



















































Multiword Expressions in the wild? The mwetoolkit comes in handy


Coling 2010: Demonstration Volume, pages 57–60,
Beijing, August 2010

Multiword Expressions in the wild?
The mwetoolkit comes in handy

Carlos Ramisch†∗ Aline Villavicencio∗ Christian Boitet†
† GETALP – Laboratory of Informatics of Grenoble, University of Grenoble

∗ Institute of Informatics, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul
{ceramisch,avillavicencio}@inf.ufrgs.br Christian.Boitet@imag.fr

Abstract

The mwetoolkit is a tool for auto-
matic extraction of Multiword Expres-
sions (MWEs) from monolingual corpora.
It both generates and validates MWE can-
didates. The generation is based on sur-
face forms, while for the validation, a se-
ries of criteria for removing noise are pro-
vided, such as some (language indepen-
dent) association measures.1 In this paper,
we present the use of the mwetoolkit
in a standard configuration, for extracting
MWEs from a corpus of general-purpose
English. The functionalities of the toolkit
are discussed in terms of a set of selected
examples, comparing it with related work
on MWE extraction.

1 MWEs in a nutshell

One of the factors that makes Natural Language
Processing (NLP) a challenging area is the fact
that some linguistic phenomena are not entirely
compositional or predictable. For instance, why
do we prefer to say full moon instead of total moon
or entire moon if all these words can be consid-
ered synonyms to transmit the idea of complete-
ness? This is an example of a collocation, i.e. a
sequence of words that tend to occur together and
whose interpretation generally crosses the bound-
aries between words (Smadja, 1993). More gen-
erally, collocations are a frequent type of mul-
tiword expression (MWE), a sequence of words
that presents some lexical, syntactic, semantic,
pragmatic or statistical idiosyncrasies (Sag et al.,
2002). The definition of MWE also includes a
wide range of constructions like phrasal verbs (go

1The first version of the toolkit was presented in
(Ramisch et al., 2010b), where we described a language- and
type-independent methodology.

ahead, give up), noun compounds (ground speed),
fixed expressions (a priori) and multiword termi-
nology (design pattern). Due to their heterogene-
ity, MWEs vary in terms of syntactic flexibility
(let alone vs the moon is at the full) and semantic
opaqueness (wheel chair vs pass away).

While fairly studied and analysed in general
Linguistics, MWEs are a weakness in current
computational approaches to language. This is
understandable, since the manual creation of lan-
guage resources for NLP applications is expen-
sive and demands a considerable amount of ef-
fort. However, next-generation NLP systems need
to take MWEs into account, because they corre-
spond to a large fraction of the lexicon of a na-
tive speaker (Jackendoff, 1997). Particularly in
the context of domain adaptation, where we would
like to minimise the effort of porting a given sys-
tem to a new domain, MWEs are likely to play a
capital role. Indeed, theoretical estimations show
that specialised lexica may contain between 50%
and 70% of multiword entries (Sag et al., 2002).
Empirical evidence confirms these estimations: as
an example, we found that 56.7% of the terms
annotated in the Genia corpus are composed by
two or more words, and this is an underestimation
since it does not include general-purpose MWEs
such as phrasal verbs and fixed expressions.

The goal of mwetoolkit is to aid lexicog-
raphers and terminographers in the task of creat-
ing language resources that include multiword en-
tries. Therefore, we assume that, whenever a tex-
tual corpus of the target language/domain is avail-
able, it is possible to automatically extract inter-
esting sequences of words that can be regarded as
candidate MWEs.

2 Inside the black box

MWE identification is composed of two phases:
first, we automatically generate a list of candi-

57



mle =
c(w1 . . .wn)

N

dice =
n× c(w1 . . .wn)

∑ni=1 c(wi)

pmi = log2
c(w1 . . .wn)
E(w1 . . .wn)

t-score =
c(w1 . . .wn)−E(w1 . . .wn)√

c(w1 . . .wn)

Figure 1: A candidate is a sequence of words w1 to
wn, with word counts c(w1) . . .c(wn) and n-gram
count c(w1 . . .wn) in a corpus with N words. The
expected count if words co-occurred by chance is
E(w1 . . .wn)≈ c(w1)...c(wn)Nn−1 .

dates from the corpus; then we filter them, so that
we can discard as much noise as possible. Can-
didate generation uses flat linguistic information
such as surface forms, lemmas and parts of speech
(POS).2 We can then define target sequences of
POS, such as VERB NOUN sequences, or even
more fine-grained constraints which use lemmas,
like take NOUN and give NOUN, or POS patterns
that include wildcards that stand for any word or
POS.3 The optimal POS patterns for a given do-
main, language and MWE type can be defined
based on the analysis of the data.

For the candidate filtering a set of association
measures (AMs), listed in figure 1, are calculated
for each candidate. A simple threshold can sub-
sequently be applied to filter out all the candidates
for which the AMs fall below a user-defined value.
If a gold standard is available, the toolkit can build
a classifier, automatically annotating each candi-
date to indicate whether it is contained in the gold
standard (i.e. it is regarded as a true MWE) or
not (i.e. it is regarded as a non-MWE).4 This
annotation is not used to filter the lists, but only

2If tools like a POS tagger are not available for a lan-
guage/domain, it is possible to generate simple n-gram lists
(n = 1..10), but the quality will be inferior. A possible solu-
tion is to filter out candidates on a keyword basis, e.g. from
a list of stopwords).

3Although syntactic information can provide better re-
sults for some types of MWEs, like collocations (Seretan,
2008), currently no syntactic information is allowed as a cri-
terion for candidate generation, keeping the toolkit as simple
and language independent as possible.

4The gold standard can be a dictionary or a manually an-
notated list of candidates.

candidate fEP fgoogle class

status quo 137 1940K True
US navy 4 1320K False
International Cooperation 2 1150K False
Cooperation Agreement 188 115K True
Panama Canal 2 753K True
security institution 5 8190 False
lending institution 4 54800 True
human right 2 251K True
Human Rights 3067 3400K False
pro-human right 2 34 False

Table 1: Example of MWE candidates extracted
by mwetoolkit.

by the classifier to learn the relation between the
AMs and the MWE class of the candidate. This
is particularly useful because, to date, it remains
unclear which AM performs better for a partic-
ular type or language, and the classifier applies
measures according to their efficacy in filtering
the candidates.Some examples of output are pre-
sented in table 1.

3 Getting started

The toolkit is open source software that can
be freely downloaded (sf.net/projects/
mwetoolkit). As a demonstration, we present
the extraction of noun-noun compounds from the
general-purpose English Europarl (EP) corpus5.

To preprocess the corpus, we used the sen-
tence splitter and tokeniser provided with EP, fol-
lowed by a lowercasing treatment (integrated in
the toolkit), and lemmatisation and POS tagging
using the TreeTagger6. The tagset was simplified
since some distinctions among plural/singular and
proper nouns were irrelevant.

From the preprocessed corpus, we obtained all
sequences of 2 nouns, which resulted in 176,552
unique noun compound candidates. Then, we ob-
tained the corpus counts for the bigrams and their
component unigrams in the EP corpus. Adopt-
ing the web as a corpus, we also use the number
of pages retrieved by Google and by Yahoo! as

5www.statmt.org/europarl.
6http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/

projekte/corplex/TreeTagger/.

58



raw EN Europarl

sentence-split, lowercased,
tokenised, POS-tagged,

lemmatised Europarl

  Preprocessing

noun-noun 
candidates

filtered-1 
candidates

filtered-2 
candidates

  Count candidates
  Threshold

 Association meas.
 Sort and threshold

mwetoolkit

Figure 2: Step-by-step demonstration on the EP
corpus.

counts. The mwetoolkit implements a cache
mechanism to avoid redundant queries, but to
speed up the process7, we filtered out all candi-
dates occurring less than two times in EP, which
reduced the list of candidates to 64,551 entries
(filtered-1 candidates in figure 2).

For the second filtering step, we calculated
four AMs for each of the three frequency sources
(EP, Google and Yahoo!). Some results on ma-
chine learning applied to the candidate lists of
the mwetoolkit can be found in Ramisch et al.
(2010b). Here, we will limit ourselves to a dis-
cussion on some advantages and inconvenients of
the chosen approach by analysing a list of selected
examples.

4 Pros and cons

One of the biggest advantages of our approach is
that, since it is language independent, it is straight-
forward to apply it on corpora in virtually any
language. Moreover, it is not dependent on a
specific type of construction or syntactic formal-
ism. Of course, since it only uses limited linguis-
tic information, the accuracy of the resulting lists
can always be further improved with language-
dependent tools. In sum, the toolkit allows users
to perform systematic MWE extraction with con-
sistent intermediary files and well defined scripts
and arguments (avoiding the need for a series of ad
hoc separate scripts). Even if some basic knowl-
edge about how to run Python scripts and how to

7Yahoo! limits the queries to 5,000/day.

pass arguments to the command line is necessary,
the user is not required to be a programmer.

Nested MWEs are a problem in the current
approach. Table 1 shows two bigrams Interna-
tional Cooperation and Cooperation Agreement,
both evaluated as False candidates. However, they
could be considered as parts of a larger MWE In-
ternational Cooperation Agreement, but with the
current methodology it is not possible to detect
this kind of situation. Another case where the
candidate contains a MWE is the example pro-
human right, and in this case it would be neces-
sary to separate the prefix from the MWE, i.e. to
re-tokenise the words around the MWE candidate.
Indeed, tools for consistent tokenisation, specially
concerning dashes and slashes, could improve the
quality of the results, in particular for specialised
corpora.

The toolkit provides full integration with web
search engine APIs. The latter, however, are of
limited utility because search engines are not only
slow but also return more or less arbitrary num-
bers, some times even inconsistent (Ramisch et
al., 2010c). When large corpora like EP are avail-
able, we suggest that it is better to use its counts
rather than web counts. The toolkit provides an
efficient indexing mechanism, allowing for arbi-
trary n-grams to be counted in linear time.

The automatic evaluation of the candidates will
always be limited by the coverage of the reference
list. In the examples, Panama Canal is consid-
ered as a true MWE whereas US navy is not, but
both are proper names and the latter should also
be included as a true candidate. The same happens
for the candidates Human Rights and human right.
The mwetoolkit is an early prototype whose
simple design allows fine tuning of knowledge-
poor methods for MWE extraction. However, we
believe that there is room for improvement at sev-
eral points of the extraction methodology.

5 From now on

One of our goals for future versions is to be able
to extract bilingual MWEs from parallel or com-
parable corpora automatically. This could be done
through the inclusion of automatic word align-
ment information. Some previous experiments
show, however, that this may not be enough, as

59



automatic word alignment uses almost no lin-
guistic information and its output is often quite
noisy (Ramisch et al., 2010a). Combining align-
ment and shallow linguistic information seems a
promising solution for the automatic extraction
of bilingual MWEs. The potential uses of these
lexica are multiple, but the most obvious appli-
cation is machine translation. On the one hand,
MWEs could be used to guide the word align-
ment process. For instance, this could solve the
problem of aligning a language where compounds
are separate words, like French, with a language
that joins compound words together, like Ger-
man. In statistical machine translation systems,
MWEs could help to filter phrase tables or to boost
the scores of phrases which words are likely to
be multiwords.Some types of MWE (e.g. collo-
cations) could help in the semantic disambigua-
tion of words in the source language. The sense
of a word defined by its collocate can allow to
chose the correct target word or expression (Sere-
tan, 2008).

We would also like to improve the techniques
implemented for candidate filtering. Related work
showed that association measures based on con-
tingency tables are more robust to data sparseness
(Evert and Krenn, 2005). However, they are pair-
wise comparisons and their application on arbi-
trarily long n-grams is not straightforward. An
heuristics to adapt these measures is to apply them
recursively over increasing n-gram length. Other
features that could provide better classification
are context words, linguistic information coming
from simple word lexica, syntax, semantic classes
and domain-specific keywords. While for poor-
resourced languages we can only count on shallow
linguistic information, it is unreasonable to ignore
available information for other languages. In gen-
eral, machine learning performs better when more
information is available (Pecina, 2008).

We would like to evaluate our toolkit on several
data sets, varying the languages, domains and tar-
get MWE types. This would allow us to assign
its quantitative performance and to compare it to
other tools performing similar tasks. Additionally,
we could evaluate how well the classifiers perform
across languages and domains. In short, we be-
lieve that the mwetoolkit is an important first

step toward robust and reliable MWE treatment.
It is a freely available core application providing
flexible tools and coherent up-to-date documenta-
tion, and these are essential characteristics for the
extension and support of any computer system.

Acknowledgements

This research was partly supported by CNPq
(Projects 479824/2009-6 and 309569/2009-5),
FINEP and SEBRAE (COMUNICA project
FINEP/SEBRAE 1194/07).

References
Evert, Stefan and Brigitte Krenn. 2005. Using small

random samples for the manual evaluation of statis-
tical association measures. Comp. Speech & Lang.
Special issue on MWEs, 19(4):450–466.

Jackendoff, Ray. 1997. Twistin’ the night away. Lan-
guage, 73:534–559.

Pecina, Pavel. 2008. Reference data for czech colloca-
tion extraction. In Proc. of the LREC Workshop To-
wards a Shared Task for MWEs (MWE 2008), pages
11–14, Marrakech, Morocco, Jun.

Ramisch, Carlos, Helena de Medeiros Caseli, Aline
Villavicencio, André Machado, and Maria José Fi-
natto. 2010a. A hybrid approach for multiword ex-
pression identification. In Proc. of the 9th PROPOR
(PROPOR 2010), volume 6001 of LNCS (LNAI),
pages 65–74, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. Springer.

Ramisch, Carlos, Aline Villavicencio, and Christian
Boitet. 2010b. mwetoolkit: a framework for multi-
word expression identification. In Proc. of the Sev-
enth LREC (LREC 2010), Malta, May. ELRA.

Ramisch, Carlos, Aline Villavicencio, and Christian
Boitet. 2010c. Web-based and combined language
models: a case study on noun compound identifica-
tion. In Proc. of the 23th COLING (COLING 2010),
Beijing, China, Aug.

Sag, Ivan, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann
Copestake, and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multi-
word expressions: A pain in the neck for NLP.
In Proc. of the 3rd CICLing (CICLing-2002), vol-
ume 2276/2010 of LNCS, pages 1–15, Mexico City,
Mexico, Feb. Springer.

Seretan, Violeta. 2008. Collocation extraction based
on syntactic parsing. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.

Smadja, Frank A. 1993. Retrieving collocations from
text: Xtract. Comp. Ling., 19(1):143–177.

60


