534

Coling 2010: Poster Volume, pages 534–542,

Beijing, August 2010

Identifying Contradictory and Contrastive Relations between Statements

to Outline Web Information on a Given Topic

Daisuke Kawahara†

Kentaro Inui†‡

Sadao Kurohashi†§

†National Institute of Information and Communications Technology

‡Graduate School of Information Sciences, Tohoku University

§Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University

dk@nict.go.jp, inui@ecei.tohoku.ac.jp, kuro@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract

We present a method for producing a
bird’s-eye view of statements that are ex-
pressed on Web pages on a given topic.
This method aggregates statements that
are relevant to the topic, and shows con-
tradictory and contrastive relations among
them. This view of contradictions and
contrasts helps users acquire a top-down
understanding of the topic. To realize
this, we extract such statements and re-
lations, including cross-document implicit
contrastive relations between statements,
in an unsupervised manner. Our experi-
mental results indicate the effectiveness of
our approach.

1 Introduction
The quantity of information on the Web is increas-
ing explosively. Online information includes news
reports, arguments, opinions, and other coverage
of innumerable topics. To ﬁnd useful information
from such a mass of information, people gener-
ally use conventional search engines such as Ya-
hoo! and Google. They input keywords to a search
engine as a query and obtain a list of Web pages
that are relevant to the keywords. They then use
the list to check several dozen top-ranked Web
pages one by one.

This method of information access does not
provide a bird’s-eye view of the queried topic;
therefore it can be highly time-consuming and dif-
ﬁcult for a user to gain an overall understanding of
what is written on the topic. Also, browsing only
top-ranked Web pages may provide the user with
biased information. For example, when a user

direct contrastive statement
contrastive keyword pair
contradictory relation
contrastive relation

“A is more P than B”
(A, B)
“A is P” ⇔ “A is not P”
“A is P” ↔ “B is P (not P)”
Table 1: Overview of direct contrastive state-
ments, contrastive keyword pairs and contradic-
tory/contrastive relations. Note that “P” is a pred-
icate.

searches for information on “agaricus,” claimed
to be a health food, using a conventional search
engine, many commercial pages touting its health
beneﬁts appear at the top of the ranks, while other
pages remain low-ranked. The user may miss an
existing Web page that indicates its unsubstanti-
ated health beneﬁts, and could be unintentionally
satisﬁed by biased or one-sided information.

This paper proposes a method for produc-
ing a bird’s-eye view of statements that are ex-
pressed on Web pages on a given query (topic).
In particular, we focus on presenting contradic-
tory/contrastive relations and statements on the
topic. This presentation enables users to grasp
what arguing points exist and furthermore to see
contradictory/contrastive relations between them
at a glance. Presenting these relations and state-
ments is thought to facilitate users’ understanding
of the topic. This is because people typically think
about contradictory and contrastive entities and is-
sues for decision-making in their daily lives.

Our system presents statements and relations
that are important and relevant to a given topic,
including the statements and relations listed in Ta-
ble 1. Direct contrastive statements compare two
entities or issues in a single sentence. The con-
trasted entities or issues are also extracted as con-
trastive keyword pairs. In addition to them, our

535

Figure 1: Examples of statements on “gosei senzai” (synthetic detergent), which are represented by
rounded rectangles. Each statement is linked with the pages from which it is extracted. The number in
a parenthesis represents the number of pages.

system shows contradictory and contrastive rela-
tions between statements. Contradictory relations
are the relations between statements that are con-
tradictory about an entity or issue. Contrastive
relations are the relations between statements in
which two entities or issues are contrasted.

In particular, we have the following two novel

contributions.

zai” (synthetic detergent) and “sekken” (soap).
The pairs of statements connected with a broad
arrow have contradictory relations. The pairs of
statements connected with a thin arrow have con-
trastive relations. Users not only can see what is
written on this topic at a glance, but also can check
out the details of a statement by following its links
to the original pages.

cross-document

• We identify contrastive relations between
statements, which consist of in-document
and
relations.
These relations complement direct con-
trastive statements, which are explicitly
mentioned in a single sentence.

implicit

• We precisely extract direct contrastive state-
ments and contrastive keyword pairs in an
unsupervised manner, whereas most previ-
ous studies used supervised methods (Jindal
and Liu, 2006b; Yang and Ko, 2009).

Our system focuses on the Japanese language.
For example, Figure 1 shows examples of ex-
tracted statements on the topic “gosei senzai”
(synthetic detergent). Rounded rectangles repre-
sent statements relevant to this topic. The ﬁrst
statement is a direct contrastive statement, which
refers to a contrastive keyword pair, “gosei sen-

2 Related Work
Studies have been conducted on automatic extrac-
tion of direct contrastive sentences (comparative
sentences) for English (Jindal and Liu, 2006b) and
for Korean (Yang and Ko, 2009). They prepared a
set of keywords that serve as clues to direct con-
trastive sentences and proposed supervised tech-
niques on the basis of tagged corpora. We pro-
pose an unsupervised method for extracting direct
contrastive sentences without constructing tagged
corpora.

From direct contrastive sentences, Jindal and
Liu (2006a) and Satou and Okumura (2007) pro-
posed methods for extracting quadruples of (tar-
get, basis, attribute, evaluation). Jindal and Liu
(2006a) extracted these quadruples and obtained
an F-measure of 70%-80% for the extraction of
“target” and “basis.” Since this extraction was

sekken-wa gosei senzai-to chigai, kankyo-ni yoi. 

	
	

[direct contrastive statement]

gosei senzai-de yogore-ga ochiru (15) 
	

		

sekken-de yogore-ga ochi-nai (6) 


	

sekken-de yogore-ga ochiru (4) 


	

gosei senzai-ni dokusei-ga aru (9) 
		



gosei senzai-ni dokusei-ga nai (2) 
	



goseisenzai-de te-ga areru (7) 
		
	

gosei senzai-wa kaimen kasseizai-wo fukumu (5) 
	


Legend:

contrastive relation

contradictory relation

536

not their main target, they did not perform er-
ror analysis on the extracted results. Satou and
Okumura (2007) extracted quadruples from blog
posts. They provided a pair of named entities
for “target” and “basis,” whereas we automati-
cally identify such pairs. Ganapathibhotla and Liu
(2008) proposed a method for detecting which en-
tities (“target” and “basis”) in a direct contrastive
statement are preferred by its author.

There is also related work that focuses on non-
contrastive sentences. Ohshima et al. (2006) ex-
tracted coordinated terms, which are semantically
broader than our contrastive keyword pairs, using
hit counts from a search engine. They made use
of syntactic parallelism among coordinated terms.
Their task was to input one of coordinated terms
as a query, which is different from ours. Soma-
sundaran and Wiebe (2009) presented a method
for recognizing a stance in online debates. They
formulated this task as debate-side classiﬁcation
and solved it by using automatically learned prob-
abilities of polarity.

To aggregate statements and detect relations be-
tween them, one of important modules is recogni-
tion of synonymous, entailed, contradictory and
contrastive statements.
Studies on rhetorical
structure theory (Mann and Thompson, 1988) and
recognizing textual entailment (RTE) deal with
these relations.
In particular, evaluative work-
shops on RTE have been held and this kind of re-
search has been actively studied (Bentivogli et al.,
2009). The recent workshops of this series set up
a task that recognizes contradictions. Harabagiu
et al. (2006), de Marneffe et al. (2008), Voorhees
(2008), and Ritter et al. (2008) focused on rec-
ognizing contradictions. For example, Harabagiu
et al. (2006) used negative expressions, antonyms
and contrast discourse relations to recognize con-
tradictions. These methods only detect relations
between given sentences, and do not create a
bird’s-eye view.

To create a kind of bird’s-eye view, Kawahara et
al. (2008), Statement Map (Murakami et al., 2009)
and Dispute Finder (Ennals et al., 2010) identi-
ﬁed various relations between statements includ-
ing contradictory relations, but do not handle con-
trastive relations, which are one of the important
relations for taking a bird’s-eye view on a topic.

Lerman and McDonald (2009) proposed a method
for generating contrastive summaries about given
two entities on the basis of KL-divergence. This
study is related to ours in the aspect of extracting
implicit contrasts, but contrastive summaries are
different from contrastive relations between state-
ments in our study.

3 Our Method

We propose a method for grasping overall infor-
mation on the Web on a given query (topic). This
method extracts and presents statements that are
relevant to a given topic, including direct con-
trastive statements and contradictory/contrastive
relations between these statements.

As a unit for statements, we use a predicate-
argument structure (also known as a case structure
and logical form). A predicate-argument struc-
ture represents a “who does what” event. Pro-
cesses such as clustering, summarization, compar-
ison with other knowledge and logical consistency
veriﬁcation, which are required for this study and
further analysis, are accurately performed on the
basis of predicate-argument structures. The ex-
traction of our target relations and statements is
performed via identiﬁcation and aggregation of
synonymous, contrastive, and contradictory rela-
tions between predicate-argument structures.

As stated in section 1, we extract direct con-
trastive statements, contrastive keyword pairs, rel-
evant statements, contrastive relations and contra-
dictory relations. We do this with the following
steps:

1. Extraction and aggregation of predicate-

argument structures

2. Extraction of contrastive keyword pairs and

direct contrastive statements

3. Identiﬁcation of contradictory relations
4. Identiﬁcation of contrastive relations

Below, we ﬁrst describe our method of extract-
ing and aggregating predicate-argument struc-
tures. Then, we explain our method of extract-
ing direct contrastive statements with contrastive
keyword pairs, and identifying contradictory and
contrastive relations in detail.

537

3.1 Extraction and Aggregation of
Predicate-argument Structures

A predicate-argument structure consists of a pred-
icate and one or more arguments that have a de-
pendency relation to the predicate.

We extract predicate-argument structures from
automatic parses of Web pages on a given topic
by using the method of Kawahara et al. (2008).
We apply the following procedure to Web pages
that are retrieved from the TSUBAKI (Shinzato
et al., 2008) open search engine infrastructure, by
inputting the topic as a query.

1. Extract important sentences from each Web
page. Important sentences are deﬁned as sen-
tences neighboring the topic word(s).

2. Obtain results of morphological analysis
(JUMAN1) and dependency parsing (KNP2)
of
the important sentences, and extract
predicate-argument structures from them.

3. Filter out

functional

and meaningless
predicate-argument structures, which are
not relevant to the topic. Pointwise mutual
information between the entire Web and the
target Web pages for a topic is used.

Note that the analyses in step 2 are performed be-
forehand and stored in an XML format (Shinzato
et al., 2008).

Acquired predicate-argument structures vary
widely in their representations of predicates and
arguments. In particular, many separate predicate-
argument structures have the same meaning due to
spelling variations, transliterations, synonymous
expressions and so forth. To cope with this prob-
lem, we apply “keyword distillation” (Shibata
et al., 2009), which is a process of absorbing
spelling variations, synonymous expressions and
keywords with part-of relations on a set of Web
pages about a given topic. As a knowledge source
to merge these expressions, this process uses a
knowledge base that is automatically extracted
from an ordinary dictionary and the Web. For
instance, the following predicate-argument struc-
tures are judged to be synonymous3.

1http://nlp.kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp/nl-resource/juman-e.html
2http://nlp.kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp/nl-resource/knp-e.html
3In this paper, we use the following abbreviations:

(1)

a. sekken-wo
soap-ACC

tsukau
use

b. sopu-wo

soap-ACC

tsukau
use

c. sekken-wo
soap-ACC

shiyou-suru
utilize

We call the predicate-argument structures that
are obtained as the result of the above proce-
dure statement candidates. The ﬁnal output of
our system consists of direct contrastive state-
ments (with contrastive keyword pairs),
top-N
statements (major statements) in order of fre-
quency of statement candidates, and statements
with contradictory/contrastive relations. Contra-
dictory/contrastive relations are identiﬁed against
major statements by searching statement candi-
dates.

Another outcome of keyword distillation is a re-
sultant set of keywords that are important and rel-
evant to the topic. We call this set of keywords
relevant keywords, which also include words or
phrases in the query. Relevant keywords are used
to extract contrastive keyword pairs.

3.2 Extraction of Contrastive Keyword Pairs

and Direct Contrastive Statements

We extract contrastive keyword pairs from con-
trastive constructs, which are manually speci-
ﬁed as patterns of predicate-argument structures.
Statements that contain contrastive constructs are
deﬁned as direct contrastive statements.

For example, the following sentence is a typi-
cal direct contrastive statement, which contains a
contrastive verb “chigau” (differ).

(2)

gosei senzai-to
synthetic detergent-ABL

sekken-wa
chigai,
soap-TOP
differ
(soap differs from synthetic detergent, ···)

···

From this sentence, a contrastive keyword pair,
“sekken” (soap) and “gosei senzai” (synthetic de-
tergent), is extracted. The above sentence is ex-
tracted as a direct contrastive statement.

We preliminarily evaluated this simple pattern-
based method and found that it has the following
three problems.
NOM (nominative), ACC (accusative), DAT (dative),
ABL (ablative), CMI (comitative), GEN (genitive) and
TOP (topic marker).

538

• Keyword pairs that are mentioned in a con-
trastive construct are occasionally not rele-
vant to the given topic.

• Non-contrastive keyword pairs are erro-
neously extracted due to omissions of at-
tributes and targets of comparisons.

• Non-contrastive keyword pairs that have an

is-a relation are erroneously extracted.

To deal with the ﬁrst problem, we ﬁlter out key-
word pairs that are contrastive but that are not rel-
evant to the topic. For this purpose, we apply ﬁl-
tering by using relevant keywords, which are de-
scribed in section 3.1.

As an example of non-contrastive keyword
pairs (the second problem), from the following
sentence, a keyword pair, “tokkyo seido” (patent
system) and “nihon” (Japan), is incorrectly ex-
tracted by the pattern-based method.

(3)

nihon-to
Japan-ABL

tokkyo seido-wa
patent system-TOP

amerika-no
America-GEN
kotonari,
different ···
(patent system of America is different from φ of
Japan ···)

In this sentence, “nihon” (Japan) has a meaning of
“nihon-no tokkyo seido” (patent system of Japan).
That is to say, “tokkyo seido” (patent system),
which is the attribute of comparison, is omitted.

In this study, in addition to patterns of con-
trastive constructs, we use checking and ﬁltering
on the basis of similarity. The use of similarity
is inspired by the semantic parallelism between
contrasted keywords. As this similarity, we em-
ploy distributional similarity (Lin, 1998), which
is calculated using automatic dependency parses
of 100 million Japanese Web pages. By search-
ing similar keywords from the above sentence, we
successfully extract a contrastive keyword pair,
“amerika” (America) and “nihon” (Japan), and
the above sentence as a direct contrastive state-
ment.

Similarly, a target of comparison can be omitted

as in the following sentence.

(4)

nedan-wa
price-TOP

gosei senzai-yori
synthetic detergent-ABL

takaidesu
high

(price of φ is higher than synthetic detergent)

In this example, the similarity between “nedan”
(price) and “gosei senzai” (synthetic detergent) is
lower than a threshold, and this sentence and the
extracts from it are ﬁltered out.

As for the third problem, we may extract non-
contrastive keyword pairs that have an is-a rela-
tion. From the following sentence, we incorrectly
extract a contrastive keyword pair, “konbini” (con-
venience store) and “7-Eleven,” which cannot be
ﬁltered out due to its high similarity.
konbini-to
convenience store-ABL

7-Eleven-wa
7-Eleven-TOP
kurabete,
compare ···
(7-Eleven is ··· compared to other convenience
stores)

hokano
other

(5)

To deal with this problem, we use a ﬁlter on the
basis of a set of words that indicate the existence
of hypernyms, such as “hokano” (other) and ip-
panno (general). We prepare six words for this
purpose.

To sum up, we use the following procedure to

identify contrast keyword pairs.

1. Extract predicate-argument structures that do
not match the above is-a patterns and match
one of the following patterns. They are ex-
tracted from the statement candidates.

• X-wa Y-to {chigau | kotonaru | kuraberu}
(X {differ | vary | compare} from/with Y)
• X-wa Y-yori [adjective]
(X is more ··· than Y)

Note that each of X and Y is a noun phrase
in the argument position.

2. Extract (x, y) that satisﬁes both the follow-
ing conditions as a contrastive keyword pair.
Note that (x, y) is part of a word sequence in
(X, Y), respectively.

evant keywords.

• Both x and y are included in a set of rel-
• (x, y) has the highest similarity among
any other candidates of (x, y), and this
similarity is higher than a threshold.

Note that the threshold is determined based on a
preliminary experiment using a set of synonyms
(Aizawa, 2007). We extract the sentence that con-
tains the predicate-argument structure used in step
1 as a direct contrastive statement.

539

3.3 Identiﬁcation of Contradictory Relations
We identify contradictory relations between state-
ment candidates. In this paper, contradictory re-
lations are deﬁned as the following two types
(Kawahara et al., 2008).

negation of predicate

If the predicate of a candidate statement is
negated, its contradiction has the same or synony-
mous predicate without negation. If not, its con-
tradiction has the same or synonymous predicate
with negation.

(6)

a. sekken-ga
soap-NOM

kankyou-ni
environment-DAT

yoi
good

b. sekken-ga
soap-NOM

kankyou-ni
environment-DAT

yoku-nai
not good

antonym of predicate

The predicate of a contradiction is an antonym
of that of a candidate statement. To judge antony-
mous relations, we use an antonym lexicon ex-
tracted from a Japanese dictionary (Shibata et al.,
2008). This lexicon consists of approximately
2,000 entries.

(7)

a. gosei senzai-ga

synthetic detergent-NOM

b. gosei senzai-ga

synthetic detergent-NOM

anzen-da
safe

kiken-da
dangerous

To identify contradictory relations between
statements in practice, we search statement can-
didates that satisfy one of the above conditions
against major statements.

3.4 Identiﬁcation of Contrastive Relations
We identify contrastive relations between state-
ment candidates. In this paper, we deﬁne a con-
trastive relation as being between a pair of state-
ment candidates whose arguments are contrastive
keyword pairs and whose predicates have synony-
mous or contradictory relations. Contradictory re-
lations of predicates are deﬁned in the same way
as section 3.3.

In the following example, (a, b) and (a, c) have
a contrastive relation. Also, (b, c) has a contradic-
tory relation.

(8)

a. gosei senzai-de

synthetic detergent-CMI

yogore-ga
stain-NOM

ochiru
wash

Topic: bio-ethanol
　 (bio-ethanol fuel, gasoline)
(bio-ethanol car, electric car)
Topic: citizen judgment system
　 (citizen judgment system, jury system)

(citizen judgment system, lay judge system)

Topic: patent system
　 (patent system, utility model system)

(large enterprise, small enterprise)

Topic: Windows Vista
　 (Vista, XP)

Table 2: Examples of extracted contrastive key-
word pairs (translated into English).

b. sekken-de
soap-CMI

yogore-ga
stain-NOM

ochiru
wash

c. sekken-de
soap-CMI

yogore-ga
stain-NOM

ochi-nai
not wash

The process of identifying contrastive relations
between statements is performed in the same way
as the identiﬁcation of contradictory relations.
That is to say, we search statement candidates
that satisfy the deﬁnition of contrastive relations
against major statements.

4 Experiments
We conducted experiments for extracting con-
trastive keyword pairs, direct contrastive state-
ments and contradictory/contrastive relations on
50 topics, such as age of adulthood, anticancer
drug, bio-ethanol, citizen judgment system, patent
system and Windows Vista.

We retrieve at most 1,000 Web pages for a topic
from the search engine infrastructure, TSUBAKI.
As major statements, we extract 10 statement can-
didates in order of frequency.

Below, we ﬁrst evaluate the extracted con-
trastive keyword pairs and direct contrastive state-
ments, and then evaluate the identiﬁed contradic-
tory and contrastive relations between statements.

4.1 Evaluation of Contrastive Keyword Pairs

and Direct Contrastive Statements

Contrastive keyword pairs and direct contrastive
statements were extracted on 30 of 50 topics. 99
direct contrastive statements and 73 unique con-
trastive keyword pairs were obtained on 30 topics.
The average number of obtained contrastive key-
word pairs for a topic was approximately 2.4. Ta-

540

Topic: “tyosakuken hou” (copyright law)

“syouhyouken-wa tyosakuken-yori zaisantekina kachi-wo motsu.”
The trademark right has more ﬁnancial value than the copyright.
“tyosakuken hou-de hogo-sareru”
protected by the copyright law
“tyosakuken-wo shingai-suru”
infringe the copyright

“tyosakuken hou-de hogo-sare-nai”
not protected by the copyright law
“tyosakuken-wo shingai-shi-nai”
not infringe the copyright
“syouhyouken-wo shingai-shi-nai”
not infringe the trademark right

Topic: “genshiryoku hatsuden syo” (nuclear power plant)

“genshiryoku hatsuden syo-wa karyoku hatsuden syo-to chigau.”
Nuclear power plants are different from thermoelectric power plants.
“CO2-wo hassei-shi-nai”
not emit carbon dioxide
“genpatsu-wo tsukuru”
construct a nuclear power plant

“CO2-wo hassei-suru”
emit carbon dioxide
“genshiryoku hatsuden syo-wo tsukura-nai”
not construct a nuclear power plant
“karyoku hatsuden syo-wo tsukuru”
construct a thermoelectric power plant

⇔
⇔
↔

⇔
⇔
↔

Table 3: Examples of identiﬁed direct contrastive statements, contradictory relations and contrastive
relations. The sentences with two underlined parts are direct contrastive statements. The arrows “⇔”
and “↔” represent a contradictory relation and a contrastive relation, respectively.
ble 2 lists examples of obtained contrastive key-
word pairs. We successfully extracted not only
contrastive keyword pairs including topic words,
but also those without them.

contrast but the source of action. The similar-
ity ﬁltering usually prevents incorrect extraction
from such a non-contrastive sentence. However,
in this case, the pair of “heisya” (our company)
and “bitWallet sya” (bitWallet, Inc.) was not ﬁl-
tered due to the high similarity between them. To
cope with this problem, it is necessary to use lin-
guistic knowledge such as case frames.

Our manual evaluation of the extracted con-
trastive keyword pairs found that 89% (65/73) of
the contrastive keyword pairs are actually con-
trasted in direct contrastive statements. Correct
contrastive keyword pairs were extracted on 28 of
30 topics. We also evaluated the contrastive key-
word pairs extracted without similarity ﬁltering.
In this case, 190 contrastive keyword pairs on 41
topics were extracted and 44% (84/190) of them
were correct. Correct contrastive keyword pairs
were extracted on 31 of 41 topics. Therefore, sim-
ilarity ﬁltering did not largely decrease the recall,
but signiﬁcantly increased the precision.

We have eight contrastive keyword pairs that
were incorrectly extracted by our proposed
method. These contrastive keyword pairs acciden-
tally have similarity that is higher than the thresh-
old. Major errors were caused by the ambiguity of
Japanese ablative keyword “yori.”

(9)

heisya-wa
our company-TOP
Edy gifuto-no
Edy gift-GEN

bitWallet sya-yori
bitWallet, Inc.-ABL

gyomu itaku-wo
entrustment-ACC

ukete-imasu
have

(Our company is entrusted with Edy gift by bitWal-
let, Inc.)

In this example, “yori” means not the basis of

4.2 Evaluation of Contradictory and

Contrastive Relations

Contradictory relations were identiﬁed on 49 of
50 topics. For 49 topics, 268 contradictory re-
lations were identiﬁed. The average number of
identiﬁed contradictory relations for a topic was
5.5. Contrastive relations were identiﬁed on 18
of 30 topics, on which contrastive keyword pairs
were extracted. For the 18 topics, 60 contrastive
relations were identiﬁed. The average number of
identiﬁed contrastive relations for a topic was 3.3.
Table 3 lists examples of the identiﬁed contra-
dictory and contrastive relations as well as direct
contrastive statements. We manually evaluated
the identiﬁed contradictory relations and the con-
trastive relations that were identiﬁed for correct
contrastive keyword pairs. As a result, we con-
cluded that they completely obey our deﬁnitions.
We also classiﬁed each of the obtained contra-
dictory and contrastive relations into two classes:
“cross-document” and “in-document.”
“Cross-

541

Topic: age of adulthood
lower the age of adulthood to 18
↔ lower the voting age to 18
Topic: anticancer drug
anticancer drugs have side effects
↔ anticancer drugs have effects

Table 4: Examples of unidentiﬁed contrastive re-
lations (translated into English).

document” means that a contradictory/contrastive
relation is obtained not from a single page but
across multiple pages.
If a relation can be
obtained from both, we classiﬁed it into “in-
document.” As a result, 67% (179/268) of contra-
dictory relations and 70% (42/60) of contrastive
relations were “cross-document.” We can see that
many cross-document implicit relations that can-
not be retrieved from a single page were success-
fully identiﬁed.

4.3 Discussions
We successfully identiﬁed contradictory relations
on almost all the topics. However, out of 50 top-
ics, we extracted contrastive keyword pairs on 30
topics and contrastive relations on 18 topics. To
investigate the resultant contrastive relations from
the viewpoint of recall, we manually checked
whether there were unidentiﬁed contrastive rela-
tions among 100 statement candidates for each
topic. We actually checked 20 topics and found
six unidentiﬁed contrastive relations in total. Ta-
ble 4 lists examples of the unidentiﬁed contrastive
relations. Out of 20 topics, in total, 44 contrastive
relations are manually discovered on 13 topics,
but out of 13 topics, 38 contrastive relations are
identiﬁed on eight topics by our method. There-
fore, we achieved a recall of 86% (38/44) at rela-
tion level and 62% (8/13) at topic level. We can
see that our method was able to cover a relatively
wide range of contrastive relations on the topics
on which our method successfully extracted con-
trastive keyword pairs.

To detect such unidentiﬁed contrastive rela-
tions, it is necessary to robustly extract contrastive
keyword pairs.
In the future, we will employ a
bootstrapping approach to identify patterns of di-
rect contrastive statements and contrastive key-

Figure 2: A view of major, contradictory and con-
trastive statements in WISDOM.

word pairs. We will also use patterns of con-
trastive discourse structures as well as those of
predicate-argument structures.

5 Conclusion
This paper has described a method for producing a
bird’s-eye view of statements that are expressed in
Web pages on a given topic. This method aggre-
gates statements relevant to the topic and shows
the contradictory/contrastive relations and state-
ments among them.

In particular, we successfully extracted direct
contrastive statements in an unsupervised man-
ner. We speciﬁed only several words for the
extraction patterns and the ﬁltering. Therefore,
our method for Japanese is thought to be easily
adapted to other languages. We also proposed
a novel method for identifying contrastive rela-
tions between statements, which included cross-
document implicit relations. These relations com-
plemented direct contrastive statements.

We have incorporated our proposed method
into an information analysis system, WISDOM4
(Akamine et al., 2009), which can show multi-
faceted information on a given topic. Now, this
system can show contradictory/contrastive rela-
tions and statements as well as their contexts as
a view of KWIC (keyword in context) (Figure 2).
This kind of presentation facilitates users’ under-
standing of an input topic.

4http://wisdom-nict.jp/



	







	






	




	

	








	

	





	






542

References
Aizawa, Akiko. 2007. On calculating word similarity
using web as corpus. In Proceedings of IEICE Tech-
nical Report, SIG-ICS, pages 45–52 (in Japanese).

Akamine, Susumu, Daisuke Kawahara, Yoshikiyo
Kato, Tetsuji Nakagawa, Kentaro Inui, Sadao Kuro-
hashi, and Yutaka Kidawara. 2009. WISDOM:
A web information credibility analysis system. In
Proceedings of
the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Software
Demonstrations, pages 1–4.

Bentivogli, Luisa, Ido Dagan, Hoa Dang, Danilo Gi-
ampiccolo, and Bernardo Magnini. 2009. The ﬁfth
PASCAL recognizing textual entailment challenge.
In Proceedings of TAC 2009 Workshop.

de Marneffe, Marie-Catherine, Anna N. Rafferty, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2008. Finding contradic-
tions in text. In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, pages
1039–1047.

Ennals, Rob, Beth Trushkowsky, and John Mark
Agosta. 2010. Highlighting disputed claims on the
web. In Proceedings of WWW 2010.

Ganapathibhotla, Murthy and Bing Liu. 2008. Mining
opinions in comparative sentences. In Proceedings
of COLING 2008, pages 241–248.

Harabagiu, Sanda, Andrew Hickl, and Finley Laca-
tusu. 2006. Negation, contrast and contradiction
in text processing. In Proceedings of AAAI-06.

Jindal, Nitin and Bing Liu. 2006a. Identifying com-
parative sentences in text documents. In Proceed-
ings of SIGIR 2006.

Jindal, Nitin and Bing Liu. 2006b. Mining compar-
In Proceedings of

ative sentences and relations.
AAAI-06.

Kawahara, Daisuke, Sadao Kurohashi, and Kentaro
Inui. 2008. Grasping major statements and their
contradictions toward information credibility analy-
sis of web contents. In Proceedings of WI’08, short
paper, pages 393–397.

Lerman, Kevin and Ryan McDonald. 2009. Con-
trastive summarization: An experiment with con-
sumer reviews.
In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT
2009, Companion Volume: Short Papers, pages
113–116.

Lin, Dekang. 1998. Automatic retrieval and cluster-
ing of similar words. In Proceedings of COLING-
ACL98, pages 768–774.

Mann, William and Sandra Thompson. 1988. Rhetor-
ical structure theory: toward a functional theory of
text organization. Text, 8(3):243–281.

Murakami, Koji, Eric Nichols, Suguru Matsuyoshi,
Asuka Sumida, Shouko Masuda, Kentaro Inui, and
Yuji Matsumoto. 2009. Statement map: Assisting
information credibility analysis by visualizing argu-
ments. In Proceedings of WICOW 2009.

Ohshima, Hiroaki, Satoshi Oyama, and Katsumi
Tanaka. 2006. Searching coordinate terms with
their context from the web. In Proceedings of WISE
2006, pages 40–47.

Ritter, Alan, Stephen Soderland, Doug Downey, and
Oren Etzioni. 2008. It’s a contradiction – no, it’s
not: A case study using functional relations. In Pro-
ceedings of EMNLP 2008, pages 11–20.

Satou, Toshinori and Manabu Okumura. 2007. Ex-
traction of comparative relations from Japanese we-
blog. In IPSJ SIG Technical Report 2007-NL-181,
pages 7–14 (in Japanese).

Shibata, Tomohide, Michitaka Odani, Jun Harashima,
Takashi Oonishi, and Sadao Kurohashi.
2008.
SYNGRAPH: A ﬂexible matching method based on
synonymous expression extraction from an ordinary
dictionary and a web corpus. In Proceedings of IJC-
NLP 2008, pages 787–792.

Shibata, Tomohide, Yasuo Banba, Keiji Shinzato, and
Sadao Kurohashi. 2009. Web information organi-
zation using keyword distillation based clustering.
In Proceedings of WI’09, short paper, pages 325–
330.

Shinzato, Keiji, Tomohide Shibata, Daisuke Kawa-
hara, Chikara Hashimoto, and Sadao Kurohashi.
2008.
TSUBAKI: An open search engine in-
frastructure for developing new information access
methodology.
In Proceedings of IJCNLP 2008,
pages 189–196.

Somasundaran, Swapna and Janyce Wiebe.

2009.
Recognizing stances in online debates. In Proceed-
ings of ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 226–234.

Voorhees, Ellen M. 2008. Contradictions and justi-
ﬁcations: Extensions to the textual entailment task.
In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, pages 63–71.

Yang, Seon and Youngjoong Ko.

2009. Extract-
ing comparative sentences from korean text docu-
ments using comparative lexical patterns and ma-
chine learning techniques. In Proceedings of ACL-
IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Papers, pages 153–
156.

