692

Coling 2010: Poster Volume, pages 692–700,

Beijing, August 2010

Contextual Recommendation based on Text Mining

Yize Li, Jiazhong Nie, Yi Zhang

School of Engineering

University of California Santa Cruz

{yize,niejiazhong,yiz}@soe.ucsc.edu

School of Computer Science Technology

Bingqing Wang

Fudan University

Baoshi Yan, Fuliang Weng

Research and Technology Center

Robert Bosch LLC

wbq@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

The potential beneﬁt of integrating con-
textual information for recommendation
has received much research attention re-
cently, especially with the ever-increasing
interest in mobile-based recommendation
services. However, context based recom-
mendation research is limited due to the
lack of standard evaluation data with con-
textual information and reliable technol-
ogy for extracting such information. As
a result, there are no widely accepted con-
clusions on how, when and whether con-
text helps. Additionally, a system of-
ten suffers from the so called cold start
problem due to the lack of data for train-
ing the initial context based recommenda-
tion model. This paper proposes a novel
solution to address these problems with
automated information extraction tech-
niques. We also compare several ap-
proaches for utilizing context based on
a new data set collected using the pro-
posed solution. The experimental results
demonstrate that 1) IE-based techniques
can help create a large scale context data
with decent quality from online reviews,
at least for restaurant recommendations;
2) context helps recommender systems
rank items, however, does not help pre-
dict user ratings; 3) simply using context
to ﬁlter items hurts recommendation per-
formance, while a new probabilistic latent
relational model we proposed helps.

Baoshi.Yan@us.bosch.com

Fuliang.Weng@us.bosch.com
1

Introduction

In the information retrieval community, one ma-
jor research focus is developing proactive re-
trieval agent that acts in anticipation of informa-
tion needs of a user and recommends information
to the user without requiring him/her to issue an
explicit query. The most popular examples of such
kind of proactive retrieval agent are recommender
systems. Over the last several years, research
in standard recommender systems has been im-
proved signiﬁcantly, largely due to the availability
of large scale evaluation data sets such as Netﬂix.
The current research focus goes beyond the stan-
dard user-item rating matrix. As researchers start
to realize that the quality of recommendations de-
pends on time, place and a range of other rele-
vant users’ context, how to integrate contextual
information for recommendation is becoming an
ever increasingly important topic in the research
agenda (Adomavicius and Ricci, 2009).

One major challenge in context-aware recom-
mendation research is the lack of large scale an-
notated data set.
Ideally, a good research data
set should contain contextual information besides
users’ explicit ratings on items. However, such
kinds of data sets are not readily available for
researchers. Previous research work in context
based recommendation usually experiments on a
small data set collected through user studies. Al-
though undoubtedly useful, this approach is lim-
ited because 1) user studies are usually very ex-
pensive and their scales are small; 2) it is very hard
for the research community to repeat such study;
and 3) a personalized contextual system may not

693

1

I was very excited to try this place and my wife took me here on my birthday. . .
We ordered a side of the brussell sprouts and they were the highlight of the night.
2 A friend of mine suggested we meet up here for a night of drinks. . . This actually

a restaurant with a bar in it, but when we went it was 10pm and . . .

Table 1: Examples of the restaurant reviews

succeed until a user has interacted with it for a
long period of time to enable context based rec-
ommendation models well trained.

On the other hand, a large amount of re-
view documents from web sites such as tri-
padvisor.com, yelp.com, cnet.com, amazon.com,
are available with certain contextual information,
such as time and companion, implicitly in the re-
views (see Table 1 for examples). This offers us an
opportunity to apply information extraction tech-
niques for obtaining contextual information from
the review texts. Together with users’ explicit rat-
ings on items, this might lead to a large research
data set for context based recommendation and
consequently address the cold start issue in the
recommender systems. This paper describes the
methods that extract the contextual information
from online reviews and their impact on the rec-
ommendation quality at different accuracy levels
of the extraction methods.

Another challenge is how to integrate contex-
tual information into existing recommendation al-
gorithms. Existing approaches can be classiﬁed
into three major categories: pre-ﬁltering, post-
ﬁltering and the modeling based approaches (Oku
et al., 2007; Adomavicius and Tuzhilin, 2008).
Pre-ﬁltering approaches utilize contextual infor-
mation to select data for that context, and then pre-
dict ratings using a traditional recommendation
method on the selected data (Adomavicius et al.,
2005). Post-ﬁltering approaches ﬁrst predict rat-
ings on the whole data using traditional methods,
then use the contextual information to adjust re-
sults. Both methods separate contextual informa-
tion from the rating estimation process and leads
to unsatisfying ﬁndings. For example, Adomavi-
cious et al.
(2005) found neither standard col-
laborative ﬁltering nor contextual reduction-based
methods dominate each other in all the cases. In
the modeling based approaches, contextual infor-
mation is used directly in the rating prediction

process. For example, Oku et al. (2007) propose
a context-aware SVM-based predictive model to
classify restaurants into “positive” and “negative”
classes, and contextual information is included as
additional input features for the SVM classiﬁer.
However, treating recommendation as classiﬁca-
tion is not a common approach, and does not take
advantage of the state of art collaborative ﬁltering
techniques. In this paper, we propose a new prob-
abilistic model to integrate contextual information
into the state of art factorization based collabora-
tive ﬁltering approach, and compare it with sev-
eral baselines.

2 Mining Contextual Information from

Textual Opinions

The context includes any information that can be
used to characterize the situation of entities. Ex-
amples of context are: location, identity and state
of people, companions, time, activities of the cur-
rent user, the devices being used etc.
(Lee et
al., 2005). Without loss of generality, we looked
into widely available restaurant review data. More
speciﬁcally, we investigated four types of contex-
tual information for a dining event, as they might
affect users’ dining decisions, and they have not
been studied carefully before. The four types of
contextual information are: Companion (whether
a dining event involves multiple people), Occa-
sion (for what occasions the event is), Time (what
time during the day) and Location (in which city
the event happens).

2.1 Text Mining Approaches
We developed a set of algorithms along with exist-
ing NLP tools (GATE (Cunningham et al., 2002)
etc.) for this task. More detailed description of
these algorithms is given below.

Time: we classiﬁed the meal time into the
following types: “breakfast”, “lunch”, “dinner”,
“brunch”, “morning tea”, “afternoon tea”. We

694

compiled a list of lexicons for these different types
of meal times, and used a string matching method
to ﬁnd the explicit meal times from reviews. Here,
the meal time with an expression, such as “6pm”,
was extracted using ANNIE’s time named entity
recognition module from the GATE toolkit. For
example, if a user says, “When we went there, it
was 10pm”, we infer that it was for dinner.

Occasion: The ANNIE’s time named en-
tity recognition module recognizes certain special
days from text. We augmented ANNIE’s lookup
function with a list of holidays in the United States
from Wikipedia1 as well as some other occasions,
such as birthdays and anniversaries.

Location: Ideally, a location context would be
a user’s departure location to the selected restau-
rant. However, such information rarely exists in
the review texts. Therefore, we used the location
information from a user’s proﬁle to approximate.
Companion: Extracting a companion’s infor-
mation accurately from review data is more difﬁ-
cult. We utilized two methods to address the chal-
lenge:

Companion-Baseline: This is a string match-
ing based approach. First, we automatically gen-
erated a lexicon of different kinds of compan-
ion words/phrases by using prepositional patterns,
such as “with my (our) NN (NNS)”. We extracted
the noun or noun phrases from the prepositional
phrases as the companion terms, which were then
sorted by frequency of occurrence and manually
veriﬁed. This led to a lexicon of 167 entries.
Next, we grouped these entries into 6 main cate-
gories of companions: “family”, “friend”, “cou-
ple”, “colleague”, “food-buddy” and “pet”. Fi-
nally, the review is tagged as one or more of the
companion categories if it contains a correspond-
ing word/phrase in that lexicon.

Companion-Classiﬁer: In order to achieve bet-
ter precision, we sampled and annotated 1000
sentences with companion terms from the corpus
and built three classiﬁers: 1) a MaxEnt classi-
ﬁer with bag-of-words features, 2) a rule-based
classiﬁer, 3) a hybrid classiﬁer. For the rule-
based classiﬁer, we looked into the structural as-
pects of the window where companion terms oc-

1http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List of holidays by

country#United States of America

curred, speciﬁcally, the adjacent verbs and prepo-
sitions associated with those terms. We collected
high frequency structures including verbs, verb-
proposition combinations, and verb-genitive com-
binations from the whole corpus, and then con-
structed a list of rules to decide whether a compan-
ion context exists based on these structures. For
the hybrid classiﬁer, we used the patterns identi-
ﬁed by the rule-based classiﬁer as features for the
MaxEnt model (Ratnaparkhi, 1998). To train the
classiﬁer, we also included features such as POS
tags of the verb and of the candidate companion
term, the occurrence of a meal term (e.g. “lunch”,
“dinner”), the occurrence of pronouns (e.g. “we”
or “us”) and the genitive of the companion term.
Based on the evaluation results (using 5-fold cross
validation) shown in Table 2, the hybrid classiﬁer
is the best performing classiﬁer and it is used for
the subsequent experiments in the paper.

Precision
Recall
F-Score

Words
0.7181
0.8962
0.7973

Rule
0.7238
0.8947
0.8003

Hybrid
0.7379
0.9143
0.8167

Table 2: Evaluation results for the bag-of-words-
based classiﬁer (Words), the rule-based classiﬁer
(Rule) and the hybrid classiﬁer (Hybrid)

3 Recommendation based on Contextual

Information

Next we consider how to integrate various con-
textual information into recommender systems.
Assume there are N items and M users. Each
user reviews a set of items in the system. The
data set can be represented as a set of quadruplet
D = (y, i, j, c), where i is the index of user, j is
the index of item, c is a vector describing the con-
text of this rating data, and y is the rating value.
Let c = (c1, ..., ck), where each component ck
represents a type of context, such as “dinner time”
or “location=San Jose”. The observed features
(meta data) of user i and item j are represented
as vectors fi and fj respectively, where each com-
ponent in the vector represents a type of feature,
such as “gender of the user” or “price range of
the restaurant”. In the rest of this paper, we in-

695

tegrate context c into the user’s observed features
fi. This makes fi a dynamic feature vector, which
will change with different context. The goal is
to predict ratings for candidate items given user i
and context c, and recommend the top items. We
present two recommendation models for integrat-
ing contextual information in this section.

3.1 Boolean Model
The Boolean Model ﬁlters out items that do not
match the context. The Boolean model itself re-
turns an item set instead of a ranked list. We fur-
ther rank the items by predicted rating values. We
score items by the Boolean model as follows:

s(j) =(sm(j)

−∞ otherwise

if item j matches the context

(1)
where sm(j) is the predicted rating computed us-
ing a rating prediction method m, such as a Col-
laborative Filtering model without using context.

3.2 Probabilistic Latent Relational Model
We propose a novel Probabilistic Latent Rela-
tional Model (PLRM) for integrating contextual
information.
In a context-aware recommender
system, a user’s interest for item is inﬂuenced by
two factors: (1) the user’s long-term preference,
which can be learned from users’ rating history;
(2) the current context (how the item matches the
current context). To capture the two factors si-
multaneously, we introduce a new probabilistic
model by assuming the rating value yi,j,c follows
a Gaussian distribution with mean ui,j,c and vari-
ance 1/λ(y):

yi,j,c ∼ N (ui,j,c, 1/λ(y))
ui,j,c = uT

i Avj + (Wufi)T (Wvfj)

(2)
(3)

where ui and vj are the hidden representations of
user i and item j to be learned from rating data,
and Wu and Wv are feature transformation matri-
ces for users and items respectively. In Equation
(3), the ﬁrst term uT
i Avj is the estimation based
on user’ long term preferences, where A = {a} is
a matrix modeling the interaction between ui and
vj.2 The second term (Wufi)T (Wvfj) is the esti-
2We introduce A matrix so that the model can also
types of relation-

be used to model multiple different

mation based on current context and the observed
features of users and items, since the context c is
integrated into user’s observed features fi.

{U, V, A, W} are the parameters of the model
to be estimated from the training data set D,
where W = {Wu, Wv} = {w} , U =
{u1, u2, ...uN} and V = {v1, v2, ...vM}. We as-
sume the prior distribution of the parameters fol-
low the Gaussian distributions centered on 0. We
use 1/λ(u),1/λ(v), 1/λ(w) and 1/λ(a) to represent
the variance of the corresponding Gaussian distri-
butions. The effect of the prior distribution is sim-
ilar to the ridge regression (norm-2 regularizer)
commonly used in machine learning algorithms to
control model complexity and avoid overﬁtting.

The proposed model is motivated by well per-
forming recommendation models in the literature.
It generalizes several existing models. If we set A
to the identity matrix and Wu, Wv to zero matri-
ces, the model presented in Equation (3) is equiv-
alent to the well known norm-2 regularized singu-
lar value decomposition, which performs well on
the Netﬂix competition(Salakhutdinov and Mnih,
2007). If we set A to zero matrix and Wu to iden-
tity matrix, the Model (3) becomes the bilinear
model that works well on Yahoo news recommen-
dation task (Chu and Park, 2009).

Based on the above model assumption, the joint
likelihood of all random variables (U, V , A, W
and D) in the system is:

P (U, V, A, W, D) =

Y(i,j,c,y)∈D
Yi
P (ui)Yj

P (yi,j,c|ui, vj, fi, fj, A, Wu, Wv)

P (vj)P (A)P (Wu)P (Wv)(4)

3.3 Parameter Estimation
We use a modiﬁed EM algorithm for parame-
ter estimation to ﬁnd the posterior distribution of
(U, V ) and max a posterior (MAP) of (A, W ).
The estimation can be used to make the ﬁnal pre-

ships/interactions jointly, where each type of relationship
corresponds to a different A matrix. For the task in this pa-
per, A is not required and can be set to the identity matrix
for simplicity. However, we leave A as parameters to be es-
timated in the rest of this paper for generality.

696

dictions as follows:

ˆyi,j,c =Zui,vj

+(Wufi)T Wvfj)duidvj

P (ui)P (vj)(uT

i Avj

E Step: the Variational Bayesian approach is used
to estimate the posterior distributions of U and V .
Assuming (A, W ) are known, based on Equation
4, we have

Y(y,i,j,c)∈D
MYi=1

×

P (U, V |A, W, D) ∝

N (uT

i Avj + (Wufi)T Wvfj, 1/λ(y))

N (ui|0, 1/λ(u)I)

N (vj|0, 1/λ(v)I)

NYj=1

i=1 Q(ui)QN

tion Q(U, V ) =QM

Deriving the exact distribution and use it to predict
y will result in intractable integrals. Thus we ap-
proximate the posterior with a variational distribu-
j=1 Q(vj). Q(ui)
and Q(vj) are restricted to Gaussian distributions
so that predicting y using Bayesian inference with
Q(U, V ) will be straightforward. Q(U, V ) can be
estimated by minimizing the KL-divergence be-
tween it and P (U, V |A, W, D). Since Q(U, V ) is
factorized into individual Q(ui) and Q(vj), we
can ﬁrst focus on one Q(ui) (or Q(vj)) at a time
by ﬁxing/ignoring other factors. For space consid-
erations, we omit the derivation in this paper. The
optimal Q(ui) is N (¯ui, Σi), where ¯ui = Σidi,
j + Ψj)AT

λ(y)A(¯vj¯vT

Σ−1

i

= X(y,i,j,c)∈D
di = X(y,i,j,c)∈D

+ λ(u)I

λ(y) ˜yA¯vj

Similarly, the optimal Q(vj) is N (¯vj, Ψj), where
¯vj = Ψjej,

Ψ−1

j

= X(y,i,j,c)∈D
ej = X(y,i,j,c)∈D

+ λ(v)I

λ(y)AT (¯ui¯uT

i + Σi)A

λ(y) ˜yAT ¯vj

M Step:
Based on the approximate pos-
terior estimation Q(U, V ) derived in the E

step,
the maximum a posteriori estimation
of {A, W} can be found by maximizing
the expected posterior likelihood { ˆA, ˆW} =
arg maxA,W EQ(U,V )(log P (A, W, U, V |D)).
This can be done using the conjugate gradient
descent method, and the gradient of A, Wu, Wv
can be calculated as follows:

λ(y)((by − y)¯ui¯vT

j

i AΨj + ΣiA¯vj¯vT

j + ΣiAΨj)

∂Φ
∂A

∂Φ
∂Wu

∂Φ
∂Wv

= X(y,i,j,c)∈D

+ ¯ui¯uT
+ λ(a)A

= X(y,i,j,c)∈D
= X(y,i,j,c)∈D

+ λ(w)Wu

+ λ(w)Wv

i

λ(y)(by − y)Wvfjf T
λ(y)(by − y)Wufif T

j

where Φ = EQ(U,V )(log P (A, W, U, V |D)) and

i A¯vj + (Wufi)T Wvfj.

by = ¯uT

4 Experimental Methodology

4.1 Data Collection

We collected an evaluation data set from a pop-
ular review web site where users review ser-
vices/products and provide integer ratings from 1
to 5. The user proﬁle and the description of items,
such as user gender and the category of restau-
rants are also collected. The data set used in this
paper includes the restaurants in Silicon Valley
(Bay area) and the users who ever reviewed these
restaurants. We extract context from the review
texts. The four kinds of context considered in our
paper are described in Section 2.1. For each type
of context, we create a subset, in which all reviews
contain the corresponding contextual information.
Finally we construct four sub data sets and each
data set is described by the corresponding con-
text type: Time, Location, Occasion and Compan-
ion. We use “All” to represent the whole data set.
Statistics about each data set are described in Ta-
ble 3.

697

(a) Time

(b) Location

(c) Occasion

(d) Companion

(e) All

Figure 1: Performance on the top-K recommendation task. The plots focus on the top 20% ranking
region.

Dataset

All

Location

Time

Occasion
Companion

#Ratings
756,031
583,051
229,321
22,732
196,000

#Users
82,892
56,026
49,748
12,689
47,545

#Items
12,533
12,155
10,561
4,135
10,246

Table 3: Statistics of data

4.2 Experimental Setup
We design the experiments to answer the follow-
ing questions: 1) Does including contextual in-
formation improve the recommendation perfor-
mance? 2) How does the probabilistic latent re-
lational modeling approach compare with pre-
ﬁltering or post-ﬁltering approaches?
3) How
does the extraction quality of the contextual infor-
mation affect the recommendation performance?
To answer the ﬁrst question, we compare the
performance of the Probabilistic Latent Relational
Model on a standard collaborative ﬁltering setting
where only rating information is considered, in-
dicated by Nocontext. We also evaluate the per-
formance of the Probabilistic Latent Relational
Model when integrating contextual information,
indicated by Context-X, where X represents the

type of contextual information considered. To
answer the second question, we compare the
performance of Context-X with the pre-ﬁltering
Boolean Model, which ﬁrst uses the context to se-
lect items and then ranks them using scores com-
puted by Nocontext. To answer the third question,
we compare the recommendation performance for
different extraction precision. The performance
on the following two recommendation tasks are
reported in this paper:

Top-K Recommendation: We rank the items
by the predicted rating values and retrieve the top
K items. This task simulates the scenario where
a real recommender system usually suggests a list
of ranked K items to a user. To simulate the sce-
nario that we only want to recommend the 5-star
items to users, we treat 5-star rating data in testing
data as relevant. Ideally, classic IR measures such
as Precision and Recall are used to evaluate the
recommendation algorithms. However, without
complete relevance judgements, standard IR eval-
uation is almost infeasible. Thus we use a varia-
tion of the evaluation method proposed by Koren
(Koren, 2008).

Rating Prediction: Given an active user i and a
target item j, the system predicts the rating of user

698

Testing Data

Time

Companion
Occasion
Location
All context

Training on Sub Data set

ItemAvg Nocontext Context
1.0067
1.1517
1.0888
1.2657
1.2803
1.1355
1.0206
1.1597

1.0067
1.0891
1.1381
1.0209

-

-

-

Training on the Whole Data set
ItemAvg Nocontext Context
0.9822
1.1052
1.0695
1.2012
1.2121
1.0583
1.0183
1.1597
1.1640
1.0219

0.9829
1.0693
1.0586
1.0183
1.0222

#Reviews
#Contexts
Precision
Recall
F-Score

Time
300
115
84.4%
80.2%
82.2%

Table 4: RMSE on the rating prediction task

CompanionBaseline CompanionClassiﬁer

Occasion

300
148
62.2%
95.8%
75.4%

300
114
77.1%
91.7%
83.8%

200
207
-
-

Accuracy 78.3%

Table 5: Performance of the context extraction module

i on item j. The prediction accuracy is measured
by Root Mean Square Error (RMSE), which is
commonly used in collaborative ﬁltering research.
This task simulates the scenario that we need to
guess a user’s rating about an item, given that the
user has already purchased/selected the item.

For each data set (Time, Companion, Location,
Occasion and All), we randomly sample 10% for
testing, 80% for training and 10% for validation.

5 Experimental Results
5.1 Performance on Top-K Recommendation
Figure 1(a)-(e) shows the ranking performance on
each data set. The x-axis is the rank and the y-axis
is the portion of relevant products covered by this
level of rank. The results across all data sets are
consistent. With contextual information, PLRM
Context-X outperforms Nocontext, whereas using
context to pre-ﬁlter items (Boolean) does not help.
It means that contextual information can help if
used appropriately, however improperly utilizing
context, such as simply using it as a boolean ﬁlter,
may hurt the recommendation performance. Our
proposed PLRM is an effective way to integrate
contextual information.

RMSE of simply using item’s average rating value
as the prediction is also reported as a reference
since it is a commonly used approach by non per-
sonalized recommender systems. For each con-
text, we can either train the model only on the sub-
set that consists of rating data with related context,
or train on a bigger data set by adding the rating
data without related context. The results on both
settings are reported here. Table 4 shows that uti-
lizing context does not affect the prediction accu-
racy. We may wonder why the effects of adding
context is so different on the rating task compared
with the ranking task. One possible explanation
is that the selection process of a user is inﬂuenced
by context, while how the user rates an item after
selecting it is less relevant to context. For exam-
ple, when a user wants to have a breakfast, he may
prefer a cafeteria rather than a formal restaurant.
However, how the user rates this cafeteria is more
based on user’s experiences in the cafeteria, such
as quality of services, food, price, environment,
etc.

5.3 How does Text Mining Accuracy Affect

Recommendation

5.2 Performance on Rating Prediction Task
Table 4 summaries the RMSE results of differ-
ent approaches on the rating prediction task. The

To evaluate the extraction performance on “Com-
panion”, “Time” and “Occasion”, we randomly
sample some reviews and evaluate the perfor-

699

mance on the samples3. The results are shown in
Table 5. Compared with other contexts, the ex-
traction of companion context is more challenging
and the string matching baseline algorithm pro-
duces signiﬁcantly inferior results. However, by
using a MaxEnt classiﬁer with features selection,
we can boost the precision of the companion con-
text extraction to a level comparable to other con-
texts.

To further investigate the relationship between
the quality of the extracted context and the perfor-
mance of the recommender system, we compare
the recommendation performance of Companion-
Baseline and Companion-Classiﬁer
in Figure
1(d). It shows that improving the quality of the
extraction task leads to a signiﬁcant improvement
on the recommender systems’ top-K ranking task.

6 Conclusions

Reviews widely available online contain a large
amount of contextual information. This paper
proposes to leverage information extraction tech-
niques to help recommender systems to train
better context-aware recommendation models by
mining reviews. We also introduce a probabilis-
tic latent relation model for integrating the cur-
rent context and the user’s long term preferences.
This model takes the advantages of traditional col-
laborative ﬁltering approaches (CF). It also cap-
tures the interaction between contextual informa-
tion and item characteristics. The experimental
results demonstrate that context is an important
factor that affects user choices. If properly used,
contextual information helps ranking based rec-
ommendation systems, probably because context
inﬂuences users’ purchasing decisions. Besides,
more accurate contextual information leads to bet-
ter recommendation models. However, contextual
information does not help the user rating predic-
tion task signiﬁcantly, probably because context
doesn’t matter much given the user has already
chosen a restaurant.

As the ﬁrst step towards using the information

3We sample 300 reviews for “Time” and “Companion”
evaluation. Due to the extremely low probability of occur-
rence of Occasion context, we futher sample 200 reviews
containing Occasion-related expressions and only evaluate
extraction accuracy on these samples

extraction techniques to help contextual recom-
mendation, the techniques used in this paper are
far from optimal. In the future, we will research
more effective text mining techniques for contex-
tual extraction(Mazur and Dale, 2008; McCallum
et al., 2000; Lafferty et al., 2001) at the same time
increasing the amount of annotated review data
for better classiﬁer performance through actively
learning (Laws and Sch¨utze, 2008). We also plan
to work towards a better understanding of con-
textual information in recommender systems, and
explore other types of contextual information in
different types of recommendation tasks besides
restaurant recommendations.

7 Acknowledgements
Part of this research is funded by National Sci-
ence Foundation IIS-0713111 and the Institute of
Education Science. Any opinions, ﬁndings, con-
clusions or recommendations expressed in this pa-
per are the authors’, and do not necessarily reﬂect
those of the sponsors. Bingqing Wang’s work is
done during his stay in the Research and Technol-
ogy Center, Robert Bosch LLC.

References
Adomavicius, Gediminas and Francesco Ricci. 2009.
Recsys’09 workshop 3: workshop on context-aware
recommender systems, cars-2009.
In Proceedings
of the 3rd ACM Conference on Recommender Sys-
tems, RecSys 2009, pages 423–424.

Adomavicius, Gediminas and Alexander Tuzhilin.
2008. Context-aware recommender systems.
In
Proceedings of the 2nd ACM Conference on Rec-
ommender Systems, RecSys 2008, pages 335–336.

Adomavicius, Gediminas, Ramesh Sankaranarayanan,
Shahana Sen, and Alexander Tuzhilin.
2005.
Incorporating contextual
information in recom-
mender systems using a multidimensional approach.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS),
23(1):103–145.

Chu, Wei and Seung-Taek Park. 2009. Personalized
recommendation on dynamic content using predic-
tive bilinear models. In Proceedings of the 18th In-
ternational Conference on World Wide Web, WWW
2009, pages 691–700.

Cunningham, Hamish, Diana Maynard, Kalina
Bontcheva, and Valentin Tablan. 2002. A frame-
work and graphical development environment for

700

robust nlp tools and applications. In Proceedings of
the 40th Anniversary Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, ACL 2002, pages 168–
175.

Koren, Yehuda.

2008.

Factorization meets the
neighborhood: a multifaceted collaborative ﬁltering
model. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining, SIGKDD 2008, pages 426–434.

Lafferty, John D., Andrew McCallum, and Fernando
C. N. Pereira. 2001. Conditional random ﬁelds:
Probabilistic models for segmenting and labeling
sequence data.
In Proceedings of the 18th Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning, ICML
2001, pages 282–289.

Laws, Florian and Hinrich Sch¨utze. 2008. Stopping
criteria for active learning of named entity recogni-
tion. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics, Coling 2008,
pages 465–472, August.

Lee, Hong Joo, Joon Yeon Choi, and Sung Joo Park.
2005. Context-aware recommendations on the mo-
bile web.
In On the Move to Meaningful Internet
Systems 2005: OTM 2005 Workshops, pages 142–
151.

Mazur, Pawel and Robert Dale. 2008. What’s the
high accuracy interpretation of weekday
date?
names.
In Proceedings of the 22nd International
Conference on Computational Linguistics, Coling
2008, pages 553–560.

McCallum, Andrew, Dayne Freitag, and Fernando
C. N. Pereira. 2000. Maximum entropy markov
models for information extraction and segmenta-
tion. In Proceedings of the 17th International Con-
ference on Machine Learning, ICML 2000, pages
591–598.

Oku, Kenta, Shinsuke Nakajima, Jun Miyazaki, and
Shunsuke Uemura. 2007. Investigation for design-
ing of context-aware recommendation system using
svm. In Proceedings of the International MultiCon-
ference of Engineers and Computer Scientists 2007,
IMECS 2007, pages 970–975.

Ratnaparkhi, A. 1998. MAXIMUM ENTROPY MOD-
ELS FOR NATURAL LANGUAGE AMBIGUITY
RESOLUTION. Ph.D. thesis, University of Penn-
sylvania.

Salakhutdinov, Ruslan and Andriy Mnih. 2007. Prob-
abilistic matrix factorization. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 20, Proceedings of
the 21st Annual Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems, NIPS 2007, pages 1257–1264.

