



















































HCAMiner: Mining Concept Associations for Knowledge Discovery through Concept Chain Queries


Coling 2010: Demonstration Volume, pages 29–32,
Beijing, August 2010

HCAMiner: Mining Concept Associations for Knowledge Dis-

covery through Concept Chain Queries 

 

Wei Jin 

Department of Computer Science 

North Dakota State University 

wei.jin@ndsu.edu 

Xin Wu 

Department of Computer Science & Technology 

University of Science and Technology of China 

xinwu@mail.ustc.edu.cn 

 

Abstract 

This paper presents HCAMiner, a system 
focusing on detecting how concepts are 

linked across multiple documents. A tra-

ditional search involving, for example, 

two person names will attempt to find 

documents mentioning both these indi-

viduals. This research focuses on a dif-

ferent interpretation of such a query: 

what is the best concept chain across 

multiple documents that connects these 

individuals? A new robust framework is 

presented, based on (i) generating con-

cept association graphs, a hybrid content 

representation, (ii) performing concept 

chain queries (CCQ) to discover candi-
date chains, and (iii) subsequently rank-

ing chains according to the significance 

of relationships suggested. These func-

tionalities are implemented using an in-

teractive visualization paradigm which 

assists users for a better understanding 

and interpretation of discovered relation-

ships. 

1 Introduction 

There are potentially valuable nuggets of 

information hidden in large document 

collections. Discovering them is important for 

inferring new knowledge and detecting new 

trends. Data mining technology is giving us the 

ability to extract meaningful patterns from large 

quantities of structured data. Collections of text, 

however, are not as amenable to data mining. In 

this demonstration, we describe HCAMiner, a 
text mining system designed to detect hidden 

information between concepts from large text 

collections and expose previously unknown logic 

connections that connect facts, propositions or 

hypotheses.  

In our previous work, we have defined concept 

chain queries (CCQ) (Jin et al , 2007), a special 
case of text mining in document collections fo-

cusing on detecting links between two concepts 

across text documents. A traditional search in-

volving, for example, two person names will at-

tempt to find documents mentioning both of 

these names and produce a list of individual 

pages as result. In the event that there are no 

pages contain both names, it will return “no 

pages found” or pages with one of the names 

ranked by relevancy. Even if two or more interre-

lated pages contain both names, the existing 

search engines cannot integrate information into 

one relevant and meaningful answer. This re-

search focuses on a different interpretation of 

such a query: what is the best concept chain 

across documents that potentially connects these 

two individuals? For example, both may be foot-

ball lovers, but are mentioned in different docu-

ments. This information can only be gleaned 

from multiple documents. A generalization of 

this task involves query terms representing gen-

eral concepts (e.g., airplane crash, foreign policy). 

The goal of this research is to sift through these 

extensive document collections and find such 

hidden links. 

Formally, a concept chain query involving 

concepts A and B has the following meaning: 

find the most plausible relationship between con-

cept A and concept B assuming that one or more 

instances of both concepts occur in the corpus, 

but not necessarily in the same document. We go 

one step further and require the response to in-

clude text snippets extracted from multiple 

documents in which the discovered relationship 

29



occurs. This may assist users with the second 

dimension of the analysis process, i.e., when the 

user has to peruse the documents to figure out the 

nature of the relationship underlying a suggested 

chain.  

2 The Proposed Techniques 

2.1 The new representation framework 

A key part of the solution is the representation 

framework. What is required is something that 

supports traditional IR models (such as the vector 

space model), graph mining and probabilistic 

graphical models. We have formulated a repre-

sentation referred to as concept association 

graphs (CAG). Figure 1 illustrates a small portion 
of CAG that has been constructed based on proc-
essing the 9/11 commission report

1
 in the coun-

terterrorism domain. The inputs for this module 

are paths for data collection and domain-specific 
dictionary containing concepts. In our experi-

ments, we extract as concepts all named entities, 

as well as any noun or noun phrases participating 

in Subject-Verb-Object relationships. Domain 

ontological links are also illustrated, e.g., white 
house is a type of organization. 

 
 

Figure 1. Portion of the CAG 

2.2 Concept profile (CP) and snippet cluster 

generation 

A concept profile (CP) is essentially a set of 
terms that together represent the corresponding 

concept. We generate concept profiles by 

adapting the Local Context Analysis technique in 
Information Retrieval and then integrate them 

into the graphical framework (Jin et al., 2007). 

                                                 
1
 http://www.9-11commission.gov/ 

Particularly, the CP for concept c is built by first 
identifying a relevant set of text segments from 

the corpus in which concept c occurs, and then 
identifying characteristic concepts from this set 

and assessing their relative importance as 

descriptors of concept c. Formally, the profile 
Profile(ci) for concept ci is described by a set of 
its related concepts ck as follows: 
 

 },,,,{)(Pr ,22,11, LL kkiiii ccccofile ωωω=  

 

Weight ωi,k denotes the relative importance of 
ck as an indicator of concept ci and is calculated 
as follows: 

 

n

idfkif k
ki

log

)),(log(
,

×
+= ξω  

 

Where n is the number of relevant text seg-
ments considered for concept ci (in our experi-
ments, the basic unit of segmentation is a sen-
tence). The function f (i, k) quantifies the correla-
tion between concept ci and concept ck and is 
given by 

 

∑
=

×=
n

j
jkji sfsfkif

1

,,),(  

                                               

Where sfi,j is the frequency of concept ci in the 
j-th sentence and sfk,j is the frequency of concept 
ck in the j-th sentence. This can be easily com-
puted by constructing “concept by sentence” ma-

trix Q whose entry Qi,j is the number of times 
concept ci  occurs in sentence sj. (QQ

T)ij then 
represents the number of times concepts ci and cj 
co-occur in sentences across the corpus. The in-

verse document frequency factor is computed as 

 

)
/log

,1max(
λ

k
k

npN
idf =  

Where N is the number of sentences in the 
document collection, npk is the number of sen-
tences containing concept ck. λ is a collection 
dependent parameter (in the experiments λ=3). 
The factor ζ is a constant parameter which avoids 
a value equals to zero for wi,k (which is useful, 
for instance, if the approach is to be used with 

probabilistic framework). Usually, ζ is a small 
factor with values close to 0.1. Table 1 illustrates 

a portion of the CP constructed for concept Bin 

30



Ladin. The best concepts are shown based on 
their relative importance.    

     

Table 1. Portion of CP for Concept ‘Bin 

Ladin’ 

Bin Ladin 

Dimension Value 

Al-qaeda 0.569744 

Afghanistan 0.535689 

Sandi Arabia 0.527825 

Islamist 0.478891 

Islamist Army 0.448877 

Extremist 0.413376 

Ramzi Yorsef 0.407401 

Sudanese 0.370125 

Saddam Hussein 0.369928 

Covert Action 0.349815 

Embassy Bombings 0.313913 

 

Given the information provided by concept 

profiles, the strength of a relation (edge weight in 

the CAG) between concept ci and concept cj is 
measured by the similarity between their respec-

tive profiles. If a concept X is related to another 
concept Y which has a similar context as that of 
X, then such a relation can be coherent and 
meaningful. More precisely, a scalar profile simi-

larity matrix Si,j is defined as follows:  
 

)(ˆ)(ˆ

)(ˆ)(ˆ

,

ji

ji

ji
cCcC

cCcC
S

×

•
=  

       

Where Ĉ(ci) and Ĉ(cj) are profile vectors for 
concepts ci and cj respectively. In terms of text 
mining and knowledge discovery, we also re-

quire the graphical representation relate concepts 

and associations to underlying text snippets in 

the corpus. Without this support, the framework 

is not complete since users need to validate con-

clusions by looking at actual documents. This is 

achieved by associating each edge with a Snip-

pet Cluster, which links the snippets (e.g., sen-

tences) in the corpus to the corresponding asso-

ciations (e.g., co-occurrence of concepts in sen-

tences) represented by edges in the CAG. The 
resulting snippet clusters offer a view of the 

document collection which is highly character-

ized by the presence of concept associations (il-

lustrated in Fig. 1). 

2.3 Concept Chain Generation and Rank-

ing 

Given two concepts of interest designated, con-
cept chain query (CCQ) tries to find if (i) there is 
a direct connection (association) between them, 

or (ii) if they can be connected by several inter-

mediate concepts (paths). Note that finding direct 

links between two concepts is trivial; in the fol-

lowing we mainly focus on discovering and rank-

ing indirect connections between concepts. 

We formulate the CCQ problem as finding op-
timized transitive associations between concepts 

in the CAG. Given the source concept c1 and des-
tination concept cn, the transitive strength of a 
path from c1 to cn made up of the links {(c1, 
c2), … , (cn-1, cn)}, denoted by TS(c1, c2 ,… ,cn), is 
given by: 

)),((),,,( 1
1

121 +

−

=∏= ii
n
in ccwcccTS L  

Where w(ci, ci+1) represents the weight of the 
edge connecting concepts ci and ci+1. The formu-
lation of generating and ranking transitive asso-

ciations is then described as follows with input 

and output constraints specified: 

Given: an edge-weighted graph CAG, vertices 
s and t from CAG, and an integer budget l 
Find: ranked lists of concept chains CCs star-

ing from s and ending at t, one list for each pos-
sible length (i.e., between the shortest connection 

length and the specified maximum length l). 
Within each list, top-K chains that maximize the 
“goodness” function TS(·) is returned. 
Our optimization problem is now to find an 

optimal path that maximizes the “goodness” 

measure for each possible length. This could be 
easily computed using dynamic programming 

given the inductive definition of the goodness 

function TS(·). Notice that in real applications 
there are often cases that users might be inter-

ested in exploring more potential chains instead 

of just one optimal chain, we have thus adapted 

the traditional dynamic programming algorithm 

into finding top-K chains connecting concepts for 
each possible length efficiently. The details of 

algorithm and implementation can be found in 

(Jin et al , 2007).  

3 The System Interface 

Figure 2 illustrates the main HCAMiner visuali-
zation interface. Given the user specified paths 

for data collection and domain specific thesaurus, 

31



the Concept Association Graph is first con-
structed. Analyzers are then provided another 

panel of parameters to guide the discovery proc-

ess, e.g., max_len controls the maximum length 
of desired chains; chain_num specifies the num-
ber of top ranked chains to be returned for each 

possible length. The visualized result for concept 

chain query involving person names “Bush” and 
“Bin Ladin” with parameter values “max_len” 3 
and “chain-num” 5 is shown in Fig. 2. The sys-
tem offers different views of the generated output:  

a) Chain Solution View (in the left pane). This 
view gives the overview of all the generated 

concept chains. 

b) XML Data View (in the upper-right pane). 
This view links each concept chain to the 

underlying text snippets in the corpus in 

which the suggested association occurs. 

Snippets are presented in XML format and 

indexed by docId.snippetID. This makes it 
easier for analyzers to explore only the rele-

vant snippet information concerning the 

query.  

c) Concept Profile View. This view provides 
the profile information for any concept in-

volved in the generated chains. Figure 2 

shows portion of the CP generated for Con-
cept ‘Bin Ladin’ (illustrated on the bottom 

right).  

4 CONCLUSIONS 

This paper introduces HCAMiner, a system fo-
cusing on detecting cross-document links be-

tween concepts. Different from traditional search, 

we interpret such a query as finding the most 

meaningful concept chains across documents that 

connect these two concepts. Specifically, the sys-

tem generates ranked concept chains where the 

key terms representing significant relationships 

between concepts are ranked high. The discov-

ered novel but non-obvious cross-document links 

are the candidates for hypothesis generation, 

which is a crucial initial step for making discov-

eries.  

We are now researching extensions of concept 

chains to concept graph queries. This will enable 

users to quickly generate hypotheses graphs 

which are specific to a corpus. These matched 

instances can then be used to look for other, 

similar scenarios. Ontology guided graph search 

is another focus of future work. 

References 

Jin, Wei, Rohini K. Srihari, and Hung Hay Ho. 2007. 

A Text Mining Model for Hypothesis Generation. 

In Proceedings of the 19th IEEE International 
Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence 
(ICTAI’07), pp. 156-162. 

Jin, Wei, Rohini K. Srihari, Hung Hay Ho, and Xin 

Wu. 2007. Improving Knowledge Discovery in 

Document Collections through Combining Text 

Retrieval and Link Analysis Techniques. In Pro-
ceedings of the 7th IEEE International Conference 
on Data Mining (ICDM’07), pp. 193-202. 

 
Figure 2. Screenshot of the user interface 

32


