Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Computational Linguistics (Coling 2010), pages 80–88,

Beijing, August 2010

80

Self-Annotation for Fine-Grained Geospatial Relation Extraction

Hinrich Sch¨utze
Andre Blessing
Institute for Natural Language Processing

Universit¨at Stuttgart
ner@ifnlp.org

Abstract

A great deal of information on the Web is
represented in both textual and structured
form. The structured form is machine-
readable and can be used to augment the
textual data. We call this augmentation
– the annotation of texts with relations
that are included in the structured data –
self-annotation.
In this paper, we intro-
duce self-annotation as a new supervised
learning approach for developing and im-
plementing a system that extracts ﬁne-
grained relations between entities. The
main beneﬁt of self-annotation is that it
does not require manual labeling. The in-
put of the learned model is a represen-
tation of the free text, its output struc-
tured relations. Thus, the model, once
learned, can be applied to any arbitrary
free text. We describe the challenges for
the self-annotation process and give re-
sults for a sample relation extraction sys-
tem. To deal with the challenge of ﬁne-
grained relations, we implement and eval-
uate both shallow and deep linguistic anal-
ysis, focusing on German.

Introduction

1
In the last years, information extraction has be-
come more important in domains like context-
aware systems (e.g. Nexus (D¨urr et al., 2004)) that
need a rich knowledge base to make the right de-
cisions in different user contexts. Geospatial data
are one of the key features in such systems and
need to be represented on different levels of de-
tail. Data providers do not cover all these lev-

els completely. To overcome this problem, ﬁne-
grained information extraction (IE) methods can
be used to acquire the missing knowledge. We
deﬁne ﬁne-grained IE as methods that recognize
entities at a ﬁner grain than standard categories
like person, location, and organization. Further-
more, the quality of the data in context-aware sys-
tems plays an important role and updates by an in-
formation extraction component can increase the
overall user acceptance.

For both issues an information extraction sys-
tem is required that can handle ﬁne-grained rela-
tions, e.g., “X is a suburb of Y” or “the river X
is a tributary of Y” – as opposed to simple con-
tainment. The World Wide Web offers a wealth of
information about geospatial data and can be used
as source for the extraction task. The extraction
component can be seen as a kind of sensor that we
call text senor (Blessing et al., 2006).

In this paper, we address the problem of de-
veloping a ﬂexible system for the acquisition of
relations between entities that meets the above
desiderata. We concentrate on geospatial entities
on a ﬁne-grained level although the approach is
in principle applicable to any domain. We use
a supervised machine learning approach, includ-
ing several features on different linguistic lev-
els, to build our system. Such a system highly
depends on the quality and amount of labeled
data in the training phase. The main contri-
bution of this paper is the introduction of self-
annotation, a novel approach that allows us to
eliminate manual labeling (although training set
creation also involves costs other than labeling).
Self-annotation is based on the fact that Word
Wide Web sites like Wikipedia include, in addi-

81

tion to unstructured text, structured data. We use
structured data sources to automatically annotate
unstructured texts. In this paper, we use German
Wikipedia data because it is a good source for the
information required for our context-aware sys-
tem and show that a system created without man-
ual labeling has good performance.

Our trained model only uses text, not the struc-
tured data (or any other markup) of the input doc-
uments. This means that we can train an informa-
tion extractor on Wikipedia and then apply it to
any text, regardless of whether this text also con-
tains structured information.

In the ﬁrst part of this paper, we discuss
the challenges of self-annotation including some
heuristics which can easily be adapted to different
relation types. We then describe the architecture
of the extraction system. The components we de-
velop are based on the UIMA (Unstructured In-
formation Management Architecture) framework
(Hahn et al., 2008) and include two linguistic en-
gines (OpenNLP1, FSPar). The extraction task is
performed by a supervised classiﬁer; this classi-
ﬁer is also implemented as a UIMA component
and uses the ClearTK framework. We evaluate our
approach on two types of ﬁne-grained relations.

2 Related work

Jiang (2009) also addresses the issue of super-
vised relation extraction when no large manually
labeled data set is available. They use only a few
seed instances of the target relation type to train
a supervised relation extraction system. However,
they use multi-task transfer learning including a
large amount of labeled instances of other relation
types for training their system.
In contrast, our
work eliminates manual labeling by using struc-
tured data to annotate the relations.

Wu and Weld (2007) extract facts from in-
foboxes and link them with their corresponding
representation in the text. They discuss several is-
sues that occur when using infoboxes as a knowl-
edge base, in particular, (i) the fact that infoboxes
are incomplete; and (ii) schema drift. Schema
drift occurs when authors over time use differ-
ent attribute names to model facts or the same

1http://opennlp.sourceforge.net/

attributes are used to model different facts. So
the semantics of the infoboxes changes slightly
and introduces noise into the structured informa-
tion. Their work differs from self-annotation in
that they are not interested in the creation of self-
annotated corpora that can be used as training data
for other tasks. Their goal is to develop methods
that make infoboxes more consistent.

Zhang and Iria (2009) use a novel entity extrac-
tion method to automatically generate gazetteers
from seed lists using Wikipedia as knowledge
source. In contrast to our work they need struc-
tured data for the extraction while our system fo-
cuses on the extraction of information from un-
structured text. Methods that are applicable to
any unstructured text (not just the text in the
Wikipedia) are needed to increase coverage be-
yond the limited number of instances covered in
Wikipedia.
annotate
Nothman
Wikipedia’s
struc-
tured data. The type of structured data they use is
hyperlinking (as opposed to infoboxes) and they
use it to derive a labeled named entity corpus.
They show that the quality of the annotation is
comparable to other manually labeled named
entity recognition gold standards. We interpret
their results as evidence that self-annotation can
be used to create high quality gold standards.

et
unstructured

(2009)

using

also

text

al.

3 Task deﬁnition
In this section, we describe the annotation task;
give a deﬁnition of the relation types covered in
this paper; and introduce the extraction model.

We focus on binary relations between two re-
lation arguments occurring in the same sentence.
To simplify the self-annotation process we restrict
the ﬁrst argument of the relation to the main en-
tity of the Wikipedia article. As we are building
text sensors for a context aware system, relations
between geospatial entities are of interest. Thus
we consider only relations that use a geospatial
named entity as second argument.

We create the training set by automatically
identifying all correct binary relations in the text.
To this end, we extract the relations from the
structured part of the Wikipedia, the infoboxes.
Then we automatically ﬁnd the corresponding

82

sentences in the text and annotate the relations
(see section 4). All other not yet marked binary
relations between the main entity and geospatial
entities are annotated as negative samples. The
result of this step is a self-annotated training set.
the self-
annotated training set is used to train the extrac-
tion model. The model only takes textual features
as input and can be applied to any free text.

In the second step of our task,

3.1 Classiﬁcation task and relations used
Our relation extraction task is modeled as a classi-
ﬁcation task which considers a pair of named en-
tities and decides whether they occur in the re-
quested relation or not. The classiﬁer uses ex-
tracted features for this decision. Features be-
long to three different classes. The ﬁrst class con-
tains token-based features and their linguistic la-
bels like part-of-speech, lemma, stem. In the sec-
ond class, we have chunks that aggregate one or
more tokens into complex units. Dependency re-
lations between the tokens are represented in the
third class.

Our classiﬁer is applicable to a wide spectrum
of geospatial relation types. For the purposes of
a focused evaluation, we selected two relations.
The ﬁrst type contains rivers and the bodies of
water into which they ﬂow. We call it river-
bodyOfWater relation. Our second type is com-
posed of relations between towns and the corre-
sponding suburb. We call this town-suburb rela-
tion.

3.2 Wikipedia as resource
Wikipedia satisﬁes all corpus requirements for our
task. It contains a lot of knowledge about geospa-
tial data with unstructured (textual) and structured
information. We consider only German Wikipedia
articles because our target application is a German
context aware system.
In relation extraction for
German, we arguably face more challenges – e.g.,
more complex morphology and freer word order –
than we would in English.

For this work we consider only a subset of the
German Wikipedia. We use all articles that belong
to the following categories: Rivers by country,
Mountains by country, Valleys by country, Islands
by country, Mountain passes by country, Forests

by country and Settlements by country.

For the annotation task we use the structural
content of Wikipedia articles. Most articles be-
longing to the same categories use similar tem-
plates to represent structured information. One
type of template is the infobox, which con-
tains pairs of attributes and their values. These
attribute-value pairs specify a wide range of
geospatial relation types including ﬁne-grained
relations. In this work we consider only the in-
fobox data and the article names from the struc-
tured data.

For context-aware systems ﬁne-grained relation
types are particularly relevant. Such relations are
not represented in resources like DBPedia (Auer
et al., 2007) or Yago (Suchanek et al., 2007) al-
though they also consist of infobox data. Hence,
we have to build our own extraction component
(see section 5.2) when using infoboxes.

4 Self-Annotation
Self-annotation is a two-fold task. First, the struc-
tured data, in our case the infoboxes of Wikipedia
articles, must be analyzed to get all relevant
attribute-value pairs. Then all relevant geospatial
entities are marked and extracted. In a second step
these entities must be matched with the unstruc-
tured data.

In most cases, the extraction of the named en-
tities that correspond to the required relations is
trivial because the values in the infoboxes con-
sist only of one single entity or one single link.
But in some cases the values contain mixed con-
tent which can include links, entities and even
free text. In order to ﬁnd an accurate extraction
method for those values we have developed sev-
eral heuristics. See section 5.2 for discussion.

The second task links the extracted structured
data to tokens in the textual data. Pattern based
string matching methods are not sufﬁcient to iden-
tify all relations in the text. In many cases, mor-
phological rules need to be applied to identify
the entities in the text.
In other cases, the pre-
processed text must be retokenized because the
borders of multi-word expressions are not consis-
tent with the extracted names in step one. One
other issue is that some named entities are a subset
of other named entities (Lonau vs. kleine Lonau;

83

Figure 1: Infobox of the German Wikipedia article
about Gollach.

similar to York vs. New York). We have to use a
longest match strategy to avoid such overlapping
annotations.

The main goal of the self-annotation task is
to reach the highest possible annotation quality.
Thus, only complete extracted relations are used
for the annotation process while incomplete data
are excluded from the training set. This procedure
reduces the noise in the labeled data.

4.1 Example
We use the river-bodyOfWater relation between
the two rivers Gollach and Tauber to describe the
self-annotation steps.

Figure 1 depicts a part of the infobox for the
German Wikipedia article about the river Gollach.
For this relation the attribute M¨undung ‘mouth’ is
relevant. The value contains unstructured infor-
mation (i.e., text, e.g. bei ‘at’ Bieberehren) and
structured information (the link from Bieberehren
to its Wikipedia page). The relation we want to
extract is that the river Gollach ﬂows into the river
Tauber.

Textual content of

Figure 2:
the German
Wikipedia article about Gollach. All named enti-
ties which are relevant for the river-bodyOfWater
relation are highlighted. This article contains two
instances for the relation between Gollach and
Tauber.

Figure 2 shows the textual content of the Gol-
lach article. We have highlighted all relevant
named entities for the self-annotation process.
This includes the name of the article and instances
of the pronoun sie referring to Gollach. Our
matching algorithm identiﬁes two sentences as
positive samples for the relation between Gollach
and Tauber:

• (i) Die Gollach ist ein rechter Nebenﬂuss der
(The
Tauber in Mittel- und Unterfranken.
Gollach is a right tributary of the Tauber in
Middle and Lower Franconia.)

• (ii) Schließlich m¨undet sie in Bieberehren
auf 244 m in die Tauber.
(Finally, it dis-
charges in Bieberehren at 244 m above MSL
into the Tauber.)

5 Processing
In this section we describe how the self-annotation
method and relation extraction is implemented.
First we introduce the interaction with the
Wikipedia resource to acquire the structured
and unstructured information for the processing

Gollach

Gollach

Tauber

Sie

sie

sie

Bieberehren

Gollach

Tauber

Tauber

84

pipeline. Second we present the components of
the UIMA pipeline which are used for the relation
extraction task.

5.1 Wikipedia interaction
We use the JWPL API (Zesch et al., 2008) to
pre-process the Wikipedia data. This interface
provides functions to extract structured and un-
structured information from Wikipedia. How-
ever, many Wikipedia articles do not adhere to
valid Wikipedia syntax (missing closing brack-
ets etc.). The API also does not correctly handle
all Wikipedia syntax constructions. We therefore
have enhanced the API for our extraction task to
get high quality data for German Wikipedia arti-
cles.

Infobox extraction

5.2
As discussed in section 4 infoboxes are the key
resource for the self-annotation step. However
the processing of infoboxes that include attribute-
value pairs with mixed content is not trivial.

For each new relation type an initial manual ef-
fort is required. However, in comparison to the
complete annotation of a training corpus, this ef-
fort is small. First the attributes used in the in-
foboxes of the Wikipedia articles relevant for a
speciﬁc relation have to be analyzed. The results
of this analysis simplify the choice of the cor-
rect attributes. Next, the used values of these at-
tributes must be investigated. If they contain only
single entries (links or named entities) the extrac-
tion is trivial. However, if they consist of mixed
content (see section 4.1) then speciﬁc extraction
methods have to be applied. We investigated dif-
ferent heuristics for the self-annotation process to
get a method that can easily be adapted to new re-
lation types.

Our ﬁrst heuristic includes a set of rules spec-
ifying the extraction of the values from the in-
foboxes. This heuristic gives an insufﬁcient basis
for the self-annotation task because the rich mor-
phology and free word order in German can not
be modeled with simple rules. Moreover, hand-
crafted rules are arguably not as robust and main-
tainable as a statistical classiﬁer trained on self-
annotated training material.

Our second heuristic is a three step process. In

step one we collect all links in the mixed con-
tent and replace them by a placeholder.
In the
second step we tag the remaining content with
the OpenNLP tokenizer to get all named entities.
Both collected lists are then looked up in a lexicon
that contains named entities and the correspond-
ing geospatial classes. This process requires a nor-
malization procedure that includes the application
of morphological methods. The second method
can be easily adapted to new relation types.

5.3 UIMA
The self-annotated corpora are processed by sev-
eral components of the UIMA (M¨uller et al.,
2008) pipeline. The advantage of exchangeable
collection readers is that they seamlessly handle
structured and unstructured data. Another advan-
tage of using UIMA is the possibility to share
components with other research groups. We can
easily exchange different components, like the us-
age of the commonly known OpenNLP process-
ing tools or the FSPar NLP engine (Schiehlen,
2003) (which includes the TreeTagger (Schmid,
1995)). This allows us to experiment with dif-
ferent approaches, e.g., shallow vs. deep analy-
sis. The components we use provide linguistic
analysis on different levels: tokens, morphology,
part of speech (POS), chunking and partial depen-
dency analysis. Figure 4 shows the results after
the linguistic processing of our sample sentence.
For this work only a few annotations are wrapped
as UIMA types: token (incl. lemma, POS), multi-
word, sentence, NP, PP and dependency relations
(labeled edges between tokens). We will intro-
duce our machine learning component in section
5.5. Finally, the CAS consumers allow us to store
extracted facts in a context model.

Figure 3 shows the article about Gollach after
linguistic processing. In the legend all annotated
categories are listed. We highlighted all marked
relations, all references to the article name (re-
ferred to as subject in the ﬁgure) and links. After
selection of the Tauber relation, all annotations for
this token are listed in the right panel.

5.4 Coreference resolution
Using anaphora to refer to the main entity is a
common practice of the authors of Wikipedia ar-

85

Figure 3: Screenshot of the UIMA Annotation-
Viewer.

ticles. Coreference resolution is therefore neces-
sary for our annotation task. A shallow linguis-
tic analysis showed that the writing style is simi-
lar throughout Wikipedia articles. Based on this
observation, we empirically investigated some
geospatial articles and came to the conclusion that
a simple heuristic is sufﬁcient for our coreference
In almost all articles, pro-
resolution problem.
nouns refer to the main entity of the article.
In
addition we include some additional rules to be
able to establish coreference of markables such as
der Fluss ‘the river’ or der Bach ‘the creek’ with
the main entity.

5.5 Supervised relation extraction
We use the ClearTK (Ogren et al., 2008) toolkit,
which is also an UIMA component, for the rela-
tion extraction task. It contains wrappers for dif-
ferent machine learning suites. Our initial exper-
iments showed that the MaximumEntropy clas-
siﬁer achieved the best results for our classiﬁ-
cation task. The toolkit provides additional ex-
tensible feature methods. Because we view self-
annotation and ﬁne-grained named entity recogni-
tion as our main contributions, not feature selec-
tion, we only give a brief overview of the features
we use.

F1 is a window based bag-of-words feature
(window size = 3). It considers lemma and part-
of-speech tag of the tokens. F2 is a phrase based
extractor that uses the parent phrase of both enti-
ties (max 2 levels). F3 is a representation of all

Figure 4: Dependency parser output of the FSPar
framework.

linguistic effort
pos-tagging
chunk-parse
dependency-parse

description
window size 3, LEMMA
parent chunks
dependency paths betw. NEs

F1
F2
F3

Table 1: List of feature types

possible dependency paths between the article’s
main entity and a target entity, where each path
is represented as a feature vector. In most cases,
more than one path is returned by the partial de-
pendency parser (which makes no disambiguation
decisions) and included in the feature representa-
tion. Figure 4 depicts the dependency parser out-
put of our sample sentence. Each pair of square
and circle with the same number corresponds to
one dependency. These different possible depen-
dency combinations give rise to 8 possible paths
between the relation entities Tauber and sie ‘she’
although our example sentence is a very simple
sentence.

6 Evaluation

We evaluate the system in two experiments. The
ﬁrst considers the relation between suburbs and
their parent towns. In the second experiment the
river-bodyOfWater relation is extracted. The ex-
periments are based on the previously described
extracted Wikipedia corpus. For each experiment
a new self-annotated corpus is created that is split
into three parts. The ﬁrst part (60%) is used as
training corpus. The second part (20%) is used
as development corpus. The remaining 20% is
used for the ﬁnal evaluation and was not inspected
while we were developing the extraction algo-
rithms.

TOP

1

münden
flow

1

2

1

2

3

1

2

3

4

ADV

SUBJ

Schließlich
Finally

2

sie
she

in
in

3

Bieberehren

auf
on

4

Meter
meter

in

Tauber

244

die
the

86

6.1 Metric used
Our gold standard includes all relations of each
article. Our metric works on the level of type
and is independent of how often the same relation
occurs in the article. The metric counts a rela-
tion as true positive (TP) if the system extracted
it at least once. If the relation was not found by
the system a false negative (FN) is counted. A
false positive (FP) is given if the system extracts
a relation between two entities that is not part of
the (infobox-derived) gold standard for the article.
All three measures are used to calculate precision
(P = T P
T P +F N ), and F1-
score (F1 = 2 P∗R

T P +F P ), recall (R = T P

P +R).

6.2 Town-suburb extraction
The town-suburb extractor uses one attribute of
the infobox to identify the town-suburb relation.
There is no schema drift in the infobox data and
the values contain only links. Therefore the self-
annotation works almost perfectly. The only ex-
ceptions are articles without an infobox which
cannot be used for training. However, this is not a
real issue because the amount of remaining data is
sufﬁcient: 9000 articles can be used for this task.
The results in table 2 show that the classiﬁer that
uses F1, F2 and F3 (that is, including the depen-
dency features) performs best.

engine
FSPar
FSPar
FSPar

features
F1
F1, F2
F1, F2, F3

F1
64.9
89.6
98.3

recall
79.0%
90.2%
98.8%

precision
55.7%
89.5%
97.8%

Table 2: Results of different feature combinations
on the test set for town-suburb relation

6.3 River-bodyOfWater extraction
For the extraction of the river-bodyOfWater re-
lation the infobox processing is more difﬁcult.
We have to handle more attributes because there
is schema drift between the different users.
It
is hence necessary to merge information coming
from different attribute values. The other difﬁ-
culty is the usage of mixed contents in the values.
Another main difference to the town-suburb rela-
tion is that the river-bodyOfWater relation is often
not mentioned in the ﬁrst sentence (which usually
gives a short deﬁnition about the the main entity).

Thus, the self-annotation method has to deal with
the more complex sentences that are common later
in the article. This also contributes to a more chal-
lenging extraction task.

Our river-bodyOfWater relation corpus consists

of 3000 self-annotated articles.

Table 3 shows the performance of the extrac-
tor using two different linguistic components as
described in section 5.3. As in the case of town-
suburb extraction the classiﬁer that uses all fea-
tures,
including dependency features, performs
best.
engine
FSPar
FSPar
FSPar
OpenNLP
OpenNLP

recall
51.8% 56.6%
72.1% 68.9%
78.3% 74.1%
48.0% 62.8%
73.3% 71.7%

features
F1
F1,F2
F1,F2,F3
F1
F1,F2

precision
47.8%
75.7%
83.0%
38.8%
74.7%

F1

Table 3: Results of different feature combinations
on the test set for river-bodyOfWater extraction

6.4 Evaluation of self-annotation
To evaluate the quality of self-annotation, we ran-
domly selected one set of 100 self-annotated ar-
ticles from each data set and labeled these sets
manually. These annotations are used to calcu-
late the inter-annotator agreement between the hu-
man annotated and machine annotated instances.
We use Cohen’s κ as measure and get a result of
1.00 for the town-suburb relation. For the river-
bodyOfWater relation we got a κ-value of 0.79,
which also indicates good agreement.

We also use a gazetteer to evaluate the qual-
ity of all town-suburb relations that were extracted
for our self-annotated training set. The accuracy
is nearly perfect (only one single error), which is
good evidence for the high quality of Wikipedia.
Required size of self-annotated training set.
The performance of a supervised system depends
on the size of the training data.
In the self-
annotation step a minimum of instances has to be
annotated, but it is not necessary to self-annotate
all available articles.

We reduced the number of articles used in
the training size to test this hypothesis. Reduc-
ing the entire training set of 9000 (respectively,
3000) self-annotated articles to 1000 reduces F1

87

by 2.0% for town-suburb and by 2.4% for river-
bodyOfWater; a reduction to 100 reduces F1 by
8.5% for town-suburb and by 9.3% for river-
bodyOfWater (compared to the 9000/3000 base-
line).

7 Discussion

Wu and Weld (2007) observed schema drift in
their work: Wikipedia authors do not not use in-
fobox attributes in a consistent manner. However,
we did not ﬁnd schema drift to be a large prob-
lem in our experiments. The variation we found
can easily be handled with a small number of
rules. This can be due to the fact that the qual-
ity of Wikipedia articles improved a lot in the last
years through the introduction of automatic main-
tenance tools like bots2. Nevertheless, the devel-
opment of self-annotation for a new relation type
requires some manual work. The developer has to
check the quality of the extraction relations in the
infoboxes. This can lead to some additional adap-
tation work for the used attributes such as merging
or creating rules. However, a perfect coverage is
not required because the extraction system is only
used for training purposes; we only need to ﬁnd
a sufﬁciently large number of positive training in-
stances and do not require exhaustive labeling of
all articles.

It is important to note that considering par-
tially found relations as negative samples has to
be avoided. Wrong negative samples have a gen-
erally unwanted impact on the performance of the
learned extraction model. A developer has to be
aware of this fact. In one experiment, the learned
classiﬁers were applied to the training data and
returned a number of false positive results – 40
in case of the river-bodyOfWater relation. 31 of
these errors were not actual errors because the
self-annotation missed some true instances. Nev-
ertheless, the trained model recognizes these sam-
ples as correct; this could perhaps be used to fur-
ther improve the quality of self-annotation.

Manually labeled data also includes noise and
the beneﬁt of self-annotation is substantial when

the aim is to build a ﬁne-grained relation extrac-
tion system in a fast and cheap way.

The difference of the results between OpenNLP
and FSPar engines are smaller than expected.
Although sentence splitting is poorly done by
OpenNLP the effect on the extraction result is
rather low. Another crucial point is that the
lexicon-based named entity recognizer of the FS-
Par engine that was optimized for named entities
used in Wikipedia has no signiﬁcant impact on the
overall performance. Thus, a basic set of NLP
components with moderate error rates may be suf-
ﬁcient for effective self-annotation.
8 Conclusion
This paper described a new approach to develop-
ing and implementing a complete system to ex-
tract ﬁne-grained geospatial relations by using a
supervised machine learning approach without ex-
pensive manual labeling. Using self-annotation,
systems can be rapidly developed and adapted for
new relations without expensive manual annota-
tion. Only some manual work has to be done
to ﬁnd the right attributes in the infoboxes. The
matching process between infoboxes and text is
not in all cases trivial and for some attributes ad-
ditional rules have to be modeled.
9 Acknowledgment
This project was funded by DFG as part of Nexus
(Collaborative Research Centre, SFB 627).

References
Auer, S¨oren, Christian Bizer, Georgi Kobilarov, Jens
Lehmann, and Zachary Ives. 2007. Dbpedia: A
nucleus for a web of open data. In In 6th Intl Se-
mantic Web Conference, Busan, Korea, pages 11–
15. Springer.

Blessing, Andre, Stefan Klatt, Daniela Nicklas, Stef-
fen Volz, and Hinrich Sch¨utze. 2006. Language-
derived information and context models.
In Pro-
ceedings of 3rd IEEE PerCom Workshop on Context
Modeling and Reasoning (CoMoRea) (at 4th IEEE
International Conference on Pervasive Computing
and Communication (PerCom’06)).

2See en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Bots. The edit his-
tory of many articles shows that there is a lot of automatic
maintenance by bots to avoid schema drift.

D¨urr, Frank, Nicola H¨onle, Daniela Nicklas, Christian
Becker, and Kurt Rothermel. 2004. Nexus–a plat-
form for context-aware applications. In Roth, J¨org,

88

ference (WWW 2007), New York, NY, USA. ACM
Press.

Wu, Fei and Daniel S. Weld. 2007. Autonomously
semantifying wikipedia. In Proceedings of the Six-
teenth ACM Conference on Information and Knowl-
edge Management, CIKM 2007, Lisbon, Portugal,
November 6-10, 2007, pages 41–50.

Zesch, Torsten, Christof M¨uller, and Iryna Gurevych.
2008.
Extracting Lexical Semantic Knowledge
from Wikipedia and Wiktionary. In Proceedings of
the Conference on Language Resources and Evalu-
ation (LREC).

Zhang, Ziqi and Jos´e Iria. 2009. A novel approach to
automatic gazetteer generation using wikipedia. In
People’s Web ’09: Proceedings of the 2009 Work-
shop on The People’s Web Meets NLP, pages 1–9,
Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

editor, 1. Fachgespr¨ach Ortsbezogene Anwendun-
gen und Dienste der GI-Fachgruppe KuVS, pages
15–18, Hagen, Juni. Informatik-Bericht der Fer-
nUniversit¨at Hagen.

Hahn, Udo, Ekaterina Buyko, Rico Landefeld,
Matthias M¨uhlhausen, Michael Poprat, Katrin
Tomanek, and Joachim Wermter.
An
overview of JCoRe, the JULIE lab UIMA compo-
nent repository.
In Proceedings of the LREC’08
Workshop ‘Towards Enhanced Interoperability for
Large HLT Systems: UIMA for NLP‘, Marrakech,
Morocco, May.

2008.

Jiang, Jing. 2009. Multi-task transfer learning for
weakly-supervised relation extraction.
In ACL-
IJCNLP ’09: Proceedings of the Joint Conference of
the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th In-
ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing of the AFNLP: Volume 2, pages 1012–
1020, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

M¨uller, Christof, Torsten Zesch, Mark-Christoph
M¨uller, Delphine Bernhard, Kateryna Ignatova,
Iryna Gurevych, and Max M¨uhlh¨auser. 2008. Flex-
ible uima components for information retrieval re-
search.
In Proceedings of the LREC 2008 Work-
shop ’Towards Enhanced Interoperability for Large
HLT Systems: UIMA for NLP’, Marrakech, Mo-
rocco, May 31, 2008. 24–27.

Nothman, Joel, Tara Murphy, and James R. Curran.
2009. Analysing wikipedia and gold-standard cor-
pora for ner training.
In EACL ’09: Proceedings
of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 612–620, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Ogren, Philip V., Philipp G. Wetzler, and Steven
Bethard. 2008. Cleartk: A uima toolkit for sta-
tistical natural language processing.
In UIMA for
NLP workshop at Language Resources and Evalua-
tion Conference (LREC).

Schiehlen, Michael. 2003. Combining deep and shal-
low approaches in parsing german.
In ACL ’03:
Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting on Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 112–
119, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Schmid, Helmut. 1995.

Improvements in part-of-
speech tagging with an application to german. In In
Proceedings of the ACL SIGDAT-Workshop, pages
47–50.

Suchanek, Fabian M., Gjergji Kasneci, and Gerhard
Weikum. 2007. Yago: A Core of Semantic Knowl-
edge.
In 16th international World Wide Web con-

