719

Coling 2010: Poster Volume, pages 719–724,

Beijing, August 2010

Tibetan Number Identification Based on Classification of Number 

Components in Tibetan Word Segmentation 

Huidan Liu 

Institute of Software, Chinese 

Academy of Sciences, 

 Graduate University of the 
Chinese Academy of Sciences 
huidan@iscas.ac.cn 

Weina Zhao 

Beijing Language and 
 Culture University, 

Qinghai Normal University 
weina@iscas.ac.cn 

Minghua Nuo 

Institute of Software, Chinese 

Academy of Sciences, 

 Graduate University of the 
Chinese Academy of Sciences
minghua@iscas.ac.cn

Li Jiang 

Jian Wu 

Institute of Software,  

 Institute of Software,  

Yeping He 

Institute of Software,  

Chinese Academy of Sciences 
jiangli@iscas.ac.cn 

Chinese Academy of Sciences
wujian@iscas.ac.cn 

Chinese Academy of Sciences
yeping@iscas.ac.cn 

 

Abstract 

Tibetan  word  segmentation  is  essential 
for Tibetan information processing. Peo-
ple mainly use the basic machine match-
ing method which is based on dictionary 
to  segment  Tibetan  words  at  present, 
because  there  is  no  segmented  Tibetan 
corpus which can be used for training in 
Tibetan  word  segmentation.  But  the 
method based on dictionary is not fit to 
Tibetan  number  identification.  This  pa-
per studies the characteristics of Tibetan 
numbers,  and  then,  proposes  a  method 
to  identify  Tibetan  numbers  based  on 
classification  of  number  components. 
The  method  first  tags  every  number 
component according to the class it be-
longs to while segmenting, and then up-
dates  the  tag  series  according  to  some 
predefined  rules.  At  last  adjacent  num-
ber components are combined to form a 
Tibetan  number  if  they  meet  a  certain 
requirement.  In  the  testing  result  from 
7938K Tibetan corpus, the identification 
accuracy is 99.21%. 

Introduction 

1 
As  a  phonetic  writing  script,  Tibetan  syllables 
are  separated  with  syllable  dots.  But  like  Chi-
nese,  there  is  no  separator  between  Tibetan 

words.  Tibetan  word  segmentation  is  essential 
for  Tibetan  information  processing.  In  recent 
years, many experts did much work on Tibetan 
word  segmentation.  CHEN  Yuzhong  (2003) 
proposed  a  method  based  on  case  auxiliary 
words  and  continuous  features  to  segment  Ti-
betan text. Based on this method, using reinstal-
lation rules to identify Abbreviated Words, CAI 
Zhijie  (2009)  designed  and  implemented  the 
Banzhida  Tibetan  word  segmentation  system. 
QI  (2006)  proposed  a  three  level  method  to 
segment  Tibetan  text.  Dolha  (2007),  Zhaxijia 
(2007), CAI Rangjia (2009) and TASHI (2009) 
researched  the  word  categories  and  annotation 
scheme  for  Tibetan  corpus  and  the  parts-of-
speech  and  tagging  set  standards.  At  present, 
there  is  no  corpus  for  Tibetan  word  segmenta-
tion.  However,  models  which  are  used  in  Chi-
nese  word  segmentation,  such  as  HMM,  ME, 
CRF, have to be trained with segmented corpus. 
As a result, we can’t use them in Tibetan word 
segmentation.  So  people  mainly  use  machine 
matching method based on dictionary in Tibetan 
word segmentation. But machine matching can 
not be used to identify Tibetan numbers because 
we can not include all numbers in the dictionary. 
In Tibetan text, numbers have 3 different rep-
resentations.  The  first  is  Arabic  numbers,  such 
as “2010”. The second is Tibetan alphabet num-
bers  composed  with  Tibetan  digital  characters: 
༠(0),༡(1),༢(2),༣(3),༤(4),༥(5), ༦(6),  ༧(7), 

720

༨(8),༩(9), such as “༢༠༡༠”(2010).  The third is 
Tibetan syllable numbers(“Tibetan numbers” in 
short)  which  are  composed  with  Tibetan  sylla-
bles,  such  as  བཅོ་ལྔ།(fifteen).The  former  two 
classes of numbers can be identified by combin-
ing  adjacent  number  characters.  However,  this 
method is not fit to the third class, because some 
Tibetan syllables are used not only in numbers 
but also in other common words. 

According to papers written by Dolha (2007), 
Zhaxijia  (2007),  CAI  Rangjia  (2009)  and 
TASHI  (2009),  Tibetan  numbers  should  be 
taken as single words in Tibetan word segmen-
tation, however, we haven’t found any paper on 
the  issue  of  the  identification  of  Tibetan  num-
bers in Tibetan word segmentation. 

In this paper, we propose a method which is 
based  on  classification  of  number  components 
to identify the third class of numbers. 
2  Composition of Tibetan numbers 
In  Tibetan,  we  use  the  following  syllables 
(words) to express the meanings of number one 
to nine: གཅིག གཉིས། གསུམ། བཞི། ལྔ། དྲུག བདུན། བརྒྱད། དགུ།, 
and  the  following  different  syllables  for  ten, 
hundred,  thousand,  ten  thousand,  million,  ten 
million  and so on: བཅུ། བརྒྱ། སྟོང་། ཁྲི། འབུམ། ས་ཡ། བྱེ་བ། 
དུང་ཕྱུར།…..Generally,  Tibetan  syllable  numbers 
are  composed  by  these  syllables,  but  some 
syllables have variants, and sometimes we have 
to  use  different  conjunctions  according  to  the 
context.  The  composition  of  Tibetan  syllable 
numbers has the following rules. 

1.  Number 1-10 are expressed with the syl-
lables  mentioned  above,  but  sometimes 
variants are used: ཆིག(1),ཉིས།(2),སུམ།(3). 
2.  Number “tens” (20, 30, 40 …) have the 
form  of  “(2-9)+བཅུ”.  but  in  “20”,  “30”, 
variants of “2” and “3” are used, while in 
“60”,  “70”,  “80”,  variant  of  “ten”(ཅུ།)  is 
used. 
form  of 
“བཅུ(10)+(1-9)”,  but  in  “13”  and  “15” 
variant of “10”(བཅོ།) is used. 

3.  Number  11-19  have 

4.  Number  21-99,  except  “tens”,  have  the 
form of “(tens)+conjunction+(1-9)”. Dif-
ferent conjunctions are used according to 

the 

5. 

different “tens”: རྩ། སོ།  ཞེ། ང་། རེ། དོན། གྱ། གོ. 
Sometimes,  this  form  is  abbreviated  to 
“conjunction+(1-9)”. 
In number which is larger then 100, con-
junction  (དང)  may  be  used,  just  like 
“and”  in  the  reading  of  English  number 
“115”.  Sometimes,  (མེད)  is  used  to  ex-
press  the  meaning  of  vacancy.  For  ex-
ample, number “507” is “ལྔ་བརྒྱ་བཅུ་མེད་བདུན”: 
ལྔ་(five) 
(ten)མེད་(has 
no)བདུན (seven).  

བརྒྱ་(hundred)བཅུ་ 

6.  Composition  of  numbers  larger  than 

7.  Ordinal numeral has the form of “(cardi-

1000 can be deduced. 
nal numeral)+(པorཔོ)”. 

8.  Multiples have the form of “ལྡབ+ (cardi-
9.  Fractions  have  the  form  of  “(cardinal 

nal numeral)”. 

numeral) +ཆ+ (cardinal numeral)”. 

10.  Decimals  have  the  form  of  “(cardinal 
numeral)  +དང+(གྲངས་ཆུངorཚེག)+  (cardinal 
numeral)”.  “གྲངས་ཆུང”  or  “ཚེག”  means the 
decimal point. 

11.  Approximate  numbers  have  the  form  of 
“(cardinal numeral)+(suffix)”. Suffix can 
be one of (ཚོ། ཙམ། ཡས་མས། ལྷག་ཙམ། གྲངས་ཁ་ཤས། 
ཕྲག་ཁ་ཤས།…) according to the meaning to 
be expressed. 

12.  Some  Tibetan  numbers  don’t  obey  the 
above rules. They have no form of num-
ber, but have meanings of number, such 
as “དང་པོ” (first). 

3  Tibetan number identification 
In this paper, we call all syllables mentioned in 
the  previous  section  “number  components”  in 
general. For some of these number components, 
we  can  take  it  as  a  part  of  number  when  we 
meet one of them. For others, we can’t, because 
they can be used to express non-number mean-
ings. So we have to check whether it is a part of 
a  number  according  to  the  context  when  we 
meet a number component. 

Tibetan number identification is a part of Ti-
betan word segmentation. In Tibetan word seg-

721

mentation  system,  Tibetan  text  is  segmented 
into  words  by  maximum  matching  method.  In 
this  procedure,  every  Tibetan  number  is  seg-
mented  into number  components.  Then,  identi-
fication  module  combines  adjacent  number 
components  when  they  meet  a  certain  prede-
fined rules. 

In this section, we first briefly introduce the 
whole procedure of Tibetan word segmentation, 
then  the  classification  of  number  components 
and  the  tagging  method  to  identify  Tibetan 
number. 
3.1  Flow of Tibetan word segmentation 

Input

Tibetan Text

Sentence 
breaking

Parts 

segmentation

Maximum 

matching word 
segmentation & 
abbreviated word 

identification

Tibetan number 
identification

Critical dictionary

Common 
dictionary

Number 
component 
dictionary

Output

Segmentation 

result

 

Figure 1. The flow chart of Tibetan word seg-

mentation 

 

As shown in Figure 1, for the input Tibetan text, 
we first segment it into sentences. Then we seg-
ment  each  sentence 
into  parts  with  case-
auxiliary words. In this procedure, a critical dic-
tionary is used because case-auxiliary words can 
be a part of some Tibetan words (critical words). 
When  we  meet  a  critical  word  in  Tibetan  text, 
we  should  not  segment  it  into  shorter  words. 
Next,  we  segment  each  part  into  words  and 

identify the abbreviated word (CAI Zhijie, 2009) 
by maximum matching method with a common 
dictionary and the number components diction-
ary.  At  last,  we  identify  Tibetan  numbers  and 
output word segmentation result. 

In  the  procedure  of  segmenting  a  part  into 
words,  a  Tibetan  number  is  segmented  into 
words; we  must ensure every one of them is a 
number  component.  To  do  this,  both  common 
dictionary  and  number  components  dictionary 
are used. As we use maximum matching method, 
all  Tibetan  number  words  in  the  common  dic-
tionary should be obsolete. 

Identification module tags each number com-
ponent with a tag according to the class which it 
belongs to, then updates the tags and combines 
adjacent number components when they meet a 
certain predefined rules. 
3.2  Classification of number components 
We  classify  number  components  into  the  fol-
lowing five classes according to their functions 
and ambiguity. 

Basic number: these number components are 
the  basis  of  Tibetan  numbers.  Every  one  of 
them can be an independent number. If we meet 
it in context, we should take it as a part of a Ti-
betan  number.  Including:  Tibetan  number  1-
9(གཅིག གཉིས། གསུམ། བཞི། ལྔ། དྲུག བདུན། བརྒྱད། དགུ།); ten, 
hundred,  thousand,  ten  thousand,  million,  ten 
million and so on(བཅུ། བརྒྱ། སྟོང་། ཁྲི། འབུམ། ས་ཡ། བྱེ་བ། 
དུང་ཕྱུར།…); and their variants. 

Number prefix: when it is used as a part of 
Tibetan number, the next word must be a basic 
number,  while  the  previous  word  may  be  or 
may  not  be  a  number  component.  Including: 
abbreviations of “(tens)+conjunction” (སོ།  ཞེ། ང་། 
རེ།  དོན།  གྱ།  གོ);  variants  of  1,  2,  3(ཆིག  ཉིས།  སུམ); 
decimal point(གྲངས་ཆུང་andཚེག). 

Number linker: when it is used as a part of 
Tibetan number, both the previous word and the 
next word must be number components. These 
include (དང་། ཆ མེད་).  Conjunctions (སོ།  ཞེ། ང་། རེ། 
དོན། གྱ། གོ) belong to number prefix class, so we 
don’t  include  them  in  this  class.  But  Conjunc-
tion  (རྩ)  doesn’t  belong  to  number  prefix  class, 
we include it in this class. 

722

Number  suffix:  these  number  components 
are used to express the meaning of “total num-
ber”, “approximate number”, and “ordinal num-
ber” and so on. They follow basic number and 
should  be  taken  as  a  part  of  Tibetan  number 
word. Including: ཚོ། ཙམ། ཡས་མས། ལྷག་ཙམ། གྲངས་ཁ་ཤས། 
ཕྲག་ཁ་ཤས།… 

Independent  number:  these  number  com-
ponents  have  no  form  of  number,  but  have 
meanings of number, such as “དང་པོ” (first). 

The  difference  between  “basic  number”  and 
“Independent  number”  is:  a  basic  number  can 
be a Tibetan number itself or a part of a Tibetan 
number,  while  an  independent  number  is  a  Ti-
betan  number  itself,  but  it  can’t  be  a  part  of  a 
Tibetan number. 
3.3  Number identification 
As  shown  in  Figure  2,  identification  module 
tags each number component with a tag accord-
ing to the class which it belongs to, then updates 
the tags and combines adjacent number compo-
nents when they meet a certain predefined rules. 
 

 
Figure 2. The flow of number identification 

Tag 
N (Number) 
P (Prefix) 
L (Linker) 
S(Suffix) 
I(Independent)

Class 
Basic number 
Number prefix 
Number linker 
Number suffix 
Independent number 
Other(non-number)  O (Other) 
Table 1. Classes and their tags 

 

 

We assign every class with a tag, as shown in 
Table  1.  The  tagging  procedure  screens  every 
segmented  part  of  Tibetan  sentences,  and  tags 
every  word  with  a  tag  according  to  the  class 
which the word belongs to. If the word is not a 
number component, we tag it with “O” (Other). 
As some number components can be used to 
express  non-number  meanings,  (the  cases  exist 
in  both  number  prefix  class  and  number  linker 
class), we have to check whether it is a part of a 
number  according  to  the  context.  For  number 

prefix, we take it as a part of number only if it is 
followed by a basic number, while for  number 
linker, only if it follows a basic number and it is 
followed  by  another  basic  number.  We  define 
two rules to do this work. 

 
Rule 1: update tag series “PN” to “NN”. 
Rule 2: update tag series “NLN” to “NNN”. 
 
The tags updating algorithm applies the rules 
to the current word series until no tag is updated. 
After tags updating, the tag of a number prefix 
(“P”) is updated to “N” when it is a part of Ti-
betan number in the context, but the tag will still 
be “P” when it is not a part of Tibetan number. 
It is the same for number linkers. 

Combination  algorithm  combines  adjacent 
number  components  to  form  a  Tibetan  number 
word.  It  mainly  combines  continuous  number 
components  with  tags  “NN…N”,  and  the  fol-
lowing word is combined too if it has a tag “S”. 
The  tag  of  the  number  is  updated  to  “N”.  All 
words with tag “N” or “I” are taken as Tibetan 
numbers after combination. 

tence: 

Then the segmentation result is output. 
For  example,  for  the  following  Tibetan  sen-
ལས་འཛོལ་མང་པོ་ཞིག་ནི་བརྒྱ་ཆ་གཅིག་གམ་ཐ་ན་བརྒྱ་ཆ་གྲངས་ཆུང་ལྔའི་
ནང་ཁོངས་ཀྱི་ལྷུ་ལག་གཅིག་ལ་སྐྱོན་ཤོར་ནས་བྱུང་འདུག  (A  consider-
able parts of accidents were due to the faults of 
1% or even 0.5% of components.) 
After  parts  segmentation  and  maximum 
matching word segmentation, it is segmented to: 
ལས་འཛོལ་/ མང་པོ་/ ཞིག་/ ནི་/ བརྒྱ་/ ཆ་/ གཅིག་/ གམ་/ ཐ་ན་/ 
བརྒྱ་/ ཆ་/ གྲངས་ཆུང་/ ལྔ/ འི་/ ནང་ཁོངས་/ ཀྱི་/ ལྷུ་ལག་གཅིག་/ ལ་/ 
སྐྱོན་ཤོར་/ ནས་/ བྱུང་/ འདུག/ 

After tagging: 
ལས་འཛོལ་/(O) མང་པོ་/(O) ཞིག་/(O) ནི་/(O) བརྒྱ་/(N) 
ཆ་/(L) གཅིག་/(N) གམ་/(O) ཐ་ན་/(O) བརྒྱ་/(N) ཆ་/(L) 
གྲངས་ཆུང་/(P)  ལྔ/(N)  འི་/(O)  ནང་ཁོངས་/(O)  ཀྱི་/(O) 
ལྷུ་ལག་གཅིག་/(O) ལ་/(O) སྐྱོན་ཤོར་/(O) ནས་/(O) བྱུང་/(O) 
འདུག/(O) 

The corresponding tag series is: 
OOOONLNOONLPNOOOOOOOOO 
After the first run of tags updating, the tag se-

ries is changed to: 

OOOONNNOONLNNOOOOOOOOO 

723

After the second run of tags updating, the tag 

series is changed to: 

OOOONNNOONNNNOOOOOOOOO 
In the third run of tags updating, no tag is up-
dated.  Then,  combination  algorithm  combines 
adjacent  number  components  corresponding  to 
the continuous “N” tags. The result is: 
ལས་འཛོལ་/  མང་པོ་/  ཞིག་/  ནི་/  བརྒྱ་ཆ་གཅིག་/  གམ་/  ཐ་ན་/ 
བརྒྱ་ཆགྲངས་ཆུང་ལྔ/  འི་/  ནང་ཁོངས་/  ཀྱི་/  ལྷུ་ལག་གཅིག་/  ལ་/ 
སྐྱོན་ཤོར་/ ནས་/ བྱུང་/ འདུག/ 

The corresponding tag series is: 
OOOONOONOOOOOOOOO 
It  has  two  “N”  tags,  which  means  two  Ti-

betan numbers are identified. 
4  Experiment 
Byte 
Corpus 
Corpus 1  1624K 
Corpus 2  1334K 
Corpus 3  1408K 
Corpus 4  1015K 
Corpus 5  1311K 
Corpus 6  1246K 
7938K 

TNS
Sentence  BNS 
1667
2590 
13957 
1076
11441 
1748 
969
1751 
11923 
672
1212 
8453 
897
10445 
1613 
1474 
10009 
880
10388  6161
66228 

Total 

Table 2. Information about the 6 corpuses 

 

Accuracy(%)

99.5

99.38

99.41 99.42

99.21

99.60

99.50

99.40

99.30

99.20

99.10

99.00

98.90

98.80

98.70

98.60

98.98

98.92

Corpus 1

Corpus 2

Corpus 3

Corpus 4

Corpus 5

Corpus 6

Total

Figure 3. Accuracy of Tibetan number identifi-

cation on 6 corpuses 

 
As there is no corpus for Tibetan word segmen-
tation, we have to make experiment on original 

 

Tibetan  texts.  We  make  use  of  several  books 
which are written in Tibetan, and collect many 
web pages from several Tibetan web sites. After 
preprocessing,  we  get  six  corpuses.  The  basic 
information about the corpuses is shown in Ta-
ble 2. Note that, in Table 2, the column “BNS” 
includes  all  sentences  which  have  in  it  at  least 
one  number  component  belonging  to  basic 
number class, while the column “TNS” includes 
all  sentences  which  have  at  least  one  Tibetan 
number in it. The count of the former is signifi-
cantly larger than the count of the later because 
some  basic  numbers  are  used  in  idioms  and 
proverbs  which  should  be  segmented  as  single 
words, thus we don’t take them as number com-
ponents  under  this  circumstance.  Figure  3 
shows the results of our experiment. As we can 
see, the total identification accuracy is 99.21%. 
As  we  have  included  all  basic  numbers  in  our 
method, theoretically the recall is 100%.  

After  analyzing  the  results,  we  find  that 
wrongly  identified  words  can  be  divided  into 
two  classes.  One  is  that  there  is  a  conjunction 
(དང) between two Tibetan numbers, but is taken 
as one Tibetan number, such as “བཅུ་དང་ཉི་ཤུ།”  (ten 
and twenty), “ཁྲི་གཅིག་དང་ཁྲི་གཉིས” (ten thousand and 
twenty  thousand).  The  other  is  that  some  Ti-
betan numbers has other non-number meanings 
in the context, but our algorithm takes them as 
numbers. For instance, “ཞེ་གཅིག” means 41 when 
it is used as a number, but it has another mean-
ing  of  “similarly”;  “དོན་ལྔ”  means  75  when  it  is 
used as a number, but it has the meaning of “the 
five internal organs”. 
5  Conclusion 
Tibetan  syllables  are  separated  with  syllable 
dots. But like Chinese, there is no separator be-
tween  Tibetan  words.  Tibetan  word  segmenta-
tion is essential for Tibetan information process-
ing.    People  mainly  use  machine  matching  in 
Tibetan  word  segmentation  base  on  dictionary. 
But machine matching can not be used to iden-
tify  Tibetan  numbers  because  we  can  not  in-
clude all numbers in our dictionary. This paper 
proposes  a  method  to  tag  number  components 
according to the classes they belong to, and then 
apply predefined rules to update tag series, and 
next  combine  adjacent  number  components  to 

724

and  tagging  set  standards  of  Tibetan  information 
process”, the 11th Symposium on Chinese Minority 
Information Processing. 

form  a  Tibetan  number.  In  the  testing  result 
from  7938K  Tibetan  corpus,  the  identification 
accuracy  is  99.21%,  which  means  that  this 
method is feasible to be applied to Tibetan word 
segmentation. 

Acknowledgement 
We  thank  the  anonymous  reviewers  for  their 
insightful comments that helped us improve the 
quality of the paper. 
 

References 
CHEN Yuzhong, LI Baoli, YU Shiwen, LAN Cuoji. 
2003.  An  Automatic  Tibetan  Segmentation 
Scheme Based on Case Auxiliary Words and Con-
tinuous  Features,  Applied  Linguistics,  2003(01): 
75-82. 

CHEN  Yuzhong,  LI  Baoli,  YU  Shiwen.  2003.  The 
Design  and  Implementation  of  a  Tibetan  Word 
Segmentation  System,  Journal  of  Chinese  Infor-
mation Processing, 17(3): 15-20. 

CAI  Rangjia.  2009.  Research  on  the  Word  Catego-
ries and Its Annotation Scheme for Tibetan Cor-
pus,  Journal  of  Chinese  Information  Processing, 
23(04):107-112 

CAI  Zhijie.  2009.  Identification  of  Abbreviated 
Word in Tibetan Word Segmentation, Journal of 
Chinese Information Processing, 23(01):35-37. 

CAI  Zhijie.  2009.  The  Design  of  Banzhida  Tibetan 
word segmentation system, the 12th Symposium on 
Chinese Minority Information Processing. 

Dolha,  Zhaxijia,  Losanglangjie,  Ouzhu.  2007.  The 
parts-of-speech  and  tagging  set  standards  of  Ti-
betan information process, the 11th Symposium on 
Chinese Minority Information Processing. 

QI  Kunyu.  2006.  On  Tibetan  Automatic  Participate 
Research  with  the  Aid  of  Information  Treatment 
Journal of Northwest University for Nationalities 
(Philosophy and Social Science), 2006(04):92-97. 
SUN  Yuan,  LUO  Sangqiangba,  YANG  Rui  and 
ZHAO Xiaobing. 2009. Design of a Tibetan Auto-
matic Segmentation Scheme, the 12th Symposium 
on Chinese Minority Information Processing. 

TASHI  Gyal,  ZHU  Jie.  2009.  Research  on  Tibetan 
Segmentation Scheme for Information Processing, 
Journal  of  Chinese  Information  Processing, 
23(04):113-117. 

Zhaxijia,  Dolha,  Losanglangjie,  Ouzhu.  2007.  The 
theoretical  explanation  on  “the  parts-of-speech 

