Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Computational Linguistics (Coling 2010), pages 1182–1190,

Beijing, August 2010

1182

Near-synonym Lexical Choice in Latent Semantic Space

Tong Wang

Graeme Hirst

Department of Computer Science

Department of Computer Science

University of Toronto

University of Toronto

tong@cs.toronto.edu

gh@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

We explore the near-synonym lexical
choice problem using a novel representa-
tion of near-synonyms and their contexts
in the latent semantic space. In contrast to
traditional latent semantic analysis (LSA),
our model is built on the lexical level
of co-occurrence, which has been empir-
ically proven to be effective in provid-
ing higher dimensional information on the
subtle differences among near-synonyms.
By employing supervised learning on the
latent features, our system achieves an ac-
curacy of 74.5% in a “ﬁll-in-the-blank”
task. The improvement over the current
state-of-the-art is statistically signiﬁcant.
We also formalize the notion of subtlety
through its relation to semantic space di-
mensionality. Using this formalization
and our learning models, several of our
intuitions about subtlety, dimensionality,
and context are quantiﬁed and empirically
tested.
Introduction

1
Lexical choice is the process of selecting content
words in language generation. Consciously or
not, people encounter the task of lexical choice
on a daily basis — when speaking, writing, and
perhaps even in inner monologues.
Its applica-
tion also extends to various domains of natural
language processing, including Natural Language
Generation (NLG, Inkpen and Hirst 2006), writ-
ers’ assistant systems (Inkpen, 2007), and sec-
ond language (L2) teaching and learning (Ouyang
et al., 2009).

In the context of near-synonymy, the process
of lexical choice becomes profoundly more com-
plicated. This is partly because of the subtle nu-
ances among near-synonyms, which can arguably
differ along an inﬁnite number of dimensions.
Each dimension of variation carries differences in
style, connotation, or even truth conditions into
the discourse in question (Cruse, 1986), all mak-
ing the seemingly intuitive problem of “choosing
the right word for the right context” far from triv-
ial even for native speakers of a language.
In
a widely-adopted “ﬁll-in-the-blank” task, where
the goal was to guess missing words (from a set
of near-synonyms) in English sentences, two hu-
man judges achieved an accuracy of about 80%
(Inkpen, 2007). The current state-of-the-art accu-
racy for an automated system is 69.9% (Islam and
Inkpen, 2010).

When the goal is to make plausible or even
elegant lexical choices that best suit the con-
text, the representation of that context becomes a
key issue. We approach this problem in the la-
tent semantic space, where transformed local co-
occurrence data is capable of implicitly inducing
global knowledge (Landauer and Dumais, 1997).
A latent semantic space is constructed by reduc-
ing the dimensionality of co-occurring linguistic
units — typically words and documents as in La-
tent Semantic Analysis (LSA). We refer to this
level of association (LoA) as document LoA here-
after. Although document LoA can beneﬁt topical
level classiﬁcation (e.g., as in document retrieval,
Deerwester et al. 1990), it is not necessarily suit-
able for lexical-level tasks which might require in-
formation on a more ﬁne-grained level (Edmonds
and Hirst, 2002). Our experimental results show

1183

noticeable improvement when the co-occurrence
matrix is built on a lexical LoA between words
within a given context window.

One intuitive explanation for this improvement
is that the lexical-level co-occurrence might have
helped recover the high-dimensional subtle nu-
ances between near-synonyms. This conjecture
is, however, as imprecise as it is intuitive. The
notion of subtlety has mostly been used qualita-
tively in the literature to describe the level of dif-
ﬁculty involved in near-synonym lexical choice.
Hence, we endeavor to formalize the concept of
subtlety computationally by using our observa-
tions regarding the relationship between “subtle”
concepts and their lexical co-occurrence patterns.
We introduce related work on near-synonymy,
lexical choice, and latent semantic space models
in the next section. Section 3 elaborates on lexical
and contextual representations in latent semantic
space. In Section 4, we formulate near-synonym
lexical choice as a learning problem and report our
system performance. Section 5 formalizes the no-
tion of subtlety and its relation to dimensionality
and context. Conclusions and future work are pre-
sented in Section 6.

2 Related Work

2.1 Near-Synonymy and Nuances
Near-synonymy is a concept better explained by
intuition than by deﬁnition — which it does not
seem to have in the existing literature. We thus
borrow Table 1 from Edmonds and Hirst (2002) to
illustrate some basic ideas about near-synonymy.
Cruse (1986) compared the notion of plesionymy
to cognitive synonymy in terms of mutual entail-
ment and semantic traits, which, to the best of our
knowledge, is possibly the closest to a textbook
account of near-synonymy.

There has been a substantial amount of inter-
est in characterizing the nuances between near-
synonyms for a computation-friendly representa-
tion of near-synonymy. DiMarco et al. (1993)
discovered 38 dimensions for differentiating near-
synonyms from dictionary usage notes and cat-
egorized them into semantic and stylistic varia-
tions. Stede (1993) focused on the latter and fur-
ther decomposed them into seven scalable sub-

Table 1: Examples of near-synonyms and dimen-
sion of variations (Edmonds and Hirst, 2002).

Types of variation

Examples

Continuous, intermittent
Emphasis
Denotational, indirect
Denotational, fuzzy
Stylistic, formality
Stylistic, force
Expressed attitude
Emotive
Collocational
Selectional
Sub-categorization

seep:drip
enemy:foe
error:mistake
woods:forest
pissed:drunk:inebriated
ruin:annihilate
skinny:thin:slim:slender
daddy:dad:father
task:job
pass away:die
give:donate

categories. By organizing near-synonym vari-
ations into a tree structure, Inkpen and Hirst
(2006) combined stylistic and attitudinal varia-
tion into one class parallel to denotational differ-
ences. They also incorporated this knowledge of
near-synonyms into a knowledge base and demon-
strated its application in an NLG system.

2.2 Lexical Choice Evaluation
Due to their symbolic nature, many of the early
studies were only able to provide “demo runs” in
NLG systems rather than any empirical evalua-
tion. The study of near-synonym lexical choice
had remained largely qualitative until a “ﬁll-in-
the-blank” (FITB) task was introduced by Ed-
monds (1997). The task is based on sentences col-
lected from the 1987 Wall Street Journal (WSJ)
that contain any of a given set of near-synonyms.
Each occurrence of the near-synonyms is removed
from the sentence to create a “lexical gap”, and the
goal is to guess which one of the near-synonyms is
the missing word. Presuming that the 1987 WSJ
authors have made high-quality lexical choices,
the FITB test provides a fairly objective bench-
mark for empirical evaluation for near-synonym
lexical choice. The same idea can be applied to
virtually any corpus to provide a fair amount of
gold-standard data at relatively low cost for lexi-
cal choice evaluation.

The FITB task has since been frequently
adopted for evaluating the quality of lexical choice
systems on a standard dataset of seven near-
synonym sets (as shown in Table 2). Edmonds

1184

(1997) constructed a second-order lexical co-
occurrence network on a training corpus (the 1989
WSJ). He measured the word-word distance us-
ing t-score inversely weighted by both distance
and order of co-occurrence in the network. For
a sentence in the test data (generated from the
1987 WSJ), the candidate near-synonym minimiz-
ing the sum of its distance from all other words in
the sentence (word-context distance) was consid-
ered the correct answer. Average accuracy on the
standard seven near-synonym sets was 55.7%.

Inkpen (2007) modeled word-word distance
using Pointwise Mutual Information (PMI) ap-
proximated by word counts from querying the
Waterloo Multitext System (Clarke et al., 1998).
Word-context distance was the sum of PMI scores
between a candidate and its neighboring words
within a window-size of 10.
An unsuper-
vised model using word-context distance directly
achieved an average accuracy of 66.0%, while a
supervised method with lexical features added to
the word-context distance further increased the
accuracy to 69.2%.

Islam and Inkpen (2010) developed a system
which completed a test sentence with possible
candidates one at a time. The candidate gener-
ating the most probable sentence (measured by
a 5-gram language model) was proposed as the
correct answer. N-gram counts were collected
from Google Web1T Corpus and smoothed with
missing counts, yielding an average accuracy of
69.9%.

2.3 Lexical Choice Outside the

Near-synonymy Domain

The problem of lexical choice also comes in many
ﬂavors outside the near-synonymy domain. Reiter
and Sripada (2002) attributed the variation in lexi-
cal choice to cognitive and vocabulary differences
among individuals. In their meteorology domain
data, for example, the term by evening was inter-
preted as before 00:00 by some forecasters but
before 18:00 by others. They claimed that NLG
systems might have to include redundancy in their
output to tolerate cognitive differences among in-
dividuals.

2.4 Latent Semantic Space Models and LoA
LSA has been widely applied in various ﬁelds
since its introduction by Landauer and Dumais
(1997).
In their study, LSA was conducted on
document LoA on encyclopedic articles and the
latent space vectors were used for solving TOEFL
synonym questions.
Rapp (2008) used LSA
on lexical LoA for the same task and achieved
92.50% in accuracy in contrast to 64.38% given
by Landauer and Dumais (1997). This work con-
ﬁrmed our early postulation that document LoA
might not be tailored for lexical level tasks, which
might require lower LoAs for more ﬁne-grained
co-occurrence knowledge. Note, however, that
confounding factors might also have led to the dif-
ference in performance, since the two studies used
different weighting schemes and different corpora
for the co-occurrence model1. In Section 3.2 we
will compare models on the two LoAs in a more
controlled setting to show their difference in the
lexical choice task.

3 Representing Words and Contexts in

Latent Semantic Space

We ﬁrst
formalize the FITB task to facili-
tate later discussions.
A test sentence t =
{w1, . . . ,w j−1,si,w j+1, . . . ,wm} contains a near-
synonym si which belongs to a set of synonyms
S = {s1, . . . ,sn},1 ≤ i ≤ n. A FITB test case is
created by removing si from t, and the context (the
incomplete sentence) c = t −{si} is presented to
subjects with a set of possible choices S to guess
which of the near-synonyms in S is the missing
word.

3.1 Constructing the Latent Space

Representation

The ﬁrst step in LSA is to build a co-occurrence
matrix M between words and documents, which is
further decomposed by Singular Value Decompo-
sition (SVD) according to the following equation:

Mv×d = Uv×kΣk×kV T
k×d

1The former used Groliers Academic American Encyclo-
pedia with weights divided by word entropy, while the latter
used the British National Corpus with weights multiplied by
word entropy.

1185

Here, subscripts denote matrix dimensions, U, Σ,
and V together create a decomposition of M, v and
d are the number of word types and documents,
respectively, and k is the number of dimensions
for the latent semantic space. A word w is repre-
sented by the row in U corresponding to the row
for w in M. For a context c, we construct a vector c
of length v with zeros and ones, each correspond-
ing to the presence or absence of a word wi with
respect to c, i.e.,

ci =(cid:26) 1 if wi ∈ c

0 otherwise

We then take this lexical space vector cv×1 as a
pseudo-document and transform it into a latent se-
mantic space vector ˆc:

ˆc = Σ−1U T c

(1)

An important observation is that this represen-
tation is equivalent to a weighted centroid of the
context word vectors: when c is multiplied by
Σ−1U T in Equation (1), the product is essentially
a weighted sum of the rows in U corresponding to
the context words. Consequently, simple modiﬁ-
cations on the weighting can yield other interest-
ing representations of context. Consider, for ex-
ample, the weighting vector wk×1 = (σ1,··· ,σk)T
with

σi =

1

|2(pgap − i)− 1|

where pgap is the position of the “gap” in the test
sentence. Multiplying w before Σ−1 in Equation
(1) is equivalent to giving the centroid gradient-
decaying weights with respect to the distance be-
tween a context word and the near-synonym. This
is a form of a Hyperspace Analogue to Language
(HAL) model, which is sensitive to word order, in
contrast to a bag-of-words model.

3.2 Dimensionality and Level of Association
The number of dimensions k is an important
choice to make in latent semantic space mod-
els. Due to the lack of any principled guideline
for doing otherwise, we conducted a brute force
grid search for a proper k value for each LoA, on
the basis of the performance of the unsupervised
model (Section 4.1 below).

Figure 1: FITB Performance on different LoAs as
a function of the latent space dimensionality.

In Figure 1, performance on FITB using this
unsupervised model is plotted against k for doc-
ument and lexical LoAs. Document LoA is very
limited in the available number of dimensions2;
higher dimensional knowledge is simply unavail-
able from this level of co-occurrence. In contrast,
lexical LoA stands out around k = 550 and peaks
around k = 700. Although the advantage of lexi-
cal LoA in the unsupervised setting is not signif-
icant, later we show that lexical LoA nonetheless
makes higher-dimensional information available
for other learning methods.

Note that the scale on the y-axis is stretched to
magnify the trends. On a zero-to-one scale, the
performance of these unsupervised methods is al-
most indistinguishable, indicating that the unsu-
pervised model is not capable of using the high-
dimensional information made available by lexi-
cal LoA. We will elaborate on this point in Section
5.2.

2The dimensions for document and lexical LoAs on our
development corpus are 55,938× 500 and 55,938× 55,938,
respectively. The difference is measured between v× d and
v× v (Section 3.1).

1186

4 Learning in the Latent Semantic Space
4.1 Unsupervised Vector Space Model
When measuring distance between vectors, LSA
usually adopts regular vector space model dis-
tance functions such as cosine similarity. With the
context being a centroid of words (Section 3.1),
the FITB task then becomes a k-nearest neighbor
problem in the latent space with k = 1 to choose
the best near-synonym for the context:

s∗ = argmax

si

cos(UrowId(v(si),M), ˆc)

where v(si) is the corresponding row for near-
synonym si in M, and rowId(v,M) gives the row
number of a vector v in a matrix M containing v
as a row.

In a model with a cosine similarity distance
function, it is detrimental to use Σ−1 to weight the
context centroid ˆc. This is because elements in Σ
are the singular values of the co-occurrence matrix
along its diagonal, and the amplitude of a singular
value (intuitively) corresponds to the signiﬁcance
of a dimension in the latent space; when the in-
verted matrix is used to weight the centroid, it will
“misrepresent” the context by giving more weight
to less-signiﬁcantly co-occurring dimensions and
thus sabotage performance. We thus use Σ instead
of Σ−1 in our experiments. As shown in Figure
1, the best unsupervised performance on the stan-
dard FITB dataset is 49.6%, achieved on lexical
LoA at k = 800.

4.2 Supervised Learning on the Latent

Semantic Space Features

In traditional latent space models, the latent space
vectors have almost invariantly been used in the
unsupervised setting discussed above. Although
the number of dimensions has been reduced in the
latent semantic space, the inter-relations between
the high-dimension data points may still be com-
plex and non-linear; such problems lend them-
selves naturally to supervised learning.

We therefore formulate the near-synonym lex-
ical choice problem as a supervised classiﬁcation
problem with latent semantic space features. For
a test sentence in the FITB task, for example, the
context is represented as a latent semantic space

vector as discussed in Section 3.1, which is then
paired with the correct answer (the near-synonym
removed from the sentence) to form one training
case.

We choose Support Vector Machines (SVMs) as
our learning algorithm for their widely acclaimed
classiﬁcation performance on many tasks as well
as their noticeably better performance on the lex-
ical choice task in our pilot study. Table 2 lists
the supervised model performance on the FITB
task together with results reported by other related
studies. The model is trained on the 1989 WSJ
and tested on the 1987 WSJ to ensure maximal
comparability with other results. The optimal k
value is 415. Context window size3 around the
gap in a test sentence also affects the model per-
formance. In addition to using the words in the
original sentence, we also experiment with enlarg-
ing the context window to neighboring sentences
and shrinking it to a window frame of n words
on each side of the gap. Interestingly, when mak-
ing the lexical choice, the model tends to favor
more-local information — a window frame of size
5 gives the best accuracy of 74.5% on the test.
Based on binomial exact test4 with a 95% conﬁ-
dence interval, our result outperforms the current
state-of-the-art with statistical signiﬁcance.

5 Formalizing Subtlety in the Latent

Semantic Space

In this section, we formalize the notion of sub-
tlety through its relation to dimensionality, and
use the formalization to provide empirical support
for some of the common intuitions about subtlety
and its complexity with respect to dimensionality
and size of context.

5.1 Characterizing Subtlety Using

Collocating Differentiator of Subtlety

In language generation, subtlety can be viewed as
a subordinate semantic trait in a linguistic realiza-

3Note that the context window in this paragraph is im-
plemented on FITB test cases, which is different from the
context size we compare in Section 5.3 for building co-
occurrence matrix.

4The binomial nature of the outcome of an FITB test case
(right or wrong) makes binomial exact test a more suitable
signiﬁcance test than the t-test used by Inkpen (2007).

1187

Table 2: Supervised performance on the seven standard near-synonym sets in the FITB task. 95%
Conﬁdence based on Binomial Exact Test.

Near-synonyms

difﬁcult, hard, tough
error, mistake, oversight
job, task, duty
responsibility, burden,
obligation, commitment
material, stuff, substance
give, provide, offer
settle, resolve
Average
Data size
95% conﬁdence

Co-occur.
network

SVMs
& PMI

5-gram

language model

(Edmonds, 1997)

(Inkpen, 2007)

(Islam and Inkpen, 2010)

SVMs on

latent vectors
(Section 4.2)

47.9%
48.9%
68.9%
45.3%

64.6%
48.6%
65.9%
55.7%
29,835

57.3%
70.8%
86.7%
66.7%

71.0%
56.1%
75.8%
69.2%
31,116

63.2%
78.7%
78.2%
72.2%

70.4%
55.8%
70.8%
69.9%
31,116

61.7%
82.5%
82.4%
63.5%

78.5%
75.4%
77.9%
74.5%
30,300

55.1–56.3% 68.7–69.7%

69.3–70.4%

74.0–75.0%

tion of an intention5. A key observation regard-
ing subtlety is that it is non-trivial to characterize
subtle differences between two linguistic units by
their collocating linguistic units. More interest-
ingly, the difﬁculty in such characterization can
be approximated by the difﬁculty in ﬁnding a third
linguistic unit satisfying the following constraints:

1. The unit must collocate closely with at least
one of the two linguistic units under differ-
entiation;

2. The unit must be characteristic of the differ-

ence between the pair.

Such approximation is meaningful in that it trans-
forms the abstract characterization into a concrete
task of ﬁnding this third linguistic unit. For ex-
ample, suppose we want to ﬁnd out whether the
difference between glass and mug is subtle. The
approximation boils the answer down to the dif-
ﬁculty of ﬁnding a third word satisfying the two
constraints, and we may immediately conclude
that the difference between the pair is not subtle
since it is relatively easy to ﬁnd wine as the quali-
fying third word, which 1) collocates closely with
glass and 2) characterizes the difference between
5The same principle applies when we replace “genera-
tion” with “understanding” and “an intention” with “a cogni-
tion”.

the pair by instantiating one of their major differ-
ences — the purpose of use. The same reasoning
applies to concluding non-subtlety for word pairs
such as pen and pencil with sharpener, weather
and climate with forecast, watch and clock with
wrist, etc.

In contrast, for the pair forest and woods, it
might be easy to ﬁnd words satisfying one but not
both constraints. Consequently, the lack of such
qualifying words — or at least the relative difﬁ-
culty for ﬁnding one — makes the difference be-
tween this pair more subtle than in the previous
examples.

We call a linguistic unit satisfying both con-
straints a collocating differentiator of subtlety
(CDS). Notably, the second constraint puts an im-
portant difference between CDSs and the conven-
tional sense of collocation. On the lexical level,
CDSs are not merely words that collocate more
with one word in a pair than with the other; they
have to be characteristic of the differences be-
tween the pair.
In the example of forest and
woods, one can easily ﬁnd a word exclusively col-
locating with one but not the other — such as na-
tional forest but not *national woods; however,
unlike the CDSs in the previous examples, the
word national does not characterize any of the dif-
ferences between the pair in size, primitiveness,

1188

proximity to civilization, or wildness (Edmonds
and Hirst, 2002), and consequently fails to satisfy
the second constraint.

5.2 Relating Subtlety to Latent Space

Dimensionality6

As mentioned in Section 4.1, elements of a latent
space vector are in descending order in terms of
co-occurrence signiﬁcance, i.e., the information
within the ﬁrst few dimensions is obtained from
more closely collocating linguistic units. From
the two constraints in the previous section, it fol-
lows that it should be relatively easier to ﬁnd a
CDS for words that can be well distinguished in a
lower-dimensional sub-space of the latent seman-
tic space, and the difference among such words
should not be considered subtle.

We thus claim that co-occurrence-based infor-
mation capable of characterizing subtle differ-
ences must then reside in higher dimensions in
the latent space vectors. Furthermore, our intu-
ition on the complexity of subtlety can also be
empirically tested by comparing the performance
of supervised and unsupervised models at differ-
ent k values. One of the differences between the
two types of models is that supervised models are
better at unraveling the convoluted inter-relations
between high-dimensional data points. Under this
assumption, if we hypothesize that subtlety is a
certain form of complex, high-dimensional rela-
tion between semantic elements, then the differ-
ence in performance between the supervised and
unsupervised model should increase as the former
recovers subtle information in higher dimensions.
As shown in Figure 2, performance of both
models is positively correlated to the number of
dimensions in the latent semantic space (with cor-
relation coefﬁcient ρ = 0.95 for supervised model
and ρ = 0.81 for unsupervised model). This sug-
gests that the lexical choice process is indeed
“picking up” implicit information about subtlety
in the higher dimensions of the latent vectors.
Meanwhile,
the difference between the perfor-
mance of the two models correlates strongly to k
with ρ = 0.95. Signiﬁcance tests on the “differ-

6In order to keep the test data (1987 WSJ) unseen before
producing the results in Table 2, models in this section were
trained on The Brown Corpus and tested on 1988–89 WSJ.

Figure 2: Supervised performance increasing fur-
ther from unsupervised performance in higher di-
mensions.

ence of difference”7 between their performances
further reveal increasing difference in growth rate
of their performance. Signiﬁcance is witnessed in
both the F-test and the paired t-test,8 indicating
that the subtlety-related information in the higher
dimensions exhibits complex clustering patterns
that are better recognized by SVMs but beyond
the capability of the KNN model.

5.3 Subtlety and the Level of Context
Our previous models on lexical LoA associated
words within the same sentence to build the co-
occurrence matrix. Lexical LoA also allows us
to associate words that co-occur in different lev-
els of context (LoC) such as paragraphs or docu-
ments. This gives an approximate measurement
of how much context a lexical LoA model uses
for word co-occurrence. Intuitively, by looking at
more context, higher LoC models should be better
at differentiating more subtle differences.

We compare the performance of models with
different LoCs in Figure 3. The sentence LoC
model constantly out-performs the paragraph LoC
model after k = 500, indicating that, by inter-
model comparison,
larger LoC models do not
necessarily perform better on higher dimensions.
However, there is a noticeable difference in the
optimal dimensionality for the model perfor-
mances. Sentence LoC performance peaks around
7The italicized difference is used in its mathematical

sense as the discrete counterpart of derivative.

8F-test:

f (1,16) = 9.13, p < 0.01. Paired t-test: t(8) =
4.16 with two-tailed p = 0.0031. Both conducted on 10 data
points at k = 50 to 500 with a step of 50.

1189

of the near-synonym lexical choice problem. By
employing supervised learning on the latent space
features, we achieve an accuracy of 74.5% on the
“ﬁll-in-the-blank” task, outperforming the current
state-of-the-art with statistical signiﬁcance.

In addition, we formalize the notion of subtlety
by relating it to the dimensionality of the latent se-
mantic space. Our empirical analysis suggests that
subtle differences between near-synonyms reside
in higher dimensions in the latent semantic space
in complex clustering patterns, and that the degree
of subtlety correlates to the level of context for co-
occurrence. Both conclusions are consistent with
our intuition.

As future work, we will make better use of the
easy customization of the context representation
to compare HAL and other models with bag-of-
words models. The correlation between subtlety
and dimensionality may lead to many interesting
tasks, such as measuring the degree of subtlety for
individual near-synonyms or near-synonym sets.
With regard to context representation, it is also
intriguing to explore other dimensionality reduc-
tion methods (such as Locality Sensitive Hashing
or Random Indexing) and to compare them to the
SVD-based model.

Acknowledgment
This study is supported by the Natural Sciences
and Engineering Research Council of Canada
(NSERC). We greatly appreciate the valuable sug-
gestions and feedback from all of our anonymous
reviewers and from our colleagues Julian Brooke,
Frank Rudzicz, and George Dahl.

Figure 3: LoC in correlation to latent space di-
mensionality for optimal model performance.

k = 700 — much lower than that of paragraph
LoC which is around k = 1,100. Such differ-
ence may suggest that, by intra-model compari-
son, each model may have its own “comfort zone”
for the degree of subtlety it differentiates; models
on larger LoC are better at differentiating between
more subtle nuances, which is in accordance with
our intuition.

One possible explanation for sentence LoC
models outperforming paragraph LoC models is
that, although the high-dimensional elements are
weighed down by Σ due to their insigniﬁcance in
the latent space, their contribution to the output
of distance function is larger in paragraph LoC
models because the vectors are much denser than
that in the sentence LoC model; since the unsuper-
vised method is incapable of recognizing the clus-
tering patterns well in high-dimensional space,
the “ampliﬁed” subtlety information is eventually
taken as noise by the KNN model. An interesting
extension to this discussion is to see whether a su-
pervised model can consistently perform better on
higher LoC in all dimensions.

6 Conclusions and Future Work
We propose a latent semantic space representa-
tion of near-synonyms and their contexts, which
allows a thorough investigation of several aspects

1190

the Eighth International Conference on
of
Computational Semantics, pages 316–319,
2009.

Reinhard Rapp. The automatic generation of the-
sauri of related words for English, French, Ger-
man, and Russian.
International Journal of
Speech Technology, 11(3):147–156, 2008.

Ehud Reiter and Somayajulu Sripada. Human
variation and lexical choice. Computational
Linguistics, 28(4):545–553, 2002.

Manfred Stede. Lexical choice criteria in lan-
guage generation. In Proceedings of the sixth
conference of the European Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages
454–459, 1993.

References
Charles L. A. Clarke, Gordon Cormack, and
Christopher Palmer. An overview of MultiText.
ACM SIGIR Forum, 32(2):14–15, 1998.

D. A. Cruse. Lexical Semantics. Cambridge Uni-

versity Press, 1986.

Scott Deerwester, Susan Dumais, George Furnas,
Thomas Landauer, and Richard Harshman. In-
dexing by latent semantic analysis. Journal of
the American Society for Information Science,
41(6):391–407, 1990.

Chrysanne DiMarco, Graeme Hirst, and Manfred
Stede. The semantic and stylistic differentiation
of synonyms and near-synonyms. AAAI Spring
Symposium on Building Lexicons for Machine
Translation, pages 114–121, 1993.

Philip Edmonds. Choosing the word most typi-
cal in context using a lexical co-occurrence net-
work. In Proceedings of the 35th annual meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics and Eighth Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 507–509, 1997.

Philip Edmonds and Graeme Hirst.

Near-
synonymy and lexical choice. Computational
Linguistics, 28(2):105–144, 2002.

Diana Inkpen. A statistical model for near-
synonym choice. ACM Transactions on Speech
and Language Processing, 4(1):1–17, 2007.

Diana Inkpen and Graeme Hirst. Building and us-
ing a lexical knowledge-base of near-synonym
differences. Computational Linguistics, 32(2):
223–262, 2006.

Aminul Islam and Diana Inkpen. Near-synonym
choice using a 5-gram language model. Re-
search in Computing Sciences, 46:41–52, 2010.
Thomas Landauer and Susan Dumais. A solution
to Plato’s problem: the latent semantic analy-
sis theory of acquisition, induction, and repre-
sentation of knowledge. Psychological Review,
104(2):211–240, 1997.

Shixiao Ouyang, Helena Hong Gao,

and
Soo Ngee Koh.
Developing a computer-
facilitated tool for acquiring near-synonyms
in Chinese and English.
In Proceedings

