Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Computational Linguistics (Coling 2010), pages 1110–1118,

Beijing, August 2010

1110

Hungarian Corpus of Light Verb Constructions

Veronika Vincze

University of Szeged

Department of Informatics

J´anos Csirik

Hungarian Academy of Sciences

Research Group on Artiﬁcial Intelligence

vinczev@inf.u-szeged.hu

csirik@inf.u-szeged.hu

Abstract

The precise identiﬁcation of light verb
constructions is crucial for the successful
functioning of several NLP applications.
In order to facilitate the development of
an algorithm that is capable of recogniz-
ing them, a manually annotated corpus of
light verb constructions has been built for
Hungarian. Basic annotation guidelines
and statistical data on the corpus are also
presented in the paper.
It is also shown
how applications in the ﬁelds of machine
translation and information extraction can
make use of such a corpus and an algo-
rithm.

1 Introduction
In this paper, we report a corpus containing light
verb constructions in Hungarian. These expres-
sions are neither productive nor idiomatic and
their meaning is not totally compositional (the
noun is usually taken in one of its literal senses but
the verb usually loses its original sense to some
extent), as it can be seen in the examples from dif-
ferent languages shown below. Since their mean-
ing is the same, only literal translations are pro-
vided:

• English:

bloom, the problem lies (in)

to give a lecture,

to come into

• German: halten eine Vorlesung to hold a pre-
sentation, in Bl¨ute stehen in bloom to stand,
das Problem liegt (in) the problem lies (in)
• French: faire une pr´esentation to make a pre-
sentation, ˆetre en ﬂeur to be in bloom, le

probl`eme r´eside (dans) the problem resides
(in)

el˝oad´ast

• Hungarian:

tart presentation-
ACC holds, vir´agba borul bloom-ILL falls,
probl´ema rejlik (vmiben) problem hides (in
sg)

Several terms like complex verb structures, sup-
port verb constructions or light verb constructions
have been used1 for these constructions in the lit-
erature (Langer, 2004).
In this paper, the term
light verb constructions will be employed.

The structure of the paper is as follows. First,
the importance of the special NLP treatment of
light verb constructions is emphasized in section
2. The precise identiﬁcation of such constructions
is crucial for the successful functioning of NLP
applications, thus, it is argued that an algorithm
is needed to automatically recognize them (sec-
tion 4). In order to facilitate the development of
such an algorithm, a corpus of light verb construc-
tions has been built for Hungarian, which is pre-
sented together with statistical data in section 5.
Finally, it is shown how NLP applications in the
ﬁelds of machine translation and information ex-
traction can proﬁt from the implementation of an
algorithm capable of identifying light verb con-
structions (section 6).

2 Light verb constructions in NLP
In natural language processing, one of the most
challenging tasks is the proper treatment of col-
1There might be slight theoretical differences in the usage
of these terms – e.g. semantically empty support verbs are
called light verbs in e.g. Meyers et al. (2004a), that is, the
term support verb is a hypernym of light verb. However,
these differences are not analyzed in detail in this paper.

1111

locations, which term comprises light verb con-
structions as well. Every multiword expression
is considered to be a collocation if its members
often co-occur and its form is ﬁxed to some ex-
tent (Siepmann, 2005; Siepmann, 2006; Sag et al.,
2001; Oravecz et al., 2004; V´aradi, 2006). Col-
locations are frequent in language use and they
usually exhibit unique behaviour, thus, they often
pose a problem to NLP systems.

Light verb constructions deserve special atten-
tion in NLP applications for several reasons. First,
their meaning is not totally compositional, that is,
it cannot be computed on the basis of the mean-
ings of the parts of the collocation and the way
they are related to each other. Thus, the result of
translating the parts of the collocation can hardly
be considered as the proper translation of the orig-
inal expression. Second, light verb constructions
(e.g. make a mistake) often share their syntac-
tic pattern with other constructions such as lit-
eral verb + noun combinations (e.g. make a cake)
or idioms (e.g. make a meal), thus, their identi-
ﬁcation cannot be based on solely syntactic pat-
terns. Third, since the syntactic and the seman-
tic head of the construction are not the same –
the syntactic head being the verb and the seman-
tic head being the noun –, they require special
treatment when parsing.
It can be argued that
they form a complex verb similarly to phrasal or
prepositional verbs (as reﬂected in the term com-
plex verb structures). Thus, it is advisable to indi-
cate their special syntacto-semantic relationship:
in dependency grammars, the new role QUASI-
ARGUMENT might be proposed for this purpose.

3 Related work
Light verb constructions – as a subtype of multi-
word expressions – have been paid special atten-
tion in NLP literature. Sag et al. (2001) classify
them as a subtype of lexicalized phrases and ﬂex-
ible expressions. They are usually distinguished
from productive or literal verb + noun construc-
tions on the one hand and idiomatic verb + noun
expressions on the other hand: e.g. Fazly and
Stevenson (2007) use statistical measures in order
to classify subtypes of verb + noun combinations
and Diab and Bhutada (2009) developed a chunk-
ing method for classifying multiword expressions.

Identifying multiword expressions in general
and light verb constructions in particular is not
unequivocal since constructions with similar syn-
tactic structure (e.g. verb + noun combinations)
can belong to different subclasses on the produc-
tivity scale (i.e. productive combinations, light
verb constructions and idioms). That is why well-
designed and tagged corpora of multiword ex-
pressions are invaluable resources for training and
testing algorithms that are able to identify multi-
word expressions. For instance, Gr´egoire (2007)
describes the design and implementation of a lexi-
con of Dutch multiword expressions. Focusing on
multiword verbs, Kaalep and Muischnek (2006;
2008) present an Estonian database and a corpus
and Krenn (2008) describes a database of German
PP-verb combinations. The Prague Dependency
Treebank also contains annotation for light verb
constructions (Cinkov´a and Kol´aˇrov´a, 2005) and
NomBank (Meyers et al., 2004b) provides the ar-
gument structure of common nouns, paying atten-
tion to those occurring in support verb construc-
tions as well. On the other hand, Zarrieß and Kuhn
(2009) make use of translational correspondences
when identifying multiword expressions (among
them, light verb constructions). A further exam-
ple of corpus-based identiﬁcation of light verb
constructions in English is described in Tan et al.
(2006).

Light verb constructions are considered to be
semi-productive, that is, certain verbs tend to co-
occur with nouns belonging to a given semantic
class. A statistical method is applied to measure
the acceptability of possible light verb construc-
tions in Stevenson et al. (2004), which correlates
reasonably well with human judgments.

4 Identifying light verb constructions
A database of light verb constructions and an an-
notated corpus might be of great help in the au-
tomatic recognition of light verb constructions.
They can serve as a training database when imple-
menting an algorithm for identifying those con-
structions.

The recognition of light verb constructions can-
not be solely based on syntactic patterns for other
(productive or idiomatic) combinations may ex-
hibit the same verb + noun scheme (see section

1112

2). However, in agglutinative languages such as
Hungarian, nouns can have several grammatical
cases, some of which typically occur in a light
verb construction when paired with a certain verb.
For instance, the verb hoz ’bring’ is a transitive
verb, that is, it usually occurs with a noun in the
accusative case. On the other hand, when it is pre-
ceded or followed by a noun in the sublative or
illative case (the typical position of the noun in
Hungarian light verb constructions being right be-
fore or after the verb2), it is most likely a light verb
construction. To illustrate this, we offer some ex-
amples:

vizet hoz
water-ACC bring
’to bring some water’

zavarba hoz
trouble-ILL bring
’to embarrass’

The ﬁrst one is a productive combination (with
the noun being in the accusative form) while the
second one is a light verb construction. Note that
the light verb construction also has got an argu-
ment in the accusative case (syntactically speak-
ing, a direct object complement) as in:

Ez a megjegyz´es mindenkit zavarba ho-
zott.
this the remark everyone-ACC trouble-
ILL bring-PAST-3SG
’This remark embarrassed everybody.’

Thus, the presence of an argument in the ac-
cusative does not imply that the noun + verb com-
bination is a light verb construction. On the other
hand, the presence of a noun in the illative or
sublative case immediately preceding or follow-
ing the verb strongly suggests that a light verb in-
stance of hoz is under investigation.

Most light verb constructions have a verbal
counterpart derived from the same stem as the
noun, which entails that it is mostly deverbal

2In a neutral sentence, the noun is right before the verb,

in a sentence containing focus, it is right after the verb.

nouns that occur in light verb constructions (as
in make/take a decision compared to decide or
d¨ont´est hoz vs. d¨ont in Hungarian). The identiﬁ-
cation of such nouns is possible with the help of a
morphosyntactic parser that is able to treat deriva-
tion as well (e.g. hunmorph for Hungarian (Tr´on
et al., 2005)), and the combination of a possible
light verb and a deverbal noun typically results in
a light verb construction.

Thus, an algorithm that makes use of mor-
phosyntactic and derivational
information and
previously given lists can be constructed to iden-
tify light verb constructions in texts. It is impor-
tant that the identiﬁcation of light verb construc-
tions precedes syntactic parsing, for the noun and
the verb in the construction form one complex
predicate, which has its effects on parsing: other
arguments belong not solely to the verb but to the
complex predicate.

To the best of our knowledge, there are no cor-
pora of light verb constructions available for Hun-
garian. That is why we decided to build such a
corpus. The corpus is described in detail in sec-
tion 5. On the basis of the corpus developed, we
plan to design an algorithm to automatically iden-
tify light verb constructions in Hungarian.

5 The corpus
In order to facilitate the extraction and the NLP
treatment of Hungarian light verb constructions,
we decided to build a corpus in which light verb
constructions are annotated. The Szeged Tree-
bank (Csendes et al., 2005) – a database in which
words are morphosyntactically tagged and sen-
tences are syntactically parsed – constitutes the
basis for the annotation. We ﬁrst selected the
subcorpora containing business news, newspaper
texts and legal texts for annotation since light verb
constructions are considered to frequently occur
in these domains (see B. Kov´acs (1999)). How-
ever, we plan to extend the annotation to other
subcorpora as well (e.g.
literary texts) in a later
phase. Statistical data on the annotated subcor-
pora can be seen in Table 1.

5.1 Types of light verb constructions
As Hungarian is an agglutinative language, light
verb constructions may occur in various forms.

1113

business news
newspapers
legal texts
total

sentences words
186030
182172
220069
582871

9574
10210
9278
29062

• Nominalization <nom>
b´erbe v´etel
rent-ILL taking
’hiring’

Table 1: Number of sentences and words in the
annotated subcorpora

For instance, the verbal component may be in-
ﬂected for tense, mood, person, number, etc.
However, these inﬂectional differences can be eas-
ily resolved by a lemmatizer. On the other hand,
besides the prototypical noun + verb combination,
light verb constructions may be present in differ-
ent syntactic structures, that is, in participles and
inﬁnitives and they can also undergo nominaliza-
tion. These types are all annotated in the corpus
texts since they also occur relatively frequently
(see statistical data in 5.3). All annotated types
are illustrated below.

• Noun + verb combination <verb>
bejelent´est tesz
announcement-ACC makes
’to make an announcement’
• Participles <part>
– Present participle

´eletbe l´ep˝o (int´ezked´es)
life-ILL stepping (instruction)
’(an instruction) taking effect’

– Past participle

cs˝odbe ment (c´eg)
bankrupt-ILL gone (ﬁrm)
’(a ﬁrm) that went bankrupt’

– Future participle

fontol´ora veend˝o (aj´anlat)
consideration-SUB to be taken (offer)
’(an offer) that is to be taken into con-
sideration’
– Inﬁnitive

forgalomba hozni
circulation-ILL bring-INF
’to put into circulation’

Split light verb constructions, where the noun
and the verb are not adjacent, are also annotated
and tagged.
In this way, their identiﬁcation be-
comes possible and the database can be used for
training an algorithm that automatically recog-
nizes (split) light verb constructions.

5.2 Annotation principles
Corpus texts contain single annotation, i.e. one
annotator worked on each text. Light verb con-
structions can be found in between XML tags
<FX> </FX>. In order to decide whether a noun
+ verb combination is a light verb construction or
not, annotators were suggested to make use of a
test battery developed for identifying Hungarian
light verb constructions (Vincze, 2008).

The annotation process was carried out manu-
ally on the syntactically annotated version of the
Szeged Treebank, thus, phrase boundaries were
also taken into consideration when marking light
verb constructions. Since the outmost boundary
of the nominal component was considered to be
part of the light verb construction, in several cases
adjectives and other modiﬁers of the nominal head
are also included in the construction, e.g.:

<FX>nyilv´anos aj´anlatot tesz</FX>
public offer-ACC make
’to make a public offer’

In the case of participles, NP arguments may
be also included (although in English, the same
argument is expressed by a PP):

<FX>Ny´ıregyh´az´an
¨ul´es´en</FX>
Ny´ıregyh´aza-SUP
3SGPOSS-SUP
’at its session held in Ny´ıregyh´aza’

hold-PPT

tartott

session-

Constructions with a nominal component in the
accusative case can be nominalized in two ways
in Hungarian, as in:

1114

szerz˝od´est k¨ot
contract-ACC bind
’to make a contract’

<FX>szerz˝od´esk¨ot´es</FX>
contract+bind-GERUND
’making a contract’

<FX>ad´asv´eteli
megk¨ot´ese</FX>
sale
contract-PL
GERUND-3SGPOSS
’making of sales contracts’

szerz˝od´esek

PREVERB-bind-

occurs 5.8 times in the corpus on average. How-
ever, the participle form ir´anyad´o occurs in 607
instances (e.g.
in ir´anyad´o kamat ’prime rate’)
due to the topic of the business news subcorpus,
which may distort the percentage rates. For this
reason, statistical data in Table 2 are shown the
occurrences of ir´anyad´o excluded.

business
news
news-
papers
legal
texts
total

part
270
28%
192

nom
verb
total
split
90
565
40
965
9.3%
58.6%
4.1% 25.2%
458
55
67
772
59.3% 24.9% 7.1%
8.7% 20.2%
640
709
236
2089
30.7% 24.1% 33.9% 11.3% 54.6%
3826
1663
854
43.5% 25.2% 22.3%
100%

236
9%

504

966

Both types are annotated in the corpus.
Besides the prototypical occurrences of light
verb constructions (i.e. a bare common noun +
verb3), other instances were also annotated in the
corpus. For instance, the noun might be accompa-
nied by an article or a modiﬁer (recall that phrase
boundaries were considered during annotation) or
– for word order requirements – the noun follows
the verb as in:

bring-PAST-3SG-OBJ

˝O hozta a j´o d¨ont´est.
he
decision-ACC
’It was him who made the good deci-
sion.’

good

the

For the above reasons, a single light verb con-
struction manifests in several different forms in
the corpus. However, each occurrence is manu-
ally paired with its prototypical (i.e. bare noun +
verb) form in a separate list, which is available at
the corpus website.

5.3 Statistics on corpus data
The database contains 3826 occurrences of 658
light verb constructions altogether in 29062 sen-
tences. Thus, a speciﬁc light verb construction

3As opposed to other languages where prototypical light
verb constructions consist of a verb + a noun in accusative or
a verb + a prepositional phrase (see e.g. Krenn (2008)), in
Hungarian, postpositional phrases rarely occur within a light
verb construction. However, annotators were told to annotate
such cases as well.

Table 2: Subtypes of light verb constructions in
the corpus

It is revealed that although it is verbal occur-
rences that are most frequent, the percentage rate
of participles is also relatively high. The number
of nominalized or split constructions is consider-
ably lower (except for the law subcorpus, where
their number is quite high), however, those to-
gether with participles are responsible for about
55% of the data, which indicates the importance
of their being annotated as well.

As for the general frequency of light verb con-
structions in texts, we compared the number of
verb + argument relations found in the Szeged De-
pendency Treebank (Vincze et al., 2010) where
the argument was a common noun to that of light
verb constructions.
It has turned out that about
13% of verb + argument relations consist of light
verb constructions. This again emphasizes that
they should be paid attention to, especially in the
legal domain (where this rate is as high as 36.8%).
Statistical data are shown in Table 3.

V + argument

LVC

business news
newspapers
legal texts
total

9524
3637
2143
15574

624 (6.6%)
539 (14.8%)
889 (36.8%)
2052 (13.2%)

Table 3: Verb + argument relations and light verb
constructions

The corpus

is publicly available for

re-

1115

search
www.inf.u-szeged.hu/rgai/nlp.

educational

and/or

purposes

at

6 The usability of the corpus
As emphasized earlier, the proper treatment of
light verb constructions is of primary importance
in NLP applications.
In order to achieve this,
their identiﬁcation is essential. The corpus cre-
ated can function as the training database for the
implementation of an algorithm capable of recog-
nizing light verb constructions, which we plan to
develop in the near future. In the following, the
ways machine translation and information extrac-
tion can proﬁt from such a corpus and algorithm
are shortly presented.

6.1 Light verb constructions and machine

translation

translation pro-
When translating collocations,
grams face two main problems. On the one hand,
parts of the collocation do not always occur next
to each other in the sentence (split collocations).
In this case, the computer must ﬁrst recognize that
the parts of the collocation form one unit (Oravecz
et al., 2004), for which the multiword context of
the given word must be considered. On the other
hand, the lack (or lower degree) of compositional-
ity blocks the possibility of word-by-word trans-
lation (Siepmann, 2005; Siepmann, 2006). How-
ever, a (more or less) compositional account of
light verb constructions is required for successful
translation (Dura and Gawro´nska, 2005).

To overcome these problems, a reliable method
is needed to assure that the nominal and verbal
parts of the construction be matched. This re-
quires an algorithm that can identify light verb
constructions. In our corpus, split light verb con-
structions are also annotated, thus, it is possible to
train the algorithm to recognize them as well: the
problem of split collocations can be eliminated in
this way.

A comprehensive list of light verb construc-
tions can enhance the quality of machine transla-
tion – if such lists are available for both the source
and the target language. Annotated corpora (es-
pecially and most desirably, parallel corpora) and
explanatory-combinatorial dictionaries4 are possi-
4Explanatory combinatorial dictionaries are essential for

ble sources of such lists. Since in foreign language
equivalents of light verb constructions, the nomi-
nal components are usually literal translations of
each other (Vincze, 2009), by collating the cor-
responding noun entries in these lists the foreign
language variant of the given light verb construc-
tion can easily be found. On the other hand, in or-
der to improve the building of such lists, we plan
to annotate light verb constructions in a subcorpus
of SzegedParalell, a Hungarian-English manually
aligned parallel corpus (T´oth et al., 2008).

6.2 Light verb constructions and

information extraction

Information extraction (IE) seeks to process large
amounts of unstructured text, in other words, to
collect relevant items of information and to clas-
sify them. Even though humans usually overper-
form computers in complex information process-
ing tasks, computers also have some obvious ad-
vantages due to their capacity of processing and
their precision in performing well-deﬁned tasks.

For several IE applications (e.g.

relationship
extraction) it is essential to identify phrases in
a clause and to determine their grammatical role
(subject, object, verb) as well. This can be carried
out by a syntactic parser and is a relatively sim-
ple task. However, the identiﬁcation of the syn-
tactic status of the nominal component is more
complex in the case of light verb constructions
for it is a quasi-argument of the verb not to be
confused with other arguments (Alonso Ramos,
1998). Thus, the parser should recognize the spe-
cial status of the quasi-argument and treat it in a
speciﬁc way as in the following sentences, one of
which contains a light verb construction while the
other one a verbal counterpart of the construction:

Pete made a decision on his future.
Pete decided on his future.

relation descriptions (up to the present, only fractions of the
dictionary have been completed for Russian (Mel’ˇcuk and
ˇZolkovskij, 1984) and for French (see Mel’ˇcuk et al. (1984
1999)), besides, trial entries have been written in Polish, En-
glish and German that contain the relations of a certain lexi-
cal unit to other lexemes given by means of lexical functions
(see e.g. Mel’ˇcuk et al. (1995)). These dictionaries indicate
light verb constructions within the entry of the nominal com-
ponent.

1116

In the sentence with the verbal counterpart, the
event of deciding involves two arguments: he and
his future. In the sentence with the light verb con-
struction, the same arguments can be found, how-
ever, it is unresolved whether they are the argu-
ments of the verb (made) or the nominal compo-
nent (decision). If a precise syntactic analysis is
needed, it is crucial to know which argument be-
longs to which governor. Nevertheless, it is still
debated if syntactic arguments should be divided
between the nominal component and the verb (see
Meyers et al. (2004a) on argument sharing) and if
yes, how (Alonso Ramos, 2007).

For the purpose of information extraction, such
a detailed analysis is unnecessary and in general
terms, the nominal component can be seen as part
of the verb, that is, they form a complex verb sim-
ilarly to phrasal or prepositional verbs and this
complex verb is considered to be the governor
of arguments. Thus, the following data can be
yielded by the IE algorithm:
there is an event
of decision-making, Pete is its subject and it is
about his future (and not an event of making
with the arguments decision, Pete and his fu-
ture). Again, the precise identiﬁcation of light
verb constructions can highly improve the perfor-
mance of parsers in recognizing relations between
the complex verb and its arguments.

7 Conclusion

In this paper, we have presented the development
of a corpus of Hungarian light verb constructions.
Basic annotation guidelines and statistical data
have also been included. The annotated corpus
can serve as a training database for implementing
an algorithm that aims at identifying light verb
constructions. Several NLP applications in the
ﬁelds of e.g. machine translation and information
extraction may proﬁt from the successful integra-
tion of such an algorithm into the system, which
we plan to develop in the near future.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported in part by the National
Ofﬁce for Research and Technology of the Hun-
garian government within the framework of the
project MASZEKER.

The authors wish to thank Gy¨orgy Szarvas for
his help in developing the annotation tool and
Rich´ard Farkas for his valuable comments on an
earlier draft of this paper.

References
Alonso Ramos, Margarita. 1998. Etude s´emantico-
syntaxique des constructions `a verbe support. Ph.D.
thesis, Universit´e de Montr´eal, Montreal, Canada.

Alonso Ramos, Margarita. 2007. Towards the Syn-
In Wanner,
thesis of Support Verb Constructions.
Leo, editor, Selected Lexical and Grammatical Is-
sues in the Meaning-Text Theory. In Honour of Igor
Mel’ˇcuk, pages 97–138, Amsterdam / Philadelphia.
Benjamins.

B. Kov´acs, M´aria. 1999. A funkci´oig´es szerkezetek
a jogi szaknyelvben [Light verb constructions in the
legal terminology]. Magyar Nyelv˝or, 123(4):388–
394.

Cinkov´a, Silvie and Veronika Kol´aˇrov´a. 2005. Nouns
as Components of Support Verb Constructions in the
Prague Dependency Treebank. In ˇSimkov´a, M´aria,
editor, Insight into Slovak and Czech Corpus Lin-
guistics, pages 113–139. Veda Bratislava, Slovakia.

Csendes, D´ora, J´anos Csirik, Tibor Gyim´othy, and
Andr´as Kocsor.
2005. The Szeged TreeBank.
In Matousek, V´aclav, Pavel Mautner, and Tom´as
Pavelka, editors, Proceedings of the 8th Interna-
tional Conference on Text, Speech and Dialogue,
TSD 2005, Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 123–132, Berlin / Heidelberg, September.
Springer.

Diab, Mona and Pravin Bhutada. 2009. Verb Noun
Construction MWE Token Classiﬁcation.
In Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Multiword Expres-
sions:
Identiﬁcation, Interpretation, Disambigua-
tion and Applications, pages 17–22, Singapore, Au-
gust. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Dura, El˙zbieta and Barbara Gawro´nska. 2005. To-
wards Automatic Translation of Support Verbs Con-
structions:
the Case of Polish robic/zrobic and
Swedish g¨ora. In Proceedings of the 2nd Language
& Technology Conference, pages 450–454, Pozna´n,
Poland, April. Wydawnictwo Pozna´nskie Sp. z o.o.

Fazly, Afsaneh and Suzanne Stevenson. 2007. Distin-
guishing Subtypes of Multiword Expressions Using
Linguistically-Motivated Statistical Measures.
In
Proceedings of the Workshop on A Broader Perspec-
tive on Multiword Expressions, pages 9–16, Prague,
Czech Republic, June. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

1117

Gr´egoire, Nicole.

2007. Design and Implemen-
tation of a Lexicon of Dutch Multiword Expres-
sions. In Proceedings of the Workshop on A Broader
Perspective on Multiword Expressions, pages 17–
24, Prague, Czech Republic, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Kaalep, Heiki-Jaan and Kadri Muischnek.

2006.
Multi-Word Verbs in a Flective Language: The Case
of Estonian. In Proceedings of the EACL Workshop
on Multi-Word Expressions in a Multilingual Con-
texts, pages 57–64, Trento, Italy, April. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Kaalep, Heiki-Jaan and Kadri Muischnek.

2008.
Multi-Word Verbs of Estonian: a Database and a
Corpus.
In Proceedings of the LREC Workshop
Towards a Shared Task for Multiword Expressions
(MWE 2008), pages 23–26, Marrakech, Morocco,
June.

Krenn, Brigitte. 2008. Description of Evaluation Re-
source – German PP-verb data.
In Proceedings
of the LREC Workshop Towards a Shared Task for
Multiword Expressions (MWE 2008), pages 7–10,
Marrakech, Morocco, June.

Langer, Stefan. 2004. A Linguistic Test Battery for
Support Verb Constructions. Lingvisticae Investi-
gationes, 27(2):171–184.

Mel’ˇcuk, Igor and Aleksander

1984.
Explanatory Combinatorial Dictionary of Modern
Russian. Wiener Slawistischer Almanach, Vienna,
Austria.

ˇZolkovskij.

Mel’ˇcuk, Igor, Andr´e Clas, and Alain Polgu`ere. 1995.
Introduction `a lexicologie explicative et combina-
toire. Duculot, Louvain-la-Neuve, France.

Mel’ˇcuk, Igor, et al. 1984–1999. Dictionnaire ex-
plicatif et combinatoire du franc¸ais contemporain:
Recherches lexico-s´emantiques I–IV.
Presses de
l’Universit´e de Montr´eal, Montreal, Canada.

Meyers, Adam, Ruth Reeves, and Catherine Macleod.
2004a. NP-External Arguments: A Study of Argu-
ment Sharing in English. In Tanaka, Takaaki, Aline
Villavicencio, Francis Bond, and Anna Korhonen,
editors, Second ACL Workshop on Multiword Ex-
pressions: Integrating Processing, pages 96–103,
Barcelona, Spain, July. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Meyers, Adam, Ruth Reeves, Catherine Macleod,
Rachel Szekely, Veronika Zielinska, Brian Young,
The NomBank
and Ralph Grishman.
Project: An Interim Report.
In Meyers, Adam,
editor, HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Frontiers in
Corpus Annotation, pages 24–31, Boston, Mas-
sachusetts, USA, May 2 - May 7. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

2004b.

Oravecz, Csaba, K´aroly Varasdi, and Viktor Nagy.
T¨obbszavas kifejez´esek sz´am´ıt´og´epes
2004.
kezel´ese [The treatment of multiword expressions
In Alexin, Zolt´an
in computational linguistics].
and D´ora Csendes, editors, MSzNy 2004 – II. Ma-
gyar Sz´am´ıt´og´epes Nyelv´eszeti Konferencia, pages
141–154, Szeged, Hungary, December. University
of Szeged.

Sag, Ivan A., Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann
Copestake, and Dan Flickinger. 2001. Multiword
Expressions: A Pain in the Neck for NLP. In Pro-
ceedings of the 3rd International Conference on In-
telligent Text Processing and Computational Lin-
guistics (CICLing-2002, pages 1–15, Mexico City,
Mexico.

Siepmann, Dirk. 2005. Collocation, colligation and
encoding dictionaries. Part I: Lexicological Aspects.
International Journal of Lexicography, 18(4):409–
444.

2006.

Siepmann, Dirk.

Collocation, colligation
and encoding dictionaries. Part II: Lexicographical
Aspects.
International Journal of Lexicography,
19(1):1–39.

Stevenson, Suzanne, Afsaneh Fazly, and Ryan North.
2004. Statistical Measures of the Semi-Productivity
of Light Verb Constructions.
In Tanaka, Takaaki,
Aline Villavicencio, Francis Bond, and Anna Ko-
rhonen, editors, Second ACL Workshop on Multi-
word Expressions: Integrating Processing, pages 1–
8, Barcelona, Spain, July. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Tan, Yee Fan, Min-Yen Kan, and Hang Cui. 2006.
Extending corpus-based identiﬁcation of light verb
constructions using a supervised learning frame-
work.
In Proceedings of the EACL Workshop on
Multi-Word Expressions in a Multilingual Contexts,
pages 49–56, Trento, Italy, April. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

T´oth, Krisztina, Rich´ard Farkas, and Andr´as Kocsor.
2008. Hybrid algorithm for sentence alignment of
Hungarian-English parallel corpora. Acta Cyber-
netica, 18(3):463–478.

Tr´on, Viktor, Gy¨orgy Gyepesi, P´eter Hal´acsy, Andr´as
Kornai, L´aszl´o N´emeth, and D´aniel Varga. 2005.
hunmorph: Open Source Word Analysis.
In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL Workshop on Software, pages
77–85, Ann Arbor, Michigan, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

V´aradi, Tam´as. 2006. Multiword Units in an MT
Lexicon. In Proceedings of the EACL Workshop on
Multi-Word Expressions in a Multilingual Contexts,
pages 73–78, Trento, Italy, April. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

1118

Vincze, Veronika, D´ora Szauter, Attila Alm´asi, Gy¨orgy
M´ora, Zolt´an Alexin, and J´anos Csirik.
2010.
Hungarian Dependency Treebank.
In Calzolari,
Nicoletta, Khalid Choukri, Bente Maegaard, Joseph
Mariani, Jan Odjik, Stelios Piperidis, Mike Ros-
ner, and Daniel Tapias, editors, Proceedings of the
Seventh conference on International Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC’10), Valletta, Malta,
May. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).

Vincze, Veronika. 2008. A puszta k¨ozn´ev + ige kom-
plexumok st´atus´ar´ol [On the status of bare common
In Sinkovics, Bal´azs,
noun + verb constructions].
editor, LingDok 7. Nyelv´esz-doktoranduszok dolgo-
zatai, pages 265–283, Szeged, Hungary. University
of Szeged.

Vincze, Veronika. 2009. F˝on´ev + ige szerkezetek a
sz´ot´arban [Noun + verb constructions in the dictio-
In V´aradi, Tam´as, editor, III. Alkalmazott
nary].
Nyelv´eszeti Doktorandusz Konferencia, pages 180–
188, Budapest. MTA Nyelvtudom´anyi Int´ezet.

2009.

Zarrieß, Sina and Jonas Kuhn.

Exploit-
ing Translational Correspondences for Pattern-
Independent MWE Identiﬁcation.
In Proceedings
of the Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Identi-
ﬁcation, Interpretation, Disambiguation and Appli-
cations, pages 23–30, Singapore, August. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

