



















































Semi-automatically Developing Chinese HPSG Grammar from the Penn Chinese Treebank for Deep Parsing


Coling 2010: Poster Volume, pages 1417–1425,
Beijing, August 2010

Semi-automatically Developing Chinese HPSG Grammar from the 
Penn Chinese Treebank for Deep Parsing 

Kun Yu1 Yusuke Miyao2 Xiangli Wang1 Takuya Matsuzaki1 Junichi Tsujii1,3 
1. The University of Tokyo 2. National Institute of Informatics 

yusuke@nii.ac.jp {kunyu, xiangli, matuzaki, tsujii} 
@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp 3. The University of Manchester 

 
Abstract 

In this paper, we introduce our recent work 
on Chinese HPSG grammar development 
through treebank conversion. By manually 
defining grammatical constraints and anno-
tation rules, we convert the bracketing trees 
in the Penn Chinese Treebank (CTB) to be 
an HPSG treebank. Then, a large-scale lexi-
con is automatically extracted from the 
HPSG treebank. Experimental results on the 
CTB 6.0 show that a HPSG lexicon was 
successfully extracted with 97.24% accu-
racy; furthermore, the obtained lexicon 
achieved 98.51% lexical coverage and 
76.51% sentential coverage for unseen text, 
which are comparable to the state-of-the-art 
works for English. 

1 Introduction 
Precise, in-depth syntactic and semantic analysis 
has become important in many NLP applications. 
Deep parsing provides a way of simultaneously 
obtaining both the semantic relation and syntac-
tic structure. Thus, the method has become more 
popular among researchers recently (Miyao and 
Tsujii, 2006; Matsuzaki et al., 2007; Clark and 
Curran, 2004; Kaplan et al., 2004).  

This paper introduces our recent work on deep 
parsing for Chinese, specifically focusing on the 
development of a large-scale grammar, based on 
the HPSG theory (Pollard and Sag, 1994). Be-
cause it takes a decade to manually develop an 
HPSG grammar that achieves sufficient coverage 
for real-world text, we use a semi-automatic ap-
proach, which has successfully been pursued for 
English (Miyao, 2006; Miyao et al., 2005; Xia, 
1999; Hockenmaier and Steedman, 2002; Chen 
and Shanker, 2000; Chiang, 2000) and other lan-
guages (Guo et al., 2007; Cramer and Zhang, 
2009; Hockenmaier, 2006; Rehbei and Genabith, 
2009; Schluter and Genabith, 2009).  

The following lists our method of approach: 
(1) define a skeleton of the grammar (in this 

work, the structure of sign, grammatical princi-
ples and schemas), (2) convert the CTB (Xue et 
al., 2002) into an HPSG-style treebank, (3) 
automatically extract a large-scale lexicon from 
the obtained treebank. 

Experiments were performed to evaluate the 
quality of the grammar developed from the CTB 
6.0. More than 95% of the sentences in the CTB 
could be successfully converted, and the ex-
tracted lexicon was 97.24% accurate. The ex-
tracted lexicon achieved 98.51% lexical coverage 
and 76.51% sentential coverage for unseen text, 
which are comparable to the state-of-the-art 
works for English. 

Since grammar engineering has many specific 
problems in each language, although we used the 
similar method applied in other languages to de-
velop a Chinese HPSG grammar, it is very dif-
ferent from applying, such as statistical parsing 
models, to a new language. Lots of efforts have 
been done for the specific characteristics of Chi-
nese. The contribution of our work is to describe 
these issues. As a result, a skeleton design of 
Chinese HPSG is proposed, and for the first 
time, a robust and wide-coverage Chinese HPSG 
grammar is developed from real-world text.  

2 Design of Grammatical Constraints 
for Chinese HPSG 

Because of the lack of a comprehensive HPSG-
based syntactic theory for Chinese, we extended 
the original HPSG (Pollard and Sag, 1994) to 
analyze the specific linguistic phenomena in 
Chinese. Due to space limitations, we will pro-
vide a brief sampling of our extensions, and dis-
cuss several selected constructions.  

2.1 Sign, Principles, and Schemas 
Sign, which is a data structure to express gram-
matical constraints of words/phrases, is modified 
and extended for the analysis of Chinese specific 
constructions, as shown in Figure 1. PHON, 
MOD, SPEC, SUBJ, MARKING, and SLASH are 

1417



features defined in the original HPSG, and they 
represent the phonological information of a 
word, the constraints on the modifiee, the speci-
fiee, the subject, the marker, and the long-
distance dependency, respectively. COMPS, 
which represents the constraints on comple-
ments, is divided into LCOMPS and RCOMPS, 
to distinguish between left and right comple-
ments. Aspect, question, and negation particles 
are treated as markers as done in (Gao, 2000), 
which are distinguished by ASPECT, 
QUESTION, and NEGATION. CONT is also 
originated from Pollard and Sag (1994), although 
it is used to represent semantic structures with 
predicate-argument dependencies. TOPIC and 
CONJ are extended features that represent the 
constraints on the topic and the conjuncts of co-
ordination. FILLER is another extended feature 
that records the grammatical function of the 
moved argument in a long-distance dependency. 

 
Figure 1. HPSG sign for Chinese. 

The principles, including Phonology Princi-
ple, Valence Principle, Head Feature Principle, 
and Nonlocal Feature Principle, are imple-
mented in our Chinese HPSG grammar as de-
fined in (Pollard and Sag, 1994). Semantic 
Principle is slightly modified so that it composes 
predicate-argument structures. 

14 schemas are defined in our grammar, 
among which the Coord-Empty-Conj Schema, 
Relative-Head Schema, Empty-Relativizer 
Schema, and Topic-Head Schema are designed 
specifically for Chinese. The other 10 schemas 
are borrowed from the original HPSG theory. 

15 Chinese constructions are considered in our 
current grammar (refer to Table 1). A detailed 
description of some particular constructions will 
be provided in the following subsection.  

2.2 An HPSG Analysis for Chinese  
2.2.1 BA Construction 
The BA construction moves the object of a verb 
to the pre-verbal position. For example, the sen-

tence in Figure 2 with the original word order is 
‘我/I 读/read 了 书/book’. There were three 
popular ways to address the BA construction: as 
a verb (Huang, 1991; Bender, 2000), preposition 
(Gao, 1992), and case marker (Gao, 2000). Since 
the aspect markers, such as ‘了’, cannot attach to 
BA, we exclude the analysis of treating BA as a 
verb. Because BA, like prepositions, always ap-
pears before a noun phrase, we therefore follow 
the analysis in Gao (1992), and treat BA as a 
preposition. As shown in Figure 2, BA takes a 
moved object as a complement, and attaches to 
the verb as a left-complement. 

 
(I read the book.) 

Figure 21. Analysis of BA construction. 

2.2.2 BEI Construction 
The BEI construction is used to make the passive 
voice of a sentence. Because the aspect marker 
also cannot attach to BEI, we do not treat BEI as 
a verb, as done in the CTB. Similar to the analy-
sis of BA construction, we regard BEI as a 
preposition that attaches to the verb as a left-
complement. Additionally, because we can insert 
a clause ‘小李/Li 派/send 人/person’ between 
the moved object ‘他/he’ and the verb ‘打/beat’, 
as is the case for ‘他/he 被/BEI 小李/Li 
派/send 人/person 打/beat 了 (He was beaten 
by the person that is sent by Li)’, we treat the 
relation between the moved object and the verb 
as a long-distance dependency. Figure 3 exem-
plifies our analysis of the BEI construction, in 
which the Filler-Head Schema is used to handle 
the long-distance dependency, and the FILLER 
feature is used to record that the role of the 
moved argument. 

 
(The book is read by me.)  

Figure 3. Analysis of BEI construction.  

2.2.3 Topic Construction 
As indicated in Li and Thompson (1989), a topic 
refers to the theme of a sentence, which always 
                                                             
1 In the figures in this paper, we will show only selected features 
that are relevant to the explanation.  

1418



appears before the subject. The difference be-
tween the topic and subject is the subject must 
always have a direct semantic relationship with 
the verb in a sentence, whereas the topic does 
not. There are two types of topic constructions. 
In the first type, the topic does not fill any argu-
ment slots of the verb, such as the topic 
‘大象/elephant’ in Figure 4. In the second type, 
the topic has a semantic relationship with the 
verb. For example, in the sentence ‘他/he 我/I 
喜欢/like (I like him)’, the topic ‘他/he’ is also 
an object of ‘喜欢/like’. For the first type, we 
define the Topic-Head Schema to describe the 
topic construction (refer to Figure 4). For the 
second type, we follow the same analysis as in 
English, and use the Filler-Head Schema.   

 
(The nose of an elephant is long.) 

Figure 4. Analysis of topic construction. 

2.2.4 Serial Verb Construction 
In contrast to the definition of serial verb con-
struction in Li and Thompson (1989), we specify 
a serial verb construction as a special type of 
verb phrase coordination, which describes sev-
eral separate events with no conjunctions inside. 
Similar to ordinary coordination, the verb 
phrases in a serial verb construction share the 
same syntactic subject (Muller and Lipenkova, 
2009), topic, and left-complement. We define 
Coord-Empty-Conj Schema to deal with it. Fig-
ure 5 shows an example analysis. 

 
(I go to the book store and buy a book.) 

Figure 5. Analysis of serial verb construction. 

2.2.5 Relative Clause 
In Chinese, a relative clause is marked by a rela-
tivizer ‘的’ and exists in the left of the head 
noun. Because Chinese noun phrases are right-
headed in general, we analyze a relative clause as 
a nominalization that modifies a head noun (Li 
and Thompson, 1989). Inside of a relative clause, 
the relativizer is treated as head. When the rela-
tivizer is omitted, we define a unary schema, 
Empty-Relativizer Schema, which functions by 
combining a relative clause with an empty rela-

tivizer. Furthermore, we introduce a Relative-
Head Schema to handle the long-distance de-
pendency for the extracted argument2 (refer to 
Figure 6).  

 
(the book that I buy) 

Figure 6. Analysis of relative clause. 

3 Converting the CTB into an HPSG 
Treebank 

3.1 Partially-specified Derivation Tree 
Annotation 

In order to convert the CTB into an HPSG tree-
bank, we first annotate the bracketing trees in the 
CTB to be partially-specified derivation trees3, 
which conform to the grammatical constraints 
designed in Section 2. Three types of rules are 
defined to fulfill this annotation. 

 
(I read the book that he wrote.) 

Figure 7. The CTB annotation for a sentence. 

 
Figure 8. Partially-specified derivation tree for Figure 7. 
For example, Figure 7 shows the bracketing 

tree of a sentence in the CTB, while Figure 8 
shows the partially-specified derivation tree after 
re-annotation. 

                                                             
2 The extracted adjunct is not treated as a long-distance dependency 
in our current grammar. 
3 Partially-specified derivation tree means a tree structure that is 
annotated with schema names and some features of the HPSG signs 
(Miyao, 2006). 

1419



3.1.1 Rules for Annotation Conversion  
In the CTB, there exist some annotations that do 
not coincide with our HPSG analysis for Chi-
nese. Therefore, we define pattern rules to con-
vert the annotations in the CTB to fit with our 
HPSG analysis. 76 annotation rules are defined 
for 15 Chinese constructions (refer to Table 2). 
Due to page constraints, we focus on the 
constructions that we discussed in Section 2. 

Construction Rule # 
Relative clause 20 

BEI construction 21 
Coordination 7 

Subject/object control 5 
Non-verbal predicate 4 

Logical subject 3 
Right node raising 3 

Parenthesis 3 
BA construction 3 

Aspect/question/negation particle 2 
Subordination 1 

Serial Verb construction 1 
Modal verb 1 

Topic construction 1 
Apposition 1 

Table 1. Chinese constructions and annotation rules. 

Rules for BA and BEI Construction 
As analyzed in Section 2, we treat BA and BEI 
as prepositions that attach to the verb as left-
complements. However, in the CTB, BA and 
BEI are annotated as verbs that take a sentential 
complement (Xue and Xia, 2000). By applying 
the annotation rules, the BA/BEI and the subject 
of the sentential complement of BA/BEI are re-
annotated as a prepositional phrase (as indicated 
in the dash-boxed part in Figure 9). 

 
(I read the book.) 

Figure 9. Conversion of BA construction. 

 
(He is regarded as a friend by me.) 

Figure 10. Verb division in BEI construction. 
In addition, in the CTB, some BA/BEI con-

structions are not annotated with trace, which 

makes it difficult to retrieve the semantic relation 
between the verb and the moved object. The 
principal reason for this is that the moved object 
in these constructions has a semantic relation 
with only part of the verb. For example, in Fig-
ure 10, the moved noun ‘他/he’ is the object of 
‘当/regard’, but not for ‘当作/regard as’. Analy-
sis shows that only a closed set of characters 
(e.g. ‘作/as’)  can be attached to verbs in such a 
case. Therefore, we manually collect these char-
acters from the CTB, and then define pattern 
rules to automatically split the verb, which ends 
with the collected characters, in the BA and BEI 
construction. Finally, we annotate trace for the 
split verb. Figure 10 exemplifies the conversion 
of an example sentence. 

Rules for Topic Construction 
In the CTB, a functional tag ‘TPC’ is used to 
indicate a topic (Xue and Xia, 2000). Therefore, 
we use this functional tag to detect topic phrases 
during conversion. 

Rules for Serial Verb Construction 
We define pattern rules to detect the parallel verb 
phrases with no conjunction inside (as shown in 
Figure 11), and treat these verb phrases as a se-
rial verb construction. However, when the verb 
in the first phrase is a modal verb, such as the 
case of ‘我/I 想/want to 唱歌/sing (I want to 
sing)’, the parallel verb phrases should not be 
treated as a serial verb construction. Therefore, a 
list of modal verbs is manually collected from 
the CTB to filter out these exceptional cases dur-
ing conversion.  

 
(go downstairs and eat meal) 

Figure 11. An example of parallel verb phrases. 

Rules for Relative Clause  

 
(the book that he wrote) 

Figure 12. Conversion of relative clause. 
We define annotation rules to slightly modify the 
annotation of a relative clause in CTB, as shown 
in Figure 12, to make the tree structure easy to be 

1420



analyzed. Furthermore, in CTB, relative clauses 
are annotated with both extracted arguments and 
extracted adjuncts. But in our grammar, we only 
deal with extracted arguments, and the gap in a 
relative clause (as indicated in the dash-boxed 
part in Figure 12). When the extracted phrase is 
an adjunct of the relative clause, we simply view 
the clause as a modifier of the extracted phrase. 

3.1.2 Rules for Correcting Inconsistency  
There are some inconsistencies in the annotation 
of the CTB, which presents difficulties for per-
forming the derivation tree annotation. There-
fore, we define 49 rules, as done in 
(Hockenmaier and Steedman, 2002) for English, 
to mitigate inconsistencies before annotation (re-
fer to Table 3).  

3.1.3 Rules for Assisting Annotation 
We also define 48 rules (refer to Table 2), which 
are similar to the rules used in (Miyao, 2006) for 
English, to help the derivation tree annotation. 
For example, 12 pattern rules are defined to as-
sign the schemas to corresponding constituents. 

Rule Type Rule Description Rule # 
Fix tree annotation 37 

Fix phrase tag annotation 5 
Fix functional tag annotation 5 

Rules for 
correcting 

inconsistent 
annotation Fix POS tag annotation 2 

Slash recognization 27 
Schema assignment 12 

Head/Argument/Modifier marking 8 

Rules for 
assisting  

annotation 
Binarization 1 

Table 2. Rules for correcting inconsistency and assisting annotation. 

3.2 HPSG Treebank Acquisition 
In this phase, the schemas and principles are ap-
plied to the annotated partially-specified trees, in 
order to fill out unspecified constraints and vali-
date the consistency of the annotated constraints. 
In effect, an HPSG treebank is obtained. 

For instance, by applying the Head-
Complement Schema to the dash-boxed nodes in 
Figure 8, the constraints of the right daughter are 
percolated to RCOMPS of the left daughter (as 
indicated as 4 in Figure 13). After applying the 
schemas and the principles to the whole tree in 
Figure 8, a HPSG derivation tree is acquired (re-
fer to Figure 13).  

3.3 Lexicon Extraction  
With the HPSG treebank acquired in Section 3.2, 
we automatically collect lexical entries as the 
combination of words and lexical entry templates 
from the terminal nodes of the derivation trees. 
For example, from the HPSG derivation tree 

shown in Figure 13, we obtain a lexical entry for 
the word ‘写/write’ as shown in Figure 14. 

 
Figure 13. HPSG derivation tree for Figure 8. 

 
Figure 14. Lexical entry extracted for the word ‘写/write’. 

3.3.1 Lexical Entry Template Expansion 

 
(a) Lexical entry template for the verb in BEI construction 

 
(b) Lexical entry template for the verb in original word order 

Figure 15. Application of a lexical rule. 
Some Chinese constructions change the word 
order of sentences, such as the BA/BEI construc-
tions. Therefore, we apply lexical rules (Naka-
nishi et al., 2004) to the lexical entry templates to 
convert them into those for the original word 
order, and expand the lexical entry templates 
consequently. 18 lexical rules are defined for the 
verbs in the BA/BEI constructions. For example, 
by applying a lexical rule to the lexical entry 
template in Figure 15(a), the moved object indi-

1421



cated by SLASH is restored into RCOMPS, and 
the subject introduced by BEI in LCOMPS is 
restored into SUBJ (refer to Figure 15(b)). 

3.3.2 Mapping of Semantics 
In our grammar, we use predicate-argument de-
pendencies for semantic representation. 44 types 
of predicate-argument relations are defined to 
represent the semantic structures of 13 classes of 
words. For example, we define a predicate-
argument relation ‘verb_arg12’, in which a verb 
takes two arguments ‘ARG1’ and ‘ARG2’, to ex-
press the semantics of transitive verbs. 72 se-
mantics mapping rules are defined to associate 
these predicate-argument relations with the lexi-
cal entry templates. Figure 16 exemplifies a se-
mantics mapping rule. The input of this rule is 
the lexical entry template (as shown in the left 
part), and the output is a predicate-argument rela-
tion ‘verb_arg12’ (as shown in the right part), 
which associates the syntactic arguments SUBJ 
and SLASH with the semantic arguments ARG1 
and ARG2 (as indicated by 1 and 2 in Figure 16). 

 
Figure 16. A semantics mapping rule. 

4 Evaluation 
4.1 Experimental Setting 
We used the CTB 6.0 for HPSG grammar devel-
opment and evaluation. We split the corpus into 
development, testing, and training data sets, fol-
lowing the recommendation from the corpus 
author. The development data was used to tune 
the design of grammar constraints and the anno-
tation rules. However, the testing data set was 
reserved for further evaluation on parsing. Thus, 
the training data was further divided into two 
parts for training and testing in this work. During 
the evaluation, unknown words were handled in 
the same way as done in (Hockenmaier and 
Steedman, 2002).  

4.2 Evaluation Metrics 
In order to verify the quality of the grammar de-
veloped in our work, we evaluated the extracted 
lexicon by the accuracy for assessing the semi-
automatic conversion process, and the coverage 
for quantifying the upper-bound coverage of the 
future HPSG parser based on this grammar.  

The accuracy of the extracted lexicon was 
evaluated by lexical accuracy, which counts the 

number of the correct lexical entries among all 
the obtained lexical entries.  

In addition, two evaluation metrics as used in 
(Hockenmaier and Steedman, 2002; Xia, 1999; 
Miyao, 2006) were used to evaluate the coverage 
of the obtained lexicon. The first one is lexical 
coverage (Hockenmaier and Steedman, 2002; 
Xia, 1999), which means that the percentage that 
the lexical entries extracted from the testing data 
are covered by the lexical entries acquired from 
the training data. The second one is sentential 
coverage (Miyao, 2006): a sentence is consid-
ered to be covered only when the lexical entries 
of all the words in this sentence are covered.  

4.3 Results of Accuracy 
Since there was no gold standard data for the 
automatic evaluation of accuracy, we randomly 
selected 100 sentences from the testing data, and 
manually checked the lexical entries extracted 
from these sentences. Results show that 1,558 
lexical entries were extracted at 97.24% 
(1,515/1,558) accuracy.  

Error analysis shows all the incorrect lexical 
entries came from the error in the derivation tree 
annotation. For example, our current design 
failed to find the correct boundary of coordinated 
noun phrases when the word ‘等/etc’ was at-
tached at the end, such as ‘产权/property right 
出让/selling 、 资产/assets 出租/renting 
等/etc (property right selling and assets renting 
etc.)’. We will improve the derivation tree anno-
tation to solve this issue. 

4.4 Results of Coverage 
Table 3 shows the coverage of the extracted lexi-
cal entries, which indicates that a large HPSG 
lexicon was successfully extracted from the CTB 
for unseen text, with reasonable coverage. The 
statistics of the HPSG lexicon extraction in our 
experiments (refer to Table 4) also indicates that 
we successfully extracted lexical entries from 
more than 95% of the sentences in the CTB.  

Among all the uncovered lexical entries, 
78.55% are for content words, such as verb and 
noun. In addition, the classification of uncovered 
lexical entries in Table 4 indicates that about 1/3 
of the uncovered lexical entries came from the 
unknown lexical entry templates (‘+w/-t’). We 
analyzed the 193 ‘+w/-t’ failures in the testing 
data, among which 169 failures resulted from the 
shortage of training data, which indicated that the 
correct lexical entry template did not appear in 

1422



the training data. The learning curve in Figure 17 
shows that we can resolve this issue by enlarging 
the training data. The other 24 failures came 
from the error in the derivation tree annotation. 
For example, our current grammar failed at de-
tecting the coordinated clauses when they were 
separated by a colon. We will be able to reduce 
this type of failure by improving the derivation 
tree annotation. 

Uncovered Lexical Entries Sent. Cov. Lex. Cov. +w/+t +w/-t 
76.51% 98.51% 1.05% 0.43% 
Table 34. Coverage of extracted HPSG lexicon. 

Data Set Total Sent # Succeed Sent # Word # 
Lexical Entry 
Template # 

Training 20,230 19,257(95.19%) 510,815 4,836 
Develop 2,067 2,009(97.19%) 55,714 1,582 
Testing 2,000 1,941(97.05%) 44,924 1,163 

Table 4. Statistics of HPSG lexicon extraction.  

 
Figure 17. Lexical coverage (Y axis) vs. corpus size (X axis). 

 
Figure 18. A lexical entry template extracted from testing data. 

The other type of failures (‘+w/+t’) indicate 
that a word was incorrectly associated with a 
lexical entry template, even though both of them 
existed in the training data. Error analysis shows 
that 64.39% of failures were related to verbs. For 
example, for a relative clause ‘投资/invest 
台湾/Taiwan 的 商人/businessman (the busi-
nessman that invests Taiwan)’ in the testing data, 
we associated a lexical entry template as shown 
in Figure 18 with the verb ‘投资/invest’. In the 
training data, however, the lexical entry template 
shown in Figure 18 cannot be extracted for 
‘投资/invest’, since this word never appears in a 
relative clause with an extracted subject. Intro-
ducing lexical rules to expand the lexical entry 
template of verbs in a relative clause is a possible 
way to solve this problem. 

4.5 Comparison with Previous Work 
Guo’s work (Guo et al., 2007; Guo, 2009) is the 
only previous work on Chinese lexicalized 

                                                             
4 ‘+w/+t’ means both the word and lexical entry template have 
been seen in the lexicon. ‘+w/-t’ means only the word has been 
seen in the lexicon (Hockenmaier and Steedman, 2002). 

grammar development from the CTB, which in-
duced wide-coverage LFG resources from the 
CTB. By using the hand-made gold-standard f-
structures of 200 sentences from the CTB 5.1, 
the LFG f-structures developed in Guo’s work 
achieved 96.34% precision and 96.46% recall for 
unseen text (Guo, 2009). In our work, we applied 
the similar strategy in evaluating the accuracy of 
the developed Chinese HPSG grammar, which 
achieved 97.24% lexical accuracy on 100 unseen 
sentences from the CTB 6.0. When evaluating 
the coverage of our grammar, we used a much 
larger data set (including 2,000 unseen sen-
tences), and achieved 98.51% lexical coverage. 
Although these results cannot be compared to 
Guo’s work directly because of the different size 
and content of data set, it indicates that the Chi-
nese HPSG grammar developed in our work is 
comparable in quality with Guo’s work. 

In addition, there were previous works about 
developing lexicalized grammar for English. 
Considering the small size of the CTB, in com-
parison to the Penn Treebank used in the previ-
ous works, the results listed in Table 5 verify 
that, the quality of the Chinese HPSG grammar 
developed in our work is comparable to these 
previous works.  

Previous Work Sent. Cov. Lex. Cov. 
Miyao (2006) 82.50% 98.97% 

Hockenmaier and Steedman (2002) - 98.50% 
Xia (1999) - 96.20% 

Table 5. Evaluation results of previous work.  

4.6 Discussion 
There are still some sentences in the CTB from 
which we failed to extract lexical entries. We 
analyzed the 59 failed sentences in the testing 
data and listed the reasons in Table 6.  

Reason Sent # 
Error in the derivation tree annotation 31 

Short of semantics mapping rule 23 
Inconsistent annotation in the CTB 5 

Table 6. Reasons for lexicon extraction failures. 
The principal reason for 31 sentence failures, 

is the error in the derivation tree annotation. For 
instance, our current annotation rules could con-
vert the regular relative clause shown in Figure 
12. Nonetheless, when the relative clause is in-
side of a parenthesis, such as ‘“ 原始/primitive 
的 ”方法/method (the method that is primi-
tive)’, the annotation rules failed at finding the 
extracted head noun to create a derivation tree. 
This type of failure can be reduced by improving 
the annotation rules. 

1423



The second reason, for which 23 sentences 
failed, is the shortage of the semantics mapping 
rules. For example, we did not define semantics 
mapping rule for a classifier that acts as a predi-
cate with two topics. This type of failure can be 
reduced by adding semantic mapping rules.  

The last reason for sentence failures is incon-
sistencies in the CTB annotation. In our future 
work, these inconsistencies will be collected to 
enrich our inconsistency correction rules.  

In addition to the reasons above, some sen-
tences with special constructions in the devel-
opment and training data also could not be 
analyzed by our current grammar, since the spe-
cial construction is difficult for the current HPSG 
to analyze. The special constructions include the 
argument-cluster coordination shown in Figure 
19. Introducing the similar rules used in CCG 
(Hockenmaier and Steedman, 2002) could be a 
possible solution to this problem. 

 
(have 177 intrant projects and 6.4 billion investments) 

Figure 19. An argument-cluster coordination in CTB. 

5 Related Work  
To the extent of our knowledge, the only previ-
ous work about developing Chinese lexicalized 
grammar from treebanks is Guo’s work (Guo et 
al., 2007; Guo, 2009). An LFG-based parsing 
using wide-coverage LFG approximations in-
duced from the CTB was done in this work. 
However, they did not train a deep parser based 
on the LFG resources obtained in their work, but 
relied on an external PCFG parser to create c-
structure trees, and then mapped the c-structure 
trees into f-structures using their annotation rules 
(Guo, 2009). In contrast to Guo’s work, we paid 
particular attention to a different grammar 
framework, i.e. HPSG, with the analysis of more 
Chinese constructions, such as the serial verb 
construction. In addition, in our on-going deep 
parsing work, we use the developed Chinese 
HPSG grammar, i.e. the lexical entries, to train a 
full-fledged HPSG parser directly. 

Additionally, there are some works that induce 
lexicalized grammar from corpora for other lan-
guages. For example, by using the Penn Tree-
bank, Miyao et al. (2005) automatically extracted 
a large HPSG lexicon, Xia (1999), Chen and 
Shanker (2000), Hockenmaier and Steedman 
(2002), and Chiang (2000) invented LTAG/CCG 

specific procedures for lexical entry extraction. 
From the German Tiger corpus, Cramer and 
Zhang (2009) constructed a German HPSG 
grammar; Hockenmaier (2006) created a German 
CCGbank; and Rehbei and Genabith (2009) ac-
quired LFG resources. In addition, Schluter and 
Genabith (2009) automatically obtained wide-
coverage LFG resources from a French Tree-
bank. Our work implements a similar idea to 
these works, but we apply different grammar 
design and annotation rules, which are specific to 
Chinese. Furthermore, we obtained a compara-
tive result to state-of-the-art works for English.  

There are some researchers who worked on 
Chinese HPSG grammar development manually. 
Zhang (2004) implemented a Chinese HPSG 
grammar using the LinGO Grammar matrix 
(Bender et al., 2002). Only a few basic construc-
tions were considered, and a small lexicon was 
constructed in this work. Li (1997) and Wang et 
al. (2009) designed frameworks for Chinese 
HPSG grammar; however, only small grammars 
were implemented in these works. 

Furthermore, some linguistic works focused 
mainly on the discussion of specific Chinese 
constructions in the HPSG or LFG framework, 
without implementing a grammar for real-world 
text (Bender, 2000; Gao, 2000; Li and McFe-
tridge, 1995; Li, 1995; Xue and McFetridge, 
1995; Wang and Liu, 2007; Ng, 1997; Muller 
and Lipenkova, 2009; Liu, 1996; Kit, 1998). 

6 Conclusion and Future Work  
In this paper, we described the semi-automatic 
development of a Chinese HPSG grammar from 
the CTB. Grammatical constraints are first de-
signed by hand. Then, we convert the bracketing 
trees in the CTB into an HPSG treebank, by us-
ing pre-defined annotation rules. Lastly, we 
automatically extract lexical entries from the 
HPSG treebank. We evaluated our work on the 
CTB 6.0. Results indicated that a large HPSG 
lexicon was successfully extracted with a 
97.24% accuracy. Furthermore, our grammar 
achieved 98.51% lexical coverage and 76.51% 
sentential coverage for unseen text.  

This is an ongoing work, and there are some 
future works under consideration, including en-
riching the design of annotation rules, introduc-
ing more semantics mapping rules, and adding 
lexical rules. In addition, the work on Chinese 
HPSG parsing is on-going, within which the 
Chinese HPSG grammar developed in this work 
will be available soon. 

1424



References  
Emily Bender. 2000. The Syntax of Madarin Ba: Reconsid-

ering the Verbal Analysis. Journal of East Asian Lin-
guistics. 9(2): 105-145. 

Emily Bender, Dan Flickinger, and Stephan Oepen. 2002. 
The Grammar Matrix: An Open-source Starter-lit for the 
Rapid Development of Cross-linguistically Consistent 
Broad-coverage Precision Grammars. Procedings of the 
Workshop on Grammar Engineering and Evaluation. 

John Chen and Vijay K. Shanker. 2004. Automated Extrac-
tion of TAGs from the Penn Treebank. Proceedings of 
the 6th IWPT. 

David Chiang. 2000. Statistical Parsing with an Automati-
cally-extracted Tree Adjoining Grammar. Proceedings of 
the 38th ACL. 456-463. 

Stephen Clark and James R. Curran. 2004. Parsing the WSJ 
Using CCG and Log-linear Models. Proceedings of the 
42nd ACL. 

Bart Cramer and Yi Zhang. 2009. Construction of a German 
HPSG Grammar from a Detailed Treebank. Proceedings 
of the 2009 Workshop on Grammar Engineering Across 
Frameworks. 

Qian Gao. 1992. Chinese Ba Construction: its Syntax and 
Semantics. Technical report.  

Qian Gao. 2000. Argument Structure, HPSG and Chinese 
Grammar. Ph.D. Thesis. Ohio State University. 

Yuqing Guo. 2009. Treebank-based acquisition of Chinese 
LFG Resources for Parsing and Generation. Ph.D. The-
sis. Dublin City University. 

Yuqing Guo, Josef van Genabith and Haifeng Wang. 2007. 
Acquisition of Wide-Coverage, Robust, Probabilistic 
Lexical-Functional Grammar Resources for Chinese. 
Proceedings of the 12th International Lexical Functional 
Grammar Conference (LFG 2007). 214-232. 

Julia Hockenmaier. 2006. Creating a CCGbank and a wide-
coverage CCG lexicon for German 
Proceedings of COLING/ACL 2006. 

Julia Hockenmaier and Mark Steedman. 2002. Acquiring 
Compact Lexicalized Grammars from a Cleaner Tree-
bank. Proceedings of the 3rd LREC. 

C-R Huang. 1991. Madarin Chinese and the Lexical Map-
ping Theory: A Study of the Interaction of Morphology 
and Argument Changing. Bulletin of the Institute of His-
tory and Philosophy 62. 

Ronald M. Kaplan et al. 2004. Speed and Accuracy in Shal-
low and Deep Stochastic Parsing. Proceedings of 
HLT/NAACL 2004. 

Chunyu Kit. 1998. Ba and Bei as Multi-valence Preposi-
tions in Chinese. Studia Linguistica Sinica: 497-522.  

Wei Li. 1995. Esperanto Inflection and its Interface in 
HPSG. Proceedings of the 11th North West Linguistics 
Conference. 

Wei Li. 1997. Outline of an HPSG-style Chinese Reversible 
Grammar. Proceedings of the 13th North West Linguis-
tics Conference. 

Wei Li and Paul McFetridge. 1995. Handling Chinese NP 
Predicate in HPSG. Proceedings of PACLING-II. 

Charles N. Li and Sandra A. Thompson. 1989. Mandarin 
Chinese: A Functional Reference Grammar. University 
of California Press, London, England. 

Takuya Matsuzaki, Yusuke Miyao, and Junichi Tsujii. 
2007. Efficient HPSG Parsing with Supertagging and 
CFG-filtering. Proceedings of the 20th IJCAI. 

Yusuke Miyao. 2006. From Linguistic Theory to Syntactic 
Analysis: Corpus-oriented Grammar Development and 
Feature Forest Model. Ph.D. Thesis. The University of 
Tokyo. 

Yusuke Miyao, Takashi Ninomiya and Junichi Tsujii. 2005. 
Corpus-oriented Grammar Development for Acquiring a 
Head-driven Phrase Structure Grammar from the Penn 
Treebank. Natural Language Processing - IJCNLP 2005: 
684-693. 

Yusuke Miyao and Junichi Tsujii. 2008. Feature Forest 
Models for Probabilistic HPSG Parsing. Computational 
Linguistics. 34(1): 35-80. 

Stefan Muller and Janna Lipenkova. 2009. Serial Verb Con-
structions in Chinese: A HPSG Account. Proceedings of 
the 16th International Conference on Head-Driven 
Phrase Structure Grammar. 234-254. 

Hiroko Nakanishi, Yusuke Miyao and Junichi Tsujii. 2004. 
An Empirical Investigation of the Effect of Lexical 
Rules on Parsing with a Treebank Grammar. Proceed-
ings of the 3rd TLT. 103-114. 

Say K. Ng. 1997. A Double-specifier Account of Chinese 
NPs Using Head-driven Phrase Structure Grammar. 
Master Thesis. Department of Linguistics, University of 
Edinburgh. 

Carl Pollard and Ivan A. Sag. 1994. Head-Driven Phrase 
Structure Grammar. The University of Chicago Press 
and CSLI Publications, Chicago, IL and Stanford, CA. 

Ines Rehbein and Josef van Genabith. 2009. Automatic 
Acquisition of LFG Resources for German – As Good as 
it Gets. Proceedings of the 14th International Lexical 
Functional Grammar Conference (LFG 2009). 

Natalie Schluter and Josef van Genabith. 2008. Treebank-
based Acquisition of LFG Parsing Resources for French. 
Proceedings of the 6th LREC. 

Mark Steedman. 2000. The Syntactic Process. The MIT 
Press. 

Xiangli Wang et al. 2009. Design of Chinese HPSG Frame-
work for Data-driven Parsing. Proceedings of the 23rd 
Pacific Asia Conference on Language, Information and 
Computation. 

Lulu Wang and Haitao Liu. 2007. A Description of Chinese 
NPs Using Head-driven Phrase Structure Grammar. Pro-
ceedings of the 14th International Conference on Head-
Driven Phrase Structure Grammar. 287-305. 

Fei Xia. 1999. Extracting Tree Adjoining Grammars from 
Bracketed Corpora. Proceedings of the 5th NLPRS. 

Nianwen Xue, Fudong Chiou, and Martha Palmer. 2002. 
Building a Large-scale Annotated Chinese Corpus. Pro-
ceedings of COLING 2002. 

Ping Xue and Paul McFetridge. 1995. DP Structure, HPSG, 
and the Chinese NP. Proceedings of the 14th Annual 
Conference of Canadian Linguistics Association. 

Nianwen Xue and Fei Xia. 2000. The Bracketing Guidelines 
for the Penn Chinese Treebank. 

Yi Zhang. 2004. Starting to Implement Chinese Resource 
Grammar using LKB and LinGO Grammar Matrix. 
Technical report.  

 

1425


