Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Computational Linguistics (Coling 2010), pages 1011–1019,

Beijing, August 2010

1011

Explore the Structure of Social Tags by Subsumption Relations

Xiance Si, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun

Department of Computer Science and Technology

State Key Lab on Intelligent Technology and Systems
National Lab for Information Science and Technology

Tsinghua University

{sixiance,lzy.thu}@gmail.com, sms@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Thanks to its simplicity, social tagging
system has accumulated huge amount of
user contributed tags. However, user
contributed tags lack explicit hierarchi-
cal structure, while many tag-based ap-
plications would beneﬁt if such a struc-
ture presents.
In this work, we explore
the structure of tags with a directed and
easy-to-evaluate relation, named as the
subsumption relation. We propose three
methods to discover the subsumption rela-
tion between tags. Speciﬁcally, the tagged
document’s content is used to ﬁnd the re-
lations, which leads to better result. Be-
sides relation discovery, we also propose
a greedy algorithm to eliminate the re-
dundant relations by constructing a Lay-
ered Directed Acyclic Graph (Layered-
DAG) of tags. We perform quantita-
tive evaluations on two real world data
sets. The results show that our methods
outperform hierarchical clustering-based
approach. Empirical study of the con-
structed Layered-DAG and error analysis
are also provided.

1 Introduction

In this work, we aim at exploring the structure of
social tags. Social tagging is widely used in Web-
based services, in which a user could use any word
to annotate an object. Thanks to its simplicity, ser-
vices with social tagging features have attracted a
lot of users and have accumulated huge amount of
annotations. However, comparing to taxonomies,
social tagging has an inherent shortcoming, that

Figure 1: Examples of (a) ﬂat tag cloud, (b) hier-
archical clusters, and (c) subsumption relations.

there is no explicit hierarchical relations between
tags. Figure 1 (a) shows an example of the com-
monly used ﬂat tag cloud, in which only the pop-
ularity of a tag is concerned. Kome et al. (2005)
argued that implicit hierarchical relations exist in
social tags. Previous literature shows that orga-
nizing tags in hierarchical structures will help tag-
based Information Retrieval applications (Begel-
man et al., 2006; Brooks and Montanez, 2006).

Hierarchical clustering could reveal the simi-
larity relations of tags. Figure 1 (b) shows an
example of a typical hierarchical clustering of
tags. While clusters can capture similarity be-
tween tags, problems still remain: First, clusters
mix different relations, such as synonyms and hy-
pernyms. Second, clusters also ignore the direc-
tion of relations, for example, the direction in
browser → firefox. Third, it is hard to evalu-
ate the correctness of clustering. Speciﬁcally, it
is hard to tell if two tags are similar or not.
In
practice, directed and easy-to-evaluate relations
between tags are preferred, such as Figure 1 (c).

In this work, we explore the structure of so-
cial tags by discovering a directed and easy-to-
evaluate relation between tags, named subsump-
tion relation. A tag ta subsumes tb, if and only
if wherever tb is used, we can also replace it

1012

with ta. Unlike similar-to, subsumption relation
is asymmetric, and its correctness is easier to as-
sess. Then, we propose three ways to discover the
subsumption relations, through tag-tag, tag-word
and tag-reason co-occurrences respectively. In the
third way, A tag’s reason is deﬁned as the word
in the content that explains the using of the tag.
We employ the Tag Allocation Model (TAM) pro-
posed by Si et al. (2010) to ﬁnd the reason for
each tag. Besides subsumption relation discov-
ery, we also propose a greedy algorithm to remove
the redundant relations. The removal is done by
constructing a Layered Directed Acyclic Graph
(Layered-DAG) of tags with the subsumption re-
lations.

We carried out the experiments on two real
world data sets. The results of quantitative evalu-
ation showed that tag-reason based approach out-
performed other two methods and a commonly
used hierarchical clustering-based method. We
also do empirical study on the output of Layered-
DAG construction.

The contribution of this paper can be summa-

rized as follows:

1. We explore the structure of social tags by
a clearly deﬁned subsumption relation. We
propose methods to discover the subsump-
tion relation automatically, leveraging both
the co-occurred tags and the content of an-
notated document.

2. We propose an algorithm to eliminate the re-
dundant relations by constructing a Layered-
DAG of tags.

3. We perform both empirical and quantitative
evaluation of proposed methods on two real
world data sets.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows:
Section 2 surveys the related work; Section 3 de-
ﬁnes the subsumption relation we used, and pro-
poses methods for relation discovery; Section 4
proposes a greedy algorithm for Layered-DAG
construction; Section 5 explains the experimen-
tal settings and shows the evaluation results. Sec-
tion 6 concludes the paper.

2 Related Work

To explore the hierarchical relations between tags,
an intuitive way is to cluster the tags into hier-

archical clusters. Wu et al. (2006b) used a fac-
torized model, namely Latent Semantic Analy-
sis, to group tags into non-hierarchical topics for
better recommendation. Brooks et al. (2006) ar-
gued that performing Hierarchical Agglomerative
Clustering (HAC) on tags can improve the col-
laborative tagging system. Later, HAC on tags
was also used for improving personalized recom-
mendation (Shepitsen et al., 2008). Heymann et
al. (2006) clustered tags into a tree by a similarity-
based greedy tree-growing method. They evalu-
ated the obtained trees empirically, and reported
that the method is simple yet powerful for orga-
nizing tags with hierarchies. Based on Heymann
et al.’s work, Schwarzkopf et al. (2007) proposed
an approach for modeling users with the hierarchy
of tags. Begelman et al. (2006) used top-down hi-
erarchical clustering, instead of bottom-up HAC,
to organize tags, and argued that tag hierarchies
improve user experiences in their system. Most
of the hierarchical clustering algorithms rely on
the symmetric similarity between tags, while the
discovered relations are hard to evaluate quantita-
tively, since one cannot distinguish similar from
not-similar with a clear boundary.

People have also worked on bridging social tag-
ging systems and ontologies. An ontology deﬁnes
relations between entities. Peter Mika (2005) pro-
posed an extended scheme of social tagging that
includes actors, concepts and objects, and used
tag co-occurrences to construct an ontology from
social tags. Wu et al. (2006a) used hierarchical
clustering to build ontology from tags that also
use similar-to relations. Later, ontology schemes
that ﬁts social tagging system were proposed, such
as (Van Damme et al., 2007) and (Echarte et
al., 2007), which mainly focused on the relation
between tags, objects and users, rather than be-
tween tags themselves. Alexandre Passant (2007)
mapped tags to domain ontologies manually to
improve information retrieval in social media. To
construct tag ontology automatically, Angeletou
et al. (2007) used ontologies built by domain ex-
perts to ﬁnd relations between tags, but observed
a very low coverage. Specia et al. (2007) pro-
posed an integrated framework for organizing tags
by existing ontologies, but no experiment was per-
formed. Kim et al. (2008) summarized the state-

1013

of-the-art methods to model tags with semantic
annotations.

Before social tagging was invented, Sanderson
et al. (1999) proposed to use subsumption relation
to organize words in text hierarchically. Schmitz
et al. (2006) followed the idea to use subsumption
relation for organizing Flickr 1 tag, where tag-tag
co-occurrences are used for discover the relations.
We follow the idea of subsumption relation in this
paper, and explore alternative ways for relation
discovery.

3 Subsumption Relations in Tags

In this section, we deﬁne the subsumption relation
used in our study, and propose three methods to
discover the subsumption relations.

3.1 Deﬁnitions

First, we introduce the symbols used through out
the paper: A tag is denoted as t ∈ T , where T is
the set of all tags. To distinguish from words, we
use fixed-width to represent the example tags.
An annotated document is denoted as d ∈ D,
where D is the set of all documents. The words
in d are denoted as a set {wdi}, where i ∈ [1,|d|],
and |d| is the number of words in d.
Inspired by (Sanderson and Croft, 1999), we
deﬁne the subsumption relation between ta and tb
as follows: ta subsumes tb, means that wherever
the tag tb is used, ta can also be used without
ambiguity. The subsumption relation between ta
and tb is denoted as ta →s tb.
is,
ta →s tb does not imply tb →s ta. For ex-
ample,
literature →s chineseliterature,
since
annotated with
for
chineseliterature, we can also annotate
it with literature. However, if we swapped the
two tags, the statement would not hold.

Subsumption relation is directional,

document

that

any

Subsumption relation is more strict than simi-
larity. For example, during the time of Haiti earth-
quake, the tag earthquake is close to haiti in
similarity, but none of them implies the use of the
other one: document annotated with earthquake
may refer to the earthquake in China, while docu-

1http://www.ﬂickr.com. An image sharing site that allows

users to annotate images with tags

ment annotated with haiti may mean the travel-
ing experience in Haiti.

Note that the subsumption has transitivity prop-
erty, that ta →s tb and tb →s tc means ta →s
tc, which corresponds to our intuition. For in-
stance, naturaldisaster →s earthquake and
disaster→s naturaldisaster means disaster
→s earthquake.
3.2 Discover Subsumption Relation
We discover the subsumption relations by estimat-
ing the probability p(ta|tb). The motivation is, if
ta →s tb and tb is used, it would be more likely to
see ta. So, by sorting all (ta, tb) pairs by p(ta|tb)
in descending order, top-ranked pairs are more
likely to have subsumption relations.

In this work, we present three methods to esti-
mate the probability p(ta|tb), using tag-tag, tag-
word and tag-reason co-occurrences respectively.
By using tag-word and tag-reason co-occurrences,
we leverage the content of the annotated docu-
ment for subsumption relation discovery.

3.2.1 Tag-Tag Co-occurrences Approach

The most intuitive way to estimate p(ta|tb) is
via tag-tag co-occurrences. Speciﬁcally, we use
the following formula:

p(ta|tb) =

Nd(ta, tb)

Nd(tb)

,

(1)

where Nd(ta, tb) is the number of documents that
are annotated by both ta and tb, and Nd(tb) is the
number of documents annotated by tb. We de-
note the tag-tag co-occurrences approach as TAG-
TAG.

The use of TAG-TAG can be found in previous
literature for organizing tags for photos(Schmitz,
2006). One of TAG-TAG’s beneﬁts is that it does
not rely on the content of the annotated document,
thus it can be applied to tags for non-text objects,
such as images and music. However, when com-
ing to text documents, this beneﬁt is also a short-
coming, that TAG-TAG makes no use of the con-
tent when it is available.

Using TAG-TAG for subsumption relation dis-
covery relies on an implication, that if a user has
annotated d with tb, he would also annotate all
tags that subsumes tb. The implication may not
always hold in real world situations. For example,

1014

a novel reader would use tags such as scifi and
mystery to organize his collections, but he is not
likely to annotate each of his collection as novel
or book, since they are too obvious for him. We
name the problem as the omitted-tag problem.

3.2.2 Tag-Word Co-occurrences Approach

When the content of the annotated document
is available, using it for estimating p(ta|tb) is a
natural thought. The content is expected to be
complete and information-rich whether or not the
user has omitted any tags. We use the follow-
ing formula to estimate p(ta|tb) by tag-word co-
occurrences:

p(ta|tb) = Xw∈W
= Xw∈W

p(ta|w)p(w|tb)
Nd(ta, w)

Nd(tb, w)

Nd(w)

Nd(tb)

, (2)

where Nd(ta, w) is the number of documents that
contains both tag ta and word w, and Nd(w) is
the number of documents that contains the word
w. We denote this approach as TAG-WORD.

Instead of computing tag-tag co-occurrences
directly, TAG-WORD uses words in the document
as a bridge to estimate p(ta|tb). By introduc-
ing words, the estimation is less affected by the
omitted-tag problem, Take the novel reader exam-
ple again: Although he does not use the tag novel
too often, the words in book descriptions would
suggest the using of novel, according to all other
documents annotated by novel.

While using the content may weaken the
omitted-tag problem, it also brings the noise in
text to the estimation. Not every word in the con-
tent is related to one of the tags. To the oppo-
site, most words are functional words or that about
other aspects of the document. p(ta|tb) estimated
by using all words may largely depends on these
irrelevant words.

3.2.3 Tag-Reason Co-occurrences Approach
To focus on the words that are highly relevant
to the interested tags, we propose the third method
that uses tag-reason co-occurrences. The reason is
deﬁned as the word(s) that can explain the using
of a tag in the document. For example, the tag
scifi for a book could be explained by the words

“robot”, “Asimov” in the book description. If the
reason of each tag could be identiﬁed, the noise in
content-based p(ta|tb) could be reduced.
Si et al. (2010) proposed a probabilistic model
for content-based social tags, named Tag Allo-
cation Model (TAM). TAM introduces a latent
variable r for each tag in the data set, known
as the reason variable. The value of r can be a
word in the corresponding document, or a global
noise variable µ. Allowing the reason of tags to
be a global noise makes TAM deal with content-
irrelevant tags and mistakenly annotated tags ef-
fectively. The likelihood that a document d is an-
notated by tag t is given as:

p(t|d) = Xw∈d

p(t|r = w)p(r = w|d)p(s = 0)
(3)

+ p(t|µ)p(r = µ)p(s = 1),

where r is the reason of the tag t, r ∈ {wdi|i ∈
[0,|d|]} ∪ {µ}, µ is the global noise variable. s is
the source of reason t, s = 0 means the source is
the content of the document, while s = 1 means
the source is the global noise variable µ. TAM
can be trained use Gibbs sampling method. For
the details of TAM, please refer to (Si and Sun,
2010).

With a trained TAM, we can infer p(t|r), the
probability of seeing a tag t when using r as the
reason, and p(r|t), the probability of choosing r
as the reason for tag t. With these probabilities,
we can estimate p(ta|tb) by

p(ta|tb) = Xr∈W

p(ta|r)p(r|tb).

(4)

Note that we use only word reasons (r ∈ W ),
ignoring the noise reason µ completely. We de-
note this approach as TAG-REASON.

With the help of TAM, TAG-REASON cov-
ers the problems of the TAG-WORD method in
two aspects: First, instead of using all words,
TAG-REASON emphasizes on the really relevant
words, which are the reasons identiﬁed by TAM.
Second, by ignoring the noise variable µ, TAG-
REASON is less affected by the content-irrelevant
noise tags, such as thingstodo or myown.

After p(ta|tb) is estimated for each (ta, tb) ∈
T × T , we use the top-n pairs with largest p(ta|tb)

1015

else

choose ta →s tb ∈ R with highest weight.
E∗ ⇐ ta →s tb
V ∗ ⇐ ta, V ∗ ← tb.
remove ta →s tb from R.
C ⇐ {ta →s tb|ta →s tb ∈ R,{ta, tb} ∩ V ∗ 6= ∅}
for ta →s tb ∈ C in descending weight order

Layered-DAG Construction Algorithm
Input: A set of weighted relations, R = {ta →s tb|ta ∈ T, tb ∈ T},
wta→stb > 0
Output: A Layered-DAG of tags G∗ = {V ∗, E∗}
1: V ∗ = {}
2: while R 6= ∅
if V ∗ = ∅
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:
18:
19:
20:

if adding ta →s tb to G∗ keeps G∗ a Layered-DAG.

endif
remove ta →s tb from R.

E∗ ⇐ ta →s tb
V ∗ ⇐ ta, V ∗ ← tb.
break

endwhile
output G∗

endfor

endif

Figure 3: A greedy algorithm for constructing
Layered-DAG of tags

Second, when more than one valid Layered-DAGs
are available, we want to use the one that contains
as many edges as possible.

Finding and proving an optimal algorithm for
maximum Layered-DAG construction are beyond
the scope of this paper. Here we present a greedy
algorithm that works well in practice, as described
in Figure 3.

The proposed algorithm starts with a minimal
Layered-DAG G∗ that contains only the high-
est weighted relation in R (Steps 1-8). Then, it
moves an edge in G to G∗ once a time, ensuring
that adding the new edge still keeps G∗ a valid
Layered-DAG (Step 11), and the new edge has the
highest weights among all valid candidates (Steps
9-10).

5 Experiments

In this section, we show the experimental results
of proposed methods. Speciﬁcally, we focus on
the following points:

• The quality of discovered subsumption rela-

tions by different methods.

• The characteristics of wrong subsumption re-

lations discovered.

• The effect of Layered-DAG construction on

the quality of relations.

• Empirical study of the resulted Layered-

DAG.

Figure 2: DAG and Layered-DAG

as the ﬁnal set of discovered subsumption rela-
tions.

4 Remove Redundancy with

Layered-DAG Construction

The discovered subsumption relations connect all
tags into a directed graph G = {V, E}, where V
is the set of nodes, with each node is a tag; E is
the set of edges, an edge eta,tb from ta to tb means
ta →s tb. Furthermore, we deﬁne the weight of
each edge we as the probability p(ta|tb).
Recalling that subsumption relation has transi-
tivity property, to avoid the cyclic references in G,
we would like to turn G into a Directed Acyclic
Graph (DAG). Further, DAG may also contains
redundant information. Figure 2 (a) shows a part
of a DAG. Note the edge marked as “*”, which
is perfectly correct, but does not provide extra
information, since literature →s novel and
novel →s scifi-novel have already implied that
literature →s novel. We would like to remove
these redundant relations, turning a DAG into the
form of Figure 2 (b).

We deﬁne Layered-DAG formally as follows:
For a DAG G, when given any pair of nodes, if ev-
ery path that can connect them has equal length, G
is a Layered-DAG. Layered-DAG prohibits edges
that link cross layers, such like edge “*” in Fig-
ure 2 (a). Constructing a Layered-DAG from the
discovered relations can eliminate the redundant
information.

Given a set of subsumption relations, multiple
Layered-DAGs may be constructed. In particular,
we want to ﬁnd the Layered-DAG that maximizes
the sum of all edges’ weights. Weight maximiza-
tion implies two concerns: First, when we need
to remove a relation to resolve the conﬂicts or re-
dundancy, the one with lower weight is prefered.

1016

Name
BLOG 100,192
BOOK 110,371

N ¯Ntag
2.78
8.51

¯Ncontent
332.87
204.76

Table 1: Statistics of the data sets. N is the num-
¯Ntag is the mean number of
ber of documents.
tags per document. ¯Ncontent is the mean number
of words per document.

5.1 Data Sets
We use two real world social tagging data sets.
The ﬁrst data set, named BLOG, is a collection
of blog posts annotated by blog authors, which
is crawled from the web. The second data set,
named BOOK, is from a book collecting and shar-
ing site2, which contains description of Chinese
books and user contributed tags. Table 1 lists the
basic statistics of the data sets.

The two data sets have different characteristics.
Documents in BLOG are longer, not well written,
and the number of tags per document is small. To
the opposite, documents in BOOK are shorter but
well written, and there are more tags for each doc-
ument.

5.2 Discovered Subsumption Relations
5.2.1 Experimental Settings

For BLOG, we use the tags that have been used
more than 10 times; For BOOK, we use the tags
that have been used more than 50 times. We per-
form 100 iterations of Gibbs sampling when train-
ing the TAM model, with ﬁrst 50 iterations as
the burn-in iterations. All the estimation meth-
ods require proper smoothing. Here we use ad-
ditive smoothing for all methods, which adds a
very small number (0.001 in our case) to all raw
counts. Sophisticated smoothing method could be
employed, but is out of the scope of this paper.

5.2.2 Evaluation

We use precision and coverage to evaluate the
discovered relations at any given cut-off threshold
n. First, we sort the discovered relations by their
weights in descending order. Then, we take the
top-n relations, discarding the others. For the re-
maining relations, precision is computed as Nc/n,
Nc is the number of correct relations in the top-n

2http://www.douban.com

list; coverage is computed as Nt/|T|, where Nt is
the number of unique tags appeared in the top-n
list, and |T| is the total number of tags.
To get Nc, the number of correct relations, we
need a standard judgement of the correctness of
relations, which involves human labeling. To min-
imize the bias in human assessment, we use pool-
ing, which is a widely accepted method in Infor-
mation Retrieval research (Voorhees and Harman,
2005). Pooling works as follows: First, relations
obtained by different methods are mixed together,
creating a pool of relations. Second, the pool is
shufﬂed, so that the labeler cannot identify the
source of a single relation. Third, annotators are
requested to label the relations in the pool as cor-
rect or incorrect, based on the deﬁnition of sub-
sumption relation. After all relations in the pool
are labeled, we use them as the standard judge-
ment to evaluate each method’s output.

Precision measures the proportion of correct re-
lations, while coverage measures the proportion of
tags that are connected by the relations. The cut-
off threshold n affects both precision and cover-
age: the larger the n, the lower the precision, and
the higher the coverage.

5.2.3 Baseline methods

Besides TAG-TAG, TAG-WORD and TAG-
REASON, we also include the method described
in (Heymann and Garcia-Molina, 2006) as a
baseline, denoted as HEYMANN. HEYMANN
method was designed to ﬁnd similar-to relation
rather than subsumption relation. The similar-to
relation is symmetric, while subsumption relation
is more strict and asymmetric. In our experiments,
we use the same evaluation process to evalu-
ate TAG-TAG, TAG-WORD, TAG-REASON and
HEYMANN, in which only subsumption relations
will be marked as correct.

5.2.4 Results

For each method, we set the cut-off threshold
n from 1 to 500, so as to plot the psrecision-
coverage curves. The result is shown in Figure 4.
The larger the area under the curve, the better the
method’s performance.

We have three observations from Figure 4.
First, TAG-REASON has the best performance

1017

n
o
i
s
i
c
e
r
P

 1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

 0

TAG-REASON
TAG-TAG
TAG-WORD
HEYMANN

n
o
i
s
i
c
e
r
P

 1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

 0

TAG-REASON
TAG-TAG
TAG-WORD
HEYMANN

 0

 0.05  0.1  0.15  0.2  0.25  0.3  0.35  0.4

 0

 0.05

 0.1

 0.15

 0.2

 0.25

 0.3

 0.35

Coverage

(a) BLOG

Coverage

(b) BOOK

Figure 4: The precision and coverage of TAG-TAG, TAG-WORD, TAG-REASON and HEYMANN
methods. The larger the area under the curve, the better the result. The cut-off threshold n ∈ [1, 500].

Insufﬁcient

childedu →s father
childedu →s grandma
emotion→swarm
childedu→schild
education→schild

Total 52%

BLOG
Reversed

Irrelevant

Insufﬁcient

BOOK
Reversed

stock →s security
stock →s ﬁnancial
delicious→staste
delicious→sfood

earthquake→sdisaster

Total 14%

travel→sbuilding
emotion →stime
emotion→soriginal
culture→sspring
poem→snight
Total 34%

textbook →s exam English →s foreignlang
history →s military
biography→speople
piano→sscores
jpbuilding→sjpculture
history→sculture
novel→spureliterature
ancientgreek→sgreek
novel→slove
Total 37%

Total 48%

Irrelevant

japan →slightnovel
building→stextbook
japan →s shower
photo→sumbrella

sales→sO

Total 15%

Table 2: Examples of mistakes and the percentage of each mistake type.

on both data sets: On the BOOK data set, TAG-
REASON outperforms others by a marked mar-
gin; On the BLOG data set, TAG-REASON has
higher precision when coverage is smaller (which
means within top-ranked relations), and has com-
parable precision to TAG-TAG when coverage
increases.
Second, similarity-based clustering
method (namely HEYMANN) performed worse
than others, suggesting it may not be adequate for
discovering subsumption relation. Third, while
also using content information, TAG-WORD per-
forms poorer than both TAG-REASON and TAG-
TAG, which suggests that noise in the content
would prevent TAG-WORD from getting the cor-
rect estimation of p(ta|tb).
To summarize, by leveraging relevant con-
tent, TAG-REASON could discover better sub-
sumption relations than just using tag-tag co-
occurrences and similarity-based hierarchical
clustering.

5.2.5 Mistakes in Discovered Relations

We also studied the type of mistakes in sub-
sumption relation discovery. To our observation, a

mistakenly discovered relation ta →s tb falls into
one of the following categories:

1. insufﬁcient ta relates with tb, but using tb
does not implies the using of ta in all cases.
2. reversed tb →s ta is correct, while ta →s tb

is not.

3. irrelevant There is no obvious connection

between ta and tb.

We collected all incorrect relations discovered
by the TAG-REASON method. Then, the type of
mistake for each relation is labeled manually. The
result is shown in Table 2, along with selected ex-
amples of each type.

In BLOG, most of

Table 2 shows different error patterns for
BLOG and BOOK.
the
mistakes are of the type insufﬁcient.
Taking
“education →s child” for example, annotating a
document as child does not imply that it is about
child education, it may about food or clothes for
a child. In BOOK, most of the mistakes are re-
versed mistakes, which is a result of the omitted-
tag problem discussed in Section 3.2.1.

1018

Figure 5: Part of the constructed Layered-DAG from the BOOK data set.

BLOG

Method
TAG-TAG

Precision Coverage
−4.7%
+7.9%
TAG-WORD
0%
TAG-REASON −3.6%

+5.4%

0%

BOOK

Precision Coverage
−7.4%
+12.5%
−9.0%
+2.2%
−0.9%
+5.4%

Table 3: The effects on precision and coverage by
Layered-DAG construction

5.3 Layered-DAG Construction
Using the algorithm introduced in Section 4, we
constructed Layered-DAGs from the discovered
relations. Constructing Layered-DAG will re-
move certain relations, which will decrease the
precision and increase the coverage. Table 3
shows the changes of precision and coverage
brought by Layered-DAG construction.
In most
of the cases, the increasing of coverage is more
than the decreasing of precision.

As a representative example, we show part of
a constructed Layered-DAG from the BOOK data
set in Figure 5, since the whole graph is too big to
ﬁt in the paper. All tags in Chinese are translated
to English.
6 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we explored the structure of social
tags by discovering subsumption relations. First,
we deﬁned the subsumption relation ta →s tb
as ta can be used to replace tb without ambigu-
ity. Then, we cast the subsumption relation iden-
tiﬁcation problem to the estimation of p(ta|tb).
We proposed three methods, namely TAG-TAG,
TAG-WORD and TAG-REASON, while the last

two leverage the content of document to help esti-
mation. We also proposed an greedy algorithm for
constructing a Layered-DAG from the discovered
relations, which helps minimizing redundancy.

We performed experiments on two real world
data sets, and evaluated the discovered subsump-
tion relations quantitatively by pooling.
The
results showed that the proposed methods out-
perform similarity-based hierarchical clusteing
in ﬁnding subsumption relations.
The TAG-
REASON method, which uses only the relevant
content to the tags, has the best performance. Em-
pirical study showed that Layered-DAG construc-
tion works effectively as expected.

The results suggest two directions for future
work: First, more ways for p(ta|tb) estima-
tion could be explored, for example, combining
TAG-TAG and TAG-REASON; Second, external
knowledge, such as the Wikipedia and the Word-
Net, could be exploited as background knowledge
to improve the accuracy.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work is supported by the National Science
Foundation of China under Grant No. 60873174
and the National 863 High-Tech Program of China
under Grant No. 2007AA01Z148. We also thank
Douban Inc.(www.douban.com) for providing the
DOUBAN data set, and Shoukun Wang, Guozhu
Wen et al. of Douban Inc. for insightful discus-
sion.

1019

Schwarzkopf, E., D. Heckmann, and D. Dengler.
2007. In Workshop on Data Mining for User Mod-
eling, ICUM’07, page 63. Citeseer.

Shepitsen, Andriy,

Jonathan Gemmell, Bamshad
Mobasher, and Robin Burke. 2008. Personalized
recommendation in collaborative tagging systems
using hierarchical clustering.
In Proceedings of
ACM RecSys’08.

Si, Xiance and Maosong Sun. 2010. Tag allocation
model: Modeling noisy social annotations by reason
ﬁnding.
In Proceedings of 2010 IEEE/WIC/ACM
International Conferences on Web Intelligence and
Intelligent Agent Technology.

Specia, Lucia and Enrico Motta. 2007.

Integrating
folksonomies with the semantic web. pages 624–
639.

Van Damme, C., M. Hepp, and K. Siorpaes. 2007.
Folksontology: An integrated approach for turning
folksonomies into ontologies. Bridging the Gap be-
tween Semantic Web and Web, 2:57–70.

Voorhees, E.M. and D.K. Harman. 2005. TREC: Ex-
periment and evaluation in information retrieval.
MIT Press.

Wu, Harris, Mohammad Zubair, and Kurt Maly.
2006a. Harvesting social knowledge from folk-
sonomies. In HYPERTEXT ’06: Proceedings of the
seventeenth conference on Hypertext and hyperme-
dia, pages 111–114, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Wu, Xian, Lei Zhang, and Yong Yu. 2006b. Exploring
social annotations for the semantic web. In WWW
’06: Proceedings of the 15th international con-
ference on World Wide Web, pages 417–426, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

References
Angeletou, S., M. Sabou, L. Specia, and E. Motta.
2007. Bridging the gap between folksonomies and
the semantic web: An experience report. In Work-
shop: Bridging the Gap between Semantic Web and
Web, volume 2. Citeseer.

Begelman, Grigory, Keller, and F. Smadja. 2006. Au-
tomated tag clustering: Improving search and explo-
ration in the tag space. In Collaborative Web Tag-
ging Workshop, 15 th International World Wide Web
Conference.

Brooks, Christopher H. and Nancy Montanez. 2006.
Improved annotation of the blogosphere via auto-
tagging and hierarchical clustering. In WWW ’06:
Proceedings of the 15th international conference on
World Wide Web, pages 625–632, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

Echarte, F., J. J. Astrain, A. C´ordoba, and J. Villadan-
gos. 2007. Ontology of folksonomy: A New mod-
eling method. Proceedings of Semantic Authoring,
Annotation and Knowledge Markup (SAAKM).

Heymann, Paul and Hector Garcia-Molina. 2006. Col-
laborative creation of communal hierarchical tax-
onomies in social tagging systems. Technical Re-
port 2006-10, Stanford University, April.

Kim, Hak L., Simon Scerri, John G. Breslin, Stefan
Decker, and Hong G. Kim. 2008. The state of the
art in tag ontologies: a semantic model for tagging
and folksonomies.
In DCMI ’08: Proceedings of
the 2008 International Conference on Dublin Core
and Metadata Applications, pages 128–137. Dublin
Core Metadata Initiative.

Kome, Sam H. 2005. Hierarchical subject relation-
ships in folksonomies. Master’s thesis, University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, November.

Mika, P. 2005. Ontologies are us: A uniﬁed model of
social networks and semantics. The Semantic Web–
ISWC 2005, pages 522–536.

Passant, Alexandre.

2007. Using ontologies to
strengthen folksonomies and enrich information re-
trieval in weblogs. In Proceedings of International
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media.

Sanderson, M. and B. Croft. 1999. Deriving concept
hierarchies from text.
In Proceedings of the 22nd
annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Re-
search and development in information retrieval,
pages 206–213. ACM.

Schmitz, P.

2006.

Inducing ontology from ﬂickr
tags.
In Collaborative Web Tagging Workshop at
WWW2006, Edinburgh, Scotland, pages 210–214.
Citeseer.

