



















































COMUNICA - A Question Answering System for Brazilian Portuguese


Coling 2010: Demonstration Volume, pages 21–24,
Beijing, August 2010

COMUNICA - A Question Answering System for Brazilian
Portuguese

Rodrigo Wilkens♣, Aline Villavicencio♣, Daniel Muller♦, Leandro Wives♣,
Fabio da Silva♠, Stanley Loh♥

♣Institute of Informatics, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (Brazil),
♦Conexum (Brazil), ♠DFL (Brazil), ♥IntextMining (Brazil)

{rwilkens,avillavicencio,wives}@inf.ufrgs.br, conexum@conexum.com.br, fabio@dfl.psi.br, sloh@terra.com.br
Abstract

COMUNICA is a voice QA system for
Brazilian Portuguese with search ca-
pabilities for consulting both struc-
tured and unstructured datasets.
One of the goals of this work is to help
address digital inclusion by providing
an alternative way to accessing writ-
ten information, which users can em-
ploy regardless of available computa-
tional resources or computational lit-
eracy.

1 Introduction

A crucial social problem in many countries
is functional illiteracy, and in Latin Amer-
ica, according to UNESCO, the process of
literacy is only effectively achieved for people
who completed at least four years of school-
ing. Among those who have not completed
this cycle of education, there has been high
rates of return to illiteracy. According to this
definition, in 2002 Brazil had a total of 32.1
million functionally illiterate citizens, repre-
senting 26% of the population aged 15 or
older1. This may have a significant effect
on digital inclusion, preventing a consider-
able part of the population from accessing
massive amounts of information such as that
available on the Web, or benefitting from
advances in technology. Although these fig-
ures do not include digital iliteracy, or lack
of computational resources, they can give an
idea of the magnitude of the problem.

In this context, voice question answering
systems (QA) have the potential to make
written information more easily accessible to

1IBGE: http://www.ibge.gov.br/ibgeteen/
pesquisas/educacao.html

wider audiences as they allow users to ask
questions in their own native language and
especially if this includes spoken language,
sometimes without the need even for a com-
puter (e.g. using the phone). This paper de-
scribes COMUNICA, a voice QA system for
Brazilian Portuguese with search capabilities
for consulting both structured and unstruc-
tured datasets. The domain chosen to eval-
uate the system is that of municipal infor-
mation from the FAMURS database.2 One
of the goals of this work is to help address
digital inclusion by providing a way to over-
come (a) difficulties in accessing written in-
formation (for visually challenged users), (b)
lack of computational resources (for users in
remote or computerless areas) and (c) com-
putational illiteracy.

2 QA systems

In recent years, QA has received consider-
able attention, as can be seen by the initia-
tives devoted to the task, such as the TREC3

and CLEF4. The task of a QA system is
to automatically answer a question in nat-
ural language, searching for information in a
given data source (e.g. a database, or cor-
pora from a given domain). This is a chal-
lenging task as question types can range from
lists to facts and definitions, while answers
may come from small data sets such as doc-
ument collections, to the World Wide Web.
Moreover, the difficulty of the task is also
influenced by whether the questions are re-
stricted to a particular domain (e.g. sports,
genes) or not, which additional sources of in-

2http://www.famurs.com.br
3http://trec.nist.gov
4http://www.clef-campaign.org

21



formation are available for a given language
(e.g. ontologies of domain-specific knowl-
edge, general ontologies), their coverage, and
which tools can be used to help the task (e.g.
named entity recognisers, parsers, word sense
disambiguation tools). Furthermore, there is
no concensus as to the amount of resources
and tools that are needed in order to build a
working QA system with reasonable perfor-
mance.

For a resource rich language like English,
there is a consistent body of work exempli-
fied by systems such as JAVELIN (Nyberg et
al., 2002) and QuALiM (Kaisser, 2005). For
other languages, like Portuguese, and partic-
ularly the Brazilian variety, QA systems are
not as numerous. Over the years, there was
an increase in the number of participating
systems and data sources in the CLEF evalu-
ation. For instance, in 2004 there were 2 par-
ticipating systems, and in 2006 it had 4 sys-
tems and the best performance was obtained
by Priberam (Amaral et al., 2005) with 67%
accuracy (Magnini et al., 2006). Figure 1
summarizes the performance of the QA sys-
tems for Portuguese for QA@CLEF over the
years.

3 COMUNICA Architecture

The Comunica system is composed of five
modules: a manager module and four pro-
cessing modules, as shown in figure 2. The
manager is responsible for the integration
and communication with the speech recog-
nition, text processing, database access, and
speech synthesis modules.

Figure 2: Architecture of the system.

3.1 Speech Recognition

For continuous speech recognition of the
users’ requests we use an automated phone
service. This module uses two research
fronts signal analysis (Fourier transform and
Wavelets). The coefficients obtained are
sequenced on three fronts for continuous
speech recognition: HMMs (Becerikli and
Oysal, 2007) TDDNN and NESTOR (Nasuto
et al., 2009). To train the models, a corpus
of FAMURS callcentre telephone interactions
has been recorded. The recognition focuses
on the vocabulary employed in the domain,
in this case municipal information related to
taxes from FAMURS. In order to do that,
it uses 2 ontologies to validate the candidate
words in the input: (a) a general purpose
and (b) a domain ontology. The recognised
transcribed input is passed to the manager
for further processing.

3.2 Text Processing

The manager sends the transcribed input
to be processed by the natural language
processing module. The natural language
queries are processed using shallow and deep
tools and accessing both a general and a do-
main specific ontologies (illustrated in Figure
3). This module needs to determine which
type of query the user performed and what
is the likely type of answer, based on mostly
lexical and syntactic information. This pro-
cess is divided into 3 mains steps: parsing,
concept identification and pattern selection.
In the first step, the input is parsed using
the PALAVRAS parser (Bick, 2002), and
the output provides information about the
particular pronoun (wh-word), subject and
other verbal complements in the sentence.
For concept identification, the system uses
the domain ontology, which contains the rel-
evant concepts to be used in next steps. The
ontologies also provide additional informa-
tion about nouns (such as hyperonymy and
synonymy) for determining which instances
of the concepts were present in the input.
For example, “Gramado” is an instance of

22



Figure 1: Performance of QA systems for Portuguese QA-CLEF.

the concept “city”. Both absolute and rela-
tive dates and periods (e.g. last quarter, first
week) need to be treated.

Finally, based on this information this
module selects from a set of pre-defined ques-
tion patterns linking concepts of the domain
ontology with SQL commands, the one which
contains the largest number of concepts in
common with the input, and sends it to the
manager in an XML format. If there is no
complete frame, this module identifies which
concepts are missing and returns this in the
XML output.

Figure 3: The domain ontology

3.3 Database Access

The search module is divided in two sub-
modules: one for searching information in a
structured database and the other for search-
ing in an unstructured knowledge base. It

receives as entry an XML file, containing
the original input in natural language and
the concepts identified in the question. The
structured search module receives the input
tagged with concepts of the ontology and an
identified search pattern, and selects a struc-
tured SQL query. These queries are prede-
fined according to the search patterns and
the structure of the database. For example,
in the case of the FAMURS domain, there
are concepts related to time period, cities
and taxes. When these 3 concepts are found
in the input, a special pattern is selected
which defines the kind of information that
must be retrieved from the database. An
SQL command is then executed in the struc-
tured database. All possible patterns are
mapped to a specific SQL command. These
commands have slots that are filled with in-
stances of the concepts identified in the sen-
tence. For example, names of cities are in-
stances of the concept “city”. The retrieved
values are used for producing the answer in
natural language, using some predefined an-
swer patterns.

Otherwise, the system uses the ADS
Digital Company Virtual Assistant (VA)
(Duizith et al., 2004) to search the unstruc-
tured data (e.g. Frequently Asked Ques-

23



tions), using the lexical information to lo-
cate the answer associated to the most simi-
lar question. This answer is written in natu-
ral language and will be returned to the main
module of the system. If no similar question
is found according to a predefined degree of
similarity, the VA returns a standard answer.

3.4 Speech Synthesis

The text output to the user is synthesized,
resulting in an audio file that is transmitted
through the server.

3.5 Manager

The manager is responsible for the integra-
tion and communication of the modules. It
processes requests, interpreting the actions
to be taken and dispatching the requests to
specific modules. To start the interaction the
manager activates the speech recogniser, and
if no problem is detected with the input, it
is passed to to the text processing module.
In the case of missing information, the man-
ager informs the user that more information
is needed. Othwerise, the query is passed to
the database module. The database module
then returns the result of the query to the
manager, which sends this information to the
interface component.

All the components are SOA compliant
and designed as Web services. This allows
us to use a common and simple way of com-
munication among components, allowing a
certain degree of independence. Then com-
ponents can be implemented using different
technologies and may be distributed among
different servers, if needed.

4 System Demonstration

This is an ongoing project, and a working
version of the system will be demonstrated
through some text example interactions from
the FAMURS domain as the speech recog-
nizer and synthesizer are currently under de-
velopment. However, users will be able to
interact with the other modules, and experi-
ence the benefits of natural language inter-
action for accessing database information.

Acknowledgments

This research was partly supported by CNPq
(Projects 479824/2009-6 and 309569/2009-
5), FINEP and SEBRAE (COMUNICA
project FI- NEP/SEBRAE 1194/07).

References

Amaral, Carlos, Helena Figueira, André F. T. Mar-
tins, Afonso Mendes, Pedro Mendes, and Cláudia
Pinto. 2005. Priberam’s question answering sys-
tem for portuguese. In Peters, Carol, Fredric C.
Gey, Julio Gonzalo, Henning Müller, Gareth J. F.
Jones, Michael Kluck, Bernardo Magnini, and
Maarten de Rijke, editors, CLEF, pages 410–419.
Springer.

Becerikli, Yasar and Yusuf Oysal. 2007. Modeling
and prediction with a class of time delay dynamic
neural networks. Applied Soft Computing, 7:1164–
1169.

Bick, Eckhard. 2002. The Parsing System Palavras -
Automatic Grammatical Analysis of Portuguese in
a Constraint Grammar Famework. Ph.D. thesis,
Aarhus University.

Duizith, José Luiz, Lizandro Kirst da Silva, Daniel
Brahm, Gustavo Tagliassuchi, and Stanley Loh.
2004. A virtual assistant for websites. Revista
Eletronica de Sistemas de Informação, 3.

Kaisser, Michael. 2005. Qualim at trec 2005: Web-
question answering with framenet. In Proceedings
of the 2005 Edition of the Text REtrieval Confer-
ence, TREC 2005.

Magnini, Bernardo, Danilo Giampiccolo, Pamela
Forner, Christelle Ayache, Valentin Jijkoun, Petya
Osenova, Anselmo Peñas, Paulo Rocha, Bogdan
Sacaleanu, and Richard F. E. Sutcliffe. 2006.
Overview of the clef 2006 multilingual question
answering track. In Peters, Carol, Paul Clough,
Fredric C. Gey, Jussi Karlgren, Bernardo Magnini,
Douglas W. Oard, Maarten de Rijke, and Maxi-
milian Stempfhuber, editors, CLEF, volume 4730
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 223–
256. Springer.

Nasuto, S.J., J.M. Bishop, and K. DeMeyerc. 2009.
Communicating neurons: A connectionist spik-
ing neuron implementation of stochastic diffusion
search. Neurocomputing, (72):704–712.

Nyberg, Eric, Teruko Mitamura, Jaime G. Carbonell,
James P. Callan, Kevyn Collins-Thompson,
Krzysztof Czuba, Michael Duggan, Laurie Hiyaku-
moto, N. Hu, Yifen Huang, Jeongwoo Ko, Lu-
cian Vlad Lita, S. Murtagh, Vasco Pedro, and
David Svoboda. 2002. The javelin question-
answering system at trec 2002. In TREC.

24


