552

Coling 2010: Poster Volume, pages 552–560,

Beijing, August 2010

Local Space-Time Smoothing for Version Controlled Documents

Seungyeon Kim

Guy Lebanon

Georgia Institute of Technology

Georgia Institute of Technology

Abstract

Unlike static documents, version con-
trolled documents are continuously edited
by one or more authors. Such collabo-
rative revision process makes traditional
modeling and visualization techniques in-
appropriate.
In this paper we propose a
new representation based on local space-
time smoothing that captures important
revision patterns. We demonstrate the ap-
plicability of our framework using experi-
ments on synthetic and real-world data.

some locally concentrated additions or deletions,
as compared to di−1.
In this paper we develop a continuous represen-
tation of version controlled documents that gener-
alizes the locally weighted bag of words represen-
tation (Lebanon et al., 2007). The representation
smooths the sequence of version controlled doc-
uments across two axes-time t and space s. The
time axis t represents the revision and the space
axis s represents document position. The smooth-
ing results in a continuous map from a space-time
domain to the simplex of term frequency vectors

1

Introduction

Most computational linguistics studies concen-
trate on modeling or analyzing documents as se-
quences of words.
In this paper we consider
modeling and visualizing version controlled doc-
uments which is the authoring process leading to
the ﬁnal word sequence. In particular, we focus on
documents whose authoring process naturally seg-
ments into consecutive versions. The revisions, as
the differences between consecutive versions are
often called, may be authored by a single author
or by multiple authors working collaboratively.

One popular way to keep track of version con-
trolled documents is using a version control sys-
tem such as CVS or Subversion (SVN). This is
often the case with books or with large com-
puter code projects. In other cases, more special-
ized computational infrastructure may be avail-
able, as is the case with the authoring API of
Wikipedia.org, Slashdot.com, and Google Wave.
Accessing such API provides information about
what each revision contains, when was it sub-
mitted, and who edited it.
In any case, we for-
mally consider a version controlled document as
a sequence of documents d1, . . . , dl indexed by
their revision number where di typically contains

γ : Ω → PV where Ω ⊂ R2,

w ∈ R|V | : wi ≥ 0,

PV =⎧⎨⎩

|V |(cid:5)i=1

(1)

.

and

wi = 1⎫⎬⎭

The mapping above (V is the vocabulary) cap-
tures the variation in the local distribution of word
content across time and space. Thus [γ(s, t)]w is
the (smoothed) probability of observing word w
in space s (document position) and time t (ver-
sion). Geometrically, γ realizes a divergence-free

vector ﬁeld (since(cid:9)w[γ(s, t)]w = 1, γ has zero

divergence) over the space-time domain Ω.

We consider the following four version con-
trolled document analysis tasks. The ﬁrst task is
visualizing word-content changes with respect to
space (how quickly the document changes its con-
tent), time (how much does the current version
differs from the previous one), or mixed space-
time. The second task is detecting sharp transi-
tions or edges in word content. The third task
is concerned with segmenting the space-time do-
main into a ﬁnite partition reﬂecting word content.
The fourth task is predicting future revisions. Our
main tool in addressing tasks 1-4 above is to an-
alyze the values of the vector ﬁeld γ and its ﬁrst

553

order derivatives ﬁelds

∇γ = ( ˙γs, ˙γt) .

(2)

2 Space-Time Smoothing for Version

Controlled Documents

With no loss of generality we identify the vocabu-
lary V with positive integers {1, . . . , V } and rep-
resent a word w ∈ V by a unit vector1 (all zero
except for 1 at the w-component)

e(w) = (0, . . . , 0, 1, 0, . . . , 0)(cid:2) w ∈ V.

(3)

We extend this deﬁnition to word sequences
thus representing documents (cid:7)w1, . . . , wN(cid:8) (wi ∈
sequences of V -dimensional vectors
V ) as
(cid:7)e(w1), . . . , e(wN )(cid:8). Similarly, a version con-
is sequence of documents
trolled document
d(1), . . . , d(l) of potentially different
lengths
d(j) = (cid:7)w(j)
N (j)(cid:8). Using (3) we represent
a version controlled document as the array

1 , . . . , w(j)

1 ),

e(w(1)
...
e(w(l)

1 ),

. . . , e(w(1)
...
. . . ,

e(w(l)

N (1))
...
N (l))

(4)

where columns and rows correspond to space
(document position) and time (versions).

The array (4) of high dimensional vectors repre-
sents the version controlled document without any
loss of information. Nevertheless the high dimen-
sionality of V suggests we smooth the vectors in
(4) with neighboring vectors in order to better cap-
ture the local word content. Speciﬁcally we con-
volve each component of (4) with a 2-D smooth-
ing kernel Kh to obtain a smooth vector ﬁeld γ
over space-time (Wand and Jones, 1995) e.g.,
Kh(s − s(cid:3), t − t(cid:3))e(w(t(cid:2))
s(cid:2) )

γ(s, t) =(cid:5)s(cid:2) (cid:5)t(cid:2)
Kh(x, y) ∝ exp(cid:10)−(x2 + y2)/(2h2)(cid:11) .

Thus as (s, t) vary over a continuous domain Ω ⊂
R2, γ(s, t), which is a weighted combination of
neighboring unit vectors, traces a continuous sur-
face in PV ⊂ RV . Assuming that the kernel
Kh is a normalized density it can be shown that
1Note the slight abuse of notation as V represents both a
set of words and an integer V = {1, . . . , V } with V = |V |.

(5)

γ(s, t) is a non-negative normalized vector i.e.,
γ(s, t) ∈ PV (see (1) for a deﬁnition of PV ) mea-
suring the local distribution of words around the
space-time location (s, t). It thus extends the con-
cept of lowbow (locally weighted bag of words)
introduced in (Lebanon et al., 2007) from single
documents to version controlled documents.

word in the second document is expanded into

One difﬁculty with the above scheme is that
the document versions d1, . . . , dl may be of dif-
ferent lengths. We consider two ways to resolve
this issue. The ﬁrst pads shorter document ver-
sions with zero vectors as needed. We refer to the
resulting representation γ as the non-normalized
representation. The second approach normalizes
all document versions to a common length, say
j=1 N (j). That is each word in the ﬁrst doc-

(cid:12)l
ument is expanded into(cid:12)j(cid:4)=1 N (j) words, each
(cid:12)j(cid:4)=2 N (j) words etc. We refer to the resulting

representation γ as the normalized representation.
The non-normalized representation has the ad-
vantage of conveying absolute lengths. For ex-
ample, it makes it possible to track how differ-
ent portions of the document grow or shrink (in
terms of number of words) with the version num-
ber. The normalized representation has the advan-
tage of conveying lengths relative to the document
length. For example, it makes it possible to track
how different portions of the document grow or
shrink with the version number relative to the to-
tal document length. In either case, the space-time
domain Ω on which γ is deﬁned (5) is a two di-
mensional rectangular domain Ω = [0, I]× [0, J].
Before proceeding to examine how γ may be
used in the four tasks described in Section 1 we
demonstrate our framework with a simple low di-
mensional example. Assuming a vocabulary of
two words V = {1, 2} we can visualize γ by
displaying its ﬁrst component as a grayscale im-
age (since [γ(s, t)]2 = 1 − [γ(s, t)]1 the sec-
ond component is redundant). Speciﬁcally, we
created a version controlled document with three
contiguous segments whose {1, 2} words were
sampled from Bernoulli distributions with param-
eters 0.3 (ﬁrst segment), 0.7 (second segment),
and 0.5 (third segment). That is, the probability
of getting 1 is highest for the second segment,
equal for the third and lowest for the ﬁrst seg-
ment. The initial lengths of the segments were

554

Figure 1: Four space-time representations of a simple synthetic version controlled document over V = {1, 2} (see text
for more details). The left panel displays the ﬁrst component of (4) (non-smoothed array of unit vectors corresponding to
words). The second and third panels display [γ(s, t)]1 for the non-normalized and normalized representations respectively.
The fourth panel displays the gradient vector ﬁeld ( ˙γs(s, t), ˙γt(s, t)) (contour levels represent the gradient magnitude). The
black portions of the ﬁrst two panels correspond to zero padding due to unequal lengths of the different versions.

30, 40 and 120 words with the ﬁrst segment in-
creasing and the third segment decreasing at half
the rate of the ﬁrst segment with each revision.
The length of the second segment was constant
across the different versions. Figure 1 displays
the nonsmoothed ragged array (4) (left), the non-
normalized [γ(s, t)]1 (middle left) and the normal-
ized [γ(s, t)]1 (middle right).

While the left panel doesn’t distinguish much
between the second and third segment the two
smoothed representations display a nice seg-
mentation of the space-time domain into three
segments, each with roughly uniform values.
The non-normalized representation (middle left)
makes it easy to see that the total length of the
version controlled document is increasing but it
is not easy to judge what happens to the relative
sizes of the three segments. The normalized rep-
resentation (middle right) makes it easy to see that
the ﬁrst segment increases in size, the second is
constant, and the third decreases in size. It is also
possible to notice that the growth rate of the ﬁrst
segment is higher than the decay rate of the third.

3 Visualizing Change in Space-Time

We apply the space-time representation to four
tasks. The ﬁrst task, visualizing change, is de-
scribed in this section. The remaining three tasks
are described in the next three section.

The space-time domain Ω represents the union
of all document versions and all document posi-
tions. Some parts of Ω are more homogeneous
and some are less in terms of their local word dis-
tribution. Locations in Ω where the local word
distribution substantially diverges from its neigh-

bors correspond to sharp content transitions. On
the other hand, locations whose word distribution
is more or less constant correspond to slow con-
tent variation.

We distinguish between three different types of
changes. The ﬁrst occurs when the word content
changes substantially between neighboring doc-
ument positions within a certain document ver-
sion. As an example consider a document loca-
tion whose content shifts from high level introduc-
tory motivation to a detailed technical description.
Such change is represented by

(cid:10) ˙γs(s, t)(cid:10)2 =

V(cid:5)w=1(cid:13) ∂[γ(s, t)]w

∂s

(cid:14)2

.

(6)

A second type of change occurs when a certain
document position undergoes substantial change
in local word distribution across neighboring ver-
sions. An example is erroneous content in one
version being heavily revised in the next version.
Such change along the time axis corresponds to
the magnitude of

(cid:10) ˙γt(s, t)(cid:10)2 =

V(cid:5)w=1(cid:13) ∂[γ(s, t)]w

∂t

(cid:14)2

.

(7)

Expression (6) may be used to measure the in-
stantaneous rate of change in the local word dis-
tribution. Alternatively, integrating (6) provides a
global measure of change

h(s) =(cid:15) (cid:10) ˙γs(s, t)(cid:10)2 dt,

g(t) =(cid:15) (cid:10) ˙γt(s, t)(cid:10)2 ds

with h(s) describing the total amount of spatial
change across all revisions and g(t) describing

555

Figure 2: Gradient and edges for a portion of the version controlled Wikipedia Religion article. The left panel displays
(cid:2) ˙γs(s, t)(cid:2)2 (amount of change across document locations for different versions). The second panel displays (cid:2) ˙γt(s, t)(cid:2)2
(amount of change across versions for different document positions). The third panel displays the local maxima of
(cid:2) ˙γs(s, t)(cid:2)2 + (cid:2) ˙γt(s, t)(cid:2)2 which correspond to potential edges, either vertical lines (section and subsection boundaries) or
horizontal lines (between substantial revisions). The fourth panel displays boundaries of sections and subsections as black
and gray lines respectively.

the total amount of version change across differ-
ent document positions. h(s) may be used to de-
tect document regions undergoing repeated sub-
stantial content revisions and g(t) may be used to
detect revisions in which substantial content has
been modiﬁed across the entire document.

We conclude with the integrated directional

derivative

(cid:15) 1
0 (cid:10) ˙αs(r) ˙γs(α(r)) + ˙αt(r) ˙γt(α(r))(cid:10)2 dr (8)
where α : [0, 1] → Ω is a parameterized curve in
the space-time and ˙α its tangent vector. Expres-
sion (8) may be used to measure change along a
dynamically moving document anchor such as the
boundary between two book chapters. The space
coordinate of such anchor shifts with the version
number (due to the addition and removal of con-
tent across versions) and so integrating the gra-
dient across one of the two axis as in (7) is not
appropriate. Deﬁning α(r) to be a parameterized
curve in space-time realizing the anchor positions
(s, t) ∈ Ω across multiple revisions, (8) measures
the amount of change at the anchor point.

3.1 Experiments
The right panel of Figure 1 shows the gradient
vector ﬁeld corresponding to the synthetic ver-
sion controlled document described in the previ-
ous section. As expected, it tends to be orthog-
onal to the segment boundaries. Its magnitude is
displayed by the contour lines which show highest
magnitudes around segment boundaries.

Figure 2 shows the norm (cid:10) ˙γs(s, t)(cid:10)2 (left),
(cid:10) ˙γt(s, t)(cid:10)2 (middle left) and the local maxima

of (cid:10) ˙γs(s, t)(cid:10)2 + (cid:10) ˙γt(s, t)(cid:10)2 (middle right) for a
portion of the version controlled Wikipedia Re-
ligion article. The ﬁrst panel shows the amount
of change in local word distribution within doc-
uments. High values correspond to boundaries
between sections, topics or other document seg-
ments. The second panel shows the amount of
change as one version is replaced with another.
It shows which revisions change the word distri-
butions substantially and which result in a rela-
tively minor change. The third panel shows only
the local maxima which correspond to edges be-
tween topics or segments (vertical lines) or revi-
sions (horizontal lines).

4 Edge Detection

In many cases documents may be divided to
semantically coherent segments. Examples of
text segments include individual news stories in
streaming broadcast news transcription, sections
in article or books, and individual messages in a
discussion board or an email trail. For non-version
controlled documents ﬁnding the text segments is
equivalent to ﬁnding the boundaries or edges be-
tween consecutive segments. See (Hearst, 1997;
Beeferman et al., 1999; McCallum et al., 2000)
for several recent studies in this area.

Things get a bit more complicated in the case
of version controlled documents. Segments, and
their boundaries exist in each version. As in
case of image processing, we may view segment
boundaries as edges in the space-time domain
Ω. These boundaries separate the segments from
each other, much like borders separate countries

556

Figure 3: Gradient and edges of a portion of the version controlled Atlanta Wikipedia article (top row) and the Google
Wave Amazon Kindle FAQ (bottom row). The left column displays the magnitude of the gradient in both space and time
(cid:2) ˙γs(s, t)(cid:2)2 + (cid:2) ˙γt(s, t)(cid:2). The middle column displays the local maxima of the gradient magnitude (left column). The
right column displays the actual segment boundaries as vertical lines (section headings for Wikipedia and author change in
Google Wave). The gradient maxima corresponding to vertical lines in the middle column matches nicely the Wikipedia
section boundaries. The gradient maxima corresponding to horizontal lines in the middle column correspond nicely to major
revisions indicated by a discontinuities in the location of the section boundaries.

in a two dimensional geographical map.

Assuming all edges are correctly identiﬁed, we
can easily identify the segments as the interior
points of the closed boundaries. In general, how-
ever, attempts to identify segment boundaries or
edges will only be partially successful. As a result
predicted edges in practice are not closed and do
not lead to interior segments. We consider now the
task of predicting segment boundaries or edges in
Ω and postpone the task of predicting a segmenta-
tion to the next section.

Edges, or transitions between segments, corre-
spond to abrupt changes in the local word dis-
tribution. We thus characterize them as points
in Ω having high gradient value.
In particu-
lar, we distinguish between vertical edges (transi-
tions across document positions), horizontal edges
(transitions across versions), and diagonal edges
(transitions across both document position and
version). These three types of edges may be di-
agnosed based on the magnitudes of ˙γs, ˙γt, and
˙α1γs + ˙α2γt respectively.

4.1 Experiments
Besides the synthetic data results in Figure 2,
we conducted edge detection experiments on six
different real world datasets. Five datasets are
Wikipedia.com articles: Atlanta, Religion, Lan-
guage, European Union, and Beijing. Religion
and European Union are version controlled docu-
ments with relatively frequent updates, while At-
lanta, language, and Beijing have less frequent
changes. The sixth dataset is the Google Wave
Amazon Kindle FAQ which is a less structured
version controlled document.

Preprocessing included removing html tags and
pictures, word stemming, stop-word removal, and
removing any non alphabetic characters (numbers
and punctuations). The section heading informa-
tion of Wikipedia and the information of author
of each posting in Google Wave is used as ground
truth for segment boundaries. This information
was separated from the dataset and was used for
training and evaluation (on testing set).

Figure 3 displays a gradient information, local
maxima, and ground truth segment boundaries for

557

Article

Rev.

2000
Atlanta
2000
Religion
2000
Language
2000
European Union
Beijing
2000
Amazon Kindle FAQ 100

Voc.
Size

3078
2880
3727
2382
3857
573

p(y)p(y)p(y)

Error Rate

F1 Measure

a

b

c

a

b

c

0.401
0.403
0.292
0.534
0.543
0.339

0.401
0.404
0.292
0.467
0.456
0.338

0.424
0.432
0.450
0.544
0.474
0.522

0.339
0.357
0.298
0.435
0.391
0.313

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.696
0.704
0.000

0.467
0.470
0.379
0.397
0.512
0.436

0.504
0.552
0.091
0.663
0.682
0.558

Figure 4: Test set error rate and F1 measure for edge prediction (section boundaries in Wikipedia articles and author
change in Google Wave). The space-time domain Ω was divided to a grid with each cell labeled edge (y = 1) or no edge
(y = 0) depending on whether it contained any edges. Method a corresponds to a predictor that always selects the majority
class. Method b corresponds to the TextTiling test segmentation algorithm (Hearst, 1997) without paragraph boundaries
information. Method c corresponds to a logistic regression classiﬁer whose feature set is composed of statistical summaries
(mean, median, max, min) of ˙γs(s, t) within the grid cell in question as well as neighboring cells.

the version controlled Wikipedia articles Religion
and Atlanta. The local gradient maxima nicely
match the segment boundaries which lead us to
consider training a logistic regression classiﬁer on
a feature set composed of gradient value statis-
tics (min, max, mean, median of (cid:10) ˙γs(s, t)(cid:10) in the
appropriate location as well as its neighbors (the
space-time domain Ω was divided into a ﬁnite grid
where each cell either contained an edge (y = 1)
or did not (y = 0)). The table in Figure 4 displays
the test set accuracy and F1 measure of three pre-
dictors: our logistic regression (method c) as well
as two baselines: predicting edge/no-edge based
on the marginal p(y) distribution (method a) and
TextTiling (method b) (Hearst, 1997) which is a
popular text segmentation algorithm. Since we do
not assume paragraph information in our experi-
ment we ignored this component and considered
the document as a sequence with w = 20 and
29 minimum depth gaps parameters (see (Hearst,
1997)). We conclude from the ﬁgure that the gra-
dient information leads to better prediction than
TextTiling (on both accuracy and F1 measure).

5 Segmentation

As mentioned in the previous section, predicting
edges may not result in closed boundaries. It is
possible to analyze the location and direction of
the predicted edges and aggregate them into a se-
quence of closed boundaries surrounding the seg-
ments. We take a different approach and partition
points in Ω to k distinct values or segments based
on local word content and space-time proximity.

For two points (s1, t2), (s2, t2) ∈ Ω to be in the
same segment we expect γ(s1, t1) to be similar to
γ(s2, t2) and for (s1, t1) to be close to (s2, t2).
The ﬁrst condition asserts that the two locations
discuss the same topic. The second condition as-
serts that the two locations are not too far from
each other in the space time domain. More specif-
ically, we propose to segment Ω by clustering its
points based on the following geometry

d((s1, t1), (s2, t2)) = dH (γ(s1, t1), γ(s2, t2))

+(cid:16)c1(s1 − s2)2 + c2(t1 − t2)2
(9)
where dH : PV × PV → R is Hellinger distance
(√ui − √vi)2.
(10)

d2
H (u, v) =

The weights c1, c2 are used to balance the contri-
butions of word content similarity with the simi-
larity in time and space.

V(cid:5)i=1

5.1 Experiments
Figure 5 displays the ground truth segment bound-
aries and the segmentation results obtained by ap-
plying k-means clustering (k = 11) to the metric
(9). The ﬁgure shows that the predicted segments
largely match actual edges in the documents even
though no edge or gradient information was used
in the segmentation process.

6 Predicting Future Operations

The fourth and ﬁnal task is predicting a future
revision dl+1 based on the smoothed representa-
tion of the present and past versions d1, . . . , dl. In

558

Figure 5: Predicted segmentation (top) and ground truth segment boundaries (bottom) of portions of the version controlled
Wikipedia articles Religion (left), Atlanta (middle) and the Google Wave Amazon Kindle FAQ(right). The predicted segments
match the ground truth segment boundaries. Note that the ﬁrst 100 revisions are used in Google Wave result. The proportion
of the segments that appeared in the beginning is keep decreasing while the revisions increases and new segments appears.

terms of Ω, this means predicting features associ-
ated with γ(s, t), t ≥ t(cid:3) based on γ(s, t), t < t(cid:3).
6.1 Experiments
We concentrate on predicting whether Wikipedia
edits are reversed in the next revision. This ac-
tion, marked by a label UNDO or REVERT in the
Wikipedia API, is important for preventing con-
tent abuse or removing immature content (by pre-
dicting ahead of time suspicious revisions).

We predict whether a version will undergo
UNDO in the next version using a support vec-
tor machine based on statistical summaries (mean,
median, min, max) of the following feature
set (cid:10) ˙γs(s, t)(cid:10), (cid:10)¨γs(s, t)(cid:10), (cid:10) ˙γt(s, t)(cid:10)), (cid:10) ˙γt(s, t)(cid:10),
g(h), and h(s). Figure 6 shows the test set er-
ror and F1 measure for the logistic regression
based on the smoothed space-time representation
(method c), as well as two baselines. The ﬁrst
baseline (method a) predicts the majority class
and the second baseline (method b) is a logistic
regression based on the term frequency content of
the current test version. Using the derivatives of
γ, we obtain a prediction that is better than choos-

ing majority class or logistic regression based on
word content. We thus conclude that the deriva-
tives above provide more useful information (re-
sulting in lower error and higher F1) for predicting
future operations than word content features.

7 Related Work

While document analysis is a very active research
area, there has been relatively little work on ex-
amining version controlled documents. Our ap-
proach is the ﬁrst to consider version controlled
documents as continuous mappings from a space-
time domain to the space of local word distribu-
tions. It extends the ideas in (Lebanon et al., 2007)
of using kernel smoothing to create a continuous
representation of documents. In fact, our frame-
work generalizes (Lebanon et al., 2007) as it re-
verts to it in the case of a single revision.

Other approaches to sequential analysis of doc-
uments concentrate on discrete spaces and dis-
crete models, with the possible extension of
(Wang et al., 2009). Related papers on segmenta-
tion and sequential document analysis are (Hearst,

559

Article

Atlanta
Religion
Language
European Union
Beijing

Rev.

2000
2000
2000
2000
2000

Voc.
Size

3078
2880
3727
2382
3857

p(y)p(y)p(y)

Error Rate

F1 Measure

a

b

c

a

b

c

0.218
0.123
0.189
0.213
0.137

0.219
0.122
0.189
0.208
0.137

0.313
0.223
0.259
0.331
0.219

0.212
0.125
0.187
0.209
0.136

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.320
0.294
0.334
0.275
0.247

0.477
0.281
0.455
0.410
0.284

Figure 6: Error rate and F1 measure over held out test set of predicting future UNDO operation in Wikipedia articles.
Method a corresponds to a predictor that always selects the majority class. Method b corresponds to a logistic regression
based on the term frequency vector of the current version. Method c corresponds a logistic regression that uses summaries
(mean, median, max, min) of (cid:2) ˙γs(s, t)(cid:2), (cid:2) ˙γs(s, t)(cid:2), g(t), and h(s).

1997; Beeferman et al., 1999; McCallum et al.,
2000) with (Hearst, 1997) being the closest in
spirit to our approach. An inﬂuential model for
topic modeling within and across documents is la-
tent Dirichlet allocation (Blei et al., 2003; Blei
and Lafferty, 2006). Our approach differs in be-
ing fully non-parametric and in that it does not
require iterative parametric estimation or integra-
tion. The interpretation of local word smoothing
as a non-parametric statistical estimator (Lebanon
et al., 2007) may be extended to our paper in a
straightforward manner.

Several attempts have been made to visualize
themes and topics in documents, either by keep-
ing track of the word distribution or by dimen-
sionality reduction techniques e.g., (Fortuna et al.,
2005; Havre et al., 2002; Spoerri, 1993; Thomas
and Cook, 2005). Such studies tend to visualize a
corpus of unrelated documents as opposed to or-
dered collections of revisions which we explore.

8 Summary and Discussion

The task of analyzing and visualizing version con-
trolled document is an important one.
It allows
external control and monitoring of collaboratively
authored resources such as Wikipedia, Google
Wave, and CVS or SVN documents. Our frame-
work is the ﬁrst to develop analysis and visualiza-
tion tools in this setting.
It presents a new rep-
resentation for version controlled documents that
uses local smoothing to map a space-time domain
Ω to the simplex of tf vectors PV . We demon-
strate the applicability of the representation for
four tasks: visualizing change, predicting edges,
segmentation, and predicting future revision oper-
ations.

Visualizing changes may highlight signiﬁcant
structural changes for the beneﬁt of users and help
the collaborative authoring process.
Improved
edge prediction and text segmentation may assist
in discovering structural or semantic changes and
their evolution with the authoring process. Pre-
dicting future operation may assist authors as well
as prevent abuse in coauthoring projects such as
Wikipedia.

The experiments described in this paper were
conducted on synthetic, Wikipedia and Google
Wave articles. They show that the proposed for-
malism achieves good performance both qualita-
tively and quantitatively as compared to standard
baseline algorithms.

It is intriguing to consider the similarity be-
tween our representation and image processing.
Predicting segment boundaries are similar to edge
detection in images. Segmenting version con-
trolled documents may be reduced to image seg-
mentation. Predicting future operations is similar
to completing image parts based on the remain-
ing pixels and a statistical model. Due to its long
and successful history, image processing is a good
candidate for providing useful tools for version
controlled document analysis. Our framework fa-
cilitates this analogy and we believe is likely to re-
sult in novel models and analysis tools inspired by
current image processing paradigms. A few po-
tential examples are wavelet ﬁltering, image com-
pression, and statistical models such as Markov
random ﬁelds.

Acknowledgements

The research described in this paper was funded
in part by NSF grant IIS-0746853.

560

References
Beeferman, D., A. Berger, and J. D. Lafferty. 1999.
Statistical models for text segmentation. Machine
Learning, 34(1-3):177–210.

Blei, D. and J. Lafferty. 2006. Dynamic topic models.
In Proc. of the International Conference on Machine
Learning.

Blei, D., A. Ng, , and M. Jordan. 2003. Latent dirich-
Journal of Machine Learning Re-

let allocation.
search, 3:993–1022.

Fortuna, B., M. Grobelnik, and D. Mladenic. 2005.
Visualization of text document corpus. Informatica,
29:497–502.

Havre, S., E. Hetzler, P. Whitney, and L. Nowell. 2002.
Themeriver: Visualizing thematic changes in large
document collections. IEEE Transactions on Visu-
alization and Computer Graphics, 8(1).

Hearst, M. A. 1997. Texttiling: Segmenting text into
multi-paragraph subtopic passages. Computational
Linguistics, 23(1):33–64.

Lebanon, G., Y. Mao, and J. Dillon. 2007. The lo-
cally weighted bag of words framework for doc-
uments.
Journal of Machine Learning Research,
8:2405–2441, October.

McCallum, A., D. Freitag, and F. Pereira. 2000. Max-
imum entropy Markov models for information ex-
traction and segmentation. In Proc. of the Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning.

Spoerri, A. 1993. InfoCrystal: A visual tool for infor-

mation retrieval. In Proc. of IEEE Visualization.

Thomas, J. J. and K. A. Cook, editors. 2005.

Illu-
minating the Path: The Research and Development
Agenda for Visual Analytics. IEEE Computer Soci-
ety.

Wand, M. P. and M. C. Jones. 1995. Kernel Smooth-

ing. Chapman and Hall/CRC.

Wang, C., D. Blei, and D. Heckerman. 2009. Continu-
ous time dynamic topic models. In Proc. of Uncer-
tainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence.

