36

Coling 2010: Poster Volume, pages 36–44,

Beijing, August 2010

Robust Sentiment Detection on Twitter from Biased and Noisy Data

Luciano Barbosa

AT&T Labs - Research

Junlan Feng

AT&T Labs - Research

lbarbosa@research.att.com

junlan@research.att.com

Abstract

In this paper, we propose an approach to
automatically detect sentiments on Twit-
ter messages (tweets) that explores some
characteristics of how tweets are written
and meta-information of the words that
compose these messages. Moreover, we
leverage sources of noisy labels as our
training data. These noisy labels were
provided by a few sentiment detection
websites over twitter data. In our experi-
ments, we show that since our features are
able to capture a more abstract represen-
tation of tweets, our solution is more ef-
fective than previous ones and also more
robust regarding biased and noisy data,
which is the kind of data provided by these
sources.

Introduction

1
Twitter is one of the most popular social network
websites and has been growing at a very fast pace.
The number of Twitter users reached an estimated
75 million by the end of 2009, up from approx-
imately 5 million in the previous year. Through
the twitter platform, users share either information
or opinions about personalities, politicians, prod-
ucts, companies, events (Prentice and Huffman,
2008) etc. This has been attracting the attention
of different communities interested in analyzing
its content.

Sentiment detection of tweets is one of the basic
analysis utility functions needed by various appli-
cations over twitter data. Many systems and ap-
proaches have been implemented to automatically
detect sentiment on texts (e.g., news articles, Web
reviews and Web blogs) (Pang et al., 2002; Pang
and Lee, 2004; Wiebe and Riloff, 2005; Glance
et al., 2005; Wilson et al., 2005). Most of these

approaches use the raw word representation (n-
grams) as features to build a model for sentiment
detection and perform this task over large pieces
of texts. However, the main limitation of using
these techniques for the Twitter context is mes-
sages posted on Twitter, so-called tweets, are very
short. The maximum size of a tweet is 140 char-
acters.

In this paper, we propose a 2-step sentiment
analysis classiﬁcation method for Twitter, which
ﬁrst classiﬁes messages as subjective and ob-
jective, and further distinguishes the subjective
tweets as positive or negative. To reduce the la-
beling effort in creating these classiﬁers, instead
of using manually annotated data to compose the
training data, as regular supervised learning ap-
proaches, we leverage sources of noisy labels as
our training data. These noisy labels were pro-
vided by a few sentiment detection websites over
twitter data. To better utilize these sources, we
verify the potential value of using and combining
them, providing an analysis of the provided labels,
examine different strategies of combining these
sources in order to obtain the best outcome; and,
propose a more robust feature set that captures a
more abstract representation of tweets, composed
by meta-information associated to words and spe-
ciﬁc characteristics of how tweets are written. By
using it, we aim to handle better:
the problem
of lack of information on tweets, helping on the
generalization process of the classiﬁcation algo-
rithms; and the noisy and biased labels provided
by those websites.

The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows. In Section 2, we provide some context about
messages on Twitter and about the websites used
as label sources. We introduce the features used
in the sentiment detection and also provide a deep
analysis of the labels generated by those sources
in Section 3. We examine different strategies of

37

combining these sources and present an extensive
experimental evaluation in Section 4. Finally, we
discuss previous works related to ours in Section 5
and conclude in Section 6, where we outline direc-
tions and future work.

RT @twUser: Obama is the first U.S. president not to
have seen a new state added in his lifetime.
http://bit.ly/9K4n9p #obama

Figure 1: Example of a tweet.

2 Preliminaries

In this section, we give some context about Twitter
messages and the sources used for our data-driven
approach.
Tweets. The Twitter messages are called tweets.
There are some particular features that can be used
to compose a tweet (Figure 1 illustrates an ex-
ample): “RT” is an acronym for retweet, which
means the tweet was forwarded from a previous
post; “@twUser” represents that this message is a
reply to the user “twUser”; “#obama” is a tag pro-
vided by the user for this message, so-called hash-
tag; and “http://bit.ly/9K4n9p” is a link to some
external source. Tweets are limited to 140 charac-
ters. Due to this lack of information in terms of
words present in a tweet, we explore some of the
tweet features listed above to boost the sentiment
detection, as we will show in detail in Section 3.
Data Sources. We collected data from 3 differ-
ent websites that provide almost real-time senti-
ment detection for tweets: Twendz, Twitter Sen-
timent and TweetFeel. To collect data, we issued
a query containing a common stopword “of”, as
we are interested in collecting generic data, and
retrieved tweets from these sites for three weeks,
archiving the returned tweets along with their sen-
timent labels. Table 1 shows more details about
these sources. Two of the websites provide 3-
class detection: positive, negative and neutral and
one of them just 2-class detection. One thing to
note is our crawling process obtained a very dif-
ferent number of tweets from each website. This
might be a result of differences among their sam-
pling processes of Twitter stream or some kind of
ﬁltering process to output. For instance, a site
may only present the tweets it has more conﬁ-
dence about their sentiment.
In Section 3, we
present a deep analysis of the data provided by
these sources, showing if they are useful to build
a sentiment classiﬁcation.

3 Twitter Sentiment Detection
Our goal is to categorize a tweet into one of the
three sentiment categories: positive, neutral or
negative. Similar to (Pang and Lee, 2004; Wil-
son et al., 2005), we implement a 2-step sentiment
detection framework. The ﬁrst step targets on dis-
tinguishing subjective tweets from non-subjective
tweets (subjectivity detection). The second one
further classiﬁes the subjective tweets into posi-
tive and negative, namely, the polarity detection.
Both classiﬁers perform prediction using an ab-
stract representation of the sentences as features,
as we show later in this section.

3.1 Features
A variety of features have been exploited on the
problem of sentiment detection (Pang and Lee,
2004; Pang et al., 2002; Wiebe et al., 1999; Wiebe
and Riloff, 2005; Riloff et al., 2006) including un-
igrams, bigrams, part-of-speech tags etc. A natu-
ral choice would be to use the raw word represen-
tation (n-grams) as features, since they obtained
good results in previous works (Pang and Lee,
2004; Pang et al., 2002) that deal with large texts.
However, as we want to perform sentiment detec-
tion on very short messages (tweets), this strat-
egy might not be effective, as shown in our ex-
periments.
In this context, we are motivated to
develop an abstract representation of tweets. We
propose the use of two sets of features: meta-
information about the words on tweets and char-
acteristics of how tweets are written.
Meta-features. Given a word in a tweet, we map
it to its part-of-speech using a part-of-speech dic-
tionary1. Previous approaches (Wiebe and Riloff,
2005; Riloff et al., 2003) have shown that the ef-
fectiveness of using POS tags for this task. The
intuition is certain POS tags are good indica-
tors for sentiment tagging. For example, opin-
ion messages are more likely containing adjec-

1The pos dictionary we used in this paper is available at:

http://wordlist.sourceforge.net/pos-readme.

38

Data sources
Twendz
Twitter Sentiment
TweetFeel

URL

http://twendz.waggeneredstrom.com/
http://twittersentiment.appspot.com/

http://www.tweetfeel.com/

# Tweets
254081
79696
13122

Sentiments

pos/neg/neutral
pos/neg/neutral

pos/neg

Table 1: Information about the 3 data sources.

tives or interjections.
In addition to POS tags,
we map the word to its prior subjectivity (weak
and strong subjectivity), also used by (Wiebe and
Riloff, 2005), and polarity (positive, negative and
neutral). The prior polarity is switched from pos-
itive to negative or vice-versa when a negative
expression (as, e.g., “don’t”, “never”) precedes
the word. We obtained the prior subjectivity and
polarity information from subjectivity lexicon of
about 8,000 words used in (Riloff and Wiebe,
2003)2. Although this is a very comprehensive
list, slang and speciﬁc Web vocabulary are not
present on it, e.g., words as “yummy” or “ftw”.
For this reason, we collected popular words used
on online discussions from many online sources
and added them to this list.
Tweet Syntax Features. We exploited the syn-
tax of the tweets to compose our features. They
are: retweet; hashtag; reply; link, if the tweet con-
tains a link; punctuation (exclamation and ques-
tions marks); emoticons (textual expression rep-
resenting facial expressions); and upper cases (the
number of words that starts with upper case in the
tweet).

The frequency of each feature in a tweet is di-

vided by the number of the words in the tweet.

3.2 Subjectivity Classiﬁer
As we mentioned before, the ﬁrst step in our tweet
sentiment detection is to predict the subjectivity of
a given tweet. We decided to create a single clas-
siﬁer by combining the objectivity sentences from
Twendz and Twitter Sentiment (objectivity class)
and the subjectivity sentences from all 3 sources.
As we do not know the quality of the labels pro-
vided by these sources, we perform a cleaning
process over this data to assure some reasonable
quality. These are the steps:

1. Disagreement

removal: we remove the

2The

subjectivity

lexicon

is

available

at

http://www.cs.pitt.edu/mpqa/

tweets that are disagreed between the data
sources in terms of subjectivity;

2. Same user’s messages: we observed that the
users with the highest number of messages
in our dataset are usually those ones that post
some objective messages, for example, ad-
vertising some product or posting some job
recruiting information. For this reason, we
allowed in the training data only one message
from the same user. As we show later, this
boosts the classiﬁcation performance, mainly
because it removes tweets labeled as subjec-
tive by the data sources but are in fact objec-
tive;

3. Top opinion words:

to clean the objective
training set, we remove from this set tweets
that contain the top-n opinion words in the
subjectivity training set, e.g., words as cool,
suck, awesome etc.

As we show in Section 4, this process is in fact
able to remove certain noisy in the training data,
leading to a better performing subjectivity classi-
ﬁer.

To illustrate which of the proposed features are
more effective for this task, the top-5 features in
terms of information gain, based on our training
data, are: positive polarity, link, strong subjec-
tive, upper case and verbs. Three of them are
meta-information (positive polarity, strong sub-
jective and verbs) and the other two are tweet
syntax features (link and upper case). Here is
a typical example of a objective tweet in which
the user pointed an external link and used many
upper case words: “Starbucks Expands Pay-By-
IPhone Pilot
to 1,000 Stores—Starbucks cus-
tomers with Apple iPhones or iPod touches can
.. http://oohja.com/x9UbC”.

39

3.3 Polarity Classiﬁer
The second step of our sentiment detection ap-
proach is polarity classiﬁcation,
i.e., predict-
ing positive or negative sentiment on subjective
tweets. In this section, ﬁrst we analyze the qual-
ity of the polarity labels provided by the three
sources, and whether their combination has the
potential
Second, we
present some modiﬁcations in the proposed fea-
tures that are more suitable for this task.

to bring improvement.

3.3.1 Analysis of the Data Sources

The 3 data sources used in this work provide
some kind of polarity labels (see Table 1). Two
questions we investigate regarding these sources
are: (1) how useful are these polarity labels? and
(2) does combining them bring improvement in
accuracy?

We take the following aspects into considera-

tion:

• Labeler quality: if the labelers have low qual-
ity, combine them might not bring much im-
provement (Sheng et al., 2008). In our case,
each source is treated as a labeler;

• Number of labels provided by the labelers:
if the labels are informative, i.e., the prob-
ability of them being correct is higher than
0.5, the more the number of labels, the higher
is the performance of a classiﬁer built from
them (Sheng et al., 2008);

• Labeler bias:

the labeled data provided by
the labelers might be only a subset of the
real data distribution. For instance, labelers
might be interested in only providing labels
that they are more conﬁdent about;

• Different labeler bias: if labelers make simi-
lar mistakes, the combination of them might
not bring much improvement.

We provide an empirical analysis of these
datasets to address these points. First, we measure
the polarity detection quality of a source by calcu-
lating the probability p of a label from this source
being correct. We use the data manually labeled
for assessing the classiﬁers’ performance (testing
data, see Section 4) to obtain the correct labels of

Data sources
Twendz
TwitterSentiment
TweetFeel

Quality Entropy

0.77
0.82
0.89

8.3
7.9
7.5

Table 2: Quality of the labels and entropy of the
tweets provided by each data source for the polar-
ity detection.

a data sample. Table 2 shows their values. We can
conclude from these numbers that the 3 sources
provide a reasonable quality data. This means that
combining them might bring some improvement
to the polarity detection instead of, for instance,
using one of them in isolation. An aspect that is
overlooked by quality is the bias of the data. For
instance, by examining the data from TwitterFeel,
we found out that only 4 positive words (“awe-
some”,“rock”,“love” and “beat”) cover 95% of
their positive examples and only 6 negative words
(“hate”,“suck”,“wtf”,“piss”,“stupid” and “fail”)
cover 96% of their negative set. Clearly, the data
provided by this source is biased towards these
words. This is probably the reason why this web-
site outputs such fewer number of tweets com-
pared to the other websites (see Table 1) as well
as why its data has the smallest entropy among
the sources (see Table 2).

The quality of the data and its individual bias
have certainly impact in the combination of labels.
However, there is other important aspect that one
needs to consider: different bias between the la-
belers. For instance, if labelers a and b make sim-
ilar decisions, we expect that combining their la-
bels would not bring much improvement. There-
fore, the diversity of labelers is a key element in
combining them (Polikar, 2006). One way to mea-
sure this is by calculating the agreement between
the labels produced by the labelers. We use the
kappa coefﬁcient (Cohen, 1960) to measure the
degree of agreement between two sources. Ta-
ble 3 presents the coefﬁcients for each par of data
source. All the coefﬁcients are between 0.4 and
0.6, which represents a moderate agreement be-
tween the labelers (Landis and Koch, 1977). This
means that in fact the sources provide different
bias regarding polarity detection.

40

Data sources
Twendz/TwitterSentiment
TwitterSentiment/TweetFeel
Twendz/TweetFeel

Kappa
0.58
0.58
0.44

Table 3: Kappa coefﬁcient between pairs of
sources.

From this analysis we can conclude that com-
bining the labels provided by the 3 sources can
improve the performance of the polarity detec-
tion instead of using one of them in isolation be-
cause they provide diverse labels (moderate kappa
agreement) of reasonable quality, although there
is some issues related to bias of the labels pro-
vided by them. In our experimental evaluation in
Section 4, we present results obtained by different
strategies of combining these sources that conﬁrm
these ﬁndings.

3.3.2 Polarity Features

The features used in the polarity detection are
the same ones used in the subjectivity detection.
However, as one would expect the set of the most
discriminative features is different between the
two tasks. For subjectivity detection, the top-5
features in terms of information gain, based on
the training data, are: negative polarity, positive
polarity, verbs, good emoticons and upper case.
For this task, the meta-information of the words
(negative polarity, positive polarity and verbs) is
more important than speciﬁc features from Twitter
(good emoticons and upper case), whereas for the
subjectivity detection, tweet syntax features have
a higher relevance.

This analysis show that prior polarity is very
important for this task. However, one limitation
of using it from a generic list is its values might
not hold for some speciﬁc scenario. For instance,
the polarity of the word “spot” is positive accord-
ing to this list. However, looking at our training
data almost half of the occurrences of this word
appears in the positive set and the other half in
the negative set. Thus, it is not correct to as-
sume that prior polarity of “spot” is 1 for this
particular data. This example illustrates our strat-
egy to weight the prior polarities: for each word
w with prior polarity deﬁned by the list, we cal-

culate the prior polarity of w, pol(w), based on
the distribution of w in the positive and negative
sets. Thus, polpos(w) = count(w, pos)/count(w)
and polneg(w) = 1 − polpos(w). We assume the
polarity of a word is associated with the polar-
ity of the sentence, which seems to be reasonable
since we are dealing with very short messages.
Although simple, this strategy is able to improve
the polarity detection, as we show in Section 4.

4 Experiments

We have performed an extensive performance
evaluation of our solution for twitter sentiment
detection. Besides analyzing its overall perfor-
mance, our goals included: examining different
strategies to combine the labels provided by the
sources; comparing our approach to previous ones
in this area; and evaluating how robust our solu-
tion is to the noisy and biased data described in
Section 3.

4.1 Experimental Setup
Data Sets. For the subjectivity detection, after
the cleansing processing (see Section 3), the train-
ing data contains about 200,000 tweets (roughly
100,000 tweets were labeled by the sources as
subjective ones and 100,000 objective ones), and
for polarity detection, 71046 positive and 79628
negative tweets. For test data, we manually la-
beled 1,000 tweets as positive, negative and neu-
tral. We also built a development set (1,000
tweets) to tune the parameters of the classiﬁcation
algorithms.
Approaches. For both tasks, subjectivity and po-
larity detection, we compared our approach with
previous ones reported in the literature. Detailed
explanation about them are as follows:

• ReviewSA: this is the approach proposed
by Pang and Lee (Pang and Lee, 2004)
for sentiment analysis in regular online re-
views.
It performs the subjectivity detec-
tion on a sentence-level relying on the prox-
imity between sentences to detect subjectiv-
ity. The set of sentences predicted as subjec-
tive is then classiﬁed as negative or positive
in terms of polarity using the unigrams that

41

compose the sentences. We used the imple-
mentation provided by LingPipe (LingPipe,
2008);

• Unigrams: Pang et al. (Pang et al., 2002)
showed unigrams are effective for sentiment
detection in regular reviews. Based on that,
we built unigram-based classiﬁers for the
subjectivity and polarity detections over the
training data. Another approach that uses un-
igrams is the one used by TwitterSentiment
website. For polarity detection, they select
the positive examples for the training data
from the tweets containing good emoticons
and negative examples from tweets contain-
ing bad emoticons. (Go et al., 2009). We
built a polarity classiﬁer using this approach
(Unigrams-TS).

• TwitterSA: TwitterSA exploits the features
described in Section 3 in this paper. For
the subjectivity detection, we trained a clas-
siﬁer from the two available sources, us-
ing the cleaning process described in Sec-
tion 3 to remove noise in the training data,
TwitterSA(cleaning), and other classiﬁer
trained from the original data, TwitterSA(no-
cleaning). For the polarity detection task,
we built a few classiﬁers to compare their
performances: TwitterSA(single) and Twit-
terSA(weights) are two classiﬁers we trained
using combined data from the 3 sources.
The only difference is TwitterSA(weights)
uses the modiﬁcation of weighting the prior
polarity of the words based on the train-
ing data.
TwitterSA(voting) and Twit-
terSA(maxconf) combine classiﬁcation out-
puts from 3 classiﬁers respectively trained
from each source. TwitterSA(voting) uses
majority voting to combine them and Twit-
terSA(maxconf) picks the one with maxi-
mum conﬁdence score.

We use Weka (Witten and Frank, 2005) to cre-
ate the classiﬁers. We tried different learning al-
gorithms available on Weka and SVM obtained
the best results for Unigrams and TwitterSA. Ex-
perimental results reported in this section are ob-
tained using SVM.

4.2 Subjectivity Detection Evaluation
Table 4 shows the error rates obtained by the dif-
ferent subjectivity detection approaches. Twit-
terSA achieved lower error rate than both Uni-
grams and ReviewSA. As a result, these num-
bers conﬁrm that features inferred from meta-
information of words and speciﬁc syntax features
from tweets are better indicators of the subjectiv-
ity than unigrams. Another advantage of our ap-
proach is since it uses only 20 features, the train-
ing and test times are much faster than using thou-
sands of features like Unigrams. One of the rea-
sons why TwitterSA obtained such a good perfor-
mance was the process of data cleansing (see Sec-
tion 3). The label quality provided by the sources
for this task was very poor: 0.66 for Twendz and
0.68 for TwitterSentiment. By cleaning the data,
the error decreased from 19.9, TwitterSA(no-
cleaning), to 18.1, TwitterSA(cleaning). Regard-
ing ReviewSA, its lower performance is expected
since tweets are composed by single sentences
and ReviewSA relies on the proximity between
sentences to perform subjectivity detection.

We also investigated the inﬂuence of the size of
training data on classiﬁcation performance. Fig-
ure 2 plots the error rates obtained by TwitterSA
and Unigrams versus the number of training ex-
amples. The curve corresponding to TwitterSA
showed that it achieved good performances even
with a small training data set, and kept almost con-
stant as more examples were added to the train-
ing data, whereas for Unigrams the error rate de-
creased. For instance, with only 2,000 tweets as
training data, TwitterSA obtained 20% of error
rate whereas Unigrams 34.5%. These numbers
show that our generic representation of tweets
produces models that are able to generalize even
with a few examples.

4.3 Polarity Detection Evaluation
We provide the results for polarity detection
in Table 5.
The best performance was ob-
tained by TwitterSA(maxconf), which combines
results of the 3 classiﬁers, respectively trained
from each source, by taking the output by the
most conﬁdent classiﬁer, as the ﬁnal predic-
tion. TwitterSA(maxconf) was followed by Twit-
terSA(weights) and TwitterSA(single), both cre-

42

ated from a single training data. This result shows
that computing the prior polarity of the words
based on the training data TwitterSA(weights)
brings some improvement for this task. Twit-
terSA(voting) obtained the highest error
rate
among the TwitterSA approaches. This implies
that, in our scenario, the best way of combining
the merits of the individual classiﬁers is by using
a conﬁdence score approach.

Unigrams also achieved comparable perfor-
mances. However, when reducing the size of the
training data, the performance gap between Twit-
terSA and Unigrams is much wider. Figure 3
shows the error rate of both approaches3 in func-
tion of the training size. Similar to subjectivity de-
tection, the training size does not have much inﬂu-
ence in the error rate for TwitterSA. However for
Unigrams, it decreased signiﬁcantly as the train-
ing size increased. For instance, for a training
size with 2,000 tweets, the error rate for Unigrams
was 46% versus 23.8% for our approach. As for
subjectivity detection, this occurs because our fea-
tures are in fact able to capture a more general rep-
resentation of the tweets.

Another advantage of TwitterSA over Uni-
grams is that it produces more robust models. To
illustrate this, we present the error rates of Uni-
grams and TwitterSA where the training data is
composed by data from each source in isolation.
For the TweetFeel website, where data is very bi-
ased (see Section 3), Unigrams obtained an error
rate of 44.5% whereas over a sample of the same
size of the combined training data (Figure 3), it
obtained an error rate of around 30%. Our ap-
proach also performed worse over this data than
the general one, but still had a reasonable er-
ror rate, 25.1%. Regarding the Twendz website,
which is the noisiest one (Section 3), Unigrams
also obtained a poor performance comparing it
against its performance over a sample of the gen-
eral data with a same size (see Table 5 and Fig-
ure 3). Our approach, on the other hand, was
not much inﬂuenced by the noise (22.9% on noisy
data and around 20% on the sample of same size
of the general data). Finally, since the data qual-
ity provided by TwitterSentiment is better than the

3For this experiment, we used the TwitterSA(single) con-

ﬁguration.

Approach
TwitterSA(cleaning)
TwitterSA(no-cleaning)
Unigrams
ReviewSA

Error rate

18.1
19.9
27.6
32

Table 4: Results for subjectivity detection.

Approach
TwitterSA(maxconf)
TwitterSA(weights)
TwitterSA(single)
TwitterSA(voting)
Unigrams
ReviewSA
Unigrams-TS

Error rate

18.7
19.4
20
22.6
20.9
21.7
24.3

Table 5: Results for polarity detection.

Site
TweetFeel
Twendz
TwitterSentiment

Training Size

13120
78025
59578

TwitterSA

25.1
22.9
22

Unigrams

44.5
32.3
23.4

Table 6: Training data size for each source and
error rates obtained by classiﬁers built from them.

Figure 2: Inﬂuence of the training data size in the
error rate of subjectivity detection using Unigrams
and TwitterSA.

previous sources (Table 2), there was not much
impact over both classiﬁers created from it.

From this analysis over real data, we can con-
clude that our approach produces (1) an effective
polarity classiﬁer even when only a small number
of training data is available; (2) a robust model to
bias and noise in the training data; and (3) com-
bining data sources with such distinct characteris-
tics, as our data analysis in Section 3 pointed out,
is effective.

e
t
a
R

 
r
o
r
r

E

 40

 35

 30

 25

 20

 15

 10

 5

 0

 0

Unigrams
TwitterSA

 20000

 40000

 60000

 80000

 100000

 120000

 140000

 160000

 180000

 200000

Training Size

43

unigrams and bigrams as features. We showed
in Section 4 that our approach works better than
theirs for this problem, obtaining lower error rates.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

We have presented an effective and robust sen-
timent detection approach for Twitter messages,
which uses biased and noisy labels as input to
build its models. This performance is due to the
fact that: (1) our approach creates a more abstract
representation of these messages, instead of using
a raw word representation of them as some pre-
vious approaches; and (2) although noisy and bi-
ased, the data sources provide labels of reasonable
quality and, since they have different bias, com-
bining them also brought some beneﬁts.

The main limitation of our approach is the cases
of sentences that contain antagonistic sentiments.
As future work, we want to perform a more ﬁne
grained analysis of sentences in order to identify
its main focus and then based the sentiment clas-
siﬁcation on it.

References
Cohen, J. 1960. A coefﬁcient of agreement for nomi-
nal scales. Educational and psychological measure-
ment, 20(1):37.

Glance, N., M. Hurst, K. Nigam, M. Siegler, R. Stock-
ton, and T. Tomokiyo. 2005. Deriving marketing
intelligence from online discussion.
In Proceed-
ings of the eleventh ACM SIGKDD, pages 419–428.
ACM.

Go, A., R. Bhayani, and L. Huang.

2009. Twit-
ter sentiment classiﬁcation using distant supervi-
sion. Technical report, Stanford Digital Library
Technologies Project.

Landis, J.R. and G.G. Koch. 1977. The measurement
of observer agreement for categorical data. Biomet-
rics, pages 159–174.

LingPipe.

2008.

LingPipe

3.9.1.

http://alias-i.com/lingpipe.

Pang, B. and L. Lee. 2004. A sentimental educa-
tion: Sentiment analysis using subjectivity summa-
rization based on minimum cuts. In Proceedings of
the ACL, volume 2004.

Figure 3: Inﬂuence of the training data size in
the error rate of polarity detection using Unigrams
and TwitterSA.

5 Related Work

There is a rich literature in the area of sentiment
detection (see e.g., (Pang et al., 2002; Pang and
Lee, 2004; Wiebe and Riloff, 2005; Go et al.,
2009; Glance et al., 2005). Most of these ap-
proaches try to perform this task on large texts, as
e.g., newspaper articles and movie reviews. An-
other common characteristic of some of them is
the use of n-grams as features to create their mod-
els. For instance, Pang and Lee (Pang and Lee,
2004) explores the fact that sentences close in a
text might share the same subjectivity to create a
better subjectivity detector and, similar to (Pang et
al., 2002), uses unigrams as features for the polar-
ity detection. However, these approaches do not
obtain a good performance on detecting sentiment
on tweets, as we showed in Section 4, mainly be-
cause tweets are very short messages. In addition
to that, since they use a raw word representation,
they are more sensible to bias and noise, and need
a much higher number of examples in the train-
ing data than our approach to obtain a reasonable
performance.

The Web sources used in this paper and some
other websites provide sentiment detection for
tweets. A great limitation to evaluate them is they
do not make available how their classiﬁcation was
built. One exception is TwitterSentiment (Go et
al., 2009), for instance, which considers tweets
with good emoticons as positive examples and
tweets with bad emoticons as negative examples
for the training data, and builds a classiﬁer using

t

e
a
R

 
r
o
r
r

E

 50

 40

 30

 20

 10

 0

 0

Unigrams
TwitterSA

 20000

 40000

 60000

 80000

 100000

 120000

 140000

 160000

Training Size

44

Pang, B., L. Lee, and S. Vaithyanathan. 2002. Thumbs
up?: sentiment classiﬁcation using machine learn-
ing techniques.
In Proceedings of the ACL, pages
79–86. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Polikar, R. 2006. Ensemble based systems in deci-
sion making. IEEE Circuits and systems magazine,
6(3):21–45.

Prentice, S. and E. Huffman. 2008. Social Medias
New Role In Emergency Management. Idaho Na-
tional Laboratory, pages 1–5.

Riloff, E. and J. Wiebe. 2003. Learning extraction pat-
terns for subjective expressions. In Proceedings of
the 2003 conference on Empirical methods in natu-
ral language processing, pages 105–112.

Riloff, E., J. Wiebe, and T. Wilson. 2003. Learning
subjective nouns using extraction pattern bootstrap-
ping. In Proceedings of the 7th Conference on Nat-
ural Language Learning, pages 25–32.

Riloff, E., S. Patwardhan, and J. Wiebe. 2006. Feature
subsumption for opinion analysis.
In Proceedings
of the 2006 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 440–448. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Sheng, V.S., F. Provost, and P.G. Ipeirotis. 2008. Get
another label? Improving data quality and data min-
ing using multiple, noisy labelers. In Proceeding of
the 14th ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 614–
622. ACM.

Wiebe, J. and E. Riloff. 2005. Creating subjective
and objective sentence classiﬁers from unannotated
texts. Computational Linguistics and Intelligent
Text Processing, pages 486–497.

Wiebe, J.M., RF Brace, and T.P. O’Hara. 1999. Devel-
opment and use of a gold-standard data set for sub-
jectivity classiﬁcations. In Proceedings of the ACL,
pages 246–253. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Wilson, T., J. Wiebe, and P. Hoffmann. 2005. Rec-
ognizing contextual polarity in phrase-level senti-
ment analysis.
In EMNLP, page 354. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Witten, Ian H. and Eibe Frank. 2005. Data Mining:
Practical machine learning tools and techniques.
Morgan Kaufmann.

