



















































Applying Syntactic, Semantic and Discourse Constraints in Chinese Temporal Annotation


Coling 2010: Poster Volume, pages 1363–1372,
Beijing, August 2010

Applying Syntactic, Semantic and Discourse Constraints in Chinese
Temporal Annotation

Nianwen Xue
Brandeis University

xuen@brandeis.edu

Yuping Zhou
Brandeis University

yzhou@brandeis.edu

Abstract

We describe a Chinese temporal annota-
tion experiment that produced a sizable
data set for the TempEval-2 evaluation
campaign. We show that while we have
achieved high inter-annotator agreement
for simpler tasks such as identification of
events and time expressions, temporal re-
lation annotation proves to be much more
challenging. We show that in order to im-
prove the inter-annotator agreement it is
important to strategically select the anno-
tation targets, and the selection of annota-
tion targets should be subject to syntactic,
semantic and discourse constraints.

1 Introduction

Event-based temporal inference is a fundamen-
tal natural language technology that attempts to
determine the temporal location of an event as
well as the temporal ordering between events. It
supports a wide range of natural language appli-
cations such as Information Extraction, Question
Answering and Text Summarization. For some
genres of text (such as news), a temporal order-
ing of events can be the most informative summa-
rization of a document (Mani and Wilson, 2000;
Filatova and Hovy, 2001). Temporal inference
is especially important for multi-document sum-
marization where events extracted from multiple
documents need to be put in a chronological or-
der (Lin and Hovy, 2001; Barzilay et al., 2002)
to make logical sense. Event-based temporal in-
ference is also necessary for Question Answer-
ing (Harabagiu and Bejan, 2005; Harabagiu and
Bejan, 2006). For example, to answer “When

was Beijing Olympics held?”, events extracted
from natural language text have to be associated
with a temporal location, whereas to answer “how
many terrorists have been caught since 9/11?”,
temporal ordering of multiple events is the pre-
requisite. Event-based temporal inference has
also been studied extensively in the context of
Information Extraction, which typically involves
extracting unstructured information from natural
language sources and putting them into a struc-
tured database for querying or other forms of in-
formation access. For event extraction, this means
extracting the event participants as well as its tem-
poral location. Generally, an event has to occur in
a specific time and space, and the temporal loca-
tion of an event provides the necessary context for
accurately understanding that event.

Being able to infer the temporal location of an
event in Chinese text has many additional applica-
tions. Besides Information Extraction, Question
Answering and Text Summarization, knowing the
temporal location of an event is also highly valu-
able to Machine Translation. To translate a lan-
guage like Chinese into a language like English
in which tense is grammatically marked with in-
flectional morphemes, an MT system will have
to infer the necessary temporal information to
determine the correct tense for verbs. Statisti-
cal MT systems, the currently dominant research
paradigm, typically do not address this issue di-
rectly or even indirectly.

As machine learning approaches are gaining
dominance in computational linguistics and pro-
ducing state-of-the-art results in many areas, they
have in turn fueled the demand for large quan-
tities of human-annotated data of various types

1363



that machine learning algorithms can be trained
on and evaluated against. In the temporal in-
ference domain, this has led to the creation of
TimeBank (Pustejovsky et al., 2003), which is an-
notated based on the TimeML language (Puste-
jovsky et al., 2005). TimeML is becoming an ISO
standard for annotating events and time expres-
sions (ISO/TC 37/SC 4/WG 2, 2007). A version
of the TimeBank has been provided as a shared
public resource for TempEval-2007, the first tem-
poral evaluation campaign aimed at automatically
identifying temporal relations between events and
time expressions as well the temporal ordering be-
tween events.

In this paper, we report work for a Chinese tem-
poral annotation project as part of the 2010 multi-
lingual temporal evaluation campaign (TempEval-
2)1. Besides Chinese, TempEval-2 also includes
English, French, Italian, Korean and Spanish.
Our temporal annotation project is set up within
the confines of BAT2, a database-driven multilin-
gual temporal annotation tool that is also used
to support other TempEval-2 languages. The
TempEval-2 evaluation framework takes a divide-
and-conquer approach to temporal annotation.
With the eventual goal being the annotation of
temporal relations between events and between
events and time expressions, the TempEval-2 an-
notation consists of a series of event and temporal
annotation subtasks. The idea is that each of these
subtasks will be easier to annotate than the larger
task as a whole and is less demanding on the an-
notators. The hope is that this will lead to more
consistent annotation that will be easier to learn
for automatic systems as well.

The rest of the paper will be organized as fol-
lows. In Section 2, we briefly describe the seven
layers of annotation. In Section 3, we describe our
annotation procedure. In Section 4, we address a
major issue that arises from our annotation effort,
which is the question of how to select annotation
targets. Our experience, some positive and some
negative, shows that temporal annotation can be
carried out much more smoothly and with higher
quality when the right annotation targets are pre-
sented to the annotators. This is especially true

1http://www.timeml.org/tempeval2/
2http://www.timeml.org/site/bat

during the annotation of temporal relations be-
tween events and between events and time expres-
sions, which are more complex than simpler anno-
tation tasks such as identifying the events and time
expressions. Section 5 concludes our paper.

2 Layers of annotation

2.1 Events and time expressions

The ultimate goal for a temporal annotation
project is to determine the temporal relationship
between events, and between events and time ex-
pressions. In order to achieve that objective,
events and time expressions must be first iden-
tified. Specifically, this means marking up text
spans in a document that can be used to represent
the events and time expressions. Events in partic-
ular are abstract objects and a full description of
an event would include its participants and tempo-
ral and spatial location. The TempEval annotation
framework simplifies this by just marking a verb
or a noun that best represents an event. The verb
or noun can be considered as an “event anchor”
that represents the most important aspect of the
event. This is illustrated in (1), where the verbs
参加 (“attend”), 举行 (“hold”) and the noun 仪
式 (“ceremony”) are marked as event anchors.

(1) 国务院
State Council

副总理
Vice Premier

邹家华
Zou Jiahua

参加
attend

了
ASP

今天
today

举行
hold

的
DE
投产
commissioning

剪彩
ribbon-cutting

仪式
ceremony

。
.

“Vice Premier Zou Jiahua of the State Coun-
cil attended today’s commissioning ribbon-
cutting ceremony”.

Once the text spans of event anchors are anno-
tated, these events are then annotated with a set of
attributes. The TempEval annotation framework
allows variations across languages in the number
of attributes one can define as well as the values
for these attributes. For example, in the English
annotation, one of the event attributes is grammat-
ical tense which can be read off the morphological
inflections of a verb. Chinese verbs, on the other
hand, are not inflected for tense. Instead, in the

1364



Chinese annotation, we have a more fully devel-
oped aspect attribute that has eight possible val-
ues: Actual, Experiential, Complementive, Delim-
itative, Progressive, Durative, Inceptive, and Con-
tinuative, largely based on the theoretical work of
Xiao and McEnery (2004).

The most important attribute for both English
and Chinese, however, is the Class attribute. The
values for this attribute include Reporting, As-
pectual, Perception, I-Action, I-State, State, and
Occurrence. The different values of the Class
attribute effectively constitute a classification of
events, and they are defined in the TimeML spec-
ification language (Pustejovsky et al., 2005).

The other building block in the TempEval anno-
tation framework is time expressions. Like events,
time expressions are marked with both text spans
and a set of attributes. The annotation of time
expressions is relatively straightforward, and we
follow the TimeML standards in our annotation
study. In TimeML, time expressions are formally
called TIMEX3s, and they have two obligatory at-
tributes: Type and Value. The value of Type is one
of time, date, duration or set. The Value attribute
is essentially a normalized time value based on
the TIDES standard for annotating time expres-
sions (Ferro et al., 2004). The normalization al-
lows easy comparison of time expression. For ex-
ample, there are three time expressions in (2),一
九九二年(“1992”),一九九六年 (“1996”) and今
年 (“this year”). Note that even though 一九九
二年 至 一九九六年 (“ 1992 to 1996”) forms
one duration, it is annotated as two time expres-
sions. All three time expressions in the sentence
are dates, and their normalized values are 1992,
1996, and 1997 respectively. To determine the
normalized value for今年 (“this year”), we need
to know the document creation time, and fortu-
nately this information is available in the meta-
data for the Chinese Treebank documents.

(2) 一九九二年
1992

至
to
一九九六年
1996

上海
Shanghai

国内 生产 总值
GDP

年均
per year on average

增长
grow

百分之十四点二
14.2%

，
,
今年
this year

的
DE

增长
growth

速度
speed

也
also
将
will
达到
reach

百分之十三
13%

以上
above

。

“From 1992 to 1996, Shanghai’s GDP on av-
erage grows at14.2% per year. This year the
(GDP) growth will also reach above 13%.”

2.2 Temporal relations
Once the events and time expressions are in place,
we are in a position to annotate various temporal
relations that are defined over them. (Since events
and time expressions are entities that temporal re-
lation is defined upon, we will subsume them un-
der the cover term “temporal entity” when conve-
nient.) The ultimate goal of temporal annotation
is to identify all temporal relations in text. This
goal cannot be achieved by manually annotating
temporal relation of all temporal entities for three
reasons. First, it is infeasible, given the number of
temporal entities in a typical document. Second,
it is unnecessary due to the transitive property of
certain types of temporal relation. For example, if
e1, e2 and e3 are all events, and if e1 is before e2,
and e2 is before e3, there is no need to also an-
notate the relation between e1 and e3. Third, the
result of annotating all temporal entity pairs does
not reflect the natural temporal relations that exist
in text. Verhagen et al. (2009) found that a major
contributor to high inter-annotator disagreement
was hard-to-classify cases that annotators were in-
structed not to avoid. If a temporal relation is not
made clear in text, then it should not be present in
annotation.

Since it is infeasible, unnecessary and even
detrimental to manually annotate all possible rela-
tions between temporal entities, the question then
becomes one of selecting which temporal rela-
tions to annotate. The TempEval-2 evaluation
starts by annotating the following temporal rela-
tions, which it considers to be a priority:

1. between an event and a time expression

2. between an event and the document creation
time

3. between a subordinating event and its corre-
sponding subordinated event

1365



4. between a main event and its immediately
preceding main event

The TempEval-2 annotation uses six values for
all temporal relations, and they are Before, Before-
or-Overlap, Overlap, Overlap-or-After, After and
Vague. The Vague value is only used as the last
resort when the annotator really cannot determine
the temporal relationship between a pair of tem-
poral entities. In the meantime, the TempEval-2
also allows variations from language to language
regarding specific annotation strategies for each
subtask. For Chinese temporal annotation, most
of the decisions we have to make revolve around
one central question, and that is which temporal
entity pair to annotate.

2.2.1 Relation between events and time
expressions

The annotation of the relationship between
events and time expressions involves i) determin-
ing which event is related to which time expres-
sion, and ii) what is the nature of this relation-
ship. In (3), for example, there are three events
and three time expressions that enter into the tem-
poral relation annotation. If the annotator is re-
quired to annotate all possible event/time combi-
nations, there will be nine possible pairs. There
are at least three possible strategies to go about
selecting event/time pairs to annotate. The first
strategy is to annotate all possible pairs. This
seems to add unnecessary burden to the annota-
tor because if we know that e1 overlaps t1, we
can infer the temporal relationship between e1 and
t3 by virtue of the fact that t1 occurs before t3.
The second strategy is to allow the annotator to
freely choose which event/time pair to annotate
based on whether there is a clear temporal rela-
tion between them. This eliminates the possibility
that the annotator is forced to annotate hard-to-
classify and inconsequential relations, but leaving
this decision to the annotator entirely might lead
to low inter-annotator agreement where annota-
tors choose to annotate different event/time pairs.

(3) 国际 货币 基金 组织
International Monetary Fund

[t1２１日
21st

]

在
at
此间
here

[e1发表
publish

]一
one
份
CL
临时
preliminary

评估
assessment

报告
report

，
,
再次
again

[e2调低
lower

]了
AS

它
its
对
regarding

[t2今
this

] [t3明
next

]两
two
年
year

全球
global

经济
economic

增长
growth

速度
speed

的
DE

[e3

预测
forecast

]。
.

“The International Monetary Fund on 21
published a preliminary assessment report,
again lowering its forecast of the global eco-
nomic growth for this year and next year.”

In our annotation, we adopt a third strategy. In-
stead of simply asking which event bears a tem-
poral relation to which temporal expression in the
same sentence, we ask annotators to judge which
event(s) a given temporal expression is intended
to modify. In essence, this amounts to asking the
annotator to first make a syntactic decision about
which events fall within the scope of a time ex-
pression. In (3), all three events e1, e2 and e3
fall within the scope of t1, and none of them are
in the scope of t2 and t3. This approach reduces
the number of fuzzy temporal relations that an-
notators might disagree on due to preference for
thoroughness vs. accuracy.

2.2.2 Temporal relation between
subordinating event and subordinated
event

The two tasks in the TempEval framework that
deal with event pairs are to annotate temporal re-
lation between the subordinating event and the
subordinated event, as well as the relation in
main event pairs. The division of labor between
them is quite clear: the former deals with intra-
sentential temporal relations whereas the latter
handles inter-sentential relations. It is not imme-
diately clear, however, how each of the two types
of relations should be defined.

Unlike in the event/time annotation where syn-
tactic notions are invoked in selecting event/time
pairs to annotate, our definitions of subordinat-
ing and subordinated events are primarily based
on semantic criteria. The subordinating event is
roughly the predicate while the subordinated event
is one of its arguments, provided that both the

1366



predicate and the argument are anchors of events.
For example, in (4), there are two subordinating
and subordinated event pairs. e2 is a subordinated
event of e1, and e4 is a subordinated event of e3.

(4) 广东
Guangdong

[e1举行]
hold

[e2研讨会]
symposium

[e3

介绍]
introduce

[e4税改]
tax reform

及
and
加工
processing

贸易
trade

台帐
accounting

制度
regulation

“Guangdong held a symposium introducing
the tax reform and the accounting regulations
on processing trade.”

An alternative to using the notion of predicate-
argument structure in determining the subordinat-
ing/subordinated events is to resort to syntactic re-
lations such as the verb and its object. The net re-
sult would be the same for Example (4). However,
the same argument that motivates the annotation
of the predicate-argument structures in the Prop-
bank (Palmer et al., 2005) and the Chinese Prop-
bank (Xue and Palmer, 2009) also applies to tem-
poral annotation. That is, the predicate-argument
structure and temporal relations tend to hold con-
stant in spite of the syntactic alternations and vari-
ations. For example, the temporal relation be-
tween the noun研讨会 (“symposium”) event and
the verb举行 (“hold”) event remains the same in
(5) in spite of the change in the syntactic relation
between them. If only event pairs in a verb-object
relation are annotated, the temporal relation be-
tween e2 and e1 in (5) would be lost.

(5) [e2研讨会]
symposium

在
PREP

广东
Guangdong

[e1举行]
hold

“The symposium was held in Guangdong.”

2.2.3 Temporal relations between main
events

The purpose of annotating the temporal relation
between main events is to capture the temporal or-
dering of events scattered in different sentences
that constitute the main chain of events covered
in the article. Annotation of the temporal relation
between main events is further divided into two
steps. In the first step, main events are first iden-
tified among all events in a sentence, and then the

temporal relation between the main events in adja-
cent pairs of sentences is annotated. As a first ap-
proximation, we define “main event” as follows:
a main event is the event expressed by the main
verb of the top-most level clause of a sentence.
The underlying assumption is that good writing
would place words representing important events
in prominent positions of a sentence and the first
choice of a prominent position in a sentence is
probably the main verb. An additional stipulation
is that in case of a co-ordinated construction in-
volving two or more main verbs at the top-most
level, the event represented by the first is the main
event of the sentence. This is to ensure that each
sentence has only one main event. As we shall
see in Section 3, this seemingly simple turns out
to be surprisingly difficult, as reflected in the low
inter-annotator agreement.

2.2.4 Temporal relation between events and
the document creation time

In this layer, all the events identified in a doc-
ument are annotated according to their temporal
relation to the document creation time. This task
is particularly challenging and intellectually inter-
esting for Chinese. As an isolating language (Li
and Thompson, 1981), Chinese has a small word
to morpheme ratio. That is, the majority of its
words consist of single morphemes. As a result, it
lacks the inflectional morphology that grammat-
ically marks tense. Tense directly encodes the
temporal location of an event in natural language
text and the lack of observable grammatical tense
makes it that much harder to determine the tem-
poral location of an event in Chinese text. This is
not to say, however, that Chinese speakers do not
attempt to convey the temporal location of events
when they speak or write, or that they cannot inter-
pret the temporal location when they read Chinese
text, or even that they have a different way of rep-
resenting the temporal location of events. In fact,
there is evidence that the temporal location is rep-
resented in Chinese in exactly the same way as it is
represented in English and most world languages:
in relation to the moment of speech. One piece of
evidence to support this claim is that Chinese tem-
poral expressions like今天 (“today”),明天 (“to-
morrow”) and 昨天 (“yesterday”) all assume a

1367



temporal deixis that is the moment of speech in re-
lation to which all temporal locations are defined.
Annotating the temporal relation between events
and document creation time would then directly
capture the temporal location of events.

3 Annotation procedure and annotation
consistency

The data set consists of 60 files taken from the
Chinese Treebank (Xue et al., 2005). The source
of these files is Xinhua newswire. It goes through
a two-phase double blind and adjudication pro-
cess. The first phase involves three annotators,
with each file annotated by two annotators; the
second phase involves two judges, with each dou-
ble annotated document assigned to a single judge
for disagreement resolution. The inter-annotator
agreement between the two annotators (A and B)
as the agreement between each annotator and the
judge (J) are presented in Table 1. The agree-
ment is measured in terms of F1-score3, which is
a weighted average between precision and recall.
The F1-score is calculated as follows:

F = 2 · precision · recall
precision + recall

(1)

The agreement statistics in Table 1 clearly show
that event and time expression annotations are
easier but temporal relations are harder as re-
flected in the lower inter-annotator agreement
scores. This is somewhat expected because rela-
tions involve two temporal entities while we are
only dealing with one temporal entity with event
and time expression annotations. The figures also
show the seemingly simple task of main event an-
notation (which only involves picking one event
per sentence as the main event) has a surprisingly
low inter-annotator agreement score. One reason
might be that in a less grammaticalized language
like Chinese, it is not always clear which verb is
the main verb when the syntactic tree information
is not displayed in the annotation interface. An-
other reason is that annotators sometimes disre-

3For a subset of the tasks, the total number of annotated
instances for the two annotators is the same. This subset
includes identification of main events, the temporal relation
between the main events in two adjacent sentences, and the
temporal relation between an event and the document cre-
ation time.

Layer f(A, B) f(A, J) f(B, J)
event-extent 0.90 0.93 0.94
timex-extent 0.86 0.88 0.93
main-events 0.74 0.90 0.82

tlinks-main-events 0.65 0.70 0.75
tlinks-dct-events 0.77 0.86 0.90

tlinks-e-t 0.75 0.88 0.83
tlinks-sub-e 0.53 0.74 0.70

Table 1: Inter-annotator agreement for the sub-
tasks: event-extent, the textual extent of an event
anchor; timex-extent, the textual span of a time
expression; tlinks-main-event, the temporal rela-
tion between the main events; tlinks-dct-events,
the temporal link between an event and the doc-
ument creation time; tlinks-e-t, the temporal re-
lation between an event and a time expression;
tlinks-sub-e, the temporal relation between a sub-
ordinating event and a subordinated event.

gard the syntax-based rule when it runs too much
afoul to their intuition, a point that we will come
back to and discuss in greater detail in Section 4.

It is worth noting that the annotation of the tem-
poral relation between an event and a time ex-
pression, and between a subordinating event and
a subordinated event involves two decisions. The
annotator needs to first decide which pairs of tem-
poral entities to annotate, and then decide what
temporal relation should be assigned to each tem-
poral entity pair. To take a closer look at which
of these two decisions creates more of a prob-
lem for the annotator, we computed the agreement
figures for these two steps respectively. In Table
2, Column 3 presents the figure for just identify-
ing which pair to annotate, and Column 4 is the
agreement for just assigning the temporal relation,
assuming the same pair of temporal entities are
found by both annotators.

Layer all identification f relation
tlinks-e-t 0.75 0.86 0.89

tlinks-sub-e 0.53 0.60 0.87

Table 2: Detailed agreement for event-time and
subordinating-subordinated events

From Table 2, it is clear that for both tasks,

1368



there is lower agreement between the annotators
in deciding which pair to annotate. Once the two
annotators agree on which pair to annotate, deter-
mining the temporal relation is relatively easier, as
reflected in higher agreement.

4 Detailed discussion

As described in Section 2, when annotating the
temporal relation between an event and a time ex-
pression, the annotators are instructed to annotate
an event-time pair if the event is falling within the
syntactic scope of the time expression. When an-
notating the relation between subordinating and
subordinated events, the annotators are instructed
to select event pairs based on the semantic notion
of predicate-argument structure. This assumes
a certain level of linguistic sophistication on the
part of the annotators. From the lower agreement
score in identifying event-time pairs (Table 2), it
is clear that our annotators, who are not trained
linguists, lack in this type of specialized knowl-
edge. They are better at making the more in-
tuitive judgment regarding the temporal relation
between two temporal entities. One solution is
obviously to find better trained linguists to per-
form these tasks, but it may not always be fea-
sible. Since our data is taking from the Chinese
Treebank and has already been annotated with
syntactic structures and predicate-argument struc-
tures (from the Chinese Propbank annotation (Xue
and Palmer, 2009)), an alternative is to extract the
event-time or event-event pairs using the syntactic
and predicate-argument structures as constraints.4

The annotation of main events and their rela-
tions presents a different challenge. Our first ap-
proximation is to select main events based on syn-
tactic considerations. A main event is equated
with the matrix verb in a sentence. In many
cases this turns out to be unintuitive. Two of the
recurring counter-intuitive cases involve directly
quoted speech and coordination structures.

Directly quoted speech In Chinese newswire
text, it is often the case that the source of informa-
tion is explicitly cited in the form of direct quota-
tions. (6) is such an example:

4See a similar approach in Bethard et al. (2007).

(6) 宋健
Song-Jian

说
say
：
,
“
“
如今
nowadays

，
,
中国
China

已
already

能
can
生产
produce

上万
tens-of-thousands

门
CL

数字
digital

电话
telephone

程控交换机
PBX

。”

“Song Jian said, ‘nowadays, China is capa-
ble of producing tens of thousands of digital
telephone PBX.’ ”

While the event represented by the underlined
verb 说 (“say”) may very well be important in
some natural language processing applications
(for example, sometimes the source of the target
information is crucial), it is not normally part of
the intended information being covered by a news
article. And it does not make much sense to anno-
tate its temporal relation to adjacent main events
that are on a par with what was said, not the saying
event itself. The point would be even clearer when
such a case is contrasted with a case in which a
similar semantic relation is formulated in a differ-
ent syntactic structure, as shown in (7):

(7) 据据据
according to

官方
official

权威
authority

人士
source

透露
divulge

，
,
今年
this-year

中国
China

政府
government

确定
determine

的
DE

经济
economic

增长率
growth rate

为
be

百分之八
8%

。

“According to some official sources in posi-
tion of authority, the economic growth rate
determined by the Chinese government is
8%.”

Because of the presence of the preposition
据 (“according to”), the underlined reporting verb
透露 (“divulge”), similar to说 (“say”) in (6) with
respect to its semantic relation to the following
material, would not be annotated as representing
the main event of the sentence. The difference
in the annotation of the main event between (7)
and (6) seems to be an undesirable artifact of the
purely syntax-based annotation rule for identify-
ing main events.

1369



Co-ordination structure Co-ordination by no
means is a rare occurrence in the data, and of-
ten times, all events within a co-ordination struc-
ture, taken together, represent the main event of
the sentence. For example, in (8), both events
represented by the underlined verbs seem to be
equally significant and should be included in the
same chain of events. Given the prevalence of co-
ordination between verbs, the stipulation that only
the first one counts significantly undermines the
coverage of the task and goes against the annota-
tor’s intuitions.

(8) 今年
This year

９月
September

，
,
多
many

家
CL
外国
foreign

石油
oil
公司
company

与
with

哈
Kazakstan

国家
national

石油
oil

公司
company

签署
sign

了
LE

一揽子
a series of

“世纪
“century

合同”
contract”

，
,
这些
these

合同
contract

将
will
在
in
今后
future

４０
40
年
years

内
within

产生
generate

７０００亿
700-billion

美元
dollar

的
DE
巨额
enormous

利润
profit

。

“In September of this year, many foreign oil
companies signed a series of ‘century con-
tract’ with Kazakstan National Oil Company.
These contracts will generate an enormous
profit of 700-billion dollars.”

The issue in the annotation of the temporal re-
lation between main events seem to be more in the
selection of main event pairs than in the determi-
nation of the nature of their relationship. Our cur-
rent rule states that any two main events in consec-
utive sentences form a pair for annotation. This
task suffers a low level of inter-annotator agree-
ment partly because many main events identified
by syntactic criteria are not actually main events
in our intended sense. Often times, two consecu-
tive main events come from different levels of the
discourse structure or different chains of events,
which puts annotators in a hard-to-classify situa-
tion.

To achieve high inter-annotator consistency
when annotating the temporal relation between
events from different sentences, we believe the se-

lection of event pairs has to be informed by the
discourse structure of the document. This only
makes sense given that the annotation of tempo-
ral relation between events and time expressions
within one sentence is informed by the syntactic
structure, and the temporal relation between sub-
ordination and subordinating events benefits from
an understanding of the predicate-argument struc-
ture.

The specific type of discourse structure we have
in mind is the kind represented in the Penn Dis-
course Treebank (Miltsakaki et al., 2004). The
Penn Discourse Treebank-style of annotation can
inform temporal relation annotation in at least two
ways. First, the Penn Discourse Treebank anno-
tates the discourse relation between two adjacent
sentences. The discourse relation holds between
two abstract objects such as events or proposi-
tions. If a discourse relation holds between two
events, the temporal relation between those two
events might also be what we are interested in for
temporal annotation. The implicit assumption is
that the discourse structure of a document repre-
sents the important temporal relations within that
document as well. (9) is an example taken from
the Penn Discourse Treebank. The discourse re-
lation, characterized by the discourse connective
“in particular”, holds between the events anchored
by“dropped” and “fell”. The temporal relation be-
tween these events also happens to be what we
would be interested in if we are to annotate the
main events between two adjacent sentences. No-
tice that in (9), material that is irrelevant to the
discourse relation is taken out of the two argu-
ments of this discourse relation, which are marked
in italics and bold face respectively.

(9) Meanwhile, the average yield on taxable
funds dropped nearly a tenth of a percent-
age point, the largest drop since midsum-
mer. implicit = in particular The average
seven-day compound yield, which assumes
that dividends are reinvested and that current
rates continue for a year, fell to 8.47%, its
lowest since late last year, from 8.55% the
week before, according to Donoghue’’’s.

The Penn Discourse Treebank also marks attri-
butions when annotating discourse relations. In

1370



(10), for example, “he says” will be marked as a
case of attribution and the “say” verb would be
marked as the main event of the sentence if syn-
tactic criteria are followed. Having attributions
identified would directly help with the temporal
annotation of examples like (6), where the main
event is embedded in direct quoted speech.

(10) When Mr. Green won a $240,000 verdict in
a land condemnation case against the State
in June 1983, [he says] Judge O’’’Kicki
unexpectedly awarded him an additional
$100,000.

As of now, the data we use for our temporal
annotation experiment have not yet been anno-
tated with discourse structures. In order to make
our temporal annotation sensitive to the discourse
structure, we either have to annotate the discourse
structure in a separate pass, or to incorporate the
key elements of the discourse structure when de-
veloping guidelines for temporal annotation.

5 Conclusion

We described a Chinese temporal annotation ex-
periment that produced a sizable data set for
the TempEval-2 annotation campaign. We show
that while we have achieved high inter-annotator
agreement for simpler tasks such as identifica-
tion of events and time expressions, temporal rela-
tion annotation proves to be much more challeng-
ing. We show that in order to improve annotation
consistency it is important to strategically select
the annotation targets, and this selection process
should be subject to syntactic, semantic and dis-
course constraints.

Acknowledgements

This work is supported by the National Sci-
ence Foundation via Grant No. 0855184 entitled
“Building a community resource for temporal in-
ference in Chinese”. All views expressed in this
paper are those of the authors and do not neces-
sarily represent the view of the National Science
Foundation.

References
Regina Barzilay, Noemie Elhadad, and Kathleen McK-

eown. 2002. Inferring strategies for sentence order-
ing in multidocument news summarization. Journal
of Artificial Intelligence Research, 17:35–55.

Steven Bethard, James H. Martin, and Sara Klin-
genstein. 2007. Finding Temporal Structure in
Text: Machine Learning of Syntactic Temporal Re-
lations. International Journal of Semantic Comput-
ing, 11(4).

Lisa Ferro, Laurie Gerber, Inderjeet Mani, Beth Sund-
heim, and George Wilson. 2004. TIDES 2003 Stan-
dard for the Annotation of Temporal Expressions.

Elena Filatova and Eduard Hovy. 2001. Assigning
Time-Stamps to Event Clauses. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Temporal and Spatial Information
Processing, Toulouse.

Sanda Harabagiu and Cosmin Adrian Bejan. 2005.
Question Answering Based on Temporal Inference.
In Proceedings of the AAAI-2005 Workshop on In-
ference for Textual Question Answering, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania.

Sanda Harabagiu and Cosmin Adrian Bejan. 2006. An
Answer Bank for Temporal Inference. In Proceed-
ings of LREC 2006, Genoa, Italy.

ISO/TC 37/SC 4/WG 2. 2007. Language Resource
Management – Semantic Annotation Framework
(SemAF) – Part 1: Time and events.

Charles Li and Sandra Thompson. 1981. Mandarin
Chinese: A Functional Reference Grammar. Berke-
ley, Los Angeles, London: University of California
Press.

Chin-Yew Lin and Eduard Hovy. 2001. Neats: A mul-
tidocument summarizer. In Proceedings of the Doc-
ument Understanding Workshop.

Inderjeet Mani and George Wilson. 2000. Robust
temporal processing of news. In Proceedings of the
ACL’2000, Hong Kong, China.

Eleni Miltsakaki, Rashmi Prasad, Aravind Joshi, and
Bonnie Webber. 2004. The Penn Discourse Tree-
Bank. In Proceedings of the Language Resources
and Evaluation Conference, Lisbon, Portugal.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The Proposition Bank: An annotated cor-
pus of semantic roles. Computational Linguistics,
31(1):71–106.

James Pustejovsky, Patrick Hanks, Roser Sauri,
Andrew See, David Day, Lisa Ferro, Robert
Gaizauskas, Marcia Lazo, Andrea Setzer, and Beth

1371



Sundheim. 2003. The TimeBank Corpus. Corpus
Linguistics, pages 647–656.

James Pustejovsky, Bob Ingria, Roser Sauri, Jose Cas-
tano, Jessica Littman, Rob Gaizauskas, Andrea Set-
zer, G. Katz, and I. Mani. 2005. The specification
language TimeML. In I. Mani, J. Pustejovsky, and
R. Gaizauskas, editors, The Language of Time: a
Reader. Oxford University Press.

Marc Verhagen, Robert Gaizauskas, Frank Schilder,
Mark Hepple, Jessica Moszkowicz, and James
Pustejovsky. 2009. The TempEval Challenge:
Identifying Temporal Relation in Text. Language
Resources and Evaluation, 43(1):161–179.

Richard Xiao and Tony McEnery. 2004. Aspect in
Mandarin Chinese: A Corpus-based Study. Ams-
terdam: John Benjamins.

Nianwen Xue and Martha Palmer. 2009. Adding se-
mantic roles to the Chinese Treebank. Natural Lan-
guage Engineering, 15(1):143–172.

Nianwen Xue, Fei Xia, Fu dong Chiou, and Martha
Palmer. 2005. The Penn Chinese TreeBank: Phrase
Structure Annotation of a Large Corpus. Natural
Language Engineering, 11(2):207–238.

1372


