



















































Automatic Extraction of Cue Phrases for Cross-Corpus Dialogue Act Classification


Coling 2010: Poster Volume, pages 1310–1317,
Beijing, August 2010

Automatic Extraction of Cue Phrases for
Cross-Corpus Dialogue Act Classification

Nick Webb and Michael Ferguson
ILS Institute, SUNY Albany

nwebb@albany.edu, ferguson@cs.albany.edu

Abstract

In this paper, we present an investiga-
tion into the use of cue phrases as a ba-
sis for dialogue act classification. We de-
fine what we mean by cue phrases, and de-
scribe how we extract them from a manu-
ally labelled corpus of dialogue. We de-
scribe one method of evaluating the use-
fulness of such cue phrases, by applying
them directly as a classifier to unseen ut-
terances. Once we have extracted cue
phrases from one corpus, we determine
if these phrases are general in nature, by
applying them directly as a classification
mechanism to a different corpus to that
from which they were extracted. Finally,
we experiment with increasingly restric-
tive methods for selecting cue phrases,
and demonstrate that there are a small
number of core cue phrases that are use-
ful for dialogue act classification.

1 Motivation

In this paper we present a recent investigation into
the role of linguistic cues in dialogue act (DA)
classification. Dialogue acts (Bunt, 1994) are an-
notations over segments of dialogue that charac-
terise the function of those segments. Linguistic
cues, which can take many forms including lexi-
cal and syntactic structures, are features that can
serve as useful indicators of discourse structure
(Hirschberg and Litman, 1993; Grosz and Sidner,
1986). In prior work, several researchers have
shown that cue phrases can be a powerful fea-
ture for DA classification (Samuel et al., 1999;
Webb et al., 2005a). Webb and Liu (2008) have
previously shown that cue phrases automatically
extracted from one corpus can be used to clas-
sify utterances from a new corpus. We take this

approach and apply it to two established corpora
with manually encoded dialogue act annotations,
to investigate both the existence and the useful-
ness of cue phrases shared between the two cor-
pora.

2 Related Work

In parallel with the increased availability of man-
ually annotated dialogue corpora there has been
a proliferation of literature detailing dialogue act
labelling as a classification task. Prior work de-
scribes the selection of features from the corpus
(including word n-grams, cue phrases, syntactic
structures, dialogue history and prosodic cues)
which are then passed to some machine learn-
ing algorithm. Most studies have concentrated on
a single corpus, and optimised feature selection
and learning algorithm accordingly. In this work
we focus on two corpora, Switchboard and ICSI-
MRDA, and discuss prior classification efforts re-
lating to these two corpora.

2.1 Switchboard Corpus
The Switchboard corpus contains a large number
of approximately 5-minute conversations between
two people who are unknown to each other, who
were asked to converse about a range of every-
day topics with little or no constraint. The DA an-
notated portion of the Switchboard corpus (Juraf-
sky et al., 1997) consists of 1155 annotated con-
versations, containing some 225,000 utterances,
of which we use 200,000 utterances, the rest be-
ing held out for separate experiments. The dia-
logues are annotated with a non-hierarchical vari-
ant of the DAMSL annotation scheme (Core et al.,
1999). The resulting Switchboard-DAMSL an-
notation was a set of more than 220 distinct la-
bels. To obtain enough data per class for statis-
tical modelling purposes, a clustered tag set was
devised, which distinguishes 42 mutually exclu-

1310



sive DA types. Classification over the Switch-
board corpus has been demonstrated using Deci-
sion Trees (Verbree et al., 2006), Memory-Based
Learning (Rotaru, 2002) and Hidden Markov
Models (HMM) (Stolcke et al., 2000). The work
of Stolcke et al. (2000) is often cited as the best
performing, achieving a classification accuracy of
71% over the 42 labels, although there is no cross-
validation of these results. The approach of Stol-
cke et al. (2000) combines HMM modelling of ut-
terances with a tri-gram model of DA sequences.
Webb et al. (2005a) report a slightly lower cross-
validated score (of 69%) containing an individ-
ual classification high of 72%, using an intra-
utterance, cue-based classification model.

2.2 ICSI-MRDA Corpus

Like the Switchboard corpus, the ICSI Meeting
Room DA (MRDA) corpus (Shriberg et al., 2004)
was annotated using a variant of the DAMSL tag-
set, similar but not identical to the Switchboard-
DAMSL annotation. The differences (and a
translation between the two sets) can be seen in
Shriberg et al. (2004). The underlying domain
of the dialogues in the ICSI-MRDA corpus was
that of multi-party meetings, with multiple partic-
ipants discussing an agenda of items in a struc-
tured meeting. This application required the in-
troduction of new tags specifically for this sce-
nario, such as a label introduced to indicate when
an utterance was used to take control of the meet-
ing. The ICSI-MRDA corpus comprises 75 nat-
urally occurring meetings, each around an hour
in length. The section of the corpus we use con-
sists of around 105,000 utterances. For each utter-
ance in the corpus, one general tag was assigned,
with zero or more additional specific tags. Ex-
cluding non-labelled cases, there are 11 general
tags and 39 specific tags resulting in 1,260 unique
dialogue acts used in the annotation. As with the
Switchboard corpus, processing steps were intro-
duced that compressed the number of unique DAs
to 55. In later work, the dimensionality was fur-
ther reduced, resulting in a subset of just 5 labels.

Over the ICSI-MRDA corpus, we also see DA
classification efforts using Decision Trees (Ver-
bree et al., 2006) and Memory-Based Learning
(Lendvai and Geertzen, 2007), in addition to

Graph Models (Ji and Bilmes, 2006) and Maxi-
mum Entropy (Ang et al., 2005). Comparatively
few approaches have been applied to the 55-label
annotated corpus, with most choosing to focus on
the 5-label clustering, presumably for the result-
ing increase in score. When Ji and Bilmes (2005)
apply a Graph Model to the 55 category corpus,
they achieve a classification accuracy of 66%.
However, when they apply the exact same method
to the 5-label corpus (Ji and Bilmes, 2006), clas-
sification accuracy is boosted to 81%. The best
reported classification score on the the 5-label ver-
sion of the corpus is reported by Verbree et al.
(2006), who achieve 89% classification accuracy
by modelling the words of the utterance, the DA
history and some orthographic information (such
as the presence of question marks).

It remains very difficult to directly compare ap-
proaches, even when applied to the same corpus,
so cross-corpora comparisons must be carefully
considered. There are issues of the DA label set
used, the labels considered and those ignored, the
pre-processing of the corpus, the use of ortho-
graphic information, or prosody and so on. What
seems clear is that there are no obvious leading
contender for algorithm best suited to the DA clas-
sification task. Instead, we focus on the features
used for DA classification.

3 Automatic Cue Extraction

When examining prior approaches, we noticed
that they used a range of different features for the
DA classification task, including lexical, syntac-
tic, prosodic and dialogue context features. Most
classifiers used some lexical features (the words
in the utterances under consideration), frequently
employing some kind of Hidden Markov Mod-
elling to every utterance (Levin et al., 2003; Stol-
cke et al., 2000; Reithinger and Klesen, 1997), a
technique popular in speech processing. We were
inspired by the work of Samuel et al. (1999), who
instead of modelling entire utterances, extract sig-
nificant cue phrases from the VerbMobil corpus
of dialogues. We use a method for cue extraction
unused by Samuel et al. (1999).

What defines a good cue phrase? We are look-
ing for words or phrases in a corpus that regularly
co-occur with individual dialogue acts. We use

1311



the term predictivity to indicate how predictive a
phrase is of a particular DA. We want to select
phrases that are highly indicative, and so concern
ourselves with the highest predictivity of a par-
ticular cue phrase. We call this score the maxi-
mal predictivity. There are several other thresh-
olds that should also be apparent. First, below
some maximal predictivity score, we assume that
phrases will no longer be discriminative enough to
be useful for labelling DAs. Second, the number
of occurrences of each phrase in the corpus as a
whole is important. In their experiments, Samuel
et al. (1999) constructed all n-grams of lengths
1 through 3 from the corpus, and then applied a
range of measures which pruned the n-gram list
until only candidate cue phrases remained. In or-
der to test the effectiveness of these automatically
acquired cue phrases, Samuel et al. (1999) passed
them as features to a machine learning method, in
their case transformation-based learning.

More formally, we can describe our criteria,
predictivity, for selecting cue phrases from the set
of all possible cue phrases in the following way.
The predictivity of phrase c for DA d is the condi-
tional probability P (d|c), where:

P (d|c) = #(c&d)
#(c)

We represent the set of all possible cue phrases
(all n-grams length 1–4 from the corpus) as C,
so given c ∈ C : c represents some possible cue
phrase. Similarly, D is the set of all dialogue act
labels, and d ∈ D : d represents some dialogue
act label. Therefore #(c) is the count of (pos-
sible) cue phrase c in corpus, and #(c&d) is the
count of occurrences of phrase c in utterances with
dialogue act d in the training data. The maximal
predictivity of a cue phrase c, written as mp(c), is
defined as:

mp(c) = max
d∈D

P (d|c)

In their experiments, Samuel et al. (1999) also
experimented with conditional probability, using
P (c|d), or the probability of some phrase occur-
ring given some Dialogue Act. For our exper-
iments, the word n-grams used as potential cue
phrases during are automatically extracted from

training data. All word n-grams of length 1–
4 within the data are considered as candidates.
The maximal predictivity of each cue phrase can
be computed directly from the corpus. We can
use this value as one threshold for pruning po-
tential cue phrases from our model. Removing
n-grams below some predictivity threshold will
improve the compactness of the model produced.
Another reasonable threshold would appear to be
the frequency count of each potential cue phrase.
Phrases which have a low frequency score are
likely to have very high predictivity scores, pos-
sibly skewing the model as a whole. For example,
any potential cue phrase which occurs only once
will de-facto have a 100% predictivity score. We
can use a minimal count value (t#) and minimal
predictivity thresholds (tmp) to prune the set C∗

of ‘useful’ cue phrases derived from the training
data, as defined by:

C∗ = {c ∈ C |mp(c) ≥ tmp ∧#(c) ≥ t#}
The n-grams that remain after this thresholding

process are those we identify as cue phrases. For
our initial experiments, we used a predictivity of
30% and a frequency of 2 as our thresholds for cue
extraction.

4 Cue-Based DA Classification

Having defined our mechanism to extract cue
phrases from a corpus, we need some way to
evaluate their effectiveness. Samuel et al. (1999)
passed their cue phrases as a feature to a machine
learning method. We chose instead a method
where the cue phrases extracted from a corpus
could be used directly as a method of classifi-
cation. If our extracted cues are indeed reliable
predictors of dialogue acts, then a classifier that
uses these cues directly should perform reason-
ably well. If, on the other hand, this mechanism
did not work, it would not necessarily mean that
our cue phrases are not effective, only that we
need to pass them to a subsequent machine learn-
ing process as others had done. The benefit of our
direct classification approach is that it is very fast
to evaluate, and gives us immediate feedback as
to the possible effectiveness of our automatically
extracted cue phrases.

1312



The predictivity of a cue phrase can be ex-
ploited directly in a simple model of Dialogue
Act classification. We can extract potential cue
phrases as described in Section 3. The resulting
cue phrases selected using our measure of predic-
tivity are then used directly to classify unseen ut-
terances in the following manner. We identify all
the potential cue phrases a target utterance con-
tains, and determine which has the highest predic-
tivity of some dialogue act category, then assign
that category. Given the notation we define earlier,
we can obtain the DA predicted by a particular cue
(dp(c)) by:

dp(c) = argmax
d∈D

P (d|c)

If multiple cue phrases share the same maxi-
mal predictivity, but predict different categories,
we select the DA category for the phrase which
has the higher number of occurrences (that is, the
n-gram with the highest frequency). If the combi-
nation of predictivity and occurrence count is in-
sufficient to determine a single DA, then a random
choice is made amongst the remaining candidate
DAs. If ng(u) defines the set of ngrams of length
1..4 in utterance u, and C∗u is the set of n-grams in
the utterance u that are also in the threshold model
C∗ then C∗u is defined as:

C∗u = ng(u) ∩ C∗

Given our thresholds, the mpu(u) (the utter-
ance maximal prediction, or mp value for the
highest scoring cue in utterance u) is defined as:

mpu(u) = max
c∈C∗u

mp(c)

The maximally predictive cues of an utterance
(mpcu(u)) are:

mpcu(u) = {c ∈ C∗u |mp(c) = mpu(u)}

Then the maximal cue of utterance (mcu(u)),
i.e. one of its maximally predictive cues that has a
maximal count (from within that set), is:

mcu(u) = argmax
c∈mpcu(u)

#(c)

Finally, for our classification model, dpu(u) ut-
terance DA prediction — the DA predicted by
model for utterance u, is defined as:

dpu(u) = dp(mcu(u))

If no cue phrases are present in the utterance
under consideration, then a default tag is assigned.

To this basic model, we added three fur-
ther elaborations. The first used models sensi-
tive to utterance length. When examining the
ICSI-MRDA corpus, Ji and Bilmes (2006) found
that the mean length of <STATEMENT> utter-
ances was 8.60 words, <BACKCHANNEL> utter-
ances were 1.04 words, <PLACE-HOLDERS> ut-
terances were 1.31 words and <QUESTIONS> ut-
terances were 6.50 words. Taking this as a start
point, we grouped utterances into those of length
1 (i.e. short, or one word utterances), those with
lengths 2–4 (we call medium length utterances),
and those of length 5+ (the long length model, that
comprises everything else), and produced separate
cue-based models for each group.

Second, we introduced <start> and <finish>
tags to each utterance (independent of the calcula-
tion of utterance length), to capture position spe-
cific information for particular cues. For exam-
ple “<start> okay” identifies the occurrence of
the word ‘okay’ as the first word in the utterance.
Finally, in the Switchboard annotation, there are
other markers dealing with various linguistic is-
sues, as outlined in Meteer (1995). A primary ex-
ample is the label <+>, which indicated the pres-
ence of overlapping speech. One approach to bet-
ter utilise this data is to ‘reconnect’ the divided
utterances, i.e. appending any utterance assigned
tag <+> to the last utterance by the same speaker.
We base the selection of these model elaborations
and the values for the parameters of frequency and
predictivity on prior research (cf. (Webb et al.,
2005a; Webb et al., 2005b; Webb et al., 2005c)).

5 Cue-Based Classification Results

Ultimately, we want to compare classification
performance of a set of automatically extracted
cue phrases across the two corpora, Switchboard
and ICSI-MRDA. Both are annotated with sim-
ilar variants of the DAMSL annotation scheme,

1313



Condition Cue Source Cue Count Accuracy

(1) Switchboard training data 136,942 80.72%
(2) ICSI-MRDA training data 48,856 70.78%
(3) Intersection of Switchboard and ICSI-MRDA Training Data 25,053 72.34%
(4) As above, discard <STATEMENT> cue phrases 577 72.62%
(5) As above, retain only cue phrases containing <start> tags 242 72.52%
(6) As above, retain only cue phrases appearing in every training intersection 148 72.09%

Table 1: Switchboard Classification Results

but there are differences. For example, the
ICSI-MRDA corpus introduces several new la-
bels that do not exist in the Switchboard annota-
tion. Some labels in the Switchboard annotation
are clustered into a single corresponding label in
the ICSI-MRDA corpus, such as the two labels
from Switchboard, <STATEMENT-OPINION> and
<STATEMENT-NON-OPINION>, which are repre-
sented by a single label <STATEMENT> in the
ICSI-MRDA corpus. To facilitate cross-corpus
classification, we will cluster these labels as de-
scribed in Shriberg et al. (2004). Of course, any
clustering of labels has an impact on classifier per-
formance, usually resulting in an increase. Webb
et al. (2005c) indicate that clustering statement la-
bels in the Switchboard corpus should improve
performance by 8-10% percentage points.

5.1 Baseline Results

We need to establish baseline classification per-
formance for both corpora. Our baseline for this
classification task is to the most frequently oc-
curring label for all utterances. For a number
of dialogue corpora, the most frequently occur-
ring label is some sort of statement or asser-
tion, which is true for both the Switchboard and
ICSI-MRDA corpora, where <STATEMENT> is
the most frequent label. For the Switchboard
corpus, selecting this label results in 51.05% ac-
curacy. Remember that we are working with
a version of the Switchboard corpus where we
have clustered the original labels <STATEMENT-
OPINION> and <STATEMENT-NON-OPINION>
into a single label. In the original Switchboard
annotation, the most frequently occurring la-
bel is <STATEMENT-NON-OPINION>, which oc-
curs 36% of the time. Further analysis on the
Switchboard corpus by Webb et al. (2005c) high-

lights that a significant number of <STATEMENT-
OPINION> utterances in Switchboard are mis-
labelled as <STATEMENT-NON-OPINION> by
human annotators. For the ICSI-MRDA corpus,
an accuracy of 31.77% is achieved by labelling
each utterance as <STATEMENT>.

Now we have established a simple baseline of
performance, we want to know how well our cue-
based classification method works applied to these
corpora, as an evaluation of how well our cue ex-
traction method works for each of these corpora.
We ran a 10-fold stratified cross-validation ex-
ercise (referred to as Condition (1) in Tables 1
and 2) using the cue-based extraction mecha-
nism described in Section 3, selecting cue phrases
from the training data (which averaged 180k ut-
terances for Switchboard, and 95k utterances for
ICSI-MRDA), resulting in an average of 135k cue
phrases from Switchboard and 50k cue phrases
from ICSI-MRDA. We then applied these cue-
based models to the held out test data as described
in Section 4, applying Switchboard extracted cue
phrases to Switchboard test data, and likewise
with the ICSI-MRDA data. This establishes the
best performance by our algorithm over these data
sets. For Switchboard, we achieve 80.72% accu-
racy, as predicted by the work reported in Webb et
al. (2005c). For ICSI-MRDA we obtain an accu-
racy of 58.14%. Remember, this model is applied
to the 55-label annotated ICSI-MRDA corpus.
Best reported classification accuracy for this cor-
pus is the 66% reported by Ji and Bilmes (2005),
using a graph-based model that models both ut-
terances and sequences of DA labels. For both
corpora, the cue-based model of classification out-
performs the baseline, using no dialogue context
whatsoever.

1314



Condition Cue Source Cue Count Accuracy

(1) ICSI-MRDA training data 48,856 58.14%
(2) Switchboard training data 136,942 47.07%
(3) Intersection of Switchboard and ICSI-MRDA Training Data 25,053 47.86%
(4) As above, discard <STATEMENT> cue phrases 577 48.05%
(5) As above, retain only cue phrases containing <start> tags 242 47.30%
(6) As above, retain only cue phrases appearing in every training intersection 148 46.34%

Table 2: ICSI-MRDA Classification Results

5.2 Cross-Corpus Results

The focus of our effort is not to maximise raw
performance over individual corpora, but to ex-
amine the effectiveness of our automatically ex-
tracted cue phrases, and one mechanism to do this
is to compare classification cross-corpora. If our
cue phrases are sufficiently general predictors of
DA labels across corpora, we believe that to be a
powerful claim for cue phrases as a DA classifica-
tion feature. Therefore, our next step was to take
the cue-phrases generated from each fold of the
Switchboard experiment, and apply them to the
held out test data from the corresponding fold of
the ICSI-MRDA experiment, and vice-versa. This
is a test to see how generally applicable are the cue
phrases extracted from each corpus.

When we take cues extracted from the Switch-
board corpus, and apply them to the held out por-
tion of the ICSI-MRDA corpus, we achieve an av-
erage classification accuracy (over our 10-folds)
of 47.07%. This score represents 81% of the ac-
curacy achieved by our prior result when ICSI-
MRDA test data is classified using ICSI-MRDA
training data. It also represents 71% of the best
published score on this corpus (Ji and Bilmes,
2005). When we classify held out Switchboard
test data with cue phrases extracted from the ICSI-
MRDA corpus, we achieve an average classifica-
tion accuracy of 70.78%, which corresponds to
88% of our best score on this corpus using Switch-
board training data. These results correspond to
Condition (2) in Tables 1 and 2.

These are very positive results for both di-
rections of classification, indicating that the cue
phrases we automatically extract from our corpora
are generally applicable as a feature for DA clas-
sification.

5.3 Cue Phrase Reduction
We have successfully shown that we can use cue
phrases extracted from one corpus to classify ut-
terances from a different corpus. We used an in-
clusive approach, using all cue phrases extracted
from the source corpus training data. Intuitively
however, we might expect to get comparable per-
formance by using only those cue phrases that ap-
pear in both corpora. For these intersection cue
phrases, we require a strict overlap. Once the cues
phrases are extracted from each individual train-
ing fold for each corpus, they are compared and
retained if and only if:

• the cue phrase itself is a direct match, includ-
ing any position specific label

• the DA the phrases predicts is a match

• the model number (as defined in Section 4) is
a match

For each fold of our cross-validation, we take
cues phrases extracted from the training data that
appear in both corpora, pruning out cue phrases
that only appear in one of the corpora. We then
retain only those cue phrases that meet these cri-
teria from both corpora for each specific fold, and
apply them to the held out test data from that fold
for each corpus.

Average classification performance for both
corpora rises very slightly in comparison to us-
ing all extracted cue phrases. These results can be
seen as Condition (3) in Tables 1 and 2. When ap-
plying the intersection cue phrases to the Switch-
board test data, we achieve an average classifica-
tion accuracy score of 72.34%. When we apply
the intersection cues to the ICSI-MRDA test data,
the average score is 47.86%. The average num-
ber of cue phrases that are used in this experiment

1315



(i.e that appear in all training folds for both cor-
pora, with matching model information) is around
25k. This represents 50% of the average num-
ber of cues extracted from the ICSI-MRDA cor-
pus, and only 19% of the average number of cue
phrases extracted from the Switchboard corpus.

We describe earlier that our default label as ap-
plied by our classifier when no cue phrase can be
found is the <STATEMENT> label, the most fre-
quent single label in both corpora. Given this,
we can safely remove cue phrases that predict
<STATEMENT> labels from our cue phrase set.
The absence of such cue phrases should have
no impact on our classification performance, but
should reduce our total number of cue phrases.
As can be seen in Condition (4) in Tables 1 and
2, this is indeed the case, with no statistical sig-
nificance between the results with and without
<STATEMENT> cue phrases. However, there is
a drop in the number of cue phrases. When we
remove all <STATEMENT> cue phrases from the
intersection of cue phrases, we are left with an av-
erage of 577 cue phrases.

Further analysis of classifier performance indi-
cates that a high percentage of actual labelling is
performed using a subset of even the cue phrases
extracted under Condition (4). We observed that
cue phrases that contain a <start> tag (as de-
scribed in Section 4) were used in the majority of
cases. Our final experiment was to extract, from
the 577 cue phrases, only those phrases that con-
tain the <start> tag. This reduced the average
number of cue phrases to 242. Classification per-
formance remains unaffected, scoring an average
of 72.52% for Switchboard and 47.30% for ICSI-
MRDA, as seen in Condition (5) in the results ta-
bles. We note that of those 242 phrases, 148 ap-
pear in the intersection of every training fold of
our 10-fold cross-validation. When we use only
those 148 cue phrases for classification, as seen
in Condition (6), average classification accuracy
remains the same; 72.09% for Switchboard, and
46.34% for ICSI-MRDA.

6 Conclusions

In this paper, we investigate a cue-based ap-
proach to DA classification, applied to two cor-
pora, Switchboard and ICSI-MRDA. We automat-

ically extracted cue phrases from both corpora,
and used them directly to classify unseen utter-
ances from the corresponding corpus, demonstrat-
ing that our automatically discovered cue phrases
are a sufficiently useful feature for this task.

We then explored the generality of our cue
phrases, by applying them directly as a classifier
to data from the alternate corpus. Whilst there
was some expected drop in performance, the clas-
sification accuracy for both experiments is good,
given such a small number of features and the sim-
ple design of the classifier. The result indicates
that cue phrases are a highly useful feature for
DA classification, and can be used to classify data
from new corpora, possibly as some part of some
quasi-automatic first annotation effort.

We experimented with reducing the set of cue
phrases, using increasingly restrictive measures
of retaining our automatically discovered cues.
We found that we did not have a drop in per-
formance compared to the cross-corpus classifica-
tion accuracy, even when the cue set is drastically
reduced (to 0.001% of the original Switchboard
cue phrases, and 0.003% of the ICSI-MRDA cue
phrases). This appears to be a strong indicator of
the discriminative power of some small number of
automatically discovered core cue phrases.

References
Ang, J., Y. Liu, and E. Shriberg. 2005. Automatic Di-

alog Act Segmentation and Classification in Multi-
party Meetings. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Pro-
cessing, pages 1061–1064, Philadelphia.

Bunt, H. 1994. Context and Dialogue Control.
THINK, 3:19–31.

Core, M., M. Ishizaki, J. Moore, and C. Nakatani.
1999. The Report of the Third Workshop of the Dis-
course Resource Initiative. Chiba University and
Kazusa Academia Hall.

Grosz, B. and C. Sidner. 1986. Attention, Intentions,
and the Structure of Discourse. Computational Lin-
guistics, 19(3).

Hirschberg, J. and D. Litman. 1993. Empirical Stud-
ies on the Disambiguation of Cue Phrases. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 19(3):501–530.

Ji, G. and J. Bilmes. 2005. Dialog Act Tagging Us-
ing Graphical Models. In Proceedings of the IEEE

1316



International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and
Signal Processing, Philadelphia, PA.

Ji, G. and J. Bilmes. 2006. Backoff Model
Training using Partially Observed Data: Applica-
tion to Dialog Act Tagging. In Proceedings of
the Human Language Technology/ American chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics(HLT/NAACL’06).

Jurafsky, D., R. Bates, N. Coccaro, R. Martin,
M. Meteer, K. Ries, E. Shriberg, A. Stolcke, P. Tay-
lor, and C. Van Ess-Dykema. 1997. Automatic De-
tection of Discourse Structure for Speech Recogni-
tion and Understanding. In Proceedings of the 1997
IEEE Workshop on Speech Recognition and Under-
standing, Santa Barbara.

Lendvai, P. and J. Geertzen. 2007. Token-Based
Chunking of Turn-Internal Dialogue Act Sequences.
In Proceedings of the 8th SIGDIAL Workshop on
Discourse and Dialogue, pages 174–181, Antwerp,
Belgium.

Levin, L., C. Langley, A. Lavie, D. Gates, and D. Wal-
lace. 2003. Domain Specific Speech Acts for Spo-
ken Language Translation. In Proceedings of 4th
SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue.

Meteer, M. 1995. Dysfluency Annotation Stylebook
for the Switchboard Corpus. Working paper, Lin-
guistic Data Consortium.

Reithinger, N. and M. Klesen. 1997. Dialogue Act
Classification Using Language Models. In Proceed-
ings of EuroSpeech-97.

Rotaru, M. 2002. Dialog Act Tagging using Memory-
Based Learning. Term project, University of Pitts-
burgh.

Samuel, K., S. Carberry, and K. Vijay-Shanker. 1999.
Automatically Selecting Useful Phrases for Dia-
logue Act Tagging. In Proceedings of the Fourth
Conference of the Pacific Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.

Shriberg, E., R. Dhillon, S. Bhagat, J. Ang, and H. Car-
vey. 2004. The ICSI Meeting Recorder Dialog Act
(MRDA) Corpus. In Special Interest Group on Dis-
course and Dialogue (SIGdial), Boston, USA.

Stolcke, A., K. Ries, N. Coccaro, E. Shriberg, R. Bates,
D. Jurafsky, P. Taylor, R. Martin, C. Van Ess-
Dykema, and M. Meteer. 2000. Dialogue Act
Modeling for Automatic Tagging and Recognition
of Conversational Speech. In Computational Lin-
guistics 26(3), 339–373.

Verbree, D., R. Rienks, and D. Heylen. 2006. Dia-
logue Act Tagging using Smart Feature Selection;
Results on Multiple Corpora. Spoken Language
Technology Workshop, 2006. IEEE, pages 70–73.

Webb, N. and T. Liu. 2008. Investigating the Porta-
bility of Corpus-Derived Cue Phrases for Dialogue
Act Classification. In Proceedings of the 22nd In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (COLING 2008), Manchester, United Kingdom.

Webb, N., M. Hepple, and Y. Wilks. 2005a. Dia-
logue Act Classification Based on Intra-Utterance
Features. In Proceedings of the AAAI Workshop
on Spoken Language Understanding, at the Twen-
tieth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
Pittsburgh, PA.

Webb, N., M. Hepple, and Y. Wilks. 2005b. Empir-
ical Determination of Thresholds for Optimal Di-
alogue Act Classification. In Proceedings of the
Ninth Workshop on the Semantics and Pragmatics
of Dialogue.

Webb, N., M. Hepple, and Y. Wilks. 2005c. Er-
ror Analysis of Dialogue Act Classification. In
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on
Text, Speech and Dialogue, Carlsbad, Czech Repub-
lic.

1317


