Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Computational Linguistics (Coling 2010), pages 913–921,

Beijing, August 2010

913

The Bag-of-Opinions Method for Review Rating Prediction from Sparse

Text Patterns

Lizhen Qu

Max-Planck Institute

for Informatics

Georgiana Ifrim

Bioinformatics Research

Centre

Gerhard Weikum
Max-Planck Institute

for Informatics

lqu@mpii.mpg.de

ifrim@birc.au.dk

weikum@mpii.mpg.de

Abstract

The problem addressed in this paper is to
predict a user’s numeric rating in a prod-
uct review from the text of the review. Un-
igram and n-gram representations of text
are common choices in opinion mining.
However, unigrams cannot capture impor-
tant expressions like “could have been bet-
ter”, which are essential for prediction
models of ratings. N-grams of words, on
the other hand, capture such phrases, but
typically occur too sparsely in the train-
ing set and thus fail to yield robust pre-
dictors. This paper overcomes the limita-
tions of these two models, by introducing
a novel kind of bag-of-opinions represen-
tation, where an opinion, within a review,
consists of three components: a root word,
a set of modiﬁer words from the same sen-
tence, and one or more negation words.
Each opinion is assigned a numeric score
which is learned, by ridge regression,
from a large, domain-independent cor-
pus of reviews. For the actual test case
of a domain-dependent review,
the re-
view’s rating is predicted by aggregat-
ing the scores of all opinions in the re-
view and combining it with a domain-
dependent unigram model. The paper
presents a constrained ridge regression al-
gorithm for learning opinion scores. Ex-
periments show that the bag-of-opinions
method outperforms prior state-of-the-art
techniques for review rating prediction.

1
Introduction
1.1 Motivation
Opinion mining and sentiment analysis has be-
come a hot research area (Pang and Lee, 2008).
There is ample work on analyzing the sentiments
of online-review communities where users com-
ment on products (movies, books, consumer elec-
tronics, etc.), implicitly expressing their opinion
polarities (positive, negative, neutral), and also
provide numeric ratings of products (Titov and
McDonald, 2008b; Lerman et al., 2009; Hu and
Liu, 2004; Titov and McDonald, 2008a; Pang
and Lee, 2005; Popescu and Etzioni, 2005a). Al-
though ratings are more informative than polari-
ties, most prior work focused on classifying text
fragments (phrases, sentences, entire reviews) by
polarity. However, a product receiving mostly 5-
star reviews exhibits better customer purchase be-
havior compared to a product with mostly 4-star
reviews. In this paper we address the learning and
prediction of numerical ratings from review texts,
and we model this as a metric regression problem
over an appropriately deﬁned feature space.

Formally, the input is a set of rated documents
i=1, where xi is a sequence
(i.e., reviews), {xi, yi}N
of word-level unigrams (w1, ..., wl) and yi ∈ R is
a rating. The goal is to learn a function f (x) that
maps the word vector x into a numerical rating ˆy,
which indicates both the polarity and strength of
the opinions expressed in a document.

Numerical review rating prediction is harder
than classifying by polarity. Consider the follow-
ing example from Amazon book reviews:

The organization of the book is hard to follow
and the chapter titles are not very helpful, so go-
ing back and trying to ﬁnd information is quite

914

difﬁcult.

We note that there are many subjective words
(hard, helpful, difﬁcult) modiﬁed by opinion mod-
iﬁers such as (very, quite) and negation words like
(not). For rating prediction, considering opin-
ion modiﬁers is crucial; very helpful is a much
stronger sentiment than helpful. Negation words
also need attention. As pointed out by Liu and
Seneff (2009) we cannot simply reverse the polar-
ity. For example, if we assign a higher positive
score to very helpful than to helpful, simply re-
versing the sign of the scores would incorrectly
suggest that not helpful is less negative than not
very helpful.

The widely used unigram (bag-of-words)
model (Pang and Lee, 2005; Snyder and Barzilay,
2007; Goldberg and Zhu, 2006; Ganu et al., 2009)
cannot properly capture phrase patterns. Con-
sider the following example: not so helpful vs.
not so bad. In a unigram-based regression model
each unigram gets a weight indicating its polarity
and strength. High positive/negative weights are
strongly positive/negative clues. It is reasonable
to assign a positive weight to helpful and a nega-
tive weight to bad. The fundamental problem of
unigrams arises when assigning a weight to not.
If not had a strongly negative weight, the posi-
tive weight of helpful would be strongly reduced
while the negative weight of bad would be ampli-
ﬁed (by combining weights). This clearly fails to
capture the true intentions of the opinion phrases.
The same problem holds for so, which is an inten-
siﬁer that should keep the same sign as the word
it modiﬁes. We refer to this limitation of the uni-
gram model as polarity incoherence.

A promising way of overcoming this weakness
is to include n-grams, generalizing the bag-of-
words model into a bag-of-phrases model (Bac-
cianella et al., 2009; Pang and Lee, 2008). How-
ever, regression models over the feature space
of all n-grams (for either ﬁxed maximal n or
variable-length phrases) are computationally ex-
pensive in their training phase. Moreover and
most importantly for our setting,
including n-
grams in the model results in a very high dimen-
sional feature space: many features will then oc-
cur only very rarely in the training data. There-
fore, it is difﬁcult if not impossible to reliably

learn n-gram weights from limited-size training
sets. We refer to this problem as the n-gram spar-
sity bottleneck.
In our experiments we inves-
tigate the effect of using bigrams and variable-
length ngrams for improving review rating predic-
tion.

1.2 Contribution
To overcome the above limitations of unigram and
n-gram features, we have developed a novel kind
of bag-of-opinions model, which exploits domain-
independent corpora of opinions (e.g., all Amazon
reviews), but is ﬁnally applied for learning predic-
tors on domain-speciﬁc reviews (e.g., movies as
rated in IMDB or Rottentomatoes). A document
is represented as a bag of opinions each of which
has three components: a root word, a set of modi-
ﬁer words and one or more negation words. In the
phrase not very helpful, the opinion root is help-
ful, one (of potentially many) opinion modiﬁer(s)
is very, and a negation word is not. We enforce po-
larity coherence by the design of a learnable func-
tion that assigns a score to an opinion.

Our approach generalizes the cumulative linear
offset model (CLO) presented in (Liu and Seneff,
2009). The CLO model makes several restrictive
assumptions, most notably, that all opinion scores
within one document are the same as the overall
document rating. This assumption does not hold
in practice, not even in reviews with extremely
positive/negative ratings. For example, in a 5-
star Amazon review the phrases most impressive
book and it helps explain should receive different
scores. Otherwise, the later transfer step to dif-
ferent domains would yield poor predictions. Due
to this restriction, CLO works well on particular
types of reviews that have pro/con entries listing
characteristic major opinions about the object un-
der review. For settings with individual reviews
whose texts do not exhibit any speciﬁc structure,
the CLO model faces its limitations.

In our bag-of-opinions method, we address the
learning of opinion scores as a constrained ridge
regression problem. We consider the opinion
scores in a given review to be drawn from an
unknown probability distribution (so they do not
have to be the same within a document). We es-
timate the review rating based on a set of statis-

915

tics (e.g., expectation, variance, etc.) derived from
the scores of opinions in a document. Thus, our
method has a sound statistical foundation and can
be applied to arbitrary reviews with mixed opin-
ion polarities and strengths. We avoid the n-gram
sparsity problem by the limited-size structured
feature space of (root,modiﬁers,negators) opin-
ions.

We treat domain-independent and domain-
dependent opinions differently in our system. In
the ﬁrst step we learn a bag-of-opinions model on
a large dataset of online reviews to obtain scores
for domain-independent opinions. Since the po-
larity of opinions is not bound to a topic, one
can learn opinion scores from a pooled corpus
of reviews for various categories, e.g., movies,
books, etc., and then use these scored opinions
for predicting the ratings of reviews belonging
to a particular category. In order to also capture
domain-dependent information (possibly comple-
mentary to the opinion lexicon used for learn-
ing domain-independent opinions), we combine
the bag-of-opinions model with an unigram model
trained on the domain-dependent corpus. Since
domain-dependent training is typically limited,
we model it using unigram models rather than
bag-of-opinions. By combining the two models,
even if an opinion does not occur in the domain-
dependent training set but it occurs in a test re-
view, we can still accurately predict the review rat-
ing based on the globally learned opinion score. In
some sense our combined learning scheme is sim-
ilar to smoothing in standard learning techniques,
where the estimate based on a limited training
set is smoothed using a large background corpus
(Zhai and Lafferty, 2004).

In summary, the contributions of this paper are

the following:

1. We introduce the bag-of-opinions model, for
capturing the inﬂuence of n-grams, but in a
structured way with root words, modiﬁers,
and negators, to avoid the explosion of the
feature space caused by explicit n-gram mod-
els.

2. We develop a constrained ridge regression
method for learning scores of opinions from

domain-independent corpora of
views.

rated re-

3. For transferring the regression model

to
newly given domain-dependent applications,
we derive a set of statistics over opinion
scores in documents and use these as fea-
tures, together with standard unigrams, for
predicting the rating of a review.

4. Our experiments with Amazon reviews from
different categories (books, movies, music)
show that the bag-of-opinions method out-
performs prior state-of-the-art techniques.

2 Bag-of-Opinions Model

introduce the bag-of-
In this section we ﬁrst
opinions model,
followed by the method for
learning (domain-independent) model parameters.
Then we show how we annotate opinions and how
we adapt the model to domain-dependent data.

2.1 Model Representation
We model each document as a bag-of-opinions
k=1, where the number of opinions K varies
{opk}K
among documents. Each opinion opk consists
of an opinion root wr, r ∈ SR, a set of opin-
ion modiﬁers {wm}M
m=1, m ∈ SM and a set of
negation words {wz}Z
z=1, z ∈ SZ, where the sets
SR, SM , SZ are component index sets of opinion
roots, opinion modiﬁers and negation words re-
spectively. The union of these sets forms a global
component index set S ∈ Nd, where d is the di-
mension of the index space. The opinion root de-
termines the prior polarity of the opinion. Modi-
ﬁers intensify or weaken the strength of the prior
polarity. Negation words strongly reduce or re-
verse the prior polarity. For each opinion, the
set of negation words consists of at most a nega-
tion valence shifter like not (Kennedy and Inkpen,
2006) and its intensiﬁers like capitalization of the
valence shifter. Each opinion component is asso-
ciated with a score. We assemble the scores of
opinion elements into an opinion-score by using
a score function. For example, in the opinion not
very helpful, the opinion root helpful determines
the prior polarity positive say with a score 0.9, the
modiﬁer very intensiﬁes the polarity say with a

916

score 0.5. The prior polarity is further strongly re-
duced by the negation word not with e.g., a score
-1.2. Then we sum up the scores to get a score of
0.2 for the opinion not very helpful.

Formally, we deﬁne the function score(op) as
a linear function of opinion components, which
takes the form

score(op) = sign(r)βrxr

+

+

MXm=1
ZXz=1

sign(r)βmxm

sign(r)βzxz

(1)

where {xz, xm, xr} are binary variables denoting
the presence or absence of negation words, modi-
ﬁers and opinion root. {βz, βm, βr} are weights of
each opinion elements. sign(r) : wr → {−1, 1}
is the opinion polarity function of the opinion root
wr. It assigns a value 1/-1 if an opinion root is
positive/negative. Due to the semantics of opin-
ion elements, we have constraints that βr ≥ 0
and βz ≤ 0. The sign of βm is determined in the
learning phase, since we have no prior knowledge
whether it intensiﬁes or weakens the prior polar-
ity.

Since a document

is modeled as a bag-of-
opinions, we can simply consider the expec-
tation of opinion scores as the document rat-
ing. If we assume the scores are uniformly dis-
tributed, the prediction function is then f (x) =
1
k=1 score(opk) which assigns the average of
opinion scores to the document x.

KPK

2.2 Learning Regression Parameters
We assume that we can identify the opinion roots
and negation words from a subjectivity lexicon. In
this work we use MPQA (Wilson et al., 2005). In
addition, the lexicon provides the prior polarity of
the opinion roots. In the training phase, we are
i=1,
given a set of documents with ratings {xi, yi}N
and our goal is to ﬁnd an optimal function f∗
i=1 are as close as possi-
whose predictions {ˆyi}N
bile to the original ratings {yi}N
i=1. Formally, we
aim to minimize the following loss function:

L =

1
2N

NXi=1

(f (xi) − yi)2

(2)

where f (xi) is modeled as the average score of
opinions in review xi.

=

the

order

between

hβ, pi

normalize

a weight

First, we rewrite score(op) as

the dot
product
vector
β = [βz, βm, βr] and a feature vector
[sign(r)xz, sign(r)xm, sign(r)xr].
p
vectors, we
In
to
rewrite the weight and feature vectors
in
the d dimensional vector space of all
root
words, modiﬁers and negation words.
Then
β = [.., βz, 0, .., βm, 0, .., βr, 0..] ∈ Rd and p =
[sign(r)xz, 0, .., sign(r)xm, 0, .., sign(r)xr, ...] ∈
Rd. The function f (xi) can then be written as
the dot product hβ, vii, where vi = 1
k=1 pk,
with Ki the number of opinions in review xi.
By using this feature representation, the learning
problem is equivalent to:

KiPKi

min

β

L(β) =

s.t.

1
2N

NXi=1

(hβ, vii + β0 − yi)2

βz ≤ 0 z ∈ SZ
βr ≥ 0 r ∈ SR

(3)
where β ∈ Rd, β = [βz, βm, βr]. β0 is the inter-
cept of the regression function, which is estimated
as the mean of the ratings in the training set. We
deﬁne a new variable ˜yi = yi − β0.
In order to avoid overﬁtting, we add an l2 norm
regularizer to the loss function with the parameter
λ > 0.

1
2N

NXi=1

LR(β) =

s.t.

(hβ, vii − ˜yi)2 +

λ
2 k β k2

2

βz ≤ 0 z ∈ SZ
βr ≥ 0 r ∈ SR

(4)

We solve the above optimization problem by Al-
gorithm 1 using coordinate descent. The proce-
dure starts with β0 = 0, β0 ∈ Rd. Then it up-
dates iteratively every coordinate of the vector β
until convergence. Algorithm 1 updates every co-
ordinate βj, j ∈ {1, 2, ..., d} of β by solving the
following one-variable sub-problem:

minlj≤βj≤cj LR(β1, ..., βj, ..., βd)

917

where lj and cj denote the lower and upper
bounds of βj. If j ∈ SZ, lj = −∞ and cj = 0.
If j ∈ SR, lj = 0 and cj = ∞. Otherwise both
bounds are inﬁnity.
According to (Luo and Tseng, 1992), the solu-

where

tion of this one-variable sub-problem is
ˆβj = max{lj, min{cj, gj}}
i=1 vij(˜yi −Pl6=j βlvl)
NPN
NPN

i=1 v2

ij + λ

gj =

1

1

Here gj is the close form solution of standard
ridge regression at coordinate j (for details see
(Friedman et al., 2008)). We prove the conver-
gence of Algorithm 1, by the following theorem
using techniques in (Luo and Tseng, 1992).
Theorem 1 A sequence of β generated by Algo-
rithm 1 globally converges to an optimal solution
β∗ ∈ χ∗ of problem (4), where χ∗ is the set of
optimal solutions.
Proof: Luo and Tseng (1992) show that coordi-
nate descent for constrained quadratic functions
in the following form converges to one of its global
optimal solutions.

minβ h(β) = hβ, Qβi/2 + hq, βi

s.t.

ET β ≥ b

where Q is a d×d symmetric positive-deﬁnite ma-
trix, E is a d× d matrix having no zero column, q
is a d-vector and b is a d-vector.

We rewrite LR in matrix form as

=

1
2N
1
2N
1
−
2N

(˜y − Vβ)T (˜y − Vβ) +
(Vβ)T (Vβ) +
βT β −
˜yT ˜y

˜yT (Vβ)) +

λ
2
1
2N

λ
2

βT β

1
2N

((Vβ)T ˜y

= hβ, Qβi/2 + hq, βi + constant

where

Q = BT B, B =" q 1

√λId×d # , q = −1

N V

N

(VT ˜y)

where Id×d is the identity matrix. Because λ >
0, all columns of B are linearly independent. As
Q = BT B and symmetric, Q is positive deﬁnite.

We deﬁne E as a d × d diagonal matrix with
all entries on the main diagonal equal to 1 except
eii = −1, i ∈ SZ and b is a d-vector with all
entries equal to −∞ except bi = 0, for i ∈ SZ or
i ∈ SR.
Because the almost cyclic rule is applied to
generate the sequence {βt}, the algorithm con-
verges to a solution β∗ ∈ χ∗.
Algorithm 1 Constrained Ridge Regression
1: Input: λ and {vn, ˜yn}N
2: Output: optimal β
3: repeat
4:

for j = 1, ..., d do

n=1

PN

1
N

P

PN

i=1 vij (˜yi−
i=1 v2

1
N

l6=j βlvl)

ij +λ

gj =

5:

6:

0,
0,
gj, else

if j ∈ SR and gj < 0
if j ∈ SZ and gj > 0

ˆβj =

end for

7:
8: until Convergence condition is satisﬁed

2.3 Annotating Opinions
The MPQA lexicon contains separate lexicons for
subjectivity clues, intensiﬁers and valence shifters
(Wilson et al., 2005), which are used for identify-
ing opinion roots, modiﬁers and negation words.
Opinion roots are identiﬁed as the positive and
negative subjectivity clues in the subjectivity lex-
icon.
In the same manner, intensiﬁers and va-
lence shifters of the type {negation, shiftneg} are
mapped to modiﬁers and negation words. Other
modiﬁer candidates are adverbs, conjunctions and
modal verbs around opinion roots. We consider
non-words modiﬁers as well, e.g., punctuations,
capitalization and repetition of opinion roots. If
the opinion root is a noun, adjectives are also in-
cluded into modiﬁer sets.

The automatic opinion annotation starts with
locating the continous subjectivity clue sequence.
Once we ﬁnd such a sequence and at least one
of the subjectivity clue is positive or negative, we
search to the left up to 4 words for negation words
and modiﬁer candidates, and stop if encountering
another opinion root. Similarly, we search to the

918

right up to 3 unigrams for modiﬁers and stop if
we ﬁnd negation words or any other opinion roots.
The prior polarity of the subjectivity sequence is
determined by the polarity of the last subjectivity
clue with either positive or negative polarity in the
sequence. The other subjectivity clues in the same
sequence are treated as modiﬁers.

2.4 Adaptation to Domain-Dependent Data

of

the

learned

to the

adaptation

The
(domain-
independent) opinion scores
target
domain and the integration of domain-dependent
unigrams is done in a second ridge-regression
task. Note that this is a simpler problem than
typical domain-adaptation, since we already know
from the sentiment lexicon which are the domain-
independent features. Additionally, its relatively
easy to obtain a large mixed-domain corpus for
reliable estimation of domain-independent opin-
ion scores (e.g., use all Amazon product reviews).
Furthermore, we need a domain-adaptation step
since domain-dependent and domain-independent
data have generally different rating distributions.
The differences are mainly reﬂected in the
intercept of the regression function (estimated
as the mean of the ratings). This means that
we need to scale the positive/negative mean of
the opinion scores differently before using it
for prediction on domain-dependent
reviews.
Moreover, other statistics further characterize the
opinion score distribution. We use the variance
of opinion scores to capture the reliability of
the mean, multiplied by the negative sign of the
mean to show how much it strengthens/weakens
the estimation of the mean. The mean score of
the dominant polarity (major exp) is also used
to reduce the inﬂuence of outliers. Because
positive and negative means should be scaled
differently, we represent positive and negative
values of the mean and major exp as 4 different
features. Together with variance, they are the 5
statistics of the opinion score distribution. The
second learning step on opinion score statistics
and domain-dependent unigrams as features,
re-weights the importance of domain-independent
and domain-dependent information according to
the target domain bias.

3 Experimental Setup

We performed experiments on three target do-
mains of Amazon reviews:
books, movies
(DVDs), and music (CDs). For each domain,
we use ca. 8000 Amazon reviews for evalua-
tion; an additional set of ca. 4000 reviews are
withheld for parameter tuning (regularization pa-
rameter, etc.). For learning weights for domain-
independent opinions, we use a mixed-domain
corpus of ca.
350,000 reviews from Amazon
(electronics, books, dvds, etc.); this data is dis-
joint from the test sets and contains no reviews
from the music domain.
In order to learn un-
biased scores, we select about the same number
of positive and negative reviews (where reviews
with more/less than 3 stars are regarded as posi-
tive/negative). The regularization parameters used
for this corpus are tuned on withheld data with ca.
6000 thematically mixed reviews.1.

We compare our method, subsequently referred
to as CRR-BoO (Constrained Ridge Regression
for Bag-of-Opinions), to a number of alternative
state-of-the-art methods. These competitors are
varied along two dimensions: 1) feature space,
and 2) training set. Along the ﬁrst dimension,
we consider a) unigrams coined uni, b) unigrams
and bigrams together, coined uni+bi, c) variable-
length n-grams coined n-gram, d) the opinion
model by (Liu and Seneff, 2009) coined CLO (cu-
mulative linear offset model). As learning pro-
cedure, we use ridge regression for a), b), and
d), and bounded cyclic regression, coined BCR,
for c). Along the second - orthogonal - di-
mension, we consider 3 different training sets:
i) domain-dependent training set coined DD, ii)
the large mixed-domain training set coined MD,
iii) domain-dependent training set and the large
mixed-domain training set coined DD+MD. For
the DD+MD training set, we apply our two stage
approach for CRR-BoO and CLO, i.e., we use
the mixed-domain corpus for learning the opinion
scores in the ﬁrst stage, and integrate unigrams
from DD in a second domain-adaptation stage.
We train the remaining feature models directly on
the combination of the whole mixed-domain cor-

1All

datasets

are

available

from

http://www.mpi-inf.mpg.de/∼lqu

919

DD

feature models
book
dvd
music
book
dvd
music
book
dvd
music

DD+MD

MD

uni
1.004
1.062
0.686
1.696
1.919
2.395
1.649
1.592
1.471

uni+bi
0.961
1.018
0.672
1.446
1.703
2.160
1.403
1.389
1.281

n-gram CLO CRR-BoO
0.942
0.997
0.946
1.054
0.683
0.638
1.427
1.643
1.565
1.858
1.731
2.340
0.884
1.611
0.928
1.533
0.627
1.398

1.469
1.554
0.870
1.714
1.890
2.301
1.032
1.086
0.698

Table 1: Mean squared error for rating prediction methods on Amazon reviews.

pus and the training part of DD.

The CLO model is adapted as follows. Since
bags-of-opinions generalize CLO, adjectives and
adverbs are mapped to opinion roots and modi-
ﬁers, respectively; negation words are treated the
same as CLO. Subsequently we use our regression
technique. As Amazon reviews do not contain pro
and con entries, we learn from the entire review.

For BCR, we adapt the variable-length n-grams
method of (Ifrim et al., 2008) to elastic-net-
regression (Friedman et al., 2008) in order to ob-
tain a fast regularized regression algorithm for
variable-length n-grams. We search for signiﬁ-
cant n-grams by incremental expansion in back-
ward direction (e.g., expand bad to not bad). BCR
pursues a dense solution for unigrams and a sparse
solution for n-grams. Further details on the BCR
learning algorithm will be found on a subsequent
technical report.

As for the regression techniques, we show
only results with ridge regression (for all fea-
ture and training options except BCR). It outper-
formed -support vector regression (SVR) of lib-
svm (Chang and Lin, 2001), lasso (Tibshirani,
1996), and elastic net (Zou and Hastie, 2005) in
our experiments.

4 Results and Discussion

Table 1 shows the mean square error (M SE) from
each of the three domain-speciﬁc test sets. The er-
ror is deﬁned as M SE = 1
i=1(f (xi) − yi)2.
The right most two columns of the table show re-
sults for the full-ﬂedge two-stage learning for our
method and CLO, with domain-dependent weight

NPN

learning and the domain adaptation step. The
other models are trained directly on the given
training sets. For the DD and DD+MD train-
ing sets, we use ﬁve-fold cross-validation on the
domain-speciﬁc sets. For the MD training set, we
take the domain-speciﬁc test sets as hold-out data
for evaluation.

Table 1 clearly shows that our CRR-BoO
method outperforms all alternative methods by a
signiﬁcant margin. Most noteworthy is the mu-
sic domain, which is not covered by the mixed-
domain corpus. As expected, unigrams only per-
form poorly, and adding bigrams leads only to
marginal improvements. BCR pursues a dense
solution for unigrams and a sparse solution for
variable-length n-grams, but due to the sparsity
of occurence of long n-grams, it ﬁlters out many
interesting-but-infrequent ngrams and therefore
performs worse than the dense solution of the
uni+bi model. The CLO method of (Liu and Sen-
eff, 2009) shows unexpectedly poor performance.
Its main limitation is the assumption that opinion
scores are identical within one document. This
does not hold in documents with mixed opinion
polarities. It also results in conﬂicts for opinion
components that occur in both positive and nega-
tive documents. In contrast, CRR-BoO naturally
captures the mixture of opinions as a bag of pos-
itive/negative scores. We only require that the
mean of opinion scores equals the overall docu-
ment rating.

The right most column of Table 1 shows that
our method can be improved by learning opinion
scores from the large mixed-domain corpus. How-

920

opinion
good
recommend
most difﬁcult
but it gets very good!
would highly recommend
would not recommend

score
0.18
1.64
-1.66
2.37
2.73
-1.93

Table 2: Example opinions learned from the Ama-
zon mixed-domain corpus.

ever, the high error rates of the models learned di-
rectly on the MD corpus show that direct training
on the mixed-domain data can introduce a signiﬁ-
cant amount of noise into the prediction models.
Although the noise can be reduced by learning
from MD and DD together, the performance is
still worse than when learning directly from the
domain-dependent corpora. Additionally, when
the domain is not covered by the mixed-domain
corpus (e.g., music), the results are even worse.
Thus,
the two stages of our method (learning
domain-independent opinion scores plus domain-
adaptation) are decisive for a good performance,
and the sentiment-lexicon-based BoO model leads
to robust learning of domain-independent opinion
scores.

Another useful property of BoO is its high in-
terpretability. Table 2 shows example opinion
scores learned from the mixed-domain corpus.
We observe that the scores corelate well with our
intuitive interpretation of opinions.

Our CRR-BoO method is highly scalable.
Excluding the preprocessing steps (same for
the learning of opinion compo-
all methods),
nent weights from the ca.
350,000 domain-
independent reviews takes only 11 seconds.

5 Related Work
Rating prediction is modeled as an ordinal re-
gression problem in (Pang and Lee, 2005; Gold-
berg and Zhu, 2006; Snyder and Barzilay, 2007).
They simply use the bag-of-words model with re-
gression algorithms, but as seen previously this
cannot capture the expressive power of phrases.
The resulting models are not highly interpretable.
Baccianella et al. (2009) restrict the n-grams to
the ones having certain POS patterns. However,

the long n-grams matching the patterns still suffer
from sparsity. The same seems to hold for sparse
n-gram models (BCR in this paper) in the spirit
of Ifrim et al. (2008). Although sparse n-gram
models can explore arbitrarily large n-gram fea-
ture spaces, they can be of little help if the n-grams
of interests occur sparsely in the datasets.

Since our approach can be regarded as learning
a domain-independent sentiment lexicon, it is re-
lated to the area of automatically building domain-
independent sentiment lexicons (Esuli and Sebas-
tiani, 2006; Godbole et al., 2007; Kim and Hovy,
2004). However, this prior work focused mainly
on the opinion polarity of opinion words, neglect-
ing the opinion strength. Recently, the lexicon
based approaches were extended to learn domain-
dependent lexicons (Kanayama and Nasukawa,
2006; Qiu et al., 2009), but these approaches
also neglect the aspect of opinion strength. Our
method requires only the prior polarity of opinion
roots and can thus be used on top of those meth-
ods for learning the scores of domain-dependent
opinion components. The methods proposed in
(Hu and Liu, 2004; Popescu and Etzioni, 2005b)
can also be categorized into the lexicon based
framework because their procedure starts with a
set of seed words whose polarities are propagated
to other opinion bearing words.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper we show that the bag-of-opinions
(BoO) representation is better suited for captur-
ing the expressive power of n-grams while at the
same time overcoming their sparsity bottleneck.
Although in this paper we use the BoO represen-
tation to model domain-independent opinions, we
believe the same framework can be extended to
domain-dependent opinions and other NLP appli-
cations which can beneﬁt from modelling n-grams
(given that the n-grams are decomposable in some
way). Moreover, the learned model can be re-
garded as a domain-independent opinion lexicon
with each entry in the lexicon having an associated
score indicating its polarity and strength. This in
turn has potential applications in sentiment sum-
marization, opinionated information retrieval and
opinion extraction.

921

References
Baccianella, S., A. Esuli, and F. Sebastiani. 2009.
In ECIR.

Multi-facet rating of product reviews.
Springer.

Chang, C.C. and C.J. Lin, 2001.

LIBSVM: a
library for
Soft-
ware available at http://www.csie.ntu.
edu.tw/˜cjlin/libsvm.

support vector machines.

Esuli, A. and F. Sebastiani. 2006. Sentiwordnet: A
publicly available lexical resource for opinion min-
ing. In LREC, pages 417–422.

Friedman, J., T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani.

2008.
Regularization paths for generalized linear models
via coordinate descent. Technical report, Techni-
cal Report, Available at http://www-stat. stanford.
edu/jhf/ftp/glmnet. pdf.

Ganu, G., N. Elhadad, and A. Marian. 2009. Beyond
the stars: Improving rating predictions using review
text content. In 12th International Workshop on the
Web and Databases.

Godbole, Namrata, Manjunath Srinivasaiah,

and
Steven Skiena. 2007. Large-scale sentiment anal-
ysis for news and blogs. In ICWSM.

2006.

Goldberg, A. B. and X.J. Zhu.

See-
ing stars when there aren’t many stars: Graph-
based semi-supervised learning for sentiment cat-
egorization.
In HLT-NAACL 2006 Workshop on
Textgraphs: Graph-based Algorithms for Natural
Language Processing.

Hu, M.Q. and B. Liu. 2004. Mining and summarizing
customer reviews. In CIKM, pages 168–177. ACM
New York,USA.

Ifrim, G., G. Bakir, and G. Weikum. 2008. Fast logis-
tic regression for text categorization with variable-
length n-grams.
In KDD, pages 354–362, New
York,USA. ACM.

Kanayama, H. and T. Nasukawa. 2006. Fully auto-
matic lexicon expansion for domain-oriented senti-
ment analysis. In EMNLP, pages 355–363.

Kennedy, A. and D. Inkpen. 2006. Sentiment classi-
ﬁcation of movie reviews using contextual valence
shifters. Computational Intelligence, 22(2):110–
125.

Kim, S.M. and E. Hovy. 2004. Determining the senti-

ment of opinions. In COLING, pages 1367–1373.

Lerman, K., S. Blair-Goldensohn, and R. McDonald.
2009. Sentiment summarization: Evaluating and
learning user preferences. In EACL, pages 514–522.
ACL.

Liu, J.J. and S. Seneff.

2009. Review Sentiment
Scoring via a Parse-and-Paraphrase Paradigm.
In
Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
161–169. ACL.

Luo, Z.Q. and Q. Tseng. 1992. On the convergence of
the coordinate descent method for convex differen-
tiable minimization. Journal of Optimization The-
ory and Applications, 72(1):7–35.

Pang, B. and L. Lee. 2005. Seeing stars: Exploiting
class relationships for sentiment categorization with
respect to rating scales. In ACL, page 124. ACL.

Pang, B. and L. Lee. 2008. Opinion mining and senti-
ment analysis. Foundations and Trends in Informa-
tion Retrieval, 2(1-2):1–135.

Popescu, A.M. and O. Etzioni. 2005a. Extracting
product features and opinions from reviews.
In
HLT/EMNLP, volume 5, pages 339–346. Springer.

Popescu, A.M. and O. Etzioni. 2005b. Extracting
product features and opinions from reviews. In Pro-
ceedings of HLT/EMNLP, volume 5, pages 339–
346. Springer.

Qiu, G., B. Liu, J.J. Bu, and C. Chen. 2009. Ex-
panding Domain Sentiment Lexicon through Dou-
ble Propagation. In IJCAI.

Snyder, B. and R. Barzilay.

pect ranking using the good grief algorithm.
NAACL/HLT, pages 300–307.

2007. Multiple as-
In

Tibshirani, R. 1996. Regression shrinkage and selec-
tion via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society. Series B (Methodological), 58(1):267–288.

Titov, I. and R. McDonald. 2008a. A joint model of
text and aspect ratings for sentiment summarization.
In HLT/ACL, pages 308–316.

Titov, I. and R. McDonald. 2008b. Modeling online
In WWW,

reviews with multi-grain topic models.
pages 111–120. ACM.

Wilson, T., J. Wiebe, and P. Hoffmann. 2005. Recog-
nizing contextual polarity in phrase-level sentiment
analysis. In HLT/ACL, pages 347–354.

Zhai, C. X. and J. Lafferty. 2004. A study of smooth-
ing methods for language models applied to infor-
mation retrieval. ACM Transactions on Information
Systems, 22(2):179–214.

Zou, H. and T. Hastie.

2005. Regularization and
variable selection via the elastic net.
Journal of
the Royal Statistical Society Series B(Statistical
Methodology), 67(2):301–320.

