



















































Cloud Computing for Linguists


Coling 2010: Demonstration Volume, pages 49–52,
Beijing, August 2010

Cloud Computing for Linguists

Dorothee Beermann
Norwegian University of Science and Technology

dorothee.beermann@hf.ntnu.no pavel@ontotext.com

Pavel Mihaylov
Ontotext

Abstract

The system presented is a web applica-
tion designed to aid linguistic research
with data collection and online publish-
ing. It is a service mainly for linguists
and language experts working with lan-
guage description of less-documented and
less-resourced languages. When the cen-
tral concern is in-depth linguistic analy-
sis, maintaining and administering soft-
ware can be a burden. Cloud computing
offers an alternative. At present mainly
used for archiving, we extend linguistic
web applications to allow creation, search
and storage of interlinear annotated texts.
By combining a conceptually appealing
online glosser with an SQL database and
a wiki, we make the online publication of
linguistic data an easy task also for non-
computationally oriented researchers.

1 General description of TypeCraft

TypeCraft (or TC in short) is a multilingual on-
line database of linguistically-annotated natural
language texts, embedded in a collaboration and
information tool. It is an online service which al-
lows users (projects as well as individuals) to cre-
ate, store and retrieve structured data of the kind
mainly used in natural language research. In a
system featuring graded access the user may cre-
ate his own domain, invite others, as well as share
his data with the public. The kernel of TypeCraft
is morphological word level annotation in a rela-
tional database setting, wrapped into a wiki which
is used as a communication and information gath-
ering and sharing tool. TypeCraft allows the im-
port of raw text for storage and annotation and
export of annotated data to MS Word, OpenOf-
fice.org, LATEX and XML. The online system is

complemented by an offline client which is a Java
application offering the same functionality as the
online version. This allows a seamless exchange
of data between the server and the user’s own
computer.

2 Online system internals

The online system is supported by a central server
running the following modules: TypeCraft server
proper, an SQL database, Apache, MediaWiki.
The client side consists of the TypeCraft editor in-
terface and a wiki environment (content produced
by MediaWiki on the server). Users perceive the
wiki and the editor interface as a single TypeCraft
web application.

The TypeCraft server proper is a Java appli-
cation running inside a Java application server.
TypeCraft uses a PostgreSQL database for data
storage. The data mapping between Java ob-
jects and database tables is managed by Hibernate,
so the system is not bound to any specific SQL
database. TypeCraft data can be divided into two
distinct groups: common data, shared between all
annotated tokens and users, such as the word and
sentence level tag sets and an ISO 639-3 speci-
fication, and individual data, by which we mean
specific texts, phrases, words and morphemes. In-
dividual data references common data types. This
for example means that all users of the system
making use of the part of speech tag N share the
reference to a single common tag N.

3 Digital linguistic data

It is well known that generation of linguistic an-
notation of any kind is a time consuming enter-
prise quite independent of the form the primary
data has and the tools chosen for processing this
data. Equally well known are problems connected
to the generation and storage of linguistic data.

49



Standard word processing programs do not func-
tion well as linguistic tools and private computers
are not a safe place to store linguistic resources
(Bird and Simons, 2003). Although it is generally
agreed that linguistic resources should be kept in
a sustainable and portable format, it is less clear
what that really means in practice. For the indi-
vidual researcher it is not easy to decide which
of the available tools serve his purpose best. To
start with, it is often unclear which direction the
research will take, which categories of data are
needed and in which form the material should be
organised and stored. We experience that it is too
time consuming or requires expert knowledge to
convert otherwise useful data into an acceptable
‘resource format’. It is perhaps even more impor-
tant that many tools turn out to be so complex that
the goal of mastering them becomes an issue in
its own right. Researchers working together with
local communities on less-documented languages
experience that linguistic software can be techni-
cally too demanding.
In fact, researchers in all non-computational fields
of linguistics encounter problems similar to those
just described for field-oriented research. Con-
cerned with timely publication, for which lin-
guistic data mainly takes the form of Interlinear
Glosses (IG), the efficiency with which linguistic
data can be created is an important issue. Sev-
eral factors will affect which form linguistic data
management will take, namely the standardisation
of data beyond the field of NLP, non-expert user
IT solutions allowing the efficient creation of lin-
guistic data, and finally, improved availability of
linguistic data for human consumption in research
and publication.

4 Linguistic services and public
linguistic data

Within linguistics the idea of cloud computing is
relatively new: the basic concept is that users of
digital technology no longer need to maintain the
software they use, instead the maintenance of the
technological infrastructure is left to services on-
line. Already a success in commercial applica-
tions, IT services have also become a reality in
research. Within linguistics and specifically lan-
guage documentation, cloud computing facilities

are at present mainly restricted to online archives.
Yet, online services can be extended to provide
tools for databasing and annotation of data. Sci-
entific data exchange is an issue in biochemistry
(Leser, 2009), but as far as we know it has not
been an issue in linguistics. The question is not
so much why we should share data but rather how
and what. The linguistic tool that we would like
to demonstrate gives a concrete answer to these
questions. Table 1 presents a short overview of
the main functionalities of the TypeCraft web ap-
plication.

5 Creation, storage, migration and
representation of IGs in TypeCraft

The TypeCraft web application can be used on-
line at http://www.typecraft.org/. The
TC wiki serves as the central hub of the applica-
tion. The TC database is accessed through My
Texts which displays the user’s repository of IG
collections, called Texts. My Texts is illustrated in
Figure 1. Graded access is one of the design prop-
erties of TypeCraft. My Texts has two sections
consisting of private data (data readable only be
the user), and shared data. Shared data are Texts
owned by groups of TC users. After being as-
signed to a group, the user can decide which data
to share with which of his groups. Data can also
be made public so that anyone on the net can read
and export (but not edit) it.

TypeCraft is like the well known Linguist’s
Toolbox (International, 2010) an interlinear
glosser. However, different from Toolbox, Type-
Craft is a relational database and therefore by na-
ture has many advantages over file-based systems
like Toolbox; this not only concerns data integrity
but also data migration. In addition, databases in
general offer greater flexibility for search and re-
trieval. The other major difference between Tool-
box and TypeCraft is that TypeCraft is an online
service which frees the users from all the prob-
lems arising from maintaining an application on
their own computer. Online databases like Type-
Craft are multiuser systems, i.e. many people can
access the same data at the same time indepen-
dently of where they are located. Users adminis-
ter their own data, either in a private domain or
publicly, and they can make use of other users’

50



Table 1: Overview over TypeCraft Functionalities
Annotation Collaboration Data Migration
sentence tokenisation graded access manual text import
interactive table cells tool internal user commu-

nication
export of annotated
phrases to MS Word,
OpenOffice.org and LATEX

Lazy Annotation Mode user pages for background
information

XML semi-automatic ex-
port to the TC wiki

extensive search function-
ality

sharing of data sets be-
tween user groups

automatic update of data
exported to the TC wiki

Figure 1: My texts in TypeCraft

data. Sharing information and data is an issue of
mutual interest. Using standard wiki functional-
ity, users discuss annotation issues. A TC inter-
nal email function allows users to communicate
directly within the application. User pages func-
tion to personalise information and to create a TC
user community. Social networking within a sci-
entific tool plays a crucial role for the improve-
ment of data validity. Information given by an-
notators, such as native language and professional
background, increase the trust in TC data.
The TC wiki features interactive Google maps (a
MediaWiki extension) which can be used to lo-
cate a language geographically. Isoglosses can be
shown on the map too.

It is not always possible to work online. The
TC online database is complemented by the TC
offline client which can be downloaded from the
project website for free. As a Java application it
runs on multiple platforms, and allows the user
to work offline in an environment familiar to him
from the web application. The offline client offers
the same functionality as the online service. The
user can import data either locally or from the cen-
tral TC database.

6 Glossing with TypeCraft

TypeCraft supports word-to-word glossing on
eight tiers. After having imported a text and run
it through a simple sentence splitter, the user can

51



click on a phrase and enter annotation mode. The
system prompts the user for lazy annotation (in
Toolbox called sentence parsing) which will au-
tomatically insert the annotation of already known
words into the annotation table.
The user is restricted to a set of predefined tags
which can be accessed from the TC wiki navi-
gation bar where they are automatically updated
when the database changes. TypeCraft is a mul-
tilingual database hosting languages from distinct
language families and grammar traditions. It is
therefore crucial to have standards that are ex-
tendible.

The TypeCraft tag set is mapped to the Gen-
eral Ontology for Linguistic Description (GOLD).
GOLD (Farrar and Langendoen, 2003) has been
created to facilitate a more standardised use of
basic grammatical features. As an OWL ontol-
ogy GOLD allows a representation of grammati-
cal features in terms of categories and their rela-
tions. By mapping TC tags to GOLD, the user
can make use of the information in the GOLD
system which allows him to relate tags to more
general grammatical concepts. The TypeCraft–
GOLD mapping allows the user direct access to
standards and necessary background information
to associate glosses with the grammatical cate-
gories they are meant to express. GOLD in many
cases provides definitions of concepts and impor-
tant bibliographic resources related to the use of
the term.

Annotated TC tokens can be exported to Mi-
crosoft Word, OpenOffice.org Writer and LATEX.
Example (1) is exported to LATEX from TypeCraft.
It illustrates locative relativisation in Runyakitara,
a Bantu language spoken in Uganda:

(1)

Omu nju ei abagyenyi baataahiremu ekasya
òmù njù èì àbàgyènyì bààtàhìrèmù èkásyà
Omu
in

n ju
CL9 house

ei
which

a ba gyenyi
IV CL2 visitor

ba a taah ire mu
CL2 PRS.PERF enter PERF LOC

e ka sya
CL9 PST burn

PREP N REL N V V
‘The house in which visitors entered burned’

Next to export to the main text processing sys-
tems, TypeCraft supports XML export which al-
lows the exchange of data with other applications.

7 Conclusion

Interlinear Glosses are the most common form of
linguistic data annotated by humans. In this pa-
per we have presented an online linguistic service
which allows the creation, storage and retrieval of
IGs, thus granting them the status of an indepen-
dent language resource. Reusability of data has
become an issue also in the non-computational
fields of linguistics. Although not sufficiently re-
warded at the moment, already now the creation
and sharing of linguistic data online is an efficient
way for the creation and propagation of annotated
texts in form of Interlinear Glosses. Since the
TypeCraft web application provides off-the-shelf
data for linguistic publications already formatted
for all main text processing systems, data creation
and retrieval with TypeCraft is time efficient. This
makes linguistic work more data oriented and en-
ables reasonable scientific turnover rate.

References
Bird, Steven and Gary Simons. 2003. Seven dimen-

sions of portability for language documentation and
description. Languages, 73(3):557–582.

Farrar, Scott and D. Terence Langendoen. 2003. A
linguistic ontology for the semantic web. GLOT In-
ternational, 7(3):97–100.

International, SIL. 2010. http://www.sil.org/, January.

Leser, Ulf. 2009. Social issues in scientific data ex-
change. Manuscript Humboldt Universität, Berlin.

52


