



















































Argument Optionality in the LinGO Grammar Matrix


Coling 2010: Poster Volume, pages 1068–1076,
Beijing, August 2010

Argument Optionality in the LinGO Grammar Matrix

Safiyyah Saleem
University of Washington

ssaleem@u.washington.edu

Emily M. Bender
University of Washington

ebender@u.washington.edu

Abstract

We present a library of implemented
HPSG analyses for argument optional-
ity based on typological studies of this
phenomenon in the world’s languages,
developed in the context of a grammar
customization system that pairs a cross-
linguistic core grammar with extensions
for non-universal phenomena on the ba-
sis of user input of typological proper-
ties. Our analyses are compatible with
multiple intersecting phenomena, includ-
ing person, number, gender, tense, aspect
and morphological rule formulation. We
achieve 80-100% coverage on test suites
from 10 natural languages.

1 Introduction

The LinGO Grammar Matrix customization sys-
tem (Bender et al., 2002; 2010) is a web-based
tool that creates starter grammars based on users’
input to a questionnaire. The system comprises a
core grammar covering linguistic phenomena that
are posited to be universal (e.g. semantic compo-
sitionality) and a set of libraries providing anal-
yses for phenomena that vary across languages
(e.g. case). These resources are developed in the
context of HPSG (Pollard and Sag, 1994), Mini-
mal Recursion Semantics (Copestake et al., 2005),
and the LKB grammar development environment
(Copestake, 2002).

Previous to the work reported here, the Gram-
mar Matrix customization system did not handle
argument optionality—the possibility of leaving
arguments unexpressed in lieu of overt pronouns.
This phenomenon, also called pro-drop, argument

drop, or null instantiation, is extremely common:
according to Dryer (2008), 79% of the 674 lan-
guages sampled cannot or do not normally use in-
dependent pronouns in subject position. Accord-
ingly, adding it to the customization system im-
proves the system’s ability to handle a large class
of core sentences in many languages.

For example, in Modern Standard Arabic [arb]
(Semitic), overt pronominal subjects are dropped
in non-emphatic contexts. Previously, the system
was able to model only the longer variant of (1).

(1) (hiyya)
(3.FEM.SG)

naama-t
sleep.PAST-3.FEM.SG

She slept. [arb]

Furthermore, there was no way to adequately ac-
count for languages such as Hausa [hau] (Chadic)
which do not allow overt simple pronominal sub-
jects and prohibit overt objects after certain verb
forms. The grammar would predict the opposite
grammaticality for the examples in (2).

(2) (*nı̄)
(*1.SG)

nā-san
1.SG.COMP-know

amsā
answer

I know the answer. [hau]

It might seem that these facts could be han-
dled by adding a rule that allows arguments to
be dropped if an appropriate option is checked in
the customization system. However, the data from
Arabic and Hausa suggest that such an approach
would be insufficient, as languages place different
constraints on the contexts in which overt argu-
ments are required or prohibited.

In §2 we discuss the broad range of typological
variation in argument optionality in the world’s
languages. In §3 we offer a set of HPSG analy-
ses for these patterns. §4 explains how these anal-
yses were incorporated into the Grammar Matrix

1068



customization system and integrated with the ex-
isting libraries. We then present the results of a
three-tiered evaluation of the implemented system
in §5. The results demonstrate that the system is
capable of accurately modeling the attested syn-
tactic argument optionality patterns exhibited by
a typologically diverse group of languages as well
as the currently unattested but logically possible
co-occurrence restrictions on affixes and overt ar-
guments. To our knowledge, this is the first such
system. The paper closes with a brief look at how
the library could be extended even further to cap-
ture the range of semantic distinctions.

2 Typological Patterns

The typological literature shows that argument
optionality is extremely common: Dryer (2008)
found that of 674 geographically and genetically
diverse languages, only 141 normally or obli-
gatorily used independent pronominal subjects.
Dryer distinguishes 4 categories in the remaining
533 languages, corresponding to how information
about the person, number, and gender (PNG) of
the subject is encoded: affixation on the verb, cl-
itics on variable hosts, no encoding, or a mixed
strategy. In addition, there are other dimensions
in which languages vary, e.g., constraints on con-
texts in which dropping is done (see (1)–(2)).

Although we were unable to find a similar com-
prehensive survey of unexpressed objects, there
is evidence to suggest that it too may be very
widespread. In particular, lexically-licensed ob-
ject dropping seems to be very common. Even En-
glish, which has a very strong preference for overt
subjects, can be analyzed as licensing lexically-
based object dropping (Fillmore, 1986). As with
subject dropping, we also found a number of dif-
ferent co-occurrence restrictions on the presence
of verbal affixes and overt objects. Some lan-
guages always encode the PNG of an object on the
verb, others optionally do so if an overt object is
present and obligatorily do so if one is not, while
still others do not encode this information at all.

Drawing on work by Dryer and others, Table 1
summarizes the 6 major dimensions along which
the rules licensing argument dropping differ. The
first constraint is syntactic context. Most lan-
guages that license argument dropping do so re-

gardless of tense/aspect, mood, or person. Finnish
[fin] and Hebrew [heb] are two notable exceptions
(Vainikka and Levy, 1999).

The second constraint, lexically-based licens-
ing, is most commonly found in object dropping.
For example, while English usually prohibits ar-
gument dropping, it arguably licenses it with
verbs such as ‘found out’, ‘agree’, and ‘promise’
(Fillmore, 1986). Lexically-based subject drop
is found in Tamil [tam], which generally licenses
subject dropping aside from some weather related
verbs (Asher, 1985).

The third constraint, noun phrase type, captures
the difference between a language such as Hausa
which generally prohibits independent pronouns
from appearing as subjects and other languages,
which allow pronouns in subject position (possi-
bly with emphatic interpretations).

The fourth constraint concerns the position of
PNG markers. Of the languages with subject PNG
markers and subject dropping, many encode sub-
ject PNG as a verbal affix. This pattern is ex-
hibited by such geographically and genetically di-
verse languages as Spanish [spa], Arabic [arb],
West Greenlandic [kal], Tamil [tam], and Nkore-
Kiga [nyn]. Other languages such as Chemehuevi
[ute], Polish [pol], and Warlpiri [wbp] make use
of a clitic which can attach to different types of
hosts (Dryer, 2008).

The final two constraints concern co-
occurrence restrictions between PNG markers
and overt objects. In some Bantu languages such
as Nkore-Kiga, a verbal affix is not used unless
the object precedes the verb or is pronominal.
Object markers are not used when a full NP
follows the verb (Taylor, 1985). In written French
[fra], verbal affixes1 are required if an object is
dropped and not permitted if it is overt. In Arabic,
for most transitive verbs, an object marker is
required if an object is dropped and is optional
if it is present. Hausa exhibits a more complex
pattern: for tenses in which the verbal affix
denoting PNG is morphologically separable from
the tense marker, the PNG affix is optional if an
overt noun phrase is present and required if it is
not (Newman, 2000).

1See (Miller and Sag, 1997) for convincing arguments
that so-called ‘clitics’ in French are actually affixes.

1069



Constraint (GF) Possible Values
Syntactic context (SUBJ) { All, select } tenses/aspects/moods/persons
Lexically-based (SUBJ, OBJ) { All, select } verbs
Noun phrase type (SUBJ, OBJ) Independent pronouns { allowed, prohibited }
Placement of PNG marker (SUBJ) { Verb, variable host }
PNG marking w/ dropped argument (OBJ) { Required, optional, not permitted }
PNG marking w/ overt argument (OBJ) { Required, optional, not permitted }

Table 1: Typological variation in licensing argument dropping

Noting these differences led us to posit that
when an argument is dropped, there are three pos-
sibilities. A verbal affix can be: not permitted,
optional, or required. The same three possibilities
exist for overt objects as well. Combining what
happens when an argument is dropped with what
happens when it is present, gives us nine logically
possible co-occurrence patterns.

Our review of the typological literature has
shown that languages place different constraints
on argument dropping. These constraints can
be lexical, syntactic, or related to affixation and
affix/overt-argument co-occurrence restrictions.

3 Analysis

This section presents HPSG analyses modeling
the six dimensions of variation described in §2.

HPSG models natural language by positing lex-
ical entries, lexical rules, and phrase structure
rules, all described in terms of feature struc-
tures. A central idea, inspired by earlier work
in Categorial Grammar (Ajdukiewicz, 1935; Bar-
Hillel, 1953), is the notion of valence features.
These list-valued features (including SUBJ and
COMPS) contain information about the dependents
required by a head. The valence lists are projected
up the tree within the domain of each head, but
shortened as the dependents are realized. A sen-
tence is thus a verbal projection with empty SUBJ
and COMPS lists.

In this context, argument dropping is the short-
ening of a valence list without the overt realiza-
tion of the argument. Formally, this can be ac-
complished in at least three different ways: (1) In
the mapping of arguments from the ARG-ST (ar-
gument structure) feature to the valence lists, one
or more arguments can be suppressed, (2) lexical
rules can operate on the valence lists, shortening
them, or (3) unary (non-branching) phrase struc-
ture rules can cancel off valence elements. In this

work, we take the third approach, as we find it
affords us the most flexibility to deal with varia-
tions across languages in constraints on argument
optionality, while promoting similarity of analy-
ses across languages.

We control the applicability of the unary-
branching rules with the boolean feature OPT,
marked on elements of valence lists.2 For lan-
guages which allow subject/object dropping, we
instantiate new phrase structure rules: head-opt-
subj-phrase and/or head-opt-comp-phrase. These
rules allow the head verb to satisfy a valence re-
quirement without combining with another ex-
pression. To undergo these rules, the head daugh-
ter (the verb) must specify that the argument that
is to be dropped is compatible with [OPT +]. This
is sufficient to account for many languages. How-
ever, to ensure that languages which have lexical,
syntactic context, and affix co-occurrence restric-
tions do not overgenerate, further additions to the
grammar are necessary.

For lexical and affix-co-occurrence restrictions,
we prevent overgeneration by manipulating the
OPT feature. In languages which only license
argument dropping for certain lexical items, we
force those verbs which do not allow argument
dropping to have arguments that are constrained
to be [OPT −]. This prevents them from under-
going the subject/object dropping rules. Verbs
are then classified into four different types based
on whether or not they allow subject and/or ob-
ject dropping. Individual lexical items instantiate
these types. For those verbs which do not allow
a particular argument to be dropped, the only way
to satisfy the valence requirement is to combine
with an overt argument.

2This feature was provided by the core Matrix but was not
previously used in the customization system. To our knowl-
edge it is not commonly used within HPSG analyses aside
from in grammars that were derived from the Matrix.

1070



Dropped/Overt Argument Affix Overt Arg Rule No-Marker-Rule Marker-Rule Transitive Verb Lex
required/required underspecified none underspecified needs lex rule
optional/optional underspecified none underspecified underspecified
not permitted/not permitted underspecified none none underspecified
required/optional OPT − OPT − underspecified needs lex rule
optional/not permitted OPT − none OPT + underspecified
not permitted/required OPT − OPT + OPT − needs lex rule
required/not permitted OPT − OPT − OPT + needs lex rule
optional/required OPT − OPT + underspecified needs lex rule
not permitted/optional OPT − none OPT − underspecified

Table 2: Constraints associated with logically possible affix co-occurrence

Languages with complex affix co-occurrence
restrictions are modeled by manipulating the OPT
feature in a different way: Constraints are placed
on lexical and phrase structure rules, as well as
on lexical types. In particular, we constrain the
rules which combine verbs with overt arguments
to check that that argument position is compati-
ble with [OPT −]. This allows the lexical rules
attaching the affixes to constrain the optionality
of the corresponding argument position. In some
of the nine logical possibilities, enforcing these
constraints requires sending the verb through “no-
marker” lexical rules so that constraints associ-
ated with markerless verbs can be enforced. Ta-
ble 2 summarizes the constraints on the OPT fea-
ture on lexical and phrase structure rules, as well
as the constraints on lexical types. The first col-
umn of this table lists the nine logically possible
combinations described in §2. For example, the
row labeled “required/required” gives the analysis
for a language like West Greenlandic, which al-
lows object dropping and always requires an ob-
ject marker on the verb regardless of whether or
not an overt object is present. In such a language,
neither the lexical rules nor the overt-complement
phrase structure rule constrain OPT, but the tran-
sitive verb lex type is required to undergo some
object marking lexical rule.

For licensing that is based on syntactic context
(subject dropping only) such as the Finnish and
Hebrew examples presented in §2, we place con-
straints on the daughter of the unary subject drop
rule which restrict its application to the right con-
texts. For example, to account for the argument
optionality pattern present in Finnish, we con-
strain the head-opt-subj-phrase rule to require that
the item on the head daughter’s SUBJ list be spec-





head-opt-subj
subj 〈 〉
obj 〈 〉









head-comp
subj 〈 NP[3sg.m] 〉
obj 〈 〉









no-marker-lex-rule
subj 〈 NP[3sg.m] 〉
obj 〈 NP[OPT −] 〉









3sgm-subj-lex-rule
subj 〈 NP[3sg.m] 〉
obj 〈 NP 〉









trans-verb-lex
subj 〈 NP 〉
obj 〈 NP 〉





ishtaraa

acc-lex-rule

noun-lex

kitaab-an

Figure 1: Parse structure for (3)
ified as non-third-person ([PER non-third]). Verbs
not meeting this constraint are only allowed to
empty their SUBJ lists by combining with an overt
subject via the standard, binary head-subj-phrase
rule. We have not seen a language which licenses
subject dropping in syntactic contexts which do
not form a natural class according to our feature
system. However, our analysis easily lends it-
self to modeling this type of pattern if it exists by
creating multiple different subtypes of the subject
drop rule.

We close this section by illustrating our analysis
with an example from Arabic. The sentence in (3)
involves subject drop and an overt object. Since
the object is overt, the verb bears only marking of
subject PNG. The grammar that our system gener-
ates for Arabic assigns (3) the structure sketched
in Figure 1.

(3) ishtaraa
3ms.buy.past

kitaab-an
book-acc

He bought a book

1071



4 Customized Grammar Creation

Before the addition of the argument optionality
library, the phenomena covered in the Grammar
Matrix customization system included word order,
person, number, gender, case, tense/aspect, coor-
dination, matrix yes-no questions, and sentential
negation. The user is also allowed to specify lex-
ical items and the morphological rules associated
with each of them. Each of the phenomena corre-
spond to a page of the questionnaire.

As the user answers questions, the choices are
saved in a ‘choices’ file. The questionnaire is dy-
namic and the answers contained in the ‘choices’
file affect the types of features that the user is
able to choose from on subsequent pages. For
example, if the user describes the language as
having 1st, 2nd, and 3rd persons on the Person
page, then on the lexicon page, the user can cre-
ate separate noun types for each person. Once
the ‘choices’ file contains responses to required
sections, the user is able to create the customized
starter grammar by clicking on the ‘create gram-
mar’ button. This invokes the customization script
which uses the responses contained in the file to
create a grammar that is compatible with the LKB
grammar development environment.

Our implementation entailed additions to two
major components of the system: the web-based
questionnaire and the customization script. To de-
termine which, if any, of the analyses presented
in §3 should be included in the customized gram-
mar, we needed to elicit the type of argument op-
tionality pattern the language exhibited. Thus, we
added an Argument Optionality page to the ques-
tionnaire. The page is divided into two sections—
one for subject dropping and one for object drop-
ping. In the section on subject dropping, the user
is asked whether subject dropping exists and if
so, whether it is context-dependent. For context-
dependent subject dropping, the user is allowed
to specify the syntactic contexts in which subject
dropping is licensed by choosing from a multi-
select list of features. There is the option to create
multiple contexts. The features that appear in the
list are drawn from those that the user chose on
previous pages in the questionnaire. The user is
also directed to select whether subject dropping

is lexically-based, whether affixes are required,
optional or not permitted with overt arguments
and whether affixes are required, optional or not
permitted with dropped arguments. The ques-
tions presented in the object dropping section are
identical to those in the subject dropping section
with the exception that there is no question about
context-dependent object dropping.

Since some of the constraints must be placed on
individual lexical items and morphological rules,
the page also includes instructions to the user on
additional steps that need to be taken when com-
pleting the Lexicon page. For example, when de-
scribing a language where affixes are optional if
an argument is dropped and not permitted if an
overt argument is present, users are instructed to
select ‘overt-arg-not-permitted’ for those affixes
on the Lexicon page.

The changes to the customization script in-
cluded adding each of the analyses described in
§3 along with a mechanism for determining which
of the analyses should be included in the gram-
mar depending on the choices related to argu-
ment optionality, lexical items, and morphological
rules contained in the ‘choices’ file. The result-
ing customized grammars include the rules and
constraints necessary to allow and prohibit strings
that do not contain overt arguments based upon
the facts of a particular language as described by
the user in the questionnaire.

5 Evaluation

The evaluation was conducted in a three stage pro-
cess. Each stage involves constructing a set of test
suites containing grammatical and ungrammatical
strings representing the argument optionality pat-
tern of a set of languages, generating grammars
for the languages by answering the Grammar Ma-
trix questionnaire, using the grammars to parse the
sentences in the test suite, and hand-verifying the
results. The three stages differed in the nature of
the languages, the method by which the languages
were selected, and the breadth of the customized
grammars. The test suites are small, as they are
specifically targeted at the phenomenon of argu-
ment optionality, but representative in the sense
that they cover the space of relevant contrasts in
each language.

1072



5.1 Set 1: Pseudo-Languages
In the first stage, we tested the analyses presented
in §3 by creating and then using the Grammar Ma-
trix customization system to generate grammars
for 38 pseudo-languages (sets of strings with as-
sociated grammaticality assignments) which col-
lectively exhaustively exhibit each of the lexical,
syntactic context or affix co-occurrence restric-
tion patterns described in Table 1 (§2). All of
the possible values identified for these given pat-
terns are present in at least one language, as well
as cross-classifications of different dimensions of
constraints where appropriate. For example, there
are pseudo-languages which share the property
of always requiring object markers but differ in
that one has lexically licensed object dropping and
the other general object dropping. These pseudo-
languages test the argument optionality analyses
in isolation in that argument optionality is not con-
strained by other phenomena such as word order.

The customized grammars were able to accu-
rately parse grammatical strings and rule out un-
grammatical ones. Coverage on this set of 38
pseudo-languages was 100% with 0% overgener-
ation and no spurious ambiguity, thus validating
the functioning of our analyses across the known
typological space.

5.2 Set 2: Illustrative Languages
Next, we tested the system’s performance in mod-
eling part of a natural language. For this stage
we deliberately chose several languages which ex-
emplified interesting licensing and co-occurrence
restriction patterns, including some which were
considered during the development of the system.
Each test suite included examples of grammatical
and ungrammatical strings that were constructed
based on the descriptions of the language given
in the following sources: Suleiman 1990 (Ara-
bic), Sulkala and Merja 1992 (Finnish), Newman
2000 (Hausa), and Asher 1985 (Tamil). As the
test suites were designed to evaluate argument op-
tionality, we restricted the test items to this phe-
nomenon only. Other syntactic phenomena were
only included if they affected the argument op-
tionality pattern in the language. For example,
gender distinctions were considered only for lan-
guages in which this was relevant to affix mark-

ing. A brief description of the argument optional-
ity patterns found in these languages follows.

Arabic [arb] (Semitic) Pronominal subjects
and objects are generally dropped. Subject affixes
are always required whether or not an overt noun
phrases is present. Affixes marking object per-
son, number, and gender are required for strictly
transitive verbs when an overt noun phrase is not
present. Other transitive verbs appear to allow ob-
ject drop without the object affix.

Finnish [fin] (Uralic) First and second person
subjects are freely dropped and markers appear
on the verb whether or not an overt noun phrase
is present. Third person subjects are not allowed
to be dropped with a referential interpretation;
however, third person pronouns are obligatorily
dropped for what Sulkala and Merja (1992) de-
scribe as a generic impersonal meaning. This de-
scription fits into what some linguists refer to as
the fourth person—a non-referential impersonal
syntactic/semantic distinction that is often real-
ized in English as the impersonal pronoun one.
Since Finnish shows evidence of further syntac-
tic distinctions between generic and referential
use of the third person marker, we have analyzed
this marker as actually corresponding to two ho-
mophonous morphemes. One requires an overt
subject and the other requires a dropped subject.
There are no verbal affixes for PNG of the object.

Hausa [hau] (Chadic) Hausa generally re-
quires pronominal subjects to be dropped. Simple,
unmodified, uncoordinated independent pronouns
are ungrammatical in subject position. Subject
PNG is marked in a person aspect complex (PAC)
along with tense and aspect information. The
PAC precedes the lexical verb. When the PNG
marker is morphologically segmentable from the
tense/aspect, the PNG marker can be omitted if an
overt noun phrase is present and is required if the
noun phrase is not present. PNG is not marked for
objects; however the verb form changes depend-
ing on whether a full noun phrase, pronoun, or no
object immediately follows the verb.

Tamil [tam] (Dravidian) Subjects and objects
can be freely dropped aside from a special class
of weather verbs requiring overt subjects. Subject

1073



PNG markers are always required whether a sub-
ject is overt or not. PNG is not marked for objects.

Lg. Items Gram- Ungram- Coverage/
matical matical Over-

generation (%)
Arabic 13 10 3 90/0
Finnish 11 9 3 100/0
Hausa 20 8 12 100/0
Tamil 7 5 2 100/0

Table 3: Illustrative Languages Results

As shown in Table 3 we achieved 100% cov-
erage over every test suite in this set except for
Arabic. In addition, there was no overgeneration
or spurious ambiguity. One Arabic item did not
parse because the current implementation of our
analyses does not elegantly account for obligatory
object marking (with object drop) on some tran-
sitive verbs and optional object marking on oth-
ers. We could have customized a grammar that
included another, parallel set of lexical rules that
would account for this item. Improvements to this
aspect of the argument optionality library depend
on upgrades to the morphotactic system.

5.3 Set 3: Held-out Languages
Finally, we tested a set of ‘held out’ languages
not considered during development and chosen for
their geographic and genetic diversity without re-
gard for argument dropping patterns. We had pre-
viously created the non-argument optionality por-
tions of these test suites and choices files to test
the coverage of other libraries in the customiza-
tion system and thus they include a wider variety
of linguistic phenomena than Sets 1 or 2. As be-
fore, the construction and grammaticality judge-
ments of the strings were based on descriptive
grammars: Chirikba 2003 (Abkhaz), Press 1979
(Chemehuevi), Smirnova 1982 and Newman 2000
(Hausa), Pensalfini 2003 (Jingulu), Asher and
Kumari 1997 (Malayalam), Taylor 1985 (Nkore-
Kiga), and Fortescue 2003 (W. Greenlandic).

Due to space constraints, we provide only a
summary of the argument optionality patterns in
these languages (Table 4). All the languages li-
censed both subject and object dropping and in
two of the six, dropping pronominal arguments
was strongly preferred. Three languages have
word order constraints on how argument option-

ality is realized: Abkhaz restricts the appearance
of one of the third person affixes depending on
verb-object order. Nkore-Kiga requires and pro-
hibits the appearance of an object marker depend-
ing on where the overt object occurs. Chemehuevi
requires that the clitic which is used to mark the
subject appear in second position. It is also the
only language that has lexical constraints on ob-
ject dropping. Malayalam was the only language
which did not mark person, number, and gender
information for the subject.

The customized grammars were able to account
for the majority of the patterns demonstrated in
these languages (Table 5). We achieved 100%
coverage on four languages with zero (Jingulu,
Malayalam, West Greenlandic) or moderate (Abk-
haz) overgeneration. The main source of errors
found in the results is the handling of word or-
der constraints: The grammars were unable to li-
cense (Chemehuevi) or restrict (Nkore-Kiga and
Abkhaz) argument optionality based on the verb’s
and argument’s positions in the sentence. Once
the Grammar Matrix word order library has been
improved and is able to account for second po-
sition clitics and fine-grained head-complement
word order constraints, it will be a simple pro-
cess to add the new feature(s) to existing lexical
rules to account for these patterns. Incorporating
the new functionality will not require any major
changes to the argument optionality library aside
from modifying the questionnaire to elicit the new
information from the user.

Language Items Gram- Un- Coverage/
mat- gram- Overgen-
ical matical eration (%)

Abkhaz 10 6 4 100/10
Chemehuevi 8 6 2 83.3/0
Jingulu 9 6 3 100/0
Malayalam 4 4 0 100/0
Nkore-Kiga 10 4 6 100/83.3
W. Greenlandic 5 3 2 100/0

Table 5: Held-out Language Results

In addition, we verified that the addition of ar-
gument optionality didn’t reduce coverage on any
other portion of these testsuites. This indicates
that the new argument optionality library is inter-
acting properly with existing libraries. Additional
interactions will be tested as we add new libraries
to the customization system.

1074



Object Dropping Subject Dropping Word Order Constraints Lexical Constraints
Abkhaz opt opt yes none
Chemehuevi opt opt yes yes
Jingulu opt opt none none
Malayalam opt opt no none
Nkore-Kiga pref pref yes none
W. Greenlandic pref pref none none

Table 4: Existence of and constraints on argument optionality in six languages

6 Related Work

Subject dropping has been studied extensively
within theoretical linguistics under many differ-
ent frameworks (Rizzi, 1986; Bresnan, 2001;
Ackema et al., 2006; Ginzburg and Sag, 2000).
Within the context of HPSG, our analysis is simi-
lar to the one in the Grammar Matrix-derived Por-
tuguese grammar (Branco and Costa, 2008) and to
Müller’s (2009) treatment of subject dropping in
Maltese. These analyses differ from Ginzburg and
Sag’s (2000) HPSG analysis which uses language
specific variations on the Argument Realization
Principle to control whether the subject/object is
placed onto the COMPS and/or SUBJ lists.

Language specific analyses have been imple-
mented in deep, broad-coverage grammars for
languages such as Japanese (Masuichi et al.
(2003), Siegel and Bender (2002)) and Portuguese
(Branco and Costa (2008)). Within the ParGram
project (Butt et al., 2002), Kim et al. (2003) were
able to directly port the argument optionality re-
lated rules from a Japanese grammar to Korean.
However, to our knowledge, no one has imple-
mented an analysis that has been applied to a large
number of typologically, geographically, and ge-
netically diverse languages.

7 Conclusion

Our current work has focused on modeling the
variation in syntactic constraints on the licens-
ing and restriction of argument dropping. To our
knowledge, this is the first analysis of argument
optionality that combines typological breadth
with precision analyses that have been imple-
mented and tested on a number of geographically
and genetically diverse languages. Although we
have tried to account for the patterns found in the
typological literature, there may be variants that
we are unaware of. We hope to learn of more pat-
terns as the Grammar Matrix customization sys-

tem is applied to an ever wider set languages.
While the current work focuses on syntactic

variation, we intend to expand the argument op-
tionality library to include semantic distinctions
as well. A likely starting point would be the pro-
posal given by Bender and Goss-Grubbs (2008)
who present a way to model the discourse status
(Prince, 1981) of an NP taking into account the
differences between definite and indefinite null in-
stantiation described by Fillmore (1986). In addi-
tion, ongoing work to improve the word order li-
brary may eventually allow us to more accurately
model word-order based constraints.

Acknowledgments

This material is based upon work supported by
the National Science Foundation under Grant No.
0644097. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions
or recommendations expressed in this material are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Science Foundation.

References
Ackema, Peter, Patrick Brandt, Maaike Schoorlemmer,

and Fred Weerman, editors. 2006. Arguments and
Agreement. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Ajdukiewicz, Kazimierz. 1935. Die syntaktische kon-
nexität. Studia Philosophica, 1:1–27.

Asher, R.E. and T.C. Kumari. 1997. Malayalam.
Routledge, NY.

Asher, R.E. 1985. Tamil. Croom Helm, London.

Bar-Hillel, Yehoshua. 1953. A quasi-arithmetical no-
tation for syntactic description. Language, 29:47–
58.

Bender, Emily M. and David Goss-Grubbs. 2008. Se-
mantic representations of syntactically marked dis-
course status in crosslinguistic perspective. In Proc.
2008 Conference on Semantics in Text Processing,
pages 17–29.

1075



Bender, Emily M., Dan Flickinger, and Stephan
Oepen. 2002. The grammar matrix: An open-
source starter-kit for the rapid development of cross-
linguistically consistent broad-coverage precision
grammars. In Proc. Workshop on Grammar Engi-
neering and Evaluation at COLING 2002, pages 8–
14.

Bender, Emily M., Scott Drellishak, Antske Fokkens,
Michael Wayne Goodman, Daniel P. Mills, Laurie
Poulson, and Safiyyah Saleem. 2010. Grammar
prototyping and testing with the LinGO Grammar
Matrix customization system. In Proc. ACL 2010
Software Demonstrations.

Branco, António and Francisco Costa. 2008. A com-
putational grammar for deep linguistic processing of
Portuguese: LXGram, version a.4.1. Technical re-
port, University of Lisbon, Dept. of Informatics.

Bresnan, Joan. 2001. Lexical Functional Syntax.
Blackwell, Boston.

Butt, Miriam, Helge Dyvik, Tracy Holloway King, Hi-
roshi Masuichi, and Christian Rohrer. 2002. The
parallel grammar project. In Proc. Workshop on
Grammar Engineering and Evaluation at COLING
2002, pages 1–7.

Chirikba, Viachesiav. 2003. Abkhaz. LINCOM, Mu-
nich.

Copestake, Ann, Dan Flickinger, Carl Pollard, and
Ivan A. Sag. 2005. Minimal recursion semantics:
An introduction. Research on Language & Compu-
tation, 3(4):281–332.

Copestake, Ann. 2002. Implementing Typed Feature
Structure Grammars. CSLI, Stanford.

Dryer, Matthew. 2008. Expression of proniminal
subjects. In Haspelmath, Martin, Matthew Dryer,
David Gil, and Bernard Comrie, editors, The World
Atlas of Language Structures Online, chapter 101.
Max Planck Digital Library.

Fillmore, Charles. 1986. Pragmatically controlled
zero anaphora. In Proc. 12th annual meeting of the
Berkeley Linguistics Society, pages 95–107.

Fortescue, Michael. 2003. West Greenlandic. Croom
Helm, London.

Ginzburg, Johnathan and Ivan Sag. 2000. Interroga-
tive Investigations. CSLI, Stanford.

Kim, Roger, Mary Dalrymple, Ronald M. Kaplan,
Tracy Holloway King, Hiroshi Masuichi, and
Tomoko Ohkuma. 2003. Multilingual grammar de-
velopment via grammar porting. In ESSLLI 2003
Workshop on Ideas and Strategies for Multilingual
Grammar Development, pages 49–56.

Masuichi, Hiroshi, Tomoko Ohkuma, Hiroki
Yoshimura, and Yasunari Harada. 2003. Japanese
parser on the basis of the lexical-functional gram-
mar formalism and its evaluation. In Dong Hong Ji,
Kim Teng Lua, editor, Proc. PACLIC17, pages
298–309.

Miller, Philip H. and Ivan A. Sag. 1997. French clitic
movement without clitics or movement. Natural
Language & Linguistic Theory, 15(3):573–639.

Müller, Stefan. 2009. Towards an HPSG analysis of
Maltese. In et al, Bernard Comrie, editor, Introduc-
ing Maltese linguistics. Papers from the 1st Inter-
national Conference on Maltese Linguistics, pages
83–112. Benjamins, Amsterdam.

Newman, Paul. 2000. The Hausa Language: An ency-
clopedic reference grammar. Yale University Press,
New Haven.

Pensalfini, Rob. 2003. A Grammar of Jingulu: An
Aboriginal language of the Northern Territory. Pa-
cific Linguistics, Canberra.

Pollard, Carl and Ivan A. Sag. 1994. Head-Driven
Phrase Structure Grammar. The University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Press, Margaret. 1979. Chemehuevi: A grammar and
lexicon. University of California Press, Berkeley.

Prince, Ellen. 1981. Toward a taxonomy of given-new
information. In Cole, P., editor, Radical Pragmat-
ics, pages 223–255. Academic Press, NY.

Rizzi, Luigi. 1986. Null objects in Italian and the the-
ory of pro. Linguistic Inquiry, 17(3):501–557.

Siegel, Melanie and Emily M. Bender. 2002. Ef-
ficient deep processing of Japanese. In Proc. 3rd
Workshop on Asian Language Resources and Inter-
national Standardization at COLING 2002.

Smirnova, Mirra A. 1982. The Hausa Language: A
Descriptive Grammar. Routledge, Boston.

Suleiman, Saleh M. 1990. The semantic functions of
object deletion in classical arabic. Language Sci-
ences, 12(2-3):255 – 266.

Sulkala, Helena and Karjalaninen Merja. 1992.
Finnish. Routledge, NY.

Taylor, Charles. 1985. Nkore-Kiga. Croom Helm,
London.

Vainikka, Anne and Yonata Levy. 1999. Empty sub-
jects in Finnish and Hebrew. Natural Language and
Linguistic Theory, 17:613–671.

1076


