Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Computational Linguistics (Coling 2010), pages 215–222,

Beijing, August 2010

215

An ontology-driven system for detecting global health events
John McCrae
Nigel Collier

Reiko Matsuda Goodwin

National Inst. Informatics

collier@nii.ac.jp

Fordham University

reikogoodwin@gmail.com

Bielefeld University

johnmccrae@gmail.com

Son Doan

Vanderbilt University

son.doan@vanderbilt.edu

Asanee Kawtrakul
Kasetart University

ak@ku.ac.th

Abstract

Ai Kawazoe
Tsuda College

zoeai@tsuda.ac.jp

Koichi Takeuchi

Okayama University

koichi@cs.okayama-u.ac.jp

Mike Conway

University of Pittsburgh

conwaym@pitt.edu

Dinh Dien

VietNam National University

ddien66@yahoo.com

Text mining for global health surveillance
is an emerging technology that is gaining
increased attention from public health or-
ganisations and governments. The lack
of multilingual resources such as Word-
Nets speciﬁcally targeted at this task have
so far been a major bottleneck. This pa-
per reports on a major upgrade to the
BioCaster Web monitoring system and
its freely available multilingual ontology;
improving its original design and extend-
ing its coverage of diseases from 70 to 336
in 12 languages.
1 Introduction
The number of countries who can sustain teams
of experts for global monitoring of human/animal
health is limited by scarce national budgets.
Whilst some countries have advanced sensor net-
works, the world remains at risk from the health
impacts of infectious diseases and environmen-
tal accidents. As seen by the recent A(H5N1),
A(H1N1) and SARS outbreaks, a problem in one
part of the world can be rapidly exported, leading
to global hardship.

The World Health Organization (WHO) esti-
mates that in the future, between 2 to 7.4 mil-
lion people could be at risk worldwide from a
highly contageous avian ﬂu virus that spreads
rapidly through the international air travel net-
work (WHO, 2005).
Pandemics of novel
pathogens have the capacity to overwhelm health-
care systems, leading to widespread morbidity,

mortality and socio-economic disruption (Cox
et al., 2003). Furthermore, outbreaks of live-
stock diseases, such as foot-and-mouth disease or
equine inﬂuenza can have a devastating impact on
industry, commerce and human health (Blake et
al., 2003). The challenge is to enhance vigilance
and control the emergence of outbreaks. Whilst
human analysis remains essential to spot complex
relationships, automated analysis has a key role
to play in ﬁltering the vast volume of data in real
time and highlighting unusual trends using reli-
able predictor indicators.

BioCaster (http://born.nii.ac.jp) (Collier et al.,
2008) is a Web 2.0 monitoring station for the early
detection of infectious disease events. The sys-
tem exploits a high-throughput semantic process-
ing pipeline, converting unstructured news texts
to structured records, alerting events based on
time-series analysis and then sharing this informa-
tion with users via geolocating maps (Fig. 1(a)),
graphs (Fig. 1(b)) and alerts. Underlying the sys-
tem is a publicly available multilingual applica-
tion ontology. Launched in 2006 (Collier et al.,
2006) the BioCaster Ontology (BCO) has been
downloaded by over 70 academic and industrial
groups worldwide. This paper reports on a ma-
jor upgrade to the system and the ontology - ex-
panding the number of languages from 6 to 12,
redeﬁning key relations and extending coverage in
the number of diseases from 70 to 336, including
many veterinary diseases.

216

(a) Bio-geographic map

(b) Trend graph analyser

(c) BioCaster processes

Figure 1: (a)BioCaster’s bio-geographic map for a suspected foot-and-mouth outbreak on 22nd March,
2010 with links to the multilingual ontology, NCBI, HighWire, GoPubMed and Google Scholar; (b)
The trends analyser showing aggregated document counts for health events in China between 13nd
March and 12th April, 2010; (c) The system’s pipeline of processes with example semantic markup.

217

2 Background

As the world becomes more interconnected and
urbanized and animal production becomes in-
creasingly intensive, the speed with which epi-
demics spread becomes faster, adding to pressure
on biomedical experts and governments to make
quick decisions. Traditional validation methods
such as ﬁeld investigations or laboratory analysis
are the mainstay of public health but can require
days or weeks to issue reports. The World Wide
Web with its economical and real time delivery of
information represents a new modality in health
surveillance (Wagner and Johnson, 2006) and has
been shown to be an effective source by the World
Health Organization (WHO) when Public Health
Canada’s GPHIN system detected the SARS out-
break in southern China from news reports dur-
ing November 2002. The recent A(H1N1) ‘swine
ﬂu’ pandemic highlighted the trend towards agen-
cies using unvalidated sources. The technologi-
cal basis for such systems can be found in sta-
tistical classiﬁcation approaches and light weight
ontological reasoning. For example, Google Flu
Trends (Ginsberg et al., 2009) is a system that de-
pends almost entirely on automatic statistical clas-
siﬁcation of user queries; MedISys-PULS (Yan-
garber et al., 2008), HealthMap (Freifeld et al.,
2008) and BioCaster use a mixture of statisti-
cal and ontological classiﬁcation; and GPHIN
(Mawudeku and Blench, 2006) and Argus (Wil-
son, 2007) rely on a mixture of ontological classi-
ﬁcation and manual analysis.

Compared to other similar systems BioCaster
is characterized by its richly featured and pub-
licly downloadable ontology and emphasizes crit-
ical evaluation of its text mining modules. Em-
pirical results have included: topic classiﬁcation,
named entity recognition, formal concept anal-
In the absence of
ysis and event recognition.
a community gold standard,
task performance
was assessed on the best available ‘silver’ stan-
dard - the ProMED-mail network (Madoff and
Woodall, 2005), achieving F-score of 0.63 on 14
disease-country pairs over a 365-day period (Col-
lier, 2010).

Despite initial skepticism within the public
health community, health surveillance systems

based on NLP-supported human analysis of me-
dia reports are becoming ﬁrmly established in
Europe, North America and Japan as sources of
health information available to governments and
the public (Hartley et al., 2010). Whilst there is no
substitute for trained human analysts, automated
ﬁltering has helped experts save time by allow-
ing them to sift quickly through massive volumes
of media data. It has also enabled them to sup-
plement traditional sources with a broader base of
information.

In comparison with other areas of biomedical
NLP such as the clinical and genetics’ domains, a
relative lack of building block resources may have
hindered the wider participation of NLP groups
in public health applications. It is hoped that the
provision of common resources like the BCO can
help encourage further development and bench-
marking.

3 Method

BioCaster performs analysis of over 9000 news ar-
ticles per day using the NPACI Rocks cluster mid-
dleware (http://www.rockcsclusters.org) on a plat-
form of 48 3.0GHz Xeon cores. Data is ingested
24/7 into a semantic processing pipeline in a short
1 hour cycle from over 1700 public domain RSS
feeds such as Google news, the European Media
Monitor and ProMED-mail. Since 2009, news has
also being gathered under contract from a com-
mercial news aggregation company, providing ac-
cess to over 80,000 sources across the world’s lan-
guages.

The new 2010 version of BioCaster uses ma-
chine translation into English (eleven languages)
to source news stories related to currently oc-
curring infectious and environmental disease out-
breaks in humans, animals and plants.

Access to the site is freely available but lo-
gin registration applies to some functions such as
email alerts. Processing is totally automatic, but
we have the potential within the login system to
enable human moderated alerts which broadcast
to Twitter and RSS.

Below we describe in detail two key aspects of
the system that have been signiﬁcantly upgraded:
the BCO and the event detection system.

218

3.1 Ontology
3.1.1 Aim

The BioCaster Ontology aims:

• To describe the terms and relations necessary
to detect and risk assess public health events
in the grey literature;

• To bridge the gap between (multilingual)
grey literature and existing standards in
biomedicine;

• To mediate integration of content across lan-

guages;

• To be freely available.
The central knowledge source for BioCaster
is the multilingual ontology containing domain
terms such as diseases, agents, symptoms, syn-
dromes and species as well as domain sensitive
relations such as a disease causing symptoms or
an agent affecting particular host species. This al-
lows the text mining system to have a basic un-
derstanding of the key concepts and relationships
within the domain to ﬁll in gaps not mentioned
explicitly in the news reports. To the best of our
knowledge the BCO is unique as an application
ontology, providing freely available multilingual
support to system developers interested in out-
break surveillance in the language of the open me-
dia.

The BCO however has little to say outside of
its application domain, e.g.
in disease-gene in-
teraction or for supporting automatic diagnosis.
As discussed in Grey Cowell and Smith (2010),
there are many other resources available that have
the potential to support applications for infec-
tious disease analysis including controlled vocab-
ularies and ontologies such as the the Uniﬁed
Medical Language System (UMLS) (Lindberg et
al., 1993), International Classiﬁcation of Diseases
(ICD-10) (WHO, 2004), SNOMED CT (Stearns
et al., 2001), Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)
(Lipscomb, 2000) and the Infectious Disease On-
tology (IDO) (Grey Cowell and Smith, 2010). In
(Collier et al., 2006) we discussed how BCO com-
pared to such ontologies so we will focus from
now on the implication of the extensions.

3.1.2 Scope

Indonesian (1081),

The new version of the BCO now covers 12 lan-
guages including all the United Nation’s ofﬁcial
languages: Arabic (968 terms), English (4113),
French (1281),
Japanese
(2077), Korean (1176), Malaysian (1001), Rus-
sian (1187), Spanish (1171), Thai (1485), Viet-
namese (1297) and Chinese (1142). The multi-
lingual ontology can be used as a direct knowl-
edge source in language-speciﬁc text mining mod-
ules, as an indexing resource for searching across
concepts in various languages and as a dictionary
for future translation modules. Currently news in
all 12 languages is available via the Web portal
but news in additional languages such as German,
Italian and Dutch are being added using machine
translation.

3.1.3 Design

Like EuroWordNet (Vossen, 1998), on which
it is loosely based, the BCO adopts a thesaurus-
like structure with synonym sets linking to-
gether terms across languages with similar mean-
ing. Synonym sets are referred to using root
terms. Root terms themselves are fully deﬁned in-
stances that provide bridges to external classiﬁca-
tion schemes and nomenclatures such as ICD10,
MeSH, SNOMED CT and Wikipedia. The central
backbone taxonomy is deliberately shallow and
taken from the ISO’s Suggested Upper Merged
Ontology (Niles and Pease, 2001). To maintain
consistency and computability we kept a single
inheritance structure throughout. 18 core domain
concepts corresponding to named entities in the
text mining system such as DISEASE and SYMP-
TOM were the results of analysis using a formal
theory (Guarino and Welty, 2000).

We have endeavoured to construct deﬁnitions
for root terms along Aristotelean principles by
specifying the difference to the parent. For ex-
ample in the case of Eastern encephalitis virus:

Eastern equine encephalitis virus is a
species of virus that belongs to the
genus Alphavirus of the family Togaviri-
dae (order unassigned) of the group
IV ((+)ssRNA) that possesses a positive
single stranded RNA genome. It is the

219

etiological agent of the eastern equine
encephalitis.

We are conscious though that terms used in
the deﬁnitions still require more rigorous control
to be considered useful for machine reasoning.
To aid both human and machine analysis root
terms are linked by a rich relational structure
reﬂecting domain sensitive relations such as
causes(virus,disease),
has symptom(disease,
symptom),
has associated syndrome(disease,
syndrome), has reservoir(virus, organism).

In such a large undertaking, the order of work
was critical. We proceeded by collecting a list of
notiﬁable diseases from national health agencies
and then grouped the diseases according to per-
ceived relevance to the International Health Reg-
ulations 2005 (Lawrence and Gostin, 2004).
In
this way we covered approximately 200 diseases,
and then explored freely available resources and
the biomedical literature to ﬁnd academic and lay-
man’s terminology to describe their agents, af-
fected hosts, vector species, symptoms, etc. We
then expanded the coverage to less well known
human diseases, zoonotic diseases, animal dis-
eases and diseases caused by toxic substances
such as sarin, hydrogen sulﬁde, sulfur dioxide and
ethylene. At regular stages we checked and val-
idated terms against those appearing in the news
media.

As we expanded the number of conditions to in-
clude veterinary diseases we found a major struc-
tural reorganization was needed to support animal
symptoms. For example, a high temperature in
humans would not be the same as one in bovids.
This prompted us in the new version to group dis-
eases and symptoms around major animal familes
and related groups, e.g. high temperature (human)
and high temperature (bovine).

A second issue that we encountered was the
need to restructure the hierarchy under Organi-
cObject which was divided between MicroOrgan-
ism and Animal. The structure of the previous
version meant that the former were doing dou-
ble duty as infecting agents and the later were af-
fected hosts. The MicroOrganism class contained
bacterium, helminth, protozoan, fungus and virus,
which then became the domain in a relation ‘x

causes y’. Expansion forced us to accomodate the
fact that some animals such as worms and mites
(e.g. scabies) also infect humans as well as ani-
mals. The result was a restructuring of the organic
classes using the Linnean taxonomy as a guide-
line, although this is probably not free from errors
(e.g. virus is typically not considered to be an or-
ganism).

3.2 Event alerting system
Figure 1(c) shows a schematic of the modular de-
sign used by the BioCaster text mining system.
Following on from machine translation and topic
classiﬁcation is named entity recognition and tem-
plate recognition which we describe in more detail
below. The ﬁnal structured event frames include
slot values normalized to ontology root terms for
disease, pathogen (virus or bacterium), country
and province. Additionally we also identify 15 as-
pects of public health events critical to risk assess-
ment such as: spread across international borders,
hospital worker infection, accidental or deliberate
release, food contamination and vaccine contami-
nation.

Latitude and longitude of events down to the
province level are found in two ways: using the
Google API up to a limit of 15000 lookups per
day, and then using lookup on the BCO taxonomy
of 5000 country and province names derived from
open sources such as Wikipedia.

Each hour events are automatically alerted to
a Web portal page by comparing daily aggre-
gated event counts against historical norms (Col-
lier, 2010). Login users can also sign up to receive
emails on speciﬁc topics. A topic would normally
specify a disease or syndrome, a country or region
and a speciﬁc risk condition.

In order to extract knowledge from docu-
ments, BioCaster maintains a collection of rule
patterns in a regular expression language that
converts surface expressions into structured in-
formation.
For example the surface phrase
“man exposes airline passengers to measles”
would be converted into the three templates
“species(human); disease(measles);
interna-
tional travel(true)”. Writing patterns to produce
such templates can be very time consuming and
so the BioCaster project has developed its own

220

D3: :- name(disease){ list(@undiagnosed) words(,1) list(@disease) }
S2: :- name(symptom) { list(@severity) list(@symptom)}
CF1: contaminated food(“true”) :- “caused” “by” list(@contaminate verbs past)
list(@injested material)
SP4: species(“animal”) :- name(animal,A) words(,3) list(@cull verbs past)

Table 1: Examples of SRL rules for named entity and template recognition. Template rules contain
a label, a head and a body, where the head speciﬁes the template pattern to be output if the body
expression matches. The body can contain word lists, literals, and wild cards. Various conditions can
be placed on each of these such as orthographic matching.

light weight rule language - called the Simple
Rule Language (SRL) and a pattern building inter-
face for maintaining the rule base (McCrae et al.,
2009). Both are freely available to the research
community under an open source license. Cur-
rently BioCaster uses approximately 130 rules for
entity recognition, 1000 word lists and 3200 tem-
plate rules (of which half are for location recogni-
tion) to identify events of interest in English. Us-
ing SRL allows us to quickly adapt the system to
newly emerging terminology such as the 11+ des-
ignations given to A(H1N1) during the ﬁrst stages
of the 2009 pandemic.

The SRL rulebook for BioCaster can recognize
a range of entities related to the task of disease
surveillance such as bacteria, chemicals, diseases,
countries, provinces, cities and major airports.
Many of these classes are recognized using terms
imported from the BCO. The rule book also con-
tains specialised thesauri to recognize subclasses
of entities such as locations of habitation, eater-
ies and medical service centres. Verb lists are
maintained for lexical classes such as detection,
mutation, investigation, causation, contamination,
culling, blaming, and spreading.

Some examples of SRL rules for named entity
recognition are shown in Table 1 and described
below:

Rule D3 in the rulebook tags phrases like ‘mys-
tery illness’ or ‘unknown killer bug’ by matching
on strings contained within two wordlists, @un-
diagnosed and @disease, separated by up to one
word.

Rule S2 allows severity indicators such as ‘se-
vere’ or ‘acute’ to modify a list of known symp-
toms in order to identify symptom entities.

Rule CF1 is an example of a template rule. If

the body of the rule matches by picking out ex-
pressions such as ‘was caused by tainted juice’,
this triggers the head to output an alert for con-
taminated food.

Rule SP4 identiﬁes the victim species as ‘ani-
mal’ in contexts like ’250 geese were destroyed’.
The rulebook also supports more complex in-
ferences such as the home country of national
public health organizations.

Since BioCaster does not employ systematic
manual checking of its reports, it uses a number of
heuristic ﬁlters to increase speciﬁcity (the propor-
tion of correctly identiﬁed negatives) for reports
that appear on the public Web portal pages. For
example, reports with no identiﬁed disease and
country are rejected. Since these heuristics may
reduce sensitivity they are not applied to news that
appears on the user login portal pages.

4 Results and Discussion
Version 3 of the ontology represents a signiﬁcant
expansion in the coverage of diseases, symptoms
and pathogens on version 2. Table 2 summarizes
the number of root terms for diseases classiﬁed by
animal familes.

The thesaurus like structure of the BCO is com-
patible in many respects to the Simple Knowledge
Organization System (SKOS) (Miles et al., 2005).
In order to extend exchange and re-use we have
produced a SKOS version of the BCO which is
available from the BCO site. We have also con-
verted the BCO terms into 12 SRL rule books (1
for each language) for entity tagging. These too
are freely available from the BCO site.

As the ontology expands we will consider
adopting a more detailed typing of diseases such
as hasInfectingPart to indicate the organ affected

221

Species
Avian
Bee

Bovine
Canine

Caprine

Cervine

Equine
Feline
Fish

Human
Lagomorph
Non-human
primate
Other
Rodent

Swine

N
22
6

24
4

14

2

17
4
2

Example
Fowl pox
Chalk brood
disease
Bluetongue
Blastomycosis
(Canine)
Contagious
agalactia
Chronic wasting
disease
Strangles
Feline AIDS
Viral hemorr
hagic septicemia

216 Scarlet fever
Myxomatosis
2
Sylvan
16
yellow fever
Crayﬁsh plague
Colorado tick
fever (Rodent)
Swine erysipelas

2
8

12

Table 2: Major disease groups organized by af-
fected animal family. N represents the number of
root terms.

or hasProtectionMethod to indicate broad classes
of methods used to prevent or treat a condition.
The typology of diseases could also be extended
in a more ﬁne grained manner to logically group
conditions, e.g. West Nile virus encephalitis,
Powassan encephalitis and the Japanese B en-
cephalitis could be connected through a hasType
relation on encephalitis.

5 Conclusion
Multilingual resources speciﬁcally targeted at the
task of global health surveillance have so far been
very rare. We hope that the release of version 3
can be used to support a range of applications such
as text classiﬁcation, cross language search, ma-
chine translation, query expansion and so on.

The BCO has been constructed to provide core
vocabulary and knowledge support to the Bio-
Caster project but it has also been inﬂuential
in the construction of other public health ori-

ented application ontologies such as the Syn-
dromic Surveillance Ontology (Okhamatovskaia
et al., 2009). The BCO is freely available from
http://code.google.com/p/biocaster-ontology/ un-
der a Creative Commons license.

Acknowledgements
The authors greatly acknowledge the many co-
workers who have provided comments and feed-
back on BioCaster. Funding support was pro-
vided in part by the Japan Science and Technology
Agency under the PRESTO programme.

References
Blake, A., M. T. Sinclair, and G. Sugiyarto. 2003.
Quantifying the impact of foot and mouth disease on
tourism and the UK economy. Tourism Economics,
9(4):449–465.

Collier, N., A. Kawazoe, L. Jin, M. Shigematsu,
D. Dien, R. Barrero, K. Takeuchi, and A. Kaw-
trakul. 2006. A multilingual ontology for infectious
disease surveillance:
rationale, design and chal-
lenges. Language Resources and Evaluation, 40(3–
4). DOI: 10.1007/s10579-007-9019-7.

Collier, N., S. Doan, A. Kawazoe, R. Matsuda Good-
win, M. Conway, Y. Tateno, Q. Ngo, D. Dien,
A. Kawtrakul, K. Takeuchi, M. Shigematsu, and
K. Taniguchi. 2008. BioCaster:detecting public
health rumors with a web-based text mining sys-
tem. Bioinformatics, 24(24):2940–1, December.
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btn534.

Collier, N.

2010. What‘s unusual in online dis-
ease outbreak news? Biomedical Semantics, 1(1),
March. doi:10.1186/2041-1480-1-2.

Cox, N., S. Temblyn, and T. Tam. 2003.

Inﬂuenza

pandemic planning. Vaccine, 21(16):1801–1803.

Freifeld, C., K. Mandl, B. Reis, and J. Brownstein.
2008. Healthmap: global infectious disease mon-
itoring through automated classiﬁcation and visual-
ization of internet media reports. J. American Med-
ical Informatics Association, 15:150–157.

Ginsberg, J., M. Mohebbi, R. Patel, L. Brammer,
M. Smolinski, and L. Brilliant. 2009. Detecting
inﬂuenza epidemics using search engine query data.
Nature, 457:1012–1014.

Grey Cowell, L. and B. Smith. 2010. Infectious dis-
ease informatics.
In Sintchenko, V., editor, Infec-
tious Disease Informatics, pages 373–395. Springer
New York.

222

Guarino, N. and C. Welty. 2000. A formal ontology
of properties. In Dieng, R. and O. Corby, editors,
EKAW-2000: Proc. 12th Int. Conf. on Knowledge
Engineering and Knowledge Management, pages
97–112.

Stearns, M. Q., C. Price, K. A. Spackman, and A. Y.
Wang. 2001. SNOMED clinical terms: overview of
the development process and project status. In Proc.
American Medical Informatics Association (AMIA)
Symposium, pages 662–666.

Vossen, P. 1998. Introduction to EuroWordNet. Com-

puters and the Humanities, 32:73–89.

Wagner, M. and H. Johnson. 2006. The internet as
sentinel.
In Wagner, M. et al., editor, The Hand-
book of Biosurveillance, pages 375–385. Academic
Press.

WHO. 2004. ICD-10, International Statistical Classi-
ﬁcation of Diseases and Related Health Problems,
Tenth Revision. World Health Organization, De-
cember.

WHO. 2005. Avian inﬂuenza: assessing the pandemic
Technical Report WHO/CDS/2005.29,

threat.
World Health Organization, Geneva, January.

Wilson, J. 2007. Argus: a global detection and track-
ing system for biological events. Advances in Dis-
ease Surveillance, 4.

Yangarber, R., P. von Etter, and R. Steinberger. 2008.
Content collection and analysis in the domain of
epidemiology. In Proc. Int. Workshop on Describ-
ing Medical Web Resources (DRMED 2008), Goten-
burg, Sweden, May 27th.

Hartley, D., N. Nelson, R. Walters, R. Arthur, R. Yan-
garber, L. Madoff, J. Linge, A. Mawudeku, N. Col-
lier, J. Brownstein, G. Thinus, and N. Lightfoot.
2010. The landscape of international biosurveil-
lance. Emerging Health Threats J., 3(e3), January.
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btn534.

Lawrence, O. and J. Gostin.

International
infectious disease law - revision of the World
Health Organization’s international health regula-
tions.
J. American Medical Informatics Associa-
tion, 291(21):2623–2627.

2004.

Lindberg, Donald A.B., L. Humphreys, Betsy, and
T. McCray, Alexa. 1993. The uniﬁed medical lan-
guage system. Methods of Information in Medicine,
32:281–291.

Lipscomb, C.

2000. Medical subject headings
(MeSH). Bulletin of the Medical Library Assoca-
tion, 88:256–266.

Madoff, Lawrence C. and John P. Woodall. 2005. The
internet and the global monitoring of emerging dis-
eases: Lessons from the ﬁrst 10 years of promed-
mail. Archives of Medical Research, 36(6):724 –
730. Infectious Diseases: Revisiting Past Problems
and Addressing Future Challenges.

Mawudeku, A. and M. Blench. 2006. Global pub-
lic health intelligence network (gphin). In Proc. 7th
Int. Conf. of the Association for Machine Transla-
tion in the Americas, Cambridge, MA, USA, August
8–12.

McCrae, J., M. Conway, and N. Collier. 2009. Simple
rule language editor. Google code project, Septem-
ber. Available from: http://code.google.com/p/srl-
editor/.

Miles, A., B. Matthews, and M. Wilson. 2005. SKOS
Core: Simple knowledge organization for the web.
In Proc. Int. Conf. on Dublin Core and Metadata
Applications, Madrid, Spain, 12–15 September.

Niles, I. and A. Pease. 2001. Towards a standard up-
per ontology.
In Welty, C. and B. Smith, editors,
2nd Int. Conf. on Formal Ontology in Information
Systems FOIS-2001, Maine, USA, October 17–19.

Okhamatovskaia, A., W. Chapman, N. Collier, J. Es-
pino, and D. Buckeridge. 2009. SSO: The syn-
dromic surveillance ontology. In Proc. Int. Soc. for
Disease Surveillance, Miami, USA, December 3–4.

