



















































Sentiment Translation through Multi-Edge Graphs


Coling 2010: Poster Volume, pages 1104–1112,
Beijing, August 2010

Sentiment Translation through Multi-Edge Graphs

Christian Scheible, Florian Laws, Lukas Michelbacher, and Hinrich Schütze
Institute for Natural Language Processing

University of Stuttgart
{scheibcn, lawsfn, michells}@ims.uni-stuttgart.de

Abstract

Sentiment analysis systems can benefit
from the translation of sentiment informa-
tion. We present a novel, graph-based ap-
proach using SimRank, a well-established
graph-theoretic algorithm, to transfer sen-
timent information from a source lan-
guage to a target language. We evaluate
this method in comparison with semantic
orientation using pointwise mutual infor-
mation (SO-PMI), an established unsuper-
vised method for learning the sentiment of
phrases.

1 Introduction

Sentiment analysis is an important topic in com-
putational linguistics that is of theoretical interest
but is also useful in many practical applications.
Usually, two aspects are of importance in senti-
ment analysis. The first is the detection of sub-
jectivity, i.e., whether a text or an expression is
meant to express sentiment at all; the second is the
determination of sentiment orientation, i.e., what
sentiment is to be expressed in a structure that is
considered subjective.

Work on sentiment analysis most often cov-
ers resources or analysis methods in a single lan-
guage, usually English. However, the transfer
of sentiment analysis between languages can be
advantageous by making use of resources for a
source language to improve the analysis of the tar-
get language.

This paper presents an approach to the transfer
of sentiment information between two languages
that does not rely on resources with limited avail-
ability like parallel corpora. It is built around Sim-
Rank, a graph similarity algorithm that has suc-
cessfully been applied to the acquisition of bilin-
gual lexicons (Laws et al., 2010) and semantic

similarity (Michelbacher et al., 2010). It uses
linguistic relations extracted from two monolin-
gual corpora to determine the similarity of words
in different languages. One of the main benefits
of our method is its ability to handle sparse data
about the relations between the languages well
(i.e., a small seed lexicon). Further, we experi-
ment with combining multiple types of linguistic
relations for graph-based translation. Our exper-
iments are carried out using English as a source
language and German as a target language. We
evaluate our method using a hand-annotated set of
German adjectives which we intend to publish.

In the following section, related work is dis-
cussed. Section 3.1 gives an introduction to Sim-
Rank and its application to lexicon induction,
while section 3.2 reviews SO-PMI (Turney, 2002),
an unsupervised baseline method for the genera-
tion of sentiment lexicons. In section 4, we define
our sentiment transfer method which we apply in
experiments in section 5.

2 Related Work

Mihalcea et al. (2007) propose two methods for
translating sentiment lexicons. The first method
simply uses bilingual dictionaries to translate an
English sentiment lexicon. A sentence-based clas-
sifier built with this list achieved high precision,
but low recall on a small Romanian test set. The
second method is based on parallel corpora. The
source language in the corpus is annotated with
sentiment information, and the information is then
projected to the target language. Problems arise
due to mistranslations.

Banea et al. (2008) use machine translation for
multilingual sentiment analysis. Given a corpus
annotated with sentiment information in one lan-
guage, machine translation is used to produce an
annotated corpus in the target language, by pre-
serving the annotations. The original annotations

1104



can be produced either manually or automatically.
Wan (2009) constructs a multilingual classi-

fier using co-training. In co-training, one classi-
fier produces additional training data for a second
classifier. In this case, an English classifier assists
in training a Chinese classifier.

The induction of a sentiment lexicon is the sub-
ject of early work by Hatzivassiloglou and McK-
eown (1997). They construct graphs from coordi-
nation data from large corpora based on the intu-
ition that adjectives with the same sentiment ori-
entation are likely to be coordinated. For example,
fresh and delicious is more likely than rotten and
delicious. They then apply a graph clustering al-
gorithm to find groups of adjectives with the same
orientation. Finally, they assign the same label to
all adjectives that belong to the same cluster.

Corpus work and bilingual dictionaries are
promising resources for translating sentiment. In
contrast to previous approaches, the work pre-
sented in this paper uses corpora that are not an-
notated with sentiment.

Turney (2002) suggests a corpus-based extrac-
tion method based on his pointwise mutual infor-
mation (PMI) synonymy measure. He assumes
that the sentiment orientation of a phrase can be
determined by comparing its pointwise mutual in-
formation with a positive (excellent) and a nega-
tive phrase (poor). An introduction to this method
is given in Section 3.2.

3 Background

3.1 Lexicon Induction via SimRank
We use the extension of the SimRank (Jeh and
Widom, 2002) node similarity algorithm proposed
by Dorow et al. (2009). Given two graphs A and
B, the similarity between two nodes a in A and b
in B is computed in each iteration as:

S(a, b) =
c

|NA(a)||NB(b)|

∑

k∈NA(a),l∈NB(b)
S(k, l).

NX(x) is the neighborhood of node x in graph
X . To compute similarities between two graphs,
some initial links between these graphs have to be
given, called seed links. These form the recursion
basis which sets S(a, b) = 1 if there is a seed

link between a and b. At the beginning of each
iteration, all known equivalences between nodes
are reset to 1.

Multi-Edge Extraction (MEE). MEE is an ex-
tension of SimRank that, in each iteration, com-
putes the average node-node similarity of several
different SimRank matrices. In our case, we use
two different SimRank matrices, one for coordi-
nations and one for adjective modification. See
(Dorow et al., 2009) for details. We also used
the node degree normalization function h(n) =√
n ×

√
maxk(|N(k)|) (where n is the node de-

gree, and N(k) the degree of node k) to decrease
the harmful effect of high-degree nodes on final
similarity values. See (Laws et al., 2010) for de-
tails.

3.2 SO-PMI

Semantic orientation using pointwise mutual in-
formation (SO-PMI) (Turney, 2002) is an algo-
rithm for the unsupervised learning of semantic
orientation of words or phrases. A word has pos-
itive (resp. negative) orientation if it is associ-
ated with positive (resp. negative) terms more
frequently than with negative (resp. positive)
terms. Association of terms is measured using
their pointwise mutual information (PMI) which
is defined for two words w1 and w2 as follows:

PMI(w1, w2) = log
(

p(w1, w2)

p(w1)p(w2)

)

Using PMI, Turney defines SO-PMI for a word
w as

SO-PMI(w) =

log

∏
p∈P hits(word NEAR p)×

∏
n∈N hits(n)∏

n∈N hits(word NEAR n)×
∏

p∈P hits(p)

hits is a function that returns the number of hits
in a search engine given the query. P is a set of
known positive words, N a set of known negative
words, and NEAR an operator of a search engine
that returns documents in which the operands oc-
cur within a close range of each other.

1105



4 Sentiment Translation

Unsupervised methods like SO-PMI are suitable
to acquire basic sentiment information in a lan-
guage. However, since hand-annotated resources
for sentiment analysis exist in other languages,
it seems plausible to use automatic translation of
sentiment information to leverage these resources.
In order to translate sentiment, we will use multi-
ple sources of information that we represent in a
MEE graph as given in Section 3.1.

In our first experiments (Scheible, 2010), coor-
dinated adjectives were used as the sole training
source. Two adjectives are coordinated if they are
linked with a conjunction like and or but. The
intuition behind using coordinations – based on
work by Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown (1997)
and Widdows and Dorow (2002) – was that words
which are coordinated share properties. In partic-
ular, coordinated adjectives usually express sim-
ilar sentiments even though there are exceptions
(e.g., “The movie was both good and bad”).

In this paper, we focus on using multiple edge
types for sentiment translation. In particular, the
graph we will use contains two types of relations,
coordinations and adjective-noun modification. In
the sentence “The movie was enjoyable and fun”,
enjoyable and fun are coordinated. In This is an
enjoyable movie, the adjective enjoyable modifies
the noun movie.

We selected these two relation types for two
reasons. First, the two types provide clues for
sentiment analysis. Coordination information is
an established source for sentiment similarity (e.g.
Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown (1997)) while
adjective-noun relations provide a different type
of information on sentiment. For example, nouns
with positive associations (vacation) tend to occur
with positive adjectives and nouns with negative
associations (pain) tend to occur with negative ad-
jectives. Second, we have successfully used these
two types for a similar acquisition task, the acqui-
sition of word-to-word translation pairs (Laws et
al., 2010).

In the resulting graph, adjectives and nouns are
represented as nodes, each containing a word and
its part of speech, and relations are represented as
links which are distinguished by their edge types.

Two graphs, one in the source language and one in
the target language, are needed to translate words
between those languages. Figure 1 shows an ex-
ample for such a setup. Black links in this graph
are coordinations, grey links are seed relations.

In order to calculate sentiment for all nodes in
the target language, we apply the SimRank algo-
rithm to the graphs which gives us similarities be-
tween all nodes in the source graph and all nodes
in the target graph. Using the similarity S(ns, nt)
between a node ns in the source language graph
S and a node nt in the target language graph T ,
the sentiment score (sent(nt)) is the similarity-
weighted average of all sentiment scores in the
target language:

sent(nt) =
∑

ns∈S
simnorm(ns, nt) sent(ns)

We assume that sentiment scores in the source
language are expressed on a numeric scale. The
normalized similarity simnorm is defined as

simnorm(ns, nt) =
S(ns, nt)∑

ns∈S S(ns, nt)
.

The normalization assures that all resulting sen-
timent values are within [−1, 1], with −1 being
the most negative sentiment and 1 the most posi-
tive.

5 Experiments

5.1 Data Acquisition
For our experiments, we needed coordination data
to build weighted graphs and a bilingual lexi-
con to define seed relations between those graphs.
Coordinations were extracted from the English
and German versions of Wikipedia1 by applying
pattern-based search using the Corpus Query Pro-
cessor (CQP) (Christ et al., 1999). We annotated
both corpora with parts of speech using the Tree
Tagger (Schmid, 1994). A total of 477,291 En-
glish coordinations and 112,738 German coordi-
nations were collected. A sample of this data is
given in Figure 2. We restrict these experiments
to the use of and/und since other coordinations

1http://www.wikipedia.org/ (01/19/2009)

1106



affordable

delicious

nutritiousjuicy

tasty

healthylovely

schmackhaft

gesundstrange

frisch

wertvoll

nahrhaft angesehen

ertragreich

Figure 1: A German and an English graph with coordinated adjectives including seed links

affordable

delicious

diverse

popularnutritious

inexpensive

original

varied

melodious

rare

strange

juicy

tasty

exotic healthy

tempting

lovely

hearty fragrant

dangerous

beautiful

charming authentic

Figure 2: English sample coordinations (adjectives)

1107



behave differently and might even express dissim-
ilarity (e.g. Was the weather good or bad?).

The seed lexicon was constructed from the
dict.cc dictionary2. While the complete dictionary
contains 30,551 adjective pairs, we reduced the
number of pairs used in the experiments to 1,576.

To produce a smaller seed lexicon which still
makes sense from a semantic point of view, we
used the General Service List (GSL) (West, 1953)
which contains about 2000 words the author con-
sidered central to the English language. More
specifically, a revised list was used3.

SO-PMI needs a larger amount of training data.
Since Wikipedia does not satisfy this need, we
collected additional coordination data from the
web using search result counts from Google. In
Turney’s original paper, he uses the NEAR oper-
ator, which returns documents that contain two
search terms that are within a certain distance of
each other, to collect collocations. Unfortunately,
Google does not support this operator, so instead,
we searched for coordinations using the queries

+ "w and s" and
+ "w und s"

for English and German, respectively. We added
the quotes and the + operator to make sure that
both spelling correction and synonym replace-
ments were disabled.

The original experiments were made for En-
glish, so we had to construct our own set of
seed words. For German, we chose gut (good),
nett (nice), richtig (right), schön (beautiful), or-
dentlich (neat), angenehm (pleasant), aufrichtig
(honest), gewissenhaft (faithful), and hervorra-
gend (excellent) as positive seed words, and
schlecht (bad), teuer (expensive), falsch (wrong),
böse (evil), feindlich (hostile), verhasst (invidi-
ous), widerlich (disgusting), fehlerhaft (faulty),
and mangelhaft (flawed) as negative ones.

5.2 Sentiment Lexicon

For our experiments, we used two different polar-
ity lexicons. The lexicon of Wilson et al. (2005)
contains sentiment annotations for 8,221 words

2http://www.dict.cc
3http://jbauman.com/aboutgsl.html

annotation value
positive 1.0
weakpos 0.5
neutral 0.0
weakneg −0.5
negative −1.0

Table 1: Assigned values for Wilson et al. set

which are tagged as positive, neutral, or nega-
tive. A few words are tagged as weakneg, imply-
ing weak negativity. These categorial annotations
are mapped to the range [-1,1] using the assign-
ment scheme given in Table 1.

5.3 Human Ratings
In order to manually annotate a test set, we
chose 200 German adjectives that occurred in the
Wikipedia corpus and that were part of a coor-
dination. From these words, we removed those
which we deemed uncommon, too complicated,
or which were mislabeled as adjectives by the tag-
ger. The test set contained 150 adjectives of which
seven were excluded after annotators discarded
them.

We asked 9 native speakers of German to anno-
tate the adjectives. Possible annotations were very
positive, slightly positive, neutral, slightly nega-
tive, or very negative. These categories are the
same as the ones used in the training data.

In order to capture the general sentiment, i.e.,
sentiment that is not related to a specific context,
the judges were asked to stay objective and not
let their personal opinions influence the annota-
tion. However, some words with strong political
implications were annotated by some judges as
non-neutral which led to disagreement beyond the
usual level. Nuklear (nuclear) is an example for
such a word. We measured the agreement of the
judges with Kendall’s coefficient of concordance
(W ) with tie correction (Legendre, 2005), yield-
ing W = 0.674 with a high level of significance
(p < .001); thus, inter-annotator agreement was
high (Landis and Koch, 1977).

5.4 Experimental Setup
Given the relations extracted from Wikipedia, we
built a German and an English graph by setting

1108



Method r
MEE 0.63
MEE-GSL 0.47
SR 0.63
SR-GSL 0.48
SO-PMI 0.58

Table 2: Correlation with human ratings

the weight of each link to the log-likelihood ra-
tio of the two words it connects according to the
corpus frequencies. There are two properties of
the graph transfer algorithm that we intend to in-
vestigate. First, we are interested in the merits of
applying multi edge extraction (MEE) for senti-
ment transfer. Second, we are interested in how
the transfer quality changes when the seed lexi-
con is reduced in size. This way, a sparse data
situation is simulated where large dictionaries are
unavailable. Having these two properties in mind,
four possible setups are evaluated: (i) using the
full seed lexicon with all 30,551 entries, but using
only coordination data (SR), (ii) reducing the seed
lexicon to 1,576 entries from the General Service
List (SR-GSL), (iii) applying MEE by adding ad-
jective modification data (MEE), and (iv) using
MEE with a reduced seed lexicon (MEE-GSL).
SimRank was run for 6 iterations in all experi-
ments. All experiments use the weight function
h as described above. We show that this function
improves similarities and thus lexicon induction
in Laws et al. (2010).

Correlation. First, we will examine the correla-
tion between the automatic methods (SO-PMI and
the aforementioned SimRank variations) and the
gold standard as done by Turney in his evaluation.
For this purpose, the human ratings are mapped
to float values following Table 1 and the aver-
age rating over all judges for each word is used.
The correlation coefficients r are given in Table 2.
Judging from these results, the ordering of SR and
MEE matches the human ratings better than SO-
PMI, however it decreases when using any of the
GSL variations instead which can be attributed to
using less data.

Classification. The correct identification of the
classes positive, neutral, and negative is more im-

portant than the correct assignment of values on
a scale since the rank ordering is debatable – this
becomes apparent when measuring the agreement
of human annotators. Since the assignments made
by the human judges are not unanimous in most
cases, the averages are distributed across the in-
terval [-1,1]; this means that the borders between
the three distinct categories are not clear. Since
there is no standard evaluation for this particu-
lar problem, we need to devise a way to make
the range of the neutral category dynamic. In or-
der to find possible borders, we first assume that
sentiment is distributed symmetrically around 0.
We then define a threshold x which assumes the
values x ∈ { i20 |0 ≤ i ≤ 20}, covering the in-
terval [0,0.5]. Since 0.5 is slightly positive, we
do not believe that values above it are plausible.
Then, each word w is positive if its human rating
scoreh(w) ≥ x, negative if scoreh(w) ≤ −x, and
neutral if −x < scoreh(w) < x. The result of
this process is a gold standard for the three cate-
gories for each of the values for x. The percentiles
of the sizes of those categories are mapped to the
values produced by the automatic methods. For
example, if x = 0.35 means that the top 21% of
all adjectives are in the positive class, the top 21%
of all adjectives as assigned by SO-PMI and the
SimRank varieties are positive as well.

The size of the neutral category increases the
larger x becomes. Thus, high values for x are
unlikely to produce a correct partitioning of the
data. Since slightly positive was defined as 0.5,
we expect the highest plausible value for x to be
below that. The size of the neutral category for
each value of x is given in Table 3. (Recall that
the total size of the set is 143.)

We can then compute the assignment accu-
racy on the positive, neutral, and negative classes,
as well macro- and micro-averages over these
classes.

5.5 Results and Discussion

Figures 3 and 4 show the macro- and micro-
averaged accuracies over the positive, negative,
and neutral class for each automatic method, re-
spectively. Overall, the SimRank variations per-
form better for x in the interval [0, 0.3]. In partic-
ular, MEE has a slightly higher accuracy than SR,

1109



x 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 0.40 0.45 0.50
# neutral 0 13 35 46 56 64 74 82 92 99 99

Table 3: Size of neutral category given x

word (translation) humans SO MEE MEE-GSL SR SR-GSL
chemisch (chemical) 0.00 -20.20 0.185 0.185 0.186 0.184
auferstanden (resurrected) 0.39 -10.96 -0.075 -0.577 -0.057 -0.493
intelligent (intelligent) 0.94 46.59 0.915 0.939 0.834 0.876
versiert (skilled) 0.67 -5.26 0.953 0.447 0.902 0.404
mean -0.04 -9.58 0.003 0.146 0.010 0.142
median 0.00 -15.60 0.110 0.157 0.114 0.157

Table 4: Example adjectives including translation, and their scores

 0

 0.2

 0.4

 0.6

 0.8

 1

 0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5

Ac
cu

ra
cy

x

SO-PMI (macro)
MEE (macro)

MEE-GSL (macro)
SR (macro)

SR-GSL (macro)

Figure 3: Macro-averaged Accuracy

 0

 0.2

 0.4

 0.6

 0.8

 1

 0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5

Ac
cu

ra
cy

x

SO-PMI (micro)
MEE (micro)

MEE-GSL (micro)
SR (micro)

SR-GSL (micro)

Figure 4: Micro-averaged Accuracy

1110



however, not significantly.
Table 4 shows selected example words with

their scores. These values can be understood bet-
ter together with the means and medians of the
respective methods which are given in the table as
well. These values give us an idea of where we
might expect the neutral point of a particular dis-
tribution of polarities.

Chemisch (chemical) is misclassified by SO-
PMI since it occurs in negative contexts on the
web. SimRank in turn was able to recognize
that most words similar to chemisch are neutral,
the most similar one being its literal translation,
chemical. Auferstanden (resurrected) is an exam-
ple for misclassification by SimRank which hap-
pens because the word is usually coordinated with
words that have negative sentiment, e.g. gestor-
ben (deceased) and gekreuzigt (crucified). This
problem could not be fixed by including adjective-
noun modification data since the coordinations
produced high log-likelihood values which lead to
dead being the most similar word to auferstanden.
Intelligent receives a score close to neutral with
the original (coordination-only) training method,
which could be corrected by applying MEE sim-
ply because the ordering of similar words changes
through the new weighting method. Nouns modi-
fied by intelligent include Leben (life) and Wesen
(being) whose translations are modified by pos-
itive adjectives. Many words, such as versiert
(skilled) are classified more accurately due to the
new weighting method when compared to our pre-
vious experiments (Scheible, 2010) where it re-
ceived a SimRank polarity of only 0.224.

The inclusion of adjective modifications does
not improve the classification results as often as
we had hoped. For some cases (cf. intelligent
mentioned above), the scores do improve, but the
overall impact is limited.

6 Conclusion and Outlook

We were able to show that sentiment translation
with SimRank is able to classify adjectives more
accurately than SO-PMI, an unsupervised base-
line method. We demonstrated that SO-PMI is
outperformed by SimRank when choosing a rea-
sonable region of neutral adjectives. In addition,
we showed that the improvements of SimRank

lead to better accuracy in sentiment translation in
some cases. In future work, we will apply a senti-
ment lexicon generated with SimRank in a senti-
ment classification task for reviews.

The algorithms we compared are different in
their purpose of application. While SO-PMI is
applicable when large corpora are available for a
language, it fails when used in a sparse-data situ-
ation, as noted by Turney (2002). We showed that
despite reducing the seed lexicon for SimRank to
a small fraction of its original size, it still performs
better than SO-PMI.

Currently, our experiments are limited by the
choice of using adjectives for our test set. While
the examination of adjectives is highly important
for sentiment analysis (as shown by Pang et al.
(2002) who were able to achieve high accuracy
even when using only adjectives), the application
of our algorithms to a broader set of linguistic
units is an important goal for future work.

Acknowledgments. We are grateful to
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft for fund-
ing this research as part of the WordGraph
project.

References
Banea, Carmen, Rada Mihalcea, Janyce Wiebe, and

Samer Hassan. 2008. Multilingual subjectivity
analysis using machine translation. In Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
127–135.

Christ, O., B.M. Schulze, A. Hofmann, and E. Koenig.
1999. The IMS Corpus Workbench: Corpus Query
Processor (CQP): User’s Manual. University of
Stuttgart, March, 8:1999.

Dorow, Beate, Florian Laws, Lukas Michelbacher,
Christian Scheible, and Jason Utt. 2009. A graph-
theoretic algorithm for automatic extension of trans-
lation lexicons. In Workshop on Geometrical Mod-
els of Natural Language Semantics, pages 91–95.

Hatzivassiloglou, Vasileios and Kathleen R. McKe-
own. 1997. Predicting the semantic orientation of
adjectives. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 174–181.

Jeh, Glen and Jennifer Widom. 2002. Simrank: A
measure of structural-context similarity. In Pro-
ceedings of the Eighth ACM SIGKDD Interna-

1111



tional Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, pages 538–543.

Landis, J.R. and G.G. Koch. 1977. The measurement
of observer agreement for categorical data. Biomet-
rics, 33(1):159–174.

Laws, Florian, Lukas Michelbacher, Beate Dorow,
Christian Scheible, Ulrich Heid, and Hinrich
Schütze. 2010. A linguistically grounded graph
model for bilingual lexicon extraction. In Proceed-
ings of the 23nd International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics.

Legendre, P. 2005. Species associations: the Kendall
coefficient of concordance revisited. Journal of
Agricultural Biological and Environment Statistics,
10(2):226–245.

Michelbacher, Lukas, Florian Laws, Beate Dorow, Ul-
rich Heid, and Hinrich Schütze. 2010. Building
a cross-lingual relatedness thesaurus using a graph
similarity measure. In Proceedings of the Seventh
Conference on International Language Resources
and Evaluation.

Mihalcea, Rada, Carmen Banea, and Janyce Wiebe.
2007. Learning multilingual subjective language
via cross-lingual projections. In Proceedings of the
45th Annual Meeting of the Association of Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 976–983.

Pang, Bo, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up? Sentiment classification using
machine learning techniques. In Proceedings of the
2002 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 79–86.

Scheible, Christian. 2010. Sentiment translation
through lexicon induction. In Proceedings of the
ACL 2010 Student Research Workshop, Uppsala,
Sweden. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Schmid, Helmut. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech
tagging using decision trees. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on New Methods in Lan-
guage Processing.

Turney, Peter. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down?
semantic orientation applied to unsupervised classi-
fication of reviews. In Proceedings of 40th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 417–424.

Wan, Xiaojun. 2009. Co-training for cross-lingual
sentiment classification. In Proceedings of the Joint
Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL
and the 4th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing of the AFNLP, pages 235–
243, Suntec, Singapore, August. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

West, Michael. 1953. A general service list of english
words.

Widdows, Dominic and Beate Dorow. 2002. A graph
model for unsupervised lexical acquisition. In COL-
ING.

Wilson, Theresa, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-
level sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of Human
Language Technology Conference and Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 347–354, October.

1112


