937

Coling 2010: Poster Volume, pages 937–945,

Beijing, August 2010

Word Space Modeling for Measuring Semantic Speciﬁcity in Chinese

Ching-Fen Pan

Department of English

National Taiwan Normal University
debbychingxp@hotmail.com

Abstract

The aim of this study is to use the
word-space model to measure the seman-
tic loads of single verbs, proﬁle verbal
lexicon acquisition, and explore the se-
mantic information on Chinese resulta-
tive verb compounds (RVCs). A distri-
butional model based on Academia Sinica
Balanced Corpus (ASBC) with Latent Se-
mantic Analysis (LSA) is built to investi-
gate the semantic space variation depend-
ing on the semantic loads/speciﬁcity. The
between group comparison of age-related
changes in verb style is then conducted
to suggest the inﬂuence of semantic space
on verbal acquisition. Finally, it demon-
strates how meaning exploring on RVCs
is done with semantic space.

1

Introduction

The issue of ‘word space’ has been gaining atten-
tion in the ﬁeld of distributional semantics, cogni-
tive and computational linguistics. Various meth-
ods have been proposed to approximate words’
meanings from linguistic distance. One of the
most popular models in distributional semantics is
Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) with dimension-
reduction technique, Singular Value Decomposi-
tion (SVD)(Landauer and Dumais, 1997; Karl-
gren and Sahlgren, 2001; Sahlgren, 2002; Wid-
dows et al., 2002). The backbone of LSA is
the co-occurrence distributional model in which
words are conceived as points scattered in a texts-
built n-dimensional space(Lenci, 2008). Rather
than trying to predict the best performing model

Shu-Kai Hsieh

Department of English

National Taiwan Normal University

shukai@gmail.com

from a set of models, this study highlights the ex-
tent to which word space or semantic space mea-
sured from a vector-based model can access the
verbal semantics and has inﬂuence on verbal ac-
quisition.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 pro-
ﬁles the variation of semantic space affected by
the semantic loads of single verbs. Section 3
discusses the correlation between the developing
change in verbal lexicon and word space from the
experimental data collected by M31 project.
It
will reveal how semantic space facilitates early
child verbal learning. Section 4 demonstrates how
to assess the meaning of Chinese resultative verb
compounds (RVCs) from semantic space. The re-
sults of this work are ﬁnally concluded in Section
5.

2 The Variation of Semantic Space

Between Two Verb Types (G/S) in LSA

The goal of this section is to examine the seman-
tic variation between two verb types, generic ver-
sus speciﬁc verbs. It ﬁrst creates a taxonomy for
the classiﬁcation of various verb groups (generic
verbs versus speciﬁc verbs) based on the seman-
tic distance with Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA)
and Cluster Analysis.

2.1 Distributional Model Based on Sinica

Corpus

The distributional model built in this survey is
based on the Chinese texts collected in Academia

1Model and Measurement of Meaning: A Cross-lingual
and Multi-disciplinary Approach of French and Mandarin
Verbs based on Distance in Paradigmatic Graphs. Project
website: http://140.112.147.149:81/m3/

938

Sinica Balanced Corpus (ASBC)2. It includes 190
ﬁles containing about 96000 word types3. The
original matrix (M) is further decomposed into
the product of three matrices (T SDT ). These ma-
trices are then reduced into k dimensions. In the
following reconstruction process based on k di-
mensions, it multiplies out the truncated matrices
TkSkD0k and then gets a Mk matrix (the approx-
imation of X)(Landauer et al., 1998; Sahlgren,
2005; Widdows and Ferraro, 2008). The follow-
ing shows an example of ﬁnding the nearest neigh-
bors of the word da (打 / to hit) via two methods
(see Table 1). For the convenience of visualization
and cluster analysis, Euclidean distance is applied
in the following study.

Cosine
Distance

qu ‘go’
0.928
0.377

na ‘take’
0.926
0.382

zhao ‘ﬁnd’
0.920
0.397

Table 1: Associating words of da ‘hit’.

2.2 Semantic Clustering

The primary objective of cluster analysis is to ex-
amine the formation of a taxonomy: whether G
verbs and S verbs form two groups separately.
The clusters also help us grasp the semantic space
among verbs as well as the potential semantic re-
lation of them. Based on the distance matrix of
lexical items generated in the last section, this
part applied cluster analysis on the selected 150
verbs/observations4. For the convenience of com-
parison, each verb is coded with its type and a se-
rial number like zuo (做/ to do) is G1 and si (撕/

to tear) is S275.

Once the similarity measure is done,

the
next procedure is to combine similar verbs into
groups.
The clustering procedure starts with
each verb/observation in its own cluster, and
combines two clusters together step by step until
all the verbs are in a single cluster6 The cluster
dendrogram is plotted is Figure 1,
in which
clusters are formed from the bottom to the top.

Figure 1 demonstrates that the highest split
the
separates these verbs into two big groups:
left branch group and right branch group drawn
in different squares. The constituents of the two
branches are listed in Table 2. It is clear that most
of the constituent parts of the left group are G
verbs whereas S verbs count as majority in the
right group. If the left group is considered as a
group formed with G verbs and right group with
S verbs, the hit ratio7 of G verbs (74.6%) is much
higher than that of S verbs (57.1%). The cluster-
ing algorithm that we applied shows some struc-
ture, but there is no accurate separation of these
two verb types. A detailed investigation of the re-
lationship between the verb type and the distance
is discussed in the next section.

Generic verbs
Speciﬁc verbs
Undetermined verbs
Hit ratio

left group
59 (64.1%)
20 (21.7%)
13 (14.1%)
74.6%

right group
18 (33.3%)
24 (44.5%)
12 (22.2%)
57.1%

Table 2: Distribution of G/S verbs in two big clus-
ters.

2ASBC website:

http://dbo.sinica.edu.tw/ftmsbin/kiwi1/mkiwi.sh

3The hapax legomena (words occur only once in the
whole data) are not included in the matrix. The total word
types including hapax amount to 220000 or so. To avoid time
and computer consuming, we excluded those hapax from the
co-occurrence matrix.

4These 150 verbs are single verbs selected from the ex-
perimental data.
In the previous study of classiﬁcation,
these verbs are divided into two types (G:generic versus
S:speciﬁc). There are 78 G verbs and 45 S verbs, along with
27 U(undetermined) verbs. It is noticeable that U verbs do
not count as one type of verbs. They are ﬂoating verbs be-
tween G and S. We keep their identity as U and examine their
potential characteristics in a binary cluster analysis.

5In fact, only 146 of 150 verbs are being classiﬁed be-
cause four words are missed in Sinica Corpus. To avoid con-
fusion, we still call them 150 verbs in cluster analysis.

6Agglomerative method is implemented in the process
in which single points are agglomerated into larger groups.
This is termed a hierarchical cluster procedure that explores
the co-relational structure of these single verbs. In complete
linkage, all objects in a cluster are linked to each other with
the longest distance. The use of the longest distance in com-
plete linkage makes the least similar pair of objects group
together. In other words, the maximum distance of the group
results from the linkage of objects with minimum similarity.

7The hit ratio is calculated as follows:

hit ratio of G in the left group: 59/(59 + 20) = 74.6%
hit ratio of S in the right group: 24/(18 + 24) = 57.1%
It is noticeable that U verbs are temporarily ignored here.

939

2.3 Distance Variation in Small-G/S-clusters
Following the line of argumentation, this section
demonstrates how distance varies within small-G-
clusters and small-S-clusters. In order to examine
the distance difference, small-G-cluster (or small-
S-cluster) is deﬁned as a cluster formed with the
nearest twenty words of the G verb (or S verb) tar-
get.8 In the example of one G verb yong (用/use)
coded as G5, the closest twenty words are almost
G verbs and the only one S verb is the farthest
word xie (寫/write) (see Figure 2). The distance
examination of the small cluster is applied to all
of the 150 verbs studied in this survey. Table 3
has illustrated the comparison of verb types and
the distance in the small cluster. As expected, the
semantic distance is signiﬁcantly affected by the
verb type of the target word in the small cluster.
The distances among words in most of the small-
G-clusters range between 0.4 and 0.8. In contrast,
over eighty percent small-S-clusters obtain a dis-
tance from 0.8 to 1.2. As for those U verbs which
can not be decided as generic or speciﬁc in the
manual tagging because of the lacking of agree-
ment, they have distance between 0.6 and 1. Their
distance shows an overlap with part of G verbs and
part of S verbs. It conﬁrms that U verbs are in a
fuzzy zone between G verbs and S verbs.

In summary, G verbs are words with more
senses and they appear more frequently in various
context. Based on their high frequency distribu-
tion, G verbs construct a solid relation with each
other in small-G-clusters. In contrast, S verbs are
8In order to test the representative power of small-clusters
with 20 words, we have examined the clusters with 25 and
30 words as well. In all of the cases, the curves in 20-word
cluster don’t change signiﬁcantly when the sample size is set
to 25 or 30. The small-G/S-clusters with the sample size
(N=20) is justiﬁed as representative.

Figure 2: The small-G-cluster of yong (用/use).

words with restricted meanings and they have rel-
atively limited distributional patterns. Due to their
low variety of patterns, S verbs are not easy to
have tight relations with other words.
It shows
that words with generic meaning have high dis-
tribution variety and the distances among them
are much shorter. The lack of polysemous fea-
ture makes the speciﬁc verbs be short of vari-
ous distributional patterns and lose the opportu-
nities to form close semantic relation with oth-
ers. The semantic space among G verbs is short
enough to form a solid cluster whereas S verbs
are relatively remote from each other in seman-
tic space. The distance of each verb cluster can
help assess the verb category as generic (G) or
speciﬁc (S). Approximately 75% of generic verbs
form small clusters with distance lower than 0.8
while more than 80% of speciﬁc verbs acquire a

Figure 1: Agglomerative hierarchical cluster analysis of 150 verbs.

940

distance greater than 0.8 . As to the verbs of inde-
terminacy, they are averagely scattered in a fuzzy
zone between G and S verbs. Over 70% U verbs
are centering the distance 0.8, which suggests that
words near distance 0.8 are likely to be undeter-
mined verbs. This analysis has proved that seman-
tic space varies in accordance with verb’s meaning
speciﬁcity. The distributions in context represent
not only the linguistic behaviors but the semantic
contents of lexical items.

3 The Inﬂuence of Speciﬁcity on

Acquisition

This section assesses the inﬂuence of semantic
space on the acquisition of the verbal lexicon.
With the examination of Speciﬁc verb (S verb)
progress, this study proposes that Generic verbs
(G verbs) are acquired earlier than S verbs due
to the closer semantic space.
It also testiﬁes
whether the S verb development is a developing
trend parallel with the acquisition of conventional
verbs(Chen et al., 2008; Hsieh et al., 2009)9 from
the experimental data collected by M3 project.
Based on the developing trend of conventional
lexical
the following parts analyze the
relation of meaning speciﬁcity and the acquisition
of lexical items.

items,

3.1 Decreasing in Lexical Variation
The section is concerned with lexical variation
among participants within the same age group.

9They rearranged the ﬁve groups of participants into three
units and then investigated the learning trend by Replacing
Rate (Frequency of V 2f req / Frequency of V 1f req ). By
deﬁning adults’ usages as the conventional one called V1,
children’s second highest frequency verb is counted as V2.
Along with the increase of age, the number of V2 drops
slowly whereas the amount of V1 increases gradually.

It measures type-token ratios of each group
and proﬁles the lexical variation10 in verbal
acquisition. Data analyzed in this part include
ﬁve groups of respondents’ usages of verbs to
four different ﬁlms, each of which pictures one
event. Respondents are assigned into ﬁve groups
according to their age: 3-year-old, 5-year-old,
7-year-old, and 9-year-old groups have 20 respon-
dents separately while 60 respondents are in the
Adult group composed of people in their twenties.
In respondents’ answers, only one single verb is
extracted from each respondent in this study. The
number of verbs in each group is equal to the
amount of participants. The ﬁrst analysis begins
with the lexical variation or lexical ﬂexibility
in these ﬁve groups.
It is done with the ratio
of lexical variation: the amount of word type is
divided by the amount of word token, as shown
in Table 4. The greater number of the ratio means
the lexical variation is more abundant and the
smaller ratio means a low diversity of word types.
The ratio of lexical variation in these four ﬁlms all
show a decreasing trend from 3-year-old groups
to adult groups. The quantity of different verbs
is higher in children group (3y, 5y,7y, 9y) than
that in adult group. That is, children appear more
creative in event description tasks while adults
are conﬁned in the conventional usage. With the
decreasing trend of lexical variety, the next step
is to propose an increasing trend of speciﬁc verb

10Lexical diversity or sometimes called lexical variation
is used to mean a combination of lexical variation and lex-
ical sophistication. It is also referred to an indication of a
combination of vocabulary size and the ability to use it ef-
fectively(Malvern et al., 2004). However, lexical variation or
lexical diversity doesn’t mean lexical richness in this study.
In other kinds of experiment like writing tests, adults should
perform better than children in lexical diversity. But the ex-
perimental data applied in this study is action-naming task.
The trend of lexical variation may perform in an opposite
way.

Distance
Small-G-cluster

0.4-0.6
24 (31.2%)

Small-S-cluster

0 (0)

Small-U-cluster

1 (4%)

0.6-0.8
32 (41.6%)
Total:72.8%
6 (13.6%)
Total:13.6%
8 (32%)

0.8-1.0
17 (22.0%)

19 (43.2%)

11 (44%)

1.0-1.2
4 (5.2%)
Total:27.2%
19 (43.2%)
Total:86.4%
5 (20%)

Table 3: Comparison of verb types (G/S) and semantic distance within small cluster.

941

usage when the age raises. It will show that the
change is from various generic verbs to one or
two speciﬁc verbs rather than various speciﬁc
verbs.

Films

3y
5y
7y
9y
Adult

carrot-
peel
0.35
0.25
0.3
0.21
0.016

paper-
crumple
0.55
0.47
0.2
0.105
0.083

plank-
saw
0.2
0.2
0.25
0.157
0.066

glass-
break
0.33
0.2
0.1
0.157
0.066

Table 4: The ratio of lexical variation (ratio =
word type/word token).

Increasing in Speciﬁc Verbs

3.2
With regard to the aim of the investigation, the
ﬁndings reported above provide evidence of the
changing trend of lexical variety in action-naming
tasks. The next step is to discover the developing
trend of verb type (G/S) usage. According to the
annotation result of verb category, each verb in the
data is now transferred into either generic (label as
G or 1) or speciﬁc (S or -1) and the proportions of
S verbs is plotted as Figure 3.
3.2.1 The Non-proportionality of S Verb

among Age Groups

The proportions of the two verb

A closer investigation is then implemented for
non-proportionalities by chi-squared test(Baayen,
2008). Although the proportion of S verb changes
more or less in different groups, it is still need to
conﬁrm that whether S verbs are more frequently
used by adults than children. The hypothesis is
formulated as follows:
H0:
types (G verb vs.
in five age groups.
four sets
With Pearson’s chi-square test
of data.
It is reported that the small p-values
(9.779e-07, 1.324e-09, and 1.191e-13) in the
ﬁrst three sets of data (carrot-peel (f 6), paper-
crumple (f 2), and plank-saw (f 16)) suggest a
non-proportionality of S verb in different age
groups. However, the p-value (0.8467) obtained
in the last data set (glass-break (f 3)) is too

S verb ) do NOT vary

for

Figure 3: The proportion of S (-1) verbs to G (1)
verbs from 5 groups of respondents to four events.

large to suggest a signiﬁcant variation of S verb
proportion in different age groups.
It proves
that the proportions of S verb change with the
participant’s age in the three event-naming tasks
but that doesn’t happen in the glass-break (f 3)
event. Except for the data in glass-break (f 3)
event,
the null hypothesis doesn’t hold in the
analysis.

3.2.2 The Relationship between S Verb and

Age

In order to test

the correlation of S verb
proportion and age variation, four groups (3y, 5y,
7y, 9y) are merged into one group called Child
versus Adult group. The data are now represented
by two by two contingency tables with one
categorical dependent variable (verb types) and
one categorical independent variable (age). Here
summarizes the hypothesis:
H0:
(G verb vs.
S verb, the dependent
variable) do NOT vary depending on
participants’ age (Child vs. Adult,
the independent variable).
The result has shown that
the small p-values
(2.803e-05, 0.001225, 1.754e-12) verify the
signiﬁcant difference of S verb in Child group

The frequency of the two verb types

942

and Adult group with regard to the three data
sets in carrot-peel (f 6), paper-crumple (f 2), and
plank-saw (f 16). Along with the correlation
examination,
the effect size is revealed with
correlation coefﬁcient from 0 (no correlation) to
1 (perfect correlation)(Gries, 2009). According
to the Phi value in this table, only the data in
plank-saw (f 16) has a correlation coefﬁcient
(0.612) greater than 0.5. That is, the correlation
between S verb usage and age group is considered
as signiﬁcantly correlated in the one data set
(plank-saw (f 16)). As for the other two data sets
(carrot-peel (f 6) with phi:0.379, paper-crumple
(f 2) with phi: 0.297),
the correlation is not
particularly strong but it is still highly signiﬁcant.
Over half of the data sets exhibit a signiﬁcant
non-proportionality of S verb usage in different
age groups but the correlation of S verb and
participants’ age requires.

In relation to the aim of this study, it has shown
that meaning speciﬁcity functions as a factor in
the development of verbal lexicon. The results of
the analysis also show a signiﬁcant variety of S
verb between children and adults. It is plausible
to suppose that verbs with speciﬁc meaning are
acquired later than those with generic meanings.
This developing trend suggests that a closer se-
mantic space among G verbs facilitates the acqui-
sition of verb meanings whereas a distant space
among S verbs causes difﬁculties in meaning ac-
quiring. Once those verbs with speciﬁc meanings
are picked up, most of them will become the so-
called conventional verbs. When the conventional
use to an action is a speciﬁc verb, the progress of
S verb usage is more obvious. The usage of verbs
with speciﬁcity meaning is a developing trend of
language acquisition.

4 Meaning Exploring on Chinese

Resultative Verb Compounds (RVCs)

In the verb-event co-occurrence matrix, verbs
elicited from the same event are considered to
be verbs have the same object in a verb-object
co-occurrence matrix. With the distributional
model, it then shows how meaning speciﬁcity af-
fects the linguistic behavior and semantic content
of Chinese resultative verb compounds (RVCs).

Those RVCs with similar distributional patterns
will present a high semantic relation. This se-
mantic relation could result from the meaning of
the ﬁrst verbal morpheme (Vcaus) or the second
one (Vres).
It is further proposed that the verb
type (generic or speciﬁc) of Vcaus would affect the
whole meaning content of V-V compounds.

4.1 The RVC Structure in the Data

A Chinese resultative verb compound (RVC) con-
sists two main elements: the ﬁrst element (Vcaus)
expresses a causing event or a state while the sec-
ond element (Vres) denotes a resulting event or the
aspectual properties of the object. According to
the Aspectual Interface Hypothesis(Tenny, 1989),
the property of an internal argument can measure
out the event. In the Chinese example, da-po bo-li
(打破玻璃 / hit-break glass), the state of the object
bo-li (玻璃 / glass) is changed into smashed and
this change points out an end point of the event.
The resultative po (破 / broken) is an delimiting
expression which refers to the property of the ob-
ject. In addition to deﬁning the second element
of an RVC as a delimiting expression, other sur-
veys label it as Vres which requires the saturation
of arguments. Four possible V-V compound argu-
ment structures are proposed in Li’s (1990) works.
In the following studies, most of RVCs require
an argument structure like (1). The ﬁrst verbal
morpheme (Vcaus) has a theta-grid <1, 2> and
the second morpheme (Vres) has <1’>. Vcaus re-
quires an external argument (a person) and an in-
ternal argument (a glass). The internal argument
(a glass) is identiﬁed with the argument of Vres.
Since the internal argument of Vcaus has to be
identiﬁed with the argument of Vres, it raises the
issue that which one functions more prominent in
choosing the object of a V-V compound. From the
study of RVCs’ distributional pattern, it examines
which one (Vcaus or Vres) is more salient and also
dominates the argument selection of a V-V com-
pound.

943

(1)

V < 1, 2-1’ > (da-po bo-li)

Vcause

Vres

da

< 1, 2 >

< person, glass >

po

< 1’>

< glass >

4.2 Semantic Assessment
The semantic links among words are built by mea-
suring the linguistic distances among them. In or-
der to examine the semantic information of RVCs,
a sub-sample with thirty-six verbs is selected to do
cluster tasks. The semantic relationships of word
in the sub-sample is visualized as a clustering tree,
as shown in Figure 4. The ﬁgure shows that an
RVC with a G verb as its Vcaus (GVcaus − Vres)
build a close relation with other RVCs which have
the same Vres with it. Take the most extreme G
verb da (打/hit)as an example, da-lan (打爛/hit-
ruin) is closer to pai-lan (拍爛/hit with palm and
ruin) than da (打/hit). On the other hand, an
RVC with an S verb as its Vcaus (SVcaus − Vres),
are grouped with those having the same Vcaus.
The RVC, ju-kai (鋸開/saw-open), with a S verb
ju (鋸/saw) as its head, forms a cluster with ju
(鋸/saw) and ju-duan (鋸斷/saw-crack).

tively. That is, half of the selected seven Vres pick
up a G verbs as its head while the other half words
go with S verbs. Those Vres preferring a G head
to a S head are sui, po, lan, duan; those prefer-
ring a S verb to a G verb head are kai, diao, xia.
According to the semantic content these resulta-
tive verbs, kai, diao, xia describes the direction
of the action and the motion of objects and they
are deﬁned as ‘path’ Vres in Ma and Lu’s (1997)
work. As for sui, po, lan, duan called as ‘result’
Vres, they mainly express the result of the object
affected by the action. The outcome reported here
suggests that ‘result’ Vres is apt to have a G verb
as its head verb whereas ‘path’ Vres tends to pick
up a S head verb. The proposal in literatures that
Vres tends to choose a G head verb is justiﬁed as
valid when the Vres expresses the meaning of ‘re-
sult’ rather than ‘path.’

‘result’ Vres
sui (碎/smash)

　 po (破/break)

lan (爛/ruin)
duan (斷/crack)
Proportion
‘path’ Vres
kai (開/open)

diao (掉/fall)
xia (下/down)
Proportion

GVcaus

SVcaus

da,
nong,
pai, ya, qiao
da, nong, ya,
qiao
da, pai
qie
47%

si

si, ci

si　
　
15%

qie

3%

si,

ju,

zhe,
bo　
zhe, ju, si, bo
bo
35%

Figure 4: Semantic clustering of selected verbs.

With regard to the semantic relation of RVCs
shown in the cluster plot, the next step is to jus-
tify the proportion of RVCs with the structure
GVcaus − Vres in which Vres selects a G verb as
its Vcause. As Table 5 shows, the proportion of
GVcaus − Vres and SVcaus − Vres is 50% respec-

Table 5: GVcaus − Vres versus SVcaus − Vres.

In summary, words with small distance re-
sulting from their similar distributional patterns
can be interpreted to be semantically similar
in a semantic cluster. The result of semantic
clustering has suggested that
the meaning of
RVCs depend on either the Vcaus or the Vres. The
meaning of GVcaus − Vres is more determined
by Vres because GVcaus is more polysemous and
the Vres becomes a prominent role to dominate
the meaning of GVcaus − Vres.
In contrast,
SVcaus − Vres focuses on the part of SVcaus since

944

SVcaus expresses its meaning speciﬁc enough.
In addition, the property of Vres also affects the
category of its head verb. When Vres like sui
belong to the ‘result’ Vres, it tend to choose a G
verb as its Vcaus. On the other hand, the ‘path’
Vres like xia, its head verb is apt to be a S verb. It
is suggested that ‘path’ Vres is more likely to have
a G verb than ‘path’ Vres. As the empirical study
illustrates the semantic information on Chinese
RVCs are affected by the semantic space of words.

5 Conclusion
In this paper, we argue the following points:
ﬁrstly, the distributional model shows that the se-
mantic space differ clearly in accordance with the
speciﬁcity of verbs. The G verbs form tight re-
lations with each other and become a larger clus-
ter whereas the semantic space among S verbs is
too distant to become a solid group. Secondly,
semantic space has inﬂuence on the acquiring of
words’ meanings. Generic verbs are earlier and
easier acquired due to the closer semantic space
among words. The developing trend of speciﬁc
verb lexicon parallel with conventional usage sug-
gests a language acquisition phenomenon. Fi-
nally, the G/S verbs play an inﬂuential role in Chi-
nese resultative compounds. The resultative verb
becomes more prominent when the ﬁrst verb is
with a generic meaning. The ‘result’ Vres is apt
to have a G verb as its head verb whereas ‘path’
Vres tends to pick up a S head verb. We believe
that results of our analysis will shed light on se-
mantic assessment and make predictions for lexi-
cal acquisition.

References
Baayen, R. H. 2008. Analyzing Linguistic Data: A
Practical Introduction to Statistics using R. Cam-
bridge University Press.

Chen, P., M.-A. Parente, K. Duvignau, L. Tonietto, and
B. Gaume. 2008. Semantic approximations in the
early verbal lexicon acquisition of chinese: Flexi-
bility against error. The 7th Workshop on Chinese
Lexical Semantics.

Gries, Stefan Thomas. 2009. Quantitative Corpus
Linguistics with R: A Practical Intriduction. Rout-
ledge.

Hsieh, Shu-Kai, Chun-Han Chang, Ivy Kuo, Hintat
Cheung, Chu-Ren Huang, and Bruno Gaume. 2009.
Bridging the gap between graph modeling and de-
velopmental psycholinguistics: An experiment on
measuring lexical proximity in chinese semantic
space. Presented at The 23rd Paciﬁc Asia Confer-
ence on Language, Information and Computation
(PACLIC 23). Hong Kong: City University of Hong
Kong., December 3-5.

Karlgren, J. and M. Sahlgren. 2001. From words
to understanding.
In Uesaka, Y., Kanerva P. and
H. Asoh, editors, Foundations of Real-World Intel-
ligence, pages 294–308.

Landauer, T. K. and S. T. Dumais. 1997. A solution to
plato’s problem: The latent semantic analysis theory
of the acquisition, induction, and representation of
knowledge. Psychological Review, 104:211–240.

Landauer, T. K., P. W. Foltz, and D. Laham. 1998.
Introduction to latent semantic analysis. Discourse
Processes, 25:259–284.

Lenci, A. 2008. Distributional semantics in linguistic
and cognitive research. From context to meaning:
Distributional models of the lexicon in linguistics
and cognitive science, special issue of the Italian
Journal of Linguistics, 20/1:1–31.

Li, Yafei. 1990. On v-v compounds in chinese. Natu-

ral Language and Linguistic Theory, 8:177–207.

Ma, Zhen and Jian-Ming Lu. 1997. Xingrongci zuo
jieguobuyu qingkuang kaocha yi (形容詞作結果補
語情況考察(一)). Hanyuxuexi (漢語學習), 1:3–7.

Malvern, David D., Brian J. Richards, Ngono Chipere,
and Pilar Duran. 2004. Lexical diversity and lan-
guage development : quantiﬁcation and assessment.
New York : Palgrave Macmillan.

Sahlgren, M. 2002. Random indexing of linguistic
units for vector-based semantic analysis. ERCIM
News, 50.

Sahlgren, Magnus. 2005. An introduction to ran-
dom indexing. In Proceedings of the Methods and
Applications of Semantic Indexing Workshop at the
7th International Conference on Terminology and
Knowledge Engineering (TKE). Copenhagen, Den-
mark.

Tenny, Carol. 1989. The aspectual interface hypothe-
sis. In Proceedings of NELS 18. University of Mas-
sachusetts at Amherst.

Widdows, Dominic and Kathleen Ferraro.

2008.
Semantic vectors: a scalable open source pack-
age and online technology management applica-
tion.
In Nicoletta Calzolari (Conference Chair),

945

Khalid Choukri, Bente Maegaard Joseph Mariani
Jan Odjik Stelios Piperidis Daniel Tapias, editor,
Proceedings of the Sixth International Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’08), Marrakech,
Morocco. European Language Resources Associa-
tion (ELRA).

2002.

Widdows, Dominic, Scott Cederberg, and Beate
Dorow.
Visualisation techniques for
analysing meaning. In Fifth International Confer-
ence on Text, Speech and Dialogue (TSD 5), pages
107–115. Brno, Czech Republic.

