



















































A Paraphrasing System for Transforming Regular Expressions into Honorifics


Coling 2010: Demonstration Volume, pages 1–4,
Beijing, August 2010

A Paraphrasing System for Transforming 

Regular Expressions into Honorifics 

Dongli Han, Shuntaro Kamochi, Xin Song, Naoki Akegawa, Tomomasa Hori 

Department of Computer Science and System Analysis,  
College of Humanities and Sciences, Nihon University 

han@cssa.chs.nihon-u.ac.jp 

 

Abstract 

Honorifics in Japanese plays an incred-
ibly important role in all walks of 
social life. The demand to transform 
regular expressions in Japanese into 
honorifics automatically has increased 
rapidly especially in business situations. 
This paper reviews existing studies and 
proposes a system to fill this demand 
with more practicable functions. The 
experiment shows the effectiveness of 
our strategy. 

1 Introduction 

The Japanese language is a kind of highly 
specific language in establishing hierarchical 
relations among people, or paying respects to 
people comparing with other languages. The 
honorifics in Japanese include different levels 
of respectful, humble, and polite speeches 
which are frequently used in various social or 
business situations. The mechanism of 
honorifics in Japanese is so complicated that 
recent young generations in Japan could hardly 
master it or use it properly.  

This situation has encouraged the study 
dealing with honorifics in Japanese including 
automatic paraphrasing. For instance, Noguchi 
et al. generate all kinds of honorific forms for 
single verbs automatically (Noguchi et al. 
2007). In their study, verbs are considered 
exclusively, and hence no contextual 
information has been employed. 

In another study, Tazoe et al. have proposed 
a computer model to translate regular 
expressions into respectful speeches (Tazoe et 
al. 2005). They determine the type and level of 
honorifics for a verb in a sentence based on the 

subject of the sentence and the listener level, 
the situation level, and the topic level retrieved 
from the entire article. Comparing with the 
study of Noguchi et al. , this one is more 
practical. However, there exist some problems 
in this work. No strategy seems to have been 
prepared in case multiple verbs with different 
agents appear in a same sentence. Another 
problem is the omission of subjects in Japanese 
sentences. This will obstruct the determination 
of the honorific form of the verb. Worst of all, 
the method proposed in this work seems to be 
remaining as a computer model without being 
implemented at all.  

This paper describes a practical system 
developed to transform regular expressions in 
Japanese into honorific forms automatically. 
Specifically, we manage to retrieve the 
hierarchical relationships among characters in 
a sentence so as to determine different 
honorific forms for multiple verbs with 
different agents in the same sentence. Another 
major difference from previous studies is that 
we employ a series of strategies to cope with 
the problem of subject-omission. Here in our 
study, we mainly concentrate our attention on 
the situation of composing business e-mails. 

We first describe the framework of our sys-
tem in Section 2, and then some main modules 
in the following sections. Finally we discuss 
the experiment and conclude this paper in Sec-
tion 7. 

2 Framework of Our System 

Our system contains four main parts: Informa-
tion-retrieval Unit, Subject-complement Unit, 
Honorific-Form-Determination Unit, and Pa-
raphrasing Unit. We illustrate the whole 
framework in Figure 1. 

1



 
Figure 1: Framework of our system 

 
  Before running the system, the user (the per-
son who has composed an e-mail and wants to 
check the honorifics with the system) is rec-
ommended to input the names and the posi-
tions or statuses of both himse lf and the person 
he is going to contact by e-mail, represented as 
the Writer and the Reader in Figure 1. This 
optional function is to help the system make 
more precise judgment on the hierarchical rela-
tions among characters in the e-mail article , 
and hence make more reasonable decision on 
respect type and status level which will be 
used in Honorific-form-determination Unit.  
  The procedure will be repeated until all sen-
tences in the input article are processed. We 
describe the main parts next in section 3, 4, 5, 
and 6 in detail.  

3 Information Retrieval 

Information-retrieval Unit is the first and most 
essential part in our system. We first retrieve 
basic information including parts of speech 
and dependency relations among constituent 
words from a sentence through a free morpho-
logical and dependency parsing software, Ca-
bocha

1
.  

Then based on the basic information ob-
tained above, the system attempts to extract 
nouns or pronouns representing characters 

                                                 
1
 http://chasen.org/~taku/software/cabocha/  

from the sentence, using a Japanese concept 
thesaurus: EDR Concept Dictionary

2
. The ex-

tracted nouns will be divided into three catego-
ries: first-person group, second-person group, 
and third-person group, by checking them 
against a first-person noun list and a second-
person noun list we have made beforehand. 
The identification results will be used later in 
the Honorific-form-determination Unit.  

Finally, the system assigns a respect type 
and a status level to each character that is ap-
pearing together with nouns showing duty po-
sitions or social statuses. Respect type reflects 
the degree of respect. A larger number indi-
cates a character with higher position, suggest-
ing that a higher honorific form with more re-
gard to the character should be appropriate. 
Status level has a similar nuance with respect 
type. It breaks each respect type down into 
several positions and ranks them according to 
tiny difference among them.  

4 Subject Complement 

The system could not determine which kind of 
honorific form should be applied to a verb with 
the information on characters only. We need to 
know the subject of each verb as well. Gener-
ally, the subject of a predicate is identified 
through the dependency analyzing process. 
However, in case the subject of a verb is omit-
ted, we have to find the subject to help deter-
mine the honorific form as described later in 
Section 5.  
  In our system, we employ five factors to help 
recognize the subject for a verb. In this section, 
we first explain the factors and then describe 
the method for complementing subjects based 
on the five factors. 

4.1 Nonhuman-behavior Verbs 

Our final purpose with this system is to 
transform a verb into an appropriate kind of 
honorific form to show the writer’s regard or 
respect to the reader. Situation will be different 
when the subject of a verb is not a person or 
character. No respect is needed to be paid to a 
thing.  
    In our system, before supplementing the 
subject, we check the verb against the EDR 

                                                 
2
 http://www2.nict.go.jp/r/r312/EDR/J_index.html  

2



Dictionary to see whether the verb represents a 
nonhuman-behavior. For example, the 

Japanese verb “沸騰する” meaning boil, will 
never appear with a person as its subject.  In 
this case, the system will not supplement the 
subject for the verb, but leave a check-mark 
here to change the verb into a polite speech 
later in Section 6.  

4.2 Expressions for Estimation 

There are a number of expressions in Japanese 
following verbs and implying estimation or 

hearsay. For example, “だろう” or “でしょう” 
indicates possibility but uncertainty. In case 
one of these expressions appears following a 
verb in a subject-omitted sentence, the subject 
of the verb tends to be the second person or the 
third person. We prepare a list containing these 
expressions and supplement the subject as non-
first-person if we find such an expression after 
the verb.  

4.3 Auxiliary Predicates  

Expressions following the predicate and ap-
pearing in the end of a sentence are called as 
auxiliary predicates (Kudo et al. 1993). They 
help predicates describe the modality of a sen-
tence, and at the same time contain the infor-

mation on subjects. For instance, “~(し)たい” 
represents the desire of the writer, while “~ても
構わない” meaning that it is all right (for some-
body) to do (something), indicates that some-
body here should be the second person or the 
third person. 

4.4 Expressions of Internal Feeling 

Internal feeling means the emotion or feeling 
in the back of one's mind, implying that no one 
could understand or represent your feeling ex-
cept yourself. In Japanese, we use adjectives or 
adjective verbs to express internal feelings, and 
the second person or the third person will nev-
er act as the subject of such an adjective or 

adjective verb. Here is an example. “楽しい” 
meaning happy, is a frequently used adjective. 
But different from happy which can be used 

for anybody, “楽しい” in Japanese is used only 
for the first person.  

This fact helps us supplement the subject in 
a sentence with the first-person noun that we 
have extracted in the Information-retrieval 

Unit. We use a Japanese lexicon, Goi-Taikei 
(Ikehara et al. 1999) as the data source, and 
employ all the adjectives or adjective verbs in 
the category of state of mind of a person in our 
system. 

4.5 Property of Case 

In most situations, if a character or person 
noun has been used as a surface case with 
some certain particles in a sentence, the cha-
racter will seldom act as other surface cases in 
the same sentence (Isozaki et al. 2006). Along 
this idea, we avoid supplementing subjects 
with non-first-person characters or person 
nouns if they have appeared as other surface 
cases. Here the reason we exclude the first-
person characters from applying the rule lies in 
the fact that some first person characters do act 
as multiple surface cases although not that fre-
quently.  

4.6 Subject-complement Procedure 

Our system tries to supplement the subject for 
a verb in a sentence utilizing all the previously 
described factors in a comprehensive manner. 
At first, every rule is checked to see whether it 
is applicable or not. Then we generate a slot 
containing four bits representing nonhuman, 
the first person, the second person, and the 
third person respectively for each rule.  
 

 
Figure 2: An example of subject complement 
 
According to the applying result of each rule, 
each slot is updated with 1 or 0 representing 
possibility and impossibility at the appropriate 
bit. At last, we carry out an And Operation 

3



with all slots and get the final answer. Figure 2 
is an example of subject complement.  
    If we get multiple candidates for the omitted 
subject, we have to determine the final one 
based on the priority order: nonhuman > the 
first person > the second person > the third 
person as shown in Figure 2. We have estab-
lished the above priority order from the result 
of a preliminary experiment.  

Here in this example, the system will sup-
plement the subject of the corresponding verb 
in the sentence with the first-person noun. 

5 Honorific Form Determination 

In this section, we describe the method of de-
termining the honorific forms for verbs. We 
have obtained the respect types, the status le-
vels, and have supplemented the subjects for 
verbs in Information-retrieval Unit and Sub-
ject-complement Unit respectively. Now, the 
system will determine the honorific form for 
each verb according to the following rules 

(R1~R4). Here, the signals sub, n
th
 P, and 

nSL  

indicates the subject, the n
th

 person, and the 
status level of the n

th
 person. 

 

R1. If ((sub = 2
nd

 P) and (
1SL < 2SL  )) or 

((sub = 3
rd

 P) and (
1SL < 3SL  ) and 

(
2SL < 3SL )) 

Then Respectful Speech 

R2. If ((sub = 1
st
 P) and (

1SL < 2SL  )) 

Then Humble Speech 
R3. If ((sub = 1

st
 P) or (sub = 3

rd
 P)) and 

(
1SL < 2SL  ) and ( 3SL < 2SL ) 

Then Teichogo Speech 
R4. Otherwise Polite Speech 

 

The formula 
mSL < nSL  means that the n

th
 per-

son has a higher position than the m
th

 person.  

6 Paraphrasing 

In accordance with the results of honorific-
form determination, we transform verbs in 
each sentence into their corresponding speech-
es. There are two types of transformation. One 
is with most normal verbs based on general 
paraphrasing rules and the respect levels that 

we have got in Section 3, such as the verb “働
く” meaning work , and “書く” meaning write.  

Another transformation is more complicated. 
We have to convert the original verb into some 
particular form first, and then inflect the new 
form according to the same general paraphras-
ing rules as those being used for normal verbs. 

Here is an example. The verb “行く” meaning 
go, holds a particular form: “いらっしゃる” for 
expressing respect, and “参る” for expressing 
modesty. 
    Besides, we have added some exception 
processing into our system to cope with indi-
vidual or isolated cases. 

7 Conclusions 

We have conducted a questionnaire to examine 
the practicality of our system. Participants in 
the questionnaires include 5 Japanese college 
students. They are told to evaluate the natural-
ness and correctness of a set of transformed 
articles from our system in 3 levels: 2 for good, 
0 for bad, and 1 for the intermediate level be-
tween good and bad: not good but acceptable. 
The average evaluation result is 1.32 showing 
the effectiveness of our system. We believe 
that the system could be utilized in situations 
of creating business documents or learning 
honorifics in Japanese. 

References 

Ikehara, S., Miyazaki, M., Shirai, S., Yokoo, A., 

Nakaiwa, H., Ogura, K., Ooyama, Y., and Haya-

shi, Y. 1999. Goi-Taikei - A Japanese Lexicon, 

Iwanami Shoten, Tokyo. (in Japanese) 

Isozaki, H., Kazawa, H., and Hirao, T. 2006. Japa-

nese Zero Pronoun Resolution Based on Lexico-

graphical Ordering of Penalties . IPSJ Trans. 

47(7):2279-2294. (in Japanese) 

Kudo, I., and Tomokiyo, M. 1993. An Ellipsis-

Resolution Mechanism by Using Japanese Pre-

dicate Particu larity. IEICE Trans. J76-D-

II(3):624-635. (in Japanese) 

Noguchi, S., Nanjo. H., and Yoshimi, T. 2007. 

Doushi No Tsujohyogen Kara Keigohyogen Eno 

Kangen. Proc. of the 13
th

 Annual Meeting of the 

Association for Natural Language Processing, 

pages 978-981. (in Japanese) 

Tazoe, T., Watanabe, C., Shiino, T. 2005. Devel-

opment of a Computer Model for Translating in 

Respect Language. IPSJ SIG Notes 2005(94):1-6. 

(in Japanese). 

4


