



















































Designing Agreement Features for Realization Ranking


Coling 2010: Poster Volume, pages 1032–1040,
Beijing, August 2010

Designing Agreement Features for Realization Ranking

Rajakrishnan Rajkumar and Michael White
Department of Linguistics
The Ohio State University

{raja,mwhite}@ling.osu.edu

Abstract

This paper shows that incorporating lin-
guistically motivated features to ensure
correct animacy and number agreement in
an averaged perceptron ranking model for
CCG realization helps improve a state-of-
the-art baseline even further. Tradition-
ally, these features have been modelled us-
ing hard constraints in the grammar. How-
ever, given the graded nature of grammat-
icality judgements in the case of animacy
we argue a case for the use of a statisti-
cal model to rank competing preferences.
Though subject-verb agreement is gener-
ally viewed to be syntactic in nature, a pe-
rusal of relevant examples discussed in the
theoretical linguistics literature (Kathol,
1999; Pollard and Sag, 1994) points to-
ward the heterogeneous nature of English
agreement. Compared to writing gram-
mar rules, our method is more robust and
allows incorporating information from di-
verse sources in realization. We also show
that the perceptron model can reduce bal-
anced punctuation errors that would other-
wise require a post-filter. The full model
yields significant improvements in BLEU
scores on Section 23 of the CCGbank and
makes many fewer agreement errors.

1 Introduction

In recent years a variety of statistical models for
realization ranking that take syntax into account
have been proposed, including generative mod-
els (Bangalore and Rambow, 2000; Cahill and
van Genabith, 2006; Hogan et al., 2007; Guo et

al., 2008), maximum entropy models (Velldal and
Oepen, 2005; Nakanishi et al., 2005) and averaged
perceptron models (White and Rajkumar, 2009).
To our knowledge, however, none of these mod-
els have included features specifically designed to
handle grammatical agreement, an important task
in surface realization. In this paper, we show that
incorporating linguistically motivated features to
ensure correct animacy and verbal agreement in
an averaged perceptron ranking model for CCG
realization helps improve a state-of-the-art base-
line even further. We also demonstrate the utility
of such an approach in ensuring the correct pre-
sentation of balanced punctuation marks.

Traditionally, grammatical agreement phenom-
ena have been modelled using hard constraints
in the grammar. Taking into consideration the
range of acceptable variation in the case of ani-
macy agreement and facts about the variety of fac-
tors contributing to number agreement, the ques-
tion arises: tackle agreement through grammar
engineering, or via a ranking model? In our
experience, trying to add number and animacy
agreement constraints to a grammar induced from
the CCGbank (Hockenmaier and Steedman, 2007)
turned out to be surprisingly difficult, as hard con-
straints often ended up breaking examples that
were working without such constraints, due to ex-
ceptions, sub-regularities and acceptable variation
in the data. With sufficient effort, it is conceiv-
able that an approach incorporating hard agree-
ment constraints could be refined to underspec-
ify cases where variation is acceptable, but even
so, one would want a ranking model to capture
preferences in these cases, which might vary de-
pending on genre, dialect or domain. Given that

1032



a ranking model is desirable in any event, we in-
vestigate here the extent to which agreement phe-
nomena can be more robustly and simply handled
using a ranking model alone, with no hard con-
straints in the grammar.

We also show here that the perceptron model
can reduce balanced punctuation errors that would
otherwise require a post-filter. As White and Ra-
jkumar (2008) discuss, in CCG it is not feasible
to use features in the grammar to ensure that bal-
anced punctuation (e.g. paired commas for NP ap-
positives) is used in all and only the appropriate
places, given the word-order flexibility that cross-
ing composition allows. While a post-filter is a
reasonably effective solution, it can be prone to
search errors and does not allow balanced punctu-
ation choices to interact with other choices made
by the ranking model.

The starting point for our work is a CCG re-
alization ranking model that incorporates Clark &
Curran’s (2007) normal-form syntactic model, de-
veloped for parsing, along with a variety of n-
gram models. Although this syntactic model plays
an important role in achieving top BLEU scores
for a reversible, corpus-engineered grammar, an
error analysis nevertheless revealed that many er-
rors in relative pronoun animacy agreement and
subject-verb number agreement remain with this
model. In this paper, we show that features specif-
ically designed to better handle these agreement
phenomena can be incorporated into a realization
ranking model that makes many fewer agreement
errors, while also yielding significant improve-
ments in BLEU scores on Section 23 of the CCG-
bank. These features make use of existing corpus
annotations — specifically, PTB function tags and
BBN named entity classes (Weischedel and Brun-
stein, 2005) — and thus they are relatively easy to
implement.

1.1 The Graded Nature of Animacy
Agreement

To illustrate the variation that can be found with
animacy agreement phenomena, consider first an-
imacy agreement with relative pronouns. In En-
glish, an inanimate noun can be modified by a rel-
ative clause introduced by that or which, while an
animate noun combines with who(m). With some

nouns though — such as team, group, squad, etc.
— animacy status is uncertain, and these can be
found with all the three relative pronouns (who,
which and that). Google counts suggest that all
three choices are almost equally acceptable, as the
examples below illustrate:

(1) The groups who protested against plans to
remove asbestos from the nuclear subma-
rine base at Faslane claimed victory when
it was announced the government intends
to dispose of the waste on site. (The Glas-
gow Herald; Jun 25, 2010)

(2) Mr. Dorsch says the HIAA is work-
ing on a proposal to establish a privately
funded reinsurance mechanism to help
cover small groups that ca n’t get insur-
ance without excluding certain employees
. (WSJ0518.35)

1.2 The Heterogeneous Nature of Number
Agreement

Subject-verb agreement can be described as a con-
straint where the verb agrees with the subject in
terms of agreement features (number and person).
Agreement has often been considered to be a syn-
tactic phenomenon and grammar implementations
generally use syntactic features to enforce agree-
ment constraints (e.g. Velldal and Oepen, 2005).
However a closer look at our data and a survey
of the theoretical linguistics literature points to-
ward a more heterogeneous conception of English
agreement. Purely syntactic accounts are prob-
lematic when the following examples are consid-
ered:

(3) Five miles is a long distance to walk.
(Kim, 2004)

(4) King prawns cooked in chili salt and pep-
per was very much better, a simple dish
succulently executed. (Kim, 2004)

(5) “ I think it will shake confidence one more
time , and a lot of this business is based on
client confidence . ” (WSJ1866.10)

(6) It ’s interesting to find that a lot of the ex-
pensive wines are n’t always walking out
the door . (WSJ0071.53)

1033



In Example (3) above, the subject and deter-
miner are plural while the verb is singular. In
(4), the singular verb agrees with the dish, rather
than with individual prawns. Measure nouns such
as lot, ton, etc. exhibit singular agreement with
the determiner a, but varying agreement with the
verb depending on the head noun of the measure
noun’s of -complement. As is also well known,
British and American English differ in subject-
verb agreement with collective nouns. Kathol
(1999) proposes an explanation where agreement
is determined by the semantic properties of the
noun rather than by its morphological properties.
This accounts for all the cases above. In the light
of this explanation, specifying agreement features
in the logical form for realization could perhaps
solve the problem. However, the semantic view
of agreement is not completely convincing due to
counterexamples like the following discussed in
the literature (reported in Kim (2004)):

(7) Suppose you meet someone and they are
totally full of themselves

(8) Those scissors are missing.

In Example (7), the pronoun they used in a
generic sense is linked to the singular antecedent
someone, but its plural feature triggers plural
agreement with the verb. Example (8) illustrates a
situation where the subject scissors is arguably se-
mantically singular, but exhibits plural morphol-
ogy and plural syntactic agreement with both the
determiner as well as the verb. Thus this suggests
that English has a set of heterogeneous agree-
ment patterns rather than purely syntactic or se-
mantic ones. This is also reflected in the pro-
posal for a hybrid agreement system for English
(Kim, 2004), where the morphology tightly in-
teracts with the system of syntax, semantics, or
even pragmatics to account for agreement phe-
nomena. Our machine learning-based approach
approximates the insights discussed in the theoret-
ical linguistics literature. Writing grammar rules
to get these facts right proved to be surprisingly
difficult (e.g. discerning the actual nominal head
contributing agreement feature in cases like areas
of the factory were/*was vs. a lot of wines are/*is)
and required a list of measure nouns and parti-
tive quantifiers. We investigate here the extent

to which a machine learning–based approach is a
simpler, practical alternative for acquiring the rel-
evant generalizations from the data by combining
information from various information sources.

The paper is structured as follows. Section 2
provides CCG background. Section 3 describes
the features we have designed for animacy and
number agreement as well as for balanced punc-
tuation. Section 4 presents our evaluation of the
impact of these features in averaged perceptron re-
alization ranking models, tabulating specific kinds
of errors in the CCGbank development section as
well as overall automatic metric scores on Sec-
tion 23. Section 5 compares our results to those
obtained with related systems. Finally, Section 6
concludes with a summary of the paper’s contri-
butions.

2 Background

2.1 Surface Realization with Combinatory
Categorial Grammar (CCG)

CCG (Steedman, 2000) is a unification-based cat-
egorial grammar formalism which is defined al-
most entirely in terms of lexical entries that en-
code sub-categorization information as well as
syntactic feature information (e.g. number and
agreement). Complementing function application
as the standard means of combining a head with its
argument, type-raising and composition support
transparent analyses for a wide range of phenom-
ena, including right-node raising and long dis-
tance dependencies. An example syntactic deriva-
tion appears in Figure 1, with a long-distance
dependency between point and make. Seman-
tic composition happens in parallel with syntactic
composition, which makes it attractive for gener-
ation.

OpenCCG is a parsing/generation library which
works by combining lexical categories for words
using CCG rules and multi-modal extensions on
rules (Baldridge, 2002) to produce derivations.
Conceptually these extensions are on lexical cate-
gories. Surface realization is the process by which
logical forms are transduced to strings. OpenCCG
uses a hybrid symbolic-statistical chart realizer
(White, 2006) which takes logical forms as in-
put and produces sentences by using CCG com-

1034



He has a point he wants to make
np sdcl\np/np np/n n np sdcl\np/(sto\np) sto\np/(sb\np) sb\np/np

> >T >B
np s/(s\np) sto\np/np

>B
sdcl\np/np

>B
sdcl/np

np\np
<np
>

sdcl\np
<sdcl

Figure 1: Syntactic derivation from the CCGbank for He has a point he wants to make [. . . ]

aa1

he
h3

he
h2

<Det>

<Arg0>
<Arg1>

<TENSE>pres

<NUM>sg

<Arg0>

w1
want.01

m1

<Arg1>

<GenRel>

<Arg1>

<TENSE>pres

p1point

h1
have.03

make.03

<Arg0>

s[b]\np/np

np/n

np

n

s[dcl]\np/np

s[dcl]\np/(s[to]\np)

np

Figure 2: Semantic dependency graph from the
CCGbank for He has a point he wants to make
[. . . ], along with gold-standard supertags (cate-
gory labels)

binators to combine signs. Edges are grouped
into equivalence classes when they have the same
syntactic category and cover the same parts of
the input logical form. Alternative realizations
are ranked using integrated n-gram or perceptron
scoring, and pruning takes place within equiva-
lence classes of edges. To more robustly support
broad coverage surface realization, OpenCCG
greedily assembles fragments in the event that the
realizer fails to find a complete realization.

To illustrate the input to OpenCCG, consider
the semantic dependency graph in Figure 2. In
the graph, each node has a lexical predication
(e.g. make.03) and a set of semantic features
(e.g. 〈NUM〉sg); nodes are connected via depen-

dency relations (e.g. 〈ARG0〉). (Gold-standard su-
pertags, or category labels, are also shown; see
Section 2.2 for their role in hypertagging.) In-
ternally, such graphs are represented using Hy-
brid Logic Dependency Semantics (HLDS), a
dependency-based approach to representing lin-
guistic meaning (Baldridge and Kruijff, 2002). In
HLDS, each semantic head (corresponding to a
node in the graph) is associated with a nominal
that identifies its discourse referent, and relations
between heads and their dependents are modeled
as modal relations.

For our experiments, we use an enhanced ver-
sion of the CCGbank (Hockenmaier and Steed-
man, 2007)—a corpus of CCG derivations derived
from the Penn Treebank—with Propbank (Palmer
et al., 2005) roles projected onto it (Boxwell and
White, 2008). Additionally, certain multi-word
NEs were collapsed using underscores so that they
are treated as atomic entities in the input to the
realizer. To engineer a grammar from this cor-
pus suitable for realization with OpenCCG, the
derivations are first revised to reflect the lexical-
ized treatment of coordination and punctuation as-
sumed by the multi-modal version of CCG that is
implemented in OpenCCG (White and Rajkumar,
2008). Further changes are necessary to support
semantic dependencies rather than surface syntac-
tic ones; in particular, the features and unifica-
tion constraints in the categories related to seman-
tically empty function words such complemen-
tizers, infinitival-to, expletive subjects, and case-
marking prepositions are adjusted to reflect their
purely syntactic status.

1035



2.2 Hypertagging
A crucial component of the OpenCCG realizer is
the hypertagger (Espinosa et al., 2008), or su-
pertagger for surface realization, which uses a
maximum entropy model to assign the most likely
lexical categories to the predicates in the input
logical form, thereby greatly constraining the real-
izer’s search space.1 Category label prediction is
done at run-time and is based on contexts within
the directed graph structure as shown in Figure 2,
instead of basing category assignment on linear
word and POS context as in the parsing case.

3 Feature Design

The features we employ in our baseline perceptron
ranking model are of three kinds. First, as in the
log-linear models of Velldal & Oepen and Nakan-
ishi et al., we incorporate the log probability of the
candidate realization’s word sequence according
to our linearly interpolated language models as a
single feature in the perceptron model. Since our
language model linearly interpolates three com-
ponent models, we also include the log prob from
each component language model as a feature so
that the combination of these components can be
optimized. Second, we include syntactic features
in our model by implementing Clark & Curran’s
(2007) normal form model in OpenCCG. The fea-
tures of this model are listed in Table 1; they
are integer-valued, representing counts of occur-
rences in a derivation. Third, we include dis-
criminative n-gram features (Roark et al., 2004),
which count the occurrences of each n-gram that
is scored by our factored language model, rather
than a feature whose value is the log probability
determined by the language model. Table 2 de-
picts the new animacy, agreement and punctuation
features being introduced as part of this work. The
next two sections describe these features in more
detail.

3.1 Animacy and Number Agreement
Underspecification as to the choice of pronoun in
the input leads to competing realizations involv-
ing the relative pronouns who, that, which etc. The

1The approach has been dubbed hypertagging since it op-
erates at a level “above” the syntax, moving from semantic
representations to syntactic categories.

Feature Type Example
LexCat + Word s/s/np + before
LexCat + POS s/s/np + IN
Rule sdcl → np sdcl\np
Rule + Word sdcl → np sdcl\np + bought
Rule + POS sdcl → np sdcl\np + VBD
Word-Word 〈company, sdcl → np sdcl\np, bought〉
Word-POS 〈company, sdcl → np sdcl\np, VBD〉
POS-Word 〈NN, sdcl → np sdcl\np, bought〉
Word + ∆w 〈bought, sdcl → np sdcl\np〉 + dw
POS + ∆w 〈VBD, sdcl → np sdcl\np〉 + dw
Word + ∆p 〈bought, sdcl → np sdcl\np〉 + dp
POS + ∆p 〈VBD, sdcl → np sdcl\np〉 + dp
Word + ∆v 〈bought, sdcl → np sdcl\np〉 + dv
POS + ∆v 〈VBD, sdcl → np sdcl\np〉 + dv

Table 1: Baseline features: Basic and dependency
features from Clark & Curran’s (2007) normal
form model; distances are in intervening words,
punctuation marks and verbs, and are capped at 3,
3 and 2, respectively

Feature Example
Animacy features
Noun Stem + Wh-pronoun researcher + who
Noun Class + Wh-pronoun PER DESC + who
Number features
Noun + Verb people + are
NounPOS + Verb NNS + are
Noun + VerbPOS people + VBP
NounPOS + VerbPOS NNS + VBP
Noun of + Verb lot of + are
Noun of + VerbPOS lot of + VBP
NounPOS of + Verb NN of + are
NounPOS of + VerbPOS NN of + VBP
Noun of + of-complementPOS + VerbPOS lot of + NN + VBZ
NounPOS of + of-complementPOS + VerbPOS NN of + NN + VBZ
Noun of + of-complementPOS + Verb lot of + NN + is
NounPOS of + of-complementPOS + Verb NN of + NN + is
Punctuation feature
Balanced Punctuation Indicator $unbalPunct=1

Table 2: New features introduced

existing ranking models (n-gram models as well
as perceptron) often allow the top-ranked output
to have the relative pronoun that associated with
animate nouns. The existing normal form model
uses the word forms as well as part-of-speech tag
based features. Though this is useful for associ-
ating proper nouns (tagged NNP or NNPS) with
who, for other nouns (as in consumers who vs.
consumers that/which), the model often prefers
the infelicitous pronoun. So here we designed fea-
tures which also took into account the named en-
tity class of the head noun as well as the stem of
the head noun. These features aid the discrimi-
native n-gram features (PERSON, which has high
negative weight). As the results section discusses,

1036



NE classes like PER DESC contribute substan-
tially towards animacy preferences.

For number agreement, we designed three
classes of features (c.f. Number Agr row in Table
2). Each of these classes results in 4 features. Dur-
ing feature extraction, subjects of the verbs tagged
VBZ and VBP and verbs was, were were iden-
tified using the PTB NP-SBJ function tag anno-
tation projected on to the appropriate arguments
of lexical categories of verbs. The first class
of features encoded all possible combinations of
subject-verb word forms and parts of speech tags.
In the case of NPs involving of-complements like
a lot of ... (Examples 5 and 6), feature classes 2
and 3 were extracted (class 1 was excluded). Class
2 features encode the fact that the syntactic head
has an associated of-complement, while class 3
features also include the part of speech tag of the
complement. In the case of conjunct/disjunct VPs
and subject NPs, the feature specifically looked
at the parts of speech of both the NPs/VPs form-
ing the conjunct/disjunct. The motivation behind
such a design was to glean syntactic and semantic
generalizations from the data. During feature ex-
traction, from each derivation, counts of animacy
and agreement features were obtained.

3.2 Balanced Punctuation
A complex issue that arises in the design of bi-
directional grammars is ensuring the proper pre-
sentation of punctuation. Among other things, this
involves the task of ensuring the correct realiza-
tion of commas introducing noun phrase apposi-
tives.

(9) John, CEO of ABC, loves Mary.
(10) * John, CEO of ABC loves Mary.
(11) Mary loves John, CEO of ABC.
(12) * Mary loves John, CEO of ABC,.
(13) Mary loves John, CEO of ABC, madly.
(14) * Mary loves John, CEO of ABC madly.

As of now, n-gram models rule out examples
like 12 above. All the other unacceptable ex-
amples are ruled out using a post-filter on real-
ized derivations. As described in White and Ra-
jkumar (2008), the need for the filter arises be-
cause a feature-based approach appears to be in-
adequate for dealing with the class of examples

presented above in CCG. This approach involves
the incorporation of syntactic features for punctu-
ation into atomic categories so that certain combi-
nations are blocked. To ensure proper appositive
balancing sentence finally, the rightmost element
in the sentence should transmit a relevant fea-
ture to the clause level, which the sentence-final
period can then check for the presence of right-
edge punctuation. However, the feature schema
does not constrain cases of balanced punctuation
in cases involving crossing composition and ex-
traction. However, in this paper we explore a sta-
tistical approach to ensure proper balancing of NP
apposition commas. The first step in this solution
is the introduction of a feature in the grammar
which indicates balanced vs. unbalanced marks.
We modified the result categories of unbalanced
appositive commas and dashes to include a fea-
ture marking unbalanced punctuation, as follows:

(15) , ` np〈1〉unbal=comma\?np〈1〉/?np〈2〉

Then, during feature extraction, derivations
were examined to detect categories such as
npunbal=comma , and checked to make sure this NP
is followed by another punctuation mark in the
string such as a full stop. The feature indicates the
presence or absence of unbalanced punctuation in
the derivation.

4 Evaluation

4.1 Experimental Conditions

For the experiments reported below, we used a
lexico-grammar extracted from Sections 02–21 of
our enhanced CCGbank with collapsed NEs, a
hypertagging model incorporating named entity
class features, and a trigram factored language
model over words, named entity classes, part-of-
speech tags and supertags. Perceptron training
events were generated for each training section
separately. The hypertagger and POS/supertag
language model were trained on all the training
sections, while separate word-based models were
trained excluding each of the training sections in
turn. Event files for 26530 training sentences with
complete realizations were generated, with an av-
erage n-best list size of 18.2. The complete set of
models is listed in Table 3.

1037



Model Description
full-model All the feats from models below
agr-punct Baseline Feats + Punct + Num-Agr
wh-punct Baseline Feats + Punct + Animacy-Agr
baseline-punct Baseline Feats + Punct
baseline Log prob + n-gram +Syntactic features

Table 3: Legend for experimental conditions

4.2 Results

Realization results on the development and test
sections are given in Table 4. For the develop-
ment section, in terms of both exact matches and
BLEU scores, the model with all the three features
discussed above (agreement, animacy and punc-
tuation) performs better than the baseline which
does not have any of these features. However, us-
ing these criteria, the best performing model is ac-
tually the model which has agreement and punc-
tuation features. The model containing all the
features does better than the punctuation-feature
only model, but performs slightly worse than the
agreement-punctuation model. Section 23, the
test section, confirms that the model with all the
features performs better than the baseline model.
We calculated statistical significance for the main
results using bootstrap random sampling.2 Af-
ter re-sampling 1000 times, significance was cal-
culated using a paired t-test (999 d.f.). The re-
sults indicated that the model with all the fea-
tures in it (full-model) exceeded the baseline with
p < 0.0001 . However, exact matches and
BLEU scores do not necessarily reflect the extent
to which important grammatical flaws have been
reduced. So to judge the effectiveness of the new
features, we computed the percentage of errors of
each type that were present in the best Section 00
realization selected by each of these models. Also
note that our baseline results differ slightly from
the corresponding results reported in White and
Rajkumar (2009) in spite of using the same feature
set because quotes were introduced into the cor-
pus on which these experiments were conducted.
Previous results were based on the original CCG-
bank text where quotation marks are absent.

Table 6 reports results of the error analysis. It

2Scripts for running these tests are available at
http://projectile.sv.cmu.edu/research/
public/tools/bootStrap/tutorial.htm

Section Model %Exact %Compl. BLEU
00 baseline 38.18 82.47 0.8341

baseline-punct 37.97 82.47 0.8340
wh-punct 38.93 82.53 0.8360
full-model 40.47 82.53 0.8403
agr-punct 40.84 82.53 0.8414

23 baseline 38.98 83.39 0.8442
full-model 40.09 83.35 0.8446

Table 4: Results (98.9% coverage)—percentage
of exact match and grammatically complete real-
izations and BLEU scores

Model METEOR TERP
baseline 0.9819 0.0939
baseline-punct 0.9819 0.0939
wh-punct 0.9827 0.0923
agr-punct 0.9821 0.0902
full-model 0.9826 0.0909

Table 5: Section 00 METEOR and TERP scores

can be seen that the punctuation-feature is effec-
tive in reducing the number of sentences with un-
balanced punctuation marks. Similarly, the full
model has fewer animacy mismatches and just
about the same number of errors of the other two
types, though it performs slightly worse than the
agreement-only model in terms of BLEU scores
and exact matches. We also manually examined
the remaining cases of animacy agreement errors
in the output of the full model here. Of the remain-
ing 18 errors, 14 were acceptable paraphrases in-
volving object relative clauses (eg. wsj 0083.40 ...
the business that/∅ a company can generate). We
also provide METEOR and TERP scores for these
models (Table 5). In recently completed work on
the creation of a human-rated paraphrase corpus
to evaluate NLG systems, our analyses showed
that BLEU, METEOR and TERP scores correlate
moderately with human judgments of adequacy
and fluency, and that the most reliable system-
level comparisons can be made only by looking
at all three metrics.

4.3 Examples
Table 7 presents four examples where the
full model differs from the baseline. Example
wsj 0003.8 illustrates an example where the NE
tag PER DESC for researchers helps the percep-
tron model enforce the correct animacy agree-
ment, while the two baseline models prefer the

1038



Ref-wsj 0003.8 full,agr,wh neither Lorillard nor the researchers who studied the workers were aware of any research on
smokers of the Kent cigarettes

baseline,baseline-punct neither Lorillard nor the researchers that studied the workers were aware of any research on
smokers of the Kent cigarettes .

Ref-wsj 0003.18 agr-punct, full the plant , which is owned by Hollingsworth & Vose Co. , was under contract with lorillard to make the cigarette filters .
baselines, wh the plant , which is owned by Hollingsworth & Vose Co. , were under contract with lorillard to make the cigarette filters .

Ref-wsj 0018.6 agr-punct, full model while many of the risks were anticipated when minneapolis-based Cray Research first announced the spinoff ...
agr-punct, full while many of the risks were anticipated when minneapolis-based Cray Research first announced the spinoff ...
baselines while many of the risks was anticipated when minneapolis-based Cray Research announced the spinoff ...

Ref-wsj 0070.4 agr-punct, full Giant Group is led by three Rally ’s directors , Burt Sugarman , James M. Trotter III and William E. Trotter II that last
month indicated that they hold a 42.5 % stake in Rally ’s and plan to seek a majority of seats on ...

all others Giant Group is led by three Rally ’s directors , Burt Sugarman , James M. Trotter III and William E. Trotter II that last
month indicated that they holds a 42.5 % stake in Rally ’s and plans to seek a majority of seats on ...

Ref-wsj 0047.5 ... the ban wo n’t stop privately funded tissue-transplant research or federally funded fetal-tissue research
that does n’t involve transplants .

agr, full ... the ban wo n’t stop tissue-transplant privately funded research or federally funded fetal-tissue research
that does n’t involve transplants .

baselines, wh ... the ban wo n’t stop tissue-transplant privately funded research or federally funded fetal-tissue research
that do n’t involve transplants .

Table 7: Examples of realized output

Model #Punct-Errs %Agr-Errs %WH-Errs
baseline 39 11.05 22.44

baseline-punct 0 10.79 20.77
wh-punct 11 10.87 13.53
agr-punct 8 4.0 21.84
full-model 10 4.31 15.53

Table 6: Error analysis of Section 00 complete re-
alizations (total of 1554 agreement cases; total of
207 WH-pronoun cases)

that realization. Example wsj 0003.18 illustrates
an instance of simple subject-verb agreement be-
ing enforced by the models containing the agree-
ment features. Example wsj 0070.4 presents a
more complex situation where a single subject
has to agree with both verbs in a conjoined verb
phrase. The last example in Table 7 shows the
case of a NP subject which is a disjunction of two
individual NPs. In both these cases, while the
baseline models do not enforce the correct choice,
the models with the agreement features do get this
right. This is because our agreement features are
sensitive to the properties of both NP and VP con-
juncts/disjuncts. In addition, most of the realiza-
tions involving of -complements are also ranked
correctly. In the final example sentence provided
(i.e. wsj 0018.6), the models with the agreement
features are able to enforce the correct the agree-
ment constraints in the phrase many of the risks
were in contrast to the baseline models.

5 Conclusion

In this paper, we have shown for the first time
that incorporating linguistically motivated fea-
tures to ensure correct animacy and number agree-
ment in a statistical realization ranking model
yields significant improvements over a state-of-
the-art baseline. While agreement has tradition-
ally been modelled using hard constraints in the
grammar, we have argued that using a statistical
ranking model is a simpler and more robust ap-
proach that is capable of learning competing pref-
erences and cases of acceptable variation. Our
approach also approximates insights about agree-
ment which have been discussed in the theoret-
ical linguistics literature. We have also shown
how a targeted error analysis can reveal substan-
tial reductions in agreement errors, whose impact
on quality no doubt exceeds what is suggested
by the small BLEU score increases. As future
work, we also plan to learn such patterns from
large amounts of unlabelled data and use models
learned thus to rank paraphrases.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported in part by NSF grant IIS-
0812297 and by an allocation of computing time
from the Ohio Supercomputer Center. Our thanks
also to Robert Levine and the anonymous review-
ers for helpful comments and discussion.

1039



References
Baldridge, Jason and Geert-Jan Kruijff. 2002. Cou-

pling CCG and Hybrid Logic Dependency Seman-
tics. In Proc. ACL-02.

Baldridge, Jason. 2002. Lexically Specified Deriva-
tional Control in Combinatory Categorial Gram-
mar. Ph.D. thesis, University of Edinburgh.

Bangalore, Srinivas and Owen Rambow. 2000. Ex-
ploiting a probabilistic hierarchical model for gen-
eration. In Proc. COLING-00.

Boxwell, Stephen and Michael White. 2008. Project-
ing Propbank roles onto the CCGbank. In Proc.
LREC-08.

Cahill, Aoife and Josef van Genabith. 2006. Ro-
bust PCFG-based generation using automatically
acquired LFG approximations. In Proc. COLING-
ACL ’06.

Clark, Stephen and James R. Curran. 2007. Wide-
Coverage Efficient Statistical Parsing with CCG and
Log-Linear Models. Computational Linguistics,
33(4):493–552.

Espinosa, Dominic, Michael White, and Dennis
Mehay. 2008. Hypertagging: Supertagging for sur-
face realization with CCG. In Proc. ACL-08: HLT.

Guo, Yuqing, Josef van Genabith, and Haifeng Wang.
2008. Dependency-based n-gram models for
general purpose sentence realisation. In Proc.
COLING-08.

Hockenmaier, Julia and Mark Steedman. 2007. CCG-
bank: A Corpus of CCG Derivations and Depen-
dency Structures Extracted from the Penn Treebank.
Computational Linguistics, 33(3):355–396.

Hogan, Deirdre, Conor Cafferkey, Aoife Cahill, and
Josef van Genabith. 2007. Exploiting multi-word
units in history-based probabilistic generation. In
Proc. EMNLP-CoNLL.

Kathol, Andreas. 1999. Agreement and the
Syntax-Morphology Interface in HPSG. In Levine,
Robert D. and Georgia M. Green, editors, Studies
in Contemporary Phrase Structure Grammar, pages
223–274. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Kim, Jong-Bok. 2004. Hybrid Agreement in English.
Linguistics, 42(6):1105–1128.

Nakanishi, Hiroko, Yusuke Miyao, and Jun’ichi Tsujii.
2005. Probabilistic methods for disambiguation of
an HPSG-based chart generator. In Proc. IWPT-05.

Palmer, Martha, Dan Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The proposition bank: A corpus annotated
with semantic roles. Computational Linguistics,
31(1).

Pollard, Carl and Ivan Sag. 1994. Head-Driven
Phrase Structure Grammar. University Of Chicago
Press.

Roark, Brian, Murat Saraclar, Michael Collins, and
Mark Johnson. 2004. Discriminative language
modeling with conditional random fields and the
perceptron algorithm. In Proc. ACL-04.

Steedman, Mark. 2000. The syntactic process. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Velldal, Erik and Stephan Oepen. 2005. Maximum
entropy models for realization ranking. In Proc. MT
Summit X.

Weischedel, Ralph and Ada Brunstein. 2005. BBN
pronoun coreference and entity type corpus. Tech-
nical report, BBN.

White, Michael and Rajakrishnan Rajkumar. 2008.
A more precise analysis of punctuation for broad-
coverage surface realization with CCG. In Proc.
of the Workshop on Grammar Engineering Across
Frameworks (GEAF08).

White, Michael and Rajakrishnan Rajkumar. 2009.
Perceptron reranking for CCG realization. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
410–419, Singapore, August. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

White, Michael. 2006. Efficient Realization of Coor-
dinate Structures in Combinatory Categorial Gram-
mar. Research on Language and Computation,
4(1):39–75.

1040


