



















































Deriving a Lexicon for a Precision Grammar from Language Documentation Resources: A Case Study of Chintang


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Technical Papers, pages 247–262,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Deriving a Lexicon for a Precision Grammar from Language
Documentation Resources: A Case Study of Chintang

Emil y M . BEN DER1 Rober t SCHIKOWSKI2

Bal thasar BICKEL2
(1) Department of Linguistics, University of Washington

(2) Seminar für Allgemeine Sprachwissenschaft, Universität Zürich
ebender@uw.edu, robert.schikowski@uzh.ch, balthasar.bickel@uzh.ch

ABSTRACT
Language documentation projects typically invest a lot of effort in creating digitized lexical
resources, which are used in the creation of dictionaries and in the glossing of collected texts.
We present and evaluate a methodology for repurposing such a lexical resource developed
for Chintang (ISO639-3: ctn), a language of Nepal, for use with a precision implemented
grammar developed in the DELPH-IN formalism. The target lexicon, when combined with a
set of morphological rules, achieves 57% type-level coverage and 50% token-level coverage
of held-out texts, while maintaining a feature-level accuracy F-measure of 70%. As lexicon
development is typically one of the most expensive aspects of creating a precision grammar,
this represents a significant savings of effort.

TITLE AND ABSTRACT IN GERMAN

Ableitung des Lexikons für eine Präzisionsgrammatik aus
dokumentationslinguistischen Ressourcen anhand einer Fall-
studie zum Chintang

Typische Sprachdokumentationsprojekte investieren viel Zeit in den Aufbau digitaler
lexikalischer Ressourcen, die für die Erstellung von Wörterbüchern und für die Glossierung
von Korpustexten genutzt werden können. Dieser Vortrag stellt eine alternative Verwendung
eines elektronischen Wörterbuchs vor, das für das Chintang (ISO639-3:ctn), eine bedrohte
Sprache Nepals, entwickelt wurde. Die Kombination dieses Wörterbuchs mit einer nach dem
DELPH-IN-Formalismus entwickelten Präzisionsgrammatik in Form morphologischer Regeln
kann erste Texte auf der Type-Ebene zu 57% und auf der Token-Ebene zu 50% abdecken,
wobei auf der Merkmalsebene ein F-Maß von 70% gewahrt wird. Da der Aufbau lexikalischer
Ressourcen zu den zeitintensivsten Komponenten der Entwicklung einer Präzisionsgrammatik
gehört, bringt diese Methode eine signifikante Zeitersparnis mit sich.

KEYWORDS: lexical acquisition, grammar engineering, endangered languages, low-resource
languages, language documentation.

KEYWORDS IN GERMAN: Lexikonerstellung, Grammar Engineering, bedrohte Sprachen,
Sprachen mit geringen Ressourcen, Sprachdokumentation.

247



1 Introduction

Endangered languages represent an especially urgent type of low-resource languages: Not only
do they generally lack computational resources, but they also unfortunately have the property
that the window in which to create such resources is small and closing. Thus to the extent
that any computational resources are created, they are particularly valuable, and if they can be
repurposed for applications beyond their original target, this extends their value further.

This paper describes a case study in the repurposing of a lexical resource for an endangered
language, Chintang. The original lexical resource is a Toolbox1 lexicon developed to assist in
the glossing of collected texts and in the development of a conventional dictionary. We present
a methodology for automatically translating this lexicon into one which can be used as part of a
precision grammar for the language, suitable for both parsing and generation and eventually in
applications including machine translation. The grammar is a starter grammar generated by
the LinGO Grammar Matrix grammar customization system (Bender et al., 2010), and includes
an initial implementation of Chintang verbal morphology. As a starter grammar, it still has very
limited coverage. However, even broad coverage grammars rely heavily on the size and quality
of their lexicons. Our focus here is therefore on the extent to which the existing resources for
Chintang can be used to bootstrap a lexicon for this implemented grammar.

This paper is structured as follows: In Section 2, we provide background on the Chintang
language, the project which is documenting it, and the relevance of precision grammars for
language documentation. Section 3 describes our methodology for creating the Grammar
Matrix-compatible lexicon on the basis of the Toolbox lexicon and the implementation of the
morphology. We evaluate the lexical coverage of the resulting grammar over held-out texts in
Section 4. Section 5 situates this work with respect to related initiatives.

2 Background

2.1 Chintang Language

Chintang (ISO639-3: ctn) is a Kiranti language spoken in the hills of Eastern Nepal. The next
bigger city close to the village of Chintang is Dhankuta, which is a six hours footwalk away. The
local economy is centered around agriculture, both for subsistence and for trade.

The Chintang language belongs to the large Sino-Tibetan (Tibeto-Burman) family. The exact
position of the Kiranti languages within this family is unclear (Ebert 2003). Within Kiranti,
Chintang belongs to the Eastern branch, which is characterized by the development of the
preglottalized stops reconstructed for Proto-Kiranti by Michailovsky (1994) to aspirated stops.

The number of speakers of Chintang is generally estimated to be around 5000 (e.g. Bickel et al.
2007), and this is in accordance with the speakers’ own estimations. There are no reliable
official data. Most speakers are bilingual, speaking Nepali, the national language of Nepal, as
the second language. Many in addition speak Bantawa, a big neighboring Kiranti language.
Chintang is still being learned by children (Stoll et al., 2012), but language knowledge and
transmission are clearly on the decline, especially in the more easily accessible parts of the
village.

1http://www.sil.org/computing/toolbox/index.htm

248



2.2 Research projects and resources

Research on Chintang started with the Chintang and Puma Documentation Project (CPDP),
which ran from 2004 to 2009. Since 2009, research has been continued by a group of several
collaborative projects together referred to as the Chintang Language Research Program (CLRP).2

Several native speakers of Chintang and Nepali were employed during the projects to make
recordings, conduct interviews, and to transcribe and translate recordings. Presently there is
an office at the Tribhuvan University, Kathmandu, where five transcribers and translators are
constantly working on the corpus, but no new recordings are being made.

The corpus comprises about 280 hours of video recordings, the majority of which have been
transcribed by now (250 hours, containing 1,130,000 words; Bickel et al., 2009ff). Transcribed
sessions are first translated from Chintang to Nepali and then from Nepali to English. The English
translation is an important aid for the final step of glossing, which is done by student assistants
studying linguistics. So far approximately 620,000 words have been glossed. Additional
annotations are added to parts of the corpus depending on the needs of individual projects.
Examples include the annotation of pointing gestures or of referential properties such as
identifiability.

The compilation of the corpus is tightly coupled with the Chintang dictionary, which presently
has about 9,000 words. The electronic version was created along with the corpus, so all words
in the corpus are in the dictionary. Some systematic elicitation work to cover semantic fields
that do not frequently come up in everyday conversation was carried out in 2010, and a printed
version for the speaker community was published in 2011 (Rā̄ı et al. 2011). The electronic
dictionary keeps growing as more and more words are glossed. New words collected by the
glossers are integrated into the main dictionary twice a year.

Both the corpus and the dictionary are in Toolbox format. In Toolbox, files are divided into
structurally similar records (utterances in the case of the corpus, entries in the case of the
dictionary). Each record consists of several lines where each line starts with a so-called field
marker indicating the type of information (e.g. phonological words, morphemes, morpheme
glosses) followed by content (see Section 3 below for details). It is possible to align the tiers
thus defined, enabling composite searches (e.g. “find all morphemes of the shape cekt which
have been glossed as ‘speak’”). Since a major revision of the dictionary in 2010, all dictionary
entries have IDs, which are inserted and aligned with morphemes upon glossing. This makes
it possible to automatically look up detailed information for each corpus morpheme in the
dictionary.

The entries in the dictionary include stem forms, alternate forms, glosses in English and Nepali,
as well as some grammatical information. In particular, the dictionary lists coarse-grained part
of speech (drawn from a set of 30 tags) as well as fairly detailed information about the syntactic
and semantic valence of verbs, that is, the number of arguments expected, the cases for each
argument, and an indication of which argument(s) the verb agrees with. This information is
encoded as a string. (1) gives the valence information for bhend ‘loosen’, indicating that this
verb takes two arguments. The most agent-like argument (“A”) is marked with ergative case,
the other (patient-like, “P”) with nominative, and the verb will be inflected to agree with both
of them.

(1) \val A-ERG P-NOM V-a(A).o(P)
2http://www.spw.uzh.ch/clrp.

249



This information reflects rich linguistic knowledge, the product of the analysis done by the
annotators, and it is digitized. However, it is not really machine interpretable. While Toolbox
can assist with morphological parsing (and thus with glossing of sentences), it does not make
use of such syntactic information for syntactic parsing.

2.3 Precision Grammars for Language Documentation

Precision grammars are machine-readable sets of rules developed by hand to capture linguistic
generalizations. Large-scale precision grammar projects have been carried out in a variety of
linguistic frameworks, including HPSG (Pollard and Sag, 1994; Flickinger, 2000) (described
further below), LFG (Kaplan and Bresnan, 1982; Butt et al., 2002)) and TAG (Joshi et al., 1975).
DELPH-IN-style3 HPSG grammars map surface strings to semantic representations in the format
of Minimal Recursion Semantics (MRS; Copestake et al., 2005), and are reversible, i.e., suitable
for use in both analysis (strings-to-MRS) and generation (MRS-to-strings).

Precision grammars can be deployed in transfer-based machine translation (e.g., Lønning et al.,
2004), grammar checking applications (e.g., Suppes et al., 2012), and other NLP applications
which benefit from a strong distinction between grammatical and ungrammatical strings (e.g.,
in generation) and/or detailed semantic representations. While broad coverage precision
grammars can be expensive to build, the alternative of treebank-derived grammars presupposes
resources which don’t typically exist for endangered languages and are themselves costly to
create. Furthermore, precision grammars, by locating analytical decisions in specific rules,
can be more easily updated than treebanks, as more is understood about the language being
described. Using the methodology of the Redwoods project (Oepen et al., 2004), precision
grammars can be used to create treebanks which can be kept up to date with the grammar as it
evolves. Both precision grammars and their associated treebanks can be valuable resources in
language documentation (Bender et al., 2012).

2.4 The LinGO Grammar Matrix

As noted, precision grammars are time-consuming to develop. However, because similar
structures recur across languages, the development time for new grammars can be reduced by
repurposing grammar code developed for other languages. This is the idea behind multilingual
grammar engineering projects, including the LinGO Grammar Matrix (Bender et al., 2002,
2010), ParGram (Butt et al., 2002; King et al., 2005), PAWS (Black and Black, 2009), and GF
(Ranta, 2007). The Grammar Matrix stores a core grammar which includes (partial) analyses
hypothesized to be cross-linguistically applicable, including basic phrase structure rule types for
combining heads with different types of dependents, as well as an implementation of semantic
compositionality, i.e., constraints which relate the semantic representation associated with a
phrase to the semantic contributions of its daughters. In addition, the Grammar Matrix provides
a series of libraries of analyses of cross-linguistically variable phenomena. These analyses are
accessed through a web-based questionnaire which elicits a linguistic description of a language
from a linguist and outputs a corresponding set of grammar files describing phrase structure
rules, lexical rules, and lexical entries.

The information provided by the linguist is encoded in a plain text ‘choices’ file, where each
‘choice’ is a simple attribute-value pair. The customization system interprets the choices to
output grammar files. The grammar files are encoded in the framework of Head-Driven Phrase

3http://www.delph-in.net

250



Structure Grammar (HPSG; Pollard and Sag, 1994), providing representations in the format of
Minimal Recursion Semantics (Copestake et al., 2005) and are compatible with the DELPH-IN
suite of grammar development and deployment tools, including the LKB (Copestake, 2002).

For the purposes of this work, the most important aspects of the Grammar Matrix are its support
for the creation of lexical rules, which handle the ordering, basic form, and syntactico-semantic
contributions of affixes, and its set of lexical types. Both the lexical rules and lexical types pair
forms with complex feature structures. These feature structures encode syntactic and semantic
information and are compatible with the feature structures for phrase structure rules, meaning
that the lexical entries can be used as part of a grammar capable of both paring and generation.

The resources of the Grammar Matrix represent another rich source of linguistic knowledge, but
in this case, the knowledge is not specific to a particular language. In order to create a grammar
for a particular language, they need to be paired with information about that language: The
forms and lexical meanings of individual words, their valence patterns, and the forms and
effects of individual affixes. While affixes generally form a relatively small closed class, lexicons
are another matter. The goal of this work is to see how effectively we can use the existing
lexicographic work of the CLRP to flesh out a Grammar Matrix-derived lexicon for Chintang.

3 Methodology

3.1 Matrix Lexicons and Toolbox Lexicons

As described above, Toolbox lexicons are structured by user-designed fields (marked with initial
tags) that store information including the orthography of a form, its gloss, example sentences,
and any other information the lexicon developers would like to collect. In the case of the CLRP,
this includes part of speech and detailed valence information (case and semantic roles). These
are each encoded as a string in the value of the associated tag.

A lexicon for a DELPH-IN style grammar associates orthographic forms with complex feature
structures representing morphological, syntactic and semantic information, encoded in such
a way that this information can interact with lexical and phrase structure rules to license
syntactic analyses of full sentences which furthermore embed compositionally created semantic
representations. The relationship between the strings and these complex feature structures is
mediated by lexical types which bear the constraints that describe the feature structures. The
lexical types, in turn, are arranged into a multiple inheritance hierarchy so that each constraint
need be stated only once and can be inherited by all lexical entries which require it.

\lex kond
\id 179
\psrev v
\val A-ERG P-NOM V-a(A).o(P)
\ge search; look.for
\dt 22/Feb/2011

Figure 1: Sample Toolbox entry from CLRP

A sample Toolbox entry is shown in Figure 1 while Figure 2 illustrates the corresponding Matrix
entry. (Both are abbreviated, to focus on the most relevant information.) In Figure 1, the value
of the tag \lex encodes the stem, \ge gives an English gloss, \psrev the part of speech, and
\val the detailed valence information. Other fields not shown in the figure encode alternate
forms of the entry, examples, and glosses in Nepali.

251



The Matrix entry in Figure 2, is a typed feature structure. The type of the whole structure is
trans-verb-lex. This type provides (or inherits from its supertypes) most of the constraints on
the entry. The only constraints provided directly in the lexical entry are the STEM value (kond,
corresponding to \lex in Figure 1) and the PRED value _search;look.for_v_rel, i.e., the predicate
symbol for the semantic relation associated from this entry. This is built on the basis of the \ge
field of the Toolbox entry.




trans-verb-lex
STEM 〈 kond 〉

SYNSEM




lex-synsem

CAT




cat

HEAD




verb
AUX −
FORM form




VAL




SUBJ

*
0




CAT


HEAD

noun

CASE erg






CONT
h

INDEX 1
i




+

COMPS

*
8




CAT


HEAD

noun

CASE nom






CONT
h

INDEX 9
i




+







CONT




INDEX 14




event
TENSE tense
ASPECT aspect
MOOD mood




RELS

*



arg12-ev-relation
PRED _search;look.for_v_rel
ARG0 14

ARG1 1

ARG2 9




+







INFLECTED
h

TRANSITIVE-VERB-FLAG +
i




Figure 2: Sample Matrix entry corresponding to Figure 1

Turning to the information contributed by trans-verb-lex, the HEAD value indicates that this is
a verb (and will head verbal projections such as VP and S), that it is not an auxiliary ([AUX
−]), and that its form value is as yet underspecified ([FORM form]). When this lexical entry
is inflected as either a finite verb or a non-finite verb, the FORM value will be constrained
accordingly. The INDEX value is linked to the ARG0 of the relation contributed by the verb, and
has underspecified values for TENSE, ASPECT, and MOOD. These, too, can be filled in via lexical
rules for affixes that mark these values.

The VAL information indicates that this verb is seeking a subject and a complement, both headed

252



by nouns, where the subject must be in the ergative case and the object in the nominative.4

Furthermore, the INDEX values of each are linked to the ARG1 and ARG2 positions in the semantic
predicate, respectively. The number of arguments and the linking to the semantic roles is
part of the cross-linguistic definition of a transitive verb in the Matrix. The constraints that
both arguments are NPs (rather than, say, PPs) and the information about case come from
specializations to the transitive verb type defined for Chintang by hand through the Grammar
Matrix customization system questionnaire.

Finally, the feature INFLECTED is related to the morphotactic system. The value of this feature is
a bundle of further ‘flag’ features (Goodman, 2012) tracking whether certain lexical rules have
or have not applied, in order to encode dependencies between lexical rules and between lexical
rules and lexical types. Here, we have shown only the TRANSITIVE-VERB-FLAG feature, whose +
value will ensure that affixes throughout the affix chain will only be those that are compatible
with transitive verbs.

3.2 Import of Lexical Entries from Toolbox Lexicons

The Grammar Matrix customization system provides facilities for the definition of lexical types.
This is in principle unbounded: the user can define, for example, types for both common and
proper nouns, as well as types for nouns of different genders and types for verbs with different
case frames. The user can specify constraints on these types through the customization system
(e.g., constraints on noun gender or case frames). Many other constraints, particularly those
concerned with semantic composition, are inherited from the Matrix core grammar.

We extended the Grammar Matrix customization system to include a subpage that allows the
user to define mappings between sets of properties encoded in a Toolbox lexical entry and
user-defined lexical types. Figure 3 gives an example. This type maps entries from the Toolbox
lexicon which are specified to have the part of speech ‘v’ and the valence ‘S-NOM V-s(S)’ to the
type ‘verb1’. This type is defined on another page of the customization system questionnaire
to describe intransitive verbs with nominative case on their sole argument. Types inherited
from the Matrix core grammar provide the constraints that contribute a one-place semantic
predicate and link the sole syntactic argument to the semantic argument. The import facility
creates the name symbol for that semantic predicate on the basis of the gloss or alternatively of
the orthography of the stem (as specified by the user).

Since Toolbox allows users to define their own tags, the extension we designed for the Grammar
Matrix customization system does not make any assumptions about the name or number of
tags which will be relevant to each import class. Users fill in the name of the tag in the ‘Toolbox
tag’ field for each tag-value pair, and can add arbitrarily many tag-value pairs with the ‘Add’
button. Another part of the page allows the user to specify the location of a Toolbox file to
import from and upload it. Though Chintang was the initial test case for this import facility,
there is (to our knowledge) nothing specific to Chintang nor the CLRP in the design of the
system. It is available for use through the Grammar Matrix customization system’s web-based

4The Grammar Matrix uses the names SUBJ and COMPS for the valence features, but makes relatively few assumptions
about which properties accrue to the argument in SUBJ as opposed to those in COMPS cross-linguistically. For example, as
case and agreement are both handled lexically, the system is flexible enough to model even tripartite case and agreement,
where the sole argument of intransitives is handled differently from either argument of transitives (Drellishak, 2009).
Similarly, grammar developers using the Grammar Matrix customization system can define multiple different classes
within transitive and intransitive which behave differently with respect to agreement and/or case.

253



Figure 3: Sample Toolbox import class

questionnaire.5

The Grammar Matrix core grammar provides support for a wide variety of semantic valences.
However, the present system only exposes simple intransitive and transitive valences to the
customization page. As soon as the customization system is updated to expose more valence
possibilities in the definition of lexical types, types using such valence possibilities will be
available as targets for the import of corresponding Toolbox lexical entries, without any further
updates to the extension we created. For the purposes of this study, however, we are limited to
nouns and simple transitive and intransitive verbs.

The final ‘choices’ file for the Chintang grammar specifies import configurations for common
nouns and two types each of transitive and intransitive verbs: native Chintang verbs which
take the full range of inflectional morphology and verbs borrowed from Nepali which must
co-occur with an auxiliary. This results in imported lexical entries for 4,741 common nouns, 282
native Chintang intransitive verbs, 142 borrowed Nepali intransitive verbs, 285 native Chintang
transitive verbs, and 190 borrowed Nepali transitive verbs. Thus 5,640/9,034 (62%) of the
entries in the Toolbox lexicon resulted in entries for the Matrix grammar, including 899/1,440
(62%) of the verbs. The most frequent remaining part of speech categories in the Toolbox
lexicon file are adverbs (866), adjectives (515), interjections (377), and affixes (286).67

3.3 Implementation of Morphology

Chintang has a relatively complex morphological system, especially for verbal inflection.
Schikowski (2012) identifies 12 suffix positions following verbs. On the other side of the
stem, a verb root may take up to 4 prefixes, and additionally endoclitics can appear inside the
prefix chain. One special type of prefix is that found in bipartite stems, where a specific prefix
is idiosyncratically selected by the verb and is in effect part of the stem, though not always
realized contiguously with the rest of the stem. To add to the complexity, the prefixes do not
occur in a fixed order (Bickel et al., 2007). Beyond that, a single verbal word can contain up
to four verb roots, each of which can host prefixes and suffixes. In these ‘verb chains’, any
given prefix can appear only once, while suffixes are frequently repeated (Bickel et al., 2007;
Schikowski, 2012). Finally, there is a host of morphophonological effects, some categorical

5http://www.delph-in.net/matrix/customize/matrix.cgi
6The Toolbox lexicon includes words from four different languages (Chintang, Nepali, Bantawa, and English), as

words from all four of these languages appear in the collected data. These numbers reflect the full Toolbox file, and
so are not directly representative of only Chintang. For example, Chintang has only two adjectives; the rest of the
adjective entries come from other languages.

7These part of speech counts are based on the \ps field in the lexicon. The import of lexical entries was done based
on the \psrev field. This field does not cover as many words as the older \ps field, but has been thoroughly reviewed.

254



and some variable, which change the surface form of any given morpheme depending on its
phonological context (as well as on sociolinguistic factors).

The Grammar Matrix customization system provides extensive support for the definition of the
morphotactic and morphosyntactic aspects of lexical rules, i.e., the order in which morphemes
appear, co-occurrence restrictions between morphemes, and the syntactico-semantic constraints
associated with each (Goodman, 2012). For this study, we defined a set of lexical rules through
this system on the basis of the prose description of Chintang morphology in Schikowski 2012
and consultation between Schikowski (field linguist) and Bender (grammar engineer). Here we
briefly describe the phenomena handled by this rule set.

There are a total of 160 verbal lexical rules (grouped into 54 position classes) and 24 nominal
lexical rules (6 position classes) in the implementation. The position classes define the order
of the affixes, including whether they are prefixes or suffixes and their relative order to other
prefixes/suffixes. We handle verb chains by treating only the first verb root as an actual root in
the model; this is facilitated by the fact that the first V position in a verb chain has the widest
lexical variation. The current system allows up to three verb roots per chain, with the verb roots
appearing in the second and third position treated as affixes. The position classes for each of
these positions contain 32 rules, one for each verb root which can appear in non-initial position.
The prefixes and suffixes which intervene between roots in the verb chain are treated as separate
lexical rules for suffixes. This duplication of the lexical rule types is partially responsible for the
high overall total of lexical rules.8

Elsewhere in the choices file we have specified information about the case system (number of
cases and their names), possible values of tense, aspect and mood, possible values of person and
number (including inclusive/exclusive distinctions in first person dual and plural), and other
similar information. This allows us to model or partially model the syntactico-semantic effects
of 131 of the 160 rules. The features targeted by these rules are shown in Table 1.9 Examples
of affixes whose syntactico-semantic effects are not modeled include the causative marker,
possessive prefixes on nouns, and verb chain elements indicating the direction of motion or
resulting position of a participant in the event. This information is not modeled because it is
not directly supported by the customization system. The grammar output by the customization
system is suitable for further hand-development, however, and nothing in HPSG theory or the
DELPH-IN formalism would prevent encoding such information.

There are a few other ways in which this model of Chintang morphology is incomplete. First,
it should be noted that we are abstracting away from most of the morphophonology by
targeting the underlying representation given in the Toolbox files (both lexicon and corpus),
rather than the transcription. Second, we are not modeling the phenomenon of free prefix
order. This is possible in the DELPH-IN formalism but not supported by the Grammar Matrix
customization system. Again, it would be relatively straightforward to modify the grammar to
accommodate this, but we have chosen to focus our evaluation on the grammar as produced by
the customization system. While the customization system can handle bipartite stems, and the
facility for importing lexical entries from Toolbox anticipates this, we are not modeling them

8HPSG’s type hierarchy in principle would allow us to define the morphosyntactic effects of these rules just once and
cross-classify those types with the types encoding the position class information. The Grammar Matrix customization
system interface, however, does not allow cross-classification of position class types with other kinds of types, so this
kind of generalization must await hand-editing of the grammar files output by the customization system.

9Note that NEGATION isn’t really a feature but rather a flag that causes the customization system to create a lexical
rule which adds negation to the verb’s semantic representation (Crowgey, ip).

255



Feature # Rules Notes
PERNUM 103 Person and/or number of verb’s dependent or of noun
CASE 17
FORM 35 Form (finite/non-finite) of verb
TENSE 27
ASPECT 5
MOOD 17
NEGATION 8

Table 1: Features constrained by lexical rules

at this time. Finally, while verb chains can in principle have four verbal roots, this model only
allows up to three, because the four-root forms are extremely rare.

4 Evaluation

We created a choices file for Chintang which gives general grammatical information as well
as definitions for lexical classes and lexical rules as described above. In addition, this choices
file defines 11 closed-class lexical entries: 10 pronouns and one auxiliary. We used three
sample narratives (totaling 2,906 word tokens) from the corpus as development data to refine
the choices file. This process involved creating a grammar from the choices file using the
customization system, loading the grammar into the LKB grammar development environment
(Copestake, 2002) and processing the utterances in the narratives with the grammar using
the [incr tsdb()] grammar profiling platform (Oepen, 2001). [incr tsdb()] provides facilities
for browsing both results and errors encountered during parsing. These were used to identify
forms that were not being handled appropriately. We then used the grammar exploration tools
provided by the LKB to diagnose the source of the problem and then updated the choices file
accordingly.

We then selected an additional four narratives to use as test data. The narratives range in
length from 200 to 489 tokens (total: 1,453) and represent a range of domains: ‘Durga_Exp’
is a biographical monologue; ‘pear_6-1’ is a Pear Story (Chafe, 1980) elicited by asking the
speaker to recount a story shown in a short, non-verbal film; ‘story_rabbit’ is a story about a
clever rabbit who escaped a tiger; and ‘choku_yakkheng’ is a recipe for cooking nettle curry. We
extracted the morpheme segmented line of each line in the narratives. An example is shown in
(2), where the second line is the line we are targeting.

(2) thupro
thupro
many

wassace
wassak-ce
bird-NS

uyuwakte
u-yuN-a-yakt-e
3NSS/A-live-PST-IPFV-IND.PST

pho
pho
REP

‘There lived many birds.’ [ctn] story_rabbit.005

The performance of the grammar was evaluated in two ways. First, we evaluated coverage at
both the type and token level over the test narratives. Table 2 gives the results. A word was
counted as ‘covered’ if the grammar assigned it a morphological analysis that the grammar
considered fully inflected. As shown in the table, the grammar found analyses for at least 50%
of both word types and tokens across all the narratives, with the exception of ‘story_rabbit’
where the token-level coverage was only 35%. The ambiguity numbers in Table 2 reflect the

256



average over those words which had at least one analysis. These numbers reflect low ambiguity,
with the maximal analyses per word form being only 8.

Narrative total # analyzed % analyzed avg ambiguity
type token type token type token type token

Durga_Exp 206 489 120 265 58 54 1.24 1.14
choku_yakkheng 152 331 89 184 59 56 1.26 1.20
pear_6-1 206 433 105 203 56 51 1.20 1.62
story_rabbit 85 200 43 69 51 35 1.37 1.23
All 568 1453 324 721 57 50 1.40 1.27

Table 2: Coverage of customized grammar over test narratives

To get a sense of the accuracy of the resulting grammar, we randomly selected 10 word types
from each of the four narratives (while ensuring that no word type was selected from more
than one narrative). We used the LKB to parse each of these word types and compared the
information in the resulting feature structure to the information in the gloss of the first instance
of that word type in the narrative it was chosen from. We calculated precision and recall for
each piece of grammatical information in the gloss and the feature structure.10 In cases where
the grammar found more than one analysis, we chose the best match to the gloss. The results
are shown in Table 3.

Narrative Total gold attributes Precision Recall F-measure
Durga_Exp 16 .48 .88 .62
choku_yakkheng 21 .57 .62 .59
pear_6-1 31 .71 .92 .80
story_rabbit 29 .62 .83 .71
Total 97 .61 .82 .70

Table 3: Accuracy of customized grammar over 40 word types from test narratives

A large portion of the precision errors in this evaluation relate to cases where the grammar
interprets the non-marking of some category as informative. For example, nouns that do not
bear any affix for number as marked as singular in the grammar, and nouns not bearing any
affix for case as nominative. These disagreements between the grammar and the glosses are
counted as errors in Table 3, as the glosses are taken as the gold standard for this evaluation.
However, the glosses reflect a systematic decision by the CLRP to not mark the contribution of
zero morphemes. In most of these cases, the grammar is likely correct. Finally, verbs inflected
for tense are considered to be finite by the grammar, and this is reflected in a (syntactic) feature
FORM in addition to the semantic feature TENSE. The glosses mark non-finiteness explicitly, but
do not mark finiteness separately from tense. Default singular number on nouns accounts for
19 errors, default nominative case 15, and finite form 9, of a total of 52 errors in precision. The
18 errors in recall are primarily due to cases where the intended lexical root is not available in
the grammar but a homophone is.

Finally, we performed an error analysis to get a sense of the range of reasons a word form might

10For the gloss, we included all information provided. For the feature structure, we included only the predicate
symbol from the root and any information that is added by some lexical rule in the grammar.

257



not be analyzed by the current grammar. We randomly selected 10 word forms from the four
narratives that were not assigned analyses by the grammar. The failure of analysis of these 40
forms can be attributed to the following causes:

• [29 forms] Stems not imported to the grammar, because they don’t match any of the
import classes. These stems include verbs taking three arguments, adverbs, numerals,
demonstratives, and other function words.

• [2 forms] Stems that are not in the version of the Toolbox lexicon used to import from.
• [4 forms] Affixes not implemented in the grammar.
• [5 forms] Other problems with the grammar, such as not allowing for case stacking and

not allowing the affix order attested.

In general, we find the results of this evaluation encouraging: They suggest that the methodology
presented here is effective at repurposing the results of the work on the Toolbox lexicon towards
additional computational linguistic ends. Furthermore, the error analysis points the way towards
effective means of improving the resulting grammar further, including fixing the specific errors
with affixes that were identified, broadening the classes of verbs handled, adding adverbs, and
creating lexical entries for high frequency closed-class words by hand.

5 Related Work

This work is similar in spirit to Bender’s (2008) development of an implemented grammar for
Wambaya (ISO639-3: wmb) based on the Grammar Matrix and a descriptive grammar. However,
that work focused on hand-development of the grammar and included a manually entered
lexicon, in contrast to our work on automatically populating the lexicon for the implemented
grammar.

Other work applying grammar engineering and shared resources (including typological informa-
tion) to endangered or other resource poor languages includes the Parser and Writer for Syntax
system (PAWS; Black and Black, 2009) and Linguist’s Assistant (Beale, 2011). We are not aware
of any work addressing lexicon repurposing for these systems, but methodology analogous to
what we propose in this paper should be applicable to them as well.

More generally, our work is situated within a broader context of reuse of lexical resources across
formalisms and across systems. Other work along these lines includes the work of Kamei et al.
(1997) and Bond et al. (2009) on making it possible to share user dictionaries across different
MT systems, that of Bond et al. (2008) on repurposing a variety of resources (both WordNets
and other lexical resources) in order to create a WordNet for Japanese and that of (McConville
and Dzikovska, 2007) on creating lexical entries for a TRIPS grammar (Dzikovska, 2004) on
the basis of FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998).

Conclusion and perspectives

The target lexical entries for a precision grammar derived from the Grammar Matrix are much
more complex than the information explicitly encoded in even a thorough Toolbox lexicon. The
work of developing the Toolbox lexicon is, however, the hard part. In this paper we have shown
how it is possible to use a language-independent (i.e., explicitly multi-lingual) tool to leverage

258



the effort and linguistic analysis encoded in a Toolbox lexicon to create the kind of resource
required for a machine-readable, precision grammar.

However, it is important to note that this is only a first step. Previous work building medium
to large scale grammars with the DELPH-IN technology, including the broad-coverage English
Resource Grammar (Flickinger, 2000, 2011) and a medium-sized grammar for Wambaya
(Bender, 2008) suggest that it should indeed be possible to build a substantial grammar
fragment for Chintang that uses this lexicon. The Wambaya grammar is especially pertinent
for two reasons: first, like Chintang, it represents an application of the Grammar Matrix to a
language not considered in its initial development, and second, its lexical types are based on the
same general supertypes as those developed here for Chintang. Nonetheless, every language is
different, and it is not possible to know without building the grammar whether the lexical types
will be compatible with the specific grammatical phenomena attested in Chintang. We intend to
develop such a grammar to test this in future work.

Acknowledgments

CPDP was funded by the VW Foundation as part of the DoBeS program (Grant No. II/79092 to
Bickel) and CLRP by the VW Foundation (Grant No. II/81 730 to S. Stoll), the German Research
Foundation (Grants No. BI 799/5-1 and BI 799/9-1 to B. Bickel) and the Swiss National Science
Foundation (Grant Nr. 100012_140881 to Bickel).

In addition, this material is also based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grants No. 0644097 and 1160274 to Bender. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

We are grateful to David Wax for assistance in integrating the software for importing lexical en-
tries from Toolbox to the Grammar Matrix into the Grammar Matrix’s web-based questionnaire.

References

Baker, C. F., Fillmore, C. J., and Lowe, J. B. (1998). The Berkeley FrameNet project. In
Proceedings of the 36th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and
17th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Volume 1, pages 86–90, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Beale, S. (2011). Using linguist’s assistant for language description and translation. In
Proceedings of the IJCNLP 2011 System Demonstrations, pages 5–8, Chiang Mai, Thailand. Asian
Federation of Natural Language Processing.

Bender, E. M. (2008). Evaluating a crosslinguistic grammar resource: A case study of Wambaya.
In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, pages 977–985, Columbus, Ohio. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Bender, E. M., Drellishak, S., Fokkens, A., Poulson, L., and Saleem, S. (2010). Grammar
customization. Research on Language & Computation, pages 1–50. 10.1007/s11168-010-9070-
1.

Bender, E. M., Flickinger, D., and Oepen, S. (2002). The grammar matrix: An open-source
starter-kit for the rapid development of cross-linguistically consistent broad-coverage precision
grammars. In Carroll, J., Oostdijk, N., and Sutcliffe, R., editors, Proceedings of the Workshop

259



on Grammar Engineering and Evaluation at the 19th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, pages 8–14, Taipei, Taiwan.

Bender, E. M., Ghodke, S., Baldwin, T., and Dridan, R. (2012). From database to treebank:
Enhancing hypertext grammars with grammar engineering and treebank search. In Nordhoff,
S., editor, Electronic Grammaticography (In press). University of Hawaii Press, Hawaii.

Bickel, B., Banjade, G., Gaenszle, M., Lieven, E., Paudyal, N., Rai, I., Rai, M., Rai, N. K., and
Stoll, S. (2007). Free prefix ordering in Chintang. Language, 83(1):43–73.

Bickel, B., Gaenszle, M., Rai, N. K., Lieven, E., Banjade, G., Bhatta, T. N., Paudyal, N.,
Pettigrew, J., Rai, I. P., Rai, M., Schikowski, R., and Stoll, S. (2009). Audiovisual corpus of the
chintang language, including a longitudinal corpus of language acquisition by six children,
plus a trilingual dictionary, paradigm sets, grammar sketches, ethnographic descriptions, and
photographs. DOBES Archive, http://www.mpi.nl/DOBES.

Black, C. A. and Black, H. A. (2009). PAWS: Parser and writer for syntax: Drafting syntactic
grammars in the third wave. In SIL Forum for Language Fieldwork, volume 2.

Bond, F., Isahara, H., Kanzaki, K., and Uchimoto, K. (2008). Boot-strapping a WordNet using
multiple existing WordNets. In Proceedings of LREC 2008, pages 1619–1624.

Bond, F., Okura, S., Yamamoto, Y., Murata, T., Uchimoto, K., Kato, M., Shimazu, M., and
Suzuki, T. (2009). Sharing user dictionaries across multiple systems with UTX-S. In Second
International Workshop on Intercultural Collaboration (IWIC-2009), Stanford CA.

Butt, M., Dyvik, H., King, T. H., Masuichi, H., and Rohrer, C. (2002). The parallel grammar
project. In Carroll, J., Oostdijk, N., and Sutcliffe, R., editors, Proceedings of the Workshop on
Grammar Engineering and Evaluation at the 19th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, pages 1–7.

Chafe, W. (1980). The Pear Stories: Cognitive, Cultural, and Linguistic Aspects of Narrative
Production. Ablex Pub. Corp., Norwood NJ.

Copestake, A. (2002). Implementing Typed Feature Structure Grammars. CSLI Publications,
Stanford, CA.

Copestake, A., Flickinger, D., Pollard, C., and Sag, I. A. (2005). Minimal recursion semantics:
An introduction. Research on Language & Computation, 3(2–3):281–332.

Crowgey, J. (ip). The syntactic exponence of sentential negation: A model for the LinGO
grammar matrix. Master’s thesis, University of Washington.

Drellishak, S. (2009). Widespread But Not Universal: Improving the Typological Coverage of the
Grammar Matrix. PhD thesis, University of Washington.

Dzikovska, M. O. (2004). A Practical Semantic Representation for Natural Language Parsing.
PhD thesis, University of Rochester, Rochester NY.

Ebert, K. (2003). Kiranti languages: an overview. In Thurgood, G. and LaPolla, R., editors,
The Sino-Tibetan languages, chapter 31, pages 505–517. Routledge, London/New York.

260



Flickinger, D. (2000). On building a more efficient grammar by exploiting types. Natural
Language Engineering, 6 (1) (Special Issue on Efficient Processing with HPSG):15 – 28.

Flickinger, D. (2011). Accuracy v. robustness in grammar engineering. In Bender, E. M. and
Arnold, J. E., editors, Language from a Cognitive Perspective: Grammar, Usage and Processing,
pages 31–50. CSLI Publications, Stanford, CA.

Goodman, M. W. (2012). Generation of machine-readable morphological rules from human-
readable input. Unpublished ms, University of Washington.

Joshi, A., Levy, L. S., and Takahashi, M. (1975). Tree adjunct grammars. Journal of Computer
Systems Science.

Kamei, S., Itoh, E., Fujii, M., Hirai, T., Saitoh, Y., Takahashi, M., Hiyama, T., and Muraki, K.
(1997). Shareable formats and their supporting environments for exchanging user dictionaries
among different MT systems as part of AAMT activities. In MT Summit VI.

Kaplan, R. M. and Bresnan, J. (1982). Lexical-Functional Grammar: a formal system for
grammatical representation. In Bresnan, J., editor, The Mental Representation of Grammatical
Relations. MIT Press.

King, T. H., Forst, M., Kuhn, J., and Butt, M. (2005). The feature space in parallel grammar
writing. Research on Language and Computation, Special Issue on Shared Representations in
Multilingual Grammar Engineering, 3(2):139–163.

Lønning, J. T., Oepen, S., Beermann, D., Hellan, L., Carroll, J., Dyvik, H., Flickinger, D.,
Johannessen, J. B., Meurer, P., Nordgård, T., Rosén, V., and Velldal, E. (2004). LOGON. A
Norwegian MT effort. In Proceedings of the Workshop in Recent Advances in Scandinavian
Machine Translation.

McConville, M. and Dzikovska, M. O. (2007). Extracting a verb lexicon for deep parsing from
FrameNet. In ACL 2007 Workshop on Deep Linguistic Processing, pages 112–119, Prague, Czech
Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Michailovsky, B. (1994). Manner vs. place articulation in the kiranti initial stops. In Kitamura,
H., Nishida, T., and Nagano, Y., editors, Current issues in Sino-Tibetan linguistics, pages 766–772.
National Museum of Ethnology, Osaka.

Oepen, S. (2001). [incr tsdb()] — Competence and performance laboratory. User manual.
Technical report, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany.

Oepen, S., Flickinger, D., Toutanova, K., and Manning, C. D. (2004). LinGO Redwoods. A
rich and dynamic treebank for HPSG. Journal of Research on Language and Computation,
2(4):575–596.

Pollard, C. and Sag, I. A. (1994). Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar. Studies in Contem-
porary Linguistics. The University of Chicago Press and CSLI Publications.

Rā̄ı, N. K., Rā̄ı, M., Paudyāl, N. P., Schikowski, R., Bickel, B., Stoll, S., Gaenszle, M., Banjade,
G., Rā̄ı, I. P., Bhat.t.a, T. N., Sauppe, S., Rā̄ı, R. M., Rā̄ı, J. K., Rā̄ı, L. K., Rā̄ı, D. B., Rā̄ı, G., Rā̄ı,
D., Rā̄ı, D. K., Rā̄ı, A., Rā̄ı, C. K., Rā̄ı, Ś. M., Rā̄ı, R. K., Pettigrew, J., and Dirksmeyer, T. (2011).
Chintāṅa-Nepāl̄ı-Ãgrej̄ı śabdakośa tathā vyākaran. a. Chintang Language Research Programme,
Kāt.hmād. auṁ.

261



Ranta, A. (2007). Modular grammar engineering in GF. Research on Language & Computation,
5:133–158.

Schikowski, R. (2012). Chintang morphology. Unpublished ms, University of Zürich.

Stoll, S., Bickel, B., Lieven, E., Banjade, G., Bhatta, T. N., Gaenszle, M., Paudyal, N. P., Pettigrew,
J., Rai, I. P., Rai, M., and Rai, N. K. (2012). Nouns and verbs in chintang: children’s usage and
surrounding adult speech. Journal of Child Language, 39:284 – 321.

Suppes, P., Flickinger, D., Macken, B., Cook, J., and Liang, T. (2012). Description of the EPGY
Stanford University online courses for mathematics and language arts. In International Society
for Technology in Education Annual (ISTE) 2012 Conference, San Diego CA.

262


