



















































Automatic Extraction of Polar Adjectives for the Creation of Polarity Lexicons


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Posters, pages 1271–1280,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Automatic extraction of polar adjectives for the creation of  
polarity lexicons 

Silvia VÁZQUEZ1 Muntsa PADRÓ1 Núria BEL1 Julio GONZALO2 

(1)UNIVERSITAT POMPEU FABRA, Roc Boronat, 138, Barcelona, Spain 
(2) E.T.S.I. INFORMÁTICA UNED, Juan del Rosal, 16, Madrid, Spain  

{silvia.vazquez, muntsa.padro, nuria.bel}@upf.edu, 

julio@lsi.uned.es 

ABSTRACT 

Automatic creation of polarity lexicons is a crucial issue to be solved in order to reduce time and 
efforts in the first steps of Sentiment Analysis. In this paper we present a methodology based on 
linguistic cues that allows us to automatically discover, extract and label subjective adjectives 
that should be collected in a domain-based polarity lexicon. For this purpose, we designed a 
bootstrapping algorithm that, from a small set of seed polar adjectives, is capable to iteratively 
identify, extract and annotate positive and negative adjectives. Additionally, the method 
automatically creates lists of highly subjective elements that change their prior polarity even 
within the same domain. The algorithm proposed reached a precision of 97.5% for positive 
adjectives and 71.4% for negative ones in the semantic orientation identification task.  

KEYWORDS: Sentiment Analysis, Opinion Mining, Polarity Lexicon, Subjectivity Detection  

1271



1 Introduction 

In recent years, Sentiment Analysis has become one of the most important applications of Natural 
Language Processing. In the beginning, the discipline tried to reutilize techniques used in fields 
like Document Classification, Information Extraction or Question-Answering, but soon 
researchers realized that the typology of the texts in Sentiment Analysis was very different from 
those studied in these areas (Cardie, 1997), (Stoyanov, Cardie, & Wiebe, 2005). In this sense, for 
the summarization of subjective texts, the most important issue is to discover what is the general 
and predominant opinion, evaluation, emotion or speculation expressed by the author, and not the 
identification of the main topic of the text, the main interest of the cited areas. This task can only 
be done with information about the polarity of words.  

Discovery and extraction of the vocabulary used to express subjectivity is crucial to start the 
development of any complex sentiment analysis tool. For example, knowing that an old film 
could be positive for some people but negative for others is very important in order to summarize 
the global opinion of that product. Therefore, designing algorithms that allow us to automatically 
build these kinds of language resources is very important.  

There are three main approaches to create polarity lexicons: manual, dictionary based and corpus 
based. Early works in the field of Sentiment Analysis manually compiled lists of subjective 
words but this task was very time consuming and needed great human efforts. Some examples of 
this approach are The General Inquirer (Stone, Dunphy, Smith, & Ogilvie, 1966) and some of the 
lists of verbs annotated by Levin (Levin, 1993). 

Dictionary based approach utilizes external language resources as lexicons and thesaurus which, 
although not collecting polarity relations, can help to increase the number of a set of opinion 
seeds by different methods. The majority of the works that follow this procedure make use of 
WordNet (Miller, 1995) to carry out this task. In the work of (Hu & Liu, 2004) the authors 
hypothesized that synonyms of a seed adjective have the same semantic orientation while the 
antonymous would have the opposite one, employing WordNet synsets to find out these relations. 
Lexical resources like SentiWordNet (Esuli & Sebastiani, 2005) (Baccianella, Esuli, & 
Sebastiani, 2010) classified polarity elements into Positive, Negative or Objective by analyzing 
the similarity between the glosses or definitions of the words and also by studying the relations 
established among them in the thesaurus. Valitutti (Valitutti, Strapparava, & Stock, 2004) tried to 
adapt WordNet to Sentiment Analysis purposes through the identification and subsequent 
annotation of all the elements having a high load of emotion or affective content.  

Although the dictionary based approach achieved great results, it has two main shortcomings. On 
the one hand, it does not take into account the polarity changes due to different domains. As 
some works demonstrated (Vázquez & Bel, 2012), a great majority of the adjectives are domain 
dependent: they could be positive in one domain but negative or even neutral in another. On the 
other hand, this approach suffers from a lack of scalability since it does not take into account 
words not appearing in the language resources used. Actually, it falls down on the analysis of 
colloquial words or different kinds of slang expressions that are not collected in WordNet or any 
thesaurus. 

Corpus based approach starts, as dictionary based one, with a manually built list of seed words 
but unlike it, this approach does not rely on the availability of external language resources (that 
for some languages could even not exist) but on linguistic cues which systematically appear in 
opinionated texts. The main idea behind this approach is that there are actually linguistic 
constraints that allow automatically identifying opinion-bearing words. One of the most early and 

1272



well-known work that followed this method was proposed by Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown 
(1997). This work will be commented in more detail in Section 2. Other important works based 
on this approach are (Kanayama & Nasukawa, 2006), (Kaji & Kitsuregawa, 2007) and (Riloff, 
Wiebe, & Wilson, 2003). Kanayama and Nasukama tried to expand a set of polar atoms (words 
and expressions) starting from an unannotated corpus and an initial lexicon. Their main 
assumption was that opinion words with the same prior polarity appear successively in the text, 
unless this context changed through an adversative expression. Kaji and Kitsuregawa addressed 
the polarity lexicon building from the lexico-syntactic patterns found in a large collection of 
documents. They achieved high precision for positive (92%) and negative (88%) elements but 
their recall is low. The work of Riloff et al. was not restricted to adjectives but they collected 
subjective nouns (they managed to learn 1000 new subjective nouns) by a bootstrapping process. 

In this paper, we follow the corpus-based approach and propose a bootstrapping method to 
automatically and iteratively extract polar adjectives as well as their prior polarity. Additionally, 
this bootstrapping method permits to identify all of the polar adjectives that, exclusively 
depending on the context (i.e. surrounding words), can behave as positive or negative polar 
elements. The proposed method achieved a precision of 97.5% for positive adjectives and 71.4% 
for negative ones in the semantic orientation identification task and significantly increased recall 
to 67%. 

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the methodology 
followed in our experiment, the bootstrapping process carried out and the results achieved. 
Section 3 details the evaluation of the bootstrapping method proposed. Finally, we present the 
conclusions and outline the future work. 

2 Methodology 

The contribution of our method to automatically identify, extract and label subjective adjectives 
is that we introduce a bootstrapping approach to gain coverage, and a new category of adjectives, 
i.e. “highly subjective adjectives”, to gain precision. Our method is based, basically, on the 
following two works.  

We based our method on the approach presented in Hatzivassiloglou & McKeown (1997) where 
the authors hypothesized that two adjectives joined by “and” have the same semantic orientation 
while two adjectives joined by “but” have the opposite one. They used this idea along with a log-
linear regression model and a set of supplementary morphological rules to predict whether a pair 
of adjectives joined by any of these conjunctions has the same or different semantic orientation. 
Once pairs of adjectives are extracted, they utilized a clustering method to separate all the 
adjectives conjoined into two groups. The group with more elements was labeled as positive 
adjectives and the other as negative. This final labeling task, based on the normal frequency of 
positive elements, it is right if we work with a balanced corpus (with the same number of positive 
and negative reviews). However, in the case we worked with a corpus with more negative than 
positive texts, the number of negative words tended to be higher, and, therefore, the results of the 
tagging could be biased.  

In this work, they achieved a 92% of accuracy in the classification of positive and negative 
adjectives. 

The second work in which our research is based on is (Vázquez & Bel, 2012). This work is a case 
study where the authors introduced a taxonomy of polar adjectives. The results of their study 
showed that a great majority of polar adjectives change their prior polarity values when occurring 

1273



in different domains, that is, an adjective could be positive in a domain but negative or even 
irrelevant in other. For example “entertaining” is very positive in a film review, but has no sense, 
for instance, in a car review. Besides, the authors proposed a new type of polar adjectives, called 
“highly subjective adjectives”, which could change their prior polarity not only among different 
domains but even within the same domain. For instance, a “big” car, could be positive for some 
customers (easy to park) but negative for others (any space inside).  

To consider the existence of these “highly subjective” adjectives turned out to be very important 
in our experiments to gain precision. Taking into account the existence of these kinds of units in 
our bootstrapping process, it was possible to automatically discover not only domain dependent 
positive and negative adjectives but also to identify highly subjective adjectives that had caused 
mistakes in our final lexicon if we had not identified them. 

The bootstrapping algorithm that we propose automatically extracts all of the polar adjectives 
joined by “y” (“and”) or “pero” (“but”) in a given corpus. A small set of seed adjectives as well 
as their corresponding prior polarity values is used for initializing the algorithm. This initial seed 
list was made from domain independent adjectives, therefore these elements could be used as 
initial list of seeds not only in the domain of cars, but also in any domain that we want to work 
with. 

Our methodology differs from the one proposed by Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown since we 
hypothesized that after the first detection step, the new adjectives and their corresponding prior 
polarity can be iteratively reused to discover more new polar adjectives. We utilized the 
adjectives that were in our seed polarity lexicon as input for our algorithm to find new adjectives 
joined with them, identifying also the prior polarity of those. Therefore, we propose that polar 
adjectives and their corresponding polarity values can be automatically identified if they are 
found in a coordinated construction with the appropriate conjunctions and with other adjectives 
that were not in our seed lexicon. The process will continue until any adjective of our lexicon is 
not found joined with any new adjective or until there is no more conjunctive relation of this 
type.  

Additionally, following the taxonomy of polar adjectives proposed in (Vázquez & Bel, 2012), we 
also automatically built lists of elements that should be treated differently in order to avoid 
important mistakes in the precision of automatically built polarity lexicons. As Vázquez & Bel 
(2012) we have worked with Spanish. However the method can be applied to any language where 
the conjunctive constructions work in the same manner. 

Therefore, our algorithm operates on the following conditions:  

  If a seed adjective is joined by “y” (“and”) with an unknown adjective (that is, it is not 
in our seed list) and did not appear in contradictory constructions1, we will conclude 
that the unknown adjective will have the same semantic orientation of the seed adjective 
and can be added, along with its corresponding prior polarity, to our polarity lexicon.  

  If a seed adjective is joined by “pero” (“but”) with an unknown adjective and did not 
appear in contradictory constructions, we will conclude that the unknown adjective will 
have the opposite semantic orientation of the seed adjective and can be added, along 
with its prior polarity, to our polarity lexicon.  

                                                           
1 Positive adjective + and + negative adjective; negative adjective + and + positive adjective; positive adjective + but + 
positive adjective ; negative adjective + but + negative adjective   

1274



  If a seed adjective appears in conjunctive patterns which imply that its semantic 
orientation is positive but also appears in conjunctive patterns which imply that its 
semantic orientation is negative, the polar adjective will be added to the highly 
subjective adjective list.  

See a diagram of the process in FIGURE 1. 

2.1 Bootstrapping experiment 

As explained before, the bootstrapping algorithm was meant to iteratively increase the number of 
polar adjectives collected for our polarity lexicon as well as to separate elements in our highly 
subjective adjective lists.  

The experiment was carried out using a corpus of 250,000 words from car reviews. This corpus 
was extracted from a wider corpus (8 million of words) consisting of texts of different domains 
(cars, movies, mobile phones, video games and sport teams).  

 

FIGURE 1 – Diagram of the bootstrapping process 

All of the texts were collected from Ciao2, a website specialized in reviews where the users write 
in Spanish, the language studied in this work, and where they are paid for doing this task. This 
last aspect guaranteed us a minimum level of correctness in all the texts, minimizing the amount 
of noisy text in the study.  

The corpus was annotated with Part-Of-Speech tags and lemmatized using Freeling3 POS tagger 
(Padró, Collado, Reese, Lloberes, & Castellón, 2010) and indexed using Corpus Query Processor 
(CQP)4 (Christ, 1994) in order to facilitate the search of coordinated adjectives.  

The process started by searching adjectives in the corpus occurring in a set of conjunction 
patterns, in order to find all the adjectives that were conjoined. 482 pairs of adjectives joined by 
the conjunctions “y” (“and”) or “pero” (“but”) were found. These pairs were the input for the 
identification of polarity if joined with an adjective of a known polarity; in a first step if the pair 
contains an adjective of the seed list, and later if containing an adjective identified and labeled by 
the algorithm.  

                                                           
2 http://www.ciao.es/ 
3 http://nlp.lsi.upc.edu/freeling/ 
4 http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/projekte/CorpusWorkbench/ 

1275



We started the iterative process with 28 positive and 7 negative seed adjectives. These elements 
were taken from the list of Bel and Vázquez (2012). Seeds were very reliable polar words that 
five annotators manually labeled as domain independent in a previous work. See the lists of 
positive and negative seeds in TABLE 1.  

The procedure was iteratively repeated until no more polar adjectives were extracted, and it 
finished in 7 iterations. 

2.2 Results 

As a result of the bootstrapping process proposed in the last subsection, we increased six times 
the number of polar adjectives that there were in the seed polarity dictionary. We augmented the 
positive adjectives from 28 (seeds) to 173 and the negative ones from 7 (seeds) to 37. Crucially, 
we identified 13 highly subjective adjectives that indeed appeared with positive polarity in some 
contexts and with negative in others.   

Positive Seeds5 

alucinante, bello, bueno, chulo, cojonudo, elegante, 
espectacular, estupendo, excelente, excepcional, 

extraordinario, fantástico, genial, hermoso, 
impecable, impresionante, increíble, inmejorable, 

insuperable, lindo, magnífico, maravilloso, novedoso, 
perfecto, precioso, recomendable, sensacional, único 

Negative Seeds6 terrible, pésimo, malo, horrible, feo, cutre, chungo 

TABLE 1- Lists of positive and negative seeds 

The growth in the number of adjectives in connection with the number of iterations is detailed in 
FIGURE 2.  

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 2 – Positive, negative and highly subjective adjectives collected and number of 
iterations 

3 Evaluation 

In this section, we report on the evaluation of the bootstrapping method proposed in the Section 
3. To carry out this evaluation, we manually annotated a Gold Standard which consisted of the 
12% of the whole car corpus; 200 documents in total. In each text, all the polar adjectives that 
should be in the final polarity lexicon were identified and labeled with their corresponding 
semantic orientation (positive or negative) in the particular context where they appeared. For the 

                                                           
5 Amazing, beautiful, good, lovely, brilliant, elegant, spectacular, excellent, exceptional, extraordinary, fantastic, terrific, 
impeccable, impressive, incredible, unbeatable, pretty, superb, marvellous, original, perfect, gorgeous, sensational (some 
of them are synonyms so we avoided to repeat them in the translation)  
6 Terrible, dreadful, bad, horrible, ugly, shabby, dicey  

1276



annotation task we used Brat7 (Stenetorp et al., 2012), a web-based annotation tool that allowed 
us to create our own labels, adapted to the experiment.  

The instructions given to the annotator were the following: “If an adjective is used to describe a 
positive or negative speaker’s evaluation, opinion, emotion or speculation of some of the objects 
reviewed, then this word should be in our polarity lexicon and annotated with the label that better 
describe it according to its semantic orientation”. 

It is important to note that some words that are typically used as subjective elements can also be 
found as objective ones. For example, “pequeño” (“small”) behaves as a subjective adjective in 
sentences like “este coche es pequeño y aburrido” (“this car is small and boring”) where we can 
easily understand than the writer does not like the car, since he joined the adjective “pequeño” 
(“small”) with a negative adjective, in this case, “aburrido” (“boring”). However, if the writer 
was enumerating the general characteristics of the car, for example in “este coche es pequeño ya 
que solo tiene dos plazas, tiene 3 puertas y los vidrios tintados…” (“this car is small because it 
only has two seats, has three doors and dyed glasses…”), it does not imply that “pequeño” 
(“small”) was positive or negative. In this last example, the writer performed a merely 
informative function, the adjective acting as an objective unit. In these cases, if the adjective had 
a subjective behavior, it was annotated with its corresponding tag, while if it was objective 
remained untagged.  

The Gold Standard contained 263 words annotated as polar adjectives, being 199 of them tagged 
as positive and 52 of them as negative. See some examples of the annotated adjectives in TABLE 
2. 

It is important to note that 12 of them were identified as highly subjective elements since they 
were tagged as positive in some occasions and as negative in others. Some examples are “alto” 
(“high”), “grande” (“big”) or “pequeño” (“small”). 

Label Examples 

Positive Adjective afortunado, bestial, deportivo, poderoso
8 

Negative Adjective despreciable, renqueante, molesto, prohibitivo9 

TABLE 2 – Examples of annotation in the Gold Standard 

In order to evaluate the bootstrapping process proposed in Section 2.1, we repeated the 
experiment only with the texts that formed the Gold Standard. We searched for all the 
conjunctive patterns and found 64 pairs of adjectives joined by “y” (“and”) or “pero” (“but”). 
Therefore, we collected 64 pairs of adjectives of the total of 482 appearing in the car corpus. 
Then, we repeated the bootstrapping process carried out for the conjunctive pairs extracted from 
the car corpus, over the pairs of conjoined adjectives extracted from the Gold Standard.  

Obviously, in this case, the growth in the number of adjectives collected is smaller, since we 
worked only with a 13% of the total pairs of adjectives joined by a conjunction. We augmented 
the positive adjectives from 28 (seeds) to 55 and the negative ones from 7 (seeds) to 14. In these 
data, we did not identify any highly subjective adjective due to the reduction of the corpus. 

                                                           
7 http://brat.nlplab.org/ 
8 Lucky, terrific, sports, powerful   
9 Despicable, ailing, annoying, prohibitive   

1277



The recall of the bootstrapping process proposed was calculated comparing the total number of 
adjectives that appeared in the conjunction pairs with the number of polar adjectives that our 
method was capable to extract. We identified the 67% of all the adjectives that appear in the 64 
pairs of adjectives. 

In order to know the precision of the method, we calculated the number of adjectives that were 
correctly labeled (as positive or negative) over all of the adjectives extracted by the bootstrapping 
process. In the Gold Standard, of all the 51 adjectives identified, 41 of them were tagged as 
positive, 7 of them were tagged as negative and 3 of them were extracted of these lists as highly 
subjective because they appeared labelled as positive or as negative depending on the context. 
This yields a precision for positives of 97.6% and 71.5% for negatives. See all the results in 
TABLE 3. 

Recall Precision for Positives Precision for Negatives  

67% 97.6% 71.5%  

TABLE 3 – Recall and precision of the extraction and annotation of the polar adjectives 

The results of the experiment and the data obtained with the evaluation show that our 
bootstrapping algorithm is able to identify and label most of the polarity adjectives contained in a 
corpus. The evaluation shows that our method achieves better rates of precision than other 
published works reported in Section 1 while maintaining recall. 

Conclusions and future work 

In this paper we present a bootstrapping method to automatically identify, extract and label polar 
adjectives, not only as positive or negative but also as highly subjective elements. Our method is 
based on the hypothesis that two adjectives joined by “y” (“and”) have the same prior polarity 
and two adjectives joined by “pero” (“but”) have the opposite one. Additionally, it labels as 
“highly subjective” all of the adjectives that can behave as positive as well as negative depending 
on the context. This triple classification of the polar adjectives improves the methods based on 
the same hypothesis and achieves a precision of 97.6% in the identification and labeling of 
positive elements and of 71.5% in the classification of negative ones.  

Moreover, our method is capable to extract some slang polar adjectives, (for example, 
“cojonudo” (“insane”), “fardón” (“showy”)) since it is not based on external language resources 
but in the real language usages of the writers. Apart from that, it is possible to reutilize the 
bootstrapping method because the process is simple and replicable for other domains and 
languages.  

In future works, we will adapt the bootstrapping method proposed in order to extract and annotate 
polar nouns joined with the appropriate conjunctions and we also plan to study the possible 
extractions of polar verbs and adverbs. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was funded by the EU 7FP project 248064 PANACEA and the UPF-IULA PhD grant 
program. 

 

1278



References 

Baccianella, S., Esuli, A., & Sebastiani, F. (2010). SentiWordNet 3.0: An Enhanced Lexical 
Resource for Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining. In N. C. C. Chair, K. Choukri, B. 
Maegaard, J. Mariani, J. Odijk, S. Piperidis, M. Rosner, et al. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 
Seventh conference on International Language Resources and Evaluation LREC10 (Vol. 0, 
pp. 2200–2204). European Language Resources Association (ELRA). Retrieved from 
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2010/pdf/769_Paper.pdf  

Cardie, C. (1997). Empirical Methods in Information Extraction. AI Magazine, 18(4), 65–79. 
Retrieved from http://www.aaai.org/ojs/index.php/aimagazine/article/viewArticle/1322  

Christ, O. (1994). A Modular and Flexible Architecture for an Integrated Corpus Query System, 
10. Computation and Language. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/cmp-lg/9408005  

Esuli, A., & Sebastiani, F. (2005). Determining the semantic orientation of terms through gloss 
classification. Proceedings of the 14th ACM international conference on Information and 
knowledge management CIKM 05, 617–624. doi:10.1145/1099554.1099713  

Hatzivassiloglou, V., & McKeown, K. R. (1997). Predicting the semantic orientation of 
adjectives. Proceedings of the 35th annual meeting on Association for Computational 
Linguistics, pages(2), 174–181. doi:10.3115/976909.979640  

Hu, M., & Liu, B. (2004). Mining and summarizing customer reviews. Proceedings of the 2004 
ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining - KDD 
’04 (p. 168). New York, New York, USA: ACM Press. doi:10.1145/1014052.1014073  

Kaji, N., & Kitsuregawa, M. (2007). Building Lexicon for Sentiment Analysis from Massive 
Collection of HTML Documents. Computational Linguistics, 43(June), 1075–1083. 
Retrieved from http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D/D07/D07-1115  

Kanayama, H., & Nasukawa, T. (2006). Fully automatic lexicon expansion for domain-oriented 
sentiment analysis. Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing EMNLP 06, (July), 355–363. doi:10.3115/1610075.1610125  

Levin, B. (1993). English Verb Classes and Alternations: A Preliminary Investigation. Chicago 
Il (p. 366). University of Chicago Press. Retrieved from http://www.amazon.com/English-
Verb-Classes-Alternations-Investigation/dp/0226475336  

Miller, G. A. (1995). WordNet: a lexical database for English. Communications of the ACM, 
38(11), 39–41. doi:10.1145/219717.219748  

Padró, L., Collado, M., Reese, S., Lloberes, M., & Castellón, I. (2010). FreeLing 2.1: Five Years 
of Open-Source Language Processing Tools. Retrieved from http://upcommons.upc.edu/e-
prints/handle/2117/7616  

Riloff, E., Wiebe, J., & Wilson, T. (2003). Learning subjective nouns using extraction pattern 
bootstrapping. In E. Riloff, J. Wiebe, & T. Wilson (Eds.), Proceedings of the seventh 
conference on Natural language learning at HLTNAACL 2003 (Vol. 4, pp. 25–32). 
Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:10.3115/1119176.1119180  

Stenetorp, P., Pyysalo, S., Topić, G., Ohta, T., Ananiadou, S., & Tsujii, J. (2012). brat: a Web-
based Tool for NLP-Assisted Text Annotation. Proceedings of the Demonstrations at the 
13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics 

1279



(pp. 102–107). Avignon: Association for Computational Linguistics. Retrieved from 
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/E12-2021 

Stone, P. J., Dunphy, D. C., Smith, M. S., & Ogilvie, D. M. (1966). The General Inquirer: A 
Computer Approach to Content Analysis. (M. I. T. Press, Ed.)The MIT Press (Vol. 08, p. 
651). MIT Press. Retrieved from http://www.webuse.umd.edu:9090/ 

Stoyanov, V., Cardie, C., & Wiebe, J. (2005). Multi-Perspective Question Answering Using the 
OpQA Corpus. Proceedings of HLT-EMNLP 2005. Retrieved from 
http://www.cs.cornell.edu/home/cardie/papers/hlt-emnlp05-ves.pdf 

Valitutti, A., Strapparava, C., & Stock, O. (2004). Developing Affective Lexical Resources. 
PsychNology Journal, 2(1), 2004. 

Vázquez, S., & Bel, N. (2012). A Classification of Adjectives for Polarity Lexicons 
Enhancement. Proceedings of the Eight International Conference on Language Resources 
and Evaluation (LREC’12). Retrieved from http://www.lrec-
conf.org/proceedings/lrec2012/pdf/223_Paper.pdf 

1280


