



















































Does Tectogrammatics Help the Annotation of Discourse?


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Posters, pages 853–862,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Does Tectogrammatics Help the Annotation of Discourse?

Jiří Mírovský, Pavlína Jínová and Lucie Poláková
Charles University in Prague

Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics

{mirovsky|jinova|polakova}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

ABSTRACT

In  the  following  paper,  we  discuss  and  evaluate  the  benefits  that  deep  syntactic  trees 
(tectogrammatics) and all the rich annotation of the Prague Dependency Treebank bring to the 
process  of  annotating  the  discourse  structure,  i.e.  discourse  relations,  connectives  and  their 
arguments. The decision to annotate discourse structure directly on the trees contrasts with the 
majority of similarly aimed projects, usually based on the annotation of linear texts. Our basic 
assumption is that some syntactic features of a sentence analysis correspond to certain discourse-
level features. Hence, we use some properties of the dependency-based large-scale treebank of 
Czech  to  help  establish an  independent  annotation  layer  of  discourse.  The question  that  we 
answer in the paper is how much did we gain by employing this approach.

TITLE AND ABSTRACT IN CZECH

Pomáhá tektogramatika při anotaci diskurzních vztahů?

ABSTRAKT

V  tomto  příspěvku  hodnotíme  přínos,  který  představují  syntacticko-sémantické  stromy 
(tektogramatická  rovina  anotace)  a  celá  bohatá  anotace  Pražského závislostního  korpusu pro 
anotaci  diskurzní  struktury  textu,  tedy  pro  anotaci  diskurzních  vztahů,  jejich  konektorů  a 
argumentů. Rozhodnutím anotovat diskurzní strukturu přímo na stromech se náš přístup liší od 
většiny podobně zaměřených projektů, které jsou obvykle založeny na anotaci lineárního textu.  
Naším základním předpokladem je, že některé syntaktické rysy větné analýzy odpovídají jistým 
rysům z roviny diskurzní struktury. Proto využíváme některé vlastnosti rozsáhlého závislostního 
korpusu  češtiny  k  ustanovení  nezávislé  diskurzní  anotační  vrstvy.  V  tomto  příspěvku 
odpovídáme na otázku, jaké výhody tento přístup přináší.

KEYWORDS : TECTOGRAMMATICS, PDT, DISCOURSE ANNOTATION

KEYWORDS IN CZECH: TEKTOGRAMATIKA, PDT, DISKURZNÍ ANOTACE

853



1 Introduction

In  recent  years,  there  has  been  an  increasing  interest  in  studying  linguistic 
phenomena going beyond the sentence boundary. Corpora of different languages 
conveying  discourse-relevant  annotation  start  to  appear,  e.g.  RST  Discourse 
Treebank  (Carlson,  Marcu  and  Okurowski,  2002),  Penn  Discourse  Treebank 
(Prasad et al., 2008) – both for English, Hindi Discourse Relation Bank (Oza et 
al.,  2009), Potsdam Commentary Corpus for German (Stede,  2004) etc.  They 
usually have raw written documents as the annotation basis and the authors use 
and adjust for their purposes some of the well known discourse methodologies. 
In  the discourse project  for  Czech,  on the contrary to  the majority,  syntactic 
(tectogrammatical) trees have been used as the basis for the discourse annotation. 
Thus,  the  project  makes  use  of  the  theoretical  framework  of  the  functional 
generative description (Sgall, Panevová and Hajičová, 1986), which gave rise to 
the dependency treebanking in Prague. The main goal of this paper is to report in 
detail  on  exploitations  we  were  able  to  make  of  the  syntactic  annotation  to 
establish  an independent  level  of the  discourse annotation.  Annotation  of the 
discourse structure here is understood as analyzing semantic relations between 
discourse units, in this phase of the project exclusively relations  signalled by a 
specific discourse connective (henceforth DC). Some of the (not only) syntactic 
features were very helpful and enabled us to perform automatic extractions and 
conversions.  The tectogrammatical  layer  of the Prague Dependency Treebank 
2.0 (henceforth PDT,  Hajič et al., 2006) provided most of the information we 
used, in less extent we used some features from the analytical layer and also the 
annotation of coreference.

1.1 Layers of Annotation in PDT

The data in our project come from the Prague Dependency Treebank 2.0, which 
is a manually annotated treebank of Czech journalistic texts, consisting of almost 
50  thousand  sentences.  It  is  already  provided  with  several  layers  of  manual 
annotation: the morphological layer (where each token from the sentence gets a 
lemma and a morphological tag), the analytical layer (surface syntax in the form 
of a dependency tree, where each node corresponds to a token in the sentence), 
and  the  tectogrammatical  layer  (henceforth  TR;  underlying syntax  and 
semantics, also in the form of a dependency tree). There is also a separate layer 
of manually annotated coreference and bridging anaphora (Nedoluzhko et  al., 
2011b), published as an extension to PDT.

854



1.2 Discourse Annotation in Two Steps

In our project so far, we have focused on discourse relations anchored by an 
explicit  (surface-present)  discourse  connective.  These  relations  and  their 
connectives have been annotated throughout the whole  treebank. However, all 
numbers reported in the paper refer to the training and development test parts of 
the whole data, i.e. 43,955 sentences (approx. 9/10 of the treebank).1

The annotation of discourse relations  proceeded in two major steps. The first 
phase  of  the  annotation  was  a  thorough  manual  processing  of  the  treebank 
focused on the inter-sentential relations (relations between sentences)  signalled 
by explicit  discourse connectives.  Intra-sentential  relations  were only marked 
manually in cases where the TR did not provide enough or correct information 
for the subsequent  automatic  extraction of discourse relations. Other cases of 
intra-sentential  relations,  where the tectogrammatical  annotation was adequate 
for the discourse interpretation, were left to the second phase.

The second phase of  the annotation  consisted predominantly of an automatic 
procedure that extracted mostly tectogrammatical features and used them directly 
for  the  annotation  of  the  intra-sentential  discourse  relations.  A  detailed 
description of the second phase can be found in Jínová, Mírovský and Poláková 
(2012b).

The main theoretical principle of the annotation was naturally the same for both 
the phases. It has been inspired partially by the lexical  approach of the Penn 
Discourse Treebank project (Prasad et  al.,  2008), and partially by the already 
mentioned tectogrammatical approach and the functional generative description 
(Sgall,  Panevová  and  Hajičová,  1986,  Mikulová  et  al.,  2005).  A  discourse 
connective  in this  view takes two discourse arguments  (verbal  clauses)  as its 
arguments.  The semantic  relation  between the  arguments  is  represented  by a 
discourse arrow (link), the direction of which also uniformly defines the nature 
of the argument (e.g. reason - result).2 However, the annotation itself proceeded 
in each of the phases differently.  During the manual annotation (phase 1), the 
annotators first searched for possible discourse connectives in the texts and then 
assigned  relations,  arguments,  connectives  and  discourse  types  to  the  tree 
structures.  In  the  automated  annotation  (phase 2),  the  relations  and  their 
discourse types were identified and annotated first (mostly automatically), then 
we searched for their connectives (also mostly automatically).

1  Thus the last tenth of the treebank, evaluation test data, remains (as far as possible) unobserved.
2 For further information on the annotation guidelines, see the annotation manual (Poláková et al., 2012) or 
http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/discourse/

855



Type of the relation number
Intra-sentential relations 12,673
    - automatic vertical 3,090 (2,599+491)
    - automatic horizontal 7,392
    - manual vertical 510
    - manual horizontal 1,681
Inter-sentential (all manual) 5,514
Total 18,187

TABLE 1 – Overview of discourse relations annotated in PDT

Table 1 shows the summary of all relations annotated during both phases. The 
intra-sentential relations are divided into two categories – vertical and horizontal. 
Vertical  relations  correspond  to  dependency  relations,  horizontal  relations 
correspond  to  coordinations.  Also  the  number  of  inter-sentential  relations 
(relations between sentences) and the total number of all relations are presented.3

2 Intra-sentential Relations

In  this  Section,  we  focus  on  the  annotation  of  the  intra-sentential  discourse 
relations  (mostly  phase  2)  and  discuss  and  evaluate  features  that  helped 
automatize the annotation. All topics are discussed only briefly here, a detailed 
analyses is given in Jínová, Mírovský and Poláková (2012b).

Concerning  the  intra-sentential  relations,  i.e.  the  syntax-based ones,  we were 
able  to  automatically  convert  10,482  (3,090  vertical  and  7,392  horizontal) 
tectogrammatical relations to discourse relations. However, for 491 of them, the 
discourse type had to be set manually, as explained below (second number in the 
parenthesis in the second row of Table 1). Mostly during the first phase of the 
annotation, 2,191 (510 vertical and 1,681 horizontal) intra-sentential discourse 
relations were annotated completely manually.

2.1 Discourse Types

An ideal case for the automatic treatment was a tectogrammatical relation with 
an exact semantic counterpart  on the level of discourse analysis,  e.g.  reason-
result (signaled  by  functors  REAS,  CSQ,  CAUS),  concession (CNCS), 

3 Let us emphasize again: all numbers refer to the training and development test parts of the data (9/10 of the 
treebank, 43,955 sentences). 

856



conjunction (CONJ)  (all  automatic  horizontal  relations  and  2,599 completely 
automatic  vertical  relations).  Because  of  rich  variety  of  connectives,  some 
manual work preceded in case of temporal relations (491 relations).

2.2 Detection of Discourse Connectives

In most cases, the discourse connectives of intra-sentential  discourse relations 
could  be  automatically  detected  on  the  basis  of  the  information  on  the 
tectogrammatical and analytical layers. With the exception of 31 atypical cases 
(which  were  fixed  manually),  discourse  connectives  could  be  detected 
automatically for all 10,482 intra-sentential discourse relations.

2.2.1 Grammatical Coreference and Expression což

Pronoun-like  expression  což4 (roughly  which  in  English)  represents  an  intra-
sentential  connective  with the conjunction meaning and is,  at  the same time, 
inflected and plays  a role of a participant  of the clause structure.  To make it 
possible to associate this connective with the discourse relation automatically, 
the grammatical coreference5 had to be used. The deictic part of the expression 
což can refer both to a verbal phrase (the war unites us in Example 1), and to a 
nominal phrase (a love to war in Example 2). However, it functions as a DC only 
when it refers to a verbal phrase (Example 1).
(1)  Válka nás sjednocuje, což pro nás není přirozené. 

The war unites us, which is not natural for us.

(2)  Cítil jsem z nich lásku k válce, což je něco proti přírodě. 
I felt from them a love to war, which is something against nature.

There  are  a  total  of  355 occurrences  of  the  expression  což in  our  data,  220 
occurrences  have  a  grammatical  coreference  link  to  a  finite-verb  node,  11 
occurrences  have  this  link  to  a  coordination  of  finite-verb  nodes.  Therefore, 
thanks  to  the  grammatical  coreference,  it  was  possible  to  automatically 
distinguish  these  231  (220+11)  occurrences  from  the  rest  and  identify  the 
expression což as a discourse connective in these contexts.

2.3 Scope of Arguments

In all intra-sentential relations, the scope of arguments is defined as the effective 

4 It has arisen from relative pronoun co (what) and particle -ž which is no longer used as a separate word in 
Czech. 
5 Grammatical coreference has been annotated in the PDT for expressions for which it is possible to identify 
the coreferred part of the text on the basis of grammatical rules (this applies e.g. for relative pronouns, 
reflexive pronouns or for participants of control verbs (see Mikulová et. al, 2005)).

857



subtree6 of the root node of the argument (the root node of the argument can 
either be a finite verb or a node coordinating finite verbs7), excluding all nodes of 
the other argument of the relation. In all 10,482 automatically annotated intra-
sentential  relations,  the  tectogrammatical  tree  structure  correctly  defined  the 
scope of  the  arguments,  independently of the fact  whether  the argument  was 
formed on the surface by a continuous sequence of words or not.

For the 2,191 manually annotated relations,  in all  but 146 cases the scope of 
arguments was also equal to the effective subtree of the root node, in the 146 
cases the annotator had to define a different scope of the argument.

3 Inter-sentential Relations

In  this  section,  we  focus  on  the  annotation  of  the  inter-sentential  discourse 
relations (phase 1). Unlike for the intra-sentential relations, the inter-sentential 
discourse relations (relations between sentences) had to be annotated completely 
manually.8 However,  in  the  following  subsections,  we  discuss  and  evaluate 
features of the tectogrammatical layer that contributed notably to the annotation. 

3.1 Expressions with the PREC Label

Although  the  annotation  on  the  tectogrammatical  layer  does  not  in  principle 
surpass sentence boundaries (i.e. each sentence is represented by an individual 
tree), one special mark has been adopted for expressions that signal (mostly) an 
inter-sentential  relation  (it  is  often  the  case  with  connectives  such  as  proto 
(therefore), ovšem (however), tedy (hence)), see Mladová (2008). An expression 
marked  with  the  functor  PREC  (a  reference  to  PREceding  Context)  on  the 
tectogrammatical layer thus indicates a possible presence of a discourse relation, 
but,  at  the same time,  it  does not interpret  the semantic  type  of the relation, 
neither  says  anything about the scope and the position of the other discourse 
argument (see Example 3).
(3)  Rádi bychom ale začali u středních odborných učilišť.

V jejich případě ovšem záleží také na domluvě s ministerstvem hospodářství.

But we would like to start with the vocational schools. 
In their case, however, also the arrangement with the Ministry of Economy matters.

Expressions  with  label  PREC proved to be  a  very important  clue  during the 
annotation process – they served as a clear signal of a possible discourse relation 
6 Effective subtree of a node is a set of nodes that linguistically depend (transitively) on the given node, taking 
all effects of coordinations etc. into account.
7 possibly transitively, i.e. through other coordinating nodes
8 See Jínová, Mírovský and Poláková (2012a) for the evaluation and analysis of the inter-annotator agreement.

858



in  the  context  and were  used  after  each  part  of  the  annotation  to  check  the 
completeness of the annotation. The total number of occurrences of expressions 
with label PREC in our data is 5,441. The vast majority of them – 4,313 – were 
added as a connective to a discourse arrow (3,910 to inter-sentential relations, 
403 to intra-sentential relations). The remaining occurrences of these expressions 
were  marked  by  an  annotator´s  comment  in  the  data  and  will  be  analyzed 
according to their function in some next phase of the work.

3.2 Role of Textual Coreference

In  the  PDT,  textual  coreference  has  been  annotated  for  all  syntactic  nouns 
(substantives and pronouns behaving as nouns) and some adjectives throughout 
the whole corpus. Coreferred expressions are not necessarily only other nouns, 
they can also be verbs or other parts of text, if it is an appropriate interpretation 
of the context (for details see Nedoluzhko, 2011a). From the theoretical point of 
view, textual coreference is not a part of the tectogrammatical layer of the PDT 
but it contributes largely to the representation of meaning.

3.2.1 Connectives with a Deictic Part

One aspect  of textual  coreference  proved to be partly helpful  in determining 
discourse connectives. Many connectives in Czech (and also in other languages) 
have arisen from a connection of a preposition and a deictic element.9 The deictic 
part  of  these  prepositional  phrases  refers  to  some  previous  context  and  the 
coreference link helps decide if the phrase in a given context functions as a DC 
or not. For the DC function of such prepositional phrases, verbal antecedent of 
the deictic part is characteristic (for a detailed analysis, see Poláková, Jínová, 
Mírovský, 2012). In Example 4, the deictic element tomu (dative form of that) of 
the phrase naproti tomu (in contrast with that, lit. opposite that) has in the PDT 
annotation a referential link to the verb dosáhnout (to achieve) in the sentence 1.
(4)  1. Velmi dobrých výsledků dosáhly divize Montáže, Klimatizace a Dodavatelská divize. 

2. Naproti tomu divize Odlučování měla za první tři měsíce ztrátu 1,8 milionu korun a divize  
Ventilátory tři miliony korun.
1. Very good results were achieved by the divisions of Assembly, Air Conditioning and 
Delivery.
2. In contrast with that [lit. opposite that], the division of Separation lost 1.8 million in the 
first three months and the division of Fans three million.

We encountered 103 occurrences of a preposition plus a deictic element during 

9 These connectives were called alternative lexicalizations in the PDTB approach to the annotation of discourse 
(see Prasad et al., 2010).

859



the discourse annotation that can function as a DC in Czech. Only 11 instances 
of them had a referential link to a syntactic noun and therefore (besides other 
criteria such as the impossibility to replace the phrase in the given context by a 
regular connective) were not considered to be DCs.

4 Ellipsis Resolution

Missing or omitted nodes in structures with an ellipsis have been reconstructed 
on the tectogrammatical layer of the PDT. It  proved to be helpful both in the 
annotation of intra-sentential and inter-sentential discourse relations, namely  in 
case of reconstructed verbal nodes. Thus, we were able to mark 1,630 relations 
that have in one or both arguments an elided verb. Without the ellipsis resolved, 
the relations could be easily overlooked in the text or it would not be possible to 
annotate them in the trees at all. Example 5 shows a relation with an elided verb. 
(5)  Zloději nechodí po horách, ale po domácnostech.

Thieves do not visit mountains but households.

Conclusions and Perspectives

We have presented a discourse annotation project and discussed and evaluated 
how  it  benefited  from  the  previous  annotation  of  the  underlying  syntactic 
structure  of  sentences  in  PDT.  Its  main  contribution  was  to  the  partially 
automatic annotation of the intra-sentential discourse relations; it helped find the 
arguments  of  the  discourse  relations,  identify  the  connectives  and assign  the 
discourse  senses.  Resolved cases  of  ellipses  in  the  trees  made  it  possible  to 
annotate relations with no surface-present finite verb and also made it easier to 
determine the argument extent, both for intra- and inter-sentential relations. As 
for the inter-sentential  discourse relations alone, the marking of a majority of 
discourse connectives with the semantic label PREC (reference to PREceding 
Context)  was  a  helpful  feature.  Grammatical  and  textual  coreference  helped 
distinguish some of the less typical connectives.

Acknowledgments

We  gratefully  acknowledge  support  from  the  Grant  Agency  of  the  Czech 
Republic (grants P406/12/0658 and P406/2010/0875) and from the Ministry of 
Education,  Youth  and  Sports  in  the  Czech  Republic,  program  KONTAKT 
(ME10018) and the LINDAT-Clarin project (LM2010013).

860



References

Carlson, L., Marcu, D., and Okurowski, M.E. (2002). RST Discourse Treebank, 
LDC2002T07 [Corpus]. Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
Hajič, J., Panevová, J., Hajičová, E., Sgall, P., Pajas, P., Štěpánek, J., Havelka, 
J., Mikulová, M., Žabokrtský, Z. and Ševčíková-Razímová, M. (2006). Prague 
Dependency Treebank 2.0. Software prototype, Linguistic Data Consortium, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA, ISBN 1-58563-370-4, www.ldc.upenn.edu, Jul 2006.

Mikulová, M., Bémová, A., Hajič, J., Hajičová, E., Havelka, J., Kolářová-
Řezníčková, V., Kučová, L., Lopatková, M., Pajas, P., Panevová, J., Razímová, 
M., Sgall, P., Štěpánek, J., Urešová, Z., Veselá, K. and Žabokrtský, Z. (2005). 
Anotace na tektogramatické rovině Pražského závislostního korpusu. 
Anotátorská příručka. Praha: UFAL MFF. Available at: 
http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.0/doc/manuals/cz/t-layer/html/index.html.

Jínová, P., Mírovský J. and Poláková, L. (2012a). Analyzing the Most Common 
Errors in the Discourse Annotation of the Prague Dependency Treebank. In 
Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic 
Theories (TLT 11), Lisbon, Portugal, November 2012.
Jínová, P., Mírovský J. and Poláková, L. (2012b). Semi-Automatic Annotation of 
Intra-sentential Discourse Relations in PDT. In Procedings of the 24th 
International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING 2012), 
ADACA Discourse Workshop, Mumbai, India, December 2012.
Mladová, L. (2008). Diskurzní vztahy v češtině a jejich zachycení v anotovaném 
korpusu. Technical report no. 2008/TR-2008-40, Faculty of Mathematics and 
Physics, Charles University in Prague, Czech Republic, ISSN 1214–5521, 136 
pp., Dec 2008.

Nedoluzhko, A. (2011a). Rozšířená textová koreference a asociační anafora 
(Koncepce anotace českých dat v Pražském závislostním korpusu). Institute of 
Formal and Applied Linguistics, Charles University in Prague, Czech Republic, 
ISBN 978-80-904571-2-6, 268 pp., Dec 2011.

Nedoluzhko, A., Mírovský, J., Hajičová, E., Pergler, J. and Ocelák, R. (2011b). 
Extended Textual Coreference and Bridging Relations in PDT 2.0. 
Data/software, ÚFAL MFF UK, Prague, Czech Republic, Dec. 2011. Available 
at: https://ufal-point.mff.cuni.cz/xmlui/handle/11858/00-097C-0000-0005-BCCF-3, Dec 2011.

861



Oza, U., Prasad, R., Kolachina S., Sharma, D.M. and Joshi, A.K. (2009).  The 
Hindi Discourse Relation Bank.  In Proc. Linguistic Annotation Workshop (LAW 
2009), Suntec, Singapore, August 2009, pp.158-161.
Poláková (Mladová), L., Jínová, P. and Mírovský, J. (2012). Interplay of 
Coreference and Discourse Relations: Discourse Connectives with a Referential 
Component. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012), Eropean Language Resources 
Association, Istanbul, Turkey, ISBN 978-2-9517408-7-7, pp. 146–153.

Poláková L., Jínová, P., Zikánová, Š., Bedřichová, Z., Mírovský, J., Rysová, M., 
Zdeňková, J., Pavlíková, V. and Hajičová, E. (2012). Manual for Annotation of 
Discourse Relations in the Prague Dependency Treebank. Technical report, 
UFAL MFF UK, Prague, Czech Republic. Available at: 
http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/techrep/tr47.pdf.
Prasad, R., Dinesh, N., Lee, A., Miltsakaki, E., Robaldo, L., Joshi, A. and 
Webber, B. (2007). The Penn Discourse TreeBank 2.0 Annotation Manual. 
Available at: http://www.seas.upenn.edu/~pdtb/PDTBAPI/pdtb-annotation-manual.pdf.

Prasad, R., Dinesh, N., Lee, A., Miltsakaki, E., Robaldo, L., Joshi, A. and 
Webber, B. (2008). The Penn Discourse Treebank 2.0. In Proceedings of the 6th 
International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2008), 
Marrakech, Morocco.

Prasad, R., Joshi, A. and Webber, B. (2010). Realization of Discourse Relation 
by Other Means: Alternative Lexicalizations. In Proceedings of the 23rd 
International Conference on Computational Linguistics (Coling 2010), Beijing, 
China, pp. 1023–1031.

Stede, M. (2004). The Potsdam Commentary Corpus. 
In Proceedings of the ACL-04 Workshop on Discourse Annotation, Barcelona, 
Spain. 

Sgall, P., Hajičová, E. and Panevová, J. (1986). The Meaning of the Sentence in 
Its Semantic and Pragmatic Aspects, Dordrecht: Reidel Publishing Company, 
Praha: Academia.

862


