



















































CRAB Reader: A Tool for Analysis and Visualization of Argumentative Zones in Scientific Literature


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Demonstration Papers, pages 183–190,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

CRAB Reader: A Tool for Analysis and Visualization of
Argumentative Zones in Scientific Literature

Yuf an Guo1 I lona Sil ins2 Roi Reichar t1 Anna Korhonen1
(1) Computer Laboratory, University of Cambridge, UK

(2) Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institute, Sweden
yg244@cam.ac.uk, ilona.silins@ki.se, Roi.Reichart@cl.cam.ac.uk,

alk23@cam.ac.uk

ABSTRACT
Given the rapid publication rate in many fields of science, it is important to develop technology
that can help researchers locate different types of information in scientific literature. A number
of approaches have been developed for automatic identification of information structure of sci-
entific papers. Such approaches can be useful for down-stream NLP tasks (e.g. summarization)
and practical research tasks (e.g. scientific literature review), and can be realistically applied
across domains when they involve light supervision. However, even light supervision requires
some data annotation for new tasks. We introduce the CRAB Reader – a tool for the analysis and
visualization of information structure (according to the Argumentative Zoning (AZ) scheme)
in scientific literature which can facilitate efficient and user-friendly expert-annotation. We
investigate and demonstrate the use of our tool for this purpose and also discuss the benefits of
using the same tool to support practical tasks such as scientific literature review.

TITLE AND ABSTRACT IN CHINESE

CRAB Reader: 分分分析析析和和和查查查看看看科科科技技技文文文献献献论论论证证证结结结构构构的的的工工工具具具

随着各个学科领域出版量的迅速增长，新的文本挖掘技术的开发对研究人员从海量科技
文献中寻找有用信息至为重要。许多自动识别科技文献信息结构的技术的开发，对于自
然语言处理领域的下游工作（例如文本摘要） 以及实际的研究工作（例如科技文献的阅
读）有很大帮助，尤其是基于弱监督学习的技术更能够实际应用于不同的学科领域。然而
即使弱监督的学习依然需要一定量的人工标注数据以适应一项新任务。本文介绍了CRAB
Reader：一款分析和查看科技文献论证结构的工具。该工具有助于高效便捷地对文献进行
标注。本文研究并证实了该工具对于文献信息结构的自动分析和识别有重要作用，同时讨
论了该工具为实际科研工作例如科技文献的阅读带来的便利。

KEYWORDS: Information Structure, Argumentative Zoning (AZ), Interactive Annotation, Active
Learning.

KEYWORDS IN CHINESE: 信息结构，论证结构分析，交互式标注，主动学习.

183



1 Introduction

There is a need to develop techniques that can help scientists locate and organize relevant infor-
mation in rapidly growing scientific literature. Scientists have diverse information needs and
are often interested in specific types of information in a paper. Although section headings (e.g.
Methods, Results) can be an indicator of information categories of interest, many sections tend
to include different types of information (e.g. the Discussion section may include information
about methods and results and also provide a comparison against other peoples’ work). An
automatic analysis of the information category of each sentence is therefore important and can
be useful for both natural language processing tasks as well as for scientists e.g. conducting
literature review.

Different approaches have been developed for determining the information structure (aka.
discourse, rhetorical, argumentative or conceptual structure) of scientific publications (Teufel
and Moens, 2002; Mizuta et al., 2006; Shatkay et al., 2008; Teufel et al., 2009; Liakata et al.,
2010; Guo et al., 2010). Some of this work has proved helpful for tasks such as information
retrieval, information extraction, and summarization (Teufel and Moens, 2002; Mizuta et al.,
2006; Tbahriti et al., 2006; Ruch et al., 2007). Most existing approaches are based on supervised
learning and require large amounts of annotated data which limits their applicability to different
domains . Recently (Guo et al., 2011b) has shown that weakly supervised learning (especially
active learning) works well for determining the information structure of biomedical abstracts.
This work is interesting since it can facilitate easier porting of the techniques to new tasks.

However, also approaches based on weak supervision require data annotation in real-world
applications. Moreover, simulation of active learning (such as that conducted by (Guo et al.,
2011b) who used a fully annotated corpus from which they restored the labels of selected
sentences in each iteration) is not practical but real-time interactive annotation is needed.

This requires a development of an efficient and user-friendly annotation tool which can facilitate
rapid expert-annotation of data according to categories of information structure in real-life
scientific tasks. We introduce such a tool: the CRAB Reader - a tool that is capable of supporting
not only off-line AZ annotation but also interactive AZ annotation through weakly supervised
learning, along with visualization of information structure in scientific literature. The latter
functionality can also be applied to support scientists in literature review.

The CRAB1 reader enables analyzing biomedical articles according to the Argumentative Zoning
(AZ) scheme – a scheme of information structure that describes the rhetorical progression in
scientific papers (Teufel and Moens, 2002). However, since the AZ scheme has been shown to
apply across different scientific domains (Teufel et al., 2009), the technology presented here
can be widely applicable.

2 CRAB Reader

The CRAB Reader allows users to define a new scheme or to modify an existing scheme for
information structure analysis. Currently, we use the Argumentative Zoning (AZ) scheme which
was originally introduced by Teufel and Moens (2002) and which was first used to describe
the rhetorical progression of scientific argument in computational linguistics papers. This
scheme was subsequently adapted to other domains such as chemistry (Teufel et al., 2009)
and biology (Mizuta et al., 2006). We adopt the latter version in our work, and use eight zone

1CRAB refers to the CRAB project which has developed text mining technology for the needs of cancer risk assessment
(Korhonen et al., 2012).

184



categories, including Background, Problem (the research question), Method, Result, Conclusion,
Connection (consistent studies), Difference (inconsistent studies) and Future-work.

Using the CRAB Reader, AZ annotation can be performed on each word, sentence, paragraph,
or the entire document, depending on the requirement. Annotated papers are saved in the
HTML format. Users can visualize zones in different colors in an annotated paper. CRAB Reader
also supports interactive annotation which is useful for weakly supervised learning when used
in conjunction with a classifier such as Support Vector Machines (SVM). More specifically, a
classifier makes a request for the labels of particular sentences; in response to such a request,
CRAB Reader presents the relevant sentences to the annotators, collects their annotations, and
returns the labeled sentences to the classifier for further learning.

2.1 Importing articles

Users can import any paper in HTML format into CRAB Reader. Since the format of articles
varies from journal to journal, an HTML paper needs to be transformed into XML and then
formatted using XSLT (Extensible Stylesheet Language Transformations). Users need to define
different style sheets for different journals. For example, the code in Figure 1 shows how to
separate an abstract from the body of an article (see the <xsl:if> element), and how to format
a section/subsection/paragraph (see the <xsl:for-each> element) given an article from The
Journal of Biological Chemistry, where an <h2> tag refers to a section, an <h3/4/5> tag refers
to a subsection, and a <p> tag refers to a paragraph. Currently, CRAB Reader provides style
sheets for main journals on chemical risk assessment, but it can handle papers from other
domains by integrating more templates. Potentially, PDF papers can also be imported into
CRAB Reader after converted into HTML files, and there are various (free) tools available for
converting PDF to HTML.

<xsl:for-each select="//div[@id='content-block']//div[@class='article fulltext-view']/div">
<xsl:if test="contains(@class, 'section')-contains(@class, 'abstract')">

<section>
<heading>

<xsl:value-of select="h2"/>
</heading>
<xsl:for-each select="p|h3|h4|h5">

<xsl:copy-of select="."/>
</xsl:for-each>

</section>
</xsl:if>

</xsl:for-each>

Figure 1: A fragment of the style sheet for The Journal of Biological Chemistry

2.2 Off-line annotation

Off-line annotation differs from interactive annotation in that users need to annotate an entire
article instead of a small number of sentences selected by the machine. The off-line annotation
tool in CRAB Reader is a Firefox plug-in written in XUL (XML User Interface Language). XUL is
based on existing Web technologies such as CSS (Cascading Style Sheets) and JavaScript. Figure
2 shows how to use the tool in Firefox: users can select any amount of text by clicking where
they want to begin, holding down the left mouse button, and then dragging the pointer over the
text. Right-clicking the selected text opens a menu of zone categories such as Result, Conclusion,
and so on. Users can then choose the appropriate category for annotation. The annotations are

185



Figure 2: Off-line annotation

saved as an attribute for each word element e.g. <w Conclusion=”1”>indicate</w>.

2.3 Interactive annotation via active learning

Interactive annotation is based on a client/server model, where a client (annotator) makes
a request for a new assignment (unlabeled sentences); the server then trains classifiers on
existing labeled data, and compares their performance on each unlabeled data, from which it
selects the most informative sentences as a new assignment for the annotator. After completing
the assignment the annotator submits the annotations to the server. The server then updates
the training data by incorporating the fresh labels for further learning. This process can be
repeated many times that is called active learning. The idea of active learning is to create a
high-performance classifier but to minimize the cost of annotation.

On the server side we tested the most popular classifiers including Naive Bayes classifier, Support
Vector Machines (SVM), Maximum Entropy Model, Conditional Random Fields, among many
others, and SVM is so far the best classifier for this task. The features listed below were used
for classification. Most of them have been successfully used in recent related work (Teufel and
Moens, 2002; Mullen et al., 2005; Merity et al., 2009; Guo et al., 2011b). The C&C POS tagger
and parser (Curran et al., 2007) was used for extracting syntactic features such as grammatical
relations (GR) from each sentence.
Section. Normalized section names (Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion).
Location in article/section/paragraph. Each article/section/paragraph was divided into ten
equal parts. Location was defined by the parts where the sentence begins and ends.
Citation. The number of citations in a sentence (0, 1 or more).
Table and Figure. The number of referred tables and figures in a sentence (0, 1 or more).
N-gram. Any unigrams and bigrams in the corpus (an n-gram feature equals 1 if it is observed
in the sentence and 0 if not; the rest of the features are defined in a similar way).
Verb. Any verbs in the corpus.
Verb Class. Verbs are grouped into 60 categories by spectral clustering (Sun and Korhonen,
2009). Each category corresponds to a feature.
Tense and Voice. Tense and voice indicated by the POS tag of main verbs and auxiliary verbs.
e.g. have|VBZ be|VBN __|VBN indicates present perfect tense, passive voice.
Grammatical Relation. Subject (ncsubj), direct object (dobj), indirect object (iobj) and second
object (obj2) relations for verbs. e.g. (ncsubj observed difference obj).

186



Subj/Obj. The subjects/objects appearing with any verbs in the corpus.

We implemented a number of query strategies for SVM-based active learning, including least
confident sampling (Lewis and Gale, 1994), margin sampling (Scheffer et al., 2001), query-by-
committee (Seung et al., 1992), etc. The interactive annotation interface is a dynamic web page
(HTML form) that presents a list of sentences selected by the server for human to annotate, as
shown in Figure 3. It also presents the context (in gray color) of each selected sentence (in
blue color) to facilitate the annotation process. After a user completes the form and clicks on
the submit button, the annotations are sent to a PHP (Hypertext Preprocessor) file and then
written to the server as the training data for further learning. The web page also records the
annotation time for each sentence, which is a more appropriate measure of annotation effort
compared to training set size. As an example, Figure 4 shows the results for real-time active
learning on 50 biomedical articles. Although the curves on the left and right panels look very
similar, CRAB Reader does offer an opportunity to evaluate the performance of active learning
in a more natural way.

Figure 3: Interactive annotation

 

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0 2000 4000 6000 8000

Annotation time (sec)

A
cc

ur
ac

y

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0 100 200 300 400 500

Number of labeled sentences

A
cc

ur
ac

y

Figure 4: Performance of interactive annotation and active learning

2.4 Visualizing argumentative zones

We use CSS to specify the look and format of an annotated paper. Zones have different colors
as shown in Figure 5. The zone label of any particular word will come up when you mouse
over it, as shown in Figure 2. The advantage of using CSS is that it provides more flexibility for
the visualization of zones and allows the same annotated paper to be presented in different
styles for different users (see Figure 6). Also, since CSS separates the format from the content
of a document, it makes it easier to insert automatic annotations into plain text so that we can
visualize the information structure of any paper on demand.

187



MedLine Annotator

Angiogenic Potential of 3-Nitro-4-Hydroxy Benzene Arsonic Acid (Roxarsone)
Abstract

Roxarsone (3-nitro-4-hydroxy benzene arsonic acid) is an arsenic compound widely used in the poultry industry as a feed additive to prevent coccidiosis, stimulate growth, and to improve tissue pigmentation. Little is known about the potential human health effects from roxarsone released into the environment from chicken waste or from residual compound in chicken products.

The growth potentiation and enhanced tissue pigmentation suggest that low levels of roxarsone exposure may have an angiogenic potential similar to that of inorganic arsenite (AsIII). The goal of this investigation was to test the hypothesis described above using cultured human aortic and lung microvascular endothelial cells in high-content imaging tube-forming assays and begin developing a molecular level understanding of the process.

We used a three-dimensional Matrigel assay for probing angiogenesis in cultured human endothelial cells, and a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) array to probe the gene changes as a function of roxarsone or AsIII treatment. In addition, we used Western blot analysis for changes in protein concentration and activation.

Roxarsone was found to exhibit a higher angiogenic index than AsIII at lower concentrations. Increased endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) activity was observed for roxarsone but not for AsIII-induced angiogenesis. However, AsIII caused more rapid and pronounced phosphorylation of eNOS. Quantitative PCR array on select genes revealed that the two compounds have different and often opposite effects on angiogenic gene expression.

The results demonstrate that roxarsone and AsIII promote angiogenic phenotype in human endothelial cells through distinctly different signaling mechanisms.

Article

Arsenic contamination of drinking water is a worldwide public health concern. The extent of the concern in some countries has reached a point such that some are calling this humanity’s largest mass poisoning (Bhattacharjee 2007). Even low levels of exposure to arsenic have been linked to increased cardiovascular disease and hypertension (Chen et al. 2007; Navas Acien et al. 2005). Although natural contamination of drinking water with inorganic arsenic represents the largest arsenical hazard to human health, environmental exposure to commercial organoarsenicals is a growing concern (Sapkota et al. 2007). Organoarsenicals such as roxarsone are widely used by the poultry
industry (Arai et al. 2003; Brown et al. 2004; Chapman et al. 2002), with approximately 2.2 million pounds of roxarsone being fed to broiler chickens raised in the United States per year (Garbarino et al. 2003). The majority of roxarsone is excreted unchanged from chickens (Morrison 1969), while the remainder increases the total arsenic present in chicken tissue (Lasky et al. 2004). This residual roxarsone could amount to ingestion of 1.38–5.24 mg/day of arsenic at mean levels of chicken consumption (60 g/person/day) (Wallinga 2006). The excreted roxarsone may pose an environmental hazard, as microbes, including those residing in the gut microflora, can release
inorganic arsenite (AsIII) from roxarsone (Stolz et al. 2007). The human health impacts of roxarsone have not been well studied, and the mechanisms for its biological effects in mammalian tissues are unknown. It has been suggested, however, that all of these biological effects require metabolism to inorganic AsIII (O’Connor et al. 2005).

In a variety of in vivo and in vitro models, nanomolar or low micromolar concentrations of arsenic (AsIII) stimulate angiogenesis and vascular remodeling that may promote vascular diseases and tumorigenesis (Kamat et al. 2005; Liu et al. 2006; Soucy et al. 2003, 2005). In addition to enhancing tumor growth, increased angiogenesis would contribute to overall growth potential and increased tissue pigmentation. These are the attributes of roxarsone that contribute to its widespread use; however, the cellular effects of roxarsone to mammalian cells are not known. Further, it is unclear whether the vascular effects of roxarsone are dependent on its metabolism to inorganic arsenic.
Herein we report the angiogenic potential of roxarsone and compare it with that of inorganic arsenite (AsIII). In addition, we report different modes of action of these two compounds in promoting angiogenesis.

Materials and Methods

Culture of endothelial cells

Human aortic endothelial cells (HAEC) and lung microvascular endothelial cells (HMVEC) (Clonetics; Lonza, Walkersville, MD, USA) were cultured at 5% CO2 in complete MCDB 131 medium (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented with 5% fetal calf serum (Hyclone; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA, USA), 1% pen/strep, 1% hydrocortisone, 2 mM l-glu-tamine, and 10 ng/mL epidermal growth factor (Sigma-Aldrich Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO, USA). Under these conditions up to 10 μM roxarsone was not cytotoxic, as determined by dye exclusion assays, whereas AsIII was toxic at 10 μM but not at 5 μM (Barchowsky et al. 1999a). Cells were used at
passages 6–7 in three-dimensional Matrigel matrix cultures to probe the angiogenic potential (tube formation) of roxarsone and AsIII.

Three-dimensional angiogenic tube-formation assay

Concentration-responsive effects of roxarsone and AsIII on the angiogenic potential of HAEC and HMVEC were compared in quantitative high-content cellular imaging tube-formation assays in Matrigel (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA). Cells were incubated for 24 hr in reduced serum and growth factor MCDB 131 (1:5 dilution of complete MCDB 131 with nonsupplemented MCDB 131). The cells were then released from the culture dish with trypsin, diluted in MCDB 131 with or without inhibitors, and 6,000–10,000 cells were plated onto 35-mL Matrigel cushions in 96-well plates. Sodium arsenite (AsIII)) or roxarsone was then added from 1,000× stock solutions. As
positive controls for angiogenic tube formation, either vascular endothelial growth factor (1 ng/mL) or a cocktail of growth factors (vascular endothelial growth factor, 10 ng/mL; fibro-blast growth factor, 10 ng/mL; erythropoietin, 2 U/mL; and interleukin-6, 10 ng/mL) were added to the cultures. After 16 hr, the medium was removed and the gels were air dried. Rhodamine-labeled phalloidin and 4′-6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; (Sigma-Aldrich) were added to stain F-actin and nuclei, respectively. Images of fluorescently labeled cells were collected with a Thermo Scientific Cellomics ArrayScan HCS Reader (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) and
analyzed by an automated algorithm that identified the tubes formed by the association and clustering of the endothelial cells. This algorithm provided quantitative measurements of tube properties such as the number of tubes, tube lengths, tube areas, number of nodal branch points, and the angiogenic index—defined as the percentage of image area covered by tubes multiplied by 10 (Ghosh et al. 2007; Grove and Ghosh 2006). Each experiment was repeated 3 times, and each treatment was probed in at least six wells. Differences between treatments were analyzed by one- and two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Dunnett or Bonferroni post hoc tests for significance
using Graphpad Prism v4.0 software (Graphpad Software, San Diego, CA, USA).

SuperArray Angiogenesis RT2 Profiler PCR array

The effects of 24-hr exposures to AsIII and roxarsone on HMVEC mRNA levels for 84 angiogenic and 5 constitutive genes were measured using the SuperArray quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay (SuperArray Bioscience Corp., Frederick, MD, USA). Total RNA was extracted from approximately 500,000 cells using QIAGEN RNeasy (QIAGEN, Chatsworth, TN, USA) mini kits with inclusion of a DNase treatment step. First-strand cDNA synthesis and quantitative real-time PCR with SYBR green master mix was performed in an Opticon 2 DNA engine (BioRad Corp., Hercules, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

Western analysis

Western blot analysis was performed on proteins isolated from HAEC exposed to AsIII or roxarsone for 0.5, 1, or 4 hr. The proteins were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and transferred to polyvinylidene membranes, as previously described (Barchowsky et al. 1999b). Blots were probed with primary antibody to either total or ser1177 phosphorylated eNOS (Cell Signaling Technologies, Danvers, MA, USA) and reacted bands were detected by horseradish peroxidase–conjugated secondary antibodies and enhanced chemiluminescence substrates (PerkinElmer, Boston, MA, USA). Density of bands on film exposed to blots was determined
using Scion Image software (Scion Corp., Frederick, MD, USA).

Figures and Tables

Results and Discussion

Concentration-responsive effects of roxarsone and AsIII on the angiogenic potential of HAEC and HMVEC were compared in quantitative high-content cellular imaging tube-formation assays in Matrigel (Figure 1). Images of fluorescently labeled cells were analyzed by an algorithm that identified the angiogenic tubes formed by the association and clustering of the endothelial cells and quantitatively measured the properties of the identified tubes such as the number of tubes, tube lengths, tube areas, number of nodal branch points, and the angiogenic index. The angiogenic index is defined as the percentage of image area covered by tubes multiplied by 10 (Ghosh et al. 2007;
Grove and Ghosh 2006). Both compounds were as effective as vascular endothelial cell growth factor (VEGF) in increasing the angiogenic index above the value for untreated control cells in both cell types (Figures 1 and 2). Both cell types exhibited strong angiogenic responses with the arsenical treatments; however, the HMVEC showed a higher basal level of angiogenesis (Table 1). Because of their lower basal angiogenic activity, HAEC were used for additional mechanistic studies.

The angiogenic threshold for roxarsone was between 0.001 and 0.01 μM, an order of magnitude lower than the threshold for AsIII (Figures 1 and 2). As we have previously shown in in vivo chicken allantoic membrane angiogenesis assays (Soucy et al. 2003), above 1 μM AsIII becomes toxic to tube formation and inhibits angiogenesis (Figure 2). In contrast, even 10 μM roxarsone showed no decrease in the angiogenic index (Figures 1 and 2) or signs of toxicity in the endothelial cells (data not shown). The fact that the efficacy for tube formation was similar, but the toxic potential differs, suggested that the two arsenicals differ in their mechanisms of action.

Nitric oxide (NO) production is required for certain stimuli to promote angiogenesis (Yu et al. 2005), but AsIII is known to promote reactive oxygen that limits available NO release in endothelial cells (Barchowsky et al. 1999a, Bunderson et al. 2006). The data in Figure 3 demonstrate that roxarsone requires NO generation to increase angiogenesis. Its effects were blocked by the eNOS inhibitor l-NG-nitroarginine methylester (L-NAME), but not its inactive enantiomer d -NG-nitroarginine methylester (D-NAME). In contrast, both NAME enantiomers prevented AsIII from increasing the angiogenic index. This would suggest either that AsIII inhibition by NAME was a
nonstereospecific chemical effect or that D-NAME interacted with AsIII in a unique manner relative to roxarsone. Thus, roxarsone and inorganic AsIII appeared to have differential effects on signaling for NO-mediated angiogenesis.

To investigate a possible mechanism for increased eNOS activity after exposure to arsenicals, we exposed HAEC to either roxarsone or AsIII for 0.5–4 hr, then probed for levels of serine phosphorylated eNOS relative to total eNOS. As shown in Figure 4, both arsenicals caused time-dependent increases in Ser1177 phosphorylation of eNOS. However, roxarsone caused a progressive increase over 4 hr, whereas AsIII caused a rapid stimulation of phosphorylation that was declining by 4 hr. These data indicate that the arsenicals do not share similar common upstream signaling actions that enhance the activity of AKT, a serine/threonine protein kinase, which commonly accounts
for serine phosphorylation (Dimmeler et al. 1999; Fulton et al. 1999). In addition, the time course for the effects of AsIII is consistent with its known ability to stimulate vascular NADPH oxidase to generate superoxide that quenches NO to form peroxynitrite (Bunderson et al. 2002; Lynn et al. 2000; Smith et al. 2001). These oxidants often mediate inflammatory angiogenesis (Ushio-Fukai and Alexander 2004) and thus may account for the mechanism of action for AsIII.

Analysis of the effects of the two arsenicals on angiogenic gene activity further indicated that roxarsone and AsIII signal through distinct but overlapping mechanisms. Superarray quantitative PCR arrays of total RNA extracts from HMVEC treated with either arsenical for 24 hr demonstrated that the arsenicals differentially affect expression of a limited set of 9 of 84 inducible genes measured. AsIII induced more genes than it inhibited (Table 2). At 0.1 μM, roxarsone inhibited more genes than it induced (Table 2). Several genes were affected in the same direction, but not to the same degree by the two agents. Both arsenicals decreased angiogenic repressive interferon 1α
(Strieter et al. 2005) and interferon-inducible CXCL9 transcripts. It was interesting that generally the higher roxarsone concentration (1.0 μM) had either no effect on gene expression or the opposite effect of the low concentration. The exception was the concentration-dependent induction of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) mRNA levels by both roxarsone concentrations. AsIII also strongly induced HGF transcripts. It is difficult to reconcile the differential effects of AsIII and the two concentrations of roxarsone on gene expression with their concentration-dependent effects on angiogenic potential. It is possible that induction of a dominant factor, such as HGF, accounted for the
observed increases in tube formation. However, the analysis was limited by the small number of gene changes measured and a lack of information regarding protein changes that may account for increased angiogenic index. Although beyond the scope of the current studies, additional mechanistic experiments would delineate the linkage between any gene or protein change and increased angiogenic index after arsenical exposure. Nonetheless, these data demonstrate that roxarsone and inorganic AsIII signal through different mechanisms to affect induction of genes that regulate angiogenesis.

Conclusion

Our results in human endothelial cell cultures demonstrate that roxarsone was a more potent inducer of angiogenesis than inorganic AsIII, and that roxarsone and AsIII signal through separate pathways to promote angiogenesis. The arsenicals had different time courses for phosphorylating eNOS; only the effects of roxarsone were blocked specifically by eNOS inhibition, and the two arsenicals differentially affected angiogenic gene induction. In addition to these differential effects, the fact that roxarsone is more potent for tube formation and less cytotoxic supports the conclusion that metabolism to inorganic AsIII cannot account for its vascular effects. More importantly, this
was the first demonstration of functional vascular effects of roxarsone that may implicate a disease risk. Future studies are needed to demonstrate the mechanisms that enable differential signaling by the two arsenicals and the impact of this signaling in human endothelial cells on vascular disease promoted by their environmental exposures.

Figure 5: Visualization of all zones

Do the authors refer to any conflicting studies? 
 Yes 

 No 

 Not found 

Next

....................................................................................................

found that workers who were cumulatively exposed to BD at higher rates also faced a significantly higher risk of chromosome damage , when compared with
less exposed workers and with unexposed controls . Among Chinese BD-exposed workers , the genotypes XRCC1 194 Arg/Trp , XRCC1 280 Arg/His ,
XRCC1 399 Arg/Gln , XRCC1 77 T/C and ADPRT 762Ala/Ala were each associated with increased MN frequency . In addition , workers carrying the
XRCC1 TCGA/TCGA diplotype were also associated with greater chromosome damage .

Our exposure assessment data showed that PBL operational sites had the highest concentration . Similarly , Hayes et al . ( 13 ) measured exposure levels in a
butadiene polymer production facility in China , the exposure range in polymer analysts was from below detection to 2382 mg/m3 . Moreover , industrials
exceeded exposure to butadiene in other countries were also reported ( 2 ) .

Consistent with previous studies ( 14,15 ) , our study found that there was no significant effect of smoking or alcohol drinking on MN frequency . The most
plausible interpretation for this lack of association is that the magnitude of association with BD exposure was so strong that relationships with smoking or
alcohol drinking were masked . Alternatively , blood concentrations of cigarette smoke or alcohol-related genotoxins may have been too low to cause
chromosomal damage in lymphocytes ( 16 ) . Previous epidemiologic studies have investigated the effect of various lifestyle and biological factors on MN
frequency in human lymphocytes . The most consistent demographic variable influencing the MN frequency was age , with MN frequency increasing
significantly with age ( 17 ) . However , our results indicated that there was no significant increase in MN frequency among older workers compared with
younger workers and no significant difference between female and male workers . A possible reason for these findings may be the limited number of older and
female workers in this study .

There are >60 validated genetic polymorphisms in XRCC1 and ∼30 variants are located in exons or promoter regions . The most extensively studied
polymorphisms are Arg194Trp on exon 6 , Arg280His on exon 9 and Arg399Gln on exon 10 ( 18 ) . In our study , the exposed workers carrying XRCC1
194 Arg/Trp and Trp/Trp genotypes had statistically higher MN frequency , when compared with workers carrying the XRCC1 194Arg/Arg wild-type
genotype . The XRCC1 194 Arg/Trp polymorphism is located in the XRCC1 nuclear localization signal domain , in proximity to other domains that mediate
polymerase β and APE1 interactions ( 19 ) . Therefore , this polymorphism may disturb XRCC1 protein conformation , resulting in a decreased protein affinity
or decreased DNA damage binding and ineffective DNA repair . Zhu et al . ( 20 ) and Zhang et al . ( 21 ) reported that this polymorphism significantly
decreased DNA damage repair in vinyl chloride monomer and benzene-exposed workers , respectively .

In our study , BD-exposed workers carrying the XRCC1 280 Arg/His and His/His genotypes were found to carry a higher chromosome damage than other
who did not carry these genotypes . Previous research that investigated XRCC1 polymorphisms and their association with DNA repair capacity reported that
only the variant proteins associated with the XRCC1 280 His allele is defective in the efficient localization of the protein to a damaged site in the chromosome ,
thereby reducing BER efficiency ( 22 ) . Because XRCC1 Arg280His is located close to sequences that mediate protein–protein interactions with ADPRT and
DNA polymerase β ( 23–25 ) , this protein may be involved in the formation of unstable chromosomal aberrations ( 26 ) . Several studies ( 27–29 ) have found
an association between the presence of the variant genotypes of the XRCC1 Arg399Gln polymorphism and reduced DNA repair capacity , including data
showing increased MN frequency . Three studies ( 30–32 ) all reported a significant increase in CA frequency in the presence of a variant allele of the XRCC1
Arg399Gln polymorphism in benzene-exposed workers . However , others have reported no detrimental effect of variant XRCC1 399 Gln allele and XRCC1-
mediated repair ( 33–36 ) . In our study , worker exposed to BD and carrying the XRCC1 399 Arg/Gln and Gln/Gln genotypes had higher chromosome
damage compared with workers carrying the Arg/Arg genotype .

Hao et al . ( 37 ) first reported the identification and association of genetic variants in XRCC1 -T77C and their associations with risk of esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma . The C-allele-containing promoter has greater Sp1-binding affinity ( 38 ) . In our study , the XRCC1 -T77C polymorphism was associated with
MN frequency in BD exposure workers . This finding is consistent with previous studies , which have reported an association between XRCC1 -T77C

Figure 6: Visualization of the ”Difference” zone

Conclusions and Future work

We have introduced CRAB Reader, a convenient tool for analysis and visualization of AZ for
scientific literature review. Particularly, CRAB Reader supports real-time interactive annotation
which makes it possible to apply weakly supervised learning to AZ for different tasks and
domains. The tool has been used for creating a corpus of 50 AZ-annotated articles (8171
sentences), and has proved successful for active learning-based AZ on that corpus with 82%
accuracy after labeling 500 sentences, which is just 2% lower than the accuracy of fully
supervised learning.

In the future, we plan to use CRAB Reader for real-world applications of AZ such as question
answering or customized summarization to speed up the literature review process. (Guo et al.,
2011a) and (Guo et al., 2011c) have shown that users find the information in question from
AZ-annotated abstracts significantly faster than from unannotated abstracts. However, is it
realistic for full-text articles, given their high linguistic and informational complexity? We plan
to conduct a similar question answering experiment to evaluate the usefulness of AZ-annotated
articles in the context of a practical biomedical research task. We also plan to investigate
whether AZ annotations are more informative than section headings for creating customized
summaries for different research purposes.

Acknowledgments

The work reported in this paper was funded by the Royal Society (UK) and EPSRC (UK) grant
EP/G051070/1. YG was funded by the Cambridge International Scholarship. IS was funded by
the Swedish Governmental Agency for Innovation System.

188



References

Curran, J. R., Clark, S., and Bos, J. (2007). Linguistically motivated large-scale nlp with c&c
and boxer. In Proceedings of the ACL 2007 Demonstrations Session, pages 33–36.

Guo, Y., Korhonen, A., Liakata, M., Karolinska, I. S., Sun, L., and Stenius, U. (2010). Identifying
the information structure of scientific abstracts: an investigation of three different schemes. In
Proceedings of BioNLP, pages 99–107.

Guo, Y., Korhonen, A., Liakata, M., Silins, I., Hogberg, J., and Stenius, U. (2011a). A
comparison and user-based evaluation of models of textual information structure in the
context of cancer risk assessment. BMC Bioinformatics, 69(12).

Guo, Y., Korhonen, A., and Poibeau, T. (2011b). A weakly-supervised approach to argumenta-
tive zoning of scientific documents. In Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 273–283.

Guo, Y., Korhonen, A., Silins, I., and Stenius, U. (2011c). Weakly supervised learning of
information structure of scientific abstracts–is it accurate enough to benefit real-world tasks in
biomedicine? Bioinformatics, 27:3179–85.

Korhonen, A., Séaghdha, D. O., Silins, I., Sun, L., Högberg, J., and Stenius., U. (2012). Text
mining for literature review and knowledge discovery in cancer risk assessment and research.
PLoS ONE, 7:e33427.

Lewis, D. D. and Gale, W. A. (1994). A sequential algorithm for training text classifiers. In
Proceedings of the 17th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development
in information retrieval, pages 3–12.

Liakata, M., Teufel, S., Siddharthan, A., and Batchelor, C. (2010). Corpora for the conceptuali-
sation and zoning of scientific papers. In Proceedings of LREC’10.

Merity, S., Murphy, T., and Curran, J. R. (2009). Accurate argumentative zoning with maximum
entropy models. In Proceedings of the 2009 Workshop on Text and Citation Analysis for Scholarly
Digital Libraries, pages 19–26.

Mizuta, Y., Korhonen, A., Mullen, T., and Collier, N. (2006). Zone analysis in biology articles
as a basis for information extraction. International Journal of Medical Informatics on Natural
Language Processing in Biomedicine and Its Applications, 75(6):468–487.

Mullen, T., Mizuta, Y., and Collier, N. (2005). A baseline feature set for learning rhetorical
zones using full articles in the biomedical domain. SIGKDD Explor. Newsl., 7:52–58.

Ruch, P., Boyer, C., Chichester, C., Tbahriti, I., Geissbuhler, A., Fabry, P., Gobeill, J., Pillet, V.,
Rebholz-Schuhmann, D., Lovis, C., and Veuthey, A. L. (2007). Using argumentation to extract
key sentences from biomedical abstracts. Int J Med Inform, 76(2-3):195–200.

Scheffer, T., Decomain, C., and Wrobel, S. (2001). Active hidden markov models for informa-
tion extraction. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Advances in Intelligent
Data Analysis, pages 309–318.

Seung, H. S., Opper, M., and Sompolinsky, H. (1992). Query by committee. In Proceedings of
the fifth annual workshop on Computational learning theory, pages 287–294.

189



Shatkay, H., Pan, F., Rzhetsky, A., and Wilbur, W. J. (2008). Multi-dimensional classification of
biomedical text: Toward automated, practical provision of high-utility text to diverse users.
Bioinformatics, 24(18):2086–2093.

Sun, L. and Korhonen, A. (2009). Improving verb clustering with automatically acquired
selectional preference. In Proceedings of EMNLP, pages 638–647.

Tbahriti, I., Chichester, C., Lisacek, F., and Ruch, P. (2006). Using argumentation to retrieve
articles with similar citations. Int J Med Inform, 75(6):488–495.

Teufel, S. and Moens, M. (2002). Summarizing scientific articles: Experiments with relevance
and rhetorical status. Computational Linguistics, 28:409–445.

Teufel, S., Siddharthan, A., and Batchelor, C. (2009). Towards domain-independent argu-
mentative zoning: Evidence from chemistry and computational linguistics. In Proceedings of
EMNLP, pages 1493–1502.

190


