



















































Bulgarian Inflectional Morphology in Universal Networking Language


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Demonstration Papers, pages 423–430,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Bulgarian Inflectional Morphology in Universal Networking
Language

Velislava STOY KOVA
INSTITUTE FOR BULGARIAN LANGUAGE - BAS, 52, Shipchensky proh. str., bl. 17, 1113 Sofia, Bulgariavstoykova@yahoo.com
ABSTRACT
The paper presents a web-based application of semantic networks to model Bulgarian inflec-
tional morphology. It demonstrates the general ideas, principles, and problems of inflectional
grammar knowledge representation used for encoding Bulgarian inflectional morphology in
Universal Networking Language (UNL). The analysis of UNL formalism is outlined in terms of
its expressive power to present inflection, and the principles and related programming encod-
ings are explained and demonstrated.

KEYWORDS: Morphology and POS tagging, Grammar and formalisms, Underresourced lan-
guages.

423



1 Introduction

Modeling inflectional morphology is a key problem for any natural language processing ap-
plication of Bulgarian language. It can result in a wide range of real applications however
different formal models and theories offer different insights for encoding of almost all gram-
mar features, and allow the use of related principles for encoding.

2 General problems with applications of word inflectional morphology

The problems with natural language processing applications for word inflectional morphology
are generally of two types (i) the problems of language theory at the level of phonology, mor-
phonology, and morphology, and (ii) the adequacy of existing methodologies and techniques
to offer the applications capable to interpret the complexity of natural language phenomena.
Thus, the context of natural language formal representations and interpretations of inflectional
morphology is the logical framework which are capable to deal with regularity, irregularity, and
subregularity and have to provide a logical basis for interpreting such language phenomena
like suppletion, syncretism, declension, conjugation, and paradigm.

2.1 The traditional academic representation and computational mor-
phology formal models of inflectional morphology

The traditional interpretation of inflectional morphology given at the academic descriptive
grammar works (Popov and Penchev, 1983) is a presentation of tables. The tables consist of all
possible inflected forms of a related word with respect to its subsequent grammar features. The
artificial intelligence (AI) techniques offer a computationally tractable encoding preceded by a
related semantic analysis, which suggest a subsequent architecture. Representing inflectional
morphology in AI frameworks is, in fact, to represent a specific type of grammar knowledge.

The computational approach to both derivational and inflectional morphology is to represent
words as a rule-based concatenation of morphemes, and the main task is to construct relevant
rules for their combinations. The problem how to segment words into morphemes is central
and there are two basic approaches of interpretation (Blevins, 2001). The first is Word and
Paradigme (WP) approach wich uses paradigme to segment morphemes. The secound is Item
and Agreement (IA) approach which uses sub-word units and morpho-syntactic units for word
segmentation. With respect to number and types of morphemes, the different theories offer
different approaches depending on variations of either stems or suffixes as follows:

(i) Conjugational solution offers invariant stem and variant suffixes, and

(ii) Variant stem solution offers variant stems and invariant suffix.

Both these approaches are suitable for languages, which use inflection rarely to express syn-
tactic structures, whereas for those using rich inflection some cases where phonological alter-
nations appear both in stem and in concatenating morpheme a "mixed" approach is used to
account for the complexity. Also, some complicated cases where both prefixes and suffixes
have to be processed require such approach.

We evaluate the "mixed" approach as a most appropriate for the task because it considers both
stems and suffixes as variables and, also, can account for the specific phonetic alternations.
The additional requirement is that during the process of the inflection all generated inflected
rules (both using prefixes and suffixes) have to produce more than one type of inflected forms.

424



Figure 1: The word structure according to the general linguistic morphological theory.

2.2 Interpreting sound alternations

The sound alternations influence the inflectional morphology of almost all part-of-speech of
standard Bulgarian language and as a result they form irregular word forms. In fact, we have
a rather unsystematically formed variety of regular and irregular sound alternations which is
very difficult to be interpreted formally.

The phonetic alternations in Bulgarian are of various types and influence both derivational and
inflectional morphology. The general morphological theory offers a segmentation of words
(Fig. 1) which consists of root to which prefixes, suffixes or endings are attached. In Bulgarian,
all three types of morphemes are used and additional difficulties come from the fact that sound
alternations can be occurred both in stems, prefixes, suffixes, and also on their boundaries
which suggest extremely complicated solutions.

3 The Universal Networking Language

In the UNL approach, information conveyed by natural language is represented as a hy-
pergraph composed of a set of directed binary labelled links (referred to as "relations")
between nodes or hypernodes (the "Universal Words"(WS)), which stand for concepts
(Uchida and Della Senta, 2005). UWs can also be annotated with "attributes" representing
context information (UNL, 2011).

Universal Words (UWs) represent universal concepts and correspond to the nodes to be in-
terlinked by "relations" or modified by "attributes" in a UNL graph. They can be associated
to natural language open lexical categories (noun, verb, adjective and adverb). Additionally,
UWs are organized in a hierarchy (the UNL Ontology), and are defined in the UNL Knowledge
Base and exemplified in the UNL Example Base, which are the lexical databases for UNL. As
language-independent semantic units, UWs are equivalent to the sets of synonyms of a given
language, approaching the concept of "synset" used by the WordNet.

Attributes are arcs linking a node to itself. In opposition to relations, they correspond to one-
place predicates, i.e., function that take a single argument. In UNL, attributes have been
normally used to represent information conveyed by natural language grammatical categories
(such as tense, mood, aspect, number, etc). Attributes are annotations made to nodes or
hypernodes of a UNL hypergraph. They denote the circumstances under which these nodes
(or hypernodes) are used. Attributes may convey three different kinds of information: (i) The
information on the role of the node in the UNL graph, (ii) The information conveyed by bound
morphemes and closed classes, such as affixes (gender, number, tense, aspect, mood, voice,
etc), determiners (articles and demonstratives), etc., (iii) The information on the (external)
context of the utterance. Attributes represent information that cannot be conveyed by UWs
and relations.

Relations, are labelled arcs connecting a node to another node in a UNL graph. They corre-
spond to two-place semantic predicates holding between two UWs. In UNL, relations have

425



Figure 2: The statistical word distribution of part-of-speech for UNL interpretation of Bulgarian
inflectional morphology.

been normally used to represent semantic cases or thematic roles (such as agent, object, in-
strument, etc.) between UWs.

UNL-NL Grammars are sets of rules for translating UNL expressions into natural language (NL)
sentences and vice-versa. They are normally unidirectional, i.e., the enconversion grammar
(NL-to-UNL) or deconversion grammar (UNL-to-NL), even though they share the same basic
syntax.

In the UNL Grammar there are two basic types of rules: (i) Transformation rules - used to
generate natural language sentences out of UNL graphs and vice-versa and (ii) Disambigua-
tion rules - used to improve the performance of transformation rules by constraining their
applicability.

The UNL offers an universal language-independent and open-source platform for multilingual
web-based applications (Boitet and Cardenosa, 2007) available for many laguages (Martins,
2011) including Slavonic languages like Russian (Boguslavsky, 2005) as well.

3.1 Representing Bulgarian inflectional morphology in UNL

The UNL specifications offer types of grammar rules particularly designed to interpret inflec-
tional morphology both with respect to prefixes, suffixes, infixes, and to sound alternations
taking place during the process of the inflection. Thus, UNL allows two types of transfor-
mation inflectional rules: (i) A-rules (affixation rules) apply over isolated word forms (as to
generate possible inflections) and (ii) L-rules (linear rules) apply over lists of word forms (as
to provide transformations in the surface structure). Affixation rules are used for adding mor-
phemes to a given base form, so to generate inflections or derivations. There are two types of
A-rules: (i) simple A-rules involve a single action (such as prefixation, suffixation, infixation
and replacement), and (ii) complex A-rules involve more than one action (such as circumfixa-
tion).

426



Figure 3: The inflectional rules definitions for the word "‘ezik"’.

There are four types of simple A-rules: (i) prefixation, for adding morphemes at the beginning
of the base form, (ii) suffixation, for adding morphemes at the end of the base form, (iii) infix-
ation, for adding morphemes to the middle of the base form, (iv) replacement, for changing
the base form.

The analysed application of Bulgarian inflectional morphology (Noncheva and Stoykova,
2011) was made within the framework of the project ‘The Little Prince Project’ of the UNDL
Foundation aimed to develop UNL grammar and lexical resources for several european lan-
guages based on the book ‘The Little Prince’. Hence, the lexicon is limitted to the text of the
book. It offers the interpretation of inflectional morphology for the nouns, adjectives, numer-
als, pronouns (Stoykova, 2012) and verbs which uses A-rules (Fig. 2).

The UNL interpretation of nouns defines 74 word inflectional types. Every inflectional type
uses its own rules to generate all possible inflected forms for the features of number and defi-
niteness. Here we are analysing the inflectional rules of Bulgarian word for language "ezik"1.base form = ezik SNG&DEF:=0>"a";SNG&DEF:=0>"ut"; PLR:=1>"ci";PLR&DEF:=1>"cite"; PAU:=0>"a"; MUL:=0>"a";
The inflectional rules for generation of all inflected word forms are defined as separate
rules (Fig. 3). The suffixation rules for adding: SNG&DEF:=0>"a";, SNG&DEF:=0>"ut";,PAU:=0>"a";, MUL:=0>"a"; use the idea of introducing stems to which the inflectional
morphemes are added. A-rules for replacement also reflect the idea of introducing inflectional
stems consisting of root plus infix PLR:=1>"ci";, PLR&DEF:=1>"cite";.
The generated inflected word forms of the example Bulgarian word for language "‘ezik"’ are
given at the Fig.4. In general, the UNL lexical information presentation scheme underlie the
idea of WordNet for semantic hierarchical representation and allows the presentation of syn-
onyms and the translation of the word as well, which also is introduced in the application.

Adjectives are defined by using 14 word inflectional types and every inflectional type uses its
own rules to generate all possible inflected forms for the features of gender, number and def-

1 Here and elsewhere in the description we use Latin alphabet instead of Cyrillic. Because of mismatching between
both some of Bulgarian phonological alternations are assigned by two letters instead of one in Cyrillic alphabet.

427



Figure 4: The word forms of the word "‘ezik"’ generated by the system.

initeness. The interpretation of numerals and pronouns consist of 5 and 6 word inflectional
types, respectively. Alternatively, verbs are represented in 48 inflectional types. The UNL in-
terpretation, also, offers syntactic and semantic account. The syntacitc account is represented
by 21 syntactic rules for subcategorization frame and linearization, and rules to define the
semantic relations.

In general, the UNL interpretation of Bulgarian inflectional morphology offers a sound alterna-
tions interpretation mostly by the use of A-rules. The inflectional rules are defined without the
use of hierarchinal inflectional representation even they define the related inflectional types.
The sound alternations and the irregularity are interpreted within the definition of the main
inflectional rule.

The UNL application, also, represents a web-based intelligent information and knowledge man-
agement system which allows different types of semantic search with respect to the context like
semantic co-occurrence relations search, keywords or key concepts search, etc.

Conclusion

The demonstrated application of Bulgarian inflectional morphology uses the semantic net-
works formal representation schemes and the UNL as a formalism. However, it encodes the
inflectional knowledge using both the expressive power and the limitations of the formalism
used. The UNL knowledge representation scheme offers well defined types of inflectional rules
and differentiates inflectional, semantic, and lexemic hierarchies. The treatment of inflectional
classes as nodes in the inflectional hierarchy is used extensively, as well.

The application is open for further improvement and development by introducing additional
grammar rules and by enlarging the database for the use in different projects.

References

(2011). URL http://www.undl.org.

Blevins, J. (2001). Morphological paradigms. Transactions of the Philosophical society, 99:207–
210.

Boguslavsky, I. (2005). Some lexical issues of unl. In J. Cardenosa, A. Gelbukh, E. Tovar (eds.)
Universal Network Language: Advances in Theory and Applications. Research on Computing
Science, 12:101–108.

428



Boitet, C., B. I. and Cardenosa, J. (2007). An evaluation of unl usability for high quality multi-
lingualization and projections for a future unl++ language. In A. Gelbukh, (ed.) Proceedings
of CICLing, Lecture Notes in Computer Sciences, 4394:361–376.

Martins, R. (2011). Le petit prince in unl. In Proceedings from Language Resources Evaluation
Conference 2011, pages 3201–3204.

Noncheva, V., S. Y. and Stoykova, V. (2011). The little prince project – encoding of bulgarian
grammar. http://www.undl.org(UNDL Foundation).

Popov, K., G. E. and Penchev, J. (1983). The Grammar of Contemporary Bulgarian Language
(in Bulgarian). Bulgarian Acdemy of Sciences Publishing house.

Stoykova, V. (2012). The inflectional morphology of bulgarian possessive and reflexive-
possesive pronouns in universal networking language. In A. Karahoca and S. Kanbul (eds.)
Procedia Technology, 1:400–406.

Uchida, H., Z. M. and Della Senta, T. (2005). Universal Networking Language. UNDL Founda-
tion.

429




