



















































Automatic Punjabi Text Extractive Summarization System


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Demonstration Papers, pages 191–198,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Automatic Punjabi Text Extractive Summarization System 

Vishal GUPTA
1   Gurpreet Singh LEHAL

2 

(1) UIET, Panjab University Chandigarh, India 
(2) Department of Computer Science, Punjabi University Patiala, Punjab, India 

vishal@pu.ac.in, gslehal@gmail.com 

 

ABSTRACT 

Text Summarization is condensing the source text into shorter form and retaining its information 

content and overall meaning. Punjabi text Summarization system is text extraction based 

summarization system which is used to summarize the Punjabi text by retaining relevant 

sentences based on statistical and linguistic features of text. Punjabi text summarization system is 

available online at website: http://pts.learnpunjabi.org/default.aspx  It comprises of two main 

phases:   1) Pre Processing   2) Processing. Pre Processing is structured representation of original 

Punjabi text. Pre processing phase includes Punjabi words boundary identification, Punjabi 

sentences boundary identification, Punjabi stop words elimination, Punjabi language stemmer for 

nouns and proper names, applying input restrictions and elimination of duplicate sentences. In 

processing phase, sentence features are calculated and final score of each sentence is determined 

using feature-weight equation.   Top ranked sentences in proper order are selected for final 

summary. This demo paper concentrates on Automatic Punjabi Text Extractive Summarization 

System.   

KEYWORDS : Punjabi Text Summarization System, Pre Processing Phase, Processing Phase, 

Punjabi stemmer for nouns and proper nouns, Punjabi Named Entity Recognition, Punjabi 

Keywords Identification 

191



1 Introduction 

Automatic text summarization (Kyoomarsi et al., 2008; Gupta & Lehal, 2010) is reducing the 

source text into a shorter form retaining its information content and overall meaning. Text 

Summarization (Lin, 2009) Process can be divided into two phases: 1) Pre Processing phase 

(Gupta & Lehal, 2011a) is structured representation of the original text.   2) Processing (Fattah & 

Ren, 2008; Kaikhah, 2004; Neto et al., 2000) phase determines the final score of each sentence 

using feature-weight equation and top ranked sentences in proper order are selected for final 

summary. This paper concentrates automatic Punjabi text summarization system. Punjabi text 

Summarization system is text extraction based summarization system which is used to summarize 

the Punjabi text by retaining the relevant sentences based on statistical and linguistic features of 

text. Punjab is one of Indian states and Punjabi is its official language. For Punjabi language, 

Punjabi text summarization system is the only text summarizer and is available online: 

http://pts.learnpunjabi.org/default.aspx . Pre processing phase includes Punjabi words boundary 

identification, Punjabi sentences boundary identification, Punjabi stop words elimination, Punjabi 

language stemmer for nouns and proper names, allowing input restrictions to input text, 

elimination of duplicate sentences and normalization of Punjabi noun words in noun morph. In 

processing phase, various features influencing the relevance of sentences are decided and 

calculated. Some of statistical features are sentence length feature, keywords selection feature 

(TF-ISF approach) and number feature etc.  Some of linguistic features that often increase the 

candidacy of a sentence for inclusion in summary are: sentence headline feature, next line 

feature, noun feature, proper noun feature, cue phrase feature and presence of headline keywords 

in a sentence etc. Final score of each sentence is determined using feature-weight equation. 

Weights of each feature are calculated using weight learning methods. Top ranked sentences in 

proper order are selected for final summary at selective compression ratios.  

2 Pre Processing Phase of Punjabi Text Summarization System 

Various sub phases of complete pre processing of Punjabi text summarization system are given 

below: 

2.1 Punjabi language stop words elimination  

Punjabi language stop words (Gupta & Lehal, 2011a) are most frequently occurring words in 

Punjabi text like: ਦਾ dē, ਷ਿ hai, ਨ਽ੂੰ  nūṃ and ਨਹਲ nāl etc. We have to eliminate these words from the 
original text otherwise, sentences containing them can get influence unnecessarily. We have 

made a list of Punjabi language stop words by creating a frequency list from a Punjabi corpus. 

Analysis of Punjabi corpus taken from popular Punjabi newspaper Ajit has been done. This 

corpus contains around 11.29 million words and 2.03 lakh unique words. We manually analyzed 

these unique words and identified 615 stop words. In the corpus, the frequency count of these 

stop words is 5.267 million, which covers 46.64% of the corpus.  

2.2 Punjabi language stemmer for nouns and proper names 

The purpose of stemming (Islam et al., 2007; Kumar et al., 2005; Ramanathan & Rao, 2003) is to 

obtain the stem or radix of those words which are not found in dictionary. If stemmed word is 

present in dictionary (Singh et al., 1999) then that is a genuine word, otherwise it may be proper 

192



name or some invalid word.  In Punjabi language stemming (Gupta & Lehal, 2011b; Gill et al., 

2007; Gill et al., 2009) for nouns and proper names, an attempt is made to obtain stem or radix of 

a Punjabi word and then stem or radix is checked against Punjabi noun morph and Proper names 

list. An in depth analysis of corpus was made and the possible eighteen noun and proper name 

suffixes were identified like ੀ਻ਆਂ īāṃ, ਺ੀਆਂ iāṃ, ੀ਽ਆਂ ūāṃ and ੀਹੀਂ āṃ etc. and various rules for 
Punjabi noun stemming have been generated. The algorithm of Punjabi language stemmer for 

nouns and proper names has been published in (Gupta & Lehal, 2011b). The efficiency of this 

stemmer is 87.37%, which is tested over 50 Punjabi news documents of corpus and is ratio of 

actual correct results to total produced results by stemmer. Some results of Punjabi language 

stemmer for nouns and Proper names for various possible suffixes are ਫ਼ੁੱ ਲਾਂ phullāṃ “flowers”  
ਫ਼ੁੱ ਲ phull “flower” with suffix ੀਹੀ ਂāṃ, ਮ਼ੂੰ ਡਾ muṇḍē “boys” ਮ਼ੂੰ ਡਹ muṇḍā “boy” with suffix ੀਾ ē and 
਺ਫਰੀਜ਼ਪ਼ਰੋਂ phirōzpurōṃ  ਺ਫਰੀਜ਼ਪ਼ਰ phirōzpur with suffix ੀੀੀਂ ōṃ etc. 

2.3 Allowing input restrictions to input text 

Punjabi Text Summarization system allows Unicode based Gurmukhi text as input. Gurmukhi is 

the most common script used for writing the Punjabi language. Majority of input characters 

should be of Gurmukhi, otherwise error will be printed. From the input text, calculate length of 

Gurmukhi characters, punctuation mark characters, numeric characters, English characters and 

other characters. If number of Gurmukhi characters are less than equal to number of punctuation 

characters or number of numeric characters or number of English characters or number of other 

characters then error message is produced, otherwise if number of English characters or number 

of other characters are greater than equal to 10% of total input characters length, then error is 

produced “Can not accept the input!!!”. 

2.4 Elimination of duplicate sentences from Punjabi input text 

Punjabi Text Summarization system eliminates the duplicate sentences from the input Punjabi 

text. Duplicate sentences are deleted from input by searching the current sentence in to the 

sentence list which is initially empty. If current sentence is found in sentence list then that 

sentence is set to null otherwise it is added to the sentence list being the unique sentence. This 

elimination prevents duplicate sentences from appearing in final summary.  

2.5 Normalization of Punjabi nouns in noun morph and input text 

Problem with Punjabi is the non-standardization of Punjabi spellings. Many of the popular 

Punjabi noun words are written in multiple ways. For example, the Punjabi noun words ਺ਤੁੱ ਬਤ਻ 
tibbtī “tibbati”, ਥਾਂ thāṃ “place” and ਦਸਹ dasaā “condition”, ਺ਬਿਗਾਡ brigēḍ “brigade” can also be 
written as ਺ਤਬਤ਻ tibtī “tibbati”, ਥਹ thā “place” and ਦਸ਼ਹ dasā “condition”, ਬ਺ਰਗਾਡ barigēḍ 
“brigade” respectively. To overcome this problem, input Punjabi text and Punjabi noun morph 

has been normalized for the various characters like ੀੁੱ  aadak, ੀਂ  bindi at top, Punjabi foot 
character ੀ  for ਰ ra, ਴ v and ਷ ha and ੀਸ  bindi at foot for ਵ, ਖ਼, ਗ਼, ਜ਼, ਫ਼, and ਲ਼.  For doing 
normalization of Punjabi noun morph and Punjabi input text, replace all the occurences of ੀੁੱ  
aadak , ੀਂ  bindi at top, ੀਸ  bindi at foot with null character and replace all the occurences of 
Punjabi foot character ੀ  with suitable ਰ ra or  ਴ v or ਷ ha characters.  

193



3 Processing Phase of Punjabi Text Summarization System 

Various sub phases for processing phase of Punjabi text summarization system are given below: 

3.1 Punjabi sentence relative length feature 

This feature is calculated as published in (Fattah & Ren, 2008). Very short sentences are avoided 

for including in final summary as often they contain less information. On the other hand lengthy 

Punjabi sentences might contain lot of information. This feature is calculated by dividing number 

of words in a sentence with word count of largest sentence. Its value will be always less than or 

equal to 1.        

3.2 Punjabi Keywords/ Title Keywords identification 

Punjabi keywords identification system is first of its kind system available and is implemented by 

us as published in (Gupta & Lehal, 2011c). Prior to it no other Punjabi keywords identification 

system was available. Keywords are thematic words containing important information. Punjabi 

keywords are identified by calculating TF-ISF (Term Frequency-Inverse Sentence Frequency)    

(Neto et al., 2000) score. The TF-ISF measure of a noun word w in a sentence s, denoted TF-

ISF(w,s), is computed by: TF-ISF(w,s)= TF(w,s)* ISF(w)   where the term frequency TF(w,s) is 

the number of times that noun word w occurs in sentence s, and the inverse sentence frequency 

ISF(w) is given by the formula: ISF(w) = log(|S|/ SF(w)) , where the sentence frequency SF(w) is 

the number of sentences in which the noun word w occurs. Top scored Punjabi noun words (Top 

20%) with high value of TF-ISF scores are treated as Punjabi keywords. 

3.3 Numeric data identification 

Numerical data (Fattah & Ren, 2008) is important and it is most probably included in the 

document summary. The sentence that contains numerical data (Digits, Roman and Gurmukhi 

numerals) is important and it is most probably included in the document summary. The score for 

this feature is calculated as the ratio of the number of numerical data in sentence over the 

sentence length. 

3.4 Punjabi named entity recognition 

Rules based Punjabi named entity recognition system is first of its kind system available and is 

implemented by us for identifying proper nouns as published in (Gupta & Lehal, 2011d). Prior to 

it, no other rule based Punjabi named entity system was available. It  uses various gazetteer lists 

like prefix list, suffix list, middle name list, last name list and proper name lists for checking 

whether the  given word is proper name or not. After doing aanalysis of Punjabi corpus, various 

gazetteer lists have been developed. The Precision, Recall and F-Score for condition based NER 

approach are 89.32%, 83.4% and 86.25% respectively.  

3.5 Punjabi sentence headlines and next lines identification 

In single/multi news documents, headlines are most important and are always included in the 

final summary. Line just next to headline might contain very important information related to 

summary and is usually included in summary. In Punjabi news corpus with 957553 sentences, the 

frequency count of these headlines/next lines is 65722 lines which covers 6.863% of the corpus. 

194



In  Punjabi headlines detection system, if current sentence does not ends with punctuation marks 

like „।‟ vertical bar etc. but ends with enter key or new line character then set the headline flag 
for that line to true.  If the next subsequent line of this headline ends with punctuation marks like 

„।‟ vertical bar etc. but does not ends with enter key or new line character then set the next line 
flag to true for that line. Those Punjabi sentences which belong to headlines are always given 

highest score equal to 10 and their headline flags are set to true. The accuracy of Punjabi headline 

identification system and next line identification is 97.43% and 98.57% respectively which is 

tested over fifty Punjabi single/multi news documents. Next lines are always given very high 

weight equal to 9 and their next line flags are set to true.  

3.6 Punjabi nouns and Proper names identification 

Those Punjabi sentences containing nouns (Neto et al., 2002) and proper names are important. 

Input words are checked in Punjabi noun morph for possibility of nouns. Punjabi noun morph is 

having 37297 noun words. Proper nouns are the names of person, place and concept etc. not 

occurring in Punjabi Dictionary. From the Punjabi news corpus, 17598 words have been 

identified as proper nouns. Punjabi nouns and proper noun feature score is calculated by dividing 

number of Punjabi nouns/ proper names in a sentence with length of that sentence. 

3.7 Punjabi Cue Phrase identification 

Cue Phrases are certain keywords like in conclusion, summary and finally etc. These are very 

much helpful in deciding sentence importance. Those sentences which are beginning with cue 

phrases or which contain these cue phrases are generally more important than others. Firstly a list 

of Punjabi Cue phrases has been developed and then those sentences containing these Cue 

phrases are given more importance. 

3.8 Calculation of scores of sentences and producing final summary 

Final scores of sentences are determined from sentence-feature-weight equation. w1f1+w2f2+ 

w3f3+……………………………………………….wnfn where f1, f2, f3……………fn are different 

features of sentences calculated in the different subphases of Punjabi text summarization system 

and w1, w2, w3……………wn are the corresponding feature weights of sentences. Mathematical 

regression (Gupta & Lehal, 2011e ; Fattah & Ren, 2008) has been used as model to estimate the text 

features weights for Punjabi text summarization. Three most important features of Punjabi text 

summarization system are Punjabi headline identification feature, Punjabi next line identification 

feature and number identification feature. Top ranked sentences in proper order are selected for 

final summary. In final summary, sentence coherence is maintained by properly ordering the 

sentences in the same order as they appear in the input text at the selective compression ratios.  

4 Results and Discussions 

Punjabi text summarization has been tested over fifty Punjabi news documents (with 6185 

sentences and 72689 words) randomly taken from Punjabi Ajit news corpus having 11.29 million 

words and fifty Punjabi stories (with 17538 sentences and 178400 words) randomly taken from 

www.likhari.org website. We have applied four intrinsic measures of summary evaluation 1) F-

Score 2) Cosine Similarity 3) Jaccard Coefficient and 4) Euclidean distance for Punjabi news 

documents and stories.  Gold summaries (reference summaries) are produced by including most 

195



common sentences of manually produced summaries by three human experts at 10%, 30% and 

50% compression ratios. For Punjabi news documents, value of average F-Score is 97.87%, 

95.32% and 94.63% at 10%, 30% and 50% compression ratios respectively and value of average 

Cosine similarity is 0.9814, 0.9629 and 0.9522 at 10%, 30% and 50% compression ratios 

respectively. For Punjabi stories, value of average F-Score is 81.78%, 89.32% and 94.21% at 

10%, 30% and 50% compression ratios respectively and value of average Cosine similarity is 

0.8226, 0.8838 and 0.9432 at 10%, 30% and 50% compression ratios respectively. The results of 

intrinsic summary evaluation show that for Punjabi news documents, Punjabi text summarization 

system performs very well at 10% compression ratio, because at 10% compression ratio usually 

headlines and next lines are extracted which are enough to describe the whole text but for Punjabi 

stories, performance of Punjabi text summarization system is not good at 10% compression ratio, 

because headlines are not present in stories and only few lines are extracted in summary which 

are not enough to describe the sense of complete story.  We have performed question answering 

task and keywords association task as extrinsic measures of summary evaluation at compression 

ratios 10%, 30% and 50% respectively for Punjabi news documents and Punjabi stories. For 

Punjabi news documents, the accuracy of question answering task is 78.95%, 81.38% and 

88.75% at 10%, 30% and 50% compression ratios respectively. The results of question answering 

task show that for Punjabi news documents, performance of Punjabi text summarization system is 

low at 10% compression ratio because news documents are usually short and at 10% compression 

ratio, mainly headlines and next lines are extracted which are not sufficient to give all answers of 

question-answering task.  For Punjabi stories, the accuracy of question answering task is 80.65%, 

84.26% and 90.72% at 10%, 30% and 50% compression ratios respectively. For Punjabi news 

documents, the accuracy of keywords association task is 80.13%, 92.37% and 96.32% at 10%, 

30% and 50% compression ratios respectively. For Punjabi stories, the accuracy of keywords 

association task is 84.29%, 90.68% and 95.16% at 10%, 30% and 50% compression ratios 

respectively. For Punjabi news documents and stories, the accuracy percentage for the task of 

keywords association is very well at 50% compression ratio because at 50% compression ratio, 

summary produced is enough to cover majority of gold keywords. Both intrinsic and extrinsic 

summary evaluation methods show that at 50% compression ratio, Performance of Punjabi text 

summarization system is good for both Punjabi news documents and Punjabi stories because 

summary produced is enough to describe the whole text. 

Conclusion  

Punjabi Text Summarization system is first of its kind Punjabi summarizer and is available online 

at http://pts.learnpunjabi.org/default.aspx . Most of the lexical resources used in pre processing 

and processing such as Punjabi stemmer, Punjabi nouns normalizer, Punjabi proper names list, 

common English-Punjabi nouns list, Punjabi stop words list, Punjabi suffix and prefix list  etc. 

had to be developed from scratch as no work was done previously in that direction. For 

developing these resources an in-depth analysis of Punjabi corpus, Punjabi dictionary and 

Punjabi morph had to be carried out using manual and automatic tools. This is first time that 

these resources have been developed for Punjabi and these can be beneficial for developing other 

Natural language processing applications for Punjabi.     

     

 

 

196



References  

Ananthakrishnan Ramanathan  and Durgesh Rao,  (2003). A Light Weight Stemmer for Hindi. 

In  Workshop on Computational Linguistics for South-Asian Languages, EACL’03. 

Farshad Kyoomarsi, Hamid Khosravi, Esfandiar Eslami and Pooya Khosravyan Dehkordy. 

(2008). Optimizing Text Summarization Based on Fuzzy Logic. In: proceedings of  Seventh 

IEEE/ACIS International Conference on Computer and Information Science, pages 347-352, 

University of Shahid  Bahonar Kerman, UK. 

Gurmukh  Singh, Mukhtiar S. Gill and S.S. Joshi, (1999). Punjabi to English Bilingual 

Dictionary. Punjabi University Patiala, India.  

Jimmy Lin (2009). Summarization. Encyclopedia of Database Systems, Springer-Verlag 

Heidelberg, Germany. 

Joel larocca Neto, Alex A. Freitas and Celso A.A.Kaestner,(2002). Automatic Text 

Summarization using a Machine Learning Approach. In Book: Advances in Artificial 
Intelligence: Lecture Notes in computer science, Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, volume 2507, 
pages 205-215. 

Joel   Larocca   Neto,   Alexandre   D. Santos, Celso A.A. Kaestner and Alex A.   Freitas, 

(2000). Document   Clustering   and   Text   Summarization.   In  Proceedings   of 4th 

International Conference on Practical Applications of Knowledge  Discovery and Data Mining, 

pages 41-55, London. 

Khosrow Kaikhah, (2004). Automatic Text Summarization with Neural Networks. In  

Proceedings of IEEE international Conference on intelligent systems, pages 40-44, Texas, USA.  

Mandeep Singh  Gill,  Gurpreet  Singh Lehal  and S. S. Gill, (2007). A full   form  lexicon based 

Morphological Analysis and generation tool for  Punjabi.  International  Journal of  Cybernatics 

and Informatics, pages 38-47, Hyderabad, India. 

http://www.advancedcentrepunjabi.org/punjabi_mor_ana.asp 

Mandeep  Singh  Gill, Gurpreet Singh Lehal and S.S. Joshi, (2009). Part of Speech  Tagging  for 

Grammar   Checking   of   Punjabi,   Linguistic Journal,  4(1): 6-21, Road Town, Tortola British  

Virgin Islands. 

Md. Zahurul Islam, Md. Nizam Uddin and Mumit Khan, (2007). A light weight stemmer for 

Bengali and its Use in spelling Checker. In: Proceedings of 1st International Conference on 

Digital Comm. and Computer Applications (DCCA 2007), pages 19-23, Irbid, Jordan. 

Mohamed Abdel Fattah and Fuji Ren (2008). Automatic Text Summarization. In: Proceedings 

of World Academy of Science Engineering and Technology, volume 27, pages 192-195. 

Praveen Kumar, S. Kashyap,  Ankush Mittal and Sumit Gupta, (2005). : A Hindi question  

answering system for E-learning documents. In Proceedings of International Conference on 

Intelligent sensing and Information processing, pages 80-85, Banglore, India  

Vishal Gupta and Gurpreet Singh Lehal, (2010). A Survey of Text Summarization Extractive 

Techniques. In International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Web Intelligence, 2(3): 258-

268. 

Vishal Gupta and Gurpreet Singh Lehal, (2011a). Preprocessing Phase of Punjabi Language 

197



Text Summarization. In Proceedings of International conference on Information Systems for 

Indian Languages Communications in Computer and Information Science ICISIL2011, pages 

250–253, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. 

Vishal Gupta and Gurpreet Singh Lehal, (2011b). Punjabi language stemmer for nouns and 

proper nouns. In proceedings of   the 2
nd

 Workshop on South and Southeast Asian Natural 

Language Processing (WSSANLP) IJCNLP, pages 35-39, Chiang Mai, Thailand. 

Vishal Gupta and  Gurpreet Singh Lehal (2011c). Automatic    Keywords Extraction for Punjabi 

Language. International Journal of Computer Science Issues, 8(5) : 327-331. 

Vishal Gupta and  Gurpreet Singh Lehal (2011d). Named Entity Recognition   for   Punjabi  

Language  Text  Summarization. In International Journal of   Computer Applications, 33(3): 

28-32. 

Vishal Gupta and  Gurpreet Singh Lehal (2011e). Feature Selection and Weight Learning   for   

Punjabi Text  Summarization. In International Journal of   Engineering Trends and Technology, 

2(2): 45-48. 

 

 

 

 

 

198


