



















































Strategies for Mixed-Initiative Conversation Management using Question-Answer Pairs


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Technical Papers, pages 2821–2834,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Strategies for Mixed-Initiative Conversation Management
using Question-Answer Pairs

Wilson Wong, Lawrence Cavedon, John Thangarajah, Lin Padgham
RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia

{wilson.wong,lawrence.cavedon,john.thangarajah,lin.padgham}@rmit.edu.au

ABSTRACT
One of the biggest bottlenecks for conversational systems is large-scale provision of suitable
content. In this paper, we present the use of content mined from online question-and-answer
forums to automatically construct system utterances. Although this content is mined in the
form of question-answer pairs, our system is able to use it to formulate utterances that drive a
conversation, not just for answering user questions as has been done in previous work. We use
a collection of strategies that specify how and when the question-answer pairs can be used and
augmented with a small number of generic hand-crafted text snippets to generate natural and
coherent system utterances. Our experiments involving 11 human participants demonstrated
that this approach can indeed produce relatively natural and coherent interaction.

KEYWORDS: conversational system; question-answer pairs; conversational strategies.

1 Introduction

A major bottleneck for any kind of conversational system is provision of sufficient content,
and if one wishes to avoid repetition and to cover the many possible user inputs, there must
be a substantial amount of content. In the case of chatbots such as ALICE (Wallace, 2009),
the content is custom-crafted to be as generic and deflective as possible to cover the needs
of open-ended conversations. This approach, which reduces the amount of content that the
system needs despite the relatively broad range of user inputs, is essentially only capable of
content-free, small talk. This kind of conversational ability is, however, inadequate for virtual
characters that need to contribute relevant content in their conversations. In systems that
require domain-specific content, for example about health in a virtual nurse (Bickmore et al.,
2009) or about children-related topics in an intelligent toy (Chen et al., 2011), the custom-
crafting of content to cover the depth and breadth of the domain as well as to keep it current
becomes an impractical task. This work reports on our use of an abundant type of data, sourced
from the Web, to equip a conversational agent with the content it needs to engage users in a
coherent and natural way over a wide range of domains.

To overcome the bottleneck of custom- or hand-crafting conversational content, researchers
have recently investigated mining online resources such as Web pages returned by search
engines (e.g., Yahoo! (Shibata et al., 2009)). The problem with this approach, however, is
that most content on the Web is not suitable for conversational agents, for various reasons. The
verbose, non-colloquial and monologue nature of much of Web text is not a good match for the
characteristics of human-human dialogue. However, there are some other sources on the Web
that have more potential for this purpose, such as human-written comments on news websites
(e.g., NYTimes.com (Marge et al., 2010)) and online forums (e.g., RottenTomatoes.com

2821



(Huang et al., 2007), 2ch.net (Inoue et al., 2011)). We use text of this nature in the current
work for obtaining content with which our conversational agent constructs its utterances.

In this paper, we propose the use of question-answer (QA) pairs from community-driven
question-and-answer websites such as AskKids.com and Answers.com as content for our
conversational agent. QA pairs from the Web are essentially individual pairings of questions
and the corresponding answers contributed by online communities. By nature, the QA pairs
extracted from a particular source on a certain topic are disjointed, in that they do not have any
temporal or structural information that could immediately lend themselves to straightforwardly
building conversations. We see the potential of QA pairs for use in a conversational agent as
they are a reasonable embodiment of human-human communication, unlike text extracted from
other sources such as Wikipedia or online news articles. The abundance and self-contained
nature of QA pairs means that they can be extracted easily over a wide range of topics covered
by the respective online communities. QA pairs have also been used in the past with some
success for interactive question answering (IQA), driven solely by the user’s information needs.
We developed an IQA system (Wong et al., 2011) in the past that supports interactivity and does
not require inputs to be formulated as questions. This system, however, still interprets inputs
as questions and service them with answers. The approach in this paper, on the other hand,
is able to share the initiative with the human user for determining conversation content and
direction, and is able to engage with the user using a range of different conversational strategies
such as ‘question asking’, ‘fact telling’ and ‘question answering’. Context is maintained, similar
to our previous work (Wong et al., 2011), but instead of using this purely to identify a question,
which is then answered, it is now used to identify a QA pair of relevance for crafting system
utterances to further a conversation.

The key contributions of this paper lie in the conversational strategies that we describe that
specify how the different parts of the QA pairs can be used and combined with a small
number of generic hand-crafted fragments to generate natural system utterances. These system
contributions, when interplayed with cooperative user inputs, will produce seemingly coherent
conversations. Unlike existing dialogue systems that rely on deep language processing to achieve
‘understanding’ from input (e.g., (Schulman et al., 2011)), our conversational agent relies
only on shallow analysis for efficiency to extract and assign weights to terms and to identify
domain information for building conversational context. To examine the level of coherence
and naturalness that our system can achieve in the absence of standard dialogue management,
custom language resources, and deep semantic analysis of user inputs, we perform a pilot study
involving 11 human assessors. The results, which show that our approach does indeed produce
natural and coherent interaction relative to the human assessment, are discussed in Section 5.
Prior to that, we look at the state of the art in conversational agents in terms of their dialogue
management approaches and language resource requirements in Section 2. In Section 3, we
provide some background on the system architecture and the overall process, including the
structure of our QA pairs, the processing of input and the building of context. We then describe
in Section 4 the way in which we use the QA pairs according to several strategies, to form a
variety of system utterances, using these to build natural, reasonably coherent conversations.
After the system evaluation in Section 5, we conclude in Section 6 with discussion of future work
to incorporate this into a more complete virtual companion, integrating these conversational
agent abilities into a fully fledged companion with a range of capabilities.

2822



2 Related Work

Mining content from the Web to support human-computer interaction applications (e.g., ques-
tion answering (Radev et al., 2001; Clarke et al., 2001; Yao et al., 2012), interactive question
answering (Wong et al., 2011), conversational systems (Huang et al., 2007; Wu et al., 2008;
Shibata et al., 2009)) has been investigated since the advent of the read-write Web. In particular,
the practice of mining the Web to alleviate the bottleneck of conversational content acquisition is
increasing in popularity. Huang et al. (Huang et al., 2007), for example, proposed a supervised
technique for extracting <thread-title><reply> pairs from online forums as ‘knowledge’
for chatbots. The authors used RottenTomatoes.com as their source of title-reply pairs. The
extraction is done in a cascaded manner, given the semi-structured and relatively noisy nature
of text in online forums. All replies relevant to the thread title are first extracted using an
SVM classifier based on features related to the structure and content. The candidate pairs are
then ranked according to the quality of the content, and the top n pairs are selected as chatbot
‘knowledge’. However, no details were provided on how the pairs could be used in a chatbot.
Yao et al. (Yao et al., 2012), on the other hand, describe a technique for extracting factoid QA
pairs from standard text, such as Wikipedia1. In their approach, natural language processing
techniques are used to create a QA pair from a declarative sentence. These QA pairs are then
used by virtual characters to answer queries from a user. As such, they are only using the
QA pairs reactively, whereas our novel proposal is to also use them proactively. Moreover, by
mining our content from social media sites, we are more likely to obtain more conversational
fragments, as opposed to the strictly factoid style QA pairs that Yao et al. are interested in.
However, they do demonstrate encouraging performance for their techniques and it may be
possible to use such an approach to further increase our content with such (factoid) QA pairs.

Overall, despite the rise in interest in deriving content from the Web for conversational systems,
there is little research on how this content can be used more effectively to maximise the traits
that should ideally be present in human-computer dialogue. These traits include the coherence
of system-generated outputs with respect to preceding exchanges, the naturalness of system
utterances (e.g., is the utterance too lengthy or formal for supposedly casual conversations),
and the ability to support mixed-initiative interactions (i.e., no strict adherence to whether the
system or the user leads the conversations). In the next section, we present our approach to a
system which mines the Web for QA pairs, and specifies how and when this content can be used
to generate coherent, natural system contributions to mixed-initiative conversation.

3 System Overview

An overview of the main components of our conversational system is shown in Figure 1. We
briefly describe the collection of QA pairs, and the Input Analysis, Context Management and QA
pair Retrieval and Ranking components in this section. We focus in more detail in Section 4 on
the Strategiser, which is the major novel contribution of this paper.

3.1 QA Pair Collection

The content for generating system utterances is primarily a set of QA pairs, mined from
community-driven question-and-answer websites. During output generation, the different parts
of the selected QA pairs are augmented by a small number of strategy-specific fragments, which
we describe together with the strategies, to create natural system utterances. As our focus

1They actually use the Simple English version of Wikipedia.

2823



Figure 1: Conversational system architecture

is a companion for children, in this work we have used websites such as AskKids.com and
Answers.com for collecting our QA pairs. This collection is constructed offline, using an
interface similar to that described in (Wong et al., 2011) which allows the system administrator
to specify the source (e.g., “askkids"), domain (e.g., “animal") and a seed word (e.g., “lion") to
represent a topic in the domain for localising and indexing QA pairs. Each QA pair consists of
the question and the answer to that question, and some metadata, which are the domain tag,
the topic tag and the source tag. These QA pairs are then organised into a database according
to the metadata. The tags are used to move between topics of the same domain during a
conversation, and to define the scope (i.e., subset of fragments) that the conversational agent
has to deal with at any one time. Currently, the collection contains a total of 23, 295 QA pairs
across 150 topics in the animal domain.

3.2 Input Analysis

Analysis of input utterances is relatively shallow, deliberately avoiding any attempt at sophis-
ticated natural language understanding. The input is first tagged with parts of speech using
FastTag2 for its speed. Noun phrases are then identified using simple regular expression patterns.
Pronouns are resolved to the most prominent entities from previous inputs, using a method
loosely similar to the backward looking centering approach (Mitkov, 2001). The phrases and
words are then assigned weights to reflect their content bearing property. These weighted
phrases and words are referred to as terms. Our system has two different weighting schemes
implemented, the deviation from Poisson approach (Church and Gale, 1995) and tf-idf , with
the former being the default. The higher the weight of a term, the more content-bearing it
is. Content-bearing terms play a more discriminatory role in selecting relevant QA pairs for
utterance generation during the retrieval and ranking process. Stopwords, on the other hand,
are removed by virtue of them being non-content bearing. In addition, a dictionary-based
approach, operating over the input string, is used to detect if an input is an explicit question or
a request for session termination.

3.3 Context Management

Context, which is essentially a collection of weighted terms decayed over time, is used to select
QA pairs which are sufficiently relevant to the user inputs to generate system utterances. By

2markwatson.com/opensource

2824



collecting the weighted terms from the user inputs (and potentially system output), and then
decaying them over time, we maintain sufficient contextual information to make good choices of
QA pairs for building system utterances. Each time a new input is processed, the corresponding
weighted terms are combined into the existing conversational context. For example, if the
current input is the 5th utterance by the user, then the context at that turn would contain all
the terms and their weights extracted from the previous four inputs. The context management
process at turn 5 would then assimilate the terms from the recent input into the current context
to create a revised conversational context for turn 6.

The rule for combining new terms to the context is as follows. If a term is already present in
the context, the weight associated with the recent occurrence is added to the term’s existing
decayed weight in the context to reinforce what we perceive as an important term. If the term
is absent from the context, the new term and its weight are added to the context. In other
words, recurrence is an important factor for a term to maintain its prominence in the context,
where the more times a term occurs in the conversation, the more significant it will become
through the compounding of its weights. During the process of combining, the weights of all
other terms in the context that are not encountered in the most recent input are decayed based
on the turn in the conversation, the decay factor and the part of speech. Those term used less
recently thus have a greatly reduced weight. Different parts of speech are decayed at different
rates, with nouns decaying less quickly than verbs, which decay slower than adjectives, adverbs
and other parts of speech. Terms are decayed according to v′ = v exp(−tλα) where v′ is the
decayed weight, v is the original weight, λ is the decay factor set to 0.8 during our experiments.
The α value has been set to the following empirically-selected values to reflect the bias that
we introduced according to a term’s part of speech: 0.25 for nouns, 0.75 for adjectives and
adverbs, 1.25 for verbs, and 2.50 for others.

3.4 QA Pair Retrieval and Ranking

QA pair retrieval and ranking are performed to determine the QA pair that has the highest
relevance to the conversational context. Initially, a set of all candidate QA pairs containing
at least one term from the context is retrieved. The relevance of the candidates with respect
to the conversational context is then determined in terms of (1) the extent of the overlap of
words in the question and answer parts of QA pairs with those in the conversational context,
and (2) the string similarity between the question component and the user input. Edit distance
(Levenshtein, 1966) is used to determine the similarity between the user input and the question
part of the candidate QA pairs. As for overlap, the more highly weighted terms from the
conversational context that appear in a QA pair, the higher the pair’s score will be. The sum of
the weights of terms from the context that appear in the question as well as the answer of a QA
pair is determined. This sum is augmented by the location of appearance, where term matches
in the questions are scored twice as high as matches in the answers. At the end of retrieval and
ranking, the top scoring QA pair is selected for utterance generation.

4 Conversational Strategies

The core of our system’s abilities are two reactive and four proactive strategies. These strate-
gies attempt to recreate the types of human-to-human communications that are commonly
encountered. The strategies is also divided into progression or conclusion depending on their
roles, to either progress or conclude a conversation. The content used by these strategies to
produce utterances are the QA pairs and a small number of specialised hand crafted fragments

2825



which include speech disfluencies to produce more natural outputs (Marge et al., 2010). These
fragments are assigned tags and are contained in the strategy library. This library can be
extended to increase the variety of specialised fragments, independently of the actual strategies.

4.1 Reactive Strategies

This group of strategies is characterised by the agent following the user’s lead. There are two
strategies in this group, the first being a reactive progression strategy called UAQ, and a reactive
conclusion strategy called UEC. The details are discussed below.

UAQ (User Asks Questions) Strategy: This strategy is initiated when the input pars-
ing detects that the user has asked a question. In this case the keywords from the parsed input,
weighted as described in Context Management, are used to select a QA pair where the context
has an optimal match with the question portion of the QA pair. The answer portion of the pair
(or if it is too long, the initial part) is then used as output. If it is desired to continue this
strategy beyond a single interaction in the conversation, then subsequent inputs are essentially
treated as refinements of the initial question. This is essentially the approach used in our IQA
system (Wong et al., 2011). We do not use any specialised fragments to augment the selected
QA pair in this strategy.

UEC (User Ends Conversation) Strategy: This strategy is used when input processing
detects signs that the user wants to conclude the conversation. When a termination is detected,
the Strategiser removes all pending outputs in the queue and adopts this strategy to access the
associated fragments shown in Table 1, which are used to generate farewell messages.

1 OK. Nice chatting with you. Cya. [UEC]
2 Bye. [UEC]

Table 1: Some fragments for the UEC strategy

4.2 Proactive Strategies

We have five proactive strategies, two for progressing and three for concluding a conversation.
The proactive progression strategies are the ones that we make most use of in our conversational
agent. In these strategies the system takes the initiative by either asking a question or sharing
some information. The three proactive conclusion strategies deal with certain circumstances that
necessitate the conclusion of conversation sessions, namely, (1) lack of user participation, and
(2) system’s inability to carry on the conversation. These conclusion strategies are the result of
the system interpreting various signs and initiating the ending. The conclusion strategies do not
use any components of QA pairs for generating system utterances.

SSK (System Shares Knowledge) Strategy: This strategy attempts to simulate conver-
sations involving the sharing of knowledge between two participants in a chat. In the SSK
strategy, the system assumes the role of imparting knowledge, with the user on the receiving
end. This strategy uses the answer component of QA pairs to formulate system utterances to
create this effect. To illustrate, consider the following QA pair:

Q: What is a panda?

2826



A: The Panda is the bear-like black and white mammals which lives in

China. These cute and cuddly like bears eats mainly bamboo shoots

and are becoming extinct. Some experts refer to them as bears while

others believe they are more like a raccoon.

The SSK strategy uses the first sentence in the answer and augments it with a selection of
fragments such as “Did you know that $X" and “I just learnt that $X". In this example, the
first system utterance generated using this strategy, which will be placed in a queue, is “Did
you know that the panda is the bear-like black and white mammals which lives in China.". The
subsequent sentences in the answer are stored in the queue for generation but their order of use
will depend on the evolving conversation context in the next n iterations. For example, assume
that the system sends the first utterance in the queue to the user, and the user provides “They
look like a racoon" as the next input. Since this new input is not an explicit question and the
queue of the next things to utter is not empty, the strategy remains the same, i.e., SSK, and the
system utterance generation process does not invoke the QA pair retrieval and ranking process.
The Strategiser is used to reorder the utterances in the queue based on their overlap with the
current conversational context that contains the term “racoon". Since the overlap of the words
in the second sentence in the queue (i.e., the third sentence in the answer of the selected QA
pair) with the context is likely to be higher (due to the word “racoon"), this sentence will be
selected, augmented with the appropriate fragments and moved to the front of the queue as
the next system utterance. This next utterance will appear as “And some experts refer to them as
bears while others believe they are more like a raccoon". In the third iteration, only one sentence
from the 3-sentence answer remains. Unless the next user input is a question, the system will
generate its next utterance as “What’s more is that these cute and cuddly like bears eats mainly
bamboo shoots and are becoming extinct". This process of reordering the sentences that the
system utters takes place for all sentences in the answer of the selected QA pair.

1 Did you know that $X? [SSK-1]
2 I just learnt that $X . [SSK-1]
3 What’s more, $X . [SSK-2]
4 What’s more is that $X . [SSK-2]
5 And $X3... Well... $X . [SSK-2]
6 And $X3... Umm... $X . [SSK-2]

Table 2: Some fragments for the SSK strategy

Table 2 shows the list of fragments associated with the SSK strategy. Fragments labelled [SSK-1]
are used by the strategy to prepend to the first sentence of the selected answer, while those
labelled [SSK-2] are used for augmenting the subsequent sentences. Fragments 5 and 6 are
three examples containing false starts, where $X3 and $X4 represents the first three and four
words in $X , respectively.

SAQ (System Asks Questions) Strategy: This strategy attempts to recreate a conver-
sational scenario where a conversation participant explicitly asks the other participant a
question. In this strategy, the system poses as the participant asking the question. Both the
question as well as the answer components of QA pairs are used to generate the system
utterances in this strategy.

2827



1 Can you tell me, $X? [SAQ-1]
2 Tell me, $X? [SAQ-1]
3 Erm... $X . [SAQ-2]
4 $X3... Well... $X . [SAQ-2]

Table 3: Some fragments for the SAQ strategy

When this strategy is selected, the question component of the selected QA pair is used to
construct the first system utterance. Fragments shown in Table 3 which are labelled [SAQ-1]
are used to augment the question. The second utterance is then constructed using the first
three sentences of the corresponding answer and a fragment tagged with [SAQ-2]. With regard
to [SAQ-2] fragments, 3 contains fillers while 4 contains a false start to add to the ‘natural’
effect of the resulting utterances. To illustrate, consider the QA pair above. The first and second
utterances in the queue would appear as “Can you tell me, what is a panda?" and “The Panda
is... Well... The Panda is the bear-like black and white mammals which lives in China. These cute
and cuddly like bears eats mainly bamboo shoots and are becoming extinct. Some experts refer to
them as bears while others believe they are more like a raccoon.". The use of only the first three
sentences in the answer to generate the second system utterance is motivated by the average
sentences in answers of QA pairs from AskKids.com being around three.

UNI (User Not Interested) Strategy: This strategy is chosen by the Strategiser when
input processing detects three empty input sentences in a row, likely to be the result of the
expiration of the 60-second timer imposed by the input waiting process at the client side. The
system assumes the three successive timeouts to be a sign of the user losing focus to other
tasks, or lacking interest in pursuing the conversation further. Similar to the UEC strategy, the
Strategiser cancels all pending utterances when this strategy is chosen, and uses one of the
fragments lablled [UNI] shown in Table 4 to generate the system’s final utterance.

1 You don’t seem very interested in continuing the chat. Let’s do this some
other time. Bye!

[UNI]

2 It seems that you’re in the middle of something. Let’s talk some other time.
Cya.

[UNI]

Table 4: Some fragments for the UNI strategy

LTT (Lost Train of Thought) and SEC (System Ends Conversation) Strategies: The
second circumstance that necessitates the conclusion of a conversation, from the system’s point
of view, is the repeated inability of the retrieval and ranking modules to select a QA pair that
the Strategiser can work on using the conversational context maintained by the system. There
are two main causes of this: (1) the user’s successive use of non-content bearing words in his or
her inputs, and (2) the exhaustion of QA pairs. Two strategies are involved in this circumstance.
Whenever the Strategiser does not receive a selected QA pair from the retrieval and ranking
modules, the LTT strategy is used to generate utterances with fragments, shown in Table 5,
designed to prompt the user to repeat the recent input(s). When this strategy is used, the
conversational context is emptied and rebuilt using the latest input with the hope that the
new context can be used to select some useful QA pairs. In the event that the LTT strategy
is being selected for the third time in a row, the system will consider this as a sign that it is
unable to further pursue the conversation. In such cases, the Strategiser uses the SEC strategy

2828



to conclude the current session. Table 6 shows the fragments associated with the SEC strategy
for ending a conversation.

1 Oops. I got distracted. You were saying? [LTT]
2 Sorry, can you please repeat what you just said? [LTT]
3 Where were we? I was talking to someone else. [LTT]

Table 5: Some fragments for the LTT strategy

1 I’ve got something that I have to attend to now. Talk to you later. [SEC]
2 Sorry. I’m tired now. Let’s continue this some other time. Bye. [SEC]
3 We’ll need to stop here now. I’ve got to run. Bye. [SEC]

Table 6: Some fragments for the SEC strategy

5 Evaluation

We conducted a pilot study to assess the naturalness and coherence of utterances generated
by our conversational agent using only QA pairs and 41 generic fragments. We first discuss
the experimental setup, before moving on to present the results of humans’ judgements of
our system outputs. Error analysis is also performed, where we analyse the causes of those
system utterances that were perceived as less natural and coherent by the judges. An actual
interaction between the system and one of the judges is presented at the end to illustrate a
typical conversation with the conversational agent.

5.1 Experimental Setup

The domain that we have selected to test our conversational agent is that of “animal".
The question-answer pairs are downloaded from two sources, namely, AskKids.com and
Answers.com, solely for this experiment. 150 topics in the “animal" domain were manually
identified and used as seed words, where 17, 790 QA pairs were retrieved from Answers.com
and 5, 505 from AskKids.com. We were only able to download QA pairs about 96 out of the
total 150 topics from AskKids.com. To ensure that the Strategiser has the option of using QA
pairs from both sources during utterance generation, a topic is randomly selected by the system
from amongst the 96 seed words to initiate every conversation with the participants.

For the experiment, we obtained the assistance of 11 human participants. For privacy reasons,
the participants’ names, genders and other personal information were not collected, and their
names were never used by the conversational agent during conversations. The experiments
were conducted over the Internet where the participants were provided with a text interface
accessible via a Web browser. The interface is made up of two main parts, a user input
field at the bottom, and a panel to display the exchanges between the user and the system.
The instructions that we provide to the participants were as follows: (1) We requested the
participants to limit their conversations to a 10-minute duration; and (2) At the end of every
conversation, the participants were requested to rate the system utterances for naturalness and
coherence using two 5-point Likert scales (the naturalness scale has scores that range from
0-very artificial to 4-very natural, while the coherence scale ranges from 0-very
incoherent to 4-very coherent).

2829



1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

3 8 1

6

8

7

10

11

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

89

10

11

1

3

2

4

65

7

8

911

10

(a) Distribution of “naturalness"

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

6 10 2345 8

11

123

4

5

6

7

8910

11

12

3

45

6

7

8

9

10

11

1

234

5

6

7

8

910

11

(b) Distribution of “coherence"

Figure 2: Distribution of human judgements

5.2 Results

A total of 168 system utterances were recorded for all 11 conversations involving the 11
participants, with 16− 17 system utterances on average per conversation.

Naturalness of system utterances: Figure 2(a) shows the distribution of the natural-
ness rating of system-generated outputs. Out of the 168 system utterances, only about 10% (17
utterances) are rated at or below level 2, with 13 system utterances being judged as neither
artificial nor natural and 4 as artificial. The other 26% (43 utterances) and 64%
(108 utterances) are judged as very natural and natural, respectively. In other words, the
chart is left-skewed, with the majority (90%) of the judgements tending towards the very
natural end of the scale, with both the mode and median for all 11 conversations being at
level 3, which is natural.

Coherence of system utterances: Figure 2(b) summarises the human judgements of
coherence of system-generated outputs. The trend appears to be quite similar to the judgements
of naturalness in terms of skewness. However, instead of being concentrated at level 3, the
judgements of coherence are slightly more spread over the neighbouring levels 2 and 4.
The modes and medians shown in the legend in Figure 2(b) also demonstrate this spread.
About 17% (29 utterances) of all system outputs were considered as neither coherent
nor incoherent (20 utterances), incoherent (7 utterances) or very incoherent (2
utterances). At the same time, the numbers of utterances rated as very coherent (67
utterances) and as coherent (72 utterances) are approximately equal and when tallied up
constitute 83% of all system-generated outputs.

Ability to maintain coherence: While the majority of the system-generated outputs
are coherent (i.e., 83% of utterances are coherent or better), we are also interested in
whether coherence of the conversations is sustained throughout, or whether coherence
deteriorates with conversation length. Figure 3 shows coherence of individual system
utterances over time for all 11 conversations. The figure shows that the coherence of the system
contributions was consistently above level 2 (i.e., neither incoherent nor coherent),
with 9 sporadic valleys reaching level 1 and 0.

2830



judge[ 57454 ] judge[ 73628 ]

judge[ 12100 ] judge[ 12755 ] judge[ 14212 ] judge[ 71645 ]

2

Figure 3: Level of coherence over the course of a conversation

causes 1 2 total

repetition of utterances 3 2 5
verbose utterances 0 4 4
perceived non-responsiveness to user questions 0 4 4
quality of QA pairs and wrongly judged utterances 1 3 4

Table 7: The causes behind the system utterances that were rated as artificial (score 1) or
neither artificial nor natural (score 2) on the naturalness scale by the judges.

5.3 Error Analysis

After collecting judgements from the human participants, we analysed chat logs for naturalness
and coherence ratings of the individual system utterances. We identified a number of causes
behind the average and poorly-rated outputs: we discuss these here. Possible ways to remove
these problems are discussed in Section 6.

Causes of artificial utterances: We identified four main causes behind the 17 system
utterances that were judged as artificial or neither artificial nor natural, as
summarised in Table 7. The first cause, i.e., repetition occurred when QA pairs which are
different on the surface but semantically similar were used in succession to generate system
utterances. For example, there were two distinct QA pairs with the questions “What is cougar"
and “What is the cougar?" in our collection. During the system’s conversation with judge
71645, these two pairs were used to generate the two different utterances “Can you tell me,
what is cougar?" and “Tell me, what is the cougar?", four turns apart. From the judge’s point
of view, these utterances appeared as unnatural in that such blatant repetitions would not
normally be encountered in human-human dialogue. The second cause, not surprisingly, is
the artificiality of verbose utterances. The number of words in a typical system output ranges
between 8 to 20. There are, however, a small number of utterances that go beyond this
range, with some approaching or exceeding length 60. In this experiment, 8 utterances were
considered to be lengthy, and of these, 4 were rated down by the participants (were rated
as neither artificial nor natural) that encountered them during their interactions
with the system. The third cause is the user perceiving the system as not responding to their
questions. This problem occurred due to the system’s more restrictive interpretation of what

2831



causes 0 1 2 total

alternation between topics 0 4 2 6
utterances which are out-of-place 1 1 1 3
perceived non-responsiveness to user questions 1 0 3 4
issues with context management 0 2 3 5
initial system utterance 0 0 11 11

Table 8: The causes behind the system utterances that were rated as very incoherent
(score 0), incoherent (score 1) or neither incoherent nor coherent (score 2) on
the coherence scale by the judges.

constitutes a question. Out of the 4 utterances in the quality of QA pairs and wrongly
judged utterances row of Table 7, 2 were the result of poorly-written QA pairs by the
online human contributors. As an example, one of the sentences in the answer of a selected QA
pair was incomplete, producing the system utterance “And the interesting bit is that the giant
panda lives in Asia and is most commonly known [sic]", which was rated as 1 for naturalness by
judge 12100. As for the other two utterances rated as neither artificial nor natural
in the same row, the causes were unclear.

Causes of incoherent utterances: Next, we discuss the causes that contributed to
some of the system utterances being judged poorly on the coherence scale. Table 8 summarises
these causes. The first cause is the generation of utterances that give the users the impression of
abrupt transitions. This may happen when the system moves to a new topic that is semantically
less related (hence the abruptness), or alternates between topics due to the presence of multiple
influential terms within the same domain in the context. The second cause is the generation of
utterances that appear out of context. This may be due to the ways the QA pairs were written
(poorly) or structured (i.e., the sentences in the answers may not lend well to the generation of
individual, successive system utterances). Consider the following QA pair as an example:

Q: What do american cockroaches eat?

A: Just about everything! American cockroaches eat plants, garbage,

people food, glue found in book bindings and other glues and

pet foods are just a few.

This particular QA pair was used as part of the SSK strategy to produce the utterance “Do you
know that just about everything?" when interacting with judge 03693. The utterance, which
appeared in the following context, was in no way related to the previous exchanges and was
ill-formed. For this reason, the judge rated its coherence as 1.

SYSM: erm... some types of cockroaches can fly but not all of them.

the american cockroach can fly but the german one cannot.

these are the most common cockroaches found.

USER: american cockroach?

SYSM: do you know that just about everything?

...

The third cause is the system’s inability to detect and handle questions that were not formulated
using typical wh-words. This cause also negatively affects the naturalness of system utterances,

2832



as previously discussed. The fourth cause is due to problems with context management. As
we have discussed before, the LTT strategy is used to recover from inadequate context for
QA pair selection. This can happen when users repeatedly provide inputs that do not contain
words that are useful for selecting QA pairs. Unfortunately, some of the judges do perceive
this system-initiated solicitation for more useful inputs as unnatural. As for the 11 utterances
judged as neither incoherent nor coherent on the fifth row of Table 8, these outputs
were simply the first utterances generated by the system in their respective conversations. Since
these utterances do not have any preceding inputs or outputs to be benchmarked against for
coherence, these level 2 ratings were expected.

6 Discussion

Conversational systems that are required to engage users in conversations that cover the breadth
and depth of certain topics face the bottleneck of custom- or hand-crafting the necessary
content. Mining conversational content from the Web is increasingly being seen as a promising
solution to this problem. However, the verbose, non-colloquial and monologue nature of typical
Web text means that such content is not straightforwardly usable for responding to users by
conversational systems for various reasons. In this work, we propose the use of question-answer
(QA) pairs mined from community-driven question-and-answer websites as content for a
conversational system. The main contribution of this paper lies in the conversational strategies
we have defined that specify how and when the different parts of QA pairs can be used and
augmented with a small number of generic fragments to generate natural system utterances.
The coherence of system contributions in a conversation is managed using context. To assess
the naturalness and coherence of system-generated utterances, we conducted a small pilot
study involving 11 human participants. Out of the 168 system outputs, over 80% were judged
as natural and coherent by the participants. The coherence of system contributions is generally
maintained throughout the course of all 11 conversations, with sporadic incoherences. We also
analysed the causes behind the 10− 20% of artificial and incoherent system outputs.

Limitations and potential improvements on the naturalness of system utterances:
The two main causes that contributed to a number of outputs being judged as artificial were
the appearance of repetitive and lengthy utterances. The problem of repetition arises when
QA pairs with different surface patterns that are semantically similar are selected within the
same conversation to generate system utterances. One possible way to overcome this is to use a
string similarity measure to compare the questions of potential QA pairs against the QA pairs
that have already been used. Candidate pairs that are similar to the previously used ones on
the surface can then be excluded from future use. As for coping with lengthy utterances, a
range of approaches are available, from detecting sentence boundaries with some heuristics for
recombining them, to more elaborate summarisation techniques.

Limitations and potential improvements on the coherence of system utterances:
Incoherent utterances are caused mainly by the lack of management of the implicit transitions
between topics in the same domain during a conversation. The problem of topic transitioning
can be managed, for example, using local wellformedness constraints, e.g., semantic relatedness
measures. The other causes of poor coherence and artificial outputs, i.e., the non-responsiveness
to certain questions (that have surface patterns not recognised by the system) and the quality of
QA pairs, are more difficult to address. Adding new patterns to support more types of questions
or using punctuation to detect questions may seem to be straightforward solutions. However,

2833



our intention to potentially incorporate speech input will render the latter option useless, while
the former solution will increase false positives during question detection. In regard to the
quality of QA pairs, manual intervention is necessary to proof-read and edit the pairs. Currently,
no manual effort is required to make our system operational, except providing seed terms to
populate the QA pair collection.

Acknowledgment
This work is partially supported by the Australian Research Council and Real Thing Entertainment Pty. Ltd.
under Linkage grant number LP110100050.

References
Bickmore, T., Pfeifer, L., and Jack, B. (2009). Taking the time to care: Empowering low health literacy
hospital patients with virtual nurse agents. In Proceedings of the 27th CHI, Boston, USA.

Chen, Z., Liao, C., Chien, T., and Chan, T. (2011). Animal companions: Fostering children’s effort-making
by nurturing virtual pets. British Journal of Educational Technology, 42(1):166–180.

Church, K. and Gale, W. (1995). Inverse document frequency (idf): A measure of deviations from poisson.
In Proceedings of the ACL 3rd Workshop on Very Large Corpora, pages 121–130.

Clarke, C., Cormack, G., and Lynam, T. (2001). Exploiting redundancy in question answering. In
Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval.

Huang, J., Zhou, M., and Yang, D. (2007). Extracting chatbot knowledge from online discussion forums.
In Proceedings of the 20th IJCAI, Hyderabad.

Inoue, M., Matsuda, T., and Yokoyama, S. (2011). Web resource selection for dialogue system generating
natural responses. In Proceedings of the 14th HCI, pages 571–575, Orlando, Florida, USA.

Levenshtein, V. (1966). Binary codes capable of correcting deletions, insertions, and reversals. Soviet
Physics Doklady, 10(8):707–710.

Marge, M., Miranda, J., Black, A., and Rudnicky, A. (2010). Towards improving the naturalness of social
conversations with dialogue systems. In Proceedings of the 11th SIGDIAL, University of Tokyo, Japan.

Mitkov, R. (2001). Outstanding issues in anaphora resolution. In Computational Linguistics and Intelligent
Text Processing, pages 110–125. Springer.

Radev, D., Qi, H., Zheng, Z., Zhang, Z., Fan, W., Blair-Goldensohn, S., and Prager, J. (2001). Mining the
web for answers to natural language questions. In Proceedings of the 10th CIKM.

Schulman, D., Bickmore, T., and Sidner, C. (2011). An intelligent conversational agent for promoting
long-term health behavior change using motivational interviewing. In Proceedings of the AAAI Spring
Symposium, Stanford University.

Shibata, M., Nishiguchi, T., and Tomiura, Y. (2009). Dialog system for open-ended conversation using
web documents. Informatica, 33(3):277–284.

Wallace, R. (2009). The anatomy of a.l.i.c.e. In Epstein, R., Roberts, G., and Beber, G., editors, Parsing
the Turing Test. Springer.

Wong, W., Thangarajah, J., and Padgham, L. (2011). Health conversational system based on contextual
matching of community-driven question-answer pairs. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM International
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM), pages 2577–2580, Glasgow, UK.

Wu, Y., Wang, G., Li, W., and Li, Z. (2008). Automatic chatbot knowledge acquisition from online forum
via rough set and ensemble learning. In Proceedings of the IFIP International Conference on Network and
Parallel Computing, Shanghai, China.

Yao, X., Tosch, E., Chen, G., Nouri, E., Artstein, R., Leuski, A., Sagae, K., and Traum, D. (2012). Creating
conversational characters using question generation tools. Dialogue and Discourse, 3(2):125–146.

2834


