



















































Flexible Japanese Sentence Compression by Relaxing Unit Constraints


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Technical Papers, pages 1097–1112,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Flexible Japanese Sentence Compression
by Relaxing Unit Constraints

Jun Harashima Sadao Kurohashi
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University

Yoshida-honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8501, Japan
harashima@nlp.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp, kuro@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

ABSTRACT
Sentence compression is important in a wide range of applications in natural language process-
ing. Previous approaches of Japanese sentence compression can be divided into two groups.
Word-based methods extract a subset of words from a sentence to shorten it, while bunsetsu-
based methods extract a subset of bunsetsu (where a bunsetsu is a text unit that consists of
content words and following function words). Basically, bunsetsu-based methods perform bet-
ter than word-based methods. However, bunsetsu-based methods have the disadvantage that
they cannot drop unimportant words from each bunsetsu because they have to follow con-
straints under which each bunsetsu is treated as a unit. In this paper, we propose a novel
compression method to overcome this disadvantage. Our method relaxes the constraints using
Lagrangian relaxation and shortens each bunsetsu if it contains unimportant words. Exper-
imental results show that our method effectively compresses a sentence while preserving its
important information and grammaticality.

TITLE AND ABSTRACT IN JAPANESE

ユニット制約の緩和による柔軟な日本語文圧縮

文圧縮は，自然言語処理の様々なアプリケーションにおいて重要である．日本語文に対する
既存の圧縮手法は二種類に分けられる．単語ベースの手法は文から単語集合を選出し，圧縮
文とする．一方，文節ベースの手法は文から文節集合を選出し，圧縮文とする．基本的には
後者の方が良く機能する．しかし，文節ベースの手法は，文節をユニットとして扱うという
制約があるため，個々の文節を圧縮できない．本稿では，この欠点を克服する新しい圧縮手
法を提案する．提案手法はラグランジュ緩和を用いて上の制約を緩和し，各文節を圧縮する．
実験の結果，提案手法によって原文の情報を多く保持する文法的な圧縮文を生成できること
が分かった．

KEYWORDS: sentence compression, Lagrangian relaxation.

KEYWORDS IN JAPANESE: 文圧縮,ラグランジュ緩和.

1097



1 Introduction

Sentence compression is the task of shortening a sentence while preserving its important in-
formation and grammaticality. This task is important in a wide range of applications such
as automatic summarization (Jing, 2000; Lin, 2003; Zajic et al., 2007), subtitle generation
(Vandeghinste and Pan, 2004), and displaying text on small screens (Corston-Oliver, 2001).

In this paper, we propose a novel compression method for a Japanese sentence. Like other
languages, Japanese uses sentences composed of words. However, we can also say that a
Japanese sentence is composed of bunsetsu. Bunsetsu is a text unit that consists of one or more
content words and possibly one or more function words. For example, consider the following
sentence.1

(1) nihon
Japan

to
CNJ

kanada
Canada

no
GEN

kokusai
international

kyoudou
collaborative

kenkyuu
research

guru-pu
group

ga
NOM

hakken
discover

shita
did

(An international collaborative research group between Japan and Canada made a dis-
covery)

This sentence is composed of four bunsetsu: “nihon to”, “kanada no”, “kokusai kyoudou
kenkyuu guru-pu ga”, and “hakken shita”. As seen in this example, a Japanese sentence can be
viewed as a bunsetsu sequence as well as a word sequence.

This characteristic of the Japanese language has led researchers to take two compression
approaches: word-based methods and bunsetsu-based methods. Word-based methods view a
source sentence as a word sequence and generate a compressed sentence by selecting a sub-
set of words from the source sentence (Hori and Furui, 2004; Hirao et al., 2009). However,
the methods do not take account of bunsetsu, and it is thus difficult to generate grammatical
compressions. For example, if only content words (or only function words) in a bunsetsu are
selected, the grammaticality of the corresponding part in the compressed sentence would be
poor.

We can avoid this problem using bunsetsu-based methods. Bunsetsu-based methods view a
source sentence as a bunsetsu sequence and generate a compressed sentence by selecting a
subset of bunsetsu from the source sentence (Takeuchi and Matsumoto, 2001; Oguro et al.,
2002; Yamagata et al., 2006; Nomoto, 2008). Bunsetsu-based methods treat each bunsetsu as
a unit. Thus, the methods do not suffer from the above problem and they can generate com-
pressions that are more grammatically correct than those generated by word-based methods.

However, bunsetsu-based methods have a disadvantage in that they cannot shorten each bun-
setsu in a source sentence. More precisely, when there is a compound noun in a bunsetsu
and the noun contains unimportant words, bunsetsu-based methods cannot drop those words
from the noun. Consider the above sentence (1) as an example. The third bunsetsu “kokusai
kyoudou kenkyuu guru-pu ga” contains a compound noun “kokusai kyoudou kenkyuu guru-pu”
(international collaborative research group). Suppose that we want to drop the word “koku-
sai” (international) from the noun and to shorten the bunsetsu to “kyoudou kenkyuu guru-pu
ga”. However, bunsetsu-based methods cannot perform such flexible word selection because
they have to treat each bunsetsu as it is.

1This paper uses the abbreviations NOM (nominative), ACC (accusative), DAT (dative), ALL (allative), GEN (geni-
tive), CMI (comitative), CNJ (conjunction), and TOP (topic marker).

1098



In this paper, we propose a novel compression method to overcome the above disadvantage.
As described above, the disadvantage results from a constraint for each bunsetsu under which
the bunsetsu has to be treated as a unit (hereafter called the unit constraint). If we ignore unit
constraints, we may be able to avoid the problem. However, if we do so, we again suffer from
the problem of word-based methods (i.e., we will not generate grammatical compressions).
We therefore do not ignore or adhere to unit constraints, but relax them using Lagrangian
relaxation. That is, the proposed method basically follows the constraints and treats each
bunsetsu as a unit. However, if a bunsetsu contains unimportant words, our method violates
its unit constraint and drops those words from the bunsetsu. In this paper, we formulate this
idea using integer linear programming (ILP) and report the effectiveness through experiments.

2 Word-based Method

We first describe word-based methods in detail. Although several word-based methods have
been proposed (Hori and Furui, 2004; Hirao et al., 2009), the basic idea behind the methods
is the same. We explain the idea in detail and discuss the advantage and disadvantage of
word-based methods.

2.1 Idea

In word-based methods, a source sentence is viewed as a word sequence. Let wi (i = 1, . . . , I)
denote a word in a source sentence. The basic idea underlying word-based methods is that the
compression is a subset of words with the maximum importance in a source sentence. Through
ILP, this idea is formulated as follows.

Sentence Compression (Word-based Formulation)

maximize
I∑

i=1

x i Score(wi) (1)

subject to
I∑

i=1

x i Leng th(wi)≤ L (2)

x i = 0 or 1 (i = 1, . . . , I) (3)

where x i denotes a decision variable of wi that is 1 if wi is contained in a compressed sentence,
and otherwise 0. Score(wi) represents the importance of wi and Leng th(wi) represents the
length of wi . L is a predefined maximum length of a compressed sentence. According to
Eq. (1), the optimal subset of words in a source sentence is selected as a compressed sentence.
In addition, according to Eq. (2), the length of the compressed sentence shall be not more than
L.

2.2 Advantage and Disadvantage

The advantage of word-based methods is that the methods can more freely select important
words in a source sentence than bunsetsu-based methods. This is because word-based methods
do not take account of bunsetsu in a source sentence and are not limited to unit constraints.

However, due to the freeness, word-based methods have the disadvantage that they tend to
generate ungrammatical compressions. As described in Section 1, if only content words (or

1099



w11 w12 w13 w14 w15

…の原因と思わ 遺伝子を日本とカナダの国際共同研究グループが発見した

Word

Source

sentence … no gennin to omowa reru idenshi wo nihon to kanada no kokusai kyoudou kenkyuu guru-pu ga hakken shita

kokusaino kyoudou

(research) (group) (NOM) (discover)

と

to

カナダ

kanada

国際 共同 研究 グループ が 発見の… …日本
nihon

(Japan) (CNJ) (Canada) (GEN) (international) (collaborative)

kenkyuu guru-pu ga hakken

(An international collaborative research group between Japan and Canada discovered a gene that causes …)

… …

Figure 1: Word-based method. A source sentence is segmented into words and a subset of
words in the sentence is selected as the compressed sentence.

only function words) in a bunsetsu are selected, the grammaticality of the corresponding part
in the compressed sentence would be poor. Consider the sentence in Figure 1. There is, for
example, the bunsetsu “kanada no” in the sentence (although word-based methods do not
take account of it). If we select only the word “kanada” (Canada) from the bunsetsu and do
not select the word “no” (GEN), the corresponding part of the compressed sentence would
not make sense. As just described, it is difficult to generate grammatical compressions using
word-based methods.

3 Bunsetsu-based Method

Like word-based methods, most previous bunsetsu-based methods (Oguro et al., 2002;
Yamagata et al., 2006; Nomoto, 2008) are based on the same idea. In this section, we ex-
plain the idea and discuss the advantages and disadvantage of bunsetsu-based methods.

3.1 Idea

Word-based methods view a source sentence as a word sequence, while bunsetsu-based meth-
ods view the sentence as a bunsetsu sequence. Let b j ( j = 1, . . . , J) denote a bunsetsu in a
source sentence. The basic idea underlying bunsetsu-based methods is that the compression
is a subset of bunsetsu with the maximum importance in a source sentence. Through ILP, this
idea is formulated as follows.

Sentence Compression (Bunsetsu-based Formulation)

maximize
J∑

j=1

y j Score(b j) (4)

subject to
J∑

j=1

y j Leng th(b j)≤ L (5)

y j = 0 or 1 ( j = 1, . . . , J) (6)

where y j denotes a decision variable of b j that is 1 if b j is contained in a compressed sen-
tence, and otherwise 0. Score(b j) represents the importance of b j and Leng th(b j) represents
the length of b j . According to Eq. (4), the optimal subset of bunsetsu in a source sentence is
selected as a compressed sentence. In addition, according to Eq. (5), the length of the com-
pressed sentence shall be not more than L.

1100



b8 b9

…の原因と思わ 遺伝子を日本とカナダの国際共同研究グループが発見した

Bunsetsu

Source

sentence … no gennin to omowa reru idenshi wo nihon to kanada no kokusai kyoudou kenkyuu guru-pu ga hakken shita

kokusaino kyoudou

(research) (group) (NOM) (discover)

と

to

カナダ

kanada

国際 共同 研究 グループ が 発見の… …日本
nihon

(Japan) (CNJ) (Canada) (GEN) (international) (collaborative)

kenkyuu guru-pu ga hakken

(An international collaborative research group between Japan and Canada discovered a gene that causes …)

… …

Figure 2: Bunsetsu-based method. A source sentence is segmented into bunsetsu and a subset
of bunsetsu in the sentence is selected as the compressed sentence. Bunsetsu-based methods
have the advantage in that they are able to use dependency information.

3.2 Advantages and Disadvantage

One advantage of bunsetsu-based methods is that the methods can generate compressions that
are more grammatical than compressions generated by word-based methods. Bunsetsu-based
methods select each bunsetsu in a source sentence just as it is. Therefore, the methods do not
suffer from the problem of word-based methods (see also Section 2.2).

Bunsetsu-based methods have the another advantage in that they are able to use dependency
information in a source sentence. In Japanese, a dependency relation is generally defined
between not a pair of words but a pair of bunsetsu. Consider the source sentence in Figure
2. In the sentence, there is the example that bunsetsu b8 depends on bunsetsu b9. Bunsetsu-
based methods can use this information by adding the following simple constraint to the above
formulation.

subject to y8 ≤ y9 (7)

This constraint ensures that if b8 is contained in a compressed sentence, b9 is also contained in
the sentence. In this way, bunsetsu-based methods can easily use dependency information in
a source sentence. On the other hand, there is a word-based method that defines dependency
relations between words in a source sentence and uses the information (Hori and Furui, 2003).
However, as described above, a dependency relation is generally defined between a pair of
bunsetsu. In the method, bunsetsu dependencies in a source sentence and complex rules are
necessary to define the word dependencies, and it is not easy to use the information.

On the other hand, as described in Section 1, the disadvantage of bunsetsu-based methods is
that they cannot shorten each bunsetsu in a source sentence. More precisely, when there is
a compound noun in a bunsetsu and the noun contains unimportant words, bunsetsu-based
methods can not drop those words from the noun. Consider again the sentence in Figure
2. Bunsetsu b9 contains a compound noun “kokusai kyoudou kenkyuu guru-pu” (international
collaborative research group). Suppose that we want to drop the word “kokusai” (interna-
tional) from the noun and to shorten the bunsetsu to “kyoudou kenkyuu guru-pu ga”. However,
bunsetsu-based methods cannot perform such flexible word selection because they are limited
to unit constraints.

1101



4 Proposed Method

Bunsetsu-based methods basically perform better than word-based methods, especially in
terms of the grammaticality of a compressed sentence. However, bunsetsu-based methods
have the disadvantage that they cannot shorten each bunsetsu in a source sentence. In this
section, we describe a novel compression method that overcomes this disadvantage.

4.1 Idea

The point of our method is to relax unit constraints responsible for the disadvantage. Under
the constraints, we have to treat each bunsetsu as a unit. If we ignore the constraints, we
may be able to avoid the problem. However, if we do so, we again suffer from the problem
of word-based methods (i.e., we will not generate grammatical compressions). Therefore, we
select a set of bunsetsu, each containing unimportant words, and relax their unit constraints.
Note that each bunsetsu that contains a compound noun (e.g., b9 in Figure 3) is selected as a
bunsetsu that may contain unimportant words. Conversely, we do not shorten each bunsetsu
that does not contain a compound noun (e.g., b8 in Figure 3) because such a bunsetsu has
only one content word and does not need to be shortened.

First, let us rewrite the bunsetsu-based formulation in Section 3.1. Using wi and x i instead of
b j and y j , the formulation can be rewritten as follows.

Sentence Compression (Bunsetsu-based Formulation 2)

maximize
I∑

i=1

x i Score(wi) (8)

subject to
I∑

i=1

x i Leng th(wi)≤ L (9)

x i = 0 or 1 (i = 1, . . . , I) (10)
xF irst(b j) = xF irst(b j)+1 = · · ·= xLast(b j)

(wF irst(b j), . . . , wLast(b j) ∈ b j , j = 1, . . . , J) (11)
where F irst(b j) represents a function that returns the index of the first word in b j , while
Last(b j) returns that of the last word in b j (e.g., in Figure 3, F irst(b9) = 13 and Last(b9) =
17). In addition, we set Score(b j) =

∑
wi∈b j Score(wi) and Leng th(b j) =

∑
wi∈b j Leng th(wi).

The notable aspect of the above formulation is Eq. (11), which is the set of unit constraints.
Equation (11) ensures that if we select one word from a bunsetsu in a source sentence, we
also select the other words from the bunsetsu. Likewise, if we do not select one word from a
bunsetsu, we must also not select the other words from the bunsetsu.

The proposed method does not ignore or adhere to unit constraints but relaxes them. To do
this, we use Lagrangian relaxation, which is a classical technique for combinatorial optimiza-
tion. The technique moves problematic constraints into the objective function and penalizes
the function if those constraints are not satisfied. Using the technique, we remove unit con-
straints for each bunsetsu that contains a compound noun.

Let BCN denotes a subset of bunsetsu, each containing a compound noun. In addition, let us
decompose a unit constraint for b j in BCN (i.e., xF irst(b j) = xF irst(b j)+1 = · · · = xLast(b j)) into

1102



w11 w12 w13 w14 w15 w16 w17

…の原因と思わ 遺伝子を日本とカナダの国際共同研究グループが発見した

Word

Source

sentence

Unit

constraint
x9 x10 x11 x12= = x13 x14 x15 x16 x17=== =

… no gennin to omowa reru idenshi wo nihon to kanada no kokusai kyoudou kenkyuu guru-pu ga hakken shita

kokusaino kyoudou

(research) (group) (NOM) (discover)

と

to

カナダ

kanada

国際 共同 研究 グループ が 発見の… …

…

日本

nihon

w9 w10 w18

x18 =

(Japan) (CNJ) (Canada) (GEN) (international) (collaborative)

kenkyuu guru-pu ga hakken

(An international collaborative research group between Japan and Canada discovered a gene that causes …)

b8 b9Bunsetsu … …

constraint
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17

Lagrangian relaxation

18

Figure 3: Proposed method. Bunsetsu b9 contains a compound noun “kokusai kyoudou
kenkyuu guru-pu” (international collaborative research group). The proposed method relaxes
the unit constraint for the bunsetsu using Lagrangian relaxation.

a set of constraints: xF irst(b j) = xLast(b j), xF irst(b j)+1 = xLast(b j), . . . , and xLast(b j)−1 = xLast(b j).
Our new formulation is given below.

Sentence Compression (Proposed Formulation)

maximize
I∑

i=1

x i Score(wi) +
∑

b j∈BCN

∑
wi∈b j\wLast(b j )

µi,Last(b j)(x i − xLast(b j)) (12)

subject to
I∑

i=1

x i Leng th(wi)≤ L (13)

x i = 0 or 1 (i = 1, . . . , I) (14)
xF irst(b j) ≤ xF irst(b j)+1 ≤ · · · ≤ xC Last(b j) = · · ·= xLast(b j)

(wF irst(b j), . . . , wLast(b j) ∈ b j , j = 1, . . . , J) (15)
where µi,Last(b j) is a Lagrangian multiplier provided for a constraint x i = xLast(b j). C Last(b j)
in Eq. (15) returns the index of the last content word in b j (e.g., in Figure 3, C Last(b9) = 16).

A notable aspect is the second term in Eq. (12). For a bunsetsu b j in BCN (e.g., b9 in Figure
3), the term penalizes the objective function if a decision variable of a word in b j (denoted as
x i) is not equal to that of the last word in b j (denoted as xLast(b j)). For example, if x i = 0 and
xLast(b j) = 1, the term penalizes the objective function. Thus, the proposed method basically
treats words in b j as a unit similarly to bunsetsu-based methods. However, now there is no
constraint under which xF irst(b j) = xF irst(b j)+1 = · · · = xLast(b j). In other words, although we
have to consider the penalty, we can set a different value for each decision variable. Suppose
that w13 in b9 in Figure 3 have little importance, while the rest words in b9 have great im-
portance. Unlike bunsetsu-based methods, the proposed method can set x13 = 0 and the rest
decision variables to 1.

Equation (15) represents a constraint that sets the order of preference of the selection of
words in a bunsetsu. As described above, for each bunsetsu in BCN , each decision variable

1103



Algorithm 1 Solve the proposed formulation.
1: for b j ∈ BCN do
2: for wi ∈ b j\wLast(b j) do
3: µ

(0)
i,Last(b j)

← 0
4: end for
5: end for
6: for t ∈ {1, . . . , T} do
7: x (t)← arg max

x
Eq. (12) (Note that µ(t−1)i,Last(b j) is used as µi,Last(b j) in Eq. (12)

8: for b j ∈ BCN do
9: for wi ∈ b j\wLast(b j) do

10: µ
(t)
i,Last(b j)

← µ(t−1)i,Last(b j) −α
(t)(x (t)i − x (t)Last(b j))

11: end for
12: end for
13: end for
14: return x (T )

can take a different value from other variables. However, care must be taken in setting each
variable. More precisely, latter words in a bunsetsu generally should not be dropped before the
earlier words are dropped. One reason for this is that function words are located in the latter
part of a bunsetsu. Another is that former words within a Japanese compound noun basically
modify the latter words (i.e., the latter words are syntactically more important than the former
words). We thus add a constraint to our formulation under which we prioritize latter words in
a bunsetsu.

We set xC Last(b j) = · · · = xLast(b j) in the latter part of Eq. (15). The purpose is to treat function
words in a bunsetsu in BCN as a unit and select at least one content word from the bunsetsu.
Furthermore, using this equation, we can retain a unit constraint for each bunsetsu that does
not contain a compound noun (i.e., for such bunsetsu, Eq. (15) is the same as Eq. (11)).

Of course, there are exceptions to Eq. (15), especially proper nouns. For example, if we drop
the first word from the compound noun “murayama tomiichi syusyou”, an unlikely noun “tomi-
ichi syusyou” would be generated (“murayama”, “tomiichi”, and “syusyou” meaning Murayama,
Tomiichi, and prime minister, respectively). In this case, we need to recognize the family name
(“murayama”), the last name (“tomiichi”), and the title (“syusyou”) and drop the words in the
following order: last name, family name, and title. In our experiments described in the follow-
ing section, we handle this exception for person names. However, we do not handle exceptions
about other proper nouns such as organization names. We leave this for our future work.

Finally, we present an algorithm to solve our formulation in Algorithm 1. In the algorithm,
T denotes the number of iterations and α(t) denotes a parameter that determines a step size
to update each Lagrangian multiplier (see (Korte and Vygen, 2008) for detail). Using this
algorithm, each multiplier is updated and a subset of words in a source sentence is selected
so that a compression produced by our method is as similar to that produced by bunsetsu-
based methods as possible. However, as described in the previous paragraphs, if bunsetsu
contain unimportant words, our method prioritizes to violate their unit constraints and drop
the unimportant words.

1104



4.2 Advantages

Compared with word-based and bunsetsu-based methods, the proposed method has at least
three advantages. First, our method can generate compressions that are more grammatical
than compressions generated with word-based methods. This is because our method is loosely
based on bunsetsu-based methods and basically treats each bunsetsu in a source sentence as it
is.

Second, unlike word-based methods, our method can easily use dependency information in a
source sentence. This is again because our method is loosely based on bunsetsu-based meth-
ods. For example, bunsetsu b8 in Figure 3 depends on bunsetsu b9 (see also Figure 2). We can
use this information employing the following constraint.

subject to x12 ≤ x17 (16)

That is, we introduce a constraint between the last words of the bunsetsu. In this way, when b8
is contained in a compressed sentence, we can ensure that b9 is also contained in the sentence
regardless of whether the bunsetsu are shortened.

Third, unlike bunsetsu-based methods, our method can shorten a bunsetsu in a source sen-
tence. Since bunsetsu-based methods are limited by unit constraints, they have to treat each
bunsetsu as a unit. Thus, even if there are unimportant words in a bunsetsu, the methods do
not drop those words from the bunsetsu. On the other hand, our method relaxes unit con-
straints using Lagrangian relaxation. Thus, our method has the ability to drop unimportant
words from a bunsetsu, even though it is loosely based on bunsetsu-based methods.

5 Experiments

In this section, we report two experiments conducted to evaluate the proposed method.

5.1 Test Set

There is no standard test set for Japanese sentence compression. We therefore constructed a
test set to evaluate the proposed method. The construction process is as follows.

First, we extracted 240 sentences from Kyoto University Text Corpus (Kurohashi and Nagao,
1998),2 a parsed corpus of Mainichi Shimbun 1995. More precisely, we extracted sentences
that satisfied all of the following three conditions. (1) The sentence was a lead sentence
(the first sentence of an article). Lead sentences are often used in experiments for sentence
compression because they can be compressed without consideration of their context. (2) The
length of the sentence was not too short and not too long. We employed the number of
characters in a sentence as the sentence length and extracted sentences not shorter than 51
characters and not longer than 100 characters. (3) The sentence did not contain parentheses.
This condition was considered because we found that even human subjects often could not
compress content in parentheses (typically speech). From the 409 extracted sentences that
satisfied these three conditions, we randomly selected 240 sentences for our experiments.

For each of the 240 sentences, two subjects produced compressed versions. The compression
ratio was set to 0.7. For example, if the length of a sentence was 100 characters, each subject
was asked to produce a compressed sentence whose length was not longer than 70 characters.

2http://nlp.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp/EN/index.php?Kyoto%20University%20Text%20Corpus

1105



Avg. # of characters per source sentence 75.1
Avg. # of words per source sentence 44.6
Avg. # of bunsetsu per source sentence 14.5
Avg. # of bunsetsu with a compound noun per source sentence 5.3

Table 1: Statistics of our test set.

Finally, from the 240 groups of a source sentence and its two compressed versions, we ran-
domly selected 160 groups as our test set. We used the remaining 80 groups as a development
set to tune the proposed method. The statistics of our test set are given in Table 1.

5.2 Methods

In our experiments, we compared the outputs of the following methods.

WORD (RANDOM) Word-based method. This method randomly selected a subset of words
from a source sentence as the compressed sentence.

WORD Word-based method described in Section 2.1. The optimal subset of words in a source
sentence was selected using ILP.

BNST (RANDOM) Bunsetsu-based method that randomly selected a subset of bunsetsu from
a source sentence as the compressed sentence.

BNST Bunsetsu-based method described in Section 3.1. The optimal subset of bunsetsu in a
source sentence was selected using ILP.

BNST w/ DPND Bunsetsu-based method. We added dependency constraints to BNST.

PROP Proposed method described in Section 4.1. Using Lagrangian relaxation, unimportant
words were dropped from a compound noun in a bunsetsu.

PROP w/ DPND Proposed method. We added dependency constraints to PROP.

HUMAN Human compression. For each source sentence in our test set, one of the two com-
pressed sentences produced by subjects were randomly selected.

For WORD, BNST, BNST w/ DPND, PROP, and PROP w/ DPND, we used lp_solve (a mixed ILP
solver3). In addition, we set Score(wi) and Score(b j) as follows. First, from articles in the
newspaper Mainichi Shimbun from 1991 to 2002, we extracted pairs of a lead sentence and a
title that could be viewed as a source sentence and its pseudo compression. Note that articles
in 1995 were excluded because they overlapped with our test set. Moreover, we viewed a lead
sentence and a title as a source sentence and its pseudo compression if the lead sentence con-
tained more than 80% of content words in the title. We then calculated the rate of occurrence
of a word in the titles to that in the lead sentences. For example, if a word appeared 50 times
in the titles and 100 times in the lead sentences, the rate of occurrence of the word was 0.5.
We used this rate as Score(wi) and set Score(b j) =

∑
wi∈bJ Score(wi).

Furthermore, we set α(t) = α(0)/t for PROP and PROP w/ DPND. Note that α(0) was set to
0.02 according to our development set. T was set to 100.

3lpsolve.sourceforge.net/5.5

1106



ROUGE 1 ROUGE 2

WORD (RANDOM) 0.690 0.409
WORD 0.736 0.540
BNST (RANDOM) 0.679 0.529
BNST 0.745 0.615
BNST w/ DPND 0.772† 0.653†
PROP 0.751 0.616
PROP w/ DPND 0.796†‡ 0.671†‡

Table 2: Information content in a compressed sentence. † and ‡ mark statistically significant
improvement over BNST and BNST w/ DPND with p < 0.01, respectively.

5.3 Information Content of a Compressed Sentence

In the first experiment, we examined how well our method performed in preserving important
information in a source sentence. Using the methods described in the previous section, we
compressed each source sentence in our test set. The compression ratio was set to 0.7. We
then computed Recall-Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation (ROUGE) scores (Lin, 2004)
for each of the methods. That is, we measured the n-gram overlap between the outputs of
each method and those of human subjects. In the calculation of ROUGE, stopwords were
not removed. In addition, each word in a compression was normalized using the Japanese
morphological analyzer JUMAN (Kurohashi et al., 1994).

Table 2 gives the results. We can see that PROP significantly outperformed WORD, especially
in terms of ROUGE 2. The reason for this is that unlike WORD, PROP basically selected words
in each bunsetsu in a source sentence as a unit.

When dependency constraints were not considered, PROP performed better than BNST. How-
ever, the performance differences between them were small and only the difference in ROUGE
1 was statistically significant (Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p < 0.05). On the other hand, when
dependency constraints were considered, PROP significantly outperformed BNST. This time,
the differences in ROUGE 1 and ROUGE 2 were both statistically significant (p < 0.01).

We found that the differences between PROP w/ DPND and BNST w/ DPND were due to the
number of available bunsetsu that each method could select. More precisely, PROP w/ DPND
selected 4.6% more (shortened) bunsetsu in a source sentence than BNST w/ DPND. Suppose
that bunsetsu b j is located at a deep node in a dependency tree of a source sentence (i.e., b j
depends on b j′ and b j′ depends on b j′′ and ... depends on bJ ). To select b j , both methods
first have to select from b j′ to bJ owing to the dependency constraints. However, since there
is a length constraint, it is usually difficult to select b j at such a deep node even if b j contains
important words. However, PROP w/ DPND has more chance of selecting b j than BNST w/
DPND. This is because PROP w/ DPND can make room to select b j by dropping unimportant
words from other bunsetsu. In this way, PROP w/ DPND selected more bunsetsu that contained
important words and achieved higher performance than BNST w/ DPND.

In contrast, when dependency constraints were not considered, the number of (shortened)
bunsetsu that PROP selected was not so different from the number of that BNST selected
(the difference was 2.4%). This is because PROP ignored dependency constraints and almost
greedily selected bunsetsu that were composed of many important words. In other words,
PROP had less opportunity to drop unimportant words. As a result, the differences between
the performances of the two methods were not so large.

1107



Grammaticality

WORD 1.50
BNST 2.23
BNST w/ DPND 4.15
PROP 2.18
PROP w/ DPND 4.14
HUMAN 4.85

Table 3: Grammaticality of a compressed sentence. The score ranges from 1 to 5: 1 (very
poor), 2 (poor), 3 (average), 4 (good), and 5 (very good).

5.4 Grammaticality of a Compressed Sentence

In the second experiment, we examined how well our method performed in producing gram-
matical compressions. We randomly selected 50 source sentences from our test set and ob-
tained the outputs of six methods for those sentences. Note that the six methods were WORD,
BNST, BNST w/ DPND, PROP, PROP w/ DPND, and HUMAN. Then, for each of the 50 source
sentences, we presented the six outputs to five subjects and asked them to rate the outputs in
terms of grammaticality. The subjects were all native Japanese speakers and did not include
the two subjects who constructed our test set. They were told that all outputs were automati-
cally generated. For each of the source sentences, the order of the outputs was randomized.

Table 3 presents the results. From the table, we can confirm that PROP produces compres-
sions that are more grammatically correct than the compressions produced by WORD. This
is because PROP was loosely based on bunsetsu-based methods and basically selected each
bunsetsu as a unit.

For the same reason, PROP achieved comparable performance with BNST. Note that the per-
formance of PROP was slightly worse than that of BNST. This is because words that should
not be dropped from a bunsetsu were dropped by PROP. For example, PROP shortened the
bunsetsu “unyu syou wa” to “shou wa” (“unyu”, “syou”, and “wa” mean transport, ministry, and
TOP, respectively). In Kyoto University Text Corpus, which we used in our experiments, “shou”
(ministry) was tagged as a noun. However, unlike usual nouns, the word cannot be located at
the beginning of a bunsetsu. This is because in Japanese, the word has a strong suffix nature.
Thus, we must not drop “unyu” (transport) from the bunsetsu and we should treat “unyu”
(transport) and “syou” (ministry) as a unit. We found that most errors arising when employing
our method related to such words, which could be viewed as both a noun and suffix (e.g., “kai”
(meeting), “jin” (-ese)). As a future work, we need to properly handle these words.

PROP achieved good performance when we added dependency constraints to the method. The
score of PROP w/ DPND was 4.14. This result indicates that the grammaticality of the com-
pressions produced by PROP w/ DPND was generally good. The reason why the performance
of PROP w/ DPND was slightly worse than that of BNST w/ DPND is the same as the reason
described in the previous paragraph. As seen in the first experiment, dependency constraints
were also effective in preserving important information. Thus, we can say that there is no
reason for not using the constraints in sentence compression.

To verify that the grading was consistent, we computed correlation coefficients between every
pair of our five subjects (i.e., between subjects 1 and 2, 1 and 3, . . . , and 4 and 5). Conse-
quently, we found that the average of the coefficients was 0.45 and those coefficients were all
statistically significant (t-test, p < 0.01). These suggest that the grading was consistent.

1108



Source sentence
中米ホンジュラスの/軍司令官は/１５日、/４０年間に/わたり/管轄してきた/警察部隊を/文民の/
指揮下に/置くと/発表した。[52]
(On the 15th, an army commander of Honduras, located in Central America, announced that the
police divisions that the army had controlled for 40 years would be placed under civilian control.)

WORD
中米ホンジュラスの軍司令官は日、４０年間に管轄警察部隊を文民の指揮下にと [36]
Ungrammatical sentence

BNST w/ DPND
中米ホンジュラスの/軍司令官は/警察部隊を/文民の/指揮下に/置くと/発表した。[34]
(An army commander of Honduras, located in Central America, announced that the police divisions
would be placed under civilian control.)

PROP w/ DPND
ホンジュラスの/軍司令官は/１５日、/警察部隊を/文民の/指揮下に/置くと/発表した。[36]
(On the 15th, an army commander of Honduras announced that the police divisions would be placed
under civilian control.)

HUMAN
ホンジュラスの/軍司令官は/１５日、/警察部隊を/文民の/指揮下に/置くと/発表した。[36]
(On the 15th, an army commander of Honduras announced that the police divisions would be placed
under civilian control.)

Figure 4: Example of the outputs. For explanation purposes, we inserted slashes between bun-
setsu in each of the outputs except for WORD. The values in square bracket denote sentence
lengths.

5.5 Example of the Outputs

Figure 4 gives an example of the output of our method (PROP w/ DPND). For comparison, we
also show the outputs of WORD, BNST w/ DPND, and HUMAN. In this example, the source
sentence comprises 52 characters. Thus, each method was required to produce a compressed
sentence whose length was not more than 36 characters (52× 0.7= 36.4).
In this example, WORD produced a completely ungrammatical compression. In contrast, BNST
w/ DPND produced a good compression, which was grammatical and preserved much infor-
mation in the source sentence. However, in the output of HUMAN, the first bunsetsu “中米ホ
ンジュラスの” in the source sentence was shortened to “ホンジュラスの” (“中米”, “ホンジュ
ラス”, and “の” mean Central America, Honduras, and GEN, respectively). BNST w/ DPND
could not perform such an operation because the method has to treat each bunsetsu as it is.

On the other hand, PROP w/ DPND could shorten the bunsetsu by dropping word “中米”,
which had less importance, from the bunsetsu (Score(“中米”) was 0.119). Additionally, using
the room that was made by dropping the word, the method could add another bunsetsu “１
５日、” to the compression (“１５”, “日”, and “、” mean 15, day, and comma, respectively).
Although there are other bunsetsu that contain compound nouns (e.g., “軍司令官は”), our
method did not drop any words from those bunsetsu and selected them as a unit similarly to
BNST w/ DPND (“軍”, “司令” + “官”, and “は” mean army, commander, and TOP, respectively).
This is because the words in the bunsetsu had great importance (e.g., Score(“軍”) was 0.378).
In this way, PROP w/ DPND could produce the same compression as HUMAN.

1109



6 Related Work

Sentence compression has been widely studied since the early 2000s. For the English lan-
guage, Jing used multiple knowledge resources to decide which phrases in a source sentence
to remove (Jing, 2000). Knight and Marcu modeled a generative process of a source sentence
based on a noisy-channel framework and generated a compressed sentence using the model
(Knight and Marcu, 2002). Turner and Charniak presented semi-supervised and unsupervised
variants of the Knight and Marcu’s model (Turner and Charniak, 2005). McDonald employed a
discriminative model to learn which words in a source sentence should be dropped (McDonald,
2006). Clarke and Lapata recasted previous methods as ILP and extended those with various
constraints (Clarke and Lapata, 2008). Our work differs from these efforts in that we focus on
Japanese sentence compression.

For the Japanese language, previous compression methods can be divided into two groups:
word-based methods and bunsetsu-based methods. Hori and Furui proposed a word-based
method to summarize speech (Hori and Furui, 2004). They extracted a set of important words
from an automatically transcribed sentence. Hirao et al. also proposed a word-based method
(Hirao et al., 2009). They extended Hori and Furui’s method using novel features. Unlike these
methods, our method is loosely based on bunsetsu-based methods, and thus easily generates
grammatical compressions.

Previous bunsetsu-based methods are given below. Takeuchi and Matsumoto used a sup-
port vector machine to acquire rules for dropping unimportant bunsetsu in a source sentence
(Takeuchi and Matsumoto, 2001). Oguro et al. and Yamagata et al. defined varying impor-
tance of bunsetsu and dependency and extracted the optimal subset of bunsetsu from a source
sentence (Oguro et al., 2002; Yamagata et al., 2006). Nomoto generated candidates for a com-
pression by removing bunsetsu from a source sentence and selected the best candidate using
a conditional random field (Nomoto, 2008). Our work differs from these efforts in that our
method has the ability to drop unimportant words from a bunsetsu.

In our method, we used Lagrangian relaxation to relax unit constraints. Lagrangian relaxation
is a well known technique for combinatorial optimization and it has recently been successfully
applied to various natural language processing tasks (Koo et al., 2010; M.Rush et al., 2010;
Chang and Collins, 2011; M.Rush and Collins, 2011). However, to the best of our knowledge,
this is the first work to use the technique for sentence compression.

Conclusions and Future Work

We presented a novel compression method for a Japanese sentence. The proposed method
was loosely based on bunsetsu-based methods. Thus, unlike word-based methods, it could
easily produce grammatical compressions. Additionally, using Lagrangian relaxation, the pro-
posed method relaxed constraints that troubled bunsetsu-based methods. In this way, unlike
bunsetsu-based methods, our method could shorten each bunsetsu if it contained unimportant
words. Experimental results showed that the proposed method could preserve more informa-
tion in a source sentence than word-based and bunsetsu-based methods. Furthermore, we
confirmed that our method could produce grammatical compressions similarly to bunsetsu-
based methods.

In future work, as described in Section 4.1, we plan to explore a technique to handle proper
nouns such as organization names. Additionally, as described in Section 5.4, we need to
develop a method to handle words that can be viewed as both a noun and suffix.

1110



References

Chang, Y.-W. and Collins, M. (2011). Exact Decoding of Phrase-Based Translation Models
through Lagrangian Relaxation. In Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2011), pages 26–37.

Clarke, J. and Lapata, M. (2008). Global Inference for Sentence Compression: An Integer
Linear Programming Approach. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 31:399–429.

Corston-Oliver, S. (2001). Text Compaction for Display on Very Small Screens. In Proceedings
of the Workshop on Automatic Summarization at the 2nd Meeting of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (WAS 2001), pages 89–98.

Hirao, T., Suzuki, J., and Isozaki, H. (2009). A Syntax-Free Approach to Japanese Sentence
Compression. In Proceedings of the 47th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 4th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (ACL-
IJCNLP 2009), pages 826–833.

Hori, C. and Furui, S. (2003). A New Approach to Automatic Speech Summarization. IEEE
Transactions on Multimedia, 5(3):368–378.

Hori, C. and Furui, S. (2004). Speech Summarization: An Approach through Word Extraction
and a Method for Evaluation. IEIEC Transactions on Information and Systems, E87-D(1):15–
25.

Jing, H. (2000). Sentence Reduction for Automatic Text Summarization. In Proceedings of the
6th Applied Natural Language Processing Conference (ANLP 2000), pages 310–315.

Knight, K. and Marcu, D. (2002). Summarization beyond sentence extraction: A probabilistic
approach to sentence compression. Artificial Intelligence, 139(1):91–107.

Koo, T., M.Rush, A., Collins, M., Jaakkola, T., and Sontag, D. (2010). Dual Decomposition
for Parsing with Non-Projective Head Automata. In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2010), pages 1288–1298.

Korte, B. and Vygen, J. (2008). Combinatorial Optimization: Theory and Algorithms. Springer
Verlag.

Kurohashi, S. and Nagao, M. (1998). Building a Japanese Parsed Corpus while Improving the
Parsing System. In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 1998), pages 719–724.

Kurohashi, S., Nakamura, T., Matsumoto, Y., and Nagao, M. (1994). Improvements of
Japanese Morphological Analyzer JUMAN. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on
Sharable Natural Language, pages 22–28.

Lin, C.-Y. (2003). Improving Summarization Performance by Sentence Compression — A Pilot
Study. In Proceedings of the 6th International Workshop on Information Retrieval with Asian
Languages (IRAL 2003), pages 1–8.

Lin, C.-Y. (2004). ROUGE: A Package for Automatic Evaluation of Summaries. In Proceedings
of the Workshop on Text Summarization Branches Out (WAS 2004), pages 74–81.

1111



McDonald, R. (2006). Discriminative Sentence Compression with Soft Syntactic Evidence. In
Proceedings of the 11th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (EACL 2005), pages 297–304.

M.Rush, A. and Collins, M. (2011). Exact Decoding of Syntactic Translation Models through
Lagrangian Relaxation. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics on Human Language Technologies (ACL-HLT 2011), pages 72–82.

M.Rush, A., Sontag, D., Collins, M., and Jaakkola, T. (2010). On Dual Decomposition and
Linear Programming Relaxations for Natural Language Processing. In Proceedings of the 2010
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2010), pages 1–11.

Nomoto, T. (2008). A Generic Sentence Trimmer with CRFs. In Proceedings of the 46th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics on Human Language Technologies
(ACL-HLT 2008), pages 299–307.

Oguro, R., Sekiya, H., Morooka, Y., Takagi, K., and Ozeki, K. (2002). Evaluation of a Japanese
Sentence Compression Method Based on Phrase Significance and Inter-Phrase Dependency.
In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Text, Speech and Dialogue (TSD 2002),
pages 27–32.

Takeuchi, K. and Matsumoto, Y. (2001). Acquisition of Sentence Reduction Rules for Improv-
ing Quality of Text Summaries. In Proceedings of the 6th Natural Language Processing Pacific
Rim Symposium (NLPRS 2001), pages 447–452.

Turner, J. and Charniak, E. (2005). Supervised and Unsupervised Learning for Sentence
Compression. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL 2005), pages 290–297.

Vandeghinste, V. and Pan, Y. (2004). Sentence Compression for Automated Subtitling: A
Hybrid Approach. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Text Summarization Branches Out (WAS
2004), pages 89–95.

Yamagata, K., Fukutomi, S., Takagi, K., and Ozeki, K. (2006). Sentence Compression Using
Statistical Information About Dependency Path Length. In Proceedings of the 9th International
Conference on Text, Speech and Dialogue (TSD 2006), pages 127–134.

Zajic, D., J.Dorr, B., Lin, J., and Schwartz, R. (2007). Multi-Candidate Reduction: Sentence
Compression as a Tool for Document Summarization Tasks. Information Processing and Man-
agement Special Issue on Summarization, 43(6):1549–1570.

1112


