



















































Two-Stage Bootstrapping for Anaphora Resolution


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Posters, pages 507–516,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Two-Stage Bootstrapping for Anaphora Resolution 
Balaji J, T V Geetha, Ranjani Parthasarathi, Madhan Karky 

Dept. of CSE & IST, 

Anna University, Chennai- 600 025 

 

Abstract: 

In this paper, we propose a two-stage bootstrapping approach to resolve various anaphora 
representing persons, places, plurals and events in Tamil text. The existing approaches dealt with 
only single pronoun type and not all anaphora using common approach. Moreover, most of the 
approaches concentrate on syntax- based algorithms and semantics to some extent. Instead in our 
approach, we tackle various types of pronouns using a semi-supervised bootstrapping approach 
with uniform pattern representation and by exploring the semantic features in resolving anaphors. 
In order to aid the semantics, we use Universal Networking Language (UNL), a deep semantic 
representation for resolving various types of pronouns. The two stages of our bootstrapping 
approach consists of identification of anaphora and its set of referring expressions in stage 1 and 
identification of correct antecedent of a pronoun in stage 2. In our approach two patterns are 
defined – one for anaphora and other for set of referring expressions. In addition, we introduce 
triggering tuples, which can be word based semantics or context based semantics, represented in 
the pattern of both anaphora and referring expressions so as to resolve the ambiguit ies during the 
identification of correct antecedent. The performance of our bootstrapping approach gives better 
results and proved. 

Keywords: Anaphora resolution, Universal Networking Language, Bootstrapping, 
Triggering Tuples 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

507



 

1. Introduction 

Anaphora Resolution commonly called Pronoun resolution is a problem of finding references in 
the previous utterances of a p ronoun. The references can be noun, noun phrase, verb phrase 
and/or clause. The main  aim of anaphora resolution is to find the correct antecedent of a pronoun 
from the set of referring expressions. The antecedent of a pronoun is identified by the set of 
features such as number gender agreement features, grammatical relat ions for person pronouns 
and verb predicates  for plural and event pronouns .  

Popular syntax-based approaches include Centering theory (Brennan et al, 1987) and Hobb’s 
algorithm (Hobbs, 1978) in  which the both the algorithms are used to resolve person  pronouns 
using agreement features and grammat ical ordering of relations . The verb  predicate feature has 
been used to identify event pronouns using a composite kernel method (Bin et al, 2010) . In 
addition, rule-based has been attempted to resolve personal pronouns. The rules do not fit to 
resolve entire pronoun resolution task. In contrast, machine learn ing approaches have also been 
attempted to resolve person pronouns  automatically.  In  particular, most of these techniques dealt 
with resolving only person pronouns and in some cases plurals and event pronouns  (Chen et al, 
2009).  

In this paper, we propose a two-stage bootstrapping approach to resolve anaphora representing 
person, place, plural and events  automatically  from Tamil text. We define a uniform pattern to 
detect all types of pronouns while for referring expressions we define two types of patterns, one 
to tackle person and place pronouns and other to tackle plural and event pronouns. To our 
knowledge, this is the first attempt to tackle all types of pronouns using a single bootstrapping 
framework. We introduce the concept of triggering tuples in both the patterns of anaphora and its 
corresponding referring expressions to identify the correct antecedent.  In order to aid the 
semantic compatibility information in anaphora resolution, we use Universal Networking 
Language (UNL) (UNDL, 2012), a  deep semantic representation, to represent the referring 
expressions in the form of directed acyclic graphs. In this paper, the word level semantics and 
context level semantics informat ion are utilized to resolve all the pronoun types. In addition, in 
order to generate new patterns, the semantic similarity of the antecedents is measured using the 
taxonomy of semantic constraints called UNL Ontology (UNDL 2012). While in our previous 
rule-based approach, we use three UNL relat ion based rules to tackle plural and event pronouns, 
however in this work, we have generalized the semantic relations to tackle more number of 
instances.  

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 d iscusses the related works on pronoun resolution. 
Section 3 describes the semi-supervised learning – bootstrapping of pronoun resolution which 
includes features, pattern representation and different stages of bootstrapping in finding the 
antecedent of a pronoun and generation of new patterns. In section 4, we d iscuss the performance 
of our approach and compared with another bootstrapping system. Finally, we conclude our 
approach with future enhancements. 

2. Related Work 

In this section, we discuss  various techniques attempted for resolving different types of anaphora. 
A modified Centering theory and a rule -based approach has been proposed for resolving 
pronouns such as person, place, plural and events in which the rules are based on word-level 
semantics such as semantic constraints  and sentence-level semantics such as UNL relations 

508



(Balaji2 et al, 2011). A robust rule based system has been applied to resolve personal pronouns, 
subject and dative pronouns in French in which the rules are based on agreement featu res and 
syntactic structure (Trouilleux, 2002). A syntactic rule based Hobb’s algorithm has been used to 
resolve possessive and reflexive pronouns of Hindi language (Kamlesh et al, 2008). In contrast to 
the rule based approaches, machine learning approaches such as conditional random field (CRF) 
statistical model for chinese(Li & Shi, 2008), Tamil (Murthi et al, 2007) have been attempted. A 
twin candidate based learning model has been proposed to resolve event pronouns in English in 
which the verb predicates are considered as antecedents  (Bin et al, 2010).  

In the existing approach (Balaji2 et al, 2011), various pronoun types  have been resolved using a 
set of rules. However, rules have limited knowledge and do not provide accurate results for large 
set of sentences. In contrast, machine learn ing techniques focused on using syntactic features. to 
resolve person pronouns and co-reference chains in which the patterns defined are based on 
syntactic paths and word associations . Moreover, gender/number informat ion and semantic 
compatibility have been determined using a probabilistic behavior (Bergsma et al, 2006). Another 
bootstrapping procedure for co-reference resolution uses word association information and are 
labeled using a self-trained approach (Kobdani et al, 2011).  

However, the use of syntactic features and paths are difficu lt in relatively free -word order 
languages like Tamil and the approaches described above consider only limited  types of 
anaphora. In order to overcome these difficult ies , we propose a semi-supervised, two-stage 
bootstrapping procedure to resolve person, place, plural and event pronouns. The input to our 
bootstrapping framework is a set of UNL semantic graphs. The word  level and context  level 
informat ion obtained from UNL graphs is utilized to define the example patterns. We introduce 
various scoring schemes during the filtering of non-referring expressions, choosing the correct 
antecedent and, the confidence of tuples and dependency relations in resolving pronouns. In 
addition to the scoring, we measure the semantic similarity between the semantic tuples of the 
referring expressions and propose a generalized procedure to learn new set coordinating and 
subordinating UNL relat ions to find the correct antecedent of a p ronoun along with the existing 
relations proposed in the existing work (Balaji2 et al, 2011).  

3. Bootstrapping for Anaphora Resolution 

 Bootstrapping is a task of iteratively learning  new patterns from un labeled data, starting 
with a small labeled data from which the seed patterns are obtained. In this paper, we describe a 
two stage bootstrapping approach to resolve various types of anaphora. Our bootstrapping 
approach consists of two stages.  

Stage 1: Extraction of anaphora and an associated set of referring expressions  

Stage 2: Identification of the correct antecedent of the anaphora from the referring expressions 
obtained from Stage 1. 

3.1 Features used for pattern representation in Anaphora Resolution 

The pattern in the anaphora resolution is represented using the word-based features and context-
based features. We use two classes of features, one for detecting anaphora and the other to extract 
the corresponding referring expressions . Here, each class consists of both word-based and 
context-based features.  In addition, we introduce the concept of triggering tuple which forms 
part of the pattern representation but however does not take part in the actual matching process. 

509



The triggering tuple helps the bootstrapping process to select the correct antecedent of a pronoun 
from the set of referring expressions obtained for that pronoun. The features are listed in Table-1. 

Features for representing Referring Expressions  

POS of the word (W i) (Nouns or Entities) - POS(W i)   

Semantic Constraint associated with the word (W i) - SC(W i) 

Attributes associated with the word (W i) - ATTR(W i) 

Semantic Relation connected with the word (W i) - SR(W i) 

Features for representing Anaphora 

Pronoun (Pj) 

POS of Pronoun (Pj) - POS(Pj) 

Type of Pronoun (Pj) - PT(Pj) 

Attributes associated with Pronoun (Pj) - ATTR(Pj) 

Semantic Relation connected with Pronoun (Pj) - SR(Pj) 

Triggering tuples  

Verb (V) - Verb(V)  

Attributes associated with the verb (V) - ATTR(V) 

Semantic Constraints associated with the verb (V) - SC(V) 

Attributes associated with the word (W i) and Pronoun (Pj) 

Semantic Relation connected with the word (W i) and Pronoun (Pj) 

TABLE 1 Features for resolving various types of anaphora 

From Table-1, we introduce a new concept called triggering tuples which are  used to signal the 
correct antecedent of a pronoun from the detected set of referring expressions. The triggering 
tuples are represented in the patterns of both referring expressions and pronouns. The triggering 
tuples can be a set of word based features and context based features  

3.2 Pattern representation 

In our approach, patterns are defined with use the graph based features (including both word-
based and context-based features. The pattern representation for the set of referring expressions 
corresponding to anaphora representing persons and places is different from the referring 
expressions corresponding to anaphora representing plurals and events and thus can be shown in 
table 2. However, it is to be noted that the pattern representation for anaphora is common to all 
anaphora types. The pattern representations are described in detail in the following sections . 

3.2.1 Pattern representation for Anaphora  

The pattern representation is generic to all types of anaphora. Based on the features mentioned in 
Table-1, the pattern of anaphora is defined as  

<Pronoun(Wi)+POS(Wi)+SC(Wi)+ATTR(Wi)+SR(Wi)-[Verb(V)+ATTR(V)+SC(V)]>  

510



where j = 1,2 ….N   

3.2.2 Pattern representation for a set of Referring Expressions  

As described earlier, the pattern representation for the set of referring expressions corresponding 
to anaphora representing persons and places is different from the referring expressions of plural 
and event anaphora which are shown in table 2.  

Referring Expressions for Pattern Representation 

Anaphora representing 
Person and Place  

 

<POS(Wi)+SC(Wi)+ATTR(Wi)+SR(Wi)-
[Verb(V)+ATTR(V)+SC(V)]>  

where i= 1, 2, 3 …N  

Anaphora representing 
Plural and Events 

<{POS(Wi)+SC(Wi)+ATTR(Wi)+SR(Wi)-
POS(Wk)+SC(Wk)+ATTR(Wk)+SR(Wk)}L-
[Verb(V)+ATTR(V)+SC(V)]>  

where i, k, L = 1, 2, 3 …N & i~=k 

TABLE 2 Pattern representations for referring expressions of various Pronouns  

3.3 Stage 1: Extraction of Anaphora and associated referring expressions  

During  this stage, anaphora and the associated possible set of referring expressions are identified 
and extracted. The referring expressions are extracted based on the triggering tuple represented in 
the pattern of anaphora. Moreover, in order to reduce the redundant expressions such as non -
referring expressions, a scoring function is introduced. This s coring is used to filter out non-
referring expressions from the set.  

3.3.1 Filtering of non-referring expressions 

One of the important tasks of anaphora resolution is to filter out non-referring expressions that do 
not take part in  resolving the anaphora type. The referring expressions of a pronoun can be nouns 
and entities. The non-referring expressions are usually filtered out using grammatical relations 
(Brennan et al, 1987). Instead of using the grammatical o rdering for filtering  out non -referring 
expressions, we use a scoring function for filtering. The scoring of referring  expressions is based 
on the number of entit ies and/or nouns identified as referring expressions for t he corresponding 
pronoun among the total number of referring expressions along with the type of anaphora to be 
resolved. 

 

Where REAs - set of referring expressions for a specific anaphora, An – all types of anaphora, REI 
- referring expressions where I = 1, 2, 3 …N,  As - specific anaphora to be resolved 

Filtering of non-referring  expressions can be performed  by identifying the occurrence of a 
referring expression for a specific anaphora among the total occurrence of that regular expression 
with other anaphora types. 

511



3.4 Stage 2: Identification of correct antecedent of a pronoun 

During this stage, the correct antecedent of a pronoun is identified from the set of referring 
expressions obtained from stage 1 through the selection of complete patterns and partial patterns . 
The defined patterns represent the anaphora and the set of referring expressions. In order to 
choose the correct antecedent of a pronoun, the triggering tuples defined in the pattern are 
exploited using word based features and context based features . 

3.4.1 Triggering Tuples 

One of the important aspects of our bootstrapping approach is the use of triggering tuples to 
identify the correct antecedent of a pronoun. The idea behind the use of triggering tuples is to 
filter out the non-referring expressions among the set of referring expressions of a pronoun. In 
some cases, most approaches as discussed earlier failed to identify the correct antecedent of a 
pronoun. This is because the most popular algorithms such as Centering theory (Brennan et al, 
1987), Hobb’s algorithm (Hobbs, 1978) etc used in the existing approaches for resolving 
pronouns are syntax-based algorithms and not focused on the semantics of the word and/or 
context of a pronoun. However, Bin et al (2010) modified the centering theory by incorporating 
the semantic ro les to resolve the pronouns. This approach solves the problem to an extent but 
only for person pronouns and the problem remains unsolvable in ambiguous cases (i.e. choosing 
an antecedent is ambiguous). Instead in our approach, this problem can be resolved by examining 
word based semantics and context based semantics. The fo llowing section describes the selection 
of correct antecedent of a pronoun.  

3.4.2 Selection of complete patterns in identifying the antecedents of a corresponding 
pronoun 

Identifying the correct antecedent of a pronoun is achieved by the selection  of complete patterns. 
The triggering tuples of the patterns of anaphora and its referring expressions play a vital role in 
identifying the correct antecedent of a pronoun. A probabilistic scoring of triggering tuples in the 
pattern of anaphora and its corresponding referring expressions set is determined. Based on the 
scoring, confidence of the instances are examined and identified as an antecedent of a 
corresponding anaphora. The scoring of tuples is given below. 

 

where ANAs – Antecedent of a specific anaphora,  As - specific anaphora to be resolved,  An – 
all types of anaphora, T – Triggering tuples, REI - referring expressions where I = 1, 2, 3 … 

3.4.3 Selection of partial patterns to generate new patterns  

After the complete pattern matching is performed, instances that are not tackled under exact 
matching are then partial matched. Partial matching is carried out at different levels. The first 
level is to modify the word-based features such as semantic constraints of referring expressions to 
obtain the semantic similarity between the exa mple patterns of the referring expressions and the 
input instances of the referring expressions. The semantic similarity of semantic constraints is 
achieved by using the semantic UNL Ontology (UNDL, 2012) in which the semantic constraints 
are arranged in a  hierarchal relations such as ―is-a‖ and ―instance-of‖. The next level of partial 
matching is performed at the context-based features such as UNL relations. In addition, the 
confidence of the tuple values is also computed to identify the correct antecedent  of a pronoun. 

512



The detailed analysis of semantic similarity of constraints and, coordinating and subordinating 
relations are described below. 

3.4.3a Semantic Similarity of Constraints  

 The semantic similarity  between constraints is useful in identify ing the anaphora 
representing places. As discussed above, adverbs such as ― ingu‖ and ―angu‖ along with its 
morphological variations can act as pronouns which represent places. Semantic constraints such 
as city, town, sta te, country etc all represent places. However it is difficult to list all these 
semantic variat ions in a pattern. Instead a semantic abstraction of constraints is needed to tackle 
these variations. This is achieved by using the semantic abstraction of the semantic constraints 
which is available through the semantic UNL ontology (UNDL, 2012). Semantic similarity is 
measured by the distance between the parent semantic constraints in UNL Ontology and is given 
below. 

 

Where Ci – Semantic Constraint of referring expression obtained for an instance, Cj – Semantic 
constraint of referring expression in an example pattern , Cparent – Parent semantic constraint in 
UNL Ontology, DIST – Distance measure  

Next, we will discuss the handling of coordinating and subordinating relations necessary to 
obtain the correct antecedent of a pronoun. 

3.4.3b Coordinating and Subordinating UNL Relations  

UNL relat ions obtained for referring expressions that exact ly matches with the UNL relation 
obtained for anaphors are coordinating UNL relations and UNL relations obtained for anaphors 
that infer the UNL relations obtained for referring expressions are subordinating UNL relations 
(Balaji et al, 2011). In addit ion, we explored more number of coordinating and subordinating 
relations to resolve various pronouns. The specific rules on UNL relat ions are also generalized 
and thus the antecedent of a pronoun can be decided by  

1. Participant relations connected with pronoun that exact ly matches with Part icipant relations 
connected with the referring expressions in the previous utterances. Here, the triggering tuple 
is a verb and its associated UNL attribute as unaccusative (NACC).  Example shown below 
comes under this category and is resolved using the triggering tuples mentioned above. For 
example, 

Ram ba luva i adiththaan. Avan azhuthaan. Ram hit Ba lu. He cried. 

hit (agt>thing, obj>thing) 

[agt] Ram (iof>person) 

[obj] Balu (iof>person) 

cry (obj>thing), NACC 

[obj] he (pronoun) 

513



FIGURE 2 UNL Graphs for the sentences “Ram hit Balu. He cried”. 

The semantic constraints are shown in the braces and the relations connected with the 
corresponding concepts are shown in square brackets. The attribute ―NACC‖ represents the verb 
is unaccusative.  

The participant relation ―obj‖ connected with pronoun that exactly matches with the participant 
relation ―obj‖ connected with the concept ―balu (iof>person)‖  in  the previous sentence. Here, the 
triggering tuple is ―NA CC‖. And thus the antecedent of a pronoun ―he‖ is identified as ―balu‖.  
Similarly the other conditions are applied to obtain the correct antecedent of a pronoun. 

2. Participant relations connected with pronoun that infers the Participant relations connected 
with the referring expressions in the previous utterances. Here, the triggering tuples are 
transitive verbs and its associated information. 

3. Modifier relat ions connected with pronoun that infers the Participant relations connected 
with the referring expressions in the previous utterances. Here, the triggering tuples are 
transitive verbs. 

4. Location relat ions connected with pronoun along with the ―be‖ verb infers the Attribute 
relations connected with referring expressions in the previous utterances. 

Using the conditions described above, the coordinating and subordinating relations are identif ied. 
In addition, new combination of relations is  learned from the above conditions and thus the 
correct antecedent of a pronoun is obtained.  

5. Evaluation 

The performance of our bootstrapping approach is investigated using Tourism and News domain. 
We have considered 10000 sentences from each domain and tagged with the appropriate features 
such as POS, UNL attributes, UNL semantic constraints and UNL relat ion. We have taken 1000 
tagged sentences for training data and extracted the most frequently occurred example patterns of 
each pronoun type.  During this process we have identified 3025 person pronouns (singular), 
2857 p lace p ronouns, 156 plural pronouns and 323 event pronouns. Out of these obtained 
pronouns, we have achieved the overall result of 84% accuracy. The precision, recall and F-
measure for resolving pronouns are shown in the table below. Table-3 shows the precision of 
various types of pronouns resolved.  

Type of 
Anaphora 

Precision Recall F-measure 

Third Person 
Singular Pronouns 

0.852 0.83 0.84 

Third Person 
Plural Pronouns 

0.79 0.74 0.76 

Place pronouns 0.842 0.823 0.832 

Event pronouns 0.837 0.656 0.735 

TABLE 3 Performance of our Bootstrapping approach 

514



We have also compared our bootstrapping approach with the previous rule based approach 
(Balaji et al, 2011). The comparison is shown in  Fig 3. From the results, it  is to be noted that our 
bootstrapping approach performs better than the previous rule based approach. Since the ru les are 
limited  in  our prev ious approach, the F-measure is low and this d ifficulty  could be resolved in 
our bootstrapping approach. We have also compared our bootstrapping approach with the  path 
coreference of (Bergsama et al, 2006) which is a bootstrapping approach. The comparison of 
baseline system with our approach is shown in  Fig 4. The parse tree for Tamil sentences is 
constructed using the existing Tamil parser (Saravanan et al, 2003). From the results, it  can be 
seen that the performance of our approach gives better results than the existing  system and the f-
measure of our approach is 84% when compared to the baseline system as 48%.  

FIGUR E 3 Comparison of Bootstrapping 
and Rule-based approach 

FIGUR E 4  Comparison – Baseline 
system Vs. Graph Bootstrapping

Conclusion  

In this paper, a semi-supervised, two-stage bootstrapping approach has been described to resolve 
all types of anaphora. In stage 1, the anaphora and its referring expressions are identified and in 
stage 2, the correct antecedent of a pronoun is selected among the set of referring expressions of a 
corresponding pronoun. This two-stage bootstrapping approach uses two patterns – for anaphora 
and referring expressions. Both the patterns consist of word  based semantics and context based 
semantics. Moreover, a new concept called triggering tuples has been introduced in our 
bootstrapping approach so as to identify correct antecedent of a pronoun in case of ambiguities. 
The performance of our bootstrapping approach produces better results when compared to the 
baseline bootstrapping system. Further, we enhance this bootstrapping approach for identifying 
coreference entities by identifying more number of coordinating and subordinating relations.   

References 

Abney Steven, (2004), Understanding the yarowsky algorithm, Computa tiona l Intelligence, 
pages: 365-395 

Balaji J1, T V Geetha, Ran jani and Madhan Karky, (2011), Morpho-Semantic Features for Rule -
based Tamil Enconversion, Interna tional Journa l of Computer Applica tions  26(6):11-18, July 
2011. Published by Foundation of Computer Science, New York, USA  

Balaji J2 and T. V. Geetha and Ranjani Parthasarathi and Madhan Karky , (2011), Anaphora 
Resolution in Tamil using Universal Networking Language, IICAI-11, pages: 1405-1415 

515



Bergsma, Shane and Lin, Dekang, (2006), Bootstrapping path-based pronoun resolution, 
Proceedings of the 21st Interna tiona l Conference on Computa tiona l Linguistics and the 44th 
annua l meeting of the Associa tion for Computationa l Linguistics , ACL-44, Sydney, Australia, 
pages: 33--40 

Bin, Chen and Jian, Su and Lim, Tan Chew, (2010), A twin-candidate based approach for event 
pronoun resolution using composite kernel, Proceedings of the 23rd Interna tional Conference on 
Computa tiona l Linguistics, COLING '10, Beijing, China, pages: 188—196 

Brennan Susan E, Marilyn W. Friedman , Carl J. Pollard, (1987), A centering approach to 
pronouns, Proceedings of the 25th annual meeting on Associa tion for Computa tiona l Linguistics , 
p.155-162, July 06-09, 1987, Stanford, California   

Chen, Zheng and Ji, Heng and Haralick, Robert , (2009), A pairwise event coreference model, 
feature impact and evaluation for event coreference resolution , Proceedings of the Workshop on 
Events in Emerging Text Types, eETTs '09, pages: 17—22 

Chen, Zheng and Ji, Heng, (2009), Graph-based event coreference resolution, Proceedings of the 
2009 Workshop on Graph-based Methods for Natura l Language Processing, TextGraphs-4, 
pages: 54—57 

Duan Manjuan and Jiang Ping, (2010), An Empirical study of Centering in  Chinese Anaphoric 
Resolution, Interna tional Conference on Artificia l Intelligence and Computa tional Intelligence, 
IEEE, pages: 373-377 

Hobbs, J. R. (1978), Resolving Pronoun references, Lingua  44:311-338 

Kamlesh Dutta, Nupur Prakash, and Saro j Kaushik, (2008),  Resolving Pronominal Anaphora in 
Hindi using Hobbs’ Algorithm, Web Journa l of Formal Computa tion and Cognitive Linguistics , 
Vol. 1, No. 10 

Kobdani, Hamidreza and Schütze, Hinrich and Schiehlen, Michael and Kamp, Hans , (2011), 
Bootstrapping coreference resolution using word associations , The Associa tion for 
Computa tiona l Linguistics, ACL, pages: 783-792 

Li Fei and Shi Shuicai, (2008), Chinese Pronominal Anaphora Resolution based on Conditional 
Random Fields, Interna tiona l Conference on Computer Science and Software Engineering, 
IEEE, pages: 732-734 

Narayana Murthi, K.N, Sobha, L, Muthukumari, B. (2007), Pronominal Resolution in Tamil 
Using Machine Learning Approach, The First Workshop on Anaphora  Resolution (WAR I),  Ed 
Christer Johansson, Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 15 Angerton Gardens, Newcastle, NE5 2JA , 
UK pp.39-50  

Saravanan K, Ranjani Parthasarathi and T V Geetha, (2003), Syntactic Parser for Tamil, In 
INFITT-2003 

Shalom Lappin , Herbert J. Leass, (1994), An algorithm for pronominal anaphora resolution, 
Computa tiona l Linguistics, v.20 n.4, p.535-561, December 1994  

UNDL, Universal Networking Digital Language, (2012), http: //www.undl.org/ Online; accessed 
28 Jan (2012) 
 

516


