



















































An Annotation System for Development of Chinese Discourse Corpus


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Demonstration Papers, pages 223–230,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

An Annotation System for Development of Chinese 
Discourse Corpus 

Hen-Hsen Huang, Hsin-Hsi Chen 
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering,  

National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan 
hhhuang@nlg.csie.ntu.edu.tw, hhchen@csie.ntu.edu.tw 

 

ABSTRACT 

Well-annotated discourse corpora facilitate the discourse researches. Unlike English, the 
Chinese discourse corpus is not widely available yet. In this paper, we present a web-
based annotation system to develop a Chinese discourse corpus with much finer 
annotation. We first review our previous corpora from the practical point of view, then 
propose a flexible annotation framework, and finally demonstrate the web-based 
annotation system. Under the proposed annotation scheme, both the explicit and the 
implicit discourse relations occurring on various linguistic levels will be captured and 
labelled with three-level PDTB tags. Besides, the sentiment information of each instance 
is also annotated for advanced study. 

 
輔助中文語篇語料庫開發的標記系統 

標記詳細語篇資訊的語料庫，對於語篇研究有很大的幫助。在英文語言處理，目前已有公
眾可以取得的質量良好語篇語料庫。相較之下，中文領域尚未有這樣的公開資源。語篇標
記的工作需要投入相當的人力和時間，為了提高工作效率，我們開發了一套系統，透過網
頁介面，可以對中文語料標記詳細的語篇資訊。在本文中，我們首先回顧過去標記的成果，
指出根據中文的語言特性，需要特別考量的要點。針對這些要點，提出了一套高度彈性的
框架。在這套框架下，標記者將圈選出外顯或內隱、句內或跨句等各式各樣的語篇關係，
並且標上PDTB的三階語篇關係標籤。此外，每一個語篇實例的情緒資訊也一併標記，作
為將來進階研究之用。 

KEYWORDS : Chinese Discourse Analysis, Corpus Annotation, Corpus Linguistics, 
Sentiment Analysis 
KEYWORDS IN CHINESE : 中文語篇分析, 語料標記, 語料庫語言學, 情緒分析 
  

223



1 In tro ductio n  

The study of discourse analysis attracts a lot of attention in recent years. The release of 
the well-annotated datasets such as the Rhetorical Structure Theory Discourse Treebank 
(RST-DT) (Carlson et al., 2002) and the Penn Discourse TreeBank (PDTB) (Prasad et al., 
200 8) facilitate the discourse researches. Many related subtopics such as discourse 
segmentation and discourse relation recognition grow rapidly. Discourse corpus 
becomes the essential component for the researches.  

Both the RST-DT and the PDTB are annotated on Wall Street J ournal articles from the 
Penn Discourse Treebank that are written in English. In Chinese, no discourse corpus is 
widely available yet. To investigate the Chinese discourse analysis, research groups 
independently developed the discourse corpora for their needs. We annotated two 
corpora based on the Sinica Treebank for Chinese discourse relation recognition (Huang 
and Chen, 2011; 2012). At present, Zhou and Xue (2012) are annotating the Penn 
Chinese Treebank with the PDTB-style scheme. 

English and Chinese natives have their  own written styles.  Chen (1994) showed that the 
number of sentence terminators (period, question and exclamation marks) is a little 
larger than segment separators (comma and semicolon) in  English.  In  contrast, the 
segment separators outnumber the sentence terminators in Chinese with the ratio 7:2 
(Chen, 1994).  It results in many segments in Chinese sentences.  Analyses of documents 
randomly sampling from Sinica Chinese Treebank (Huang et al., 2000) show the 
distribution of the number of segments in Chinese sentences is 1 segment (12.18%), 2 
segments (18.35%), 3 segments (20 .15%), 4 segments (15.72%), 5 segments (12.91%), 6-
10  segments (17.72%), and more than 10  segments (2.97%).  Long sentences tend to have 
more complex structural relationships and thus make Chinese discourse annotation 
challenging. 

For our previous two discourse annotation work (Huang and Chen, 2011; 2012), 
different annotation schemes were used. One corpus was annotated on the sentence level 
with the PDTB four-class tags. Another corpus was annotated on the clause level with 
the Contingency and the Comparison relations from the PDTB four-class tags. In this 
paper, we consider the specific written style of Chinese sentences and propose a flexible 
annotation scheme to develop a new Chinese discourse corpus. 

In this corpus, the three level discourse relation tags from the PDTB 2.0  are fully used 
(Prasad et al., 2007). The discourse units can be on various levels. An argument of a 
discourse pair can be as short as a clause and as long as several sentences. In addition, 
the nested discourse pairs are annotated in our scheme. For example, the sentence (S1) 
is a Chinese sentence that consists of three clauses. As illustrated in  Figure 1, (S1) forms 
a Comparison discourse pair on the top level, and it contains a nested Contingency 
discourse pair. We annotate not only the discourse relations, but also the sentiment 
information of each discourse pair and its two arguments. As shown in  Figure 1, the 
polarity of the first clause is positive, the polarity of the fragments that consist of the last 
two clauses is negative, and finally the whole statement (S1) constitute a polarity of 
negative. Such information is valuable for the study of the correlations between 
discourse relation and sentiment analysis. 

224



 

FIGURE 1 - Discourse structure and sentiment polarities of (S1). 

(S1) 經過唐宋明等幾代發展到顛峰的中國茶文化 (‘After several dynasties such as 
Tang, Song, and Ming, the Chinese tea culture developed to the peak’)，在清朝末年
卻因為戰亂及革命 (‘however, because of war and revolution at the end of the Qing 
Dynasty’)，逐漸走向沒落 (‘gradually declined’)。   

Constructing a well-annotated corpus with adequate amounts of data is not a trivial task. 
Various considerations and design processes should be involved. In  this paper, we aim to 
share our experience of developing Chinese discourse corpora and introduce the 
approaches to facilitate the annotation work with a web-based system. 

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In  Section 2, our previous two Chinese 
discourse corpora, which are annotated on the inter-sentential level and the intra-
sentential level, respectively, are analyzed. Consideration and the annotation plan of the 
Chinese discourse corpus are described in Section 3. The design and its current status 
are given in Section 4. Finally, we conclude this paper in the last section.  

2  Tw o  Pilo t Chin e se  Disco urse  Co rpo ra 

Two pilot Chinese discourse corpora were developed on the Sinica Treebank 3.1 (Huang 
et al., 200 0), which is a traditional Chinese Treebank based on the Academic Sinica 
Balanced Corpus (Huang and Chen, 1992). To tackle the issue of Chinese discourse 
recognition, a moderate-sized corpus with the fundamental discourse relation was 
tagged as our first Chinese discourse corpus (Huang and Chen, 2011). For each article, 
annotators tag the discourse relation between every two successive sentences with one of 
the PDTB top four classes: Tem poral, Contingency , Com parison , and Expansion . These 
four classes are the top level tags in the PDTB tagging system.  

The downside of this corpus is that only a few Comparison and Contingency relations are 
labelled. After analysis, we find the Contingency and the Comparison relations tend to 
occur within a sentence, especially the Contingency relation. Since we annotate the 
relations on the inter-sentence level only, such instances are missing. Besides, the nested 

225



relations shown in Figure 1 are also completely missing in this corpus because only the 
relations between every two successive sentences are labelled. 

To study the Contingency and the Comparison relations occurring in  sentences and their  
nested structure, an intra-sentential corpus was constructed as our second corpus 
(Huang and Chen, 2012). The discourse unit in this corpus is clause, which is defined as 
a sequence of words in  a sentence that are delimited by commas (‘，’). Annotators 
decide the structure of a sentence and tag the relations between every successive clause 
in the sentence. To simplify the annotation work, only the sentences that consist  of two, 
three, and four clauses are selected.  

3  Mo re  Practical Co n s ide ratio n s  

To annotate a Chinese discourse corpus, we should tackle some practical issues. Firstly, 
the unit of a discourse argument is not regular. As mentioned in Section 1, an argument 
of a discourse pair may be as short as a clause, and may also be as long as several 
sentences. The more vexing case is the nested discourse relations illustrated in Figure 1. 
Annotators have to determine the correct boundary of arguments. That is important for 
training and testing discourse parsers. 

Secondly, discourse markers are important clues for labelling discourse relations. In  
English, the explicit discourse markers are defined as three grammatical classes of 
connectives, including subordinating conjunctions, coordinating conjunctions, and 
adverbial connectives (Prasad et al., 200 8). These words can be automatically extracted 
using a syntactic parser or a POS tagger. However, it is not clear what the Chinese 
discourse markers are. Cheng and Tian (1989) suggested a dictionary of Chinese 
discourse markers, which consist of many words including connectives and various parts 
of speech such as adverbs, verbs, prepositions, and time nouns.  

Detecting the Chinese discourse markers automatically is not trivial. Wrong 
segmentation is prone to result in the less accurate marker detection. Besides, some 
words in a discourse marker dictionary are general function words that can be used in 
other purposes rather than discourse relation marking only. For example, the word 或 
(“or”) can be used as a discourse marker of the Expansion relation and a correlative 
conjunction. Thus, to disambiguate if a word is used as a discourse marker is necessary. 
Furthermore, the vocabulary of Chinese discourse markers is not a closed set. The 
explicit discourse markers are labelled by annotators on the character level. 

Thirdly, veridicality is a property of a discourse relation that specifies whether both 
arguments of a discourse pair are truth or not (Hutchinson, 2004). In the three-level 
PTDB tagging scheme, the veridicality will be distinguished in  different tags. For 
example, the tag CONTINGENCY:Condition:unreal-past indicates a discourse pair 
where the second argument of the pair did not occur in the past and the first argument 
denotes what the effect would have been if the second argument had occurred. By 
labelling the data with the full PDTB tagging scheme, the veridical information of the 
discourse pairs are naturally labelled at the same time. 

Fourthly, sentiment polarity is another property of a discourse relation that indicates the 
sentiment transition between the two arguments of a discourse pair (Hutchinson, 2004). 

226



Such information will help us realize the correlations between discourse relations and 
sentiment polarities. 

4  An  An n o tatio n  Fram e w o rk 

A flexible interface that allows annotators to label a variety of discourse relations with 
detailed information is proposed. An annotator first signs in to the online annotation 
system, and a list of articles that are assigned to the annotator are given. The annotator 
labels the articles one by one. As shown in Figure 2, the annotator selects the clauses 
that form a discourse pair in the text if it  is found. The selected clauses will be denoted in 
the bold and red font. The annotator clicks the button “Create” when all the clauses 
belonging to this discourse pair are selected, and then the advanced annotation window 
will be popped up.  

As shown in Figure 3, the discourse relation, the discourse marker, the boundaries of 
arguments, and the sentiment polarities of the two arguments and the entire discourse 
pairs are labelled in the pop-up window. The entire selected discourse pair is present in 
the top of the pop-up window. The following is the drop-down selection lists that 
correspond to the three levels of hierarchical discourse relation tags used in the PDTB. 
The next part is about to highlight the discourse markers from the text. As mentioned in 
Section 3, the annotator highlights the discourse marker on the character level. The 
annotator can select multiple characters for the phrase or the pairwise discourse marker 
such as “因為  … , 所以…” (“Because ..., so ...”). The implicit discourse relation is 
distinguished if no discourse marker is highlighted. And then, the annotator splits the 
first argument and the second argument by selecting the clauses belonging to the first 
argument. The rest clauses are regarded as the second argument. The last part of 
annotation is labeling the sentiment information. There are three types of sentiment 
polarity, i.e., positive, neutral, and negative. The polarities of the whole discourse pair 
and both of its two arguments will be labelled. The annotator is asked to judge the 
sentiment polarities on the pragmatic level. That is, the sentiment polarity of the text is 
not determined by the surface semantics, but by its real meaning. The annotator submits 
the annotation by clicking the button ‘Save’ and continues to look up another discourse 
pair in  the article. The nested relations can be annotated in  this interface by choosing the 
repeated clauses in different rounds. 

FIGURE 2 –  Choosing a discourse pair on the web-based online system 

227



 

FIGURE 3 –  Labeling the information for the chosen discourse pair with the web-based 
online system 

Co n clus io n  

Discourse corpus is indispensable for the study of discourse analysis. In this paper, we 
address some considerations specific to Chinese language. A flexible annotation 
framework is proposed to cover a variety of discourse relations and determine the 
argument boundary of a relation. Furthermore, the sentiment polarities are also 
annotated on the discourse pairs and their arguments. Such a corpus is helpful for the 
exploration of the areas of Chinese discourse processing and sentiment analysis. The 
cost of the detailed annotation is much higher and the annotation task is time-
consuming. In order to facilitate the complicated annotation work, we demonstrate a 
web-based system that supports annotators to do the work fast and accurately. 

228



Ackn o w le dgm e n ts  

This research was partially supported by Excellent Research Projects of National Taiwan 
University under contract 101R890 858 and 2012 Google Research Award. 

Re fe re n ce s  

Carlson, L., Marcu, D., and Okurowski, M.E. (2002). RST Discourse Treebank . 
Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia.  

Chen, H.H. (1994). The Contextual Analysis of Chinese Sentences with Punctuation 
Marks. Literal and Linguistic Com puting , Oxford University Press, 9(4): 281-289. 

Cheng, X. and Tian, X. (1989). Xian dai Han yu (現代漢語), San lian shu dian (三聯書店), 
Hong Kong. 

Huang, C. R., Chen, F. Y., Chen, K. J ., Gao, Z. M., and Chen, K. Y. (2000). Sinica 
Treebank: design, criteria, annotation guidelines, and on-line interface. In the 2nd 
Chinese Language Processing W orkshop , pages 29-37, Hong Kong, China. 

Huang, C.R. and Chen, K.J ., (1992). A Chinese corpus for linguistics research. In the 14th 
International Conference on Com putational Linguistics (COLING-92), pages 1214-1217, 
Nantes, France. 

Huang, H.H. and Chen, H.H. (2011). Chinese discourse relation recognition. In the 5th 
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing  (IJCNLP 2011). pages 
1442-1446, Chiang Mai, Thailand. 

Huang, H.H. and Chen, H.H. (2012). Contingency and comparison relation labeling and 
structure prediction in Chinese sentences. In the 13th Annual Meeting of the Special 
Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue (SIGDIAL 2012), pages 261-269, Seoul, 
South Korea. 

Hutchinson, B. (2004). Acquiring the meaning of discourse markers. In the 42nd 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Com putational Linguistics (ACL 2004), pages 
684-691, Barcelona, Spain . 

Prasad, R., Miltsakaki, E., Dinesh, N., Lee, A., J oshi, A., Robaldo, L., and Webber, B. 
(2007). The Penn Discourse Treebank 2.0  Annotation Manual. The PDTB Research 
Group. 

Prasad, R., Dinesh, N., Lee, A., Miltsakaki, E., Robaldo, L., J oshi, A., and Webber, B. 
(200 8). The Penn Discourse TreeBank 2.0 . In the 6th Language Resources and 
Evaluation Conference (LREC 200 8), pages 2961-2968, Marrakech, Morocco. 

Zhou, Y. & Xue, N. (2012). PDTB-style discourse annotation of Chinese text. In the 50 th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Com putational Linguistics (ACL 2012), pages 69-
77, J eju, South Korea. 

229




