



















































Eating Your Own Cooking: Automatically Linking Wordnet Synsets of Two Languages


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Demonstration Papers, pages 239–246,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Eating your own cooking: automatically linking wordnet synsets
of two languages

Salil Joshi Arindam Chatterjee Arun Karthikeyan Karra
Pushpak Bhattacharyya

(1) IBM Research India, Bangalore, India
(2) Symantec Labs, Pune, India

(3) Oracle Labs, Hyderabad, India
(4) CSE Department, IIT Bombay, Mumbai, India

saljoshi@in.ibm.com, arindam.chatterjee23@gmail.com,
arun.karthikeyan.arun@gmail.com, pb@cse.iitb.ac.in

ABSTRACT
Linked wordnets are invaluable linked lexical resources. Wordnet linking involves matching a
particular synset (concept) in one wordnet to a synset in another wordnet. We have developed an
automatic wordnet linking system that is divided into a number of stages. Starting with a synset
in the first language (also referred to as the source language), our algorithm generates a list of
candidate synsets in the second language (also referred to as the target language). In consecutive
stages, a heuristic is used to prune and rank this list. The winner synset is then chosen as the
linkage for the source synset. The candidate synsets are generated using a bilingual dictionary
(BiDict). Further, the earlier heuristics which we developed used BiDict to rank these candidate
synsets. However, development of a BiDict is cumbersome and requires human labor. Furthermore,
in several cases sparsity of the BiDict handicaps the ranking algorithm to a great extent. We have
thus devised heuristics to eliminate the requirement of BiDict during the ranking process by using
the already linked synsets. Once sufficient number of linked synsets are available, these heuristics
outperform our heuristics which use a BiDict. These heuristics are based on observations made
from linking techniques applied by lexicographers. Our wordnet linking system can be used for
any pair of languages, given either a BiDict or sufficient number of already linked synsets. The
interface of the system is easy to comprehend and use. In this paper, we present this interface along
with the developed heuristics.

KEYWORDS: Wordnet Linking, Bilingual Dictionary, Resource reuse for linking.

239



1 Introduction
Wordnet Linking, as the name suggests, is the process of linking wordnet of one language to an-
other. Efforts towards mapping synsets across wordnets have been going on for a while in various
parts of the world. EuroWordNet (Vossen and Letteren, 1997) is one of the projects which is at-
tempting to link wordnets across various European languages. Another effort towards wordnet
linking can be found in the MultiWordNet (Pianta et al., 2002), aligning the Italian and the En-
glish language wordnets. Our linking process can be used for any pair of languages. Currently, we
support linking for Hindi to English. Our wordnet linking system is automatic and involves deploy-
ment of heuristics to find the correct linkage. We initially developed BiDict (Bilingual Dictionary)
based heuristics for ranking. The BiDict is a dictionary, mapping words from the source language
to the target language. The usage of the such a dictionary has certain bottlenecks as follows:

1. Human effort: The development of the BiDict is cumbersome and requires considerable
human efforts.

2. Sparsity: The BiDict is typically sparse in nature and hence in several cases the ranking
results are error prone.

3. Morphological issues: The bilingual dictionary entries are categorized by their respective
parts of speech. Hence in quite a few cases, the word forms differ in their morphology, which
affects the performance of the system as the word form given in the synset and that in the
dictionary do not match.

Due to the issues mentioned above, we had to find an alternative way of ranking the candidate
synsets without using the BiDict. We decided to eat our own cooking. We devised a strategy to use
the already linked synsets for this purpose. The heuristics based on this strategy perform better than
the BiDict based heuristics. In our wordnet linking system, the user can select a source language
(Hindi) synset which goes as input into the system, along with the desired heuristic (both with and
without the usage of the BiDict), which is again opted by the user. The system outputs the top-5
candidate target language synsets, ranked by the chosen heuristic, which can be used for linking
purposes.

The key features of the system are as follows:

1. Minimized dependency on dictionary: The system uses heuristics which use the informa-
tion from already linked synsets, to generate candidate synsets of the target language. Since
the bilingual dictionary has numerous bottlenecks in the process of pruning the candidate
synsets, the tool provides an option of ranking the candidate synsets without such a knowl-
edge source. This is beneficial for language pairs, where an efficient bilingual dictionary is
not available that maps synsets, and a reasonable number of linked synsets are available.

2. User friendliness: Our system interface provides a nice visual experience. The design of
the interface makes the operation of the interface completely clear to the end user.

3. System independence: The system is independent of the web browser and the operating
system it is used on. Since the business logic is written in Java, the system can be easily
ported on another machine.

4. Ease of configuration: The wordnets, BiDict and already linked synsets can be provided
to the system through a simple change in the configuration. This is particularly useful in
porting the system for wordnet linking for a different pair of languages.

5. Easily interpretable output: Our interface is designed in such a way that the user can
easily understand the linking data being displayed. When the candidate synsets of the target
language are exhibited, the user can click on each candidate, to view the details of the synsets

240



i.e., each portion of the candidate synset (viz. synset id, gloss, example, etc.), is displayed
separately, making the output easily comprehensible.

This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays down the system architecture of our wordnet
linking system, followed by section 3 describing the heuristics employed for ranking candidate
synsets. In section 4 we describe the operation of the tool, followed by section 5 comparing the
results of the heuristics against the baseline. We conclude the paper with section 6.

2 System Architecture
Figure 1 shows the basic architecture of the model adopted to achieve linking of a Hindi synset with
an English synset. Given a Hindi synset, the gloss, examples and synonymous words are parsed
depending on the parts-of-speech (POS) and a bag of words are obtained. This bag of Hindi words
are then translated to English using a Hindi-English bilingual dictionary. Using these translated
bag of words and the English WordNet, candidate English synsets are selected. Now on each of
these candidate synsets, the heuristics are applied and the synset to be linked in the target language
is generated.

Figure 1: Hindi-English wordnet linking system architecture

3 Heuristics
As mentioned earlier, we have a set of heuristics for performing wordnet linking. Our initial heuris-
tics made use of a bilingual dictionary, but due to the problems mentioned earlier, the results were
error prone. We later developed heuristics which do not require any such dictionary for ranking
purposes and yet provide comparable results in presence of already linked synsets. We present
both types of heuristics in this section, each can be used under certain scenarios. Throughout this
description, we follow the standard definitions for hypernym, hyponym, gloss, concept and synset
(Fellbaum, 1998)

3.1 Heuristics based on Bilingual Dictionary
The heuristics that use the BiDict for ranking candidate synsets are as follows. These heuristics are
particularly helpful in presence of a good quality BiDict:

1. Monosemous Word Heuristic- In this heuristic, the monosemous words in the source synset
are only considered for obtaining the candidate synsets. First the translations of the monose-
mous words are obtained using the bilingual dictionary, then synsets containing these trans-
lations are chosen as candidate synsets.

241



2. Single Translation Heuristic- This heuristic is similar to the monosemous word heuristic.
Here only those words which have single translations according to the bilingual dictionary
are considered in obtaining the candidate synsets.

3. Hyponymy/Hypernymy Word-bag Heuristics- These heuristics rank candidates by finding
the similarity of synset words of the hyponym/hypernym respectively, of the source synset
with the candidate target synsets.

4. Gloss/Synset/Concept Word-bag Heuristic- These heuristics score the candidates based on
the similarity between the words in the gloss or synset or concept respectively, on source and
target sides.

5. Synset/Concept Back Translation Heuristic- These heuristics make use of synset or con-
cept word translations respectively, from source to target language and vice versa. The can-
didates are ranked based on the combined score.

3.2 Heuristics based on already Linked Synsets
The primary aim of our work was to build a comprehensive, accurate and user friendly tool for
wordnet linking. Since a low quality BiDict lowers the ranking performance of the system, we
resorted to a strategy that avoids the usage of such a knowledge source for ranking, and makes
use of the already linked synsets. The chief design strategy here was to find the closest synset
from the existing set of linked synsets, to the synset in source language to be linked. The metric
of closeness has been defined differently in different heuristics. These heuristics are particularly
helpful in presence of sufficient number of already linked synsets.

3.2.1 Closest Common Synset Word-bag Heuristic

This heuristic uses the maximum intersection of the synset word-bags of the source synset to be
linked and already linked synsets. Once this synset is found, its corresponding link on the target
side is found. The candidate synsets are ranked based on the degree of intersection of synset words,
with this synset in the target language. The heuristic score for each target language candidate synset
is calculated follows:

Score = |TargetcandidateSynsetWords ∩ TargetclosestSynsetWords|

3.2.2 Closest Common Concept Word-bag Heuristic

This heuristic uses the maximum intersection of the concept word-bags of the source synset to be
linked and already linked synsets. It is similar to the Closest Common Synset Word-bag Heuristic,
in operation. It uses the intersection of the concept word-bags instead of synset word-bags. Hence
the heuristic score for each target language candidate synset is as follows:

Score = |TargetcandidateConceptWords ∩ TargetclosestConceptWords|

3.2.3 Closest Hypernym Synset Heuristic

The total number of linked synsets from Hindi to English available is 24,1241, which are manually
inspected by our lexicographers. Among these 24,124 synsets, 18,441 (76.443%) are nouns. Hence
a heuristic which performs well on nouns was desirable, as it would boost the accuracy of the entire
system. More importantly, a strategy for finding similarity between the source language synset to be
linked and the linked set of synsets was semantic relations available within the wordnet framework.

1as of June, 2012

242



Theoretically, the wordnet linking process should follow the hypernymy hierarchy of the source and
target wordnets i.e., if a synset A on source side is linked to synset B on target side, correspondingly
synset C which is a hyponym of A in the source language wordnet should be linked to a hyponym of
B on the target side. The heuristic score for each target language candidate synset can be calculated
as follows:

Score = Distancehypernymy(TargetcandidateSynset, TargetclosestHypernym)

4 Interface Design
To support various web browsers on different operating systems, we have designed the web in-
terface using standard open technologies. The interface runs using PHP52 on the server side, and
for the GUI, we have used a javascript framework viz., ExtJS v4.03 which provides a neat and
aesthetic display to the user. Figure 2 shows the system interface. The main screen is divided into

Figure 2: Screen-shot showing the main interface of the system
neatly arranged panels, which can be collapsed, in case if the monitor resolution can not display the
complete interface. The screen-shot shows that currently the Help panel on the left is in collapsed
form. Each synset in the list displays the Synset ID, gloss, POS category and the constituent words
fetched from Hindi Wordnet. Selecting a row in this list automatically populates the synset details
in the form adjacent to the grid. The list of synsets can be searched for a particular synset.

Once a source (Hindi) synset is chosen, the user simply needs to select a heuristic and submit the
form. Based on the input synset and the heuristic, the system computes the candidate synsets, ranks
them and returns top-5 candidates to the user. The outcome of this process is shown in figure 3.

5 Empirical evaluation
The system was tested on a total of 24,124 linked synsets manually inspected by our lexicographers.
The results are shown in Table 1. We present the results for all the heuristics developed by us.
Rows 1 to 9 summarize the performance of BiDict based heuristics, and rows 10 to 12 show the
results obtained with heuristics which make use of already linked synsets. Row 13 compares the
performance of all the heuristics against the random baseline, in which a random candidate synset
is assigned as the linked synset. Clearly, the performance of heuristics is improved when they make
use of already linked synsets for linking new synsets.

2http://php.net/downloads.php
3http://www.sencha.com/products/extjs/

243



Figure 3: System interface showing the outcome of the linking process

Heuristic Coverage Accuracy
Monosemous Word 6644 (27.541 %) 4194 (63.131 %)
Single Translation 6100 (25.282 %) 3458 (56.692 %)
Gloss Word-bag 11298 (46.833 %) 5241 (46.393 %)
Hypernymy Word-bag 12127 (50.269 %) 5041 (41.570 %)
Hyponymy Word-bag 12127 (50.269 %) 5712 (47.108 %)
Synset Word-bag 12127 (50.269 %) 6068 (50.044 %)
Concept Word-bag 11298 (46.833 %) 5731 (50.737 %)
Synset Back Translation 12127 (50.269 %) 6133 (50.574 %)
Concept Back Translation 12127 (50.269 %) 6312 (52.052 %)
Closest Hypernym Synset 12127 (50.269 %) 9671 (79.758 %)
Closest Common Synset Word-bag 12127 (50.269 %) 9032 (74.482 %)
Closest Common Concept Word-bag 12127 (50.269 %) 6694 (55.203 %)
Random Baseline 12127 (54.071 %) 3024 (24.936 %)

Total number of synsets being mapped is 24,124
Average cardinality of candidate English synsets per Hindi synset is 25

Table 1: System Performance for different heuristics and random baseline

6 Conclusion
In this work, we presented a tool for wordnet linking which uses heuristic based approach. The
necessity of a BiDict for ranking process was circumvented by designing new heuristics which
made use of the already linked set of synsets from source to target languages. These heuristics
perform at par with the heuristics based on the BiDict. Once quality linked data between two
languages is available, tasks like WSD, Machine Translation, Cross-lingual Information Retrieval,
etc., can benefit from it. Our on-line system interface is simple yet user-friendly and allows the
user to make use of several linking heuristics which we have developed. The system can be easily
adapted for a new pair of languages by simply supplying the language wordnets along with either
a bilingual dictionary or already linked synsets across the two languages.

In the future, we would like to support more languages. We would also like to provide the users a
facility of adding new heuristics to our system for better comparison.

244



References
Fellbaum, C. (1998). WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database.

Pianta, E., Bentivogli, L., and Girardi, C. (2002). Multiwordnet: developing an aligned multilin-
gual database. In Proceedings of the First International Conference on Global WordNet.

Vossen, P. and Letteren, C. C. (1997). Eurowordnet: a multilingual database for information
retrieval. In In: Proceedings of the DELOS workshop on Cross-language Information Retrieval,
pages 5–7.

245




