



















































Modelling the Organization and Processing of Bangla Polymorphemic Words in the Mental Lexicon: A Computational Approach


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Posters, pages 235–244,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Modelling the Organization and Processing of Bangla
Polymorphemic Words in the Mental Lexicon: A

Computational Approach

Tir thankar Dasgupta Manjira Sinha Anupam Basu
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur 721302

iamtirthankar@gmail.com, manjira87@gmail.com, anupambas@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
In this paper we try to present psycholinguistically motivated computational model for the
access and representation of Bangla polymorphemic words in the Mental Lexicon. We first
conduct a series of masked priming experiment on a set of Bangla polymorphemic words. Our
analysis indicates a significant number of words shows morphological decomposition during
the processing stage. We further developed a computational model for the processing of Bangla
polymorphemic words. The novelty of the new model over the existing ones are, the proposed
model not only considers the frequency of the derived word but also considers the role of its
constituent stem, suffix and the degree of affixation between the stem and the suffix. We have
evaluated the new model with the results obtained from the priming experiment and then
compare it with the state of the art. The proposed model has been found to perform better than
the existing models.

KEYWORDS: Mental Lexicon, Morphology, Decomposition, Psycholinguistics, Masked Priming.

235



1 Introduction

The mental lexicon refers to the organization of words in the human mind and their interactions
that facilitates fast retrieval and comprehension of a word in a context. One important goal of
cognitive science is to understand the organization of mental lexicon as it will help to model
how brain processes language. This knowledge will benefit the development various NLP
applications that includes text comprehension, lexicon development, information retrieval, text
summarization and question answering.

One of the key investigation areas in psycholinguistics is the representation and processing of
morphologically complex words in the mental lexicon. That is, for a native speaker, whether
a polymorphemic word like “unpreventable” will be processed as a whole (Bradley, 1980;
Butterworth, 1983) or will it be decomposed into its individual morphemes “un”, “prevent”,
and “able” and finally recognised by the representation of its stem (morphemic model)(Taft
and Forster, 1975; MacKay, 1978). It has been argued that people do have the capability
of such decomposition as they can understand novel words like “unsupportable”. However,
there has been a long standing debate whether such decomposition are obligatory or are they
applicable to only those situations where the whole word access fails (Taft, 2004) (partial
decomposition model) (Caramazza et al., 1988; Baayen et al., 1997; Baayen, 2000). An
alternative to the morphemic and partial decomposition model is the full listing model that
assumes decomposition is not at all an obligatory process and the initial processing of words
are performed in terms of the whole word representation in the mental lexicon (Burani and
Caramazza, 1987; Burani and Laudanna, 1992; Caramazza et al., 1988). Several computational
models have been developed to predict the processing of polymorphemic words. The obligatory
decomposition model (Taft, 2004) accounts for the fact that decomposition of a polymorphemic
word depends on the frequency of its constituent stem (or the base word). Therefore, higher
the stem frequency, easier is the decomposition. On the other hand, the full listing model
(Burani and Laudanna, 1992) states that the whole word frequency facilitates the recognition
of a polymorphemic word. The dual route access model (Baayen et al., 1997) argues that
the decomposition of a polymorphemic word into its constituent morphemes depends on the
surface frequency of that word; if the frequency crosses a threshold then the word is accessed
as a whole otherwise it is accessed via its parts.

In spite of the plethora of work that has been done to understand the representation and
processing of polymorphemic words in the mental lexicon, a coherent picture is yet to be
emerged. Further, most of the existing studies have conducted experiments mainly in English;
Hebrew, Italian, French, Dutch, and few other languages (Frost et al., 1997), (Forster and Davis,
1984; Grainger et al., 1991; Drews and Zwitserlood, 1995; Taft and Forster, 1975; Taft, 2004)
have also been considered. Any such investigation for Indian languages has not been reported so
far, though they are considered to be morphologically richer than many of their Indo-European
cousins. On the other hand, several cross-linguistic experiments have indicated that mental
representation and processing of polymorphemic words are not language independent (Taft,
2004). The conclusion drawn in one language cannot be generalized to the others without
repeating the experiments on them. Bangla, in particular, supports stacking of inflectional
suffixes and it has a rich derivational morphology inherited from Sanskrit and some borrowed
from Persian, and Arabic, and shows abundance of compounding.

The objective of this paper is to understand the organization and processing of Bangla deriva-
tionally suffixed words in the mental lexicon. Our aim is to determine whether the mental

236



lexicon decomposes morphologically complex words into its constituent morphemes or it repre-
sents the intact surface form of a word and subsequently develop a robust computational model.
To achieve this, first we have conducted the masked priming experiment and gathered reaction
time data for next level analysis. The experimental results show that priming occurs only for
those cases where the prime is the derived form of the target and have a recognizable suffix
(like, sonA-sonAli (GOLD-GOLDEN), and bayasa-bayaska(AGE-AGED). Weak or no priming is
observed for cases where the prime is a derived form of the target but do not have a recognizable
suffix or when the prime and the target is not morphologically related at all. These observations
instigate the basic assumptions of the obligatory decomposition model (Taft and Forster, 1975;
Taft, 2004) that polymorphemic words are always processed via decomposition. Deeper analysis
of the experimental data reveals that processing of Bangla polymorphemic words may be
explained by the dual route decomposition model proposed by (Baayen, 2000). However, unlike
the dual route model, our proposed model not only considers the frequency of the derived word
but also the role of its constituent stem, suffix and the degree of affixation between them. Our
proposed model is the first ever attempt to computationally predict the processing mechanism
of a polymorphemic word in any Indian language. We have evaluated our proposed model
against the priming experiment results and also compared our performance with that of the
existing models in other languages. We have found that our proposed model provides good
accuracy for Bangla polymorphemic words which reinforces the language dependent nature of
word processing phenomena.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: section 2 presents related works; section 3
describes the masked priming experiment performed over a set of Bangla morphologically
complex words; section 4 compares the performance of different frequency based models in
predicting the processing mechanisms of Bangla polymorphemic words; section 5 describes
the proposed models of word recognition in Bangla; the last concluding section contains the
summary of the observations and discusses the findings.

2 Related Works

Their is a rich literature on representation, organization and accessing of polymorphemic
words in the mental lexicon. Typically, priming experiments, and frequency models are used
to address such issues. Priming is a process that results in increase in speed or accuracy of
response to a stimulus, called the target, based on the occurrence of a prior exposure of another
stimulus, called the prime. For details please refer to the literature (Caramazza et al., 1988;
Bodner and Masson, 1997; Tulving et al., 1982). These experiments demonstrate that across
the languages, recognition of a target word (say happy) is facilitated by a prior exposure
of a morphologically related prime word (e.g., happiness). Since morphological relatedness
often implies orthographic, phonological and semantic similarities between two words, several
attempts have been made to factor out other priming effects from morphological priming
(Bentin and Feldman, 1990; Drews and Zwitserlood, 1995)(Bodner and Masson, 1997)(Davis
and Rastle, 2010)(Forster and Davis, 1984)(Frost et al., 1997)(Crepaldi et al., 2010)(Grainger
et al., 1991)(Drews and Zwitserlood, 1995). A cross modal priming experiment has been
conducted for Bangla derivationally suffixes words by (Dasgupta et al., 2010) where strong
priming effects have been observed for morphologically and phonologically related prime-target
pairs; weak priming is observed for morphologically related but phonologically opaque pairs
and no priming is observed for morphologically unrelated pairs. Apart from this, we do not
know of any other cognitive experiments on morphological priming in Bangla or other Indian
languages.

237



Class Examples
M+S+O+ nibAsa (residence)-nibAsi (resident)
M+S+O- mitra (friend) - maitri (friendship)
M’+S-O+ Ama (Mango)- AmadAni (import)
M-S+O- jantu (Animal)- bAgha (Tiger)
M-S-O+ ghaDi (watch)- ghaDiYAla (crocodile)

Table 1: Dataset for the Experiment. M=Morphology, S=Semantics, O=Orthography. + implies
related, - implies unrelated.

In the frequency model analysis, (Taft and Forster, 1975) with his experiment on English
inflected words, argued that lexical decision responses of polymorphemic words depends
upon the base word frequency. In other words, higher the frequency of the stem is (called,
base frequency), the shorter is the time to recognize the word (called, Reaction Time or RT).
Previous experiments have shown such base frequency effects in most of the cases but not for
all (Baayen et al., 1997; Bertram et al., 2000; Bradley, 1980; Burani and Caramazza, 1987;
Burani et al., 1984; Colé et al., 1989; Schreuder and Baayen, 1997; Taft and Forster, 1975; Taft,
2004). (Baayen, 2000) proposed the dual processing race model where both the full-listing and
morphemic path compete among each other and depending upon the frequency of base and the
surface word any one of the paths are chosen.

3 Psycholinguistic Study of Bangla Polymorphemic Words through
Masked Priming Experiments

We apply the masked priming experiment discussed in (Forster and Davis, 1984; Rastle et al.,
2000) (Marslen-Wilson et al., 2008) for Bangla morphologically complex words. Here, the
prime is placed between a forward pattern mask and the target stimulus, which acts as a
backward mask. This is illustrated below.
mask(500ms) #####→ prime(50ms) sonA(GOLD)→ tar get(500ms) sonAli(GOLDEN)
After presenting the target probe, the subjects were asked to make a lexical decision whether
the given target is a valid word in that language. The same target word is again probed but
with a different visual probe called the control word. The control shows no relationship with
the target. For example, baYaska (aged) and baYasa (age) is a prime-target pair, for which the
corresponding control-target pair could be naYana (eye) and baYasa (age).

There were 171 prime-target and control-target pairs classified into five different classes.
The prime is related to the target either in terms of morphology, semantics and orthography
depending upon the class in which they belong. For example, class-I primes are morphologically,
semantically as well as orthographically related where as class-V primes are related only in
terms of semantics. The five different class along with their examples are discussed in Table 1.

The experiments were conducted on 14 highly educated native Bangla speakers. Nine of them
have a graduate degree and five hold a post graduate degree. The age of the subjects varies
between 22 to 35 years.
Results:
The RTs with extreme values and those for incorrect lexical decisions (about 3.2%) were
excluded from the data1. Table 2 summarizes the average RTs for the prime and control sets for
the five classes. The p-values for two-sample t-test and paired t-test are also indicated, where

1Any RT value that falls outside the range of Average RT ± 500ms is considered as extreme

238



the prime and corresponding control RTs have been considered as the two samples or items
within a pair. We observe that, strong priming effects are observed when the target word is
morphologically derived and has a recognizable suffix, semantically and orthographically related
with respect to the prime; no priming effects are observed when the prime and target words
are orthographically related but share no morphological or semantic relationship; although
not statistically significant, but weak priming is observed for prime target pairs that are
only semantically related. The results for [M+S+O+] and [M-S-O+] classes are statistically
significant according to the t-statistics. However, we see no significant difference between the
prime and control RTs for other classes.

Class Avg RT p values Sign Score Range
(in ms)

P C S Pair -14 to -4 -3 to +3 +4 to +14
[M + S +O+] 623 689 <0.00 <0.01 24 4 18
[M + S +O−] 658 660 <0.09 <0.06 6 14 19
[M ′ + S −O+] 545 549 <0.10 >0.20 5 7 19
[M − S +O−] 602 597 >0.20 <0.10 3 6 22
[M − S −O+] 590 569 <0.05 <0.08 2 5 21

Table 2: Average RT for the word classes, the p-values and the sign score ranges.

Analysis of RTs for Lexical Items:
We also looked at the RTs for each of the 171 target words. Since we had only 14 observations,
one from each participant, we decided to conduct a sign test instead of the usual parametric
tests of significance (e.g., t-test). The null hypothesis here is that the average or sum is 0 (i.e.,
there are equal number of cases where control RT is greater than prime RT and vice versa).
The results are summarized in Table 2. Since, we subtracted the control RT from the prime
RT, a negative sign indicates priming. Therefore, the smaller the value of the sum for a target
word, the more significant is the priming effect. We consider a value less than or equal to -4 as
significant. In other words, a target is considered to be significantly primed by the prime word
if, out of 14 responses, RT for the prime-target was smaller than the RT for the corresponding
control-target in at least 9 cases.

As explained earlier, the effect of priming with a morphologically derived word instigates
decomposition, leading to reduced RT of the target. However, it is apparent from the above
results that not all polymorphemic words tend to decompose during processing. This contradicts
the obligatory decomposition model of (Taft and Forster, 1975; Taft, 2004). Naturally, the
question that arises is, what are the other factors that are responsible for the decomposition
of Bangla polymorphemic words. In order to answer this we need to further investigate the
processing phenomena of Bangla derived words. One notable means is to identify whether the
stem or suffix frequency of a polymorphemic word is involved in the processing stage of that
word. For this, we apply the existing frequency based models to the Bangla polymorphemic
words and try to evaluate their performance by comparing their predicted results with the result
obtained through the priming experiment.

4 Applying Base Word and Derived Word Frequency Models

The base word frequency model (or, Model-1) states that a polymorphemic word that constitute
a high frequency stem will be decomposed faster than a word having low stem frequency. In

239



order to compare the results with respect to that of the masked priming experiment discussed
in the previous section, we made a slight change to the original model. We propose that if the
stem frequency of a polymorphemic word crosses a given threshold value τ, then the word will
decomposed into its constituent morpheme. The model is formally represented as:

Decomposabil i t y(Wi) =

¨
TRU E, if log10( f requenc y(Wstem))≥ τ
FALSE, if log10( f requenc y(Wstem))≤ τ

(1)

The derived word frequency model (or, Model-2) claims that, if a specific morphologically complex
form is above a certain threshold of frequency, then the whole word access will be preferred
and thus no priming effect will be observed in this case. On the other hand if the derived word
frequency is below that same threshold of frequency, the parsing route will be preferred, and the
word will be accessed via its parts. Here, the threshold value is computed as the log of average
corpus frequency of words2 which comes out to be 3 in our case. We apply model-1 and Model-2
to a set of 171 morphologically derived words. The predicted values of both the models are
evaluated with respect to the results obtained from the priming experiment discussed in section.
performances of the models are computed in terms of Precision, Recall, F-Measure and Accuracy.
matrix along with the computed results is depicted in Table 4. We observed that Model-1 posses
an accuracy of 62% where as Model-2 has an accuracy of 49%. Table 4 also shows that the false
positive and false negative values to be around 11% and 26% respectively. This indicates for
these 11% of the words, Model-1 predicts no morphological decomposition due to extremely
low base word frequency (ranges between 1 to 7 out of 4 million) but the priming experiment
shows high degree of morphological decomposition. On the other hand, model fails to explain
why around 27% words (like, ekShatama, juYADi and rAjakiYa) having extremely low base word
frequency (ranges between 1 to 7) shows high degree of priming. Moreover, the model also
fails to explain the negative decomposability of 11% words (like, laThiYAla, dAktArakhAnA, and
Alokita) despite having high root word frequencies (ranges between 100 to 1100). We observe
that Model-2 can be used to explain the possible decomposition of low frequency derived words
which the base word frequency model fails to explain. Thus, the false positive value for the
present model is lower than that of the earlier one (21%). However, the present model performs
poorly due to the high false negative value (28%). This implies the model fails to recognise the
potentially decomposable words (like, meghalA, pAkAmo and AkAShamandala) properly.

From the above results we observed that, Model-1 predicts that the priming/decomposition will
take place if the base word frequency is high, irrespective of the frequency of the prime. However,
the prediction of the model was not validated when the prime as well as the target words are
both having high frequency. On the other hand, Model-2 predicts that priming/decomposition
will take place if the prime is of low frequency. However, the model was not validated from the
experimental results for low frequency prime and low frequent target pairs. Hence, the two
extremes of paring call for a newer model.

5 Combining the Base and the Derived Word Frequencies with Suffix Fre-
quencies

In a pursuit towards an extended model, we combine the model 1 and 2 together to observe if
and how their combination can predict the parsing phenomena. We further tried to analyse

2Computed by combining the CIIL, and Anandabazar corpus and literary works of Rabindranath Tagore, and Bankim
Chandra available from (www.ciil.org, iitkgp.ernet.in and nltr.org)

240



the role of suffixes in determining the decomposability of Bangla derivationally suffixed words.
Accordingly, we followed the same regression based technique discussed in (Hay and Baayen,
2001) to derive relationship between the base and surface word frequencies. We took the log of
frequency of both the base and the derived words and plotted their values in a log-log scale. In
order to get the best-fit curve over the given dataset we have used the least square fit regression
method, the equation of the straight line being:

Log10(Base F requenc y) = 0.264× Log10(Sur f ace F requenc y) + 1.822 (2)

We propose that any point that falls above the regression line will be parsed into its constituent
morphemes during processing. On the other hand, points situated below the regression line
will be accessed as a whole. In other words, given the surface frequency of a derived word W,
the equation above can predict the frequency of the corresponding base word. If the predicted
frequency of the base word is greater than the actual frequency then the point lies above the
regression line and thus, during processing these words will be accessed via the decomposition
model. This is depicted in Figure 1 which illustrates the surface and base word frequency
distribution of 171 Bangla polymorphemic words. The model predicts that those points that
lie on or above the regression line will be parsed during processing where as points lying
below the regression line will be accessed as a whole. Next, we compute the type and token

y = 0.264x + 1.822

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5

Surface Frequency of Derived Words

B
as

e 
W

or
d 

F
re

qu
en

cy

Figure 1: The relation between log derived frequency and log base frequency for 171 different
Bangla polymorphemic words.

frequencies of the individual suffixes. The type frequency is defined as the total number of
distinct words associated with an affix. On the other hand, token frequency of a suffix is the
total number of times a suffix is attached with a word. The hypothesis can be given as, for a
given Bangla polymorphemic word if the type/token ratio exceeds a predefined threshold τ,
then the word will be accessed as a whole otherwise the derived word will be decomposed into
the corresponding stem and suffix. In order to compute the threshold ratio, we follow the same
approach as discussed above. Therefore, we draw a parsing line which is the linear regression
line passing from the origin. The slope of the line thus computed is the value of the threshold
frequency τ. Thus, the proposed model can be viewed as:

T ype F requenc y(Si) = 0.09 ∗ Token F requenc y(Si) (3)
Finally, we combine equation 2 (E2) and equation 3 (E43) together to get a new enhanced
model. The combination of the models were done by performing a logical OR operation on the

241



False True True False P R F A
Positive Negative Positive Negative (%) (%) (%) (%)

BF 46 38 68 19 40 54 46 62
SF 38 30 53 49 41 55 47 49

Combined 20 39 51 17 72 75 73 71

Table 3: Summarising the comparative results of the frequency based models. BF= Base
frequency model, SF= Surface frequency model, Combine= Combining all the models together.
P= Precision, R=Recall, F=F-Measure, A=Accuracy

outputs of E2 and E3. This is represented as:

Decomposabil i t y(W ) =

¨
TRU E, if (E3∨ E4) = 1
FALSE, Otherwise

(4)

The enhanced model is evaluated over a set of 136 Bangla polymorphemic words where the
stem and the suffixes are transparent (i.e the suffix is fully or partly recognizable). This is
because, as automatic identification of opaque Bangla suffixes and computing the frequency
is difficult. Thus, for the present model we have not considered the 39 Bangla derived words
(belonging to the class [M+S+O-]) for which the stem and suffix is opaque. The results are
depicted in Table 4. The performance of our final model shows an accuracy of 71% with a
precision of 72% and a recall of 75%. This suppresses the performance of the other models
discussed earlier. However, around 29% of the test words that includes words like, rAShTrIya,
nAchuni, nishThAbAna, and juyADi, were wrongly classified which the model fails to justify.

Conclusion

In this paper we try to model the processing of Bangla words in the mental lexicon. Our aim
is to determine whether such words are accessed as a whole or does it is decomposed into
its constituent morphemes during recognition. We tried to answer this question through two
different angles. First, we conduct a series of masked priming experiments. The reaction time
of the subjects for recognizing various lexical items under appropriate conditioning reveals
important facts about their organization and processing of words in the brain which are
discussed in the paper. Next, we try to develop computational models that can predict the
recognition process of Bangla words and validated the prediction through the results of priming
experiment. We observed that appart from the surface and base word frequency, decomposition
of a Bangla polymorphemic word depends upon the suffix with which the base is attached. The
performance of our proposed model shows an improvement of 9% compared to the existing
ones. However, further study is needed in order to concretize our claim. To the best of our
knowledge there is no other work on computational modelling of Bangla polymorphemic words
against which we could benchmark our results.

Acknowledgements

We thank Dr. Monojit Choudhury from Microsoft Research India for his valuable suggestions and
SNLTR, Kolkata to support and sponsor our work. We also thank members of SNLTR, Kolkata
and Communication Empowerment Lab, IIT Kharagpur for participating in our experiments.

242



References

Baayen, H. (2000). On frequency, transparency and productivity. G. Booij and J. van Marle
(eds), Yearbook of Morphology, pages 181–208.

Baayen, R., Dijkstra, T., and Schreuder, R. (1997). Singulars and plurals in dutch: Evidence
for a parallel dual-route model. Journal of Memory and Language, 37(1):94–117.

Bentin, S. and Feldman, L. (1990). The contribution of morphological and semantic relatedness
to repetition priming at short and long lags: Evidence from hebrew. The quarterly journal of
experimental psychology, 42(4):693–711.

Bertram, R., Schreuder, R., and Baayen, R. (2000). The balance of storage and computa-
tion in morphological processing: The role of word formation type, affixal homonymy, and
productivity. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26(2):489.

Bodner, G. and Masson, M. (1997). Masked repetition priming of words and nonwords:
Evidence for a nonlexical basis for priming. Journal of Memory and Language, 37:268–293.

Bradley, D. (1980). Lexical representation of derivational relation. Juncture, pages 37–55.

Burani, C. and Caramazza, A. (1987). Representation and processing of derived words.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 2(3-4):217–227.

Burani, C. and Laudanna, A. (1992). Units of representation for derived words in the lexicon.
Advances in psychology, 94:361–376.

Burani, C., Salmaso, D., and Caramazza, A. (1984). Morphological structure and lexical access.
Visible Language, 18(4):342–352.

Butterworth, B. (1983). Lexical representation. Language production, 2:257–294.

Caramazza, A., Laudanna, A., and Romani, C. (1988). Lexical access and inflectional morphol-
ogy. Cognition, 28(3):297–332.

Colé, P., Beauvillain, C., and Segui, J. (1989). On the representation and processing of prefixed
and suffixed derived words: A differential frequency effect. Journal of Memory and Language,
28(1):1–13.

Crepaldi, D., Rastle, K., Coltheart, M., and Nickels, L. (2010). ‘fell’primes ‘fall’, but does
‘bell’prime ‘ball’? masked priming with irregularly-inflected primes. Journal of memory and
language, 63(1):83–99.

Dasgupta, T., Choudhury, M., Bali, K., and Basu, A. (2010). Mental representation and access
of polymorphemic words in bangla: Evidence from cross-modal priming experiments. In
International Conference on Natural LAnguage Processing.

Davis, M. and Rastle, K. (2010). Form and meaning in early morphological processing:
Comment on feldman, o’connor, and moscoso del prado martín (2009). Psychonomic bulletin &
review, 17(5):749–755.

Drews, E. and Zwitserlood, P. (1995). Morphological and orthographic similarity in visual
word recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
21(5):1098.

243



Forster, K. and Davis, C. (1984). Repetition priming and frequency attenuation in lexical
access. Journal of experimental psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 10(4):680.

Frost, R., Forster, K., and Deutsch, A. (1997). What can we learn from the morphology
of hebrew? a masked-priming investigation of morphological representation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23(4):829.

Grainger, J., Colé, P., and Segui, J. (1991). Masked morphological priming in visual word
recognition. Journal of memory and language, 30(3):370–384.

Hay, J. and Baayen, H. (2001). Parsing and productivity. Yearbook of morphology, 35.

MacKay, D. (1978). Derivational rules and the internal lexicon. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 17(1):61–71.

Marslen-Wilson, W., Bozic, M., and Randall, B. (2008). Early decomposition in visual word
recognition: Dissociating morphology, form, and meaning. Language and Cognitive Processes,
23(3):394–421.

Rastle, K., Davis, M., Marslen-Wilson, W., and Tyler, L. (2000). Morphological and semantic
effects in visual word recognition: A time-course study. Language and Cognitive Processes,
15(4-5):507–537.

Schreuder, R. and Baayen, R. (1997). How complex simplex words can be. Journal of Memory
and Language, 37:118–139.

Taft, M. (2004). Morphological decomposition and the reverse base frequency effect. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology Section A, 57(4):745–765.

Taft, M. and Forster, K. (1975). Lexical storage and retrieval of prefixed words. Journal of
verbal learning and verbal behavior, 14(6):638–647.

Tulving, E., Schacter, D., and Stark, H. (1982). Priming effects in word-fragment completion
are independent of recognition memory. Journal of experimental psychology: learning, memory,
and cognition, 8(4):336–342.

244


