



















































Generating ``A for Alpha'' When There Are Thousands of Characters


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Technical Papers, pages 1411–1424,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Generating “A for Alpha”
When There Are Thousands of Characters

Hiroaki KAWASAKI1 Ryohei SASANO2

Hiro ya TAKAMURA2 Manabu OKU MURA2
(1) Interdisciplinary Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology

(2) Precision and Intelligence Laboratory, Tokyo Institute of Technology
kawa@lr.pi.titech.ac.jp, {sasano,takamura,oku}@pi.titech.ac.jp

ABSTRACT
The phonetic alphabet enables people to dictate letters of the alphabet accurately by using
representative words, i.e., A for Alpha. Japanese kanji (idiographic Chinese characters) vastly
outnumber the letters of the Roman alphabet, and thus Japanese requires an explanatory
reading like a phonetic alphabet. We call the explanatory reading of a kanji a “distinctive
explanation.” Most kanji characters have their homophones, and the role of the distinctive
explanations is to enable users to identify a specific kanji character only by listening to the
explanation. In this paper, we propose a corpus-based method for automatically generating
distinctive explanations for a kanji, in which information about familiarity and homophones
of kanji are taken into consideration. Through the kanji-identification experiments, we show
that the quality of the explanations generated by the proposed method is higher than that of
the manually crafted distinctive explanations.

KEYWORDS: phonetic alphabet, distinctive explanation for a kanji.

1411



1 Introduction

Japanese has three types of characters: hiragana, katakana, and kanji (Chinese characters).
While hiragana and katakana characters are phonograms, kanjis are ideograms, each of which
usually has several readings. Most kanjis have homophones, and thus it is difficult to identify
a kanji only by its reading. However, sometimes we need to identify a kanji verbally. For
example, screen readers need to enable the users, especially visually impaired people who have
difficulty seeing things, to identify a kanji only by sound. When we talk over the telephone,
we have to exchange information, such as proper names, only by our voice. In such cases, we
explain a kanji by using not only its reading but also its properties, compositions, and so on,
to reduce the ambiguity. In this paper, we call such an explanation a “distinctive explanation
for a kanji” and propose a method for generating distinctive explanations automatically.

One concept similar to a distinctive explanation is the phonetic alphabet, e.g., A for Alpha,
B for Bravo, and C for Charlie. While a distinctive explanation explains kanjis, the phonetic
alphabet explains letters and numbers. One of the major differences between them is the
number of target characters. Whereas the phonetic alphabet for English deals with only 26
letters and 10 numbers, the distinctive explanation for kanjis deals with thousands of kanji
characters.

The distinctive explanation leverages various aspects of the target kanji such as its Chinese
reading, its Japanese reading, and its radicals, to reduce ambiguity. Each kanji has several
readings, some of which are derived from Chinese readings and the others are Japanese tra-
ditional readings. If a kanji has a distinctive reading, the reading can be used to generate the
distinctive explanation. Some kanjis can be divided into left and right parts and we can explain
a kanji without ambiguity by using them. For example, the kanji “評 (hyou)” can be divided
into “言 (gon)” and “平 (hei).” By listening to the information of “言 (gon)” and “平 (hei),” we
can identify “評 (hyou).” Words including the target kanji, such as “購入 (kou-nyū, purchase)”
for “購 (kou),” are also effective in identifying the target kanji because they can reduce the
ambiguity.

Some screen readers (Lazar et al., 2007) already have functions for outputting distinctive ex-
planations for kanjis. A screen reader is a software application for visually impaired people
that reads aloud a text on a computer screen. This function enables visually impaired people
to use e-mail, read news, view Web pages, and operate other complex applications. However,
the existing screen readers use some distinctive explanations that do not make a target kanji
easily identifiable, such as “aya for1 aya-ori (綾織, twill)” for “綾 (aya).” “綾織 (aya-ori, twill)”
is not a word with which most people are familiar, and thus we cannot identify the target
kanji “綾 (aya)” easily. Watanabe et al. (2003) pointed out that the main factors that prevent
the users from identifying the target kanji are the low familiarity and the homophones of the
words used in the distinctive explanations.

Vocabulary and word familiarity vary among age groups, regions, and social backgrounds. It is
hard work to remake a distinctive explanation for each kanji in accordance with changes in the
target audience. We try to automate both the acquisition of vocabulary and word familiarity,
and the generation of the distinctive explanations.

1In fact, distinctive explanations are expressed by using a Japanese word “no” as in “kou-nyū no kou.” “no” is a
Japanese postposition that can represent a wide range of semantic relations. It is similar to “for” in English. In this
paper, we therefore refer to distinctive explanations by using “for” as in “kou for kou-nyū.”

1412



In this paper, we propose a method for automatically generating distinctive explanations for
a kanji, and aim to improve the kanji identification rate. Our system automatically generates
distinctive explanations using the knowledge of familiarity and homophones derived from a
large text corpus. Automatic methods for generating the distinctive explanation can easily
adapt to the users.

2 Distinctive explanation for kanji

With the growth of computers, screen readers that have functions for producing voice outputs
of distinctive explanations have become popular among visually impaired people. Accordingly,
people argued over the problem of what distinctive explanations should be outputted from
screen readers.

Ooyama et al. (1996) proposed a spoken explanation generator, PLANET. This system can ex-
plain a kanji, especially those used in peoples’ names, only by sound. When explaining, the
system uses the information such as words containing the target kanji and the components of
the kanji.

Watanabe et al. (2005a) manually produced distinctive explanations on the basis of children’s
vocabulary familiarity obtained by a kanji dictation survey. When producing distinctive expla-
nations, they prioritized words that had higher familiarity than others and no homophones.
Moreover, they avoided using negative expressions and English words like “kin2 for gold,” so
that generated distinctive explanations would be suitable for elementary school students. The
identification rate for their generated distinctive explanations was 14.1% higher than that for
the existing distinctive explanations in the experiments of kanji dictation involving elementary
school students.

Nishida et al. (2005) proposed distinctive explanations based on the meanings of a kanji. For
example, the traditional distinctive explanation of “情報 (jou-hou, information)” was “jou for
jou-netsu (情熱, passion)” and “hou for hou-koku (報告, report).” On the other hand, in dis-
tinctive explanations based on the meanings, “情報 (jou-hou, information)” was explained
as “i-n-fo-mē-sho-n (インフォメーション, information),” “chou-hou (諜報, intelligence),” or
“hi-mitsu-jou-hou (秘密情報, confidential information).” Experimental results showed no dif-
ferences between the identification rates of the traditional distinctive explanations and expla-
nations based on the semantics. Since those main target words are those that appear in a
thesaurus, we cannot easily compare them and our distinctive explanations.

Watanabe et al. (2005b) classified in detail the composition of the traditional distinctive ex-
planations derived from screen readers. Distinctive explanations can be classified into three
types in accordance with their configuration:

Type 1 consists of a word that includes the target kanji and the reading of the target kanji in
the word.

“kou for kou-nyū (購入, purchase)” for “購 (kou)”

Type 2 consists of the distinctive reading of the target kanji. This type uses the reading that
other kanjis never have.

“sakura (桜, cherry blossom)” for “桜 (sakura)”
2In Japanese, kin means gold.

1413



Type 3 uses the components of radicals of the target kanji or consists of meanings of the target
kanji that forms a word only by itself.

“kawa with sanzui3” for “河 (kawa)”

They reported that Type 1 distinctive explanations were most common. Type 1 is suitable for
use in statistical treatment, and therefore we aim to generate Type 1 distinctive explanations
automatically in this paper.

Watanabe et al. also investigated the factors that make it difficult to identify the target kanji
(Watanabe et al., 2003). We enumerate the major factors reported in their work:

Factor 1 The low familiarity of words such as “千代紙 (chi-yo-gami, Japanese paper with col-
ored figures).”

Factor 2 The presence of homophones such as “購買 (kou-bai, purchase)” and “勾配 (kou-bai,
gradient).”

Factor 3 The target kanji itself is difficult, such as “爾 (ji, thou).”

Factors 1 and 2 can be improved by selecting a suitable word for the distinctive explanation,
but Factor 3 cannot because of the difficulty of the target kanji itself. Our study aims to improve
the rate of identifying the target kanji from the distinctive explanation, and hence we focus on
Factors 1 and 2.

3 Automatic generation of distinctive explanation for kanji

We propose an interactive system that automatically generates distinctive explanations for a
kanji. Figure 1 shows the overview of our system. The first step outputs one Type 1 distinctive
explanation. If the user cannot recall a kanji, the second step outputs another distinctive
explanation.

The first step uses a single word that has high familiarity and few homophones. How-
ever, some kanjis are hard to identify from one word unambiguously; for example, “科
(ka).” While the most common words that include “科 (ka)” are “科学 (ka-gaku, science),”
“教科 (kyou-ka, subject),” and “単科 (tan-ka, single subject),” all have several homophones
such as “化学 (ka-gaku, chemistry)” for “科学 (ka-gaku),” “強化 (kyou-ka, reinforcement)”
for “教科 (kyou-ka),” and “炭化 (tan-ka, carbonization)” and “単価 (tan-ka, unit price)” for
“単科 (tan-ka, single subject),” and thus it is hard to identify “科 (ka)” unambiguously from
a Type 1 distinctive explanation. For such a kanji, our system proceeds to the second step,
and generates another distinctive explanation for the kanji by using a word that ensures a
high kanji identification rate when combined with the word presented by the first step of our
system.

The first example of the system’s input in Figure 1 is the kanji “購 (kou).” The system outputs
the distinctive explanation “kou for kou-nyū”by our first step and describes it to the user.
The user identifies the correct kanji “購 (kou)” from the distinctive explanation. The second
example of the system’s input is the kanji “科 (ka).” The system outputs the distinctive expla-
nation “ka for ka-gaku” by our first step and describes it to the user. The user cannot identify

3sanzui means “ .”

1414




 


 
 








! 





 
 
 



"
! 
#
$ 

$ 

  

  

  


 








!"

#$%$

$#$&

#$%$

Figure 1: The overview of our system. If “購 (kou)” is input, the first step outputs “kou for
kou-nyū.” In this case, the user will think of the correct kanji since there is no ambiguity. If “科
(ka)” is input, the first step outputs “ka for ka-gaku.” However, there are plural candidates such
as “科 (ka)” and “化 (ka).” In such case, the user asks our system to generate an additional
distinctive explanation. The second step then outputs "ka for gak-ka," and the user can identify
the correct kanji.

the correct kanji because the reading “ka-gaku” has many homophones. Then the user asks
our system to generate an additional distinctive explanation. Our system outputs the second
distinctive explanation “ka for gak-ka,” and the user identifies the correct kanji “科 (ka)” from
the two distinctive explanations.

3.1 Generation of distinctive explanations in the first step

The first step generates a Type 1 distinctive explanation as follows:

i. Extract words from the corpus that have more than two characters and include the target
kanji.

ii. Calculate the score for each word w:

score1(w)! p(w)α · u1(w)β , (1)

1415



where

p(w): the probability of w in the corpus,

u1(w): the ratio of the frequency of w to the frequency of all words in the corpus
that have the same reading as w,

α: a parameter that reflects the importance of familiarity (∈ [0, 1]),
β : a parameter that reflects the importance of not having homophones (∈
[0,1]).

The probability p(w) is calculated as follows:

p(w)!
c(w)∑

w′∈W c(w
′)

, (2)

where

c(w): the frequency of w in the corpus,

W : the set of words that appear in the corpus.

The ratio u1(w) is calculated in the following way:

u1(w)!
c(w)∑

w′∈H(w) c(w
′)

, (3)

where

H(w): the set of words that have the same reading as w.

iii. Select the word with the highest score and then use it to generate a Type 1 distinctive
explanation.

In Equation (1), p(w) represents the degree of familiarity and u1(w) represents the degree of
uniqueness. For example, the most common words that include “購 (kou)” are “購読 (kou-
doku, subscription),” “購入 (kou-nyū, purchase),” and “購買 (kou-bai, purchase).” While “購読
(kou-doku, subscription)” has higher probability than the other words, it has homophones such
as “鉱毒 (mining pollution).” u1(w) functions to reduce the score of such ambiguous words.
As a result, our system prioritizes the output of the distinctive explanation using the word “購
入 (kou-nyū, purchase)” rather than “購読 (kou-doku, subscription).”

3.2 Generation of distinctive explanations in the second step

The second step generates an additional distinctive explanation that reduces ambiguity when
combined with the distinctive explanation by the first step.

i. Extract words from the corpus that have more than two characters and include the target
kanji.

1416



ii. Give a score for each pair of the word selected in the first step w1, and a word extracted
in i. The score is calculated in the following way:

score2(w1, w)! score1(w1) · score1(w) · u2(w1, w)γ, (4)
where

u2(w1, w): the ratio of the number of the target kanjis to the number of the kanjis
that we can recall from the pairs composed of w1 and w,

γ: a parameter that reflects the importance of combination ambiguity (∈
[0,1]).

The ratio u2(w1, w) is calculated in the following way:

u2(w1, w)!
min(c(w1), c(w))∑

(w′1,w
′)∈C min(c(w

′
1), c(w

′))
, (5)

where

C: the set of candidate pairs of words that have the same reading as w1 and
w and can make the user recall a kanji.

iii. Select the word with the highest score and then generate a distinctive explanation by
using w besides w1.

Equation (4) consists of a product of score1(w1), score1(w), and u2(w1, w)γ. u2(w1, w)γ rep-
resents the uniqueness when using two words. For example, the distinctive explanation “ka for
ka-gaku” and “ka for tan-ka” evoke at least two kanjis: “科 (ka)” and “化 (ka).” The candidate
kanjis for the distinctive explanation “ka for ka-gaku” are “科 (ka)” from “科学 (ka-gaku, sci-
ence)” and “化 (ka)” from “化学 (ka-gaku, chemistry).” Similarly, those for “ka for tan-ka” are “
科 (ka)” from “単科 (tan-ka, single subject)” and “化 (ka)” from “炭化 (tan-ka, carbonization)”
and “価 (ka)” from “単価 (tan-ka, unit price).” Thus we have C = {(科学,単科 ), (化学,炭
化 )}. The term u2(x , y)γ reduces the scores of such ambiguous distinctive explanations. Our
system outputs distinctive explanations that are less ambiguous, such as “ka for ka-gaku” and
“ka for gak-ka.”

4 Experiments

4.1 Experimental Settings

We used three corpora in experiments:

• Google Japanese N-gram corpus (Google corpus)
• Yomiuri newspaper corpus (Yomiuri corpus)
• Balanced Corpus of Contemporary Written Japanese (BCCWJ)

The Google Japanese N-gram corpus (Kudo and Kazawa, 2007) was constructed from 20 bil-
lion Japanese sentences on the Web and consists of 255 billion words. The Yomiuri newspaper
corpus consists of 400 million words in Yomiuri newspaper articles from 1991 to 2004. The

1417



BCCWJ (Maekawa, 2008) is a balanced corpus of 100 million words of contemporary written
Japanese.

We used MeCab (Kudo et al., 2004), an open-source morphological analyzer, to separate the
corpus into words. We applied the IPA dictionary with the parameter estimated by Conditional
Random Fields (CRF) based on IPA corpus4. We also used the Simple Kana to Kanji conversion
program (SKK) dictionary5 to utilize words longer than those in the IPA dictionary. This is
because the words in the IPA dictionary tend to be too short for our method. For example,
although we want to use “炒め物 (ita-me-mono, fried food)” to generate a distinctive expla-
nation for “炒 (ita),” there is no entry for “炒め物” in the IPA dictionary, and thus “炒め物” is
divided into two words: “炒め (ita-me, fried)” and “物 (mono, object).” On the other hand,
there is an entry for “炒め物” in the SKK dictionary, and in such cases we consider the word as
a candidate word for generating distinctive explanations.

We used the kanjis selected from top 2,000 frequently occurring kanjis in the Google corpus for
experiments. This is because we want to focus on the performance of generating distinctive
explanations, and thus we want to ignore errors caused by Factor 3: the target kanji itself
is difficult. Note that since the total frequency of the 2,000 kanjis covered more than 99%
kanji occurrences, our experimental setting is very practical. We set the parameters (α,β ,γ)
to (0.1, 1.0,1.0) in accordance with the results of a preliminary experiment.

4.2 Comparison of the three corpora

We first conducted a preliminary experiment to evaluate distinctive explanations generated by
the first step to examine which corpus is the most preferable for our method. We prepared
four distinctive explanations for each kanji: three are generated by using each corpus (Google
corpus, Yomiuri corpus, and BCCWJ) and one is the distinctive explanation used in the screen
reader PC-Talker XP for comparison. We randomly selected 100 kanjis for an evaluation from
the 2,000 most frequently occurring kanjis that had Type 1 distinctive explanations in PC-
Talker XP such as “kou for kou-nyū (購入, purchase)” for “購 (kou).”

The distinctive explanations were evaluated by eight human subjects. These distinctive expla-
nations were written on paper, randomly shuffled, and shown to the subjects. Each subject
was shown only one distinctive explanation for each kanji. Since there were eight human sub-
jects and four types of distinctive explanations were generated for each kanji, each distinctive
explanation was evaluated by two subjects. The subjects were requested to think of the most
likely kanji from the presented distinctive explanation and to choose one from the following
choices:

a. I thought of a kanji that matched the target kanji.

b. I thought of a kanji that did not match the target kanji.

c. I could not think of any kanji.

We did not conduct a kanji dictation test when we evaluated the distinctive explanations.
Japanese speakers cannot always write out kanjis that they can identify, probably because of

4http://en.sourceforge.jp/projects/ipadic/
5http://openlab.ring.gr.jp/skk/index.html

1418



Google Yomiuri BCCWJ PC-Talker
corpus corpus XP

a 179 170 185 185
b 15 15 9 9
c 6 15 6 6

IR[%] 89.5 85.0 92.5 92.5

Table 1: The identification rates for three corpora.

the spread of computers, which let us input kanjis simply by selecting the correct one instead
of actually writing it. This situation is similar to the fact that some English speakers cannot
always spell familiar words correctly.

We calculated the identification rate (IR), i.e., the percentage of successfully identified kanji,
for each corpus, as follows:

IR=
n(a)

n(a) + n(b) + n(c)
× 100 [%] (6)

where n(x) is the number of times choice x is selected.

Table 1 shows the identification rates for three corpora. PC-Talker XP and our system based
on BCCWJ achieved the highest identification rate (92.5%). We conducted the McNemar’s test
and confirmed that there were significant differences at the 0.05 significance level between our
system with Yomiuri corpus and PC-Talker XP, and between our system with Yomiuri corpus and
with BCCWJ.

Table 2 shows the examples of distinctive explanations and their evaluation. Distinctive ex-
planations generated by the Yomiuri corpus (newspaper articles) tend to use difficult words
such as “gai for gai-bou (外貌, exterior)” generated for “貌 (bou)” and “gi for yo-gi-nai (余儀無
い, unavoidable)” generated for “儀 (gi),” while there are easier words such as “美貌 (bi-bou,
beauty)” and “儀式 (gi-shiki, ceremony).” This tendency would be one of the factors of the
lower identification rate of distinctive explanations generated by the Yomiuri corpus.

4.3 Evaluation of the proposed method

We then evaluated the proposed method with both steps. We used the output of PC-Talker XP
as a comparison. On the basis of the results in Sec. 4.2, we used BCCWJ as the corpus in
this experiment. We used 100 kanjis randomly selected from the 2,000 most frequent kanjis
that were not limited to kanjis that had Type 1 distinctive explanations in PC-Talker XP. Table
3 shows the number of kanjis for each type used in PC-Talker XP.

We evaluated 200 distinctive explanations: 100 generated from our method and 100 extracted
from PC-Talker XP. Sixty subjects were each shown 50 distinctive explanations. Thus each
distinctive explanation was evaluated by 15 subjects.

When evaluating our system, we first asked the subjects to think of a kanji from the distinctive
explanation generated by the first step described in the paper. If the subjects could not think
of a kanji, we asked the subjects to look at the distinctive explanation generated by the second
step and to think of a kanji. After that, we asked the subjects to choose one from the following:

1419



Kanji Google corpus Yomiuri corpus BCCWJ PC-Talker XP

儀
“gi for sou-gi” “gi for yo-gi-na-i” “gi for gi-shiki” “gi for gi-shiki”
葬儀 (2/2) 余儀無い (0/2) 儀式 (2/2) 儀式 (2/2)

funeral unavoidable ceremony ceremony

貌
“bou for bi-bou” “bou for gai-bou” “bou for bi-bou” “bou for bi-bou”
美貌 (2/2) 外貌 (0/2) 美貌 (2/2) 美貌 (2/2)

beauty exterior beauty beauty

感
“kan for kan-ji” “kan for kan-jiru” “kan for kan-jiru” “kan for kan-shin-suru”
感じ (0/2) 感じる (2/2) 感じる (2/2) 感心する (2/2)

feeling feel feel be impressed

遥
“you for you-hai” “you for you-hai” “you for you-hai” “haru for haru-ka-kanata”
遥拝 (0/2) 遥拝 (0/2) 遥拝 (0/2) 遥か彼方 (2/2)

worshipping from afar worshipping from afar worshipping from afar far away

餅
“hei for sen-bei” “mochi for kiri-mochi” “hei for sen-bei” “mochi for mochi-tsuki”
煎餅 (1/2) 切餅 (1/2) 煎餅 (2/2) 餅つき (1/2)
rice cracker sliced cracker rice cracker mochi pounding

欄
“ran for kū-ran” “ran for ran-kan” “ran for ran-kan” “ran for ran-gai”
空欄 (2/2) 欄干 (0/2) 欄干 (1/2) 欄外 (2/2)

blank parapet parapet margin

点
“ten for kyo-ten” “ten for kyo-ten” “ten for kan-ten” “ten for ten-sū”
拠点 (1/2) 拠点 (1/2) 観点 (0/2) 点数 (2/2)
stronghold stronghold standpoint score

輪
“yu for yu-nyū” “yu for yu-nyū” “yu for yu-nyū” “yu for yu-shutu-su-ru”
輸入 (2/2) 輸入 (2/2) 輸入 (2/2) 輸出する (2/2)
importation importation importation export

Table 2: Examples of distinctive explanations and their evaluation. “(n/2)” means n subjects
out of two chose a.

• I thought of a specific kanji from only the first distinctive explanation, and the kanji was
a1. correct, b1. wrong.

• I thought of a specific kanji from the first and the second distinctive explanation, and the
kanji was

a2. correct, b2. wrong.

• c. I could not think of any kanji.

To evaluate our whole system, we regarded a1 and a2 as positive answers and calculated the
identification rate (IR2) as follows:

IR2 =
n(a1) + n(a2)

n(a1) + n(b1) + n(a2) + n(b2) + n(c)
× 100. [%] (7)

We also evaluated the distinctive explanations generated only by the first step in our system
for comparison. For this evaluation, we regarded a1 as a positive answer and calculated the
identification rate (IR1) as follows:

IR1 =
n(a1)

n(a1) + n(b1) + n(a2) + n(b2) + n(c)
× 100. [%] (8)

1420



Type # Example

Type 1 93
“ka for ka-zei-su-ru (課税する, tax)”

“ken for ken-ka-su-ru (喧嘩する, fight)”
Type 2 0 -

Type 3 7
“yorokobi-wo-imi-suruka (happiness)”

“tsuchi-wo-hutatu-kasaneta kei (to stack soil on soil)”

Table 3: The number of kanjis for each type used in PC-Talker XP.

Our system using BCCWJ PC-Talker XP
a1 1,181 1,301
b1 28 58
a2 163 -
b2 22 -
c 106 141

IR[%] IR1: 78.7, IR2: 89.6 IRSR: 86.7

Table 4: Evaluation results of our system outputs and distinctive explanations in screen reader.

To evaluate the distinctive explanations in PC-Talker XP, we asked the subjects to choose one
from the following options:

a. I thought of a specific kanji that was correct.

b. I thought of a specific kanji that was wrong.

c. I could not think of any kanji.

For evaluating the screen reader, we regarded a as a positive answer and calculated the iden-
tification rate (IRSR) as follows:

IRSR =
n(a)

n(a) + n(b) + n(c)
× 100. [%] (9)

Table 4 shows the results. We confirmed that our whole system outperformed PC-Talker XP.
We conducted the McNemar’s test and confirmed that our whole system (IR2) and PC-Talker
XP significantly differed at the 0.05 level. Distinctive explanations generated by our system
seem to be longer and take more time to listen to than those of PC-Talker XP. However, users
do not always need to hear the entire distinctive explanation of our system to think of a kanji.
Table 5 shows the average length of distinctive explanations shown to the subjects. In 80.6 %6

of cases, the target kanjis were correctly thought of in the first step. In addition, the average
length of the first step’s output was shorter than that of distinctive explanations of PC-Talker
XP. The average length of our system output was 8.14, which was shorter than that of PC-Talker
XP, and thus the comparison of (IR2) and (IRSR) is fair.

The identification rate of the first step (IR1) was lower than both those of the screen reader
(IRSR) and the rate in Sec. 4.2 (IR). We think there are two reasons for this. The first

6(1,181+ 28)/1, 500= 0.806

1421



First step Second step The average length
Our system 6.80 13.93 8.14

PC-Talker XP - - 8.96

Table 5: The average lengths of distinctive explanations shown to the subjects.

Kanji Our system PC-Talker XP
First step Second step

悟
“go for kaku-go” “sato for sato-ri” “go for kaku-go, sato-ru”
覚悟 (9/15) 悟り (14/15) 覚悟;悟る (13/15)
preparation enlightenment preparation; to realize

課
“ka for ka-dai” “ka for ka-zei” “ka for ka-zei-suru”
課題 (13/15) 課税 (15/15) 課税する (6/15)
assignment taxation tax

灌
“kan for yu-kan” “kan for kan-gai-you-sui” “kan for kan-gai-suru, soso-gu”
湯灌 (1/15) 灌漑用水 (7/15) 灌漑する;灌ぐ (1/15)

wash a dead body irrigation irrigate; pour

藍
“ran for ga-ran” “ai for ai-hara” “ai for ai-iro”
伽藍 (0/15) 藍原 (4/15) 藍色 (12/15)

temple family name indigo blue

圭
“kei for kei-ji-rou” “kei for kei-ichi” “tsuchi-wo-hutatu-kasaneta kei”
圭二郎 (2/15) 圭一 (4/15) (11/15)

first name first name to stack soil on soil

嘩
“ka for hū-hu-gen-ka” “ka for ō-gen-ka” “ken for ken-ka-suru”
夫婦喧嘩 (4/15) 大喧嘩 (5/15) 喧嘩する (1/15)
marital quarrel big fight fight

嘉
“ka for ka-ei” “ka for ka-de-na” “yoroko-bi-wo-i-mi-suru ka”
嘉永 (0/15) 嘉手納 (0/15) 嘉 (1/15)

era name place-name that means happiness

Table 6: Examples of distinctive explanations generated by the whole our system and distinc-
tive explanations in PC-Talker XP and their evaluation. “(n/15)” means n subjects out of 15
chose a positive answer.

is the differences between evaluation methods. While the prior evaluation (IR) contained the
possibility of positive evaluation when subjects thought of multiple kanjis, this evaluation (IR1)
did not. The second is the use of different kanjis. While kanjis are limited to those that have
Type 1 distinctive explanations in PC-Talker XP in the prior evaluation (IR), all kanjis were
allowed in this evaluation. Even for the kanji unsuitable for the Type 1 distinctive explanation,
our system has to output Type 1 distinctive explanations.

Table 6 shows examples of distinctive explanations and their evaluation. We confirmed that
our system generates a better distinctive explanation for “課 (ka)” and “灌 (kan).” In the case
of “課 (ka),” 13 subjects out of 15 successfully identified “課 (ka)” from distinctive explana-
tions generated by the first step. However, two subjects could not identify the target kanji.
This would be because our system outputted the distinctive explanation using the word “課
題 (ka-dai, assignment),” which has homophones such as “過大 (ka-dai, excessive)” and “仮
題 (ka-dai, a tentative title).” Since the remaining two identified the correct kanji by using
distinctive explanations generated by the second step, we confirmed the effectiveness of the

1422



proposed two-step method. On the other hand, only six subjects identified kanji from distinc-
tive explanations of the screen reader. The cause of the low identification rate of the screen
reader may be that subjects thought of “ka-sei-suru (加勢する, assist)” instead of “ka-zei-suru
(課税する, tax).” In the case of “灌 (kan),” only one subject out of 15 identified “灌 (kan)”
from our first step or the screen reader. However, when other subjects looked at distinctive
explanations generated by the second step, seven identified “灌 (kan).” It can be inferred from
these results that “灌 (kan)” is difficult to identify but our two-step approach is effective in
such a case.

Conversely, the examples where our system was worse than the screen reader were the cases
of “藍 (ai or ran)” and “圭 (kei).” In the case of “藍 (ai or ran),” our first step could not
make anyone identify the kanji. In addition, even our second step made only four subjects
identify the kanji. However, the screen reader succeeded in making 12 subjects identify the
kanji. This is because our system cannot capture the specific features of “藍 (ai or ran):” in
Japanese, “藍色 (ai-iro, indigo blue)” is a color. While the screen reader used words related
to the color, our system used “伽藍 (ga-ran, temple)” and “藍原 (ai-hara, which is a Japanese
family name).” The neither word includes information about the color. Such kanji-specific
information is important but our system cannot use it well. For “圭 (kei),” our system used
ambiguous words, and most subjects failed to identify the kanji7. In contrast, the screen reader
achieved a high identification rate for this kanji, by using the distinctive explanation “Write土
on top of土 (tsu-chi, soil).” The use of kanji components or radicals as in this example by the
screen reader, on top of our method, will further improve the identification performance.

Although we selected the top 2,000 frequent kanjis for the candidates of evaluation in order
to eliminate the difficult kanji, some difficult kanjis still appeared. For example, in the case of
“嘉8 (ka),” our system and the screen reader made barely any subjects identify the kanji. We
think that this is because “嘉 (ka)” itself is difficult.

Conclusion

In this paper, we proposed a method for automatically generating distinctive explanations for
a kanji using a text corpus. The proposed method took into account familiarity and homo-
phones of kanjis. As a result of human evaluation, we confirmed that distinctive explanations
generated by our system outperformed those in existing screen readers.

Our future work involves incorporation of intonation, application to Chinese, and user adap-
tation. Intonation of words can help generate good distinctive explanations. For example, “
橋 (hashi, bridge)” and “箸 (hashi, chopstick)” have the same readings but different intona-
tions, so we think intonation can be a clue for identifying a kanji. Kanjis are used in not only
Japanese but also Chinese. Since our proposed method is language-independent, our method
can be applied to distinctive explanations for Chinese. Finally, we are considering generating
distinctive explanations that consider the user attributes. For example, users who have stud-
ied the law will be familiar with legal terms but not medical terms. To adapt our system to
different users, we can select a corpus that is suitable for them.

7“Kei-ji-rou” has homophones such as “慶二郎,” “敬二郎,” and “啓二郎” and “kei-ichi” have homophones such as “
恵一,” “慶一,” and “啓一.” All are Japanese male names.

8“嘉 (ka)” means happiness, but this kanji is rarely used.

1423



References

Kudo, T. and Kazawa, H. (2007). Japanese web n-gram corpus version 1. Google/Linguistic
Data Consortium.

Kudo, T., Yamamoto, K., and Matsumoto, Y. (2004). Applying conditional random fields to
Japanese morphological analysis. In Proceedings of EMNLP, pages 230–237.

Lazar, J., Allen, A., Kleinman, J., and Malarkey, C. (2007). What frustrates screen reader users
on the web: A study of 100 blind users. Int. J. Hum. Comput. Interaction, pages 247–269.

Maekawa, K. (2008). Balanced corpus of contemporary written Japanese. Proceedings of the
6th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, pages 101–102.

Nishida, M., Horiuchi, Y., and Ichikawa, A. (2005). Kanji transformation using semantic infor-
mation for blind people. IEICE technical report. Welfare Information technology (In Japanese),
105(186):1–6.

Ooyama, Y., Asano, H., and Matsuoka, K. (1996). Spoken-style explanation generator for
japanese kanji using a text-to-speech system. 3:1369–1372.

Watanabe, T., Teruyoshi, F., Watanabe, B., Sawada, M., and Kamata, K. (2003). A consider-
ation on shosaiyomi (explanatory expressions) used in screen readers for visually-impaired
persons. Technical report of IEICE. HCS (In Japanese), 102(599):25–28.

Watanabe, T., Watanabe, B., Okada, S., Yamaguchi, T., Oosugi, N., and Sawada, M. (2005a).
A study on shosaiyomi of screen readers kanji writing test using newly devised shosaiyomi.
IEICE technical report. Welfare Information technology (In Japanese), 105(373):7–12.

Watanabe, T., Watanebe, B., Fujinuma, T., Osugi, N., Sawada, M., and Kamata, K. (2005b).
Major factors that affect comprehensibility of shosaiyomi (explanatory expressions) used in
screen readers: Consideration based on classification of shosaiyomi and kanji writing test.
The transactions of the Institute of Electronics, Information and Communication Engineers. D-I
(In Japanese), 88(4):891–899.

1424


