



















































Method Mention Extraction from Scientific Research Papers


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Technical Papers, pages 1211–1222,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Method mention extraction from scientific research papers

Hospice Houngbo Robert E. Mercer
Department of Computer Science

The University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada
hhoungbo@uwo.ca, mercer@csd.uwo.ca

ABSTRACT
Scientific publications contain many references to method terminologies used during scientific
experiments. New terms are constantly created within the research community, especially in the
biomedical domain where thousands of papers are published each week. In this study we report
our attempt to automatically extract such method terminologies from scientific research papers,
using rule-based and machine learning techniques. We first used some linguistic features to
extract fine-grained method sentences from a large biomedical corpus and then applied well
established methodologies to extract the method terminologies.

We focus the present study on the extraction of method phrases that contain an explicit mention
of method keywords such as (algorithm, technique, analysis, approach and method) and
other less explicit method terms such as Multiplex Ligation dependent Probe Amplification.
Our initial results show an average F-score of 91.89 for the rule-based system and 78.26 for the
Conditional Random Field-based machine learning system.

KEYWORDS: terminology extraction, rule-based, machine learning, corpus, linguistic features.

1211



1 Introduction

The methods and techniques used during scientific experiments and reported in scientific papers
are often expressed in different forms. They can be in the form of a semantic sequence (see
(Hunston, 2008) containing the word method (“rank-based normalization method” in Sentence
1), the word technique (“Non-negative matrix factorization technique” in Sentence 2), the word
analysis (“discriminant analysis” in Sentence 3), and so on.

Sentence 1: In order to compare U133A and U133 Plus 2.0 data we further normalized the data
with a rank-based normalization method.

Sentence 2: In the Bioinformatics field a great deal of interest has been given to Non-negative
matrix factorization technique NMF due to its capability of providing new insights and
relevant information about the complex latent relationships in experimental data sets.

Sentence 3: The relative performance of the four IBDQ dimensions in distinguishing best patients
with minor symptoms from those with severe was studied by discriminant analysis.

A method mention can be a terminology term such as the phrase Multiplex Ligation dependent
Probe Amplification in Sentence 4.

Sentence 4: Recently <Multiplex Ligation dependent Probe Amplification > <MLPA > has
also been used to quantify copy number classes.

A method expression can also be a verb phrase referring to an action performed during an
experiment, such as the verb phrase to search for in sentence 5.

Sentence 5: These sequences were used to search for the nearly invariant nucleotides of the
inverse core AAC and core GTT sites separated by a distance typical of previously identified
attC sites to bp .

In some cases, the context in which the method terminologies are used in the text can contain
valuable information about the method mention, such as synonyms, definition, and other
relations with entities in the text.

The automatic extraction of terminologies has been the focus of many studies in the past
(Maynard and Ananiadou, 2000), (Zhang and Wu, 2012), but not many works have focussed on
automatic extraction of method mentions. We believe that the extraction of method expressions
from research papers can help to build lexical resources that can be used in various NLP tasks
on research papers.

For example, the automatic recognition of method expressions can help to easily detect method
sentences and classify them into their rhetorical categories as in (Agarwal and Yu, 2009).

In addition, the automatic extraction of method mentions and the information surrounding
them can be useful in dictionary building, ontology population and glossary creation. Also, it
can help in the task of knowledge discovery from scientific papers, as any mention of methods
and techniques used in that paper can easily be presented to readers without them having to
read the whole text.

1212



The extraction of contextual information around the method mentions can be useful in building
Question-answering and focussed text summarization systems.

In this study, we present our attempt to extract method terminologies from sentences. Also
we showed how we can use a terminology context to extract other relevant information about
the term. We define “other relevant information” to be the syntactic and semantic relationship
between the term and other words. It may be a definition, a variant terminology and so on.

This study doesn’t take into account the extraction of verbs as method mention in scientific
research papers.

The contribution of our work is twofold. First we used some linguistic filters to automatically
select thousands of fine-gained method sentences that have a high probability to contain
methodology terminologies; then we used the context of such sentences to extract terminologies
and other information about them.

The rest of this paper is organized as follow. The next section reviews some related works. In
Section 3, a detailed methodology of method mentions extraction techniques is presented. In
Section 4, the results are described. We conclude the paper by a summary and directions for
future work.

2 Related work

Automatic term extraction is an important component of many natural language processing
systems. It is often used in applications such as knowledge discovery, knowledge management,
automatic text indexing, and so on. Many studies have been conducted on the recognition
of terminologies from research papers, especially in the biological domains where new terms
are created constantly. These studies primarily focussed on the extraction of domain specific
concepts such as nouns and collocations. But it is hasn’t been possible to apply a general rules
to extract all the terms.

Previous studies on automatic term extraction have been made possible with the availability
of many language resources and large electronic corpora. Three main approaches are used in
terminology extraction, namely, linguistics-based approaches, statistical approaches and hybrid
approaches.

2.1 Linguistics-based approach

A term from a terminology is often a unit of meaning related to a specific field or domain
of study. It can be a single word, such as clustering, or a compound expression made up of
individual terms, such as Hidden Markov Model. Some terms in a terminology can follow
comprehensive rules which can help with their generalization.

With the linguistics-based approach, candidate terminology is filtered by linguistic features
using morphological analysis, such as part of speech (POS). Complex terms are extracted using
shallow parsing and dependency analysis between words in the sentence (Bourigault, 1992).
(Dagan and Church, 1994) limited the candidate terminology to a string that represents the
pattern of noun sequences. Good results can be achieved in small corpora using linguistic
methods, but due to the shortage of patterns, recall can be low and it is difficult to generalize
these techniques across fields and languages.

1213



2.2 Statistical approach and machine learning approach

Statistical approaches are based on statistical information, such as the frequency of terms
appearing in the corpus. As already noted in (Zhang and Wu, 2012), statistical features can
include term document frequency and inverse document frequency TF*IDF (Maedche and
Staab, 2000), KF*IDF (Xu et al., 2002), C-value/NC-value (Frantzi et al., 2000) and so on. Term
extraction is based on the computation of the Unithood – i.e. a degree of strength or stability of
syntagmatic combinations or collocations, and Termhood – i.e. the degree that a linguistic unit
is related to a domain-specific concept (Kageura and Umino, 1996) of the terminology.

Termhood calculation is often based on the frequency of the term in the paper or a given
baseline corpus.

(Church and Hanks, 1990) used Mutual Information (MI) to compute Unithood, (Dunning,
1993) used LogL , and (Patry and Langlais, 2005) computed left/right entropy to extract
unithood candidates. When computing termhood, methods such as TF*IDF (Maedche and
Staab, 2000), DR-D (Velardi et al., 2001), C-value/NC value (Frantzi et al., 2000)) and Domain
Component Feature Set (DCFS) (Zhang and Sui, 2007) are employed, as reported in (Zhang
and Wu, 2012).

2.3 Hybrid approach

Linguistics-based and statistical approaches have their own advantages and disadvantages.
They are often integrated to extract terminology. There are two ways to combine them. One
way is to extract candidate terms with linguistics methods and then if no terms are found then
the statistical methods are applied. (Daille, 1996) used the linguistic methods to get candidate
terms and set them as the input of statistical models. Then statistical methods such as MI and
LogL are used to get final terms.

The other way is to obtain candidate terms using statistical methods first and then use linguistic
methods to discard those terms that are inconsistent with linguistic patterns. (Maynard and
Ananiadou, 2000) extracted multi-word terms using a thesaurus and the semantic Web concept
to get the semantic and category information, and then integrated it with the statistical and
syntactic information in the corpora. Different terminology extraction toolkits can also be
integrated to extract terminology besides the integration of linguistics and statistics methods.
(Vivaldi and Rodriguez, 2001) integrated different term extraction tools using simple voting
and the results were better than that with single term extraction tools. (Vivaldi et al., 2001)
improved the previously mentioned voting approach, got the best integration strategy with
Boosting algorithm and improved the performance of terminology extraction based on the
hybrid approach.

3 Methodology

3.1 Corpus creation

The goal of this study is to extract the methods and techniques used in biomedical research
papers in order to build a lexical resource comprising the name, the variants and definition of
such methods and techniques as they are mentioned and used in research articles. The first
task consists of the gathering of a comprehensive corpus that is large enough to contain an
important number of method mentions and information about how they are used in the papers.
One way is to select some research papers and scan through each of them to extract candidate

1214



“method sentences” manually. Another way is to use filters to automatically select in a large
repository of papers, “method sentences” that we believe are about the methods or techniques
used in the paper as well as the context of such sentences. We define the context of a “method
sentence” to be a window of sentences coming after or before them. The first option has proved
in the past to be more precise, but very difficult to implement. In fact, a manual information
extraction task can be tedious and time-consuming and requires many specialized skills and
domain experts. It is therefore recommended to use automatic extraction techniques whenever
it is possible. Since our purpose is to find as many relevant sentences as possible, it is obvious
that we cannot rely on existing corpora to achieve our goal.

Some recent works have focussed on the classification of sentences from biomedical articles into
the IMRAD (Introduction, Methods, Research, and, Discussion) categories. In their attempt to
classify biomedical research papers into these categories (Agarwal and Yu, 2009) used a corpus
of 1131 sentences. Of these sentences, 389 were labelled Introduction, 363 were labelled
Methods, 273 were labelled Results and 106 were labelled Discussion. Even though the corpus
contained “method” sentences, very few contain the mention of the techniques used in the
paper. Also, the context of the sentence was not retrieved. (Liakata et al., 2012) used a corpus
of 265 articles from biochemistry and chemistry annotated at the sentence level by experts in
the domains. Even though the corpus contains 8404 method sentences, many sentences belong
to the same papers and are about the same methods or techniques. For instance 10 consecutive
sentences can be annotated to belong to the method category. Those sentences usually refer
to the same method or technology and some of them may not even contain any mention of a
method. Besides, few of the sentences contain a definition of the techniques used in the papers.

Based on the study of the corpora mentioned above, we deemed it necessary to build a different
corpus that contains as many method sentences as possible and a definition or a usage context
of the method mention.

We relied on some linguistic concepts such as anaphoric relations to produce our fine-grained
method corpus.

In fact, most demonstrative noun phrases are anaphoric; therefore a sentence that begins
with the demonstrative noun phase “This method” is anaphoric and its antecedents are likely
to be found in previous sentences. (Torii and Vijay-Shanker, 2005) reported their work on
anaphora resolution of demonstrative noun phrases in Medline abstracts, and found that nearly
all antecedents of such demonstrative phrases can be found within two sentences. On the other
hand, (Hunston, 2008) reported that interpreting recurring phrases in a large corpus enables us
to capture the consistency in meaning as well as the role of specific words in such phrases. So,
the recurring semantic sequence “this method” in the Pubmed corpus can help us to capture
valuable information in the context of their usage.

To build our corpus we therefore search for sentences starting with “This method” in the PubMed
article repository as well as the sentences immediately preceding them. Then we collected the
pairs of sentences.

Sentence 6 in Example 1 contains the mention of the method and Sentence 7 contains its usage
and definition context.

Example 1

Sentence 6 : The Ortholuge method reported here appears to significantly improve the specificity

1215



( precision ) of high-throughput ortholog prediction for both bacterial and eukaryotic species
.

Sentence 7 : This method , and its associated software , will aid those performing various
comparative genomics-based analyses , such as the prediction of conserved regulatory elements
upstream of orthologous genes .

We can see that Sentence 6 is talking about the method and Sentence 7 is a reference to the
method mention and how it is used. Combining both sentences we therefore have sufficient
information to extract the “method” mention, its usage and its benefits.

We can then derive such information to fill lexical components such as:

• Method Mention: Ortholuge method
• Usage/Role: comparative genomics-based analyses/ prediction of conserved regula-

tory elements upstream of orthologous genes.

Example2

Sentence 8 : An alternative method for predicting protein function is the Phylogenetic profile
method, also known as the Co-Conservation method , which rests on the premise that
functionally related proteins are gained or lost together over the course of evolution [ 4 ] .

Sentence 9 : This method predicts functional interactions between pairs of proteins in a target
organism by determining whether both proteins are consistently present or absent across a
set of reference genomes.

In Example 2, it is possible to extract the following information:

• Method : Phylogenetic profile method
• Variant/ also known as:Co-Conservation method
• Usage: for predicting protein function / predicts functional interactions between

pairs of proteins
• How: by determining whether both proteins are consistently present or absent across

a set of reference genomes.

The information that we can derive from this pair is sufficient enough to create lexical resources
that can be used in many natural language processing tasks.

Using the retrieval technique mentioned above, we have been able to retrieve about 6500 such
pairs of sentences from 189 different journals and 2000 papers.

We limit the scope of this study to the extraction and recognition of the method terminologies,
due to time constraints.

3.2 Gold Standard datasets

We created 2 sets of gold standards with sentences taken only from BiomedCentral journals.
The first gold standard comprises 918 pairs of sentences containing the first category of method
mention – i.e. terminology units ending with a method keyword. The second gold standard
comprises 122 pairs of sentences of method mentions that don’t contain a method keyword. In

1216



each gold standard, we assumed that the method mention is in the first sentence and the other
information about its usage is in the second sentence.

We used grammatical rules to extract the first category (method mentions that contain keywords,
such as algorithm, technique, analysis, approach and method) and machine learning techniques
to extract the second category of method mention (those that don’t contain the above keywords).

When a method keyword is not explicitly mentioned in a sentence containing a method mention,
it is not obvious to apply general grammatical rule to recognize it as the words composing it
can be of various forms. In the following sentences:

Sentence 10 : Enault and colleagues proposed an improved < phylogenetic profile > based
on a < normalized Blastp bit score >.

Sentence 11 : Another way to obtain suboptimal solutions from a < HMM > is to do < HMM
sampling >.

Sentence 12 : In this paper we introduce a < Bootstrap procedure > to test the null
hypothesis that each gene has the same relevance between two conditions where the
relevance is represented by the Shapley value of a particular coalitional game defined on
a microarray data set .

we can notice that the different method mentions - < phylogenetic profile >, < normalized Blastp
bit score > < HMM >, < Bootstrap procedure > are all of different word shapes. Also when
most of them are nouns phrases, they can be confused with other noun phrases in the sentence.
We thus believed that the extraction of this type of method mentions can be viewed as a named
entity recognition task (Maynard et al., 2001), (Palmer and Day, 1997).

For this second task, we transformed each sentence into the BIO format (Table 1). There are
284 manual-tagged terms, 122 sentences, 2871 words and punctuations.

In Table 2 we shows the number of sentences in each dataset.

Enault and colleagues proposed
an improved < phylogenetic
profile > based on a <
normalized Blastp bit score >

Enault O
and O
colleagues O
proposed O
phylogenetic B-method
profile I-method
based O
on O
a O
normalized B-method
Blastp I-method
bit I-method
score I-method
. O

Table 1: Representation of a method sentence in the BIO format.

1217



Category (keywords) Number of sentences Proportion
Method 439 42%
Analysis 200 19%
Model 63 6%
Algorithm 73 7%
Approach 145 14%
Other (Machine learning corpus) 122 12%
Total 1040 100%

Table 2: Corpus statistics (combining both datasets).

3.3 Rule-based extraction

Most of the method mentions in the first category can be represented by the following examples:

1. rank-based normalization method
2. HRV power spectral analysis
3. Non-negative matrix factorization technique
4. linear regression analysis
5. Newton-type algorithm
6. tube group amplification approach
7. progressive alignment algorithm
8. metabolite profiling approach coupling mass spectrometry
9. profile-based HMM method

10. multifactor-dimensionality reduction MDR method

As we can notice these are simple grammatical patterns that can be extracted with simple rules.

1. They can start and continue either with an adjective or a noun.
2. They can continue either with an adjective or a noun.
3. They end with a method keyword.

These rules can be represented by the following regular expression:

(Adjective | Noun)+(method | analysis | algorithm | approach| model)

To extract such patterns, we first used the Genia tagger (Tsuruoka et al., 2005), a Part-of-Speech
tagger trained on a biomedical corpus, to tag every word in the sentence. Then, we used the
rules to extract all phrases and terminologies that correspond to the above mentioned patterns.
The results are presented in the Result section.

3.4 Machine learning and feature extraction

3.4.1 Feature extraction

The feature pool includes:

1. Word feature

The word itself.

2. Part-of-speech tags

We used a POS tagger (the Genia tagger) to tag each word in the sentence.

1218



3. Word-shape features

We check whether the word is lower case, upper case or has both lower case and upper
case letters.

These features include: isAllCaps, StartWithCap, isAllLowerCase, isMixedCase.

4. Position features

We checked if the word is at the beginning of sentence (BOS), at the end of sentence
(EOS), Not Beginning of Sentence (!BOS), Not Ending of Sentence (!EOS).

5. Token prefixes and suffixes features

We extract the prefixes and suffixes for each word. These include the first four prefixes
and the last four prefixes for each word.

6. Bigram features

For each sentence we extracted bigrams containing only nouns and adjectives.

3.4.2 Conditional Random Field (CRF)

To train the model, we used Conditional Random Field machine learning on 90 % of the dataset
and we tested on 10 % of the dataset.

CRF is a machine learning model proposed by (Lafferty et al., 2001). It is widely used in word
segmentation, part-of-speech tagging, chunking recognition, named entity recognition and so
on.

Conditional Random Fields (CRF) model is a state-of-the-art sequence labeling method, which
can use the features of documents more sufficiently and effectively. As we said earlier, non-
explicit method mention extraction can be considered as a task of entity recognition to which
string labeling techniques can be successfully applied.

4 Results and Discussion

The experimental results used 924 for the rule-based task and 122 sentences for the machine
learning task. Table 3 shows the performance of the two tasks. As we could expect recall is very
high (100 %) for the rule-based task because every sentence in the dataset contains a method
keyword. Our rules were able to recognize every noun phrase and adjective phase ending with
a method keyword. Precision is 85.40, which is not bad. Some of the errors came from the
tagger. We have spotted these errors and we will remove them in future study For the machine
learning task, precision is 81.8 percent, recall is 75 and F-score is 78.26 percent. Features such
as word shape, POS, and noun-bigrams performed better than the position features. Also some
of the errors came from the all-lower-case terms as they tend to be confused with similar words
in the sentence. Table 3 shows the performance of both systems. We believe that the scores
can be improved with better linguistic filters in the case of the first task and a better feature
selection for the second task.

System Precision Recall F-Measure
Rule-based 85.40 100 91.89
Machine Learning 81.8 75.00 78.26

Table 3: Precision, Recall, F-measure of the Various Methods.

1219



Our work can be compared to (Zhang et al., 2008) which uses CRF for automatic keyword
extraction from documents; they reported promising results (F-score of 51.25 percent) on a
Chinese corpus.

It can also be compared to (Zhang and Wu, 2012), which uses a multi-level termhood method
to extract terminology candidates from a bilingual corpus. Their system achieves an F-score
of 79.6% with CRF. Both works use similar techniques to ours, but most of the terminology
extraction tasks are performed using a Chinese corpus.

5 Conclusions and future work

In this paper we have first presented a simple approach to extract fine-grained method sentences
from large scientific corpora. We have also explored two established techniques to automatically
extract method terminologies from method sentences. Our results showed that we can extract
most of these terms using simple grammatical patterns. A few other terms can be extracted with
machine learning techniques. A brief study of the corpus showed that the context of the method
mentions can help in the extraction of important information about the method term. Our
future work will then be to use the whole corpus to extract such information that is essential in
the building of NLP resources such as glossaries, ontologies and specialist lexicons.

References

Agarwal, S. and Yu, H. (2009). Automatically classifying sentences in full-text biomedical
articles into introduction, methods, results and discussion. Bioinformatics, 25(23):3174–3180.

Bourigault, D. (1992). Surface grammatical analysis for the extraction of terminological noun
phrases. In Proceedings of the 14th conference on Computational linguistics - Volume 3, COLING
’92, pages 977–981, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Church, K. W. and Hanks, P. (1990). Word association norms, mutual information, and
lexicography. Computational Linguistics, 16(1):22–29.

Dagan, I. and Church, K. W. (1994). Termight: Identifying and translating technical terminol-
ogy. In ANLP, pages 34–40.

Daille, B. (1996). Study and implementation of combined techniques for automatic extraction
of terminology. In Klavans, J. and Resnik, P., editors, The Balancing Act: Combining Symbolic
and Statistical Approaches to Language, pages 29–36. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Dunning, T. (1993). Accurate methods for the statistics of surprise and coincidence. Comput.
Linguist., 19(1):61–74.

Frantzi, K., Ananiadou, S., and Mima, H. (2000). Automatic recognition of multi-word terms:.
the C-value/NC-value method. International Journal on Digital Libraries, 3(2):115–130.

Hunston, S. (2008). Starting with the small words patterns, lexis and semantic sequences.
International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 13(3):271–295.

Kageura, K. and Umino, B. (1996). Methods of automatic term recognition: a review. Termi-
nology, 3(2):259–289.

1220



Lafferty, J. D., McCallum, A., and Pereira, F. C. N. (2001). Conditional random fields: Proba-
bilistic models for segmenting and labeling sequence data. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth
International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML ’01, pages 282–289, San Francisco, CA,
USA. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.

Liakata, M., Saha, S., Dobnik, S., Batchelor, C. R., and Rebholz-Schuhmann, D. (2012).
Automatic recognition of conceptualization zones in scientific articles and two life science
applications. Bioinformatics, 28(7):991–1000.

Maedche, A. and Staab, S. (2000). Mining ontologies from text. In Proc. of Knowledge
Engineering and Knowledge Management (EKAW 2000), LNAI 1937, pages 169–189. Springer.

Maynard, D. and Ananiadou, S. (2000). TRUCKS: a model for automatic multi-word term
recognition. volume 8, pages 101––125.

Maynard, D., Tablan, V., Ursu, C., Cunningham, H., and Wilks, Y. (2001). Named entity
recognition from diverse text types. In In Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing 2001
Conference, Tzigov Chark.

Palmer, D. D. and Day, D. S. (1997). A statistical profile of the named entity task. In
Proceedings of the fifth conference on Applied natural language processing, ANLC ’97, pages
190–193, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Patry, A. and Langlais, P. (2005). Corpus-based terminology extraction. In 7th International
Conference on Terminology and Knowledge Engineering, pages 313–321, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Torii, M. and Vijay-Shanker, K. (2005). Anaphora resolution of demonstrative noun phrases in
medline abstracts. In Procedings of PACLING 2005, pages 332–339.

Tsuruoka, Y., Tateishi, Y., Kim, J.-D., Ohta, T., McNaught, J., Ananiadou, S., and ichi Tsujii,
J. (2005). Developing a robust part-of-speech tagger for biomedical text. In Bozanis, P. and
Houstis, E. N., editors, Panhellenic Conference on Informatics, volume 3746 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 382–392. Springer.

Velardi, P., Missikoff, M., and Basili, R. (2001). Identification of relevant terms to support
the construction of domain ontologies. In Proceedings of the ACL 2001 Workshop on Human
Language Technology and Knowledge Management, pages 5:1–5:8, Toulouse.

Vivaldi, J., Màrquez, L., and Rodríguez, H. (2001). Improving term extraction by system
combination using boosting. In Proceedings of the 12th European Conference on Machine
Learning, EMCL ’01, pages 515–526, London, UK. Springer-Verlag.

Vivaldi, J. and Rodriguez, H. (2001). Improving term extraction by combining different
techniques. Terminology, 7(1):31–48.

Xu, F., Kurz, D., Piskorski, J., and Schmeier, S. (2002). A domain adaptive approach to
automatic acquisition of domain relevant terms and their relations with bootstrapping. In 3rd
International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, page 7pp. European Language
Resources Association.

Zhang, C., Wang, H., Liu, Y., Wu, D., Liao, Y., and Wang, B. (2008). Automatic keyword
extraction from documents using conditional random fields. In Journal of Computational
Information Systems, pages 1169–1180. Binary Information Press.

1221



Zhang, C. and Wu, D. (2012). Bilingual terminology extraction using multi-level termhood.
The Electronic Library, 30(2):295–309.

Zhang, Q. L., Q. L. and Sui, Z. F. (2007). Measuring termhood in automatic terminology
extraction. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Natural Language Processing and
Knowledge Engineering, pages 328–335. IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ.

1222


