



















































Employing Morphological Structures and Sememes for Chinese Event Extraction


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Technical Papers, pages 1619–1634,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Employing Morphological Structures and Sememes for 
Chinese Event Extraction 

LI Pei Feng and ZHOU Guo Dong

 

School of Computer Science & Technology, Soochow University , Suzhou, China, 215006 

{pfli, gdzhou}@suda.edu.cn 

ABSTRA CT 

Current Chinese event extract ion systems suffer much from the low recall due to unknown 

triggers. To resolve this problem, this paper firstly introduces morphological structures to better 

represent the compositional semantics inside Chinese triggers and then proposes a mechanism to 

automatically identify  the head morpheme (either verb  or noun) as the governing sememe of a 

trigger. Finally, it proposes a mechanism of combining the morphological structures and 

sememes of Chinese words to infer unknown triggers to improve the recall of the Chinese event 

extraction system. Evaluation on the ACE 2005 Chinese corpus justifies the effectiveness of our 

approach over a state-of-the-art system. 

 

形态结构和义原在中文事件抽取中的应用 

由于存在大量未知的触发词，当前的中文事件抽取系统受限于它的低召回率。为了解决这
个问题，本文首先引入形态结构来更好地表示隐含在中文触发词内部的组合语义，然后提
出了一个自动识别触发词中作为支配义原的核心词素（动词或名词）的机制。最后，本文
提出了一个结合了中文词语的形态结构和义原去推测未知触发词的方法，用于提高中文事
件抽取系统的召回率。在ACE 2005中文语料上的实验验证了我们方法的性能超越了目前
最好的中文事件抽取系统。  

KEYWORDS: Chinese event extraction; Morphological structure; Governing sememe; Trigger 

identification; Head morpheme. 

Keywords in L2: 中文事件抽取; 形态结构; 支配语义; 触发词识别; 核心语素  

                                                                 
 Corresponding author 

1619



1 Introduction 

As a compromise to natural language understanding, Information Extract ion (IE) aims to extract 

structured informat ion (e .g., entities, relat ions and events) from a text. Event extract ion, a classic 

subtask in IE, is to  recognize event trigger mentions of a predefined event type and their 

participants and attributes . While most studies in the literature focus on English event extract ion, 

there are few successful stories concerning Chinese event extraction due to the special 

characteristics and challenges in Chinese language. Even with ground truth entities, times and 

values, the performance of most Chinese event extraction systems is much lower than that of 

English ones.  

For Chinese event extraction, unknown triggers (a trigger in the test set doesn’t occur in the 

training set and otherwise, a known trigger.) and word segmentation erro rs are two  major reasons 

for the low performance, particularly  the recall. The statistics on the ACE 2005 Chinese and 

English corpora (Li et al., 2012) shows that these two cases cover almost 30% of Chinese trigger 

mentions while this figure reduces to only about 9% in English. Besides, given the same number 

of event mentions, there are about 30% more different triggers in Chinese than those in English. 

This amplifies the problem. Therefore, trigger identification becomes a key to the success of 

Chinese event extract ion. 

Currently, there main ly exist two major mechanisms to solve this problem. The first one is to 

expand the triggers using predefined or automatically-clustered synsets, a common mechanism 

widely used in various NLP applications. The problem with this mechanism is that it fails to 

consider the sense shifting of a word in  difficult contexts  and thus may  introduce too many 

pseudo triggers and harm the precision. This largely limits the contribution of this mechanism 

(Chen and Ji, 2009b; Ji, 2009; Qin et  al. 2010). For example, as a trigger of the Start-position 

event, “担任” has more than five senses (e.g., serve as, bear, engage, do, etc.) and only one of 
them (serve as) can trigger a Start-position event. Take following two sentences as samples: 

(E1) 我们将承担所有本公司的费用。 ( We will bear all the expenses for our company.) 

(E2) 他将在IBM从事科学研究工作。 (He will engage in scientific research in IBM.) 

Although “承担” (bear) and “从事”  (engage) are two  synonyms of “担任”, they do not trigger 
the Start-position event but any other events.  

The second one is to expand the triggers using the compositional semantics inside Chinese words. 

The intuition is that if a Chinese word contains more than one character, and its meaning can be 

often inferred from the meanings of its component characters (Yuan, 1998). For example, Li et al. 

(2012) infer the semantics of a verb (most triggers in Chinese events are verbs) from its basic 

single-character verb (BV) and significantly improve the F1-measure, largely due to the dramatic 

increase in the recall. The problem with Li et al. (2012) is that they extract all single-character 

verbs contained in triggers as BVs (e.g., “担” (undertake, verb) and “任” (serve as, verb) are 
treated as two BVs for “担任” (serve as)). Therefore, pseudo triggers are much introduced. This 
severely harms the precision. Take the following sentence as a sample: 

(E3) 所有的公司员工信任他们的董事长。（All employees trust their chairman. ）  

Although “信任” (trust) and “担任” have the same BV (“任”) and the same verb structure 
(verb+BV), “信任”(trust) does not trigger the Start-position event but any other events. 

1620



Further analysis indicates that above two mechanis ms are quite complementary. For example, we 

can find out that if we introduce the semantic similarity into the compositional semantics, “信
任”(trust) in (E3) will not be expanded as a trigger for the Start-position event because of  its 
different sense from “担任”(serve as), while if we introduce the compositional semantics into the 
semantic similarity, “从事”(engage) in (E2) will be filtered out from the trigger list of the Start-
position event since it doesn’t have the same BV as “担任” (serve as). However, a more refined 
mechanis m is required to filter out “承担”(bear) in (E1).  

In this paper, we first introduce the more general morphological structures in Chinese triggers, in 

place of verb structures in Li et al. (2102), to better represent the compositional semantics inside 

Chinese words and then propose a mechanism to automatically identify the head morpheme 

(either verb or noun) as the governing sememe of a trigger based on its morphological structure. 

The intuition behind is  that the head morpheme can better represent the semantics of a Chinese 

word than the combination of all its component BVs. Finally, we propose a mechanism of 

combin ing the morphological structures and sememes of Chinese words to infer unknown 

triggers. Evaluation on the ACE 2005 Chinese corpus justifies the appropriateness of our 

approach. 

To better understand the Chinese event extraction task as defined in ACE evaluations, where an 

event is defined as a specific occurrence involving participants , we list some ACE terminologies: 

 Event mention: a  phrase or sentence within which an event is described; 

 Trigger: the main  word  that most clearly expresses the occurrence of an  event, so 

recognizing an event can be recast as identifying a corresponding trigger; 

 Trigger mention: a reference to a trigger. 

 Trigger type/Event type : the type of an event; 

 Argument: the entity mentions involved in an event; 

 Argument role : the relation of an argument to an event where it part icipates. 

In particular, the event extraction task is div ided into four components: 

 Trigger identification: to distinguish true trigger mentions from pseudo trigger mentions; 

 Event type determination : to classify trigger mentions by event types; 

 Argument identification: to distinguish true arguments from pseudo arguments; 

 Argument role determination: to classify arguments by argument roles. 

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 overviews the related work. Sect ion 3 

describes various morphological structures in Chinese words and proposes a mechanis m for 

determining the morphological structure and head morpheme in a Chinese trigger. Section 4 

proposes an algorithm to infer unknown triggers on their morphological structures and sememes. 

Section 5 presents the experimental results. Finally, we conclude the paper with future work.  

2 Related work 

In the literature, most of existing studies on event extraction concern English  and can be 

classified into either pattern-based (e.g., Riloff, 1996;  Yangarber et al.,  2000; Stevenson and 

Greenwood, 2005; Shinyama and Sekine, 2006;  Patwardhan and Riloff, 2007; Chambers and 

1621



Jurafsky, 2011) or classifier-based (e.g., Grishman  et al., 2005; Ahn, 2006;  Hardy et al., 2006; 

Maslennikov and Chua, 2007; Ji and Grishman, 2008; Patwardhan and Riloff, 2009; Liao and 

Grishman, 2010; & 2011; Hong et al., 2011; Lu and Roth, 2012; Llorens et al., 2012). In 

particular, while earlier studies focus on sentence-level extract ion, later ones turn to employ 

global information.  

Compared with tremendous work on English event extraction, there are only a few studies on 

Chinese event extract ion with focus on either feature engineering or trigger expansion, under the 

same framework as English event extraction.  

On feature engineering, Tan et al. (2008) first employ a local feature selection method to ensure 

the performance of t rigger classificat ion and then apply multip le levels of patterns to improve the 

coverage in argument classification. Fu et al. (2010) apply a feature weighting scheme to re-

weight various features for trigger identification and event type determination. Chen and Ji 

(2009b) apply various kinds of lexical, syntactic and semantic features  to address the special 

issues in Chinese. Li et al. (2012) extend Chen and Ji (2009b) with more refined features  and 

additional dependency and semantic role features. 

On trigger expansion, Chen and Ji (2009a) propose a bootstrapping framework to exp loit  extra 

informat ion captured by an English event extract ion system. Ji (2009) first extracts some cross-

lingual pred icate clusters using bilingual parallel corpora and a cross-lingual information 

extraction system, and then employs the derived clusters to expand the triggers . Qin  et al. (2010) 

employ a semantic dictionary “TongYiCi Ciling (expanded  version)” to expand triggers for 

Chinese event type determination. Li et al. (2012) propose an inference mechanism to infer new 

triggers by employing the verb structures to explore the compositional semantics inside Chinese 

triggers (verbs only) and ach ieve the state-of-the-art performance of 67.4% in F1-measure on the 

ACE 2005 Chinese corpus , ignoring the post-processing – discourse consistency. 

3 Morphological structures and head morphemes inside Chinese triggers 

In this section, we introduce various morphological structures to better represent the 

compositional semantics inside Chinese triggers and then propose two mechanisms to identify the 

morphological structures and the head morpheme in Chinese triggers respectively. 

3.1 Compositional semantics and morphological structures in Chinese words  

Both in English and Chinese languages, a word is composed of one or more characters. However, 

a component character in  English is just the basic unit to form a word  instead of a semantic unit. 

In comparison, almost all Chinese characters have their own meanings and are called morpheme 

(or single-morpheme word), the minimal meaningful unit in Chinese language. If a Chinese word 

contains more than one character, its meaning can be often interpreted in terms of its composite 

characters/morphemes. This more fine-grained semantics are the compositional semantics  inside 

Chinese words namely. Actually, it is also a normal way to understand a new Chinese word in 

everyday life for a Chinese native speaker.  

Without doubt, a general method to represent the compositional semantics inside Chinese words 

is to systematically exp lore the morphological structures in Chinese words since it is the nature of 

compound words. Morphological structures in Chinese words are the word-building process to 

form the morphemes into words and are fo rmulated by three major processes: compounding, 

affixat ion, and conversion. Compounding is a process , by which two or more  morphemes are 

composed together to form a compound word. Affixation is a morphological process to add 

1622



grammatical o r lexical information to a base form. By the conversion process, a word is changed 

from one part-of-speech (POS) into another without the addition or deletion  of any morphemes. 

Compounding is the most productive way to compose a Chinese word while affixation is the 

most popular way  to construct an English word. Affixation also is used widely in Chinese, but its 

prefix or suffix doesn’t have the meaning and can be always omitted (e.g., “老虎” (t iger) and 
“虎” (t iger) have the same meaning.). As for conversion, it ’s really not a way to construct a word 
and just represents the fact that some words have more than one tense.  

3.2 Morphological structures in Chinese triggers 

Since almost all t riggers in Chinese events are verbs and nouns, we focus on the morphological 

structures of Chinese verbs and nouns. Actually, statistics on the ACE 2005 Chinese corpus 

shows that 95% of triggers are either verbs or verbal nouns  and just nearly 5% are pure nouns 

(e.g., “公开信”  (open letter), “大会” (p lenary session)). In A CE 2005 English corpus, there are 
some adjectives triggering an event of special type. However, no ad jective acts as a trigger in the 

ACE 2005 Chinese corpus  for the special characteristics in Chinese language. Besides, almost 

95% of triggers in the train ing set just contain one or two morphemes, so this paper only 

considers the one-morpheme and two-morpheme triggers of verbs and nouns . 

There are two type words in Chinese triggers: single-morpheme words and compound words. 

Single-morpheme word just contains one morpheme. Somet imes, a single -morpheme word 

maybe is composed by more than one character, such as the transliterated word. But it doesn’t 

occur in Chinese triggers and we disregard them in this paper. So there is only one morphological 

structure concerning a single-morpheme trigger: 

Single-Morpheme Structure: Single-morpheme trigger whose POS is a verb or a noun (e.g., 

“死” (die), “去” (go), “信” (letter), etc.). 

Compounding is the most productive way to compose a Chinese trigger. In this paper we define 

five types (similar to (Chang, 1995)) of the morphological structures in Chinese triggers based on 

the relations between their morphemes. 

Coordinative Structure: The two morphemes of a trigger play coordinat ive ro le. For example, 

“合” (combine) and “并” (merge) are coordinative in trigger “合并” (merge). 

Modifier-Head Structure: The modified morpheme follows the modify ing one in a trigger. For 

example, “婚” (marry) is modified by “新” (new) in trigger “ 新婚” (newly-married). 

Subject-Predicate Structure: One morpheme is the subject and the other one tells something 

about the subject. This structure is like a subject-predicate sentence condensed in a trigger. For 

example, “身” (body) is a subject of predicate “亡” (d ie) in trigger “身亡” (d ie). 

Predicate-Object Structure: The first morpheme (predicate) governs the second one (object) in 

a trigger. For example, “业” (business) serves as the object of predicate “开” (start) in trigger “开
业” (start business). 

Predicate-Complement Structure: The first morpheme is a predicate and the second one 

interprets the first one from d ifferent aspects (e.g., d irection, result and  tense) in a trigger. For 

example, morpheme“入” (into) expresses the direction of action “进” (go) in trigger “进入” (go 
into). 

1623



3.3 Determining the morphological structure  in a Chinese trigger 

A general method to determine the morphological structures in Chinese triggers is to first 

annotate some instances manually and then train a classifier. A lternatively, a simple way is 

employed in this paper to determine the morphological structures in Chinese triggers via their 

POS structures, due to our finding that the morphological structures in Chinese triggers can be 

inferred from their POS structures. Following are the inference ru les employed in this pape r for 

different morphological structures: 

Single-Morpheme Structure : For a single-morpheme trigger whose POS is a noun or a verb, its 

morphological structure is Single-Morpheme. The statistics on the training set shows that this 

inference ru le covers almost 100% of cases given correct POSs.  

Predicate-Complement Structure: If the POS structure of a trigger is (verb  + preposition) or 

(verb + auxiliary), its morphological structure is Predicate-Complement. The statistics on the 

training set shows that this inference rule covers almost 100% of cases given correct POSs.  

Predicate-Object Structure: If the POS structure of a trigger is (verb + noun), its morphological 

structure is Predicate-Object. The statistics on the training set shows that this inference rule 

covers almost 100% of cases given correct POSs. 

Coordinative Structure: If the POS structure of a trigger is (verb + verb) (e.g., “捐/VV 赠/VV” 

(donate), “购/VV 买/VV” (buy), etc.), its morphological structure is Coordinative. The statistics 

on the training set shows that this inference ru le covers almost 98% of cases given correct POSs. 

The only exception to this inference ru le is that it ignores those triggers whose POS structure is 

(noun + noun), This happens in Chinese triggers, though seldom. In such cases, i.e. if the POS 

structure of a trigger is (noun + noun), its morphological structure can be either Modifier-Head 

or Coordinative (e.g., “婚/NN 姻/NN” (marriage)).  

Modifier-Head Structure : The morphological structure of a trigger is Modifier-Head, if its POS 

structure is one of following four structures: 1) (adjective + verb); 2) (adjective + noun); 3) 

(noun + noun); 4) (noun + verb). The statistics on the training set shows that this inference rule 

covers almost 96% of cases given correct POSs. The only exceptions to this inference rule are 

that if the POS structure of a trigger is (noun + noun) or (noun + verb), its morphological 

structure can also be Coordinative or Subject-Predicate, respectively.  

Subject-Predicate Structure : Our exp loration on the ACE 2005 Chinese corpus shows that only 

one trigger (i.e . “身亡” (die)) has the Subject-Predicate structure. Therefore, we ignore this 

structure.  

Structure % Trigger mentions 

Single-Morpheme 19.1 

Coordinative  46.3 

Modifier-Head  13.3 

Predicate-Object  11.4 

Predicate-Complement 8.7 

Words (length>=3) 1.2 

TABLE 1 – Distribution of different morphological structures in Chinese trigger mentions 

1624



To obtain the POS structures of Chinese triggers, we split all t riggers into characters and employ 

a Chinese POS tool – ICTCLA S to tag their POSs. Table 1 shows the distribution of the 

morphological structures in Chinese triggers in the train ing set, ext racted using above inference 

rules. Random manual evaluation  of 1000 instances shows that our inference ru les achieve the 

accuracy of more than 91% given automat ically-tagged POSs. 

3.4 Identifying head morpheme in Chinese triggers 

Normally, almost all Chinese verbs or nouns contain one morpheme as the governing semantic 

element, called Head Morpheme (HM), to construct a word and the semantics of such a word 

thus can be inferred from its HM. Since the semantics of a Chinese trigger can be often inferred 

from its HM, it’s natural to infer unknown triggers via HMs. For example, given verb “死” (die) 
as HM in trigger “烧死” (burn to death, trigger of the Die event) whose morphological structure 
is Coordinative, it is reasonable to infer “砸死” (crush to death), “炸死” (burst to death), “闷死”  
(stifle to death) to be triggers of the same event, due to their same HM and morphological 

structure as “烧死”.  

Li et  al. (2012) regards all single -character verbs contained in triggers as BVs and use them to 

infer unknown triggers. It  may introduce many pseudo triggers into candidates and harm the 

precision for that loose constraint. For example, the morphological structure  of “烧死 ” is 
Coordinative, and “烧” (burn) and “死” (die) are two single-morpheme verbs in it. Following 
Li’s inference rule, all words including BV “烧” or “死” are regarded as triggers if their verb 
structures are (BV + verb) or (verb + BV). Hence, some pseudo triggers, such as “烧烤” 
(barbecue), “烧焊”  (weld), “烧制” (fire), etc., would be expanded to be triggers.  

Besides, a noun may be a HM to infer new triggers. For example, given “信” (letter) as the HM 
in trigger “私信”(private letter, trigger of Phone-Write event) whose morphological structure is  
Modifier-Head. It’s correctly to infer those words (e.g., “贺信” (congratulatory letter), “密信”  
(secret letter), etc.) with the HM “信” (letter) and the morphological structure Modifier-Head, as 
triggers.  

Therefore, how to identify the HM in a Chinese trigger becomes the key to infer unknown 

triggers. Table 2 shows our automatic mechanis m to identify HM, where LM(w) and RM(w) are 

used to obtain the left and right morphemes from one-morpheme or two-morphemes word w  

respectively. 

Structure Inferences to select HM  

Single-morpheme tr 

Coordinative  
LM(tr): if SSIM(tr, LM(tr)) > α 

RM(tr): if  SSIM(tr, RM(tr)) > α  

Modifier-Head  RM(tr) 

Predicate-Object  RM(tr) 

Predicate-Complement LM(tr) 

TABLE 2 – Inferences on different morphological structures  to extract HMs  

For a trigger whose morphological structure is Single-morpheme, Predicate-Complement or 

Modifier-Head, it’s easy to identify its HM from the relationship between its two morphemes. If 

the structure of a trigger is Predicate-Object, we select the noun (object) as HM because it better 

represents the semantics of the trigger than the predicate, i.e. the governing semantic element 

1625



always comes from the object. However, without additional informat ion, it ’s hard to select HM 

from a trigger whose morphological structure is Coordinative. For example, given the trigger “访

问” (visit) whose morphological structure is Coordinative, its two component morphemes, “访” 

(visit) and “问” (ask), have their own semantics  respectively. Fortunately, we can find out that 

morpheme “访” (visit) has the same meaning as trigger “访问” (visit). So an effective way to 

identify HM in a trigger with the Coordinative structure is via the semantic similarity (SemSim).  

In this paper, we employ HowNet
1
 (Dong and Dong, 2006) to obtain the semantics of Chinese 

words. Similar to Wordnet in English, HowNet  is a structured Chinese lexical semantic resource. 

In HowNet, sememe is a basic semantic unit and represents the meaning of a word. In total, about 

2200 sememes are used to define 95000 Chinese words. In this paper, the governing sememe is 

introduced to recognize HMs from those triggers with the Coordinative structure. That is, if a 

morpheme represents the governing sememe, it is recognized as HM of that trigger. Following 

Liu and Li (2002), function SemSim(x, y)  is used to calculate the semantic similarity between the 

sememes of the trigger x and its morpheme y  as follow: 








),(
),(

yxDis
yxSemSim                                                                                    (1) 

where Dis(x,y) is the distance between the sememe of x and y in HowNet’s sememe hierarchical 

architecture, and ϕ is an adjustable parameter and assigned 0.75 following Liu and Li (2002).  

4 Inferring unknown triggers on HMs and sememes 

To better represent the compositional semantics inside Chinese words and filter out more pseudo 

triggers, we introduce the morphological structures and sememes of Chinese words to infer 

unknown triggers. The methodology is shown as follows: 1) following the principle of 

compositional semantics, we extract  these one-morpheme or two-morpheme words in the test set 

as candidates when they contain at least one HM and their POS are nouns or verbs; 2) according 

to the morphological structure of each candidate word, we applied different inferences to choose 

unknown triggers . We implement an algorithm to determine whether a candidate is an unknown 

trigger and the input and output are shown as follows: 

Input: HMs  the set of all HMs extracting from the train ing set  

             candidates   }

0))(),((

))()((

))(()((

{







wHMwMORPHMPRO

verbwPOSnounwPOS

HMswRMHMswLM

w  

triggerwords   ϕ 

Output: triggerwords : the set of unknown triggers accepted by our algorithm 

POS(w) and HM(w) are applied to get the POS of word w and obtain the HM in word w  

respectively. MPRO(ms, hm) is defined to compute the conditional probability of a trigger when 

it contains a HM hm and its morphological structure is ms. MORPH(w) is used to get the 

morphological structure of word w . 

For each candidate word w  in  candidates, we apply following in ferences to distinguish the true 

unknown triggers from the pseudo ones according to the morphological structure and sememe. 

                                                                 
1  http://www.keenage.com 

1626



Single-Morpheme : These expanding single-morpheme words are those HMs in two-morpheme 

triggers. So we apply a simple constraint to determine whether or not it ’s an unknown trigger:  

1)),(( 


i
Sm

mwSemSimMAX
i

                                                          (2) 

where S is the set of triggers in the training set which contain word w. If the maximum score of 

the semantic similarity between these triggers and word w is equal to 1, we accept it.  

Predicate-Complement: The first morpheme is usually a verb, so the sememe of word w always 

is similar to the sememe of its first morpheme. The constraint for Predicate-Complement 

structure is: 

pcsm SSwLM )(                                                          (3) 

where Ssm is the set of triggers in the t rain ing set whose structures are Single-morpheme while Spc 

is the set of left  morphemes of triggers in the training set whose structures are Predicate-

Complement. 

Predicate-Object: for a word w  whose morphological structure is Predicate-Object, we regard it 

as the unknown trigger fo llowing two conditions  to constrain its two morphemes: 

HMswRM )(                                                                        (4) 




))),((( i
SWm

mwLMSemSimMAX
i

                                                 (5) 

where SW is the set of p redicates in the similar triggers
2
 of word  w. For example, if there are two 

triggers “离职” (resign) and “辞职” (resign), and their HMs are “职” (job) too. For a candidate 
“免职” (resign), its morphological structure is as same as the above two and its HM also is “职” 
(job). We call them similar triggers and calculate the similarities between “免”(dis miss) and the 
predicates ( “离” (leave), “辞” (d ismiss)) in its similar triggers in the training set.  

Modifier-Head: The first morpheme of word w  modifies the second one, so that the semantics of 

word w comes from its second morpheme. We apply fo llowing ru les based on POS consistency 

and semantic similarity. 

HMswRM )(                                                                        (6) 

}),()({))(( HMsbSblCOMlPOSwLMPOS mh                           (7) 

1)),(( 


i
Sm

mwSemSimMAX
i

                                                              (8) 

where Smh is the set of triggers in  the train ing set whose structures are Modifier-Head and 

COM(l,b) is to combine morpheme l  and b to be a two-morpheme word. Otherwise, S is the set of 

those triggers which contain word w. 

Coordinative: Since the two composite morphemes of word w are homogeneous and its 
semantics is flexible and maybe comes from the combination of its two morphemes or one of its 

morpheme. We calculate the average score of the similarities to infer trigger of th is type: 

                                                                 
2 Similar triggers are those triggers with the same morphological structure and the same BM in the training set. 

1627






 

3

),((
)}(),(,{ wRMwLMwco

i
SCm

mcoSemSimMAX
i                                        (9) 

where  

 
))}()()(

)()()(()()({

sRMwRMHMswRM

wLMsLMHMswLMwMORPHsMORPHsSC



                (10) 

where SC is the set of triggers in  the training set with fo llowing two constraints: 1) their 

morphological structures are Coordinative; 2) their left/right morphemes and the left/right 

morpheme of word w are the same HM. 

5 Experimentation and discussion 

In this section, we evaluate our mechanis m of combin ing the morphological structures and 

sememes of Chinese words in inferring unknown triggers and report the experimental results on 

trigger identificat ion and its application to overall Chinese event extraction.  

5.1 Experimental setting and baseline 

We use a state-of-the-art Chinese event ext raction system (Li et al., 2012) as one of our baselines 

which consists of four typical components (trigger identificat ion, event type determination, 

argument identification and argument role determination) in a pipeline way. During testing, each 

word in the test set is first scanned for instances of known triggers from the t rain ing set and then 

scanned by employing the compositional semantics inside Chinese triggers to infer instances of 

unknown triggers. When an instance is found, the trigger identifier is applied to distinguish those 

true trigger mentions from pseudo ones. If t rue, the event type determiner is then applied to 

recognize its event type. For any entity mention  in  a sentence which is identified as an event, the 

argument identifier is employed to assign its possible arguments afterwards. Finally, the 

argument ro le determiner is introduced to assign a role to each argument. 

Besides, we adopt the same experimental setting as Li et al. (2012). The A CE 2005 Chinese 

corpus (only the training data is available) is used in all our experiments. The corpus contains 

633 Chinese documents  annotated with 8 p redefined event types and 33 predefined event 

subtypes
3

. We randomly  select 567 documents as the training set and the remaining 66 

documents as the test set. Besides, we reserve 33 documents in the training set as the 

development set and follow the setting of ACE diagnostic tasks and use the ground truth entities, 

times and values for our training and testing. As for evaluation, we also follow the standards as 

defined in Li et al (2012): 

 A trigger is correctly identified if its position in the document matches a reference trigger;  

 An event type is correctly determined if the trigger’s event type and position in the document 

match a reference trigger; 

 An argument is  correctly identified if its involved event type and position in the document 

match any of the reference argument mentions; 

 An argument role  is correctly determined if its involved event type, position in the document, 

and role match any of the reference argument mentions. 

                                                                 
3 Similar to previous studies, we treat these subtypes simply as 33 separate event types and do not consider the 
hierarchical structure among them. 

1628



Finally, all the sentences in the corpus are divided into words using a word segmentation tool 

(ICTCLAS) with all entities annotated in the corpus kept. Besides, we use Berkeley Parser and 

Stanford Parser to create the constituent and dependency parse trees . We use N-gram features and 

employ the ME model
4
 to train indiv idual component classifiers. 

5.2 Results on identifying HMs and unknown triggers 

As the key to infer unknown triggers, Table 3 shows the performance of HM identification. For 

evaluation, the HMs of all the known triggers in the ACE 2005 Chinese corpus are manually 

labeled by three annotators and we accept those morphemes as HMs when at least two annotators 

agree on them. The thresholds α is fine-tuned to 0.85 using the development set. Compared to  Li 

et al. (2012), our approach can improve the F1-measure by 6.9%, largely due to the dramatic 

increase in Precision of 15.8%. Li et al. (2012) extracted all single-character verbs as BVs, so 

their Recall is h igher than that of ours. Otherwise, we extract  30 single-morpheme nouns as HMs 

and 73% of them occur in the gold set while this number in Li et al. (2012) is 0. 

System #BV/HMs P(%) R(%) F1 

Li et al. (2012) 361 64.3 88.5 74.5 

Ours  266 80.1 82.1 81.4 

TABLE 3– Performance of the HM identification (#Gold: 262) 

We apply the mechanism of combining the morphological structures and sememes of Chinese 

words (CMS) to in fer unknown triggers. The thresholds β and λ are fine-tuned to 0.7 using the 

development set. Following Li et al. (2012), we also apply the non-trigger filtering ru le in  our 

system and just filter out those candidates which occur as pseudo triggers more than 5 times in 

the training set. So we obtain a candidate set of words including known triggers in the train ing set 

and those unknown triggers identified by our mechanism. Manual inspection shows that 62 

words are inferred as unknown triggers, among which 69.4% are true triggers. 

To verify the effectiveness of our mechanis m, we extract those trigger mentions from the test set 

when they are instances of known t riggers from the t rain ing set or unknown triggers extracted by 

CMS. Table 4 shows the results of our CMS and two baseline systems in in ferring unknown 

trigger ment ions. Here, Baseline-1 (Chen and Ji (2009b))  just extracts those trigger mentions 

occurring in the training data while Baseline-2 (Li, et  al., 2012) infers unknown trigger mentions 

based on the compositional semantics and verb structures of Chinese words.  

System #True trigger mentions  #Pseudo trigger mentions 

Baseline-1 266 629 

Baseline-2 302 444 

CMS 326 508 

Gold  367 - 

Table 4 – Impact of combining the morphological structure and sememe of Chinese words in 

inferring unknown triggers 

Compared with Baseline-1 and Baseline-2, our mechanis m recovers 16.3% (60) and 6.5% (24) of 

true trigger mentions respectively. This improvement mainly comes from two factors. The first 

one is that we introduce those nouns to be HMs and almost 20% of the true unknown  triggers 

                                                                 
4 http://mallet.cs.umass.edu/ 

1629



(e.g., “失业” (lose one’s job), “出境” (leave the country)) are extracted. The second one is that 
our mechanism filters out more pseudo trigger mentions due to the  contribution of combining the 

morphological structures and sememes of Chinese words. For example, Baseline-2 will infer “调
频” (frequency adjustment) “妨害” (impair) to be triggers due to “调” (adjust) and “害” (harm) 
are BVs and their syntactic structures are (BV+noun) and (verb+BV) respectively. On the 

contrary, our mechanis m will filter out “调频” since its structure is Modifier-Head and the head 
morpheme “频” (frequency) doesn’t appear in HMs while “妨害” will also be ignored because its 
sememe is not similar to any known triggers with the same HM “害”  (harm). It justifies the 
effectiveness of our mechanis m to combine the morphological structures and sememes of 

Chinese words in recovering true triggers.  

Otherwise, some triggers in the training set are seldom used as trigger mentions. We also applied 

above mechanism to filter out those triggers. Table 4 shows that almost 28% of pseudo trigger 

mentions is filtered out, so the number of pseudo trigger mentions is reduced to 508. 

5.3 Results on trigger identification and overall Chinese event extraction 

There are too many pseudo trigger mentions showed in Table 4 by using our mechanism to infer 

unknown triggers and extract trigger ment ions from the test set, so we introduce a ME-based 

trigger identifier to distinguish the true trigger mentions from the pseudo ones  as previous works.  

Table 5 shows the contribution of our mechanism to trigger identificat ion on the held-out test set. 

Compared to  Baseline-1, our approach can dramatically  improve the F1-measure by 10.0%, with 

a big gain of 17.8% in Recall and a small loss of 1.8% in Precision. It further proves the 

effectiveness of the compositional semantics in inferring Chinese unknown triggers. Compared to 

the state-of-the-art system ( Baseline-2), our approach also enhances F1-measure by 4.1%, largely 

due to a dramat ic increase of 7.7% in  Recall. It  also justifies that the morphological structures of 

Chinese words are more effect ive than the verb structures when they are employed to infer 

unknown triggers. Besides, these results also show that introducing sememes of Chinese words 

into our mechanism is  a helpfu l way to filter out those pseudo triggers.  

We also employ the mechanism of discourse consistency (Li et al., 2012) to improve the 

Precision and our results show that our approach achieves 79.4%, 69.2% and 73.9% in F1-

measure, Precision and Recall respectively and it  outperforms Li et  al. (2012) by 3.4% and 5.7% 

in F1-measure and Recall, with a small loss of 0.1% in Precision.  

System 
Trigger identification 

P(%) R(%) F1 

Baseline-1 75.2 52.0 61.5 

Baseline-2 (Li et al. (2012)) 73.5 62.1 67.4 

CMS 73.4 69.8 71.5 

Baseline-2+ Discourse consistency 79.3 63.5 70.5 

CMS + Discourse consistency 79.4 69.2 73.9 

Table 5 – Contribution to Chinese trigger identification  

Table 6 shows the contribution of trigger identification to overall event extraction on the held -out 

test set. Compared to Baseline-2, we can find that our approach can improve the F1-measure for 

event type determination by 4.0%, argument identificat ion by 3.3% and argument role 

determination (i.e . overall event ext raction) by 2.9%, largely  due to the dramat ic increase in 

1630



Recall of 7.4%, 6.1% and 5.6%. These results also ensure the importance of trigger identification 

in Chinese event extraction.  

System 

Event type 

determination 

Argument 

identification 

Argument role 

determination 

P(%) R(%) F1 P(%) R(%) F1 P(%) R(%) F1 

Baseline-1 70.3 49.0 57.8 58.4 42.7 49.3 55.2 38.6 45.4 

Baseline-2 70.2 59.1 64.2 58.0 48.9 53.0 54.7 44.5 49.1 

CMS 69.9 66.5 68.2 57.6 55.0 56.3 54.1 50.1 52.0 

Table 6 – Contribution to Overall Chinese event ext raction 

5.4 Discussion 

Through manual inspection, we find that many remaining errors are related to three aspects. The 

first one is that almost 4.7% of trigger mentions in the test set doesn ’t have a morpheme appeared 

in the set of HMs. For example, there are so many ways to hurt a human to express an injure 

event and just a few of triggers or its HMs occurred in  the train ing set. The second one comes 

from the errors in POS tagging in the verb structures of triggers and constituent parse tree. 

Almost all errors in  determin ing morphologica l structures are come form those wrong POSs, 

especially those single-morpheme triggers, with the wrong POS in the parse tree will be ignored  

in inferring unknown triggers . The last one is the low quality of the annotated event corpus and 

many event mentions are missed. Those un-annotated true mentions would make the classifier 

confuse to distinguish true event mentions from pseudo ones. We look into those pseudo trigger 

mentions which are classified as true ones by the ME classifier and find out almost 20% of them 

maybe are true ones by our knowledge. 

In order to evaluate the effect  of the t rain ing set size on the performance, we modify the 

proportion of the training set to the test set from 9:1 to 1:9. Fig. 2 shows the percentages of true 

trigger ment ions extracted by our baseline and our CMS. From Figure 1, we can find out that our 

mechanis m can extract much more true trigger mentions than that of the baseline, especially for a 

smaller training set. When the proportion of the train ing set to the test set is set to 1:9, our 

mechanis m can extract 67.5% of true trigger mentions while the figure drops to 43.3% in our 

baseline. This justifies that our mechanism can be well applied to minimally-supervised event 

extraction. 

 
FIGURE 1 – The percentages of extract ing true trigger ment ions on different proportions of the 

training set to the test set 

Compared to Li et al. (2012), There are three contributions in our work: 1) we use the 

morphological structure to better represent the compositional semantics inside Chinese triggers; 2) 

we introduce a mechanism to identify HMs in triggers automatically and those HMs can be verbs 

or nouns; 3) we propose a mechanism of combin ing the morphological structures and sememes of 

1631



Chinese words to extract unknown triggers. The results show that our mechanism outperforms 

the state-of-the-art system. 

Conclusion 

To address the special characteristics of Chinese event ext raction  and ext ract more true trigger 

mentions, this paper presents a novel approach to Chinese trigger identification which combines 

the morphological structures and sememes of Chinese words to infer unknown triggers. The 

experimental results show that our approach can significantly improve the performance of the 

Chinese event extraction system, especially  Chinese trigger identification in  Recall. In  future 

work, we will focus on how to apply  the mechanism of compositional semantics to unsupervised 

or minimally supervised event extraction system and improve their performance.  

Acknowledgments 

The authors would like to thank three anonymous reviewers for their comments on this paper. 

This research was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 

Nos. 61070123 and 61273320, the National 863 Project o f China under Grant No. 

2012AA011102. 

REFERENCES 
Ahn, D. (2006). The stages of event extraction. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Annotating 

and Reasoning about Time and Events (ARTE 2006), pages 1-8. 

Chambers, N. and Jurafsky, D. (2011). Template-based informat ion extraction without the 

templates. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 

Linguistics (ACL 2011), pages 976–986. 

Chang, S. M. (1995). A study on Mandarin compounds. Hsinchu: National Tsing Hua University. 

Chen, Z. and Ji, H. (2009a). Can one language bootstrap the other: a case study on event 

extraction. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2009 Workshop on Semi-Supervised Learning for 

Natural Language Processing (SemiSupLearn 2009), pages 66-74. 

Chen, Z. and Ji, H. (2009b). Language specific issue and feature exp loration in Chinese event 

extraction. In Proceedings of Human Language Technologies: the 2009 Annual Conference of 

the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics  (NAACL 2009), 

pages 209-212. 

Dong Z. D. and Dong Q. (2006). HowNet and the computation of meaning. World Scientific Pub 

Co. Inc. 

Finkel, J., Grenager, T. and Manning, C. (2005). Incorporating non-local information into 

informat ion extract ion systems by Gibbs sampling. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting 

on Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2005), pages 363-370.  

Fu, J. F., Liu, Z. T., Zhong, Z. M. and Shan, J. F. (2010). Chinese event extraction based on 

feature weighting. Information Technology Journal , 9: 184-187.  

Gupta, P. and Ji, H. (2009). Predict ing unknown time arguments based on cross-event 

propagation. In Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Papers (ACLShort 

2009), pages 369-272. 

Grishman, R., Westbrook, D. and Meyers, A. (2005). NYU’s English ACE 2005 system 

description. In Proceedings of ACE 2005 Evaluation Workshop (ACE workshop 2005) . 

Hardy, H., Kanchakouskaya, V. and Strzalkowski, T. (2006). Automatic event classification 

1632



using surface text features. In Proceedings of the Twenty-first National Conference on Artificial 

Intelligence Workshop on Event Extraction and Synthesis (AAAI workshop 2006), pages 36-41. 

Hong, Y., Zhang, J., Ma, B., Yao, J. M., Zhou, G. G. and Zhu, Q. M. (2011). Using cross-entity 

inference to improve event extract ion. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the 

Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies  (ACL-HLT 2011), 

pages 1127-1136. 

Ji, H. (2009). Cross-lingual pred icate cluster acquisition  to improve bilingual event ext raction by 

inductive learning. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Unsupervised and Minimally Supervised 

Learning of Lexical Semantics (UMSLLS 2009), pages 27-35. 

Ji, H. and Grishman, R. (2008). Refin ing event extract ion through cross-document inference. In 

Proceedings of the 46th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: 

Human Language Technologies (ACL-HLT 2008), pages 254-262.  

Li, J. H., Zhou, G. D. and Ng, H. T. (2010). Joint syntactic and semantic parsing of Chinese. In 

Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 

2010), pages 1108-1117. 

Li, P. F., Zhou G. D., Zhu Q. M. and Hou L. B. (2012). Employing compositional semantics and 

discourse consistency in Chinese event extraction. In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference 

on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational Natural Language 

Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL 2012), pages 1006-1016. 

Liao, S. S. and Grishman, R. (2010). Using document level cross-event inference to improve 

event extraction. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for 

Computational Linguistics  (ACL 2010), pages 789-797. 

Liao, S. S. and Grishman, R. (2011). Using predict ion from sentential scope to build a pseudo co-

testing learner for event extraction. In Proceedings of the 5th International Joint Conference on 

Natural Language Processing (IJCNLP 2011), pages 714–722. 

Llorens, H., Saquete, E., Navarro-Colorado, B. (2012). Applying semantic knowledge to the 

automatic processing of temporal expressions and events. Information Processing & 

Management. 

Lu, W. and Roth, D. (2012). Automat ic event extraction with structured preference modeling. In 

Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 

Processing and Computational Natural Language Learning  (EMNLP-CoNLL 2012), pages 835–

844. 

Maslennikov, M. and Chua, T. (2007). A multi resolution framework for in formation ext raction 

from free text. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational 

Linguistics (ACL 2007), pages 592-599. 

Patwardhan, S. and Riloff, E. (2007). Effect ive informat ion extraction with semantic affinity 

patterns and relevant regions. In Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods 

in Natural Language Processing and Computational Natural Language Le arning (EMNLP-

coNLL 2007), pages 717-727. 

Patwardhan, S. and Riloff, E. (2009). A unified model of phrasal and sentential evidence for 

informat ion ext raction. In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 

Language Processing (EMNLP 2009), pages 151-160. 

Qin, B., Zhao, Y. Y., Ding, X., Liu , T. and Zhai, G. F. (2011). Event type recognition based on 

trigger expansion. Tsinghua Science and Technology. 15(3): 251-258. 

1633



Riloff, E. (1996). Automat ically generating ext raction patterns from untagged text. In 

Proceedings of the Thirteenth National Conference on Articial Intelligence , pages 1044–1049. 

Shinyama, Y. and Sekine, S. (2006). Preempt ive information ext raction using unrestricted 

relation discovery. In Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North 

American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL-HLT 2006), pages 

304–311. 

Stevenson, M. and Greenwood, M. (2005). A semantic approach to IE pattern induction. In 

Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 

2005), pages 379–386. 

Tan, H., Zhao, T., Zheng, J. (2008). Identification of Chinese event and their argument ro les. In 

Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE 8th International Conference on Computer and Information 

Technology Workshops (CITWORKSHOPS 2008), pages 14-19.  

Yangarber, R., Grishman, R., Tapanainen, P. and Huttunen, S. (2000). Automatic acquisit ion of 

domain knowledge for informat ion extraction. In Proceedings of the 18th International 

Conference on Computational Linguistics (ACL 2000), pages 940–946. 

Yuan, M. L. (1998). Studies on valency in  modern Chinese. Chinese Commerce and Trade Press, 

Beijing, China. 

1634


