



















































Complete Pre Processing Phase of Punjabi Text Extractive Summarization System


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Demonstration Papers, pages 199–206,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Complete Pre Processing phase of Punjabi Text Extractive 
Summarization System 

Vishal GUPTA1   Gurpreet Singh LEHAL2 
(1) UIET, Panjab University Chandigarh, India 

(2) Department of Computer Science, Punjabi University Patiala, Punjab, India 
vishal@pu.ac.in, gslehal@gmail.com 

ABSTRACT 

Text Summarization is condensing the source text into shorter form and retaining its information 
content and overall meaning. Punjabi text Summarization system is text extraction based 
summarization system which is used to summarize the Punjabi text by retaining the relevant 
sentences based on statistical and linguistic features of text. It comprises of two main phases:   1) 
Pre Processing   2) Processing. Pre Processing is structured representation of the original Punjabi 
text. In Processing, final score of each sentence is determined using feature-weight equation.   
Top ranked sentences in proper order are selected for final summary. This paper concentrates on 
complete pre processing phase of Punjabi text summarization system.  Pre processing phase 
includes Punjabi words boundary identification, Punjabi sentences boundary identification, 
Punjabi stop words elimination, Punjabi language stemmer for nouns and proper names, allowing 
input in proper format and elimination of duplicate sentences. 

KEYWORDS : Punjabi Text Summarization System, Pre Processing Phase, Punjabi stemmer for 
nouns and proper nouns, Natural Language Processing 

199



1 Introduction 

Automatic text summarization (Kyoomarsi et al., 2008) is reducing the source text into a shorter 
form retaining its information content and overall meaning. The goal of automatic text 
summarization is to present most important contents from information source to the user in a 
shorter version. Text Summarization (Gupta & Lehal, 2010) methods can be classified into 
abstractive and extractive summarization. An abstractive summarization method consists of 
understanding the original text and re-telling it in fewer words. Extractive summary deals with 
selection of important sentences from the original text. The importance of sentences is decided 
based on statistical and linguistic features of sentences. Text Summarization Process can be 
divided into two phases: 1) Pre Processing phase (Gupta & Lehal, 2011a) is structured 
representation of the original text.   2) In Processing (Fattah & Ren, 2008; Kaikhah, 2004; Neto, 
2000) phase, final score of each sentence is determined using feature-weight equation.   Top 
ranked sentences in proper order are selected for final summary. This paper concentrates on 
complete pre processing of Punjabi text extractive summarization system. Punjabi text 
Summarization system is text extraction based summarization system which is used to summarize 
the Punjabi text by retaining the relevant sentences based on statistical and linguistic features of 
text. Punjab is one of Indian states and Punjabi is its official language. Punjabi is spoken in India, 
Pakistan, USA, Canada, England, and other countries with Punjabi immigrants. Punjabi is written 
in „Gurmukhi‟ script in eastern Punjab (India), and in „Shahmukhi‟ script in western Punjab 
(Pakistan).  For some of Indian languages like Hindi, Bengali etc. a number of automatic text 
summarization systems are available. For Punjabi, the only text summarization system available 
is online:http://pts.learnpunjabi.org/default.aspx and no other Punjabi summarizer is available in the 
world. Pre processing phase includes Punjabi words boundary identification, Punjabi sentences 
boundary identification, Punjabi stop words elimination, Punjabi language stemmer for nouns 
and proper names, allowing input in proper format, elimination of duplicate sentences and 
normalization of Punjabi noun words in noun morph. 

2 Complete Pre Processing Phase of Punjabi Text Summarization System 

Various Sub phases for complete pre processing of Punjabi text summarization system are given 

below: 

2.1 Punjabi language stop words elimination  

Punjabi language stop words (Gupta & Lehal, 2011a)  are most frequently occurring words in 
Punjabi text like: ਦੀ d , ਹੁ hai, ਨਿੰ  nūṃ and ਨ਻ਰ nāl etc. We have to eliminate these words from the 
original text otherwise, sentences containing them can get influence unnecessarily. We have 
made a list of Punjabi language stop words by creating a frequency list from a Punjabi corpus. 
Analysis of Punjabi corpus taken from popular Punjabi newspaper Ajit has been done. This 
corpus contains around 11.29 million words and 2.03 lakh unique words. We manually analyzed 
these unique words and identified 615 stop words. In the corpus of 11.29 million words, the 
frequency count of these stop words is 5.267 million, which covers 46.64% of the corpus.  

Sample input sentence:- 

ਘਯੀਰਿ ਗੁਸ ਦ਽ ਸਭੱ਼ਸਆ ਩਼ਹਰ ਦੀ ਆਧ਻ਯ ਤੀ ਹੱਰ ਹੂਲੀਗ਽-਼ਥੰਦ 

200



ghar lū gais d  samssiā pahil d  ādhār t  hall hōv g -thind 

Sample output sentence:- 

ਘਯੀਰਿ ਗੁਸ ਸਭੱ਼ਸਆ ਩਼ਹਰ  ਆਧ਻ਯ  ਹੱਰ-਼ਥੰਦ 

ghar lū gais samssiā pahil  ādhār hall –thind 

As we can see from the sample input and output of Punjabi stop words elimination sub phase that 
four stop words (ਦ਽ d , ਦੀ d , ਤੀ t , ਹੂਲੀਗ਽ hōv g ) have been eliminated from the sample output 
sentence. 

2.2 Punjabi language stemmer for nouns and proper nouns 

The purpose of stemming (Islam et al., 2007; Kumar et al., 2005; Ramanathan & Rao, 2003) is to 
obtain the stem or radix of those words which are not found in dictionary. If stemmed word is 
present in dictionary (Singh et al., 1999) , then that is a genuine word, otherwise it may be proper 
name or some invalid word.  In Punjabi language stemming (Gupta & Lehal, 2011b; Gill et al., 
2007; Gill et al., 2009) for nouns and proper names, an attempt is made to obtain stem or radix of 
a Punjabi word and then stem or radix is checked against Punjabi noun morph and proper names 
list. An in depth analysis of corpus was made and the eighteen possible noun and proper name 
suffixes were identified  like ੀ਽ਆਂ āṃ, ਼ੀਆਂ Iāṃ, ੀਿਆਂ ūāṃ, ੀ਻ੀਂ āṃ, ੀ਽ਏ , ੀੀ  and ੀ਽ਓ ō etc. 
Proper names are the names of person, place and concept etc. not occurring in Punjabi dictionary. 
Proper names play an important role in deciding a sentence‟s importance. From the Punjabi 
corpus, 17598 words have been identified as proper names. The percentage of these proper names 
words in the Punjabi corpus is about    13.84 %. Some of Punjabi language proper names are 

ਅਕ਻ਰ਽ akāl , ਰਾ਼ਧਆਣ਻ ludhiāṇā, ਫ਻ਦਰ bādal and ਩਼ਿਆਰ਻ paṭiālā etc. 
Algorithm of Punjabi language stemmer for nouns and proper names is as below: 

The algorithm of Punjabi language stemmer (Gupta & Lehal, 2011b) for nouns and proper names 
proceeds by segmenting the source Punjabi text into sentences and words. For each word of every 
sentence follow following steps:  

Step 1: If current Punjabi word ends with ੀ਽ਆਂ āṃ, ਼ੀਆਂ iāṃ, ੀਿਆਂ ūāṃ then remove ਆਂ āṃ from 
end. 

Step 2: Else If current Punjabi word ends with ੀ਽ਏ  then remove ਏ  from end. 
Step 3: Else If current Punjabi word ends with ੀ਽ਓ ō then remove ਓ ō from end. 
Step 4: Else If current Punjabi word ends with ੀ਽ਆ ā, ਈਆ ā then remove ਆ ā from end. 
Step 5: Else If current Punjabi word ends with ਈ , ਲਂ vāṃ, ੀ਻ੀਂ āṃ, ੀੂੀਂ ōṃ, ੀ਽ੀਂ ṃ and   
            ਜ/ਜ਼/ਸ ja/z/s then remove the corresponding suffix from end. 
Step 6: Else If current Punjabi word ends with ੀੀ , ਼ੀਓ iō, ੀੂ ō, ਼ੀਂ iuṃ and ਼ੀਆ iā then  
             remove the corresponding suffix and add kunna at the end. 

Step 7: Current Punjabi Stemmed word is checked against Punjabi noun morph or Proper names   

            list. If found, It is Punjabi noun or Punjabi Proper name. 

Algorithm Input: ਪਾੱ ਰਂ phullāṃ (Flowers) and ਰੜਕ਽ਆ ਂlaṛk āṃ (Girls) 

201



Algorithm Output: ਪਾੱ ਰ phull (Flower) and ਰੜਕ਽ laṛk  (Girl) 
An in depth analysis of output of Punjabi language stemmer for nouns and proper names has been 
done over 50 Punjabi documents of Punjabi news corpus of 11.29 million words. The efficiency 
of Punjabi language noun and Proper name stemmer is 87.37%, which is tested over 50 Punjabi 
news documents of corpus and is ratio of actual correct results to total produced results by 
stemmer. 

2.3 Normalization of Punjabi nouns in noun morph 

Problem with Punjabi is the non-standardization of Punjabi spellings. Many of the popular 
Punjabi noun words are written in multiple ways. For example, the Punjabi noun words ਤਤੱਬਤੀ 
tibbt , ਥਂ  thāṃ and ਦਸਾ dasaā can also be written as  ਤਤਬਤੀ tibt , ਥਾ thā and ਦਸਾ dasā respectively. 
To overcome this problem Punjabi noun morph has been normalized for different spelling 
variations of same Punjabi noun words. 

The algorithm for normalization of Punjabi nouns proceeds by copying noun_morph into another 
table noun_morph_normalized.  For each noun word in table noun_morph_normalized follow the 
following steps:  

Step 1 : Replace all the occurrences of ੀੱ aadak with null character. 
Step 2 : Replace all the occurrences of ੀਂ Bindi at top with null character. 
Step 3 :Replace all the occurences of ੀ  Punjabi foot characters with any of suitable  
            ਯ (ra) or  ਲ (v) or ਹ (ha)characters. 

Step 4 :Replace all the occurrences of ੀ਺ bindi at foot with null character. 
Step 5 : noun_morph_normalized is now normalized. 

Step 6: End of algorithm 

Algorithm Input: ਿੱਫ  ṭabb , ਯਕਭਂ  rakm ṃ, ਆ਼ਕਿਤ਽ ākrit  and ਼ਿਆਰ khaiāl 
Algorithm Output: ਿਫ ṭab, ਯਕਭ਽ rkam , ਆਕ਼ਯਤ਽ ākrit   and ਼ਿਆਰ khiāl 
An exhaustive analysis has been done on fifty Punjabi news documents for normalization of 

Punjabi nouns and it is discovered that very less spelling variations are found. Only 1.562% noun 

words show the variations in their spellings. TABLE 1 shows that out of these 1.562% words, 

percentage of words having one, two or three variations: 

Number of 
Variants 

Words 
Frequency (%) 

Example 

1 99.95 ਩ੰਜ਻਱਽ pañjāl , ਩ੰਜ਻ਰ਽ pañjāl  
2 0.046 ੱਿ਱਽ ukkhla , ਉਿ਱਽ ukhla  ,  ੱਿਰ਽ ukkhl  
3 0.004 ਅੰਗਯੀਜ਽ aṅgr j , ਅੰਗਯੀਜ਼਽ aṅgr z , ਅੰਗਿੀਜ਽ aṅgr j , ਅੰਗਿੀਜ਼਽ 

aṅgr z  

TABLE 1 – Percentage Word Occurrence with Spelling Variations Count 

202



Thus, above table represents that, the variations found for majority of the words is just 1 and in 
worst case, it can go up to 3. And no case has been found with more than three spelling variants. 

2.4 Allowing input restrictions to input text 

Punjabi Text Summarization system allows Unicode based Gurmukhi text as input. Gurmukhi is 
the most common script used for writing the Punjabi language.  Punjabi Text Summarization 
system can accept maximum upto 1,00000 characters as input otherwise it will give error 
message. Majority of input characters should be of Gurmukhi otherwise error will be printed. 

Algorithm: 

Step 1 : If Uploaded input file is in Unicode based .txt format then calculate input character 
length and go to step 2, otherwise display the error message “Can not accept input of this type!!!”  

Step 2 : If input character length> 1,00000 characters then display error message “Input length 
exeeds the limit” otherwise go to step 3. 

Step 3 : From the input text, calculate length of Gurmukhi characters, Punctuation mark 
characters, numeric characters, English characters  and other characters. 

If Gurmukhi characters length is less than equal to Punctuation character length or numeric 
characters length or English Characters length or other characters length then display error 
message “Can not accept the input!!!” 

Else If English characters length or other characters length is greater than equal to 10% of total 
input characters length then display error message “Can not accept the input!!!” 

Else Go to Stop words elimination phase. 

2.5 Elimination of duplicate sentences from Punjabi input text 

Duplicate sentences are the redundant sentences which need to be deleted otherwise these can get 
the influence unnecessarily and due to which, certain other important sentences will not be 
displayed in the summary. Some summarization systems delete the duplicate sentences in the 
output summary and other systems delete them in the input itself. It is desirable to delete the 
duplicate sentences from input because numbers of input sentences are reduced and processing 
phase takes less time. Punjabi text summarization system eliminates the duplicate sentences from 
the input Punjabi text. An exhaustive analysis has been done on fifty Punjabi news documents for 
determining the frequency of duplicate sentences and it is discovered 9.60% sentences are 
duplicate. Minimum frequency of a duplicate sentence in a single Punjabi news document is two, 
maximum frequency is four and average frequency is three. Out of 9.6% duplicate sentences 
from fifty Punjabi news documents, there are 5.4% sentences with minimum frequency two, 
2.29% sentences with average frequency three and 1.91% sentences with maximum frequency 
four. Duplicate sentences are deleted from input by searching the current sentence in to the 
sentence list which is initially empty. If current sentence is found in sentence list then that 
sentence is set to null otherwise it is added to the sentence list being the unique sentence. This 
elimination prevents duplicate sentences from appearing in final summary.  

203



3 Pre processing algorithm for Punjabi text summarization system 

The algorithm for complete Pre Processing Phase (Gupta & Lehal 2011a) proceeds by checking 
input Punjabi text into proper format and segmenting it into sentences and words. Set the scores 
of each sentence as 0. Normalize the Punjabi noun morph for different spelling variations of 
nouns. For each word of every sentence follow step 1 and step 2:  

Step 1 : If current Punjabi word is stop word then delete all the occurrences of it from current 
sentence. 

Step 2 :If current Punjabi word is not present in Punjabi dictionary, Punjabi noun morph, 
common English-Punjabi nouns list, Punjabi proper nouns list then apply Punjabi Noun and 
proper noun Stemmer for the possibility of Punjabi noun or proper noun. 

Step 3: Delete redundant (duplicate) sentences from input text, to prevent them occurring in final 
summary and produce output of preprocessing phase. 

TABLE 2 shows sample input and output sentences, for pre processing algorithm. 
 

Input Punjabi sentence Output Punjabi sentence 
 

ਭਾੱ ਿ ਭੰਤਯ਽ ਨੇ ਼ਕਹ਻ ਼ਕ ਉਹ ਅੱਜ ਕਂਗਯਸ ਉਭ਽ਦਲ਻ਯ 
ਬਯਤ ਼ਸੰਘ ਫੁਰ਽ਲ਻ਰ ਰਈ ਲੂਿਂ ਦ਽ ਅ਩਽ਰ ਕਯਨ ਰਈ 
ਆਏ ਹਨ ਩ਯ ਲੂਿ ਩਻ਉਣ ਤ ਂ਩਼ਹਰਂ ਩਻ਯਿ਽ ਦ਽ ਨ਽ਤ਽, 
਼ਨਮਤ ਤੀ ਨੇਤ਻ ਫ਻ਯੀ ਜਯਿਯ ਼ਲਚ਻ਯ ਦ਽ ਰੂੜ ਹੁ। 
mukkh mantr  n  kihā ki uh ajj kāṅgras um dvār 
bharat siṅgh bail vāl la  vōṭāṃ d  ap l karan la  
ā  han par vōṭ pāuṇ tōṃ pahilāṃ pāraṭ  d  n t , 
niyat t  n tā bār  jarūr vicār d  lōṛ hai. 

ਭਾੱ ਿ ਭੰਤਯ਽ ਅੱਜ ਕਂਗਯਸ ਉਭ਽ਦਲ਻ਯ ਬਯਤ ਼ਸੰਘ 
ਫੁਰ਽ਲ਻ਰ  ਲੂਿ  ਅ਩਽ਰ      ਲੂਿ   ਩਼ਹਰ ਩਻ਯਿ਽  
ਨ਽ਤ਽ ਼ਨਮਤ  ਨੇਤ਻  ਜਯਿਯ ਼ਲਚ਻ਯ  ਰੂੜ 
mukkh mantr  ajj kāṅgras um dvār bharat 
siṅgh bail vāl  vōṭ  ap l      vōṭ   pahil 
pāraṭ   n t  niyat  n tā  jarūr vicār  lōṛ 

TABLE 2 – Pre processing algorithm sample input and output sentences 

A through analysis of result of pre processing phase has been done on fifty Punjabi news 
documents and stories and it is discovered, that with pre processing phase there is gain in 32% 
efficiency of Punjabi Text Summarization system at 50% compression ratio.  

Conclusion  

Punjabi text summarization system is first of its kind Punjabi summarizer and is available online 
at http://pts.learnpunjabi.org/default.aspx. In this paper, we have discussed the complete pre 
processing phase for Punjabi text summarization system. Most of the lexical resources used in 
pre processing such as Punjabi stemmer, Punjabi nouns normalizer, Punjabi proper names list, 
common English-Punjabi nouns list, Punjabi stop words list  etc. had to be developed from 
scratch as no work was done previously in that direction. For developing these resources an in-
depth analysis of Punjabi corpus, Punjabi dictionary and Punjabi morph had to be carried out 
using manual and automatic tools. This is first time that these resources have been developed for 
Punjabi and these can be beneficial for developing other NLP applications for Punjabi. 
         

204



References 

Ananthakrishnan Ramanathan  and Durgesh Rao,  (2003). A Light Weight Stemmer for Hindi. 
In  Workshop on Computational Linguistics for South-Asian Languages, EACL’03. 

Farshad Kyoomarsi, Hamid Khosravi, Esfandiar Eslami and Pooya Khosravyan Dehkordy. 
(2008). Optimizing Text Summarization Based on Fuzzy Logic. In: proceedings of  Seventh 
IEEE/ACIS International Conference on Computer and Information Science, pages 347-352, 
University of Shahid  Bahonar Kerman, UK. 

Gurmukh  Singh, Mukhtiar S. Gill and S.S. Joshi, (1999). Punjabi to English Bilingual 
Dictionary. Punjabi University Patiala , India.  

Khosrow Kaikhah, (2004). Automatic Text Summarization with Neural Networks. In  
Proceedings of IEEE international Conference on intelligent systems, pages 40-44, Texas, USA.  

Mandeep Singh  Gill,  Gurpreet  Singh Lehal  and S. S. Gill, (2007). A full   form  lexicon based 
Morphological Analysis and generation tool for  Punjabi.  International  Journal of  Cybernatics 
and Informatics, pages 38-47, Hyderabad, India. 
http://www.advancedcentrepunjabi.org/punjabi_mor_ana.asp 

Mandeep  Singh  Gill, Gurpreet Singh Lehal and S.S. Joshi, (2009). Part of Speech  Tagging  for 
Grammar   Checking   of   Punjabi,   Linguistic Journal,  4(1): 6-21, Road Town, Tortola British  
Virgin Islands. 

Md. Zahurul Islam, Md. Nizam Uddin and Mumit Khan, (2007). A light weight stemmer for 
Bengali and its Use in spelling Checker. In: Proceedings of 1st International Conference on 
Digital Comm. and Computer Applications (DCCA 2007), pages 19-23, Irbid, Jordan. 

Mohamed Abdel Fattah and Fuji Ren (2008). Automatic Text Summarization. In: Proceedings 
of World Academy of Science Engineering and Technology, volume 27, pages 192-195. 

Joel L. Neto, (2000). Document Clustering and Text Summarization. In: Proceedings  of 4th Int. 
Conf. Practical Applications of Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages 41-55, London. 

Praveen Kumar, S. Kashyap,  Ankush Mittal and Sumit Gupta, (2005). : A Hindi question  
answering system for E-learning documents. In Proceedings of International Conference on 
Intelligent sensing and Information processing, pages 80-85, Banglore, India  

Vishal Gupta and Gurpreet Singh Lehal, (2010). A Survey of Text Summarization Extractive 
Techniques. In International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Web Intelligence, 2(3): 258-
268. 

Vishal Gupta and Gurpreet Singh Lehal, (2011a). Preprocessing Phase of Punjabi Language 
Text Summarization. In Proceedings of International conference on Information Systems for 
Indian Languages Communications in Computer and Information Science ICISIL2011, pages 
250–253, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. 

Vishal Gupta and Gurpreet Singh Lehal, (2011b). Punjabi language stemmer for nouns and 
proper nouns. In proceedings of   the 2nd Workshop on South and Southeast Asian Natural 
Language Processing (WSSANLP) IJCNLP , pages 35-39, Chiang Mai, Thailand. 

205




