



















































Semantic Processing of Compounds in Indian Languages


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Technical Papers, pages 1489–1502,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Semantic Processing of Compounds in Indian Languages

Amba Kulkarni1 Soma Paul2 Malhar Kulkarni3

Anil Kumar1 Nitesh Surtani2

1. Department of Sanskrit Studies, University of Hyderabad
2. International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad

3. School of Humanities and Social Sciences, I.I.T. Bombay

apksh@uohyd.ernet.in, soma@iiit.ac.in, malharku@gmail.com,

anil.lalit22@gmail.com, nitesh.surtani0606@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
Compounds occur very frequently in Indian Languages. There are no strict orthographic
conventions for compounds in modern Indian Languages. In this paper, Sanskrit compounding
system is examined thoroughly and the insight gained from the Sanskrit grammar is applied for
the analysis of compounds in Hindi and Marathi. It is interesting to note that compounding
in Hindi deviates from that in Sanskrit in two aspects. The data analysed for Hindi does not
contain any instance of Bahuvr̄ıhi (exo-centric) compound. Second, Hindi data presents many
cases where quite a lot of compounds require a verb as well as vibhakti(a case marker) for its
paraphrasing. Compounds requiring a verb for paraphrasing are termed as madhyama-pada-lop̄ı
in Sanskrit, and they are found to be rare in Sanskrit.

KEYWORDS: Multi Word Expression, Compounds, Pān. ini, As.t.ādhyāȳı, semantics.

1489



1 Introduction

Noun compounds represent a linguistic device of encrypting information that makes their
analysis a challenging NLP task. For example, consider a compound ‘ballpoint pen’. It is made
up of two nouns: a modifier ‘ballpoint’ and a head ‘pen’. The modifier is again a compound
that is composed of two nouns ‘ball’ and ‘point’. The relation between ‘ball’ and ‘point’ and in
turn between ‘ballpoint’ and ‘pen’ is not encoded anywhere on the surface although a user of
the language can decodify the meaning correctly. The study of compounds involves two major
tasks: 1) automatic identification and extraction of compounds from natural language texts
and 2) syntactic and semantic analysis of compounds. The task of identification of compounds
becomes significant because of orthographic vagaries. Orthographic conventions for writing
compounds may vary from language to language and even within the same language. For
example, in Sanskrit a compound is a single word, while in English (as exemplified above)
as well as in modern Indian Languages (ILs) we find the following conventions of writing:
components written with or without a space and components separated by a hyphen. When
compounds are written without a space, the adjoining phonemes undergo euphonic changes
as in gaṅgā-udaka changing to gaṅgodaka. Analysis of compounds primarily involves the
expansion of these syntactically condensed constructs with an aim to unfold the meaning of the
constructions (Butnariu and Veale, 2008; Girju et al., 2007; Kim and Baldwin, 2006; Kumar,
2012; Nakov, 2008; Nastase and Szpakowicz, 2009; Séaghdha and Copestake, 2007). Semantic
analysis of compound is significant for various NLP applications including machine translation,
information extraction and so on. Here we discuss one example to show how semantic analysis
helps in machine translation. For example, let us consider the English compounds cancer death
and room temperature. Lexical substitution of components of these compounds into Hindi
would produce the following result: kainsara mauta and kamarā tāpamāna which are not
legitimate constructions in Hindi. However, the semantic paraphrase of the two compounds,
namely, death from cancer and temperature of room will be helpful for achieving the correct
translations of the compounds: kainsara se (or ke kāran. a) mauta and kamare kā tāpamāna.
Currently there exist two different approaches in Computational Linguistics to deal with this
phenomenon (Paul et al., 2010). They are (a) Labeling the semantics of compound with a set of
abstract relations (Girju et al., 2003) and (b) Paraphrasing the compound in terms of syntactic
constructs. Paraphrasing is again done in three ways: (i) with prepositions (war story vs story
about war) (Lauer, 1995) (ii) with verb+preposition nexus (war story vs story pertaining to
war, noise pollution vs pollution caused by noise (Finin, 1980) (iii) with Copula (tuna fish vs
fish that is tuna) (Vanderwende, 1995).

Detailed study of Sanskrit compound processing had been taken up recently (Kumar, 2012),
and the insights gained there were found useful for processing the compounds in ILs. After
looking at the features of Sanskrit as described in the Sanskrit grammar, in the third section
we describe the automatic Sanskrit compound processor, followed by the insights we gained
from this processor to identify the compound tags and also the semantic categories necessary to
carry out the compound analysis automatically. The fourth section discusses as a case study, use
of these tags for Hindi and Marathi compound types. Conclusion follows in the fifth section.

2 Sanskrit Compounds

Pān. ini (500 BCE approximately) has described the process of compound formation in Sanskrit
in his grammar called As.t.ādhyāȳı. He used the term Samāsa for Compound. The word Samāsa
literally means “Throwing out together” which in the context means “throwing out the words

1490



together”. This concept implies that words are thrown out of mouth by human beings in
syntactically related structures. There are three main features of a Compound: 1. One word
(aikapadya), 2. One meaning (aikārthya) and 3. One accent (aikasvarya). According to Pān. ini,
two words within a sentence can form a compound if and only if there is syntactic compatibility
(sāmarthya) amongst them. Mere adjacency of words does not allow them to get compounded.
The words should be first syntactically related and further should possess the quality of being
used by the native speakers as one unit. Further, what distinguishes a compound from a non
compounded word group within a sentence are various morphological as well as syntactical
features such as a) loss of case, b) absence of intervention of other words, c) no possibility of
relation of a non-head word within a compound with another word in the sentence, d) absence
of expression of number of the first component.

There are broadly speaking four types of compounds in Sanskrit: 1. Avyaȳıbhāva, 2. Tatpurus.a,
3. Dvandva and 4. Bahuvr̄ıhi. Semantically, Avyaȳıbhāva and Tatpurus.a are endocentric
compounds with the head typically to the left and right respectively. Dvandva is a copulative
compound while Bahuvr̄ıhi is an exocentric compound. Many of the compounds are compo-
sitional and hence can be generated with the help of a rule base. However, there are some
compounds which are non-compositional and they are treated separately in Pān. ini’s grammar.
These compounds are called nitya samāsa (obligatory compounds), that is they are always
used in compounding form. Such compounds either can not be paraphrased at all (Avigraha)
or involve extra words other than the components for their paraphrase (Asvapadavigraha).
Following two examples will illustrate this point:

i) aśvakarn. a (name of a medicinal plant) is a compound made up of two words, aśva ‘a horse’
and karn. a ‘an ear’. When both these words are joined together, they result into a compound,
aśvakarn. a; but, this compound has no traces of the meanings of it’s components. Therefore,
this compound can not be paraphrased in terms of its components.

ii) Kākapeyā (meaning: a river which contains water potable only by crows). This compound is
made up of two components, namely, kāka ‘a crow’ and peya ‘potable’. As we see, there is an
additional semantic element of censure which goes to make this compound. This additional
meaning is obviously not a part of the component meanings.

The meaning of compounds may or may not be compositional. Based on the discussions in
traditional Sanskrit grammar sources, we see a spectrum of compositionality as illustrated
below (Shastri, 2006).
i) purely compositional (sambaddhārtha)
ex: rāja-purus.ah.
gloss: King - man
meaning: King’s man

ii) compositionality with fixity of expression (sampreks.ita)
ex: khat.vā-ārud. hah.
gloss: Bed - one who climbs
meaning: One who climbs the bed without completing the education

iii) Non compositionality (with some predictability) (samgatārtha)
ex: citra-gu
gloss: colorful - cow
meaning: One who has a colorful cow

1491



iv) Non compositionality (samsr.s.t.ārtha)
ex: as.va-karn. a
gloss: horse - ear
meaning: Name of a medicinal plant.

In Sanskrit compounds are always written without any space in between. But modern Indian
languages do allow space in between. Therefore, this spectrum of meanings makes it difficult to
decide whether a group of words written with space in between is a compound or not, making
the identification of a compound a challenging task for these languages.

3 Sanskrit Compound Processing

Sanskrit is rich in compound formation. Almost every fifth or sixth word in a randomly chosen
Sanskrit text is a compound. Compound formation being very productive, we can not list all the
compounds in a dictionary. An automatic compound processor was developed (Kumar, 2012)
as a part of Computational Toolkit for Sanskrit. This compound processor provides a general
architecture for processing compounds.

Analysing a Sanskrit compound involves
i) Segmentation,
ii) Deciding the constituency structure,
iii) Identification of relations between the constituents, and
iv) paraphrasing it.

3.1 Segmentation

In Sanskrit a compound is always written without any space. Moreover, the phonemes of the
adjoining components necessarily undergo euphonic changes. Splitting involves reversing these
euphonic changes. For instance, the compound gaṅgodaka is segmented as gaṅgā-udaka. It is
possible that a word is ambiguous leading to multiple possible splitting. In Sanskrit the authors
have taken advantage of this ambiguity which resulted in many texts with pun. The splitter
should be able to produce all possible splits and also rank them if possible. A splitter needs
sandhi rules and also a morphological analyser to validate the splits. Two different methods
have been followed for building a Sanskrit splitter (Mittal, 2010). In the first approach FST built
for morphological analyser is augmented with the sandhi rules (Huet, 2009). In the second
approach a given string is split in all possible ways following the sandhi rules, and then the splits
are validated through the morphological analyser. This is closer to the GENerate-CONstrain-
EVALuate model of Optimality theory (Prince and Smolensky, 1993). The sandhi rules split the
given string into all possible ways, then constraints, such as every component of the split should
be a valid morph, are applied, and finally the possible splits are ranked using the language and
split model. The results of this splitter are quite good, with 93% of cases the first split is correct.
This method, though sounds good, practically ends up generating thousands of splits 90% of
which are not validated morphologically. Thus this method is computationally less efficient. On
the other hand a splitter built by augmenting the FST with sandhi rules is computationally very
efficient, since it splits the string only if it is morphologically valid thereby avoiding unnecessary
splits. If this FST is further augmented with a proper model for sandhi rules and the lexicon,
better results are expected.

1492



3.2 Constituency Parser

Constituency parser takes an output of the segmenter and produces a binary tree showing the
syntactic composition of a compound corresponding to each of the possible segmentations. Each
of these compositions shows the possible ways various segments can be grouped. To illustrate
various possible parses that result from a single segmentation, consider the segmentation a-b-c
of a compound. A compound being binary1, the three components a-b-c may be grouped in
two ways as <a-< b-c>> or <<a-b>-c>. Only one of the ways of grouping may be correct
in a given context (unless the text has intended pun) as illustrated by the following two
examples. Parse of three-meter-wide is <<three-meter>-wide>, and that of iron water pump is
<iron-<water-pump>>. The number of possible parses increase exponentially as the number
of components increase. The problem of constituency parsing is similar to the problem of
completely parenthesizing n+1 factors in all possible ways. Thus the total possible ways of
parsing a compound with n+ 1 constituents is equal to a Catalan number, Cn (Huet, 2009). In
the absence of any morpheme marking the relation between the components, the constituency
structure is governed by the compatibility of meanings of the components involved. Hence
to decide the constituent structure, a semantically rich lexicon is needed. In the absence of
any such lexicon, the statistical properties of the manually tagged corpus were used (Kulkarni
and Kumar, 2011) to decide the constituency structure. For compounds with 3 components, it
had a F-measure of 93.66, in case of compounds with 4 components, the F-measure dropped
to 65.4. The corpus had compounds with as many as 10 components. On average in 86.5%
of cases, the machine could produce the correct parse. Pān. ini has also provided certain rules
with morphological constraints on the final component2, or certain group of words as an initial
component3. These rules help in prioritising the grouping. These rules, though are written
for Sanskrit, hold good across languages. Here is an example of a rule which deals with three
components. The sūtra (diksaṅkhye) taddhitārthottarapadasamāhāre ca (2.1.50) says that in
case of a compound with three components with number or direction indicating word as the
first component, the first two components combine first. This holds good for other languages
as well. For example, one day cricket match is <<one-day>-<cricket-match >> and South
Indian Association is <<South-Indian>-Association>. However, since the surface forms for
adjectival usage and compounding forms in English being the same, one may have ambiguous
expressions such as South sea route. But in Marathi which distinguishes between the adjectival
and compounding usage, daks.in. a sumudr̄ı mārga (<<south-sea>-route>) is different from
daks.in. ı̄ sumudr̄ı mārga (<south-<sea-route>>).

3.3 Type Identifier

The semantic classification of compounds given by Pān. ini is not only restricted to Sanskrit
language per se, but is more general. For example, the Cambridge Grammar of the English
language (Huddleston and Pullum, 2002) uses this classification to describe compounds in
English. Water pump is an endocentric compound. An endo-centric compound typically shows
a hyponymic relation with the head noun. An egghead is a bahuvr̄ıhi compound meaning a
person whose head resembles the shape of an egg, i.e. a high forehead, and hence intellectual.
An example of a coordinative compound is Hewlett-Packard meaning a company whose owners
are both Hewlett and Packard, or secretary-treasurer which stands for a person who is both a

1 With a possible exceptions of coordinative and certain other rare compounds.
2 for example, non-finite verbs ending in ‘kta’ suffix.
3 for example sūtras corresponding to the ‘avyaȳıbhāva’ type.

1493



secretary as well as a treasurer. The type of a compound thus is useful in deciding the meaning
of a compound. In order to decide the type of a compound, an access to the semantic content of
its constituents, and possibly even to the wider context is needed. Now the immediate question
is whether this classification of compounds into four classes is sufficient, or do we need further
sub-classification. The grammatical texts sub-divide the Tatpurus.a compounds further into sub-
classes based on the case marker the first component takes when the compound is paraphrased.
As an illustration, a compound vidyānipun. a ‘one who is sharp in the studies’, when paraphrased,
the first component takes a locative case marker, another compound Daśarathaputrah. ‘son of
Dasharatha’ takes a genitive marker, while the compound vyāghrabhaya ‘fear of a tiger’ takes
an ablative case marker in Sanskrit. Based on the paraphrase, a set of 56 fine-grain tags was
identified (Kumar et al., 2009) for Sanskrit.

It is important to note the level of semantics the compound tags deal with. Consider the
compounds rājapurus.ah. ‘King’s servant’, Daśarathaputrah. ‘son of Dasharatha’, and vr.ks.aśākhā
‘branch of a tree’. In the first case the relation between rājan ‘king’ and purus.a ‘man’ is that
of servant-master (sevya-sevaka), in the second the relation between Daśaratha and putrah.
‘son’ is of father-son (pitā-putra) and in the third case the relation between vr.ks.a ‘tree’ and
śākhā ‘branch’ is part-of (avayava-avayavi). However, in all the three cases instead of specifying
these deeper relations, relation between the components is expressed through the genitive case
suffix in the paraphrase of these compounds as rājñah. purus.ah. ‘King’s servant’, Daśarathasya
putrah. ‘son of Dasharatha’, and vr.ks.asya śākhā ‘branch of a tree’, and thus these are classified
as S. as.t.h̄ı-Tatpurus.a ‘genitive endocentric compounds with head to the right’. In other words,
the classification is not guided by the deeper semantics, but by the paraphrase of a given
compound, or by what the language expresses. Thus, on the one hand, to decide the meaning
of a compound, we need a fine-grain tagset, at the same time, it should not be as fine-grained
as to distinguish between the meaning of genitive cases in rājñah. purus.ah. , Das.arathasya putrah.
and vr.ks.asya śākhā.

Assuming that we follow the fine-grained classification of compounds as dictated by the
paraphrase, the question is, to what extent is it possible to decide the relation between the
words only on the basis of components involved? For classification, a manually tagged corpus
was used as a training data. A corpus of size 800K is tagged manually for the compounds
in context by the Sanskrit Consortium. This had 92K instances of compound words. The
distribution of frequent compounds is given in Table 1.

Type Percentage

Endocentric 58.70
Karmadhāraya
(IS_A) 18.11
Exocentric 11.04
copulative 5.67

Table 1: Distribution of Sanskrit Compounds

The endocentric compounds were further classified on the basis of missing case marker in the
paraphrase. It was found that 55% of these compounds required genitive case marker. (Kumar
et al., 2010) reported that the precision of a statistical classifier on this data considering only
the major classification, is 72.7%. Allowing sub-divisions resulting into fine-grained tagset

1494



lowers the performance to 63%. Statistical taggers perform well provided the training data is
sufficient. So their performance goes down on compounds of rare type. Pān. ini has provided
several sūtras in As.t.ādhyāȳı which deal with rare compound types. These sūtras provide various
kind of semantic conditions under which a particular type of compound formation takes place.
After going through the relevant sūtras, we observe that the conditions stated by Pān. ini fall
under the following categories.

1. A restricted list of allowed components in certain type of compounds is provided.

2. A restriction in terms of special inflectional suffix / derivational suffix / category is
mentioned.

3. A restriction is stated in terms of special technical terms, which are theory internal.

4. A restriction in terms of semantic relations between the components is mentioned.

5. Semantic property of the component is stated as a condition.

Out of these, the fourth and fifth category are important. The fourth category provides us clues
for the important types of relations. Efforts such as Sanskrit WordNet (Kulkarni et al., 2010) or
on marking semantic information in various kośas such as Amarakośa (Nair and Kulkarni, 2010)
are concerned about lexical as well as semantic relations. In the sūtras related to compounds,
we found the mention of following semantic relations.
i) víses.an. a-víses.ya-bhāva ‘modifier-modified relation’
ii) upamāna-upameya-bhāva ‘analogy or comparison’
iii) avayava-avayav̄ı-bhāva ‘part-whole relation’
iv) instrument-action relation.

The fifth category of conditions puts certain restrictions on the component in terms of semantic
properties such as the component should be either a number or a direction or a color or a class
indicating word or an adjective. This provides us a clue that the lexicon should have these
semantic properties marked to enable automatic compound processing.

3.4 Paraphrase

The tagset for Sanskrit is dictated by the paraphrase. So except for some rare compound types
with irregular paraphrases, typically each tag correspond to a well defined paraphrase (Kumar
et al., 2009), distinct from the other, and one can then generate the paraphrase automatically.
For example, the paraphrase rule for a S.as.t.h̄ı Tatpuruśa (T6) ‘genitive compound’ is given as
below.

<x-y>T6 = x{6} y

where x{6} stands for the nominal form of x in genitive case. The paraphrase rules for the
complete tagset along with the paraphrase generation is discussed in (Kumar et al., 2009).
The problematic cases were those with an elision of certain terms called madhyampadalop̄ı.
For example, the paraphrase of Śākapārthivah. ‘vegetable - human’ is Śākapriyah. pārthivah. ‘a
human who likes vegetables’. In order to get this paraphrase, we need to insert appropriate
content word. Such compounds are rare in Sanskrit, and are listed as exceptions.

1495



3.5 Insights Gained
This detailed study of Sanskrit compounds has helped us in getting a good insight into the
compound processing. To understand the meaning of a compound, or to translate a compound
into another language, first one needs to understand the underlying constituency structure. For
example,
South Indian Cricket Association = <<South-Indian>-<Cricket-Association>>,
South Indian Food Plaza = <<<South-Indian>-Food>-Plaza>, and
Colon Cancer Tumor Suppressor Protein = <<<<Colon-Cancer>-Tumor>-Suppressor>-
Protein>.

The second important step in understanding of a compound is to identify the relation between
the component pairs. These relations are classified broadly into four categories depending upon
the position of the head in the compound. The four major types of compounds were further
sub-divided taking into account the differences in their paraphrases. Manual tagging of the
Sanskrit compounds revealed that only few of the compounds are very frequent. They include
Tatpurus.a, Bahuvr̄ıhi and the Karmadhāraya. In case of Tatpurus.a compounds, the paraphrase
requires appropriate case marker which shows the relation between the components. Among
the Tatpurus.a compounds S.as.t.h̄ı Tatpurus.a ‘genitive’ were most frequent. The Karmadhāraya
marking the relation of co-referentiality was also frequent. The Sanskrit grammar also provided
us certain clues for identifying a compound and its types based on its components.

Finally an important observation from Pān. ini’s treatment of Sanskrit grammar was the following.
Pān. ini has strived hard to make his grammar as exhaustive as possible by providing rules to
handle very rare compounds. So we could take the advantage of both the statistical techniques
which perform better with frequent cases and the rule based approach to cover the rare cases.

4 Nominal Compounds in Marathi and Hindi
We used these insights for processing nominal compounds in two major Indian Languages,
namely, Hindi and Marathi. Both languages do not have any specific convention for writing the
compounds. We find instances of compounds written with components joined together, with a
hyphen in between and also with a space in between. Compounds when written as a single
word need a segmenter to split it into valid components.

It was observed that a special type of compounds termed as ‘Avyaȳıbhāva’ are always written
as a single word in these languages. Examples of such compounds are yathāśakti ‘as per the
capability’, anurūpa ‘in accordance with’. These are statistically found to be rare in Sanskrit
Corpus. We also observe that in Hindi as well as Marathi also such compounds are rare. There
could be two ways of accounting for such rare compounds:
1. To have them stored in the lexicon.
2. To have rules with the help of which such compounds can be analysed.
Pān. ini has accounted for such rare compounds with rules which we may use for Hindi and
Marathi as well.

In what follows we concentrated only on the compounds written with a space in between.
The study was undertaken only to decide the tagset for marking the relation between the
components. The tagset for Sanskrit is very exhaustive, covering even the rare compounds.
However the purpose of this study was to identify only those tags which are frequent in Hindi
and Marathi.

The researchers working on the Cross Lingual Information Retrieval systems among Indian

1496



Languages at IIT Bombay have developed a tool for automatic extraction of Multi Word
Expressions from a corpus that uses minimum linguistic tools such as morphological analysers,
and POS taggers. The candidates were ranked using Point-wise Mutual Information (PMI)
method. Marathi corpus from Tourism domain consisting of 15,925 sentences with 0.325M
words was chosen for the experiment. The Multi Word Expression extraction tool gave an
initial set of Multi Word Expressions. From these Multi Word Expressions for Marathi, noun
compounds were extracted manually, and a study was undertaken to identify the relations
between the components. Table 2 lists the identified relations with examples from Marathi.

Dependence relation Example Gloss Meaning

Tādarthya (Purpose) Praveśa dvāra Entry door Door for entry
Karan. a (Instrument) Hasta shilpa Hand Architechture Architecture made

by Hand
adhikaran. a (Loca-
tion)

Bhitti chitra Wall painting Painting on the wall

samānādhikaran. a
(co-referentiality)

Bauddha dharma Buddhist religion Buddhist religion

sāhasika paryat.ana adventurous Tourism adventurous
Tourism

dara vars.̄ı Every in year Every year

śes.a (genitive)

samudra tat.a Sea bank/shore Shore of sea
pāka kalā Cooking art Art of cooking
paryat.ana sthala tourism place place of tourism
upāhāra gr.ha little food house restaurant

Table 2: Relations in Marathi Noun compounds

As observed in Sanskrit, in Marathi as well we found compounds with genitive case marker, com-
pounds with co-referential components and compounds involving various kinds of dependency
relation amongst the components were dominant.

In order to make sure that these relations are sufficient across other ILs, we repeated this study
with Hindi. However, this time the compounds were extracted from a Hindi-Urdu dependency
treebank being developed at IIIT Hyderabad. Pān. inian grammar formalism is being followed
for the annotation. The treebank has 10,799 sentences consisting of approximately 0.25M
words. The compounds in this treebank form a chunk and are annotated with a special label.
This made it easy to extract the sentences with compounds. We have examined around 827
sentences and identified 895 noun compounds with two components. Number of unique
compounds is 597. Among them 20 are dvandva (copulative) compounds and 15 are cases of
reduplication. We observe that compounds can be analysed with genitive (s.as.t.h̄ı sambandha)
for around 45% of times even though we understand that paraphrasing with genitives does not
necessarily capture deep semantic relations (see section 3.3 for examples). Nevertheless for
the purpose of machine translation genitive paraphrasing may be sufficient because a genitive
construct in one language can be mostly translated into a genitive construct in another language
whereas a source language compound need not remain a compound in the target language. For
example, both the compound room temperature and the corresponding genitive construction
temperature of room can only be translated into kamare kā tāpamāna in Hindi. In case of

1497



English-Hindi language pairs, it was observed that in 59% of cases an English Noun compound
can be translated into genitive construction in Hindi (Paul et al., 2010). However, for other
NLP tasks such as information extraction, question answering etc., genitive relation will not be
sufficient and one needs to look for deeper semantic relation. In the present work, we have
attempted annotation of deeper semantic relation only when the paraphrase with genitive is
illegitimate. The paraphrases were of the following types.

a) with vibhakti (equivalent to post-positions)
b) verb + vibhakti (and not with vibhakti alone)
c) Subtype relation (hyponymy relation)
d) Other kinds of paraphrase

We will discuss each case with suitable examples:

(I) Paraphrasing with vibhakti alone
We come across six classes of vibhaktis4 which are used for paraphrasing other than the
genitive one. Table 3 provides the examples.

(II) Paraphrasing with verb + vibhakti
We find many cases where a meaningful paraphrase is not possible with post-position
alone. We have used verbal form along with post-position for meaningful paraphrasing
for such cases. For example:

• antar̄ıks.a yāna vs antar̄ıks.a meṁ jāne vālā (or ke lie) yāna
gloss: space ship vs ship that goes into space

• rela sad. aka vs rela calane ke lie sad. aka
gloss: railway track vs track for the running of train

• rājya sarakāra vs rājya ke lie cun̄ı gaȳı sarakāra
gloss: state government vs a government to run the state affairs

• nirvān. a sthala vs nirvān. a prāpti (or pāne) ke lie sthala (which according to some
annotators can be tagged as nirvān. a ke lie sthala)
gloss: nirvān. a place vs a place where nirvān. a is attained

• garbha gr.ha vs garbha meṁ sthita gr.ha
gloss: inside room vs a room situated inside

(III) Hyponymic Relation
This relation is quite common apart from vibhakti paraphrasing. Hyponymic relations
can again be of different nature as exemplified below.

(i) A hyponymic relation which is similar to samānādhikarana (see section 3.3). For
example,
a. kāngresa dala vs kāngresa IS_A (nāmaka) dala
gloss: Congress Party
b. tat.araks.aka bala vs tat.araks.aka IS_A (nāmka) bala
gloss: Post guard

4 Vibhakti or post-position can be multi word in Hindi; for example: ke vis.aya meṁ, ke bAre meṁ etc. These multi
word expressions are treated as one post-position.

1498



Vibhakti Meaning
Instances

Compound Gloss English Transla-
tion

se, ke
dvārā

With

rimot. kant.rola Remote Control Remote Control

gaisa p̄ıd. ita Gas Victim Gas Victim
phot.o pahacāna Photo Identity Identity Card
dhvani
pradūs.an. a

Noise Pollution Noise Pollution

dūrasaṁchāra
sevā

Telecom Service Telecom Service

se From
sevā nivr.tta Service Retired Retired from Ser-

vice
karma nivr.tti Work Retired Retired from

Work

ke lie For

surakshā bala Security Forces Security Forces
samanvaya
samiti

Sensation Com-
mittee

Sensation Com-
mittee

t.urist.a hāusa Tourist House Tourist House
prajanana aṁga Reproductive Or-

gans
Reproductive Or-
gans

śoka saṁvedanā Mourning Sensa-
tion

Condolence

meṁ,
para

In, On, At
besa kāmpa Base Camp Base Camp

bāla aparādha Child Crime Juvenile Delin-
quency

ke
vis.aya
meṁ

About
vidhi śiks.ā Legal Education Legal Education

śramika mudde Labour Issues Labour Issues
ke
sam-
bandha
meṁ,
sam-
band-
hita

About
(with
regard to)

videśa n̄ıti Foreign Policy Foreign Policy

anusandhāna
vibhāga

Research Depart-
ment

Research Depart-
ment

Table 3: Paraphrasing Hindi compounds with vibhakti alone

(ii) A hyponymic relation which refers the whole Multi Word Expression as a type of
the entity that the head denotes; for example:
a. mot.ara bot.a vs mot.ara bot.a IS_A (Type of) bot.a (unlike (i), mot.ara is not a bot.a)

1499



gloss: Motor Boat
b. prashna cinha vs prashna cinha IS_A (Type of) cinha
gloss:question mark

(IV) Other kinds of paraphrases
We come across some cases where the genitive paraphrase is possible if and only if the
modifier can be pluralized. For example,

(a) film abhinetā vs filmoṁ kā abhinetā
gloss: film actor vs actor of film

(b) pujār̄ı samudāya vs pujār̄ıyoṁ kā samudāya
gloss: priest group vs group of priests

(c) cālaka dala vs cālakoṁ kā dala
gloss: driver group vs group of drivers

The heads of (b) and (c) are aggregate nouns and therefore the modifier acquires plural
meaning. In case of (a), film (sg.) kā abhinetā would mean actor of a particular film;
whereas film abhinetā as a compound conveys the meaning of ‘profession’ as in amitābha
eka film abhinetā haiṁ. The other suitable paraphrase would be film meṁ kāma karane
vālā abhinetā, where film remains singular.

There are institutionalized terms such as pulisa āyukta, vikāsa saciva and so on and also
borrowed compounds such as d. āyala up ‘dial up’, kebal cār ‘cable car’, which we have
left out of the scope of paraphrasing. Table 4 presents number of occurrence of various
paraphrases in the data that we have analysed.

Type No of Instances Percentage

Genitive 270 47.12
Paraphrasing with
Vibhakti alone

80 13.96

Hyponymic Relation 68 11.86
Paraphrasing with
verb + Vibhakti

40 6.98

Copulative 20 3.49
Reduplications 15 2.62
Other kinds of Para-
phrases

14 2.44

Difficulty in annota-
tion

66 11.51

Table 4: Analysis of Hindi data for various types of paraphrases

This table further supports our intuition from analysis of Marathi data that the tatpurus.a ‘endo-
centric with missing case markers’ and the copulative compounds are more frequent, providing
a very strong empirical support for the development of tagset for semantic annotation of noun
compounds. In Hindi we also found a considerable number of compounds which require an
additional verb and a post position marker for paraphrasing. It is necessary to study the last

1500



category of compounds further in order to enable machines to carry out the analysis and ‘guess’
the missing verb automatically.

5 Conclusion

It is clear from the data analysed for Sanskrit and Hindi that the most dominating type of
compounds is the S. as.t.h̄ı Tatpurus.a (genitive), in both languages. There are cases of Tatpurus.a
which cannot be analysed with genitive and they are paraphrased with various vibhaktis (case
markers). We come across quite a number of cases of Karmadhāraya ‘hyponymic’ compounds.
It is interesting to note that compounding in Hindi deviates from that in Sanskrit in two aspects.
Data analysed for Hindi does not contain any instance of Bahuvr̄ıhi (exo-centric) compound.
Second, Hindi data presents many cases where quite a lot of compounds requires a verb as
well as vibhakti for its paraphrasing. Such compounds are termed as madhyama-pada-lop̄ı in
Sanskrit, and they are found to be rare in Sanskrit. The compounds which were found to be
difficult for the annotators should form the part of a lexicon.

References

Butnariu, C. and Veale, T. (2008). A concept-centered approach to noun compound inter-
pretation. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING-08), Manchester, UK.

Finin, T. W. (1980). The semantic interpretation of nominal compounds. In In the Proceedings
of the 1st Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-80).

Girju, R., Badulescu, A., and Moldovan, D. (2003). Learning semantic constraints for the
automatic discovery of part-whole relations. In In the proceedings of the Human Language
Technology Conference (HLT).

Girju, R., Nakov, P., Nastase, V., Szpakowicz, S., Turney, P., and Yuret, D. (2007). Classification
of semantic relations between nominals. In Proceedings of The Semantic Evaluation Workshop
(SemEval) in Conjunction with ACL, Prague.

Huddleston, R. and Pullum, G. K. (2002). The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language.
Cambridge University Press.

Huet, G. (2009). Formal structure of Sanskrit text: Requirements analysis for a mechanical
Sanskrit processor. In Huet, G., Kulkarni, A., and Scharf, P., editors, Sanskrit Computational
Linguistics 1 & 2. Springer-Verlag LNAI 5402.

Kim, S. N. and Baldwin, T. (2006). Interpreting semantic relation in noun compound via verb
semantics. In Proceedings of ACL/COLING-2006.

Kulkarni, A. and Kumar, A. (2011). Statistical constituency parser for Sanskrit compounds. In
Proceedings of ICON 2011. Macmillan Advanced Research Series, Macmillan Publishers India
Ltd.

Kulkarni, M., Dangarikar, C., Kulkarni, I., Nanda, A., and Bhattacharyya, P. (2010). Introducing
sanskrit wordnet. In Pushpak Bhattacharyya, C. F. and Vossen, P., editors, Principles, Construc-
tion and Application of Multilingual Wordnets, Proceedings of the Global Wordnet Conference,
2010. Narosa Publishing House, New Delhi.

1501



Kumar, A. (2012). An automatic Sanskrit Compound Processing. PhD thesis, University of
Hyderabad, Hyderabad.

Kumar, A., Mittal, V., and Kulkarni, A. (2010). Sanskrit compound processor. In Jha, G. N.,
editor, Proceedings of the International Sanskrit Computational Linguistics Symposium. Springer-
Verlag LNAI 6465.

Kumar, A., SheebaSudheer, V., and Kulkarni, A. (2009). Sanskrit compound paraphrase
generator. In Proceedings of ICON 2009.

Lauer, M. (1995). Designing Statistical Language Learners: Experiments on Noun compounds.
PhD thesis, Macquarie University, Australia.

Mittal, V. (2010). Automatic sanskrit segmentizer using finite state transducers. In Proceedings
of the ACL 2010 Student Research Workshop, pages 85–90, Uppsala, Sweden. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Nair, S. and Kulkarni, A. (2010). The knowledge structure in amarakośa. In Jha, G. N., editor,
Proceedings of the International Sanskrit Computational Linguistics Symposium. Springer-Verlag
LNAI 6465.

Nakov, P. (2008). Noun compound interpretation using paraphrasing verbs: Feasibility study.
In Proceeding of 13th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence: Methodology, Systems
and Applications (AIMSA-08), Varna, Bulgaria.

Nastase, V. and Szpakowicz, S. (2009). The same semantic relations link structurally different
realizations of concept. In Linguistic Issues in Language.

Paul, S., Mathur, P., and Kishore, S. (2010). Syntactic construct: An aid for translating english
nominal compound into hindi. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Extracting and
Using Constructions in Computational Linguistics, Los Angeles, California.

Prince, A. and Smolensky, P. (1993). Optimality theory: Constraint interaction in generative
grammar. Technical report, Rutgers University, Piscataway.

Séaghdha, D. O. and Copestake, A. (2007). Co-occurrence contexts for noun-compound
interpretation. In Proceedings of the ACL-07 Workshop on a Broader Perspective on Multiword
Expression (MWE-07), Prague, Czech Republic.

Shastri, G. (2006). Patañjali’s Vyākaran. a Mahābhās.ya with Kaiyat.a’s Prad̄ıpa and Nāgojibhat.t.a’s
Uddyota with the Notes by Guruprasad Shastri (Adhyāya 2). Rashtriya Sanskrit Sansthan, New
Delhi (reprint of 1938 edition).

Vanderwende, L. (1995). The Analysis of Noun Sequences Using semantic Information Extracted
from on-line Dictionaries. PhD thesis, Georgetown University.

1502


