



















































Extraction of Domain-Specific Bilingual Lexicon from Comparable Corpora: Compositional Translation and Ranking


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Technical Papers, pages 745–762,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Extraction of domain-specific bilingual lexicon from 
comparable corpora: compositional translation and ranking

Estelle DELPECH1, Béatrice DAILLE1, Emmanuel MORIN1, Claire LEMAIRE2,3
(1) UNIVERSITÉ DE NANTES – LINA UMR 6241, 2 rue de la Houssinière, BP 92208, 44322 Nantes, 

Cedex 3, France
(2) UNIVERSITÉ STENDHAL – GRENOBLE – ILCA – BP 25, 38040 Grenoble Cedex 9, France

(3) LINGUA ET MACHINA, c/o Inria Rocquencourt BP 105, Le Chesnay Cedex 78153, France
estelle.delpech@univ-nantes.fr, beatrice.daille@univ-nantes.fr, 
emmanuel.morin@univ-nantes.fr, claire.lemaire1@e.u-grenoble3.fr 

ABSTRACT

This paper proposes a method for extracting translations of morphologically constructed terms 
from  comparable  corpora.  The  method  is  based  on  compositional  translation  and  exploits 
translation  equivalences  at  the  morpheme-level,  which  allows  for  the  generation  of  “fertile”  
translations (translation pairs in which the target term has more words than the source term).  
Ranking methods relying on corpus-based and translation-based features are used to select the 
best  candidate  translation.  We  obtain  an  average  precision  of  91%  on  the  Top1  candidate 
translation. The method was tested on two language pairs (English-French and English-German) 
and with a small specialized comparable corpora (400k words per language).

TITLE AND ABSTRACT IN ANOTHER LANGUAGE, FRENCH

Extraction  de  lexiques  bilingues  spécialisés  à  partir  de  corpus 
comparales : traduction compositionnelle et ordonnancement
Cet  article  propose  une  méthode  permettant  d'extraire  des  traductions  de  termes 
morphologiquement  construits  à  partir  de  corpus  comparables.  La  méthode  se  base  sur  la 
traduction  compositionnelle  et  exploite  des  équivalences  traductionnelles  au  niveau 
morphologique,  ce  qui  nous  permet  de  générer  des  traductions  “fertiles”  (des  paires  de 
traductions dans lesquelles le terme cible a plus de mots que le terme source). Des méthodes 
d'ordonnancement s'appuyant sur des traits extraits du corpus et des paires de traduction sont 
utilisées pour sélectionnner la meilleure traduction candidate. Nous obtenons une précision de 
91% sur le  Top1 en moyenne.  La méthode a été testée sur deux paires  de langues (anglais-
français et anglais-allemand) et sur un corpus comparable spécialisé de petite taille (400k mots  
par langue).

KEYWORDS: COMPUTER-AIDED TRANSLATION,  MACHINE TRANSLATION,  COMPARABLE CORPORA,  LEARNING-TO-
RANK, COMPOSITIONALITY, TERMINOLOGY

MOTS-CLÉS :  TRADUCTION ASSISTÉE PAR ORDINATEUR,  TRADUCTION AUTOMATIQUE,  CORPUS COMPARABLES, 
LEARNING-TO-RANK, COMPOSITIONNALITÉ, TERMINOLOGIE

745



Introduction

Comparable corpora  are composed of texts in different languages which are not translations but 
deal with the same subject  matter and were produced in similar situations of communication. 
They are  used  in  Computer-Aided  Translation to  provide  technical  translators  with  domain-
specific bilingual lexicons when there is no parallel data available (e.g. translation memories, 
multilingual terminologies). This situation happens when translators have to translate texts which 
deal with emerging technical domains or when the translation is done from/to an under-resourced 
language. Comparable corpora also have the advantage of containing more idiomatic expressions 
than parallel corpora do because the target texts do not bear the influence of the source language. 
Indeed,  Baker  (1996)  observed  that  translated  texts  tend  to  bear  features  like  explicitation, 
simplification, normalization and levelling out.  As a consequence, one of the difficulties with 
comparable corpora is that the translation of a source term may not be present in its “normalized” 
or “canonical” form but rather in the form of a morphological or paraphrastic variant (e.g. post-
menopausal translates  to  après  la  ménopause  'after  the  menopause' instead  of  post-
ménopausique).  Another  limitation  is  that  algorithms output,  for  each  source  term,  a  set  of 
candidate  translations  instead  of  just  one  target  term. This  state  of  affairs  makes  it  very 
challenging  for  translators  to  use  lexicons  extracted  from  comparable  corpora  in  real-life 
situations (Delpech, 2011).

The solution that consists in increasing the size of the corpus in order to find more translation  
pairs or to extract parallel segments of text (Fung & Cheung, 2004; Rauf & Schwenk, 2009) is  
only possible when large amounts of texts are available. In the case of the extraction of domain-
specific lexicons, we quickly face the problem of data scarcity: in order to extract high-quality 
lexicons, the corpus must contain text dealing with very specific subject domains and the target 
and source texts must be highly comparable. If one tries to increase the size of the corpus, one 
takes the risk of decreasing its quality by adding out-of-domain texts. Studies support the idea 
that the quality of the corpora is more important than its size. Morin et al. (2007) show that the 
discourse categorization of the documents increases the precision of the lexicon despite the data  
sparsity. Bo & Gaussier (2010) show that they improve the quality of the extracted lexicon if 
they improve the comparability of the corpus by selecting a smaller – but more comparable – 
corpus from an initial set of documents.

This  paper  proposes  methods  for  ranking  and  extracting  canonical  translations  as  well  as 
translation variants, with a special focus on the extraction of fertile translations. In parallel texts 
processing, the notion of fertility has been defined by Brown  et al. (1993). They defined the 
fertility of a source word e as the number of target words to which e is connected in a randomly 
selected alignment. Similarly, we call a fertile translation a translation pair in which the target  
term has more words than the source term. The identification of fertile  translations is useful  
because (i) they frequentlty correspond to non-canonical translations, e.g. paraphrastic variants 
and (ii) they tend to correspond to vulgarized forms of technical terms (e.g. « cytotoxic » vs. «  
toxic to the cells ») which are useful when the translator translates lay science texts. Up to now, 
fertility  has  received  little  attention  in  the  field  of  comparable  corpora  processing.  To  our 
knowledge, only Daille & Morin (2005) and Weller et al. (2011) tried to extract translation pairs 
of different lengths from comparable corpora. Daille & Morin (2005) focus on the specific case 
of multi-word terms whose meaning is not compositional and tried to align these multi-word 
terms with either single-word terms or multi-word terms using a context-based approach. Weller 

746



et  al. (2011)  concentrate  on  translating   noun  compounds  as  noun  phrases.  Similar  to  the 
approach  presented  here,  Claveau  &  Kijak  (2011)  use  translation  equivalences  between 
morphemes  to  generate  translations  and  can  handle  fertility.  However  it  is  not  suited  for  
comparable corpora since it requires domain-specific parallel data (in their case, a multilingual 
terminology) to learn alignment probabilities.

Our method is based on compositional translation. We chose this approach because: (i) according 
to Namer & Baud (2007), compositional terms form a major part of the new terms found in 
technical and scientific domains, this is not restricted to the field of biomedicine as it is generally  
believed ; (ii) compositionality-based methods have been shown to clearly outperform context-
based ones for the translation of terms with compositional meaning, both in terms of translation 
accuracy and rank of the correct candidate translation (Morin & Daille, 2010) ; (iii) we believe 
that  compositionality-based  methods  offer  the  opportunity  to  generate  fertile  translations  if  
combined  with  a  morphology-based  approach.  This  method,  which  we  call  morpho-
compositional translation, consists in: (i)  decomposing the source term into morphemes:  post-
menopause is  split  into  post-  +  menopause1 ;  (ii)  translating the  morphemes  to bound 
morphemes  or  fully  autonomous  words: post- becomes  post-  or après, menopause  becomes 
ménopause ; (iii) recomposing the translated elements into a target term: post-ménopause 'post-
menopause',  après  la  ménopause 'after  the menopause'.  Fertile  translations can be generated 
because we allow bound morphemes to be translated to autonomous lexical items (e.g. prefix 
post-  → preposition  après).  The proposed ranking methods exploit various corpus-based and 
translation-based features.

This paper falls into 4 sections. Section 1 outlines recent research in compositional approaches to 
bilingual  lexicon  extraction.  Section  2 explains  the  methods  we  designed  for  translation 
generation  and  ranking.  Section  3 describes  our  experimental  data.  Section  4 presents  and 
discusses the results of our experimentations.

1 Compositional approaches to bilingual lexicon extraction

The core of compositional translation consists in generating candidate translations following the 
principle of compositionality: “the meaning of the whole is a function of the meaning of the  
parts” (Keenan & Faltz, 1985, pp. 24-25). Once the candidate translations have been generated, 
one generally ranks  them and selects the TopN candidate translations. Generation methods are 
described in section 1.1. Ranking methods are described in section 2.3.

1.1 Generation methods
Compositional  translation  consists  in  decomposing  the  source  term into  atomic  components, 
translating these components into the target language and recomposing the translated components 
into target terms. Existing implementations differ on the kind of atomic components they use for 
translation.

Lexical  compositional  translation  (Baldwin  & Tanaka,  2004;  Grefenstette,  1999;  Morin  & 
Daille, 2009; Robitaille  et al., 2006) deals with multi-word term to multi-word term alignment 
and uses lexical words as atomic components:  rate of evaporation is translated into French as 

1We use the following notations: trailing hyphen for prefixes (a-), leading hyphen for suffixes (-a), both for confixes (-
a-), no hyphen for autonomous morphemes (a) and a plus sign (+) for intra-word morpheme boundaries. The term confix 
is borrowed from Martinet (1979) and refers to neoclassical (Latin or Ancient Greek) roots.

747



taux d'évaporation by translating  rate to  taux and  evaporation to  évaporation using dictionary 
lookup. Recomposition may be done by permuting the translated components (Morin & Daille, 
2010) or with translation patterns (Baldwin & Tanaka, 2004).

Sublexical  compositional  translation deals  with  single-word  term  translation.  The  atomic 
components are subparts of the source single-word term. Cartoni (2009) translates neologisms 
created  by  prefixation  with  a  formalism called  Bilingual  Lexeme  Formation  Rules.  Atomic 
components  are  the  prefix  and  the  lexical  base:  Italian  neologism  ricostruire 'rebuild' is 
translated  into  French  reconstruire by  translating  the  prefix  ri- to  re- and  the  lexical  base 
costruire as  construire.  Weller  et al. (2011) translate two types of single-word term. German 
single-word terms formed by the concatenation of two neoclassical roots are decomposed into 
these two roots, then the roots are translated into target language roots and recomposed into an 
English or French single-word term, e.g.  Kalori1metrie2 is translated as  calori1metry2. German 
NOUN1+NOUN2 compounds are  translated into French  and English  NOUN1  NOUN2 or  NOUN1 PREP 
NOUN2 multi-word terms, e.g. ElektronenN1-mikroskopN2 is translated to electronN1 microscopeN2. 
Garera & Yarowsky (2008) translate various compound sequences  (NOUN1+NOUN2,  ADJ1+NOUN2 
…). They generate an English literal gloss of the compounds with the compositional method (for 
instance, the English gloss for the Albanian word hekurudhë 'railway' is iron path). Then, they 
search for entries in Lx-to-English dictionaries where the entry in language Lx is a word-to-word 
translation of  the English gloss (e.g.  iron path matches the German entry  Eisenbahn and the 
Italian  entry  ferrovia).  The  final  candidate  translations  are  the  fluent  English  translations 
proposed by the bilingual dictionaries (e.g.  Eisenbahn  and  ferrovia  both translate to  railway ; 
railway is considered as a potential translation for hekurudhë).

1.2 Ranking and selection methods
Generally, compositional translation generates several possible translations for one source term. 
One has to find a way to rank the translations from the most to the least reliable.  Garera & 
Yarowsky (2008) tried two ranking methods: (i) a probability score  P based on the number of 
different languages exhibiting the association between the literal gloss and the fluent translation ; 
(ii) the probability score P combined with the similarity of the source and target words' contexts 
using context-based methods like in the work of Rapp (1995) and Fung (1997). Robitaille et al. 
(2006) extract translation pairs from a corpus built by querying a search engine with a set of seed 
translation pairs.  They select  the candidate translations which are  semantically  related to the 
target seed terms. The semantic similarity measure is based on the number of hits containing the 
seed term and/or the candidate translation (Jaccard coefficient). Other works  simply select the 
candidate translations which occur in the target corpus (Weller  et al., 2001 ; Morin and Daille, 
2010) or which are significantly attested on the Web (Cartoni, 2009).

Only Baldwin and Takana (2004) use machine learning. They train a SVM classifier with corpus-
based, dictionary-based and translation pattern-based features and use the value returned by the 
classifier (a  continuous  value  between  -1  and  +1)  to  rank  the  candidate  translations. Their 
approach  is  tantamount  to  point-wise  approaches  in  learning-to-rank.  To our  knowledge,  no 
research work has investigated the possible contribution of advanced learning-to-rank algorithms 
to candidate translations ranking.  Learning-to-rank algorithms are  widely used in Information 
Retrieval for ranking documents from the most to the least relevant to a given query (Li, 2011). 
They can be easily ported to the problem of ranking the candidate translations of a source term. 
There  exists  three  families of  learning-to-rank algorithms:  point-wise (for  a  given  a  query-

748



document  pair,  predict  its  relevance  score  or  label:  ranking  is  treated  as  a  regression  or 
classification problem), pair-wise (for a given query and two documents, indicate which of the 
two documents is the most relevant) and list-wise (given a query and a list of documents, indicate 
how  to  order  the  documents:  this  last  family  straightforwardly  represents  learning-to-rank 
problem). According to the tests of Liu (2009), list-wise algorithms generally outperform the two 
other approaches.

1.3 Challenges of compositional translation
Compositional  translation faces four main challenges which are:  morphosyntactic variation: 
source  and  target  terms'  morphosyntactic  structures  are  different:  anti-cancerNOUN → anti-
cancéreuxADJ 'anti-cancerous'  ;  lexical variation: source and target terms contain semantically 
related - but not equivalent - words: machine translation → traduction automatique 'automatic  
translation' ; terminological variation: a source term can be translated to different target terms: 
oophorectomy  → ovariectomie 'oophorectomy', ablation des ovaires 'removal of the ovaries'  ; 
fertility: the target term has more content words than the source term. Note that fertility can have 
two origins. In the case of surface fertility, the target term has more words than the source term 
but source and target terms have the same number of morphemes. Source and target languages  
differ in the way they concatenate morphemes to form words: bi-dimensional → deux dimensions  
'two dimensions'. In the case of semantic fertility, the target term has more morphemes than the 
source term. Source and target languages differ in the way they combine elements of meaning to  
create  new  words:  voie  de  glace  'route  of  ice'  →  ice  climbing  route,  aquarelle (not 
decomposable) → water color.

Solutions to  morphosyntactic,  lexical  and  to  some extent  terminological  variation  have  been 
proposed in the form of thesaurus lookup (Robitaille et al., 2006), morphological derivation rules 
(Morin & Daille, 2010), morphological variant dictionaries (Cartoni, 2009) or morphosyntactic 
translation patterns (Baldwin & Tanaka, 2004; Weller et al., 2011). Although it is not specifically 
outlined in their paper, the work of Garera & Yarowsky (2008) can theoretically handle semantic 
fertility and lexical divergence. However, their method depends on a large number of dictionaries 
with a substantial coverage of compounds. Surface fertility has been addressed by Weller et al. 
(2011) for the specific case of German NOUN+NOUN compounds. The method presented here is 
able to deal  with surface fertility and to generate and rank translations for a large variety of 
morphologically constructed words.

2 Translation method

2.1 Principle of morpho-compositional translation 
The  idea  of  morpho-compositional  translation  is  to  apply  the  principle  of  compositional 
translation  at  the  morpheme-level  rather  than  at  the  lexical  level  and  to  allow  translation 
equivalences between bound and autonomous morphemes in order to generate fertile translations. 
It  relies  on  the  assumptions  that:  (i)  a  lexical  item  can  be  decomposed  into  smaller 
components. These components may be free, i.e. they can occur in texts as autonomous lexical 
items like toxicity in cardiotoxicity or bound, i.e. they cannot occur as autonomous lexical items, 
in that case they correspond to bound morphemes like -cardio- in cardiotoxicity  ; (ii) a bound 
component can be translated to an autonomous or a bound component: -cardio- can be 
translated  to -cardio-  or  cœur  'heart'  or  cardiaque  'cardiac'.  Thus,  cardiotoxicity  can  be 

749



translated to toxicité cardiaque 'cardiac toxicity' or toxicité pour le cœur 'toxicity to the heart' or 
cardiotoxicité 'cardiotoxicity'. 

Like other sublexical approaches, the main idea behind morpho-compositional translation is to go 
beyond the word level and work with subword components. In our case, these components are 
morpheme-like items which either (i) bear referential lexical meaning like confixes (-cyto-, -bio-) 
and autonomous lexical items (cancer, toxicity) or (ii) can substantially change the meaning of a 
word, especially prefixes (anti-, post-) and some suffixes (-less, -like). Unlike other approaches, 
morpho-compositional  translation  is  not  limited  to  small  set  of  source-to-target  structure  
equivalences. It takes as input a morphologically constructed single-word term which can be the 
result  of  prefixation  'pretreatment',  confixation  'densitometry',  suffixation  'childless', 
compounding 'anastrozole-associated'  or  any combinations of  the four.  Its  output  is  a  set  of 
single or multi-word candidate translations. For instance, postoophorectomy may be translated to 
postovariectomie 'postoophorectomy'  or  après l'ovariectomie 'after the oophorectomy'  or après  
l'ablation des ovaires 'after the removal of the ovaries'. 

Section 3.2 explains the algorithm for generating candidate translations. Section 3.3 describes 
different methods for ranking the candidate translations.

2.2 Generation algorithm 
The generation method is described in the algorithm 1. A detailed version of the algorithm can be 
found in the feasibility study of  Delpech et al. (2012).

Algorithm 1 Generate translations
Require: source_term, target_corpus
translations ← Ø
for all {c1, … ci} in DECOMPOSE (source_term) do

for all {e1, … ej} in CONCATENATE ({c1, … ci}) do
for all {t1, … tk} in {TRANSLATE (e1) × … TRANSLATE (ej)} do

if k ≠ j then
continue

for all{t1, … tk} in PERMUTATE ({t1, … tk}) do
for all {w1, … wl} in CONCATENATE ({t1, … tk}) do

for all match in MATCH ({w1, … wl}, target_corpus) do
add match to translations

return translations

The DECOMPOSE function splits the source term into minimal components {c1, … ci} by matching 
substrings of the term with lists of prefixes, confixes, suffixes and lexical items and respecting 
some length constraints on the substrings.  When several splittings are possible, only the ones 
with the highest number of components are retained.

The  CONCATENATE function  generates all possible concatenations of a list of components. For 
example, if the term “abc” has been split into 3 components {a, b, c}, then there are 4 different 
concatenations  :  {a,bc},  {ab,c},  {a,b,c},  {abc} (for  n  components,  we  have  2n-1 possible 
concatenations). When called used after the decomposition, the concatenation of the components 
increases the chances of matching the entries of the linguistic resources used by the TRANSLATE 
function. When called after the permutation, the concatenation is used to recreate a set of target 
words {w1, ...wl} from the set of translated components.

750



The TRANSLATE function uses two kinds of linguistic resources to generate translations. Bilingual 
resources map elements across languages. Variation resources are used to handle variation at the  
lexical and morphological level. Hence, the output of  TRANSLATE(e) correspond to  Trans(e)  U 
Trans(Varsrc(e)) U Vartgt(Trans(e)) where Trans is a bilingual resource, Var a variation resource, 
src is the source language and tgt is the target language. For example, toxic can be translated to 
toxique 'toxic', toxicité 'toxicity'  or  vénéneux 'poisonous'. If one element can not be translated 
then the translation of the whole fails. 

The PERMUTATE function serves to capture the fact that components' order may be different in the 
source and target language (distortion). As a general rule,  O(n!) procedures should be avoided 
but we are permuting small sets (up to 4 items). 

The  MATCH function returns  a series  of tokens which occur  in the target  corpus and whose 
lemmas match the generated target words {w1, … wl}. We allow for 3 stop words between each 
lemma. For example, if the system generates the target words {toxique, cellule} 'toxic, cell' from 
cytotoxic, it  will  match  “toxique pour les cellules” 'toxic to the cells'.  We consider that  two 
matches are one and the same translation if they correspond to the same series of (lemma, part-
of-speech) pairs. For example, toxique pour les cellules and toxique pour la cellule 'toxic to the  
cell' correspond to the same translation.

2.3 Ranking methods

We have considered four parameters for ranking the translations: frequency of the translation, 
part-of-speech translation probability, context similarity and the reliability of the resources used 
for translating the components of the source term. These parameters can be used separately or in  
a combined manner.

The frequency (FREQ) corresponds to the number of occurrences of the translation in the target 
corpus divided by the total number of words in the target corpus. 

The part-of-speech translation probability (POS) corresponds to  P(y|x),  the probability that a 
source term with part-of-speech x will be translated to a target term with part(s)-of-speech y, e.g. 
it is more probable that a NOUN is translated by another NOUN or by a NOUN PREP NOUN sequence 
rather than an ADVERB. The part-of-speech translation probabilities were acquired by running the 
software ANYMALIGN (Lardilleux, 2008) on the EMEA corpus (Tiedemann, 2009) which had been 
previously  pos-tagged  with  the  linguistic  analyzer  XELDA2. ANYMALIGN outputs  a phrase 
translation table. Each line of the translation table corresponds to an alignment a = {lems, poss,  
lemt, post, p(s|t), p(t|s)} where poss is the parts-of-speech of the source phrase, post is the parts-of-
speech of the target phrase and pos(t|s) is the probability of translating the source phrase to the 
target phrase. From these alignments, we obtain P(y|x) with the following formula:

The  context  similarity  (CONT) corresponds  to  the  method  used  for  ranking  translations  in 
context-based approaches. For each source term and target term we build a context vector. This 
vector indicates the number of times the term co-occurs with each word of the corpus within a 

2http://www.temis.com  

P (y∣x)=
∑

{a∈A∣poss=x , post=y }
p (t∣s)

∑
{a∈A∣poss=x }

p (t∣s)

751



contextual window of 5 words around the term. The number of co-occurrences is normalized 
with the log-likelihood ratio (Dunning, 1993). Then, the vector of the source term is translated  
into the target language. Finally, the source vector and the target vector are compared: the most 
similar the vectors, the most likely the target and source terms are translations of each other. The 
similarity between source vector s and target vector t is  computed with the weighted jaccard:

where  c(s,  w),  respectively  c(t,  w), is  the normalized number of  co-occurrences  between the 
source, respectively target, term and word w. Note that for multi-word terms, the context vector 
corresponds to the union of the context vectors of the lexical words that compose the multi-word  
term.

The resources score (RESO) corresponds to:

where T is the total number of components in the target term t and rel(Ti) is the reliability of the 
target component Ti. The reliability of a component is a float value between 0 and 1 inclusive. It 
depends on the nature of the component and on the resources which were used to generate it. We 
defined  8 types  of  target  components:  1)  the  target  component  is  a  lexical  item found in  a 
general-language dictionary ; 2) target component is a lexical item which was found by cognate 
matching ; 3)  target  component is a  lexical  item which is a  lexical  variant of the translation 
(found in general language dictionary or by cognate matching) ; 4) target component is a lexical 
item which is a  morphological variant of the translation ; 5)  target component is a  lexical item 
which is  the translation of  a  bound morpheme ;  6)  target  component  is  a  prefix ;  7)  target 
component is a confix ; 8) target component is a suffix. We tuned the reliability values associated 
to these 8 types of target components empirically: we tested several arrangements3 of reliability 
values on a training dataset (described in section 3.3) and retained the arrangement that gave the 
best rankings.

Scores combination (COMBI) is the linear combination of the FREQ, POS, CONT and RESO scores.

Learning-to-rank  algorithms  (LTR) were  also  tested.  We tried  three  list-wise  algorithms: 
AdaRank (Li & Xu, 2007), Coordinate Ascend (Metzler & Croft, 2000) and LambdaMart (Wu et  
al.,  2010). We used the  implementations  available  in  the  RankLib software4.  The  predictive 
variables are the FREQ, POS, CONT and RESO scores. We trained the models on the training dataset 
described in section 3.3.

3 Data

We worked with 3 languages:  English as source language and French and German as target  
languages.
3all 8-arrangement with repetition of {0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1}
4http://people.cs.umass.edu/~vdang/ranklib.html  . We set the metric to optimize on the training data to  MAP (Manning et  
al., 2008) ; all other parameters were left to default.

RESO (t )= 1
∣T∣∑i=1

∣T∣

rel (T i)

WeightedJaccard ( s , t)=
∑

w∈ s∩t
min(c(s ,w) , c(t ,w))

∑
w∈s∩t

max (c(s , w) , c(t ,w))+ ∑
w∈ s∖t

c(s , w)+ ∑
w∈t∖ s

c (t ,w)

752



3.1 Comparable corpora
Our corpus is composed of specialized texts from the medical domain dealing with breast cancer. 
We define specialized texts as texts being produced by domain experts and directed towards  
either an expert or a non-expert readership (Bowker & Pearson, 2002). The texts were collected 
from scientific papers portals and from information websites targeted to breast cancer patients 
and their relatives. Each corpus has approximately 400k words (cf. table 1). All texts were pos-
tagged and lemmatized with  XELDA. We also computed the comparability of the corpora5. The 
English-French corpus' comparability is 0.71 and the English-German corpus' comparability is  
0.45. The difference in comparability can be explained by the fact that German texts on breast  
cancer were hard to find (especially scientific papers): we had to collect texts in which breast 
cancer was not the main topic. This may have added out-of-domain words.

EN FR DE

Expert readership 218.3k 267.2k 197.2k

Non-expert readership 198.2k 184.5k 201.7k

TOTAL 416.5k 451.75k 398.9k

TABLE 1: Composition and size of corpora (nb. of words)

3.2 Resources for generation
Tables 2 and 3 show the size of the resources we used for generation.

General language dictionary: We used the dictionary which is part of the XELDA software. This 
dictionary was used for generating translations but also for computing the corpus comparability 
and for translating the context vectors for the context similarity measure (CONT score). 

Cognate dictionary: We built this resource automatically by extracting pairs of cognates from 
the comparable  corpora.  We used the  same technique  as  Hauer  & Kondrak  (2011):  a  SVM 
classifier trained on examples taken from online dictionaries6.

Morpheme translation table:  this  resource  was  created  manually by translators  since  there 
exists no publicly available morphology-based bilingual dictionary. This translation table links 
the  English  bound  morphemes  contained  in  the  source  terms  to  their  French  or  German 
equivalents (which can be bound morphemes or lexical items).

In order to handle the variation phenomena described in section  1.3, we used a  dictionary of 
synonyms and lists of  morphologically related words. The dictionary of synonyms is part of 
the XELDA software. Morphologically related words were collected by stemming the words of the 
comparable  corpora  and  the  entries  of  the  bilingual  dictionary  with  the  algorithm of  Porter 
(1980).

The DECOMPOSE function uses the entries of the morpheme translation table (242 entries) and a list 
of 85k lexical  items composed of the entries of the general  language dictionary and English  
words extracted from the Leipzig Corpus (Quasthoff et al., 2006).

5We used the measure defined by Bo & Gaussier (2010) which indicates, given a bilingual dictionary, the expectation of 
finding, for each word of the source corpus, its translation in the target corpus and vice-versa.
6http://www.dicts.info/uddl.php  

753



EN → FR EN → DE
General language 38k → 60k 38k → 70k

Domain specific 6.7k → 6.7k 6.4k → 6.4k

Morphemes (TOTAL) 242 → 729 242 → 761

    Prefixes 50 → 134 50 → 166

    Confixes 185 → 574 185 → 563

    Suffixes 7 → 21 7 → 32

TABLE 2: Nb. of entries in the multilingual resources

EN → EN FR → FR DE → DE
Synonyms 5.1k → 7.6k 2.4k → 3.2k 4.2k → 4.9k

Morphological families 5.9k → 15k 7.1k → 18k 7.4k → 16k

TABLE 3: Nb. of entries in the monolingual resources

3.3 Datasets for evaluation and training
We  extracted  morphologically  constructed  source  terms  from  the  English  texts  in  a  semi-
supervised manner: (i) we wrote a short seed list of English bound morphemes. We automatically 
extracted from the English texts all the words that contained these morphemes. For example, we 
extracted the words postchemotherapy and poster because they contained the string post- which 
corresponds to a bound morpheme of English ; (ii) The extracted words were sorted: those which 
were  not  morphologically  constructed  were  eliminated  (like  poster),  and  those  which  were 
morphologically  constructed  were  kept  (like  postchemotherapy).  The  morphologically 
constructed words were manually split  into morphemes.  For example, postchemotherapy was 
split into  post-,  -chemo- and  therapy ;  (iii) if some bound morphemes which were not in the 
initial seed list were found when we split the words during step (ii), we started the whole process 
again, using the new bound morphemes to extract new morphologically constructed words. 

We also added hyphenated terms like ER-positive to our list of source terms. With this method, 
we  collected  2025  source  terms.  Then,  we  excluded  all  the  source  terms  which  could  be 
translated with the general language dictionary and whose translation was present in the target 
corpus. Finally for each language pair, we divided the source terms into two groups:

The evaluation dataset contains source terms which could be translated with the UMLS meta-
thesaurus (Bodenreider, 2004) and whose translation was in the target corpus – these terms, along 
with their UMLS translations, constitute the reference lexicon for the evaluation. 

754



EN → FR EN → DE

EVALUATION dataset 126 → 163 90 → 104

TRAINING dataset 642 → 1953 584 → 1826 

TABLE 4: Size of datasets

The training dataset contains  source  terms which could not  be translated with the general-
language dictionary or the UMLS but for which we could generate translations with our method. 
This generated translations were manually annotated by translators. These terms, along with their 
annotated translations, were used as training data for learning the ranking models and to tune the 
reliability  values  used  in  the  RESO score. We  used  four  classes  for  the  annotation: exact,  
acceptable, related and wrong. An exact translation is a canonical translation like cytoprotection 
→ Zellschutz  (DE), protection  des  cellules  'protection  of  the  cells'  (FR).  An  acceptable 
translation  is  a  variant  of  the  canonical  translation:  cytoprotection  → protéger  les  cellules  
'protect the cells', cytoprotecteur 'cytoprotective'. A related translation is a translation which is 
only semantically related to the source term:  insecure  → ohne Sicherheit 'without safety'. All 
other translations are wrong translations. We computed inter-annotator agreement on a set of 100 
randomly selected translations. We used the Kappa statistics (Carletta, 1996) and obtained a high 
agreement (0.77 for English to German translations and 0.71 for English to French).

4 Results

4.1 Related work
Generally, systems are compared using the TopN precision: the percentage of source terms with 
at least one exact translation among the TopN candidate translations.  Compositional-translation 
methods tend to give better results when they are applied to general language texts rather than 
domain-specific texts. Indeed, it is easier to find translations of the components since they belong 
to the general  language and large corpora are also easier  to collect.   Working with general 
language texts, Baldwin & Tanaka (2004) were able to generate candidate translations for 92% 
of their source terms and they report 43% (gold-standard) to 84% (silver standard) of correct  
translations on Top1. Corpus' size exceeds 80M words for each language. Cartoni (2009) works 
on the translation of prefixed Italian neologisms into French. He finds that between 42% and 
94% of the generated neologisms occur more than five times on the Internet. Garera & Yarowski  
(2008) obtain translations for 13% of the source words and the best precision is 39% for the 
Top10  candidate  translations  (for  German  and  Swedish).  Regarding  domain-specific 
translation, Robitaille et al. (2006) collect translation pairs in an incremental manner. They start 
with a list of 9.6 pairs (on average) with a precision of 92% and end up with a final output of  
19.6 pairs on average with a precision of 81%. Morin & Daille (2010) could generate candidate 
translations for 15% of their source terms and they report 88% of correct translations on Top1. 
The size of their corpus is 700k words per language. Weller et al. (2011) obtained correct English 
translations for 18% of their German compounds. Their corpus contains approximately 1.5M 
words per language.

755



4.2 Generation
We tested several combinations of linguistic resources. Table 5 only shows the results for the 
best combination. For English to French translation, the best results where obtained with all the  
combined  resources,  closely  followed  by  the  combination  of  the  general  language  and  the 
cognate dictionary. For English to German translation, the best results were obtained with the 
combination of the general language and the cognate dictionary. Morphologically related words 
and synonyms tend to increase the number of generated translations to the cost of translation 
accuracy. 

EN → FR EN → DE

# source terms 126 90

# source terms with no translation 40 (32%) 34 (38%)

# source terms with at least one translation 86 56

    # nb of translations / source term 2.05 2.6

    # at least one reference translation (UMLS) 68 (79%) 40 (71%)

    # at least one exact translation (translators or UMLS) 81 (94%) 51 (91%)

TABLE 5: Results of generation

Regarding English to French translations, we were able to generate translations for 86 of the 126 
English  source  terms  (68%).  Among these  86  source  terms,  79% had  the  UMLS reference 
translation among their  candidate  translations.  Regarding  English to German translations,  we 
were able to generate translations for 56 of the 90 English source terms (62%). Among these 56 
source terms, 71% had a reference translation among their candidate translations. We noticed that 
the algorithm generated translations which were not in the UMLS lexicon but which were exact 
translations  according  to  the  translators.  For  example,  the  German  reference  translation  for 
mastectomy is mastektomie. The system generated the reference translation mastektomie but also 
translations like  ablation der brust,  abschnitt  der  brust,  brustentfernun,  entfernung der  brust 
which are all exact translations. Thus, if we take into account these translations, we find that 94% 
and 91% of the source terms had at least one exact translation for English to French and English  
to  German  respectively.  Among  all  these  correct  translations  21%  and  10%  were  fertile 
translations for English to French and English to German respectively. 

There are several reasons for untranslated source terms. In 30% of the cases, silence is due to the 
coverage of the linguistic resources: some of the components could not be translated and the 
translation  of  the  whole  source  term  failed.  Another  30%  of  target  terms  do  not  have  a  
compositional meaning: breastfeeding → allaitement (FR), stillen (DE). The third reason is due to 
lexical  variation  (~  20%),  e.g.  radio+sensitivity translates  to strahlen+toleranz but  toleranz 
'tolerance' has a different meaning than sensitivity. There was also cases of semantic fertility (~ 
13%).

Errors  were  mainly due to  problems in word reordering  when generating fertile  translations, 
especially with German. Other errors were due to wrong translations in the cognate dictionary 
and translations which were inappropriate in the context, e.g. the translation of  gynae  to  frau 

756



'woman' in gynaecomastia → Frau gegen Brust 'women against breast'. If we look at the part of 
fertile translations in the incorrect translations, we find that they constitute half of the English to 
French incorrect translations and 80% of the English to German incorrect translations. We think 
it is due to the morphological type of the languages involved in the translation. As a matter of  
fact, fertile variants are more natural and more frequent in French than in German. English and 
German are Germanic languages with a tendency to build new words by agglutinating words or  
morphemes  into  one  single  word.  Noun  compounds  such  as  anthracycline-containing or 
Anthracyclin-enthaltende are common in these two languages. Conversely, French is a Romance 
language which prefers to use phrases composed of two nouns and a preposition rather than a 
single-noun  compound.  For  example,  anthracycline-containing would  be  translated  as 
comprenant une anthracycline 'containing an anthracycline'. There is no non-fertile equivalent 
in French (*anthracycline-contenant would be ungrammatical). It is the same with the bound/free 
morpheme alternation. The term cytotoxic will be translated into German as zytotoxisch whereas 
in French it can be translated as cytotoxique or toxique pour les cellules 'toxic to the cells'.

4.3 Ranking
Table 6 indicates the precision on Top1, 2 and 3, i.e. the percentage of source terms which have 
at least one exact translation (found in the UMLS or according to the translators)  on the TopN 
candidate translations. 

EN → FR EN → DE Average

Top1 Top2 Top3 Top1 Top2 Top3 Top1

RANDOM .83 .88 .93 .80 .88 .88 .815

FREQ .92 .92 .94 .84 .88 .91 .88

POS .88 .93 .94 .91 . 91 .91 .895

CONT .90 .91 .93 .82 .88 .88 .86

 RESO .92 .94 .94 .82 .86 .88 .87

COMBI .93 .94 .94 .89 .89 .91 .91

LTR ADARANK .90 .90 .93 .84 .88 .88 .87

LTR COORDINATE ASCEND .93 .94 .94 .89 .89 .91 .91

LTR LAMBDAMART .86 .91 .93 .88 .91 .91 .87

TABLE 6: Results of ranking

We tested the ranking methods described in section  2.3: the scores  FREQ, POS, CONT and  RESO 
separately, a linear combination of these scores (COMBI)  and three learning-to-rank algorithms 
(LTR).  We also randomly ranked the translations to serve as a baseline.  On average, the best 
precision on Top1 (91%) is obtained with the linear combination and Coordinate Ascend. All 
ranking methods perform better than the baseline. For English to French, the best rankings were 
obtained with the linear combination  and  Coordinate Ascend. For  English to German, the best 

757



rankings were obtained with the POS parameter alone, closely followed by the linear combination 
and Coordinate Ascend. 

We expected learning-to-rank algorithms to perform much better than simple methods like part-
of-speech probabilities or the linear combination of several scores. This might be due to the small 
size of our training dataset (approx. 600 ranked lists per language).  We note that the context 
similarity score (CONT) is the least performing ranking method. Similarly, Garera and Yarowsky 
(2008) note only a small performance gain when they use context similarity. This might be due to 
the fact that context-based methods need the source and target words to be very frequent in the 
corpora to work properly. The lower quality of the German translations can be explained by the 
fact that the English-German corpus is much less comparable than the English-French corpus 
(0.45 vs. 0.71). 

Conclusion and perspectives

We have proposed a new compositional translation method for domain-specific bilingual lexicon 
extraction  from  comparable  corpora.  We  obtain  an  average  precision  of  91%  on  the  Top1 
candidate  translation.  English-to-French  translation  performs  slightly  better  than  English-to-
German translation, probably due to the morphological type of the languages and to the lower  
quality of the German data.

Future  work  includes  the  improvement  of  the  identification  of  morphological  variants.  The 
morphological families extracted by the stemming algorithm are too broad for the purpose of  
translation. For example, the words desirability and desiring have the same stem but they are too 
distant  semantically  to  be  used  to  generate  translation  variants.  We  need  to  restrict  the  
morphological  families  to  a  smaller  set  of  morphological  relations  (e.g.  noun  → relational 
adjective). Furthermore, some work needs to be done on lexical variation: we used a dictionary 
of synonyms, but a thesaurus, which contains a large variety of semantic relations, may help us 
better in tackling lexical variation. Another improvement will be to use translation patterns to  
recompose the components into a target language term structure instead of using the PERMUTATE 
and CONCATENATE functions.

Our investigation of the contribution of learning-to-rank algorithms to the problem of candidate 
translations ranking shows encouraging results and we should further pursue this line of research.  
Future experiments  include:  testing other  learning-to-rank  approaches  (pair-wise,  point-wise), 
increasing the number of predictive variables (e.g. source/target term frequency ratio, number of 
components...) and finding ways to increase the size of the training dataset at a lesser cost.

Acknowledgment

The research leading to these results has received funding from the French National Research 
Agency  under  grant  ANR-08-CORD-013  and  from  the  European  Community's  Seventh 
Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under Grant Agreement no 248005. We would like to 
thank  the  company  LINGUA ET MACHINA (www.lingua-et-machina.com)  for  supporting  this 
research as well as Clémence de Baudus and Kiril Isakov for their participation in the annotation  
task and Van Dang for his help with the RankLib software.

758



References
Baker,  M.  (1996).  Corpus-based  translation  studies:  The  challenges  that  lie  ahead.  In 
Terminology, LSP and Translation: Studies in Language Engineering in Honour of Juan C.  
Sager. Somers H., Amsterdam & Philadelphia, John Benjamins edition.

Baldwin, T., & Tanaka, T. (2004). Translation by Machine of Complex Nominals. Proceedings  
of  the ACL 2004 Workshop on Multiword expressions:  Integrating Processing  (pp.  24-31). 
Barcelona, Spain. 

Bo,  L.,  &  Gaussier,  E.  (2010).  Improving  Corpus  Comparability  for  Bilingual  Lexicon 
Extraction  from Comparable  Corpora.  Proceedings  of  the  23th  International  Conference  on  
Computational Linguistics (pp. 23-27). COLING 2010, Beijing, Chine.

Bodenreider,  O.  (2004).  The  Unified  Medical  Language  System  (UMLS):  integrating 
biomedical terminology. Nucleic Acids Research, 32, 267-270.

Bowker, L., & Pearson, J. (2002).  Working with Specialized Language: A Practical Guide to  
Using Corpora. London/New York: Routledge.

Brown, P., Della Pietra, S., Della Pietra, V., & Mercer, R. (1993). The mathematics of statistical 
machine translation: parameter estimation. Computational Linguistics, 19(2), 263-311.

Carletta,  J.  (1996).  Assessing  Agreement  on  Classification  Tasks:  The  Kappa  Statistic. 
Computational Linguistics, 22(2), 249-254.

Cartoni,  B.  (2009).  Lexical  Morphology  in  Machine  Translation:  A  Feasibility  Study. 
Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of the ACL (pp. 130-138). EACL 
2009, Athens, Greece.

Claveau,  V.,  & Kijak,  E.  (2011).  Morphological  analysis  of  Biomedical  Terminology with 
Analogy-Based Alignment.  Proceedings of Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing  
(pp. 347-354). RANLP 2011, Hissar, Bulgaria.

Daille,  B.,  &  Morin,  E.  (2005).  French-English  terminology  extraction  from  comparable 
corpora.  Proceedings  of  the  2nd  International  Joint  Conference  on  Natural  Language  
Processing, Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Vol. 3651, pp. 707-718). Jeju Island, Korea: 
Springer.

Delpech,  E.  (2011).  Evaluation  of  terminologies  acquired  from  comparable  corpora  :  an 
application  perspective.  Proceedings  of  the  18th Nordic  Conference  of  Computational  
Linguistics (pp. 66-73). NODALIDA 2011, Riga, Latvia.

Delpech, E., Daille, B., Morin, E. & Lemaire, C. (2012).  Identification of Fertile Translations 
in Medical Comparable Corpora : a Morpho-Compositional Approach. Proceedings of the 10th 
Biennal Conference  of  the Association for  Machine Translation in  the Americas  (in press). 
AMTA 2012, San Diego, CA, USA.

Dunning,  T.  (1993).  Accurate  Methods  for  the  Statistics  of  Surprise  and  Coincidence. 
Computational Linguistics, 19(1), 61-74.

Fung, P. (1997). Finding Terminology Translations from Non-parallel Corpora. Proceedings of  
the 5th Workshop on Very Large Corpora (pp. 192-202), Hong Kong. 

759



Fung,  P.,  & Cheung,  P.  (2004).  Mining  Very-Non-Parallel  Corpora:  Parallel  Sentence  And 
Lexicon Extraction Via Bootstrapping And EM. Proceedings of Empirical Methods in Natural  
Language Processing (pp. 57-63). EMNLP 2004, Barcelona, Spain.

Garera N.,  & Yarowsky,  D. (2008).  Translating Compounds by Learning Component Gloss 
Translation  Models  via  Multiple  Languages.  Proceedings  of  the  3rd International  Joint  
Conference on Natural Language Processing (pp. 403-410). IJCNLP 2008, Hyderabad, India.

Grefenstette,  G.  (1999).  The  world  wide  web  as  a  resource  for  example-based  machine 
translation tasks. Proceedings of the ASLIB Conference on Translating and the Computer, 21.

Hauer, B., & Kondrak, G. (2011). Clustering Semantically Equivalent Words into Cognate Sets 
in  Multilingual  Lists.  Proceedings  of  the  5th  International  Joint  Conference  on  Natural  
Language Processing (pp. 865–873). IJCNLP 2011, Chiang Mai, Thailand.

Keenan,  E.  L.,  & Faltz,  L.  M. (1985).  Boolean semantics  for  natural language.  Dordrecht, 
Holland: D. Reidel.

Lardilleux, A. (2008). A truly multilingual, high coverage, accurate, yet simple, sub-sentential 
alignment  method.  The  8th  conference  of  the  Association  for  Machine  Translation  in  the  
Americas (pp. 125-132). AMTA 2008, Waikiki, Honolulu, USA.

Li,  H.,  &  Xu,  J.  (2007).  AdaRank:  A  Boosting  Algorithm  for  Information  Retrieval.  
Proceedings  of  the  30th  annual  international  ACM  SIGIR  conference  on  Research  and  
development in information retrieval (pp. 391-398). SIGIR ’07, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Li, H. (2011). Learning to Rank  for Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing. 
Synthesis  Lectures  on  Human  Language  Technology,  Lecture  12.  Morgan  &  Claypool 
Publishers. 

Liu,  T.-Y.  (2009).  WWW 2009 Tutorial  on  learning  to  rank  for  information  retrieval.  18th 
International World Wide Web Conference. WWW 2009, Madrid, Spain.

Manning,  C.,  Raghavan,  P.,  &  Schütze,  H.  (2008).  Introduction  to  Information  Retrieval. 
Cambridge University Press. New York, NY, USA.

Martinet, A. (1979). Grammaire fonctionnelle du français. Crédif/Dider. Paris, France.

Metzler,  D.,  & Croft,  W. B.  (2000).  Linear  feature-based models  for  information retrieval.  
Information Retrieval, 10(3), 257-274.

Morin, E., & Daille, B. (2010). Compositionality and lexical alignment of multi-word terms. 
Language Resources and Evaluation (LRE), Multiword expression: hard going or plain sailing 
(Springer Netherlands., Vol. 44, pp. 79–95). Rayson, P. and Piao, S. and Sharoff, S. and Evert, 
S. and Villada Moirón.

Morin,  E.,  Daille,  B.,  Takeuchi,  K.,  & Kageura,  K. (2007).  Bilingual terminology mining - 
using brain,  not brawn comparable corpora.  Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the  
Association for Computational Linguistics (pp. 664-671). ACL 2007, Prague, Czech Republic.

Namer,  F.,  & Baud,  R.  (2007).  Defining  and  relating  biomedical  terms:  Towards  a  cross-
language morphosemantics-based system. International Journal of Medical Informatics,  76(2-
3), 226-33.

760



Porter, M. F. (1980). An algorithm for suffix stripping. Program, 14(3), 130-137.

Quasthoff, U., Richter, M., & Biemann, C. (2006). Corpus Portal for Search in Monolingual 
Corpora.  Proceedings  of  the  fifth  international  conference  on  Language  Resources  and  
Evaluation (pp. 1799-1802). LREC 2006, Genoa, Italy.

Rapp, R. (1995). Identifying Word Translations in Non-Parallel Texts. Proceedings of the 33rd  
Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics  (pp. 320-322). ACL'95, Boston, 
Massachussets, USA.

Rauf,  S.,  &  Schwenk,  H.  (2009).  On  the  use  of  comparable  corpora  to  improve  SMT 
performance. Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of the ACL (pp. 16-
23). EACL 2009, Athens, Greece.

Robitaille,  X.,  Sasaki,  X.,  Tonoike,  M.,  Sato,  S.,  & Utsuro,  S.  (2006).  Compiling  French-
Japanese terminologies from the Web.  Proceedings of the 11th Conference of the European  
Chapter  of  the Association for  Computational  Linguistics (pp.  225-232).  EACL’06,  Trento, 
Italy.

Tiedemann, J. (2009). News from OPUS - A Collection of Multilingual Parallel Corpora with 
Tools and Interfaces. Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing, John Benjamins (Vol. 
V, pp. 237-248). Amsterdam, Philadelphia: N. Nicolov and K. Bontcheva and G. Angelova and 
R. Mitkov. 

Weller, M., Gojun, A., Heid, U., Daille, B., & Harastani, R. (2011). Simple methods for dealing 
with term variation and term alignment.  Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on  
Terminology and Artificial Intelligence (pp. 87-93). TIA 2011, Paris, France.

Wu, Q., Burges, J. C., Svore, K., & Gao, J. (2010). Adapting Boosting for Information Retrieval  
Measures. Journal of Information Retrieval, 13(3), 254 - 270.

761




