



















































UNL Explorer


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Demonstration Papers, pages 453–458,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

UNL Explorer 

Hiroshi Uchida1   Meiying Zhu1    Khan Md. Anwarus Salam1,2  
(1) UNDL Foundation, Tokyo, Japan. 

 (2) The University of Electro-Communications, Tokyo, Japan. 
uchida@undl.org, zhu@undl.org, khan@undltokyo.org 

ABSTRACT 

Universal Networking Language (UNL) is a language for computer to represent knowledge and 
information described in natural languages. Universal Words (UWs) constitute the vocabulary of 
UNL. The UNL Explorer is a web based application, which combines all the components of UNL 
system to be accessible online. The users of UNL Explorer are not only researchers and linguists 
who are interested to work with UNL technologies, but also general people who want to com-
municate free from language barriers. This paper describes the features of UNL Explorer. In 
brief, UNL Explorer provides many powerful features such as multilingual context search, multi-
lingual communication such as UNL Talk and multilingual dictionary. Using multilingual context 
search users can retrieve documents in any language. Moreover, UNL Explorer shows the docu-
ments in various languages such as English, Japanese and more than 40 languages. Users can also 
access the UWs based multilingual dictionaries. UNL Society members can contribute online for 
updating their language dictionary entries.  
KEYWORDS: Multilingual Context Search; Machine Translation; Multilingual Dictionary; Uni-
versal Networking Language (UNL); Ontology;  

453



 

1 Introduction 

Universal Networking Language (UNL) is a language for computer to represent knowledge and 
information described in natural languages. Universal Words (UWs) constitute the vocabulary of 
UNL. UW is a word for constructing UNL expressions (UNL Graph). So keys to the information 
in UNL documents are UWs. UWs are stored in the UW dictionary.  

UNL Explorer is a web based application, which combines all the components of UNL system to 
be accessible online. The users of UNL Explorer are not only researchers and linguists who are 
interested to work with UNL technologies, but also general people who want to communicate 
free from language barriers. This paper describes the features of UNL Explorer. 

In brief, UNL Explorer provides many powerful features such as multilingual context search, 
multilingual communication such as UNL Talk, multilingual dictionary and UNL Ontology. Us-
ing multilingual context search users can retrieve documents in any language. UNL Explorer 
provides very promising solution for search. Moreover, UNL Explorer shows the documents in 
various languages such as English, Japanese and more than 40 languages. Users can also access 
the UWs based multilingual dictionaries. UNL Society members can contribute online for updat-
ing their language dictionary entries. 

2 BACKGROUND  

2.1 Universal Networking Language (UNL) 

UNL initiative was originally launched in 1996 as a project of the Institute of Advanced 
Studies of the United Nations University (UNU/IAS)1. Describing the detail technical information 
UNL book was first published in 1999 (Uchida et. al. 1999). In 2001, the United Nation University 
set up the UNDL Foundation2, to be responsible for the development and management of the UNL 
project. In 2005, a new technical manual of UNL was published (Uchida et. al. 2005), which 
defined UNL as an knowledge and information representation language for computer. UNL has all 
the components to represent knowledge described in natural languages. UWs constitute the 
vocabulary of UNL and each concept that natural languages have is represented as unique UW. A 
UW of UNL is defined in the following format: 

< uw>  = :: < headword>[< constraint list> ] 

Here, English words or phrases are used for headword, because of easy understanding for the 
people in the world. UW can be a word, a compound word, a phrase or a sentence. Universal 
Words (UWs) constitute the vocabulary of UNL. UW is a word for constructing UNL expressions 
(UNL Graph). So keys to the information in UNL documents are UWs. UWs are stored in the UW 
dictionary. UWs are inter-linked with other UWs using “relations” to form the UNL expressions of 
sentences. These relations specify the role of each word in a sentence. Using "attributes" it can 
express the subjectivity of author. Currently, UWs are available for many languages such as 
Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Mongolian, Russian, 
Spanish and so forth. 

                                                           
1http://www.ias.unu.edu/ 
2http://www.undl.org/ 

454



2.2 UNL Ontology 

UNL Ontology is a semantic network with hyper nodes. It contains UW System which de-
scribes the hierarchy of the UWs in lattice structure, all possible semantic co-occurrence relations 
between each UWs and UWs definition in UNL. With the property inheritance based on UW 
System, possible relations between UWs can be deductively inferred from their upper UWs and 
this inference mechanism reduces the number of binary relation descriptions of the UNL Ontology. 
In the topmost level UWs are divided into four categories: adverbial concept, attributive concept, 
nominal concept and predicative concept.  

3 UNL Explorer  

UNL Explorer3 is a web based application, which combines all the components of UNL system to 
be accessible online. In brief, UNL Explorer provides many powerful features such as multilin-
gual context search, multilingual communication such as UNL Talk, multilingual dictionary and 
UNL Ontology.  

Multilingual context search enable the people to retrieve desired documents by the natural lan-
guage query of any language. Each document is provided in UNL by automatically analysing the 
original document, together with the original document. The queries are converted into UNL. 
Then the system try to match this UNL graph with the existing UNL documents with inference. 
Knowledge which is necessary to make inference are provided in UNL Ontology, especially in 
UWs definition.  

Retrieved documents or any other documents can be shown in various languages such as English, 
Japanese and more than 40 languages, by automatically generating each language sentences from 
UNL expressions.  

This function allows the users to translate any documents in different languages. This allows the 
users to communicate across language barriers by UNL Talk. This option can be very useful for 
communicating in cross-cultural communication. To realize this function the system need the 
UW dictionaries for many languages, which defines the correspondence between UWs and each 
languages words. 

This data can be access as multilingual dictionary. UNL Society members can contribute online 
for updating their language dictionary entries. Figure1 shows the UNL Explorer screen shot with 
explanations of the options. 

 

FIGURE 1 –UNL Explorer Homepage screen shot  

                                                           
3http://www.undl.org/unlexp/ 

455



3.1 Multilingual Context Search  

Multilingual context search enable the people to retrieve desired documents by the natural lan-
guage query of any language. UNL Explorer provides multilingual search facility for UNL doc-
uments. For this each document is provided in UNL by automatically analysing the original doc-
ument, together with the original document. The queries are converted into UNL. Then the sys-
tem try to match this UNL graph with the existing UNL documents with inference. Knowledge 
which is necessary to make inference is provided in UNL Ontology, especially in UWs defini-
tion. To perform multilingual context search user can write the search query in text box and click 
the Search button.  

 

FIGURE 2 –UNL Explorer screen shot showing the UNESCO document on “Elephanta Caves” 

Retrieved documents or any other documents can be shown in various languages such as English, 
Japanese and more than 40 languages, by automatically generating each language sentences from 
UNL expressions. Search Query: Write the Keyword or Content to search from UNL Information 
and Knowledge Management System. The UNL Explorer will show the results in UNL or in a 
desired natural language by Deconverting the UNL expressions of the information using the UNL 
Deconverter. In background UNL Explorer translates using UNL Enconverter and Deconverter. 
Both UNL EnConverter and Deconverter support different languages such as Chinese, English, 
Japanese and so forth.   

3.2 UNL Talk 

UNL Talk allows the users to communicate across language barriers by UNL Talk. This option 
can be very useful for communicating in cross-cultural communication. To realize this function 
the system need the UW dictionaries for many languages, which defines the correspondence be-
tween UWs and each languages words. Figure 3 shows the screen shot of UNL Talk where the 

456



authors are communicating using Bengali and English. Each users can see the messages in their 
mother language. 

 

 

 

 
FIGURE 3 –Screen shot of UNL Talk where users communicating in Bengali and English 

3.3 Multilingual Dictionary  

One of the most unique features of UNL Explorer is the multilingual dictionary which is available 
for more than 40 languages. This multilingual dictionary is based on UWs dictionaries for many 
languages, which defines the correspondence between UWs and each languages words. Users can 
use the dictionary side by side for any of these language pair. 

 

FIGURE 4– Multilingual dictionary frame showing English-UNL  

457



UNL Explorer users can browse the multilingual dictionary which comes in the left side, which 
we refer as “multilingual dictionary frame” as shown in Figure 4. This tool also provides the 
search facility for UWs dictionary. Users can search the meaning of a word in any languages. Us-
ers can choose their desired language pairs from the options given in the downside of the multilin-
gual dictionary frame. Figure 4 shows the screen shot of Universal Words frame. It displays the 
UWs system hierarchy (a lattice structure) in a plain tree form. Information can be navigated 
through the UWs system and users are also able to know the position of each concept of a UW in 
the conceptual hierarchy at the same time.  

UNL Explorer also provides an advanced search facility for discovering UWs relations from 
UNL Ontology. This option allows user to get the semantic co-occurrence of any UWs. Users can 
also check incoming and outgoing relationships of each UWs using this facility. This UNL Ontol-
ogy search mechanism is accessible for computer program using UNL Explorer API. However, to 
use this API, user need to be a UNL society member by signing an agreement with UNDL Foun-
dation. 

UNL Society members can contribute online for updating their language dictionary entries. 
From 'Universal Word' Properties menu, users can browse the word semantics. It is possible to edit 
the UWs dictionaries online. UNL society members can also download the UWs dictionaries. 

To ensure every language speakers can create the correct UWs dictionary entry, UNL Explorer 
provide the explanation of UWs in different natural languages (Khan et. al., 2011). It is a novel 
contribution for auto generating the UWs explanations from the semantic background provided by 
UNL Ontology. 

Conclusion  

In this paper, we described the features of online based UNL Explorer. For making the people 
freely communicate with each other in their mother language, UNL technology is very promising.  
UNL Explorer provides useful features such as multilingual context search, multilingual commu-
nication using UNL Talk and multilingual dictionary for general users. UNL Explorer also pro-
vides API for researchers and application developers to use UNL technologies such as UNL En-
converter, DeConverter, UWs Dictionary, UNL Ontology based on corpus. 

References 

H. Uchida, M. Zhu, T. Della Senta. “A gift for a millenium”. Tokyo: IAS/UNU. 1999. 

H. Uchida, M. Zhu, and T. Della Senta. “The Universal Networking Language”, 2nd ed. UNDL 
Foundation, 2005. 

Khan Md. Anwarus Salam, Hiroshi Uchida and Tetsuro Nishino. “How to Develop Universal 
Vocabularies Using Automatic Generation of the Meaning of Each Word”, 7th International 
Conference on Natural Language Processing and Knowledge Engineering (NLPKE'11), To-
kushima, Japan. ISBN: 978-1-61284-729-0. Page 243 – 246. 2011. 

458


