



















































Part of Speech (POS) Tagger for Kokborok


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Posters, pages 923–932,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Part of Speech (POS) Tagger for Kokborok 

Braja Gopal Patra1 Khumbar Debbarma2 Dipankar Das3 Sivaji Bandyopadhyay1 
(1) Department of Compute Science & Engineering, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India 

(2) Department of Compute Science & Engineering, TIT, Agartala, India 
(3) Department of Compute Science & Engineering, NIT Meghalaya, Shillong, India 

brajagopal.cse@gmail.com, khum_10jan@yahoo.co.in, 

dipankar.dipnil2005@gmail.com,sivaji_cse_ju@yahoo.com 

ABSTRACT 

The Part of Speech (POS) tagging refers to the process of assigning appropriate lexical category 
to individual word in a sentence of a natural language. This paper describes the development of a 
POS tagger using rule based and supervised methods in Kokborok, a resource constrained and 
less computerized Indian language. In case of rule based POS tagging, we took the help of a 
morphological analyzer while for supervised methods, we employed two machine learning 
classifiers, Conditional Random Field (CRF) and Support Vector Machines (SVM). A total of 
42,537 words were POS tagged. Manual checking achieves the accuracies of 70% and 84% in 
case of rule based and supervised POS tagging, respectively. 

 
KEYWORDS : Kokborok, POS Tagger, Suffix, Prefix, CRF, SVM, Morph analyser.  

923



1 Introduction 

From the very beginning, POS tagging has been playing its significant roles in several Natural 
Language Processing (NLP) applications such as chunking, parsing, developing Information 
Extraction systems, semantic processing, Question Answering (QA), Summarization, Event 
Tracking etc. To the best of our knowledge, no prior work on POS tagging has been done for 
Kokborok except the development of a stemmer (Patra et al., 2012). Thus, in this paper, we have 
basically described the development of a POS tagger in Kokborok, a less privileged native 
language of the Borok people of Tripura, a state in North Eastern part of India. Kokborok is also 
spoken by neighboring states such as Assam, Manipur, Mizoram and the countries like 
Bangladesh, Myanmar etc. The language comprises of more than 2.5 millions of people1 and 
belongs to Tibeto-Burman (TB) language family. It has several unique features if compared with 
other South-Asian Tibeto-Burman languages. Kokborok literatures were written in Koloma or 
Swithaih borok script which suffered massive destruction. Overall, the Kokborok language is 
very scientific and the people use a script similar to Roman script to project the tonal effect. As 
the language follows the Subject-Object-Verb (SOV) pattern and its agglutinative verb 
morphology is enriched by the Indo-Aryan languages of Sanskrit origin. The affixes play an 
important role in framing the structure of the language, e.g., prefixing, suffixing and 
compounding form new words in this language. In case of compound words, some infixing are 
also seen where no specific demarcation and morphology is found. Mainly, the root words appear 
in bounded forms and are joined together to form the compound words.  

In general, the POS tagger for the natural languages are developed using linguistic rules, 
probabilistic models and combination of both. To the best of our knowledge, the POS tag set is 
not available in Kokborok as no prior work has been carried out in this language. Thus, we 
prepared a POS tag set by ourselves with the help of linguists by considering different 
characteristics of the similar Indian languages.  

Several POS taggers have been developed in different languages using both rule based and 
statistical methods. Different approaches to POS tagging for English have already been 
developed such as Transformation based error-driven learning (Brill, 1995), Decision tree (Black 
et al., 1992), Hidden Markov Model (Cutting et al., 1992), Maximum Entropy model 
(Ratnaparkhi, 1996) etc. It was also found that in a practical Part-of-Speech Tagger (Cutting et 
al., 1992), the accuracy exceeds 96%. 

The rule based systems require handcrafted rules and are typically not very robust (Brill, 1992). 
POS tagger in different Indian languages such as in Hindi (Dalal et al., 2007; Shrivastav et al., 
2006; Singh et al., 2006), Bengali (Dandapat et al., 2007; Ekbal et al., 2007; Ekbal and 
Bandyopadhyay, 2008a), and Manipuri (Kishorjit et al., 2011; Singh and Bandyopadhyay 2008; 
Singh et al., 2008) etc. have also been developed using both rule based and machine learning 
approaches. In case of rule based POS Tagging, we considered the help of three dictionaries, 
namely prefix, suffix and root dictionary. It is also observed that the Probabilistic models have 
been widely used in POS tagging as they are simple to use and language independent (Dandapat 
et al., 2007). Among the probabilistic models, Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) are quite popular 
but it performs poor when less tagged data is used to estimate the parameters of the model. Due 
to the scarcity of POS tagged corpus in Kokborok, among different machine learning algorithms, 

                                                           
1 http://tripura.nic.in 

924



we have used only CRF and SVM to accomplish the POS tagging task. CRF is a widely used 
probabilistic framework for sequence labelling tasks. In our case, we observed that the accuracies 
achieved in the rule based POS tagger is less than the CRF based POS tagger whereas the 
accuracy of CRF based POS tagger is less than SVM based POS tagger. 

The rest of the paper is organized in the following manner. Section 2 gives a brief discussion 
about word features in Kokborok whereas Section 3 details about resources preparation. Section 
4 describes the implementation of rule based POS tagger and Section 5 gives the detail study of 
Machine learning algorithms, feature selection, implementation and their results while the 
conclusion is drawn at the end. 

2 Word Features in Kokborok 

In general, Kokborok possesses unique features like agglutination and compounding. Specially, it 
has both free and bound root words and has more numbers of bound root words compared to 
English. In Kokborok, the inflections play the major role and almost all verbs and many of noun 
root words are bound. It is found that the free root words are nouns, pronouns, some adjectives, 
numerals etc. The compound words are formed by joining multiple root words affixed with 
multiple suffixes or prefixes. It is found by the linguistic observations that we can classify the 
Kokborok words into following seven categories as given below. 

i) Only root word (RW). For e.g., Naithok (beautiful) 
ii) Root words (RW) having a prefix (P). For e.g., Bupha (my father) 
iii) Root words having a suffix (S). For e.g., Brajano (to Braja) 
iv) P+RW+S. For e.g. Bukumuini (His/Her Brother In Law‟s) 
v) P+RW+S+S… For e.g., Ma(P)+thang (to go)+lai(S)+nai(S)Mathanglainai(need to go) 
vi) RW+RW… For e.g., Khwn (Flower)+Lwng(Garden)Khwmlwng(Flowergarden) 
vii) RW+S+RW+S. For e.g., Hui(RW)(to hide)+jak(S)+hui(RW)+jak(S)+wi(S)  

Hujakhujakwi (Without Being Seen) 

We observed that there is less number of free root words. In Kokborok, affixes are of two types, 
i.e. derivational affixes and inflectional affixes (Debbarma et al., 2012). In Kokborok, the 
prefixes are very limited in numbers, generally inflectional and do not change the syntactic 
category when added to a root word but the suffixes are of both inflectional and derivational. A 
total of 19 prefixes and 72 suffixes are found in Kokborok. 

3 Resource Preparation 

In the following sections, we have discussed about the basic requirements of our experiments. 
The first section discusses about the dictionaries used in the experiments and their formats and in 
the final section, we have presented the POS tagset for Kokborok which is used for our 
experiments. 

3.1 Dictionaries  

We used three dictionaries namely prefix, suffix and root. Prefix and suffix dictionaries contain 
the list of prefixes and suffixes along with the word features like TAM (Tense, Aspect and 
Modality), gender, number and person etc. Root dictionary is a bilingual dictionary containing 

925



1895 root words. The format of root dictionary is <root><lexical category><English meaning>. 
This bilingual dictionary is used for testing of the POS tagger. 

3.2 The Tagset 

The Kokborok language is one of the agglutinative languages in India and its word formation 
technique is quite different from other Indian languages. Thus, the POS tagset for Kokborok has 
been developed keeping the similarity of the POS tagset with other Indian languages2 in mind. 
The POS tagset used in this task is given below in Table 1. 

POS Types/ Tag Examples 

Noun 
Proper (NNP), Common 
(NNC), Verbal (NNV) 

Aguli, yachakrai (All names), Chwla(boy), 
bwrwi(girl), khaina(to do), phaina(to come) 

Pronoun Personal (PRP) Ang(I), Nwng(you), Bo(He/she), Ani(my) 
Adjective JJ Naithok(beautiful), kwchwng(bright) 

Determiner Singular (DTS), Plural (DTP) Khoroksa(a), Joto(all), bebak(every) 

Predeterminer PDT Aa(that), o(this) 
Conjunction CC Bai(and), tei(or) 

Verb 

Root (VB), Present (VBP), 
Past (VBD), Gerund (VBG),  
Progression (PROG),  
Future (VBF) 

Cha (to eat), khai (to do), Chao (eat), khaio 
(do), Chakha (ate), phaikha (came), Chawi 
(eating), khaiwi (doing), Tongo (is/am/are), 
tongmani (was/were), Chanai(will eat), 
khainai (will do) 

Inflectors *D O (to), Rok([charai(child)rok]-children 
Quantifiers QF Kisa(less), kwbang(more) 
Cardinal CD Sa(one), nwi(two) 
Adverb RB Twrwk(slow), dakti(fast) 
Interjection UH Bah(wao), uh(huh) 
Indeclinable ID Haiphano(still), Abonibagwi(that‟s why) 
Onomatopes ON Sini-sini, sek-sek,sep-sep 
Question Words QW boh(which), sabo(who), Saboni(whose) 
Compound word CW  
Unknown UNK  
Symbol SYM `,~,@,#,$,%,^,&,*,_,+,-,=,<,>,.,‟, etc. 

Table 1 – POS Tagset for Kokborok. 

4 Rule Based POS Tagger 

In case of rule based POS tagger, the basic POS tags are assigned to each of the words in a 
natural language sentence using the morphological rules. The descriptions of the different 
modules as shown in Figure.1 are as follows: 

 Tokenizer: Based on the space in between consecutive words, each word of a sentence is 
separated or tokenized. 

                                                           
2 http://shiva.iiit.ac.in/SPSAL2007/iiit_tagset_guidelines.pdf 

926



 Stemmer (Patra et al., 2012): It identifies the prefixes and suffixes using the affix 
dictionaries and finds the root words.   Morphological Analyzer & Tag generator: Different analysis on the stemmed words and 
suffixes are performed using the lexical rules and morpho-syntactic features. Then, the POS 
tags are assigned to the words based on the tagset and morphology rules.  Dictionary: Prefix, suffix and root dictionaries are described in Section 3.  Morpho syntactic Rules: These are the heuristic rules based morphological characteristics 
of the words. For e.g., VB + kha (suffix) = VBD, VB + o(suffix)=VBP etc. 

 

FIGURE 1 –System Diagram of Rule based Morphology driven POS Tagger. 

4.1 Algorithm 

1. Give input text to the tokenizer module. 
2. Repeat step 3 and 4 until each token is tagged. 
3. Check for prefixes and suffixes and separate them with the help of affix dictionaries and 

check if the stemmed word occurs in the root dictionary or not. The words which are not 
stemmed are sent to the complex word handler module. 

4. The complex words are stemmed separately, if these words are not stemmed by complex 
word handler and tag them as the Named Entities (NEs).  

5. Apply the morphological rules on the affixes and root words for identifying the POS tag of 
the words according to the output of the morphological analyzer. 

4.2 Evaluation and Result Discussion 

In Kokborok, word categories are not distinct; all the verbs are under the bound categories 
whereas another problem is to classify basic root forms according to their word classes as the 
distinction between noun and adjectives is often vague while the distinction between the noun 
and verb classes is relatively clear. It is found that distinction between a noun and an adjective 
becomes unclear because structurally a word may be a noun but contextually it is an adjective. 
For e.g., Uttor Bharato watwi kwbang wakha  (“North” “India” “lots” “rain” “happened”). Here 
north is an adjective where as in the sentence, “Abo uttor” (that is north) the word „uttor‟ is a 
noun. Thus, the word „uttor‟ may be an adjective or a noun but the POS of the word in lexicon is 

927



noun there by making it difficult to extract the exact POS for the word appearing in various 
sentences.  

The assumption made for the word categories depends upon the root category and affix 
information that are available from the dictionaries. Further a part of root may also be a prefix 
which leads to wrong tagging. It is found that the verb morphology is more complex than that of 
noun. When multiple suffixes added to a verb, it‟s difficult to find the POS category of the word 
as the specific rules are not available. The input of 2525 Kokborok sentences of 42537 words was 
supplied to the tagger . Sometimes, two words get fused to form a complete word and handling 
such collocations is difficult. Table 2 shows the percentage of tagging output based on the actual 
and correctly tagged words. There are some unknown words which could not be tagged based on 
rules available. Due to the unavailability of root dictionary, the performance of POS tagger was 
reduced effectively. A word can be easily formed by affixation or compounding in Kokborok, so 
the number of unknown words are relatively large. The accuracy of the tagging can be further 
improved by introducing more numbers of linguistic rules and adding more root words to the 
dictionary. 

Items Percentage 

Correctly tagged words 70% 

Wrongly tagged words 22% 

Wrongly tagged unknown words 8% 

TABLE 2 – Results of the Rule Based POS Tagger. 

5 Stochastic POS Taggers 

Stochastic models are more popular than rule based POS taggers as these are language 
independent and easy to use. Among the entire stochastic models, HMMs is quite popular but it 
requires a huge amount of annotated corpus. Simple HMMs do not work well when small amount 
of labelled data are used to estimate the model parameters. Incorporating diverse features in an 
HMM-based tagger is also difficult and complicates the smoothing typically used in such taggers 
(Ekbal and Bandyopadhyay, 2008b). Thus, we have used Conditional Random Fields (CRF) 
(Lafferty et al., 2001) and Support Vector Machines (SVM) (Cortes and Vapnik, 1995) 
frameworks to develop Stochastic POS taggers for the resource constrained Kokborok language. 

5.1 Feature Selection 

Feature selection plays important role in CRF based machine learning framework. The main 
features for POS tagging are selected based on the different combinations of available words and 
tags. As the Kokborok is one of the highly inflected and agglutinative Indian languages, the 
suffix and prefix features are the effective features in POS tagging task. We have considered 
different combinations of features to get the best feature set for POS tagging task. Following are 
the sample and the details of the set of features that have been included in the above list for POS 
tagging in Kokborok: 

F={w(i-m),w(i-m+1),……w(i-1), wi, w(i+1),……..w(i+n), |prefix|=n, |suffix|=n, Context word feature, 
Digit information, Symbol, Length of the word, Frequent word} 

928



Word suffix: Kokborok is highly inflected language. So, the word suffix information is one of 
the most important features as it is very helpful to identify the POS classes. This feature can be 
used in two different ways. The first way is to check whether a word has a suffix or not. If yes, 
then set the suffix feature 1 else set 0. The second way is to check whether a suffix is changing 
the POS class of the root word. If yes, then set change POS feature 1 else set 0. 
Word prefix: Word prefix information is also helpful to identify the POS class of the word. This 
feature has been introduced with the observation that the words of the same category POS tags 
contain some common prefix. This feature has been used in a similar way as word suffixes. 
Context word Feature: The immediate previous and next word of a particular word can also be 
used as feature, i.e., the surrounding words can play an important role in deciding the POS tag of 
the current word. 
Digit information: If any word consists of any digit, then set the digit feature to 1 otherwise 0. It 
helps to identify the QF (Quantifier) tag. 
Symbol: If the token consists of symbols like (%, $,. etc.), then set the symbol feature to 1, 
otherwise set it to 0. This helps to identify the SYM tag. 
Length of a word: It is found that length of a word is an effective feature in deciding POS tag of 
the word (Singh et al., 2008). If the length of a word is four or less, set the length word feature to 
1, otherwise set it as 0. The motivation of using this feature is to distinguish the Personal pronoun 
from the nouns. We observed that words of very short length are generally Personal pronoun.  
Frequent Word: A list for frequently occurring word is prepared for the training corpus. The 
words that occur more than 10 times in the entire training corpus are considered as the frequent 
words. The feature for the frequent word is set to 1 if they are in the list else set it as 0. This has 
been observed that frequently occurring words are rarely proper nouns. 

5.2 Evaluation 

For applying the statistical models in Kokborok, we required huge amount of annotated corpus in 
order to achieve good result. But, Kokborok is less computerized language and the corpora for 
training and testing were not available. During the manually annotation, we faced the problems 
due to agglutinative structure of the Kokborok language.  

5.2.1 Experimental Results of CRF  

We have conducted several experiments by considering the different combination of features to 
find out the best combination of features and feature templates. From the analysis, we observed 
that our proposed features as mentioned in Section 5.1 give the best results for testing purpose. 

We have designed three types of modules based on the CRF Frameworks. The first module 
makes use of simple contextual features (i.e. CRF), whereas the second module uses the 
information of affixes along with contextual information (i.e. CRF+suf.). In order to increase the 
accuracy of the system, we have integrated the morphological information with the model (i.e. 
CRF + suf. +MAF). The tagging accuracy of the CRF based POS tagging model has been 
evaluated as the ratio of correctly tagged words with respect to the total numbers of words. We 
have trained the system on different data size and the result is shown in Table 3. 

The above experiment leads us to the following observations that the use of suffix information 
plays an important role in achieving the accuracy of the system, especially when the training data 
is less. Furthermore, the morphology of the word gives significant improvement in the accuracy 
over the CRF and CRF+suf models. 

929



It was found that the CRF based POS tagger performs far better than the morphology driven POS 
tagger and has less computational complexity. We have also conducted the experiments with 
large number of features but, the inclusion of the features decreases the accuracy. It is found that 
large number of features works well when large amount of annotated corpus is available for 
training. The other reason was the biasness of noun tags in the corpus.  

 10K 20K 40K 
CRF baseline model 59.67 63.51 65.72 
CRF + suf. 67.23 73.57 76.25 
CRF + suf. + MAF 74.57 79.53 81.67 
SVM baseline model 60.51 64.26 68.32 
SVM + suf. 69.38 72.66 76.97 
SVM + suf. + MAF 75.52 80.47 84.46 

TABLE 3 – Tagging Accuracies In %age With Different Template For CRF & SVM. 

5.2.2 Experimental Results of SVM 

Same training set which was used for CRF is also used for SVM based experiments. We also 
conducted several experiments considering the different combination of features to find out the 
best combination of features and feature templates. From the analysis, we found that the similar 
features of CRF also produced the best results for testing of SVM based POS Tagger.  

We have also conducted several experiments for the various polynomial kernel functions and 
found that the system is giving the best result for the second degree kernel functions. It has been 
also observed that the pair wise multi-class decision strategy performs better than the than the 
one-vs.-rest strategy. The models described here are simple and quite good for automatic POS 
tagging even less amount of tagged corpus was available. The best performance is achieved when 
suffix information and morphological information is added to the system. 

SVM performs far better than the CRF based POS tagger. The performance in SVM can be 
improved significantly by including the language specific resources such as lexicon and 
inflection lists. It is found that a Named Entity Recognizer (NER) and a Multiword Identification 
Systems are necessary to reduce the large number of errors that involve proper nouns and 
different multiword expressions. The experiments of SVMs are also conducted on same type of 
data set and same features as shown in Table 3.  

Conclusion and Future works 

In this paper, we have described the development of POS taggers using both rule based and 
statistical models. We achieved the accuracies of 69%, 81.67% and 84.46% in rule based, CRF 
based and SVM based POS taggers, respectively with respect to 26 different POS tags.  

Future work includes the development of language specific resources such as lexicon and 
inflection lists. The Named Entity recognition module may be included to improve the accuracy 
in the POS taggers. Some language specific rules should be implemented to handle the Complex 
words in rule based POS tagger. Other experiments like voting technique for two or more models 
may be an interesting research direction. 

930



References 

Black, E., Jelinek, F., Lafferty, J., Mercer, R., and Roukos, S. (1992). Decision tree models 
applied to the labeling of text with parts-of-speech. In Proceedings of the DARPA Speech and 
Natural Language Workshop, pages 117-121. 

Brants, T. (2000). TnT: a statistical part-of-speech tagger. In Proceedings of the sixth 
conference on Applied natural language processing, pages 224-231, Association for 
Computational Linguistics.  

Brill, E. (1992). A simple rule-based part of speech tagger. In Proceedings of the workshop on 
Speech and Natural Language, pages 112-116, Association for Computational Linguistics.  

Brill, E. (1995). Transformation-based error-driven learning and natural language processing: A 
case study in part-of-speech tagging. Computational linguistics, 21(4):543-565. 

Carlos, C. S., Choudhury, M., and Dandapat, S. (2009). Large-coverage root lexicon extraction 
for Hindi. In Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics, pages 121-129, Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Choudhury, S., Singh, L., Borgohain, S., and Das, P. (2004). Morphological Analyzer for 
Manipuri: Design and Implementation. Applied Computing, 123-129. 

Cortes, C., and Vapnik, V. (1995). Support-vector networks. Machine learning, 20(3): 273-297. 

Cutting, D., Kupiec, J., Pedersen, J., and Sibun, P. (1992). A practical part-of-speech tagger. 
In Proceedings of the third conference on Applied natural language processing, pages 133-140. 
Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Debbarma, Binoy and Debbarma, Bijesh (2001). Kokborok Terminology P-I, II, III, English-
Kokborok-Bengali. Language Wing, Education Dept., TTAADC, Khumulwng, Tripura. 

Debbarma, K., Patra, B. G., Debbarma, S., Kumari, L., and Purkayastha, B. S. (2012). 
Morphological analysis of Kokborok for universal networking language dictionary. 
In Proceedings of First International Conference on Recent Advances in Information 
Technology, pages 474-477. IEEE. 

Dalal, A., Nagaraj, K., Swant, U., Shelke, S., and Bhattacharyya, P. (2007). Building feature 
rich pos tagger for morphologically rich languages: Experience in Hindi. In Proceedings of 
ICON. 

Dandapat, S., Sarkar, S., and Basu, A. (2007). Automatic Part-of-Speech tagging for Bengali: 
An approach for morphologically rich languages in a poor resource scenario. In Proceedings of 
the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL on Interactive Poster and Demonstration Sessions, pages 
221-224. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Ekbal, A., and Bandyopadhyay, S. (2008a). Part of speech tagging in Bengali using Support 
Vector Machine. In proceedings of the International Conference on Information Technology, 
2008. ICIT'08, pages 106-111. IEEE. 

Ekbal, A., and Bandyopadhyay, S. (2008). Web-based Bengali News Corpus for lexicon 
Development and POS tagging. POLIBITS, ISSN 1870, 9044(37):20-29. 

Ekbal, A., Haque, R., and Bandyopadhyay, S. (2007). Bengali Part of Speech Tagging using 

931



Conditional Random Field. In Proceedings of Seventh International Symposium on Natural 
Language Processing (SNLP2007), pages 131-136. 

Kishorjit, N., Laishram, J., Haobam, V., Soibam, A., Longjam, N., Lourembam, S. and 
Bandyopadhyay, S. (2009). Unsupervised POS Tagging for Manipuri Text. In Reso-illusion 
2009, MIT, Imphal, India. 

Kishorjit, N., Salam, B., Romina, M., Chanu, N. M., and Bandyopadhyay, S. (2011). A Light 
Weight Manipuri Stemmer. In The Proceedings of National Conference on Indian Language 
Computing (NCILC), Chochin, India .  

Kumar, D., and Josan, G. S. (2010). Part of Speech Taggers for Morphologically Rich Indian 
Languages: A Survey. International Journal of Computer Applications IJCA, 6(5):1-9. 

Lafferty, J., McCallum, A., and Pereira, F. C. (2001). Conditional random fields: Probabilistic 
models for segmenting and labeling sequence data. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth 
International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 282–289. 

Patra, B. G., Debbarma, K., Debabarma, S., Das, D., Das, A. and Bandyopadhyay, S. (2012). A 
light Weight Stemmer for Kokborok. In Proceedings of the 24th Conference on Computational 
Linguistics and Speech Processing (ROCLING 2012), Yuan Ze University, Chung-Li, Taiwan, 
pages 318-325. 

Ratnaparkhi, A. (1996). A maximum entropy model for part-of-speech tagging. In Proceedings 
of the conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, volume 1, pages 133-
142. 

Shrivastav, M., Melz, R., Singh, S., Gupta, K. and Bhattacharyya, P. (2006). Conditional 
Random Field Based POS Tagger for Hindi. In Proceedings of the MSPIL, pages 63-68. 

Singh, S., Gupta, K., Shrivastava, M., and Bhattacharyya, P. (2006). Morphological richness 
offsets resource demand-experiences in constructing a POS tagger for Hindi. In Proceedings of 
the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Conference Poster Sessions, pages 779-786. 

Singh, T. D. and Bandyopadhyay, S. (2005). Manipuri Morphological Analyzer. In Proceedings 
of the Platinum Jubilee International Conference of LSI, University of Hyderabad, India. 

Singh, T. D., and Bandyopadhyay, S. (2008). Morphology driven Manipuri POS 
tagger. IJCNLP-08 Workshop on NLP for Less Privileged Languages, pages 91-98, IIIT, 
Hyderabad, India. 

Singh, T. D., Ekbal, A., and Bandyopadhyay, S. (2008). Manipuri POS tagging using CRF and 
SVM: A language independent approach. In proceeding of 6th International conference on 
Natural Language Processing (ICON-2008), pages 240-245. 

932


