



















































Identification of Social Acts in Dialogue


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Technical Papers, pages 375–390,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Identification of Social Acts in Dialogue

David B. Bracewell, Marc T. Tomlinson, and Hui Wang
Language Computer Corporation

Richardson, TX
{david,marc,hui}@languagecomputer.com

Abstract
The emergence of dialogue on social medial neccessitates the development of new dialogue
processing models. We argue that to address coherence and to infer the implicatures of
social dialogue it is vital to understand the social aspirations of the dialogue participants.
One key aspect of understanding social dialogue is to understand the intentions and goals
of participants. In this paper, we present 11 social acts that capture a broad number of
social intentions and goals. We define social acts as pragmatic speech acts designed to give
insight into the socio-cognitive processes that individuals unconsciously go through when
communicating in dialogue. Identification of the social acts is done using a combination of
a generative model in which utterances are generated from gappy patterns, which define a
given social act, and a series of binary classifiers. Our experimentation shows that we can
capture these social acts with an overall F-measure of 50.4%.

Keywords: dialogue, social actions, online communication, speech acts, social goals, social
implicature.

375



1 Introduction

Traditional approaches to dialogue processing have been primarily focused on task-based
(Grosz, 1978; Traum and Hinkelman, 1992) dialogue. In addition, the recognition of
speech acts has proved useful for identifying the structure of the dialogue which takes place
in formal meetings (Shriberg et al., 2004) where the dialogue is often a function of the
job or position of the participants. Theories of the coherence of discourse and discourse
relations (Barzilay and Lapata, 2005; Byron and Stent, 1998; Hobbs, 1979, 1985; Mann
and Thompson, 1988; Marcu and Echihabi, 2002) have proved useful for the semantic
interpretation of discourse. However, in the world of Twitter, Facebook, and other social
media where people voluntarily join in the conversation, dialogue is often focused on the
social engagements between participants. These social dialogues are often not driven by a
common group task, goal or purpose, but by the social aspirations of the participants. As an
example let us examine the following excerpt of dialogue from a political debate forum:

A) Seriously, how can anybody still support this president’s economic policies? How can HE just continue
to do the same things and why can’t HE take responsibility for the lousy economy???

B) Not to worry, last time we had a democrat president that was this bad, we had a huge victory!

C) Being neither a Republican or Democrat I wonder if a Republican administration would have done
any better? We know McCain’s proposed tax and spending policies during the 2008 election would have
led to even larger deficits than what Obama was proposing at the time. Not to mention the bailouts and
TARP of Bush.

D)What about the showing that when Obama took office, the economy was spiraling down with -9% real
rate, losing 700,000+ jobs a month, skyrocketing unemployment, and the stock markets were crashing in
the worst recession in 80 years. Not to mention the destruction of the housing market. Oh yeah and we
were headed straight for a depression.

In the example shown above, the participants do not form a unified group working toward
a common goal or task, but are instead splintered into subgroups which have their own
agenda. The dialogue only progresses and stays coherent because the participants wish to
further their own goals, e.g. further their bond with others in their subgroup, demonstrate
their opposition to other groups, and influence the undecided. These social goals represent
an individual’s task in a task-oriented dialogue. Individuals construct a plan to accomplish
their task and carry out their plan through social actions.

In order to address the coherence and to infer social implicatures from social dialogue
it is vital to determine the social intentions and goals of the dialogue participants. The
representation of social dialogue plays an important role in facilitating the inference of
social intentions and goals. We believe the seminal work on attentions, intentions and the
structure of discourse by Grosz and Sidner (1986) is best suited for the inference of social
goals. A central component of this approach is the intentional structure, which takes into
account the purpose of discourse segments. In social dialogue the purpose of a discourse
segment is to further the social goal of the dialogue participants. Thus, by understanding
the discourse segments, social goals can be inferred.

A straightforward approach to using Grosz and Sidner’s theory for inferring social implica-
tures is to use the prevailing methods in dialogue processing. Topic modeling, such as Blei
et al. (2003), can be used for identification of linguistic structure where topic shifts (Cassell
et al., 2001) break the larger dialogue into dialogue segments. Dialogue acts (Allen and

376



Core, 1997; Stolcke et al., 1998; Bunt et al., 2010), which inform the intentions of dialogue,
can be employed to infer the social goals of the participants. The attentional state can be
captured using local coherence (Barzilay and Lapata, 2005; Byron and Stent, 1998). The
social implicatures of the dialogue can then be inferred through the intentional structure,
i.e. the social intentions and goals, and the attentional state, i.e. the focus of the dialogue
and its participants.

However, our early experimentation revealed that this straightforward approach of using
Grosz and Sidner’s framework with prevailing dialogue processing techniques fails to capture
the complexities of human social interactions and is incapable of reliably inferring the social
implicatures of dialogue. The primary factor for this failure is that traditional dialogue acts
are not capable of capturing the nuances of the social intentions and goals of the dialogue
participants. Instead of focusing solely on the dialogue, we must also focus on the dialogue
participants and how their social aspirations constrain their dialogue. Thus, we must look
at the social intentional structure of dialogue which models the social intentions and goals of
the dialogue participants and how the participants perceive the social intentions of others.
The question then becomes: How can the social intentional structure be captured?

We propose to use social acts for inferring the social intentions and goals of dialogue
participants which act to define the social intentional structure of the dialogue. Social acts
capture the complex social actions individuals signal through their utterances. While most
dialogue acts have some social overtones, they fail to adequately interpret the speaker’s
social goals. In contrast, the definitions of social acts are specifically designed to take
into account participants’ social cognition which constrains their dialogue facilitating the
inference of social intentions and goals from their communication. We identify a set of 11
social acts, listed in section 3, that capture a variety of social goals and intentions. These
social acts come from literature in the fields of psychology and organizational behavior and
are motivated by work in dialogue understanding.

As with work in dialogue acts, we identify social acts at the utterance level. We employ a
generative model for discovering gappy patterns which capture generalized cue phrases for
each of the social acts. A gappy pattern consists of one or more words in between which
there can exist gaps, or wildcards, which match any word. Each gap has an associated width
which determines how many words the gap can match. The gappy patterns are used as
features in a binary classifier. Each social act is associated with a classifier which determines
if the social act is manifested or not in an utterance.

2 Related Work

Research understanding the intentionality of dialogue and dialogue has a long history.
Some of the earliest work in dialogue processing is on speech acts. Speech acts are actions
performed by individuals when making an utterance. Austin (1962) formalized the concept
of speech acts by separating them into three classes: (1) locutionary, (2) illocutionary, and
(3) perlocutionary. Much of the work in speech acts has been focused on illocutionary acts
due to the work of Searle (1969).

Dialogue acts are specialized speech acts which include the internal structure, such as
grounding and adjacency pairs, of a dialogue. There are a number of schemes for coding
dialogue acts, such as DAMSL (Allen and Core, 1997), VERBMOBIL (Jekat et al., 1995),
and DIT++ (Bunt et al., 2010). The DAMSL coding scheme defines dialogue acts that are

377



forward looking, which are extensions of speech acts, and which are backward looking,
which relate the utterance to previous utterances. Frameworks like DIT++ have extended
the typical coverage of dialogue acts to encompass a boarder set of acts, such as social
obligations. However, when dialogue act schemes incorporate socially motivated acts
often they do not fully take into account the multitude of purposes, social intentions, and
ultimately the social implicatures of these acts. For example, in the statement “get me a
cup of coffee“, speech acts would focus on identifying the set of actions that would result
from the utterance - presumably the target of the utterance physically going to get a cup
of coffe for the speaker. In DIT++ the example utterance would most likely be labeled as
“Instruct“ which is void of any social implicatures resulting from the instruction. In contrast,
social acts reflect the social intention of an utterance focusing on the social implicature of
the statement, which in the case of the example utterance is that the speaker is indicating
their power over the target.

A vast amount of research has been focused on the coherence of dialogue(Barzilay and
Lapata, 2005; Byron and Stent, 1998; Hobbs, 1979; Mann and Thompson, 1988). Mann
and Thompson Mann and Thompson (1988) introduce Rhetorical Structure Theory (RST),
which was originally developed during the study of automatic text generation. They posit
that the coherence of a text is attributed to the rhetorical relations between non-overlapping
texts called the nucleus and satellite. The definition of the relations are not morphological
or syntactic, but instead are focused on function and semantics. Discourse Representation
Theory (DRT) (Kamp, 1984) provides a framework for the semantic understanding of
discourse. DRT models the cognitive state of the reader, or hearer, of the discourse using
discourse representation structures which convert the discourse into a logical form made up
of referents and conditions. In social dialogue we must model and understand the speaker’s
cognitive state, which informs their social intentions and constrains their actions facilitating
the progression and coherence of the dialogue.

Grosz and Sidner (1986) posit a structural approach to dialogue understanding where
dialogue is broken into three constituents: linguistic structure, intentional structure, and
attentional state. The linguistic structure encompasses how utterances combine together
to form larger segments of dialogue. The intentional structure is defined using a single
dialogue purpose and multiple dialogue segment purposes. The dialogue purpose is the
overarching motivation for the dialogue. For social dialogue, the dialogue purpose should
infer the social implicatures of the dialogue. Dialogue segment purposes are sub-components
of the larger dialogue purpose and define the intention of a single dialogue segment. In
social dialogue, one would expect the dialogue segment purpose to relate to the social
intentions of the participants. The final structural component, the attentional state is a
property of the dialogue and acts to keep track of the current focus of the dialogue. When
dealing with social dialogue the attentional state is influenced by the participants and their
social intentions.

The inference of social implicatures and identification of social goals through the use spe-
cialized social acts has been the focus of recent research. Bramsen et al. (2011) examined
how individuals change their language usage depending on the status of the individual
with whom they are communicating. In particular, they examine the use of upspeak and
downspeak for signaling power relationships where upspeak is a sign that an individual is
communicating with someone of higher status and downspeak is a sign that an individual is
communicating with someone of lesser power. Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al. (2012) exam-

378



ined the use of coordination, often referred to as mimicry, for inferring power relationships.
They showed that individuals are more likely to coordinate with individuals of higher status,
i.e. those who have more power, than those with lower or equal status. Bracewell et al.
(2011) examined a number of social acts for inferring whether two dialogue participants
have a collegial relationship.

Other research has focused on the annotation of social acts. Tomlinson et al. (2012)
examined the manifestation of a set of social acts in Arabic for inferring pursuits of power by
participants. Bracewell et al. (2012) created an annotated corpus of collegial and adversarial
social actions. Bender et al. (2011) created an annotated corpus of social acts relating to
authority claims and alignment moves for determining authority and influence.

Related work is also found in the methods for identifying dialogue acts. Petukhova and
Bunt (2011) examined using Bayes Net and Ripper for classification of high level dialogue
acts in the DIT++ schema. They reported F-measures ranging from 62% to 95.1% for the
AMI meeting corpus. Webb and Ferguson (2010) introduced an automated method for the
extraction of cue phrases for identification of dialogue acts. They obtained an identification
accuracy of almost 81% on the switchboard corpus when using cue phrases extracted from
a portion of the switchboard corpus and an accuracy of almost 71% when using cue phrases
extracted from the ICSI-MRDA corpus. Our approach combines the use of cue phrases and
classification. We first extract cue phrases in the form of gappy patterns using a generative
model. Then the cue phrases are used in a binary classifier which determines if an utterance
is a manifestation of the associated social act.

3 Social Acts
Social interaction is one of the primary reasons for dialogue. Even predominantly task
oriented dialogue (e.g. “let’s go to the movies“) has many possible social implications. The
most apparent is the expression of a desire to establish or reaffirm a bond between the
individuals. In order to reliably infer these social implications, the social intentions and
goals for the dialogue participants must be taken into account.

We label the dialogue segment purpose, or the social intentions of an utterance, as social act.
Social acts are pragmatic speech acts that signal a dialogue participant’s social intentions.
There are a number of social goals which a participant may have, including (1) maintaining
an existing role, such as being an authority (Mayfield and Rose, 2011), in power (Bramsen
et al., 2011), or collegial (Kim and Galstyan, 2010; Bracewell et al., 2011); (2) gaining a
new role, such as by pursuing power (Tomlinson et al., 2012); or (3) maintaining or altering
the role or status of another individual in the dialogue. Social acts can be signaled by a
variety of cue phrases as well as through a dialogue participant’s observation or violation of
social norms, or expectations of socially appropriate responses.

The set of acts presented in this section have been derived from work in psychology on
power, status, and leadership (Anderson et al., 2001; French and Raven, 1959; Keltner
et al., 2008; Owens and Sutton, 2001; Smith and Galinsky, 2010), as well as on conflict and
cooperation (Brewer and Gardner, 1996; Deutsch, 2011; Jehn and Mannix, 2001). This set
of social acts was designed to have broad coverage, but is not to be taken as an exclusive
set. Figure 2 gives an example of a dialogue marked with the social acts.

Agreement can act as an affordance to an individual or as a means to establish solidarity
between individuals. Likewise disagreement can act as a way of undermining or challenging

379



Agreement Statements that a group member makes to indicate that he/she shares the same view
about something another member has said or done.

Challenge
Credibility

Attempts to discredit or raise doubt about another group member’s qualifications or
abilities.

Disagreement Statements a group member makes to indicate that he/she does not share the same
view about something another member has said or done.

Disrespect Inappropriate statements that a group member makes to insult another member of
the group.

Establish
Credibility

Statements that a speaker makes to demonstrate his/her knowledge or personal
experience in order to make him/herself look better in the eyes of the group.

Managerial
Influence

Statements that a speaker makes to control the discussion with the goal of increasing
sway over the group.

Mediation Attempts made by a group member to resolve a conflict occurring between other
group members.

Relationship
Conflict

Personal, heated disagreement between individuals.

Solidarity Statements that a group member makes to strengthen the group’s sense of community
and unity.

Supportive
Behavior

Statements of personal support that one group member makes toward another.

Task
Conflict

Disagreement over the manner in which a task is performed or over the outcome of
the task.

Figure 1: The set of eleven social acts.

credibility. However, because of the special status of agreement and disagreement we
consider them as two separate social acts.

Agreement can be manifested through simple phrases, such as “I agree”, through negations
of disagreement, such as “I am not disagreeing with you”, and through more complex
phrases, such as “What Adam says is in principle correct.” Similarly, disagreement is
manifested through simple “I disagree” phrases as well as negations of agreement, such as
“I definitely do not agree with what you said.”

Challenging credibility can be used by an individual to lower the status of other group
members (Owens and Sutton, 2001). These challenges can be in demands to prove
credibility, such as “prove your lies” and aggressive accusing questions, such as "what does
that have to do with what we are talking about?". Challenging credibility can also occur
through gossip, such as “X doesn’t know what he is talking about”. This tactic can be used
by group members to moderate the power of a leader who has overstepped their boundaries
(Keltner et al., 2008).

Disrespected individuals often feel they have been unjustly treated due to the disrespectful
action, causing a social imbalance between them and the perpetrator (Miller, 2001). This
social imbalance causes a power differential between the two individuals, thus giving the
perpetrator power over the individual. Examples of disrespect include “You are a gigantic
hypocrite you know that?” and “Do you speak English well?”

Establishing credibility reflects an attempt by an individual to demonstrate their credibility
and fitness for leadership (Keltner et al., 2008). Evidence for establishment of credibility
manifests itself in many different ways. The most common in our data set is an explicit
mention of the individual’s credentials, such as “I am a physicist”. Alternatively a person
can demonstrate their credibility by providing the group with cited information, such as

380



A) Propose that this page be moved to East Timor Defence Force as this is the closest translation
of Forças de Defesa de Timor Leste [Managerial Influence]. I have worked in Timor Leste as a
government advisor, including with FDTL, and have never heard anybody ever refer to the FDTL
as Military of East Timor [Establish Credibility].

B) As I understand it, ’East Timor Defence Force’ is considered outdated [Managerial Influence].
While it was commonly used when the force was established, almost all english-language publica-
tions now use ’F-FDTL’. [Managerial Influence] ’Military of East Timor’ is a generic name, and I agree
that it’s rarely used and not a great title. [Agreement] I’d prefer ’Timor Leste Defence Force’ as
this seems to be the direct translation, but this would be inconsistent with the other Wikipedia
articles on the country. [Managerial Influence] Should we be bold and move this article to ’Timor
Leste Defence Force’? [Establish Solidarity]

A) I so totally agree with you. [Agreement] ’Timor Leste Defence Force’ is it. [Agreement] The only
reason I did not propose that was the failure to change the country page from East Timor to Timor
Leste, a decision that I feel was extremely discourteous of Wikipedia considering the government’s
specific request that it be referred to as Timor Leste. [Managerial Influence] If you have worked there
you will know that everybody uses ’Timor Leste’, even the ADF but the Australian DFAT uses East
Timor although the more enlightened Kiwi embassy call it TL. [Establish Credibility] I suggest we
leave it for 48 hours to see if anyone has any strong feelings and then change it to ’ Timor Leste
Defence Force’ with diverts from F-FDTL and FDTL. [Managerial Influence]

Figure 2: Social acts tagged for an excerpt of a discussion taken from a Wikipedia Talk page.

“Article 10.5 paragraph 3 says...”. Finally an individual can justify their opinion through the
use of logic or citation of personally relevant anecdotes.

Managerial influence is used by individuals to signal that they are a leader. Examples of
managerial influence include “Can we focus the discussion” and “Are we still trying to find
out where the scholarly consensus is on the matter of Lukan authorship?” Figure 2 has a
number of examples of managerial influence, such as A proposing to move the page and B
giving factual reasons why “Military of East Timor” is an incorrect name for the page.

A person in power often acts as a mediator for disputes between other group members.
Mediation itself is an attempt to resolve a conflict occurring between other group members.
Individuals performing mediation may already be in position of power. Examples of
mediation include “You really need to back off and take a deep breath” and “Let’s just all
keep calm, yes?”

Relationship conflict is a personal, heated disagreement between individuals (Jehn and
Mannix, 2001). Individuals exhibiting relationship conflict are being adversarial. Examples
of relationship conflict include “your arrogant blathering” and “I consider it offensive for
you to assert that i insist on turning every interaction into a personality conflict.’

Further, language indicative of a desire for group solidarity encapsulates the establishment
and maintenance of shared group membership. Group membership can be expressed at
either the relational level (e.g. Father, co-worker, etc.) or the collective level (e.g. single
mothers) (Brewer and Gardner, 1996). Language indicative of a desire for group solidarity
demonstrates that an individual identifies with the group, an important characteristic of
leaders (Keltner et al., 2008) and cooperators (Deutsch, 2011). This solidarity can be
expressed explicitly (e.g. “We’re all in this together”), covertly (e.g. as through the use of
inclusive first-person pronouns), or through unconscious actions and linguistic cues, such as
the use of in-group jargon, certain syntactic constructions, and mimicry.

381



Supportive behavior, or cooperation towards a common goal, is an example of collegiality.
This type of behavior lies at the center of group dynamics. Cooperation is correlated with
both overall group performance and managerial ratings of group effectiveness (Campion
et al., 1996). Evidence for cooperation manifests itself in many different ways. Classically,
there is the notion of cooperation on a physical task (e.g. one person helping another lift a
heavy weight), or cooperation through social support (e.g. Mary says, “John’s decision is
excellent”).

There are also more subtle, unconscious examples of cooperation between individuals, which
can demonstrate a certain degree of collegiality between the individuals. One example is
cooperation for the effective use of language and the building of dialogue (Garrod and
Pickering, 2004). Dialogue is a complicated interaction that requires commitment from
both parties. In order to maintain a stable conversation, participants must be willing to
expend cognitive effort to listen, understand, and form a relevant response that advances the
dialogue. The degree to which participants are able to maintain a cohesive dialogue should
be reflected in the collegiality of the participants. If one participant is not cooperating, the
dialogue will not progress.

Task conflict often arises during power struggles in a group where one individual is at-
tempting to overtake the position of another (Jehn and Mannix, 2001). It is defined as
disagreement over the manner in which a task is performed or over the outcome of the task.
Task conflict can be manifested by actions performed to undo or challenge other’s work
toward a task, such as “I reverted your all your changes.” Additionally, it may manifest itself
as taking sides or stating positions around a conflict, such as “So yes, I will not be editing
but I will be monitoring to see if some other naive soul wishes to and try to support them
(and revert the vandalism that happens from time to time).”

4 A Generative Model for Identifying Social Acts
A system for the recognition of intentions and goals is the foundation for the understanding
of social implicatures in social dialogue. Here we present a generative model for identifying
social acts at the utterance level. The model generates utterances exhibiting a social act as
a series of gappy patterns. A gappy pattern consists of one or more words in between which
there can be gaps, or wildcards, which match any contiguous sequence of non-whitespace
characters. Associated with the gap is a width, which determines how many words the gap
can match. An example of a gappy pattern with a gap width of one extracted for a three
utterances is shown in Figure 3.

    
Your arrogant blathering must stop!
    
Your incessant blathering serves no purpose to anyone.
    
Your blathering only serves to show your point is invalid!

    
Your <gap|1> blathering

Figure 3: An example of a gappy pattern consisting of a single gap which can capture zero
or one words and three utterances for which the pattern matches.

The generative model we employ is a modified version of the model introduced by Gimpel
and Smith (2011) for machine translation. The main difference is that our model is
supervised whereas Gimpel and Smith’s model is unsupervised. The supervision in our

382



model helps to guide the generative process in discovering gappy patterns related to a
specific social act.

We assume that we are given a set of utterances u1:k where each utterance is made up
of n-words, w1:n, and a set of labels l1:k such that label li is associated with utterance ui.
Following the terminology of Gimpel and Smith (2011), gappy patterns are represented
over the words in the utterances as a color where each word in the utterance has a color
assignment, i.e. there is a vector of color assignments ci:n for each utterance. A color Cj
is a set made up of the ci color-word associations such that Cj = i : ci = j. A pattern is
built from each color Cj by concatenating the words assigned to the color from left to write
inserting gaps between non-adjacent words.

The generative story for a single utterance entails sampling the following:

1. The number of words, n, in an utterance as a Poisson distribution with parameter β.

2. The number of unique colors in an utterance given a Uniform distribution.

3. The color ci for each word wi in the utterance as a Uniform distribution.

4. The probability of the pattern associated with each color Cj for utterances with label l
as a Multinominal with parameter µ.

Thus, to generate patterns we must calculate the probability of generating an utterance of
length n, with m colors, label l, and color assignments c1:n as:

p(w1:n, c1:n,m|β, µ) = 1Z (
βn

n! e
−β)( 1n )(

1
m )n

∏m
j=1 pµ(π(Cj) | l)

where Z is a normalization factor.

The multinomial distribution, pµ, is modeled using a Dirichlet process. A Dirichlet process
can be treated as a probability distribution over random distributions which facilitates an
unbounded set of parameters µ ∼ DP (α, P0), where α is the concentration parameter and
P0 is the base distribution. The base distribution is made up of: (1) a Poisson distribution
with parameter υ over the number of words in the utterance; (2) a uniform distribution for
each word; (3) a uniform distribution over the number of gaps given the number of words;
and (4) a uniform distribution over the arrangement of gaps given the number of gaps and
words.

Gibbs sampling is used to sample the posterior distribution
p({c(i),m(i)}Ui=1 | {w(i)}Ui=1, υ, α), where U is the total number of utterances. Gibbs
sampling is a form of Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), which is used to obtain a
sequence of random samples from a joint probability distribution of two or more random
variables. In particular, Gibbs sampling is used when direct sampling is prohibitive. The
Gibbs sampler makes repeated iterations. During each of the iterations it samples a new
color for each of the color assignments (ci). A new color is assigned to ci by first removing
the current color and then choosing from either one the other m colors in the utterance or a
creating a new color. The probability of choosing a new color is proportional to:

Nπ({i})+αP0(π({i}) | l)
N+α

383



where Nπ({i}) is the count of pattern π over all utterances with label l and N is the total
count of all the patterns. The probability of assigning an existing color j to ci is proportional
to:

Nπ(Cj∪{i})+αP0(π(Cj∪{i}) | l)
Nπ(Cj)+αP0(π(Cj) | l)

where Cj ∪ {i} states that ci is being added to Cj .
After discovering gappy patterns using the described generative model, we build a binary
classifier for each of the social acts we wish to identify. In particular, we use a logistic
regression classifier to the learn a set of weights for each of the gappy patterns, which
denotes the discriminatory ability of the pattern in identifying the social act. A social act is
manifested in an utterance when H(z) = 1, where H(z) is calculated as:

H(z) =
{

1, 11+e−z > 0.5
0, 11+e−z ≤ 0.5

where z =
∑m
i=1 wi ∗ φ(πi, wi:n) and φ returns 1 if pattern πi is present in the utterance

made up of words w1:n. An utterance is then assigned all social acts whose accompanying
classifier results in an H(z) = 1.

5 Data Collection & Annotation
We constructed a corpus of 215 social dialogues extracted from English Wikipedia talk
pages, public forums, and chat transcripts. A total of 21,067 utterances were extracted from
the social dialogues. On average each utterance contained 18.7 words.

A web-based interface was constructed for annotation. The interface listed for a single social
dialogue all of the utterances in the order in which they appeared in the dialogue along
with speaker information. Social acts were annotated by through the use a drop-down list
and allowed for an arbitrary number of social acts to be assigned to an utterance.

Each utterance was annotated by two annotators, who were trained linguists, as either
being a manifestation or not of one or more of the eleven social acts described in section
3. In total, 8,149 (38.7%) of the total utterances had at least one of the eleven social acts
annotated. On average each utterance was assigned with 0.98 social acts.

We first looked at the inter-annotator agreement for if an utterance exhibited any social act
or not. The results are listed in Table 1. The micro-averaged mutual F-Measure was 94.0%
which broke down as 84.0% F-Measure for “exhibited” and a 94.0% F-Measure for “Not
Exhibited.” The results show that expert annotators can reliably determine the presence or
absence of social actions in utterances.

Next, we examined the inter-annotator agreement rate for each of the individual social acts.
Table 2 shows the number of utterances annotated for each social act, the Cohen’s kappa
(Cohen, 1960), and the mutual F-measure.

As seen in table 2, the kappa values range from 0.13 to 0.53. In contrast, the kappa values
for dialogue acts have been reported as high as 0.76 for ANSWER and as low as 0.15 for
COMMITTING-SPEAKER-FUTURE-ACTION (Allen and Core, 1997). More recent work in
dialogue act annotation has been performed by Geertzen and Bunt (2006) who report kappa

384



F-Measure
Exhibited 84.0%
Not Exhibited 94.0%
micro-Averaged 94.0%
macro-Averaged 89.0%

Table 1: The mutual F-Measure for an utterance exhibiting or not exhibiting any social act.

# Annotated Kappa F-Measure
Agreement 295 0.38 0.76
Challenge Credibility 1,113 0.36 0.33
Disagreement 434 0.46 0.71
Disrespect 367 0.24 0.54
Establish Credibility 364 0.53 0.45
Managerial Influence 2,486 0.23 0.16
Mediation 167 0.26 0.52
Relationship Conflict 399 0.13 0.21
Solidarity 100 0.52 0.42
Supportive Behavior 269 0.36 0.68
Task Conflict 2,802 0.35 0.31

Table 2: The number of annotations and kappa per social act.

values between 0.21 and 1.0 for the top level of a hierarchical dialogue act scheme (Bunt
et al., 2010). However, they only calculated kappa for utterances in which both annotators
had assigned a dialogue act, i.e. utterances where only one annotator assigned a dialogue
act were ignored. In contrast, we calculated our kappa values for all utterances where at
least one annotator assigned a social act.

Other work in social acts have seen kappa values in a similar range, such as the Bender et al.
(2011) who report kappa values from 0.13 to 0.63. Given the complexities presented by
annotating the social intentions of dialogue participants, we believe that the kappa values
reported here are acceptable given the accompanying F-Measures.

6 Experimental Results
The utterances in the corpus were labeled with a social act if it was assigned by either of the
annotators. The reason for this was two-fold: (1) The definitions of the social acts can be
interpreted differently depending on internal thresholding (e.g. how hostile does a remark
need to be in order to be classified as a Relationship Conflict?) and no interpretation is truly
incorrect. (2) Given the sparsity of annotation for some of the social acts (e.g. Solidarity
only having 100 total annotations) made it necessary to include any instance. Experiments
were then performed using a standard 80/10/10 split where 80% of the data was used
for training, 10% for development, and 10% for testing. We examined an n-gram based
approach for comparison to the gappy patterns.

For the gappy pattern method, we constrained the gap width to 2, meaning that the
maximum number of words a gap can consume was two. In addition, the sampling process
was ran for 1,000 iterations with a burn-in of 50 iterations. A minimum probability of

385



70% was needed to initiate a new color and a minimum probability of 40% was needed to
propagate a color. These parameters were tuned using the development set.

The N-gram based method is a simplification of the gappy pattern method, i.e. it is patterns
without gaps. First, n-grams were extracted from the annotated data. Second, the n-grams
were pruned using information gain where the exact number of features retained was
determined using the development set. Finally, the remaining n-grams were used as binary
features in an Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifier with a linear kernel. SVMs are
frequently used in text classification and have been shown to give good results for dialogue
acts (Hu et al., 2009). We examined using unigrams (1-gram) and unigrams and bigrams
(1+2-grams). Other size bigrams were tried as well as incorporating part-of-speech, but
resulted in extremely poor performance.

Precision Recall F-Measure
Gappy 49.5% 51.3% 50.4%
1-gram 43.8% 43.2% 43.5%
1+2-grams 38.4% 37.8% 38.1%

Table 3: Micro averaged precision, recall, and F-measure for identifying the 11 social acts
using an 80/20 split.

Table 3 lists the micro-averaged precision, recall, and F-measure for the identification of
the 11 social acts. As can be seen in the table, the gappy-pattern based approach had an
increase of 6.9% in F-Measure over the best n-gram approach (1-gram). This included an
increase in precision of 5.7% and in recall of 8.1%. The unigram and bigram (1+2-grams)
based method performed the worst, mostly due to the size of data. In contrast, the gappy
pattern approach was able to learn a mix of patterns of varying lengths and gaps (up to 2)
that were able to separate the social acts. Figure 4 shows example patterns for each of the
social acts that were discovered by the generative model and then weighted as a positive
indicator by logistic regression.

Conclusion

In this work we have begun a process of revisiting classical theories of dialogue coherence
and understanding. Our initial efforts have been to show how the social intentions behind
dialogue segments can be understood. Understanding the social goals of individuals is
critical to properly parsing dialogue in a modern age of social media. We introduced a set
of social acts designed to capture the social intentions of dialogue participants. Our results
show that social acts can be reliably understood by annotators and that a novel method for
detecting speech acts, based on a generative method for identifying gappy patterns, can
achieve results consistent with work in recognizing dialogue acts.

This work creates a foundation for building models of the higher level intentional structure
of social dialogue and attention. The intentional structure around the social acts could
provide valuable insight into the social goals of a dialogue and the dialogue participants. It
is also critical that future work addresses the way in which social attention is modulated
within a coherent dialogue.

386



Agreement Supportive Behavior Challenge Credibility
exactly support tring bullshit
maybe works beautifully been spite

certainly woman support reverting move
fair appreciate fixing

Disagreement Disrespect Relationship Conflict
violate simply cowardice insult <gap> against

your <gap> unacceptable fooling <gap> fallacy simple
misinformative hahaha amazingly <gap> decision

not agree quaking arrogant blathering

Mediation Task Conflict Establish Credibility
insulting each threshold myself

false accusations article title difference between
former <gap> violates sources lead <gap> reflect

should resolve rebutting reliable giving <gap> revert

Managerial Influence Solidarity
discussion definitely improvement

also <gap> problematic good point
information should improving thanks

contentious <gap> problem reliable

Figure 4: Example patterns for each social act that were discovered using the generative
model and then determined to be a positive indicator by logistic regression.

Acknowledgment
This research was funded by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI),
Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA), and through the U.S. Army
Research Lab. All statements of fact, opinion or conclusions contained herein are those of
the authors and should not be construed as representing the official views or policies of
IARPA, the ODNI or the U.S. Government.

References
Allen, J. and Core, M. (1997). Draft of DAMSL: Dialog Act Markup in Several Layers.

Anderson, C., John, O. P., Keltner, D., and Kring, A. M. (2001). Who attains social status?
Effects of personality and physical attractiveness in social groups. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 81(1):116–132.

Austin, J. L. (1962). How to do things with words, volume 7 of The William James lectures.
Harvard University Press.

Barzilay, R. and Lapata, M. (2005). Modeling local coherence: an entity-based approach.
In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL
’05, pages 141–148, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Bender, E. M., Morgan, J. T., Oxley, M., Zachry, M., Hutchinson, B., Marin, A., Zhang, B.,
and Ostendorf, M. (2011). Annotating social acts: authority claims and alignment moves
in wikipedia talk pages. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Languages in Social Media, LSM
’11, pages 48–57, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Blei, D. M., Ng, A., and Jordan, M. (2003). Latent dirichlet allocation. JMLR, 3:993–1022.

Bracewell, D., Tomlinson, M., Brunson, M., Plymale, J., Bracewell, J., and Boerger, D.
(2012). Annotation of adversarial and collegial social actions in discourse. In Proceedings

387



of the Sixth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 184–192, Jeju, Republic of Korea.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Bracewell, D. B., Tomlinson, M., Shi, Y., Bensley, J., and Draper, M. (2011). Who’s
playing well with others: Determining collegiality in text. In Proceedings of the 5th IEEE
International Conference on Semantic Computing (ICSC 2011), Palo Alto. IEEE Computer
Society.

Bramsen, P., Escobar-Molano, M., Patel, A., and Alonso, R. (2011). Extracting social power
relationships from natural language. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies - Volume 1, HLT
’11, pages 773–782, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Brewer, M. B. and Gardner, W. (1996). Who is this "We"? Levels of collective identity and
self representations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71(1):83–93.

Bunt, H., Alexandersson, J., Carletta, J., Choe, J.-W., Fang, A. C., Hasida, K., Lee, K.,
Petukhova, V., Popescu-Belis, A., Romary, L., Soria, C., and Traum, D. R. (2010). Towards
an iso standard for dialogue act annotation. In LREC.

Byron, D. and Stent, A. (1998). A preliminary model of centering in dialog. In Proceedings
of the 36th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and 17th
International Conference on Computational Linguistics - Volume 2, ACL ’98, pages 1475–
1477, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Campion, M., Papper, E., and Medsker, G. (1996). Relations between work team character-
istics and effectiveness: A replication and extension. Personnel psychology, 49(2):429–452.

Cassell, J., Nakano, Y. I., Bickmore, T. W., Sidner, C. L., and Rich, C. (2001). Non-verbal
cues for discourse structure. In Proceedings of the 39th Annual Meeting on Association for
Computational Linguistics, ACL ’01, pages 114–123, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Cohen, J. (1960). A Coefficient of Agreement for Nominal Scales. Educational and
Psychological Measurement, 20(1):37–46.

Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, C., Lee, L., Pang, B., and Kleinberg, J. (2012). Echoes of power:
language effects and power differences in social interaction. In Proceedings of the 21st
international conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’12, pages 699–708, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

Deutsch, M. (2011). Cooperation and competition. Conflict, Interdependence, and Justice,
pages 23–40.

French, J. R. P. and Raven, B. (1959). The Bases of Social Power. In Cartwright, D., editor,
Studies in Social Power, volume 35 of Studies in social power, chapter 9, pages 150–167.
Institute for social research.

Garrod, S. and Pickering, M. J. (2004). Why is conversation so easy? Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 8(1):8–11.

388



Geertzen, J. and Bunt, H. (2006). Measuring annotator agreement in a complex hier-
archical dialogue act annotation scheme. In Proceedings of the 7th SIGdial Workshop on
Discourse and Dialogue, SigDIAL ’06, pages 126–133, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Gimpel, K. and Smith, N. A. (2011). Generative Models of Monolingual and Bilingual
Gappy Patterns. Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
(2009):512–522.

Grosz, B. J. (1978). Understanding Spoken Language, chapter Discourse Analysis. Elsevier
Science.

Grosz, B. J. and Sidner, C. L. (1986). Attention, Intention, and the Structure of Discourse.
Computational Linguistics, 12(3):175–204.

Hobbs, J. R. (1979). Coherence and coreference *. Cognitive Science, 3(1):90–67.

Hobbs, J. R. (1985). On the Coherence and Structure of Discourse. In CSLI 85-37.

Hu, J., Passonneau, R. J., and Rambow, O. (2009). Contrasting the interaction structure of
an email and a telephone corpus: a machine learning approach to annotation of dialogue
function units. In Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2009 Conference: The 10th Annual Meeting
of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, SIGDIAL ’09, pages 357–366,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jehn, K. A. and Mannix, E. A. (2001). The Dynamic Nature of Conflict: A Longitudinal
Study of Intragroup Conflict and Group Performance. Academy of Management Journal,
44(2):238.

Jekat, S., Klein, R., Maier, E., Maleck, I., Mast, M., Berlin, T., Quantz, J. J., and Quantz,
J. J. (1995). Dialogue acts in verbmobil. Technical report.

Kamp, H. (1984). A theory of truth and semantic representation. In Groenendijk, J.,
Janssen, T. M. V., and Stokhof, M., editors, Truth, Interpretation and Information: Selected
Papers from the Third Amsterdam Colloquium, pages 1–41. Foris Publications, Dordrecht.

Keltner, D., Van Kleef, G. A., Chen, S., and Kraus, M. W. (2008). A reciprocal influence
model of social power: Emerging principles and lines of inquiry. Advances in experimental
social psychology, 40:151–192.

Kim, J. and Galstyan, A. (2010). Towards modeling social and content dynamics in
discussion forums. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational
Linguistics in a World of Social Media, WSA ’10, pages 13–14, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Mann, W. C. and Thompson, S. A. (1988). Rhetorical Structure Theory: Toward a
Functional Theory of Text Organization. Text, 8(3):243–281.

Marcu, D. and Echihabi, A. (2002). An unsupervised approach to recognizing discourse
relations. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting on Association for Computational
Linguistics, ACL ’02, pages 368–375, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

389



Mayfield, E. and Rose, C. P. (2011). Recognizing Authority in Dialogue with an Integer
Linear Programming Constrained Model. In Computational Linguistics, pages 1018–1026.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Owens, D. and Sutton, R. (2001). Status contests in meetings: Negotiating the informal
order. Groups at work: Theory and research, 14:299–316.

Petukhova, V. and Bunt, H. (2011). Incremental dialogue act understanding. In Proceedings
of the Ninth International Conference on Computational Semantics, IWCS ’11, pages 235–244,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Searle, J. R. (1969). Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language. Cambridge
University Press.

Shriberg, E., Dhillon, R., Bhagat, S., Ang, J., and Carvey, H. (2004). The ICSI Meeting
Recorder Dialog Act (MRDA) Corpus. In Strube, M. and Sidner, C., editors, Proceed-
ings of the 5th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 97–100, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Smith, P. and Galinsky, A. (2010). The nonconscious nature of power: Cues and conse-
quences. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 4(10):918–938.

Stolcke, A., Shriberg, E., Bates, R., Coccaro, N., Jurafsky, D., Martin, R., Meteer, M., Ries,
K., Taylor, P., and Van Ess-Dykema, C. (1998). Dialog Act Modeling for Conversational
Speech. In Applying Machine Learning to Discourse Processing, pages 98–105. AAAI Press.

Tomlinson, M., Bracewell, D. B., Draper, M., Almissour, Z., Shi, Y., and Bensley, J. (2012).
Pursing power in arabic on-line discussion forums. In Proceedings of the Eighth Conference
on International Language Resources and Evaluation.

Traum, D. R. and Hinkelman, E. A. (1992). Conversation acts in task-oriented spoken
dialogue. Computational Intelligence, 8(3):575–599.

Webb, N. and Ferguson, M. (2010). Automatic extraction of cue phrases for cross-corpus
dialogue act classification. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics: Posters, COLING ’10, pages 1310–1317, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

390


