



















































Tweet Ranking Based on Heterogeneous Networks


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Technical Papers, pages 1239–1256,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Tweet Ranking Based on Heterogeneous Networks

Hongzhao HUANG1 Arkaitz ZUBIAGA1 Heng J I1

Hong bo DENG2 Dong WANG2 Hieu LE2 Tarek ABDELZAHER2

J iawei HAN 2 Alice LEUNG3 John HANCOCK4 Clare VOSS5
(1) COMPUTER SCIENCE DEPARTMENT AND LINGUISTICS DEPARTMENT,

QUEENS COLLEGE AND GRADUATE CENTER,
CITY UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK, New York, NY, USA 11367

(2) COMPUTER SCIENCE DEPARTMENT, UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN,
Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA 61820

(3) RAYTHEON BBN TECHNOLOGIES, Cambridge, MA, USA 02138
(4) ARTISTECH INC., Fairfax, VA, USA 22030

(5) MULTILINGUAL COMPUTING BRANCH, ARMY RESEARCH LAB, Adelphi, MD, USA 20783
{hongzhaohuang, arkaitz.zubiaga, hengjicuny}@gmail.com

Abstract
Ranking tweets is a fundamental task to make it easier to distill the vast amounts of information
shared by users. In this paper, we explore the novel idea of ranking tweets on a topic using
heterogeneous networks. We construct heterogeneous networks by harnessing cross-genre linkages
between tweets and semantically-related web documents from formal genres, and inferring implicit
links between tweets and users. To rank tweets effectively by capturing the semantics and importance
of different linkages, we introduce Tri-HITS, a model to iteratively propagate ranking scores across
heterogeneous networks. We show that integrating both formal genre and inferred social networks
with tweet networks produces a higher-quality ranking than the tweet networks alone. 1

Title and Abstract in Chinese

基基基于于于异异异构构构网网网络络络的的的微微微信信信息息息排排排序序序

微信息排序是一个可以过滤由用户分享的大量信息的根本任务。 在这篇文章中，
我们探索利用异构网络来排序微信息。我们利用来源于正规类型并且与微信息语义相关的
网络文本的跨类型联接,和推理微信息和用户之间的潜在联系来构造异构网络。为了有效
地捕获不同联接的语义和重要性，我们提出了Tri-HITS,一个能够跨网络循环传播排序分数
的模型。我们证明了结合来自正规类型的信息，和推理隐含的社交网络可以取得比仅靠微
信息网络本身更高的排序质量。2

Keywords: Tweet Ranking, Heterogeneous Networks, Iterative Propagation Model.
Keywords in Chinese:微信息排序，异构网络，循环传播模型.

1Related resources and software are freely available for research purposes at http://nlp.cs.qc.cuny.edu/tweetranking.zip;
the system demo is at http://nlp.cs.qc.cuny.edu/tweet_summary/ground-truth-demo.xhtml.

2有关的资源和程序公布在如下地址和研究相关的应用分享: http://nlp.cs.qc.cuny.edu/tweetranking.zip;系统演示
在如下地址： http://nlp.cs.qc.cuny.edu/tweet_summary/ground-truth-demo.xhtml.

1239



1 Introduction

Twitter has become a popular service for online communication through short messages of up to 140
characters, known as tweets. Its users produce millions of tweets a day, enabling both individuals
and organizations to disseminate information about current affairs and breaking news in a timely
fashion. This information is sometimes posted by users on-site or in the vicinity of events, providing
first-hand accounts from a wide variety of sources. However, the sheer volume of tweets sent
during events of general interest is overwhelming and hence difficult to distill for the most relevant
information, while also filtering out non-informative tweets.

To facilitate finding informative and trustworthy content in tweets, it is crucial to develop an
effective ranking method. This is particularly useful in emerging situations. Eyewitnesses might
be live-tweeting about anything happening at ongoing events (Diakopoulos et al., 2012) such as
natural disasters. To assist in these situations, we aim to develop a ranking system that organizes
tweets by informativeness, so that informative tweets are readily identified, while pointless and
speculative observations are filtered out. However, the definition of informativeness might vary for
different points of view. Twitter users can produce diverse content ranging from news and events,
to conversations and personal status updates. While personal updates and conversations might be
relevant to a specific group of people, we aim to find tweets on topics that are informative to a
general audience, such as breaking news and real-time coverage of on-going events. For example,
during Hurricane Irene in 2011, updates from a user living in New York City about her own safety
might be very informative to her friends and relatives, but not so informative to others. To produce
rankings that are as relevant to as many people as possible, we define informativeness as the extent
to which a tweet meets the general interest of people involved with or tracking the event.

While previous research has relied on either the text of tweets or explicit features of social network
such as retweets, replies, and follower-followee relationships, we believe that such networks can
be enhanced by integrating information from a formal genre. On one hand, tweets from different
sources tend to contain non-informative noise such as subjective comments and conversations.
Therefore it is challenging to identify salient information from tweet content alone. On the other
hand, events of general interest such as natural disasters or political elections are the topics of tweets
sent by many users from multiple communities which are not connected to each other. In these
situations, users are likely to be unaware of each other. As a result, they fail to connect with many
others on topics of mutual interest. This lack of social interaction produces networks with few
explicit linkages between users, and therefore between tweets and users. The sparsity of linkages
would limit the effectiveness of features extracted from social network.

In this work, we introduce Tri-HITS, a novel propagation model that leverages global information
iteratively computed across heterogeneous networks constructed from web documents, tweets, and
users, to rank tweets on a topic by informativeness. The model addresses the two issues mentioned
above (noisy tweets, limited social connections). Using Tri-HITS, we establish cross-genre linkages
between tweets and web documents, filter informal writing and noise contained in tweets, and infer
implicit tweet-user relations beyond the explicit ones, so that networks are enriched by connecting
users that are sharing similar contents. We propose three high-level hypotheses that motivate the
presented methods of constructing heterogeneous networks of tweets, users, and web documents.
The proposed model, Tri-HITS, operates iteratively over all networks incorporating the semantics
and importance of different linkages. By ranking tweets about the Hurricane Irene, we demonstrate
that incorporating a formal genre such as web documents, inferring implicit social networks and
performing effective ranking score propagation with the proposed model can significantly improve

1240



the ranking quality.

2 Background
In this section, we describe the basic techniques used in the paper: information networks, the ranking
approach TextRank, and a widely used method for redundancy removal.

2.1 Information Networks
We define an information network as a graph G = (V, E) on X = {X1, X2, ..., XZ} for Z types of
vertices, where V (G) = X1 ∪ X2 ∪ ... ∪ XZ and E(G) = 〈x i , x j〉, for x ∈ X . An edge 〈x i , x j〉 is a
binary relation between two vertices x i and x j . An information network is heterogeneous when the
vertices are from multiple distinct types of sources (Z ≥ 2). (Deng et al., 2011) defined a text-rich
heterogeneous information network as an information network that integrates a set of text documents
D = {d1, d2, ..., dn} with other types of vertices, so that V (G) = D ∪ X1 ∪ ...∪ XZ−1. In this work,
we construct heterogeneous networks that include web documents, tweets, and users, as shown in
Figure 1.

U1

U2

U3

T1

T2

T3

T4

D1

D2

D3

Web-Tweet Networks Tweet-User Networks

Web-Tweet-User Networks

Figure 1: Web-Tweet-User heterogeneous networks

2.2 TextRank: Baseline Approach
Graph-based ranking algorithms have been widely used to generate rankings for vertices in graphs..
Adapted from PageRank (Page et al., 1998) to weighted graphs, TextRank (Mihalcea and Tarau,
2004) is a well-known ranking algorithm for homogeneous networks, which is defined as follows:

s(vi) = (1− d) + d ∗
∑

v j∈In(vi)

w jis(v j)∑
vk∈Out(v j)

w jk
(1)

where vi is a vertex with s(vi) as the ranking score, In(vi) as the set of incoming edges, and Out(vi)
as the set of outgoing edges; wi j is the weight for the edge between two vertices vi and v j . An edge
exists between two vertices that represent text units when their computed shared content (cosine
similarity) exceeds or equals a predefined threshold δt t .

Given its success when applied to sentence ranking for the task of extractive document summariza-
tion (Mihalcea, 2004), we choose TextRank as the baseline method to compute ranking scores in

1241



tweet-only networks where edges between tweets are determined by their cosine similarity.

2.3 Redundancy Removal
Since users on Twitter can be tweeting similar information obliviously, and retweet and reply others’
tweets, redundancy has been shown to be a pervasive phenomenon (Zanzotto et al., 2011). This
issue has not been considered in previous works on tweet ranking (Duan et al., 2010; Huang et al.,
2011). In this work, we perform a redundancy removal step to diversify top ranked tweets. To do
so, we adopt the widely used greedy procedure (Carterette and Chandar, 2009; McDonald, 2007)
to apply redundancy removal after the completion of each ranking method, as follows: tweet t i in
position i is removed when its cosine similarity with tweets t j ∈ [t1, t i−1] in more highly-ranked
positions exceeds or equals a predefined threshold δred 3

3 Motivations and Hypotheses
Next, we describe the motivational aspects and hypotheses in this work, which we aim to prove.

Hypothesis 1: Informative tweets are more likely to be posted by credible users; and vice versa
(credible users are more likely to post informative tweets). (Duan et al., 2010; Huang et al., 2011)
consider that users who have more followers, mentions, and retweets, and are listed more, are more
likely to be authoritative. They used retweet, reply, user mention and follower counts to to compute
the degree of authoritativeness of users; and showed that user account authority is a helpful feature
for tweet ranking. However, for events of general interest involving multiple communities, users
are more likely to be unaware of each other, and rarely interact. This makes it insufficient to rely
on user-user networks constructed from retweet and reply interactions to compute user credibility
scores. To overcome this problem, we apply a Bayesian approach to compute the credibility of users
by incorporating the contents shared by them.

Hypothesis 2: Tweets involving many users are more likely to be informative. Having many users
share similar tweets at the same time helps identify informative tweets. For example, in the context of
Hurricane Irene, users were likely to share information about the Evacuation Zone when they found
relevant news or events. The synchronization of information within groups has been successfully
harnessed in other fields like financial trading, autonomous swarms of exploratory robots, and flocks
of communicating software agents (Couzin, 2007; Saavedra et al., 2011). This idea has also been
successfully exploited for event summarization from tweets (Zubiaga et al., 2012).

Hypothesis 3: Tweets aligned with contents of web documents are more likely to be informative.
Tweets come from diverse sources, and can diverse content ranging from news and events, to
conversations and personal status updates. Therefore, informative tweets tend to be interspersed
with noisy and non-informative tweets. This differs from formal genres such as web documents,
which tend to be cleaner. In the case of current events such as natural disasters or political elections,
there are tight correlations between social media and web documents. Important information shared
in social media tends to be posted in web documents. For example, the following informative
tweets would rank highly because they are linked to informative web documents: " New Yorkers,
find your exact evacuation zone by your address here: http://t.co/9NhiGKG /via @user #Irene
#hurricane #NY" and "Details of Aer Lingus flights affected by Hurricane Irene can be found at
http://t.co/PCqE74V2̆01d". As far as we know, this is the first work to integrate information from a
formal genre such as web documents to enhance tweet ranking.

3We choose δred = 0.6 as a threshold, obtained from our empirical studies with values from 0.1 to 1.0 in the development
set.

1242



4 Enhanced Approach: Tri-HITS
Based on the formulated hypotheses, we describe how Tri-HITS works.

4.1 Overview
Figure 2 depicts how Tri-HITS works. For a set of tweets on a specific topic, a rule-based filtering
component is first applied to filter out a subset of non-informative tweets. For the remaining tweets,
we define queries based on top terms in tweets, and use Bing Search API4 to retrieve the titles5 of
the top m web documents for those queries (m= 2 for these experiments). Then we apply TextRank
and a Bayesian approach that initialize ranking scores for tweets, web documents, and users. Finally,
we iteratively propagate ranking scores for web documents, tweets, and users across the networks to
refine the tweet ranking.

Tweets 
T 

 

Query Construction And 
Retrieval of Web Documents D 

Ranked Tweets 
Based on 

Informativeness  

Iterative Propagation

Heterogeneous 
Networks 

Heterogeneous Networks Construction 

Infer Implicit  
U-T Links 

Noisy Tweet 
Filtering 

Users 
U 

Initialize Ranking Scores 

Align 
T-D

Figure 2: Overview of Tri-HITS

4.2 Filtering non-informative Tweets
Tweets are more likely to be shortened or informally written than texts from a formal genre such as
web documents. Thus, a prior filtering step would clean up the set of tweets and improve the ranking
quality. We observed that numerous non-informative tweets have some common characteristics,
which help infer patterns to clean up the set of tweets. In our filtering method, we define several
patterns to capture the characteristics of a non-informative tweet, i.e., very short tweets without
a complementary URL, tweets with first personal pronouns, or informal tweets containing slang
words6. These features have been shown to be effective in previous work on tweet ranking and
information credibility (Duan et al., 2010; Castillo et al., 2011; Uysal and Croft, 2011). Our filtering
component accurately filters out non-informative tweets, achieving 96.59% at precision.

4http://www.bing.com/toolbox/bingdeveloper/
5We rely on page titles, but it could be extended to the whole content of web documents straightforwardly.
6http://www.mltcreative.com/blog/bid/54272/Social-Media-Minute-Big-A-List-of-Twitter-Slang-and-Definitions

1243



4.3 Initializing Ranking Scores
Initializing scores for tweets and web documents. For a set of tweets T , we first construct an
undirected and weighted graph G = (V, E). After removing stopwords and punctuations, the bag-of-
words of each tweet t i is represented as a vertex vi ∈ V , and the weight for the edge between tweets
is the cosine similarity using TF-IDF representations. Then, we use TextRank to compute initial
scores. The same approach is used to initialize ranking scores for web documents.

Initializing user credibility scores. Based on Hypothesis 1, we define two approaches to compute
initial user credibility scores. First, we construct a user network based on retweets, replies and user
mentions as in (Duan et al., 2010). This results in a directed and weighted graph Gd = (V, E), where
V is the set of users and E is the set of directed edges. A directed edge exists from ui to u j if user
ui interacts with u j (i.e., mentions, retweets, or replies to u j). The weight of the edge is defined as
Ni j , according to the number of interactions. In this case, we use TextRank to compute initial user
credibility scores.

In addition, we also use the Bayesian ranking approach (Wang et al., 2011, 2012) that considers
the credibility scores of tweets and users simultaneously based on Tweet-User networks. Given a
set of users U = {u1, u2, ..., um}, and a set of claims C = {c1, c2, ..., cn} the users make (each claim
corresponds to a cluster of tweets in this paper). We also define matrix W cu where wcuji = 1 if user ui
makes claim c j , and is zero otherwise. Let uti denote the proposition that ’user ui speaks the truth’.
Let c tj denote the proposition that ’claim c j is true’. Also, let P(u

t
i ) and P(u

t
i |W cu) be the prior

and posterior probability that user ui speaks the truth. Similarly, P(c ti ) and P(c
t
i |W cu) are the prior

and posterior probability that claim ci is true. We define the credibility rank of a claim Rank(c j)
as the increase in the posterior probability that a claim is true, normalized by prior probability
P(c ti ). Similarly, the credibility rank of a user Rank(ui) is defined as the increase in the posterior
probability that a user is credible, normalized by prior probability P(uti ). In other words, we can get:

Rank(c j) =
P(c tj |W cu)− P(c tj )

P(c tj )
(2)

Rank(ui) =
P(uti |W cu)− P(uti )

P(uti )
(3)

In our previous work, we showed that the following relations hold true regarding the credibility rank
of a claim Rank(c j) and a user Rank(ui):

Rank(c j) =
∑

k∈Users j
Rank(uk) (4)

Rank(ui) =
∑

k∈Claimsi
Rank(ck) (5)

where Users j is the set of users makes claim c j , and Claimsi is the set of claims the user ui makes.
From the above, the credibility of sources and claims can be derived as:

P(c tj |W cu) = pta(Rank(c j) + 1) (6)
P(uti |W cu) = pts (Rank(ui) + 1) (7)

1244



where pta and p
t
s are initialization constants, which are the ratio of true claims to the total claims,

and the ratio of credible users to the total users.

Then, Equation 7 is used to compute initial user credibility scores as our second approach.

4.4 Constructing Heterogeneous Networks
Next, we describe the two types of networks we build as constituent parts of heterogeneous networks:

Tweet-User networks. Based on Hypothesis 2, we expand the Tweet-User networks by inferring
implicit tweet-user relations. If a user ui posted a set of tweets Ti during a period of time, we say an
implicit relation exists between ui and a tweet t j if the maximum cosine similarity between t j and
t i ∈ Ti exceeds or equals a threshold δtu.
Web-Tweet networks. Given a set of tweets T and a set of associated web documents D, we build
a bipartite graph G = T ∪ D, E, where an undirected edge with weight w tdi j is added when the cosine
similarity between t i ∈ T and d j ∈ D exceeds or equals δtd . This approach creates cross-genre
linkages between tweets and web documents on similar events (e.g., evacuation events).

In subsection 5.3, we will discuss the effects of parameters δtd and δtu.

4.5 Iterative Propagation
We introduce a novel algorithm to incorporate both initial ranking scores and global evidence from
heterogeneous networks. It propagates ranking scores across heterogeneous networks iteratively.
Our algorithm is an extension of Co-HITS (Deng et al., 2009), which is limited to bipartite graphs.
Co-HITS was designed to incorporate links of a bipartite graph with content from two types of
objects. The intuition behind the score propagation is the mutual reinforcement to boost co-linked
objects.

Let G = (U ∪ V, E) be a bipartite graph, in which the vertices are divided into two disjoint sets U
and V , and each edge in E connects one vertex in U to another in V . We use wuvi j (or w

vu
ji ) to denote

the weight for the edge between ui and v j . To put all the weights between sets U and V together,
we can use W uv ∈ R|U |×|V | (or W vu ∈ R|V |×|U |) to denote the weight matrix between U and V . Note
that W uv ∈ R|U |×|V | is the transpose of W vu ∈ R|V |×|U | as we have wuvi j = wvuji . For each ui ∈ U , a
transition probability puvi j is defined as the probability that vertex ui in U reaches vertex v j in V at

the next step. Formally, it is defined as a normalized weight puvi j =
wuvi j∑
k w

uv
ik

, such that
∑

j∈V p
uv
i j = 1.

Similarly, we obtain the transition probability pvuji =
wvuji∑
k w

vu
jk

and
∑

i∈U p
vu
ji = 1 for each v j ∈ V . The

Co-HITS algorithm is defined as follows:

s(ui) = (1−λu)s0(ui) +λu
∑
j∈V

pvuji s(v j), (8)

s(v j) = (1−λv)s0(v j) +λv
∑
i∈U

puvi j s(ui), (9)

where λu ∈ [0, 1] and λv ∈ [0,1] are personalized parameters, s0(ui) and s0(v j) are initial ranking
scores for ui and v j , and s(ui) and s(v j) denote updated ranking scores of vertices ui and v j . In this
algorithm, the initial scores are normalized to

∑
i∈U s

0(ui) = 1 and
∑

j∈V s
0(vi) = 1, and the sum of

updated s(ui) and s(v j) will be 1 as well.

1245



The problem with Co-HITS in our experimental settings is the transition probability. As mentioned
before, we choose cosine similarity as the weight for the edge between two vertices, and a similarity
matrix W is obtained to denote the weight matrix where each entry wi j is the similarity between
vertex ui and vertex v j . Although the transition probability is a natural normalization for the weight
between two vertices, it may not be suitable for similarity matrix. The reason is that the original
similarity between different objects has already been normalized, so a further normalization from
the similarity matrix to transition matrix may weaken or damage inherent meanings of the original
similarity. For example, if a tweet ui is aligned with one and only one document v j with relatively
low similarity weight, the transition probability wuvi j will be increased to 1 after normalization.
Similarly, some higher similarity weights may be normalized to small transition probabilities.

By extending and adapting Co-HITS, we develop Tri-HITS to handle heterogeneous networks
with three types of objects: users, tweets and web documents. Given the similarity matrices W d t

(between documents and tweets) and W tu (between tweets and users), and initial ranking scores of
s0(d), s0(t) and s0(u), we aim to refine the initial ranking scores and obtain the final ranking scores
s(d), s(t) and s(u). Starting from document s(d), the update process considers both the initial score
s0(d) and the propagation from connected tweets s(t), which can be expressed as:

ŝ(di) =
∑
j∈T

w tdji s(t j),

s(di) = (1−λtd)s0(di) +λtd
ŝ(di)∑
i ŝ(di)

, (10)

where W td is the transpose of W d t , and λtd ∈ [0, 1] is the parameter to balance between initial
and propagated ranking scores. Tri-HITS normalizes the propagated ranking scores ŝ(di), while
Co-HITS propagates normalized ranking scores by using the transition matrix instead of the original
similarity matrix, potentially weakening or damaging the inherent meanings of the original similarity.
Similarly, we define the propagation from tweets to users as:

ŝ(uk) =
∑
j∈T

w tujks(t j),

s(uk) = (1−λtu)s0(uk) +λtu
ŝ(uk)∑
k ŝ(uk)

, (11)

Each tweet s(t j) may be influenced by the propagation from both documents and users:

ŝd(t j) =
∑
i∈D

wd ti j s(di),

ŝu(t j) =
∑
k∈U

wutk j s(uk),

s(t j) = (1−λd t −λut)s0(t j) (12)

+λd t
ŝd(t j)∑
j ŝd(t j)

+λut
ŝu(t j)∑
j ŝu(t j)

.

where W ut is the transpose of W tu, λd t and λut are parameters to balance between initial and
propagated ranking scores. The λ variables define the networks being considered: (i) when λd t is

1246



Input: A set of tweets (T ), and users (U) on a given topic.
Output: Ranking scores (St ) for T .

1: Use rule-based method to filter out noisy tweets (remaining T̂ posted by users Û);
2: Retrieve relevant web documents D for T̂ ;
3: Use TextRank and Bayesian Ranking to compute initial ranking scores S0t for T̂ , S

0
d for D and initial credibility

scores S0u for Û ;
4: Construct heterogeneous networks across T̂ , Û and D;
5: k← 0, di f f ← 10e6;
6: while k <MaxIteration and di f f >MinThreshold do
7: Use Eq. (12) to compute Sk+1t ;
8: Use Eq. (11) to compute Sk+1u ;
9: Use Eq. (10) to compute Sk+1d ;

10: Normalize Sk+1t ,S
k+1
d , and S

k+1
u ;

11: di f f ←∑(|Sk+1t − Skt |);
12: k← k+ 1
13: end while

Algorithm 1: Tri-HITS: Tweet ranking using heterogeneous networks

set to 0, only Tweet-User networks are considered (Method 3 in Table 1); (ii) when λut is set to
0, only Web-Tweet networks are considered (Method 4); (iii) when both λd t and λut are different
from 0, the entire heterogeneous Web-Tweet-User network is considered (Method 5). For methods
relying on bipartite graphs, we define as one-step propagation when the propagation is performed in
a single direction, while we call it two-step propagation when it is performed in both directions.
The selection of one-step propagation and two-step propagation is controlled by λ parameters.

Model Convergence Proof: From Equation (10), and assuming λtd > 0 (the ranking scores s(d)
for web documents would not change if λtd = 0), we get:

s̄(di) =
1

λtd
[s(di)− (1−λtd)s0(di)] =

ŝ(di)∑
i ŝ(di)

. (13)

s̄(d), the normalized score of ŝ(d), is similar to the normalized authority or hub scores defined in
HITS (Kleinberg, 1999), the difference being only the function to select vector norms. Kleinberg
proved that s̄(di) converges as the iterative procedure continues, from which the convergence of the
ranking scores s(d) for web documents is guaranteed. The same assumption proves the convergence
of ranking scores for tweets and users.

Algorithm 1 summarizes Tri-HITS.

5 Experiments
Next, we present the experiment settings and analyze the methods shown in Table 1.

Methods Descriptions Hypotheses
1. Baseline TextRank based on tweet-tweet networks.
2. 1+Filtering Baseline with filtering included.
3. 2+Tweet-User∗ Propagation on explicit and implicit Tweet-User networks. 1 and 2
4. 2+Web-Tweet Propagation on Web-Tweet networks. 3
5. 3+4 Web-Tweet-User∗ Propagation on Web-Tweet-User networks. all

Table 1: Description of methods (method with ∗ make use of the Bayesian Approach to initialize
user credibility scores.

1247



Grade 5 4 3 2 1
Hour 1 65 48 93 119 847
Hour 2 135 159 255 164 458
Hour 3 129 102 162 123 602

Table 2: Tweet distribution by grade

5.1 Data
We use tweets on the Hurricane Irene from August 26 to September 2, 2011 for our experiments.
Using the query terms hurricane or irene to monitor tweets, we collected 176,014 tweets posted by
139,136 users within that timeframe. For evaluation purposes, we segment the tweets into 153 hours
with an average of 1,150 tweets in each hour.

We randomly chose tweets from three hours to be manually annotated as our reference. This subset
contains 3,460 tweets posted on different days: August 27, 2011, August 28, 2011 and September 1,
2011. Following the annotation guidelines defined by (Huang et al., 2011), two annotators parallelly
assigned each tweet a grade in a 5-star likert scale. Tweets with grade 5 are the most informative,
while tweets with label 1 are the least informative. When the label difference between annotators
was 1, the lower grade was selected. When the label difference was greater than 1, those tweets
were re-annotated until the label difference did not exceed 1. Table 2 shows the distributions of all
grades for each of the three hours of tweets.

5.2 Evaluation Metric
To evaluate tweet ranking, we rely on three-fold cross validation using nDCG as a measure (Jarvelin
and Kekalainen, 2002), which considers both the informativeness, and the position of a tweet:

nDCG(Φ, k) =
1

|Φ|
|Φ|∑
i=1

DCGik
I DCGik

,

DCGik =
k∑

j=1

2reli j − 1
log(1+ j)

,

where Φ is the set of documents in the test set, each document corresponding to an hour of
tweets in our case, reli j is the human-annotated label for the tweet j in the document i, and
I DCGik is the DCG score for the ideal ranking. The average nDCG score for the top k tweets
is: Avg@k =
∑k

i=1 nDCG(Φ, i)/k. To favor diversity of top ranked tweets, redundant tweets are
penalized to lower down the final score.

5.3 Effect of Parameters
We study the impact of different parameters on the training set. We present the most representative
figures to show the effect, due to the lack of space. For TextRank, we explore δt t values from 0 to 1.
For the enhanced approaches, we firstly perform one-step propagation of ranking scores from web
documents to tweets by considering all pairs of δtd and λd t from 0 to 1 with a step of 0.1. For each
δtd , the corresponding λd t and the best average nDCG scores for top 10 and 100 tweets are shown
in Figure 3(a). We notice that when both initial tweet ranking scores and propagated ranking scores
from web documents are considered (i.e., δtd is set from 0 to 0.9 and λd t > 0), the ranking quality

1248



outperforms that by simply considering initial ranking scores of tweets (i.e. δtd = 1). Secondly, for
the ranking performance of double-step ranking scores propagation, we choose to set δtd = 0.1,
λd t = 0.4 and test λtd from 0 to 1. Figure 3(b) shows an encouraging improvement in the ranking
quality, and more stable over the baseline and one-step propagation. This suggests that two-step
propagation provides mutual improvement in the ranking quality. The reason is that the ranking
of web documents may also be refined using tweet and user evidence thanks to the large volume
and synchrony of tweeting (Zanzotto et al., 2011). Here, λtd = 0.2 yields the best performance.
The aforementioned process is followed for Tweet-User networks, finding the best performance for
δtu = 0.1, λut = 0.2, and λtu = 0.6.

When validating on the test set, Method 4 based on Web-Tweet networks outperforms Method 3
relying on Tweet-User networks. Therefore, for Web-Tweet-User networks, we keep the above
values, and explore λut values from 0 to 0.6 (e.g., 1− λd t ). Figure 3(c) shows that integrating
web documents, tweets and users, the ranking quality improves over both Web-Tweet networks and
Tweet-User networks.

0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0
0 . 6 0

0 . 6 5

0 . 7 0

0 . 7 5

0 . 8 0

0 . 8 5

0 . 9 0

0 . 9 5

1 . 0 0

0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0
0 . 6 0

0 . 6 5

0 . 7 0

0 . 7 5

0 . 8 0

0 . 8 5

0 . 9 0

0 . 9 5

1 . 0 0

0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6
0 . 6 0

0 . 6 5

0 . 7 0

0 . 7 5

0 . 8 0

0 . 8 5

0 . 9 0

0 . 9 5

1 . 0 0

λ u t  λ t d  

Av
era

ge
 nD

CG

0 . 3
0 . 1

0 . 1

0 . 10 . 1
0 . 1

0 . 2

0 . 30 . 4
0 . 6

Av
era

ge
 nD

CG

λ d t = 0 . 2

 A v g @ 1 0
 A v g @ 1 0 0

( a ) ( b ) δt d = 0 . 1 ,  λ d t = 0 . 4  

 A v g @ 1 0
 A v g @ 1 0 0

 ( c ) δt u = 0 . 1 ,  δt d = 0 . 1 ,  λ t u = 0 . 6 ,  λ d t = 0 . 4 ,  λ t d = 0 . 2

 A v g @ 1 0
 A v g @ 1 0 0

Av
era

ge
 nD

CG

δt d

Figure 3: Effect of parameters: (a) δtd and λd t for Web-Tweet networks, (b) λtd for Web-Tweet
networks, (c) λd t for Web-Tweet-User networks.

5.4 Performance and Analysis

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
0 . 5 0

0 . 5 5

0 . 6 0

0 . 6 5

0 . 7 0

0 . 7 5

0 . 8 0

0 . 8 5

0 . 9 0

0 . 9 5

1 . 0 0

nD
CG

@n

n

 1 .  T e x t R a n k
 2 .  1 + F i l t e r i n g
 3 .  2 + T w e e t - U s e r
 4 .  2 + W e b - T w e e t
 5 .  3 + 4 W e b - T w e e t - U s e r

1

2

3

4

5

Figure 4: Performance comparison of ranking methods
Figure 4 shows the performance of ranking methods. The performance gain from Method 1 to
Method 2 shows the need of filtering short and informal tweets. In this case, filtering reduced from
3,460 to 1,765 tweets (∼ 49% reduction). Table 3 shows the distribution of labels for filtered tweets:
a great majority of 91.75% had been annotated as 1, while only 0.11% had been annotated as 5.

Methods 3, 4 and 5, which integrate heterogeneous networks after filtering, outperform the baseline
TextRank. When tweets are aligned with web documents (Method 4), the ranking quality improves

1249



Grade 5 4 3 2 1
Percentage 0.11% 0.17% 3.13% 4.84% 91.75%

Table 3: Grade distributions for filtered tweets.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0

0 . 6 0

0 . 6 5

0 . 7 0

0 . 7 5

0 . 8 0

0 . 8 5

0 . 9 0

0 . 9 5

1 . 0 0

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0

0 . 6 0

0 . 6 5

0 . 7 0

0 . 7 5

0 . 8 0

0 . 8 5

0 . 9 0

0 . 9 5

1 . 0 0

nn

 E x p l i c i t + I m p l i c i t  T w e e t - U s e r  N e t w o r k s
 E x p l i c i t  T w e e t - U s e r  N e t w o r k s

nD
CG

@n

( a )

T e x t R a n k + F i l t e r i n g
R e t w e e t / R e p l y / U s e r -  

        M e n t i o n  R e l a t i o n s
B a y e s i a n  A p p r o a c h

nD
CG

@n

( b )

Figure 5: (a) Explicit vs Inferred Implicit Tweet-User Relations to Construct Tweet-User Networks;
(b) TextRank vs One-step Propagation on Explicit Tweet-User Networks Using Bayesian Approach
and Retweet/Reply/User Mention Relations.

significantly, proving that web documents can help infer informative tweets adding support from a
formal genre. The fact that tweets with low initial ranking scores are aligned with web documents
helps improve their ranking positions (Hypothesis 3). For example, the ranking of the tweet
“Hurricane Irene: City by City Forecasts http://t.co/x1t122A” is improved compared to TextRank,
helped by the fact that 10 retrieved web documents are about this topic.

Integrating users (Method 5) further improves performance. This indicates that Web-Tweet and
Tweet-User networks may complement each other in improving ranking. For example, the tweet “A
social-media guide to dealing with Hurricane Irene http://t.co/0XBEnEJ” is not top-ranked when
only using Web-Tweet networks, since none of the retrieved web documents is related to it. However,
similar tweets appear with high frequency in the tweet set. Hence, inferring implicit tweet-user
relations and propagating information through the tweet-user network also improves the ranking.

Figure 5(a) shows that inferring implicit tweet-user relationships outperforms the only use of explicit
tweet-user relations, especially for top positions. Looking into lower positions, we find that the
redundancy removal performs better for the only use of explicit relations. However, both approaches
can still perform similarly in positions 5∼ 10. This corroborates the synchronous behavior of users
as an indicator of informative contents (Hypothesis 2). Since it is likely that a large set of users only
tweet once within a short timeframe, limiting to explicit tweet-user relations results in sparse links,
and ranking quality cannot be bootstrapped. Interestingly, inferring implicit tweet-user relations can
capture synchronous behavior of users, which indicates subjects that users are concerned about.

Figure 5(b) shows that initializing user credibility scores with the Bayesian approach and performing
one-step ranking score propagation from users to tweets based on the explicit tweet-user networks
also outperforms TextRank. This corroborates our hypothesis that credible users are more likely to
post informative tweets (Hypothesis 1). In addition, using only retweets, replies, and user mentions
to compute initial user ranking scores, the performance does not improve over TextRank. The reason
is that for an event of general interest like the Hurricane Irene, users from different communities
rarely interact with each other.

Finally, Figure 6 shows that Tri-HITS significantly outperforms Co-HITS over bipartite graphs,
with the only exception of position n = 2 for the Web-Tweet network. This corroborates that
normalizing the similarity matrix weakens semantic relations between different objects, and that

1250



1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
0 . 6 5

0 . 7 0

0 . 7 5

0 . 8 0

0 . 8 5

0 . 9 0

0 . 9 5

1 . 0 0

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
0 . 6 5

0 . 7 0

0 . 7 5

0 . 8 0

0 . 8 5

0 . 9 0

0 . 9 5

1 . 0 0

 T r i - H I T S
 C o - H I T S

n
nD

CG
@n

( a )
n

nD
CG

@n

 T r i - H I T S
 C o - H I T S

( b )

Figure 6: Co-HITS vs Tri-HITS on (a) Web-Tweet Networks, (b) Tweet-User Networks

capturing inherent meanings of cross-genre linkages is crucial for information propagation.

5.5 Remaining Error Analysis
Tri-HITS shows encouraging improvements in ranking quality with respect to a state-of-the-art
model like TextRank. However, there are still some issues to be addressed for further improvements.

(i) Topically-relevant tweet identification. We tracked tweets containing the keywords “Hurricane”
and “Irene”. Using such a query to follow tweets might also return tweets that are not related to the
event being followed. This may occur either because the terms are ambiguous, or because of spam
being injected into trending conversations to make it visible. For example, the tweet “Hurricane
Kitty: http://t.co/cdIexE3” is an advertisement, which is not topically related to Irene.

(ii) Non-informative tweet identification. Our rule-based filtering component achieves high precision
(96.59%) on the identification of non-informative tweets, while there are still a number of false
positives with a 70.7% recall. Performing deeper linguistic analysis, such as exploring subjectivity,
might help clean up the tweet set by identifying additional non-informative tweets. For example,
an analysis of writing styles would help identify the tweet “Hurricane names hurricane names
http://t.co/iisc7UY ;)” as informal because it contains repeated phrases. And the tweet “My favorite
parts of Hurricane coverage is when the weathercasters stand in those 100 MPH winds right on
the beach. Good stuff.” is clearly subjective commentary that may entertain but will not meet the
general interest of people involved with or tracking the event.

(iii) Deep semantic analysis of the content. Users may rely on distinct terms to refer to the
same concept. More extensive semantic analyses of text could help identify those terms, possibly
enhancing the propagation process. For example, information extraction tools can be used to extract
entities and events, and their coreferential relations, such as “NYC” and “New York City”, or “MTA
closed” and “subway shutting down”. Likewise, existing dictionaries such as WordNet (Miller,
1995) can be utilized to mine synonym/hypernym/hyponym relations, and Brown clusters (Brown
et al., 1992) can be explored to mine other types of relations.

6 Related Work
We discuss relevant research on tweet ranking, information credibility for tweets, and the use of
graphical models.

Previous research on tweet ranking has relied on the analysis of content (Sankaranarayanan et al.,
2009), user credibility (Golder et al., 2009; Weng et al., 2010; Yamaguchi et al., 2010; Hannon et al.,
2010; Uysal and Croft, 2011) and URL availability, or combinations of them (Duan et al., 2010;

1251



Huang et al., 2011). In addition, (Huang et al., 2011) also exploited content similarity to propagate
evidence within the tweet genre. Most work has been based on supervised learning models such as
RankSVM, Naive-Bayes classifier, and Linear Regression. (Inouye and Kalita, 2011) compared
various unsupervised methods to rank tweets for summarization purposes, but only used lexical-level
content analysis features.

In analyzing the information credibility of tweets, (Castillo et al., 2011) relied on various levels
of features (i.e., message-based, user-based, topic-based and propagation-based features) and
supervised learning models for information credibility assessment in Twitter, which (Gupta et al.,
2012) extended by capturing relations among events, tweets, and users. (Wang et al., 2011, 2012)
proposed a Bayesian interpretation to assess tweet credibility. However, it remains as a preliminary
approach due to the linear assumption made in the iterative algorithm of the basic fact-finding
scheme. Intensive research has also been conducted on information credibility analysis (cf. (Gupta
and Han, 2011)).

Graphical models have been effectively used in document summarization (Mihalcea, 2004; Sornil
and Greeu, 2006; Sharifi et al., 2010) demonstrating their power of propagating information across
linked instances. However, most of these models, such as TextRank (Mihalcea and Tarau, 2004),
as originally developed apply only to homogeneous networks. In contrast to existing research, we
introduce Tri-HITS, a novel method that incorporates evidence from multiple genres, by exploiting
semantically-related links to external web documents and inferring the implicit tweet-user relations.
Following a different method for linking tweets and web documents, (Dong et al., 2010) used
outgoing links from tweets to improve recency ranking for a search engine.

7 Conclusions and Future Work
We have introduced Tri-HITS, a novel propagation model that makes use of heterogeneous networks
composed of tweets, users, and web documents to rank tweets. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first approach to integrating tweets with formal genres that improves tweet ranking quality.
Using propagation models to define ranking scores, we have shown that information from the formal
genre of web documents can help improve the ranking quality. By introducing this new propagation
model, studying the integration of different genres, presenting a way of inferring implicit tweet-user
relations, and exploring the impact of parameters, this work sheds light on the challenging task of
ranking tweets that are written informally by a diverse community of users.

Our next step is to develop metrics to predict ranking confidence so that we can remove low-
confidence results and outliers from the evidence propagation. In addition, ranking tweets (and
later, news) by their informativeness within a given time frame, will help in identifying elements
of information for inclusion in a summary. More ambitiously, in future work, we plan to generate
automatic summaries from the information jointly provided by tweets and web documents.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the U.S. Army Research Laboratory under Cooperative Agreement No.
W911NF-09-2-0053, the U.S. NSF Grants IIS-0953149, IIS-1144111, IIS-0905215, CNS-0931975
and the U.S. DARPA BOLT program, the U.S. Air Force Office of Scientific Research MURI award
FA9550-08-1-0265. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors
and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of
the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for
Government purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation here on.

1252



References
Brown, P. F., deSouza, P. V., Mercer, R. L., Pietra, V. J. D., and Lai, J. C. (1992). Class-based
n-gram models of natural language. Computational Linguistics, 18:467–479.

Carterette, B. and Chandar, P. (2009). Probabilistic models of ranking novel documents for
faceted topic retrieval. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference on Information and knowledge
management, CIKM ’09, pages 1287–1296, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Castillo, C., Mendoza, M., and Poblete, B. (2011). Information credibility on twitter. In Proceed-
ings of the 20th international conference on World wide web, pages 675–684. ACM.

Couzin, I. (2007). Collective minds. Nature, 445.

Deng, H., Han, J., Zhao, B., Yu, Y., and Lin, C. (2011). Probabilistic topic models with biased
propagation on heterogeneous information networks. In Proc. ACM SIGKDD2011, pages 1271–
1279. ACM.

Deng, H., Lyu, M. R., and King, I. (2009). A generalized co-hits algorithm and its application to
bipartite graphs. In Proc. ACM SIGKDD2009.

Diakopoulos, N., De Choudhury, M., and Naaman, M. (2012). Finding and assessing social media
information sources in the context of journalism. In Proc. Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI).

Dong, A., Zhang, R., Kolari, P., Bai, J., Diaz, F., Chang, Y., Zheng, Z., and Zha, H. (2010).
Time is of the essence: improving recency ranking using twitter data. In Proceedings of the 19th
international conference on World wide web, WWW ’10, pages 331–340, New York, NY, USA.
ACM.

Duan, Y., Jiang, L., Qin, T., Zhou, M., and Shum, H.-Y. (2010). An empirical study on learning to
rank of tweets. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Computational Linguistics,
COLING ’10, pages 295–303, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Golder, S. A., Marwick, A., and Yardi, S. (2009). A structural approach to contact recommendations
in online social networks. In Proc. SIGIR2009 Workshop on Search in Social Media.

Gupta, M. and Han, J. (2011). Heterogeneous network-based trust analysis: a survey. SIGKDD
Explor. Newsl., 13(1):54–71.

Gupta, M., Zhao, P., and Han, J. (2012). Evaluating event credibility on twitter. In SDM, pages
153–164.

Hannon, J., Bennett, M., and Smyth, B. (2010). Recommending twitter users to follow using
content and collaborative filtering approaches. In Proceedings of the fourth ACM conference on
Recommender Systems.

Huang, M., Yang, Y., and Zhu, X. (2011). Quality-biased ranking of short texts in microblogging
services. In Proceedings of 5th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing,
pages 373–382, Chiang Mai, Thailand. Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing.

Inouye, D. and Kalita, J. K. (2011). Comparing twitter summarization algorithms. In IEEE
SocialCom 2011.

1253



Jarvelin, K. and Kekalainen, J. (2002). Cumulated Gain-based Evaluation of IR Techniques. ACM
Transactions on Information Systems, 20.

Kleinberg, J. M. (1999). Authoritative sources in a hyperlinked environment. J. ACM, 46(5):604–
632.

McDonald, R. (2007). A study of global inference algorithms in multi-document summarization.
In Proceedings of the 29th European conference on IR research, ECIR’07, pages 557–564, Berlin,
Heidelberg. Springer-Verlag.

Mihalcea, R. (2004). Graph-based ranking algorithms for sentence extraction, applied to text
summarization. In Proc. ACL2004.

Mihalcea, R. and Tarau, P. (2004). Textrank: Bringing order into texts. In Proceedings of EMNLP,
volume 4. Barcelona: ACL.

Miller, G. A. (1995). Wordnet: A lexical database for english. Communications of the ACM,
38:39–41.

Page, L., Brin, S., Motwani, R., and Winograd, T. (1998). The pagerank citation ranking: Bringing
order to the web. In Proc. the 7th International World Wide Web Conference.

Saavedra, S., Hagerty, K., and Uzzi, B. (2011). Synchronicity, Instant Messaging and Performance
among Financial Traders. PNAS.

Sankaranarayanan, J., Samet, H., Teitler, B. E., Lieberman, M. D., and Sperling, J. (2009).
Twitterstand: News in tweets. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGSPATIAL International
Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems.

Sharifi, B., Hutton, M.-A., and Kalita, J. K. (2010). Experiments in microblog summarization. In
IEEE Second International Conference on Social Computing (SocialCom).

Sornil, O. and Greeu, K. (2006). An automatic text summarization approach using content-based
and graph-based characteristics. In IEEE Conference on Cybernetics and Intelligent Systems.

Uysal, I. and Croft, W. B. (2011). User oriented tweet ranking: A filtering approach to microblogs.
In Proc. CIKM2011 (Poster).

Wang, D., Abdelzaher, T., Ahmadi, H., Pasternack, J., Roth, D., Gupta, M., Han, J., Fatemieh,
O., Le, H., and Aggrawal, C. (2011). On bayesian interpretation of fact-finding in information
networks. In Proc 14th International Conference on Information Fusion (Fusion ’11).

Wang, D., Le, H., Kaplan, L., and Abdelzaher, T. (2012). On truth discovery in social sensing: A
maximum likelihood estimation approach. In Proc. 11th ACM/IEEE Conference on Information
Processing in Sensor Networks (IPSN).

Weng, J., Lim, E.-P., Jiang, J., and He, Q. (2010). Twitterrank: Finding topic-sensitive influential
twitterers. In Proc. WSDM2010.

Yamaguchi, Y., Takahashi, T., Amagasa, T., and Kitagawa, H. (2010). Turank: Twitter user ranking
based on user-tweet graph analysis. In Proc. WISE2010.

1254



Zanzotto, F. M., Pennacchiotti, M., and Tsioutsiouliklis, K. (2011). Linguistic redundancy in
twitter. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
EMNLP ’11, pages 659–669, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Zubiaga, A., Spina, D., Amigó, E., and Gonzalo, J. (2012). Towards real-time summarization of
scheduled events from twitter streams. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM conference on Hypertext
and social media, pages 319–320. ACM.

1255




