



















































Collaborative Computer-Assisted Translation Applied to Pedagogical Documents and Literary Works


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Demonstration Papers, pages 255–260,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Collaborative computer-assisted translation applied to 
pedagogical documents and literary works

Ruslan KALITVIANSKI, Christian BOITET, Valérie BELLYNCK
GETALP-LIG, 41, rue des Mathématiques, 

38400 St Martin d'Hères, FRANCE
ruslan.kalitvianski@imag.fr, christian.boitet@imag.fr, 

valerie.bellynck@imag.fr 
ABSTRACT

This paper showcases three applications of GETALP's iMAG (Interactive Multilingual Access 
Gateway) technology.  IMAGs allow internet users to navigate a selected website in the language  
of  their  choice  (using  machine  translation),  as  well  as  to  collaboratively  and  incrementally 
improve the translation through a web-based interface. One of GETALP's ongoing projects is  
MACAU (Multilingual Access and Contributive Appropriation for Universities), a platform that  
allows users to reuse existing pedagogical material to generate adaptive content. We demonstrate 
how student- and teacher-produced lecture notes can be translated into different languages in the 
context of MACAU, and show the same approach applied to textbooks and to literary works. 

Применение коллективного автоматизированого 
перевода к учебным материалам и литературным 

работам

РЕЗЮМЕ

Эта  статья  демонстрирует  три  применения  технологии  iMAG  (Interactive  Multilingual 
Access Gateway) лаборатории GETALP-LIG. IMAG-и позволяют Интернет-пользователям 
посещать избранный веб-сайт на желаемом языке благодаря машинному переводу, а так 
же  постепенно  коллективно  улучшать  перевод  через  веб-интерфейс.  Один  из  текущих 
проектов  GETALP  -  MACAU  (Multilingual  Access  and  Contributive  Appropriation  for 
Universities),  платформа,  позволяющая  пользователям  использовать  существующие 
педагогические  материалы,  чтобы  генерировать  персонализированные  уроки.  Мы 
показываем, как конспекты студентов и учителей могут быть переведены на различные 
языки в контексте MACAU, и демонстрируем применение данного подхода к учебникам и 
литературным работам.

KEYWORDS : MACHINE TRANSLATION,  COMPUTER-ASSISTED TRANSLATION,  PEDAGOGICAL DOCUMENTS, 
INTERACTIVE MULTILINGUAL ACCESS GATEWAY, IMAG, COLLABORATIVE TRANSLATION, POST-EDITING.

КЛЮЧЕВЫЕ СЛОВА:  МАШИННЫЙ ПЕРЕВОД,  АВТОМАТИЗИРОВАНЫЙ ПЕРЕВОД,  УЧЕБНЫИЕ МАТЕРИАЛЫ,  IMAG, 
КОЛЛЕКТИВНЫЙ ПЕРЕВОД, ПОСТРЕДАКТИРОВАНИЕ..

255



1 Interactive Multilingual Access Gateways

An iMAG (interactive Multilingual Access Gateway) to a website is a web service that allows 
users to access the site in a language of their choice (by translating it with one or several machine  
translation engines) and to improve the translation by post-editing (Boitet et al, 2008). 

When the user chooses to display the page in a new language, the textual segments of the page  
are substituted either by a new translation or, if the page has been translated before, by their best  
translation retrieved from the translation memory. The translation of a segment can be edited by 
hovering the cursor above the segment. This brings up a bubble containing the segment in the 
source  language,  an  editing  zone  and  a  choice  of  a  score  to  be  assigned  to  the  post-edited  
translation. Figures 1 and 2 show the interface of iMAG-COLING.

Figure 1: COLING 2012 website accessed in Japanese through iMAG-COLING

256



2  Translation of pedagogical content

One of our ongoing projects is MACAU (Multilingual Access and Contributive Appropriation 
for Universities), a platform that would allow its users to reuse existing pedagogical materials to 
improve them and generate pedagogical content that best fits their needs, given their preferences  
and  their  level  of  domain  knowledge.  This  includes  multilingualism,  as  well  as  choices  of  
presentation, including topics, types of material and levels of abstraction.

IMAGs  can  be  used  by  foreign  students  to  access  course  content  in  their  language  and  to 
collectively  improve  the  translations  when  needed.  A simple  scenario  within  the  context  of  
MACAU would the following. 

First, a set of documents is received. We can, for instance, consider a teacher-produced LaTeX 
file  containing a course on computational  complexity theory,  and two MS Word documents, 
containing student-produced lecture notes. 

These documents are converted to an iMAG-compatible format, which for the moment is html. In  
this example, we use HeVeA for the LaTeX → html conversion, and MS Word's built-in  export  
tool. The resulting html documents can now be annotated with semantic information, allowing 
for later selective access and extraction. Annotations can indicate the level of abstraction of a  
section,  its difficulty, pre-requisites,  etc. Here, we use simple “span” tags to indicate the type of  
a section of the document (e.g. definition, example, illustration). 

Figure 2: post-edition of the translation of a segment.

257



The documents are then placed in a repository accessible to iMAG-MACAU that can be visited 
at http://service.aximag.fr//xwiki/bin/view/imag/macau-fr. Users can now navigate and post-edit 
the documents in different languages. Since iMAGs preserve the underlying html code of a page,  
the annotations are never lost and whatever content generated from these files using the semantic  
annotations,  has  its  segments  translated.  We are  currently developing tools that  would allow 
reversible conversion in order to generate translations of documents in their initial formats. 

Figure 3: semantic annotation of document sections.

Figure 4: a bilingual view of the document being translated.

258



3 Translation of books

Many  universities  now release  their  educational  materials  free  of  charge,  however  they  are 
usually unavailable in more than one or two languages, or available for a fee. IMAGs provide a 
rapid, convenient and cost-effective alternative for obtaining multilingual versions of educational 
materials such as textbooks that are converted into an iMAG-compatible format. As an example, 
readers  are  invited to visit  the demonstration iMAG for the book “Bioelectromagnetism” by 
Jaakko  Malmivuo  and  Robert  Plonsey  at 
http://service.aximag.fr//xwiki/bin/view/imag/BEMBOOK. 

The use of volunteer workforce for the translation of literary works is a novel approach. Fig. 5 
demonstrates  a  chapter  of  Rohit  Manchanda's  “Monastery,  Sanctuary,  Laboratory”  being 
translated from English to Hindi. 

Readers  are  invited  to  contribute  at  http://service.aximag.fr/xwiki/bin/view/imag/xan-en?
u=http://www-clips.imag.fr/geta/User/christian.boitet/iMAGs-tests/en/ManchandaArticles/IITB-
Monastery-Sanctuary-Laboratory

Figure 5: translation of Rohit Manchanda's "Monastery, Sanctuary, Laboratory: 50 years of IIT-
Bombay"

259



References
Boitet,  C.,  Bellynck,  V.,  Mangeot,  M.,  and  Ramisch,  C.,  (2008).  Towards  Higher  Quality  
Internal and Outside Multilingualization of Web Sites. In  Proceedings of ONII-08 (Summer 
Workshop on Ontology, NLP, Personalization and IE/IR), Mumbai, CFILT, IITB.

Maranget.  L., HEVEA,  version  2.00.  Sources  and  documentation  available  at 
http://hevea.inria.fr/

Maranget.  L.,  HEVEA,  un  traducteur  de  LATEX  vers  HTML  en  Caml.  Available  at 
http://pauillac.inria.fr/~maranget/papers/hevea/ 

Malmivuo, J., and Plonsey, R., (1995).  Bioelectromagnetism - Principles and Applications of  
Bioelectric  and  Biomagnetic  Fields,  Oxford  University  Press,  New  York 
http://www.bem.fi/book/index.htm

Manchanda,  R.,  (2008).  Monastery,  Sanctuary,  Laboratory:  50  Years  of  IIT-Bombay, 
Macmillan India.

260


