



















































Implicitness of Discourse Relations


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Technical Papers, pages 2669–2684,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Implicitness of Discourse Relations

Fatemeh Torabi Asr and V era Demberg
Cluster of Excellence Multimodal Computing and Interaction (MMCI)

Saarland University
Campus C7.4, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany

fatemeh@coli.uni-saarland.de, vera@coli.uni-saarland.de

Abstract
The annotations of explicit and implicit discourse connectives in the Penn Discourse Treebank
make it possible to investigate on a large scale how different types of discourse relations are
expressed. Assuming an account of the Uniform Information Density hypothesis, we expect
that discourse relations should be expressed explicitly with a discourse connector when
they are unexpected, but may be implicit when the discourse relation can be anticipated.
We investigate whether discourse relations which have been argued to be expected by
the comprehender exhibit a higher ratio of implicit connectors. We find support for two
hypotheses put forth in previous research which suggest that continuous and causal relations
are presupposed by language users when processing consecutive sentences in a text. We
then proceed to analyze the effect of Implicit Causality (IC) verbs (which have been argued
to raise an expectation for an explanation) as a local cue for an upcoming causal relation.

Keywords: Causality, Continuity, Discourse relations, Discourse cues, Implicit discourse
relations, Corpus study, Uniform Information Density.

2669



1 Introduction

David Hume, in his prominent work “An enquiry concerning human understanding” proposed
that ideas in the human mind were associated according to at least three types of relations:
resemblance, contiguity in time or place, and causality (Hume, 1784). Since then, many
language scientists have tried to adapt this idea about human general reasoning to the
world of language (Simon, 1952; Hobbs, 1990; Kehler, 2000). A discourse relation as defined
by linguists is an inference intended by the writer or made by a reader to establish local
coherence among individual sentences. For example, a binary causal relation refers to a
logical cause-consequence inference whose elements are directly accessible in the text: two
propositional arguments plus an operator that could be an explicit connective such as
“because” (1-a). The operator might sometimes not be explicit in the text, but in most
cases a suitable connective could be inserted to specify the coherence relation between the
involved propositions (1-b).

(1) a. Bill took his daughter to the hospital, because she looked pale and sick in the
morning.

b. I was very tired last night. [Therefore] I went to sleep earlier than usual.

According to some cognitive theories on discourse processing, people have expectations
about inter-sentential relations when reading a text, which bias their inferential decisions
during comprehension (Segal et al., 1991; Murray, 1997; Levinson, 2000; Sanders, 2005).
Two important characteristics that are expected to exist between consecutive events in a
text are continuity and causality. Segal et al. (1991) and Murray (1997) argue that readers
expect a sentence to be causally congruent and continuous with respect to its preceding
context. Continuity in the sense of Segal et al. means that the same frame of reference is
maintained, for example by subsequent sentences talking about the same event, without
shift in perspective. Continuous discourse relations are claimed to be easier to process and
more expected than other types. On the other hand, relations that are discontinuous (for
example adversatives) would be less expected and more difficult to process. This notion
also includes temporal continuity, implying that a non-linearity in presenting a consequence
before its effect or any two situations in a reverse temporal order (1-a) is less expected
than a relation keeping the forward temporal transition between events (1-b). A second
hypothesis about what kind of discourse relations are typically assumed by comprehenders
was proposed by Sanders (2005) in his “causality-by-default” hypothesis, which states that
language users prefer causal relations to other types (such as mere expansion or temporal
relations) when establishing discourse coherence.

To investigate the validity of these hypotheses in the experimental paradigm, researchers
have studied participants’ sentence completion preferences, coherence judgments, and
reading patterns during reading of the sentence pairs implying different types of discourse
relations (Irwin, 1980; Trabasso et al., 1984; Caron et al., 1988; Millis et al., 1995; Murray,
1997; Kuperberg et al., 2011). We are, however, not aware of a large-scale study of
these hypotheses in naturally occurring texts. To address this, we analyzed the use of
causal/temporal relations and their markers in the Penn Discourse Tree Bank (PDTB;
Prasad et al., 2008), a large corpus of newspaper texts which is annotated with discourse
relations.

2670



Our methodology relies strongly on the assumption of implicitness of the discourse connector
as a sign of expectation of the discourse relation: if readers have a default preference to infer
a specific relation in the text, this type of relation should tend to appear without explicit
markers. The assumption is drawn on a usage-based approach to the study of language
preferences that links comprehension phenomena with typicalities in production (Langacker,
2000). It also can be thought of in terms of the Uniform Information Density (UID)
hypothesis (Frank and Jaeger, 2008) which suggests that humans tend to spread information
evenly across a text or utterance, thereby reducing or omitting redundant optional markers
(e.g., Levy and Jaeger, 2007; Florian Jaeger, 2010). At the level of inter-sentential relations,
this would mean that the presence of explicit connectives is necessary when the relation is
unexpected, but that a connective may be implicit if the relation is predictable. Hence, we
investigate the validity of the following predictions in the corpus:

1. continuous discourse relations should be implicit more often than discontinuous ones

2. causal relationships should be implicit more often than other discourse relationships

3. relations which keep the forward temporality should be implicit more often than their
backward counterparts.

These predictions refer to general tendencies of comprehenders to expect that phrases and
sentences are linked causally, and that the sentences in e.g. a narrative are interpreted in a
continuous manner. Beside these general expectations regarding the upcoming discourse
relation, expectations can also be influenced by local factors: (Pitler et al., 2008) found that
discourse relations in the PDTB are not independently distributed. For example, explicit
comparisons are significantly more often followed by implicit contingencies than would be
expected under the independence assumption. Furthermore, Sanders (1997) and (Sagi,
2006) showed that the genre of a text, or more specifically, the distribution of different
types of relations in a particular text can shape the expectation of a reader about what
relations will appear more frequently later in the text.

The discourse relation between two sentences can also become clear by other means such as
shared entities, adverbial phrases and even the type of verbs used in the arguments. An
interesting case are so-called implicit causality (IC) verbs (as the verb “scolded” in (2-a);
see Section 5.6 for more details), which have recently been argued to trigger the expectation
for a reason (see (2-b)) to be communicated in the following sentence (Rohde and Horton,
2010), such that the discourse relation between the sentences is a backward causal relation.

(2) a. Arthur scolded Patricia.
b. She had put thumbtacks on the teacher’s chair.

According to the UID hypothesis, we would expect that causal relations which contain an
IC verb in their first argument (Arg1) would be expressed without an explicit connective
more often, as the reason relation is predictable. In other words, as our third hypothesis,
we investigate whether:

4. backward causal relations that contain an IC verb (which already marks causality) in
their first argument are implicit more often than those that contain a non-IC verb.

2671



This work strives to get a better understanding of when discourse relations are expressed
implicitly, and when they should be explicitly stated. Furthermore, it can possibly inform
work on automatic identification of discourse relations, especially in the absence of explicit
discourse markers (Sporleder, 2008; Lin et al., 2009; Zhou et al., 2010). The rest of the
paper is structured as follows. Section 2 includes a review of the causality-by-default
and the continuity hypotheses and the related experimental studies. In Section 3, we
introduce the PDTB corpus and the relevant relations we extract to obtain evidence for the
aforementioned hypotheses. Section 4 will describe our method of analysing implicitness
and Section 5 includes the results. Finally, conclusions are presented in Section 6.

2 Background on the Continuity and Causality Hypotheses

In this section we explain the continuity hypothesis (Segal et al., 1991; Murray, 1997)
and the causality-by-default hypothesis (Sanders, 2005). Taken together, these hypotheses
suggest that language users first try to establish causal relatedness and temporal linearity
between phrases when processing a text.

2.1 The Continuity Hypothesis

Levinson (2000) notes in his discussion on presumptive meanings that “when events are
conjoined they tend to be read as temporally successive and if at all plausible, as causally
linked.”. An early notion of the continuity hypothesis proposed by Segal et al. (1991)
suggests that discourse connectives are used to mark the deictic continuity or discontinuity
in texts (their study was limited to narratives). As Murray (1997) states, the hypothesis
is that comprehension difficulty ensues when a text event is discontinuous without this
discontinuity having been explicitly marked. Segal et al. (1991) found that comprehenders
expect subsequent sentences to be causally congruent and temporally continuous. Support
for the continuity hypothesis comes also from a series of experiments by Murray (1997).
In an initial sentence completion experiment, subjects had to write a continuation to
the preceding discourse starting with a connective that was either additive, causal, or
adversative. Murray confirmed that sentences generated in response to an additive or causal
connective generally depicted continuous events with respect to the preceding discourse,
while completions following adversative connectives depicted discontinuous events. In a
subsequent experiment, he asked people to read sentence pairs with inappropriately placed
connectives, and found that the disruptive effect was largest for inappropriately placed
adversative connectives. Sentences with inappropriately placed adversative connectives
were also judged as less coherent than ones with inappropriately placed causal or additive
connectives. In particular, there was no difference in processing disruption or coherency
judgment between inappropriately used additive and causal connectives, which is why
Murray attributes the difference between these connectors and adversative ones to the
underlying continuity or discontinuity of the described event. Murray interprets his findings
in terms of readers generally expecting a continuous event and their processing being
more disrupted by a connective that signals an upcoming discontinuity, than by one that
would signal continuity. Taken together with an earlier experiment (Murray, 1995), which
showed that correctly placed adversative connectors also have a greater beneficiary effect
than correctly placed causal or additive connectors, Murray concludes that adversative
connectives are more salient than connectives that signal continuity.

While he generally classifies causal relations as continuous ones, Murray also notes that a

2672



connective like “because” which signals a temporally non-linear causal relation (backward
transition from the effect to the cause) should have stronger contextual effects than connec-
tives such as “so” or “therefore”. In the literature, some types of adversative relations are
interpreted as negative causal relations, e.g., a pair of sentences connected with although
implies a causal relation in which an unexpected consequence has happened (König, 1991).
According to Segal et al. (1991) and Murray (1997), such relations — usually referred to as
concession — are not expected to the same degree as positive causal relations, which benefit
from a higher degree of continuity. The continuity hypothesis also predicts that temporal
relations between sentences which cue a non-linear relationship between the arguments
would be more difficult to process, and that cues for temporal non-linearity (such as “after”,
as opposed to “before”, which indicates the expected temporal order) should be more
salient.

2.2 The Causality-by-default Hypothesis

The main motivation behind our study of causal relations comes from Sanders’s cognitive
theory of discourse representation. Specifically, the causality-by-default hypothesis states:

“because experienced readers aim at building the most informative representation, they start out

assuming the relation between two consecutive sentences is a causal relation” – Sanders (2005) .

Experimental evidence for this claim comes from a range of studies on understanding
causal relations in narratives (Trabasso et al., 1984), the effect of connectives on recall
of inter-sentential relations (Irwin, 1980; Caron et al., 1988) and preferences in sentence
completion tasks (Murray, 1997). A recent study of online sentence processing furthermore
reveals that causal relations between sentences facilitate processing even in the absence of
discourse connectors: Kuperberg et al. (2011) finds that a small discourse consisting of three
sentences was easier to process when the sentences were causally related. Specifically, a
larger N400 (an EEG signal which typically indicates semantic anomalies) was found when
sentences were irrelevant. All of these findings suggest that readers have a prior expectation
that consecutive sentences in a text should be causally related and congruent, unless an
explicit cue such as adversative connectives (e.g., but) provides marking for another type of
relation. The most relevant experiment specific to the tendency towards causal inference is
again the one by Murray (1997) in which subjects were asked to continue individual sentences
that ended with either a period or a connective of the aforementioned types (additive, causal
or adversative). The majority of the answers for the no-connective condition conveyed a
causal relation, meaning that subjects often chose a type of continuation that provided a
cause or a consequence for the given sentence instead of a simple additive continuation or
an adversative one.

However, arguments against the causality-by-default hypothesis can also be found in the
literature. Millis et al. (1995) performed an experiment where two consecutive sentences
(that did not stand in an obviously causal relationship) were connected with a full stop,
or one of the three discourse connectors “because”, “and” or “after”, as the indicators of
causal, additive and temporal relations, respectively. The sentence pairs inherently could be
interpreted as expressing any of the mentioned relation types. Millis at al. found that causal
inferences (as measured by asking participants a “Why?” question after pair of sentences)
were only reliably made in the “because” condition, but not in the conditions where the
sentences were connected by a period or one of the other connectors. They concluded that

2673



the discourse marker “because” played a very important role in people’s forming of an
inference, and that this inference was not formed automatically in these contexts.

The studies we reviewed are all small scale and use carefully designed experimental materials;
it is, however, an open question whether the hypotheses generated based on the experimental
studies also hold for naturally occurring texts. An additional difficulty is that results from
previous studies are often not easily comparable, as they use a slightly different taxonomy
of discourse relation types (e.g., adversative relations in Murray (1997) includes both
negative causal and negative additive relations, while in other related studies such as
König (1991),Couper-Kuhlen and Kortmann (2000), and Köhne and Demberg (2011) the
former is referred to as a concession relation). In this paper, we use the discourse relation
categorization of the Penn Discourse Treebank and see how different sentence connectives
are being used in naturally occurring text with respect to the extent they reflect causality
and continuity.

3 An Overview of the PDTB Corpus

Penn Discourse Tree Bank (PDTB; Prasad et al., 2008) is a large corpus of texts from
the Wall Street Journal, which is annotated with discourse relations between every pair of
adjacent clauses, sentences or larger text spans1. The PDTB covers all 25 sections of the
Penn Treebank, which has been annotated with various other linguistic information such as
syntactic structures and semantic frames.

Discourse relations can either be marked explicitly with a discourse connector (such as
“because”, “nevertheless”, “and”), or be implicit2. Both explicit and implicit discourse
relations are annotated in the corpus, and each discourse relation is marked with a discourse
connector and two propositional arguments. In the case of implicit relations, a suitable
discourse connector was identified (and inserted) by the annotators. Each argument is
an independent text segment whose boundaries are also determined by the annotators.
Labeling of the relations has been done according to a hierarchy of discourse relation senses
(see Figure 1), including four top-level classes: CONTINGENCY, COMPARISON, TEMPORAL and
EXPANSION.

Temporal Relations TEMPORAL relations include Synchronous and Asynchronous types.
Asynchronous relations have two subtypes precedence and succession, which mark
forward (3-a) and backward (3-b) temporal transitions respectively.

(3) a. He believes [that $55 a share is the most you can pay for Georgia Gulf], before [it
becomes a bad acquisition].

b. [The fields were developed], after [the Australian government decided in 1987 to
make the first 30 million barrels from new fields free of excise tax].

We classify Asynchronous temporal relations as markers of discontinuity, following (Segal
et al., 1991). Among the Asynchronous temporal relations, the ones where events are in the
correct temporal order should be easier to process than the ones where temporal order is

1For details on the choice of text spans and adjacency we refer the reader to Prasad et al. (2008).
2Other than explicit and implicit relations, the corpus contains two other categories of relations, namely

EntRel, indicating the relation between sentences only according to the common entities, as well as AltLex,
in which the relation between the two arguments is not lexicalized via the defined set of connectives. We do
not include AltLex category in our analysis as it only contains one percent of all the tagged relations.

2674



Figure 1: Hierarchy of senses in PDTB (Prasad et al., 2008)

reversed. Synchronous temporal relations are harder to classify: they sometimes introduce
new events and should thus be classified as discontinuous.

Contingency Relations Causal relations in the PDTB hierarchy are categorized as
members of the CONTINGENCY family. Cause itself is divided into two subtypes, namely
reason and result. These two subtypes, respectively, indicate forward and backward
cause-consequence relations between their arguments as shown in (4-b) (reason) and (4-a)
(result).

(4) a. [The governor couldn’t come]cause, so [the lieutenant governor welcomed the special
guests]consequence.

b. [There was some profit-taking]consequence, because [prices for all precious metals
had risen to levels at which there was resistance to further advance]cause, he said.

c. [Mrs Yeargin is lying], because [they found students in an advanced class a year
earlier who said she gave them similar help].

In addition to the Cause type in the CONTINGENCY class, there is a type called Pragmatic
Cause which is much less frequent but still relevant to our study. It includes only one
subtype, namely justification, indicating an epistemic causal relation in which the second
argument provides a justification for a claim expressed in the first argument, see (4-c). In
the literature, this has also been referred to as diagnostic relation (Traxler et al., 1997).
In PDTB hierarchy conditional discourse relations are also categorized as CONTINGENCY
relations, see Figure 1. They typically include “if” sentences but are not in the domain of
our study, as we cannot classify them as either continuous / discontinuous or causal.

Comparisons All types of COMPARISON relations can be classified as discontinuous. As
mentioned at the end of Section 2.1, König (1991) proposed that concessive relations
are the dual of causal discourse relations in the sense that they involve a negative cause-
consequence inference. In the PDTB, Concession relations are divided into two subtypes:
expectation and contra-expectation, which represent as the duals of reason and result

2675



respectively. In expectation relations (5-b) the second argument of the connective is a
cause for something that is in contrast with the first argument, and in contra-expectation
(5-a) the first argument of the connective is a cause for something in contrast to what the
second argument asserts.

(5) a. [The demonstrators have been non-violent]cause, but [the result of their tres-
passes has been to seriously impair the rights of others unconnected with their
dispute]neg−consequence.

b. [Third, oil prices haven’t declined]neg−consequence, although [supply has been
increasing]cause.

Other relation types of the comparison class, namely contrast and pragmatic contrast
cover some of the adversative relations that have been compared with causal relations in
studies such as Murray (1997).

Expansions Among the EXPANSION relations we classify as continuous the types
Instantiation, Restatement and List. Alternative and Exception senses are ob-
viously types of discontinuity. The remaining type, namely Conjunction relations are
used in cases where “Arg2 provides additional, discourse new, information that is not
related to Arg1 in any of the ways described for other types of EXPANSION.” (The PDTB
Research Group, 2008, p. 37). It is difficult to make one classification for the whole class -
during manual inspection we found that these relations should sometimes be classified as
discontinuous because they indicate a deictic shift in entity.

4 Methods

Given the continuity hypothesis, we would expect continuous relations to be very frequent
in the corpus, and in particular more frequent than discontinuous relations. Similarly, we
expect to see a relatively high frequency of causal discourse relations. An analysis of simple
frequencies of total occurrences would however be rather limited, as there are a number
of possible confounds. In particular, we would like to be able to test whether there is any
evidence for people generating expectations of upcoming discourse relations, as argued by
the continuity and causality literature.

To test whether comprehenders in fact do generate expectations about upcoming discourse
relations, we draw on the uniform information density (UID) hypothesis (Frank and Jaeger,
2008). The UID hypothesis suggests that humans tend to spread information evenly across
a text or utterance, and thereby use linguistic means in order to reduce or omit highly
predictable linguistic material (which, because it is predictable, carries only a small amount
of information and therefore would lead to a dip in information density if not reduced
or omitted). Florian Jaeger (2010) show this effect for the optional “that” in English
complement clauses, which they find is omitted more often if the complement clause is
predictable from the verb than when it is not. It has been suggested that the function
of such a constant rate of information density would be to facilitate information transfer
(Genzel and Charniak, 2002). In analyzing the rate of implicit discourse connectors in
function of the predictability of the discourse relation according to the continuity and
causality-by-default hypotheses, we hypothesize that speakers are also able to dynamically
choose to use an explicit discourse connector or drop it in order to achieve UID. In order
to measure the ratio of implicit discourse connectors in a discourse relation, we define the

2676



implicitness measure as follows:

Implicitness(relation) =
# of implicit relation

#relation

A large value of implicitness (in particular, larger than average implicitness among all
relations, which is 0.46) for a particular discourse relation in the corpus would thus indicate
that the relation is expressed without the use of a specific discourse connector more often
than average. We interpret high values of implicitness as the producer not needing to
explicitly specify the relation for the comprehender because it is predictable (or otherwise
easily inferable from local cues3). It would also suggest that the annotators of the corpus
tended to mark that relation even in the absence of direct textual signals. On the other
hand, a small value of implicitness means that the discourse relation is expressed with an
explicit discourse cue more often than average, and we would interpret that as the relation
being not easily predictable or difficult to process, such that an explicit marker is needed to
avoid a peak in information density.

5 Results

This section will first discuss evidence for general patterns of the use of discourse markers,
and then proceed to analyze a specific case of IC verbs, which are a local cue of causality.

5.1 Analysis of Global Expectations

Figure 2: Frequency distribution of different types of relations in PDTB corpus: rela-
tion types are arranged across the horizontal axis according to their comprising classes:
comparison, contingency, expansion and temporal.

Figure 2 depicts the distribution of different relation types over 19,009 explicit and 16,327
implicit considered relations4. There are 16 relation types in the hierarchy, some of which

3This notion of no need for marking of specific discourse relations such as causal ones reminds us also of
Kehler’s coherence theory, which indicates that arguments on syntactic decisions should be revisited with
respect to the inferences underlying the establishment of discourse relations. For example, Kehler (2000)
asserts that in elliptic structures, requirement of parallelism between the two involved discourse segments is
important when a resemblance relation is targeted. In contrast, when a causal relation is being expressed
via an elliptic construction, people understand it with no need of exact structural parallelism to help them
with argument identification and alignment.

4Not all relations in the PDTB are annotated down to the third level of the hierarchy (this happened

2677



are more frequent than others. The most frequent labels used to annotate the explicit
relations (those associated with a textual discourse marker present in the original text)
are Conjunction, Contrast, Cause and Asynchrony. It is obvious from the chart that
the distribution of explicitly marked discourse relations is different from the distribution
of implicit occurrence. The most frequent types among implicit relations are in order
Cause, Conjunction, Restatement, and Contrast. In terms of total frequencies of the
different discourse relationships (see Figure 2), Conjunction, Cause and Contrast are
the most common relations, and hence could be claimed to be most expected on a pure
frequency-based account. However, the relations Conjunction and Contrast have rather
low rates of implicitness (see Figure 3).

Figure 3: Implicitness of different types of relations in PDTB corpus: relation types are
arranged across the horizontal axis according to their comprising classes: comparison,
contingency, expansion and temporal.

5.2 Evidence for the Continuity Hypothesis

In Section 3 we classified the PDTB discourse relations with respect to continuity or
discontinuity of an event in the sense of Segal et al. (1991). In particular, we argued that all
of the discourse relations in the COMPARISON and TEMPORAL5 family describe discontinuous
events, while Cause and Pragmatic Cause are continuous. Within the EXPANSION family,
we argued that Instantiation, Restatement and List are continuous, while Exception
and possibly Conjunction can be viewed as denoting discontinuous events. Figure 3 depicts
the implicitness of different level-2 types of discourse relations in the PDTB. We find that
the relations that denote continuous events are exactly the ones that have implicitness
values larger than average implicitness, while the ones that can be classified as discontinuous
are exactly the ones with lower values of implicitness. The PDTB data thus provides
strong supporting evidence for the continuity hypothesis. We will get back to more detailed
analyzes concerning the concept of temporal continuity in Sections 5.4 and 5.5.

5.3 Evidence for the Causality-by-default Hypothesis

The causality-by-default hypothesis (Sanders, 2005) proposes that people preferentially
interpret consecutive sentences as standing in a causal relationship. The data from the

when no consensus on the more detailed classification could been reached among the annotators). In
our study, we only included those relations that were annotated down to at least the second level of the
hierarchy. Also, some relations are tagged with more than one type. Hence, the sum over occurrences of all
types does not necessarily match the total number of argument pairs in the corpus.

5Note: Synchronous is not straightforward to classify.

2678



PDTB corpus shows that causal relations are not the only ones that are often expressed
without an explicit connective, and hence with view on the UID hypothesis are not the only
predictable relation (e.g., Restatement is a more implicit relation). Nevertheless, causal
relations are the most frequent type of implicit discourse relations in the PDTB, see Figure
2. The implicitness of causal discourse relations is significantly higher (at 0.65) than the
implicitness of the other frequent discourse relations, in particular Conjunction (0.39),
Concession (0.15), Asynchronous (0.25), as well as the average overall relation types (0.46),
– all comparisons significant at p < 0.001, according to a binomial test. This result supports
the hypothesis we constructed on top of the causality-by-default and the UID hypotheses:
in the absence of explicit connectives, a causal relation is expected between neighboring
sentences.

5.4 Temporal Continuity

Now it is time to compare the subtypes of causal and temporal relations to investigate
whether continuity in the temporal ordering of events is implicit or marked explicitly
most often. Table 1 includes frequencies of the forward vs. backward causal, concessive
and temporal relations in the corpus. As predicted, for each pair of the same type, the
forward relation is associated with a higher degree of implicitness. We performed a binomial
significance test and obtained p < 0.001 for all pairwise comparisons. This result supports
the continuity hypothesis in the sense that discourse markers tend to be dropped when the
relation between the arguments conform to linearity in time (Murray, 1997).

Type:subtype Explicit Implicit Implicitness Signif.

Cause:result 752 1704 0.69 } ***Cause:reason 1488 2467 0.62
Concession:contra-expectation 804 186 0.19 } ***Concession:expectation 392 31 0.08
Asynchrony:precedence 986 536 0.35 } ***Asynchrony:succession 1101 161 0.12

***: significant at p < 0.001 according to a binomial test

Table 1: Forward and backward occurrences of causal, concessive and temporal relations.

5.5 Textual Order of Arguments

It should be kept in mind that forward/backwardness of the relation (or the connective) in
some cases does not correspond with the order in which the arguments of the relation appear
in the text. Connectives such as “because” and “although” can take their subordinate clause
(Arg2 according to PDTB) to the beginning of a composite sentence, see for example (6).

(6) Because the drought reduced U.S. stockpiles, they have more than enough storage
space for their new crop, and that permits them to wait for prices to rise.

Since all of the occurrences of a particular relation type (e.g., reason) in the PDTB are
tagged with the same label regardless of the textual order of the arguments, we performed a
second analysis. Table 2 presents separate statistics for the Arg1-connective-Arg2 (ordered)

2679



versus the connective-Arg2-Arg1 (reversed) occurrences for the relations Cause, Concession
and Asynchrony, which we also focused on in our analysis of temporal continuity. PDTB
annotators always put connectives between the arguments of the implicit relations. That is
why we only present numbers for the explicit occurrences. Interestingly, there are always
more ordinal modifications (the reversed presentation) when a backward relation of any
type is being expressed. This implies that even in the presence of the cues, people have
a tendency to keep the textual order of the arguments the same as the temporal order in
which the associated events happened. In order to conduct a more accurate analysis of
the temporal transition, given the information about argument organization we gathered
all implicit and explicit occurrences of temporally linear vs. non-linear instances from all
the 6 relation subtypes and performed a correlation analysis. In this analysis reversed
occurrences of backward relations count as temporally linear and reversed occurrences of
forward relations are taken as temporally non-linear (e.g., a reason relation in which Arg2
appears first in the text is taken as linear, just like a result relation). The chi-square test of
the temporal linearity and the implicitness of the relation shows a significant correlation
between these two factors (χ2 = 67.31, df = 1, p < 0.001). This is a more accurate result
(compared with our analysis of continuity merely according to the relation types in 5.4)
which indeed supports our hypothesis based on the UID and the continuity hypotheses:
temporal forwardness is implicit in relations between consecutive sentences and its explicit
cues are typically dropped.

Type:subtype (explicit only) Ordered Reversed Signif.

Cause:result 746 6 } ***Cause:reason 1324 164
Concession:contra-expectation 791 13 } ***Concession:expectation 183 209
Asynchrony:precedence 931 55 } ***Asynchrony:succession 867 234

***: significant at p < 0.001 according to a binomial test

Table 2: Distribution of textually ordered vs. reversed occurrences of arguments in causal,
concessive and temporal relations with explicit connectors.

5.6 A potential local predictor: Implicit Causality Verbs

Implicit Causality verbs (such as adore, inspire, humiliate) have been studied for many
years, mostly in the context of coreference (whether the subject of the clause explaining
the reason is the subject or object of the IC verb). Recently, IC verbs have however also
been argued to make comprehenders anticipate an upcoming causal discourse relation,
i.e. comprehenders expect to learn about the reason if they hear a sentence with an IC verb,
like “Peter adored his older brother.”: In a visual world experiment, Rohde and Horton
(2010) compared sentences with IC verbs to sentences with transfer-of-possesion (TOP)
verbs, and found that participants are much more likely to expect a reason following an
IC verb sentence than when they have heard a sentence with a TOP verb. This indicates
that people are able to take into account local cues like IC verbs and anticipate upcoming
discourse relations.

To test on the corpus data the validity of the hypothesis that IC verbs lead people to
anticipate causal relationships, we extracted all sentences from the PDTB which contained

2680



an IC verb in the Arg1 of a discourse relation. In order to identify the IC verbs, we used
a list of 300 IC verbs provided by Ferstl et al. (2011). In order to avoid noise in the
data, we extracted only those instances where the IC verb was the main verb of an Arg1
which contained only a single sentence. Therefore, we simultaneously queried the PDTB
annotation and the syntactic annotation of the Penn Treebank. To make sure that the IC
verb worked as a cue in the sentence, we only considered relations with ordered arguments,
namely the Arg1-connective-Arg2 occurrences. We found that the discourse relation was
labeled as reason significantly more often if Arg1 contained an IC verb than when it did
not (p < 0.01), however, the size of the effect was small: likelihood of reason given an
IC verb in Arg1 was 14.0%, and 11.7% for other verbs. This is support (though relatively
weak) for IC verbs actually affecting the upcoming discourse relation.

The more interesting question in the context of the UID hypothesis, however, is whether
markers for causal relations following IC verbs are more likely to be absent, due to the added
predictability of the reason relationship. We compared the implicitness of reason relations
where the Arg1 contains an IC verb to the implicitness of reason relations with non-IC verbs
as the head of Arg1. Counterintuitively, we found that the implicitness of reason relations
with an IC verb in the Arg1 was smaller than for non-IC Arg1s. To make sure that this
effect was not due to noise, we also checked all occurrences of IC verbs manually and only
included the correct verbs and not homonyms (such as for lie) or other unintended semantic
sense (e.g. “leave it up to somebody” instead of “leave somebody”). We found that such
incorrectly tagged verbs were evenly distributed among implicit and explicit relations, such
that the implicitness value was not affected by the noise (implicitness was 61% for IC verb
reason relations and 65% for non-IC verb reason relations). Table 3 shows the manually
checked numbers within reason relations (for all relations, only automatically extracted
numbers are available due to the large number of occurrences, and absence of effect from
manually checking the IC verbs in reason relations6).

Total IC verb in Arg1

Implicit: reason relations 2462 153 (manually checked)
Explicit: reason relations 1324 96 (manually checked)
Implicit: all relations 15682 910 (automatically extracted)
Explicit: all relations 16147 1034 (automatically extracted)

Table 3: Total frequency of relations and the frequency of IC verbs appearing as the head
of a single-sentence Arg1. All selected relations are also filtered to have ordered arguments.

The result goes against our predictions and merits further investigation in further work: all
verbs need to be classified into their IC semantic class according to the previous research,
and finer-grained verb sense disambiguation should also be considered7, and further factors
such as whether the verb occurs in passive voice could be taken into account. Also, the list

6The number of automatically extracted reason relations including IC verbs were 164 and 108 for the
implicit and explicit occurrences, respectively.

7Ferstl et al. (2011) categorize IC verb usages into 4 classes: AgentPatient, AgentEvocator, Experiencer-
Stimulus, and StimulusExperiencer. For example, the AgentPatient class covers activity transitive verbs
such as “carry” which associate Agent and Patient roles to the involved entities. The 300 IC verb list that
we employed also did not contain information about which fine-grained verb sense should be treated as an
IC verb.

2681



of 300 IC verbs from (Ferstl et al., 2011) are only annotated for their subject or object bias.
In future work, these verbs should all be tested for the strength of predicting an upcoming
reason relationship; and the result could be taken into account to see whether the prediction
of higher implicitness of discourse cues signaling a reason relationship following IC verbs
possibly holds for those IC verbs which strongly predict a reason relationship.

6 Conclusions

We conducted an empirical study of discourse relations in newspaper text, specifically the
PDTB treebank, with respect to the causality-by-default and continuity hypotheses. We
found supporting evidence for both hypotheses: As the continuity hypothesis (Murray,
1997; Segal et al., 1991) predicts, discourse relations which are discontinuous or temporally
non-linear are much more likely to be expressed with an explicit discourse marker than
those which are continuous. The statistics on the forward vs. backward temporal transition
between arguments of discourse relations furthermore show a higher degree of implicitness
for the forward directionality of all causal, concessive and temporal relations than for the
backward versions of them.

Causal relations constitute the largest proportion of the implicit discourse relations in the
corpus, which suggests that they are more expected when no discourse marker is present,
compared to many other relation types such as temporals, adversatives and additives.
From a usage-based perspective, this provides partial support for the causality-by-default
hypothesis put forth by Sanders (2005) in the sense that causal relations are identified even
if no textual element explicitly marks them. However, in the absence of explicit sentence
connectives other types of discourse relations could also be inferred, such as restatement or
instantiation, which also account for a large proportion of unmarked relations in the PDTB
corpus.

We also investigated implicit causality verbs which have been argued to act as local cues for
an upcoming causal relationship. However, we found that their presence in the first sentence
of a reason relationship does not increase the probability of the explicit connective to be
dropped. This finding stands in contrast to what we predicted via an account of the UID
hypothesis, which suggests that optional markers might be dropped if they contribute less
information. Nevertheless, we observed that presence of an IC verb in the first argument
of a sentence pair could generally signal a reason relation in the corpus, in line with the
experimental finding of (Rohde and Horton, 2010) on discourse-level predictions. Taken
together, our findings raise an interesting question for the future work: to what extent can
global patterns vs. local cues account for the discourse relations being left implicit?

While the patterns we observed in the production data are compatible with the mentioned
hypotheses about causality and continuity, they do not give us insight about the source of
the tendency. Our results along with the related experimental findings can be considered
from a frequency-based perspective, meaning that typical patterns in language production
lead to expectations during comprehension about causality and continuity. Alternatively, it
could be that people have an intrinsic tendency towards congruent and temporally ordered
relations both in production and interpretation.

References

Caron, J., Micko, H. C., and Thuring, M. (1988). Conjunctions and the recall of composite
sentences. Journal of Memory and Language, 27(3):309–323.

2682



Couper-Kuhlen, E. and Kortmann, B. (2000). Cause, Condition, Concession, Contrast:
Cognitive and Discourse Perspectives, volume 33. Walter de Gruyter.

Ferstl, E., Garnham, A., and Manouilidou, C. (2011). Implicit causality bias in english: a
corpus of 300 verbs. Behavior Research Methods, 43(1):124–135.

Florian Jaeger, T. (2010). Redundancy and reduction: Speakers manage syntactic infor-
mation density. Cognitive Psychology, 61(1):23–62.

Frank, A. and Jaeger, T. (2008). Speaking rationally: Uniform information density as an
optimal strategy for language production. Proceedings of the 28th meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society.

Genzel, D. and Charniak, E. (2002). Entropy rate constancy in text. In Proceedings of the
40th Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 199–206.

Hobbs, J. (1990). Literature and Cognition, volume 21. Center for the Study of Language
and Information (CSLI lecture notes).

Hume, D. (1784). An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. New York: The Liberal
Arts Press, 1955 edition.

Irwin, J. (1980). The effects of explicitness and clause order on the comprehension of
reversible causal relationships. Reading Research Quarterly, pages 477–488.

Kehler, A. (2000). Coherence and the resolution of ellipsis. Linguistics and Philosophy,
23(6):533–575.

Köhne, J. and Demberg, V. (2011). Incremental and predictive discourse based on causal
and concessive discourse markers – a visual study. In 24th Annual CUNY Conference on
Human Sentence Processing.

König, E. (1991). Concessive relations as the dual of causal relations. Semantic Universals
and Universal Semantics. Groningen-Amsterdam Studies in Semantics, 12:190–209.

Kuperberg, G., Paczynski, M., and Ditman, T. (2011). Establishing causal coherence
across sentences: An ERP study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23(5):1230–1246.

Langacker, R. (2000). A dynamic usage-based model. Usage-based Models of Language,
pages 1–63.

Levinson, S. (2000). Presumptive Meanings: The Theory of Generalized Conversational
Implicature. The MIT Press.

Levy, R. and Jaeger, T. F. (2007). Speakers optimize information density through syntactic
reduction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.

Lin, Z., Kan, M., and Ng, H. (2009). Recognizing implicit discourse relations in the
penn discourse treebank. In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 343–351.

Millis, K., Golding, J., and Barker, G. (1995). Causal connectives increase inference
generation. Discourse Processes, 20(1):29–49.

2683



Murray, J. (1995). Logical connectives and local coherence. Sources of Coherence in
Reading, pages 107–125.

Murray, J. (1997). Connectives and narrative text: The role of continuity. Memory and
Cognition, 25(2):227–236.

Pitler, E., Raghupathy, M., Mehta, H., Nenkova, A., Lee, A., and Joshi, A. (2008). Easily
identifiable discourse relations. Technical Reports (CIS), page 884.

Prasad, R., Dinesh, N., Lee, A., Miltsakaki, E., Robaldo, L., Joshi, A., and Webber,
B. (2008). The Penn Discourse Treebank 2.0. In Proceedings of the 6th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2008), pages 2961–2968.

Rohde, H. and Horton, W. (2010). Why or what next? eye movements reveal expectations
about discourse direction. In Proceedings of 23rd Annual CUNY Conference on Human
Sentence Processing, pages 18–20.

Sagi, E. (2006). Context and the processing of discourse: Priming and genre effects on
discourse comprehension. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society.

Sanders, T. (1997). Semantic and pragmatic sources of coherence: On the categorization
of coherence relations in context. Discourse Processes, 24(1):119–147.

Sanders, T. (2005). Coherence, causality and cognitive complexity in discourse. In Pro-
ceedings/Actes SEM-05, First International Symposium on the Exploration and Modelling
of Meaning, pages 105–114.

Segal, E., Duchan, J., and Scott, P. (1991). The role of interclausal connectives in narrative
structuring: Evidence from adults’ interpretations of simple stories. Discourse Processes,
14(1):27–54.

Simon, H. (1952). On the definition of the causal relation. The Journal of Philosophy,
49(16):517–528.

Sporleder, C. (2008). Lexical models to identify unmarked discourse relations: Does
WordNet help? Lexical-Semantic Resources in Automated Discourse Analysis, page 20.

The PDTB Research Group (2008). The Penn Discourse Treebank 2.0 annotation manual.
Technical report, Institute for Research in Cognitive Science, University of Pennsylvania.

Trabasso, T., Secco, T., and van den Broek, P. (1984). Causal cohesion and story coherence.
Learning and Comprehension of Text, pages 83–111.

Traxler, M., Sanford, A., Aked, J., and Moxey, L. (1997). Processing causal and diagnostic
statements in discourse. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 23(1):88.

Zhou, Z., Lan, M., Niu, Z., Xu, Y., and Su, J. (2010). The effects of discourse connectives
prediction on implicit discourse relation recognition. In Proceedings of the 11th Annual
Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 139–146.

2684


