



















































Constructing Reference Semantic Predictions from Biomedical Knowledge Sources


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Technical Papers, pages 133–148,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Constructing	  Reference	  Semantic	  Predictions	  from	  
Biomedical	  Knowledge	  Sources	  

Demeke Ayele1, J. P. Chevallet2, Million Meshesha1, Getnet Kassie1 
        (1) Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia 

(2) University of Grenoble, Grenoble, France 
{demekeayele, meshe8, getnetmk}@gmail.com, jean-

pierre.chevallet@imag.fr 

ABSTRACT 

Semantic tuples are core component of text mining and knowledge extraction systems in 
biomedicine. The practical success of these systems significantly depends on the correctness and 
quality of the extracted semantic tuples. The quality and correctness of the semantic predictions 
can be measured against a benchmark semantic structure. In this article, we presented an 
approach for constructing a reference semantic tuple structure based on the existing biomedical 
knowledge sources in which the evaluation is based on the UMLS knowledge sources. In the 
evaluation, 7400 semantic triples are extracted from UMLS knowledge sources and the semantic 
predictions are constructed using the proposed approach. In the semantic triples, 87 concepts are 
found redundantly classified and 207 pair of semantic triples showed hierarchically inconsistent. 
128 are found to be non-taxonomically inconsistent. The quality of the semantic triple is also 
judged using expert evaluators. The Cohen's kappa coefficient is used to measure the degree of 
agreement between two evaluators and the result is promising (0.9). 

Construire	  des	  prévisions	  de	  référence	  sémantique	  à	  
partir	  de	  sources	  de	  connaissances	  biomédicales	  

Les "tuples sémantiques" forment un élément essentiel à la fouille de texte et aux systèmes 
d'extraction de connaissances dans le domaine biomédical. Le succès en pratique des systèmes 
exploitant ces informations sémantique, dépend fortement de l'exactitude et de la qualité des 
tuples sémantiques. La qualité et l'exactitude des informations sémantiques produites 
automatiquement peuvent être mesurées par rapport à une structure de référence. Dans cet article, 
nous présentons une approche pour construire une structure sémantique à base de tuples, basée 
sur des sources existantes dans le domaine biomédicale. L'approche est évaluée en comparaison 
du méta-thésaurus UMLS. Dans une évaluation préliminaire, 7400 tuples sémantiques ont été 
aléatoirement extraits de UMLS et les prédictions de relations on été construites en utilisant 
l'approche proposée. Dans les triplets sémantiques étudiés, 87 concepts se révèlent être classés de 
manière redondante et 207 paires de triplets sémantiques ont une relation hiérarchique 
incompatible, et finalement 128 sont jugées taxonomiquement compatibles. La qualité de la 
relation sémantique est également jugée en utilisant des évaluateurs, experts du domaine. Le 
coefficient kappa de Cohen est utilisé pour mesurer le degré d'accord entre deux évaluateurs et le 
résultat est d'ors et déjà prometteur (0,9). 
KEYWORDS: Acceptable semantics, domain semantics, knowledge extraction, semantic triples 
MOTS-CLÉS: sémantique, la sémantique de domaine acceptables, extraction de connaissances, 
triples sémantiques 

133



1 Introduction 

Semantic predictions, semantic triples, are the basic components of text mining and knowledge 
representation systems. Nowadays, large scale semantic prediction extraction and representation 
systems are increasingly emerging to sustain text mining and knowledge management systems in 
biomedicine. These in turn support intelligent and quality healthcare services and management 
(Abacha and Zweigenbaum, 2011; Cameron, 2011; Denecke, 2008; Harkema et al., 2004).  

The practicality and usability of semantic relation extraction systems critically depends on the 
correctness, accuracy and quality of the extracted semantic predictions. The relations are formed 
under a general structure of subject-predicate-object triples (Harkema et al., 2004; Spasic, 2005), 
called semantic predictions hereafter. A benchmark is necessary to evaluate the accuracy and 
quality of the semantic relations generated by the automatic semantic relation extraction systems. 
This in turn improves the usefulness of the semantic predictions in the knowledge management 
systems (Abacha and Zweigenbaum, 2011; Denecke, 2008).  

Most of the existing semantic triple extraction systems are based on either a shallow (e.g. 
Wordnet or Ontologies) or a narrower (e.g. terminologies) semantic resources for measuring the 
accuracy and quality of the extracted semantic relations (Abacha and Zweigenbaum, 2011; 
Cameron, 2011; Denecke, 2008). These semantic resources either lack the fine-grained semantics 
(e.g. Wordnet) or focus on narrower domains (e.g. terminological resources), and adopt different 
semantic representation contexts. This renders difficulties in the semantic resources to use them 
in benchmarking for independently developed semantic tuple extraction and representation 
systems (Denecke, 2008). 

In biomedicine, various semantic resources have emerged recently (Bada and Hunter, 2007; 
Herre et al., 2011). They range from terminologies (e.g. UMLS (Keith et al., 1998; Lindberg et 
al., 1993)) to Ontologies (e.g. BioTop (Beisswanger, 2007)). Most of the ontological resources 
contain high level semantics of the domain (Beisswanger, 2007), resulting in lack of fine-grained 
semantic triples that may have significant impact on reasoning and intelligent systems 
application. Terminologies (e.g. UMLS) are the most common semantic resources utilized as 
reference in semantic triple extraction and representation because they contain the fine-grained 
semantic triples in a very specific domain.  

For example, the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) semantics is used to measure the 
correctness and usefulness of extracted semantic predictions in the work of Abacha and 
Zweigenbaum (2011), Cameron (2011) and Denecke (2008). According to Keith et al (1998) and 
Lindberg et al (1993), the UMLS is the integration of many vocabulary sources in biomedicine. It 
is a widely accepted semantic resource to represent the biomedicine. It has richer semantic 
content than other terminological resources in biomedical domain yet.  

As pointed out previously, most terminological resources, however, are developed using experts 
for specialized application contexts in the domain (Keith et al., 1998; Lindberg et al., 1993). This 
makes the semantic tuples to have multiple semantic interpretation contexts and views, which 
leads to many inconsistencies and ambiguities in the domain representations (Erdogan, 2010; Fan 
and Friedman, 2008; Freitas et al, 2009).  

 

 

134



This problem is intensified if the resources are combined (e.g. UMLS) to integrate the different 
views and interpretations of the semantic triples. This may significantly affects the accuracy, 
correctness and quality of the semantic triples (Erdogan, 2010; Morreya, 2009; Mougin and 
Bodenreider, 2005; Spasic, 2005; Vizenor et al, 2009).  

Auditing systems have been developed to asses the semantic inconsistencies and ambiguities in 
biomedical semantic resources and to suggest corrective measures. For example, in (Erdogan, 
2010; Morreya, 2009; Mougin and Bodenreider, 2005; Spasic, 2005; Vizenor et al, 2009), 
auditing systems are developed to asses the inconsistencies inherent to Unified Medical 
Language System (UMLS) knowledge sources.  

But, while auditing systems have made large contributions in identifying the inconsistencies and 
ambiguities, the large volume and number of biomedical knowledge sources and many 
inconsistencies and ambiguities make them difficult to circumvent the inherent problems of the 
resources (Erdogan, 2010; Friedman et al, 2001). Consequently, using these resources as a 
benchmark for semantic triple extraction could lead to incorrect interpretation of the semantic 
triples, which results low accuracy and quality of the semantic predictions. 

In this context, a reference semantic tuple structure is required to provide consistent, accurate, 
and high quality semantic triples for benchmarking semantic prediction extraction systems in 
biomedicine. The lack of a suitable gold standard reference semantic prediction structure has so 
far precluded the formal evaluation of semantic triple extraction systems. Most of the existing 
semantic extraction systems have been informally evaluated using statistical methods through 
error analysis. A formal evaluation requires measuring the semantic distances of extracted 
semantics against the benchmark semantics. That is, the spans of texts need to be mapped to 
concepts and their relationships in the reference semantic structure, which provides a consistent 
and formal representation of biomedicine.  

Constructing such a reference semantic structure needs a comprehensive analysis of the 
biomedicine semantic knowledge resources (e.g. UMLS) to guarantee the correctness and quality 
of the semantic triples in them (Erdogan, 2010; Friedman et al, 2001). Furthermore, the analysis 
is made in perspectives where most inconsistencies and ambiguities are assumed to occur 
(Erdogan, 2010; Morreya, 2009; Mougin and Bodenreider, 2005; Spasic, 2005; Vizenor et al, 
2009).  

We have structured our semantic analysis in four perspectives before transforming the semantic 
knowledge sources into semantic predictions. The first semantic analysis is used to identify 
redundantly classified concepts to guarantee the correct assignments of concepts in the 
knowledge source (e.g. UMLS (Fan and Friedman, 2008)). The second semantic analysis is made 
for ensuring the consistency of hierarchical relationship semantics held by the biomedical 
knowledge sources (e.g. UMLS semantic network and Metathesaurus (Cimino et al., 2003)).  

The third semantic analysis checks the consistency of non-taxonomically related semantic triples 
in the semantic knowledge sources (e.g. UMLS semantic network and Metathesaurus) 
(Bodenreider and Burgun, 2004; Vizenor et al., 2009). The fourth analysis verifies the alignment 
of concepts and semantic types between UMLS knowledge sources. Lastly, the UMLS semantics 
is transformed into a set of consistent and acceptable semantic predictions. 

 

 

135



In this article, we presented a method to construct consistent and domain expert acceptable 
semantic tuple structure with assessment and analysis of the biomedical knowledge sources 
applied on Unified Medical Language System (UMLS). The techniques are developed to assess 
and identify the semantic inconsistencies and ambiguities in the biomedical knowledge sources 
and transform the knowledge source semantics into a set of semantic triples.  

As the approach focuses at the semantic level (concept), it can be applied on languages included 
in the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS). That is, it can be applied for those languages 
in the Unified Medical Language System’s knowledge sources (e.g. English and some European 
languages) or the language of its source vocabularies (e.g. SNOMED CT). This makes the 
proposed approach to have language independent nature. 

The approach is based on the language model developed by the National Library of Medicine in 
designing the Unified Medical Language System to integrate multiple terminologies in the 
domain of biomedicine. It combines conceptual and lexical representations of the domain 
semantics. The third Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) resource component, for 
example, is the SPECIALIST Lexicon, which is designed to have morphological and syntactical 
language models. 

The approach also measures the accuracy, quality and correctness of the transformed semantic 
tuples using experts. Each semantic tuples are transformed into human readable format and 
presented to experts. The experts rate the semantics of the tuples by providing judgmental value 
of 1 or 0, where 1 is acceptable and 0 is unacceptable. The degree of agreement between two 
evaluators is measured using Cohen's kappa coefficient (k). In this way, three expert evaluators 
judge the accuracy and quality of the semantic tuples. The result obtained is promising. Finally, 
the results are discussed and concluded in future works.  

2 Background 

According to literatures (Freitas and et al, 2009), several semantic resources have been emerging 
increasingly in biomedical domain. The resources may generally be categorized into lexical, 
terminologies and Ontologies based on the semantic content they have (Freitas and et al, 2009).  
For example, Wordnet could be a lexical resource, SNOMED CT or UMLS is a Terminological 
resource and BioTop is ontological resource.  

The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) is the largest terminological resource in the 
domain, which has been developed by the National Library of Medicine (NLM) since 1986 as a 
long term project. Currently, it is an integration of more than 150 biomedical vocabulary sources 
into its Metathesaurus. The Metathesaurus consists of more than 3 million concepts and their 
relationships (Keith et al., 1998; Lindberg et al., 1993).  

The Unified Medical language System (UMLS) has three semantically correlated components 
that represent the biomedical domain at various level of semantic granularity. The Unified 
Medical Language System (UMLS) semantic network represents the high level conceptual 
domain representations with broader semantic classes, called semantic types. The Unified 
Medical Language System (UMLS) Metathesaurus also represents the fine-grained domain 
semantic concepts and the corresponding terms as well as relationships among concepts.  

 

136



The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) SPECIALIST Lexicon represents the linguistics 
knowledge sources and lexical resources. The linguistics knowledge sources include 
morphological and syntactic attributes of each term in the Metathesaurus. This creates a linkage 
to span of texts in biomedical documents.  

The semantic tuples forming subject-predicate-object triples in the Metathesaurus are logically 
linked to the semantic network semantic tuples. In Metathesaurus, the concepts are the subjects 
and objects in the triple whereas the thesauri relationships are the predicates. In the semantic 
network, the subjects and objects are semantic classes (types) where as the predicate is the 
semantic network relationships.  

The semantic concepts in the Metathesaurus are categorized in at least one semantic type in the 
semantic network. These concepts are in turn represented by several synonymous terms from 
multiple vocabulary sources. In this respect, the two knowledge sources of the UMLS, semantic 
network and Metathesaurus, are semantically linked to structure the semantics of biomedicine. 

However, the integration of several vocabulary sources into UMLS has been made using experts 
with a goal to create a semantic link among the different biomedical resources by preserving the 
semantics and terms in the original resources. This leads the UMLS to have inherent 
inconsistency and ambiguity problems in its semantic content (Erdogan, 2010; Fan and Friedman, 
2008; Freitas et al, 2009; Friedman et al., 2001; Harkema et al., 2004). According to empirical 
results in auditing the UMLS (Bodenreider, 2001, 2004; Cimino, 1998; Erdogan, 2010; Fan and 
Friedman, 2008; Friedman and et al., 2001; Morreya, 2009; Mougin and Bodenreider, 2005; 
Spasic, 2005; Vizenor et al, 2009), the major sources of these problems are: 1) Due to errors 
made by experts in the integration process; 2) inconsistencies and ambiguities that arise in the 
process of preserving the different views and semantic contexts of the original sources in the 
integration. 

Erdogan et al. (2011) quantified the semantic inconsistencies in UMLS concepts from the 
perspective of their hierarchical relations and showed how inconsistent concepts can help reveal 
erroneous synonymy relations. The study evaluates consistency by comparing the semantic 
groups of hierarchically related pair of concepts. As a result, 81, 512 concepts were found to be 
inconsistent due to differences in semantic groups of a concept and its parents. Morrey et al. 
(2009), presented Neighborhood Auditing software Tool (NAT), which facilitated the UMLS 
auditing tasks. It supports neighborhood based auditing, where an auditor concentrates on a 
focused concept and one of a variety of neighborhoods of its closely related concepts. It also 
allows an auditor to display knowledge from the two UMLS knowledge sources.  

Cimino (1998) developed semantic techniques to audit Metathesaurus for identifying possible 
inconsistencies. The result of the study showed that out of 57,592 concepts with multiple 
semantic types, 3.2% were judged ambiguous. Keyword analysis showed 7121 pairs of 
interchangeable terms. Using the keyword pairs, 5031 pairs of potentially redundant concepts 
were suggested, of which 65.1% were judged to actually be redundant. Review of the 100,586 
parent–child relationships revealed 0.54% that was incorrect. Review of the 219,664 other 
relationships (RO) (e.g. see in TABLE 1 below) suggested 1299 places in the Semantic Network 
(SN) where relations between pairs of semantic types could be added.  

 

 

137



CHD Has child relationship C1 parent of C2, inverse_ISA 

PAR Has parent relationship C1 child of C2, ISA 

RB Has a broader relationship C1 parent of C2, inverse_ISA 

RN Has a narrower relationship C1 child of C2, ISA 

RL The relationship is similar or alike C1 alike C2, mapping 

RO Relationships other than CHD, PAR, RB, 
RN and SY 

Associative relationship of 
C1 & C2 

RU Related, unspecified Inherited from SN, T1 & T2 

SIB Has sibling relationship C1 SIB C2, sistership 

TABLE 1 - META relationships and their mapping 

Auditing methods can be classified as logic and non-logic based (Cornet, 2005; Mougin and 
Bodenreider, 2005). While the logic based methods have been better performing, the semantic 
structure of UMLS is not consistent with it (Cornet, 2005; Mougin and Bodenreider, 2005). The 
non-logic based methods (Bodenreider, 2001; Cimino, 1998, 2003; Erdogan, 2010; Fan and 
Friedman, 2008; Morreya, 2009; Mougin and Bodenreider, 2005; Vizenor et al., 2009) detect and 
avoid semantic inconsistencies and ambiguities based on semantical and structural properties of 
the UMLS semantics and fix the problems manually. The methods detect redundant assignments, 
hierarchical and associative semantics inconsistencies, and hierarchically circular relationships. 
The purpose of the methods is to enhance the correctness and semantic quality of the UMLS 
knowledge sources. More comprehensive literature survey about auditing methods can be 
referred in (Zhu, 2009).  

Some semantic predictions systems, in biomedicine, have also used the UMLS semantics for 
accurate extraction of semantic predictions and measuring the quality of the resulting semantic 
propositions. For example, in 2008, Denecke the quality and correctness of the extracted 
semantic predictions are checked against the semantics of the UMLS semantic network in its 
evaluation. Accuracy is measured in terms of the number of concepts extracted compared to 
those actually exist in a sentence and the quality of the relation was compared to manually 
generated semantic structures.  

In this context, a semantic structure is correct if it contains all medical concepts in a sentence and 
if the semantics of the concepts are according to manually constructed representations. Kilicoglu 
et al (2011) also developed a semantic prediction gold standard from biomedical literatures to 
evaluate semantic prediction systems (e.g. semRep). However, though the studies were 
concerned on accuracy, structural and semantical acceptability of the semantic predictions, 

138



manual construction is very limited and consumes more time and effort in large scale semantic 
prediction systems, which results the need of developing alternative approaches. 

3 MATERIALS 

The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) Semantic Network (SN) and Metathesaurus 
(MT) are used as a baseline semantic resource to evaluate the approach for generating consistent 
and acceptable semantic predictions under a general structure of object-attribute-value triple. 
According to the studies in (Keith et al., 1998; Lindberg et al., 1993), UMLS combines many 
medical vocabularies and provides a mapping structure among them. It is composed of the 
semantic knowledge components, the metathesaurus and semantic network, and lexical 
knowledge source, the SPECIALIST Lexicon. The semantic structure in the UMLS is inherently 
related to the semantic structures of its semantic network and Metathesaurus. Fig. 1 below depicts 
the semantic relationships of the two UMLS knowledge sources. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 1- Semantic structure of the SN and MT 

The upper one is the UMLS semantic network semantic types where as the lower one is the 
concepts in the UMLS Metathesaurus. The link between the two is the hierarchical relationship. 
For example, the semantic type body part, organ and organ component is a fully formed 
anatomical structure, which is in the semantic network. And heart is body part, organ and 
organ component, which is a semantic binding between Metathesaurus and semantic network. 

The semantic network consists of 135 semantic types that have been aggregated into a set of 15 
semantic groups to reduce complexity (McCray, 2001). For example, the semantic type Finding 
and Pathologic Function belong to the semantic group Disorders. The semantic types are linked 
using 54 semantic relationships. For example, the semantic type Body Part, Organ, or Organ 
Component is associated with the semantic type body substance by the semantic relationship 
location_of. The semantic type dysfunction is related to the semantic type biologic function 
hierarchically, isa. 

 

139



In semantic network, semantic types are related taxonomically in a single inheritance 
relationship. The hierarchy is rooted at two nodes, the entity and event. Along the hierarchy, the 
associative relationships defined in the ancestor semantic types are easily inherited by the 
decedent semantic types unless otherwise the inheritance is blocked explicitly. If a relationship 
can not be inherited, it is blocked in two ways. The first is inheritance blocking (B), to mean the 
relationship cannot be inherited by the descendant semantic types. There are also cases where 
semantic relationships are Defined but Not Inherited (DNI). The relationships are used only in 
the defining semantic types but not inherited by its decedents.  

The semantic types and concepts are related using categorization links. These links are assumed 
as hierarchical (isa) relationships. Intuitively, it is assumed that a semantic relationship defined 
between two semantic types is also inheritable between pair of concepts categorized in the two 
semantic types. For example, the relationship affects is defined between Acquired Abnormality 
and organism function as (acquired abnormality, affects, organism function). If it is inheritable, 
the relationship or its decedents is inherited between concepts categorized in Acquired 
Abnormality (e.g. C0001168) and Organism Function (e.g. C0000934) as (C0001168, 
affects/causes/induces, C0000934).  

Fig. 2 below shows the general semantic inheritance structure between the UMLS semantic 
network and Metathesaurus. In the figure, the semantic types fully formed anatomical structure 
and biologic function is related by location_of.  This semantic relationship can also be inherited 
by the descendent semantic types of fully formed anatomical structure and biologic function, 
which are body part, organ and organ components, and diseases and symptom. The same 
semantic relationship can also be inherited by the corresponding semantic concepts in the 
Metathesaurus between as shown in Fig. 2 below adrenal cortex and adrenal cortical 
hypofunction. 

 

FIGURE 2 – Semantic inheritance between SN and MT 

 

140



Though difficult and challenging [23], associative relationships (e.g. affects) can be inherited by 
pair of concepts in MT. They are not explicitly defined among concepts, which results the 
requirement of mapping the SN relationships. Furthermore, some MT relationships can’t map to 
the existing SN relationships, which also results the need of defining additional SN relationships. 
In this study, the MT relationships considered are listed in table 1, and only the existing SN 
relationship mapping is made. Concepts in Metathesaurus are groups of similar terms from the 
various source vocabularies. These terms create linkage to the SPECIALIST Lexicon, which in 
turn enables to create linkage to domain texts. Similarly, relationships between concepts can be 
mapped among terms and in turn between span of texts in the discourse. 

In this article, therefore, the UMLS semantic network, Metathesaurus and their semantic binding 
are used as a semantic resource except co-occurrence relationship. Within these, the SN (e.g. 
SRSTRE2.TXT) and MT (e.g. MRSTY.RRF, MRREL.RRF) and UMLS relationship files in 
addition to the semantic groups are used in constructing the semantic predictions.  

4 METHOD 

In this article, we proposed an approach for constructing consistent and acceptable semantic 
triples under a framework of object-attribute-value/subject-predicate-object triple from 
biomedical knowledge sources. In each semantic triple, the object/subject and value/object are 
either semantic types or semantic concepts or atoms. The attribute/predicate is the semantic 
relationship defined/inherited between semantic types or semantic concepts. For example, in the 
triple (pharmacologic substance, treats, pathologic function), pharmacologic substance is the 
object/subject and pathologic function is value/object while treats is attribute/predicate.  

In the approach, two general steps are made to complete the construction. First, all possible 
semantic triples in the knowledge sources (e.g. UMLS semantic network and Metathesaurus) are 
extracted. Second, the consistency and acceptability of the triples are assessed. The notations 
C=concept, T=semantic type, G=semantic group, R=relationship, D=inheritable, B=Blocked, 
DNI=Defined but Not Inheritable are used henceforth. Fig. 3 shown below depicts the general 
semantic prediction process. 

4.1 Semantic Triple Extraction 
In Metathesaurus, semantic relationships are based at each semantic context of the terms, which 
we referred as semantic atoms, hereafter. Semantic triples can be constructed at the level of 
semantic atoms, concepts, types and groups. That is, semantic types in each semantic group, 
semantic concepts in each semantic type, and semantic atoms in each semantic concept are 
extracted to have explicit representation of the structure. This enables to identify concepts that a 
semantic atom belongs, semantic types that a concept belongs, and a semantic group that a 
semantic type belongs. The extraction is splitted into two steps. The first is the extraction of 
taxonomically related semantic triples and next, the extraction of non-taxonomically related 
semantic triples.  

 

 

 

 

141



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 3– Semantic Prediction 

Taxonomic (hierarchical) semantic triple extraction is straightforward. Because the taxonomy is 
transitive, relations that can be derived are easily inferred from the taxonomy. For instance, given 
a taxonomic hierarchy (C3, C2, C1), the triples (C2, C1), (C3, C2), and (C3, C1) can be derived.  The 
triple (C3, C1) is inferred from the transitive characteristics of taxonomic relationships. Fully 
inherited SN files (SRSTRE2.txt) and the hierarchical relation MT files (MRHIER.RRF and 
MRSTY.RRF) are used to construct the taxonomic structure. Fig. 4 below shows the result of the 
taxonomic semantic triple construction. 
 Algorithm: building taxonomic semantic triples 

   For each sem. group, G, obtain semantic types 

   For each sem. type, T, obtain semantic concepts 

   For each sem. concept, C, obtain sem. atoms, A 

   Build the taxonomic structure, ISA (A, C, T, G) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 4- Snapshot of taxonomic semantic triples 

 

Biomedical 
Knowledge 

Sources

Extracting 
semantic 

triples

Auditing

Biomedical 
Semantic 

triples

Semantic 
predictionsevalutions

142



 

In non-taxonomic semantic triple extraction, all semantic classes (semantic types, concepts and 
atoms) are considered as concepts. Non-taxonomic semantic triples of a concept Ci in which Ci is 
the subject of the triple (Ci, R, Ck) are extracted. Then, triples that have the same relationships (in 
R) and object concepts (in Ck) are merged. Finally, only semantic triples differing with at least 
one of Ci, R, Ck, are considered as useful.  

Relationship inheritance between semantic triple in SN (T1, R, T2) and the corresponding 
semantic triples in MT (C1, r, C2) in which C1 and C2 are related hierarchically to T1 and T2 
respectively is the mapping of R to r, where r is either same as R or decedents of R. This mapping 
is valid if the inheritance of R is permitted (i.e. D) otherwise the mapping is blocked (B or DNI). 
The fully inherited SN files (SRSTRE2.txt) and a MT file (MRSTY.RRF and MRREL.RRF) are 
used to develop the nontaxonomic structure. The algorithm below constructs the nontaxonomic 
propositions. 
 

Algorithm: non-taxonomic semantic triples 

For each sem. type (Ti), obtain (Ti, R, Tk) 

For each Ci in Ti, map R to r, obtain (Ci, r, Ck) 

Collect tuples (Ti, Rij, Tj) and (Ci, rij, Cj) 

Repeat from i=1 to 135, all semantic types   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 5 - Snapshot of Non-Taxonomic Semantic Triples 

143



 

4.2 Consistent Semantic Triples 
Consistency is defined as accurate representation of the semantic tuples or non-redundant 
classification of concepts in MT. Inconsistencies are resulted from inaccurate representation of 
semantic network and Metathesaurus relations, and inaccurate concept categorizations. Detecting 
and removing the redundant classifications and the inaccurate representation of semantic tuples 
could eliminate the semantic inconsistencies. 

Redundant classification occurs in cases if T1 is decedents of T2 and a concept C1 is classified 
under T1 and T2. In this situation, the assignment of C1 to T2 is redundant. This is because it can 
be inferred from the assignment of C1 to T1 transitively. The redundant assignment (or the 
semantic tuple C1 isa T2) is removed or made implicit to make consistent. The algorithm below is 
developed to detect and remove the redundancy. 
 

Algorithm: removing redundant classifications  

 For each concept Ci in MT, obtain its sem. types 

 Obtain taxonomically related semantic types 

 Remove the ancestor STs, if any 

Hierarchical relationship inconsistencies occur in cases where T1 becomes an ancestor of T2 in 
relationship conditions if C1 and C2 are related taxonomically in MT (C1 isa C2), and C1 is in T1 
(C1 isa T1), C2 is in T2 (C2 isa T2).  That is, T1 must be decedent or the same as T2 to make 
consistent. The next algorithm is developed to detect and remove such inconsistencies. 
Algorithm: hierarchical inconsistencies 

 For each related concepts, Ci and Cj 

 Obtain the semantic types for each, Ci and Cj 

 Remove the intersection STs of Ci and Cj 

 Verify the STs of Ci are decedents of that of Cj 

 Remove the inconsistencies, if any 

Unlike the semantic network relationships, Associative relationships in MT are not explicitly 
defined (Vizenor et al, 2009). This creates difficulties in mapping the SN semantics to the 
corresponding MT semantics, resulting associative inconsistencies. This occurs when the 
semantic relationships between two semantic types, T1 and T2, have no direct mapping to the 
semantic relationships made by two semantic concepts, C1 and C2, which are categorized in T1 
and T2 respectively.  

For example, the semantic type body part, organ and organ component is hierarchically related 
to fully-formed anatomical structure. The semantic type disease and syndrome is also related to 
pathologic function hierarchically. A semantic relationship location_of exists between semantic 
type body part, organ and organ component, and disease and syndrome. Adrenal cortex and 
adrenal cortical hypofunction are two Metathesaurus concepts categorized in body part, organ 
and organ component, and disease and syndrome respectively. However, the relationship 

144



between the two concepts are not explicitly defined or inherited. In order to make consistent 
semantic mapping, the relationship between the two concepts should be either location_of or its 
decedents, if any. 

We assumed that the inheritable relationship (R) between semantic types T1 and T2 or its 
decedents in SN are also inheritable to all concepts categorized in T1 and T2. This leads to 
develop simple algorithm to map the semantic tuples in SN to semantic tuples in MT. In this 
article, the semantic mapping considers only semantic relationships in MT indicated in table 1. 
Specifically, for example, other relationships (RO) and unspecified relationships (RU) are 
considered for associative semantics mapping. After mapping the semantic relations between the 
two knowledge sources, manual assessment is made to assure the consistency of the mapping. 

5 Results and Discussion 

The approach is evaluated by extracting a total of 7400 semantic triples from the Unified Medical 
Language System (UMLS 2010AB). I.e. there is no special consideration for the semantics of 
either hierarchical or associative relationship triples. Out of 7400, 4040 are found to be 
hierarchically related semantic triples, which account 55% of the total. 3360 semantic triples, 
which accounts about 45% of the total, are found to be non-hierarchically (associatively) related.  

This seems that hierarchically related semantic triples are provided more emphasis than 
associative relations. However, according to the empirical analysis, most of the semantic 
relationships in MT are hierarchical as they brought from thesauri relationships of the source 
vocabularies. 

In an empirical analysis of the different causes of inconsistencies such as redundant 
classification, hierarchical and associative relationships, we have compared each of them from 
the total semantic triples and to the count of semantic triples in the two semantic classes, 
taxonomic and non-taxonomic. This enables to forecast the trend of the possible inconsistencies 
in about 15 million semantic triples in the UMLS.  

Out of 4040 hierarchically related semantic triples, we have obtained 87 redundantly categorized 
concepts, which they are removed accurately. Similarly, in the taxonomically related semantic 
triples, only 207 semantic triples are found to have hierarchically inconsistent in the assignments 
of concepts to semantic types. This account 5% to the taxonomically related semantic triples and 
0.03% to the total semantic triples extracted. 

In the case of non-taxonomically related semantic triples, we obtained 128 semantic 
inconsistencies in mapping the semantic network triples to the corresponding Metathesaurus 
semantic triples. This accounts 0.04% of non-taxonomically related semantic triples. Some of 
these inconsistencies come from lexical variations of the relationship phrases and the blocking of 
inheritances.  

Finally, one hundred randomly selected semantic triples are presented to expert evaluators. Each 
semantic triple is judged by the two evaluators and classified in either 1 (acceptable) or 0 
(unacceptable). In evaluator A, 87 are accepted and 13 are unaccepted. In evaluator B, 93 are 
accepted and 7 are unaccepted.  Five semantic triples are unaccepted by evaluator A but accepted 
by B. Three semantic triples are unaccepted by evaluator B but accepted by the A. Twelve 
semantic triples are unaccepted and eighty semantic triples are accepted in common.  

145



 

Cohen's kappa coefficient (k) is computed to see the degree of agreements between two 
evaluators where k= (pr (a)-pr (e))/ (1-pr (e)). Pr (a) is the relative observed agreement and pr (e) 
is the probability of random agreement. The result is 0.9, which indicates better agreement 
between the two evaluators.  

Conclusion and Future Work 
In order to utilize the biomedical knowledge sources as a benchmark for quality semantic 
prediction extraction, the quality and correctness of the semantic triples should be assured by 
domain experts and the inherent inconsistency and ambiguity problems need to be alleviated.  

In this article, we have developed an approach for assessing inconsistency problems and 
transforming the knowledge source semantics to consistent and domain expert acceptable 
semantic triples. In the approach, we have developed techniques to extract semantic triples in the 
Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) and transform the triple in the form of subject-
predicate-object triplets. Furthermore, to assess the inconsistencies related to redundant 
classification, hierarchical and associative relationships, algorithms are developed.   

A preliminary evaluation is conducted by extracting 7400 semantic triples from Unified Medical 
Language System (UMLS) knowledge sources. Though the number of semantic triples 
considered is small, the result of the evaluation is promising. However, for accurate result and for 
our purpose, we will increase the number of semantic triples to one hundred thousand. 
Furthermore, the quality (acceptability and naturalness) of the semantic triples are also judged 
using domain experts. The Cohen's kappa coefficient (k) is used to measure the degree of 
agreement between the evaluators and the result is promising (0.9). 

The approach developed in this article is limited to the use of the study in knowledge extraction 
in biomedicine. But, to utilize the full semantic potential of the biomedical knowledge sources, a 
generic and rigorous approach, which transforms its semantics to standard semantic structure and 
eliminate the possible inconsistencies and ambiguities are required. 

146



Reference 

Abacha, A and Zweigenbaum, Z (2011). Automatic Extraction of Semantic Relations between 
Medical Entities: A Rule Based Approach. Journal of Biomedical Semantics: Fourth 
International Symposium on Semantic Mining in Biomedicine, 2(2011), 1-11. 

Bada, M and Hunter, L (2007). Enrichment of OBO Ontologies. Journal of Biomedical 
Informatics, 40 (2007), 300–315. 

Beisswanger, E (2007). BioTop: An Upper Domain Ontology for the Life Sciences. IOS Press, 
pp. 1-7. 

Bodenreider, O (2001). Circular Hierarchical Relationships in the UMLS: Etiology, Diagnosis, 
Treatment, Complications and Prevention. AMIA, 57-61. 

Bodenreider, O and Burgun, A (2004). Aligning Knowledge Sources in the UMLS: Methods, 
Quantitative Results, and Applications. IMIA: Medinfo, 327-331. 

Cameron, D (2011). Semantic Predications for Complex Information Needs in Biomedical 
Literature. Proceedings of the 5th IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and 
Biomedicine, 512-519. 

Cimino, J (1998). Auditing the Unified Medical Language System with Semantic Methods. 
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 5 (1998), 41-51. 

Cimino, J. and et al (2003). Consistency across the hierarchies of the UMLS semantic network 
and Metathesaurus. Journal of biomedical informatics, 36 (2003), 450–461. 

Cornet, R (2005). Two DL-based Methods for Auditing Medical Terminological Systems. AMIA 
2005 Symposium Proceedings, 166-170. 

Denecke, K (2008). Semantic Structuring of and Information Extraction from Medical 
Documents Using the UMLS. Methods Inf. Med., 4 (2008), 425-434. 

Erdogan, H (2010). Exploiting UMLS Semantics for Checking Semantic Consistency among 
UMLS concepts. MEDINFO, 749-753. 

Fan, J. and Friedman, C (2008). Semantic reclassification of the UMLS concepts. Bioinformatics, 
24 (2008), 1971-1973. 

Freitas, F. and et al (2009). Survey of current terminologies and ontologies in biology and 
medicine. RECIIS – Elect. J. Commun. Inf. Innov Health, 7-18. 

Friedman, C. and et al (2001). Evaluating the UMLS as a source of lexical knowledge for 
medical language processing. Proceedings of the AMIA Symposium, 189-193. 

147



Harkema, H. and et al (2004). A Large Scale Terminology Resource for Biomedical Text 
Processing. HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Biolink 2004, Linking Biological Literature, 
Ontologies and Databases, 53-60. 

Herre, H. and et al (2004). OBML - Ontologies in Biomedicine and Life Sciences. Journal of 
Biomedical Semantics: Ontologies in Biomedicine and Life Sciences. 2(2011). 

Keith, E and et al (1998). The Unified Medical Language System: Toward a Collaborative 
Approach For Solving Terminological Problems, JAMIA, 5(1998), 12-16.  

Lindberg, D. and et al (1993). The Unified Medical Language System. Methods of Information in 
Medicine, 281-291. 

McCray, A. T (2001). Aggregating UMLS Semantic Types for Reducing Conceptual 
Complexity. MEDINFO, 216-220. 

Morreya, C. P (2009). The Neighborhood Auditing Tool: A Hybrid Interface for Auditing the 
UMLS. J Biomed. Inform, 42 (2009), 468-489.  

Mougin, F. and Bodenreider, O (2005). Approaches to Eliminating Cycles in the UMLS 
Metathesaurus: Naïve Vs. Formal. AMIA Symposium Proceedings, 550-554. 

Spasic, I (2005). Text Mining and Ontologies in Biomedicine: Making Sense of Raw Text, 
Briefings in Bioinformatics, Henry Stewart Publications., 6(2005), 239-251. 

Vizenor, L and et al (2009). Auditing Associative Relations Across Two Knowledge Sources. 
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 42 (2009), 426-439. 

Zhu, X (2009). A Review of Auditing Methods Applied to The Content of Controlled Biomedical 
Terminologies. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 42 (2009), 413-425. 

Kilicoglu, H and et al (2011). Constructing a Semantic Predication Gold Standard from the 
Biomedical Literature. BMC Bioinformatics, 12(2011), 1-17. 

 

148


