



















































OpenWordNet-PT: An Open Brazilian Wordnet for Reasoning


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Demonstration Papers, pages 353–360,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

OpenWordNet-PT: An Open Brazilian Wordnet for Reasoning

Valeria de Paiva1 Alexandre Rademaker2 Gerard de Melo3
(1) School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, England

(2) Escola de Matemática Aplicada, FGV, Brazil
(3) ICSI, Berkeley, USA

valeria.depaiva@gmail.com, alexandre.rademaker@fgv.br, demelo@icsi.berkeley.edu

ABSTRACT
Brazilian Portuguese needs a Wordnet that is open access, downloadable and changeable, so
that it can be improved by the community interested in using it for knowledge representation
and automated deduction. This kind of resource is also very valuable to linguists and computer
scientists interested in extracting and representing knowledge obtained from texts. We discuss
briefly the reasons for a Brazilian Portuguese Wordnet and the process we used to get a
preliminary version of such a resource. Then we discuss possible steps to improving our
preliminary version.1

KEYWORDS: Wordnet, Portuguese, lexical resources, SUMO Ontology.

KEYWORDS IN L2: Wordnet, Português, recursos léxicos, SUMO.

1Acknowledgments: We would like to thank Francis Bond for help in getting OpenWordNet-PT online and for
general discussions. We also thank Adam Pease for introducing us and helping to start this project.

353



1 Motivation

WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) is an extremely valuable resource for research in Computational
Linguistics and Natural Language Processing in general. WordNet has been used for a number
of different purposes in information systems, including word sense disambiguation, information
retrieval, automatic text classification, automatic text summarization, and dozens of other
knowledge intensive projects.

We started a project at Fundação Getulio Vargas (FGV) in Brazil, whose goal, in the long run,
is to use formal logical tools to reason about knowledge obtained from texts in Portuguese.
Originally we had expected to be able to use some existing Brazilian Wordnet, out of the box,
but it turns out that these are not available in the form that we need it. There are some attempts.

There is the project WordNet.PT (Portuguese WordNet) from the “Centro de Linguistica da
Universidade de Lisboa” headed by Prof. Palmira Marrafa. But this is available online only,
no download available and, as far as we can see on their webpages, little development has
happened recently to this project. The WordNet.PT version available online has about 19000
lexical expressions, from different semantic fields. The fragment made available online in-
cludes expressions from subdomains such as art, clothing, geography, health, institutions,
living entities and transportation, but no description of other domains and/or future releases
of the database are discussed. The group has also a newer version of WordNet.PT called
WordNet.PTglobal (Marrafa et al., 2011) which pays attention to different varieties of Por-
tuguese, like African variations of the language. But while this is very interesting for linguistic
comparative research and useful for online queries (http://www.clul.ul.pt/wnglobal/),
this smaller version of WordNet.PT is not available for download and hence cannot be the target
of modifications and improvements.

There is also the MultiWordNet project and its Portuguese version MWN.PT, developed by
Antônio Branco and colleagues at the NLX-Natural Language and Speech Group, of the University
of Lisbon, Department of Informatics. According to their description (http://mwnpt.di.fc.
ul.pt/), MWN.PT, the MultiWordnet of Portuguese (version 1), spans over 17,200 manually
validated concepts/synsets, linked under the semantic relations of hyponymy and hypernymy.
These concepts are made of over 21,000 word senses/word forms and 16,000 lemmas from
both European and American variants of Portuguese. It includes the sub-ontologies under the
concepts of Person, Organization, Event, Location, and Artworks, which are covered by the top
ontology made of the Portuguese equivalents to all concepts in the 4 top layers of the English
Princeton WordNet and to the 98 Base Concepts suggested by the Global Wordnet Association,
and the 164 Core Base Concepts indicated by the EuroWordNet project. But again this wordnet
is available online only and with a restrictive license that requires payment.

Finally, there is a first version of a Brazilian Portuguese version of Wordnet developed by Bento
Dias da Silva and collaborators (Dias-Da-Silva et al., 2000; Scarton and Aluisio, 2009). But this
also cannot be downloaded, is not available online and is not being maintained on an open
access basis, which is one of the strongest points of Princeton WordNet.

Open access availability is one of the main reasons we would like to create a new Portuguese
Wordnet, which we are calling OpenWordNet-PT (or OpenWN-PT for short). This is because we
believe that resources like Wikipedia and WordNet need to be open and modifiable by others in
order to improve over time.

With a similar philosophy of open access to ours, there is also the work of Hugo Oliveira

354



and Paulo Gomes on Onto.PT ((Gonçalo Oliveira et al., 2011)), another lexical ontology
for the Portuguese language, structured similarly to Princeton’s WordNet, in the process of
development at the University of Coimbra, Portugal. Unlike our own OpenWordNet-PT, Onto.PT
is not connected to the synsets in the Princeton WordNet. Due to this, existing Princeton
WordNet-focused resources like inter-lingual links in EuroWordNet, mappings to the SUMO
ontology and DBpedia/YAGO cannot be used in conjunction with this resource.

2 OpenWordNet-PT

OpenWordNet-PT is being created by drawing on a two-tiered methodology so as to offer high
precision for the more salient and frequent words of the language, but also high recall in
order to cover a wide range of words in the long tail. We thus combine manual base concept
annotation with statistical cross-lingual projection techniques.

2.1 Cross-Lingual Projection

As a starting point, we applied the UWN/MENTA methodology (de Melo and Weikum, 2009,
2010), developed by one of the authors of this paper in conjunction with Gerhard Weikum, to
the Portuguese language.

In a first step, the information in the English Princeton WordNet is projected to Portuguese by
using translation dictionaries to map the English members of a synset to possible Portuguese
translation candidates. In order to disambiguate and choose the correct translations, feature
vectors for possible translations are created by computing graph-based statistics in the graph of
words, translations, and synsets. Additional monolingual wordnets and parallel corpora are
used to enrich this graph. Finally, statistical learning techniques are then used to iteratively
refine this information and build an output graph connecting Portuguese words to synsets.

In a second step, Wikipedia pages are linked to relevant WordNet synsets by learning from
similar graph-based features as well as gloss similarity scores. Such mappings allow us to attach
the article titles of the Portuguese Wikipedia with WordNet synsets, thus further increasing the
coverage.

2.2 Base Concept Annotation

Using cross-lingual projection, we obtain a resource with good coverage. In order to have high
precision for the most important concepts of a language, we rely on human annotators.

In particular, we decided to rely on a set of Base Concepts. The Global WordNet Association
aims at the development of wordnets for all languages of the world and to extend the existing
wordnets to full coverage and many parts-of-speech. In 2006, the association launched a project
to start building a completely free worldwide wordnet “grid”. This grid would be built around a
shared set of concepts, which would be expressed in terms of the original Wordnet synsets and
SUMO (Niles and Pease, 2001) terms.

The vision of a global grid of wordnets in many languages that draw on a common set of
concepts is very appealing, as it enables many cross-lingual applications. The suggestion of
the Global WordNet Association is to build a first version of the grid around the set of 4689
“Common Base Concepts” and to make the grid free, following the example of the Princeton
WordNet. The Base Concepts are supposed to be the most important concepts in the various
wordnets of different languages. The importance of the concepts was measured in terms of two

355



main criteria: (1) A high position in the semantic hierarchy; (2) Having many relationships
to other concepts. The procedure described as the EuroWordNet “expand approach” seemed
sensible: First translate the synsets in the Princeton WordNet to Portuguese, then take over
the relations from Princeton and revise, adding the Portuguese terms that satisfy different
relations. Then we hope to revise thoroughly to guarantee the consistency of the taxonomy
and to make sure that all lexical items with a heavy use in Portuguese were described. This
process is under development at the moment. Currently, Portuguese annotators are revising the
base concepts by manually choosing appropriate Portuguese words and by manually writing
appropriate Portuguese gloss descriptions.

2.3 Project Status

OpenWordNet-PT is freely available as an open-source project2. The data is also available for
online browsing3 via the online interface developed by Francis Bond (Bond and Paik, 2012).
This interface, depicted in Fig. 1, is particularly insightful, as it displays Portuguese entries
in conjunction with entries in several other languages given by other open-source wordnet
projects.

Figure 1: Francis Bond’s Open Multilingual Wordnet website

In total, our resource has 62,034 sense-word pairs, and 45,421 unique words. These include
2,498 manually entered sense-word pairs as well as an additional 1,299 manually written
Portuguese synset glosses. Additional statistics regarding the lexical coverage are provided in
the appendix.

The raw coverage seems reasonable in number of terms in the ontology, but we need to make
sure that the quality of the items is comparable and in particular that the level of detail is
approximately the right one for our intended application.

2https://github.com/arademaker/wordnet-br/
3http://casta-net.jp/~kuribayashi/cgi-bin/wn-multi.cgi

356



3 Perspectives

3.1 OpenWordNet-PT and SUMO

We started from an informal project discussing how logic and automated reasoning could
have a bigger impact, if coupled with natural language processing. We also wanted to make
sure that we could obtain some (ideally most) of the advances already made for English text
understanding to Portuguese text understanding and reasoning.

Building on previously developed technology, like the Xerox PARC XLE (Xerox Language Engine)
system and trying to adapt that system to Brazilian Portuguese seemed a good idea. However,
the AI and logic components of the system come at the end of a long pipeline of modules
which require expertise on processing of natural language. In particular we felt that a Brazilian
Portuguese version of WordNet that could be freely distributed to others was an essential part
of it.

Wordnet is an important component of the XLE Unified Lexicon (UL (Crouch and King, 2005)),
as the logical formulae created by the Abstract Knowledge Representation (AKR) component of
the system are given meaning, in terms of Wordnet synsets. A previous version of the system
used, instead of the Unified Lexicon, the proprietary Cyc (Lenat, 1995) concepts as semantics.
As discussed in (De Paiva et al., 2007) the sparseness of Cyc concepts was the main reason
to move away from Cyc onto a version of the Bridge system based on the unified lexicon and
WordNet.

Having a Brazilian version of WordNet and a mapping from Portuguese words to that would
allow us to use a knowledge representation system very similar to the AKR (Abstract Knowledge
Representation) used in the PARC Bridge system. Having our version of the Portuguese WordNet
based on basic concepts we hope to leverage the huge manual construction effort which
constitutes the mapping from WordNet to SUMO (Niles and Pease, 2003).

Through a partnership with Adam Pease, (the technical editor of SUMO), we additionally intend
to use the SUMO hierarchy to check the consistency between the Portuguese version of WordNet
and the English one.

3.2 Intended Application

The main application we envisage for our work in OpenWordNet-PT is related to the entries
in the Brazilian Dictionary of Historical Biographies (in Portuguese DHBB), one of the main
knowledge resources implemented as a result of the archival efforts of the Fundação Getulio
Vargas. The DHBB consists of 7,553 dictionary entries, out of which 6,584 are biographies of
important politicians in Brazil’s recent history. There are also 969 topical entries, concerning
institutions, events and descriptions relating to the history and economy of Brazil after 1930.
The dictionary is available online, but since the project was started in the 1970s the information
is not properly linked, which makes querying its data somewhat unwieldy.

We intend to process all of the DHBB entries and we plan to extract from them the main SUMO
concepts referenced. Using these main SUMO concepts we want to bootstrap a fledgeling
Ontology of Historical Biographies, already started and documented in the Development section
of SUMO. From the analysis of the SUMO concepts uncovered in the biographical entries, we
want to discover new relationships between the historical characters described in the DHBB.

Here are some examples of the kinds of questions that this association of text of biography

357



entry with collections of SUMO concepts will allow us to answer: (1) Amongst Brazilian first
rank politicians how many are from São Paulo? (2) Has the proportion of Paulistas increased
of decreased since the 1930s? Since 1965 when Brasilia became the Capital of Brazil has the
proportion changed? (3) What are the important Brazilian political families, corresponding
to the Kennedys, the Bushs, etc? (4) What are the prevalent occupations among Brazilian
historical figures? Are they mostly lawyers by training?

4 Conclusion

OpenWordNet-PT combines high recall with high precision for the more salient words in the
language. The work in this project is only starting, but we have many plans to measure and
increase the quality of the Portuguese lexical resource, as well as many plans to use the resource
in its current form. The data is freely available for download as well as for online browsing.

References

Bond, F. and Paik, K. (2012). A survey of wordnets and their licenses. In Proceedings of the 6th
Global WordNet Conference (GWC 2012), Matsue.

Crouch, D. and King, T. (2005). Unifying lexical resources. In Proceedings of the Interdisci-
plinary Workshop on the Identification and Representation of Verb Features and Verb Classes,
Saarbruecken, Germany.

de Melo, G. and Weikum, G. (2009). Towards a universal wordnet by learning from combined
evidence. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management
(CIKM 2009), pages 513–522, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

de Melo, G. and Weikum, G. (2010). Menta: inducing multilingual taxonomies from wikipedia.
In Proceedings of the 19th ACM international conference on Information and knowledge manage-
ment, pages 1099–1108. ACM.

De Paiva, V., Bobrow, D., Condoravdi, C., Crouch, R., Karttunen, L., King, T., Nairn, R., and
Zaenen, A. (2007). Textual inference logic: Take two. Proceedings of the Workshop on Contexts
and Ontologies, Representation and Reasoning, page 27.

Dias-Da-Silva, B. C., Moraes, H. R., Oliveira, M. F., Hasegawa, R., Amorim, D. A., Paschoalino,
C., and Nascimento, A. C. (2000). Construção de um thesaurus eletrônico para o português do
brasil. In Processamento Computacional do Português escrito e falado (Propor), pages 1–10.

Fellbaum, C. (1998). WordNet: An electronic lexical database. The MIT press.

Gonçalo Oliveira, H., Pérez, L. A., Costa, H., and Gomes, P. (2011). Uma rede léxico-semântica
de grandes dimensões para o português, extraída a partir de dicionários electrónicos. Lin-
guamática, 3(2):23–38.

Lenat, D. (1995). Cyc: A large-scale investment in knowledge infrastructure. Communications
of the ACM, 38(11):33–38.

Marrafa, P., Amaro, R., and Mendes, S. (2011). Wordnet.pt global – extending wordnet.pt
to portuguese varieties. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Algorithms and Resources for
Modelling of Dialects and Language Varieties, pages 70–74, Edinburgh, Scotland. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

358



Niles, I. and Pease, A. (2001). Towards a standard upper ontology. In Proceedings of the
international conference on Formal Ontology in Information Systems-Volume 2001, pages 2–9.
ACM.

Niles, I. and Pease, A. (2003). Linking lexicons and ontologies: Mapping wordnet to the
suggested upper merged ontology. In Proceedings of the 2003 International Conference on
Information and Knowledge Engineering, Las Vegas, Nevada.

Scarton, C. and Aluisio, S. (2009). Herança automática das relações de hiperônimia para a
wordnet.br. Technical Report NILC-TR-09-10, USP, Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil.

A Some OpenWordNet-PT Statistics

In Table 1, columns 1-3 numbers by POS are: (1) word-sense-pairs; (2) unique words/terms;
and (3) synsets with portuguese words. Columns 4-6 apresent averages of polysemy and senses
by POS: (4) the average polysemy (number of senses per word, tot avg. 1.3658); (5) the
average polysemy excluding monosemous, (number of senses per word excluding words with
only one sense, tot. avg. 3.0100); and (6) the average number of sense lexicalizations excluding
unlexicalized (number of words per synset for those synsets that have at least one Portuguese
word, tot. avg. 1.4836).

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Nouns 45,751 31,438 35,869 1.2755 2.9681 1.4553
Verbs 7,155 4,265 3,724 1.9213 3.9200 1.6776
Adjectives 7,402 5,193 4,996 1.4816 2.8145 1.4254
Adverbs 1,726 917 1,305 1.3226 2.3849 1.8822
Total 62,034 41,813 45,421

Table 1: The size of OpenWN-BR and averages about polysemy and senses

In Table 2, column (1) shows the number of relations from Princeton WordNet where either
source or target synset have a Portuguese lexicalization. Column (2) shows the number of
relations from Princeton WordNet where both source and target synset have a Portuguese
lexicalization.

(1) Source or Target (2) Source and Target
hypernymy 68,002 22,002
instance-of/has-instance 7,899 4,540
part meronymy 7,964 4,247
member meronymy 8,591 2,802
substance meronymy 637 332
has-category 6,494 2,213
cause 163 76
entailment 370 162
similar 13,998 3,524
closely-related 2,595 1,117
attribute 1,068 516
antonym 4,907 1,863

Table 2: Relations from Princeton WordNet

359




