



















































Readability Classification for German using Lexical, Syntactic, and Morphological Features


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Technical Papers, pages 1063–1080,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Readability Classification for German using lexical, syntactic,
and morphological features

Julia HANCKE Sowmya VAJJALA Detmar MEURERS
Seminar für Sprachwissenschaft, Universität Tübingen
{jhancke,sowmya,dm}@sfs.uni-tuebingen.de

ABSTRACT
We investigate the problem of reading level assessment for German texts on a newly com-
piled corpus of freely available easy and difficult articles, targeted at adult and child readers
respectively. We adapt a wide range of syntactic, lexical and language model features from
previous research on English and combined them with new features that make use of the rich
morphology of German. We show that readability classification for German based on these
features is highly successful, reaching 89.7% accuracy, with the new morphological features
making an important contribution.

TITLE AND ABSTRACT IN GERMAN

Lesbarkeitsklassifizierung für das Deutsche mit lexikalischen,
syntaktischen und morphologischen Merkmalen

Wir untersuchen das Problem der Lesbarkeitsklassifizierung für deutsche Texte anhand eines
neuen Korpus frei zugänglicher Artikel, die einerseits Erwachsene und andererseits Kinder als
Zielgruppe haben. Wir adaptieren eine Vielzahl syntaktischer, lexikalischer und language model
Merkmale aus der englischen Lesbarkeitsforschung und kombinierten sie mit neuen Merkmalen,
die sich die ausgeprägte Morphologie des Deutschen zu Nutze machen. Wir zeigen, dass diese
Merkmale sehr erfolgreich dazu eingesetzt werden können, deutsche Texte nach ihrer Lesbarkeit
zu klassifizieren. In unseren Experimenten erreicht die Klassifikation eine Genauigkeit von
89,7%, wozu die neuen morphologischen Merkmale einen wichtigen Beitrag leisten.

KEYWORDS: Readability, Complexity, Simplification, Second Language Acquisition, Proficiency.

KEYWORDS IN GERMAN: Lesbarkeit, Komplexität, Textvereinfachung, Zweitspracherwerb,
Sprachniveau.

1063



1 Introduction

The last decade has seen an increasing interest in building automatic readability assessment
systems. Such systems can help users in finding texts that they can understand, for example
by identifying appropriate texts from the huge number of documents available on the web
(Bennöhr, 2005; Miltsakaki, 2009; Ott and Meurers, 2010; Collins-Thompson, 2011). This is
particularly relevant for first or second language learners as well as for people with intellectual
disabilities. Readability classification systems can also be used as a starting point in identifying
targets for text simplification, with the goal of ensuring that information can be accessed and
understood by a broader audience. The need for such applications is likely to increase given the
increasing relevance of information from the web for everyday life.

While early research on readability assessment derived readability formulae from superficial
language properties, most current research takes advantage of natural language processing
tools to analyze the texts. The resulting features are combined for classification using machine
learning. While syntactic, lexical, language model and discourse features have been examined
extensively in readability classification, the influence of morphological indicators has received
only little attention. This may also be due to the fact that most of the readability research has
focused on English. However, there is some recent interest in automatic readability assessment
for other languages such as French, German, Italian and Portuguese.

In this paper, we present and evaluate a readability classification approach for German, as a
first step towards our overall goal of identifying targets for text simplification. Since there
are no existing German corpora that met our needs, we created a two-level readability corpus
collected from publicly accessible websites. On this basis, we explore a wide range of syntactic,
lexical and language model features derived from previous research on English. In addition, as
German has a rich morphology, morphological features may also provide valuable information
on the reading level. Hence, we devised a new set of features based on the inflectional and
derivational morphology of German. We then conducted classification experiments to examine
how well the different feature groups work as indicators of the reading level. We also compared
the performance of these feature groups in isolation as well as in combination with each other.
To summarize, in this paper, we show that the features used in English readability research
can be successfully applied to German, and that the addition of German language-specific
morphological features will improve the classification accuracy.

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 summarizes related work in the field of readability
assessment. Section 3 provides information about the origin and nature of our dataset. Section
4 introduces our approach to readability classification including the features we used. Section 5
describes our experimental setup and the results. We conclude this paper with a discussion of
the results and directions of future work.

2 Related Work

Research on English readability assessment has a long history spanning several decades (DuBay,
2006). Many traditional readability formulae, such as the Flesch-Kincaid score (Kincaid et al.,
1975), relied on easy to calculate approximations of syntactic or lexical complexity, such as
number of characters per word or average sentence length. Other early approaches, like
the Dale-Chall formula (Chall and Dale, 1995), approximated semantic complexity by using
word frequency lists. More recent approaches benefit from advances in natural language
processing and machine learning. Si and Callan (2001) and Collins-Thompson and Callan (2004)

1064



used a unigram model for readability classification. Heilman et al. (2007, 2008) combined
unigram models with grammatical features and trained machine learning models for readability
assessment. Their aim in the context of the REAP project (http://reap.cs.cmu.edu) was to
retrieve reading material for language learners.

Schwarm and Ostendorf (2005) and Petersen and Ostendorf (2009) combined traditional
features with syntactic parse tree features and n-gram language models. Their work is based
on the Weekly Reader, an educational newspaper consisting of articles at four reading lev-
els. Feng (2010) also used the Weekly Reader dataset to build classification models with
several discourse features alongside parse features, language model features, and traditional
features. The discourse features are motivated by the cognitive processes involved in text
understanding and underline their focus on finding appropriate texts for people with mild
intellectual disabilities. Crossley and McNamara (2011) and the overall CohMetrix project
(http://cohmetrix.memphis.edu) also explored a wide range of cognitively grounded fea-
tures related to text cohesion and coherence. Vajjala and Meurers (2012) showed that reading
level assessment can benefit from Second Language Acquisition (SLA) research. They enriched
the lexical and syntactic features from previous approaches by using features derived from
measures of the language proficiency of learners.

Readability research on English has ignored morphological features to a large extent. However,
with recent interest in readability assessment for languages other than English, the use of
features which are relevant for other languages is gaining some prominence. Research on
Italian and French readability is taking advantage of the rich verbal morphology of these
languages. Dell’Orletta et al. (2011) worked with a corpus of Italian newspaper text at two
different reading levels. They used a mixture of traditional, morpho-syntactic, lexical and
syntactic features for building a two class readability model for Italian. Among others, their
feature set included verbal mood based features, which relied on the rich verbal morphology of
Italian. François and Fairon (2012) built their French readability classification model using a text
book corpus designed for adult learners of French. They also considered verb tense and mood
based text difficulty features along with several other features. Readability assessment was
also studied for Portuguese using various lexical, syntactic, discourse and language modeling
features derived from English research (dos Santos Marujo, 2009; Aluisio et al., 2010). Lau
(2006) utilized the nature of the Chinese script to form several sub-character and character level
features in addition to the common word and sentence level features for Chinese readability
classification.

The only published research on German readability assessment that we know of is the DeLite
readability checker (Vor der Brück and Hartrumpf, 2007; Vor der Brück et al., 2008a,b). DeLite
was built using a human annotated corpus of 500 texts from the municipal domain, such as
city ordinances. It was classified into ten levels of difficulty. The corpus includes mostly legal
texts and is generally at a higher level of reading difficulty compared to ordinary texts. DeLite
makes use of a comprehensive set of features that aim to capture readability at lexical, syntactic,
semantic and discourse levels. They also considered some morphological indicators, such as the
number of nouns that are derived from adjectives or verbs, the complexity of compounds, and
the number of acronyms.

Due to the lack of multi-level graded corpora for languages other than English, researchers
often built readability models from freely available collections of two or three classes collected
from the web. Dell’Orletta et al. (2011), Aluisio et al. (2010), and Klerke and Søgaard (2012)

1065



report on creating and experimenting with such corpora in Italian, Portuguese and Danish
respectively. Napoles and Dredze (2010) performed a similar experiment for English with a
corpus built from Wikipedia and Simple Wikipedia. Incidentally, all of these groups worked on
readability assessment in the context of text simplification.

3 Data: The GEO-GEOlino Corpus

Research on the readability classification of English texts has often used the Weekly Reader
as a gold standard. An established resource that could be compared to this dataset does not
exist for German. The only existing German readability corpus is the one collected for the
readability checker DeLite, but as discussed in the previous section, it is a domain specific
collection, consisting mostly of legal texts from the municipal domain. Hence, we created our
own two class corpus (easy vs. difficult) with articles collected from the web, based on the
assumption that texts written for children are easier to read than those for adults.

We crawled articles from the websites of two related German magazines, GEO (http://www.geo.
de) and GEOlino (http://www.geolino.de), published by Gruner & Jahr. GEO is a monthly
magazine containing articles in the domains of nature, culture and science. GEOlino is a
magazine on similar topics by the same publisher, but it is targeted at children from age 8–14.
GEOlino it is not a simplified version of GEO; the content is specifically created for child readers.

Table 1 shows the distribution of the articles we crawled across all topics. The overall corpus
we collected consists of 4603 articles from both websites.1

GEOlino GEO
Topics: Num. tokens Num. sentences Num. articles Num. tokens Num. sentences Num. articles
Nature 189 004 13 976 321 877 920 54 300 1 459
Human 412 769 33 497 901 443 221 29 482 662

Technology 57 819 4 356 83 204 891 12 674 392
Culture – – – 442 888 30 748 463
Creative 169 800 12 354 322 – – –

Total 829 392 65 183 1 627 1 968 920 127 204 2 976

Table 1: Composition of the GEO-GEOlino corpus

For the experiments discussed in this paper, we randomly selected an equal number of docu-
ments from each of the topics that existed in both GEO and GEOlino: 321 articles from Nature,
662 from Human and 83 from Technology. We cleaned the data obtained from the web by
removing all html markup, meta data, and non-text content. We also eliminated duplicate
articles. We then tagged the corpus using a Java interface2 to the RFTagger (Schmid and Laws,
2008), a statistical tagger that provides a fine grained morphological analysis. The tagged
articles, mapped to the Stuttgart-Tübingen Tagset (STTS) for German, were then parsed with
the Stanford Parser for German (Rafferty and Manning, 2008), which comes with a German
model trained on NEGRA.3

4 Features

We modeled readability using five groups of features: features from traditional readability
formulas, lexical features, syntactic features, language model features, and morphological
features. For the first three groups, we essentially adapted the English features described by

1Contact us by email if you are interested in using this corpus for non-commercial research purposes.
2http://www.sfs.uni-tuebingen.de/~nott/rftj-public/
3http://www.coli.uni-saarland.de/projects/sfb378/negra-corpus/negra-corpus.html

1066



Vajjala and Meurers (2012) to German. Given the effectiveness of language models in previous
work on English (e.g., Petersen and Ostendorf, 2009; Feng, 2010), we included language model
features as our fourth group. In the fifth group, we explored new features that encode aspects
of the inflectional and derivational morphology and compounding of German.

4.1 Traditional Features (TRAD)

The traditional features group we used includes the average sentence length in words, the
average number of characters, and syllables per word. These properties have often been used
in traditional readability formulae (e.g., Kincaid et al., 1975). Although they do not analyze
readability at a deeper level, they have been popular in the English readability literature for a
long time. They also constitute a useful baseline against which to interpret the effect of broader
and deeper analysis in current readability classification.

4.2 Lexical Features (LEX)

Vajjala and Meurers (2012) employed the lexical richness measures that were originally devel-
oped for judging the proficiency of second language learners (Lu, 2011) for English readability
classification. We adapted these features for German and added some further features we
considered worth exploring. We added the noun token ratio, the verb token ratio and the
verb-noun token ratio as additional lexical features, with the hypothesis that easy documents
will include fewer nominalizations compared to difficult documents. Additionally, we added the
ratio of sein to verbs and haben to verbs. The list of all implemented lexical features is shown
in Table 2. As the class of lexical words (Lex) mentioned in several of the formulas, we used
nouns, adjectives, adverbs, and full verbs – i.e., in terms of the STTS tagset: AD.*, N.*, VV.*.

Lexical Richness Features from SLA Other Lexical Features
Type-Token Ratio sein to Verb Token Ratio
Root Type-Token Ratio haben to Verb Token Ratio
Corrected Type-Token Ratio Avg. Num. Characters per word
Bilogarithmic Type-Token Ratio Avg. Num. Syllables per word
Uber Index = log (T yp2)/ log (Tok/T yp) Verb Token Ratio = TokVer b/Tok
Measure of Textual Lexical Diversity (McCarthy, 2005) Noun Token Ratio
Lexical Density = TokLex/Tok Verb-Noun Token Ratio
Lexical Word Variation = T ypLex/TokLex
Noun Variation = T ypNoun/TokLex
Adjective Variation, Adverb Variation
Modifier Variation = (T ypAd j + T ypAdv)/TokLex
Verb Variation 1 = T ypVer b/TokVer b
Verb Variation 2 = T ypVer b/TokLex
Squared Verb Variation 1 = T yp2Ver b/TokVer b
Corrected Verb Variation 1 = T ypVer b/

�
2TokVer b

Table 2: The lexical features we implemented

4.3 Syntactic Features (SYN)

For the syntactic features, we adapted a range of parse tree based features from English
readability assessment research to German. The features include the average parse tree height

1067



and the average length and number of NPs, VPs and PPs per sentence (Petersen and Ostendorf,
2009; Feng, 2010). Following Vajjala and Meurers (2012), we also adapted proficiency measures
from SLA (Lu, 2010), including various ratios that try to capture level of embedding and
coordination, length of production unit, and relationships between specific structures. Table 3
lists all the syntactic features we implemented.

Syntactic Features from SLA Other Syntactic Features
Avg. length of a clause Num. NPs per sentence
Avg. length of a sentence Num. VPs per sentence
Avg. length of a T-unit Num. PPs per sentence
Num. of Clauses per Sentence Num. VZs per sentence
Num. of T-Units per sentence Avg. length of a NP
Num. of Clauses per T-unit Avg. length of a VP
Num. of Complex-T-Units per T-unit Avg. length of a PP
Dependent Clause to Clause Ratio Num. Dependent Clauses per sentence
Dependent Clause to T-unit Ratio Num. Complex-T units per sentence
Co-ordinate Phrases per Clause Co-ordinate Phrases per sentence
Co-ordinate Phrases per T-unit Avg. parse tree height
Complex Nominals per Clause
Complex Nominals per T-unit
Verb phrases per T-unit

Table 3: The syntactic features we implemented

Three basic production units, sentences, clauses, and T-Units are relevant for computing these
measures. We adapted their definitions from those used in the SLA literature (Lu, 2010).
A sentence is a group of words delimited with a punctuation mark (period, question mark,
exclamation mark, or quotation mark). We implemented sentence splitting using the Stanford
Document Processor with the default tokenizer factory.

Clauses for English are characterized as structures that contain a subject and a finite verb (Hunt,
1965). Different from English, German allows subjectless sentences, so we consider all maximal
projections headed by a finite verb, as well as elliptical constructions where the finite verb is
omitted. One word exclamations such as Stop! are excluded. In the parsed data, this notion of
a clause corresponds to the category S of the NEGRA annotation scheme (Skut et al., 1997).

T-Units are defined as “one main clause plus any subordinate clause or non clausal structure that
is attached to or embedded in it” (Hunt 1970, p. 4; cf. Lu, 2010). Only independent clauses
(including their dependents) count as a T-unit. Consider, for example, the sentence in (1).

(1) Tom
Tom

fragt
asks

Maria,
Maria

ob
whether

sie
she

die
the

Wahrheit
truth

sagt,
says

aber
but

sie
she

antwortet
answers

nicht.
not

‘Tom asks Maria, whether she says the truth, but she does not answer.’

Figure 1 shows the parse tree of this example sentence. It includes three clauses (shown by the
category S) but only two T-Units (indicated by rectangles). One of the clauses is a dependent
clause (underlined) and the T-Unit containing it is therefore a complex T-Unit.

1068



!"##$
%%!&'
%%%%!'
%%%%%%!()*'+%!(,%$-.//
%%%%%%!0012(%34567/
%%%%%%!()*#8%!(,%954:5/%!;<%</
%%%%%%%%!'%!=#>'%-?/
%%%%%%%%%%!()*'+%!)),"%@:A//
%%%%%%%%%%!()*#8%!8"$%B:A/%!((%C5D4DA:7//
%%%%%%%%%%!0012(%@567////%%%%
%%%%!;<%</%!=#(%5?A4/%%%%
%%%%!'%%%%%%
%%%%%%!()*'+%!)),"%@:A//%%%%%%
%%%%%%!0012(%5E7F-47A7/%!)$=(,G%E:HD7//%%%%
%%%%!;I%I///

Figure 1: Parse tree of example sentence (1)

At the phrasal level, coordinated phrases are defined as coordinated adjective, adverb, noun,
and verb phrases. Verb phrases include non-finite as well as finite verb phrases. Finally, complex
nominals are nouns with an adjective, possessive, possessive, prepositional phrase, relative
clause, participle, or appositive; nominal clauses, gerunds and infinitives in subject position are
also included.

In addition to adapting the patterns and categories for German, we also added VZs (’zu’-marked
infinitives) per phrase as a feature. In the so-called incoherent constructions in German (Bech,
1955; Meurers, 2000), the verb always appears in the ’zu’-infinitival form and the phrase it heads
is similar in function to a subordinate clause. This naturally is only a coarse approximation
of clause-like infinitival constructions given that many verbs selecting ’zu’-infinitivals can
alternatively appear in non-clausal, coherent constructions.

On the practical side, TregEx (Levy and Andrew, 2006) was used to extract the patterns that
identify the relevant syntactic structures. Lu (2010) created such patterns for English. We
modified those patterns to suit the German parse tree structures and categories. As an example,
(2a) shows the TregEx pattern for coordinated phrases, for which (2b) is an example structure
from our corpus (translating to parents and children). (3a) shows the regular expression for
complex nominals and (3b) a corpus instance matching that pattern (a spoiled child).

(2) a. CAC|CAVP|CNP|CVP
b. (CNP (NN Eltern) (KON und) (NN Kindern))

(3) a. @NP|NN|NE < S | <@AP | <@PP | <@PP | < ADJA|ORD
b. (NP (ART ein) (ADJA verwöhntes) (NN Kind))

4.4 Language Model Features

Following Petersen and Ostendorf (2009), we chose a separate data set for training the language
models. For building the easy language model, we collected 2000 articles from News4Kids
(http://www.news4kids.de), a German website which adapts news found on the web for
children. The difficult language model was created using 2000 articles from the website of the

1069



German news channel NTV (http://www.n-tv.de). For these web texts, we followed the same
preprocessing routine as explained in Section 3.

Schwarm and Ostendorf (2005) and Feng (2010) suggested that mixed models combining
words and parts of speech are more effective for readability assessment than simple word based
models. But Petersen and Ostendorf (2009) reached the opposite conclusion. We experimented
with both types of models. For preparing the mixed models, we followed the procedure
suggested in Petersen and Ostendorf (2009). We trained a bag-of-words classifier with our
language modeling dataset (News4Kids and NTV) and employed Information Gain (Yang and
Pedersen, 1997) for feature selection. All words below an empirically determined threshold
were replaced by their part of speech.

We used the SRI Language Modeling toolkit (Stolcke, 2002) for training unigram, bigram
and trigram models on the words-only and mixed word/part of speech corpora for each of our
two reading levels. This resulted in twelve language models. For all models, we selected
Kneyser-Ney smoothing (Chen and Goodman, 1999) as smoothing technique. The perplexity
scores from all twelve language models were used as features for building the classifier. These
features are listed in Table 4.

Level of Difficulty Word Based Model Mixed Model
Unigram perplexity Unigram perplexity

Easy Bigram perplexity Bigram perplexity
Trigram perplexity Trigram perplexity
Unigram perplexity Unigram perplexity

Difficult Bigram perplexity Bigram perplexity
Trigram perplexity Trigram perplexity

Table 4: The twelve perplexity scores used as language model features

4.5 Morphological Features (MORPH)

German has a rich inflectional and derivational morphology. Although not to the same extent as
Romance languages, German uses inflectional morphemes to convey a range of grammatical
meanings. For example, person and number of a verb are indicated by inflectional endings (e.g.,
ich kaufe [I buy], du kaufst [you buy]). On the nominal side, German has four cases and nouns
fall into several different declension paradigms. Case information is sometimes carried by the
articles and sometimes by the noun.

German derivational morphology uses various prefixes and suffixes. Nominalizations with a
suffix (regieren [govern] – Regierung [government]) or without (laufen [to run] – der Lauf [the
run]) are very common. Compounding is another productive morphological process in German.

Since these three morphological processes may reflect distinctions of relevance for identifying
the reading level of a text, we included them in our experiments.

4.5.1 Inflectional Morphology of the Verb (INFLV) and the Noun (INFLN)

We wanted to investigate if the verbal tense and mood encodes relevant information about
a text’s difficulty. Hence, we examined a broad range of features related to the inflectional
properties of the verb including person, tense, mood and type of verb (finite, non-finite,
auxiliary). Additionally, we included the case properties of nouns as features. The case of a

1070



nominal argument, for example, reflects the nature and complexity of the subcategorization
frame of the head that selects it. The list of all our features related to inflectional morphology is
shown in Table 5.

Verb (INFLV) Noun (INFLN)
Num. infinitive Vs / Num. Vs Num. accusative Ns / Num. Ns
Num. participle Vs / Num. Vs Num. dative. Ns / Num. Ns
Num. imperative Vs / Num. Vs Num. genitive Ns / Num. Ns
Num. present tense Vs / Num finite Vs Num. nominative Ns / Num. Ns
Num. past tense Vs / Num. finite Vs
Num. 1st person Vs / Num. finite Vs
Num. 2nd person Vs / Num. finite Vs
Num. 3rd person Vs / Num. finite Vs
Num. subjunctive Vs / Num. finite Vs
Num. finite Vs / Num. Vs
Num. modal Vs / Num. Vs
Num. auxiliary Vs / Num. Vs
Num. Vs / Num. S

Table 5: The features based on inflectional morphology

4.5.2 Derivational Morphology of the Noun (DERIV)

Two features based on derivational morphology were previously used for German. Vor der
Brück et al. (2008b) measured the number of words that are derived from a verb or an adjective.
Derived nouns are linguistically more complex than simple nouns. Additionally, derivational
suffixes often differ for words which are native German words and lexical items that have
come into German from other languages, e.g., linguist can be translated into German as either
Linguist or as Sprachwissenschaftler.

We included relatively fine grained derivational properties by taking into account the distribution
of a number of individual suffixes. We manually compiled a set of suffixes from a comprehensive
overview of native and foreign suffixes (Fleischer and Barz, 1995). For each suffix, we listed all
of the different gender and number forms. The counts are accumulated per type of suffix. For
example, if there are two instances of -ismus and one instance of -ismen (the plural form), then
a sum of three instances is recorded for -ismus. To avoid counting instances of homomorphic
nouns as suffixes (e.g., Ei [egg] vs. suffix -ei), we only considered polysyllabic words for the
suffix analysis. A list of all the suffixes we used is shown in Table 6.

All occurrences of each suffix (and its forms) were counted per document. Three different ratios
can then be generated for each suffix. Let S be the count of a given suffix from Table 6 for a
given document, and let T , N and DN be the number of tokens, nouns, and derived nouns in
that document. We defined derived noun as a noun which ends in one of the suffixes listed in
Table 6. The suffix token ratio (STR), suffix noun ratio (SNR) and suffix derived noun ratio
(SDNR) can then be calculated as follows:

• Suffix Token Ratio (STR) = 1
T

S

• Suffix Noun Ratio (SNR) = 1
N

S

• Suffix Derived Noun Ratio (SDNR) = 1
DN

S

1071



suffix further suffix forms
ant anten, antin, antinnen
arium arien
ast asten, astin, astinnen
at ate
ator atoren, atorin, atorinnen
atur aturen
ei eien
er erin, erinnen
ent ents
enz enzen
eur eure, eurin, eurinnen
heit heiten

suffix further suffix forms
ist isten, istin, istinnen
ion ionen
ismus ismen
ität itäten
keit keiten
ling lingen
nis nisse
schaft schaften
tum tümer
ung ungen
ur
werk werke
wesen

Table 6: List of German derivational suffixes used

For example, consider the sentence in (4) and assume that this is a one sentence document.

(4) Die
the

Regierung
government

muss
has to

die
the

Nutzung
use

der
of

landwirtschaftlichen
agricultural

Flächen
areas

mit
with

großer
great

Präzision
precision

planen.
plan

‘The government has to plan the use of the agricultural areas with great precision.’

In this example, there are two instances of the suffix -ung and one instance of the suffix -ion
(shown in bold). Regierung and Nutzung are both nominalizations of native words with native
origin, and Präzision is of foreign origin. This one sentence document includes twelve tokens,
four nouns and three derived nouns, so one obtains STR(ung) = 2/12, SNR(ung) = 2/4 and
SDNR(ung) = 2/3. For the suffix -ion we get 1/12, 1/4 and 1/3, respectively. The values for all
other suffixes are zero. In addition to the specific suffix ratios, we also computed the overall
ratio of derived nouns to nouns.

4.5.3 Nominal Compounds (COMP)

Compounds are frequent in German and compounding is a productive mechanism of word
formation in German Fleischer and Barz (1995, p. 85). Vor der Brück et al. (2008b) included
two compounding features into the classifier for the readability checker DeLite: the number of
words that form a compound and the number of semantic concepts that are incorporated into a
compound. In our approach, we considered the ratio of compound nouns to all nouns and the
average number of words in a compound as our compounding based features. For identifying
compounds and splitting them into their parts we used JWordSplitter 3.44.

5 Experiments and Results

We performed our classification experiments using the Geo-GeoLino dataset described in Sec-
tion 3. We employed the WEKA (Hall et al., 2009) implementation of the Sequential Minimal

4http://www.danielnaber.de/jwordsplitter

1072



Optimization (SMO) algorithm to create our classification models. For all our classification
experiments, we report the overall accuracy after 10-fold cross validation.

We first report the results with language modeling (LM) and the morphological feature groups
separately. We then report the performance of each of the other feature groups introduced in
Section 4 separately, before turning to combinations.

5.1 Language Modeling

In previous research on the use of language model features for readability assessment, it
remained unclear if word based models or mixed word/part of speech models are more
effective. While Schwarm and Ostendorf (2005) reported that the mixed models performed
better, this was not confirmed by Petersen and Ostendorf (2009). Schwarm and Ostendorf
(2005) trained the language models on the same dataset they used for training their classifier,
whereas Petersen and Ostendorf (2009) used different datasets for training the language models
and the classifier. Feng (2010), who also trained the language models on the same data as
the readability classifier, reports that the mixed models outperformed the purely word based
models.

As we discussed in section 4.4, we followed Petersen and Ostendorf (2009) in training the
language model on a separate data set, to test whether the information picked up about easy vs.
difficult texts generalizes across corpora. We trained one classifier on the purely word based
models and another one on the mixed model. We combined all perplexity scores from both
word based and mixed models. In our experiments, the mixed model (71%) performed only
slightly better than the word based model (70.8%). However, an experiment using all twelve
perplexity scores as features showed that a combination of mixed and word based models
improved classification accuracy (77.6%). So we kept all twelve scores in the feature group for
further experiments.

5.2 Morphological Features

We investigated the morphological features in detail given that most of them had not been
employed before. In the case of derivational morphology, as described in Section 4.5.2, we
calculated three ratios: suffix token ratio, suffix noun ratio and suffix derived noun ratio for
each of the 25 derivational suffixes and also calculated the overall ratio of derived nouns to
nouns, leading to a total of 76 features. We first performed classification experiments with
all three suffix ratio feature subsets separately. The suffix token ratio features performed
best (76.6%), followed by suffix noun ratio features (74.4%) and suffix derived noun ratio
features (74.0%). However, a combination of all the derivational suffix based features achieved
a higher accuracy (78.5%) than the individual subsets. The verbal inflection (INFLV) and
nominal inflection (INFLN) features (Table 5) alone achieved accuracies of 74.3% and 67.2%,
respectively. Combining all the inflectional features resulted in a classifier that performed much
better, at 79.0%.

Table 7 shows the results for each of our morphological feature groups. The derivational features
(DERIV) achieved the highest accuracy followed by the features that use verbal inflection (INFLV)
and nominal inflection (INFLN). The nominal compound features (COMP) were the least effective
predictors among the morphological groups.

1073



The combined feature set (MORPH) consisting of all four morphological subsets performed
with an accuracy 85.4%, which is better than any of the individual subsets. Removing the
compounding features from MORPH had no impact on the accuracy.

Feature set Num. Features Accuracy
DERIV 76 78.5%
INFLN 4 67.2%
INFLV 13 74.3%

INFLN & INFLV 17 79.0%
COMP 2 56.96%

MORPH 95 85.4%

Table 7: Results for the different types of morphological features

5.3 Most Predictive Features

Apart from the various feature subsets, we also determined the most predictive features using
Information Gain. The ten most predictive features (TOP 10) are shown in Table 8. Training a
classifier with the TOP10 features resulted in an accuracy of 84.3%.

Feature Group
Avg. Word Length Lex/Trad
Num. 2nd person Vs / Num. finite Vs Morph
Num. Syllables Per Word Lex/Trad
Num. 3rd person Vs / Num. finite Vs Morph
Avg. length of a T-unit Syn
Avg. length of a Sentence Syn/Trad
Complex Nominals per Clause Syn
Complex Nominals per T-unit Syn
Num. PPs per sentence Syn
Avg. length of a clause Syn

Table 8: The ten most predictive features according to Information Gain

Most of the features in the TOP 10 belong to the syntactic feature group, but morphology
features and some traditional measures are included as well. The dominance of syntactic
features, especially of those from SLA research, confirms the conclusions of Vajjala and Meurers
(2012) for English that these measures are particularly effective for readability classification.
The list also indicates that investigating the usefulness of morphological features for readability
classification was well-worth the effort, even at this relatively shallow level of morphological
modeling. Note also that the three traditional readability features (TRAD) that we view as a
baseline are among the TOP10 features. While these superficial features have little conceptual
value, they seem to be good predictors of reading level.

5.4 Results for Feature Groups and Combinations

We trained classifiers with various individual feature groups and some of their combinations.
Table 9 summarizes the results for the different classification models. For the feature group
combinations, only the most successful combinations are shown.

1074



Feature set Num. Features Accuracy
TRAD 3 82.2%
LEX 23 82.1%
SYN 26 76.8%

MORPH 95 85.4%
LM 12 77.6%

SYN & MORPH 120 86.7%
LEX & LM & MORPH 130 89.4%

ALL 155 89.7%
TOP 10 10 84.3%

Table 9: A comparison of all five feature groups

Among the models trained on a single feature group, the morphological classifier (MORPH)
performed best with an accuracy of 85.4%. The lexical classifier (LEX) (82.1%) and the
baseline classifier (TRAD) (82.2 %) performed almost equally well, but slightly worse than the
morphological classifier (MORPH). The classifiers trained on language model features (LM) and
syntactic features (SYN) proved to be less effective predictors when taken on their own. However,
they proved to be valuable when combined with other feature groups. Our experiments
combining different feature groups showed that the syntactic (SYN) and morphological (MORPH)
feature groups together were the most predictive two group combination with 86.7 % accuracy.
When using three feature groups a combination of lexical (LEX), language model (LM) and
morphological (MORPH) features performed best (89.4%).

Overall, the best result was achieved by combining all feature groups (ALL), which resulted in
89.7% accuracy. Compared to the traditional readability measures (TRAD) as baseline (82.2%),
our best model improved classification performance by 7.5%. The classifier built with the ten
best features (TOP 10) at 84.3% accuracy performed at about the level of the best single feature
group (MORPH).

Conclusion and Outlook

As empirical basis of our work, we created the GEO-GEOlino corpus, a German corpus with two
different reading levels that we collected from magazine articles that were available online. The
easy reading level consists of the GEOlino articles targeted at children, while the GEO articles
targeted at adults were labeled as difficult.

We trained classifiers with syntactic, lexical, and language model features derived from research
on English, to see how well they can predict the reading level of German texts. We then intro-
duced language-specific morphological complexity indicators as an additional group of features.
We inspected a broad set of inflectional properties for German and for the first time made use of
the derivational and inflectional morphology of nouns as features for readability classification of
German. The novel morphological features proved to be especially good indicators for reading
level, outperforming all other feature groups, when considered in isolation.

While all the individual feature groups except morphological features performed below the
baseline, combinations of various feature sets resulted in higher accuracies. The best perfor-
mance was obtained by combining all features. This achieved an accuracy of 89.7%, which is
7.5% above a baseline classifier using only traditional readability measures.

1075



In terms of outlook, we are investigating how well the trained models generalize to other data
sets, for which obtaining more graded reading material for German is an important next step.
Going beyond readability classification of entire documents, we want to explore which features
are effective not only at the document level but already at paragraph or sentence levels. Being
able to identify simple and difficult paragraphs or sentences is relevant for identifying targets
for simplification – the next step for our overall goal of building text simplification systems.

Finally, some of the features used in this paper were originally developed as measures of
language proficiency in Second Language Acquisition research. Given how well SLA measures
of language proficiency (based on texts produced by the learners) work as features for readability
classification of native texts, it would be natural to take the features developed for our readability
research back to the SLA domain and explore their applicability to classifying the language
proficiency of language learners. In addition to quantitatively testing their impact for proficiency
classification, strengthening that link could also help with qualitatively interpreting and further
refining the different features on the background of SLA insights into stages of language
development.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their feedback on the paper, and Niels Ott
and Ramon Ziai for the RFTagger Java interface. The research leading to the reported results
has received funding through the European Commission’s 7th Framework Program under grant
agreement number 238405 (CLARA, http://clara.uib.no).

References

Aluisio, S., Specia, L., Gasperin, C., and Scarton, C. (2010). Readability assessment for text
simplification. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Fifth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP
for Building Educational Applications, pages 1–9, Los Angeles, California.

Bech, G. (1955). Studien über das deutsche verbum infinitum. Historisk-filologiske Meddelelser
udgivet af Det Kongelige Danske Videnskabernes Selskab. Bind 35, no. 2, 1955; Bind 36, no. 6,
1957; Kopenhagen. Reprinted 1983, Tübingen: Max Niemeyer Verlag.

Bennöhr, J. (2005). A web-based personalised textfinder for language learners. Master’s thesis,
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh.

Chall, J. S. and Dale, E. (1995). Readability Revisted: The New Dale-Chall Readability Formula.
Brookline Books.

Chen, S. F. and Goodman, J. T. (1999). An empirical study of smoothing techniques for
language modeling. Computer Speech and Language, 13:359–394.

Collins-Thompson, K. (2011). Improving information retrieval with reading level prediction.
In SIGIR 2011 Workshop on Enriching Information Retrieval.

Collins-Thompson, K. and Callan, J. (2004). A language modeling approach to predicting
reading difficulty. In Proceedings of HLT/NAACL 2004, Boston, USA.

Crossley, S. A. and McNamara, D. S. (2011). Understanding expert ratings of essay quality:
Coh-metrix analyses of first and second language writing. International Journal of Continuing
Engineering Education and Life-Long Learning, 21(2/3):170–191.

1076



Dell’Orletta, F., Montemagni, S., and Venturi, G. (2011). Read-it: Assessing readability of
italian texts with a view to text simplification. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Speech
and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies, pages 73–83.

dos Santos Marujo, L. C. (2009). Reap.pt (reap-portuguese). Master’s thesis, Universidade
Tecnica de Lisboa.

DuBay, W. H. (2006). The Classic Readability Studies. Impact Information, Costa Mesa,
California.

Feng, L. (2010). Automatic Readability Assessment. PhD thesis, City University of New York
(CUNY).

Fleischer, W. and Barz, I. (1995). Worbildung der deutschen Gegenwartssprache. Niemeyer,
Tübingen, Germany.

François, T. and Fairon, C. (2012). An “ai readability” formula for french as a foreign language.
In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and Computational Natural Language Learning.

Hall, M., Frank, E., Holmes, G., Pfahringer, B., Reutemann, P., and Witten, I. H. (2009). The
weka data mining software: An update. In The SIGKDD Explorations.

Heilman, M., Collins-Thompson, K., Callan, J., and Eskenazi, M. (2007). Combining lexical
and grammatical features to improve readability measures for first and second language texts.
In Human Language Technologies 2007: The Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (HLT-NAACL-07), pages 460–467, Rochester, New
York.

Heilman, M., Collins-Thompson, K., and Eskenazi, M. (2008). An analysis of statistical models
and features for reading difficulty prediction. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Innovative
Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications at ACL-08, Columbus, Ohio.

Hunt, K. W. (1965). Grammatical structures written at three grade levels. NCTE Research
Report No. 3.

Hunt, K. W. (1970). Do sentences in the second language grow like those in the first? TESOL
Quarterly, 4(3):195–202.

Kincaid, J. P., Fishburne, R. P. J., Rogers, R. L., and Chissom, B. S. (1975). Derivation of
new readability formulas (Automated Readability Index, Fog Count and Flesch Reading Ease
formula) for Navy enlisted personnel. Research Branch Report 8-75, Naval Technical Training
Command, Millington, TN.

Klerke, S. and Søgaard, A. (2012). Danish parallel corpus for text simplification. In In
Proceedings of Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC), 2012.

Lau, T. P. (2006). Chinese readability analysis and its applications on the internet. Master’s
thesis, CUHK, Hongkong.

Levy, R. and Andrew, G. (2006). Tregex and tsurgeon: tools for querying and manipulating
tree data structures. In 5th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation,
Genoa, Italy.

1077



Lu, X. (2010). Automatic analysis of syntactic complexity in second language writing. Interna-
tional Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 15(4):474–496.

Lu, X. (2011). The relationship of lexical richness to the quality of esl learners’ oral narratives.
The Modern Languages Journal.

McCarthy, P. M. (2005). An assessment of the range and usefulness of lexical diversity measures
and the potential of the measure of textual, lexical diversity (MTLD). PhD thesis, University of
Memphis.

Meurers, W. D. (2000). Lexical Generalizations in the Syntax of German Non-Finite Constructions.
Phil. dissertation, Eberhard-Karls-Universität Tübingen. Published as: Arbeitspapiere des SFB
340, Nr. 145.

Miltsakaki, E. (2009). Matching readers’ preferences and reading skills with appropriate web
texts. In Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Demonstrations Session, EACL ’09, pages 49–52, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Napoles, C. and Dredze, M. (2010). Learning simple wikipedia: a cogitation in ascertaining
abecedarian language. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational
Linguistics and Writing: Writing Processes and Authoring Aids, CL&W ’10, pages 42–50, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Ott, N. and Meurers, D. (2010). Information retrieval for education: Making search engines
language aware. Themes in Science and Technology Education. Special issue on computer-aided
language analysis, teaching and learning: Approaches, perspectives and applications, 3(1–2):9–
30.

Petersen, S. E. and Ostendorf, M. (2009). A machine learning approach to reading level
assessment. Computer Speech and Language, 23:86–106.

Rafferty, A. N. and Manning, C. D. (2008). Parsing three German treebanks: lexicalized and
unlexicalized baselines. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Parsing German, PaGe ’08, pages
40–46, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Schmid, H. and Laws, F. (2008). Estimation of conditional probabilities with decision trees
and an application to fine-grained pos tagging. In COLING ’08 Proceedings of the 22nd
International Conference on Computational Linguistics, volume 1, pages 777–784, Stroudsburg,
PA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Schwarm, S. and Ostendorf, M. (2005). Reading level assessment using support vector
machines and statistical language models. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL-05), pages 523–530, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

Si, L. and Callan, J. (2001). A statistical model for scientific readability. In Proceedings of
the 10th International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM), pages
574–576. ACM.

Skut, W., Kreen, B., Brants, T., and Uszkoreit, H. (1997). An annotation scheme for free
word order languages. In Proceedings of the Fith Conference on Applied Natural Language,
Washington, D.C.

1078



Stolcke, A. (2002). SRILM – an extensible language modeling toolkit. In Proceedings of ICSLP,
volume 2, pages 901–904, Denver, USA.

Vajjala, S. and Meurers, D. (2012). On improving the accuracy of readability classification
using insights from second language acquisition. In Tetreault, J., Burstein, J., and Leacock,
C., editors, Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational
Applications (BEA7) at NAACL-HLT, pages 163—-173, Montréal, Canada. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Vor der Brück, T. and Hartrumpf, S. (2007). A semantically oriented readability checker for
german. In Proceedings of the 3rd Language & Technology Conference.

Vor der Brück, T., Hartrumpf, S., and Helbig, H. (2008a). A readability checker with supervised
learning using deep syntactic and semantic indicators. Informatica, 32(4):429—-435.

Vor der Brück, T., Helbig, H., and Leveling, J. (2008b). The readability checker delite. Technical
Report Technical Report 345-5/2008, Fakultät für Mathematik und Informatik, FernUniversität
in Hagen.

Yang, Y. and Pedersen, J. O. (1997). A comparative study on feature selection in text catego-
rization. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML
’97, pages 412–420, San Francisco, CA, USA. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.

1079




