



















































Complex Predicates in Telugu: A Computational Perspective


Proceedings of COLING 2012: Demonstration Papers, pages 1–8,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Complex Predicates in Telugu: A computational perspective

Rahul BALUSU
EFL University, India

kodiguddu@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
Complex predicates raise the question of how to encode them in computational lexicons. Their
computational implementation in South Asian languages is in its infancy. This paper examines
in detail the variety of complex predicates in Telugu revealing the syntactic process of their
composition and the constraints on their formation. The framework used is First Phase Syntax
(Ramchand 2008). In this lexical semantic approach that ties together the constraints on the
meaning and the argument structure of complex predicates, each verb breaks down into 3
sub-event heads which determine the nature of the verb. Complex predicates are formed by one
verb subsuming the sub-event heads of another verb, and this is constrained in principled ways.
The data analysed and the constraints developed in the paper are of use to linguists working
on computational solutions for Telugu and other languages, for design and development of
predicate structure functions in linguistic processors.

KEYWORDS: Complex Predicates, Dravidian, First Phase Syntax, Argument Structure, Telugu.

1



1 Introduction

Complex predicates are predicates that are multi-headed; they are composed of more than
one grammatical element (either morphemes or words), each of which contributes part of the
information ordinarily associated with a head (Alsina et al. 1997). They exhibit word-like
properties in terms of argument structure composition and in sometimes having lexicalised
meanings (Lapointe 1980). They exhibit phrase-like properties in allowing certain syntactic
operations, such as movement, to manipulate their internal structure (Bresnan and Mchombo
1995). While complex predicates have two or more heads, these heads function as a single
predicate in a monoclausal configuration. Computationally, we need a mapping procedure in
order to account for the full set of predicate meanings that can be associated with monoclausal
structures, which derives both ‘word-like’ meanings, and ‘phrase-like’ meanings (Mohanan
2007).

2 Theoretical Framework: A super quick guide to First Phase Syntax

In First Phase Syntax (Ramchand 2008) terms, the verbal domain decomposes into 3 distinct
heads or subevent projections: init[iation]P, proc[ess]P, and res[ult]P. Each subevent head enters
in a predicational relation with its specifier position. InitP introduces the causation event and
licenses the external argument – the Initiator. ProcP specifies the process or the nature of the
change and licenses the internal argument – the Undergoer. ResP introduces the result state
and licenses the holder of the result state – the Resultee. Depending on which subevent heads
a verb lexicalizes, it belongs to a particular verb class – <init, proc, res>, <proc,res>, etc.
Activities are <init, proc>. Achievements are <init, proc, res>. Unergatives have co-indexed
<init, proc>. Unaccusatives lack <init>. The DP argument can occupy two or more specifier
positions. For example, Initiator-Undergoer in John ran, Undergoer-Resultee in The vase broke,
and Initiator-Undergoer-Resultee in John arrived. Composite thematic roles are encoded in
the lexical entry of the verb – the verb determines whether a DP will raise from one specifier
to another or not. An event head can have verbal or non-verbal material (DP, AP, PP, etc.)
occupying its complement position – Rheme. Rhemes are not subjects of events but part of the
description of the predicate. A DP in the rheme position builds one joint predication with the
verb. A DP in the specifier position of a subevent head is a verbal argument.

3 Verbal Complex Predicates in Telugu

There are 3 aspectual/completive light verbs in Telugu, shown in (1).

(1) poo ‘go’
Sita paD.i.pooindi
Sita fall.perf.went
‘Sita fell (fully)’

veyyi ‘throw’
Sita pustakam cadi.veesindi
Sita book read.perf.throw
‘Sita read the book (fully)’

paDa.veyyi ‘throw down’
Sita pustakam cadiv.i.paDesindi
Sita book read.perf.throwdown
‘Sita read the book (totally)’

Complex predicates like these have been analyzed in First Phase Syntax terms as underassocia-
tion of the main or heavy verb features under the light verb. This is shown for the Telugu data
that is given above in (2). The light verb bears tense and agreement. The heavy verb appears
as a perfective/conjunctive participle with the marker -i. The light verb has a very abstract
semantics. The semantic content of the complex predicate comes from the heavy verb. The
subevent feature specification of the light verb is the same as the subevent specification of that
verb when it is used as a heavy verb (Butt’s Generalization; see Butt 1997, 2003). The heavy
verb lexicalizes or occupies the rheme position. Together they form one joint predication.

2



(2)

Of the 3 aspectuals in Telugu, poo is an unaccusative verb (<init>-less in First Phase terms)
and selects for other unaccussative verbs. The other two have an <init> head and select for
verbs with <init>. The <init>-less light verb cannot select <init> verbs and the <init> light
verb cannot select <init>-less verbs as shown in (3). This further strengthens the selectional
restrictions of light verbs that Ramchand (2008) identifies from Bangla data.

(3) poo + <init>
*Sita cadives.i.poindi
Sita read.perf.went
Intended: ‘Sita read’

veyyi + <init>less
*Sita USA vell.i.veesindi
Sita USA go.perf.threw
Intended: ‘Sita went to USA’

paDa.veyyi + <init>less
*Sita USA vell.i.paDeesindi
Sita USA go.perf.throwdown
Intended: ‘Sita went to USA’

The constraints on underassociation that Ramchand (2008) derives from analyzing complex
predicates in Bangla and Hindi are the following: 1) Underassociation of category features of
any ‘main verb’ is possible, constrained by Agree. 2) Agreeing categorial features must unify
their conceptual content. This means that if the heavy verb is specified for [init] but the light
verb is not, the structure will not converge.

Among the 3 aspectual light verbs, paDa.veyyi is a complex light verb and involves ‘double’
complex predication of two verbs paDu and veyyi as shown in (4).

(4)

3



The causative suffix in Telugu is -inc or -imp as shown in (5)a. An unaccusative verb can be tran-
sitivized using the causative as shown in (5)b. It can causativize further with underassociation
as shown in (5)c.

(5) a. b. c.

But the causative cannot co-occur with an unaccusative (<init>less) light verb, as shown in
(6). This is because the [init] feature of -inc cannot underassociate with the <init>less light
verb, whereas it can underassociate with <init> light verbs, as predicted by the constraints on
underassociation.

(6) *karig-inci-poo vs. karig-inci-veyyi *karig-inci-poo vs. karig-inci-veyyi
[init] [init]-[init]

The benefactive light verb in Telugu is peTTu ‘put’. In most languages it is ‘give’. It is an
applicative light verb. It always increase the valency, as shown in (7).

(7) Sita pustakam akkaDa peTTindi
Sita book there put
‘Sita put the book there’

Sita Raviki cadiv.i.peTTindi
Sita Ravi read.PERF.put
‘Sita read for Ravi (out loud or for his sake)’

The permissive light verb in Telugu is an + ivvu – aN is the infinitival marker, ivvu is ‘give’. It is
also an applicative light verb. But it doesn’t increase the valency, as shown in (8).

(8) Sita pustakam Raviki iccindi
Sita book Ravi give
‘Sita gave the book to Ravi’

Sita Ravini cadav.an.iccindi
Sita Ravi read.inf.give
‘Sita let Ravi read’

In summary, there are three aspectuals in Telugu – one of these light verbs is itself complex.
There are three Transitivizers – light verbs with direct lexicalization. They provide inceptual
meaning. Non-aspectuals compose differently from aspectuals. There are other interesting
beasts in the Telugu light verb jungle. Causativization with light verbs differs syntactically and
semantically from that with the causative morpheme. Unlike the aspectual light verbs, the
applicative light verbs can combine with <init> and <init>less verbs.

4



4 Nominal Complex Predicates in Telugu

In nominal complex predication, the light verb lexicalizes the subevent heads and provides
the argument structure skeleton (Pantcheva 2007 et seq.). The light verb has a very abstract
semantics. The semantic content of the complex predicate comes from the preverb (Lazard
1957). The preverb lexicalizes the rheme. Together they form one joint predication. This is
shown in (9).

(9)

As the light verb lexicalizes the verbal heads, the argument structure depends entirely on the
categorial specification of the light verb. Karimi-Doostan (1997) divides Persian light verbs
into two classes: initiatory and transition light verbs. Telugu light verbs also fall into these
two groups as shown in (10). In First Phase Syntax terms, initiatory light verbs have <init>
specification, transitory light verbs do not have an <init> subevent head.

(10) <init> light verbs
ceyyi ‘make’ ivvu ‘give’
peTTu ‘put’ tiyyi ‘remove’
koTTu ‘hit’ aaDu ‘play’
veyyi ‘throw’ cuupincu ‘show’

<init>less light verbs
paDu ‘fall’ avvu ‘happen’
kalugu ‘arose’ tegu ‘break’
poo ‘go’ digu ‘go down’
ekku ‘go up’ maaru ‘change’

When the <init> light verbs compose with a nominal element, they have an initiatory meaning
with an external argument. When the <init>less light verbs combine with a nominal element,
they have an experiential meaning only. This is shown in (11) and (12).

(11) paDu
neenu booltaa paDDaanu
I flip fell
‘I flipped’

koTTu
neenu booltaa koTTeenu
I flip hit
‘I did a cartwheel’

(12) <init>less = experiential
baya paDu ‘get scared’
pedda avvu ‘grow up’
muuta paDu ‘closed down’

<init> = initiatory
baya peTTu ‘scare someone’
pedda ceyyi ‘bring up’
muuta veyyi ‘close something down’

5



Loan words productively enter into nominal complex predicate formation. The loan words are
overwhelmingly verbs in the language they are borrowed from. But in the nominal complex
predicates they enter as rhemes. This is shown in (13).

(13) Loanwords with <init> light verbs
ceyyi ‘make’, koTTu ‘hit’, ivvu ‘give’
print/phone/call/defeat/post/apply
hurt/help/type/madad/ready/brush

Loanwords with <init>less
light verb avvu ‘happen’
surprise/shock/excite/
defeat/begin/irritate/

In sum, in nominal complex predicates in Telugu, the verb determines the argument structure.
The lexical-encyclopaedic information is smeared from the nominal element onto this skeleton.
<init>less to <init> change in light verb changes meaning from undergoer to initiator. The
nominal complex predicate behaves syntactically like the light verb that constitutes it.

Nominal predicates enter into constructions only with corresponding verbal predicates. This is
shown in (14). The nominal complex predicate behaves syntactically like the light verb that
constitutes it. A mismatch is not allowed in terms of sub-event heads. This is shown in (15).

(14) poo ‘go’
Sita bay.paD.i.poindi
Sita fear.fell.perf.went
‘Sita got afraid’

veyyi ‘throw’
Sita guraka.peTT.i.veesindi
Sita snore.put.perf.threw
‘Sita snored away’

paDa.veyyi ‘throw down’
Sita sutti.koTT.i.paDeesindi
Sita hammer.hit.perf.fall.threw
‘Sita talked boringly’

(15) <init>less NomCPr + <init> verb
*Siita baya.paD.i.veesindi
Sita fear.fell.perf.threw
Intended: ‘Sita got afraid’

<init> NomCPr + <init>less verb
*Siita sutti.koTT.i.pooindi
Sita hammer.hit.perf.went
Intended: ‘Sita talked boringly’

A comparison of nominal and verbal complex predicate formation in Telugu is given in (16).

(16) Nominal Complex Predication
a. No underassociation
b. No inceptual meanings
c. Less compositional meaning

(partly from N, partly from V)
d. Nominal is without any wrapping.

Verbal Complex Predication

a. Underassociation

b. Inceptual meanings

c. More compositional meaning
(‘skeletal’ light verb)

d. Heavy V has perfective wrapping

Conclusion and perspectives

This detailed analysis of complex predicates of all types, verbal and nominal, in Telugu, shows
that underlying their superficial differences and display of variety, they can be fruitfully analyzed
in a lexical decompositional approach like First Phase Syntax in a unified manner, which along
the way reveals the syntactic process of their composition and the constraints on their formation.
This is of interest to computational linguists working on languages that heavily employ complex
predicates in designing and developing solutions for predicate and argument structure and
function in linguistic processors. The data presented here is an initial exploration of the
approach towards a lexical semantic implementation of complex predicates together with the
constraints on the composition of their argument structure and meaning.

6



References

Alsina, A., Bresnan, J., and Sells, P. (1997). Complex predicates: structure and theory. In
Alsina, A., Bresnan, J., and Sells, P., editors, Complex predicates, pages 1–12. Center for the
Study of Language and Information, Stanford.

Bresnan, J. and Mchombo, S. A. (1995). The lexical integrity principle: Evidence from Bantu.
Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, 13(2):181–254.

Butt, M. (1997). Complex predicates in Urdu. In Alsina, A., Bresnan, J., and Sells, P.,
editors, Complex Predicates, pages 107–150. Center for the Study of Language and Information,
Stanford.

Butt, M. (2003). The light verb jungle. In Aygen, G., Bowern, C., and Quinn, C., editors,
Workshop on Multi-Verb Constructions, volume 9 of Harvard Working Papers in Linguistics, pages
1–49. Papers from the GSAS/Dudley House workshop on light verbs.

Karimi-Doostan, G. (1997). Light verb constructions in Persian. PhD thesis, University of Essex.

Lapointe, S. (1980). A lexical analysis of the English auxiliary verb system. Lexical grammar,
pages 215–254.

Lazard, G. (1957). Grammaire du Persan contemporain. Librairie C. Klincksiek, Paris.

Mohanan, T. (2007). Grammatical verbs (with special reference to light verbs). The Blackwell
Companion to Syntax, pages 459–492.

Pantcheva, M. (2007). Assembling Persian Complex Predicates. Handout, ConSole XVI, Paris.

Pantcheva, M. (2008). Noun preverbs in Persian complex predicates. Tromsø Working Papers
on Language and Linguistics: Nordlyd, 35:19–45.

Pantcheva, M. (2010). First phase syntax of Persian complex predicates: Argument structure
and telicity. Journal of South Asian Linguistics, 2(1).

Ramchand, G. C. (2008). Verb Meaning and the Lexicon. Cambridge Studies in Linguistics.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

7




