



















































Opinion Retrieval Systems using Tweet-external Factors


Proceedings of COLING 2016, the 26th International Conference on Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations,
pages 126–130, Osaka, Japan, December 11-17 2016.

Opinion Retrieval Systems using Tweet-external Factors 

 
Yoon-Sung Kim 

Dept. of Computer Science 
Korea University 

Seoul, Korea 
kys0205@korea.ac.kr 

Young-In Song 
Dept. of Computer Science 

Korea University 
Seoul, Korea 

youngin.song@gmail.com

Hae-Chang Rim 
Dept. of Computer Science

Korea University 
Seoul, Korea 

rim@korea.ac.kr 
 

  
 

Abstract 

Opinion mining is a natural language processing technique which extracts subjective 
information from natural language text. To estimate an opinion about a query in large data 
collection, an opinion retrieval system that retrieves subjective and relevant information about 
the query can be useful. We present an opinion retrieval system that retrieves subjective and 
query-relevant tweets from Twitter, which is a useful source of obtaining real-time opinions. 
Our system outperforms previous opinion retrieval systems, and it further provides subjective 
information about Twitter authors and hashtags to describe their subjective tendencies. 

1 Introduction 
Opinion mining is a natural language processing technique estimating an opinion from natural language 
text. This is useful for various users who report opinions in case of making reference to an opinion in 
various texts such as blogs, microblogs and forums. It can be used for identifying relevant opinions of 
customers about products or social issues. In addition, companies can utilize for analysis and establish-
ing a marketing strategy using the analyzed results. 

Analyzing sentiment for an entity from a large collection of data is costly. Therefore, an opinion 
retrieval system providing subjective and query-relevant documents can be useful. Especially, social 
network services such as Twitter are useful sources for estimating real-time public opinion. In case of 
social network services, there are limitations for retrieving subjective documents because of the limita-
tions on the document length (Luo et al., 2012). 

As a result of inherent document length limitations, several social search engine systems have been 
developed. The Sentiment1401 system based on (Go et al., 2009) provides query-relevant and subjective 
documents in Twitter and the proportion of a collected and analysed sentiment. This system, however, 
does not perform sufficiently effective because it classifies documents using simple text features. More-
over, this system does not provide subjective information about Twitter authors and hashtags, although 
these features are useful for sentiment classification (Barbosa and Feng, 2010). Formerly, Twendz and 
Tweetfeel were the tools used for labeling Twitter polarity classification, however, these are no longer 
in service.2  

We present a more powerful opinion retrieval system using tweet-external resources, which are used 
in state-of-the-art sentiment analysis approaches (Go et al., 2009; Luo et al., 2012; Luo et al., 2015). 
Our opinion retrieval system outperforms previous social network retrieval systems by adding features 
that are proposed in state-of-the-arts. In addition, our system provides information pursuant to subjec-
tivity tendencies of Twitter authors and hashtags by showing sentiment statistics and tweet texts so that 
users can determine the opinion of the queries and subjective factors. 

                                                 
1 http://www.sentiment140.com 
2 Twendz: http://twendz.waggeneredstrom.com, Tweetfeel: http://www.tweetfeel.com 

126



2 Opinion Retrieval System using Tweet-external Factors 
Our opinion retrieval system retrieves subjective and query-relevant tweet documents. To provide the 
results, we use a learning-to-rank framework, utilizing several features that are helpful for opinion re-
trieval, as well as subjective information about each author and hashtag. Section 2.1 presents the opinion 
retrieval model, which forms the core of our system. Next, we describe how to use our opinion retrieval 
system in Section 2.2, and we show the architecture of our system in Section 2.3.  

2.1 Opinion Retrieval Model using Learning-to-rank Framework 
Our system performs opinion retrieval by re-ranking ad-hoc retrieval results. We re-rank our results 
using a learning-to-rank framework which is used in previous works (Luo et al., 2012). We use the 
features related to the document, author meta information, and Twitter-external information in our sys-
tem. 

Document features denote the characteristics that are observed in a tweet document. Several state-of-
the-arts of polarity classification and opinion retrieval approaches use these features (Go et al., 2009; 
Barbosa and Feng, 2010; Luo et al., 2012; Luo et al., 2015). We use BM25 score, opinion word rate, 
and existence of link, hashtag, and mention. 

Author-meta information is the information that we obtain from the author profile. It is useful for 
identifying subjectivity in Twitter (Luo et al., 2012). We use tweet number, follower number, friend 
number, and list number for author-meta features in our system. 

Twitter-external information denotes the information that is related to Twitter-specific information 
such as the author of a tweet and hashtag in the tweet text. We aggregate the author-related tweet list 
written by the author wrote and we convert it into a document. In addition, we create a document based 
on the hashtag-related tweet list. which is the entire list of tweets using a particular hashtag (Kim et al., 
2016). In this system, we use opinion word rate, retweet rate, pronoun rate, link rate, and average tweet 
length features in each aggregated document. 

2.2 System Usage 
In this section, we describe how to use our opinion retrieval system. Our system is composed of the 
components shown in Figure 1: 

 
Figure 1. Screenshot of the main page of our proposed system 

 
Figure 1 shows the screenshot of the main page of our site. On the main page, a user can write a query 

for retrieval. After writing such queries and deploying the search button, relevant and subjective results 
related to a query will be provided. As shown in Figure 1, the retrieved result consists of subjective 
information and the list of tweets. We provide polarity statistics, frequent authors and hashtags which 
have subjective information relevant to the authors’ and hashtags’ tendencies. Color marks in the tweet 
texts also give clues regarding the polarity (e.g., subjective lexicon). 

The provided links for subjective author and subjective hashtags re-direct to a popup page. We pro-
vide the polarity information of the author and other subjective information and their tweet texts. More-
over, color marks of the texts are provided, which are same as the main tweet results. 

127



2.3 System Architecture 
In this section, we describe the architecture that comprises our system. Because of the absence of real-
time Twitter API which provides hashtag text information, we use the English Twitter corpus using a 
Twitter public streaming API. 

In our system, we first index the Twitter corpus for retrieval. We use Indri toolkit for indexing. Then, 
we extract features in the corpus for opinion retrieval, and create tweet lists for a tweet author, who 
wrote more than 100 tweets and hashtags which were used in more than 100 tweets.  When a query is 
received, the retrieval system returns the top 500 tweets. We use BM25 algorithm for retrieving the 
queries. Then, we perform opinion retrieval by using the model described in Section 2.1. We use the 
ranking SVM algorithm from SVM Light toolkit. (Joachims, 1999). Finally, we provide the desired 
results and useful subjective information as described in Section 2.2. To provide sentiment statistics, we 
use a polarity classifier of (Barbosa and Feng, 2010). Finally, we utilize feature values for providing 
information of subjective authors and hashtags. 

3 Experimental Result and Scenario 
In this section, we describe the performance and effectiveness of the retrieval result of our system. In 
Section 3.1, we compare the performance to the previous opinion retrieval system, and in Section 3.2, 
we show an example of the retrieval result to explain the effectiveness of the retrieved results and the 
information of top users and hashtags. 

3.1 Evaluation 
To evaluate our system, we used the English Twitter corpus and the dataset in (Kim et al., 2016) The 
corpus was crawled during 1 month in 2012. The dataset was composed of tweets that are created by 
using Amazon Mechanical Turk. We utilized the corpus for composing the retrieval system, and then 
we evaluated the performance using the dataset. We used 10-fold cross validation for evaluation, and 
we used MAP metric. And, the Sentiment140 was used for our baseline system. We composed it using 
(Go et al., 2009). As shown in Table 1, our system significantly outperforms the baseline. 
 

 Sentiment140 Presented System 
MAP 0.2869 0.3892 

Table 1. Performance of Sentiment140 and the presented system 

3.2 Retrieval Scenario of our system 
In this section, we show a scenario of retrieving a query to explain the effectiveness of our system and 
its usefulness in identifying the subjective tendency of the author and hashtag. Table 2 contains the top 
10 retrieval results of our system when we search the query “Breaking Dawn”, the name of a movie. 

 
Rank Tweet Text Author ID 
1 Going to watch breaking dawn #Lonely /: Iam_princess123 
2 #30GoodMovies is Twilight 6x New moon 6x Eclipse 6x Breaking Dawn part 1 6x Breaking 

Dawn part 2 6x #loveall 
Vira_thecoldone 

3 #5FavouriteFilms twilight, new moon, eclipse, breaking dawn part 1 and breaking dawn part 
2 

TeamKristen 

4 cant wait for breaking dawn part 2 #ashamed (: DutchZaynsters 
5 #6favMovies twilight,new moon,eclipse,breaking dawn part 1,breaking dawn part 2 and 

welcome to the Riley's #Krisbian #Robstener #Robsesed!x 
Nic_in_twiland 

6 My moms face during Breaking Dawn #priceless lmao KissaNicole 
7 Twilight, New Moon, Eclipse, Breaking Dawn Part 1..& when it comes out, I'm sure Break-

ing Dawn Part 2 will be my fifth. ♥ #5FavouriteFilms. 
fearlesskristen 

8 #MoviesThatMadeMeCry breaking dawn LOL AbbyFrasca 
9 @TeamKristen: #5FavouriteFilms twilight, new moon, eclipse, breaking dawn part 1 and 

breaking dawn part 2 HahahaHahahaHahahaHahaha 
jaythom93 

10 #ReplaceMovieTitleWithSabaw : The Breaking #Sabaw (The Breaking Dawn) _iM_sOnNy_ 
Table 2.  Results of our system in case of retrieving “Breaking Dawn” 

128



As shown in Table 2, we can figure out that the tweets containing opinion are in the top rank such as 
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8. The fact that the results with hashtags such as “#30GoodMovies”, “#loveall”, “#5Fa-
vouriteFilms” have higher ranks indicates the effectiveness of hashtag features because there are no 
clues about subjectivity except the hashtags. 

In Table 3, we can see the lists of tweets for authors “TeamKristen” and “fearlesskristen” ranked 3 
and 7 in Table 2, respectively. These tweets are about “Kristen Stewart”, who is the actress of “Breaking 
Dawn”, and the tweets are opinions about her and her movies. Table 4 shows the lists of tweets with 
hashtag “#30GoodMovies” and “#5FavouriteFilms” which rank 2 and 3 in Table 2, respectively. As 
shown in Table 4, there are subjective tweets about the movies for which these hashtags were used. 
Therefore, we can determine that the information provided by our subjective authors and relevant 
hashtags are useful for estimating subjectivity. 

 
TeamKristen Fearlesskristen 
RT If you would go #LesbianForKristenStewart ;) RT if your heart broke on 25th July 2012. 
4 am and my love for Kristen is too big to let me sleep "Ruperv." Lol omg, I love our fandom. :\') 
I believe in Kristen. She's my role model for some reason. #10PlacesIWantToGo: Kristen's house to tell her I love her. 

♥ RT if you want to do that too. 
IF YOU HATE KRISTEN STEWART UNFOLLOW ME, 
THANKS. 

"You don’t need to have the perfect face to be beautiful." - 
Kristen Jaymes Stewart. ♥ 

RT IF YOU STILL LOVE AND SUPPORT THE GIRL 
FROM MY ICON ♥ 

"Just follow your heart..you'll usually wind up where you 
want to be." - Kristen Stewart. ♥ 

Table 3. Examples of author-related tweets 
 

#30GoodMovies #5FavouriteFilms 
I'm Legend #30GoodMovies #5FavouriteFilms walk the line 
Shaun the sheep #30GoodMovies #5FavouriteFilms Batman: The Dark Knight 
#30GoodMovies 6. Harry Potter and the half blood prince #5FavouriteFilms the nutty professor, the original,,, jerry 

Lewis one 
Harry Potter is one of #30GoodMovies Oh no wait, I'm replacing Cool Runnings with Friends With 

Benefits #5FavouriteFilms 
#30GoodMovies, anything and everything directed by Tim 
Burton. 

#5FavouriteFilms inception - salt - 1984 - hunger games - 
beauty& the beast. 

Table 4. Examples of hashtag-related tweets 

4 Conclusion 
We presented an opinion retrieval system for Twitter to find a subjective and query-relevant tweet re-
lated to a query. Our system outperformed previous opinion retrieval systems; it provides subjective 
information even about an individual user, which is not provided by other systems. In addition, our 
system can analyze the pros and cons of a product or service, which is certainly useful in the develop-
ment of a marketing strategy. Unfortunately, we do not provide real-time tweet information due to the 
absence of a related Twitter API. If a Twitter is provided eventually, we will be able to provide real-
time tweet service for real-time information of hashtag texts. 

Acknowledgements 
This research was supported by Next-Generation Information Computing Development Program 
through the National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & 
Future Plannig (2012M3C4A7033344). 

Reference 
Barbosa L. and Feng J. 2010. Robust Sentiment Detection on Twitter from Biased and Noisy Data, Proceedings of 

the 23rd International Conference on Computational Linguistics, 36-44. 

Go A., Bhayani R. and Huang L. 2009. Twitter Sentiment Classification using Distant Supervision, Technical 
Report, Stanford Digital Library 

129



Joachim T. 1999. Making large-Scale SVM Learning Practical. Advances in Kernel Methods – Support Vector 
Learning, 169-184 

Kim, Y., Song Y.-I., Rim H.-C. 2016. Opinion Retrieval for Twitter Using Extrinsic Information, Journal of Uni-
versal Computer Science, Volume 22, No 5, 608-629 

Luo Z., Osborne M, and Wang T. 2012. Opinion Retrieval in Twitter, Proceedings of the Sixth International AAAI 
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, 507-510 

Luo Z., Yu Y., Osborne M. and Wang T. 2015. Structuring Tweets for improving Twitter search, Journal of the 
Association for Information Science and Technology, Volume 66, Issue 12, 2522-2539 

130


