










































Assessing Phrase-Based Translation Models with Oracle Decoding


Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 933–943,
MIT, Massachusetts, USA, 9-11 October 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Assessing Phrase-Based Translation Models with Oracle Decoding

Guillaume Wisniewski and Alexandre Allauzen and Fraņcois Yvon
Univ. Paris Sud ; LIMSI—CNRS

91403 ORSAY CEDEX
France

{wisniews,allauzen,yvon}@limsi.fr

Abstract

Extant Statistical Machine Translation (SMT) sys-
tems are very complex softwares, which embed mul-
tiple layers of heuristics and embark very large num-
bers of numerical parameters. As a result, it is diffi-
cult to analyze output translations and there is a real
need for tools that could help developers to better
understand the various causes of errors.

In this study, we make a step in that direction and
present an attempt to evaluate the quality of the
phrase-based translation model. In order to identify
those translation errors that stem from deficiencies
in the phrase table (PT), we propose to compute the
oracle BLEU-4 score, that is the best score that a
system based on this PT can achieve on a reference
corpus. By casting the computation of the oracle
BLEU-1 as an Integer Linear Programming (ILP)
problem, we show that it is possible to efficiently
compute accurate lower-bounds of this score, and re-
port measures performed on several standard bench-
marks. Various other applications of these oracle de-
coding techniques are also reported and discussed.

1 Phrase-Based Machine Translation
1.1 Principle
A Phrase-Based Translation System (PBTS) consists of a
ruleset and a scoring function (Lopez, 2009). The ruleset,
represented in the phrase table, is a set of phrase1pairs
{(f, e)}, each pair expressing that the source phrase f
can be rewritten (translated) into a target phrase e. Trans-
lation hypotheses are generated by iteratively rewriting
portions of the source sentence as prescribed by the rule-
set, until each source word has been consumed by exactly
one rule. The order of target words in an hypothesis is
uniquely determined by the order in which the rewrite op-
eration are performed. The search space of the translation
model corresponds to the set of all possible sequences of

1Following the usage in statistical machine translation literature, we
use “phrase” to denote a subsequence of consecutive words.

rules applications. The scoring function aims to rank all
possible translation hypotheses in such a way that the best
one has the highest score.

A PBTS is learned from a parallel corpus in two inde-
pendent steps. In a first step, the corpus is aligned at the
word level, by using alignment tools such as Giza++
(Och and Ney, 2003) and some symmetrisation heuris-
tics; phrases are then extracted by other heuristics (Koehn
et al., 2003) and assigned numerical weights. In the
second step, the parameters of the scoring function are
estimated, typically through Minimum Error Rate train-
ing (Och, 2003).

Translating a sentence amounts to finding the best scor-
ing translation hypothesis in the search space. Because
of the combinatorial nature of this problem, translation
has to rely on heuristic search techniques such as greedy
hill-climbing (Germann, 2003) or variants of best-first
search like multi-stack decoding (Koehn, 2004). More-
over, to reduce the overall complexity of decoding, the
search space is typically pruned using simple heuristics.
For instance, the state-of-the-art phrase-based decoder
Moses (Koehn et al., 2007) considers only a restricted
number of translations for each source sequence2 and en-
forces a distortion limit3 over which phrases can be re-
ordered. As a consequence, the best translation hypothe-
sis returned by the decoder is not always the one with the
highest score.

1.2 Typology of PBTS Errors

Analyzing the errors of a SMT system is not an easy task,
because of the number of models that are combined, the
size of these models, and the high complexity of the vari-
ous decision making processes. For a SMT system, three
different kinds of errors can be distinguished (Germann
et al., 2004; Auli et al., 2009): search errors, induction
errors and model errors. The former corresponds to cases
where the hypothesis with the best score is missed by
the search procedure, either because of the use of an ap-

2the ttl option of Moses, defaulting to 20.
3the dl option of Moses, whose default value is 7.

933



proximate search method or because of the restrictions of
the search space. Induction errors correspond to cases
where, given the model, the search space does not contain
the reference. Finally, model errors correspond to cases
where the hypothesis with the highest score is not the best
translation according to the evaluation metric.

Model errors encompass several types of errors that oc-
cur during learning (Bottou and Bousquet, 2008)4. Ap-
proximation errors are errors caused by the use of a re-
stricted and oversimplistic class of functions (here, finite-
state transducers to model the generation of hypotheses
and a linear scoring function to discriminate them) to
model the translation process. Estimation errors corre-
spond to the use of sub-optimal values for both the phrase
pairs weights and the parameters of the scoring function.
The reasons behind these errors are twofold: first, train-
ing only considers a finite sample of data; second, it re-
lies on error prone alignments. As a result, some “good”
phrases are extracted with a small weight, or, in the limit,
are not extracted at all; and conversely that some “poor”
phrases are inserted into the phrase table, sometimes with
a really optimistic score.

Sorting out and assessing the impact of these various
causes of errors is of primary interest for SMT system
developers: for lack of such diagnoses, it is difficult to
figure out which components of the system require the
most urgent attention. Diagnoses are however, given the
tight intertwining among the various component of a sys-
tem, very difficult to obtain: most evaluations are limited
to the computation of global scores and usually do not
imply any kind of failure analysis.

1.3 Contribution and organization

To systematically assess the impact of the multiple
heuristic decisions made during training and decoding,
we propose, following (Dreyer et al., 2007; Auli et al.,
2009), to work out oracle scores, that is to evaluate the
best achievable performances of a PBTS. We aim at both
studying the expressive power of PBTS and at providing
tools for identifying and quantifying causes of failure.

Under standard metrics such as BLEU (Papineni et al.,
2002), oracle scores are difficult (if not impossible) to
compute, but, by casting the computation of the oracle
unigram recall and precision as an Integer Linear Pro-
gramming (ILP) problem, we show that it is possible to
efficiently compute accurate lower-bounds of the oracle
BLEU-4 scores and report measurements performed on
several standard benchmarks.

The main contributions of this paper are twofold. We
first introduce an ILP program able to efficiently find
the best hypothesis a PBTS can achieve. This program
can be easily extended to test various improvements to

4We omit here optimization errors.

phrase-base systems or to evaluate the impact of differ-
ent parameter settings. Second, we present a number of
complementary results illustrating the usage of our or-
acle decoder for identifying and analyzing PBTS errors.
Our experimental results confirm the main conclusions of
(Turchi et al., 2008), showing that extant PBTs have the
potential to generate hypotheses having very high BLEU-
4 score and that their main bottleneck is their scoring
function.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: in Sec-
tion 2, we introduce and formalize the oracle decoding
problem, and present a series of ILP problems of increas-
ing complexity designed so as to deliver accurate lower-
bounds of oracle score. This section closes with various
extensions allowing to model supplementary constraints,
most notably reordering constraints (Section 2.5). Our
experiments are reported in Section 3, where we first in-
troduce the training and test corpora, along with a de-
scription of our system building pipeline (Section 3.1).
We then discuss the baseline oracle BLEU scores (Sec-
tion 3.2), analyze the non-reachable parts of the reference
translations, and comment several complementary results
which allow to identify causes of failures. Section 4 dis-
cuss our approach and findings with respect to the exist-
ing literature on error analysis and oracle decoding. We
conclude and discuss further prospects in Section 5.

2 Oracle Decoder

2.1 The Oracle Decoding Problem

Definition To get some insights on the errors of phrase-
based systems and better understand their limits, we pro-
pose to consider the oracle decoding problem defined as
follows: given a source sentence, its reference transla-
tion5 and a phrase table, what is the “best” translation
hypothesis a system can generate? As usual, the quality
of an hypothesis is evaluated by the similarity between
the reference and the hypothesis. Note that in the ora-
cle decoding problem, we are only assessing the ability
of PBT systems to generate good candidate translations,
irrespective of their ability to score them properly.

We believe that studying this problem is interesting for
various reasons. First, as described in Section 3.4, com-
paring the best hypothesis a system could have gener-
ated and the hypothesis it actually generates allows us to
carry on both quantitative and qualitative failure analysis.
The oracle decoding problem can also be used to assess
the expressive power of phrase-based systems (Auli et
al., 2009). Other applications include computing accept-
able pseudo-references for discriminative training (Till-
mann and Zhang, 2006; Liang et al., 2006; Arun and

5The oracle decoding problem can be extended to the case of multi-
ple references. For the sake of simplicity, we only describe the case of
a single reference.

934



Koehn, 2007) or combining machine translation systems
in a multi-source setting (Li and Khudanpur, 2009). We
have also used oracle decoding to identify erroneous or
difficult to translate references (Section 3.3).

Evaluation Measure To fully define the oracle de-
coding problem, a measure of the similarity between a
translation hypothesis and its reference translation has
to be chosen. The most obvious choice is the BLEU-4
score (Papineni et al., 2002) used in most machine trans-
lation evaluations.

However, using this metric in the oracle decoding
problem raises several issues. First, BLEU-4 is a met-
ric defined at the corpus level and is hard to interpret at
the sentence level. More importantly, BLEU-4 is not de-
composable6: as it relies on 4-grams statistics, the con-
tribution of each phrase pair to the global score depends
on the translation of the previous and following phrases
and can not be evaluated in isolation. Because of its non-
decomposability, maximizing BLEU-4 is hard; in partic-
ular, the phrase-level decomposability of the evaluation
metric is necessary in our approach.

To circumvent this difficulty, we propose to evaluate
the similarity between a translation hypothesis and a ref-
erence by the number of their common words. This
amounts to evaluating translation quality in terms of un-
igram precision and recall, which are highly correlated
with human judgements (Lavie et al., ). This measure
is closely related to the BLEU-1 evaluation metric and
the Meteor (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005) metric (when it is
evaluated without considering near-matches and the dis-
tortion penalty). We also believe that hypotheses that
maximize the unigram precision and recall at the sen-
tence level yield corpus level BLEU-4 scores close the
maximal achievable. Indeed, in the setting we will intro-
duce in the next section, BLEU-1 and BLEU-4 are highly
correlated: as all correct words of the hypothesis will be
compelled to be at their correct position, any hypothesis
with a high 1-gram precision is also bound to have a high
2-gram precision, etc.

2.2 Formalizing the Oracle Decoding Problem

The oracle decoding problem has already been consid-
ered in the case of word-based models, in which all trans-
lation units are bound to contain only one word. The
problem can then be solved by a bipartite graph matching
algorithm (Leusch et al., 2008): given a n×m binary ma-
trix describing possible translation links between source
words and target words7, this algorithm finds the subset
of links maximizing the number of words of the reference
that have been translated, while ensuring that each word

6Neither at the sentence (Chiang et al., 2008), nor at the phrase level.
7The (i, j) entry of the matrix is 1 if the ith word of the source can

be translated by the jth word of the reference, 0 otherwise.

is translated only once.
Generalizing this approach to phrase-based systems

amounts to solving the following problem: given a set
of possible translation links between potential phrases of
the source and of the target, find the subset of links so that
the unigram precision and recall are the highest possible.
The corresponding oracle hypothesis can then be easily
generated by selecting the target phrases that are aligned
with one source phrase, disregarding the others. In ad-
dition, to mimic the way OOVs are usually handled, we
match identical OOV tokens appearing both in the source
and target sentences. In this approach, the unigram pre-
cision is always one (every word generated in the oracle
hypothesis matches exactly one word in the reference).
As a consequence, to find the oracle hypothesis, we just
have to maximize the recall, that is the number of words
appearing both in the hypothesis and in the reference.

Considering phrases instead of isolated words has a
major impact on the computational complexity: in this
new setting, the optimal segmentations in phrases of both
the source and of the target have to be worked out in ad-
dition to links selection. Moreover, constraints have to
be taken into account so as to enforce a proper segmenta-
tion of the source and target sentences. These constraints
make it impossible to use the approach of (Leusch et al.,
2008) and concur in making the oracle decoding prob-
lem for phrase-based models more complex than it is for
word-based models: it can be proven, using arguments
borrowed from (De Nero and Klein, 2008), that this prob-
lem is NP-hard even for the simple unigram precision
measure.

2.3 An Integer Program for Oracle Decoding

To solve the combinatorial problem introduced in the pre-
vious section, we propose to cast it into an Integer Lin-
ear Programming (ILP) problem, for which many generic
solvers exist. ILP has already been used in SMT to find
the optimal translation for word-based (Germann et al.,
2001) and to study the complexity of learning phrase
alignments (De Nero and Klein, 2008) models. Follow-
ing the latter reference, we introduce the following vari-
ables: fi,j (resp. ek,l) is a binary indicator variable that
is true when the phrase contains all spans from between-
word position i to j (resp. k to l) of the source (resp.
target) sentence. We also introduce a binary variable, de-
noted ai,j,k,l, to describe a possible link between source
phrase fi,j and target phrase ek,l. These variables are
built from the entries of the phrase table according to se-
lection strategies introduced in Section 2.4. In the fol-
lowing, index variables are so that:

0 ≤ i < j ≤ n, in the source sentence and
0 ≤ k < l ≤ m, in the target sentence,

935



where n (resp. m) is the length of the source (resp. target)
sentence.

Solving the oracle decoding problem then amounts to
optimizing the following objective function:

max
i,j,k,l

∑
i,j,k,l

ai,j,k,l · (l − k) , (1)

under the constraints:

∀x ∈ J1,mK :
∑

k,l s.t. k≤x≤l

ek,l ≤ 1 (2)

∀y ∈ J1, nK :
∑

i,j s.t. i≤y≤j

fi,j = 1 (3)

∀k, l :
∑
i,j

ai,j,k,l = fk,l (4)

∀i, j :
∑
k,l

ai,j,k,l = ei,j (5)

The objective function (1) corresponds to the number
of target words that are generated. The first set of con-
straints (2) ensures that each word in the reference e ap-
pears in no more than one phrase. Maximizing the objec-
tive under these constraints amounts to maximizing the
unigram recall. The second set of constraints (3) ensures
that each word in the source f is translated exactly once,
which guarantees that the search space of the ILP prob-
lem is the same as the search space of a phrase-based sys-
tem. Constraints (4) bind the fk,l and ai,j,k,l variables,
ensuring that whenever a link ai,j,k,l is active, the corre-
sponding phrase fk,l is also active. Constraints (5) play a
similar role for the reference.

The Relaxed Problem Even though it accurately
models the search space of a phrase-based decoder,
this programs is not really useful as is: due to out-of-
vocabulary words or missing entries in the phrase table,
the constraint that all source words should be translated
yields infeasible problems8. We propose to relax this
problem and allow some source words to remain untrans-
lated. This is done by replacing constraints (3) by:

∀y ∈ J1, nK :
∑

i,j s.t. i≤y≤j

fi,j ≤ 1

To better reflect the behavior of phrase-based decoders,
which attempt to translate all source words, we also need
to modify the objective function as follows:∑

i,j,k,l

ai,j,k,l · (l − k) +
∑
i,j

fi,j · (j − i) (6)

The second term in this new objective ensures that opti-
mal solutions translate as many source words as possible.

8An ILP problem is said to be infeasible when every possible solu-
tion violates at least one constraint.

The Relaxed-Distortion Problem A last caveat
with the Relaxed optimization program is caused by
frequently occurring source tokens, such as function
words or punctuation signs, which can often align with
more than one target word. For lack of taking distor-
tion information into account in our objective function,
all these alignments are deemed equivalent, even if some
of them are clearly more satisfactory than others. This
situation is illustrated on Figure 1.

le chat et le chien

the cat and the dog

Figure 1: Equivalent alignments between “le” and “the”. The
dashed lines corresponds to a less interpretable solution.

To overcome this difficulty, we propose a last change
to the objective function:∑

i,j,k,l

ai,j,k,l · (l − k) +
∑
i,j

fi,j · (j − i)

−α
∑

i,j,k,l

ai,j,k,l|k − i| (7)

Compared to the objective function of the relaxed prob-
lem (6), we introduce here a supplementary penalty factor
which favors monotonous alignments. For each phrase
pair, the higher the difference between source and target
positions, the higher this penalty. If α is small enough,
this extra term allows us to select, among all the opti-
mal alignments of the relaxed problem, the one with
the lowest distortion. In our experiments, we set α to
min {n, m} to ensure that the penalty factor is always
smaller than the reward for aligning two single words.

2.4 Selecting Indicator Variables
In the approach introduced in the previous sections, the
oracle decoding problem is solved by selecting, among
a set of possible translation links, the ones that yield the
solution with the highest unigram recall.

We propose two strategies to build this set of possible
translation links. In the first one, denoted exact match,
an indicator ai,j,k,l is created if there is an entry (f, e) so
that f spans from word position i to j in the source and
e from word position k to l in the target. In this strat-
egy, the ILP program considers exactly the same ruleset
as conventional phrase-based decoders.

We also consider an alternative strategy, which could
help us to identify errors made during the phrase extrac-
tion process. In this strategy, denoted inside match, an
indicator ai,j,k,l is created when the following three cri-
teria are met: i) f spans from position i to j of the source;
ii) a substring of e, denoted ē, spans from position k to l

936



of the reference; iii) (f, ē) is not an entry of the phrase ta-
ble. The resulting set of indicator variables thus contains,
at least, all the variables used in the exact match strategy.
In addition, we license here the use of phrases containing
words that do not occur in the reference. In fact, using
such solutions can yield higher BLEU scores when the
reward for additional correct matches exceeds the cost
incurred by wrong predictions. These cases are symp-
toms of situations where the extraction heuristic failed to
extract potentially useful subphrases.

2.5 Oracle Decoding with Reordering Constraints
The ILP problem introduced in the previous section can
be extended in several ways to describe and test various
improvements to phrase-based systems or to evaluate the
impact of different parameter settings. This flexibility
mainly stems from the possibility offered by our frame-
work to express arbitrary constraints over variables. In
this section, we illustrate these possibilities by describing
how reordering constraints can easily be considered.

As a first example, the Moses decoder uses a distortion
limit to constrain the set of possible reorderings. This
constraint “enforces (...) that the last word of a phrase
chosen for translation cannot be more than d9 words from
the leftmost untranslated word in the source” (Lopez,
2009) and is expressed as:

∀aijkl, ai′j′k′l′ s.t. k > k′,
aijkl · ai′j′k′l′ · |j − i′ + 1| ≤ d,

The maximum distortion limit strategy (Lopez, 2009) is
also easily expressed and take the following form (assum-
ing this constraint is parameterized by d):

∀l < m− 1,
ai,j,k,l·ai′,j′,l+1,l′ · |i′ − j − 1| < d

Implementing the “local” or MJ-d (Kumar and Byrne,
2005) reordering strategy is also straightforward, and im-
plies using the following constraints:

∀i, k,

∣∣∣∣∣∣
∑
i′≤i

ai′,j′,k′,l′ −
∑
k′≤k

ai′,j′,k′,l′

∣∣∣∣∣∣ ≤ d
Similarly, It is possible to simulate decoding under the

so-called IBM(d) reordering constraints10 by considering
the following constraints:

∀µ ≤ m, max
i,k,l
j≤µ

ai,j,k,l · j −
∑

i,j,k,l

ai,j,k,l · (j − i) ≤ d

9This corresponds to the dl parameter of Moses
10Under IBM(d) constraints, the translation is done, phrase by phrase,

from the beginning of the sentence until the end and only one of the first
d untranslated phrase can be selected for translation.

In these constraints, the first factor corresponds to the
rightmost translated word of the source and the second
one to the number of translated source words. The con-
straints simply enforce that, at each step of the decoding,
there are no more than d source words that were skipped.

Note that the constraints introduced above are not all
linear in the problem variables; however they can eas-
ily be linearized using standard ILP techniques (Roth and
Yih, 2005).

3 Oracle Decoding for Failure Analysis

3.1 Experimental Setting

We propose to use our oracle decoder to study the ability
of a PBTS to translate from English to French and from
German to English. These two languages pairs present
different challenges: English to French translation is con-
sidered a relatively easy pair, notwithstanding the diffi-
culties of generating the right inflection marks in French.
Translating from German into English is more difficult,
notably due to the productivity of inflectional and com-
pounding processes in German, and also to significant
differences in word ordering between these languages.

Our experiments are based on the corpora distributed
for the WMT’09 constrained tasks (Callison-Burch et
al., 2009). All data are tokenized, cleaned and con-
verted to lowercase letters using the tools provided
by the organizers. We then used a standard training
pipeline to construct the translation model: the bitexts
were aligned using Giza++11, symmetrized using the
grow-diag-final-and heuristic; the phrase table
was extracted and scored using the tools distributed with
Moses.12 Finally, baseline systems were optimized using
WMT’08 test set as development using MERT. Note that,
for all these steps, we used the default value of the var-
ious parameters. The extracted phrase table is then used
to find the oracle alignment on the task test set. Recall
that oracle decoding do not use the scores estimated by
Moses in any way.

In the experiments reported below, two settings are
considered. In the first one, denoted NEWSCO, Moses
was trained only on a small data set taken from the News
Commentary corpus. Using a small sized corpus reduces
both training time and decoding time, which allows us to
quickly test different configurations of the decoder. In a
second setting, denoted EUROPARL, Moses was trained
on a larger corpora containing the entirety of the Europarl
Corpus, but no in-domain data, to provide results on more
realistic conditions. Statistics regarding the different cor-
pora used are reported in Table 1. These statistics are
computed on the lowercase cleaned corpora.

11http://www.fjoch.com/GIZA++.html
12http://statmt.org/moses

937



en → fr de → en
NEWSCO EUROPARL NEWSCO EUROPARL

#words 1, 023, 401 21, 616, 114 1, 530, 693 22, 898, 644
#sentences 51, 375 1, 050, 398 71, 691 1, 118, 399

#vocabulary 31, 416 78, 071 78, 140 242, 219
#phrase table 3, 061, 701 46, 003, 525 4, 133, 190 44, 402, 367

% OOV 5.3% 3.1% 8.0% 5.2%

Table 1: Statistics regarding the training corpora: number of words, number of sentences, vocabulary and phrase table size and
percentage of test words not appearing in the train set (OOV).

Finding the oracle alignment amounts to solving the
ILP problems introduced above. Even though ILP prob-
lems are NP-hard in general, there exist several off-the-
shelf ILP solvers able to efficiently find an optimal solu-
tion or decide that the problem is infeasible. In our exper-
iments, we used the free solver SCIP (Achterberg, 2007).
An optimal solution was found for all problems we con-
sidered. Decoding the 3, 027 sentences of WMT’09 test
set takes about 10 minutes (wall time) for the NEWSCO
setting, and several hours for the EUROPARL setting13.

3.2 Oracle BLEU Score
Table 2 reports, for all considered settings, the BLEU-4
scores14 achieved by our oracle decoder, as well as the
number of source words used to generate the oracle hy-
pothesis and the number of target words that are reach-
able. In these experiments, two objective functions were
considered: first, we only consider the objective function
corresponding to the relaxed problem defined by Eq. (6);
second, we introduced an extra term in the objective to
penalize distortion, as described by Eq. (7). Unless ex-
plicitly stated otherwise, we always used the exact match
strategy.

The main result in 2 is that, for the two language pairs
considered, the expressive power of PBTS is not the lim-
iting factor to achieve high translation performance. In
fact, for most sentences in the test set, excellent oracle
hypotheses, which contain a very high proportion of ref-
erence words, are found. This remains true even when the
phrase table is extracted from a small corpus. Given that
the best BLEU-4 scores achieved during the WMT’09
evaluation are about 28 for the English to French task
and 24 for the German to English task ((Callison-Burch
et al., 2009), Tables 26 and 25), these results strongly
suggest that the main bottleneck of current phrase-based
translation systems is their scoring function rather than
their expressive power. As we will discuss in Section 4,
similar conclusions were drawn by (Auli et al., 2009) and
(Turchi et al., 2008).

Several additional comments on these numbers are in
13All our experiments are run on a 8 cores computer, each core being

a 2.2GHz Intel Processor; the decoder is multi-threaded.
14These are computed on lowercase with the default tokenization.

order. Despite these very high BLEU scores, in most
cases, the reference is only partly translated. In the most
favorable case, for the English to French EUROPARL set-
ting, only 26% of the references could be fully gener-
ated15. These numbers are consistent with the results re-
ported in (Auli et al., 2009). Similarly, only about 31%
of the source sentences are completely translated by the
oracle decoder, which supports our choice to consider a
relaxed version of the ILP problem. Finally, Table 2 also
shows that introducing the distortion penalty does not af-
fect the oracle performance of the decoder.

Considering the inside match strategy improves the
performance of the oracle decoder: for instance, for the
English to French NEWSCO setting, oracle decoder with
the inside match strategy achieves a BLEU-4 score of
70.15 (a 2.5 points improvement over the baseline). To
achieve this score, 21.45% of the phrases used during de-
coding were phrases that are not considered by the exact
match strategy. Similar results can be observed for other
settings, which highlights the significance of one kind of
failure of the extraction heuristic: useful “subphrases” of
actual phrase pairs are not always extracted.

The numbers in Table 2, no matter how good they may
look, should be considered with caution: they only imply
that, for most test sentences, all the information necessary
to produce a good translation is available in the phrase ta-
ble. However, the alignment decisions underlying these
oracle hypotheses are sometimes hard to justify, and one
has to accept that part of these good hypotheses transla-
tions are due to a series of lucky alignment errors. This
is illustrated on Figure 2, which displays one such lucky
oracle alignment based on the misalignment, during train-
ing, of the French preposition “des” (of the) with the En-
glish noun “stock”. Such lucky errors are naturally also
observed in the outputs of conventional decoders, even
though phrase table filtering heuristics probably makes
them somewhat more rare.

3.3 Analyzing Non-Reachable Parts of a Reference
Table 3 contains typical examples of sentence pairs that
could not be fully generated by our oracle decoder. They

15Similar numbers were obtained, albeit much more slowly, with the
--constraint option of Moses.

938



training set objective function % source translated % target generated 4-BLEU

en → fr
NEWSCO RELAXED 86.04% 84.74% 67.65RELAXED-DISTORTION 85.99% 84.77% 67.77

EUROPARL RELAXED 93.66% 93.06% 85.05RELAXED-DISTORTION 93.65% 93.06% 85.08

de → en
NEWSCO RELAXED 82.57% 82.33% 64.60RELAXED-DISTORTION 82.59% 82.30% 64.65

EUROPARL RELAXED 90.34% 91.16% 81.77RELAXED-DISTORTION 90.36% 91.12% 81.77

Table 2: Translation score of the ILP oracle decoder for the various settings described in Section 3.1

stock fall in asia

chute des actions en asie

Figure 2: Example of alignment obtained by our oracle decoder

illustrate the three main reasons which cause some parts
of the reference to remain unreachable:

• phrases are missing from the phrase table, either
because they do not occur in the training corpus
(OOVs) or because they failed to be extracted. In
Table 3, OOV errors are mainly due to past tense
forms translated into verbs conjugated in passé sim-
ple (“rejeta”, “rencontrèrent”, “renoua”) a French
literary tense, mostly used in formal writings.

• obvious errors (misspelled words, misinterpretation
or mistranslation, ...) in the reference. The refer-
ence of the fifth example contains one such error:
the state name “Nevada” is translated to “n’évadiez”
(literally “have not escaped”), yielding a very poor
reference sentence.

• parts of the reference have no translation equiva-
lence in the source. This can be either because ref-
erences are produced in “context” and some pieces
of information are moved across sentence bound-
aries or because these references are non-literal. The
fourth example, which seems to be the translation of
a title, falls into this category: the French part con-
tains a reference to the context (“les SA” is referring
to the bacteria the text is talking about) which is not
in the source text. Non-literal translation are illus-
trated by the third example, where English “Mon-
day” is translated into French “la veille” (the day
before).

While the first kind of errors is inherent to the use of
a statistical approach, the last two kinds result from the
quality of the data used in the evaluation and directly im-
pact both training and evaluation of automatic translation

systems: if they should not distort too much comparisons
of MT systems, these errors prevent us from assessing
the “global” quality of automatic translation and, if sim-
ilar errors are found in the train set, they make learning
harder as some probability mass is wasted to model them.

To provide a more quantitative analysis, we manually
looked at all the non-aligned parts of some WMT’09 ref-
erences and found that out of 800 references, more than
133 contain either an obvious translation error or can not
be achieved by a PBTS16. Note that, while identifying
these errors could be done in many ways, our oracle de-
coder makes it far easier.

3.4 Identifying Causes of Failure

By comparing the hypotheses found by the oracle de-
coder and the ones found by the phrase-based decoder,
causes of failure can be easily identified. In this section,
we will present several measures that allow us to identify
and quantify several causes of failure.

Errors Caused by Search Space Pruning Recall from
Section 1.1 that Moses uses several heuristics to prune the
search space. In particular, there is a distortion limit and
a limit on the number of target phrases considered for one
source phrase. In this paragraph, we evaluate the impact
of these two heuristics on translation quality.

Table 4 presents the average distortion computed on
the oracle hypotheses, as well as the percentage of
phrases used that have a distortion strictly greater than
6 (the default distortion limit of Moses). All these num-
bers are obtained by solving the RELAXED-DISTORTION
problem. Surprisingly enough, the average distortion of
oracle hypotheses is quite small, even for the German to
English task, and the distortion constraint seems to be vi-
olated only in a few cases. It also appears that the distor-
tion of the hypotheses generated in the NEWSCO setting
is significantly larger than in the EUROPARL setting. This
can be explained by the extra degrees of freedom in the

16Annotation at a finer level is an on-going effort; the annotated
corpus is available from http://www.limsi.fr/Individu/
wisniews/oracle decoding.

939



À – On Monday the American House of Representatives rejected the plan to support the financial
system, into which up to 700 billion dollars (nearly 12 billion Czech crowns) was to be invested.
– Lundi, la chambre des représentants américaine rejeta le projet de soutient du système financier,
auquel elle aurait dû consacrer jusqu’à 700 milliards de dollars (près de 12 bilions de kč).

Á – Representatives of the legislators met with American Finance Minister Henry Paulson Saturday
night in order to give the government fund a final form.
– Dans la nuit de samedi à dimanche, des représentants des législateurs rencontrèrent le ministre
des finances américain Henry Paulson, afin de donner au fond du gouvernement une forme finale.

Â – The Prague Stock Market immediately continued its fall from Monday at the beginning of
Tuesday’s trading , when it dropped by nearly six percent.
– Mardi, dès le début des échanges, la bourse de prague renoua avec sa chute de la veille,
lorsqu’elle perdait presque six pour cent.

Ã – Antibiotic Resistance
– Les SA résistent aux antibiotiques.

Ä – According to Nevada Democratic senator Harry Reid, that is how that legislators are trying to
have Congress to reach a definitive agreement as early as on Sunday.
– D’après le sénateur dèmocrate n’évadiez Harry Reid, les législateurs font de sorte que le Congrès
aboutisse à un accord définitif dès dimanche.

Table 3: Output examples of our oracle decoder on the English to French task. Words in bold are non-aligned words and words in
italic are non-aligned out-of-vocabulary words. For clarity the examples have been detokenized and recased.

training set avg.
distortion

%phrases
with a dist.

> 6

en → fr NEWSCO 4.57 22.02%EUROPARL 3.21 13.32%

de → en NEWSCO 5.16 25.37%EUROPARL 3.81 17.21%

Table 4: Average distortion and percentage of phrases with a
distortion greater that Moses default distortion limit.

alignment decisions enabled by the use of larger training
corpora and phrase table.

To evaluate the impact of the second heuristic, we com-
puted the number of phrases discarded by Moses (be-
cause of the default ttl limit) but used in the oracle hy-
potheses. In the English to French NEWSCO setting,
they account for 34.11% of the total number of phrases
used in the oracle hypotheses. When the oracle decoder
is constrained to use the same phrase table as Moses, its
BLEU-4 score drops to 42.78. This shows that filtering
the phrase table prior to decoding discards many useful
phrase pairs and is seriously limiting the best achievable
performance, a conclusion shared with (Auli et al., 2009).

Search Errors Search errors can be identified by com-
paring the score of the best hypothesis found by Moses
and the score of the oracle hypothesis. If the score of the
oracle hypothesis is higher, then there has been a search
error; on the contrary, there has been an estimation error
when the score of the oracle hypothesis is lower than the
score of the best hypothesis found by Moses.

Based on the comparison of the score of Moses hy-
potheses and of oracle hypotheses for the English to
French NEWSCO setting, our preliminary conclusion is
that the number of search errors is quite limited: only
about 5% of the hypotheses of our oracle decoder are ac-
tually getting a better score than Moses solutions. Again,
this shows that the scoring function (model error) is
one of the main bottleneck of current PBTS. Compar-
ing these hypotheses is nonetheless quite revealing: while
Moses mostly selects phrase pairs with high translation
scores and generates monotonous alignments, our ILP de-
coder uses larger reorderings and less probable phrases
to achieve better solutions: on average, the reordering
score of oracle solutions is −5.74, compared to −76.78
for Moses outputs. Given the weight assigned through
MERT training to the distortion score, no wonder that
these hypotheses are severely penalized.

The Impact of Phrase Length The observed outputs
do not only depend on decisions made during the search,
but also on decisions made during training. One such
decision is the specification of maximal length for the
source and target phrases. In our framework, evaluating
the impact of this decision is simple: it suffices to change
the definition of indicator variables so as to consider only
alignments between phrases of a given length.

In the English-French NEWSCO setting, the most re-
strictive choice, when only alignments between single
words are authorized, yields an oracle BLEU-4 of 48.68;
however, authorizing phrases up to length 2 allows to
achieve an oracle value of 66.57, very close to the score
achieved when considering all extracted phrases (67.77).

940



This is corroborated with a further analysis of our ora-
cle alignments, which use phrases whose average source
length is 1.21 words (respectively 1.31 for target words).
If many studies have already acknowledged the predomi-
nance of “small” phrases in actual translations, our oracle
scores suggest that, for this language pair, increasing the
phrase length limit beyond 2 or 3 might be a waste of
computational resources.

4 Related Work
To the best of our knowledge, there are only a few works
that try to study the expressive power of phrase-based ma-
chine translation systems or to provide tools for analyzing
potential causes of failure.

The approach described in (Auli et al., 2009) is very
similar to ours: in this study, the authors propose to find
and analyze the limits of machine translation systems by
studying the reference reachability. A reference is reach-
able for a given system if it can be exactly generated
by this system. Reference reachability is assessed using
Moses in forced decoding mode: during search, all hy-
potheses that deviate from the reference are simply dis-
carded. Even though the main goal of this study was to
compare the search space of phrase-based and hierarchi-
cal systems, it also provides some insights on the impact
of various search parameters in Moses, delivering con-
clusions that are consistent with our main results. As de-
scribed in Section 1.2, these authors also propose a typol-
ogy of the errors of a statistical translation systems, but
do not attempt to provide methods for identifying them.

The authors of (Turchi et al., 2008) study the learn-
ing capabilities of Moses by extensively analyzing learn-
ing curves representing the translation performances as a
function of the number of examples, and by corrupting
the model parameters. Even though their focus is more
on assessing the scoring function, they reach conclusions
similar to ours: the current bottleneck of translation per-
formances is not the representation power of the PBTS
but rather in their scoring functions.

Oracle decoding is useful to compute reachable
pseudo-references in the context of discriminative train-
ing. This is the main motivation of (Tillmann and Zhang,
2006), where the authors compute high BLEU hypothe-
ses by running a conventional decoder so as to maximize
a per-sentence approximation of BLEU-4, under a simple
(local) reordering model.

Oracle decoding has also been used to assess the
limitations induced by various reordering constraints in
(Dreyer et al., 2007). To this end, the authors propose
to use a beam-search based oracle decoder, which com-
putes lower bounds of the best achievable BLEU-4 us-
ing dynamic programming techniques over finite-state
(for so-called local and IBM constraints) or hierarchically
structured (for ITG constraints) sets of hypotheses. Even

though the numbers reported in this study are not directly
comparable with ours17, it seems that our decoder is not
only conceptually much simpler, but also achieves much
more optimistic lower-bounds of the oracle BLEU score.
The approach described in (Li and Khudanpur, 2009) em-
ploys a similar technique, which is to guide a heuristic
search in an hypergraph representing possible translation
hypotheses with n-gram counts matches, which amounts
to decoding with a n-gram model trained on the sole ref-
erence translation. Additional tricks are presented in this
article to speed-up decoding.

Computing oracle BLEU scores is also the subject of
(Zens and Ney, 2005; Leusch et al., 2008), yet with a
different emphasis. These studies are concerned with
finding the best hypotheses in a word graph or in a con-
sensus network, a problem that has various implications
for multi-pass decoding and/or system combination tech-
niques. The former reference describes an exponential
approximate algorithm, while the latter proves the NP-
completeness of this problem and discuss various heuris-
tic approaches. Our problem is somewhat more complex
and using their techniques would require us to built word
graphs containing all the translations induced by arbitrary
segmentations and permutations of the source sentence.

5 Conclusions
In this paper, we have presented a methodology for ana-
lyzing the errors of PBTS, based on the computation of
an approximation of the BLEU-4 oracle score. We have
shown that this approximation could be computed fairly
accurately and efficiently using Integer Linear Program-
ming techniques. Our main result is a confirmation of
the fact that extant PBTS systems are expressive enough
to achieve very high translation performance with respect
to conventional quality measurements. The main efforts
should therefore strive to improve on the way phrases and
hypotheses are scored during training. This gives further
support to attempts aimed at designing context-dependent
scoring functions as in (Stroppa et al., 2007; Gimpel and
Smith, 2008), or at attempts to perform discriminative
training of feature-rich models. (Bangalore et al., 2007).

We have shown that the examination of difficult-to-
translate sentences was an effective way to detect errors
or inconsistencies in the reference translations, making
our approach a potential aid for controlling the quality or
assessing the difficulty of test data. Our experiments have
also highlighted the impact of various parameters.

Various extensions of the baseline ILP program have
been suggested and/or evaluated. In particular, the ILP
formalism lends itself well to expressing various con-
straints that are typically used in conventional PBTS. In

17The best BLEU-4 oracle they achieve on Europarl German to En-
glish is approximately 48; but they considered a smaller version of the
training corpus and the WMT’06 test set.

941



our future work, we aim at using this ILP framework to
systematically assess various search configurations. We
plan to explore how replacing non-reachable references
with high-score pseudo-references can improve discrim-
inative training of PBTS. We are also concerned by de-
termining how tight is our approximation of the BLEU-
4 score is: to this end, we intend to compute the best
BLEU-4 score within the n-best solutions of the oracle
decoding problem.

Acknowledgments
Warm thanks to Houda Bouamor for helping us with the
annotation tool. This work has been partly financed by
OSEO, the French State Agency for Innovation, under
the Quaero program.

References
Tobias Achterberg. 2007. Constraint Integer Program-

ming. Ph.D. thesis, Technische Universität Berlin.
http://opus.kobv.de/tuberlin/volltexte/
2007/1611/.

Abhishek Arun and Philipp Koehn. 2007. Online learning
methods for discriminative training of phrase based statis-
tical machine translation. In Proc. of MT Summit XI, Copen-
hagen, Denmark.

Michael Auli, Adam Lopez, Hieu Hoang, and Philipp Koehn.
2009. A systematic analysis of translation model search
spaces. In Proc. of WMT, pages 224–232, Athens, Greece.

Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. METEOR: An
automatic metric for MT evaluation with improved correla-
tion with human judgments. In Proc. of the ACL Workshop
on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for Machine
Translation and/or Summarization, pages 65–72, Ann Arbor,
Michigan.

Srinivas Bangalore, Patrick Haffner, and Stephan Kanthak.
2007. Statistical machine translation through global lexi-
cal selection and sentence reconstruction. In Proc. of ACL,
pages 152–159, Prague, Czech Republic.

Léon Bottou and Olivier Bousquet. 2008. The tradeoffs of large
scale learning. In Proc. of NIPS, pages 161–168, Vancouver,
B.C., Canada.

Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz, and Josh
Schroeder. 2009. Findings of the 2009 Workshop on Sta-
tistical Machine Translation. In Proc. of WMT, pages 1–28,
Athens, Greece.

David Chiang, Steve DeNeefe, Yee Seng Chan, and Hwee Tou
Ng. 2008. Decomposability of translation metrics for
improved evaluation and efficient algorithms. In Proc. of
ECML, pages 610–619, Honolulu, Hawaii.

John De Nero and Dan Klein. 2008. The complexity of phrase
alignment problems. In Proc. of ACL: HLT, Short Papers,
pages 25–28, Columbus, Ohio.

Markus Dreyer, Keith B. Hall, and Sanjeev P. Khudanpur. 2007.
Comparing reordering constraints for smt using efficient bleu
oracle computation. In NAACL-HLT/AMTA Workshop on
Syntax and Structure in Statistical Translation, pages 103–
110, Rochester, New York.

Ulrich Germann, Michael Jahr, Kevin Knight, Daniel Marcu,
and Kenji Yamada. 2001. Fast decoding and optimal decod-
ing for machine translation. In Proc. of ACL, pages 228–235,
Toulouse, France.

Ulrich Germann, Michael Jahr, Kevin Knight, Daniel Marcu,
and Kenji Yamada. 2004. Fast and optimal decoding for
machine translation. Artificial Intelligence, 154(1-2):127–
143.

Ulrich Germann. 2003. Greedy decoding for statistical ma-
chine translation in almost linear time. In Proc. of NAACL,
pages 1–8, Edmonton, Canada.

Kevin Gimpel and Noah A. Smith. 2008. Rich source-side
context for statistical machine translation. In Proc. of WMT,
pages 9–17, Columbus, Ohio.

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu. 2003. Sta-
tistical phrase-based translation. In Proc. of NAACL, pages
48–54, Edmonton, Canada.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris Callison-
Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi, Brooke Cowan,
Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, On-
drej Bojar, Alexandra Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007.
Moses: Open source toolkit for statistical machine transla-
tion. In Proc. of ACL, demonstration session.

Philipp Koehn. 2004. Pharaoh: A beam search decoder for
phrase-based statistical machine translation models. In Proc.
of AMTA, pages 115–124, Washington DC.

Shankar Kumar and William Byrne. 2005. Local phrase re-
ordering models for statistical machine translation. In Proc.
of HLT, pages 161–168, Vancouver, Canada.

Alon Lavie, Kenji Sagae, and Shyamsundar Jayaraman. The
significance of recall in automatic metrics for MT evaluation.
In In Proc. of AMTA, pages 134–143, Washington DC.

Gregor Leusch, Evgeny Matusov, and Hermann Ney. 2008.
Complexity of finding the BLEU-optimal hypothesis in a
confusion network. In Proc. of EMNLP, pages 839–847,
Honolulu, Hawaii.

Zhifei Li and Sanjeev Khudanpur. 2009. Efficient extraction
of oracle-best translations from hypergraphs. In Proc. of
NAACL, pages 9–12, Boulder, Colorado.

Percy Liang, Alexandre Bouchard-Côté, Dan Klein, and Ben
Taskar. 2006. An end-to-end discriminative approach to ma-
chine translation. In Proc. of ACL, pages 761–768, Sydney,
Australia.

Adam Lopez. 2009. Translation as weighted deduction. In
Proc. of EACL, pages 532–540, Athens, Greece.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A systematic com-
parison of various statistical alignment models. Comput.
Linguist., 29(1):19–51.

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training in statis-
tical machine translation. In Proc. of ACL, pages 160–167,
Sapporo, Japan.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-jing Zhu.
2002. Bleu: A method for automatic evaluation of machine
translation. Technical report, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

D. Roth and W. Yih. 2005. Integer linear programming infer-
ence for conditional random fields. In Proc. of ICML, pages
737–744, Bonn, Germany.

Nicolas Stroppa, Antal van den Bosch, and Andy Way. 2007.
Exploiting source similarity for smt using context-informed

942



features. In Andy Way and Barbara Gawronska, editors,
Proc. of TMI, pages 231–240, Skövde, Sweden.

Christoph Tillmann and Tong Zhang. 2006. A discriminative
global training algorithm for statistical mt. In Proc. of ACL,
pages 721–728, Sydney, Australia.

Marco Turchi, Tijl De Bie, and Nello Cristianini. 2008. Learn-
ing performance of a machine translation system: a statistical
and computational analysis. In Proc. of WMT, pages 35–43,
Columbus, Ohio.

Richard Zens and Hermann Ney. 2005. Word graphs for sta-
tistical machine translation. In Proc. of the ACL Workshop
on Building and Using Parallel Texts, pages 191–198, Ann
Arbor, Michigan.

943


