










































Effects of Empty Categories on Machine Translation


Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 636–645,
MIT, Massachusetts, USA, 9-11 October 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Effects of Empty Categories on Machine Translation

Tagyoung Chung and Daniel Gildea
Department of Computer Science

University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627

Abstract

We examine effects that empty categories have
on machine translation. Empty categories are
elements in parse trees that lack corresponding
overt surface forms (words) such as dropped
pronouns and markers for control construc-
tions. We start by training machine trans-
lation systems with manually inserted empty
elements. We find that inclusion of some
empty categories in training data improves the
translation result. We expand the experiment
by automatically inserting these elements into
a larger data set using various methods and
training on the modified corpus. We show that
even when automatic prediction of null ele-
ments is not highly accurate, it nevertheless
improves the end translation result.

1 Introduction

An empty category is an element in a parse tree
that does not have a corresponding surface word.
They include traces such as Wh-traces which indi-
cate movement operations in interrogative sentences
and dropped pronouns which indicate omission of
pronouns in places where pronouns are normally
expected. Many treebanks include empty nodes in
parse trees to represent non-local dependencies or
dropped elements. Examples of the former include
traces such as relative clause markers in the Penn
Treebank (Bies et al., 1995). An example of the lat-
ter include dropped pronouns in the Korean Tree-
bank (Han and Ryu, 2005) and the Chinese Tree-
bank (Xue and Xia, 2000).

In languages such as Chinese, Japanese, and Ko-
rean, pronouns are frequently or regularly dropped

when they are pragmatically inferable. These lan-
guages are called pro-drop languages. Dropped pro-
nouns are quite a common phenomenon in these lan-
guages. In the Chinese Treebank, they occur once
in every four sentences on average. In Korean the
Treebank, they are even more frequent, occurring
in almost every sentence on average. Translating
these pro-drop languages into languages such as En-
glish where pronouns are regularly retained could
be problematic because English pronouns have to be
generated from nothing.

There are several different strategies to counter
this problem. A special NULL word is typically
used when learning word alignment (Brown et al.,
1993). Words that have non-existent counterparts
can be aligned to the NULL word. In phrase-based
translation, the phrase learning system may be able
to learn pronouns as a part of larger phrases. If the
learned phrases include pronouns on the target side
that are dropped from source side, the system may
be able to insert pronouns even when they are miss-
ing from the source language. This is an often ob-
served phenomenon in phrase-based translation sys-
tems. Explicit insertion of missing words can also
be included in syntax-based translation models (Ya-
mada and Knight, 2001). For the closely related
problem of inserting grammatical function particles
in English-to-Korean and English-to-Japanese ma-
chine translation, Hong et al. (2009) and Isozaki et
al. (2010) employ preprocessing techniques to add
special symbols to the English source text.

In this paper, we examine a strategy of automat-
ically inserting two types of empty elements from
the Korean and Chinese treebanks as a preprocess-

636



Korean
*T* 0.47 trace of movement
(NP *pro*) 0.88 dropped subject or object
(WHNP *op*) 0.40 empty operator in relative

constructions
*?* 0.006 verb deletion, VP ellipsis,

and others

Chinese
(XP (-NONE- *T*)) 0.54 trace of A’-movement
(NP (-NONE- *)) 0.003 trace of A-movement
(NP (-NONE- *pro*)) 0.27 dropped subject or object
(NP (-NONE- *PRO*)) 0.31 control structures
(WHNP (-NONE- *OP*)) 0.53 empty operator in relative

constructions
(XP (-NONE- *RNR*)) 0.026 right node raising
(XP (-NONE- *?*)) 0 others

Table 1: List of empty categories in the Korean Treebank
(top) and the Chinese Treebank (bottom) and their per-
sentence frequencies in the training data of initial experi-
ments.

ing step. We first describe our experiments with data
that have been annotated with empty categories, fo-
cusing on zero pronouns and traces such as those
used in control constructions. We use these an-
notations to insert empty elements in a corpus and
train a machine translation system to see if they im-
prove translation results. Then, we illustrate differ-
ent methods we have devised to automatically insert
empty elements to corpus. Finally, we describe our
experiments with training machine translation sys-
tems with corpora that are automatically augmented
with empty elements. We conclude this paper by
discussing possible improvements to the different
methods we describe in this paper.

2 Initial experiments

2.1 Setup

We start by testing the plausibility of our idea
of preprocessing corpus to insert empty cate-
gories with ideal datasets. The Chinese Treebank
(LDC2005T01U01) is annotated with null elements
and a portion of the Chinese Treebank has been
translated into English (LDC2007T02). The Korean
Treebank version 1.0 (LDC2002T26) is also anno-
tated with null elements and includes an English
translation. We extract null elements along with
tree terminals (words) and train a simple phrase-

BLEU
Chi-Eng No null elements 19.31

w/ *pro* 19.68
w/ *PRO* 19.54
w/ *pro* and *PRO* 20.20
w/ all null elements 20.48

Kor-Eng No null elements 20.10
w/ *pro* 20.37
w/ all null elements 19.71

Table 2: BLEU score result of initial experiments.
Each experiment has different empty categories added in.
*PRO* stands for the empty category used to mark con-
trol structures and *pro* indicates dropped pronouns for
both Chinese and Korean.

based machine translation system. Both datasets
have about 5K sentences and 80% of the data was
used for training, 10% for development, and 10%
for testing.

We used Moses (Koehn et al., 2007) to train
machine translation systems. Default parameters
were used for all experiments. The same number
of GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003) iterations were
used for all experiments. Minimum error rate train-
ing (Och, 2003) was run on each system afterwards,
and the BLEU score (Papineni et al., 2002) was cal-
culated on the test sets.

There are several different empty categories in
the different treebanks. We have experimented with
leaving in and out different empty categories for dif-
ferent experiments to see their effect. We hypoth-
esized that nominal phrasal empty categories such
as dropped pronouns may be more useful than other
ones, since they are the ones that may be missing in
the source language (Chinese and Korean) but have
counterparts in the target (English). Table 1 summa-
rizes empty categories in Chinese and Korean tree-
bank and their frequencies in the training data.

2.2 Results

Table 2 summarizes our findings. It is clear that
not all elements improve translation results when in-
cluded in the training data. For the Chinese to En-
glish experiment, empty categories that mark con-
trol structures (*PRO*), which serve as the sub-
ject of a dependent clause, and dropped pronouns
(*pro*), which mark omission of pragmatically in-

637



word P (e | ∗pro∗) word P (e | ∗PRO∗)
the 0.18 to 0.45
i 0.13 NULL 0.10
it 0.08 the 0.02
to 0.08 of 0.02
they 0.05 as 0.02

Table 3: A lexical translation table from the Korean-
English translation system (left) and a lexical transla-
tion from the Chinese-English translation system (right).
For the Korean-English lexical translation table, the left
column is English words that are aligned to a dropped
pronoun (*pro*) and the right column is the conditional
probability of P (e | ∗pro∗). For the Chinese-English
lexical translation table, the left column is English words
that are aligned to a control construction marker (*PRO*)
and the right column is the conditional probability of
P (e | ∗PRO∗).

ferable pronouns, helped to improve translation re-
sults the most. For the Korean to English experi-
ment, the dropped pronoun is the only empty cate-
gory that seems to improve translation.

For the Korean to English experiment, we also
tried annotating whether the dropped pronouns are a
subject, an object, or a complement using informa-
tion from the Treebank’s function tags, since English
pronouns are inflected according to case. However,
this did not yield a very different result and in fact
was slightly worse. This is possibly due to data spar-
sity created when dropped pronouns are annotated.
Dropped pronouns in subject position were the over-
whelming majority (91%), and there were too few
dropped pronouns in object position to learn good
parameters.

2.3 Analysis

Table 3 and Table 4 give us a glimpse of why having
these empty categories may lead to better transla-
tion. Table 3 is the lexical translation table for the
dropped pronoun (*pro*) from the Korean to En-
glish experiment and the marker for control con-
structions (*PRO*) from the Chinese to English ex-
periment. For the dropped pronoun in the Korean
to English experiment, although there are errors,
the table largely reflects expected translations of a
dropped pronoun. It is possible that the system is in-
serting pronouns in right places that would be miss-
ing otherwise. For the control construction marker

in the Chinese to English experiment, the top trans-
lation for *PRO* is the English word to, which is ex-
pected since Chinese clauses that have control con-
struction markers often translate to English as to-
infinitives. However, as we discuss in the next para-
graph, the presence of control construction markers
may affect translation results in more subtle ways
when combined with phrase learning.

Table 4 shows how translations from the system
trained with null elements and the system trained
without null elements differ. The results are taken
from the test set and show extracts from larger sen-
tences. Chinese verbs that follow the empty node for
control constructions (*PRO*) are generally trans-
lated to English as a verb in to-infinitive form, a
gerund, or a nominalized verb. The translation re-
sults show that the system trained with this null el-
ement (*PRO*) translates verbs that follow the null
element largely in such a manner. However, it may
not be always closest to the reference. It is exempli-
fied by the translation of one phrase.

Experiments in this section showed that prepro-
cessing the corpus to include some empty elements
can improve translation results. We also identified
which empty categories maybe helpful for improv-
ing translation for different language pairs. In the
next section, we focus on how we add these ele-
ments automatically to a corpus that is not annotated
with empty elements for the purpose of preprocess-
ing corpus for machine translation.

3 Recovering empty nodes

There are a few previous works that have attempted
restore empty nodes for parse trees using the Penn
English Treebank. Johnson (2002) uses rather sim-
ple pattern matching to restore empty categories as
well as their co-indexed antecedents with surpris-
ingly good accuracy. Gabbard et al. (2006) present
a more sophisticated algorithm that tries to recover
empty categories in several steps. In each step, one
or more empty categories are restored using pat-
terns or classifiers (five maximum-entropy and two
perceptron-based classifiers to be exact).

What we are trying to achieve has obvious simi-
larity to these previous works. However, there are
several differences. First, we deal with different
languages. Second, we are only trying to recover

638



Chinese English Reference System trained w/ nulls System trained w/o nulls
*PRO*贯彻 implementing implementation implemented
*PRO*逐步形成 have gradually formed to gradually form gradually formed
*PRO*吸引外资作为 attracting foreign investment attracting foreign investment attract foreign capital

Table 4: The first column is a Chinese word or a phrase that immediately follows empty node marker for Chinese
control constructions. The second column is the English reference translation. The third column is the translation
output from the system that is trained with the empty categories added in. The fourth column is the translation output
from the system trained without the empty categories added, which was given the test set without the empty categories.
Words or phrases and their translations presented in the table are part of larger sentences.

a couple of empty categories that would help ma-
chine translation. Third, we are not interested in re-
covering antecedents. The linguistic differences and
the empty categories we are interested in recovering
made the task much harder than it is for English. We
will discuss this in more detail later.

From this section on, we will discuss only
Chinese-English translation because Chinese
presents a much more interesting case, since we
need to recover two different empty categories that
are very similarly distributed. Data availability
was also a consideration since much larger datasets
(bilingual and monolingual) are available for
Chinese. The Korean Treebank has only about 5K
sentences, whereas the version of Chinese Treebank
we used includes 28K sentences.

The Chinese Treebank was used for all experi-
ments that are mentioned in the rest of this Section.
Roughly 90% of the data was used for the training
set, and the rest was used for the test set. As we have
discussed in Section 2, we are interested in recover-
ing dropped pronouns (*pro*) and control construc-
tion markers (*PRO*). We have tried three different
relatively simple methods so that recovering empty
elements would not require any special infrastruc-
ture.

3.1 Pattern matching
Johnson (2002) defines a pattern for empty node re-
covery to be a minimally connected tree fragment
containing an empty node and all nodes co-indexed
with it. Figure 1 shows an example of a pattern. We
extracted patterns according this definition, and it
became immediately clear that the same definition
that worked for English will not work for Chinese.
Table 5 shows the top five patterns that match con-
trol constructions (*PRO*) and dropped pronouns
(*pro*). The top pattern that matches *pro* and

*PRO* are both exactly the same, since the pat-
tern will be matched against parse trees where empty
nodes have been deleted.

When it became apparent that we cannot use the
same definition of patterns to successfully restore
empty categories, we added more context to the pat-
terns. Patterns needed more context for them to be
able to disambiguate between sites that need to be
inserted with *pro*s and sites that need to be in-
serted with *PRO*s. Instead of using minimal tree
fragments that matched empty categories, we in-
cluded the parent and siblings of the minimal tree
fragment in the pattern (pattern matching method
1). This way, we gained more context. However,
as can be seen in Table 5, there is still a lot of over-
lap between patterns for the two empty categories.
However, it is more apparent that at least we can
choose the pattern that will maximize matches for
one empty category and then discard that pattern for
the other empty category.

We also tried giving patterns even more context
by including terminals if preterminals are present in
the pattern (pattern matching method 2). In this way,
we are able have more context for patterns such as
(VP VV (IP ( NP (-NONE- *PRO*) ) VP)) by know-
ing what the verb that precedes the empty category
is. Instead of the original pattern, we would have
patterns such as (VP (VV决定) ( IP ( NP (-NONE-
*PRO*)) VP)). We are able to gain more context be-
cause some verbs select for a control construction.
The Chinese verb 决定 generally translates to En-
glish as to decide and is more often followed by
a control construction than by a dropped pronoun.
Whereas the pattern (VP (VV 决定) ( IP ( NP (-
NONE- *PRO*)) VP)) occurred 154 times in the
training data, the pattern (VP (VV 决定) (IP (NP
(-NONE- *pro*)) VP)) occurred only 8 times in the

639



IP

NP-SBJ

-NONE-

*pro*

VP

VV

谢谢

NP-OBJ

PN

各位

PU

。

→ IP

VP

VV

谢谢

NP-OBJ

PN

各位

PU

。

(IP (NP-SBJ (-NONE- *pro*)) VP PU) (IP VP PU)

Figure 1: An example of a tree with an empty node (left), the tree stripped of an empty node (right), and a pattern that
matches the example. Sentences are parsed without empty nodes and if a tree fragment (IP VP PU) is encountered in
a parse tree, the empty node may be inserted according to the learned pattern (IP (NP-SBJ (-NONE- *pro*)) VP PU).

*PRO* *pro*
Count Pattern Count Pattern
12269 ( IP ( NP (-NONE- *PRO*) ) VP ) 10073 ( IP ( NP (-NONE- *pro*) ) VP )

102 ( IP PU ( NP (-NONE- *PRO*) ) VP PU ) 657 ( IP ( NP (-NONE- *pro*) ) VP PU )
14 ( IP ( NP (-NONE- *PRO*) ) VP PRN ) 415 ( IP ADVP ( NP (-NONE- *pro*) ) VP )
13 ( IP NP ( NP (-NONE- *PRO*) ) VP ) 322 ( IP NP ( NP (-NONE- *pro*) ) VP )
12 ( CP ( NP (-NONE- *PRO*) ) CP ) 164 ( IP PP PU ( NP (-NONE- *pro*) ) VP )

*PRO* *pro*
Count Pattern Count Pattern
2991 ( VP VV NP ( IP ( NP (-NONE- *PRO*) ) VP ) ) 1782 ( CP ( IP ( NP (-NONE- *pro*) ) VP ) DEC )
2955 ( VP VV ( IP ( NP (-NONE- *PRO*) ) VP ) ) 1007 ( VP VV ( IP ( NP (-NONE- *pro*) ) VP ) )
850 ( CP ( IP ( NP (-NONE- *PRO*) ) VP ) DEC ) 702 ( LCP ( IP ( NP (-NONE- *pro*) ) VP ) LC )
765 ( PP P ( IP ( NP (-NONE- *PRO*) ) VP ) ) 684 ( IP IP PU ( IP ( NP (-NONE- *pro*) ) VP ) PU )
654 ( LCP ( IP ( NP (-NONE- *PRO*) ) VP ) LC ) 654 ( TOP ( IP ( NP (-NONE- *pro*) ) VP PU ) )

Table 5: Top five minimally connected patterns that match *pro* and *PRO* (top). Patterns that match both *pro*
and *PRO* are shaded with the same color. The table on the bottom show more refined patterns that are given added
context by including the parent and siblings to minimally connected patterns. Many patterns still match both *pro*
and *PRO* but there is a lesser degree of overlap.

640



training data.
After the patterns are extracted, we performed

pruning similar to the pruning that was done by
Johnson (2002). The patterns that have less than
50% chance of matching are discarded. For exam-
ple, if (IP VP) occurs one hundred times in a tree-
bank that is stripped of empty nodes and if pattern
(IP (NP (-NONE- *PRO*)) VP) occurs less than
fifty times in the same treebank that is annotated
with empty nodes, it is discarded.1 We also found
that we can discard patterns that occur very rarely
(that occur only once) without losing much accu-
racy. In cases where there was an overlap between
two empty categories, the pattern was chosen for
either *pro* or *PRO*, whichever that maximized
the number of matchings and then discarded for the
other.

3.2 Conditional random field

We tried building a simple conditional random field
(Lafferty et al., 2001) to predict null elements. The
model examines each and every word boundary and
decides whether to leave it as it is, insert *pro*,
or insert *PRO*. The obvious disadvantage of this
method is that if there are two consecutive null el-
ements, it will miss at least one of them. Although
there were some cases like this in the treebank, they
were rare enough that we decided to ignore them.
We first tried using only differently sized local win-
dows of words as features (CRF model 1). We also
experimented with adding the part-of-speech tags of
words as features (CRF model 2). Finally, we exper-
imented with a variation where the model is given
each word and its part-of-speech tag and its imme-
diate parent node as features (CRF model 3).

We experimented with using different regulariza-
tions and different values for regularizations but it
did not make much difference in the final results.
The numbers we report later used L2 regularization.

3.3 Parsing

In this approach, we annotated nonterminal symbols
in the treebank to include information about empty
categories and then extracted a context free gram-
mar from the modified treebank. We parsed with
the modified grammar, and then deterministically re-

1See Johnson (2002) for more details.

*PRO* *pro*
Cycle Prec. Rec. F1 Prec Rec. F1
1 0.38 0.08 0.13 0.38 0.08 0.12
2 0.52 0.23 0.31 0.37 0.18 0.24
3 0.59 0.46 0.52 0.43 0.24 0.31
4 0.62 0.50 0.56 0.47 0.25 0.33
5 0.61 0.52 0.56 0.47 0.33 0.39
6 0.60 0.53 0.56 0.46 0.39 0.42
7 0.58 0.52 0.55 0.43 0.40 0.41

Table 6: Result using the grammars output by the Berke-
ley state-splitting grammar trainer to predict empty cate-
gories

covered the empty categories from the trees. Fig-
ure 2 illustrates how the trees were modified. For
every empty node, the most immediate ancestor of
the empty node that has more than one child was an-
notated with information about the empty node, and
the empty node was deleted. We annotated whether
the deleted empty node was *pro* or *PRO* and
where it was deleted. Adding where the child was
necessary because, even though most empty nodes
are the first child, there are many exceptions.

We first extracted a plain context free grammar af-
ter modifying the trees and used the modified gram-
mar to parse the test set and then tried to recover the
empty elements. This approach did not work well.
We then applied the latent annotation learning pro-
cedures of Petrov et al. (2006)2 to refine the non-
terminals in the modified grammar. This has been
shown to help parsing in many different situations.
Although the state splitting procedure is designed to
maximize the likelihood of of the parse trees, rather
than specifically to predict the empty nodes, learning
a refined grammar over modified trees was also ef-
fective in helping to predict empty nodes. Table 6
shows the dramatic improvement after each split,
merge, and smoothing cycle. The gains leveled off
after the sixth iteration and the sixth order grammar
was used to run later experiments.

3.4 Results
Table 7 shows the results of our experiments. The
numbers are very low when compared to accuracy
reported in other works that were mentioned in the
beginning of this Section, which dealt with the Penn
English Treebank. Dropped pronouns are especially

2http://code.google.com/p/berkeleyparser/

641



IP

NP-SBJ

-NONE-

*pro*

VP

VV

谢谢

NP-OBJ

PN

各位

PU

。

→ SPRO0IP

VP

VV

谢谢

NP-OBJ

PN

各位

PU

。

Figure 2: An example of tree modification

*PRO* *pro*
Prec. Rec. F1 Prec Rec. F1

Pattern 1 0.65 0.61 0.63 0.41 0.23 0.29
Pattern 2 0.67 0.58 0.62 0.46 0.24 0.31
CRF 1 0.66 0.31 0.43 0.53 0.24 0.33
CRF 2 0.68 0.46 0.55 0.58 0.35 0.44
CRF 3 0.63 0.47 0.54 0.54 0.36 0.43
Parsing 0.60 0.53 0.56 0.46 0.39 0.42

Table 7: Result of recovering empty nodes

hard to recover. However, we are dealing with a dif-
ferent language and different kinds of empty cate-
gories. Empty categories recovered this way may
still help translation. In the next section, we take the
best variation of the each method use it to add empty
categories to a training corpus and train machine
translation systems to see whether having empty cat-
egories can help improve translation in more realis-
tic situations.

3.5 Analysis

The results reveal many interesting aspects about re-
covering empty categories. The results suggest that
tree structures are important features for finding sites
where markers for control constructions (*PRO*)
have been deleted. The method utilizing patterns
that have more information about tree structure of
these sites performed better than other methods. The
fact that the method using parsing was better at pre-
dicting *PRO*s than the methods that used the con-
ditional random fields also corroborates this finding.
For predicting dropped pronouns, the method using
the CRFs did better than the others. This suggests
that rather than tree structure, local context of words

and part-of-speech tags maybe more important fea-
tures for predicting dropped pronouns. It may also
suggest that methods using robust machine learning
techniques are better outfitted for predicting dropped
pronouns.

It is interesting to note how effective the parser
was at predicting empty categories. The method us-
ing the parser requires the least amount of supervi-
sion. The method using CRFs requires feature de-
sign, and the method that uses patterns needs hu-
man decisions on what the patterns should be and
pruning criteria. There is also room for improve-
ment. The split-merge cycles learn grammars that
produce better parse trees rather than grammars that
predict empty categories more accurately. By modi-
fying this learning process, we may be able to learn
grammars that are better suited for predicting empty
categories.

4 Experiments

4.1 Setup

For Chinese-English, we used a subset of FBIS
newswire data consisting of about 2M words and
60K sentences on the English side. For our develop-
ment set and test set, we had about 1000 sentences
each with 10 reference translations taken from the
NIST 2002 MT evaluation. All Chinese data was
re-segmented with the CRF-based Stanford Chinese
segmenter (Chang et al., 2008) that is trained on
the segmentation of the Chinese Treebank for con-
sistency. The parser used in Section 3 was used to
parse the training data so that null elements could
be recovered from the trees. The same method for
recovering null elements was applied to the train-

642



BLEU BP *PRO* *pro*
Baseline 23.73 1.000
Pattern 23.99 0.998 0.62 0.31
CRF 24.69* 1.000 0.55 0.44
Parsing 23.99 1.000 0.56 0.42

Table 8: Final BLEU score result. The asterisk indicates
statistical significance at p < 0.05 with 1000 iterations
of paired bootstrap resampling. BP stands for the brevity
penalty in BLEU. F1 scores for recovering empty cate-
gories are repeated here for comparison.

ing, development, and test sets to insert empty nodes
for each experiment. The baseline system was also
trained using the raw data.

We used Moses (Koehn et al., 2007) to train
machine translation systems. Default parameters
were used for all experiments. The same number
of GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003) iterations were
used for all experiments. Minimum error rate train-
ing (Och, 2003) was run on each system afterwards
and the BLEU score (Papineni et al., 2002) was cal-
culated on the test set.

4.2 Results

Table 8 summarizes our results. Generally, all sys-
tems produced BLEU scores that are better than the
baseline, but the best BLEU score came from the
system that used the CRF for null element insertion.
The machine translation system that used training
data from the method that was overall the best in
predicting empty elements performed the best. The
improvement is 0.96 points in BLEU score, which
represents statistical significance at p < 0.002 based
on 1000 iterations of paired bootstrap resampling
(Koehn, 2004). Brevity penalties applied for cal-
culating BLEU scores are presented to demonstrate
that the baseline system is not penalized for produc-
ing shorter sentences compared other systems.3

The BLEU scores presented in Table 8 represent
the best variations of each method we have tried
for recovering empty elements. Although the dif-
ference was small, when the F1 score were same
for two variations of a method, it seemed that we
could get slightly better BLEU score with the varia-
tion that had higher recall for recovering empty ele-

3We thank an anonymous reviewer for tipping us to examine
the brevity penalty.

ments rather the variation with higher precision.
We tried a variation of the experiment where the

CRF method is used to recover *pro* and the pattern
matching is used to recover *PRO*, since these rep-
resent the best methods for recovering the respective
empty categories. However, it was not as successful
as we thought would be. The resulting BLEU score
from the experiment was 24.24, which is lower than
the one that used the CRF method to recover both
*pro* and *PRO*. The problem was we used a very
naïve method of resolving conflict between two dif-
ferent methods. The CRF method identified 17463
sites in the training data where *pro* should be
added. Of these sites, the pattern matching method
guessed 2695 sites should be inserted with *PRO*
rather than *pro*, which represent more than 15%
of total sites that the CRF method decided to in-
sert *pro*. In the aforementioned experiment, wher-
ever there was a conflict, both *pro* and *PRO*
were inserted. This probably lead the experiment
to have worse result than using only the one best
method. This experiment suggest that more sophisti-
cated methods should be considered when resolving
conflicts created by using heterogeneous methods to
recover different empty categories.

Table 9 shows five example translations of source
sentences in the test set that have one of the empty
categories. Since empty categories have been auto-
matically inserted, they are not always in the cor-
rect places. The table includes the translation results
from the baseline system where the training and test
sets did not have empty categories and the transla-
tion results from the system (the one that used the
CRF) that is trained on an automatically augmented
corpus and given the automatically augmented test
set.

5 Conclusion

In this paper, we have showed that adding some
empty elements can help building machine transla-
tion systems. We showed that we can still benefit
from augmenting the training corpus with empty el-
ements even when empty element prediction is less
than what would be conventionally considered ro-
bust.

We have also shown that there is a lot of room for
improvement. More comprehensive and sophisti-

643



source 中国计划 *PRO*投资在基础设施上
reference china plans to invest in the infrastructure
system trained w/ nulls china plans to invest in infrastructure
system trained w/o nulls china ’s investment in infrastructure
source 有利 *PRO*巩固香港的贸易和航运中心
reference good for consolidating the trade and shipping center of hong kong
system trained w/ nulls favorable to the consolidation of the trade and shipping center in hong kong
system trained w/o nulls hong kong will consolidate the trade and shipping center
source 一些大型企业 *PRO*逐步走向破产
reference some large - sized enterprises to gradually go bankrupt
system trained w/ nulls some large enterprises to gradually becoming bankrupt
system trained w/o nulls some large enterprises gradually becoming bankrupt
source *pro*目前还不清楚
reference it is not clear now
system trained w/ nulls it is also not clear
system trained w/o nulls he is not clear
source *pro*现在还不清楚
reference it is not clear yet
system trained w/ nulls it is still not clear
system trained w/o nulls is still not clear

Table 9: Sample translations. The system trained without nulls is the baseline system where the training corpus and
test corpus did not have empty categories. The system trained with nulls is the system trained with the training corpus
and the test corpus that have been automatically augmented with empty categories. All examples are part of longer
sentences.

cated methods, perhaps resembling the work of Gab-
bard et al. (2006) may be necessary for more accu-
rate recovery of empty elements. We can also con-
sider simpler methods where different algorithms
are used for recovering different empty elements, in
which case, we need to be careful about how recov-
ering different empty elements could interact with
each other as exemplified by our discussion of the
pattern matching algorithm in Section 3 and our ex-
periment presented in Section 4.2.

There are several other issues we may consider
when recovering empty categories that are miss-
ing in the target language. We only considered
empty categories that are present in treebanks. How-
ever, there might be some empty elements which are
not annotated but nevertheless helpful for improv-
ing machine translation. As always, preprocessing
the corpus to address a certain problem in machine
translation is less principled than tackling the prob-
lem head on by integrating it into the machine trans-
lation system itself. It may be beneficial to include
consideration for empty elements in the decoding
process, so that it can benefit from interacting with

other elements of the machine translation system.

Acknowledgments We thank the anonymous re-
viewers for their helpful comments. This work
was supported by NSF grants IIS-0546554 and IIS-
0910611.

References
Ann Bies, Mark Ferguson, Karen Katz, and Robert Mac-

Intyre. 1995. Bracketing guidelines for treebank II
style. Penn Treebank Project, January.

Peter F. Brown, Stephen A. Della Pietra, Vincent J. Della
Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 1993. The mathematics
of statistical machine translation: Parameter estima-
tion. Computational Linguistics, 19(2):263–311.

Pi-Chuan Chang, Michel Galley, and Christopher Man-
ning. 2008. Optimizing Chinese word segmentation
for machine translation performance. In Proceedings
of the Third Workshop on Statistical Machine Transla-
tion, pages 224–232.

Ryan Gabbard, Seth Kulick, and Mitchell Marcus. 2006.
Fully parsing the Penn Treebank. In Proceedings of
the Human Language Technology Conference of the
NAACL, Main Conference, pages 184–191, New York

644



City, USA, June. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Na-Rae Han and Shijong Ryu. 2005. Guidelines for
Penn Korean Treebank version 2.0. Technical report,
IRCS, University of Pennsylvania.

Gumwon Hong, Seung-Wook Lee, and Hae-Chang Rim.
2009. Bridging morpho-syntactic gap between source
and target sentences for English-Korean statistical ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP
2009 Conference Short Papers, pages 233–236.

Hideki Isozaki, Katsuhito Sudoh, Hajime Tsukada, and
Kevin Duh. 2010. Head finalization: A simple re-
ordering rule for sov languages. In Proceedings of the
Joint Fifth Workshop on Statistical Machine Transla-
tion and Metrics, pages 244–251.

Mark Johnson. 2002. A simple pattern-matching al-
gorithm for recovering empty nodes and their an-
tecedents. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Confer-
ence of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL-02), Philadelphia, PA.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard
Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra Con-
stantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open source
toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of ACL, Demonstration Session, pages 177–180.

Philipp Koehn. 2004. Statistical significance tests for
machine translation evaluation. In 2004 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP), pages 388–395, Barcelona, Spain, July.

John Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando Pereira.
2001. Conditional random fields: Probabilistic mod-
els for segmenting and labeling sequence data. In Ma-
chine Learning: Proceedings of the Eighteenth Inter-
national Conference (ICML 2001), Stanford, Califor-
nia.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A system-
atic comparison of various statistical alignment mod-
els. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training for
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
41th Annual Conference of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (ACL-03).

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: A method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
40th Annual Conference of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (ACL-02).

Slav Petrov, Leon Barrett, Romain Thibaux, and Dan
Klein. 2006. Learning accurate, compact, and inter-
pretable tree annotation. In Proceedings of the 21st In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics

and 44th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 433–440, Sydney, Aus-
tralia, July. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Nianwen Xue and Fei Xia. 2000. The bracketing guide-
lines for the Penn Chinese Treebank. Technical Report
IRCS-00-08, IRCS, University of Pennsylvania.

Kenji Yamada and Kevin Knight. 2001. A syntax-based
statistical translation model. In Proceedings of the
39th Annual Conference of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (ACL-01), Toulouse, France.

645


