










































Automatic Discovery of Manner Relations and its Applications


Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 315–324,
MIT, Massachusetts, USA, 9-11 October 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Automatic Discovery of Manner Relations and its Applications

Eduardo Blanco and Dan Moldovan
Human Language Technology Research Institute

The University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, TX 75080 USA

{eduardo,moldovan}@hlt.utdallas.edu

Abstract

This paper presents a method for the auto-
matic discovery of MANNER relations from
text. An extended definition of MANNER is
proposed, including restrictions on the sorts
of concepts that can be part of its domain and
range. The connections with other relations
and the lexico-syntactic patterns that encode
MANNER are analyzed. A new feature set spe-
cialized on MANNER detection is depicted and
justified. Experimental results show improve-
ment over previous attempts to extract MAN-
NER. Combinations of MANNER with other
semantic relations are also discussed.

1 Introduction

Extracting semantic relations from text is an impor-
tant step towards understanding the meaning of text.
Many applications that use no semantics, or only
shallow semantics, could benefit by having available
more text semantics. Recently, there is a growing in-
terest in text semantics (Màrquez et al., 2008; Davi-
dov and Rappoport, 2008).

An important semantic relation for many appli-
cations is the MANNER relation. Broadly speaking,
MANNER encodes the mode, style, way or fashion
in which something is done or happened. For ex-
ample, quick delivery encodes a MANNER relation,
since quick is the manner in which the delivery hap-
pened.

An application of MANNER detection is Question
Answering, where many how questions refer to this
particular relation. Consider for example the ques-
tion How did the President communicate his mes-

sage?, and the text Through his spokesman, Obama
sent a strong message [. . . ]. To answer such ques-
tions, it is useful to identify first the MANNER rela-
tions in text.

MANNER occurs frequently in text and it is
expressed by a wide variety of lexico-syntactic
patterns. For example, PropBank annotates
8,037 ARGM-MNR relations (10.7%) out of 74,980
adjunct-like arguments (ARGMs). There are verbs
that state a particular way of doing something, e.g.,
to limp implicitly states a particular way of walk-
ing. Adverbial phrases and prepositional phrases
are the most productive patterns, e.g., The nation’s
industrial sector is now growing very slowly if at
all and He started the company on his own. Con-
sider the following example: The company said
Mr. Stronach will personally direct the restructur-
ing assisted by Manfred Gingl, [. . . ]1. There are
two MANNER relations in this sentence: the under-
lined chunks of text encode the way in which Mr.
Stronach will direct the restructuring.

2 Previous Work

The extraction of semantic relations in general has
caught the attention of several researchers. Ap-
proaches to detect semantic relations usually focus
on particular lexical and syntactic patterns. There
are both unsupervised (Davidov et al., 2007; Turney,
2006) and supervised approaches. The SemEval-
2007 Task 04 (Girju et al., 2007) aimed at relations
between nominals. Work has been done on detect-
ing relations within noun phrases (Nulty, 2007),

1Penn TreeBank, file wsj 0027, sentence 10.

315



named entities (Hirano et al., 2007), clauses (Sz-
pakowicz et al., 1995) and syntax-based comma res-
olution (Srikumar et al., 2008). There have been
proposals to detect a particular relation, e.g., CAUSE
(Chang and Choi, 2006), INTENT (Tatu, 2005),
PART-WHOLE (Girju et al., 2006) and IS-A (Hearst,
1992).

MANNER is a frequent relation, but besides the-
oretical studies there is not much work on detect-
ing it. Girju et al. (2003) propose a set of fea-
tures to extract MANNER exclusively from adverbial
phrases and report a precision of 64.44% and re-
call of 68.67%. MANNER is a semantic role, and all
the works on the extraction of roles (Gildea and Ju-
rafsky, 2002; Giuglea and Moschitti, 2006) extracts
MANNER as well. However, these approaches treat
MANNER as any other role and do not use any spe-
cific features for its detection. As we show in this
paper, MANNER has its own unique characteristics
and identifying them improves the extraction accu-
racy. The two most used semantic role annotation
resources, FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998) and Prop-
Bank (Palmer et al., 2005), include MANNER.

The main contributions of this paper are: (1) em-
pirical study of MANNER and its semantics;
(2) analysis of the differences with other relations;
(3) lexico-syntactic patterns expressing MANNER;
(4) a set of features specialized on the detection of
MANNER; and (5) the way MANNER combines with
other semantic relations.

3 The Semantics of MANNER Relation

Traditionally, a semantic relation is defined by stat-
ing the kind of connection linking two concepts.
For example, MANNER is loosely defined by the
PropBank annotation guidelines2 as manner adverbs
specify how an action is performed [. . . ] manner
should be used when an adverb be an answer to
a question starting with ’how?’. We find this kind
of definition weak and prone to confusion (Section
3.2). Nonetheless, to the best of our knowledge,
semantic relations have been mostly defined stating
only a vague definition.

Following (Helbig, 2005), we propose an ex-
tended definition for semantic relations, includ-

2http://verbs.colorado.edu/˜mpalmer/projects/ace/PBguide
lines.pdf, page 26.

ing semantic restrictions for its domain and range.
These restrictions help deciding which relation
holds between a given pair of concepts. A relation
shall not hold between two concepts unless they be-
long to its domain and range. These restrictions are
based on theoretical and empirical grounds.

3.1 MANNER Definition
Formally, MANNER is represented as MNR(x, y),
and it should be read x is the manner in which
y happened. In addition, DOMAIN(MNR) and
RANGE(MNR) are the sets of sorts of concepts that
can be part of the first and second argument.

RANGE(MNR), namely y, is restricted to situa-
tions, which are defined as anything that happens
at a time and place. Situations include events and
states and can be expressed by verbs or nouns, e.g.,
conference, race, mix and grow. DOMAIN(MNR),
namely x, is restricted to qualities (ql), non temporal
abstract objects (ntao) and states (st). Qualities rep-
resent characteristics that can be assigned to other
concepts, such as slowly and abruptly. Non tempo-
ral abstract objects are intangible entities. They
are somehow product of human reasoning and are
not palpable. They do not encode periods or points
of time, such as week, or yesterday. For example,
odor, disease, and mile are ntao; book and car are
not because they are tangible. Unlike events, states
are situations that do not imply a change in the con-
cepts involved. For example, standing there or hold-
ing hands are states; whereas walking to the park
and pinching him are events. For more details about
these semantic classes, refer to (Helbig, 2005).

These semantic restrictions on MANNER come af-
ter studying previous definitions and manual exami-
nation of hundreds of examples. Their use and ben-
efits are described in Section 4.

3.2 MANNER and Other Semantic Relations
MANNER is close in meaning with several other rela-
tions, specifically INSTRUMENT, AT-LOCATION and
AT-TIME.

Asking how does not identify MANNER in many
cases. For example, given John broke the window
[with a hammer], the question how did John break
the window? can be answered by with the hammer,
and yet the hammer is not the MANNER but the IN-
STRUMENT of the broke event. Other relations that

316



may be confused as MANNER include AT-LOCATION
and AT-TIME, like in [The dog jumped]x [over the
fence]y and [John used to go]x [regularly]y.

A way of solving this ambiguity is by prioritiz-
ing the semantic relations among the possible can-
didates for a given pair of concepts. For exam-
ple, if both INSTRUMENT and MANNER are possi-
ble, the former is extracted. In a similar fashion, AT-
LOCATION and AT-TIME could have higher priority
than MANNER. This idea has one big disadvantage:
the correct detection of MANNER relies on the detec-
tion of several other relations, a problem which has
proven difficult and thus would unnecessarily intro-
duce errors.

Using the proposed extended definition one may
discard the false MANNER relations above. Hammer
is not a quality, non temporal abstract object or state
(hammers are palpable objects), so by definition a
relation of the form MNR(the hammer, y) shall not
hold. Similarly, fence and week do not fulfill the
domain restriction, so MNR(over the fence, y) and
MNR(every other week, y) are not valid either.

MANNER also relates to CAUSE. Again, ask-
ing how? does not resolve the ambiguity. Given
The legislation itself noted that it [was introduced]x
“by request,” [. . . ] (wsj 0041, 47), we believe
the underlined PP indicates the CAUSE and not the
MANNER of x because the introduction of the leg-
islation is the effect of the request. Using the ex-
tended definition, since request is an event (it im-
plies a change), MNR(by request, y) is discarded
based on the domain and range restrictions.

4 Argument Extraction

In order to implement domain and range restrictions,
one needs to map words to the four proposed se-
mantic classes: situations (si), states (st), qualities
(ql) and non temporal abstract objects (ntao). These
classes are the ones involved in MNR; work has been
done to define in a similar way more relations, but
we do not report on that in this paper.

First, the head word of a potential argument is
identified. Then, the head is mapped into a seman-
tic class using three sources of information: POS
tags, WordNet hypernyms and named entity (NE)
types. Table 1 presents the rules that define the map-
ping. We obtained them following a data-driven ap-

proach using a subset of MANNER annotation from
PropBank and FrameNet. Intermediate classes are
defined to facilitate legibility; intermediate classes
ending in -NE only involve named entity types.

Words are automatically POS tagged using a
modified Brill tagger. We do not perform word sense
disambiguation because in our experiments it did not
bring any improvement; all senses are considered
for each word. isHypo(x) for a given word w in-
dicates if any of the senses of w is a hyponym of x
in WordNet 2.0. An in-house NE recognizer is used
to assign NE types. It detects 90 types organized
in a hierarchy with an accuracy of 92% and it has
been used in a state-of-the-art Question Answering
system (Moldovan et al., 2007). As far as the map-
ping is concerned, only the following NE types are
used: human, organization, country, town, province,
other-loc, money, date and time. The mapping also
uses an automatically built list of verbs and nouns
that encode events (verb events and noun events).

The procedure to map words into semantic
classes has been evaluated on a subset of PropBank
which was not used to define the mapping. First,
we selected 1,091 sentences which contained a total
of 171 MANNER relations. We syntactically parsed
the sentences using Charniak’s parser and then per-
formed argument detection by matching the trees to
the syntactic patterns depicted in Section 5. 52,612
arguments pairs were detected as potential MAN-
NER. Because of parsing errors, 146 (85.4%) of the
171 MANNER relations are in this set.

After mapping and enforcing domain and range
constraints, the argument pairs were reduced to
11,724 (22.3%). The filtered subset includes 140
(81.8%) of the 171 MANNER relations. The filtering
does make mistakes, but the massive pruning mainly
filters out potential relations that do not hold: it fil-
ters 77.7% of argument pairs and it only misclassi-
fies 6 pairs.

5 Lexico-Syntactic Patterns Expressing
MANNER

MANNER is expressed by a wide variety of lexico-
syntactic patterns, implicitly or explicitly.

Table 2 shows the syntactic distribution of MAN-
NER relation in PropBank. We only consider rela-
tions between a single node in the syntactic tree and

317



Class Rule
situation state || event
state POStag=verb || isHypo(state.n.4)
event (POStag=verb && in(verb events)) || (POStag=noun &&

!animate object && (isHypo(phenomenon.n.1) || isHypo(event.n.1)
|| in(noun events)))

animate object livingNE || (POStag=noun && ((isHypo(entity.n.1) &&
!isHypo(thing.n.9) && !isHypo(anticipation.n.4)) ||
isHypo(social group.n.1)))

livingNE neType=(human | organization | country | town | province |
other-loc)

quality POStag=(adverb | gerund) || headPP=(with | without)
non temporal abstract object abstract object && !temporal
abstract object neType=money || isHypo(thing.n.9) || (!isHypo(social group.n.1)

&& (isHypo(abstraction.n.6 | psychological feature.n.1 |
possession.n.2 | event.n.1 | state.n.4 | group.n.1 | act.n.2)))

temporal TemporalNE || isHypo(time period.n.1) || isHypo(time.n.5)
temporalNE ne-type=(date | time)

Table 1: Mapping for the semantic classes used for defining DOMAIN(MNR) and RANGE(MNR).
.

Synt. #Occ. %Occ. Examplepattern File, #sent Sentence
ADVP 3559 45.3% wsj 0039, 24 This story line might [resonate]y [more strongly]ADVP if Mr. Lane

had as strong a presence in front of the camera as he does behind it.
PP 3499 44.6% wsj 2451, 0 NBC may yet find a way to [take]y a passive, minority interest in a

program-maker [without violating the rules]PP.
RB 286 3.6% wsj 0052, 3 Backe is [a [[closely]RB [held]y]ADJP media firm]NP run by former

CBS Inc. President Jon Backe.
S 148 1.9% wsj 1217, 25 Salomon [posted]y an unexpectedly big gain in quarterly earnings,

[aided by its securities trading and investments banking activities]S.
NP 120 1.5% wsj 0100, 21 [. . . ] he [graduated]y [Phi Beta Kappa]NP from the University of

Kentucky at age 18, after spending only 2 1/2 years in college.
Other 240 3.1% wsj 1337, 0 Tokyo stocks [closed]y [firmer]ADJP Monday, with the Nikkei index

making its fifth consecutive daily gain.

Table 2: Syntactic patterns encoding MANNER in PropBank, number of occurrences, and examples. A total of 7,852
MANNER relations are encoded in PropBank between a single node in the syntactic tree and a verb. In all examples,
MNR(x, y) holds, where x is the text underlined. Syntactic annotation comes straight from the Penn TreeBank.

a verb; MANNER relations expressed by trace chains
identifying coreference and split arguments are ig-
nored. This way, we consider 7,852 MANNER out
of the total of the 8,037 PropBank annotates. Be-
cause ADVPs and PPs represent 90% of MANNER
relations, in this paper we focus exclusively on these
two phrases.

For both ADVP and PP the most common direct
ancestor is either a VP or S, although examples are
found that do not follow this rule. Table 3 shows the
number of occurrences for several parent nodes and
examples. Only taking into account phrases whose

ancestor is either a VP or S yields a coverage of 98%
and thus those are the focus of this work.

5.1 Ambiguities of MANNER

Both ADVPs and PPs are highly ambiguous when
the task is to identify their semantics. The PropBank
authors (Palmer et al., 2005) report discrepancies
between annotators mainly with AT-LOCATION and
simply no relation, i.e., when a phrase does not en-
code a role at all. In their annotation, 22.2% of AD-
VPs encode MANNER (30.3% AT-TIME), whereas
only 4.6% of PPs starting with in and 6.1% start-

318



Parent #Occ. ExamplePhrase File, #sent Sentence

VP 3306 ADVP wsj 2341, 23 The company [was [officially]ADVP [merged]y with Bristol-MyersCo. earlier this month]VP.
3107 PP wsj 2320, 7 This is something P&G [would [do]y [with or without Kao]PP]VP,

says Mr. Zurkuhlen.

S 215 ADVP wsj 0044, 6 [[Virtually word by word]ADVP, the notes [matched]y questions andanswers on the social-studies section of the test the student was
taking.]S

339 PP wsj 2454, 9 [[Under the laws of the land]PP, the ANC [remains]y an illegal or-
ganization, and its headquarters are still in Lusaka, Zambia.]S

ADJP 17 ADVP wsj 1057, 85 [. . . ] ABC touted “Call to Glory,” but the military drama was[[missing]y [in action]PP]ADJP within weeks.
4 PP wsj 2431, 14 Two former ministers [were]y [[so heavily]ADVP implicated]ADJP in

the Koskotas affair that PASOK members of Parliament voted [. . . ]

PP 9 ADVP wsj 1249, 24 In Japan, by contrast, companies tend to develop their talent and[promote]y [from [within]PP]PP.
9 PP wsj 1505, 30 London share prices were [influenced]y [[largely]ADVP by declines

on Wall Street and weakness in the British pound]PP.

Table 3: Examples of ADVPs and PPs encoding MANNER with different nodes as parents. In all examples, MNR(x, y)
holds, where x is the underlined phrase. Syntactic annotation comes straight from the Penn TreeBank.

ing with at encode MANNER. The vast majority of
PPs encode either a AT-TIME or AT-LOCATION.

MANNER relations expressed by ADVPs are eas-
ier to detect since the adverb is a clear signal. Ad-
verbs ending in -ly are more likely to encode a MAN-
NER. Not surprisingly, the verb they attach to also
plays an important role. Section 6.2 depicts the fea-
tures used.

PPs are more complicated since the preposition
per se is not a signal of whether or not the phrase
encodes a MANNER. Even prepositions such as un-
der and over can introduce a MANNER. For ex-
ample, A majority of an NIH-appointed panel rec-
ommended late last year that the research con-
tinue under carefully controlled conditions, [. . . ]
(wsj 0047, 9) and [. . . ] bars where Japanese rev-
elers sing over recorded music, [. . . ] (wsj 0300, 3).
Note that in both cases, the head of the NP contained
in the PP encoding MANNER (conditions and music)
belongs to ntao (Section 4). Other prepositions, like
with and like are more likely to encode a MANNER,
but again it is not guaranteed.

6 Approach

We propose a supervised learning approach, where
instances are positive and negative MANNER exam-
ples. Due to their intrinsic difference, we build dif-

ferent models for ADVPs and PPs.

6.1 Building the Corpus

The corpus building procedure is as follows. First,
all ADVPs and PPs whose parent node is a VP or
S and encode a MANNER according to PropBank
are extracted, yielding 3559 and 3499 positive in-
stances respectively. Then, 10,000 examples of AD-
VPs and another 10,000 of PPs from the Penn Tree-
Bank not encoding a MANNER according to Prop-
Bank are added. These negative instances must have
as their parent node either VP or S as well and are
selected randomly.

The total number of instances, 13,559 for ADVPs
and 13,499 for PPs, are then divided into training
(60%), held-out (20%) and test (20%). The held-out
portion is used to tune the feature set and the final
results provided are the ones obtained with the test
portion, i.e., instances that have not been used in any
way to learn the models. Because PropBank adds se-
mantic role annotation on top of the Penn TreeBank,
we have gold syntactic annotation for all instances.

6.2 Selecting features

Selected features are derived from previous works
on detecting semantic roles, namely (Gildea and
Jurafsky, 2002) and the participating systems in

319



No. Feature Values Explanation
1 parent-node {S, VP} syntactic node of ADVP’s parent
2 num-leaves N number of words in ADVP
3 adverb {often, strongly, . . . } main adverb of ADVP
4 dictionary {yes, no} is adverb is in dictionary?
5 ends-with-ly {yes, no} does adverb end in -ly?
6 POS-tag-bef POStags POS tag word before adverb
7 POS-tag-aft POStags POS tag word after adverb
8 verb {assigned, go, . . .} main verb the ADVP attaches to
9 distance N number of words between adverb and verb

Table 4: Features used for extracting MANNER from ADVPs, their values and explanation. Features 4 and 5 are
specialized on MANNER detection.

No. Feature Values Explanation
1 parent-node {S, VP} syntactic node of PP’s parent
2 next-node {NP, SBAR, , . . .} syntactic node of sibling to the right of PP
3 num-pp-bef N number of sibling before PP which are PP
4 num-pp-aft N number of sibling after PP which are PP
5 first-word {with, after, . . .} first word in PP
6 first-POS-tag POStags first POS tag in PP
7 first-prep {by, on, . . . } first preposition in PP
8 POS-tag-bef POStags POS tag before first-word
9 POS-tag-aft POStags POs tag after first-word

10 word-aft {one, their, . . . } word after first-word
11 has-rb {yes, no} does the PP contain an adverb?
12 has-quotes {yes, no} does the PP have any quotes?
13 head-np-lemma {amount, year, . . . } head of the NP whose parent is the PP
14 head-is-last {yes, no} is head-np the last word of the sentence?
15 head-has-cap {yes, no} does the PP have a capitalized word?
16 verb {approved, fly, . . . } verb the PP attaches to
17 verb-lemma {approve, be, . . . } verb lemma the PP attaches to
18 verb-pas {yes, no} is verb in passive voice?

Table 5: Features used for extracting MANNER from PPs, their values and explanation. Features in bold letters are new
and specialized on detecting MANNER from PPs.

CoNLL-2005 Shared Task (Carreras and Màrquez,
2005), combined with new, manner-specific features
that we introduce. These new features bring a signif-
icant improvement and are dependent on the phrase
potentially encoding a MANNER. Experimentation
has shown that MANNER relations expressed by an
ADVP are easier to detect than the ones expressed
by a PP.

Adverbial Phrases The feature set used is depicted
in Table 4. Some features are typical of semantic
role labeling, but features adverb, dictionary
and ends-with-ly are specialized to MANNER
extraction from ADVPs. These three additional fea-
tures bring a significant improvement (Section 7).

We only provide details for the non-obvious fea-
tures.

The main adverb and verb are retrieved by select-
ing the last adverb or verb of a sequence. For exam-
ple, in more strongly, the main adverb is strongly,
and in had been rescued the main verb is rescued.

Dictionary tests the presence of the
adverb in a custom built dictionary which
contains all lemmas for adverbs in WordNet
whose gloss matches the regular expression in
a .* (manner|way|fashion|style). For example,
more.adv.1: used to form the comparative of some
adjectives and adverbs does not belong to the
dictionary, and strongly.adv.1: with strength or in a

320



strong manner does. This feature is an extension of
the dictionary presented in (Girju et al., 2003).

Given the sentence [. . . ] We [work
[damn hard]ADVP at what we do for damn lit-
tle pay]VP, and [. . . ] (wsj 1144, 128), the features
are: {parent-node:VP, num-leaves:2, adverb:hard,
dictionary:no, ends-with-ly:no, POS-tag-bef:RB,
POS-tag-aft:IN, verb:work, distance:1}, and it is a
positive instance.

Prepositional Phrases PPs are known to be highly
ambiguous and more features need to be added. The
complete set is depicted in Table 5.

Some features are typical of semantic role detec-
tion; we only provide a justification for the new
features added. Num-pp-bef and num-pp-aft
captures the number of PP siblings before and after
the PP. The relative order of PPs is typically MAN-
NER, AT-LOCATION and AT-TIME (Hawkins, 1999),
and this feature captures this idea without requiring
temporal or local annotation.

PPs having quotes are more likely to en-
code a MANNER, the chunk of text between
quotes being the manner. For example, use
in “very modest amounts” (wsj 0003, 10) and re-
ward with “page bonuses” (wsj 0012, 8).
head-np indicates the head noun of the NP

that attaches to the preposition to form the PP. It
is retrieved by selecting the last noun in the NP.
Certain nouns are more likely to indicate a MAN-
NER than others. This feature captures the do-
main restriction. For nouns, only non temporal
abstract objects and states can encode a MAN-
NER. Some examples of positive instances are
haul in the guests’ [honor], lift in two [stages], win
at any [cost], plunge against the [mark] and ease
with little [fanfare]. However, counterexamples can
be found as well: say through his [spokesman] and
do over the [counter].
Verb-pas indicates if a verb is in passive

voice. In that case, a PP starting with by is much
more likely to encode an AGENT than a MAN-
NER. For example, compare (1) “When the fruit is
ripe, it [falls]y from the tree [by itself]PP,” he says.
(wsj 0300, 23); and (2) Four of the planes [were
purchased]y [by International Lease]PP from Singa-
pore Airlines in a [. . . ] transaction (wsj 0243, 3).
In the first example a MANNER holds; in the second

an AGENT.
Given the sentence Kalipharma is a New Jersey-

based pharmaceuticals concern that [sells products
[under the Purepac label]PP]VP. (wsj 0023, 1), the
features are: {parent-node:VP, next-node:-, num-
pp-bef:0, num-pp-aft:0, first-word:under, first-POS-
tag:IN, first-prep:under, POS-tag-bef:NNS, POS-
tag-aft:DT, word-aft:the, has-rb:no, has-quotes:no,
head-np-lemma:label, head-is-last:yes, head-has-
cap:yes, verb:sells, verb-lemma:sell, verb-pas:no},
and it is a positive instance.

7 Learning Algorithm and Results

7.1 Experimental Results

As a learning algorithm we use a Naive Bayes clas-
sifier, well known for its simplicity and yet good per-
formance. We trained our models with the training
corpus using 10-fold cross validation, and used the
held-out portion to tune the feature set and adjust
parameters. More features than the ones depicted
were tried, but we only report the final set. For ex-
ample, named entity recognition and flags indicat-
ing the presence of AT-LOCATION and AT-TIME re-
lations for the verb were tried, but they did not bring
any significant improvement.

Table 6 summarizes the results obtained. We re-
port results only on the test corpus, which corre-
sponds to instances not seen before and therefore
they are a honest estimation of the performance.
The improvement brought by subsets of features
and statistical significance tests are also reported.
We test the significance of the difference in per-
formance between two feature sets i and j on a
set of ins instances with the Z-score test, where
z =

abs(erri,errj)
σd

, errk is the error made using set

k, and σd =
√

erri(1−erri)
ins +

errj(1−errj)
ins .

ADVPs The full set of features yields a F-measure
of 0.815. The three specialized features (3, 4 and
5) are responsible for an improvement of .168 in the
F-measure. This difference in performance yields a
Z-score of 7.1, which indicates that it is statistically
significant.

PPs All the features proposed yield a F-measure of
0.693. The novel features specialized in MANNER
detection from PPs (in bold letters in Table 5) bring
an improvement of 0.059, which again is significant.

321



Phrase #MNR Feat. Set #MNR retrieved #MNR correct P R F

ADVP 678 1,2,6-9 908 513 .565 .757 .647all 757 585 .773 .863 .815

PP 705 1,2,5,6,8-10,16,17 690 442 .641 .627 .634all 713 491 .689 .696 .693

Table 6: Results obtained during testing for different sets of features.

The Z-score is 2.35, i.e., the difference in perfor-
mance is statistically significant with a confidence
greater than 97.5%. Thus, adding the specialized
features is justified.

7.2 Error Analysis

The mapping of words to semantic classes is
data-driven and decisions were taken so that the
overall accuracy is high. However, mistakes
are made. Given We want to [see]y the mar-
ket from the inside, the underlined PP encodes a
MANNER and the mapping proposed (Table 1)
does not map inside to ntao. Similarly, given
Like their cohorts in political consulting, the litiga-
tion advisers [encourage]y their clients [. . . ], the
underlined text encodes a MANNER and yet cohorts
is subsumed by social group.n.1 and therefore is not
mapped to ntao.

The model proposed for MANNER detection
makes mistakes as well. For ADVPs, if the main
adverb has not been seen during training, chances of
detecting MANNER are low. For example, the classi-
fier fails to detect the following MANNER relations:
[. . . ] which together own about [. . . ] (wsj 0671, 1);
and who has ardently supported [. . . ] (wsj 1017,
26) even though ardently is present in the dictionary
and ends in -ly;

For PPs, some errors are due to the Prop-
Bank annotation. For example, in Shearson
Lehman Hutton began its coverage of the company
with favorable ratings. (wsj 2061, 57), the under-
lined text is annotated as ARG2, even though it
does encode a MANNER. Our model correctly de-
tects a MANNER but it is counted as a mistake.
Manners encoded by under and at are rarely de-
tected, as in that have been consolidated in fed-
eral court under U.S. District Judge Milton Pollack
(wsj 1022.mrg, 10).

8 Comparison with Previous Work

To the best of our knowledge, there have not been
much efforts to detect MANNER alone. Girju et al.
(2003), present a supervised approach for ADVP
similar to the one reported in this paper, yielding
a F-measure of .665. Our augmented feature set
obtains a F-measure of .815, clearly outperforming
their method (Z-test, confidence > 97.5%). More-
over, ADVPs only represent 45.3% of MANNER as a
semantic role in PropBank. We also have presented
a model to detect MANNER encoded by a PP, the
other big chunk of MANNER (44.6%) in PropBank.

Complete systems for Semantic Role Labeling
perform poorly when detecting MANNER; the Top-
10 systems in CoNLL-2005 shared task3 obtained
F-measures ranging from .527 to .592. We have
trained our models using the training data provided
by the task organizers (using the Charniak parser
syntactic information), and tested with the provided
test set (test.wsj). Our models yield a Precision of
.759 and Recall of .626 (F-measure .686), bringing a
significant improvement over those systems (Z-test,
confidence > 97.5%). When calculating recall, we
take into account all MANNER in the test set, not
only ADVPs and PPs whose fathers are S or VP (i.e.
not only the ones our models are able to detect). This
evaluation is done with exactly the same data pro-
vided from the task organizers for both training and
test.

Unlike typical semantic role labelers, our features
do not include rich syntactic information (e.g. syn-
tactic path from verb to the argument). Instead, we
only require the value of the parent and in the case of
PPs, the sibling node. When repeating the CoNLL-
2005 Shared Task training and test using gold syn-
tactic information, the F-measure obtained is .714,
very close to the .686 obtained with Charniak syn-
tactic trees (not significant, confidence > 97.5%).

3http://www.lsi.upc.es/˜srlconll/st05/st05.html

322



Even though syntactic parsers achieve a good perfor-
mance, they make mistakes and the less our models
rely on them, the better.

9 Composing MANNER with PURPOSE

MANNER can combine with other semantic rela-
tions in order to reveal implicit relations that oth-
erwise would be missed. The basic idea is to com-
pose MANNER with other relations in order to in-
fer another MANNER. A necessary condition for
combining MANNER with another relation R is the
compatibility of RANGE(MNR) with DOMAIN(R) or
RANGE(R) with DOMAIN(MNR). The extended def-
inition (Section 3) allows to quickly determine if two
relations are compatible (Blanco et al., 2010).

The new MANNER is automatically inferred
by humans when reading, but computers need
an explicit representation. Consider the follow-
ing example: [. . . ] the traders [place]y orders
[via computers]MNR [to buy the basket of stocks
. . . ]PRP (wsj 0118, 48). PropBank states the basic
annotation between brackets: via computers is the
MANNER and to buy the basket [. . . ] the PURPOSE
of the place orders event. We propose to combine
these two relations in order to come up with the new
relation MNR(via computers, buy the basket [. . . ] ).
This relation is obvious when reading the sentence,
so it is omitted by the writer. However, any seman-
tic representation of text needs as much semantics as
possible explicitly stated.

This claim is supported by several PropBank
examples: (1) The classics have [zoomed]y
[in price]MNR [to meet the competition]PRP,
and . . . (wsj 0071, 9) and (2) . . . the govern-
ment [curtailed]y production [with land-idling
programs]MNR [to reduce price-depressing
surpluses]PRP (wsj 0113, 12). In both exam-
ples, PropBank encodes the MANNER and PURPOSE
for event y indicated with brackets. After com-
bining both relations, two new MANNER arise:
MNR(in price, meet the competition) and MNR(with
land-idling programs, reduce price-depressing
surpluses).

Out of 237 verbs having in PropBank both PUR-
POSE and MANNER annotation, the above inference
method yields 189 new valid MANNER not present
in PropBank (Accuracy .797).

MANNER and other relations. MANNER does
not combine with relations such as CAUSE, AT-
LOCATION or AT-TIME. For example, given And
they continue [anonymously]x,MNR [attacking]y CIA
Director William Webster [for being too accom-
modating to the committee]z,CAU (wsj 0590, 27),
there is no relation between x and z. Similarly,
given [In the tower]x,LOC, five men and women
[pull]y [rhythmically]z,MNR on ropes attached to
[. . . ] (wsj 0089, 5) and [In May]x,TMP, the two
companies, [through their jointly owned holding
company]z,MNR, Temple, [offered]y [. . . ] (wsj 0063,
3), no connection exists between x and z.

10 Conclusions

We have presented a supervised method for the au-
tomatic discovery of MANNER. Our approach is
simple and outperforms previous work. Our mod-
els specialize in detecting the most common pattern
encoding MANNER. By doing so we are able to spe-
cialize our feature sets and outperform previous ap-
proaches that followed the idea of using dozens of
features, most of them potentially useless, and let-
ting a complicated machine learning algorithm de-
cide the actual useful features.

We believe that each relation or role has its own
unique characteristics and capturing them improves
performance. We have shown this fact for MANNER
by examining examples, considering the kind of ar-
guments that can be part of the domain and range,
and considering theoretical works (Hawkins, 1999).

We have shown performance using both gold syn-
tactic trees and the output from the Charniak parser,
and there is not a big performance drop. This is
mainly due to the fact that we do not use deep syn-
tactic information in our feature sets.

The combination of MANNER and PURPOSE
opens up a novel paradigm to perform semantic in-
ference. We envision a layer of semantics using a
small set of basic semantic relations and inference
mechanisms on top of them to obtain more seman-
tics on demand. Combining semantic relations in
order to obtain more relation is only one of the pos-
sible inference methods.

323



References
Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe.

1998. The Berkeley FrameNet Project. In Proceed-
ings of the 17th international conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics, Montreal, Canada.

Eduardo Blanco, Hakki C. Cankaya, and Dan Moldovan.
2010. Composition of Semantic Relations: Model and
Applications. In Proceedings of the 23rd International
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING
2010), Beijing, China.

Xavier Carreras and Lluı́s Màrquez. 2005. Introduction
to the CoNLL-2005 shared task: semantic role label-
ing. In CONLL ’05: Proceedings of the Ninth Confer-
ence on Computational Natural Language Learning,
pages 152–164, Morristown, NJ, USA.

Du S. Chang and Key S. Choi. 2006. Incremen-
tal cue phrase learning and bootstrapping method for
causality extraction using cue phrase and word pair
probabilities. Information Processing & Management,
42(3):662–678.

Dmitry Davidov and Ari Rappoport. 2008. Unsuper-
vised Discovery of Generic Relationships Using Pat-
tern Clusters and its Evaluation by Automatically Gen-
erated SAT Analogy Questions. In Proceedings of
ACL-08: HLT, pages 692–700, Columbus, Ohio.

Dmitry Davidov, Ari Rappoport, and Moshe Koppel.
2007. Fully Unsupervised Discovery of Concept-
Specific Relationships by Web Mining. In Proceed-
ings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association
of Computational Linguistics, pages 232–239, Prague,
Czech Republic.

Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic La-
beling Of Semantic Roles. Computational Linguistics,
28:245–288.

Roxana Girju, Manju Putcha, and Dan Moldovan. 2003.
Discovery of Manner Relations and Their Applicabil-
ity to Question Answering. In Proceedings of the ACL
2003 Workshop on Multilingual Summarization and
Question Answering, pages 54–60, Sapporo, Japan.

Roxana Girju, Adriana Badulescu, and Dan Moldovan.
2006. Automatic Discovery of Part-Whole Relations.
Computational Linguistics, 32(1):83–135.

Roxana Girju, Preslav Nakov, Vivi Nastase, Stan Sz-
pakowicz, Peter Turney, and Deniz Yuret. 2007.
SemEval-2007 Task 04: Classification of Semantic
Relations between Nominals. In Proceedings of the
Fourth International Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
tions (SemEval-2007), pages 13–18, Prague, Czech
Republic.

Ana M. Giuglea and Alessandro Moschitti. 2006. Se-
mantic role labeling via FrameNet, VerbNet and Prop-
Bank. In Proceedings of the 21st International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics and the 44th

annual meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 929–936, Morristown, NJ, USA.

John A. Hawkins. 1999. The relative order of prepo-
sitional phrases in English: Going beyond Manner-
Place-Time. Language Variation and Change,
11(03):231–266.

Marti A. Hearst. 1992. Automatic Acquisition of Hy-
ponyms from Large Text Corpora. In Proceedings of
the 14th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, pages 539–545.

Hermann Helbig. 2005. Knowledge Representation and
the Semantics of Natural Language. Springer.

Toru Hirano, Yoshihiro Matsuo, and Genichiro Kikui.
2007. Detecting Semantic Relations between Named
Entities in Text Using Contextual Features. In Pro-
ceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, Demo and Poster
Sessions, pages 157–160, Prague, Czech Republic.

Lluı́s Màrquez, Xavier Carreras, Kenneth C. Litkowski,
and Suzanne Stevenson. 2008. Semantic Role Label-
ing: An Introduction to the Special Issue. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 34(2):145–159.

Dan Moldovan, Christine Clark, and Mitchell Bowden.
2007. Lymba’s PowerAnswer 4 in TREC 2007. In
Proceedings of the Sixteenth Text REtrieval Confer-
ence (TREC 2007).

Paul Nulty. 2007. Semantic Classification of Noun
Phrases Using Web Counts and Learning Algorithms.
In Proceedings of the ACL 2007 Student Research
Workshop, pages 79–84, Prague, Czech Republic.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The Proposition Bank: An Annotated Cor-
pus of Semantic Roles. Computational Linguistics,
31(1):71–106.

Vivek Srikumar, Roi Reichart, Mark Sammons, Ari Rap-
poport, and Dan Roth. 2008. Extraction of Entailed
Semantic Relations Through Syntax-Based Comma
Resolution. In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, pages
1030–1038, Columbus, Ohio.

Barker Szpakowicz, Ken Barker, and Stan Szpakowicz.
1995. Interactive semantic analysis of Clause-Level
Relationships. In Proceedings of the Second Confer-
ence of the Pacific Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 22–30.

Marta Tatu. 2005. Automatic Discovery of Intentions in
Text and its Application to Question Answering. In
Proceedings of the ACL Student Research Workshop,
pages 31–36, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

Peter D. Turney. 2006. Expressing Implicit Semantic
Relations without Supervision. In Proceedings of the
21st International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 313–320, Syd-
ney, Australia.

324


