










































Unsupervised Discovery of Negative Categories in Lexicon Bootstrapping


Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 356–365,
MIT, Massachusetts, USA, 9-11 October 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Unsupervised discovery of negative categories in lexicon bootstrapping

Tara McIntosh
NICTA Victoria Research Lab

Dept of Computer Science and Software Engineering
University of Melbourne

nlp@taramcintosh.org

Abstract

Multi-category bootstrapping algorithms were
developed to reduce semantic drift. By ex-
tracting multiple semantic lexicons simultane-
ously, a category’s search space may be re-
stricted. The best results have been achieved
through reliance on manually crafted negative
categories. Unfortunately, identifying these
categories is non-trivial, and their use shifts
the unsupervised bootstrapping paradigm to-
wards a supervised framework.

We present NEG-FINDER, the first approach
for discovering negative categories automat-
ically. NEG-FINDER exploits unsupervised
term clustering to generate multiple nega-
tive categories during bootstrapping. Our al-
gorithm effectively removes the necessity of
manual intervention and formulation of nega-
tive categories, with performance closely ap-
proaching that obtained using negative cate-
gories defined by a domain expert.

1 Introduction

Automatically acquiring semantic lexicons from text
is essential for overcoming the knowledge bottle-
neck in many NLP tasks, e.g. question answer-
ing (Ravichandran and Hovy, 2002). Many of the
successful methods follow the unsupervised itera-
tive bootstrapping framework (Riloff and Shepherd,
1997). Bootstrapping has since been effectively ap-
plied to extracting general semantic lexicons (Riloff
and Jones, 1999), biomedical entities (Yu and
Agichtein, 2003) and facts (Carlson et al., 2010).

Bootstrapping is often considered to be minimally
supervised, as it is initialised with a small set of seed

terms of the target category to extract. These seeds
are used to identify patterns that can match the tar-
get category, which in turn can extract new lexicon
terms (Riloff and Jones, 1999). Unfortunately, se-
mantic drift often occurs when ambiguous or erro-
neous terms and/or patterns are introduced into the
iterative process (Curran et al., 2007).

In multi-category bootstrapping, semantic drift is
often reduced when the target categories compete
with each other for terms and/or patterns (Yangarber
et al., 2002). This process is most effective when
the categories bound each other’s search space. To
ensure this, manually crafted negative categories are
introduced (Lin et al., 2003; Curran et al., 2007).
Unfortunately, this makes these algorithms substan-
tially more supervised.

The design of negative categories is a very time
consuming task. It typically requires a domain ex-
pert to identify the semantic drift and its cause, fol-
lowed by a significant amount of trial and error in or-
der to select the most suitable combination of nega-
tive categories. This introduces a substantial amount
of supervised information into what was an unsuper-
vised framework, and in turn negates one of the main
advantages of bootstrapping — the quick construc-
tion of accurate semantic lexicons.

We show that although excellent performance is
achieved using negative categories, it varies greatly
depending on the negative categories selected. This
highlights the difficulty of crafting negative cate-
gories and thus the necessity for tools that can au-
tomatically identify them.

Our second contribution is the first fully unsu-
pervised approach, NEG-FINDER, for discovering

356



negative categories automatically. During boot-
strapping, efficient clustering techniques are applied
to sets of drifted candidate terms to generate new
negative categories. Once a negative category is
identified it is incorporated into the subsequent it-
erations whereby it provides the necessary semantic
boundaries for the target categories.

We demonstrate the effectiveness of our ap-
proach for extracting biomedical semantic lexicons
by incorporating NEG-FINDER within the WMEB-
DRIFT bootstrapping algorithm (McIntosh and Cur-
ran, 2009). NEG-FINDER significantly outperforms
bootstrapping prior to the domain expert’s negative
categories. We show that by using our discovered
categories we can reach near expert-guided perfor-
mance. Our methods effectively remove the neces-
sity of manual intervention and formulation of neg-
ative categories in semantic lexicon bootstrapping.

2 Background

Various automated pattern-based bootstrapping al-
gorithms have been proposed to iteratively build se-
mantic lexicons. In multi-level bootstrapping, a lex-
icon is iteratively expanded from a small sample of
seed terms (Riloff and Jones, 1999). The seed terms
are used to identify contextual patterns they appear
in, which in turn may be used to extract new lexi-
con entries. This process is repeated with the new
expanded lexicon identifying new patterns.

When bootstrapping semantic lexicons, polyse-
mous or erroneous terms and/or patterns that weakly
constrain the semantic class are eventually extracted.
This often causes semantic drift — when a lexicon’s
intended meaning shifts into another category dur-
ing bootstrapping (Curran et al., 2007). For exam-
ple, female names may drift into gemstones when
the terms Ruby and Pearl are extracted.

Multi-category bootstrapping algorithms, such as
BASILISK (Thelen and Riloff, 2002), NOMEN (Yan-
garber et al., 2002), and WMEB (McIntosh and
Curran, 2008), aim to reduce semantic drift by
extracting multiple semantic categories simultane-
ously. These algorithms utilise information about
other semantic categories in order to reduce the cate-
gories from drifting towards each other. This frame-
work has recently been extended to extract different
relations from text (Carlson et al., 2010).

2.1 Weighted MEB

In Weighted Mutual Exclusion Bootstrapping
(WMEB, McIntosh and Curran, 2008), multiple se-
mantic categories iterate simultaneously between
the term and pattern extraction phases, competing
with each other for terms and patterns. Semantic
drift is reduced by forcing the categories to be mu-
tually exclusive. That is, candidate terms can only
be extracted by a single category and patterns can
only extract terms for a single category.

In WMEB, multiple bootstrapping instances are
initiated for each competing target category. Each
category’s seed set forms its initial lexicon. For
each term in the category lexicon, WMEB identifies
all candidate contextual patterns that can match the
term in the text. To ensure mutual exclusion between
the categories, candidate patterns that are identified
by multiple categories in an iteration are excluded.
The remaining patterns are then ranked according to
the reliability measure and relevance weight.

The reliability of a pattern for a given category
is the number of extracted terms in the category’s
lexicon that match the pattern. A pattern’s relevance
weight is defined as the sum of the χ-squared values
between the pattern (p) and each of the lexicon terms
(t): weight(p) =

∑
t∈T χ

2(p, t). These metrics are
symmetrical for both candidate terms and patterns.

The top-m patterns are then added to the pool of
extracting patterns. If each of the top-m patterns al-
ready exists in the pool, the next unseen pattern is
added to the pool. This ensures at least one new pat-
tern is added to the pool in each iteration.

In the term selection phase, all patterns within the
pattern pool are used to identify candidate terms.
Like the candidate patterns, terms that are extracted
by multiple categories in the same iteration are also
excluded. The remaining candidate terms are ranked
with respect to their reliability and relevance weight,
and the top-n terms are added to the lexicon.

2.2 Detecting semantic drift in WMEB

In McIntosh and Curran (2009), we showed that
multi-category bootstrappers are still prone to se-
mantic drift in the later iterations. We proposed a
drift detection metric based on our hypothesis that
semantic drift occurs when a candidate term is more
similar to the recently added terms than to the seed

357



and high precision terms extracted in the earlier
iterations. Our metric is based on distributional sim-
ilarity measurements and can be directly incorpo-
rated into WMEB’s term selection phase to prevent
drifting terms from being extracted (WMEB-DRIFT).

The drift metric is defined as the ratio of the aver-
age distributional similarity of the candidate term to
the first n terms extracted into the lexicon L, and to
the last m terms extracted in the previous iterations:

drift(term, n,m) =
avgsim(L1...n, term)

avgsim(L(N−m+1)...N , term)
(1)

2.3 Negative categories
In multi-category bootstrapping, improvements in
precision arise when semantic boundaries between
multiple target categories are established. Thus, it is
beneficial to bootstrap categories that share similar
semantic spaces, such as female names and flowers.

Unfortunately, it is difficult to predict if a tar-
get category will suffer from semantic drift and/or
whether it will naturally compete with the other tar-
get categories. Once a domain expert establishes
semantic drift and its possible cause, a set of neg-
ative/stop categories that may be of no direct inter-
est are manually crafted to prevent semantic drift.
These additional categories are then exploited dur-
ing another round of bootstrapping to provide fur-
ther competition for the target categories (Lin et al.,
2003; Curran et al., 2007).

Lin et al. (2003) improved NOMEN’s perfor-
mance for extracting diseases and locations from
the ProMED corpus by incorporating negative cat-
egories into the bootstrapping process. They first
used one general negative category, seeded with the
10 most frequent nouns in the corpus that were un-
related to the target categories. This single nega-
tive category resulted in substantial improvements in
precision. In their final experiment, six negative cat-
egories that were notable sources of semantic drift
were identified, and the inclusion of these lead to
further performance improvements (∼20%).

In similar experiments, both Curran et al. (2007)
and McIntosh (2010) manually crafted negative
categories that were necessary to prevent semantic
drift. In particular, in McIntosh (2010), a biomedical
expert spent considerable time (∼15 days) and effort

Initial Lexicon

Drift Cache

Clustered Terms Negative Lexicon

Figure 1: NEG-FINDER: Local negative discovery

identifying potential negative categories and subse-
quently optimising their associated seeds in trial and
error bootstrapping runs.

By introducing manually crafted negative cate-
gories, a significant amount of expert domain knowl-
edge is introduced. The use of this expert knowl-
edge undermines the principle advantages of un-
supervised bootstrapping, by making it difficult to
bootstrap lexicons for a large number of categories
across diverse domains or languages. In this pa-
per, we aim to push multi-category bootstrapping
back into its original minimally-supervised frame-
work, with as little performance loss as possible.

3 NEG-FINDER

Our approach, Negative Category Finder for Boot-
strapping (NEG-FINDER), can be easily incorporated
into bootstrapping algorithms that exclude candidate
terms or facts based on a selection criteria, includ-
ing WMEB-DRIFT and Paşca et al.’s (2006) large-
scale fact extraction system. For simplicity, we de-
scribe our approach within the WMEB-DRIFT boot-
strapping algorithm. Figure 1 shows the framework
of our approach.

To discover negative categories during bootstrap-
ping, NEG-FINDER must identify a representative
cluster of the drifted terms. In this section, we
present the two types of clustering used (maximum
and outlier), and our three different levels of nega-
tive discovery (local, global and mixture).

3.1 Discovering negative categories

We have observed that semantic drift begins to dom-
inate when clusters of incorrect terms with similar

358



meanings are extracted. In the term selection phase
of WMEB-DRIFT, the top-n candidate terms that sat-
isfy the drift detection threshold are added to the ex-
panding lexicon. Those terms which are considered
but do not meet the threshold are excluded.

In NEG-FINDER, these drifted terms are cached as
they may provide adequate seed terms for new neg-
ative categories. However, the drifted terms can also
include scattered polysemous or correct terms that
share little similarity with the other drifted terms.
Therefore, simply using the first set of drifted terms
to establish a negative category is likely to introduce
noise rather than a cohesive competing category.

To discover negative categories, we exploit hi-
erarchical clustering to group similar terms within
the cache of drifted terms. In agglomerative hi-
erarchical clustering, a single term is assigned to
an individual cluster, and these clusters are itera-
tively merged until a final cluster is formed contain-
ing all terms (Kaufmann and Rousseeuw, 1990). In
our approach, the similarity between two clusters is
computed as the average distributional similarity be-
tween all pairs of terms across the clusters (average-
link clustering).

For calculating the similarity between two terms
we use the distributional similarity approach de-
scribed in Curran (2004). We extracted window-
based features from the set of candidate patterns to
form context vectors for each term. We use the
standard t-test weight and weighted Jaccard measure
functions (Curran, 2004).

To ensure adequate coverage of the possible drift-
ing topics, negative discovery and hence clustering
is only performed when the drift cache consists of at
least 20 terms.

3.2 Maximum and outlier clustering
Although hierarchical clustering is quadratic, we can
efficiently exploit the agglomerative process as the
most similar terms will merge into clusters first.
Therefore, to identify the k most similar terms, we
can exit the clustering process as soon as a cluster
of size k is established. We refer to this approach as
maximum clustering.

In our next clustering method, we aim to form a
negative category with as little similarity to the tar-
get seeds. We use an outlier clustering strategy, in
which the drifted term t with the least average distri-

butional similarity to the first n terms in the lexicon
must be contained in the cluster of seeds. We use
average similarity to the first n terms, as it is already
pre-computed for the drift detection metric. As with
maximum clustering, once a cluster of size k con-
taining the term t is formed, the clustering process
can be terminated.

3.3 Incorporating the negative category

After a cluster of negative seed terms is established,
the drift cache is cleared, and a new negative cate-
gory is created and introduced into the iterative boot-
strapping process in the next iteration. This means
that the negative category can only influence the
subsequent iterations of bootstrapping. The nega-
tive categories can compete with all other categories,
including any previously introduced negative cate-
gories, however the negative categories do not con-
tribute to the drift caches.

Before the new category is introduced, its first
set of extracting patterns must be identified. For
this, the complete set of extracting patterns match-
ing any of the negative seeds are considered and
ranked with respect to the seeds. The top scoring
patterns are considered sequentially until m patterns
are assigned to the new negative category. To ensure
mutual exclusion between the new category and the
target categories, a candidate pattern that has previ-
ously been selected by a target category cannot be
used to extract terms for either category in the sub-
sequent iterations.

3.4 Levels of negative discovery

Negative category discovery can be performed at a
local or global level, or as a mixture of both. In local
discovery, each target category has its own drifted
term cache and can generate negative categories ir-
respective of the other target categories. This is
shown in Figure 1. The drifted terms (shaded) are
extracted away from the lexicon into the local drift
cache, which is then clustered. A cluster is then used
to initiate a negative category’s lexicon. Target cate-
gories can also generate multiple negative categories
across different iterations.

In global discovery, all drifted terms are pooled
into a global cache, from which a single negative
category can be identified in an iteration. This is
based on our intuition that multiple target categories

359



TYPE MEDLINE

No. Terms 1 347 002
No. Patterns 4 090 412
No. 5-grams 72 796 760
No. Unfiltered tokens 6 642 802 776

Table 1: Filtered 5-gram dataset statistics.

may be drifting into similar semantic categories, and
enables these otherwise missed negative categories
to be established.

In the mixture discovery method, both global and
local negative categories can be formed. A cate-
gory’s drifted terms are collected into its local cache
as well as the global cache. Negative discovery is
then performed on each cache when they contain at
least 20 terms. Once a local negative category is
formed, the terms within the local cache are cleared
and also removed from the global cache. This pre-
vents multiple negative categories being instantiated
with overlapping seed terms.

4 Experimental setup

To compare the effectiveness of our negative discov-
ery approaches we consider the task of extracting
biomedical semantic lexicons from raw text.

4.1 Data

The algorithms take as input a set of candidate terms
to be extracted into semantic lexicons. The source
text collection consists of 5-grams (t1, t2, t3, t4, t5)
from approximately 16 million MEDLINE abstracts.1

The set of possible candidate terms correspond to
the middle tokens (t3), and the possible patterns are
formed from the surrounding tokens (t1, t2, t4, t5).
We do not use syntactic knowledge, as we did not
wish to rely on any tools that require supervised
training, to ensure our technique is as domain and
language independent as possible.

Limited preprocessing was required to extract the
5-grams from MEDLINE. The XML markup was
removed, and the collection was tokenised and split
into sentences using bio-specific NLP tools (Grover
et al., 2006). Filtering was applied to remove infre-
quent patterns and terms – patterns appearing with
less than 7 different terms, and terms only appearing

1The set contains all MEDLINE titles and abstracts available
up to Oct 2007.

CAT DESCRIPTION

ANTI Antibodies: MAb IgG IgM rituximab infliximab
(κ1:0.89, κ2:1.0)

CELL Cells: RBC HUVEC BAEC VSMC SMC (κ1:0.91,
κ2:1.0)

CLNE Cell lines: PC12 CHO HeLa Jurkat COS (κ1:0.93,
κ2: 1.0)

DISE Diseases: asthma hepatitis tuberculosis HIV malaria
(κ1:0.98, κ2:1.0)

DRUG Drugs: acetylcholine carbachol heparin penicillin
tetracyclin (κ1:0.86, κ2:0.99)

FUNC Molecular functions and processes: kinase ligase
acetyltransferase helicase binding (κ1:0.87, κ2:0.99)

MUTN Protein and gene mutations: Leiden C677T C282Y
35delG null (κ1:0.89, κ2:1.0)

PROT Proteins and genes: p53 actin collagen albumin IL-6
(κ1:0.99, κ2:1.0)

SIGN Signs and symptoms: anemia fever hypertension
hyperglycemia cough (κ1:0.96, κ2:0.99)

TUMR Tumors: lymphoma sarcoma melanoma osteosarcoma
neuroblastoma (κ1:0.89, κ2:0.95)

Table 2: The MEDLINE semantic categories

with those patterns were removed. The statistics of
the resulting dataset are shown in Table 1.

4.2 Semantic categories

The semantic categories we extract from MEDLINE
were inspired by the TREC Genomics entities (Hersh
et al., 2007) and are described in detail in McIntosh
(2010). The hand-picked seeds selected by a domain
expert for each category are shown in italics in Table
2. These were carefully chosen to be as unambigu-
ous as possible with respect to the other categories.

4.3 Negative categories

In our experiments, we use two different sets of neg-
ative categories. These are shown in Table 3. The
first set corresponds to those used in McIntosh and
Curran (2008), and were identified by a domain ex-
pert as common sources of semantic drift in prelimi-
nary experiments with MEB and WMEB. The AMINO
ACID category was created in order to filter common
MUTN errors. The ANIMAL and BODY PART cate-
gories were formed with the intention of preventing
drift in the CELL, DISE and SIGN categories. The
ORGANISM category was then created to reduce the
new drift forming in the DISE category after the first
set of negative categories were introduced.

The second set of negative categories was identi-
fied by an independent domain expert with limited

360



CATEGORY SEED TERMS

1 AMINO ACID arginine cysteine glycine glutamate histamine
ANIMAL insect mammal mice mouse rats
BODY PART breast eye liver muscle spleen
ORGANISM Bartonella Borrelia Cryptosporidium

Salmonella toxoplasma
2 AMINO ACID Asn Gly His Leu Valine

ANIMAL animals dogs larvae rabbits rodents
ORGANISM Canidia Shigella Scedosporium Salmonella

Yersinia
GENERIC decrease effects events increase response
MODIFIERS acute deep intrauterine postoperative

secondary
PEOPLE children females men subjects women
SAMPLE biopsies CFU sample specimens tissues

Table 3: Manually crafted negative categories

knowledge of NLP and bootstrapping. This expert
identified three similar categories to the first expert,
however their seeds are very different. They also
identified three more categories than the first.

4.4 Lexicon evaluation

Our evaluation process follows that of McIntosh
and Curran (2009) and involved manually inspect-
ing each extracted term and judging whether it was
a member of the semantic class. This manual eval-
uation was performed by two domain experts and is
necessary due to the limited coverage of biomedical
resources. Inter-annotator agreement scores are pro-
vided in Table 2.2 To make later evaluations more
efficient, all evaluators’ decisions for each category
are cached.

Unfamiliar terms were checked using online re-
sources including MEDLINE, MeSH, and Wikipedia.
Each ambiguous term was counted as correct if it
was classified into one of its correct categories, such
as lymphoma, which is a TUMR and DISE. If a term
was unambiguously part of a multi-word term we
considered it correct. Abbreviations, acronyms, and
obvious misspelled words were included.

For comparing the performance of the algorithms,
the average precision for the top-1000 terms over the
10 target categories is measured. To identify when
semantic drift has a significant impact, we report the
precision of specific sections of the lexicon, e.g. the
801-1000 sample corresponds to the last 200 terms.

2All disagreements were discussed, and the kappa scores κ1
and κ2 are those before and after the discussions, respectively.

1-500 1-1000
WMEB-DRIFT 74.3 68.6
+negative 1 87.7 82.8
+negative 2 83.8 77.8

Table 4: Influence of negative categories

4.5 System settings

All experiments were performed using the 10 tar-
get categories as input. Unless otherwise stated, no
hand-picked negative categories are used.

Each target category is initialised with the 5 hand-
picked seed terms (Table 2). In each iteration a max-
imum of 5 lexicon terms and 5 new patterns can
be extracted by a category. The bootstrapping al-
gorithms are run for 200 iterations.

The drift detection metric is calculated over the
first 100 terms and previous 5 terms extracted into
the lexicon, and the filter threshold is set to 0.2, as
in McIntosh and Curran (2009). To ensure infre-
quent terms are not used to seed negative categories,
drifted terms must occur at least 50 times to be re-
tained in the drift cache. Negative category discov-
ery is only initiated when the drifted cache contains
at least 20 terms, and a minimum of 5 terms are used
to seed a negative category.

4.6 Random seed experiments

Both McIntosh and Curran (2009) and Pantel et
al. (2009) have shown that a bootstrapper’s per-
formance can vary greatly depending on the input
seeds. To ensure our methods are compared reliably,
we also report the average precision of randomised
seed experiments. Each algorithm is instantiated 10
times with different random gold seeds for each tar-
get category. These gold seeds are randomly sam-
pled from the evaluation cache formed in McIntosh
and Curran (2009).

5 Results

5.1 Influence of negative categories

In our first experiments, we investigate the per-
formance variations and improvements gained us-
ing negative categories selected by two indepen-
dent domain experts. Table 4 shows WMEB-DRIFT’s
average precision over the 10 target categories with
and without the two negative category sets. Both

361



1-200 201-400 401-600 601-800 801-1000 1-1000
WMEB-DRIFT 79.5 74.8 64.7 61.9 62.1 68.6
NEG-FINDER
First discovered 79.5 74.3 64.8 67.8 66.6 70.7
Local discovery

+maximum 79.5 74.8 67.3 69.3 70.5 72.2
+outlier 79.5 73.9 64.8 67.8 71.0 71.5

Global discovery
+maximum 79.5 73.9 65.7 73.2 72.7 73.4
+outlier 79.5 74.7 65.6 71.4 68.2 72.1

Mixture discovery
+maximum 79.5 74.7 69.3 73.3 72.8 74.0
+outlier 79.5 75.2 69.7 72.0 69.4 73.2

Table 5: Performance comparison of WMEB-DRIFT and NEG-FINDER

sets significantly improve WMEB-DRIFT, however
there is a significant performance difference be-
tween them. This demonstrates the difficulty of se-
lecting appropriate negative categories and seeds for
the task, and in turn the necessity for tools to dis-
cover them automatically.

5.2 Negative category discovery

Table 5 compares the performance of NEG-FINDER
incorporated with WMEB-DRIFT. Each method has
equal average precision over the first 200 terms, as
semantic drift does not typically occur in the early
iterations. Each discovery method significantly out-
performs WMEB-DRIFT in the later stages, and over
the top 1000 terms.3

The first discovery approach corresponds to the
naı̈ve NEG-FINDER system that generates local neg-
ative categories from the first five drifted terms. Al-
though it outperforms WMEB-DRIFT, its advantage
is smaller than the clustering methods.

The outlier clustering approach, which we pre-
dicted to be the most effective, was surprisingly less
accurate than the maximum approach for selecting
negative seeds. This is because the seed cluster
formed around the outlier term is not guaranteed to
have high pair-wise similarity and thus it may repre-
sent multiple semantic categories.

Local discovery was the least effective discov-
ery approach. Compared to local discovery, global
discovery is capable of detecting new negative cate-
gories earlier, and the categories it detects are more

3Statistical significance was tested using computationally-
intensive randomisation tests (Cohen, 1995).

CATEGORY NEGATIVE SEEDS

CELL-NEG animals After Lambs Pigs Rabbits
TUMR-NEG inoperable multinodular nonresectable

operated unruptured
GLOBAL days Hz mM post Torr
GLOBAL aortas eyes legs mucosa retinas
GLOBAL men offspring parents persons relatives
GLOBAL Australian Belgian Dutch European Italian
GLOBAL Amblyospora Branhamella Phormodium

Pseudanabaena Rhodotorula

Table 6: Negative categories from mixture discovery

likely to compete with multiple target categories.
The NEG-FINDER mixture approach, which ben-

efits from both local and global discovery, identi-
fies the most useful negative categories. Table 6
shows the seven discovered categories — two lo-
cal negative categories from CELL and TUMOUR,
and five global categories were formed. Many of
these categories are similar to those identified by
the domain experts. For example, clear categories
for ANIMAL, BODY PART, PEOPLE and ORGANISM
are created. By identifying and then including these
negative categories, NEG-FINDER significantly out-
performs WMEB-DRIFT by 5.4% over the top-1000
terms and by 10.7% over the last 200 terms, where
semantic drift is prominent. These results demon-
strate that suitable negative categories can be identi-
fied and exploited during bootstrapping.

5.3 Boosting hand-picked negative categories

In our next set of experiments, we investigate
whether NEG-FINDER can improve state-of-the-
art performance by identifying new negative cate-
gories in addition to the manually selected negative

362



1-200 201-400 401-600 601-800 801-1000 1-1000
WMEB-DRIFT
+negative 1 90.5 87.3 82.0 74.6 79.8 82.8
+negative 2 87.8 82.2 78.7 76.1 63.3 77.8

WMEB-DRIFT
+restart +local 85.5 82.6 76.5 75.7 68.5 78.4
+restart +global 84.0 83.8 79.1 74.8 69.5 79.7
+restart +mixture 85.2 85.0 82.3 72.5 72.7 81.4

Table 7: Performance of WMEB-DRIFT using negative categories discovered by NEG-FINDER

601-800 801-1000 1-1000
WMEB-DRIFT
+negative 1 74.6 79.8 82.8

NEG-FINDER
+negative 1 +local 76.4 80.1 83.2
+negative 1 +global 77.5 76.0 82.7
+negative 1 +mixture 76.7 79.9 83.2

Table 8: Performance of NEG-FINDER with manually
crafted negative categories

categories. Both NEG-FINDER and WMEB-DRIFT
are initialised with the 10 target categories and the
first set of negative categories.

Table 8 compares our best performing systems
(NEG-FINDER maximum clustering) with standard
WMEB-DRIFT, over the last 400 terms where seman-
tic drift dominates. NEG-FINDER effectively dis-
covers additional categories and significantly out-
performs WMEB-DRIFT. This further demonstrates
the utility of our approach.

5.4 Restarting with new negative categories

The performance improvements so far using NEG-
FINDER have been limited by the time at which new
negative categories are discovered and incorporated
into the bootstrapping process. That is, system im-
provements can only be gained from the negative
categories after they are generated. For example,
in Local NEG-FINDER, five negative categories are
discovered in iterations 83, 85, 126, 130 and 150.
On the other hand, in the WMEB-DRIFT +negative
experiments (Table 8 row 2), the hand-picked neg-
ative categories can start competing with the target
categories in the very first iteration of bootstrapping.

To test the full utility of NEG-FINDER, we use the
set of discovered categories as competing input for
WMEB-DRIFT. Table 7 shows the average precision
of WMEB-DRIFT over the 10 target categories when

it is restarted with the new negative categories dis-
covered from our three approaches (using maximum
clustering). Over the first 200 terms, significant im-
provements are gained using the new negative cate-
gories (+6%). However, the manually selected cat-
egories are far superior in preventing drift (+11%).
This may be attributed by the target categories not
strongly drifting into the new negative categories un-
til the later stages, whereas the hand-picked cate-
gories were selected on the basis of observed drift
in the early stages (over the first 500 terms).

Each NEG-FINDER approach significantly outper-
forms WMEB-DRIFT with no negative categories.
For example, using the NEG-FINDER mixture cat-
egories increases precision by 12.8%. These ap-
proaches also outperform their corresponding inline
discovery methods (e.g. +7.4% with mixture discov-
ery – Table 5).

Table 7 shows that each of the discovered neg-
ative sets can significantly outperform the negative
categories selected by a domain expert (negative set
2) (+0.6 – 3.9%). Our best system’s performance
(mixture: 81.4%) closely approaches that of the su-
perior negative set, trailing by only 1.4%.

5.5 Individual categories
In this section, we analyse the effect of NEG-FINDER
on the individual target categories. Table 9 shows
the average precision of the lexicons for some tar-
get categories. All categories, except TUMOUR, im-
prove significantly with the inclusion of the discov-
ered negative categories. In particular, the CELL
and SIGN categories, which are affected severely by
semantic drift, increase by up to 33.3% and 45.2%,
respectively. The discovered negative categories
are more effective than the manually crafted sets in
reducing semantic drift in the ANTIBODY, CELL and
DISEASE lexicons.

363



ANTI CELL DISE SIGN TUMR

WMEB-DRIFT 92.9 47.8 49.3 27.9 39.5
+negative 1 91.6 73.1 87.8 76.5 48.7
+negative 2 85.8 68.0 84.2 71.3 16.3
NEG-FINDER
+mixture 94.9 73.9 56.0 41.0 42.2
+mixture +negative 1 90.8 77.2 87.8 78.2 48.2
WMEB-DRIFT
+restart +local 89.9 78.8 71.6 73.1 32.2
+restart +global 94.6 79.0 81.9 62.6 35.2
+restart +mixture 92.6 81.1 91.1 63.6 47.5

Table 9: Individual category results (1-1000 terms)

5.6 Random seed experiments

In Table 10, we report the results of our randomised
experiments. Over the last 200 terms, WMEB-DRIFT
with the first set of negative categories (row 2) is out-
performed by NEG-FINDER (row 4). NEG-FINDER
also significantly boosts the performance of the orig-
inal negative categories by identifying additional
negative categories (row 5). Our final experiment,
where WMEB-DRIFT is re-initialised with the nega-
tive categories discovered by NEG-FINDER, further
demonstrates the utility of our method. On average,
the discovered negative categories significantly out-
perform the manually crafted negative categories.

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we have proposed the first completely
unsupervised approach to identifying the negative
categories that are necessary for bootstrapping large
yet precise semantic lexicons. Prior to this work,
negative categories were manually crafted by a do-
main expert, undermining the advantages of an un-
supervised bootstrapping paradigm.

There are numerous avenues for further examina-
tion. We intend to use sophisticated clustering meth-
ods, such as CBC (Pantel, 2003), to identify multiple
negative categories across the target categories in a
single iteration. We would also like to explore the
suitability of NEG-FINDER for relation extraction.

Our initial analysis demonstrated that although
excellent performance is achieved using negative
categories, large performance variations occur when
using categories crafted by different domain experts.

In NEG-FINDER, unsupervised clustering ap-
proaches are exploited to automatically discover

401-600 801-1000
WMEB-DRIFT 66.9 58.5
+negative 1 73.1 61.7
NEG-FINDER
+mixture 71.9 64.2
+mixture +negative 1 76.1 66.7
WMEB-DRIFT
+restart +mixture 78.0 70.8

Table 10: Random seed results

negative categories during bootstrapping. NEG-
FINDER identifies cohesive negative categories and
many of these are semantically similar to those iden-
tified by domain experts.

NEG-FINDER significantly outperforms the state-
of-the-art algorithm WMEB-DRIFT, before negative
categories are crafted, by up to 5.4% over the top-
1000 terms; and by 10.7% over the last 200 terms ex-
tracted, where semantic drift is extensive. The new
discovered categories can also be fully exploited in
bootstrapping, where they successfully outperform
a domain expert’s negative categories and approach
that of another expert.

The result is an effective approach that can be in-
corporated within any bootstrapper. NEG-FINDER
successfully removes the necessity of including
manually crafted supervised knowledge to boost a
bootstrapper’s performance. In doing so, we revert
the multi-category bootstrapping framework back to
its originally intended minimally supervised frame-
work, with little performance trade-off.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Dr Cassie Thornley, our
second evaluator; and the anonymous reviewers for
their helpful feedback. NICTA is funded by the Aus-
tralian Government as represented by the Depart-
ment of Broadband, Communications and the Dig-
ital Economy and the Australian Research Council
through the ICT Centre of Excellence program.

References

Andrew Carlson, Justin Betteridge, Richard C. Wang, Jr.
Estevam R. Hruschka, and Tom M. Mitchell. 2010.
Coupled semi-supervised learning for information ex-
traction. In Proceedings of the third ACM interna-
tional conference on Web search and data mining,
pages 101–110, New York, NY, USA.

364



Paul R. Cohen. 1995. Empirical Methods for Artificial
Intelligence. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA.

James R. Curran, Tara Murphy, and Bernhard Scholz.
2007. Minimising semantic drift with mutual exclu-
sion bootstrapping. In Proceedings of the 10th Con-
ference of the Pacific Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 172–180, Melbourne, Australia.

James R. Curran. 2004. From Distributional to Seman-
tic Similarity. Ph.D. thesis, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, UK.

Claire Grover, Michael Matthews, and Richard Tobin.
2006. Tools to address the interdependence between
tokenisation and standoff annotation. In Proceed-
ings of the 5th Workshop on NLP and XML: Multi-
Dimensional Markup in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 19–26, Trento, Italy.

William Hersh, Aaron M. Cohen, Lynn Ruslen, and
Phoebe M. Roberts. 2007. TREC 2007 Genomics
track overview. In Proceedings of the 16th Text RE-
trieval Conference, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.

Leonard Kaufmann and Peter J. Rousseeuw. 1990. Find-
ing Groups in Data: an Introdution to Cluster Analy-
sis. John Wiley and Sons.

Winston Lin, Roman Yangarber, and Ralph Grishman.
2003. Bootstrapped learning of semantic classes from
positive and negative examples. In Proceedings of
the ICML-2003 Workshop on The Continuum from La-
beled to Unlabeled Data, pages 103–111, Washington,
DC, USA.

Tara McIntosh and James R. Curran. 2008. Weighted
mutual exclusion bootstrapping for domain indepen-
dent lexicon and template acquisition. In Proceedings
of the Australasian Language Technology Association
Workshop, pages 97–105, Hobart, Australia.

Tara McIntosh and James R. Curran. 2009. Reducing
semantic drift with bagging and distributional similar-
ity. In Proceedings of the 47th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics and the 4th
International Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing of the Asian Federation of Natural Language
Processing, pages 396–404, Suntec, Singapore.

Tara McIntosh. 2010. Reducing Semantic Drift in
Biomedical Lexicon Bootstrapping. Ph.D. thesis, Uni-
versity of Sydney.

Marius Paşca, Dekang Lin, Jeffrey Bigham, Andrei Lif-
chits, and Alpa Jain. 2006. Names and similarities on
the web: Fact extraction in the fast lane. In Proceed-
ings of the 21st International Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics and the 44th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
809–816, Sydney, Australia.

Patrick Pantel, Eric Crestan, Arkady Borkovsky, Ana-
Maria Popescu, and Vishnu Vyas. 2009. Web-scale

distributional similarity and entity set expansion. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 238–247, Sin-
gapore, Singapore.

Patrick Pantel. 2003. Clustering by Committee. Ph.D.
thesis, University of Alberta.

Deepak Ravichandran and Eduard Hovy. 2002. Learning
surface text patterns for a question answering system.
In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 41–47,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Ellen Riloff and Rosie Jones. 1999. Learning dictionar-
ies for information extraction by multi-level bootstrap-
ping. In Proceedings of the 16th National Conference
on Artificial Intelligence and the 11th Innovative Ap-
plications of Artificial Intelligence Conference, pages
474–479, Orlando, FL, USA.

Ellen Riloff and Jessica Shepherd. 1997. A corpus-based
approach for building semantic lexicons. In Proceed-
ings of the Second Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 117–124,
Providence, RI, USA.

Michael Thelen and Ellen Riloff. 2002. A bootstrapping
method for learning semantic lexicons using extraction
pattern contexts. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 214–221, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Roman Yangarber, Winston Lin, and Ralph Grishman.
2002. Unsupervised learning of generalized names. In
Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics (COLING), pages 1135–
1141, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Hong Yu and Eugene Agichtein. 2003. Extracting syn-
onymous gene and protein terms from biological liter-
ature. Bioinformatics, 19(1):i340–i349.

365


