










































Modeling Organization in Student Essays


Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 229–239,
MIT, Massachusetts, USA, 9-11 October 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Modeling Organization in Student Essays

Isaac Persing and Alan Davis and Vincent Ng
Human Language Technology Research Institute

University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, TX 75083-0688

{persingq,alan,vince}@hlt.utdallas.edu

Abstract

Automated essay scoring is one of the most
important educational applications of natural
language processing. Recently, researchers
have begun exploring methods of scoring es-
says with respect to particular dimensions of
quality such as coherence, technical errors,
and relevance to prompt, but there is rela-
tively little work on modeling organization.
We present a new annotated corpus and pro-
pose heuristic-based and learning-based ap-
proaches to scoring essays along the organi-
zation dimension, utilizing techniques that in-
volve sequence alignment, alignment kernels,
and string kernels.

1 Introduction

Automated essay scoring, the task of employing
computer technology to evaluate and score writ-
ten text, is one of the most important educational
applications of natural language processing (NLP)
(see Shermis and Burstein (2003) and Shermis et al.
(2010) for an overview of the state of the art in this
task). Recent years have seen a surge of interest in
this and other educational applications in the NLP
community, as evidenced by the panel discussion
on “Emerging Application Areas in Computational
Linguistics” at NAACL 2009, as well as increased
participation in the series of workshops on “Innova-
tive Use of NLP for Building Educational Applica-
tions”. Besides its potential commercial value, au-
tomated essay scoring brings about a number of rel-
atively less-studied but arguably rather challenging
discourse-level problems that involve the computa-
tional modeling of different facets of text structure,
such as content, coherence, and organization.

A major weakness of many existing essay scor-
ing engines such as IntelliMetric (Elliot, 2001) and
Intelligent Essay Assessor (Landauer et al., 2003)
is that they adopt a holistic scoring scheme, which
summarizes the quality of an essay with a single
score and thus provides very limited feedback to
the writer. In particular, it is not clear which di-
mension of an essay (e.g., coherence, relevance)
a score should be attributed to. Recent work ad-
dresses this problem by scoring a particular dimen-
sion of essay quality such as coherence (Miltsakaki
and Kukich, 2004), technical errors, and relevance
to prompt (Higgins et al., 2004). Automated sys-
tems that provide instructional feedback along mul-
tiple dimensions of essay quality such as Criterion
(Burstein et al., 2004) have also begun to emerge.

Nevertheless, there is an essay scoring dimension
for which few computational models have been de-
veloped — organization. Organization refers to the
structure of an essay. A high score on organization
means that writers introduce a topic, state their po-
sition on that topic, support their position, and con-
clude, often by restating their position (Silva, 1993).
A well-organized essay is structured in a way that
logically develops an argument. Note that organi-
zation is a different facet of text structure than co-
herence, which is concerned with the transition of
ideas at both the global (e.g., paragraph) and local
(e.g., sentence) levels. While organization is an im-
portant dimension of essay quality, state-of-the-art
essay scoring software such as e-rater V.2 (Attali
and Burstein, 2006) employs rather simple heuristic-
based methods for computing the score of an essay
along this particular dimension.

Our goal in this paper is to develop a compu-
tational model for the organization of student es-

229



says. While many models of text coherence have
been developed in recent years (e.g., Barzilay and
Lee (2004), Barzilay and Lapata (2005), Soricut and
Marcu (2006), Elsner et al. (2007)), the same is not
true for text organization. One reason is the avail-
ability of training and test data for coherence mod-
eling. Coherence models are typically evaluated on
the sentence ordering task, and hence training and
test data can be generated simply by scrambling the
order of the sentences in a text. On the other hand, it
is not particularly easy to find poorly organized texts
for training and evaluating organization models. We
believe that student essays are an ideal source of
well- and poorly-organized texts. We evaluate our
organization model on a data set of 1003 essays an-
notated with organization scores.

In sum, our contributions in this paper are two-
fold. First, we address a less-studied discourse-level
task — predicting the organization score of an essay
— by developing a computational model of organi-
zation, thus establishing a baseline against which fu-
ture work on this task can be compared. Second, we
annotate a subset of our student essay corpus with
organization scores and make this data set publicly
available. Since progress in organization modeling
is hindered in part by the lack of a publicly anno-
tated corpus, we believe that our data set will be a
valuable resource to the NLP community.

2 Corpus Information

We use as our corpus the 4.5 million word Interna-
tional Corpus of Learner English (ICLE) (Granger
et al., 2009), which consists of more than 6000 es-
says written by university undergraduates from 16
countries and 16 native languages who are learners
of English as a Foreign Language. 91% of the ICLE
texts are argumentative. The essays we used vary
greatly in length, containing an average of 31.1 sen-
tences in 7.5 paragraphs, averaging 4.1 sentences per
paragraph. About one quarter of the essays had five
or fewer paragraphs, and another quarter contained
nine or more paragraphs. Similarly, about one quar-
ter of essays contained 24 or fewer sentences and the
longest quarter contained 36 or more sentences

We selected a subset consisting of 1003 essays
from the ICLE to annotate and use for training and
testing of our model of essay organization. While

Topic Languages Essays
Most university degrees are
theoretical and do not prepare
students for the real world.
They are therefore of very lit-
tle value.

13 147

The prison system is out-
dated. No civilized society
should punish its criminals: it
should rehabilitate them.

11 103

In his novel Animal Farm,
George Orwell wrote “All
men are equal but some are
more equal than others.” How
true is this today?

10 82

Table 1: Some examples of writing topics.

narrative writing asks students to compose descrip-
tive stories, argumentative (also known as persua-
sive) writing requires students to state their opinion
on a topic and to validate that opinion with convinc-
ing arguments. For this reason, we selected only ar-
gumentative essays rather than narrative pieces, be-
cause they contain the discourse structures and kind
of organization we are interested in modeling.

To ensure representation across native languages
of the authors, we selected mostly essays written
in response to topics which are well-represented in
multiple languages. This avoids many issues that
may arise when certain vocabulary is used in re-
sponse to a particular topic for which essays written
by authors from only a few languages are available.
Table 1 shows three of the twelve topics selected for
annotation. Fifteen native languages are represented
in the set of essays selected for annotation.

3 Corpus Annotation

To develop our essay organization model, human an-
notators scored 1003 essays using guidelines in an
essay annotation rubric. Annotators evaluated the
organization of each essay using a numerical score
from 1 to 4 at half-point increments. This contrasts
with previous work on essay scoring, where the cor-
pus is annotated with a binary decision (i.e., good or
bad) for a given scoring dimension (e.g., Higgins et
al. (2004)). Hence, our annotation scheme not only
provides a finer-grained distinction of organization
quality (which can be important in practice), but also

230



makes the prediction task more challenging.
The meaning of each integer score was described

and discussed in detail. Table 2 shows the descrip-
tion of each score for the organization dimension.

Score Description of Essay Organization
4 essay is well structured and is organized in

a way that logically develops an argument
3 essay is fairly well structured but could

somewhat benefit from reorganization
2 essay is poorly structured and would

greatly benefit from reorganization
1 essay is completely unstructured and re-

quires major reorganization

Table 2: Descriptions of the meaning of each score.

Our annotators were selected from over 30 appli-
cants who were familiarized with the scoring rubric
and given sample essays to score. The six who were
most consistent with the expected scores were given
additional essays to annotate. To ensure consistency
in scoring, we randomly selected a large subset of
our corpus (846 essays) to have graded by two differ-
ent annotators. Analysis of these doubly annotated
essays reveals that, though annotators only exactly
agree on the organization score of an essay 29% of
the time, the scores they apply are within 0.5 points
in 71% of essays and within 1.0 point in 93% of es-
says. Additionally, if we treat one annotator’s scores
as a gold standard and the other annotator’s scores
as predictions, the predicted scores have a mean er-
ror of 0.54 and a mean squared error of 0.50. Table 3
shows the number of essays that received each of the
seven scores for organization.

score 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
essays 24 14 35 146 416 289 79

Table 3: Distribution of organization scores.

4 Function Labeling

As mentioned before, a high score on organization
means that writers introduce a topic, support their
position, and conclude. If one or more of these ele-
ments are missing or if they appear out of order (e.g.,
the conclusion appears before the introduction), the
resulting essay will typically be considered poorly
organized. Hence, knowing the discourse function

label of each paragraph in an essay would be help-
ful for predicting its organization score.

Two questions naturally arise. First, how can we
obtain the discourse function label of each para-
graph? One way is to automatically acquire such
labels from a corpus of student essays where each
paragraph is annotated with its discourse function
label. To our knowledge, however, there is no pub-
licly available corpus that is annotated with such in-
formation. As a result, we will resort to labeling a
paragraph with its function label heuristically.

Second, which paragraph function labels would
be most useful for scoring the organization of an es-
say? Based on our linguistic intuition, we identify
four potentially useful paragraph function labels: In-
troduction, Body, Rebuttal, and Conclusion. Table 4
gives the descriptions of these labels.

Label Name Paragraph Type
I Introduction introduces essay topic and

states author’s position and
main ideas

B Body provides reasons, evidence,
and examples to support main
ideas

C Conclusion summarizes and concludes ar-
guments made in body para-
graphs

R Rebuttal considers counter-arguments
to thesis or main ideas

Table 4: Descriptions of paragraph function labels.

Setting aside for the moment the problem of ex-
actly how to predict an essay’s organization score
given its paragraph sequence, the problem of ob-
taining paragraph labels to use for this task still re-
mains. As mentioned above, we adopt a heuristic ap-
proach to paragraph function labeling. The question,
then, is: what kind of knowledge sources should our
heuristics be based on? We have identified two types
of knowledge sources that are potentially useful for
paragraph labeling. The first of these are positional,
dealing with where in the essay a paragraph appears.
So for example, the first paragraph in an essay is
likely to be an Introduction, while the last is likely
to be a Conclusion. A paragraph in any other posi-
tion, on the other hand, is more likely to be a Body
or Rebuttal paragraph.

231



Label Name Sentence Function
P Prompt restates the prompt given to the author and contains no new material or opinions
T Transition shifts the focus to new topics but contains no meaningful information
H Thesis states the author’s position on the topic for which he/she is arguing
M Main Idea asserts reasons and foundational arguments that support the thesis
E Elaboration further explains reasons and ideas but contains no evidence or examples
S Support provides evidence and examples to support the claims made in other statements
C Conclusion summarizes and concludes the entire argument or one of the main ideas
R Rebuttal considers counter-arguments that contrast with the thesis or main ideas
O Solution puts to rest the questions and problems brought up by counter-arguments
U Suggestion proposes solutions the problems brought up by the argument

Table 5: Descriptions of sentence function labels.

A second potentially useful knowledge source in-
volves the types of sentences appearing in a para-
graph. This idea presupposes that, like paragraphs,
sentences too can have discourse function labels in-
dicating the logical role they play in an argument.
The sentence label schema we propose, which is de-
scribed in Table 5, is based on work in discourse
structure by Burstein et al. (2003), but features addi-
tional sentence labels.

To illustrate why these sentence function labels
may be useful for paragraph labeling, consider a
paragraph containing a Thesis sentence. The pres-
ence of a Thesis sentence is a strong indicator that
the paragraph containing it is either an Introduction
or Conclusion. Similarly, a paragraph containing
Rebuttal or Solution sentences is more likely to be
a Body or Rebuttal paragraph.

Hence, to obtain a paragraph’s function label,
we need to first label its sentences. However, we
are faced with the same problem: how can we ob-
tain the sentence function labels? One way is to
learn them from a corpus where each sentence is
manually annotated with its sentence function la-
bel, which is the approach adopted by Burstein et
al. (2003). However, this annotated corpus is not
publicly available. In fact, to our knowledge, there
is no publicly-available corpus that is annotated with
sentence function labels. Consequently, we adopt a
heuristic approach to sentence function labeling.

Overall, we created a knowledge-lean set of
heuristic rules labeling paragraphs and sentences.
Because many of the paragraph labeling heuristics
depend on the availability of sentence labels, we will
describe the sentence labeling heuristics first. For

each sentence function label x, we identify several
features whose presence increases our confidence
that a given sentence is an example of x. So for
example, the presence of any of the words “agree”,
“think”, or “opinion” increases our confidence that
the sentence they occur in is a Thesis. If the sentence
instead contains words such as “however”, “but”,
or “argue”, these increase our confidence that the
sentence is a Rebuttal. The features we examine
for sentence labeling are not limited to words, how-
ever. Each content word the sentence shares with
the essay prompt gives us evidence that the sentence
is a restatement of the prompt. Having searched a
sentence for all these clues, we finally assign the
sentence the function label having the most support
among the clues found.

The heuristic rules for paragraph labeling are sim-
ilar in nature, though they depend heavily on the
labels of a paragraph’s component sentences. If a
paragraph contains Thesis, Prompt, or Background
sentences, the paragraph is likely to be an Introduc-
tion. However, if a paragraph contains Main Idea,
Support, or Conclusion sentences, it is likely to be
a Body paragraph. Finally, as mentioned previously,
some positional information is used in labeling para-
graphs. For example, a paragraph that is the first
paragraph in an essay is likely to be an Introduction,
but a paragraph that is neither the first nor the last
is likely to be either a Rebuttal or Body paragraph.
After searching a paragraph for all these features,
we gather the pieces of evidence in support of each
paragraph label and assign the paragraph the label
having the most support.1

1Space limitations preclude a complete listing of these para-

232



5 Heuristic-Based Organization Scoring

Having applied labels to each paragraph in an es-
say, how can we use these labels to predict the es-
say’s score? Recall that the importance of each para-
graph label stems not from the label itself, but from
the sequence of labels it appears in. Motivated by
this observation, we exploit a technique that is com-
monly used in bioinformatics — sequence align-
ment. While sequence alignment has also been used
in text and paraphrase generation (e.g., Barzilay and
Lee (2002; 2003)), it has not been extensively ap-
plied to other areas of language processing, includ-
ing essay scoring. In this section, we will present
two heuristic approaches to organization scoring,
one based on aligning paragraph sequences and the
other on aligning sentence sequences.

5.1 Aligning Paragraph Sequences

As mentioned above, our first approach to heuristic
organization scoring involves aligning paragraph se-
quences. Specifically, this approach operates in two
steps. Given an essay e in the test set, we (1) find the
k essays in the training set that are most similar to e
via paragraph sequence alignment, and then (2) pre-
dict the organization score of e by aggregating the
scores of its k nearest neighbors obtained in the first
step. Below we describe these two steps in detail.

First, to obtain the k nearest neighbors of e,
we employ the Needleman-Wunsch alignment algo-
rithm (Needleman and Wunsch, 1970), which com-
putes a similarity score for any pair of essays by
finding an optimal alignment between their para-
graph sequences. To illustrate why we believe se-
quence alignment can help us determine which es-
says are most similar, consider two example es-
says. One essay, which we will call IBBBC, begins
with an Introductory paragraph, follows it with three
Body paragraphs, and finally ends with a Conclud-
ing paragraph. Another essay CRRRI begins with
a paragraph stating its Conclusion, follows it with
three Rebuttal paragraphs, and ends with a para-
graph Introducing the essay’s topic. We can tell by
a casual glance at the sequences that any reasonable
similarity function should tell us that they are not

graph and sentence labeling heuristics. See our website at
http://www.hlt.utdallas.edu/˜alan/ICLE/ for
the complete list of heuristics.

very similar. The Needleman-Wunsch alignment al-
gorithm has this effect since the score of the align-
ment it produces would be hurt by the facts that (1)
there is not much overlap in the sets of paragraph
labels each contains, and (2) the paragraph labels
they do share (I and C) do not occur in the same
order. The resulting alignment would therefore con-
tain many mismatches or indels.2

If we now consider a third essay whose para-
graph sequence could be represented as IBRBC, a
good similarity function should tell us that IBBBC
and IBRBC are very similar. The Needleman-
Wunsch alignment score between the two paragraph
sequences has this property, as the alignment al-
gorithm would discover that the two sequences are
identical except for the third paragraph label, which
could be mismatched for a small penalty. We would
therefore conclude that the IBBBC and IBRBC es-
says should receive similar organization scores.

To fully specify how to find the k nearest neigh-
bors of an essay, we need to define a similarity func-
tion between paragraph labels. In sequence align-
ment, similarity function S(i, j) tells us how likely
it is that symbol i (in our case, a paragraph label)
will be substituted with another symbol j. While
we expect that in an alignment between high-scoring
essays, an Introduction paragraph is most likely to
be aligned with another Introduction paragraph, how
much worse should the alignment score be if an In-
troduction paragraph needs to be mismatched with
a Rebuttal paragraph or replaced with an indel? We
solve this problem by heuristically defining the sim-
ilarity function as follows: S(i, j) = 1 when i = j,
S(i, j) = −1 when i 6= j, and also S(i,−) =
S(−, i) = −1, where ‘−’ is an indel. In other
words, the similarity function encourages the align-
ment between two identical function labels and dis-
courages the alignment between two different func-
tion labels, regardless of the type of function labels.

After obtaining the k nearest neighbors of e, the
next step is to predict the organization score of e
by aggregating the scores of its k nearest neighbors
into one number. (Note that we know the organiza-

2In pairwise sequence alignment, a mismatch occurs when
one symbol has to be substituted for another to make two se-
quences match. An indel indicates that in order to transform
one sequence to match another, we must either insert a symbol
into one sequence or delete a symbol from the other sequence.

233



tion score of each nearest neighbor, since they are
all taken from the training set.) One natural way to
do this would be to take the mean, median, or mode
of its k nearest neighboring essays from the training
set. Hence, our first heuristic method Hp for scoring
organization has three variants.

5.2 Aligning Sentence Sequences

An essay’s paragraph sequence captures information
about its organization at a high level, but ignores
much of its lower level structure. Since we have also
heuristically labeled sentences, it now makes sense
to examine the sequences of sentence function labels
within an essay’s paragraphs. The intuition is that at
least some portion of an essay’s organization score
can be attributed to the organization of the sentence
sequences of its component paragraphs.

To address this concern, we propose a second
heuristic approach to organization scoring. Given
a test essay e, we first find for each paragraph in
e the k paragraphs in the training set that are most
similar to it. Specifically, each paragraph is repre-
sented by its sequence of sentence function labels.
Given this paragraph representation, we can find the
k nearest neighbors of a paragraph by applying the
Needleman-Wunsch algorithm described in the pre-
vious subsection to align sentence sequences, using
the same similarity function we defined above.

Next, we score each paragraph pi by aggregating
the scores of its k nearest neighbors obtained in the
first step, assuming the score of a nearest neighbor
paragraph is the same as the organization score of
the training set essay containing it. As before, we
can employ the mean, median, or mode to aggregate
the scores of the nearest neighbors of pi.

Finally, we predict the organization score of e by
aggregating the scores of its paragraphs obtained in
the second step. Again, we can employ mean, me-
dian, or mode to aggregate the scores. Since we have
three ways of aggregating the scores of a paragraph’s
nearest neighbors and three ways of aggregating the
resulting paragraph scores, this second method Hs
for scoring organization has nine variants.

6 Learning-Based Organization Scoring

In the previous section, we proposed two heuris-
tic approaches to organization scoring, one based

on aligning paragraph label sequences and the other
based on aligning sentence label sequences. In the
process of constructing these two systems, however,
we created a lot of information about the essays
which might also be useful for organization scoring,
but which the heuristic systems are unable to exploit.
To remedy the problem, we introduce three learning-
based systems which abstract the additional infor-
mation we produced in three different ways. In each
system, we use the SVMlight (Joachims, 1999) im-
plementation of regression support vector machines
(SVMs) (Cortes and Vapnik, 1995) to train a regres-
sor because SVMs have been frequently and suc-
cessfully applied to a variety of NLP problems.

6.1 Linear Kernel

Owing to the different ways we presented of com-
bining the scores of an essay’s nearest neighbors,
the paragraph label sequence alignment approach
has three variants, and its sentence label sequence
alignment counterpart has nine. Unfortunately, these
heuristic approaches suffer from two major weak-
nesses. First, it is not intuitively clear which of
these 12 ways for predicting an essay’s organiza-
tion score is clearly better than the others. Second,
it is not clear that the k nearest neighbors of an es-
say will always be similar to it with respect to or-
ganization score. While we do expect the alignment
scores between good essays with reasonable para-
graph sequences to be high, poorly organized es-
says by their nature have more random paragraph
sequences. Hence, we have no intuition about the k
nearest neighbors of a poor essay, as it may have as
high an alignment score with another poorly orga-
nized essay as with a good essay.

Our solution to these problems is to use the orga-
nization scores obtained by the 12 heuristic variants
as features in a linear kernel SVM learner. We be-
lieve that using the estimates given by all the 12 vari-
ants of the two heuristic approaches rather than only
one of them addresses the first weakness mentioned
above. The second weakness, on the other hand, is
addressed by treating the organization score predic-
tions obtained by the nearest neighbor methods as
features for an SVM learner rather than as estimates
of an essay’s organization score.

The approach we have just described, however,
does not exploit the full power of linear kernel

234



SVMs. One strength of linear kernels is that they
make it easy to incorporate a wide variety of dif-
ferent types of features. In an attempt to further
enhance the prediction capability of the SVM re-
gressor, we will provide it with not only the 12 fea-
tures derived from the heuristic-based approaches,
but also with two additional types of features.

First, to give our learner more direct access to
the information we used to heuristically predict es-
say scores, we can extract paragraph label subse-
quences3 from each essay and use them as features.
To illustrate the intuition behind these features, con-
sider two paragraph subsequences: Introduction–
Body and Rebuttal–Introduction. It is fairly typi-
cal to see the first subsequence, I–B, at the begin-
ning of a good essay, so its occurrence should give
us a small amount of evidence that the essay it oc-
curs in is well-organized. The presence of the sec-
ond subsequence, R–I, however, should indicate that
its essay’s organization is poor because, in general, a
good essay should not give a Rebuttal before an In-
troduction. Because we can envision subsequences
of various lengths being useful, we create a binary
presence or absence feature in the linear kernel for
each paragraph subsequence of length 1, 2, 3, 4, or
5 appearing in the training set.

Second, we employ sentence label subsequences
as features in the linear kernel. Recall that when
describing our alignment-based nearest neighbor
organization score prediction methods, we noted
that an essay’s organization score may be partially
attributable to how well the sentences within its
paragraphs are organized. For example, if one
of an essay’s paragraphs contains the sentence la-
bel subsequence Main Idea–Elaboration–Support–
Conclusion this gives us some evidence that the es-
say is overall well-organized since one of its compo-
nent paragraphs contains this reasonably-organized
subsequence. An essay with a paragraph contain-
ing the subsequence Conclusion–Support–Thesis–
Rebuttal, however, is likely to be poorly orga-
nized because this is a poorly-organized subse-
quence. Since sentence label subsequences of dif-
fering lengths may be useful for score prediction, we
create a binary presence or absence feature for each
sentence label subsequence of length 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5

3Note that a subsequence is not necessarily contiguous.

in the training set.
While the number of nearest neighbor features is

manageable, the presence of a large number of fea-
tures can sometimes confuse a learner. For that rea-
son, we do feature selection on the two types of
subsequence features, selecting only 100 features
for each type that has the highest information gain
(see Yang and Pedersen (1997) for details). We
call the system resulting from the use of these three
types of features Rlnps because it uses Regression
with linear kernel to predict essay scores, and it
uses nearest neighbor, paragraph subsequence, and
sentence subsequence features.

6.2 String Kernel

In a traditional learning setting, the feature set em-
ployed by an off-the-shelf learning algorithm typ-
ically consists of flat features (i.e., features whose
values are discrete- or real-valued, as the ones de-
scribed in the Linear Kernel subsection). Advanced
machine learning algorithms such as SVMs, on the
other hand, have enabled the use of structured fea-
tures (i.e., features whose values are structures such
as parse trees and sequences), owing to their ability
to employ kernels to efficiently compute the similar-
ity between two potentially complex structures.

Perhaps the most obvious advantage of employ-
ing structured features is simplicity. To understand
this advantage, consider learning in a traditional set-
ting. Recall that we can only employ flat features in
this setting, as we did with the linear kernel. Hence,
if we want to use information from a parse tree as
features, we will need to design heuristics to extract
the desired parse-based features from parse trees.
For certain tasks, designing a good set of heuris-
tics can be time-consuming and sometimes difficult.
On the other hand, SVMs enable a parse tree to
be employed directly as a structured feature, obvi-
ating the need to design heuristics to extract infor-
mation from potentially complex structures. How-
ever, structured features have only been applied to a
handful of NLP tasks such as semantic role labeling
(Moschitti, 2004), syntactic parsing and named en-
tity identification (Collins and Duffy, 2002), relation
extraction (Bunescu and Mooney, 2005), and coref-
erence resolution (Versley et al., 2008). Our goal
here is to explore this rarely-exploited capability of
SVMs for the task of essay scoring.

235



While the vast majority of previous NLP work
on using structured features have involved tree ker-
nels, we employ a kernel that is rarely investigated in
NLP: string kernels (Lodhi et al., 2002). Informally,
a string kernel aims to efficiently compute the sim-
ilarity between two strings (or sequences) of sym-
bols based on the similarity of their subsequences.
We apply string kernels to essay scoring as follows:
we represent each essay using its paragraph function
label sequence, and employ a string kernel to com-
pute the similarity between two essays based on this
representation. Typically, a string kernel takes as in-
put two parameters: K (which specifies the length
of the subsequences in the two strings to compare)
and λ (which is a value between 0 and 1 that spec-
ifies whether matches between non-contiguous sub-
sequences in the two strings should be considered
as important as matches between contiguous subse-
quences). In our experiments, we select values for
these parameters in a somewhat arbitrary manner. In
particular, since λ ranges between 0 and 1, we sim-
ply set it to 0.5. For K , since in the flat features we
considered all paragraph label sequences of lengths
from 1 to 5, we again take the middle value, setting
it to 3. We call the system using this kernel Rs be-
cause it uses a Regression SVM with a string kernel
to predict essay scores.

6.3 Alignment Kernel

In general, the purpose of a kernel function is to
measure the similarity between two examples. The
string kernel we described in the previous subsec-
tion is just one way of measuring the similarity of
two essays given their paragraph sequences. While
this may be the most obvious way to use paragraph
sequence information from a machine learning per-
spective, our earlier use of the Needleman-Wunsch
algorithm suggests a more direct way of extracting
structured information from paragraph sequences.

More specifically, recall that the Needleman-
Wunsch algorithm finds an optimal alignment be-
tween two paragraph sequences, where an opti-
mal alignment is defined as an alignment having
the highest possible alignment score. The optimal
alignment score can be viewed as another similar-
ity measure between two essays. As such, with
some slight modifications, the alignment score be-
tween two paragraph sequences can be used as the

kernel value for an Alignment Kernel.4 We call
the system using this kernel Ra because it uses a
Regression SVM with an alignment kernel to pre-
dict essay scores.

6.4 Combining Kernels

Recall that the flat features are computed using a lin-
ear kernel, while the two types of structured features
are computed using string and alignment kernels. If
we want our learner to make use of more than one of
these types of features, we need to employ a compos-
ite kernel to combine them. Specifically, we define
and employ the following composite kernel:

Kc(F1, F2) =
1

n

n∑

i=1

Ki(F1, F2),

where F1 and F2 are the full set of features (contain-
ing both flat and structured features) that represent
the two essays under consideration, Ki is the ith ker-
nel we are combining, and n is the number of kernels
we are combining. To ensure that each kernel under
consideration contributes equally to the composite
kernel, each kernel value Ki(F1, F2) is normalized
so that its value falls between 0 and 1.

7 Evaluation

7.1 Evaluation Metrics

We designed three evaluation metrics to measure the
error of our organization scoring system. The sim-
plest metric, S1, is perhaps the most intuitive. It
measures the frequency at which a system predicts
the wrong score out of the seven possible scores.
Hence, a system that predicts the right score only
25% of the time would receive an S1 score of 0.75.

The S2 metric is slightly less intuitive than S1,
but no less reasonable. It measures the average
distance between the system’s score and the actual
score. This metric reflects the idea that a system
that estimates scores close to the annotator-assigned
scores should be preferred over a system whose esti-
mations are further off, even if both systems estimate
the correct score at the same frequency.

Finally, the S3 evaluation metric measures the
average square of the distance between a system’s

4In particular, we note that for theoretical reasons, a kernel
function must always return a non-negative value. The align-
ment score function does not have this property, so we increase
all alignment scores until their theoretical minimum value is 0.

236



organization score estimations and the annotator-
assigned scores. The intuition behind this system
is that not only should we prefer a system whose es-
timations are close to the annotator scores, but we
should also prefer one whose estimations are not too
frequently very far away from the annotator scores.
These three scores are given by:

1

N

∑

Ai 6=Ei

1,
1

N

N∑

i=1

|Ai − Ei|,
1

N

N∑

i=1

(Ai − Ei)
2,

where Ai and Ei are the annotator assigned and sys-
tem estimated scores respectively for essay i, and N
is the number of essays. Since many of the systems
we have described assign test essays real-valued or-
ganization scores, to obtain Ei for system S1 we
round the outputs of each system to the nearest of
the seven scores the human annotators were permit-
ted to assign (1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5, 3.0, 3.5, 4.0).

To test our system, we performed 5-fold cross val-
idation on our 1003 essay set, micro-averaging our
results into three scores corresponding to the three
scoring metrics described above.

7.2 Results and Discussion

The average baseline. As mentioned before, there
is no standard baseline for organization modeling
against which we can compare our systems. To start
with, we employ a simple “average” baseline. Avg
computes the average organization score of essays
in the training set and assigns this score to each test
set essay. Results of this baseline are shown in row
1 of Table 6. Though simple, this baseline is by no
means easy-to-beat, since 41% of the essays have a
score of 3, and 96% of the essays have a score that
is within one point of 3.

Heuristic baselines. Recall that we have 12 ver-
sions of the two heuristic approaches to organization
prediction. Space limitations preclude a discussion
of the results of all these versions, so instead, to ob-
tain the strongest baseline results, we show only the
best results achieved by the three versions based on
aligning paragraph label sequences in row 2 (Hp)
and the best results achieved by the nine versions
based on aligning sentence label sequences in row
3 (Hs) of Table 6. It is clear from the results that
the Hp systems yielded the best baseline predictions
under all three scoring metrics, performing signif-
icantly better than both the Avg and Hs systems

System S1 S2 S3
1 Avg .585 .412 .348
2 Hp .548 .339 .198
3 Hs .575 .397 .329
4 Rlnps .520 .331 .186
5 Rs .577 .369 .222
6 Ra .686 .519 .429
7 Rlsnps .534 .332 .187
8 Rlanps .541 .332 .178
9 Rsa .517 .325 .177

10 Rlsanps .517 .323 .175

Table 6: System Performance

(p < 0.01) with respect to the S2 and S3 metrics,
but its S1 performance is less significant with re-
spect to Avg (p < 0.1) and is indistinguishable at
even the p < 0.1 level from Hs.5 In general, how-
ever, it appears to be the case that systems based
on aligning paragraph label sequences achieve better
results than systems that attempt to align sentence
label sequences.

Learning-based approaches. Rows 4–6 of Table
6 show the results we obtained using each of the
three single-kernel systems. When compared to the
best baseline, these results suggest that Hp is a pretty
good heuristic approach to organization scoring. In
fact, only one of these three learning-based sys-
tems (Rlnps) performs better than Hp under the three
scoring metrics, and in each case, the difference be-
tween the two is not significant even at p < 0.1. This
suggests that, even though Rlnps performs slightly
better than Hp, the only major benefit we have ob-
tained by using the linear kernel is that it has made
it unnecessary for us to choose between the 12 pro-
posed heuristic systems.

Considering that the second best one-kernel sys-
tem, Rs, does not have access to any of the near-
est neighbor features, which have already proven
useful, its performance seems reasonably good in
that its performance is at least better than the Avg
system. This suggests that, even though Rs does
not perform exceptionally, it is extracting some use-
ful information for organization scoring from the
heuristically assigned paragraph label sequences.
The best one-kernel system, Rlnps, however, is sig-

5All significance tests are two-tailed paired t-tests.

237



nificantly better than Rs with respect to all three
scoring metrics, with p < 0.1 for S1 and p < 0.05
for S2 and S3. By contrast, it initially appears that
the alignment kernel is not extracting any useful
information from these paragraph sequences at all,
since its S1, S2, and S3 scores are all much worse
than all of the baseline systems. The second best
one-kernel system Rs performs significantly better
than Ra at p < 0.01 for all three scoring metrics.

Next, we explore the impact of composite kernels,
which allow our learners to make use of multiple
types of flat and structured features. Specifically, the
results shown in rows 7–9 are obtained by combin-
ing two kernels at a time. These experiments reveal
the surprising result that the two worst performing
single-kernel systems, Rs and Ra, when combined
into Rsa, yield the best two-kernel system results,
which are significant with respect to the best one-
kernel system results under S3 at p < 0.1. This re-
sult suggests that these two different methods of ex-
tracting information from paragraph sequences pro-
vide us with different kinds of evidence useful for
organization scoring, although neither method by it-
self was exceptionally useful. Though Rsa does
not have any access to nearest neighbor informa-
tion, it still performs significantly better than Hp at
p < 0.05 under S1 and S3.

While we have already pointed out that Rsa is
the best composite two-kernel system, it is not clear
which of Rlsnps and Rlanps is second-best. Neither
system consistently performs better than the other
under all three scoring metrics, and the differences
between them are not significant even at p < 0.1. It
is clear only that Rsa is better than both, as its scores
are statistically significantly better at p < 0.01 with
respect to Rlsnps and Rlanps under at least one of
the three scoring metrics in each case.

Finally, in the last row of Table 6, we combine
all three kernels into one SVM learner. The most
important lesson we learn from this experiment is
that each of the three kernels provides the learner
with a different kind of useful information, so that
a composite kernel using all three sources of in-
formation performs better than any system using
fewer kernels. Although the improvements over the
best two-kernel system (Rsa) and one-kernel sys-
tem (Rlnps) are small, they are still statistically sig-
nificant at p < 0.1 under one of the scoring metrics,

S3. When we compare this combined system to the
best baseline (Hp), we discover the improvements
derived from the three-kernel system are significant
improvements over it at p < 0.05 and p < 0.01 with
respect to S1 and S3 respectively.

Feature analysis. To better understand which of
the three flat features (nearest neighbors, paragraph
label sequences, or sentence label sequences) con-
tributes the most to the linear kernel portion of the
systems’ performances, we analyze the three fea-
ture types on Rlnps using the backward elimination
feature selection algorithm. First, we remove each
of the three feature groups independently from the
Rlnps’s feature set and determine which of the three
removals yields the best performance according to
each scoring metric. Next, among the remaining
two feature groups, we repeat the same step, remov-
ing each of the two groups independently from the
feature set to determine which of the two removals
yields the best performance.

While space limitations preclude showing the ac-
tual numbers, the trend is consistent among all three
scoring metrics: the first feature type to remove
is paragraph sequences (meaning that they are the
least important) and the last to remove is the near-
est neighbor features. Nevertheless, performance al-
ways drops when a feature type is removed, indicat-
ing that all three feature types contribute positively
to overall performance. The fact that flat paragraph
sequence features proved to be least useful high-
lights the importance of the structured methods we
presented for using paragraph sequence information.

8 Conclusions

We have investigated the relatively less-studied
problem of modeling the organization in student es-
says. The contributions of our work include the
novel application of two techniques from bioinfor-
matics and machine learning — sequence align-
ment and string kernels, as well as the introduc-
tion of alignment kernels — to essay scoring. We
showed that each technique makes a significant con-
tribution to a scoring system, and we hope that this
work will increase awareness of these powerful tech-
niques among NLP researchers. Finally, to stimulate
work on this problem, we make our corpus of anno-
tated essays available to other researchers.

238



Acknowledgments

We thank the three reviewers for their comments.
Our six annotators, Andrew Hubbs, Karin Khoo,
Jayne Koath, Christopher Maier, Andrew Mallon,
and Cory Thornton, all deserve numerous thanks,
because without the countless hours they each spent
annotating hundreds of essays, none of the research
described in this paper would have been possible.

References

Yigal Attali and Jill Burstein. 2006. Automated es-
say scoring with e-rater V.2. Journal of Technology,
Learning, and Assessment, 4(3).

Regina Barzilay and Mirella Lapata. 2005. Modeling
local coherence: An entity-based approach. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL, pages 141–148.

Regina Barzilay and Lillian Lee. 2002. Bootstrapping
lexical choice via multiple-sequence alignment. In
Proceedings of EMNLP, pages 164–171.

Regina Barzilay and Lillian Lee. 2003. Learning to
paraphrase: An unsupervised approach using multiple-
sequence alignment. In HLT-NAACL 2003: Main Pro-
ceedings, pages 16–23.

Regina Barzilay and Lillian Lee. 2004. Catching the
drift: Probabilistic content models, with applications
to generation and summarization. In HLT-NAACL
2004: Main Proceedings, pages 113–120.

Razvan Bunescu and Raymond Mooney. 2005. A short-
est path dependency kernel for relation extraction. In
Proceedings of HLT/EMNLP, pages 724–731.

Jill Burstein, Martin Chodorow, and Claudia Leacock.
2004. Automated essay evaluation: The Criterion on-
line writing evaluation service. AI Magazine, 25(3),
27–36.

Jill Burstein, Daniel Marcu, and Kevin Knight. 2003.
Finding the write stuff: Automatic identification of
discourse structure in student essays. IEEE Intelligent
Systems, 18(1):32–39.

Michael Collins and Nigel Duffy. 2002. New ranking
algorithms for parsing and tagging: Kernels over dis-
crete structures, and the voted perceptron. In Proceed-
ings of the ACL, pages 263–270.

Corinna Cortes and Vladimir Vapnik. 1995. Support-
vector networks. Machine Learning, 20(3):273–297.

Scott Elliot. 2001. IntelliMetric: From here to validity.
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American
Educational Research Association, Seattle, WA.

Micha Elsner, Joseph Austerweil, and Eugene Charniak.
2007. A unified local and global model for discourse
coherence. In NAACL HLT 2007: Proceedings of the
Main Conference, pages 436–443.

Sylviane Granger, Estelle Dagneaux, Fanny Meunier,
and Magali Paquot. 2009. International Corpus of
Learner English (Version 2). Presses universitaires de
Louvain.

Derrick Higgins, Jill Burstein, Daniel Marcu, and Clau-
dia Gentile. 2004. Evaluating multiple aspects of co-
herence in student essays. In HLT-NAACL 2004: Main
Proceedings, pages 185–192.

Thorsten Joachims. 1999. Making large-scale SVM
learning practical. In Bernhard Scholkopf and Alexan-
der Smola, editors, Advances in Kernel Methods - Sup-
port Vector Learning, pages 44–56. MIT Press.

Thomas K. Landauer, Darrell Laham, and Peter W.
Foltz. 2003. Automated scoring and annotation of
essays with the Intelligent Essay AssessorTM. In Auto-
mated Essay Scoring: A Cross-Disciplinary Perspec-
tive, pages 87–112.

Huma Lodhi, Craig Saunders, John Shawe-Taylor, Nello
Cristianini, and Christopher J. C. H. Watkins. 2002.
Text classification using string kernels. Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research, 2:419–444.

Eleni Miltsakaki and Karen Kukich. 2004. Evaluation
of text coherence for electronic essay scoring systems.
Natural Language Engineering, 10(1):25–55.

Alessandro Moschitti. 2004. A study on convolution ker-
nels for shallow statistic parsing. In Proceedings of the
ACL, pages 335–342.

Saul Ben Needleman and Christian Dennis Wunsch.
1970. A general method applicable to the search for
similarities in the amino acid sequence of two proteins.
Journal of Molecular Biology, 48(3):443–453, March.

Mark Shermis and Jill Burstein. 2003. Automated Essay
Scoring: A Cross-Disciplinary Perspective. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc., Mahwah, NJ.

Mark Shermis, Jill Burstein, Derrick Higgins, and Klaus
Zechner. 2010. Automated essay scoring: Writing
assessment and instruction. In International Encyclo-
pedia of Education (3rd edition), pages 20–26.

Tony Silva. 1993. Toward an understanding of the dis-
tinct nature of L2 writing: The ESL research and its
implications. 27(4):657–677.

Radu Soricut and Daniel Marcu. 2006. Discourse gener-
ation using utility-trained coherence models. In Pro-
ceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Conference
Poster Sessions, pages 803–810.

Yannick Versley, Alessandro Moschitti, Massimo Poe-
sio, and Xiaofeng Yang. 2008. Coreference systems
based on kernels methods. In Proceedings of COL-
ING, pages 961–968.

Yiming Yang and Jan O. Pedersen. 1997. A comparative
study on feature selection in text categorization. In
Proceedings of ICML, pages 412–420.

239


