










































An Approach of Generating Personalized Views from Normalized Electronic Dictionaries : A Practical Experiment on Arabic Language


Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 953–960,
MIT, Massachusetts, USA, 9-11 October 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

 An approach for generating personalized views from normalized 

electronic dictionaries : A practical experiment on                      

Arabic language 

 
Aida Khemakhem  

MIRACL Laboratory            

FSEGS, B.P. 1088,                     

3018 Sfax, Tunisia 
khemakhem.aida@ 

gmail.com 

Bilel Gargouri 
MIRACL Laboratory         

FSEGS, B.P. 1088,      

3018 Sfax, Tunisia 
bilel.gargouri@ 

fsegs.rnu.tn 

Abdelmajid Ben Hamadou 
MIRACL Laboratory  

ISIMS, Cité Ons,                                     

3021 Sfax, Tunisia 
abdelmajid.benhamadou 

@isimsf.rnu.tn 

  

     

 

 

Abstract 

Electronic dictionaries covering all natural 

language levels are very relevant for the hu-
man use as well as for the automatic 

processing use, namely those constructed 

with respect to international standards. Such 

dictionaries are characterized by a complex 

structure and an important access time when 

using a querying system. However, the need 

of a user is generally limited to a part of such 

a dictionary according to his domain and ex-

pertise level which corresponds to a specia-

lized dictionary. Given the importance of 

managing a unified dictionary and consider-

ing the personalized needs of users, we pro-

pose an approach for generating personalized 

views starting from a normalized dictionary 

with respect to Lexical Markup Framework 

LMF-ISO 24613 norm. This approach pro-

vides the re-use of already defined views for 
a community of users by managing their pro-

files information and promoting the materia-

lization of the generated views. It is com-

posed of four main steps: (i) the projection of 

data categories controlled by a set of con-

straints (related to the user‟s profiles), (ii) the 

selection of values with consistency check-

ing, (iii) the automatic generation of the 

query‟s model and finally, (iv) the refinement 

of the view. The proposed approach was con-

solidated by carrying out an experiment on an 

LMF normalized Arabic dictionary. 

1 Introduction 

Electronic dictionaries are very useful in nowa-
days society, with the globalization and the in-

crease of world communication and exchanges. 
There are clearly identified needs of dictionaries 

for human use as well as for automatic processing 
use.  

Given the importance of having recourse to 
standards when constructing such lexical re-
sources in order to promote the reuse and the fu-
sion, the standardization committee ISO 
TC37/SC4 has recently validated the Lexical 
Markup Framework norm (LMF) project under 

the standard ISO 24 613 (Francopoulo and George 
2008). LMF provides a common and shared repre-
sentation of lexical objects that allows for the en-
coding of rich linguistic information, including 
among others morphological, syntactic, and se-
mantic aspects. The LMF proposal is distin-
guished by the separate management of the hierar-

chical data structure (meta-model) and elementary 
linguistic descriptors (data categories) which pro-
motes to cover several languages. 

A normalized dictionary covers wide areas that 
include all lexical information of a given language 
and which are useful both for human use and for 
Natural Language Processing use in accordance 

with the kind of the user (linguist, lexicographer, 
developer,  etc.),  the level of the user (learner, 
expert, etc.) and the domain of the use (linguistic, 
medicine, biology, etc.).  These dictionaries are 
characterized by a complex structure that supports 
the richness of natural languages. Therefore, deal-
ing with a unique and complete dictionary is well 
for the manage task.  However, such dictionaries 

are large and can be time consuming when query-
ing their contents especially on the web.  Moreo-
ver, displaying all details when some of which are 
not useful for the field of the query research is a 

953



nuisance for the user. So, it will be interesting to 
reduce the displayed details according to the do-
main or to the expertise level of the user by gene-
rating personalized views (virtual or materialized) 
in order to appropriate the use of such dictionaries 

to the user needs. 
The idea of creating document views is not a 

new concept but applying it on LMF normalized 
dictionaries is a new one. Indeed, it has been some 
attempts for dictionary creating in accordance to 
the TEI consortium (Véronis and Ide 1996) but the 
problem was the fact that created textual views 

(corresponding to the surface structure) or data 
base views (corresponding to the deep structure) 
were not customized. Others propositions are very 
interesting but they concern the ontology domain 
when dealing with the concept of point of view 
(Corby and al 2005).   

In this paper, we propose an approach that favors 

the use of normalized dictionaries by generating 
virtual/materialized personalized views. This ap-
proach is based on the profiles information asso-
ciated to user‟s community which helps to retrieve 
already defined views stored in a library of views. 
For the illustration, we use an Arabic LMF norma-
lized dictionary (Baccar and al. 2008, Khemak-
hem and al., 2009) developed in the framework of 

an Arabic project supervised by the ALECSO 
(The Arab League Educational, Cultural and 
Scientific Organization) and founded by the Uni-
versity of King Abdul-Aziz in the Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia1 . An environment supporting the 
proposed approach was implemented. At present, 
it concerns the Arabic language.   

The present paper is outlined as follows. We will 
start by giving an overview of projects that use 
LMF notably for the construction and the exploi-
tation of electronic dictionaries. Then, we will 
present the foundation of the proposed approach 
related to the profile and the view concepts. After 
that, we will explain the different steps of the 

view‟s generating approach. Finally, we will bring 
back the experimentation that we carried out on a 
normalized Arabic dictionary using the proposed 
approach. 

2 State of the art of projects using LMF 

After the emergence of LMF, some projects were 

launched in order to construct or exploit electronic 

                                                   
1
 www.almuajam.org 

dictionaries in accordance with this norm. Among 
others we note LEXUS (Kirsch 2005) (Kemps-
Snijders and al 2006), LIRICS (LIRICS 2005) and 
LMF-QL (Ben Abderrahmen and al 2007). All 
these labors have been recourse to Web service 

technology that favors to invoke, locally or afar, 
appropriate services for the management or the 
exploitation of a normalized dictionary. 
LEXUS offers an interface permitting to the user 
to define formats of lexical bases with a perspec-
tive to enable the construction of lexical bases ac-
cording to the LMF model. However, it does not 

allow the verification of the compliance between 
the model and the norm. 

LIRICS proposes some APIs that focus especial-
ly on the management of lexical data base. These 
APIs offer the possibility to work on the structure 
of the LMF base by adding, modifying or deleting 
components of LMF model. However, there is no 

interface which facilitates the use of these APIs. 
LMF-QL provides Web services to be used 

while developing lingware systems. These servic-
es offer the exploitation of a normalized lexical 
base without having any piece of information 
about its content and its structure. The results of 
these services may be personalized dictionaries 
given in an XML format. However, it covers only 

the morphological level.   
Concerning the construction of personalized dic-

tionaries using the works mentioned above, we 
can notice that the user must have an idea about 
the content of the desired dictionary and its struc-
ture. He must also have acquaintances with que-
ries generation to satisfy his requirements. 

Finally, we note an absence of works dealing 
with the generation of views starting from LMF 
standardized dictionary. 

3 Foundation of the approach 

An electronic dictionary can be used by many us-
ers who have different requirements. Indeed, by 

being a language learner, a researcher in linguis-
tics or a teacher‟s, needs and uses are not the 
same. Therefore, it will be better to have a tool 
(editor) allowing generating a suitable view. The 
making of a view of the dictionary might be diffi-
cult for some kinds of users, so the recourse to 
user profiles may facilitate this task. One can note 

that the user profile is very important to guide the 
user through the retrieval and the reuse of existent 
views corresponding to his profile. 

954



3.1 A user profile definition 

Generally, all features characterizing a user or a 
group of users can be grouped under the term of a 
user profile. For electronic dictionaries, a user 
profile is a dataset that concerns a community of 
users of the dictionary. 
Every profile is characterized by a category, a lev-

el of expertise and a field. Indeed, we classify the 
views of the dictionary according to a profile that 
is based on a selection of these three criteria. The 
formal representation of a profile is the following: 
       P : < K, L, F> 

K: the kind of user: lexicographer, linguist, ling-

ware system developer, etc. 

L: the level of the expertise: beginner, student, 

expert, etc. 

F: the field of user: medicine, sport, biology, gen-

eral, etc.   

3.2 A View definition 

A view of a dictionary is a synthesis of a dictio-
nary interrogation query. We can consider it as a 
specialized or lexical dictionary, supported by a 
query. 
A dictionary view allows to filter some lexico-
graphic information and to hide others that are 

useless for some users. 
The formal representation of a view: 
       View : < D, P, C > 

D: dictionary: each view is specific to a norma-

lized dictionary.  

P: profile of the view (see previous section). 

C: it is a set of properties which characterizes the 

model of the view. Each property has the follow-
ing representation:  
            C : <A, V, W> 

A: attribute is a simple representation of a charac-

teristic model. This characteristic may be a class 
(Lemma, Sense…), a feature (definition, pos, ge-
nre,…) or a relationship (RelatedForm, SenseRe-
lation…) as indicated in Figure 3. 

V: value: each attribute can have a set of values. 

For example, the values verb and noun for the 
attribute POS (Part Of Speech). 

W: weight of a property. It may take the values 0 

or 1. 

 If the weight equals to 0, then this proper-
ty is mandatory only for part of the lexical 
entry. 

 If the weight equals to 1, then this proper-
ty is mandatory for each lexical entry of this 
view. 

3.3 Different types of views 

There are two types of views: 

 Virtual view: the results of this view are 
calculated upon request. In this case, inter-
rogating queries of this view might generate 

a composed query that interrogates directly 
the principal dictionary (underlying). 

 Materialized view (physical): a physical 
copy faithful to the view definition which is 
stored and maintained. 

4 Proposed approach 

In this section we describe the proposed approach 
through the detail that we will give for each one of 
its four steps. These steps are illustrated in Figure 
1.   

 Projection of the view model: includes the 
specification of data categories (linguistic in-
formation), controlled by constraints in order 
to build a suitable normalized and valid mod-
el. It can be started by already existing pro-
files. 

 Selection and checkout of the coherence: 
concerns the specification of some values for 
data categories (DC) already specified. We 
use coherence rules to check the constancy 
knowing that there are strong dependencies 
between some DCs and values of other DCs 
(see section 4.2). 

 Automatic generation of the model and the 
query: includes the model refinement and the 
checking of constraints by priority. 

 Refinement of the view: involves the valida-
tion of a new view of dictionary, by adding 

the elements that are related to the lexical en-
tries of this view. 

  
 

955



      

Figure 1.The approach for generating personalized dictionary views. 

4.1 Projection of the view model 

The UML model of the dictionary is difficult to 
understand. So, we suggest a simpler represen-
tation which is more abstract. The choice can be 
started by already existing profiles in order to 
avoid views redundancy by the reuse of the pre-
vious ones and help users. 

a.   The specification of a profile  

A user profile is a description that corresponds 
to a user community. We use the features of 
profile to filter the DCs. Indeed, we offer to the 
user only DCs that correspond to its field and its 

level based on the weight assigned to each DC. 
We assigned these weights according to a study 
on the needs of each user level. This study is 
based on the specific documents and dictiona-

ries for each user level. By example for begin-
ner level, we studied the school books to extract 

the information (root, schema,…) needed at this 
level. 

It also facilitates and accelerates the task of 
needs specification and permits to avoid views 
redundancy. The projection phase is started by 
the specification of the user profile that requires 
the choice of its category, its level and its field. 

Then, if the user wants to consult the previous 
views of his profile, we display all the views 
associated to this profile. Otherwise, we offer 
the DCs specific to its field and its level. 

b.   Constraints    

The abstraction of the model can hides relations 
between DCs. Indeed, during their specification 
there is a risk of having views with a non valid 

R
efin

em
en

t o
f th

e 

v
iew

 

no yes 

Specification of a profile 

 

Specification of the view model 

 

Automatic generation of the DTD and 

the query 

View creation 

request 

 

virtual view 

Filter storage 
 

Generation of the new ver-

sion of the dictionary 

View filter 

 
Materialized view 

Dictionary 

Profiles 

Constraints 

Coherence 

rules 

S
electio

n
 a

n
d

   

ch
eck

 o
u

t o
f th

e           

co
h

eren
ce

 

P
ro

jectio
n

 

O
f th

e
 v

iew
 m

o
d

el 

v
iew

 

Specification of values 

 

Coherence checkout 

 

956



model. So, the DC specification must be con-
trolled by constraints rules such as: 

 If we select the field, the semantic class or 
the nature then the definition must be se-
lected. 

 If the relation between syntactic behaviors 
and senses is selected then the definition 
must be selected.  

4.2 Selection and checkout of the cohe-
rence 

Most of data categories use a list of values such 
as part-of-speech (pos), scheme, field, etc. Val-
ues specification of some DCs might influence 
the presence or the absence of the other DCs. 
For example, if the user has chosen DCs: pos, 
root, scheme, gender and number; then, he has 
fixed the value du pos =”particle” (it means that 

he needs only particles) and the value of the 
number =”singular”. In this case, we note an 
incoherence problem since the DC “number” is 
among particles characteristics but it concerns 
nouns. In this case, we must request the user to 
rectify the specifications. The selection must 
contain a checkout phase of coherence of DCs 
specified with the already existing data in the 

dictionary. This phase is based on coherence 
rules which ensure consistency between DCs 
and the specified values. 

4.3 Automatic generation of the DTD and 
the query 

We use the Document Type Definition (DTD) 
of the LMF norm and DC specifications of the 
model to automatically generate the DTD of the 

view. We use algorithms to generate DTD ele-
ments, respecting the order of the participating 
classes and ensuring classes relations.   

The automatic generation of the query (i.e. us-
ing XQuery) involves two steps: the first one 
concern the specification of conditions for the 
selection of a lexical entry and its related infor-

mation (i.e., semantic, syntactic). The second 
step permits the definition of an XML represen-
tation of a lexical entry. This step is based on 
the projection specified by the user and the 
priority order of DCs. There are DCs that influ-
ence the presence of the lexical entry and others 
that only influence the presence of the sense. 

4.4 Refinement of the view 

The steps of this phase depend on the type of 
the view. If it‟s a virtual one, then it‟s necessary 
to save the query already generated. This query 
will be used during the operation of this view. If 
it‟s a materialized one, then query results are a 
part of the dictionary and must be saved for the 

operation of the view. The second case may 
give us a non valid XML base, especially when 
there are two lexical entries in relation and our 
query will select one of them that have an iden-
tifier of the other entry that is not selected. We 
recall that the lexical entries may have morpho-
logical links with other lexical entries and se-

mantic links with other senses.  
Indeed, after recording query„s results, we 

move to the step of refinement. This step con-
sists to valid the new personalized dictionary, 
adding lexical entries, senses and syntactic 
frame in relation with these results. 

5 Experimentation 

5.1 The normalized Arabic dictionary 

In order to experiment our approach, we are 

going to use the normalized Arabic interactive 
dictionary containing more than 38000 lexical 
entries and developed in the framework of an 
Arabic project 2  supervised by the ALECSO. 
This dictionary is modeled according to the me-
ta-model proposed by LMF3 (ISO 24613) and 
uses data categories generated by the DCR 4 

norm (ISO 12620). The dictionary pattern is 
composed of classes selected from the kernel or 
from one of its extensions (morphological, se-
mantic, syntactic, MRD) in order to see a dic-
tionary covering most of new dictionary‟s needs 
(Baccar and al 2008). Since there are many in-
formation that can be classified in multi exten-

sions in the same time, the norm‟s editor have 
chosen to put them in one of these extensions. 
For this reason, we did not use only Machine 
Readable Dictionary (MRD) extension. This 
pattern valorizes derivation phenomenon in 
Arabic language and neutralizes the differences 
between lexicographical schools, ensuring lan-
guage evolution. In fact, we have considered 

                                                   
2
 www.almuajam.org/ 

3
 www.lexicalmarkupframework.org/ 

4
 www.isocat.org/ 

957



roots (ك ت ب “k t b”), derived forms ( -kata“ َكتَةَ 
ba” (write), َكاتِة ”kâtib” (writer)), invariable 
words (  إن ”inna” (indeed), َحت ى “hattâ” (in order)) 
and non-Arab origin words (َكْمبْيُوتَر “computer”, 
 internet”) as lexical entries that can have“ أَنْتَْرنَات

morphological relations (i.e., RelatedForm rela-
tion). 

In addition, this dictionary is rich with seman-
tic information (i.e., definitions, examples, sub-

ject field, semantic class) and syntactic informa-
tion (i.e., subcategorisation frame). It ensures 
the link between senses and their possible syn-
tactic behaviors. 

The Figure 2, given below, shows a part of the 

lexical entry “ ََكتَة” ”kataba” (write) which gives 
an idea about the structure of this dictionary.

 

 

Figure 2. Example of a lexical entry of the normalized Arabic dictionary.  

In this Figure, we highlight some properties of 
the used dictionary such as: 

 The diversity of information: morphology, 
semantics, syntax, image, video, etc.  

 The sense relations (i.e., synonym) link two 
senses and not two lexical entries 

 The precision of the syntactic behavior. In-
deed, each syntactic behavior has a type; the 
particles needed an example and its defini-
tion. 

 The structure of a lexical entry varies ac-
cording to its part of speech 

5.2 Experiment of the approach 

We illustrate in this section the generation 

process of a personalized dictionary view. We 
have setup a computing system online, that al-
lows the user to make his view of the dictionary 
in the format of an interactive Web page (so 
independent of all material or software owner) 
in which he will be able to define, create and 
enhance his personal view.  

Before starting the generation of the view, the 

user must specify his profile. If the views are 
associated with this profile, we will display their 
description to reuse the existing views and to 
avoid redundancy. 

pos : part of speech 

nat : nature      inf Morp : Morphlogical piece of information 

class : class      def : definition     

field : field       expSyn : example of using a type 

exp : example for a sense    type : type of a syntactic frame 

 

 

 def 

 nat 

class 

root pos inf Morp scheme 

field 

exp 

type 

expSyn 

 

particule 

 

lemma 

958



 
 
 
 
 

                                                                             

Figure 3. Specification of the user profile.  

 

The user must set its category, its level and its 
field.  

He can select an existing view corresponding 
to its needs or he can specify its purpose with-
out using the existing. Then, he chooses the cat-
egories of data needed. Next, he can set their 
values. 

                                         

Figure 4. Representation of some categories of data and the list of values for selected DCs 

In the following Figure 5, we present the key 
information in the dictionary. We give an ex-
ample of view that includes only the schema, 
the derivational relations, sense, examples of all 

the Arabic verbs (pos = verb). Then from 38000 
lexical entries, our view has 7000 verbs and 
3000 roots i.e. only 10,000 entries. 

 

 

Figure 5. Interface for creating a view. 

In the Figure 5, the user has selected the lem-
ma, pos, schema, the derivational relations, 
etymology, sense, definition and example. For 

pos, he fixed the value of “فِْعل” (verb). Accord-
ing to the specification of requirements, the user 
clicks the save button. The system checks the 

 

category level field 

 lemma 

 pos 

 scheme 

 related form     

 etymology 

 phonetic 

 list of pos 

 scheme 

 types of related form 

 language list  

 

959



consistency of the chosen data categories and 
values, then, it generates a query in the XQuery 
language (see Figure 6). 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Figure 6. Example of a generated query   

 

If the user chooses a materialized view, the 
system must save the query result in the user's 
computer after refinement (add missing infor-
mation to validate the XML document). 

For the verification of results, the user must 
choose the view before starting the search in the 
dictionary. In the following Figure 7, we present 

the results of research in the view already speci-
fied in Figure 5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Displayed results of query applied 

on a generated view. 

6 Conclusion 

The construction of specialized dictionaries is 
an old concept. However, it has not been used 
after the publication of LMF standard in spite of 
the complexity and the richness of normalized 

dictionaries. In this paper, we proposed an ap-
proach allowing the generation of specialized 
and personalized views of dictionaries accord-
ing to users‟ profiles in order to benefit from the 
management of a unique dictionary and give 
appropriate services.  

A Practical experiment was carried out on a 
normalized Arabic dictionary using an appro-
priate tool that permits to manage users‟ profiles 
and views‟ generation. We successfully per-
formed some empirical illustrations starting 

from the normalized dictionary.   
In the future, we will consider the experimen-

tation of the developed tool in the generation of 
various personalized views both in virtual and 
materialized versions. Also, we plan to put up 
our system on the Web. Also, we plan to expe-
riment our approach on others languages.   

References 

Baccar, F., Khemakhem, A., Gargouri, B., Haddar, 

K. and Hamadou, A.B.. 2008. LMF Standardized 

Model for the Editorial Electronic Dictionaries of 

Arabic. In Proceedings of NLPCS‟08, pp. 64–73. 

Barcelona, Spain. 

Ben Abderrahmen M., Gargouri B. and Jmaiel M. 

2007. LMF-QL: A Graphical Tool to Query LMF 

Databases for NLP and Editorial Use. Book 

Chapter In: Human Language Technology. Chal-

lenges of the Information Society, Third Lan-

guage and Technology Conference, LTC 2007, 

Poznan, Poland.  

Corby O., Dieng-Kuntz R., Faron-Zucker C., Gan-
don F., Giboin A. 2005. Le moteur de recherche 

sémantique Corese. In Proc. of the Workshop 

Raisonner le web sémantique avec des graphes, 

AFIA platform. Nice. 

Francopoulo G. and George M. 2008. ISO/TC 37/SC 

4 N453 (N330 Rev.16), Language resource mana-

gement- Lexical markup framework (LMF). 

Kemps-Snijders M., Nederhof M.-J. and Wittenburg 

P. 2006. LEXUS, “A web-based tool for manipu-

lating lexical resources”. In LREC 2006.  

Kirsch K. 2005. LEXUS Manual. LEXUS version 

1.0.  

LIRICS (Linguistic Infrastructure for Interoperable 

Resource and Systems). 2005. “Guidelines and 

tools for producing standards, test-suites and 

API(s)”.  

Véronis, J. and Ide, N.1996. Encodage des diction-

naires électroniques: problèmes et propositions 

de la TEI. In D. Piotrowsky (Ed.), Lexicograpbie 

et informatique - Autour de l'informatisation du 

Trésor de la Langue Française. Actes du Colloque 

International de Nancy (1996) (pp. 239-261). Pa-

ris: Didier Erudition. 

 

 

 

960


