










































Automatically Producing Plot Unit Representations for Narrative Text


Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 77–86,
MIT, Massachusetts, USA, 9-11 October 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Automatically Producing Plot Unit Representations for Narrative Text

Amit Goyal
Dept. of Computer Science

University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742

amit@umiacs.umd.edu

Ellen Riloff
School of Computing

University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
riloff@cs.utah.edu

Hal Daumé III
Dept. of Computer Science

University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
hal@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract

In the 1980s, plot units were proposed as a
conceptual knowledge structure for represent-
ing and summarizing narrative stories. Our
research explores whether current NLP tech-
nology can be used to automatically produce
plot unit representations for narrative text. We
create a system called AESOP that exploits
a variety of existing resources to identify af-
fect states and applies “projection rules” to
map the affect states onto the characters in a
story. We also use corpus-based techniques
to generate a new type of affect knowledge
base: verbs that impart positive or negative
states onto their patients (e.g., being eaten is
an undesirable state, but being fed is a desir-
able state). We harvest these “patient polar-
ity verbs” from a Web corpus using two tech-
niques: co-occurrence with Evil/Kind Agent
patterns, and bootstrapping over conjunctions
of verbs. We evaluate the plot unit representa-
tions produced by our system on a small col-
lection of Aesop’s fables.

1 Introduction

In the 1980s, plot units (Lehnert, 1981) were pro-
posed as a knowledge structure for representing nar-
rative stories and generating summaries. Plot units
are fundamentally different from the story represen-
tations that preceded them because they focus on the
affect states of characters and the tensions between
them as the driving force behind interesting and co-
hesive stories. Plot units were used in narrative sum-
marization studies, both in computer science and
psychology (Lehnert et al., 1981), but previous com-

putational models of plot units relied on tremendous
amounts of manual knowledge engineering.

The last few decades have seen tremendous ad-
vances in NLP and the emergence of many resources
that could be useful for plot unit analysis. So we em-
barked on a project to see whether plot unit repre-
sentations can be generated automatically using cur-
rent NLP technology. We created a system called
AESOP that uses a variety of resources to iden-
tify words that correspond to positive, negative, and
mental affect states. AESOP uses affect projection
rules to map the affect states onto the characters in
the story based on verb argument structure. Addi-
tionally, affect states are inferred based on syntactic
properties, and causal and cross-character links are
created using simple heuristics.

Affect states often arise from actions that produce
good or bad states for the character that is acted
upon. For example, “the cat ate the mouse” pro-
duces a negative state for the mouse because being
eaten is bad. Similarly, “the man fed the dog” pro-
duces a positive state for the dog because being fed
is generally good. Knowledge about the effects of
actions (i.e., state changes) on patients is not readily
available in existing semantic resources. We create
a new type of lexicon consisting of patient polarity
verbs (PPVs) that impart positive or negative states
on their patients. These verbs reflect world knowl-
edge about desirable/undesirable states for animate
beings; for example, being fed, paid or adopted are
generally desirable states, while being eaten, chased
or hospitalized are generally undesirable states.

We automatically generate a lexicon of “patient
polarity verbs” from a Web corpus using two tech-

77



The Father and His Sons
(s1) A father had a family of sons who were perpetually
quarreling among themselves. (s2) When he failed to
heal their disputes by his exhortations, he determined
to give them a practical illustration of the evils of dis-
union; and for this purpose he one day told them to
bring him a bundle of sticks. (s3) When they had done
so, he placed the faggot into the hands of each of them
in succession, and ordered them to break it in pieces.
(s4) They tried with all their strength, and were not
able to do it. (s5) He next opened the faggot, took the
sticks separately, one by one, and again put them into
his sons’ hands, upon which they broke them easily.
(s6) He then addressed them in these words: “My sons,
if you are of one mind, and unite to assist each other,
you will be as this faggot, uninjured by all the attempts
of your enemies; but if you are divided among your-
selves, you will be broken as easily as these sticks.”

(a) “Father and Sons” Fable

Father Sons
(quarreling)a1

(stop quarreling)a3

(annoyed)a2

(exhortations)a4

(exhortations fail)a5

m

m

a

(teach lesson)a6
m

(get sticks & break)a7
m

(get sticks & break)a8

(cannot break sticks)a9
a

(cannot break sticks)a10

a

(bundle & break)a11
(bundle & break)a12

(break sticks)a13
a

(break sticks)a14

a

m

a

shared

request

request

mixed

shared

s2

s2

s2

s2

s2

s2

s4

s5

s5

s1

s2

s4

s5

s5

(lesson succeeds)a15s5

(b) Plot Unit Analysis for “Father and Sons” Fable

Figure 1: Sample Fable and Plot Unit Representation

niques: patterns that identify co-occurrence with
stereotypically evil or kind agents, and a bootstrap-
ping algorithm that learns from conjunctions of
verbs. We evaluate the plot unit representations pro-
duced by our system on a small collection of fables.

2 Overview of Plot Units

Plot unit structures consist of affect states for each
character, and links defining the relationships be-
tween them. Plot units include three types of affect
states: positive (+), negative (-), and mental (M).
Affect states can be connected by causal links and
cross-character links, which explain how the nar-
rative hangs together. Causal links exist between
affect states for the same character and have four
types: motivation (m), actualization (a), termination
(t) and equivalence (e). Cross-character links indi-
cate that a single event affects multiple characters.
For instance, if one character requests something of
another, then each character is assigned an M state
and a cross-character link connects the states.

To see a concrete example of a plot unit represen-
tation, a short fable, “The Father and His Sons,” is
shown in Figure 1(a) and our annotation of its plot
unit structure is shown in Figure 1(b). In this fable,
there are two characters, the “Father” and (collec-
tively) the “Sons”, who go through a series of affect
states depicted chronologically in the two columns.

The first affect state (a1) is produced from sen-
tence #1 (s1) and is a negative state for the sons be-
cause they are quarreling. This state is shared by the

father (via a cross-character link) who has a nega-
tive annoyance state (a2). The father decides that
he wants to stop the sons from quarreling, which
is a mental event (a3). The causal link from a2 to
a3 with an m label indicates that his annoyed state
“motivated” this decision. His first attempt is by ex-
hortations (a4). The first M (a3) is connected to the
second M (a4) with an m (motivation) link, which
represents subgoaling. The father’s overall goal is
to stop the quarreling (a3), and to do so he creates a
subgoal of exhorting the sons to stop (a4). The ex-
hortations fail, which produces a negative state (a5)
for the father. The a causal link indicates an “actu-
alization”, representing the failure of his plan (a4).

This failure motivates a new subgoal: teach the
sons a lesson (a6). At a high level, this subgoal
has two parts, indicated by the two gray regions
(a7 − a10 and a11 − a14). The first gray region
begins with a cross-character link (M to M), which
indicates a request (in this case, to break a bundle
of sticks). The sons fail at this, which upsets them
(a9) but pleases the father (a10). The second gray
region depicts the second part of the father’s sub-
goal; he makes a second request (a11 to a12) to sep-
arate the bundle and break the sticks, which the sons
successfully do, making them happy (a13) and the
father happy (a14) as well. This latter structure (the
second gray region) is an HONORED REQUEST plot
unit structure. At the end, the father’s plan succeeds
(a15) which is an actualization (a link) of his goal
to teach the sons a lesson (a6).

78



3 Where Do Affect States Come From?

We briefly overview the variety of situations that can
be represented by affect states in plot units.
Direct Expressions of Emotion: Affect states can
correspond to positive/negative emotional states, as
have been studied in the realm of sentiment anal-
ysis. For example, “Max was disappointed” pro-
duces a negative affect state for Max, and “Max was
pleased” produces a positive affect state for Max.
Situational Affect States: Positive and negative af-
fect states can represent good and bad situational
states that characters find themselves in. These
states do not represent emotion, but indicate whether
a situation (state) is good or bad for a character
based on world knowledge. e.g., “The wolf had a
bone stuck in his throat.” produces a negative affect
state for the wolf. Similarly, “The woman recovered
her sight.” produces a positive affect state for the
woman.
Plans and Goals: The existence of a plan or goal is
represented as a mental state (M). Plans and goals
can be difficult to detect automatically and can be
revealed in many ways, such as:
• Direct expressions of plans/goals: a plan/goal
may be explicitly stated (e.g., “John wants food”).
• Speech acts: a plan or goal may be revealed
through a speech act. For example, “the wolf asked
an eagle to extract the bone” is a directive speech
act that indicates the wolf’s plan to resolve its
negative state (having a bone stuck). This example
illustrates how a negative state (bone stuck) can
motivate a mental state (plan). When a speech act
involves multiple characters, it produces multiple
mental states.
• Inferred plans/goals: plans and goals are some-
times inferred from actions. e.g., “the lion hunted
deer” implies that the lion has a plan to obtain food.
Similarly, “the serpent spat poison at John” implies
that the serpent wants to kill John.
• Plan/Goal completion: Plans and goals produce
+/- affect states when they succeed or fail. For
example, if the eagle successfully extracts the bone
from the wolf’s throat, then both the wolf and the
eagle will have positive affect states because both
were successful in their respective goals.

We observed that situational and plan/goal states
often originate from an action. When a character is

acted upon (the patient of a verb), then the charac-
ter may be in a positive or negative state depend-
ing upon whether the action was good or bad for
them based on world knowledge. For example, be-
ing fed, paid or adopted is generally desirable, but
being chased, eaten, or hospitalized is usually unde-
sirable. Consequently, we decided to create a lex-
icon of patient polarity verbs that produce positive
or negative states for their patients. In Section 4.2,
we present two methods for automatically harvest-
ing these verbs from a Web corpus.

4 AESOP: Automatically Generating Plot
Unit Representations

Our system, AESOP, automatically creates plot unit
representations for narrative text. AESOP has four
main steps: affect state recognition, character iden-
tification, affect state projection, and link creation.
During affect state recognition, AESOP identifies
words that may be associated with positive, nega-
tive, and mental states. AESOP then identifies the
main characters in the story and applies affect pro-
jection rules to map the affect states onto these char-
acters. During this process, some additional affect
states are inferred based on verb argument structure.
Finally, AESOP creates cross-character links and
causal links between affect states. We also present
two corpus-based methods to automatically produce
a new resource for affect state recognition: a patient
polarity verb lexicon.

4.1 Plot Unit Creation

4.1.1 Recognizing Affect States
The basic building blocks of plot units are af-

fect states which come in three flavors: positive,
negative, and mental. In recent years, many pub-
licly available resources have been created for sen-
timent analysis and other types of semantic knowl-
edge. We considered a wide variety of resources and
ultimately decided to experiment with five resources
that most closely matched our needs:
• FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998): We manually

identified 87 frame classes that seem to be associ-
ated with affect: 43 mental classes (e.g., COMMU-
NICATION and NEEDING), 22 positive classes (e.g.,
ACCOMPLISHMENT and SUPPORTING), and 22 neg-
ative classes (e.g., CAUSE HARM and PROHIBIT-

79



ING). We use the verbs listed for these classes to
produce M, +, and - affect states.
•MPQA Lexicon (Wilson et al., 2005b): We used

the words listed as having positive or negative senti-
ment polarity to produce +/- states, when they occur
with the designated part-of-speech.
• OpinionFinder (Wilson et al., 2005a) (Version

1.4) : We used the +/- labels assigned by its con-
textual polarity classifier (Wilson et al., 2005b) to
create +/- states and the MPQASD tags produced
by its Direct Subjective and Speech Event Identifier
(Choi et al., 2006) to produce mental (M) states.
• Semantic Orientation Lexicon (Takamura et al.,

2005): We used the words listed as having posi-
tive or negative polarity to produce +/- affect states,
when they occur with the designated part-of-speech.
• Speech Act Verbs: We used 228 speech act

verbs from (Wierzbicka, 1987) to produce M states.

4.1.2 Identifying the Characters
For the purposes of this work, we made two sim-

plifying assumptions: (1) There are only two char-
acters per fable1, and (2) Both characters are men-
tioned in the fable’s title. The problem of corefer-
ence resolution for fables is somewhat different than
for other genres, primarily because the characters
are often animals (e.g., he=owl). So we hand-crafted
a simple rule-based coreference system. First, we
apply heuristics to determine number and gender
based on word lists, WordNet (Miller, 1990) and
part-of-speech tags. If no determination of a char-
acter’s gender or number can be made, we employ a
process of elimination. Given the two character as-
sumption, if one character is known to be male, but
there are female pronouns in the fable, then the other
character is assumed to be female. The same is done
for number agreement. Finally, if there is only one
character between a pronoun and the beginning of
a document, then we resolve the pronoun with that
character and the character assumes the gender and
number of the pronoun. Lastly, WordNet provides
some additional resolutions by exploiting hypernym
relations, for instance, linking peasant with man.

4.1.3 Mapping Affect States onto Characters
Plot unit representations are not just a set of af-

fect states, but they are structures that capture the
1We only selected fables that had two main characters.

chronological ordering of states for each character
as the narrative progresses. Consequently, every af-
fect state needs to be attributed to a character. Since
most plots revolve around events, we use verb argu-
ment structure as the primary means for projecting
affect states onto characters.

We developed four affect projection rules that or-
chestrate how affect states are assigned to the char-
acters. We used the Sundance parser (Riloff and
Phillips, 2004) to produce a shallow parse of each
sentence, which includes syntactic chunking, clause
segmentation, and active/passive voice recognition.
We normalized the verb phrases with respect to ac-
tive/passive voice to simplify the rules. We made the
assumption that the Subject of the VP is its AGENT
and the Direct Object of the VP is its PATIENT.2

The rules only project affect states onto AGENTS
and PATIENTS that refer to a character in the story.
The four projection rules are presented below.

1. AGENT VP : This rule applies when the VP
has no PATIENT or the PATIENT corefers with the
AGENT. All affect tags assigned to the VP are pro-
jected onto the AGENT. Example: “Mary laughed
(+)” projects a + affect state onto Mary.

2. VP PATIENT : This rule applies when the VP
has no agent, which is common in passive voice con-
structions. All affect tags assigned to the VP are
projected onto the PATIENT. Example: “John was
rewarded (+), projects a + affect state onto John.

3. AGENT VP PATIENT : This rules applies
when both an AGENT and PATIENT are present, do
not corefer, and at least one of them is a character. If
the PATIENT is a character, then all affect tags asso-
ciated with the VP are projected onto the PATIENT.
If the AGENT is a character and the VP has an M
tag, then we also project an M tag onto the AGENT
(representing a shared, cross-character mental state).

4. AGENT VERB1 to VERB2 PATIENT : This
rule has two cases: (a) If the AGENT and PATIENT
refer to the same character, then we apply Rule #1.
Example: “Bo decided to teach himself...” (b) If the
AGENT and PATIENT are different, then we apply
Rule #1 to VERB1 and Rule #2 to VERB2.

Finally, if an adverb or adjectival phrase has af-
fect, then that affect is mapped onto the preceding
VP and the rules above are applied. For all of the

2This is not always correct, but worked ok in our fables.

80



rules, if a clause contains a negation word, then we
flip the polarity of all words in that clause.

4.1.4 Inferring Affect States
Recognizing plans and goals depends on world

knowledge and inference, and is beyond the scope
of this paper. However, we identified two cases
where affect states often can be inferred based on
syntactic properties. The first case involves verb
phrases (VPs) that have both an AGENT and PA-
TIENT, which corresponds to projection rule #3. If
the VP has polarity, then rule #3 assigns that po-
larity to the PATIENT, not the AGENT. For exam-
ple, “John killed Paul” imparts negative polarity on
Paul, but not necessarily on John. Unless we are
told otherwise, one assumes that John intentionally
killed Paul, and so in a sense, John accomplished
his goal. Consequently, this action should produce a
positive affect state for John. We capture this notion
of accomplishment as a side effect of projection rule
#3: if the VP has +/- polarity, then we produce an
inferred positive state for the AGENT.

The second case involves infinitive verb phrases
of the form: “AGENT VERB1 TO VERB2 PA-
TIENT” (e.g., “Susan tried to warn Mary”). The
infinitive VP construction suggests that the AGENT
has a goal or plan that is being put into motion (e.g.,
tried to, wanted to, attempted to, hoped to, etc.). To
capture this intuition, in rule #4 if VERB1 does not
already have an affect state assigned to it then we
produce an inferred mental state for the AGENT.

4.1.5 Causal and Cross-Character Links
Our research is focused primarily on creating af-

fect states for characters, but plot unit structures
also include cross-character links to connect states
that are shared across characters and causal links
between states for a single character. As an ini-
tial attempt to create complete plot units, AESOP
produces links using simple heuristics. A cross-
character link is created when two characters in a
clause have affect states that originated from the
same word. A causal link is created between each
pair of (chronologically) consecutive affect states
for the same character. Currently, AESOP only pro-
duces forward causal links (motivation (m), actual-
ization (a)) and does not produce backward causal
links (equivalence (e), termination (t)). For forward

links, the causal syntax only allows for five cases:
M

m→ M , + m→ M , − m→ M , M a→ +, M a→ −.
So when AESOP produces a causal link between
two affect states, the order and types of the two states
uniquely determine which label it gets (m or a).

4.2 Generating PPV Lexicons

During the course of this research, we identified a
gap in currently available knowledge: we are not
aware of existing resources that identify verbs which
produce a desirable/undesirable state for their pa-
tients even though the verb itself does not carry po-
larity. For example, the verb eat describes an action
that is generally neutral, but being eaten is clearly
an undesirable state. Similarly, the verb fed does not
have polarity, but being fed is a desirable state for the
patient. In the following sections, we try to fill this
gap by using corpus-based techniques to automati-
cally acquire a Patient Polarity Verb (PPV) Lexicon.

4.2.1 PPV Harvesting with Evil/Kind Agents
The key idea behind our first approach is to iden-

tify verbs that frequently occur with evil or kind
agents. Our intuition was that an “evil” agent will
typically perform actions that are bad for the patient,
while a “kind” agent will typically perform actions
that are good for the patient.

We manually identified 40 stereotypically evil
agent words, such as monster, villain, terrorist, and
murderer, and 40 stereotypically kind agent words,
such as hero, angel, benefactor, and rescuer. We
searched the Google Web 1T N-gram corpus to
identify verbs that co-occur with these words as
probable agents. For each agent term, we applied
the pattern “* by [a,an,the] AGENT” and extracted
the matching N-grams. Then we applied a part-of-
speech tagger to each N-gram and saved the words
that were tagged as verbs (i.e., the words in the *
position).3 This process produced 811 negative (evil
agent) PPVs and 1362 positive (kind agent) PPVs.

4.2.2 PPV Bootstrapping over Conjunctions
Our second approach for acquiring PPVs is based

on an observation from sentiment analysis research
that conjoined adjectives typically have the same po-
larity (e.g. (Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown, 1997)).

3The POS tagging quality is undoubtedly lower than if tag-
ging complete sentences but it seemed reasonable.

81



Our hypothesis was that conjoined verbs often share
the same polarity as well (e.g., “abducted and
killed” or “rescued and rehabilitated”). We exploit
this idea inside a bootstrapping algorithm to itera-
tively learn verbs that co-occur in conjunctions.

Bootstrapping begins with 10 negative and 10
positive PPV seeds. First, we extracted triples of
the form “w1 and w2” from the Google Web 1T
N -gram corpus that had frequency ≥ 100 and were
lower case. We separated each conjunction into
two parts: a primary VERB (“w1”) and a CONTEXT
(“and w2”), and created a copy of the conjunction
with the roles of w1 and w2 reversed. For example,
“rescued and adopted” produces:

VERB=“rescued” CONTEXT=“and adopted”
VERB=“adopted” CONTEXT=“and rescued”

Next, we applied the Basilisk bootstrapping al-
gorithm (Thelen and Riloff, 2002) to learn PPVs.
Basilisk identifies semantically similar words based
on their co-occurrence with seeds in contextual pat-
terns. Basilisk was originally designed for semantic
class induction using lexico-syntactic patterns, but
has also been used to learn subjective and objective
nouns (Riloff et al., 2003).

Basilisk first identifies the pattern contexts that
are most strongly associated with the seed words.
Words that occur in those contexts are labeled as
candidates and scored based on the strength of their
contexts. The top 5 candidates are selected and the
bootstrapping process repeats. Basilisk produces a
lexicon of learned words as well as a ranked list of
pattern contexts. Since we bootstrapped over verb
conjunctions, we also extracted new PPVs from the
contexts. We ran the bootstrapping process to create
a lexicon of 500 words, and we collected verbs from
the top 500 contexts as well.

5 Evaluation

Plot unit analysis of narrative text is enormously
complex – the idea of creating gold standard plot
unit annotations seemed like a monumental task.
So we began with relatively simple and constrained
texts that seemed appropriate: fables. Fables have
two desirable attributes: (1) they have a small cast
of characters, and (2) they typically revolve around
a moral, which is exemplified by a short and concise
plot. Even so, fables are challenging for NLP due to

anthropomorphic characters, flowery language, and
sometimes archaic vocabulary.

We collected 34 Aesop’s fables from a web site4,
choosing fables that have a true plot (some only con-
tain quotes) and exactly two characters. We divided
them into a development set of 11 stories, a tuning
set of 8 stories, and a test set of 15 stories.

Creating a gold standard was itself a substantial
undertaking, and training non-experts to produce
them did not seem feasible in the short term. So
the authors discussed and iteratively refined manual
annotations for the development and tuning sets un-
til we produced similar results and had a common
understanding of the task. Then two authors inde-
pendently created annotations for the test set, and a
third author adjudicated the differences.

5.1 Evaluation Procedure

For evaluation, we used recall (R), precision (P),
and F-measure (F). In our gold standard, each af-
fect state is annotated with the set of clauses that
could legitimately produce it. In most cases (75%),
we were able to ascribe the existence of a state to
precisely one clause. During evaluation, the system-
produced affect states must be generated from the
correct clause. However, for affect states that could
be ascribed to multiple clauses in a sentence, the
evaluation was done at the sentence level. In this
case, the system-produced affect state must come
from the sentence that contains one of those clauses.

Coreference resolution is far from perfect, so we
created gold standard coreference annotations for
our fables and used them for most of our experi-
ments. This allowed us to evaluate our approach
without coreference mistakes factoring in. In Sec-
tion 5.5, we re-evaluate our final results using auto-
matic coreference resolution.

5.2 Evaluation of Affect States using External
Resources

Our first set of experiments evaluates the quality of
the affect states produced by AESOP using only the
external resources. The top half of Table 1 shows the
results for each resource independently. FrameNet
produced the best results, yielding much higher re-
call than any other resource. The bottom half of Ta-

4www.pacificnet.net/∼johnr/aesop/

82



Affect State M (59) + (47) - (37) All (143)
Resource(s) R P F R P F R P F R P F
FrameNet .49 .51 .50 .17 .57 .26 .14 .42 .21 .29 .51 .37
MPQA Lexicon .07 .50 .12 .21 .24 .22 .22 .38 .28 .15 .31 .20
OpinionFinder .42 .40 .41 .00 .00 .00 .03 .17 .05 .18 .35 .24
Semantic Orientation Lexicon .07 .44 .12 .17 .40 .24 .08 .38 .13 .10 .41 .16
Speech Act Verbs .36 .53 .43 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .15 .53 .23
FrameNet+MPQA Lexicon .44 .52 .48 .30 .28 .29 .27 .38 .32 .35 .40 .37
FrameNet+OpinionFinder .53 .39 .45 .17 .38 .23 .16 .33 .22 .31 .38 .34
FrameNet+Semantic Orientation Lexicon .49 .51 .50 .26 .36 .30 .22 .42 .29 .34 .45 .39
FrameNet+Speech Act Verbs .51 .48 .49 .17 .57 .26 .14 .42 .21 .30 .49 .37

Table 1: Evaluation results for AESOP using external resources. The # in parentheses is the # of gold affect states.

Affect State M (59) + (47) - (37) All (143)
Resource(s) R P F R P F R P F R P F
- Evil Agent PPVs .07 .50 .12 .21 .40 .28 .46 .46 .46 .22 .44 .29
- Neg Basilisk PPVs .07 .44 .12 .11 .45 .18 .24 .45 .31 .13 .45 .20
- Evil Agent and Neg Basilisk PPVs .05 .43 .09 .21 .38 .27 .46 .40 .43 .21 .39 .27
+ Kind Agent PPVs (θ>1) .03 .33 .06 .28 .17 .21 .00 .00 .00 .10 .19 .13
+ Pos Basilisk PPVs .08 .56 .14 .02 .12 .03 .03 1.00 .06 .05 .39 .09
FrameNet+SOLex+EvilAgentPPVs .49 .54 .51 .30 .38 .34 .46 .42 .44 .42 .46 .44
FrameNet+EvilAgentPPVs .49 .54 .51 .28 .45 .35 .46 .46 .46 .41 .49 .45
FrameNet+EvilAgentPPVs+PosBasiliskPPVs .49 .53 .51 .30 .41 .35 .49 .49 .49 .43 .48 .45

Table 2: Evaluation results for AESOP with PPVs. The # in parentheses is the # of gold affect states.

ble 1 shows the results when combining FrameNet
with other resources. In terms of F score, the only
additive benefit came from the Semantic Orientation
Lexicon, which produced a better balance of recall
and precision and an F score gain of +2.

5.3 Evaluation of Affect States using PPVs

Our second set of experiments evaluates the quality
of the automatically generated PPV lexicons. The
top portion of Table 2 shows the results for the neg-
ative PPVs. The PPVs harvested by the Evil Agent
patterns produced the best results, yielding recall
and precision of .46 for negative states. Note that
M and + states are also generated from the negative
PPVs because they are inferred during affect projec-
tion (Section 4.1.4). The polarity of a negative PPV
can also be flipped by negation to produce a + state.

Basilisk’s negative PPVs achieved similar preci-
sion but lower recall. We see no additional recall
and some precision loss when the Evil Agent and
Basilisk PPV lists are combined. The precision drop
is likely due to redundancy, which creates spurious
affect states. If two different words have negative
polarity but refer to the same event, then only one
negative affect state should be generated. But AE-

SOP will generate two affect states, so one will be
spurious.

The middle section of Table 2 shows the results
for the positive PPVs. Both positive PPV lexicons
were of dubious quality, so we tried to extract a high-
quality subset of each list. For the Kind Agent PPVs,
we computed the ratio of the frequency of the verb
with Evil Agents versus Kind Agents and only saved
verbs with an Evil:Kind ratio (θ) > 1, which yielded
1203 PPVs. For the positive Basilisk PPVs, we used
only the top 100 lexicon and top 100 context verbs,
which yielded 164 unique verbs. The positive PPVs
did generate several correct affect states (including
a - state when a positive PPV was negated), but also
many spurious states.

The bottom section of Table 2 shows the impact
of the learned PPVs when combined with FrameNet
and the Semantic Orientation Lexicon (SOLex).
Adding the Evil Agent PPVs improved AESOP’s F
score from 39% to 44%, mainly due to a +8 recall
gain. The recall of the - states increased from 22%
to 46% with no loss of precision. Interestingly, if
we remove SOLex and use only FrameNet with our
PPVs, precision increases from 46% to 49% and re-
call only drops by -1. Finally, the last row of Table

83



2 shows that adding Basilisk’s positive PPVs pro-
duces a small recall boost (+2) with a slight drop in
precision (-1).

Evaluating the impact of PPVs on plot unit struc-
tures is an indirect way of assessing their quality be-
cause creating plot units involves many steps. Also,
our test set is small so many verbs will never appear.
To directly measure the quality of our PPVs, we re-
cruited 3 people to manually review them. We devel-
oped annotation guidelines that instructed each an-
notator to judge whether a verb is generally good or
bad for its patient, assuming the patient is animate.
They assigned each verb to one of 6 categories: ×
(not a verb), 2 (always good), 1 (usually good), 0
(neutral, mixed, or requires inanimate patient), -1
(usually bad), -2 (always bad). Each annotator la-
beled 250 words: 50 words randomly sampled from
each of our 4 PPV lexicons5 (Evil Agent PPVs, Kind
Agent PPVs, Positive Basilisk PPVs, and Negative
Basilisk PPVs) plus 50 verbs labeled as neutral in
the MPQA lexicon.

First, we measured agreement based on three
groupings: negative (-2 and -1), neutral (0), or pos-
itive (1 and 2). We computed κ scores to measure
inter-annotator agreement for each pair of annota-
tors.6, but the κ scores were relatively low because
the annotators had trouble distinguishing the posi-
tive cases from the neutral ones. So we re-computed
agreement using two groupings: negative (-2 and -
1) and not-negative (0 through 2), and obtained κ
scores of .69, .71, and .74. We concluded that peo-
ple largely agree on whether a verb is bad for the
patient, but they do not necessarily agree if a verb is
good for the patient. One possible explanation is that
many “bad” verbs represent physical harm or dan-
ger: these verbs are both plentiful and easy to rec-
ognize. In contrast, “good” verbs are often more ab-
stract and open to interpretation (e.g., is being “en-
vied” or “feared” a good thing?).

We used the labels produced by the two an-
notators with the highest κ score to measure the
accuracy of our PPVs. Both the Evil Agent and
Negative Basilisk PPVs were judged to be 72.5%
accurate, averaged over the judges. The Kind Agent

5The top-ranked Evil/Kind Agent PPV lists (θ > 1) which
yields 1203 kind PPVs, and 477 evil PPVs, the top 164 positive
Basilisk verbs, and the 678 (unique) negative Basilisk verbs.

6We discarded words labeled as not a verb.

PPVs were only about 39% accurate, while the
Positive Basilisk PPVs were nearly 50% accurate.
These results are consistent with our impressions
that the negative PPVs are of relatively high quality,
while the positive PPVs are mixed. Some examples
of learned PPVs that were not present in our other
resources are:
- : censor, chase, fire, orphan, paralyze, scare, sue
+ : accommodate, harbor, nurse, obey, respect, value

5.4 Evaluation of Links
We represented each link as a 5-tuple
〈src-clause, src-state, tgt-clause, tgt-state, link-type〉,
where source/target denotes the direction of the
link, the source/target-states are the affect state type
(+,-,M) and link-type is one of 3 types: actualization
(a), motivation (m), or cross-character (xchar). A
system-produced link is considered correct if all 5
elements of the tuple match the human annotation.

Gold Aff States System Aff States
Links R P F R P F
xchar (56) .79 .85 .82 .18 .43 .25
a (51) .90 .94 .92 .04 .07 .05
m (26) 1.0 .57 .72 .15 .10 .12

Table 3: Link results; parentheses show # of gold links.

The second column of Table 3 shows the perfor-
mance of AESOP when using gold standard affect
states. Our simple heuristics for creating links work
surprisingly well for xchar and a links when given
perfect affect states. However, these heuristics pro-
duce relatively low precision for m links, albeit with
100% recall. This reveals that m links primarily do
connect adjacent states, but we need to be more dis-
criminating when connecting them. The third col-
umn of Table 3 shows the results when using system-
generated affect states. We see that performance is
much lower. This is not particularly surprising, since
AESOP’s F-score is 45%, so over half of the indi-
vidual states are wrong, which means that less than
a quarter of the pairs are correct. From that perspec-
tive, the xchar link performance is reasonable, but
the causal a and m links need improvement.

5.5 Analysis
We performed additional experiments to evaluate
some assumptions and components. First, we cre-
ated a Baseline system that is identical to AESOP

84



except that it does not use the affect projection rules.
Instead, it naively projects every affect state in a
clause onto every character in that clause. The first
two rows of the table below show that AESOP’s pre-
cision is double the Baseline, with nearly the same
recall. This illustrates the importance of the projec-
tion rules for mapping affect states onto characters.

R P F
Baseline .44 .24 .31
AESOP, gold coref .43 .48 .45
AESOP, gold coref, infstates .39 .48 .43
AESOP, auto coref, infstates .24 .56 .34

Our gold standard includes pure inference affect
states that are critical to the plot unit structure but
come from world knowledge outside the story itself.
Of 157 affect states in our test set, 14 were pure in-
ference states. We ignored these states in our previ-
ous experiments because our system has no way to
generate them. The third row of the table shows that
including them lowers recall by -4. Generating pure
inferences is an interesting challenge, but they seem
to be a relatively small part of the problem.

The last row of the table shows AESOP’s perfor-
mance when we use our automated coreference re-
solver (Section 4.1.2) instead of gold standard coref-
erence annotations. We see a -15 recall drop coupled
with a +8 precision gain. We were initially puz-
zled by the precision gain but believe that it is pri-
marily due to the handling of quotations. Our gold
standard includes annotations for characters men-
tioned in quotations, but our automated coreference
resolver ignores quotations. Most fables end with
a moral, which is often a quote that may not men-
tion the plot. Consequently, AESOP generates more
spurious affect states from the quotations when us-
ing the gold standard annotations.

6 Related Work and Conclusions

Our research is the first effort to fully automate
the creation of plot unit structures. Other prelimi-
nary work has begun to look at plot unit modelling
for single character stories (Appling and Riedl,
2009). More generally, our work is related to re-
search in narrative story understanding (e.g., (El-
son and McKeown, 2009)), automatic affect state
analysis (Alm, 2009), and automated learning of
scripts (Schank and Abelson, 1977) and other con-

ceptual knowledge structures (e.g., (Mooney and
DeJong, 1985; Fujiki et al., 2003; Chambers and Ju-
rafsky, 2008; Chambers and Jurafsky, 2009; Kasch
and Oates, 2010)). Our work benefitted from prior
research in creating semantic resources such as
FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998) and sentiment lex-
icons and classifiers (e.g., (Takamura et al., 2005;
Wilson et al., 2005b; Choi et al., 2006)). We showed
that affect projection rules can effectively assign af-
fect states to characters. This task is similar to, but
not the same as, associating opinion words with their
targets or topics (Kim and Hovy, 2006; Stoyanov
and Cardie, 2008). Some aspects of affect state iden-
tification are closely related to Hopper and Thomp-
son’s (1980) theory of transitivity. In particular, their
notions of aspect (has an action completed?), benefit
and harm (how much does an object gain/lose from
an action?) and volition (did the subject make a con-
scious choice to act?).

AESOP produces affect states with an F score of
45%. Identifying positive states appears to be more
difficult than negative or mental states. Our sys-
tem’s biggest shortcoming currently seems to hinge
around identifying plans and goals. This includes
the M affect states that initiate plans, the +/- com-
pletion states, as well as their corresponding links.
We suspect that the relatively low recall on positive
affect states is due to our inability to accurately iden-
tify successful plan completions. Finally, these re-
sults are based on fables; plot unit analysis of other
types of texts will pose additional challenges.

Acknowledgments

The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of
Department of Homeland Security Grant N0014-07-
1-0152, NSF grant IIS-0712764, and the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Ma-
chine Reading Program under Air Force Research
Laboratory (AFRL) prime contract no. FA8750-09-
C-0172. Any opinions, findings, and conclusion
or recommendations expressed in this material are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the view of the DARPA, AFRL, or the U.S. gov-
ernment. Thanks to Peter Jensen, Emily Schlichter,
and Clay Templeton for PPV annotations, Nathan
Gilbert for help with the coreference resolver, and
the anonymous reviewers for many helpful com-
ments.

85



References

Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm. 2009. Affect in Text and Speech.
VDM Verlag Dr. Mller.

D. Scott Appling and Mark O. Riedl. 2009. Representa-
tions for learning to summarize plots. In Proceedings
of the AAAI Spring Symposium on Intelligent Narra-
tive Technologies II.

Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe.
1998. The Berkeley FrameNet Project. In In Proceed-
ings of COLING/ACL, pages 86–90.

Nathanael Chambers and Dan Jurafsky. 2008. Unsuper-
vised learning of narrative event chains. In Proceed-
ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics.

Nathanael Chambers and Dan Jurafsky. 2009. Unsuper-
vised learning of narrative schemas and their partici-
pants. In Proceedings of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Yejin Choi, Eric Breck, and Claire Cardie. 2006. Joint
extraction of entities and relations for opinion recogni-
tion. In EMNLP ’06: Proceedings of the 2006 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 431–439, Morristown, NJ, USA. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

David Elson and Kathleen McKeown. 2009. Extending
and evaluating a platform for story understanding. In
Proceedings of the AAAI 2009 Spring Symposium on
Intelligent Narrative Technologies II.

Toshiaki Fujiki, Hidetsugu Nanba, and Manabu Oku-
mura. 2003. Automatic acquisition of script knowl-
edge from a text collection. In Proceedings of the Eu-
ropean Association for Computational Linguistics.

Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou and Kathy McKeown. 1997.
Predicting the semantic orientation of adjectives. In
Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, pages 174–181,
Madrid, Spain.

Paul J. Hopper and Sandra A. Thompson. 1980.
Transitivity in grammar and discourse. Language,
56:251299.

Niels Kasch and Tim Oates. 2010. Mining script-like
structures from the web. In NAACL-10 Workshop on
Formalisms and Methodology for Learning by Read-
ing (FAM-LbR).

S. Kim and E. Hovy. 2006. Extracting Opinions, Opin-
ion Holders, and Topics Expressed in Online News
Media Text. In Proceedings of ACL/COLING Work-
shop on Sentiment and Subjectivity in Text.

W. Lehnert, J. Black, and B. Reiser. 1981. Summariz-
ing Narratives. In Proceedings of the Seventh Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.

W. G. Lehnert. 1981. Plot Units and Narrative Summa-
rization. Cognitive Science, 5(4):293–331.

G. Miller. 1990. Wordnet: An On-line Lexical Database.
International Journal of Lexicography, 3(4).

Raymond Mooney and Gerald DeJong. 1985. Learning
Schemata for Natural Language Processing. In Pro-
ceedings of the Ninth International Joint Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, pages 681–687.

E. Riloff and W. Phillips. 2004. An Introduction to the
Sundance and AutoSlog Systems. Technical Report
UUCS-04-015, School of Computing, University of
Utah.

E. Riloff, J. Wiebe, and T. Wilson. 2003. Learning Sub-
jective Nouns using Extraction Pattern Bootstrapping.
In Proceedings of the Seventh Conference on Natural
Language Learning (CoNLL-2003), pages 25–32.

Roger C. Schank and Robert P. Abelson. 1977. Scripts,
plans, goals and understanding. Lawrence Erlbaum.

V. Stoyanov and C. Cardie. 2008. Topic Identification
for Fine-Grained Opinion Analysis. In Conference on
Computational Linguistics (COLING 2008).

Hiroya Takamura, Takashi Inui, and Manabu Okumura.
2005. Extracting semantic orientations of words using
spin model. In ACL ’05: Proceedings of the 43rd An-
nual Meeting on Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

M. Thelen and E. Riloff. 2002. A Bootstrapping Method
for Learning Semantic Lexicons Using Extraction Pa
ttern Contexts. In Proceedings of the 2002 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 214–221.

A. Wierzbicka. 1987. English speech act verbs: a se-
mantic dictionary. Academic Press, Sydney, Orlando.

T. Wilson, P. Hoffmann, S. Somasundaran, J. Kessler,
J. Wiebe, Y. Choi, C. Cardie, E. Riloff, and S. Patward-
han. 2005a. OpinionFinder: A system for subjectivity
analysis. In Proceedings of HLT/EMNLP 2005 Inter-
active Demonstrations.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005b. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-
level sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of Human
Language Technology Conference and Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 347–354. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

86


