










































Word-Based Dialect Identification with Georeferenced Rules


Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1151–1161,
MIT, Massachusetts, USA, 9-11 October 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Word-based dialect identification with georeferenced rules

Yves Scherrer
LATL

Université de Genève
Genève, Switzerland

yves.scherrer@unige.ch

Owen Rambow
CCLS

Columbia University
New York, USA

rambow@ccls.columbia.edu

Abstract

We present a novel approach for (written) di-
alect identification based on the discrimina-
tive potential of entire words. We generate
Swiss German dialect words from a Standard
German lexicon with the help of hand-crafted
phonetic/graphemic rules that are associated
with occurrence maps extracted from a linguis-
tic atlas created through extensive empirical
fieldwork. In comparison with a character-
n-gram approach to dialect identification, our
model is more robust to individual spelling dif-
ferences, which are frequently encountered in
non-standardized dialect writing. Moreover, it
covers the whole Swiss German dialect contin-
uum, which trained models struggle to achieve
due to sparsity of training data.

1 Introduction

Dialect identification (dialect ID) can be viewed as
an instance of language identification (language ID)
where the different languages are very closely re-
lated. Written language ID has been a popular re-
search object in the last few decades, and relatively
simple algorithms have proved to be very successful.
The central question of language ID is the following:
given a segment of text, which one of a predefined
set of languages is this segment written in? Language
identification is thus a classification problem.

Dialect identification comes in two flavors: spoken
dialect ID and written dialect ID. These two tasks are
rather different. Spoken dialect ID relies on speech
recognition techniques which may not cope well with
dialectal diversity. However, the acoustic signal is

also available as input. Written dialect ID has to deal
with non-standardized spellings that may occult real
dialectal differences. Moreover, some phonetic dis-
tinctions cannot be expressed in orthographic writing
systems and limit the input cues in comparison with
spoken dialect ID.

This paper deals with written dialect ID, applied to
the Swiss German dialect area. An important aspect
of our model is its conception of the dialect area as a
continuum without clear-cut borders. Our dialect ID
model follows a bag-of-words approach based on the
assumption that every dialectal word form is defined
by a probability with which it may occur in each
geographic area. By combining the cues of all words
of a sentence, it should be possible to obtain a fairly
reliable geographic localization of that sentence.

The main challenge is to create a lexicon of dialect
word forms and their associated probability maps.
We start with a Standard German word list and use
a set of phonetic, morphological and lexical rules
to obtain the Swiss German forms. These rules are
manually extracted from a linguistic atlas. This lin-
guistic atlas of Swiss German dialects is the result of
decades-long empirical fieldwork.

This paper is organized as follows. We start with
an overview of relevant research (Section 2) and
present the characteristics of the Swiss German di-
alect area (Section 3). Section 4 deals with the im-
plementation of word transformation rules and the
corresponding extraction of probability maps from
the linguistic atlas of German-speaking Switzerland.
We present our dialect ID model in Section 5 and
discuss its performance in Section 6 by relating it to
a baseline n-gram model.

1151



2 Related work

Various language identification methods have been
proposed in the last three decades. Hughes et al.
(2006) and Řehůřek and Kolkus (2009) provide re-
cent overviews of different approaches. One of
the simplest and most popular approaches is based
on character n-gram sequences (Cavnar and Tren-
kle, 1994). For each language, a character n-gram
language model is learned, and test segments are
scored by all available language models and labeled
with the best scoring language model. Related ap-
proaches involve more sophisticated learning tech-
niques (feature-based models, SVM and other kernel-
based methods).

A completely different approach relies on the iden-
tification of entire high-frequency words in the test
segment (Ingle, 1980). Other models have proposed
to use morpho-syntactic information.

Dialect ID has usually been studied from a speech
processing point of view. For instance, Biadsy et
al. (2009) classify speech material from four Arabic
dialects plus Modern Standard Arabic. They first run
a phone recognizer on the speech input and use the
resulting transcription to build a trigram language
model. Classification is done by minimizing the per-
plexity of the trigram models on the test segment.

An original approach to the identification of Swiss
German dialects has been taken by the Chochichästli-
Orakel.1 By specifying the pronunciation of ten pre-
defined words, the web site creates a probability map
that shows the likelihood of these pronunciations in
the Swiss German dialect area. Our model is heavily
inspired by this work, but extends the set of cues to
the entire lexicon.

As mentioned, the ID model is based on a large
Swiss German lexicon. Its derivation from a Standard
German lexicon can be viewed as a case of lexicon
induction. Lexicon induction methods for closely
related languages using phonetic similarity have been
proposed by Mann and Yarowsky (2001) and Schafer
and Yarowsky (2002), and applied to Swiss German
data by Scherrer (2007).

The extraction of digital data from hand-drawn di-
alectological maps is a time-consuming task. There-
fore, the data should be made available for differ-
ent uses. Our Swiss German raw data is accessible

1http://dialects.from.ch

on an interactive web page (Scherrer, 2010), and
we have proposed ideas for reusing this data for
machine translation and dialect parsing (Scherrer
and Rambow, 2010). An overview of digital dialec-
tological maps for other languages is available on
http://www.ericwheeler.ca/atlaslist.

3 Swiss German dialects

The German-speaking area of Switzerland encom-
passes the Northeastern two thirds of the Swiss ter-
ritory, and about two thirds of the Swiss population
define (any variety of) German as their first language.

In German-speaking Switzerland, dialects are used
in speech, while Standard German is used nearly ex-
clusively in written contexts (diglossia). It follows
that all (adult) Swiss Germans are bidialectal: they
master their local dialect and Standard German. In
addition, they usually have no difficulties understand-
ing Swiss German dialects other than their own.

Despite the preference for spoken dialect use, writ-
ten dialect data has been produced in the form of
dialect literature and transcriptions of speech record-
ings made for scientific purposes. More recently,
written dialect has been used in electronic media like
blogs, SMS, e-mail and chatrooms. The Alemannic
Wikipedia contains about 6000 articles, among which
many are written in a Swiss German dialect.2 How-
ever, all this data is very heterogeneous in terms of
the dialects used, spelling conventions and genre.

4 Georeferenced word transformation
rules

The key component of the proposed dialect ID model
is an automatically generated list of Swiss German
word forms, each of which is associated with a
map that specifies its likelihood of occurrence over
German-speaking Switzerland. This word list is gen-
erated with the help of a set of transformation rules,
taking a list of Standard German words as a start-
ing point. In this section, we present the different
types of rules and how they can be extracted from a
dialectological atlas.

2http://als.wikipedia.org; besides Swiss German, the
Alemannic dialect group encompasses Alsatian, South-West Ger-
man Alemannic and Vorarlberg dialects of Austria.

1152



4.1 Orthography

Our system generates written dialect words according
to the Dieth spelling conventions without diacritics
(Dieth, 1986).3 These are characterized by a transpar-
ent grapheme-phone correspondence and are widely
used by dialect writers. However, they are by no
means enforced or even taught.

This lack of standardization is problematic for di-
alect ID. We have noted two major types of deviations
from the Dieth spelling conventions in our data. First,
Standard German orthography may unduly influence
dialect spelling. For example, spiele is modelled af-
ter Standard German spielen ‘to play’, although the
vowel is a short monophthong in Swiss German and
should thus be written spile (ie represents a diph-
thong in Dieth spelling). Second, dialect writers do
not always distinguish short and long vowels, while
the Dieth conventions always use letter doubling to
indicate vowel lengthening. Future work will incor-
porate these fluctuations directly into the dialect ID
model.

Because of our focus on written dialect, the follow-
ing discussion will be based on written representa-
tions, but IPA equivalents are added for convenience.

4.2 Phonetic rules

Our work is based on the assumption that many words
show predictable phonetic differences between Stan-
dard German and the different Swiss German dialects.
Hence, in many cases, it is not necessary to explicitly
model word-to-word correspondences, but a set of
phonetic rules suffices to correctly transform words.

For example, the word-final sequence nd [nd
˚
] (as

in Standard German Hund ‘dog’4) is maintained in
most Swiss German dialects. However, it has to be
transformed to ng [N] in Berne dialect, to nn [n]
in Fribourg dialect, and to nt [nt] in Valais and Uri
dialects.

This phenomenon is captured in our system by four
transformation rules nd→ nd, nd→ ng, nd→ nn and
nd→ nt. Each rule is georeferenced, i.e. linked to

3Of course, these spelling conventions make use of umlauts
like in Standard German. There is another variant of the Di-
eth conventions that uses additional diacritics for finer-grained
phonetic distinctions.

4Standard German nd is always pronounced [nt] following a
general final devoicing rule; we neglect that artifact as we rely
only on graphemic representations.

a probability map that specifies its validity in every
geographic point. These four rules capture one single
linguistic phenomenon: their left-hand side is the
same, and they are geographically complementary.

Some rules apply uniformly to all Swiss Ger-
man dialects (e.g. the transformation st [st]→ scht
[St]). These rules do not immediately contribute to
the dialect identification task, but they help to ob-
tain correct Swiss German forms that contain other
phonemes with better localization potential.

More information about the creation of the proba-
bility maps is given in Sections 4.5 and 4.6.

4.3 Lexical rules

Some differences at the word level cannot be ac-
counted for by pure phonetic alternations. One reason
are idiosyncrasies in the phonetic evolution of high
frequency words (e.g. Standard German und ‘and’
is reduced to u in Bern dialect, where the phonetic
rules would rather suggest *ung). Another reason is
the use of different lexemes altogether (e.g. Standard
German immer ‘always’ corresponds to geng, immer,
or all, depending on the dialect). We currently use
lexical rules mainly for function words and irregular
verb stems.

4.4 Morphological rules

The transformation process from inflected Standard
German word forms to inflected Swiss German word
forms is done in two steps. First, the word stem is
adapted with phonetic or lexical rules, and then, the
affixes are generated according to the morphological
features of the word.

Inflection markers also provide dialect discrimina-
tion potential. For example, the verbal plural suffixes
offer a surprisingly rich (and diachronically stable)
interdialectal variation pattern.

4.5 The linguistic atlas SDS
One of the largest research projects in Swiss German
dialectology has been the elaboration of the Sprachat-
las der deutschen Schweiz (SDS), a linguistic atlas
that covers phonetic, morphological and lexical dif-
ferences of Swiss German dialects. Data collection
and publication were carried out between 1939 and
1997 (Hotzenköcherle et al., 1962-1997). Linguis-
tic data were collected in about 600 villages (in-
quiry points) of German-speaking Switzerland, and

1153



resulted in about 1500 published maps (see Figure 1
for an example).

Each map represents a linguistic phenomenon that
potentially yields a set of transformation rules. For
our experiments, we selected a subset of the maps ac-
cording to the perceived importance of the described
phenomena. There is no one-to-one correspondence
between maps and implemented phenomena, for sev-
eral reasons. First, some SDS maps represent in-
formation that is best analyzed as several distinct
phenomena. Second, a set of maps may illustrate the
same phenomenon with different words and slightly
different geographic distributions. Third, some maps
describe (especially lexical) phenomena that are be-
coming obsolete and that we chose to omit.

As a result, our rule base contains about 300 pho-
netic rules covering 130 phenomena, 540 lexical
rules covering 250 phenomena and 130 morpholog-
ical rules covering 60 phenomena. We believe this
coverage to be sufficient for the dialect ID task.

4.6 Map digitization and interpolation

Recall the nd -example used to illustrate the phonetic
rules above. Figure 1 shows a reproduction of the
original, hand-drawn SDS map related to this phe-
nomenon. Different symbols represent different pho-
netic variants of the phenomenon.5 We will use this
example in this section to explain the preprocessing
steps involved in the creation of georeferenced rules.

In a first preprocessing step, the hand-drawn map
is digitized manually with the help of a geographical
information system. The result is shown in Figure 2.
To speed up this process, variants that are used in less
than ten inquiry points are omitted. (Many of these
small-scale variants likely have disappeared since the
data collection in the 1940s.) We also collapse minor
phonetic variants which cannot be distinguished in
the Dieth spelling system.

The SDS maps, hand-drawn or digitized, are point
maps. They only cover the inquiry points, but do not
provide information about the variants used in other
locations. Therefore, a further preprocessing step in-
terpolates the digitized point maps to obtain surface
maps. We follow Rumpf et al. (2009) to create kernel
density estimators for each variant. This method is

5We define a variant simply as a string that may occur on the
right-hand side of a transformation rule.

Figure 1: Original SDS map for the transformation of
word-final -nd. The map contains four major linguistic
variants, symbolized by horizontal lines (-nd ), vertical
lines (-nt), circles (-ng), and triangles (-nn) respectively.
Minor linguistic variants are symbolized by different types
of circles and triangles.

Figure 2: Digitized equivalent of the map in Figure 1.

Figure 3: Interpolated surface maps for the variants -nn
(upper left), -ng (upper right), -nt (lower left) and -nd
(lower right). Black areas represent a probability of 1,
white areas a probability of 0.

1154



less sensitive to outliers than simpler linear interpola-
tion methods.6 The resulting surface maps are then
normalized such that at each point of the surface, the
weights of all variants sum up to 1. These normalized
weights can be interpreted as conditional probabili-
ties of the corresponding transfer rule: p(r | t), where
r is the rule and t is the geographic location (repre-
sented as a pair of longitude and latitude coordinates)
situated in German-speaking Switzerland. (We call
the set of all points in German-speaking Switzerland
GSS.) Figure 3 shows the resulting surface maps for
each variant. Surface maps are generated with a reso-
lution of one point per square kilometer.

As mentioned above, rules with a common left-
hand side are grouped into phenomena, such that at
any given point t ∈ GSS, the probabilities of all rules
r describing a phenomenon Ph sum up to 1:

∀
t∈GSS ∑r∈Ph

p(r | t) = 1

5 The model

The dialect ID system consists of a Swiss German
lexicon that associates word forms with their geo-
graphical extension (Section 5.1), and of a testing
procedure that splits a sentence into words, looks
up their geographical extensions in the lexicon, and
condenses the word-level maps into a sentence-level
map (Sections 5.2 to 5.4).

5.1 Creating a Swiss German lexicon
The Swiss German word form lexicon is created
with the help of the georeferenced transfer rules pre-
sented above. These rules require a lemmatized, POS-
tagged and morphologically disambiguated Standard
German word as an input and generate a set of di-
alect word/map tuples: each resulting dialect word
is associated with a probability map that specifies its
likelihood in each geographic point.

To obtain a Standard German word list, we ex-
tracted all leaf nodes of the TIGER treebank (Brants
et al., 2002), which are lemmatized and morphologi-
cally annotated. These data also allowed us to obtain
word frequency counts. We discarded words with
one single occurrence in the TIGER treebank, as well
as forms that contained the genitive case or preterite

6A comparison of different interpolation methods will be the
object of future work.

tense attribute (the corresponding grammatical cate-
gories do not exist in Swiss German dialects).

The transfer rules are then applied sequentially on
each word of this list. The notation w0

∗→ wn repre-
sents an iterative derivation leading from a Standard
German word w0 to a dialectal word form wn by the
application of n transfer rules of the type wi→ wi+1.
The probability of a derivation corresponds to the
joint probability of the rules it consists of. Hence,
the probability map of a derivation is defined as the
pointwise product of all rule maps it consists of:

∀
t∈GSS

p(w0
∗→ wn | t) =

n−1

∏
k=0

p(wi→ wi+1 | t)

Note that in dialectological transition zones, there
may be several valid outcomes for a given w0.

The Standard German word list extracted from
TIGER contains about 36,000 entries. The derived
Swiss German word list contains 560,000 word
forms, each of which is associated with a map that
specifies its regional distribution.7 Note that proper
nouns and words tagged as “foreign material” were
not transformed. Derivations that did not obtain a
probability higher than 0.1 anywhere (because of
geographically incompatible transformations) were
discarded.

5.2 Word lookup and dialect identification
At test time, the goal is to compute a probability map
for a text segment of unknown origin.8 As a prepro-
cessing step, the segment is tokenized, punctuation
markers are removed and all words are converted to
lower case.

The identification process can be broken down in
three levels:

1. The probability map of a text segment depends
on the probability maps of the words contained
in the segment.

2. The probability map of a word depends on the
probability maps of the derivations that yield
the word.

7Technically, we do not store the probability map, but the
sequence of rule variants involved in the derivation. The proba-
bility map is restored from this rule sequence at test time.

8The model does not require the material to be syntactically
well-formed. Although we use complete sentences to test the
system, any sequence of words is accepted.

1155



3. The probability map of a derivation depends on
the probability maps of the rules it consists of.

In practice, every word of a given text segment is
looked up in the lexicon. If this lookup does not suc-
ceed (either because its Standard German equivalent
did not appear in the TIGER treebank, or because the
rule base lacked a relevant rule), the word is skipped.
Otherwise, the lookup yields m derivations from m
different Standard German words.9 The lexicon al-
ready contains the probability maps of the derivations
(see 5.1), so that the third level does not need to be
discussed here. Let us thus explain the first two levels
in more detail, in reverse order.

5.3 Computing the probability map for a word
A dialectal word form may originate in different Stan-
dard German words. For example, the three deriva-
tions sind [VAFIN] ∗→ si (valid only in Western di-
alects), sein [PPOSAT] ∗→ si (in Western and Central
dialects), and sie [PPER] ∗→ si (in the majority of
Swiss German dialects) all lead to the same dialectal
form si.

Our system does not take the syntactic context
into account and therefore cannot determine which
derivation is the correct one. We approximate by
choosing the most probable one in each geographic
location. The probability map of a Swiss German
word w is thus defined as the pointwise maximum10
of all derivations leading to w, starting with different
Standard German words w( j)0 :

∀
t∈GSS

p(w | t) = max
j

p(w( j)0
∗→ w | t)

This formula does not take into account the relative
frequency of the different derivations of a word. This
may lead to unintuitive results. Consider the two
derivations der [ART] ∗→ dr (valid only in Western
dialects) and Dr. [NN] ∗→ dr (valid in all dialects).
The occurrence of the article dr in a dialect text is a
good indicator for Western Swiss dialects, but it is
completely masked by the potential presence of the

9Theoretically, two derivations can originate at the same
Standard German word and yield the same Swiss German word,
but nevertheless use different rules. Our system handles such
cases as well, but we are not aware of such cases occurring with
the current rule base.

10Note that these derivations are alternatives and not joint
events. This is thus not a joint probability.

abreviation Dr. in all dialects. We can avoid this by
weighting the derivations by the word frequency of
w0: the article der is much more frequent than the
abreviation Dr. and is thus given more weight in the
identification task. This weighting can be justified
on dialectological grounds: frequently used words
tend to show higher interdialectal variation than rare
words.

Another assumption in the above formula is that
each derivation has the same discriminative poten-
tial. Again, this is not true: a derivation that is valid
in only 10% of the Swiss German dialect area is
much more informative than a derivation that is valid
in 95% of the dialect area. Therefore, we propose
to weight each derivation by the proportional size of
its validity area. The discriminative potential of a
derivation d is defined as follows:11

DP(d) = 1− ∑t∈GSS p(d | t)
|GSS|

The experiments in Section 6 will show the relative
impact of these two weighting techniques and of the
combination of both with respect to the unweighted
map computation.

5.4 Computing the probability map for a
segment

The probability of a text segment s can be defined as
the joint probability of all words w contained in the
segment. Again, we compute the pointwise product
of all word maps. In contrast to 5.1, we performed
some smoothing in order to prevent erroneous word
derivations from completely zeroing out the proba-
bilities. We assumed a minimum word probability of
φ = 0.1 for all words in all geographic points:

∀
t∈GSS

p(s | t) = ∏
w∈s

max(φ , p(w | t))

Erroneous derivations were mainly due to non-
implemented lexical exceptions.

6 Experiments and results

6.1 Data
In order to evaluate our model, we need texts an-
notated with their gold dialect. We have chosen to
use the Alemannic Wikipedia as a main data source.

11d is a notational abreviation for w0
∗→ wn.

1156



Wikipedia name Abbr. Pop. Surface
Baseldytsch BA 8% 1%
Bärndütsch BE 17% 13%
Seislertütsch FR 2% 1%
Ostschwizertütsch OS 14% 8%
Wallisertiitsch WS 2% 7%
Züritüütsch ZH 22% 4%

Table 1: The six dialect regions selected for our tests,
with their annotation on Wikipedia and our abreviation.
We also show the percentage of the German-speaking
population living in the regions, and the percentage of the
surface of the region relative to the entire country.

Figure 4: The localization of the six dialect regions used
in our study.

The Alemannic Wikipedia allows authors to write
articles in any dialect, and to annotate the articles
with their dialect. Eight dialect categories contained
more than 10 articles; we selected six dialects for our
experiments (see Table 1 and Figure 4).

We compiled a test set consisting of 291 sentences,
distributed across the six dialects according to their
population size. The sentences were taken from dif-
ferent articles. In addition, we created a development
set consisting of 550 sentences (100 per dialect, ex-
cept FR, where only 50 sentences were available).
This development set was also used to train the base-
line model discussed in section 6.2.

In order to test the robustness of our model, we
collected a second set of texts from various web sites
other than Wikipedia. The gold dialect of these texts
could be identified through metadata.12 This informa-
tion was checked for plausibility by the first author.
The Web data set contains 144 sentences (again dis-

12We mainly chose websites of local sports and music clubs,
whose localization allowed to determine the dialect of their con-
tent.

Wikipedia Web
Dialect P R F P R F
BA 34 61 44 27 61 37
BE 78 51 61 51 47 49
FR 28 71 40 10 33 15
OS 63 64 64 50 38 43
WS 58 100 74 14 33 20
ZH 77 62 69 77 41 53
W. Avg. 62 46

Table 2: Performances of the 5-gram model on Wikipedia
test data (left) and Web test data (right). The columns
refer to precision, recall and F-measure respectively. The
average is weighted by the relative population sizes of the
dialect regions.

tributed according to population size) and is thus
roughly half the size of the Wikipedia test set.

The Wikipedia data contains an average of 17.8
words per sentence, while the Web data shows 14.9
words per sentence on average.

6.2 Baseline: N-gram model

To compare our dialect ID model, we created a base-
line system that uses a character-n-gram approach.
This approach is fairly common for language ID and
has also been successfully applied to dialect ID (Bi-
adsy et al., 2009). However, it requires a certain
amount of training data that may not be available for
specific dialects, and it is uncertain how it performs
with very similar dialects.

We trained 2-gram to 6-gram models for each di-
alect with the SRILM toolkit (Stolcke, 2002), using
the Wikipedia development corpus. We scored each
sentence of the Wikipedia test set with each dialect
model. The predicted dialect was the one which ob-
tained the lowest perplexity.13

The 5-gram model obtained the best overall per-
formance, and results on the Wikipedia test set were
surprisingly good (see Table 2, leftmost columns).14

Note that in practice, 100% accuracy is not always
achievable; a sentence may not contain a sufficient
localization potential to assign it unambiguously to
one dialect.

13We assume that all test sentences are written in one of the
six dialects.

14All results represent percentage points. We omit decimal
places as all values are based on 100 or less data points. We did
not perform statistical significance tests on our data.

1157



However, we suspect that these results are due to
overfitting. It turns out that the number of Swiss
German Wikipedia authors is very low (typically,
one or two active writers per dialect), and that ev-
ery author uses distinctive spelling conventions and
writes about specific subjects. For instance, most
ZH articles are about Swiss politicians, while many
OS articles deal with religion and mysticism. Our
hypothesis is thus that the n-gram model learns to
recognize a specific author and/or topic rather than
a dialect. This hypothesis is confirmed on the Web
data set: the performances drop by 15 percentage
points or more (same table, rightmost columns; the
performance drops are similar for n = [2..6]).

In all our evaluations, the average F-measures for
the different dialects are weighted according to the
relative population sizes of the dialect regions be-
cause the size of the test corpus is proportional to
population size (see Section 6.1).15

We acknowledge that a training corpus of only 100
sentences per dialect provides limited insight into the
performance of the n-gram approach. We were able
to double the training corpus size with additional
Wikipedia sentences. With this extended corpus,
the 4-gram model performed better than the 5-gram
model. It yielded a weighted average F-measure
of 79% on Wikipedia test data, but only 43% on
Web data. The additional increase on Wikipedia data
(+17% absolute with respect to the small training
set), together with the decrease on Web data (−3%
absolute) confirms our hypothesis of overfitting. An
ideal training corpus should thus contain data from
several sources per dialect.

To sum up, n-gram models can yield good perfor-
mance even with similar dialects, but require large
amounts of training data from different sources to
achieve robust results. For many small-scale dialects,
such data may not be available.

6.3 Our model
The n-gram system presented above has no geo-
graphic knowledge whatsoever; it just consists of
six distinct language models that could be located
anywhere. In contrast, our model yields probability

15Roughly, this weighting can be viewed as a prior (the proba-
bility of the text being constant):

p(dialect | text) = p(text | dialect)∗ p(dialect)

maps of German-speaking Switzerland. In order to
evaluate its performance, we thus had to determine
the geographic localization of the six dialect regions
defined by the Wikipedia authors (see Table 1). We
defined the regions according to the respective can-
ton boundaries and to the German-French language
border in the case of bilingual cantons. The result of
this mapping is shown in Figure 4.

The predicted dialect region of a sentence s is de-
fined as the region in which the most probable point
has a higher value than the most probable point in
any other region:

Region(s) = arg max
Region

(
max

t∈Region
p(s | t)

)
Experiments were carried out for the four combi-

nations of the two derivation-weighting techniques
presented in Section 5.3 and for the two test sets
(Wikipedia and Web). Results are displayed in Ta-
bles 3 to 6. The majority of FR sentences were mis-
classified as BE, which reflects the geographic and
linguistic proximity of these regions.

The tables show that frequency weighting helps
on both corpora: the discriminative potential only
slightly improves performance on the web corpus.
Crucially, the two techniques are additive, so in
combination, they yield the best overall results. In
comparison with the baseline model, there is a per-
formance drop of about 16 percent absolute on
Wikipedia data. In contrast, our model is very ro-
bust and outperforms the baseline model on the Web
test set by about 7 percent absolute.

These results seem to confirm what we suggested
above: that the n-gram model overfitted on the small
Wikipedia training corpus. Nevertheless, it is still
surprising that our model has a lower performance
on Wikipedia than on Web data. The reason for this
discrepancy probably lies in the spelling conventions
assumed in the transformation rules: it seems that
Web writers are closer to these (implicit) spelling
conventions than Wikipedia authors. This may be
explained by the fact that many Wikipedia articles
are translations of existing Standard German articles,
and that some words are not completely adapted to
their dialectal form. Another reason could be that
Wikipedia articles use a proportionally larger amount
of proper nouns and low-frequency words which can-

1158



Wikipedia Web
Dialect P R F P R F
BA 41 19 26 80 22 35
BE 42 62 50 48 76 59
FR 0 0 0 17 33 22
OS 36 41 38 45 41 43
WS 3 14 5 8 33 13
ZH 65 33 44 62 37 46
W. Avg. 40 46

Table 3: Performances of the word-based model using
unweighted derivation maps.

Wikipedia Web
Dialect P R F P R F
BA 50 33 40 57 22 32
BE 47 60 53 60 79 68
FR 0 0 0 0 0 0
OS 29 31 30 46 50 48
WS 11 29 15 17 33 22
ZH 60 47 53 65 53 58
W. Avg. 44 53

Table 4: Performances of the word-based model using
derivation maps weighted by word frequency.

not be found in the lexicon and which therefore re-
duce the localization potential of a sentence.

However, one should note that the word-based di-
alect ID model is not limited on the six dialect regions
used for evaluation here. It can be used with any size
and number of dialect regions of German-speaking
Switzerland. This contrasts with the n-gram model
which has to be trained specifically on every dialect
region; in this case, the Swiss German Wikipedia
only contains two additional dialect regions with an
equivalent amount of data.

6.4 Variations

In the previous section, we have defined the predicted
dialect region as the one in which the most probable
point (maximum) has a higher probability than the
most probable point of any other region. The results
suggest that this metric penalizes small regions (BA,
FR, ZH). In these cases, it is likely that the most
probable point is slightly outside the region, but that
the largest part of the probability mass is still inside
the correct region. Therefore, we tested another ap-
proach: we defined the predicted dialect region as the
one in which the average probability is higher than

Wikipedia Web
Dialect P R F P R F
BA 34 31 32 38 17 23
BE 46 47 47 54 76 63
FR 11 14 13 20 33 25
OS 34 50 40 53 59 56
WS 5 14 7 0 0 0
ZH 47 27 34 75 43 55
W. Avg. 37 51

Table 5: Performances of the word-based model using
derivation maps weighted by their discriminative potential.

Wikipedia Web
Dialect P R F P R F
BA 46 28 35 33 11 17
BE 47 62 54 58 84 69
FR 0 0 0 20 33 25
OS 35 31 33 47 47 47
WS 8 29 13 14 33 20
ZH 63 53 58 66 51 58
W. Avg. 46 52

Table 6: Performances using derivation maps weighted by
word frequency and discriminative potential.

the average probability in any other region:

Region(s) = arg max
Region

(
∑t∈Region p(s | t)
|Region|

)
This metric effectively boosts the performance on

the smaller regions, but comes at a cost for larger
regions (Table 7). We also combined the two metrics
by using the maximum metric for the three larger
regions and the average metric for the three smaller
ones (the cutoff lies at 5% of the Swiss territory).
This combined metric further improves the perfor-
mance of our system while relying on an objective
measure of region surface.

We believe that region surface as such is not so
crucial for the metrics discussed above, but rather
serves as a proxy for linguistic heterogeneity. Geo-
graphically large regions like BE tend to have internal
dialect variation, and averaging over all dialects in
the region leads to low figures. In contrast, small
regions show a quite homogeneous dialect landscape
that may protrude over adjacent regions. In this case,
the probability peak is less relevant than the average
probability in the entire region. Future work will at-
tempt to come up with more fine-grained measures of

1159



Wikipedia Web
Dialect Max Avg Cmb Max Avg Cmb
BA 35 32 32 17 43 43
BE 54 39 54 69 54 69
FR 0 7 7 25 11 11
OS 33 23 33 47 49 47
WS 13 13 13 20 31 20
ZH 58 60 60 58 68 68
W. Avg. 46 40 47 52 55 58

Table 7: Comparison of different evaluation metrics. All
values refer to F-measures obtained with frequency and
discriminative potential-weighted derivation maps. Max
refers to the Maximum metric as used in Table 6. Avg
refers to the average metric, and Cmb is the combination
of both metrics depending on region surfaces. The under-
lined values in the Avg and Max columns represent those
used for the Cmb metric.

linguistic heterogeneity in order to test these claims.

7 Future work

In our experiments, the word-based dialect identifi-
cation model skipped about one third of all words
(34% on the Wikipedia test set, 39% on the Web
test set) because they could not be found in the lex-
icon. While our model does not require complete
lexical coverage, this figure shows that the system
can be improved. We see two main possibilities of
improvement. First, the rule base can be extended
to better account for lexical exceptions, orthographic
variation and irregular morphology. Second, a mixed
approach could combine the benefits of the word-
based model with the n-gram model. This would
require a larger, more heterogeneous set of training
material for the latter in order to avoid overfitting.
Additional training data could be extracted from the
web and automatically annotated with the current
model in a semi-supervised approach.

In the evaluation presented above, the task con-
sisted of identifying the dialect of single sentences.
However, one often has access to longer text seg-
ments, which makes our evaluation setup harder
than necessary. This is especially important in situ-
ations where a single sentence may not always con-
tain enough discriminative material to assign it to a
unique dialect. Testing our dialect identification sys-
tem on the paragraph or document level could thus
provide more realistic results.

8 Conclusion

In this paper, we have compared two empirical meth-
ods for the task of dialect identification. The n-gram
method is based on the approach most commonly
used in NLP: it is a supervised machine learning ap-
proach where training data of the type we need to
process is annotated with the desired outcome of the
processing.

Our second approach – the main contribution of
this paper – is quite different. The empirical compo-
nent consists in a collection of data (the SDS atlas)
which is not of the type we want to process, but rather
embodies some features of the data we ultimately
want to process. We therefore analyze this data in
order to extract empirically grounded knowledge for
more general use (the creation of the georeferenced
rules), and then use this knowledge to perform the
dialect ID task in conjunction with an unrelated data
source (the Standard German corpus).

Our choice of method was of course related to the
fact that few corpora, annotated or not, were avail-
able for our task. But beyond this constraint, we
think it may be well worthwhile for NLP tasks in
general to move away from a narrow machine learn-
ing paradigm (supervised or not) and to consider
a broader set of empirical resources, sometimes re-
quiring methods which are quite different from the
prevalent ones.

Acknowledgements

Part of this work was carried out during the first au-
thor’s stay at Columbia University, New York, funded
by the Swiss National Science Foundation (grant
PBGEP1-125929).

References
Fadi Biadsy, Julia Hirschberg, and Nizar Habash. 2009.

Spoken Arabic dialect identification using phonotactic
modeling. In EACL 2009 Workshop on Computational
Approaches to Semitic Languages, Athens.

S. Brants, S. Dipper, S. Hansen, W. Lezius, and G. Smith.
2002. The TIGER Treebank. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories, So-
zopol.

W. B. Cavnar and J. M. Trenkle. 1994. N-gram based
text categorization. In Proceedings of SDAIR’94, Las
Vegas.

1160



Eugen Dieth. 1986. Schwyzertütschi Dialäktschrift.
Sauerländer, Aarau, 2nd edition.

Rudolf Hotzenköcherle, Robert Schläpfer, Rudolf Trüb,
and Paul Zinsli, editors. 1962-1997. Sprachatlas der
deutschen Schweiz. Francke, Berne.

Baden Hughes, Timothy Baldwin, Steven Bird, Jeremy
Nicholson, and Andrew MacKinlay. 2006. Recon-
sidering language identification for written language
resources. In Proceedings of LREC’06, Genoa.

N. Ingle. 1980. A language identification table. Technical
Translation International.

Gideon S. Mann and David Yarowsky. 2001. Multipath
translation lexicon induction via bridge languages. In
Proceedings of NAACL’01, Pittsburgh.

Radim Řehůřek and Milan Kolkus. 2009. Language
identification on the web: Extending the dictionary
method. In Computational Linguistics and Intelligent
Text Processing – Proceedings of CICLing 2009, pages
357–368, Mexico. Springer.

Jonas Rumpf, Simon Pickl, Stephan Elspaß, Werner
König, and Volker Schmidt. 2009. Structural analysis
of dialect maps using methods from spatial statistics.
Zeitschrift für Dialektologie und Linguistik, 76(3).

Charles Schafer and David Yarowsky. 2002. Inducing
translation lexicons via diverse similarity measures and
bridge languages. In Proceedings of CoNLL’02, pages
146–152, Taipei.

Yves Scherrer and Owen Rambow. 2010. Natural lan-
guage processing for the Swiss German dialect area. In
Proceedings of KONVENS’10, Saarbrücken.

Yves Scherrer. 2007. Adaptive string distance measures
for bilingual dialect lexicon induction. In Proceedings
of ACL’07, Student Research Workshop, pages 55–60,
Prague.

Yves Scherrer. 2010. Des cartes dialectologiques
numérisées pour le TALN. In Proceedings of TALN’10,
Montréal.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM – an extensible language
modeling toolkit. In Proceedings of ICSLP’02, pages
901–904, Denver.

1161


