



















































Generating Subsequent Reference in Shared Visual Scenes: Computation vs Re-Use


Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1158–1167,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 27–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Generating Subsequent Reference in Shared Visual Scenes:
Computation vs. Re-Use

Jette Viethen1,2
jette.viethen@mq.edu.au

1TiCC
University of Tilburg

Tilburg, The Netherlands

Robert Dale2
robert.dale@mq.edu.au

2Centre for Language Technology
Macquarie University

Sydney, Australia

Markus Guhe3
m.guhe@ed.ac.uk

3School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh

Edinburgh, UK

Abstract

Traditional computational approaches to re-
ferring expression generation operate in a de-
liberate manner, choosing the attributes to be
included on the basis of their ability to dis-
tinguish the intended referent from its dis-
tractors. However, work in psycholinguis-
tics suggests that speakers align their refer-
ring expressions with those used previously in
the discourse, implying less deliberate choice
and more subconscious reuse. This raises the
question as to which is a more accurate char-
acterisation of what people do. Using a cor-
pus of dialogues containing 16,358 referring
expressions, we explore this question via the
generation of subsequent references in shared
visual scenes. We use a machine learning ap-
proach to referring expression generation and
demonstrate that incorporating features that
correspond to the computational tradition does
not match human referring behaviour as well
as using features corresponding to the process
of alignment. The results support the view that
the traditional model of referring expression
generation that is widely assumed in work on
natural language generation may not in fact
be correct; our analysis may also help explain
the oft-observed redundancy found in human-
produced referring expressions.

1 Introduction

Computational work on referring expression genera-
tion (REG) has an extensive history, and a wide vari-
ety of algorithms have been proposed, dealing with
various facets of what is recognised to be a com-
plex problem. Almost all of this work sees the task

as being concerned with choosing those attributes
of an intended referent that distinguish it from the
other entities with which it might be confused (see,
for example, Dale (1989), Dale and Reiter (1995),
Krahmer et al. (2003), van Deemter and Krahmer
(2007), Gardent and Striegnitz (2007)). Indepen-
dently, an alternative way of thinking about refer-
ence has arisen within the psycholinguistics com-
munity: there is now a long tradition of work that
explores how a dialogue participant’s forms of ref-
erence are influenced by those previously used for
a given entity. Most recently, this line of work has
been discussed in terms of the notions of alignment
(Pickering and Garrod, 2004) and conceptual pacts
(Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986; Brennan and Clark,
1996).

We suspect that neither approach tells the full
story, and so we are interested in exploring whether
the two perspectives should be integrated. Using a
large corpus of referring expressions in task-oriented
dialogues, this paper presents a machine learning
approach that allows us to combine features corre-
sponding to the two perspectives. Our results show
that models based on the alignment perspective out-
perform models based on traditional REG considera-
tions, as well as a number of simpler baselines.

The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2,
we outline the two perspectives on subsequent ref-
erence, and summarise related work. In Section 3,
we describe the iMAP Corpus and the referring ex-
pressions it contains. In Section 4, we describe the
approach we take to learning models of referential
behaviour using this data, and in Section 5 we dis-
cuss the results of a number of experiments based

1158



on this approach, followed by an error analysis in
Section 6. Section 7 draws some conclusions and
discusses future work.

2 Related Work

2.1 The Algorithmic Approach

We use the term algorithmic approach here to re-
fer to the perspective that is common to the consid-
erable body of work within computational linguis-
tics on the problem of referring expression gener-
ation developed over the last 20 years. Much of
this work takes as its starting point the characterisa-
tion of the problem expressed in (Dale, 1989). This
work has focused on the design of algorithms which
take into account the context of reference in order to
decide what properties of an entity should be men-
tioned in order to distinguish that entity from others
with which it might be confused. Early work was
concerned with subsequent reference in discourse,
inspired by Grosz and Sidner’s (1986) observations
on how the attentional structure of a discourse made
particular referents accessible at any given point.
More recently, attention has shifted to initial ref-
erence in visual domains, driven in large part by
the availability of the TUNA dataset and the shared
tasks that make use of it (Gatt et al., 2008). The con-
struction of distinguishing descriptions has consis-
tently been a key consideration in this body of work.

Scenarios that require the generation of references
in multi-turn dialogues that concern visual scenes
are likely to be among the first where we can ex-
pect computational approaches to referring expres-
sion generation to be practically useful. Surpris-
ingly, however, the more recent work on initial refer-
ence in visual domains and the earlier work on sub-
sequent reference in discourse remain somewhat dis-
tinct and separate from each other, despite much the
same algorithms having been used in both. There
is very little work that brings these two strands to-
gether by looking at both initial and subsequent ref-
erences in dialogues that concern visual scenes. An
exception here is the machine learning approach de-
veloped by Stoia et al. (2006), who aimed at building
a dialogue system for a situated agent giving instruc-
tions in a virtual 3D world. However, their approach
was concerned with choosing the type of reference
to use (definite or indefinite, pronominal, bare or

modified head noun), and not with the content of the
reference; and their data set consisted of only 1242
referring expressions.

2.2 The Alignment Approach

Meanwhile, starting with the early work of Carroll
(1980), a quite distinct strand of research in psy-
cholinguistics has explored how a speaker’s form of
reference to an entity is impacted by the way that en-
tity has been previously referred to in the discourse
or dialogue. The general idea behind what we will
call the alignment approach is that a conversational
participant will often adopt the same semantic, syn-
tactic and lexical alternatives as the other party in a
dialogue. This perspective is most strongly associ-
ated with the work of Pickering and Garrod (2004).
With respect to reference in particular, speakers are
said to form conceptual pacts in their use of lan-
guage (Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986; Brennan and
Clark, 1996). Although there is disagreement about
the exact mechanisms that enable alignment and
conceptual pacts, the implication of much of this
work is that one speaker introduces an entity by
means of some description, and then (perhaps after
some negotiation) both conversational participants
share this form of reference, or a form of reference
derived from it, when they subsequently refer to that
entity.

Recent work by Goudbeek and Krahmer (2010)
supports the view that subconscious alignment does
indeed take place at the level of content selection for
referring expressions. The participants in their study
were more likely to use a dispreferred attribute to
describe a target referent if this attribute had recently
been used in a description by a confederate.

There is some work within natural language gen-
eration that attempts to model the process of align-
ment (Buschmeier et al., 2009; Janarthanam and
Lemon, 2009), but this is predominantly concerned
with what we might think of as the ‘lexical perspec-
tive’, focussing on lexical choice rather than the se-
lection of appropriate semantic content for distin-
guishing descriptions.

2.3 Combined Models

This paper is not the first to look at how the algorith-
mic approach and the alignment approach might be
integrated in REG. An early machine learning ap-

1159



Figure 1: An example pair of maps.

proach to content selection was presented by Jor-
dan and Walker (2000; 2005); they were also in-
terested in an exploration of the validity of differ-
ent psycholinguistic models of reference produc-
tion, including Grosz and Sidner’s (1986) model
of discourse structure, the conceptual pacts model
of Clark and colleagues, and the intentional influ-
ences model developed by Jordan (2000). However,
their data set consists of only 393 referring expres-
sions, compared to our 16,358, and these expres-
sions had functions other than identification; most
importantly, the entities referred to were not part of
a shared visual scene as is the case in our data.

Gupta and Stent (2005) instantiated Dale and Re-
iter’s (1995) Incremental Algorithm with a prefer-
ence ordering that favours the attributes that were
used in the previous mention of the same referent. In
a second variant, they even require these attributes
to be included in a subsequent reference. Differ-
ently from most other work on REG, they extended
the task to include ordering of the attributes in the
surface form. They therefore create a special evalu-
ation metric that takes ordering into account, which
makes it hard to compare the performance they re-
port to that of any system that is not concerned with
attribute ordering, such as ours. Their evaluation set
was also considerably smaller than ours: they used

1294 and 471 referring expressions from two differ-
ent corpora, compared to our test set of 4947 refer-
ring expressions.

More recently in (Viethen et al., 2010), we pre-
sented a rule-based system that addressed a specific
instance of the problem we consider here, using the
same corpus as we do: we singled out 2579 first ref-
erences to landmarks by the second speaker (‘second
speaker initial references’) and attempted to repro-
duce these using a system based on Dale and Re-
iter’s (1995) Incremental Algorithm. Although the
data set was a subset of the one used here, the system
did not reach the same performance (see Section 5).

3 Referring Expressions in the iMAP
Corpus

The iMAP Corpus (Louwerse et al., 2007) is a col-
lection of 256 dialogues between 32 participant-
pairs who contributed 8 dialogues each. Both par-
ticipants had a map of the same environment, but
one participant’s map showed a route winding its
way between the landmarks on the map; see Fig-
ure 1. The task was for this participant (the in-
struction giver, IG) to describe this route in such a
way that their partner (the instruction follower, IF)
could draw it onto their map; this was complicated
by some discrepancies between the two maps, such

1160



as missing landmarks, the unavailability of colour in
some regions due to ink stains, and small differences
between some landmarks.

The landmarks differ from each other in type,
colour, and one other attribute, which is different
for each type of landmark. For example, there are
different kinds of birds (eagle, ostrich, penguin . . . );
fish differ by their patterns (dotted, checkered, plain
. . . ), aliens have different shapes (circular, hexago-
nal . . . ), and bugs appear in small clusters of differ-
ing numbers. In addition to these inherent attributes
of the landmarks, participants used spatial relations
to other items on the map. Each referring expression
in the corpus is annotated with a unique identifier
corresponding to the landmark that it describes and
the semantic values of the attributes that it contains.
This collection of annotations forms the basic data
we use in our experiments.

For each landmarkR referred to in a dialogue, we
view the sequence of references to this landmark as
a coreference chain, notated 〈R1, R2, . . . , Rn〉. By
convention, R1 is termed the initial reference, and
all other references in the chain are subsequent ref-
erences. From the corpus as a whole we extracted
34,127 referring expressions in 9558 chains. The av-
erage length of a chain is 4.74; and the longest coref-
erence chain contains 43 references. References
may be contributed to a chain by either speaker, and
can be arbitrarily far apart: in the data, 4201 refer-
ences are in the utterance immediately following the
preceding reference in the chain, but the distance be-
tween references in a chain can be as high as 423
utterances.

We removed from the data any annotation that
was not concerned with the four landmark attributes,
type, colour, relation, or the landmark’s other dis-
tinguishing attribute. For example, ‘semantically
empty’ head nouns such as thing or set. Ordi-
nal numbers that were annotated as the use of the
number attribute were re-tagged as spatial relations,
as these usually described the position of the target
within a line of landmarks.

As a result of the removal of annotations not per-
taining to the use of the four landmark attributes,
2785 referring expressions had no annotation left;
we removed these instances from the final data set.
We also do not attempt to replicate the remaining
5552 plural referring expressions or the 3062 pro-

Content Pattern Count Proportion
〈other〉 5893 36.0%
〈other, type〉 3684 22.5%
〈other, colour〉 1630 10.0%
〈other, colour, type〉 1021 6.2%
〈colour〉 969 5.9%
〈relation〉 777 4.7%
〈other, relation〉 587 3.6%
〈type〉 574 3.5%
〈colour, type〉 434 2.7%
〈other, relation, type〉 312 1.9%
〈relation, type〉 236 1.4%
〈colour, relation〉 99 0.6%
〈other, colour, relation〉 81 0.5%
〈other, colour, relation, type〉 44 0.3%
〈colour, relation, type〉 17 0.1%

Total 16,358

Table 1: The 15 content patterns by frequency.

nouns found in the corpus.1 However, we do in-
clude all of these instances in the feature extraction
step, on the assumption that they might impact on
the content of subsequent references. Similarly, we
filter out 6369 initial references after we have ex-
tracted features from them, since we focus here on
the generation of subsequent reference only. The re-
maining 16,358 referring expressions form the data
which we use in our experiments.

Contrary to findings from other corpora, in which
colour was used much more frequently (Gatt, 2007;
Viethen and Dale, 2008), the colour attribute was
used in only 26.3% of the referring expressions in
our data set. This is probably due to the often low
reliability of colour in this task caused by the ink
stains. The proportion of referring expressions men-
tioning the target’s type might, at 38.7%, also seem
low. This can be explained by the fact that one quar-
ter of the landmarks, namely birds and buildings, are
more likely to be described in terms of their specific
kind than in terms of their generic type. This also
helps explain why the overall use of the other at-
tribute, which for some landmarks was their kind,
was used in 81.0% of all instances. Spatial relations
were used in 13.16% of the referring expressions,
comparable to other corpora in the literature.

1The additional issues that arise in generating plural refer-
ences and deciding when to use pronouns considerably compli-
cate the problem; see (Gatt, 2007).

1161



We can think of each referring expression as be-
ing a linguistic realisation of a content pattern: this
is the collection of attributes that are used in that
instance. The attributes can be derived from the
property-level annotation given in the corpus. So,
for example, if a particular reference appears as the
noun phrase the blue penguin, annotated seman-
tically as 〈blue, penguin〉, then the corresponding
content pattern is 〈colour, kind〉. Our aim is to repli-
cate the content pattern of each referring expression
in the corpus. Table 1 lists the 15 content patterns
that occur in our data set in order of frequency.

4 Modelling Referential Behaviour

4.1 The Two Perspectives
Our task is defined simply as follows: for each sub-
sequent referenceR in the corpus, can we predict the
content pattern that will be used in that reference?
As we noted at the outset of the paper, the literature
would appear to suggest two distinct approaches to
this problem. What we have characterised as the al-
gorithmic approach can be summarised thus:

At the point where a reference is required,
a speaker determines the relevant features
of other entities in the context, then com-
putes the content of a referring expression
which distinguishes the intended referent
from the other entities.

The alignment approach, on the other hand, can be
summarised thus:

Speakers align the forms of reference they
use to be similar or identical to references
that have been used before. In particular,
once a form of reference to the intended
referent has been established, they tend to
re-use that form of reference, or perhaps
an abbreviated version of it.

The alignment approach would appear to be prefer-
able on the grounds of computational cost: we
would expect that retrieving a previously-used refer-
ring expression, or parts thereof, generally requires
less computation than building a new referring ex-
pression from scratch.

On the other hand, if the context has changed
in any way, then a previously-used form of ref-
erence may no longer be effective in identifying

Map Features
Main Map type most frequent type of LM on this map
Main Map other other attribute if the most frequent type of LM
Mixedness are other LM types present on this map?
Ink Orderliness shape of the ink blot(s) on the IF’s map
Lmprop Features
other Att type of the other attribute of the target
[att] Value value for each att of target
[att] Difference was att of target different between the two

maps?
Missing was target missing one of the maps?
Inked Out was target inked] out on the IG’s map?
Speaker Features
Dyad ID ID of the pair of participant-pair
Speaker ID ID of the person who uttered this RE
Speaker Role was the speaker the IG or the IF?

Table 2: The Ind feature set.

the intended referent, and recomputation may be
required.2 This is precisely the consideration on
which the initial work on referring expression gen-
eration was based, inspired by Grosz and Sidner’s
(1986) observations about how the changing atten-
tional structure of a discourse moves different en-
tities in and out of focus. However, a straightfor-
ward recomputation of reference based on the cur-
rrent context carries the risk that the most effective
set of properties to use may change quite radically;
if no account is taken of the history of previous ref-
erences to the entity, it’s conceivable that one could
produce a description that is so different from the
previous description that they are virtually unreco-
gisable as descriptions of the same entity. Ideally,
what we want to do is modify a previous description
to do the job.

These observations suggest that, in order to
choose the most appropriate form of reference for an
entity, we need to simultaneously take account of:

• the other entities from which it must be distin-
guished, both in the visual context and in the
preceding discourse (in other words, exactly
the information that traditional algorithmic ap-
proaches consider);

• how this entity, and perhaps other entities, have
been referred to in the past (precisely the infor-
mation that the alignment approach considers).

2Unfortunately, determining what counts as a change of con-
text, especially in visual scenes, is fraught with difficulty.

1162



TradREG Features (Visual)
Count Vis Distractors number of visual distractors
Prop Vis Same [att] proportion of visual distractors with

same att
Dist Closest distance to the closest visual distrac-

tor
Closest Same [att] has the closest distractor the same

att?
Dist Closest Same [att] distance to the closest distractor of

same att as target
Cl Same type Same [att] has the closest distractor of the same

type also the same att?
TradREG Features (Discourse)
Count Intervening LMs number of other LMs mentioned since

the last mention of the target
Prop Intervening [att] proportion of intervening LMs for

which att was used AND which have
the same att as target

Table 3: The TradREG feature set.

The set of features we describe next attempts to cap-
ture these two aspects of the problem.

4.2 Features
The number of factors that can be hypothesised as
having an impact on the form of a referring expres-
sion in a dialogic setting associated with a visual do-
main is very large. Attempting to incorporate all of
these factors into parameters for rule-based systems,
and then experimenting with different settings for
these parameters, is prohibitively complex. Instead,
we here capture a wide range of factors as features
that can be used by a machine learning algorithm to
automatically induce from the data a classifier that
predicts for a given set of features the attributes that
should be used in a referring expression.

The features we extracted from the data set are
listed in Tables 2–4.3 They fall into five subsets.
Map Features capture design characteristics of the
maps the current dialogue is about; Speaker Fea-
tures capture the identity and role of the partici-
pants; and LMprop Features capture the inherent
visual properties of the target referent. For our ex-
periments, we group the Map, LMprop and Speaker
feature sets into one theory-independent set (Ind).
Most importantly for our present considerations,

3In these tables, att is an abbreviatory variable that is instan-
tiated once for each of the four attributes type, colour, relation,
and the other distinguishing attribute of the landmark. The ab-
breviation LM stands for landmark

Alignment Features (Recency)
Last Men Speaker Same who made the last mention of target?
Last Mention [att] was att used in the last mention of

target?
Dist Last Mention Utts distance to the last mention of target

in utterances
Dist Last Mention REs distance to the last mention of target

in REs
Dist Last [att] LM Utts distance in utterances to last use of

att for target
Dist Last [att] LM REs distance in REs to last use of att for

target
Dist Last [att] Dial Utts distance in utterances to last use of

att
Dist Last [att] Dial REs distance in REs to last use of att
Dist Last RE Utts distance to last RE in utterances
Last RE [att] was att mentioned in the last RE?
Alignment Features (Frequency)
Count [att] Dial how often has att been used in the dialogue?
Count [att] LM how often has att been used for target?
Quartile quartile of the dialogue the RE was uttered in
Dial No number of dialogues already completed +1
Mention No number of previous mentions of target +1

Table 4: The Alignment feature set.

TradREG Features capture factors that the tradi-
tional computational approaches to referring expres-
sion generation take account of, in particular prop-
erties of the discourse and visual distractors; and
Alignment Features capture factors that we would
expect to play a role in the psycholinguistic models
of alignment and conceptual pacts.

4.3 The Models
For the experiments described here, we used a 70–30
split to divide the data into a training set (11,411 in-
stances) and a test set (4,947 instances). In addition
to the main prediction class content pattern, the split
was stratified for Speaker ID and Quartile to ensure
that training and test set contained the same pro-
portion of descriptions from each speaker and each
quartile of the dialogues. We used the J48 algorithm
implemented in the Weka toolkit (Witten and Frank,
2005) to train decision trees with the task of judging,
based on the given features, which content pattern
should be used.

First, we have three separate baseline models:

HeadNounOnly generates only the property that is
the most likely head noun for the target, which
is kind for birds and buildings and type for all

1163



other landmarks. This is a form of ‘reduced
reference’ strategy.

RepeatLast represents a very simplistic alignment
approach. It generates the same content pattern
that was used in the previous mention of the
target referent.

MajorityClass generates the content pattern most
commonly used in the training set.

We then have a number of models that use subsets
of the features described above:

AllFeatures is a decision tree trained on all fea-
tures;

TradREG is a decision tree trained on the
TradREG features only;

Alignment is a decision tree trained on the Align-
ment features only;

Ind is a decision tree trained on the Ind features
only;

Alignment+Ind is a decision tree trained on all but
the TradREG features;

TradREG+Ind is a decision tree trained on all but
the Alignment features; and

TradREG+Alignment is a decision tree trained on
all but the Ind features.

5 Results

In this section we report how the models described
in the previous section performed on the held-out
test set in comparison to each other and to the three
baselines.

We use Accuracy and average DICE score for our
comparisons; these are the most commonly used
measures in the REG literature (see, for example,
Gatt et al., 2008). Given two sets of attributes, A
and B, DICE is computed as

(1) DICE =
2× |A ∩B|
|A|+ |B| .

This gives some measure of the overlap between two
referring expressions, assigning a partial score if the
two sets share attributes but are not identical. The
Accuracy of a system is the proportion of test in-
stances for which it achieves a DICE score of 1, sig-
nifying a perfect match.

col other type rel Comb. Pattern
Acc Acc Acc Acc Acc DICE

HeadOnly n/a n/a n/a n/a 23.1 0.49
RepLast n/a n/a n/a n/a 38.4 0.55
Majority 73.8 81.0 61.7 86.8 36.0 0.65

predicts no yes no no 〈other〉
Trad 74.6 84.8 77.1 87.0 47.3 0.73
Align 83.6 84.1 80.7 87.5 54.6 0.78
Ind 81.9 82.8 81.4 88.0 52.7 0.78
Align+Ind 86.1 85.3 82.4 88.7 58.2 0.81
Trad+Ind 82.2 84.1 81.1 87.1 52.5 0.78
Trad+Align 84.1 84.0 80.1 86.8 53.9 0.78
AllFeatures 86.2 85.8 83.2 88.5 58.8 0.81

Table 5: Performance of our models compared to the
baselines. Model names are abbreviated for space rea-
sons. The Accuracy (given in %) of all models is signifi-
cantly better than that of the highest performing baseline
at p<.01 according to the χ2 statistic.

We tested two different ways of generating con-
tent patterns based on the different feature sets de-
scribed above: PatternAtOnce builds a decision
tree that chooses one of the 15 content patterns that
occur in our data set; whereas CombinedPattern
builds attribute-specific decision trees (one for each
of the four attributes that occur in the data: colour,
other, type, and relation), and then combines their
predictions into a complete content pattern. We
found that CombinedPattern slightly outperformed
PatternAtOnce, although the difference is not statis-
tically significant for all feature sets. For space rea-
sons, we report in what follows only on the slightly
better-performing CombinedPattern model.

Table 5 compares the performances of the three
baselines and the decision trees based on the five fea-
ture subsets for each of the individual attributes and
for the combined content pattern; note that the Head-
NounOnly and RepeatLast baselines do not make
attribute-specific predictions. The table shows that
the learned systems outperform all three baselines
for the individual attributes as well as for the com-
bined content pattern.

A comparison of the Alignment feature set and
the TradREG feature set shows that the former out-
performs the latter for the attribute-specific trees
which predict the use of the colour attribute and the

1164



use of relation, and that the combined patterns re-
sulting from the Alignment trees are a better match
of the human-produced patterns both in terms of Ac-
curacy (p<.01 for all three categories, using χ2) and
DICE. Interestingly, even the theory-independent
Ind features outperform the TradREG features.

The comparison between TradREG+Ind and
Alignment+Ind again shows a clear advantage for
the Alignment features: dropping them from the
complete feature set significantly hurts performance
compared to AllFeatures (χ2=80.5, p<.01), while
dropping the TradREG features has no significant
impact. Also consistent with the results of the three
individual feature sets, dropping the Ind features
hurts performance more than dropping the TradREG
features, but less than dropping the Alignment fea-
tures. Training on the complete feature set (All-
Features) achieves the highest performance, which
is significantly better than that of all other features
sets (p<.01 using χ2) except Alignment+Ind.

These results suggest that considerations at the
heart of traditional REG approaches do not play as
important a role as those postulated by alignment-
based models for the selection of semantic content
for subsequent referring expressions.

We also note that the Accuracy scores achieved
by our learned systems are similar to the best num-
bers previously reported in the REG literature. While
Jordan and Walker’s (2005) data set is not directly
comparable, they achieved a maximum of 59.9%
Accuracy, against our 58.8%. Stoia et al.’s (2006)
best Accuracy was 31.2%, albeit on a slightly dif-
ferent task. Even in the arguably much simpler
non-dialogic domains of the REG competitions con-
cerned with pure content selection, the best perform-
ing system achieved only 53% Accuracy (see Gatt et
al., 2008). The most comparable approach, the rule-
based system we presented in (Viethen et al., 2010)
for a subset of the data used here, was not able to
outperform a RepeatLast baseline at 40.2% Accu-
racy and an average DICE score of 0.67.

6 Error Analysis

An important question to ask is how wrong the mod-
els really are when they do not succeed in perfectly
matching a human-produced reference in our test
set. It might be that they choose a completely dif-

Acc Dice Super Sub Inter Noover
Trad 47.3 0.75 14.4 22.2 5.5 10.5

Align 54.6 0.78 16.0 16.1 3.9 9.4
Ind 52.7 0.78 17.1 17.2 3.9 9.0

Align+Ind 58.2 0.81 16.0 14.8 3.1 7.9
Trad+Ind 52.5 0.78 17.4 17.5 3.8 8.8

Trad+Align 53.9 0.78 17.1 15.6 4.3 9.0
AllFeature 58.8 0.81 16.5 14.5 3.1 7.2

Table 6: The proportions of test instances for which each
model produced a subset, a superset, some other form of
intersection or no-overlap to the human reference.

ferent set of attributes from those included by the
human speaker; however, the Accuracy score also
counts as incorrect any set that only partly overlaps
with the reference found in the test set.

The DICE score gives us a partial answer to this
question, as it assigns a score that is based on the
size of the overlap between the attribute set cho-
sen by the model and that included by the human
speaker. A DICE score that is equal to the Accuracy
score would mean that each referring expression was
either reproduced perfectly, or that a set of attributes
was chosen that did not overlap with the original
one at all. The fact that all our models achieved
DICE scores much higher than their Accuracy scores
shows that they only rarely got it completely wrong.

Table 6 gives a more fine-grained picture by list-
ing, for each model, what percentage of the refer-
ring expressions it produced contained a subset of
the attributes included in the human reference, what
percentage were a superset, what percentage had
another form of partial intersection, and what per-
centage had no commonality with the human refer-
ence. Interestingly, a large number of the referring
expressions produced by the model trained only on
TradREG features are subsets of the human refer-
ence. This indicates that human speakers tend to in-
clude more attributes than are strictly speaking nec-
essary to distinguish the landmark.4 The Alignment
model does not as often produce a subset of the gold
standard content pattern, suggesting that it might be
alignment considerations that account for some of

4That humans often produce ‘redundant’ descriptions, in op-
position to the target behaviour of some of the early REG algo-
rithms, is of course an oft-observed fact.

1165



both both 1st 2nd either pot.
corr. wrong corr. corr. corr. Acc

Trad vs Ind 1797 1794 545 811 3153 63.7
Trad vs Align 1742 1647 600 958 3300 66.7
Trad vs Align+Ind 1849 1574 493 1031 3373 68.2

Align vs Trad+Ind 1908 1557 792 690 3390 68.5
Align vs Ind 1872 1511 828 736 3436 69.5

Ind vs Trad+Align 1840 1511 768 828 3436 69.5

Table 7: Comparison of the predictions for the combined
content pattern between the models trained on mutually
exclusive feature sets.

the apparent redundancy that human-produced refer-
ring expressions contain.

A second important question is whether the differ-
ent feature sets are doing the same work, or whether
they complement each other. Table 7 lists for those
pairings of our learned models which were based on
mutually exclusive feature sets how many referring
expressions both models predicted correctly, how
many both failed to predict, and how many were pre-
dicted correctly by either of the two models.

Note the high numbers in the columns listing the
counts of instances which both models got either
correct or wrong: these show that there is con-
siderable overlap between all pairings. The small-
est agreement lies at 3424 instances (68.2%) be-
tween TradREG (the least successful model) and
Alignment+Ind (the most successful model). How-
ever, they also each predict correct solutions that the
other misses: 493 (10.0%) for TradREG and 1031
(20.8%) for Alignment+Ind.

The last two columns of Table 7 show the number
of instances that at least one of the two models in
each pairing got correct and the proportion out of
all test instances that this number represents. This
proportion is the maximum Accuracy that could be
achieved by a model that combines the two models
in a pairing and then correctly chooses which one to
use in each instance. The maximum Accuracies that
could be achieved in this way on our data set lie just
below 70%, significantly higher than any numbers
reported in the literature on the task of generating
subsequent reference.

7 Conclusions

Using the largest corpus of referring expressions
to date, we have shown how both the traditional
computational view of REG and the alternative psy-
cholinguistic alignment approach can be captured
via a large set of features for machine learning. Ad-
ditionally, we defined a number of theory indepen-
dent features. Using this approach we have pre-
sented three main findings.

First, we have demonstrated that a model using all
these features to predict content patterns in subse-
quent references in shared visual scenes delivers an
Accuracy of 58.8% and a DICE score of 0.81, out-
performing models based only on features inspired
by one of the two approaches. However, we found
that the features based on traditional REG considera-
tions do not contribute as much to this score as those
based on the alignment approach, and that dropping
the traditional REG features does not significantly
hurt the performance of a model based on alignment
and theory-independent features.

Second, our error analysis showed that the main
reason for the low performance of a model based
on traditional algorithmic features is that it often
chooses too few attributes. The fact that the model
based on the alignment features does not make this
mistake so frequently suggests that it may be the
psycholinguistic considerations incorporated in our
alignment features that lead people to add those ad-
ditional attributes.

Finally, while the different models make the same
correct predictions about the content of referring ex-
pressions in many cases, there are also a consider-
able number of cases where the models based on
either the traditional algorithmic features (10.0%)
or the alignment and independent features (20.8%)
alone make correct predictions that the other gets
wrong; this suggests that a system with the ability
to choose the correct model in each of those cases
(perhaps based on a hypothesis as to whether or not
the relevant context has changed) could reach an ac-
curacy of almost 70% on our data set. In future work
we plan to identify further features that will allow us
to inform this choice so that we can move towards
this level of performance.

1166



References

Susan E. Brennan and Herbert H. Clark. 1996. Concep-
tual pacts and lexical choice in conversation. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 22:1482–1493.

Hendrik Buschmeier, Kirsten Bergmann, and Stefan
Kopp. 2009. An alignment-capable microplanner for
natural language generation. In Proceedings of the
12th European Workshop on Natural Language Gen-
eration, pages 82–89, Athens, Greece.

John M. Carroll. 1980. Naming and describing in social
communication. Language and Speech, 23:309–322.

Herbert H. Clark and Deanna Wilkes-Gibbs. 1986. Re-
ferring as a collaborative process. Cognition, 22(1):1–
39.

Robert Dale and Ehud Reiter. 1995. Computational
interpretations of the Gricean maxims in the gener-
ation of referring expressions. Cognitive Science,
19(2):233–263.

Robert Dale. 1989. Cooking up referring expressions. In
Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, Vancouver B.C.,
Canada.

Claire Gardent and Kristina Striegnitz. 2007. Generat-
ing bridging definite descriptions. In Harry C. Bunt
and Reinhard Muskens, editors, Computing Meaning,
volume 3, pages 369–396. Kluwer, Dordrecht, The
Netherlands.

Albert Gatt, Anja Belz, and Eric Kow. 2008. The TUNA
Challenge 2008: Overview and evaluation results. In
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on
Natural Language Generation, pages 198–206, Salt
Fork OH, USA.

Albert Gatt. 2007. Generating Coherent Reference to
Multiple Entities. Ph.D. thesis, University of Ab-
erdeen, UK.

Martijn Goudbeek and Emiel Krahmer. 2010. Pref-
erences versus adaptation during referring expression
generation. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 55–59, Uppsala, Sweden.

Barbara J. Grosz and Candance L. Sidner. 1986. Atten-
tion, intentions, and the structure of discourse. Com-
putational Linguistics, 12(3):175–204.

Surabhi Gupta and Amanda Stent. 2005. Automatic
evaluation of referring expression generation using
corpora. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Using
Corpora for Natural Language Generation, pages 1–
6, Brighton, UK.

Srinivasan Janarthanam and Oliver Lemon. 2009. Learn-
ing lexical alignment policies for generating referring

expressions for spoken dialogue systems. In Pro-
ceedings of the 12th European Workshop on Natu-
ral Language Generation (ENLG 2009), pages 74–
81, Athens, Greece, March. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Pamela W. Jordan and Marilyn Walker. 2000. Learning
attribute selections for non-pronominal expressions.
In Proceedings of the 38th Annual Meeting on As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Hong Kong,
China.

Pamela W. Jordan and Marilyn Walker. 2005. Learning
content selection rules for generating object descrip-
tions in dialogue. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Re-
search, 24:157–194.

Pamela W. Jordan. 2000. Intentional Influences on Ob-
ject Redescriptions in Dialogue: Evidence from an
Empirical Study. Ph.D. thesis, University of Pitts-
burgh, Pittsburgh PA, USA.

Emiel Krahmer, Sebastiaan van Erk, and André Verleg.
2003. Graph-based generation of referring expres-
sions. Computational Lingustics, 29(1):53–72.

Max M. Louwerse, Nick Benesh, Mohammed E. Hoque,
Patrick Jeuniaux, Gwyneth Lewis, Jie Wu, and Megan
Zirnstein. 2007. Multimodal communication in face-
to-face computer-mediated conversations. In Proceed-
ings of the 28th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, pages 1235–1240.

Martin J. Pickering and Simon Garrod. 2004. Toward a
mechanistic psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 27(2):169–226.

Laura Stoia, Darla M. Shockley, Donna K. Byron, and
Eric Fosler-Lussier. 2006. Noun phrase generation
for situated dialogs. In Proceedings of the 4th Interna-
tional Conference on Natural Language Generation,
pages 81–88, Sydney, Australia, July.

Kees van Deemter and Emiel Krahmer. 2007. Graphs
and Booleans: On the generation of referring expres-
sions. In Harry C. Bunt and Reinhard Muskens, edi-
tors, Computing Meaning, volume 3, pages 397–422.
Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.

Jette Viethen and Robert Dale. 2008. The use of spatial
relations in referring expression generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 5th International Conference on Natu-
ral Language Generation, pages 59–67, Salt Fork OH,
USA.

Jette Viethen, Simon Zwarts, Robert Dale, and Markus
Guhe. 2010. Dialogue reference in a visual domain.
In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation, Valetta, Malta.

Ian H. Witten and Eibe Frank. 2005. Data Mining: Prac-
tical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques. Mor-
gan Kaufmann, San Francisco CA, USA.

1167


