



















































Unsupervised Dependency Parsing without Gold Part-of-Speech Tags


Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1281–1290,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 27–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Unsupervised Dependency Parsing without Gold Part-of-Speech Tags

Valentin I. Spitkovsky†∗

valentin@cs.stanford.edu

Hiyan Alshawi∗

hiyan@google.com

Angel X. Chang†∗

angelx@cs.stanford.edu

Daniel Jurafsky‡†

jurafsky@stanford.edu

†Computer Science Department
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, 94305

∗Google Research
Google Inc.

Mountain View, CA, 94043

‡Department of Linguistics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, 94305

Abstract

We show that categories induced by unsuper-
vised word clustering can surpass the perfor-
mance of gold part-of-speech tags in depen-
dency grammar induction. Unlike classic clus-
tering algorithms, our method allows a word
to have different tags in different contexts.
In an ablative analysis, we first demonstrate
that this context-dependence is crucial to the
superior performance of gold tags — requir-
ing a word to always have the same part-of-
speech significantly degrades the performance
of manual tags in grammar induction, elim-
inating the advantage that human annotation
has over unsupervised tags. We then introduce
a sequence modeling technique that combines
the output of a word clustering algorithm with
context-colored noise, to allow words to be
tagged differently in different contexts. With
these new induced tags as input, our state-of-
the-art dependency grammar inducer achieves
59.1% directed accuracy on Section 23 (all
sentences) of the Wall Street Journal (WSJ)
corpus — 0.7% higher than using gold tags.

1 Introduction

Unsupervised learning — machine learning without
manually-labeled training examples — is an active
area of scientific research. In natural language pro-
cessing, unsupervised techniques have been success-
fully applied to tasks such as word alignment for ma-
chine translation. And since the advent of the web,
algorithms that induce structure from unlabeled data
have continued to steadily gain importance. In this
paper we focus on unsupervised part-of-speech tag-
ging and dependency parsing — two related prob-

lems of syntax discovery. Our methods are applica-
ble to vast quantities of unlabeled monolingual text.

Not all research on these problems has been fully
unsupervised. For example, to the best of our knowl-
edge, every new state-of-the-art dependency gram-
mar inducer since Klein and Manning (2004) relied
on gold part-of-speech tags. For some time, multi-
point performance degradations caused by switching
to automatically induced word categories have been
interpreted as indications that “good enough” parts-
of-speech induction methods exist, justifying the fo-
cus on grammar induction with supervised part-of-
speech tags (Bod, 2006), pace (Cramer, 2007). One
of several drawbacks of this practice is that it weak-
ens any conclusions that could be drawn about how
computers (and possibly humans) learn in the ab-
sence of explicit feedback (McDonald et al., 2011).

In turn, not all unsupervised taggers actually in-
duce word categories: Many systems — known as
part-of-speech disambiguators (Merialdo, 1994) —
rely on external dictionaries of possible tags. Our
work builds on two older part-of-speech inducers
— word clustering algorithms of Clark (2000) and
Brown et al. (1992) — that were recently shown to
be more robust than other well-known fully unsuper-
vised techniques (Christodoulopoulos et al., 2010).

We investigate which properties of gold part-of-
speech tags are useful in grammar induction and
parsing, and how these properties could be intro-
duced into induced tags. We also explore the number
of word classes that is good for grammar induction:
in particular, whether categorization is needed at all.
By removing the “unrealistic simplification” of us-
ing gold tags (Petrov et al., 2011, §3.2, Footnote 4),
we will go on to demonstrate why grammar induc-
tion from plain text is no longer “still too difficult.”

1281



NNS VBD IN NN ♦
Payrolls fell in September .

P = (1−
0︷ ︸︸ ︷

PSTOP(⋄, L, T)) × PATTACH(⋄, L, VBD)
× (1− PSTOP(VBD, L, T)) × PATTACH(VBD, L, NNS)
× (1− PSTOP(VBD, R, T)) × PATTACH(VBD, R, IN)
× (1− PSTOP(IN, R, T)) × PATTACH(IN, R, NN)
× PSTOP(VBD, L, F) × PSTOP(VBD, R, F)
× PSTOP(NNS, L, T) × PSTOP(NNS, R, T)
× PSTOP(IN, L, T) × PSTOP(IN, R, F)
× PSTOP(NN, L, T) × PSTOP(NN, R, T)
× PSTOP(⋄, L, F)︸ ︷︷ ︸

1

× PSTOP(⋄, R, T)︸ ︷︷ ︸
1

.

Figure 1: A dependency structure for a short WSJ sen-
tence and its probability, factored by the DMV, using gold
tags, after summing out PORDER (Spitkovsky et al., 2009).

2 Methodology

In all experiments, we model the English grammar
via Klein and Manning’s (2004) Dependency Model
with Valence (DMV), induced from subsets of not-
too-long sentences of the Wall Street Journal (WSJ).

2.1 The Model

The original DMV is a single-state head automata
model (Alshawi, 1996) over lexical word classes
{cw} — gold part-of-speech tags. Its generative story
for a sub-tree rooted at a head (of class ch) rests on
three types of independent decisions: (i) initial di-
rection dir ∈ {L, R} in which to attach children, via
probability PORDER(ch); (ii) whether to seal dir, stop-
ping with probability PSTOP(ch, dir, adj), conditioned
on adj ∈ {T, F} (true iff considering dir’s first, i.e., ad-
jacent, child); and (iii) attachments (of class ca), ac-
cording to PATTACH(ch, dir, ca). This recursive process
produces only projective trees. A root token ♦ gen-
erates the head of the sentence as its left (and only)
child (see Figure 1 for a simple, concrete example).

2.2 Learning Algorithms

The DMV lends itself to unsupervised learning via
inside-outside re-estimation (Baker, 1979). Klein
and Manning (2004) initialized their system using an
“ad-hoc harmonic” completion, followed by training
using 40 steps of EM (Klein, 2005). We reproduce
this set-up, iterating without actually verifying con-
vergence, in most of our experiments (#1–4, §3–4).

Experiments #5–6 (§5) employ our new state-of-
the-art grammar inducer (Spitkovsky et al., 2011),
which uses constrained Viterbi EM (details in §5).

2.3 Training Data

The DMV is usually trained on a customized sub-
set of Penn English Treebank’s Wall Street Jour-
nal portion (Marcus et al., 1993). Following Klein
and Manning (2004), we begin with reference con-
stituent parses, prune out all empty sub-trees and
remove punctuation and terminals (tagged # and $)
that are not pronounced where they appear. We then
train only on the remaining sentence yields consist-
ing of no more than fifteen tokens (WSJ15), in most
of our experiments (#1–4, §3–4); by contrast, Klein
and Manning’s (2004) original system was trained
using less data: sentences up to length ten (WSJ10).1

Our final experiments (#5–6, §5) employ a simple
scaffolding strategy (Spitkovsky et al., 2010a) that
follows up initial training at WSJ15 (“less is more”)
with an additional training run (“leapfrog”) that in-
corporates most sentences of the data set, at WSJ45.

2.4 Evaluation Methods

Evaluation is against the training set, as is standard
practice in unsupervised learning, in part because
Klein and Manning (2004, §3) did not smooth the
DMV (Klein, 2005, §6.2). For most of our experi-
ments (#1–4, §3–4), this entails starting with the ref-
erence trees from WSJ15 (as modified in §2.3), au-
tomatically converting their labeled constituents into
unlabeled dependencies using deterministic “head-
percolation” rules (Collins, 1999), and then com-
puting (directed) dependency accuracy scores of the
corresponding induced trees. We report overall per-
centages of correctly guessed arcs, including the
arcs from sentence root symbols, as is standard prac-
tice (Paskin, 2001; Klein and Manning, 2004).

For a meaningful comparison with previous work,
we also test some of the models from our earlier ex-
periments (#1,3) — and both models from final ex-
periments (#5,6) — against Section 23 of WSJ∞, af-
ter applying Laplace (a.k.a. “add one”) smoothing.

1WSJ15 contains 15,922 sentences up to length fifteen (a to-
tal of 163,715 tokens, not counting punctuation) — versus 7,422
sentences of at most ten words (only 52,248 tokens) comprising
WSJ10 — and is a better trade-off between the quantity and
complexity of training data in WSJ (Spitkovsky et al., 2009).

1282



Accuracy Viable
1. manual tags Unsupervised Sky Groups

gold 50.7 78.0 36
mfc 47.2 74.5 34
mfp 40.4 76.4 160

ua 44.3 78.4 328
2. tagless lexicalized models

full 25.8 97.3 49,180
partial 29.3 60.5 176

none 30.7 24.5 1

3. tags from a flat (Clark, 2000) clustering
47.8 83.8 197

4. prefixes of a hierarchical (Brown et al., 1992) clustering
first 7 bits 46.4 73.9 96

8 bits 48.0 77.8 165
9 bits 46.8 82.3 262

Table 1: Directed accuracies for the “less is more” DMV,
trained on WSJ15 (after 40 steps of EM) and evaluated
also against WSJ15, using various lexical categories in
place of gold part-of-speech tags. For each tag-set, we
include its effective number of (non-empty) categories in
WSJ15 and the oracle skylines (supervised performance).

3 Motivation and Ablative Analyses

The concepts of polysemy and synonymy are of fun-
damental importance in linguistics. For words that
can take on multiple parts of speech, knowing the
gold tag can reduce ambiguity, improving parsing by
limiting the search space. Furthermore, pooling the
statistics of words that play similar syntactic roles,
as signaled by shared gold part-of-speech tags, can
simplify the learning task, improving generalization
by reducing sparsity. We begin with two sets of ex-
periments that explore the impact that each of these
factors has on grammar induction with the DMV.

3.1 Experiment #1: Human-Annotated Tags

Our first set of experiments attempts to isolate the
effect that replacing gold part-of-speech tags with
deterministic one class per word mappings has on
performance, quantifying the cost of switching to a
monosemous clustering (see Table 1: manual; and
Table 4). Grammar induction with gold tags scores
50.7%, while the oracle skyline (an ideal, supervised
instance of the DMV) could attain 78.0% accuracy.

It may be worth noting that only 6,620 (13.5%) of
49,180 unique tokens in WSJ appear with multiple
part-of-speech tags. Most words, like it, are always
tagged the same way (5,768 times PRP). Some words,

token mfc mfp ua
it {PRP} {PRP} {PRP}

gains {NNS} {VBZ, NNS} {VBZ, NNS}
the {DT} {JJ, DT} {VBP, NNP, NN, JJ, DT, CD}

Table 2: Example most frequent class, most frequent pair
and union all reassignments for tokens it, the and gains.

like gains, usually serve as one part of speech (227
times NNS, as in the gains) but are occasionally used
differently (5 times VBZ, as in he gains). Only 1,322
tokens (2.7%) appear with three or more different
gold tags. However, this minority includes the most
frequent word — the (50,959 times DT, 7 times JJ,
6 times NNP and once as each of CD, NN and VBP).2

We experimented with three natural reassign-
ments of part-of-speech categories (see Table 2).
The first, most frequent class (mfc), simply maps
each token to its most common gold tag in the entire
WSJ (with ties resolved lexicographically). This ap-
proach discards two gold tags (types PDT and RBR are
not most common for any of the tokens in WSJ15)
and costs about three-and-a-half points of accuracy,
in both supervised and unsupervised regimes.

Another reassignment, union all (ua), maps each
token to the set of all of its observed gold tags, again
in the entire WSJ. This inflates the number of group-
ings by nearly a factor of ten (effectively lexicaliz-
ing the most ambiguous words),3 yet improves the
oracle skyline by half-a-point over actual gold tags;
however, learning is harder with this tag-set, losing
more than six points in unsupervised training.

Our last reassignment, most frequent pair (mfp),
allows up to two of the most common tags into
a token’s label set (with ties, once again, resolved
lexicographically). This intermediate approach per-
forms strictly worse than union all, in both regimes.

3.2 Experiment #2: Lexicalization Baselines

Our next set of experiments assesses the benefits of
categorization, turning to lexicalized baselines that
avoid grouping words altogether. All three models
discussed below estimated the DMV without using
the gold tags in any way (see Table 1: lexicalized).

2Some of these are annotation errors in the treebank (Banko
and Moore, 2004, Figure 2): such (mis)taggings can severely
degrade the accuracy of part-of-speech disambiguators, without
additional supervision (Banko and Moore, 2004, §5, Table 1).

3Kupiec (1992) found that the 50,000-word vocabulary of
the Brown corpus similarly reduces to ∼400 ambiguity classes.

1283



First, not surprisingly, a fully-lexicalized model
over nearly 50,000 unique words is able to essen-
tially memorize the training set, supervised. (With-
out smoothing, it is possible to deterministically at-
tach most rare words in a dependency tree correctly,
etc.) Of course, local search is unlikely to find good
instantiations for so many parameters, causing unsu-
pervised accuracy for this model to drop in half.

For our next experiment, we tried an intermediate,
partially-lexicalized approach. We mapped frequent
words — those seen at least 100 times in the training
corpus (Headden et al., 2009) — to their own indi-
vidual categories, lumping the rest into a single “un-
known” cluster, for a total of under 200 groups. This
model is significantly worse for supervised learn-
ing, compared even with the monosemous clusters
derived from gold tags; yet it is only slightly more
learnable than the broken fully-lexicalized variant.

Finally, for completeness, we trained a model that
maps every token to the same one “unknown” cat-
egory. As expected, such a trivial “clustering” is
ineffective in supervised training; however, it out-
performs both lexicalized variants unsupervised,4

strongly suggesting that lexicalization alone may be
insufficient for the DMV and hinting that some de-
gree of categorization is essential to its learnability.

Cluster #173 Cluster #188
1. open 1. get
2. free 2. make
3. further 3. take
4. higher 4. find
5. lower 5. give
6. similar 6. keep
7. leading 7. pay
8. present 8. buy
9. growing 9. win

10. increased 10. sell
...

...
37. cool 42. improve

...
...

1,688. up-wind 2,105. zero-out

Table 3: Representative members for two of the flat word
groupings: cluster #173 (left) contains adjectives, espe-
cially ones that take comparative (or other) complements;
cluster #188 comprises bare-stem verbs (infinitive stems).
(Of course, many of the words have other syntactic uses.)

4Note that it also beats supervised training. That isn’t a bug:
Spitkovsky et al. (2010b, §7.2) explain this paradox in the DMV.

4 Grammars over Induced Word Clusters

We have demonstrated the need for grouping simi-
lar words, estimated a bound on performance losses
due to monosemous clusterings and are now ready
to experiment with induced part-of-speech tags. We
use two sets of established, publicly-available hard
clustering assignments, each computed from a much
larger data set than WSJ (approximately a million
words). The first is a flat mapping (200 clusters)
constructed by training Clark’s (2000) distributional
similarity model over several hundred million words
from the British National and the English Gigaword
corpora.5 The second is a hierarchical clustering —
binary strings up to eighteen bits long — constructed
by running Brown et al.’s (1992) algorithm over 43
million words from the BLLIP corpus, minus WSJ.6

4.1 Experiment #3: A Flat Word Clustering

Our main purely unsupervised results are with a flat
clustering (Clark, 2000) that groups words having
similar context distributions, according to Kullback-
Leibler divergence. (A word’s context is an ordered
pair: its left- and right-adjacent neighboring words.)

To avoid overfitting, we employed an implemen-
tation from previous literature (Finkel and Manning,
2009). The number of clusters (200) and the suf-
ficient amount of training data (several hundred-
million words) were tuned to a task (NER) that is
not directly related to dependency parsing. (Table 3
shows representative entries for two of the clusters.)

We added one more category (#0) for unknown
words. Now every token in WSJ could again be re-
placed by a coarse identifier (one of at most 201,
instead of just 36), in both supervised and unsuper-
vised training. (Our training code did not change.)

The resulting supervised model, though not as
good as the fully-lexicalized DMV, was more than
five points more accurate than with gold part-of-
speech tags (see Table 1: flat). Unsupervised accu-
racy was lower than with gold tags (see also Table 4)
but higher than with all three derived hard assign-
ments. This suggests that polysemy (i.e., ability to

5http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/

stanford-postagger-2008-09-28.tar.gz:
models/egw.bnc.200

6http://people.csail.mit.edu/maestro/papers/

bllip-clusters.gz

1284



1 4 16 64 256 1,024 (# of clusters) 49,180

20

40

60

80

%

gold
mfc mfp

ua

full

partial

none

flat

gold
mfc

mfp
ua

full
partial

none

flat

k = 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 – 18 bits

Figure 2: Parsing performance (accuracy on WSJ15) as a “function” of the number of syntactic categories, for all prefix
lengths — k ∈ {1, . . . , 18} — of a hierarchical (Brown et al., 1992) clustering, connected by solid lines (dependency
grammar induction in blue; supervised oracle skylines in red, above). Tagless lexicalized models (full, partial and
none) connected by dashed lines. Models based on gold part-of-speech tags, and derived monosemous clusters (mfc,
mfp and ua), shown as vertices of gold polygons. Models based on a flat (Clark, 2000) clustering indicated by squares.

tag a word differently in context) may be the primary
advantage of manually constructed categorizations.

4.2 Experiment #4: A Hierarchical Clustering

The purpose of this batch of experiments is to show
that Clark’s (2000) algorithm isn’t unique in its suit-
ability for grammar induction. We found that Brown
et al.’s (1992) older information-theoretic approach,
which does not explicitly address the problems of
rare and ambiguous words (Clark, 2000) and was de-
signed to induce large numbers of plausible syntac-
tic and semantic clusters, can perform just as well.

Once again, the sufficient amount of data (43 mil-
lion words) was tuned in earlier work (Koo, 2010).
His task of interest was, in fact, dependency parsing.
But since this algorithm is hierarchical (i.e., there
isn’t a parameter for the number of categories), we
doubt that there was a strong enough risk of overfit-
ting to question the clustering’s unsupervised nature.

As there isn’t a set number of categories, we used
binary prefixes of length k from each word’s address
in the computed hierarchy as cluster labels. Results
for 7 ≤ k ≤ 9 bits (approximately 100–250 non-
empty clusters, close to the 200 we used before) are

similar to those of flat clusters (see Table 1: hierar-
chical). Outside of this range, however, performance
can be substantially worse (see Figure 2), consistent
with earlier findings: Headden et al. (2008) demon-
strated that (constituent) grammar induction, using
the singular-value decomposition (SVD-based) tag-
ger of Schütze (1995), also works best with 100–200
clusters. Important future research directions may
include learning to automatically select a good num-
ber of word categories (in the case of flat clusterings)
and ways of using multiple clustering assignments,
perhaps of different granularities/resolutions, in tan-
dem (e.g., in the case of a hierarchical clustering).

4.3 Further Evaluation

It is important to enable easy comparison with pre-
vious and future work. Since WSJ15 is not a stan-
dard test set, we evaluated two key experiments —
“less is more” with gold part-of-speech tags (#1, Ta-
ble 1: gold) and with Clark’s (2000) clusters (#3, Ta-
ble 1: flat) — on all sentences (not just length fifteen
and shorter), in Section 23 of WSJ (see Table 4).
This required smoothing both final models (§2.4).

We showed that two classic unsupervised word
1285



System Description Accuracy
#1 (§3.1) “less is more” (Spitkovsky et al., 2009) 44.0
#3 (§4.1) “less is more” with monosemous induced tags 41.4 (-2.6)

Table 4: Directed accuracies on Section 23 of WSJ (all sentences) for two experiments with the base system.

clusterings — one flat and one hierarchical — can
be better for dependency grammar induction than
monosemous syntactic categories derived from gold
part-of-speech tags. And we confirmed that the un-
supervised tags are worse than the actual gold tags,
in a simple dependency grammar induction system.

5 State-of-the-Art without Gold Tags

Until now, we have deliberately kept our experimen-
tal methods simple and nearly identical to Klein and
Manning’s (2004), for clarity. Next, we will explore
how our main findings generalize beyond this toy
setting. A preliminary test will simply quantify the
effect of replacing gold part-of-speech tags with the
monosemous flat clustering (as in experiment #3,
§4.1) on a modern grammar inducer. And our last
experiment will gauge the impact of using a polyse-
mous (but still unsupervised) clustering instead, ob-
tained by executing standard sequence labeling tech-
niques to introduce context-sensitivity into the origi-
nal (independent) assignment or words to categories.

These final experiments are with our latest state-
of-the-art system (Spitkovsky et al., 2011) — a par-
tially lexicalized extension of the DMV that uses
constrained Viterbi EM to train on nearly all of the
data available in WSJ, at WSJ45 (48,418 sentences;
986,830 non-punctuation tokens). The key contribu-
tion that differentiates this model from its predeces-
sors is that it incorporates punctuation into grammar
induction (by turning it into parsing constraints, in-
stead of ignoring punctuation marks altogether). In
training, the model makes a simplifying assumption
— that sentences can be split at punctuation and that
the resulting fragments of text could be parsed inde-
pendently of one another (these parsed fragments are
then reassembled into full sentence trees, by pars-
ing the sequence of their own head words). Fur-
thermore, the model continues to take punctuation
marks into account in inference (using weaker, more
accurate constraints, than in training). This system
scores 58.4% on Section 23 of WSJ∞ (see Table 5).

5.1 Experiment #5: A Monosemous Clustering

As in experiment #3 (§4.1), we modified the base
system in exactly one way: we swapped out gold
part-of-speech tags and replaced them with a flat dis-
tributional similarity clustering. In contrast to sim-
pler models, which suffer multi-point drops in ac-
curacy from switching to unsupervised tags (e.g.,
2.6%), our new system’s performance degrades only
slightly, by 0.2% (see Tables 4 and 5). This result
improves over substantial performance degradations
previously observed for unsupervised dependency
parsing with induced word categories (Klein and
Manning, 2004; Headden et al., 2008, inter alia).7

One risk that arises from using gold tags is that
newer systems could be finding cleverer ways to ex-
ploit manual labels (i.e., developing an over-reliance
on gold tags) instead of actually learning to acquire
language. Part-of-speech tags are known to contain
significant amounts of information for unlabeled de-
pendency parsing (McDonald et al., 2011, §3.1), so
we find it reassuring that our latest grammar inducer
is less dependent on gold tags than its predecessors.

5.2 Experiment #6: A Polysemous Clustering

Results of experiments #1 and 3 (§3.1, 4.1) suggest
that grammar induction stands to gain from relaxing
the one class per word assumption. We next test this
conjecture by inducing a polysemous unsupervised
word clustering, then using it to induce a grammar.

Previous work (Headden et al., 2008, §4) found
that simple bitag hidden Markov models, classically
trained using the Baum-Welch (Baum, 1972) variant
of EM (HMM-EM), perform quite well,8 on aver-
age, across different grammar induction tasks. Such
sequence models incorporate a sensitivity to context
via state transition probabilities PTRAN(ti | ti−1), cap-
turing the likelihood that a tag ti immediately fol-
lows the tag ti−1; emission probabilities PEMIT(wi | ti)
capture the likelihood that a word of type ti is wi.

7We also briefly comment on this result in the “punctuation”
paper (Spitkovsky et al., 2011, §7), published concurrently.

8They are also competitive with Bayesian estimators, on
larger data sets, with cross-validation (Gao and Johnson, 2008).

1286



System Description Accuracy
(§5) “punctuation” (Spitkovsky et al., 2011) 58.4

#5 (§5.1) “punctuation” with monosemous induced tags 58.2 (-0.2)
#6 (§5.2) “punctuation” with context-sensitive induced tags 59.1 (+0.7)

Table 5: Directed accuracies on Section 23 of WSJ (all sentences) for experiments with the state-of-the-art system.

We need a context-sensitive tagger, and HMM
models are good — relative to other tag-inducers.
However, they are not better than gold tags, at least
when trained using a modest amount of data.9 For
this reason, we decided to relax the monosemous
flat clustering, plugging it in as an initializer for the
HMM. The main problem with this approach is that,
at least without smoothing, every monosemous la-
beling is trivially at a local optimum, since P(ti | wi)
is deterministic. To escape the initial assignment,
we used a “noise injection” technique (Selman et
al., 1994), inspired by the contexts of Clark (2000).
First, we collected the MLE statistics for PR(ti+1 | ti)
and PL(ti | ti+1) in WSJ, using the flat monosemous
tags. Next, we replicated the text of WSJ 100-fold.
Finally, we retagged this larger data set, as follows:
with probability 80%, a word kept its monosemous
tag; with probability 10%, we sampled a new tag
from the left context (PL) associated with the origi-
nal (monosemous) tag of its rightmost neighbor; and
with probability 10%, we drew a tag from the right
context (PR) of its leftmost neighbor.10 Given that
our initializer — and later the input to the grammar
inducer — are hard assignments of tags to words, we
opted for (the faster and simpler) Viterbi training.

In the spirit of reproducibility, we again used an
off-the-shelf component for tagging-related work.11

Viterbi training converged after just 17 steps, re-
placing the original monosemous tags for 22,280 (of
1,028,348 non-punctuation) tokens in WSJ. For ex-

9All of Headden et al.’s (2008) grammar induction experi-
ments with induced parts-of-speech were worse than their best
results using gold part-of-speech tags, most likely because they
used a very small corpus (half of WSJ10) to cluster words.

10We chose the sampling split (80:10:10) and replication pa-
rameter (100) somewhat arbitrarily, so better results could likely
be obtained with tuning. However, we suspect that the real gains
would come from using soft clustering techniques (Hinton and
Roweis, 2003; Pereira et al., 1993, inter alia) and propagating
(joint) estimates of tag distributions into a parser. Our ad-hoc
approach is intended to serve solely as a proof of concept.

11David Elworthy’s C+ tagger, with options -i t -G -l,
available from http://friendly-moose.appspot.com/
code/NewCpTag.zip.

ample, the first changed sentence is #3 (of 49,208):

Some “circuit breakers” installed after
the October 1987 crash failed their first
test, traders say, unable to cool the selling
panic in both stocks and futures.

Above, the word cool gets relabeled as #188 (from
#173 — see Table 3), since its context is more
suggestive of an infinitive verb than of its usual
grouping with adjectives. (A proper analysis of all
changes, however, is beyond the scope of this work.)

Using this new context-sensitive hard assignment
of tokens to unsupervised categories our gram-
mar inducer attained a directed accuracy of 59.1%,
nearly a full point better than with the monosemous
hard assignment (see Table 5). To the best of our
knowledge it is also the first state-of-the-art unsuper-
vised dependency parser to perform better with in-
duced categories than with gold part-of-speech tags.

6 Related Work

Early work in dependency grammar induction al-
ready relied on gold part-of-speech tags (Carroll and
Charniak, 1992). Some later models (Yuret, 1998;
Paskin, 2001, inter alia) attempted full lexicaliza-
tion. However, Klein and Manning (2004) demon-
strated that effort to be worse at recovering depen-
dency arcs than choosing parse structures at random,
leading them to incorporate gold tags into the DMV.

Klein and Manning (2004, §5, Figure 6) had also
tested their own models with induced word classes,
constructed using a distributional similarity cluster-
ing method (Schütze, 1995). Without gold part-of-
speech tags, their combined DMV+CCM model was
about five points worse, both in (directed) unlabeled
dependency accuracy (42.3% vs. 47.5%)12 and unla-
beled bracketing F1 (72.9% vs. 77.6%), on WSJ10.

In constituent parsing, earlier Seginer (2007a, §6,
Table 1) built a fully-lexicalized grammar inducer

12On the same evaluation set (WSJ10), our context-sensitive
system without gold tags (Experiment #6, §5.2) scores 66.8%.

1287



that was competitive with DMV+CCM despite not
using gold tags. His CCL parser has since been
improved via a “zoomed learning” technique (Re-
ichart and Rappoport, 2010). Moreover, Abend et
al. (2010) reused CCL’s internal distributional rep-
resentation of words in a cognitively-motivated part-
of-speech inducer. Unfortunately their tagger did
not make it into Christodoulopoulos et al.’s (2010)
excellent and otherwise comprehensive evaluation.

Outside monolingual grammar induction, fully-
lexicalized statistical dependency transduction mod-
els have been trained from unannotated parallel bi-
texts for machine translation (Alshawi et al., 2000).
More recently, McDonald et al. (2011) demonstrated
an impressive alternative to grammar induction by
projecting reference parse trees from languages that
have annotations to ones that are resource-poor.13 It
uses graph-based label propagation over a bilingual
similarity graph for a sentence-aligned parallel cor-
pus (Das and Petrov, 2011), inducing part-of-speech
tags from a universal tag-set (Petrov et al., 2011).

Even in supervised parsing we are starting to see
a shift away from using gold tags. For example,
Alshawi et al. (2011) demonstrated good results for
mapping text to underspecified semantics via depen-
dencies without resorting to gold tags. And Petrov et
al. (2010, §4.4, Table 4) observed only a small per-
formance loss “going POS-less” in question parsing.

We are not aware of any systems that induce both
syntactic trees and their part-of-speech categories.
However, aside from the many systems that induce
trees from gold tags, there are also unsupervised
methods for inducing syntactic categories from gold
trees (Finkel et al., 2007; Pereira et al., 1993), as
well as for inducing dependencies from gold con-
stituent annotations (Sangati and Zuidema, 2009;
Chiang and Bikel, 2002). Considering that Headden
et al.’s (2008) study of part-of-speech taggers found
no correlation between standard tagging metrics and
the quality of induced grammars, it may be time for
a unified treatment of these very related syntax tasks.

13When the target language is English, however, their best ac-
curacy (projected from Greek) is low: 45.7% (McDonald et al.,
2011, §4, Table 2); tested on the same CoNLL 2007 evaluation
set (Nivre et al., 2007), our “punctuation” system with context-
sensitive induced tags (trained on WSJ45, without gold tags)
performs substantially better, scoring 51.6%. Note that this is
also an improvement over our system trained on the CoNLL set
using gold tags: 50.3% (Spitkovsky et al., 2011, §8, Table 6).

7 Discussion and Conclusions

Unsupervised word clustering techniques of Brown
et al. (1992) and Clark (2000) are well-suited to de-
pendency parsing with the DMV. Both methods out-
perform gold parts-of-speech in supervised modes.
And both can do better than monosemous clusters
derived from gold tags in unsupervised training. We
showed how Clark’s (2000) flat tags can be relaxed,
using context, with the resulting polysemous cluster-
ing outperforming gold part-of-speech tags for the
English dependency grammar induction task.

Monolingual evaluation is a significant flaw in our
methodology, however. One (of many) take-home
points made in Christodoulopoulos et al.’s (2010)
study is that results on one language do not neces-
sarily correlate with other languages.14 Assuming
that our results do generalize, it will still remain to
remove the present reliance on gold tokenization and
sentence boundary labels. Nevertheless, we feel that
eliminating gold tags is an important step towards
the goal of fully-unsupervised dependency parsing.

We have cast the utility of a categorization scheme
as a combination of two effects on parsing accuracy:
a synonymy effect and a polysemy effect. Results
of our experiments with both full and partial lexi-
calization suggest that grouping similar words (i.e.,
synonymy) is vital to grammar induction with the
DMV. This is consistent with an established view-
point, that simple tabulation of frequencies of words
participating in certain configurations cannot be reli-
ably used for comparing their likelihoods (Pereira et
al., 1993, §4.2): “The statistics of natural languages
is inherently ill defined. Because of Zipf’s law, there
is never enough data for a reasonable estimation of
joint object distributions.” Seginer’s (2007b, §1.4.4)
argument, however, is that the Zipfian distribution
— a property of words, not parts-of-speech —
should allow frequent words to successfully guide

14Furthermore, it would be interesting to know how sensitive
different head-percolation schemes (Yamada and Matsumoto,
2003; Johansson and Nugues, 2007) would be to gold versus
unsupervised tags, since the Magerman-Collins rules (Mager-
man, 1995; Collins, 1999) agree with gold dependency annota-
tions only 85% of the time, even for WSJ (Sangati and Zuidema,
2009). Proper intrinsic evaluation of dependency grammar in-
ducers is not yet a solved problem (Schwartz et al., 2011).

1288



parsing and learning: “A relatively small number of
frequent words appears almost everywhere and most
words are never too far from such a frequent word
(this is also the principle behind successful part-of-
speech induction).” We believe that it is important to
thoroughly understand how to reconcile these only
seemingly conflicting insights, balancing them both
in theory and in practice. A useful starting point may
be to incorporate frequency information in the pars-
ing models directly — in particular, capturing the
relationships between words of various frequencies.

The polysemy effect appears smaller but is less
controversial: Our experiments suggest that the pri-
mary drawback of the classic clustering schemes
stems from their one class per word nature — and
not a lack of supervision, as may be widely believed.
Monosemous groupings, even if they are themselves
derived from human-annotated syntactic categories,
simply cannot disambiguate words the way gold tags
can. By relaxing Clark’s (2000) flat clustering, us-
ing contextual cues, we improved dependency gram-
mar induction: directed accuracy on Section 23 (all
sentences) of the WSJ benchmark increased from
58.2% to 59.1% — from slightly worse to better than
with gold tags (58.4%, previous state-of-the-art).

Since Clark’s (2000) word clustering algorithm is
already context-sensitive in training, we suspect that
one could do better simply by preserving the polyse-
mous nature of its internal representation. Importing
the relevant distributions into a sequence tagger di-
rectly would make more sense than going through an
intermediate monosemous summary. And exploring
other uses of soft clustering algorithms — perhaps as
inputs to part-of-speech disambiguators — may be
another fruitful research direction. We believe that
a joint treatment of grammar and parts-of-speech in-
duction could fuel major advances in both tasks.

Acknowledgments

Partially funded by the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL),
under prime contract no. FA8750-09-C-0181, and by NSF, via
award #IIS-0811974. We thank Omri Abend, Spence Green,
David McClosky and the anonymous reviewers for many help-
ful comments on draft versions of this paper.

References

O. Abend, R. Reichart, and A. Rappoport. 2010. Im-
proved unsupervised POS induction through prototype
discovery. In ACL.

H. Alshawi, S. Bangalore, and S. Douglas. 2000. Learn-
ing dependency translation models as collections of
finite-state head transducers. Computational Linguis-
tics, 26.

H. Alshawi, P.-C. Chang, and M. Ringgaard. 2011. De-
terministic statistical mapping of sentences to under-
specied semantics. In IWCS.

H. Alshawi. 1996. Head automata for speech translation.
In ICSLP.

J. K. Baker. 1979. Trainable grammars for speech recog-
nition. In Speech Communication Papers for the 97th
Meeting of the Acoustical Society of America.

M. Banko and R. C. Moore. 2004. Part of speech tagging
in context. In COLING.

L. E. Baum. 1972. An inequality and associated maxi-
mization technique in statistical estimation for proba-
bilistic functions of Markov processes. In Inequalities.

R. Bod. 2006. An all-subtrees approach to unsupervised
parsing. In COLING-ACL.

P. F. Brown, V. J. Della Pietra, P. V. deSouza, J. C. Lai,
and R. L. Mercer. 1992. Class-based n-gram models
of natural language. Computational Linguistics, 18.

G. Carroll and E. Charniak. 1992. Two experiments on
learning probabilistic dependency grammars from cor-
pora. Technical report, Brown University.

D. Chiang and D. M. Bikel. 2002. Recovering latent
information in treebanks. In COLING.

C. Christodoulopoulos, S. Goldwater, and M. Steedman.
2010. Two decades of unsupervised POS induction:
How far have we come? In EMNLP.

A. Clark. 2000. Inducing syntactic categories by context
distribution clustering. In CoNLL-LLL.

M. Collins. 1999. Head-Driven Statistical Models for
Natural Language Parsing. Ph.D. thesis, University
of Pennsylvania.

B. Cramer. 2007. Limitations of current grammar induc-
tion algorithms. In ACL: Student Research.

D. Das and S. Petrov. 2011. Unsupervised part-of-
speech tagging with bilingual graph-based projections.
In ACL.

J. R. Finkel and C. D. Manning. 2009. Joint parsing and
named entity recognition. In NAACL-HLT.

J. R. Finkel, T. Grenager, and C. D. Manning. 2007. The
infinite tree. In ACL.

J. Gao and M. Johnson. 2008. A comparison of Bayesian
estimators for unsupervised Hidden Markov Model
POS taggers. In EMNLP.

1289



W. P. Headden, III, D. McClosky, and E. Charniak.
2008. Evaluating unsupervised part-of-speech tagging
for grammar induction. In COLING.

W. P. Headden, III, M. Johnson, and D. McClosky.
2009. Improving unsupervised dependency parsing
with richer contexts and smoothing. In NAACL-HLT.

G. Hinton and S. Roweis. 2003. Stochastic neighbor
embedding. In NIPS.

R. Johansson and P. Nugues. 2007. Extended
constituent-to-dependency conversion for English. In
NODALIDA.

D. Klein and C. D. Manning. 2004. Corpus-based induc-
tion of syntactic structure: Models of dependency and
constituency. In ACL.

D. Klein. 2005. The Unsupervised Learning of Natural
Language Structure. Ph.D. thesis, Stanford Univer-
sity.

T. Koo. 2010. Advances in Discriminative Dependency
Parsing. Ph.D. thesis, MIT.

J. Kupiec. 1992. Robust part-of-speech tagging using
a hidden Markov model. Computer Speech and Lan-
guage, 6.

D. M. Magerman. 1995. Statistical decision-tree models
for parsing. In ACL.

M. P. Marcus, B. Santorini, and M. A. Marcinkiewicz.
1993. Building a large annotated corpus of English:
The Penn Treebank. Computational Linguistics, 19.

R. McDonald, S. Petrov, and K. Hall. 2011. Multi-
source transfer of delexicalized dependency parsers.
In EMNLP.

B. Merialdo. 1994. Tagging English text with a proba-
bilistic model. Computational Linguistics, 20.

J. Nivre, J. Hall, S. Kübler, R. McDonald, J. Nils-
son, S. Riedel, and D. Yuret. 2007. The CoNLL
2007 shared task on dependency parsing. In EMNLP-
CoNLL.

M. A. Paskin. 2001. Grammatical bigrams. In NIPS.
F. Pereira, N. Tishby, and L. Lee. 1993. Distributional

clustering of English words. In ACL.
S. Petrov, P.-C. Chang, M. Ringgaard, and H. Alshawi.

2010. Uptraining for accurate deterministic question
parsing. In EMNLP.

S. Petrov, D. Das, and R. McDonald. 2011. A universal
part-of-speech tagset. In ArXiv.

R. Reichart and A. Rappoport. 2010. Improved fully un-
supervised parsing with zoomed learning. In EMNLP.

F. Sangati and W. Zuidema. 2009. Unsupervised meth-
ods for head assignments. In EACL.

H. Schütze. 1995. Distributional part-of-speech tagging.
In EACL.

R. Schwartz, O. Abend, R. Reichart, and A. Rappoport.
2011. Neutralizing linguistically problematic annota-
tions in unsupervised dependency parsing evaluation.
In ACL.

Y. Seginer. 2007a. Fast unsupervised incremental pars-
ing. In ACL.

Y. Seginer. 2007b. Learning Syntactic Structure. Ph.D.
thesis, University of Amsterdam.

B. Selman, H. A. Kautz, and B. Cohen. 1994. Noise
strategies for improving local search. In AAAI.

V. I. Spitkovsky, H. Alshawi, and D. Jurafsky. 2009.
Baby Steps: How “Less is More” in unsupervised de-
pendency parsing. In NIPS: Grammar Induction, Rep-
resentation of Language and Language Learning.

V. I. Spitkovsky, H. Alshawi, and D. Jurafsky. 2010a.
From Baby Steps to Leapfrog: How “Less is More” in
unsupervised dependency parsing. In NAACL-HLT.

V. I. Spitkovsky, H. Alshawi, D. Jurafsky, and C. D. Man-
ning. 2010b. Viterbi training improves unsupervised
dependency parsing. In CoNLL.

V. I. Spitkovsky, H. Alshawi, and D. Jurafsky. 2011.
Punctuation: Making a point in unsupervised depen-
dency parsing. In CoNLL.

H. Yamada and Y. Matsumoto. 2003. Statistical de-
pendency analysis with support vector machines. In
IWPT.

D. Yuret. 1998. Discovery of Linguistic Relations Using
Lexical Attraction. Ph.D. thesis, MIT.

1290


