



















































Classifying Sentences as Speech Acts in Message Board Posts


Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 748–758,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 27–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Classifying Sentences as Speech Acts in Message Board Posts

Ashequl Qadir and Ellen Riloff
School of Computing

University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112

{asheq,riloff}@cs.utah.edu

Abstract

This research studies the text genre of mes-
sage board forums, which contain a mix-
ture of expository sentences that present fac-
tual information and conversational sentences
that include communicative acts between the
writer and readers. Our goal is to create
sentence classifiers that can identify whether
a sentence contains a speech act, and can
recognize sentences containing four different
speech act classes: Commissives, Directives,
Expressives, and Representatives. We con-
duct experiments using a wide variety of fea-
tures, including lexical and syntactic features,
speech act word lists from external resources,
and domain-specific semantic class features.
We evaluate our results on a collection of mes-
sage board posts in the domain of veterinary
medicine.

1 Introduction

In the 1990’s, the natural language processing com-
munity shifted much of its attention to corpus-based
learning techniques. Since then, most of the text cor-
pora that have been annotated and studied are collec-
tions of expository text (e.g., news articles, scientific
literature, etc.). The intent of expository text is to
present or explain information to the reader. In re-
cent years, there has been a growing interest in text
genres that originate from Web sources, such as we-
blogs and social media sites (e.g., tweets). These
text genres offer new challenges for NLP, such as
the need to handle informal and loosely grammatical
text, but they also pose new opportunities to study

discourse and pragmatic phenomena that are funda-
mentally different in these genres.

Message boards are common on the WWW as a
forum where people ask questions and post com-
ments to members of a community. They are typ-
ically devoted to a specific topic or domain, such as
finance, genealogy, or Alzheimer’s disease. Some
message boards offer the opportunity to pose ques-
tions to domain experts, while other communities
are open to anyone who has an interest in the topic.

From a natural language processing perspective,
message board posts are an interesting hybrid text
genre because they consist of both expository text
and conversational text. Most obviously, the conver-
sations appear as a thread, where different people
respond to each other’s questions in a sequence of
posts. Studying the conversational threads, however,
is not the focus of this paper. Our research addresses
the issue of conversational pragmatics within indi-
vidual message board posts.

Most message board posts contain both exposi-
tory sentences as well as speech acts. The person
posting a message (the “writer”) often engages in
speech acts with the readers. The writer may explic-
itly greet the readers (“Hi everyone!”), request help
from the readers (“Anyone have a suggestion?”), or
commit to a future action (“I promise I will report
back soon.”). But most posts contain factual infor-
mation as well, such as general knowledge or per-
sonal history describing a situation, experience, or
predicament.

Our research goals are twofold: (1) to distin-
guish between expository sentences and speech act
sentences in message board posts, and (2) to clas-

748



sify speech act sentences into four types: Com-
missives, Directives, Expressives, and Representa-
tives, following Searle’s original taxonomy (Searle,
1976). Speech act classification could be useful
for many applications. Information extraction sys-
tems could benefit from filtering speech act sen-
tences (e.g., promises and questions) so that facts are
only extracted from the expository text. Identifying
Directive sentences could be used to summarize the
questions being asked in a forum over a period of
time. Representative sentences could be extracted
to highlight the conclusions and beliefs of domain
experts in response to a question.

In this paper, we present sentence classifiers that
can identify speech act sentences and classify them
as Commissive, Directive, Expressive, and Repre-
sentative. First, we explain how each speech act
class is manifested in message board posts, which
can be different from how they occur in spoken dia-
logue. Second, we train classifiers to identify speech
act sentences using a variety of lexical, syntactic,
and semantic features. Finally, we evaluate our sys-
tem on a collection of message board posts in the
domain of veterinary medicine.

2 Related Work

There has been relatively little work on applying
speech act theory to written text genres, and most
of the previous work has focused on email classi-
fication. Cohen et al. (2004) introduced the notion
of “email speech acts” defined as specific verb-noun
pairs following a pre-designed ontology. They ap-
proached the problem as a document classification
task. Goldstein and Sabin (2006) adopted this no-
tion of email acts (Cohen et al., 2004) but focused
on verb lexicons to classify them. Carvalho and
Cohen (2005) presented a classification scheme us-
ing a dependency network, capturing the sequential
correlations with the context emails using transition
probabilities from or to a target email. Carvalho and
Cohen (2006) later employed N-gram sequence fea-
tures to determine which N-grams are meaningfully
related to different email speech acts with a goal
towards improving their earlier email classification
based on the writer’s intention.

Lampert et al. (2006) performed speech act clas-
sification in email messages following a verbal re-

sponse modes (VRM) speech act taxonomy. They
also provided a comparison of VRM taxonomy with
Searle’s taxonomy (Searle, 1976) of speech act
classes. They evaluated several machine learning al-
gorithms using syntactic, morphological, and lexi-
cal features. Mildinhall and Noyes (2008) presented
a stochastic speech act model based on verbal re-
sponse modes (VRM) to classify email intentions.

Some research has considered speech act classes
in other means of online conversations. Twitchell
and Jr. (2004) and Twitchell et al. (2004) employed
speech act profiling by plotting potential dialogue
categories in a radar graph to classify conversa-
tions in instant messages and chat rooms. Nas-
tri et al. (2006) performed an empirical analysis of
speech acts in the away messages of instant mes-
senger services to achieve a better understanding of
the communication goals of such services. Ravi
and Kim (2007) employed speech act profiling in
online threaded discussions to determine message
roles and to identify threads with questions, answers,
and unanswered questions. They designed their own
speech act categories based on their analysis of stu-
dent interactions in discussion threads.

The work most closely related to ours is the re-
search of Jeong et al. (2009) on semi-supervised
speech act recognition in both emails and forums.
Like our work, their research also classifies indi-
vidual sentences, as opposed to entire documents.
However, they trained their classifier on spoken
telephone (SWBD-DAMSL corpus) and meeting
(MRDA corpus) conversations and mapped the la-
belled dialog act classes of these corpora to 12 di-
alog act classes that they found suitable for email
and forum text genres. These dialog act classes (ad-
dressed as speech acts by them) are somewhat differ-
ent from Searle’s original speech act classes. They
also used substantially different types of features
than we do, focusing primarily on syntactic subtree
structures.

3 Classifying Speech Acts in Message
Board Posts

3.1 Speech Act Class Definitions

Searle’s (Searle, 1976) early research on speech acts
was seminal work in natural language processing
that opened up a new way of thinking about con-

749



versational dialogue and communication. Our goal
was to try and use Searle’s original speech act def-
initions and categories as the basis for our work to
the greatest extent possible, allowing for some inter-
pretation as warranted by the WWW message board
text genre.

For the purposes of defining and evaluating our
work, we created detailed annotation guidelines for
four of Searle’s speech act classes that commonly
occur in message board posts: Commissives, Direc-
tives, Expressives, and Representatives. We omitted
the fifth of Searle’s original speech act classes, Dec-
larations, because we virtually never saw declara-
tive speech acts in our data set.1 The data set used in
our study is a collection of message board posts in
the domain of veterinary medicine. We designed our
definitions and guidelines to reflect language use in
the text genre of message board posts, trying to be as
domain-independent as possible so that these defini-
tions should also apply to message board texts rep-
resenting other topics. However, we give examples
from the veterinary domain to illustrate how these
speech act classes are manifested in our data set.

Commissives: A Commissive speech act oc-
curs when the speaker commits to a future course
of action. In conversation, common Commissive
speech acts are promises and threats. In message
boards, these types of Commissives are relatively
rare. However, we found many statements where the
main purpose was to confirm to the readers that the
writer would perform some action in the future. For
example, a doctor may write “I plan to do surgery on
this patient tomorrow” or “I will post the test results
when I get them later today”. We viewed such state-
ments as implicit commitments to the reader about
intended actions. We also considered decisions not
to take an action as Commissive speech acts (e.g., “I
will not do surgery on this cat because it would be
too risky.”). However, statements indicating that an
action will not occur because of circumstances be-
yond the writer’s control were considered to be fac-
tual statements and not speech acts (e.g., “I cannot
do an ultrasound because my machine is broken.”).

Directives: A Directive speech act occurs when
1Searle defines Declarative speech acts as statements that

bring about a change in status or condition to an object by virtue
of the statement itself. For example, a statement declaring war
or a statement that someone is fired.

the speaker expects the listener to do something as
a response. For example, the speaker may ask a
question, make a request, or issue an invitation. Di-
rective speech acts are common in message board
posts, especially in the initial post of each thread
when the writer explicitly requests help or advice re-
garding a specific topic. Many Directive sentences
are posed as questions, so they are easy to identify
by the presence of a question mark. However, the
language in message board forums is informal and
often ungrammatical, so many Directives are posed
as a question but do not end in a question mark (e.g.,
“What do you think.”). Furthermore, many Direc-
tive speech acts are not stated as a question but as
a request for assistance. For example, a doctor may
write “I need your opinion on what drug to give this
patient.” Finally, some sentences that end in ques-
tion marks are rhetorical in nature and do not repre-
sent a Directive speech act, such as “Can you believe
that?”.

Expressives: An Expressive speech act occurs in
conversation when a speaker expresses his or her
psychological state to the listener. Typical cases are
when the speaker thanks, apologizes, or welcomes
the listener. Expressive speech acts are common in
message boards because writers often greet readers
at the beginning of a post (“Hi everyone!”) or ex-
press gratitude for help from the readers (“I really
appreciate the suggestions.”). We also found Ex-
pressive speech acts in a variety of other contexts,
such as apologies.

Representatives: According to Searle, a Rep-
resentative speech act commits the speaker to the
truth of an expressed proposition. It represents the
speaker’s belief of something that can be evaluated
to be true or false. These types of speech acts were
less common in our data set, but some cases did ex-
ist. In the veterinary domain, we considered sen-
tences to be a Representative speech act when a
doctor explicitly confirmed a diagnosis or expressed
their suspicion or hypothesis about the presence (or
absence) of a disease or symptom. For example, if a
doctor writes that “I suspect the patient has pancre-
atitis.” then this represents the doctor’s own propo-
sition/belief about what the disease might be.

Many sentences in our data set are stated as fact
but could be reasonably inferred to be speech acts.
For example, suppose a doctor writes “The cat has

750



pancreatitis.”. It would be reasonable to infer that
the doctor writing the post diagnosed the cat with
pancreatitis. And in many cases, that is true. How-
ever, we saw many posts where that inference would
have been wrong. For example, the following sen-
tence might say “The cat was diagnosed by a pre-
vious vet but brought to me due to new complica-
tions” or “The cat was diagnosed with it 8 years
ago as a kitten in the animal shelter”. Consequently,
we were very conservative in labelling sentences as
Representative speech acts. Any sentence presented
as fact was not considered to be a speech act. A sen-
tence was only labelled as a Representative speech
act if the writer explicitly expressed his belief.

3.2 Features for Speech Act Classification

To create speech act classifiers, we designed a vari-
ety of lexical, syntactic, and semantic features. We
tried to capture linguistic properties associated with
speech act expressions as well as discourse prop-
erties associated with individual sentences and the
message board post as a whole. We also incorpo-
rated speech act word lists that were acquired from
external resources, and used two types of seman-
tic features to represent semantic entities associated
with the veterinary domain. Except for the semantic
features, all of our features are domain-independent
so should be able to recognize speech act sentences
across different domains. We experimented with
domain-specific semantic features to test our hy-
pothesis that Commissive speech acts can be asso-
ciated with domain-specific semantic entities.

For the purposes of analysis, we partition the fea-
ture set into three groups: Lexical and Syntactic
(LexSyn) Features, Speech Act Clue Features, and
Semantic Features. Unless otherwise noted, all of
the features had binary values indicating the pres-
ence or absence of that feature.

3.2.1 Lexical and Syntactic Features
We designed a variety of features to capture lexical
and syntactic properties of words and sentences. We
described the feature set below, with the features cat-
egorized based on the type of information that they
capture.

Unigrams: We created bag-of-word features rep-
resenting each unigram in the training set. Numbers
were replaced with a special # token.

Personal Pronouns: We defined three features to
look for the presence of a 1st person pronoun, 2nd
person pronoun, and 3rd person pronoun. We in-
cluded the subjective, objective, and possessive form
of each pronoun (e.g., he, him, and his).

Tense: Speech acts such as Commissives can be
related to tense. We created three features to iden-
tify verb phrases that occur in the past, present, or
future tense. To recognize tense, we followed the
rules defined by Allen (1995).

Tense + Person: We created four features that re-
quire the presence of a first person subjective pro-
noun (I, we) within a two word window on the left of
a verb phrase matching one of four tense representa-
tions: past, present, future, and present progressive
(a subset of the more general present tense represen-
tation).

Modals: One feature indicates whether the sen-
tence contains a modal (may, must, shall, will,
might, should, would, could).

Infinitive VP: One feature looks for an infinitive
verb phrase (‘to’ followed by a verb) that is preceded
by a first person pronoun (I, we) within a three word
window on the left. This feature tries to capture
common Commissive expressions (e.g., “I definitely
plan to do the test tomorrow.”).

Plan Phrases: Commissives are often expressed
as a plan, so we created a feature that recognizes
four types of plan expressions: “I am going to”, “I
am planning to”, “I plan to”, and “My plan is to”.

Sentence contains Early Punctuation: One fea-
ture checks for the following punctuation marks
within the first three tokens of the sentence: , : ! This
feature was designed to recognize greetings, such as:
“Hi,” , or “Hiya everyone !”.

Sentence begins with Modal/Verb: One feature
checks if a sentence begins with a modal or verb.
The intuition is to capture interrogative and impera-
tive sentences, since they are likely to be Directives.

Sentence begins with WH Question: One fea-
ture checks if a sentence begins with a WH question
word (Who, When, Where, What, Which, What,
How).

Neighboring Question: One feature checks
whether the following sentence contains a question
mark ‘?’. We observed that in message boards, Di-
rectives often occur in clusters.

751



Sentence Position: Four binary features repre-
sent the relative position of the sentence in the post.
One feature indicates whether it is the first sentence,
one feature indicates whether it is the last sentence,
one feature indicates whether it is the second to last
sentence, and one feature indicates whether the sen-
tence occurs in the bottom 25% of the message. The
motivation for these features is that Expressives of-
ten occur at the beginning and end of the post, and
Directives tend to occur toward the end.

Number of Verbs: One feature represents the
number of verbs in the sentence using four possible
values: 0, 1, 2, >2. Some speech acts classes (e.g.,
Expressives) may occur with no verbs, and rarely
occur in long, complex sentences.

3.2.2 Speech Act Word Clues

We collected speech act word lists (mostly verbs)
from two external sources. In Searle’s original pa-
per (Searle, 1976), he listed words that he consid-
ered to be indicative of speech acts. We discarded
a few that we considered to be overly general, and
we added a few additional words. We also collected
a list of speech act verbs published in (Wierzbicka,
1987). The details for these speech act clue lists are
given below. Our system recognized all derivations
of these words.

Searle Keywords: We created one feature for
each speech act class. The Representative keywords
were: (hypothesize, insist, boast, complain, con-
clude, deduce, diagnose, and claim). We discarded 3
words from Searle’s list (suggest, call, believe) and
added 2 new words, assume and suspect. The Direc-
tive keywords were: (ask, order, command, request,
beg, plead, pray, entreat, invite, permit, advise,
dare, defy, challenge). We added the word please.
The Expressives keywords were: (thank, apolo-
gize, congratulate, condole, deplore, welcome). We
added the words appreciate and sorry. Searle did
not provide any hint on possible indicator words for
Commissives, so we manually defined five likely
Commissive keywords: (plan, commit, promise, to-
morrow, later).

Wierzbicka Verbs: We created one feature that
included 228 speech act verbs listed in the book
“English speech act verbs: a semantic dictionary”

(Wierzbicka, 1987)2.

3.2.3 Semantic Features
All of the previous features are domain-

independent and should be useful for identifying
speech acts sentences across many domains. How-
ever, we hypothesized that semantic entities may
correlate with speech acts within a particular do-
main. For example, consider medical domains. Rep-
resentative speech acts may involve diagnoses and
hypotheses regarding diseases and symptoms. Sim-
ilarly, Commissive speech acts may reveal a doc-
tor’s plan or intention regarding the administration
of drugs or tests. Thus, it may be beneficial for a
classifier to know whether a sentence contains cer-
tain semantic entities. We experimented with two
different sources of semantic information.

Semantic Lexicon: Basilisk (Thelen and Riloff,
2002) is a bootstrapping algorithm that has been
used to induce semantic lexicons for terrorist events
(Thelen and Riloff, 2002), biomedical concepts
(McIntosh, 2010), and subjective/objective nouns
for opinion analysis (Riloff et al., 2003). We
ran Basilisk over our collection of 15,383 veteri-
nary message board posts to create a semantic lex-
icon for veterinary medicine. As input, Basilisk
requires seed words for each semantic category.
To obtain seeds, we parsed the corpus using a
noun phrase chunker, sorted the head nouns by fre-
quency, and manually identified the 20 most fre-
quent nouns belonging to four semantic categories:
DISEASE/SYMPTOM, DRUG, TEST, and TREAT-
MENT.

However, the induced TREATMENT lexicon was
of relatively poor quality so we did not use it. The
DISEASE/SYMPTOM lexicon appeared to be of good
quality, but it did not improve the performance of
our speech act classifiers. We suspect that this is due
to the fact that diseases were not distinguised from
symptoms in our lexicon.3 Representative speech
acts are typically associated with disease diagnoses

2openlibrary.org/b/OL2413134M/English_
speech_act_verbs

3We induced a single lexicon for diseases and symptoms be-
cause it is difficult to draw a clear line between them seman-
tically. A veterinary consultant explained to us that the same
term (e.g., diabetes) may be considered a symptom in one con-
text if it is secondary to another condition (e.g., pancreatitis) but
a disease in a different context if it is the primary diagnosis.

752



and hypotheses, rather than individual symptoms.
In the end, we only used the DRUG and TEST se-

mantic lexicon in our classifiers. We used all 1000
terms in the DRUG lexicon, but only used the top
200 TEST words because the quality of the lexicon
seemed questionable after that point.

Semantic Tags: We also used bootstrapped con-
textual semantic taggers (Huang and Riloff, 2010)
that had been previously trained for the domain of
veterinary medicine. These taggers assign seman-
tic class labels to noun phrase instances based on
the surrounding context in a sentence. The tag-
gers were trained on 4,629 veterinary message board
posts using 10 seed words for each semantic cate-
gory (see (Huang and Riloff, 2010) for details). To
ensure good precision, only tags that have a confi-
dence value ≥ 1.0 were used. Our speech act classi-
fiers used the tags associated with two semantic cat-
egories: DRUG and TEST.

3.3 Classification

To create our classifiers, we used the Weka (Hall et
al., 2009) machine learning toolkit. We used Sup-
port Vector Machines (SVMs) with a polynomial
kernel and the default settings supplied by Weka.
Because a sentence can include multiple speech acts,
we created a set of binary classifiers, one for each of
the four speech act classes. All four classifiers were
applied to each sentence, so a sentence could be as-
signed multiple speech act classes.

4 Evaluation

4.1 Data Set

Our data set consists of message board posts from
the Veterinary Information Network (VIN), which is
a web site (www.vin.com) for professionals in vet-
erinary medicine. Among other things, VIN hosts
message board forums where veterinarians and other
veterinary professionals can discuss issues and pose
questions to each other. Over half of the small an-
imal veterinarians in the U.S. and Canada use the
VIN web site.

We obtained 15,383 VIN message board threads
representing three topics: cardiology, endocrinol-
ogy, and feline internal medicine. We did basic
cleaning, removing html tags and tokenizing num-
bers. We then applied the Stanford part-of-speech

tagger (Toutanova et al., 2003) to each sentence to
obtain part-of-speech tags for the words. For our ex-
periments, we randomly selected 150 message board
threads from this collection. Since the goal of our
work was to study speech acts in sentences, and not
the conversational dialogue between different writ-
ers, we used only the initial post of each thread.
These 150 message board posts contained a total of
1,956 sentences, with an average of 13.04 sentences
per post. In the next section, we explain how we
manually annotated each sentence in our data set to
create gold standard speech act labels.

4.2 Gold Standard Annotations

To create training and evaluation data for our re-
search, we asked two human annotators to manually
label sentences in our message board posts. Iden-
tifying speech acts is not always obvious, even to
people, so we gave them detailed annotation guide-
lines describing the four speech act classes discussed
in Section 3.1. Then we gave them the same set of
50 message board posts from our collection to an-
notate independently. Each annotator was told to
assign one or more speech act classes to each sen-
tence (COM, DIR, EXP, REP), or to label the sen-
tence as having no speech acts (NONE). The vast
majority of sentences had either no speech acts or
at most one speech act, but a small number of sen-
tences contained multiple types of speech acts.

We measured the inter-annotator agreement of the
two human judges using the kappa (κ) score (Car-
letta, 1996). However, kappa agreement scores are
only applicable to labelling schemes where each in-
stance receives a single label. Therefore we com-
puted kappa agreement in two different ways to look
at the results from two different perspectives. In the
first scheme, we discarded the small number of sen-
tences that had multiple speech act labels and com-
puted kappa on the rest.4 This produced a kappa
score of .95, suggesting extremely high agreement.
However, over 70% of the sentences in our data set
have no speech act at all, so NONE was by far the
most common label. Consequently, this agreement
score does not necessarily reflect how consistently
the judges agreed on the four speech act classes.

4Of the 594 sentences in these 50 posts, only 22 sentences
contained multiple speech act classes.

753



In the second scheme, we computed kappa for
each speech act category independently. For each
category C, the judges were considered to be in
agreement if both of them assigned category C to
the sentence or if neither of the judges assigned cat-
egory C to the sentence. Table 1 shows the κ agree-
ment scores using this approach.

Speech Act Kappa (κ) score
Expressive .97
Directive .94
Commissive .81
Representative .77

Table 1: Inter-annotator (κ) agreement

Inter-annotator agreement was very high for both
the Expressive and Directive classes. Agreement
was lower for the Commissive and Representative
classes, but still relatively good so we felt comfort-
able that we had high-quality annotations.

To create our final data set, the two judges adjudi-
cated their disagreements on this set of 50 posts. We
then asked each annotator to label an additional (dif-
ferent) set of 50 posts each. All together, this gave
us a gold standard data set consisting of 150 anno-
tated message board posts. Table 2 shows the distri-
bution of speech act labels in our data set. 71% of
the sentences did not include any speech acts. These
were usually expository sentences containing factual
information. 29% of the sentences included one or
more speech acts, so nearly 13 of the sentences were
conversational in nature. Directive and Expressive
speech acts are by far the most common, with nearly
26% of all sentences containing one of these speech
acts. Commissive and Representative speech acts
are less common, each occurring in less than 3% of
the sentences.5

4.3 Experimental Results

4.3.1 Speech Act Filtering
For our first experiment, we created a speech act

filtering classifier to distinguish sentences that con-
tain one or more speech acts from sentences that do
not contain any speech acts. Sentences labelled as

5These numbers do not add up to 100% because some sen-
tences contain multiple speech acts.

Speech Act # sentences distribution
None 1397 71.42%
Directive 311 15.90%
Expressive 194 9.92%
Representative 57 2.91%
Commissive 51 2.61%

Table 2: Speech act class distribution in our data set.

having one or more speech acts were positive in-
stances, and sentences labelled as NONE were neg-
ative instances. Speech act filtering could be useful
for many applications, such as information extrac-
tion systems that only seek to extract facts. For ex-
ample, information may be posed as a question (in
a Directive) rather than a fact, information may be
mentioned as part of a future plan (in a Commis-
sive) that has not actually happened yet, or informa-
tion may be stated as a hypothesis or suspicion (in a
Representative) rather than as a fact.

We performed 10-fold cross validation on our set
of 150 annotated message board posts. Initially, we
used all of the features defined in Section 3.2. How-
ever, during the course of our research we discov-
ered that only a small subset of the lexical and syn-
tactic features seemed to be useful, and that remov-
ing the unnecessary features improved performance.
So we created a subset of minimal lexsyn features,
which will be described in Section 4.3.2. For speech
act filtering, we used the minimal lexsyn features
plus the speech act clues and semantic features.6

Class P R F
Speech Act .86 .83 .84
No Speech Act .93 .95 .94

Table 3: Precision, Recall, F-measure for speech act fil-
tering.

Table 3 shows the performance for speech act
filtering with respect to Precision (P), Recall (R),
and F-measure score (F).7 The classifier performed
well, recognizing 83% of the speech act sentences
with 86% precision, and 95% of the expository (no

6This is the same feature set used to produce the results for
row E of Table 4.

7We computed an F1 score with equal weighting of preci-
sion and recall.

754



Commissives Directives Expressives Representatives
Features P R F P R F P R F P R F

Baselines
Com baseline .45 .08 .14 - - - - - - - - -
Dir baseline - - - .97 .73 .83 - - - - - -
Exp baseline 1 - - - - - - .58 .18 .28 - - -
Exp baseline 2 - - - - - - .97 .86 .91 - - -
Rep baseline - - - - - - - - - 1.0 .05 .10

Classifiers
U Unigram .45 .20 .27 .87 .84 .85 .97 .88 .92 .32 .12 .18
A U+all lexsyn .52 .33 .40 .87 .84 .86 .98 .88 .92 .30 .14 .19
B U+minimal lexsyn .59 .33 .42 .87 .85 .86 .98 .88 .92 .32 .14 .20
C B+speechActClues .57 .31 .41 .86 .84 .85 .97 .91 .94 .33 .16 .21
D C+semTest .64 .35 .46 .87 .84 .85 .97 .91 .94 .33 .16 .21
E D+semDrug .63 .39 .48 .86 .84 .85 .97 .91 .94 .32 .16 .21

Table 4: Precision, Recall, F-measure for four speech act classes. The highest F score for each category appears in
boldface.

speech act) sentences with 93% precision.

4.3.2 Speech Act Categorization

BASELINES

Our next set of experiments focused on labelling
sentences with the four specific speech act classes:
Commissive, Directive. Expressive, and Represen-
tative. To assess the difficulty of identifying each
speech act category, we created several simple base-
lines using our intuitions about each category.

For Commissives, we created a heuristic to cap-
ture the most obvious cases of future tense (because
Commissive speech acts represent a writer’s com-
mitment toward a future course of action). For ex-
ample, the presence of the phrases ‘I will’ and ‘I
shall’ were hypothesized by Cohen et al. (2004) to
be useful bigram clues for Commissives. This base-
line looks for future tense verb phrases with a 1st
person pronoun within one or two words preceding
the verb phrase. The Com baseline row of Table 4
shows the results for this heuristic, which obtained
8% recall with 45% precision. The heuristic applied
to only 9 sentences in our test set, 4 of which con-
tained a Commissive speech act.

Directive speech acts are often questions, so we
created a baseline system that labels all sentences
containing a question mark as a Directive. The Dir
baseline row of Table 4 shows that 97% of sentences

with a question mark were indeed Directives.8 But
only 73% of the Directive sentences contained a
question mark. The remaining 27% of Directives
did not contain a question mark and generally fell
into two categories. Some sentences asked a ques-
tion but the writer ended the sentence with a period
(e.g., “Has anyone seen this before.”). And many di-
rectives were expressed as requests rather than ques-
tions (e.g., “Let me know if anyone has a sugges-
tion.”).

For Expressives, we implemented two baselines.
Exp baseline 1 simply looks for an exclamation
mark, but this heuristic did not work well (18% re-
call with 58% precision) because exclamation marks
were often used for general emphasis (e.g., “The
owner is frustrated with cleaning up urine!”). Exp
baseline 2 looks for the presence of four common
expressive words (appreciate, hi, hello, thank), in-
cluding morphological variations of appreciate and
thank. This baseline produced very good results,
86% recall with 97% precision. Obviously a small
set of common expressions account for most of the
Expressive speech acts in our corpus. However, the
word “hi” did produce some false hits because it was
used as a shorthand for “high”, usually when report-
ing test results (e.g., “hi calcium”).

8235 sentences contained a question mark, and 227 of them
were Directives.

755



Finally, as a baseline for the Representative class
we simply looked for the words diagnose(d) and sus-
pect(ed). The Rep baseline row of Table 4 shows
that this heuristic was 100% accurate, but only pro-
duced 5% recall (matching 3 of the 57 Representa-
tive sentences in our test set).

CLASSIFIER RESULTS

The bottom portion of Table 4 shows the results
for our classifiers. As we explained in Section 3.3,
we created one classifier for each speech act cate-
gory, and all four classifiers were applied to each
sentence. So a sentence could receive anywhere
from 0-4 speech act labels indicating how many dif-
ferent types of speech acts appeared in the sentence.
We trained and evaluated each classifier using 10-
fold cross-validation on our gold standard data set.

The Unigram (U) row shows the performance of
classifiers that use only unigram features. For Di-
rectives, we see a 2% F-score improvement over the
baseline, which reflects a recall gain of 11% but
a corresponding precision loss of 10%. The uni-
grams are clearly helpful in identifying many Direc-
tive sentences that do not end in a question mark,
but at some cost to accuracy. For Expressives, the
unigram classifier achieves an F score of 92%, iden-
tifying slightly more Expressive sentences than the
baseline with the same level of precision. For Com-
missives and Representatives, the unigram classi-
fiers performed susbtantially better than their corre-
sponding baseline systems, but performance is still
relatively weak.

Row A (U+ all lexsyn) in Table 4 shows the re-
sults using unigram features plus all of the lexical
and syntactic features described in Section 3.2.1.
The lexical and syntactic features dramatically im-
prove performance on Commissives, increasing F
score from 27% to 40%, and they produce a 2% re-
call gain for Representatives but with a correspond-
ing loss of precision.

However, we observed that only a few of the lex-
ical and syntactic features had much impact on per-
formance. We experimented with different subsets
of the features and obtained even better performance
when using just 10 of them, which we will refer to as
the minimal lexsyn features. The minimal lexsyn fea-
ture set consists of the 4 Tense+Person features, the
Early Punctuation feature, the Sentence begins with

Modal/Verb feature, and the 4 Sentence Position fea-
tures. Row B shows the results using unigram fea-
tures plus only these minimal lexsyn features. Preci-
sion improves for Commissives by an additional 7%
and Representatives by 2% when using only these
lexical and syntactic features. Consequently, we use
the minimal lexsyn features for the rest of our exper-
iments.

Row C shows the results of adding the speech act
clue words (see Section 3.2.2) to the feature set used
in Row B. The speech act clue words produced an
additional recall gain of 3% for Expressives and 2%
for Representatives, although performance on Com-
missives dropped 2% in both recall and precision.

Rows D and E show the results of adding the se-
mantic features. We added one semantic category
at a time to measure the impact of them separately.
Row D adds two semantic features for the TEST cat-
egory, one from the Basilisk lexicon and one from
the semantic tagger. The TEST semantic features
produced an F-score gain of 5% for Commissives,
improving recall by 4% and precision by 7%. Row
E adds two semantic features for the DRUG category.
The DRUG features produced an additional F-score
gain of 2% for Commissives, improving recall by
4% with a slight drop in precision.

4.4 Analysis
Together, the TEST and DRUG semantic features dra-
matically improved the classifier’s ability to recog-
nize Commissive speech acts, increasing its F score
from 41% → 48%. This result demonstrates that
in the domain of veterinary medicine, some types
of semantic entities are associated with speech acts.
Our intuition behind this result is that commitments
are usually related to future actions. In veterinary
medicine, TESTS and DRUGS are associated with ac-
tions performed by doctors. Doctors help their pa-
tients by prescribing or administering drugs and by
conducting tests. So these semantic entities may
serve as a proxy to implicitly represent actions that
the doctor has done or may do. In future work, ex-
plicitly recognizing actions and events many be a
worthwhile avenue to further improve results.

We achieved good success at identifying both Di-
rectives and Expressives, although simple heuristics
also perform well on these categories. We showed
that training a Directive classifier can help to iden-

756



tify Directive sentences that do not end with a ques-
tion mark, although at the cost of some precision.

The Commissive speech act class benefitted the
most from the rich feature set. Unigrams are clearly
not sufficient to identify Commissive sentences.
Many different types of clues seem to be important
for recognizing these sentences. The improvements
obtained from adding semantic features also sug-
gests that domain-specific semantics can be useful
for recognizing some speech acts. However, there is
still ample room for improvement, illustrating that
speech act classification is a challenging problem.

Representative speech acts were by far the most
difficult to recognize. We believe that there are
several reasons for their low performance. First,
Representatives were sparse in the data set, occur-
ring in only 2.91% of the sentences. Consequently,
the classifier had relatively few positive training
instances. Second, Representatives had the low-
est inter-annotator agreement, indicating that human
judges had difficulty recognizing these speech acts
too. The judges often disagreed about whether a
hypothesis or suspicion was the writer’s own belief
or whether it was stated as a fact reflecting general
medical knowledge. The message board text genre
is especially challenging in this regard because the
writer is often presumed to be expressing his/her be-
liefs even when the writer does not explicitly say so.
Finally, our semantic features could not distinguish
between diseases and symptoms. Access to a re-
source that can reliably identify disease terms could
potentially improve performance in this domain.

5 Conclusions

Our goal was to identify speech act sentences in
message board posts and to classify the sentences
with respect to four categories in Searle’s (1976)
speech act taxonomy. We achieved good results for
speech act filtering and the identification of Direc-
tive and Expressive speech act sentences. We found
that Representative and Commissive speech acts are
much more difficult to identify, although the per-
formance of our Commissive classifier substantially
improved with the addition of lexical, syntactic, and
semantic features. Except for the semantic class
information, our feature set is domain-independent
and could be used to recognize speech act sentences

in message boards for any domain. Furthermore, our
features only rely on part-of-speech tags and do not
require parsing, which is of practical importance for
text genres such as message boards that are littered
with ungrammatical text, typos, and shorthand nota-
tions.

In future work, we believe that segmenting sen-
tences into clauses may help to train classifiers more
precisely. Ultimately, we would like to identify
the speech act expressions themselves because some
sentences contain speech acts as well as factual in-
formation. Extracting the speech act expressions
and clauses from message boards and similar text
genres could provide better tracking of questions
and answers in web forums and be used for sum-
marization.

6 Acknowledgments

We gratefully acknowledge that this research was
supported in part by the National Science Founda-
tion under grant IIS-1018314. Any opinions, find-
ings, and conclusion or recommendations expressed
in this material are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the view of the U.S. government.

References
James Allen. 1995. Natural language understanding

(2nd ed.). Benjamin-Cummings Publishing Co., Inc.,
Redwood City, CA, USA.

Jean Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on classifi-
cation tasks: the kappa statistic. Comput. Linguist.,
22:249–254, June.

Vitor R. Carvalho and William W. Cohen. 2005. On the
collective classification of email ”speech acts”. In SI-
GIR ’05: Proceedings of the 28th annual international
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development
in information retrieval, pages 345–352, New York,
NY, USA. ACM Press.

Vitor R. Carvalho and William W. Cohen. 2006. Improv-
ing ”email speech acts” analysis via n-gram selection.
In Proceedings of the HLT-NAACL 2006 Workshop on
Analyzing Conversations in Text and Speech, ACTS
’09, pages 35–41, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

William W. Cohen, Vitor R. Carvalho, and Tom M.
Mitchell. 2004. Learning to classify email into
“speech acts”. In EMNLP, pages 309–316. ACL.

Jade Goldstein and Roberta Evans Sabin. 2006. Using
speech acts to categorize email and identify email gen-

757



res. In Proceedings of the 39th Annual Hawaii Inter-
national Conference on System Sciences - Volume 03,
pages 50.2–, Washington, DC, USA. IEEE Computer
Society.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H. Witten.
2009. The weka data mining software: an update.
SIGKDD Explor. Newsl., 11:10–18, November.

Ruihong Huang and Ellen Riloff. 2010. Inducing
domain-specific semantic class taggers from (almost)
nothing. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL
’10, pages 275–285, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Minwoo Jeong, Chin-Yew Lin, and Gary Geunbae Lee.
2009. Semi-supervised speech act recognition in
emails and forums. In Proceedings of the 2009 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing: Volume 3 - Volume 3, EMNLP ’09, pages
1250–1259, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Andrew Lampert, Robert Dale, and Cecile Paris. 2006.
Classifying speech acts using verbal response modes.
In Proceedings of the 2006 Australasian Language
Technology Workshop (ALTW2006), pages 34–41.
Sydney Australia : ALTA.

Tara McIntosh. 2010. Unsupervised discovery of neg-
ative categories in lexicon bootstrapping. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP ’10,
pages 356–365, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

John Mildinhall and Jan Noyes. 2008. Toward a stochas-
tic speech act model of email behavior. In CEAS.

Jacqueline Nastri, Jorge Pena, and Jeffrey T. Hancock.
2006. The construction of away messages: A speech
act analysis. J. Computer-Mediated Communication,
pages 1025–1045.

Sujith Ravi and Jihie Kim. 2007. Profiling student inter-
actions in threaded discussions with speech act classi-
fiers. In Proceeding of the 2007 conference on Arti-
ficial Intelligence in Education: Building Technology
Rich Learning Contexts That Work, pages 357–364,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, The Netherlands. IOS
Press.

Ellen Riloff, Janyce Wiebe, and Theresa Wilson. 2003.
Learning subjective nouns using extraction pattern
bootstrapping. In Proceedings of the seventh confer-
ence on Natural language learning at HLT-NAACL
2003 - Volume 4, CONLL ’03, pages 25–32, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

John R. Searle. 1976. A classification of illocutionary
acts. Language in Society, 5(1):pp. 1–23.

Michael Thelen and Ellen Riloff. 2002. A bootstrapping
method for learning semantic lexicons using extrac-
tion pattern contexts. In Proceedings of the ACL-02
conference on Empirical methods in natural language
processing - Volume 10, EMNLP ’02, pages 214–221,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, Christopher D. Manning,
and Yoram Singer. 2003. Feature-rich part-of-speech
tagging with a cyclic dependency network. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics on Human Language Technology - Volume 1,
NAACL ’03, pages 173–180, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Douglas P. Twitchell and Jay F. Nunamaker Jr. 2004.
Speech act profiling: a probabilistic method for ana-
lyzing persistent conversations and their participants.
In System Sciences, 2004. Proceedings of the 37th An-
nual Hawaii International Conference on, pages 1–10,
January.

Douglas P. Twitchell, Mark Adkins, Jay F. Nunamaker
Jr., and Judee K. Burgoon. 2004. Using speech act
theory to model conversations for automated classi-
fication and retrieval. In Proceedings of the Inter-
national Working Conference Language Action Per-
spective Communication Modelling (LAP 2004), pages
121–130.

A. Wierzbicka. 1987. English speech act verbs: a se-
mantic dictionary. Academic Press, Sydney, Orlando.

758


