



















































Cache-based Document-level Statistical Machine Translation


Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 909–919,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 27–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Cache-based Document-level Statistical Machine Translation 

 
 

Zhengxian Gong1 Min Zhang2 Guodong Zhou1* 
1 School of Computer Science and Technology 
Soochow University, Suzhou, China 215006 

2 Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore 138632 
{zhxgong, gdzhou}@suda.edu.cn mzhang@i2r.a-star.edu.sg 

  
 

Abstract 

Statistical machine translation systems are 
usually trained on a large amount of bilingual 
sentence pairs and translate one sentence at a 
time, ignoring document-level information. In 
this paper, we propose a cache-based approach 
to document-level translation. Since caches 
mainly depend on relevant data to supervise 
subsequent decisions, it is critical to fill the 
caches with highly-relevant data of a reasonable 
size. In this paper, we present three kinds of 
caches to store relevant document-level infor-
mation: 1) a dynamic cache, which stores bilin-
gual phrase pairs from the best translation 
hypotheses of previous sentences in the test 
document; 2) a static cache, which stores rele-
vant bilingual phrase pairs extracted from simi-
lar bilingual document pairs (i.e. source 
documents similar to the test document and 
their corresponding target documents) in the 
training parallel corpus; 3) a topic cache, which 
stores the target-side topic words related with 
the test document in the source-side. In particu-
lar, three new features are designed to explore 
various kinds of document-level information in 
above three kinds of caches. Evaluation shows 
the effectiveness of our cache-based approach 
to document-level translation with the perfor-
mance improvement of 0.81 in BLUE score 
over Moses. Especially, detailed analysis and 
discussion are presented to give new insights to 
document-level translation. 

1 Introduction 
During last decade, tremendous work has been 
done to improve the quality of statistical machine 
__________________ 
* Corresponding author. 

translation (SMT) systems. However, there is still 
a huge performance gap between the state-of-the-
art SMT systems and human translators. Bond 
(2002) suggested nine ways to improve machine 
translation by imitating the best practices of human 
translators (Nida, 1964), with parsing the entire 
document before translation as the first priority. 
However, most SMT systems still treat parallel 
corpora as a list of independent sentence-pairs and 
ignore document-level information.  

Document-level information can and should be 
used to help document-level machine translation. 
At least, the topic of a document can help choose 
specific translation candidates, since when taken 
out of the context from their document, some 
words, phrases and even sentences may be rather 
ambiguous and thus difficult to understand. Anoth-
er advantage of document-level machine transla-
tion is its ability in keeping a consistent translation.  

However, document-level translation has drawn 
little attention from the SMT research community.  
The reasons are manifold. First of all, most of pa-
rallel corpora lack the annotation of document 
boundaries (Tam, 2007). Secondly, although it is 
easy to incorporate a new feature into the classical 
log-linear model (Och, 2003), it is difficult to cap-
ture document-level information and model it via 
some simple features. Thirdly, reference transla-
tions of a test document written by human transla-
tors tend to have flexible expressions in order to 
avoid producing monotonous texts. This makes the 
evaluation of document-level SMT systems ex-
tremely difficult.  

Tiedemann (2010) showed that the repetition 
and consistency are very important when modeling 
natural language and translation. He proposed to 
employ cache-based language and translation 
models in a phrase-based SMT system for domain 

909



 

adaptation. Especially, the cache in the translation 
model dynamically grows up by adding bilingual 
phrase pairs from the best translation hypotheses of 
previous sentences. One problem with the dynamic 
cache is that those initial sentences in a test docu-
ment may not benefit from the dynamic cache. 
Another problem is that the dynamic cache may be 
prone to noise and cause error propagation. This 
explains why the dynamic cache fails to much im-
prove the performance. 

This paper proposes a cache-based approach for 
document-level SMT using a static cache and a 
dynamic cache. While such a approach applies to 
both phrase-based and syntax-based SMT, this pa-
per focuses on phrase-based SMT. In particular, 
the static cache is employed to store relevant bilin-
gual phrase pairs extracted from similar bilingual 
document pairs (i.e. source documents similar to 
the test document and their target counterparts) in 
the training parallel corpus while the dynamic 
cache is employed to store bilingual phrase pairs 
from the best translation hypotheses of previous 
sentences in the test document. In this way, our 
cache-based approach can provide useful data at 
the beginning of the translation process via the 
static cache. As the translation process continues, 
the dynamic cache grows and contributes more and 
more to the translation of subsequent sentences. 

Our motivation to employ similar bilingual doc-
ument pairs in the training parallel corpus is simple: 
a human translator often collects similar bilingual 
document pairs to help translation. If there are 
translation pairs of sentences/phrases/words in 
similar bilingual document pairs, this makes the 
translation much easier. Given a test document, our 
approach imitates this procedure by first retrieving 
similar bilingual document pairs from the training 
parallel corpus, which has often been applied in 
IR-based adaptation of SMT systems (Zhao et 
al.2004; Hildebrand et al.2005; Lu et al.2007) and 
then extracting bilingual phrase pairs from similar 
bilingual document pairs to store them in a static 
cache. 

However, such a cache-based approach may in-
troduce many noisy/unnecessary bilingual phrase 
pairs in both the static and dynamic caches. In or-
der to resolve this problem, this paper employs a 
topic model to weaken those noisy/unnecessary 
bilingual phrase pairs by recommending the de-
coder to choose most likely phrase pairs according 
to the topic words extracted from the target-side 

text of similar bilingual document pairs. Just like a 
human translator, even with a big bilingual dictio-
nary, is often confused when he meets a source 
phrase which corresponds to several possible trans-
lations. In this case, some topic words can help 
reduce the perplexity. In this paper, the topic words 
are stored in a topic cache. In some sense, it has 
the similar effect of employing an adaptive lan-
guage model with the advantage of avoiding the 
interpolation of a global language model with a 
specific domain language model. 

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 reviews the related work. Section 3 
presents our cache-based approach to document-
level SMT. Section 4 presents the experimental 
results. Session 5 gives new insights on cache-
based document-level translation. Finally, we 
conclude this paper in Section 6. 

2 Related work 
There are only a few studies on document-level 
SMT. Representative work includes Zhao et al. 
(2006), Tam et al. (2007), Carpuat (2009). 

Zhao et al. (2006) assumed that the parallel sen-
tence pairs within a document pair constitute a 
mixture of hidden topics and each word pair fol-
lows a topic-specific bilingual translation model. It 
shows that the performance of word alignment can 
be improved with the help of document-level in-
formation, which indirectly improves the quality of 
SMT.  

Tam et al. (2007) proposed a bilingual-LSA 
model on the basis of a parallel document corpus 
and built a topic-based language model for each 
language. By automatically building the corres-
pondence between the source and target language 
models, this method can match the topic-based 
language model and improve the performance of 
SMT. 

Carpuat (2009) revisited the “one sense per dis-
course” hypothesis of Gale et al. (1992) and gave a 
detailed comparison and analysis of the “one trans-
lation per discourse” hypothesis. However, she 
failed to propose an effective way to integrate doc-
ument-level information into a SMT system. For 
example, she simply recommended some transla-
tion candidates to replace some target words in the 
post-process stage.  

In principle, the cache-based approach can be 
well suited for document-level translation. Basical-

910



 

ly, the cache is analogous to “cache memory” in 
hardware terminology, which tracks short-term 
fluctuation (Iyer et al., 1999). As the cache 
changes with different documents, the document-
level information should be capable of influencing 
SMT.  

Previous cache-based approaches mainly point 
to cache-based language modeling (Kuhn and Mori, 
1990), which uses a large global language model to 
mix with a small local model estimated from recent 
history data. However, applying such a language 
model in SMT is very difficult due to the risk of 
introducing extra noise (Raab, 2007).  

For cache-based translation modeling, Nepveu 
et al. (2004) explored user-edited translations in 
the context of interactive machine translation. Tie-
demann (2010) proposed to fill the cache with bi-
lingual phrase pairs from the best translation 
hypotheses of previous sentences in the test docu-
ment. Both Nepveu et al. (2004) and Tiedemann 
(2010) also explored traditional cache-based lan-
guage models and found that a cache-based lan-
guage model often contributes much more than a 
cache-based translation model. 

3 Cache-based document-level SMT 
Given a test document, our system works as fol-
lows:  
1) clears the static, topic and dynamic caches 

when switching to a new test document dx; 
2) retrieves a set of most similar bilingual docu-

ment pairs dds for dx from the training parallel 
corpus using the cosine similarity with tf-idf 
weighting; 

3) fills the static cache with bilingual phrase pairs 
extracted from dds;  

4) fills the topic cache with topic words extracted 
from the target-side documents of dds; 

5) for each sentence in the test document, trans-
lates it using cache-based SMT and conti-
nuously expands the dynamic cache with 
bilingual phrase pairs obtained from the best 
translation hypothesis of the  previous sen-
tences. 

In this way, our cache-based approach can pro-
vide useful data at the beginning of the translation 
process via the static cache. As the translation 
process continues, the dynamic cache grows and 
contributes more and more to the translation of 
subsequent sentences. Besides, the possibility of 

choosing noisy/unnecessary bilingual phrase pairs 
in both the static and dynamic caches is wakened 
with the help of the topic words in the topic cache. 
In particular, only the most similar document pair 
is used to construct the static cache and the topic 
cache unless specified. 

In this section, we first introduce the basic 
phrase-based SMT system and then present our 
cache-based approach to achieve document-level 
SMT with focus on constructing the caches (static, 
dynamic and topic) and designing their corres-
ponding features. 
3.1 Basic phrase-based SMT system 
It is well known that the translation process of 
SMT can be modeled as obtaining the best transla-
tion e of the source sentence f by maximizing fol-
lowing posterior probability (Brown et al., 1993): 

)()|(maxarg)|(maxarg ePefPfePe lm
ee

best ==  (1) 

where P(e|f) is a translation model and Plm is a lan-
guage model. 

Our system adopted Moses (a state-of-art 
phrase-based SMT system) as a baseline, which 
follows Koehn et al. (2003) and mainly adopts six 
groups of popular features: 1) two phrase transla-
tion probabilities (two directions): Pphr(e|f) and 
Pphr(f|e); 2) two word translation probabilities (two 
directions) : Pw(e|f) and Pw(f|e); 3) one language 
model (target language): LM(e); 4) one phrase pe-
nalty (target language): PP(f); 5) one word penalty 
(target language):WP(e); 6) a lexicalized reorder-
ing model. Besides, the log-linear model as de-
scribed in (Och and Ney, 2003) is employed to 
linearly interpolate these features for obtaining the 
best translation according to the formula (2): 

)},(max{arg
1

fehe m
M

m
mbest ∑

=

= λ   (2) 

where hm(e , f) is a feature function, and λm is the 
weight of hm(e , f)  optimized by a discriminative 
training method on a held-out development data. 

In principle, a phrase-based SMT system can 
provide the best phrase segmentation and align-
ment that cover a bilingual sentence pair. Here, a 
segmentation of a sentence into K phrases is de-
fined as: 

(f~e)≈  ∑ (f , e , ~)      (3) 
 

where tuple (f , e ) refers to a phrase pair, and ~ 
indicates corresponding alignment information.  

911



 

3.2 Dynamic Cache 
Our dynamic cache is mostly inspired by Tiede-
mann (2010), which adopts a dynamic cache to 
store relevant bilingual phrase pairs from the best 
translation hypotheses of previous sentences in the 
test document. In particular, a specific feature is 
incorporated S      to capture useful document-
level information in the dynamic cache: 

∑
∑

=

=
−∂

=

×>>=<<
= K

i ic

K

i
i

iicc
cccache

ffI

efefeI
feS

1

1

)(

),,(
)|(

(4)

 

where ie−∂ is a decay factor to avoid the depen-
dence of the feature’s contribution on the cache 
size. Given <ec, fc> an existing phrase pair in the 
dynamic cache and <ei,fi> a phrase pair in a new 
hypothesis, if ( ei=ec ∧ fi=fc ) is true (i.e. full match-
ing), function I(.) returns 1 , otherwise 0.  

One problem with the dynamic cache in Tiede-
mann (2010) is that it continuously updates the 
weight of a phrase pair in the dynamic cache. This 
may cause noticeable computational burden with 
the increasing number of phrase pairs in the dy-
namic cache. In addition, as a source phrase (fc) 
may occur many times in the dynamic cache, the 
weights for related phrase pairs may degrade se-
verely and thus his decoder needs a decay factor, 
which is difficult to optimize. Finally, Tiedemann 
(2010) only allowed full matching. This largely 
lowers down the probability of hitting the dynamic 
cache and thus much affects its effectiveness. 

To overcome above problems, we only employ 
the bilingual phrase pairs in the dynamic cache to 
inform the decoder whether one bilingual phrase 
pair exists in the dynamic cache or not, which is 
slightly similar to (Nepveu et al, 2004) ,thus avoid-
ing extra computational burden and the fine-tuning 
of the decay factor.  In particular, following new 
feature is incorporated to better explore the dynam-
ic cache:   = ∑ dpairmatch(e , f )        (5) 
where dpairmatch(  ,  )  

  = ⎩⎪⎨
⎪⎧ 1   (e = e ∧ f = f )                       ∨  e  = e ∧ f  = f ∧∥ e ∥> 3    ∨  e = e  ∧ f = f  ∧∥ e ∥> 3 0    other                                               

Here, F  is called the dynamic cache feature. 
Assume (ec,fc ) is a phrase pair in the dynamic 
cache and (ei,fi) is a phrase pair candidate for a 
new hypothesis. Besides full matching, we intro-
duce a symbol of “^” for sub-phrase, such as e   for 

a sub-phrase of ei and  e   for a sub-phrase of e  , to 
allow partial matching. Finally, F  measures the 
overall value of a target candidate f  by summing 
over the scores of K phrase pairs. 

Obviously, F  rewards both full matching and 
partial matching. In order to avoid too much noise, 
we put some constraints on the number of words in 
the target phrase of <ec,fc> or <ei,fi>, such as ∥ e ∥> 3 , where " ∥∥ "  measures the number of 
non-blank characters in a phrase. For example, if 
phrase pair “, 减少||| and reduced” occurs in the 
cache, phrase pair “,|||and” is not rewarded because 
such shorter phrase pairs occur frequently and may 
largely degrade the effect of the cache. In accor-
dance, the dynamic cache only contains phrase 
pairs whose target phrases contain 4 or more non-
blank characters. 
3.3 Static Cache 
In Tiedemann (2010), initial sentences in a test 
document fail to benefit from the dynamic cache 
due to the lack of contents in the dynamic cache at 
the beginning of the translation process. To over-
come this problem, a static cache is included to 
store relevant bilingual phrase pairs extracted from 
similar bilingual document pairs in the training 
parallel corpus. In particular, a static cache feature F  is designed to capture useful information in the 
static cache in the same way as the dynamic cache 
feature, shown in Formula (5). 

For this purpose, all the document pairs in the 
training parallel corpus are aligned at the phrase 
level using 2-fold cross-validation. That is, we 
adopt 50% of the training parallel corpus to train a 
model using Moses and apply the model to enforce 
phrase alignment of the remaining training data, 
and vice versa. Here, the enforcement is done by 
guaranteeing the occurrence of the target phrase 
candidate of a source phrase in the sentence pair. 
Besides, all the words pairs trained on the whole 
training parallel corpus are included in both folds 
to ensure at least one possible translation. Finally, 
the phrase pairs in the best translation hypothesis 
of a sentence pair is retrieved from the decoder. In 
this way, we can extract a set of phrase pairs for 
each bilingual document pairs. 

Given a test document, we first find a set of sim-
ilar source documents by computing the Cosine 
similarity using the TF-IDF weighting scheme and 
their corresponding target documents, from the 
training parallel corpus. Then, the phrase pairs ex-

912



 

tracted from these similar bilingual document pairs 
are collected into the static cache.  To avoid noise, 
we filter out those phrase pairs which occur less 
than two times in the training parallel corpus. 

 
出口 ||| exports 
放慢 ||| slowdown 
股市 ||| stock market 
现行 ||| leading 

汇率 ||| exchange 
活力 ||| vitality 
加快 ||| speed up the 
经济学家 ||| economists 

出口 增幅 ||| export growth 
多种 原因 ||| various reasons 
国家 著名 ||| a well-known international 
议会 委员会 ||| congressional committee 
不 乐观 的 预期 ||| pessimistic predictions 
保持 一定 的 增长 ||| maintain a certain growth 
美元 汇率 下跌 ||| a drop in the dollar exchange rate 
Table 1: Phrase pairs extracted from a document pair 

with an economic topic 

Similar to the dynamic cache, we only consider 
those phrase pairs whose target phrases contain 4 
or more non-blank characters to avoid noise. We 
do not deliberately remove long phrase pairs. It is 
possible to use these long phrase pairs if our test 
document is very similar to one training document 
pair.  Table 1 shows some bilingual phrase pairs 
extracted from a document pair, which reports a 
piece of news about “impact on slowdown in US 
economic growth”. Obviously, these phrase pairs 
are closely related to economics. 

3.4 Topic Cache 
Both the dynamic and static caches may still intro-
duce noisy/unnecessary bilingual phrase pairs even 
with constraints on the length of phrases and their 
occurrence frequency in the training parallel cor-
pus. In order to resolve this problem, this paper 
adopts a topic cache to store relevant topic words 
and employs a topic cache feature to weaken those 
noisy/unnecessary phrase pairs. 

Given w  is a topic word in the topic cache, the 
topic cache feature F  is designed as follows:   =  topicexist(e , f )          (6) 
where topicexist(e , f ) =   1   (w ∈ e )                                    0    other                                            
Here, the target phrase which contains a topic word w  will be rewarded. w  is derived by a topic mod-
el, LDA (Latent Dirichlet Allocation). This is dif-
ferent from the previous work (Tam, 2007), which 
mainly interpolated a topic language model with a 

general language model and added additional two 
adaptive lexicon probabilities in his phrase table. 

In principle, LDA is a probabilistic model of 
text data, which provides a generative analog of 
PLSA (Blei et al., 2003), and is primarily meant to 
reveal hidden topics in text documents. Like most 
of the text mining techniques, LDA assumes that 
documents are made up of words and the ordering 
of the words within a document is unimportant (i.e. 
the “bag-of-words” assumption).  

Figure 1 shows the principle of LDA, where α is 
the parameter of the uniform Dirichlet prior on the 
per-document topic distributions, β is the parame-
ter of the uniform Dirichlet prior on the per-topic 
word distribution, θi is the topic distribution for 
document i, zij is the topic for the jth word in doc-
ument i, and wij is the specific word. Among all 
variables, wij is the only observable variable with 
all the other variables latent. In particular, K de-
notes the number of topics considered in the model 
and φ is a K*V (V is the dimension of the vocabu-
lary) Markov matrix each line of which denotes the 
word distribution of a topic. The inner plate over z 
and w illustrates the repeated sampling of topics 
and words until N

 
words have been generated for 

document d. The plate surrounding θ
 
illustrates the 

sampling of a distribution over topics for each 
document d for a total of M documents. The plate 
surrounding φ

 
illustrates the repeated sampling of 

word distributions for each topic z until K topics 
have been generated. 

We use a LDA tool1 to build a topic model using 
the target-side documents in the training parallel 
corpus. Using LDA, we can obtain the topic distri-
bution of each word w, namely p(z|w) for topic z ϵK. Moreover, using the obtained word topic dis-
tributions, we can infer the topic distribution of a 
new document, namely p(z|d) for each topic z ϵK. 

Given a test document, we first find the most 
similar source document from the training data in 

                                                        
1 http://www.arbylon.net/projects/ 

Figure 1: LDA  

913



 

the same way as done in the static cache. After that, 
we retrieve its corresponding target document. 
Then, the topic of the target document is deter-
mined by its major topic, with the maximum p(z|d). 
Finally, we load some topic words corresponding 
to this topic z into the topic cache. In particular, 
our LDA model deploy the setting of K=15, α=0.5 
and β=0.1. Besides, only top 1000 topic words are 
reserved for each topic. Table 2 shows top 10 topic 
words for five topics. 

 
Topic 1 Topic 2 Topic 3 Topic4 Topic5 
company  
corporation  
limited  
manager  
board  
branch  
companies  
ltd  
business  
personnel  

army  
armed  
military  
officers  
forces  
units  
troops  
force  
soldiers  
police  

party  
represents  
study  
theory  
leadership  
political  
cadres  
speech  
comrade  
central  

bush  
united  
adminis-
tration  
policy  
president  
clinton  
office  
secretary  
powell  
relations  

election  
olympic  
games  
votes  
bid  
gore  
presi-
dential  
party  
won  
speech 

Table 2: Topic words extracted from target-side doc-
uments  

 

4 Experimentation 
We have systematically evaluated our cache-based 
approach to document-level SMT on the Chinese-
English translation task. 

4.1 Experimental Setting 
Here, we use SRI language modeling toolkit to 
train a trigram general language model on English 
newswire text, mostly from the Xinhua portion of 
the Gigaword corpus (2007) and performed word 
alignment on the training parallel corpus using 
GIZA++(Och and Ney,2000) in two directions. For 
evaluation, the NIST BLEU script (version 13) 
with the default setting is used to calculate the 
Bleu score (Papineni et al. 2002), which measures 
case-insensitive matching of n-grams with n up to 
4. To see whether an improvement is statistically 
significant, we also conduct significance tests us-
ing the paired bootstrap approach (Koehn, 2004)2. 
In this paper, ‘***’, ‘**’, and ‘*’ denote 
p-values less than or equal to 0.01, in-between 
(0.01, 0.05), and bigger than 0.05, which mean 
significantly better, moderately better and slightly 
better, respectively. 
                                                        
2 http://www.ark.cs.cmu.edu/MT 

In this paper, we use FBIS as the training data, 
the 2003 NIST MT evaluation test data as the de-
velopment data, and the 2005 NIST MT test data 
as the test data. Table 3 shows the statistics of 
these data sets (with document boundaries anno-
tated). 

 
   Corpus Sentences Documents 
Role Name 
Train FBIS 239413 10353 
Dev NIST2003 919 100 
Test NIST2005 1082 100 

Table 3: Corpus statistics 

In particular, the sizes of the static, topic and 
dynamic caches are fine-tuned to 2000, 1000 and 
5000 items, respectively. For the dynamic cache, 
we only keep those most recently-visited items, 
while for the static cache; we always keep the most 
frequently-occurring items. 

4.2 Experimental Results 
Table 4 shows the contribution of various caches in 
our cache-based document-level SMT system. The 
column of “BLEU_W” means the BLEU score 
computed over the whole test set and “BLEU_D” 
corresponds to the average BLEU score over sepa-
rated documents. 
 

System BLEU on 
Dev(%) 

BLEU on Test(%) 
BLEU_W NIST BLEU_D 

Moses 29.87 25.76 7.784 25.08 
Fd 29.90 26.03 (*) 7.852 25.39 
Fd+Fs 30.29 26.30 (**) 7.884 25.86 
Fd+Ft 30.11 26.24 (**) 7.871 25.74 
Fd+Fs+Ft 30.50 26.42 (***) 7.896 26.11 
Fd+Fs+Ft 
with merg-
ing 

- 26.57 (***) 7.901 26.32 

Table 4: Contribution of various caches in our cache-
based document-level SMT system. Note that signific-

ance tests are done against Moses. 

Contribution of dynamical cache (Fd)  

Table 4 shows that the dynamic cache slightly im-
proves the performance by 0.27 (*) in BLEU_W. 
This is similar to Tiedemann (2010). However, 
detailed analysis indicates that the dynamic cache 
does have negative effect on about one third of 
documents, largely due to the instability of the dy-
namic cache at the beginning of translating a doc-
ument. Figure 2 shows the distribution of the 

914



 

BLEU_D difference of 100 test documents (sorted 
by BLEU_D). It shows that about 55% of test 
documents benefit from the dynamic cache. 

Contribution of static cache (Fs) 
Table 4 shows that the combination of the static 
cache with the dynamic cache further improves the 
performance by 0.27(*) in BLEU_W. This sug-
gests the effectiveness of the static cache in elimi-
nating the instability of the dynamic cache when 
translating first few sentences of a test document. 
Together, the dynamic and static caches much im-
prove the performance by 0.54 (**) in BLEU_W 
over Moses.  Figure 3 shows the distribution of the 
BLEU_D difference of 100 test documents (sorted 
by BLEU_D), with more positive effect on those 
borderline documents, compared to Figure 2. 

Contribution of topic cache (Ft) 

Table 4 shows that the topic cache has comparable 
effect on improving the performance as the static 
cache when combined with the dynamic cache 
(0.48 vs. 0.54 in BLEU_W). Figure 4 shows the 

effectiveness of combining the dynamic and topic 
caches (sorted by BLEU_D). 

However, detailed analysis shows that the topic 
cache and the static cache are quite complementary 
by contributing on different test documents, largely 
due to that while the static cache tends to keep 
translation consistent, the topic cache plays like a 
document-specific language model. This is justi-
fied by Table 4 that the combination of the dynam-
ic, static and topic caches significantly improve the 
performance by 0.66 (***) in BLEU_W, and by 
Figure 5 that about 75% of test documents benefit 
from the combination of the three caches (sorted 
by BLEU_D). 

Contribution of merging phrase pairs of similar 
document pairs 

Here, the number of similar documents we adopt is 
different from previous experiments. In the pre-
vious experiments, we only cache bilingual phrase 
pairs extracted from the most similar document. 
Here, we merge phrase pairs for several most simi-
lar documents (5 at most) which have the same 
topic. 

Figure 2: Contribution of employing the dynamic 
cache on different test documents 

-8.00%

-6.00%

-4.00%

-2.00%

0.00%

2.00%

4.00%

6.00%

8.00%

1 8 15 22 29 36 43 50 57 64 71 78 85 92 99

fd-moses

 
Figure 3: Contribution of combining the dynamic and 

static cache on different test documents 

-6.00%

-4.00%

-2.00%

0.00%

2.00%

4.00%

6.00%

1 8 15 22 29 36 43 50 57 64 71 78 85 92 99

fd+fs-moses

 
Figure 4: Contribution of combining the dynamic 

and topic caches 

-6.00%

-4.00%

-2.00%

0.00%

2.00%

4.00%

6.00%

8.00%

10.00%

1 7 13 19 25 31 37 43 49 55 61 67 73 79 85 91 97

fd+ft-moses

 
Figure 5: Contribution of combining the three caches 

-4.00%

-2.00%

0.00%

2.00%

4.00%

6.00%

8.00%

10.00%

1 9 17 25 33 41 49 57 65 73 81 89 97

fd+fs+ft-moses

915



 

 Table 4 shows that employing this trick can fur-
ther improve the performance by 0.15 in BLEU_W. 
As a result, the cache-based approach significantly 
improve the performance by 0.81 (***) in 
BLEU_W over Moses. 

5 Discussion 
In this section, we explore in more depth why the 
static cache can help the dynamic cache, some 
constrained factors which impact the effectiveness 
of our cache-based approach. 

Effectiveness of the static cache  

We investigate why the static cache affects the per-
formance. Basically, it is difficult for the dynamic 
cache to capture such similar information in the 
static cache. 

In principle, the static cache can both influence 
the initial and subsequent sentences; however sub-
sequent ones can be affected by multiple caches. In 
order to give an insight of the static cache, we eva-
luate its effectiveness on the first sentence for each 
test document. Figure 6 shows the contribution of 
the static cache on translating these first sentences 
(y-axis shows BLEU value of the first sentence for 
each test document). It notes that the most BLEU 
scores of them are zeros because of the length limi-
tation of first sentences. 

Furthermore, we count the hit (matching) fre-
quency of the static cache for each test documents. 
Since we use 1 or 0 for the static cache feature, it is 
easy to retrieve its effect for each test document. 
Our statistics shows that the hit frequency on static 
cache fluctuates between 5 and 18 for each test 
document. Without the static cache, the hit fre-

quency of the dynamic cache is 504 on whole test 
sets, this figure increases to 685 with the static 
cache. This means that the static cache significant-
ly enlarges the effectiveness of the dynamic cache 
by including more relevant phrase pairs to the dy-
namic cache, largely due to the positive impact of 
the static cache on the initial sentences of each test 
document. 

Size of topic cache  
Table 5 shows the impact of the topic cache when 
the number of the retained topic words for each 
topic increases from 500 to 2000. It shows that too 
more topic words actually harm the performance, 
due to the increase of noise. 1000 topic words 
seem a lot largely due to that we didn’t do stem-
ming for our topic modeling since we hope to in-
troduce some tense information of them in the 
future.  
 

Number of topic words BLEU_W 
500 26.27 
700 26.31 

1000 26.42 
1500 26.23 
2000 26.19 

Table 5: Impact of the topic cache size 

Influenced translations  

In order to explore how our cache-based system 
impacts on translation results, we manually in-
spected 5 documents respectively which is im-
proved or degraded in translation quality compared 
to the baseline Moses output. Those documents 
have 107 sentences in sum. 

The good effectiveness of each kind of cache 
can be observed by the example 1 and 2 showed in 
Table 6. Both the example 1 and 2 come from the 
same document whose “BLEU_D” score exceeds 
Moses with 8.4 point. The example 1 benefits from 
the topic cache which contains the item of “action”. 
The example 2 benefits from the static cache which 
contains a phrase pair of  “承诺 ||| promised to” 
while Moses use “commitment” for “承诺” , which 
may be the reason for  missing the part of “prime 
minister” in Moses output. Furthermore, due to the 
phrase pair of “停火 协议||| the ceasefire agree-
ment” existing in our static cache, our decoder 
keeps using “ceasefire” to translate “停火” in the 
whole document while Moses randomly use “cea-
sefire” or “cease-fire” for this translation.  

 
Figure 6: Contribution of the static cache on the first 

sentence of each test document  
(i.e. with empty dynamic cache)   

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

0 20 40 60 80 100 120

Fd FdFs

916



 

1 官员 预测 “ 准备 工作 将 会 进行 到 七月 , 然后 再 展开 政治 动作 ” 
Moses: official forecasts said that preparatory work will be carried out in july and then launched a political maneuver . 
Ours:   official forecasts said that preparatory work will be carried out in july , then began a political action . 
Reference: officials expected that "preparations would take place until July, after which political action will begin".          

2 关于 这 一 点 , 中东新闻社 说 , 以色列 总理 夏隆 承诺 “ 只 要 巴勒斯坦 当局 尊重 停火 协议 , 控
制 好 它们 的 地方 , 以色列 将 会 停止 对 巴勒斯坦 人 的 军事 行动 ” 。 

Moses: on this point , said that israeli commitment to the palestinian authorities to respect the cease-fire agreement , 
where they are well under control , israel will stop its military actions against palestinians . 
Ours: on this point , said that israeli prime minister promised to respect the ceasefire agreement , the palestinian au-
thorities to properly control their areas and israel will stop its military actions against palestinians . 
Reference:For this point , MENA said Israeli Prime Minister Sharon has promised to " stop Israeli military operations 
against the Palestinians insofar as they continue to respect the ceasefire deal and control their territory . " 

3 17 日 晚 ，近 3000 多 名 市民 在 市中心 的 武器 广场 观看 了 由 市政府 举办 的 精彩纷呈 的 歌舞 

晚会 ，五颜六色 的 灯光 装扮 着 广场 周围 的 古老 建筑 ，著名 歌舞 艺术家 们 表演 了 不同 地区 

的 民族 歌舞 。 

Moses: on the evening , nearly 3,000 residents in the downtown square of the weapons held by the municipal govern-
ment , watched a song and dance soiree , having colorful lighting disguise of ancient buildings around the square , sing-
ing and dancing famous artists staged different regions of ethnic song and dance . 
Ours: later on, nearly 3,000 residents in the downtown square to watch the government of having a song and dance 
performances were held under the disguise of colorful lighting around the square , a famous ancient buildings and local 
artists of different ethnic song and dance . 
Reference: On the night of the 17th , nearly 3,000 residents watched a wonderful gala of songs and dances , organized 
by the municipal government , at Plaza da Armas . Colorful lights lighted up ancient architecture around the plaza . 
Famous artists including singers and dancers staged performances of national songs and dances of different regions . 

4 利马 的 城市 面积 已 从 建城 之 初 的 2.14 平方公里 发展 到 2600 多 平方公里 ， 而 人口 也 增加 

到 800万 左右 ， 约 占 全国 总人口 的 31% 。 
Moses: at lima 's urban area from the beginning of 2600 square to 2.14 million square kilometers , while the popula-
tion has increased to 8 percent of the country 's total , about 31% . 
Ours: lima , the urban area from the beginning of 2600 square kilometers to 2.14 million square kilometers , but also 
increased to about 8 million population , the country 's total population of about 31% . 
Reference: The area of Lima city has expanded to more than 2,600 square kilometers from the original 2.14 square ki-
lometers when the city was founded , while the population has increased to around 8 million , roughly accounting for 
31% of the nation's total . 

Table 6: Positive and negative examples  
The example 3 and 4 also come from the same 

document however whose performance degrades 
with 2.17 point.  We don’t think the translation 
quality for example 4 in our system is worse than 
Moses. However, the translation quality for exam-
ple 3 in our system is very bad and especially 
showed on “re-ordering”. We found this sentence 
did not match any item in our static cache and top-
ic cache. Although this phenomenon also happens 
in other documents, but this is the most typical 
negative example among these documents.  

Document-specific characteristics  
It seems that using the same weight for the whole 
test sets (all documents) is not very reasonable. 
Actually, if we can determine those negative doc-
uments which are not suitable for the cache-based 
approach, our cache-based approach may gain 
much improvement. Tiedemann (2010) explored 
the correlation to document length, baseline per-
formance and source document repetition. Howev-

er, it seems that there are no obvious rules to filter 
out those negative documents. Besides, there may 
be two more document-specific factors: repetition 
of the reference text and document style.  

Tiedemann (2010) only considered the repetition 
of the test text in the source side. Since BLEU 
score is computed against the reference text, the 
repetition in the reference text may greatly influ-
ence the performance of our cache-based approach 
to document-level SMT. As for document style, it 
is quite possible that a document may contain sev-
eral topics. Therefore, it may be useful to track 
such change over topics and refresh various caches 
when there is a topic change. We will leave the 
above issues to the future work. 

6 Conclusion 
We have shown that our cache-based approach 
significantly improves the performance with the 
help of various caches, such as the dynamic, static 
and topic caches, although the cache-based ap-

917



 

proach may introduce some negative impact on 
BLEU scores for certain documents.  

In the future, we will further explore how to re-
flect document divergence during training and dy-
namically adjust cache weights according to 
different documents.  

There are many useful components in training 
documents, such as named entity, event and co-
reference. In this experiment, we only adopt the 
flat data in our cache. However, the structured data 
may improve the correctness of matching and thus 
effectively avoid noise. We will explore more ef-
fective ways to pick up various kinds of useful in-
formation from the training parallel corpus to 
expand our cache-based approach. Besides, we will 
resort to comparable corpora to enlarge our cache-
based approach to document-level SMT.  

Acknowledgments 
This research was supported by Projects 90920004, 
60873150, and 61003155 under the National Natu-
ral Science Foundation of China, Project 
20093201110006 under the Specialized Research 
Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Educa-
tion of China. 

References  
David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan. 

2003. Latent Dirichlet Allocation. Journal of machine 
Learning Research 3, pages 993–1022. 

Francis Bond. 2002. Toward a Science of Machine 
Translation. Asian Association of Machine Transla-
tion (AAMT) Journal, N0.22, Tokyo, Japan, pages 
12-20. 

PF Brown, SA Della Pietra, VJ Della Pietra, RL Merc-
er.1992.The Mathematics of Statistical Machine 
Translation: Parameter Estimation. Computational 
Linguistics. 19(2):263-309. 

Marine Carpuat. 2009. One Translation per Discourse. 
In Proc. of the NAACL HLT workshop on Semantic 
Evaluation, pages 19-26. 

John DeNero, Alexandre Buchard-Cˆot´e, and Dan 
Klein. 2008. Sampling Alignment Structure under a 
Bayesian Translation Model. In Proc. of EMNLP 
2008, pages 314–323, Honolulu, October. 

William A. Gale, Kenneth W. Church, and David Ya-
rowsky. 1992. One Sense per Discourse. In Proceed-
ings of the workshop on Speech and Natural 
Language, Harriman, NY. 

Almut Silja Hildebrand, Matthias Eck, Stephan Vo-
gel,and Alex Waibel. 2005. Adaptation of the Trans-
lation Model for Statistical Machine Translation 
based on Information Retrieval. Proceedings of 
EAMT 2005:133-142. 

Rukmini M. Iyer and Mari Ostendorf. 1999. Modeling 
Long Distance Dependence in Language:Topic 
Mixtures Versus Dynamic Cache Models. IEEE 
Transactions on speech and audio processing, 7(1). 

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och ,and DanielMarcu.2003. 
Statistical Phrase-Based Translation. Proceedings of 
the 2003 Conference of the North American Chapter 
of the Association for Computational Linguistics on 
Human Language Technology, pages 48-54. 

Philipp Koehn.2004.Statistical Significance Tests for 
Machine Translation Evaluation. In Proc. of EMNLP 
2004,  pages 388–395. 

Roland Kuhn and Renato De Mori. 1990. A Cache-
based Natural Language Model for Speech Recogni-
tion. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Ma-
chine Intelligence,12(6):570-583. 

Yajuan Lu, Jin Huang, and Qun Liu. 2007. Improving 
statistical machine translation performance by train-
ing data selection and optimization. In Proc. of  
EMNLP 2007,pages 343–350, Prague, Czech Repub-
lic, June. 

Daniel Marcu and William Wong. 2002. A phrase-based 
Joint Probability Model for Statistical Machine 
Translation. In Proc. of  EMNLP 2002, July. 

Laurent Nepveu, Guy Lapalme, Philippe Langlais and 
George Foster.2004. Adaptive Language and Trans-
lation Models for Interactive Machine Translation. In 
Proc. of EMNLP 2004, pages 190-197. 

Eugene A. Nida. 1964. Toward a Science of Translating. 
Leiden, Netherlands:E.J.Brill. 

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum Error Rate Training in 
Statistical Machine Translation. In Proc. of ACL, 
pages 160–167. 

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2000. Improved 
Statistical Alignment Models. In Proc. of ACL, pages 
440–447. 

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: A Method for Automatic 
Evaluation of Machine Translation. In Proc. of 
ACL02, pages 311–318. 

Martin Raab. 2007. Language Modeling for Machine 
Translation. VDM Verlag, Saarbrucken, Germany. 

918



 

G. Salton and C. Buckley. 1988. Term-weighting Ap-
proaches in Automatic Text Retrieval. Information 
Processing and management,24(5):513-523,1988. 

Yik-Cheung Tam, Ian Lane and Tanja Schultz. 2007. 
Bilingual ISA-based Adaptation for Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. Machine Translation, 28:187-207. 

Jorg Tiedemann. 2010. Context Adaptation in Statistical 
Machine Translation Using Models with Exponen-
tially Decaying Cache. In Proc. of the 2010 work-
shop on domain adaptation for Natural Language 
Processing, ACL 2010, pages 8-15. 

Joern Wuebker and Arne Mauser and Hermann Ney. 
2010. Training Phrase Translation Models with Leav-
ing-One-Out. In Proc. of ACL, pages 475-484. 

Bing Zhao, Matthias Eck, and Stephan Vogel. 
2004.Language Model Adaptation for Statistical Ma-
chine Translation with Structured Query Models. In 
COLING 2004, Geneva, August. 

Bing Zhao and Eric P. Xing .2006. BiTAM:Bilingual 
Topic Ad-Mixture Models for Word Alignment. In 
Proc. of ACL2006. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

919


