



















































Divide and Conquer: Crowdsourcing the Creation of Cross-Lingual Textual Entailment Corpora


Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 670–679,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 27–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Divide and Conquer:
Crowdsourcing the Creation of Cross-Lingual Textual Entailment Corpora

Matteo Negri
FBK-irst

Trento, Italy
negri@fbk.eu

Luisa Bentivogli
FBK-irst

Trento, Italy
bentivo@fbk.eu

Yashar Mehdad
FBK-irst and University of Trento

Trento, Italy
mehdad@fbk.eu

Danilo Giampiccolo
CELCT

Trento, Italy
giampiccolo@celct.it

Alessandro Marchetti
CELCT

Trento, Italy
amarchetti@celct.it

Abstract

We address the creation of cross-lingual tex-
tual entailment corpora by means of crowd-
sourcing. Our goal is to define a cheap and
replicable data collection methodology that
minimizes the manual work done by expert
annotators, without resorting to preprocess-
ing tools or already annotated monolingual
datasets. In line with recent works empha-
sizing the need of large-scale annotation ef-
forts for textual entailment, our work aims to:
i) tackle the scarcity of data available to train
and evaluate systems, and ii) promote the re-
course to crowdsourcing as an effective way
to reduce the costs of data collection without
sacrificing quality. We show that a complex
data creation task, for which even experts usu-
ally feature low agreement scores, can be ef-
fectively decomposed into simple subtasks as-
signed to non-expert annotators. The resulting
dataset, obtained from a pipeline of different
jobs routed to Amazon Mechanical Turk, con-
tains more than 1,600 aligned pairs for each
combination of texts-hypotheses in English,
Italian and German.

1 Introduction

Cross-lingual Textual Entailment (CLTE) has been
recently proposed by (Mehdad et al., 2010; Mehdad
et al., 2011) as an extension of Textual Entailment
(Dagan and Glickman, 2004). The task consists of
deciding, given a text (T) and an hypothesis (H) in
different languages, if the meaning of H can be in-
ferred from the meaning of T. As in other NLP appli-
cations, both for monolingual and cross-lingual TE,

the availability of large quantities of annotated data
is an enabling factor for systems development and
evaluation. Until now, however, the scarcity of such
data on the one hand, and the costs of creating new
datasets of reasonable size on the other, have repre-
sented a bottleneck for a steady advancement of the
state of the art.

In the last few years, monolingual TE corpora for
English and other European languages have been
created and distributed in the framework of sev-
eral evaluation campaigns, including the RTE Chal-
lenge1, the Answer Validation Exercise at CLEF2,
and the Textual Entailment task at EVALITA3. De-
spite the differences in the design of the tasks, all
the released datasets were collected through simi-
lar procedures, always involving expensive manual
work done by expert annotators. Moreover, in the
data creation process, large amounts of hand-crafted
T-H pairs often have to be discarded in order to re-
tain only those featuring full agreement, in terms of
the assigned entailment judgements, among multiple
annotators. The amount of discarded pairs is usually
high, contributing to increase the costs of creating
textual entailment datasets4.

The issues related to the shortage of datasets and
the high costs for their creation are more evident

1http://www.nist.gov/tac/2011/RTE/
2http://nlp.uned.es/clef-qa/ave/
3http://www.evalita.it/2009/tasks/te
4For instance, in the first five RTE Challenges, the aver-

age effort needed to create 1,000 pairs featuring full agreement
among 3 annotators was around 2.5 person-months. Typically,
around 25% of the original pairs had to be discarded during the
process, due to low inter-annotator agreement (Bentivogli et al.,
2009).

670



in the CLTE scenario, where: i) the only dataset
currently available is an English-Spanish corpus ob-
tained by translating the RTE-3 corpus (Negri and
Mehdad, 2010), and ii) the application of the stan-
dard methods adopted to build RTE pairs requires
proficiency in multiple languages, thus significantly
increasing the costs of the data creation process.

To address these issues, in this paper we devise
a cost-effective methodology to create cross-lingual
textual entailment corpora. In particular, we focus
on the following problems:
(1) Is it possible to collect T-H pairs minimizing
the intervention of expert annotators? To address
this question, we explore the feasibility of crowd-
sourcing the corpus creation process. As a contri-
bution beyond the few works on TE/CLTE data ac-
quisition, we define an effective methodology that:
i) does not involve experts in the most complex (and
costly) stages of the process, ii) does not require pre-
processing tools, and iii) does not rely on the avail-
ability of already annotated RTE corpora.
(2) How can we guarantee good quality of the col-
lected data at a low cost? We address the quality
control issue through the decomposition of a com-
plex task (i.e. creating and annotating entailment
pairs) into smaller sub-tasks. Complex tasks are usu-
ally hard to explain in a simple way understandable
to non-experts, difficult to accomplish, and not suit-
able for the application of the quality-check mecha-
nisms provided by current crowdsourcing services.
Our “divide and conquer” solution represents the
first attempt to address a complex task involving
content generation and labelling through the defini-
tion of a cheap and reliable pipeline of simple tasks
which are easy to define, accomplish, and control.
(3) Can we adapt such methodology to collect
cross-lingual T-H pairs? We tackle this question
by separating the problem of creating and annotating
TE pairs from the issues related to the multilingual
dimension. Our solution builds on the assumption
that entailment annotations can be projected across
aligned T-H pairs in different languages. In this
case, a complex multilingual task is reduced to a se-
quence of simpler subtasks where the most difficult
one, the generation of entailment pairs, is entirely
monolingual. Besides ensuring cost-effectiveness,
our solution allows us to overcome the problem of
finding workers that are proficient in multiple lan-

guages. Moreover, since the core monolingual tasks
of the process are carried out by manipulating En-
glish texts, we are able to address the very large
community of English speaking workers, with a
considerable reduction of costs and execution time.
Finally, as a by-product of our method, the acquired
pairs are fully aligned for all language combinations,
thus enabling meaningful comparisons between sce-
narios of different complexity (monolingual TE, and
CLTE between close or distant languages).

We believe that, in the same spirit of recent works
promoting large-scale annotation efforts around en-
tailment corpora (Sammons et al., 2010; Bentivogli
et al., 2010), the proposed approach and the resulting
dataset5 will contribute to meeting the strong need
for resources to develop and evaluate novel solutions
for textual entailment.

2 Related Works

Crowdsourcing services, such as Amazon Mechan-
ical Turk6 (MTurk) and CrowdFlower7, have been
recently used with success for a variety of NLP ap-
plications (Callison-Burch and Dredze, 2010). The
idea is that the acquisition and annotation of large
amounts of data needed to train and evaluate NLP
tools can be carried out in a cost-effective manner
by defining simple Human Intelligence Tasks (HITs)
routed to a crowd of non-expert workers (aka “Turk-
ers”) hired through on-line marketplaces.

As regards textual entailment, the first work ex-
ploring the use of crowdsourcing services for data
annotation is described in (Snow et al., 2008), which
shows high agreement between non-expert annota-
tions of the RTE-1 dataset and existing gold standard
labels assigned by expert labellers.

Focusing on the actual generation of monolingual
entailment pairs, (Wang and Callison-Burch, 2010)
experiments the use of MTurk to collect facts and
counter facts related to texts extracted from an ex-
isting RTE corpus annotated with named entities.
Taking a step beyond the task of annotating exist-

5The CLTE corpora described in this paper will be made
freely available for research purposes through the website of
the funding EU Project CoSyne (http://www.cosyne.eu/).

6https://www.mturk.com/
7Although MTurk is directly accessible only to US citizens,

the CrowdFlower service (http://crowdflower.com/) provides an
interface to MTurk for non-US citizens.

671



ing datasets, and showing the feasibility of involving
non-experts also in the generation of TE pairs, this
approach is more relevant to our objectives. How-
ever, at least two major differences with our work
have to be remarked. First, they still use avail-
able RTE data to obtain a monolingual TE corpus,
whereas we pursue the more ambitious goal of gen-
erating from scratch aligned CLTE corpora for dif-
ferent language combinations. To this aim, we do
not resort to already annotated data, nor language-
specific preprocessing tools. Second, their approach
involves qualitative analysis of the collected data
only a posteriori, after manual removal of invalid
and trivial generated hypotheses. In contrast, our
approach integrates quality control mechanisms at
all stages of the data collection/annotation process,
thus minimizing the recourse to experts to check the
quality of the collected material.

Related research in the CLTE direction is re-
ported in (Negri and Mehdad, 2010), which de-
scribes the creation of an English-Spanish corpus
obtained from the RTE-3 dataset by translating the
English hypotheses into Spanish. Translations have
been crowdsourced adopting a methodology based
on translation-validation cycles, defined as separate
HITs. Although simplifying the CLTE corpus cre-
ation problem, which is recast as the task of translat-
ing already available annotated data, this solution is
relevant to our work for the idea of combining gold
standard units and “validation HITS” as a way to
control the quality of the collected data at runtime.

3 Quality Control of Crowdsourced Data

The design of data acquisition HITs has to take into
account several factors, each having a considerable
impact on the difficulty of instructing the workers,
the quality and quantity of the collected data, the
time and overall costs of the acquisition. A major
distinction has to be made between jobs requiring
data annotation, and those involving content gener-
ation. In the former case, Turkers are presented with
the task of labelling input data referring to a fixed
set of possible values (e.g. making a choice between
multiple alternatives, assigning numerical scores to
rank the given data). In the latter case, Turkers are
faced with creative tasks consisting in the production
of textual material (e.g. writing a correct translation,

or a summary of a given text).

The ease of controlling the quality of the acquired
data depends on the nature of the job. For annotation
jobs, quality control mechanisms can be easily set up
by calculating Turkers’ agreement, by applying vot-
ing schemes, or by adding hidden gold units to the
data to be annotated8. In contrast, the quality of the
results of content generation jobs is harder to assess,
due to the fact that multiple valid results are accept-
able (e.g. the same content can be expressed, trans-
lated, or summarized in different ways). In such sit-
uations the standard quality control mechanisms are
not directly applicable, and the detection of errors
requires either costly manual verification at the end
of the acquisition process, or more complex and cre-
ative solutions integrating HITs for quality check.

Most of the approaches to content generation pro-
posed so far rely on post hoc verification to fil-
ter out undesired low-quality data (Mrozinski et al.,
2008; Mihalcea and Strapparava, 2009; Wang and
Callison-Burch, 2010). The few solutions integrat-
ing validation HITs address the translation of sin-
gle sentences, a task that is substantially different
from ours (Negri and Mehdad, 2010; Bloodgood and
Callison-Burch, 2010). Compared to sentence trans-
lation, the task of creating CLTE pairs is both harder
to explain without recurring to notions that are dif-
ficult to understand to non-experts (e.g. “seman-
tic equivalence”, “unidirectional entailment”), and
harder to execute without mastering these notions.
To tackle these issues the “divide and conquer” ap-
proach described in the next section consists in the
decomposition of a difficult content generation job
into easier subtasks that are: i) self-contained and
easy to explain, ii) easy to execute without any NLP
expertise, and iii) suitable for the integration of a va-
riety of runtime control mechanisms (regional qual-
ifications, gold units, “validation HITs”) able to en-
sure a good quality of the collected material.

8Both MTurk and CrowdFlower provide means to check
workers’ reliability, and weed out untrusted ones without money
waste. These include different types of qualification mecha-
nisms, the possibility of giving work only to known trusted
Turkers (only with MTurk), and the possibility of adding hid-
den gold standard units in the data to be annotated (offered as a
built-in mechanism only by CrowdFlower).

672



4 CLTE Corpus Creation Methodology

Our approach builds on a pipeline of HITs routed to
MTurk’s workforce through the CrowdFlower inter-
face. The objective is to collect aligned T-H pairs
for different language combinations, reproducing an
RTE-like annotation style. However, our annotation
is not limited to the standard RTE framework, where
only unidirectional entailment from T to H is con-
sidered. As a useful extension, we annotate any pos-
sible entailment relation between the two text frag-
ments, including: i) bidirectional entailment (i.e.
semantic equivalence between T and H), ii) unidi-
rectional entailment from T to H, and iii) unidirec-
tional entailment from H to T. The resulting pairs
can be easily used to generate not only standard RTE
datasets9, but also general-purpose collections fea-
turing multi-directional entailment relations.

4.1 Data Acquisition and Annotation

We collect large amounts of CLTE pairs carrying out
the most difficult part of the process (the creation of
entailment-annotated pairs) at a monolingual level.
Starting from a set of parallel sentences in n lan-
guages, (e.g. L1, L2, L3), n entailment corpora are
created: one monolingual (L1/L1), and n-1 cross-
lingual (L1/L2, and L1/L3).

The monolingual corpus is obtained by modify-
ing the sentences only in one language (L1). Orig-
inal and modified sentences are then paired and an-
notated to form an entailment dataset for L1. The
CLTE corpora are obtained by combining the mod-
ified sentences in L1 with the original sentences in
L2 and L3, and projecting to the multilingual pairs
the annotations assigned to the monolingual pairs.

In principle, only two stages of the process re-
quire crowdsourcing multilingual tasks, but do not
concern entailment annotations. The first one, at the
beginning of the process, aims to obtain a set of par-
allel sentences to start with, and can be done in dif-
ferent ways (e.g. crowdsourcing the translation of
a set of sentences). The second one, at the end of
the process, consists of translating the modified L1
sentences into other languages (e.g. L2) in order to
extend the corpus to cover new language combina-

9With the positive examples drawn from bidirectional and
unidirectional entailments from T to H, and the negative ones
drawn from unidirectional entailments from H to T.

tions (e.g. L2/L2, L2/L3).
The execution of the two “multilingual” stages is

not strictly necessary but depends on: i) the avail-
ability of parallel sentences to start the process, and
ii) the actual objectives in terms of language combi-
nations to be covered10.

As regards the first stage, in this work we started
from a set of 467 English/Italian/German aligned
sentences extracted from parallel documents down-
loaded from the Cafebabel European Magazine11.
Concerning the second multilingual stage, we per-
formed only one round of translations from En-
glish to Italian to extend the 3 combinations ob-
tained without translations (ENG/ENG, ENG/ITA,
and ENG/GER) with the new language combina-
tions ITA/ITA, ITA/ENG, and ITA/GER.

STEP1:	  Sentence	  modifica2on	  
(monolingual)	  

STEP3:	  Transla2on	  
(mul2lingual)	  

GER	   ENG	  

ENG1	  

ITA	  

ITA1	   ITA	  ENG	   ENG1	  

STEP2:	  TE	  annota2on	  
(monolingual)	  

Monolingual	  
TE	  corpus	  

Cross-­‐lingual	  
TE	  corpus	  

ENG1	  GER	  

ENG1	  ITA	  

TE	  annota2ons	  projec2on	  	  	  

ITA1	   GER	  

ITA1	   ENG	  

Figure 1: Corpus creation process.

The main steps of our corpus creation process,
depicted in Figure 1, can be summarized as follows:

Step1: Sentence modification. The original
English sentences (ENG) are modified through
(monolingual) generation HITs asking Turkers to:
i) preserve the meaning of the original sentences
using different surface forms, or ii) slightly change
their meaning by adding or removing content. Our
assumption, in line with (Bos et al., 2009), is that

10Starting from parallel sentences in n languages, the n cor-
pora obtained without recurring to translations can be aug-
mented, by means of translation HITs, to create the full set of
language combinations. Each round of translation adds 1 mono-
lingual corpus, and n-1 CLTE corpora.

11http://www.cafebabel.com/

673



another way to think about entailment is to consider
whether one text T1 adds new information to the
content of another text T: if so, then T is entailed by
T1.

The result of this phase is a set of texts (ENG1)
that can be of three types:

1. Paraphrases of the original ENG texts, that will
be used to create bidirectional entailment pairs
(ENG↔ENG1);

2. More specific sentences (the outcome of
content addition operations), used to create
ENG←ENG1 unidirectional entailment pairs;

3. More general sentences (the outcome of
content removal operations), used to create
ENG→ENG1 unidirectional entailment pairs.

Step2: TE Annotation. Entailment pairs com-
posed of the original sentences (ENG) and the modi-
fied ones (ENG1) are used as input of (monolingual)
annotation HITs asking Turkers to decide which of
the two texts contains more information. As a re-
sult, each ENG/ENG1 pair is annotated as an ex-
ample of uni-/bidirectional entailment, and stored in
the monolingual English corpus. Since the original
ENG texts are aligned with the ITA and GER texts,
the entailment annotations of ENG/ENG1 pairs can
be projected to the other language pairs and the
ITA/ENG1 and GER/ENG1 pairs are stored in the
CLTE corpus. The possibility of projecting TE an-
notations is based on the assumption that the seman-
tic information is mostly preserved during the trans-
lation process. This particularly holds at the deno-
tative level (i.e. regarding the truth values of the
sentence) which is crucial to semantic inference. At
other levels (e.g. lexical) there might be slight se-
mantic variations which, however, are very unlikely
to play a crucial role in determining entailment rela-
tions.

Step3: Translation. The modified sentences
(ENG1) are translated into Italian (ITA1) through
(multilingual) generation HITs reproducing the ap-
proach described in (Negri and Mehdad, 2010). As
a result, three new datasets are produced by au-
tomatically projecting annotations: the monolin-
gual ITA/ITA1, and the cross-lingual ENG/ITA1 and
GER/ITA1.

Since the solution adopted for sentence transla-
tion does not present novelty factors, the remainder
of this paper will omit further details on it. Instead,
the following sections will focus on the more chal-
lenging tasks of sentence modification and TE anno-
tation.

4.2 Crowdsourcing Sentence Modification and
TE Annotation

Sentence modification and TE annotation have been
decomposed into a pipeline of simpler monolingual
English sub-tasks. Such pipeline, depicted in Figure
2, involves several types of generation/annotation
HITs designed to be easily understandable to non-
experts. Each HIT consists of: i) a set of instruc-
tions for a specific task (e.g. paraphrasing a text),
ii) the data to be manipulated (e.g. an English sen-
tence), and iii) a test to check workers’ reliability.
To cope with the quality control issues discussed in
Section 3, such tests are realized using gold stan-
dard units, either hidden in the data to be annotated
(annotation HITs) or defined as test questions that
workers must correctly answer (generation HITs).
Moreover, regional qualifications are applied to all
HITs. As a further quality check, all the annotation
HITs consider Turkers’ agreement as a way to filter
out low quality results (only annotations featuring
agreement among 4 out of 5 workers are retained).
The six HITs defined for each subtask can be de-
scribed as follows:

1. Paraphrase (generation). Modify an En-
glish text (ENG), in order to produce a semantically
equivalent variant (ENG1). As a reliability test, be-
fore creating the paraphrase workers are asked to
judge if two English sentences contain the same in-
formation.

2. Grammaticality (annotation). Decide if an
English sentence is grammatically correct. This val-
idation HIT represents a quality check of the out-
put of each generation task (i.e. paraphrasing, and
add/remove information HITs).

3. Bidirectional Entailment (annotation). De-
cide whether two English sentences, the original
ENG and the modified ENG1, contain the same in-
formation (i.e. are semantically equivalent).

4a. Add Information (generation). Modify an
English text to create a more specific one by adding
content. As a reliability test, before generating the

674



Figure 2: Sentence modification and TE annotation pipeline.

new sentence workers are asked to judge which of
two given English sentences is more detailed.

4b. Remove Information (generation). Mod-
ify an English text to create a more general one by
removing part of its content. As a reliability test, be-
fore generating the new sentence workers are asked
to judge which of two given English sentences is less
detailed.

5. Unidirectional Entailment (annotation). De-
cide which of two English sentences (the original
ENG, and a modified ENG1) provides more infor-
mation.

These HITs are combined in an iterative pro-
cess that alternates text generation, grammaticality
check, and entailment annotation steps. As a result,
for each original ENG text we obtain multiple ENG1
variants of the three types (paraphrases, more gen-
eral texts, and more specific texts) and, in turn, a set
of annotated monolingual (ENG/ENG1) TE pairs.

As described in Section 4.1, the resulting mono-
lingual English TE corpus (ENG/ENG1) is used to
create the following mono/cross-lingual TE corpora:

• ITA/ENG1, and GER/ENG1 (by projecting TE
annotations)

• ITA/ITA1, GER/ITA1, and ENG/ITA1 (by
translating the ENG1 texts into Italian, and pro-
jecting TE annotations)

5 The Resulting CLTE Corpora

This section provides a quantitative and qualita-
tive analysis of the results of our corpus creation
methodology, focusing on the collected ENG-ENG1
monolingual dataset. It has to be remarked that, as
an effect of the adopted methodology, all the obser-
vations and the conclusions drawn hold for the col-
lected CLTE corpora as well.

5.1 Quantitative Analysis

Table 1 provides some details about each step of the
pipeline shown in Figure 2. For each HIT the table
presents: i) the number of items (sentences, or pairs
of sentences) given in input, ii) the number of items
(sentences or annotations) produced as output, iii)
the number of items discarded when the agreement
threshold was not reached, iv) the number of entail-
ment pairs added to the corpus, v) the time (days and
hours) required by the MTurk workforce to complete
the job, and vi) the cost of the job.

In HIT-1 (Paraphrase) 1,414 paraphrases were
collected asking three different meaning-preserving
modifications of each of the 467 original sen-
tences12. From a practical point of view, such redun-
dancy aims to ensure a sufficient number of gram-
matically correct and semantically equivalent mod-
ified sentences. From a theoretical point of view,

12Often, crowdsourced jobs return a number of output items
that is slightly larger than required, due to the labour distribution
mechanism internal to MTurk.

675



HIT # Input items # Output items # Discarded items # Pairs to corpus MTurk time Cost ($)
1. Paraphrase 467 1,414 5d+10.5h 45.48
2. Grammaticality 1,414 1,326 88 (6.22%) 1d+15h 56.88
3. Bidirectional Ent. 1,326 1,213 113 (8.52%) 301 3d+2h 53.47

(yes=1,205 no=8)
4a. Add Info 452 916 3d 37.02
4b. Remove Info 452 923 2d+22h 29.73
2. Grammaticality 1,839 1,749 90 (4.89%) 2d+5h 64.37
3. Bidirectional Ent. 1,749 1,438 311 (17.78%) 148 3d+20.5h 70.52

(yes=148 no=1,290)
5. Unidirectional Ent. 1,298 1,171 127 (9.78%) 1,171 8.5h 78.24

(491 + 680)
TOTAL 721 1,620 22d+11h 435.71

Table 1: The monolingual dataset creation pipeline.

collecting many variants of a small pool of origi-
nal sentences aims to create pairs featuring different
entailment relations with similar superficial forms.
This, in principle, should allow to obtain a dataset
which requires TE systems to focus more on deeper
semantic phenomena than on the surface realization
of the pairs.

The collected paraphrases were sent as input to
HIT-2 (Grammaticality). After this validation HIT,
the number of acceptable paraphrases was reduced
to 1,326 (with 88 discarded sentences, correspond-
ing to 6.22% of the total).

The retained paraphrases were paired with their
corresponding original sentences, and sent to HIT-3
(Bidirectional Entailment) to be judged for semantic
equivalence. The pairs marked as bidirectional en-
tailments (1,205) were divided in three groups: 25%
of the pairs (301) were directly stored in the final
corpus, while the ENG1 paraphrases of the remain-
ing 75% (904) were equally distributed to the next
modification steps.

In both HIT-4a (Add Information) and HIT-4b
(Remove information) two new modified sentences
were asked for each of the 452 paraphrases received
as input. The sentences collected in these generation
tasks were respectively 916 and 923.

The new modified sentences were sent back to
HIT-2 (Grammaticality) and HIT-3 (Bidirectional
Entailment). As a result 1,438 new pairs were cre-
ated; out of these, 148 resulted to be bidirectional
entailments and were stored in the corpus.

Finally, the 1,298 entailment pairs judged as non-
bidirectional in the two previously completed HIT-
3 (8+1,290) were given as input to HIT-5 (Unidi-

rectional Entailment). The pairs which passed the
agreement threshold were classified according to the
judgement received, and stored in the corpus as uni-
directional entailment pairs.

The analysis of Table 1 allows to formulate
some considerations. First, the percentage of dis-
carded items confirms the effectiveness of decom-
posing complex generation tasks into simpler sub-
tasks that integrate validation HITs and quality
checks based on non-experts’ agreement. In fact, on
average, around 9.5% of the generated items were
discarded without experts’ intervention13. Second,
the amount of discarded items gives evidence about
the relative difficulty of each HIT. As expected,
we observe lower rejection rates, corresponding to
higher inter-annotator agreement, for grammatical-
ity HITs (5.55% on average) than for more complex
entailment-related tasks (12.02% on average).

Looking at costs and execution time, it is hard
to draw definite conclusions due to several factors
that influence the progress of the crowdsourced jobs
(e.g. the fluctuations of Turkers’ performances, the
time of the day at which jobs are posted, the dif-
ficulty to set the optimal cost for a given HIT14).
On the one hand, as expected, the more creative
“Add Info” task proved to be more demanding than
the “Remove Info”: even though it was paid more,

13Moreover, it is worthwhile noticing that around 20% of the
collected items were automatically rejected (and not paid) due
to failures on the gold standard controls created both for gener-
ation and annotation tasks.

14The payment for each HIT was set on the basis of a pre-
vious feasibility study aimed at determining the best trade-off
between cost and execution time. However, replicating our ap-
proach would not necessarily result in the same costs.

676



it still took little more time to be completed. On
the other hand, although the “Unidirectional Entail-
ment” task was expected to be more difficult and
thus rewarded more than the “Bidirectional Entail-
ment” one, in the end it took notably less time to
be completed. Nevertheless, the overall figures (435
USD, and about 22.5 days of MTurk work to com-
plete the process)15 clearly demonstrate the effec-
tiveness of the approach. Even considering the time
needed for an expert to manage the pipeline (i.e. one
week to prepare gold units, and to handle the I/O of
each HIT), these figures show that our methodology
provides a cheaper and faster way to collect entail-
ment data in comparison with the RTE average costs
reported in Section 1.

As regards the amount of data collected, the re-
sulting corpus contains 1,620 pairs with the fol-
lowing distribution of entailment relations: i) 449
bidirectional entailments, ii) 491 ENG→ENG1 uni-
directional entailments, and iii) 680 ENG←ENG1
unidirectional entailments.

It must be noted that our methodology does not
lead to the creation of pairs where some information
is provided in one text and not in the other, and vice-
versa, as Example 1 shows:

Example 1.
ENG: New theories were emerging in the field of psychology.
ENG1: New theories were rising, which announced a kind of
veiled racism.

These negative examples in both directions repre-
sent a natural extension of the dataset, relevant also
for specific application-oriented scenarios, and their
creation will be addressed in future work.

Besides the achievement of our primary objec-
tives, the adopted approach led to some interesting
by-products. First, the generated corpora are per-
fectly suitable to produce entailment datasets simi-
lar to those used in the traditional RTE evaluation
framework. In particular, considering any possible
entailment relation between two text fragments, our
annotation subsumes the one proposed in RTE cam-
paigns. This allows for the cost-effective genera-
tion of RTE-like annotations from the acquired cor-

15Although by projecting annotations the ENG1/ITA and
ENG1/GER CLTE corpora came for free, the ITA1/ITA,
ITA1/ENG, and ITA1/GER combinations created by crowd-
sourcing translations added 45 USD and approximately 5 days
to these figures.

pora by combining ENG↔ENG1 and ENG→ENG1
pairs to form 940 positive examples (449+491),
keeping the 680 ENG←ENG1 as negative exam-
ples. Moreover, by swapping ENG and ENG1 in the
unidirectional entailment pairs, 491 additional nega-
tive examples and 680 positive examples can be eas-
ily obtained.

Finally, the output of HITs 1-2-3 in Table 1 rep-
resents per se a valuable collection of 1,205 para-
phrases. This suggests the great potential of crowd-
sourcing for paraphrase acquisition.

5.2 Qualitative Analysis

Through manual verification of more than 50% of
the corpus (900 pairs), a total number of 53 pairs
(5.9%) were found incorrect. The different errors
were classified as follows:

Type 1: Sentence modification errors. Generation
HITs are a minor source of errors, being responsible
for 10 problematic pairs. These errors are either in-
troduced by generating a false statement (Example
2), or by forming a not fully understandable, awk-
ward, or non-natural sentence (Example 3).

Example 2.
ENG: Kosovo was the subject of major riots in 1989.
ENG1: The Russian city of Kosovo was the subject of ...

Example 3.
ENG: Balat is the Kurdish-Armenian district of Instanbul.
ENG1: Balat is a place, which is the Kurdish-Armenian ...

Type 2: TE annotation errors. The notion of con-
taining more/less information, used in the “Unidi-
rectional Entailment” HIT, can mostly be applied
straightforwardly to the entailment definition. How-
ever, the concept of “more/less detailed”, which gen-
erally works for factual statements, in some cases is
not applicable. In fact, the MTurk workers have reg-
ularly interpreted the instructions about the amount
of information as concerning the quantity of con-
cepts contained in a sentence. This is not always cor-
responding to the actual entailment relation between
the sentences. As a consequence, 43 pairs featur-
ing wrong entailment annotations were encountered.
These errors can be classified as follows:

a) 13 pairs, where the added/removed information
changes the meaning of the sentence. In these cases,
the modified sentence was judged more/less specific

677



than the original one, leading to unidirectional en-
tailment annotation. On the contrary, in terms of
the standard entailment definition, the correct anno-
tation is “no entailment” (as in Example 4, which
was annotated as ENG→ENG1):
Example 4.
ENG: If you decide to live in Bulgaria, you have to like
difficulties because they are not difficulties, they are challenges.
ENG1: You have to like difficulties as they are not difficulties,
they are challenges.

b) 10 pairs where the incorrect annotation is due to
a coreference problem, as in:
Example 5.
ENG: John Smith is the new CEO of the company.
ENG1: He is the new CEO of the company.

These pairs were labelled as unidirectional entail-
ments (in the example above ENG→ENG1), under
the assumption that a proper name is more specific
and informative than a pronoun. However, adher-
ing to the TE definition, co-referring expressions are
equivalent, and their realization does not play any
role in the entailment decision. This implies that the
correct entailment annotation is “bidirectional”.

c) 9 pairs where the sentences are semantically
equivalent, but contain a piece of information which
is explicit in one sentence, and implicit in the other.
In these cases, Turkers judged the sentence contain-
ing the explicit mention as more specific, and thus
the pair was annotated as unidirectional entailment.
Example 6.
ENG: I hear the click of the trigger and the burst of bullets
reach me immediately.
ENG1: I hear the trigger and the burst of bullets reach me
instantly.

In Example 6, the expression “the trigger” in ENG1
implicitly means “the click of the trigger”, mak-
ing the two sentences equivalent, and the entailment
bidirectional (instead of ENG→ENG1).
d) 7 pairs where the information removed from or
added to the sentence is not relevant to the entail-
ment relation. In these cases, the modified sen-
tence was judged less/more specific than the origi-
nal one (and thus considered as unidirectional entail-
ment), even though the correct judgement is “bidi-
rectional”, as in:
Example 7.
ENG: At the same time, AKP is struggling with its approach to
the EU.

ENG1: AKP is struggling with its approach to the European
Union.

e) 4 pairs where the added/removed information
concerns universally quantified general statements,
about which the interpretation of “more/less spe-
cific” given by Turkers resulted in the wrong anno-
tation.
Example 8.
ENG: I think the success of multicultural couples depends on
the size of the cultural gap between the two partners
ENG1: I believe the success of the couples depends on the size
of the cultural gap between the 2 partners.

In Example 8, the additional information (“mul-
ticultural”) restricts the set to which it refers
(“couples”) making ENG entailed by ENG1, and
not vice versa as resulted from Turkers’ annotation.

In light of this analysis, we conclude that the sen-
tence modification methodology proved to be suc-
cessful, as the low number of Type 1 errors shows.
Considering that the most expensive phase in the
creation of a TE dataset is the generation of the
pairs, this is a significant achievement. Differently,
the entailment assessment phase appears to be more
problematic, accounting for the majority of errors.
As shown by Type 2 errors, this is due to a par-
tial misalignment between the instructions given in
our HITs, and the formal definition of textual en-
tailment. For this reason, further experimentation
will explore different ways to instruct workers (e.g.
asking to consider proper names and pronouns as
equivalent) in order to reduce the amount of errors
produced. As a final remark, considering that in the
creation of a TE dataset the manual check of the an-
notated pairs represents a minor cost, even the in-
volvement of experts to filter out wrong annotations
would not decrease the cost-effectiveness of the pro-
posed methodology.

6 Conclusions

There is an increasing need of annotated data to
develop new solutions to the Textual Entailment
problem, explore new entailment-related tasks, and
set up experimental frameworks targeting real-world
applications. Following the recent trends promot-
ing annotation efforts that go beyond the estab-
lished RTE Challenge framework (unidirectional en-
tailment between monolingual T-H pairs), in this

678



paper we addressed the multilingual dimension of
the problem. Our primary goal was the creation of
large-scale collections of entailment pairs for differ-
ent language combinations. Besides that, we consid-
ered cost effectiveness and replicability as additional
requirements. To achieve our objectives, we devel-
oped a “divide and conquer” methodology based on
crowdsourcing. Our approach presents several key
innovations with respect to the related works on TE
data acquisition. These include the decomposition
of a complex content generation task in a pipeline
of simpler subtasks accessible to a large crowd of
non-experts, and the integration of quality control
mechanisms at each stage of the process. The result
of our work is the first large-scale dataset contain-
ing both monolingual and cross-lingual corpora for
several combinations of texts-hypotheses in English,
Italian, and German. Among the advantages of our
method it is worth mentioning: i) the full alignment
between the created corpora, ii) the possibility to
easily extend the dataset to new languages, and iii)
the feasibility of creating general-purpose corpora,
featuring multi-directional entailment relations, that
subsume the traditional RTE-like annotation.

Acknowledgments

This work has been partially supported by the EC-
funded project CoSyne (FP7-ICT-4-24853). The au-
thors would like to thank Emanuele Pianta for the
helpful discussions, and Giovanni Moretti for the
valuable support in the creation of the CLTE dataset.

References

Luisa Bentivogli, Ido Dagan, Hoa Trang Dang, Danilo
Giampiccolo, and Bernardo Magnini. 2009. The Fifth
PASCAL Recognizing Textual Entailment Challenge.
Proceedings of TAC 2009.

Luisa Bentivogli, Elena Cabrio, Ido Dagan, Danilo Gi-
ampiccolo, Medea Lo Leggio, and Bernardo Magnini.
2010. Building Textual Entailment Specialized Data
Sets: a Methodology for Isolating Linguistic Phenom-
ena Relevant to Inference. Proceedings of LREC 2010.

Michael Bloodgood and Chris Callison-Burch. 2010.
Using Mechanical Turk to Build Machine Translation
Evaluation Sets. Proceedings of the NAACL 2010
Workshop on Creating Speech and Language Data
With Amazons Mechanical Turk.

Johan Bos, Fabio Massimo Zanzotto, and Marco Pennac-
chiotti. 2009. Textual Entailment at EVALITA 2009.
Proceedings of EVALITA 2009.

Chris Callison-Burch and Mark Dredze. 2010. Creat-
ing Speech and Language Data With Amazons Me-
chanical Turk. Proceedings NAACL-2010 Workshop
on Creating Speech and Language Data With Amazons
Mechanical Turk.

Ido Dagan and Oren Glickman. 2004. Probabilistic tex-
tual entailment: Generic applied modeling of language
variability. Proceedings of the PASCAL Workshop of
Learning Methods for Text Understanding and Min-
ing.

Yashar Mehdad, Matteo Negri, and Marcello Federico.
2010. Towards Cross-Lingual Textual Entailment.
Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2010.

Yashar Mehdad, Matteo Negri, and Marcello Federico.
2011. Using Bilingual Parallel Corpora for Cross-
Lingual Textual Entailment. Proceedings of ACL-HLT
2011.

Rada Mihalcea and Carlo Strapparava. 2009. The Lie
Detector: Explorations in the Automatic Recognition
of Deceptive Language. Proceedings of ACL 2009.

Joanna Mrozinski, Edward Whittaker, and Sadaoki Furui.
2008. Collecting a Why-Question Corpus for Devel-
opment and Evaluation of an Automatic QA-System.
Proceedings of ACL 2008.

Matteo Negri and Yashar Mehdad. 2010. Creating a Bi-
lingual Entailment Corpus through Translations with
Mechanical Turk: $100 for a 10-day Rush. Proceed-
ings of the NAACL 2010 Workshop on Creating Speech
and Language Data With Amazons Mechanical Turk.

Mark Sammons, V. G. Vinod Vydiswaran, and Dan Roth.
2010. Ask Not What Textual Entailment Can Do for
You... Proceedings of ACL 2010.

Rion Snow, Brendan O’Connor, Daniel Jurafsky and An-
drew Y. Ng. 2008. Cheap and Fast - But is it Good?
Evaluating Non-Expert Annotations for Natural Lan-
guage Tasks. Proceedings of EMNLP 2008.

Rui Wang and Chris Callison-Burch. 2010. Cheap Facts
and Counter-Facts. Proceedings of the NAACL 2010
Workshop on Creating Speech and Language Data
With Amazons Mechanical Turk.

679


