



















































Generating Aspect-oriented Multi-Document Summarization with Event-aspect model


Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1137–1146,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 27–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Generating Aspect-oriented Multi-Document Summarization with
Event-aspect model

Peng Li1 and Yinglin Wang1 and Wei Gao2and Jing Jiang3
1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

2 Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management, Chinese University of Hong Kong
3 School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University

{lipeng, ylwang@sjtu.edu.cn} {wgao@se.cuhk.edu.hk} {jingjiang@smu.edu.sg}

Abstract

In this paper, we propose a novel approach to
automatic generation of aspect-oriented sum-
maries from multiple documents. We first de-
velop an event-aspect LDA model to cluster
sentences into aspects. We then use extend-
ed LexRank algorithm to rank the sentences
in each cluster. We use Integer Linear Pro-
gramming for sentence selection. Key features
of our method include automatic grouping of
semantically related sentences and sentence
ranking based on extension of random walk
model. Also, we implement a new sentence
compression algorithm which use dependency
tree instead of parser tree. We compare our
method with four baseline methods. Quantita-
tive evaluation based on Rouge metric demon-
strates the effectiveness and advantages of our
method.

1 Introduction

In recent years, there has been much interest in
the task of multi-document summarization. In this
paper, we study the task of automatically generat-
ing aspect-oriented summaries from multiple docu-
ments. The goal of aspect-oriented summarization
is to present the most important content to the us-
er in a condensed form and a well-organized struc-
ture to satisfy the user’s needs. A summary should
follow a readable structure and cover all the aspect-
s users are interested in. For example, a summary
about natural disasters should include aspects about
what happened, when/where it happened, reasons,
damages, rescue efforts, etc. and these aspects may
be scattered in multiple articles written by different
news agencies. Our goal is to automatically collect

aspects and construct summaries from multiple doc-
uments.

Aspect-oriented summarization can be used in
many scenarios. First of all, it can be used to gener-
ate Wikipedia-like summary articles, especially used
to generate introduction sections that summarizes
the subject of articles before the table of contents
and other elaborate sections. Second, opinionat-
ed text often contains multiple viewpoints about an
issue generated by different people. Summarizing
these multiple opinions can help people easily di-
gest them. Furthermore, combined with search en-
gines and question&answering systems, we can bet-
ter organize the summary content based on aspects
to improve user experience.

Despite its usefulness, the problem of modeling
domain specific aspects for multi-document summa-
rization has not been well studied. The most relevant
work is by (Haghighi and Vanderwende, 2009) on
exploring content models for multi-document sum-
marization. They proposed a HIERSUM model for
finding the subtopics or aspects which are combined
by using KL-divergence criterion for selecting rel-
evant sentences. They introduced a general con-
tent distribution and several specific content distri-
butions to discover the topic and aspects for a s-
ingle document collection. However, the aspects
may be shared not only across documents in a sin-
gle collection, but also across documents in different
topic-related collections. Their model is conceptual-
ly inadequate for simultaneously summarizing mul-
tiple topic-related document collections. Further-
more, their sentence selection method based on KL-
divergence cannot prevent redundancy across differ-
ent aspects.

In this paper, we study how to overcome these

1137



limitations. We hypothesize that comparatively
summarizing topics across similar collections can
improve the effectiveness of aspect-oriented multi-
document summarization. We propose a novel
extraction-based approach which consists of four
main steps listed below:

Sentence Clustering: Our goal in this step is to
automatically identify the different aspects and clus-
ter sentences into aspects (See Section 2). We sub-
stantially extend the entity-aspect model in (Li et al.,
2010) for generating general sentence clusters.

Sentence Ranking: In this step, we use an exten-
sion of LexRank algorithm proposed by (Paul et al.,
2010) to score representative sentences in each clus-
ter (See Section 3).

Sentence Compression: In this step, we aim to
improve the linguistic quality of the summaries by
simplifying the sentence expressions. We prune sen-
tences using grammatical relations defined on de-
pendency trees for recognizing important clauses
and removing redundant subtrees (See Section 4).

Sentence Selection: Finally, we select one com-
pressed version of the sentences from each aspec-
t cluster. We use Integer Linear Programming
(ILP) algorithm, which optimizes a global objective
function, for sentence selection (McDonald, 2007;
Gillick and Favre, 2009; Sauper and Barzilay, 2009)
(See Section 5).

We evaluate our method using TAC2010 Guided
Summarization task data sets1 (Section 6). Our eval-
uation shows that our method obtains better ROUGE
recall score compared with four baseline methods,
and it also achieve reasonably high-quality aspec-
t clusters in terms of purity.

2 Sentence Clustering

In this step, our goal is to discover event aspects con-
tained in a document set and cluster sentences in-
to aspects. Here we substantially extend the entity-
aspect model in Li et al. (2010) and refer to it as
event-aspect model. The main difference between
our event-aspect model and entity-aspect model is
that we introduce an additional layer of event topics
and the separation of general and specific aspects.

1http://www.nist.gov/tac/2010/
Summarization/

Our extension is based upon the following ob-
servations. For example, specific events like
“Columbine Massacre” and “Malaysia Resort Ab-
duction” can be related to the “Attack” topic. Each
event consists of multiple articles written by dif-
ferent news agencies. Interesting aspects may in-
clude “what happened, when, where, perpetrators,
reasons, who affected, damages and countermea-
sures,” etc2. We compared the “Columbine Mas-
sacre” and “Malaysia Resort Abduction” data set-
s and found 5 different kinds of words in the text:
(1) stop words that occur frequently in any docu-
ment collection; (2) general content words describ-
ing “damages” or “countermeasures” aspect of at-
tacks; (3) specific content words describing “what
happened”, “who affected” or “where” aspect of the
concrete event; (4) background words describing the
general topic of “Attack”; (5) words that are local to
a single document and do not appear across different
documents. Table 1 shows four sentences related to
two major aspects. We found that the entity-aspect
model does not have enough capacity to cluster sen-
tences into aspects (See Section 6). So we introduce
additional layer to improve the effectiveness of sen-
tence clustering. We also found that their one aspect
per sentence assumption is not very strong in this
scenario. Although a sentence may belong to a sin-
gle general aspect, it still contains multiple specific
aspect words like second sentence in Table 1. There-
fore, We assume that each sentence belongs to both
a general aspect and a specific aspect.

2.1 Event-Aspect Model
Stop words can be ignored by LDA model because
they can be easily identified using a standard stop
word list. Suppose that for a given event topic, there
are in total C specific events for which we need to
simultaneously generate summaries. We can assume
four kinds of unigram language models (i.e. multi-
nomial word distributions). For each event topic,
there is a background model ϕB that generates words
commonly used in all documents, and there are AG

general aspect models ϕga (1 ≤ ga ≤ AG), where
AG is the number of general aspects. For each spe-
cific event in a topic, there are AS specific aspect

2http://www.nist.gov/tac/2010/
Summarization/Guided-Summ.2010.guidelines.
html

1138



countermeasures
Police/GA are/S close/B to/S identifying/GA someone/B responsible/GA

for/S the/S attack/B .
Investigators/GA do/S not/S know/B how/S many/S suspects/SA

they/S are/S looking/B for/S, but/S reported/B progress/B toward/S
identifying/GA one/S of/S the/S bombers/SA .
what happened, when, where

During/S the/S morning/SA rush/D hour/D on/S July/SA 7/SA terrorists/B
exploded/SA bombs/SA on/S three/D London/SA subway/D trains/SA and/S a/S
double-decker/D bus/SA .

Four/D coordinated/B bombings/SA struck/B central/B London/SA on/SA
July/SA 7/SA, three/D in/S subway/D cars/SA and/S one/D on/S a/S bus/SA .

Table 1: Four sentences on “COUNTERMEASURES” and “What, When, Where” aspects from the “Attack” topic. S:
stop word. B: background word. GA: general aspect word. SA: specific aspect word. D: document word.

models ϕsa (1 ≤ sa ≤ AS), where AS is the num-
ber of specific aspects, and also there are D doc-
ument models ϕd (1 ≤ d ≤ D), where D is the
number of documents in this collection. We assume
that these word distributions have a uniform Dirich-
let prior with parameter β.

We introduce a level distribution σ that control-
s whether we choose a word from ϕga or ϕsa. σ
is sampled from Beta(δ0, δ1) distribution. We also
introduce an aspect distribution θ that controls how
often a general or a specific aspect occurs in the col-
lection, where θ is sampled from another Dirichlet
prior with parameter α. There is also a multinomi-
al distribution π that controls in each sentence how
often we encounter a background word, a document
word, or an aspect word. π has a Dirichlet prior with
parameter γ.

Let Sd denote the number of sentences in docu-
ment d, Nd,s denote the number of words (after stop
word removal) in sentence s of document d, and
wd,s,n denote the n’th word in this sentence. We
introduce hidden variables zgad,s and z

sa
d,s to indicate

that a sentence s of document d belongs to which
general or specific aspects . We introduce hidden
variables yd,s,n for each word to indicate whether a
word is generated from the background model, the
document model, or the aspect model. We also intro-
duce hidden variables ld,s,n to indicate whether the
n’th word in sentence s of document d is generated
from the general aspect model. Figure 1 describes
the process of generating the whole document col-
lection. The plate notation of the model is shown in
Figure 2. Note that the values of δ0, δ1, α1, α2, β

and γ are fixed. The number of general and specific
aspects AG and AS are also empirically set.

Given a document collection, i.e. the set of all
wd,s,n, our goal is to find the most likely assignmen-
t of zgad,s, z

sa
d,s, yd,s,n and ld,s,n that maximizes dis-

tribution p(z,y, l|w;α, β, γ, δ), where z, y, l and w
represent the set of all z, y, l and w variables, respec-
tively. With the assignment, sentences are naturally
clustered into aspects, and words are labeled as ei-
ther a background word, a document word, a general
aspect word or a specific aspect word.

Inference can be done with Gibbs sampling,
which is commonly used in LDA models (Griffiths
and Steyvers, 2004).

In our experiments, we set α1 = 5, α2 = 3,
β = 0.01, γ = 20, δ1 = 10 and δ2 = 10. We
run 100 burn-in iterations through all documents in
a collection to stabilize the distribution of z and y
before collecting samples. We take 10 samples with
a gap of 10 iterations between two samples, and av-
erage over these 10 samples to get the estimation for
the parameters.

After estimating all the distributions, we can find
the values of each zgad,s and z

sa
d,s that gives us sen-

tences clustered into general and specific aspects.

3 Sentence Ranking

In this step, we want to order the clustered sen-
tences so that the representative sentences can be
ranked higher in each aspect. Inspired by Paul et
al. (2010), we use an extended LexRank algorithm
to obtain top ranked sentences. LexRank (Erkan and
Radev, 2004) algorithm defines a random walk mod-

1139



1. Draw θ1 ∼ Dir(α1), θ2 ∼ Dir(α2), π ∼ Dir(γ)
Draw σ ∼ Beta(δ0, δ1)

2. For each event topic, there is a background model
ϕB, and there are general aspect ga, where 1 ≤
ga ≤ AG

(a) draw ϕB ∼ Dir(β)
(b) draw ϕga ∼ Dir(β)

3. For each document collection, there are specific
aspect sa, where 1 ≤ sa ≤ AS

(a) draw ϕsa ∼ Dir(β)
4. For each document d = 1, . . . , D,

(a) draw ϕd ∼ Dir(β)
(b) for each sentence s = 1, . . . , Sd

i. draw zga ∼ Multi(θ1)
ii. draw zsa ∼ Multi(θ2)

iii. for each word n = 1, . . . , Nd,s
A. draw ld,s,n ∼ Binomial(σ)
B. draw yd,s,n ∼ Multi(π)
C. draw wd,s,n ∼ Multi(ϕB) if yd,s,n =

1, wd,s,n ∼ Multi(ϕd) if yd,s,n = 2,
wd,s,n ∼ Multi(ϕz

sa
d,s) if yd,s,n =

3 and ld,s,n = 1 or wd,s,n ∼
Multi(ϕz

ga
d,s) if yd,s,n = 3 and

ld,s,n = 0

Figure 1: The document generation process.

el on top of a graph that represents sentences to be
summarized as nodes and their similarities as edges.
The LexRank score of a sentence gives the expected
probability that a random walk will visit that sen-
tence in the long run. A variant is called continu-
ous LexRank improved LexRank by making use of
the strength of the similarity links. The continuous
LexRank score can be computed using the following
formula:

L(u) =
d

N
+ (1 − d)

∑

v∈adj[u]
p(u|v)L(v)

where L(u) is the LexRank value of sentence u, N is
the total number of nodes in the graph, d is a damp-
ing factor for the convergence of the method, and
p(u|v) is the jumping probability between sentence
u and its neighboring sentence v. p(u|v) is defined
using content similarity function sim(u, v) between
two sentences:

T

ydφ
dS

D

sd� ,

wSA
φ

β

C

γ

π σ

δ

gaz
saz

l

φ
GA

Bφ

1
θ 2θ

1
α 2α

Figure 2: The event-aspect model.

p(u|v) = sim(u, v)∑
z∈adj[v] sim(z, v)

The major extension is to modify this jumping
probability so as to favor visiting representative sen-
tences. More specifically, we scale sim(u, v) by the
likelihood that the two sentences represent the same
general aspect ga or specific aspect sa:

sim′(u, v) = sim(u, v)[
AG∑

ga=1

P (ga|u)P (ga|v)

+

AS∑

sa=1

P (sa|u)P (sa|v)]

where the value P (ga|u) and P (sa|u) can be
computed by our event-aspect model. We define
sim(u, v) as the tf ∗ idf weighted cosine similar-
ity between two sentences.

We found that sentence ranking is better con-
ducted before the compression because the pre-
compressed sentences are more informative and the
similarity function in LexRank can be better off with
the complete information.

4 Sentence Compression

It has been shown that sentence compression can
improve linguistic quality of summaries (Zajic et
al., 2007; Gillick et al., 2010). Commonly used
“Syntactic parse and trim” approach may produce
poor compression results. For example, given the
sentence “We have friends whose children go to
Columbine, the freshman said”, the procedure tries
to remove the clause “the freshman said” from the
parse tree by using the “SBAR” label to locate the

1140



clause, and will result in “whose children go to
Columbine”, which is not adequate. Furthermore,
some important temporal modifier, numeric modifier
and clausal complement need to be retained because
they reflect content aspects of the summary. There-
fore, we propose the “dependency parse and trim”
approach, which prunes sentences based on depen-
dency tree representations, using English grammati-
cal relations to recognize clauses and remove redun-
dant structures. Table 2 shows two examples by re-
moving redundant auxiliary clauses. Below is the
sentence compression procedure:

1. Select possible subtree root nodes using gram-
matical relations, such as clausal complement,
complementizer, or parataxis 3.

2. Decide which subtree root node can be the root
of clause. If this root contains maximum num-
ber of child nodes and the collection of all child
edges include object or auxiliary relations, it is
selected as the root node.

3. Remove redundant modifiers such as adverbial-
s, relative clause modifiers and abbreviations,
participials and infinitive modifiers.

4. Traverse the subtrees and generate all possible
compression alternatives using the subtree root
node, then keep the top two longest sub sen-
tences.

5. Drop the sub sentences shorter than 5 words.

5 Sentence Selection

After sentence pruning, we prepare for the final
event summary generation process. In this step, we
select one compressed version of the sentence from
each aspect cluster. To avoid redundancy between
aspects, we use Integer Linear Programming to opti-
mize a global objective function for sentence selec-
tion. Inspired by (Sauper and Barzilay, 2009), we
formulate the optimization problem based on sen-
tence ranking information. More specifically, we

3The parataxis relation is a relation between the main verb
of a clause and other sentential elements, such as a sentential
parenthetical, colon, or semicolon

Original Compressed
When rescue workers
arrived, they said, on-
ly one of his limbs was
visible.

When rescue workers
arrived, only one of his
limbs was visible.

Two days earlier, a
massacre by two s-
tudents at Columbine
High, whose teams are
called the Rebels, left
15 people dead and
dozens wounded.

Two days earlier, a
massacre by two stu-
dents at Columbine
High, left 15 peo-
ple dead and dozens
wounded.

Table 2: Example compressed sentences.

would like to select exactly one compressed sen-
tence which receives the highest possible ranking s-
core from each aspect cluster subject to a series of
constraints, such as redundancy and length. We em-
ployed lp solver 4, an efficient mixed integer pro-
gramming solver using the Branch-and-Bound algo-
rithm to select sentences.

Assume that there are in total K aspects in an
event topic. For each aspect j, there are in total R
ranked sentences. The variables Sjl is a binary indi-
cator of the sentence. That is, Sjl= 1 if the sentence
is included in the final summary, and Sjl = 0 other-
wise. l is the ranked position of the sentence in this
aspect cluster.

Objective Function

Top ranked sentences are the most relevant corre-
sponding to the related aspects which we want to in-
clude in the final summary. Thus we try to minimize
the ranks of the sentences to improve the overall re-
sponsiveness.

min(

K∑

j=1

Rj∑

l=1

l · Sjl)

Exclusivity Constraints
To prevent redundancy in each aspect, we just
choose one sentence from each general or specific
aspect cluster. The constraint is formulated as fol-
lows:

Rj∑

l=1

Sjl = 1 ∀j ∈ {1 . . . K}

4http://lpsolve.sourceforge.net/5.5/

1141



Redundancy Constraints

We also want to prevent redundancy across differ-
ent aspects. If sentence-similarity sim(sjl, sj′l′) be-
tween sentence sjl and sj′l′ is above 0.5, then we
drop the pair and choose one sentence ranked higher
from the pair otherwise. This constraint is formulat-
ed as follows:

(Sjl + Sj′l′) · sim(sjl, sj′l′) ≤ 0.5
∀j, j′ ∈ {1 . . .K}∀l ∈ {1 . . . Rj}∀l′ ∈ {1 . . . Rj′}

Length Constraints

We add this constraint to ensure that the length of
the final summary is limited to L words.

K∑

j=1

Rj∑

l=1

lenjl · Sjl ≤ L

where lenjl is the length of Sjl.

6 Evaluation

In order to systematically evaluate our method, we
want to check (1) whether the whole system is effec-
tive, which means to quantitatively evaluate summa-
ry quality, and (2) whether individual components
like clustering and compression algorithms are use-
ful.

6.1 Data

We use TAC2010 Summarization task data set for
the summary content evaluation. This data set pro-
vides 46 events. Each event falls into a predefined
event topic. Each specific event includes an even-
t statement and 20 relevant newswire articles which
have been divided into 2 sets: Document Set A and
Document Set B. Each document set has 10 docu-
ments, and all the documents in Set A chronologi-
cally precede the documents in Set B. We just use
document Set A for our task. Assessors wrote mod-
el summaries for each event, so we can compare
our automatic generated summaries with the model
summaries. We combine topic related data sets to-
gether, then these data sets simultaneously annotated
by our Event-aspect model. After labeling process,
we run sentence ranking, compression and selection
module to get final aspect-oriented summarizations.

6.2 Quality of summary

We use the ROUGE (Lin and Hovy, 2003) metric for
measuring the summarization system performance.
Ideally, a summarization criterion should be more
recall oriented. So the average recall of ROUGE-
1, ROUGE-2, ROUGE-SU4, ROUGE-W-1.2 and
ROUGE-L were computed by running ROUGE-
1.5.5 with stemming but no removal of stop word-
s. We compare our method with the following four
baseline methods.

Baseline 1
In this baseline, we try to compare different sen-

tence clustering algorithms in the multi-document
summarization scenario. First, we use CLUTO 5 to
do K-means clustering. Then we try entity-aspect
model proposed by Li et al. (2010) to do sentence
clustering. Entity-aspect model is similar with “HI-
ERSUM” content model proposed by Haghighi and
Vanderwende (2009). We use the same ranking,
compression, and selection components to generate
aspect-oriented summaries for comparison.

Baseline 2
In this baseline, we compare our method with

traditional ranking and selection summary genera-
tion framework (Erkan and Radev, 2004; Nenkova
and Vanderwende, 2005) to show that our sentence
clustering component is necessary in aspect-oriented
summarization system. Also we want check whether
sentence ranking combined with greedy based sen-
tence selection can prevent redundancy effective-
ly. We follow LexRank based sentence ranking
combined with greedy sentence selection methods.
We implement two greedy algorithms (Zhang et al.,
2008; Paul et al., 2010). One is to select the top
ranked sentence simultaneously by removing 10 re-
dundant neighbor sentences from the sentence sim-
ilarity graph if the summary length is less then 100
words. This is repeated until the graph cannot be
partitioned. The similarity graph building threshold
is 0.3, damping factor is 0.2 and error tolerance for
Power Method in LexRank is 0.1. The other is to se-
lect top ranked sentences as long as the redundancy
score (similarity) between a candidate sentence and

5http://glaros.dtc.umn.edu/gkhome/cluto/
cluto/overview

1142



current summary is under 0.5. This is repeated until
the summary reaches a 100 word length limit.

Baseline 3
In this baseline, we compare our ILP based sen-

tence selection with KL-divergence based sentence
selection. The KL-divergence formula we use is be-
low,

KL(PS ||QD) =
∑

w

P (w) log
P (w)

Q(w)

where P (S) is the empirical unigram distribution of
the candidate summary S, and Q(D) is the unigram
distribution of document collection D. We only re-
placed our selection method with the KL-divergence
selection method. Other parts are the same. After
ranking sentences for each aspect, we add the sen-
tence with the highest ranking score from each as-
pect sentence cluster as long as the KL-divergence
between candidate and current summary does not
decrease. This is repeated until the summary reach-
es a 100 word length limit. To our knowledge, this
is the first work to directly compare Integer Lin-
ear Programming based sentence selection with KL-
divergence based sentence selection in summariza-
tion generation framework.

Baseline 4
In this baseline, we directly compare our method

with “HIERSUM” proposed by (Haghighi and Van-
derwende, 2009). As in Baseline 1, we use entity-
aspect model to approximate “HIERSUM” mod-
el. We replace unigram distribution of P (w) in
KL-divergence with learned distribution estimated
by “HIERSUM” model. The KL-divergence based
greedy sentence selection algorithm is similar to
Baseline 3.

For fair comparison, Baselines 1, 2, 3 and 4 use
the same sentence compression algorithm and have
the summary length no more then 100 words. In
Table 3, we show the average ROUGE recall of 46
summaries generated by our method and four base-
line methods. We can see that our method gives
better Rouge recall measures then the four baseline
methods. For BL-1, we can see that LDA-based sen-
tence clustering is better then k-means. For BL-2,
we can see that traditional ranking plus greedy selec-
tion summary generation framework is not suitable

for the aspect-oriented summarization task. More
specifically, greedy-based sentence selection can not
prevent redundancy effectively. BL-3 evaluation re-
sults showed that ILP-based sentence selection is
better then KL-divergence selection in terms of pre-
venting redundancy across different aspects. The
measurement performance between BL-3 and BL-
4 is close. They use the same KL-divergence based
sentence selection, but topic model they use are d-
ifferent, and also BL-3 has a sentence ranking pro-
cess. The Rouge recall of our method is better than
BL-4. It is expected because our event-aspect mod-
el can better find the aspects and also prove that
our LexRank based sentence ranking combined with
ILP-based sentence selection can prevent redundan-
cy.

Due to TAC2010 summarization community just
compute ROUGE-2 and ROUGE-SU4 metrics for
participants, our ROUGE-2 metric ranked 11 out
of 23, ROUGE-SU4 metric ranked 12 out of 23.
They use MEAD6 as their baseline approach. The
ROUGE-2 score of our approach achieve 0.06508
higher than MEAD’s 0.05929. The ROUGE-SU4 s-
core of our approach achieve 0.10146 higher than
MEAD’s 0.09112. Many systems that get high-
er performances leverage domain knowledge bases
like Wikipedia or training data, but we didn’t. The
advantage of our method is that we generate sum-
maries with totally unsupervised framework and this
approach is domain adaptive.

6.3 Quality of aspect-oriented sentence clusters

To judge the quality of the aspect-oriented sentence
clusters, we ask the human judges to group the
ground truth sentences based on the aspect related-
ness in each event topic. We then compute the pu-
rity of the automatically generated clusters against
the human judged clusters. The results are shown
in Table 4. In our experiments, we set the number
of general aspect clusters AG is 5 and specific as-
pect clusters AS is 3. We can see from Table 4 that
our generated aspect clusters can achieve reasonably
good performance.

6http://www.summarization.com/mead/

1143



Rouge Average Recall
Method ROUGE-1 ROUGE-2 ROUGE-SU4 ROUGE-W-1.2 ROUGE-L

BL-1 k-means 0.21895 0.03689 0.06644 0.06683 0.19208
entity-aspect 0.26082 0.05082 0.08286 0.08055 0.22976

BL-2 greedy 1 0.27802 0.04872 0.08302 0.08488 0.24426
greedy 2 0.27898 0.04723 0.08275 0.08500 0.24430

BL-3 KL-Div 0.29286 0.05369 0.09117 0.08827 0.25100
BL-4 HIERSUM 0.28736 0.05502 0.08932 0.08923 0.25285
Without compression 0.30563 0.05983 0.09513 0.09468 0.25487

Our Method 0.32641 0.06508 0.10146 0.09998 0.28610

Table 3: ROUGE evaluation results on TAC2010 Summarization data sets

Category A Purity
Accidents and Natural Disasters 7 0.613
Attacks 8 0.658
Health and Safety 5 0.724
Endangered Resources 4 0.716
Investigations and Trials 6 0.669

Table 4: The true numbers of aspects as judged by the
human annotator (A), and the purity of the clusters.

Category Average Score
Accidents and Natural Disasters 2.4
Attacks 2.3
Health and Safety 2.6
Endangered Resources 2.5
Investigations and Trials 2.4

Table 5: The average score of each event topic.

6.4 Quality of sentence compression

To judge the quality of the dependency tree based
sentence compression algorithm, we ask the human
judges to choose 20 sentences from each event top-
ic then score them. The judges follow 3-point scale
to score each compressed sentence: 1 means poor,
2 means barely acceptable, and 3 means good. We
then compute the average scores. The results are
shown in Table 5. To evaluate the effectiveness of
sentence compression component, we conduct the
system without sentence compression component,
then compare it with our system. In Table 3, we
can see that sentence compression can improve the
system performance.

7 Related Work

Our event-aspect model is related to a number of
previous extensions of LDA models. Chemudugun-
ta et al. (2007) proposed to introduce a background
topic and document-specific topics. Our background
and document language models are similar to theirs.
However, they still treat documents as bags of words
rather then sets of sentences as in our models. Titov
and McDonald (2008) exploited the idea that a short
paragraph within a document is likely to be about
the same aspect. The way we separate words in-
to stop words, background words, document word-
s and aspect words bears similarity to that used
in (Daumé III and Marcu, 2006; Haghighi and Van-
derwende, 2009). Paul and Girju (2010) proposed a
topic-aspect model for simultaneously finding topic-
s and aspects. The most related extension is entity-
aspect model proposed by Li et al. (2010). The main
difference between event-aspect model and entity-
aspect model is our model further consider aspect
granularity and add a layer to model topic-related
events.

Filippova and Strube (2008) proposed a depen-
dency tree based sentence compression algorithm.
Their approach need a large corpus to build language
model for compression, whereas we prune depen-
dency tree using grammatical rules.

Paul et al. (2010) proposed to modify LexRank
algorithm using their topic-aspect model. But their
task is to summarize contrastive viewpoints in opin-
ionated text. Furthermore, they use a simple greedy
approach for constructing summary.

McDonald (2007) proposed to use Integer Linear
Programming framework in multi-document sum-

1144



marization. And Sauper and Barzilay (2009) use in-
teger linear programming framework to automatical-
ly generate Wikipedia articles. There is a fundamen-
tal difference between their method and ours. They
used trained perceptron algorithm for ranking ex-
cerpts, whereas we give an extended LexRank with
integer linear programming to optimize sentence se-
lection for our aspect-oriented multi-document sum-
marization.

8 Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper, we study the task of automatically
generating aspect-oriented summary from multiple
documents. We proposed an event-aspect model
that can automatically cluster sentences into aspect-
s. We then use an extension of the LexRank algo-
rithm to rank sentences. We took advantage of the
output generated by the event-aspect model to mod-
ify jumping probabilities so as to favor visiting rep-
resentative sentence. We also proposed dependen-
cy tree compression algorithm to prune sentence for
improving linguistic quality of the summaries. Fi-
nally we use Integer Linear Programming Frame-
work to select aspect relevant sentences. We con-
ducted quantitative evaluation using standard test
data sets. We found that our method gave overal-
l better ROUGE scores than four baseline methods,
and the new sentence clustering and compression al-
gorithm are robust.

There are a number of directions we plan to pur-
sue in the future in order to improve our method.
First, we can possibly apply more linguistic knowl-
edge to improve the quality of sentence compres-
sion. Currently the sentence compression algorith-
m may generate meaningless subtrees. It is rela-
tively hard to decide which clause is redundant in
terms of summarization. Second, we may explore
more domain knowledge to improve the quality of
aspect-oriented summaries. For example, we know
that the “who-affected” aspect is related to person,
and “when, where” are related to Time and Location.
we can import Name Entity Recognition to anno-
tate these phrases and then help locate relevant sen-
tences. Third, we want to extend our event-aspect
model to simultaneously find topics and aspects.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the National Nat-
ural Science Foundation of China (NSFC No.
60773088), the National High-tech R&D Program
of China (863 Program No. 2009AA04Z106), and
the Key Program of Basic Research of Shanghai
Municipal S&T Commission (No. 08JC1411700).

References

Chaitanya Chemudugunta, Padhraic Smyth, and Mark
Steyvers. 2007. Modeling general and specific aspects
of documents with a probabilistic topic model. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 19,
pages 241–248.

Hal. Daumé III and Daniel. Marcu. 2006. Bayesian
query-focused summarization. In Proceedings of the
21st International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics and the 44th annual meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, pages 305–312.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Günes. Erkan and Dragomir Radev. 2004. LexRank:
Graph-based lexical centrality as salience in text sum-
marization. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Re-
search, 22(1):457–479.

K. Filippova and M. Strube. 2008. Dependency
tree based sentence compression. In Proceedings of
the Fifth International Natural Language Generation
Conference, pages 25–32. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Dan Gillick and Benoit Favre. 2009. A scalable global
model for summarization. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Integer Linear Programming for Natural Lan-
gauge Processing, pages 10–18.

Dan Gillick, Benoit Favre, D. Hakkani-Tur, B. Bohnet,
Y. Liu, and S. Xie. 2010. The icsi/utd summarization
system at tac 2009. In Proceedings of the Second Text
Analysis Conference, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA:
National Institute of Standards and Technology.

Thomas L. Griffiths and Mark Steyvers. 2004. Find-
ing scientific topics. Proceedings of the National A-
cademy of Sciences of the United States of America,
101(Suppl. 1):5228–5235.

A. Haghighi and L. Vanderwende. 2009. Exploring con-
tent models for multi-document summarization. In
Proceedings of Human Language Technologies: The
2009 Annual Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics on
ZZZ, pages 362–370. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

1145



Peng Li, Jing Jiang, and Yinglin Wang. 2010. Gen-
erating templates of entity summaries with an entity-
aspect model and pattern mining. In Proceedings of
the Joint Conference of the 48th Annual Meeting of the
ACL. Association for Computational Linguistics.

C.Y. Lin and E. Hovy. 2003. Automatic evaluation
of summaries using n-gram co-occurrence statistics.
In Proceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics on Human Language Technology-
Volume 1, pages 71–78. Association for Computation-
al Linguistics.

Ryan McDonald. 2007. A study of global inference algo-
rithms in multi-document summarization. Advances in
Information Retrieval, pages 557–564.

A. Nenkova and L. Vanderwende. 2005. The impact
of frequency on summarization. Microsoft Research,
Redmond, Washington, Tech. Rep. MSR-TR-2005-101.

Michael J. Paul and Roxana Girju. 2010. A two-
dimensional topic-aspect model for discovering multi-
faceted topics. In In AAAI-2010: Twenty-Fourth Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence.

Michael J. Paul, ChengXiang Zhai, and Roxana Girju.
2010. Summarizing contrastive viewpoints in opin-
ionated text. In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, EMNLP ’10, pages 66–76, Morristown, NJ, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Christina Sauper and Regina Barzilay. 2009. Automati-
cally generating wikipedia articles: A structure-aware
approach. In Proceedings of the Joint Conference of
the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th Inter-
national Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing of the AFNLP, pages 208–216, Suntec, Singa-
pore, August. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Ivan Titov and Ryan McDonald. 2008. Modeling online
reviews with multi-grain topic models. In Proceeding
of the 17th International Conference on World Wide
Web, pages 111–120.

D. Zajic, B.J. Dorr, J. Lin, and R. Schwartz. 2007. Multi-
candidate reduction: Sentence compression as a tool
for document summarization tasks. Information Pro-
cessing & Management, 43(6):1549–1570.

Jin. Zhang, Xueqi. Cheng, and Hongbo. Xu. 2008. GSP-
Summary: a graph-based sub-topic partition algorith-
m for summarization. In Proceedings of the 4th Asi-
a information retrieval conference on Information re-
trieval technology, pages 321–334. Springer-Verlag.

1146


