










































Detecting Subgroups in Online Discussions by Modeling Positive and Negative Relations among Participants


Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational Natural
Language Learning, pages 59–70, Jeju Island, Korea, 12–14 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Detecting Subgroups in Online Discussions by Modeling Positive and
Negative Relations among Participants

Ahmed Hassan
Microsoft Research

Redmond, WA
hassanam@microsoft.com

Amjad Abu-Jbara
University of Michigan

Ann Arbor, MI
amjbara@umich.edu

Dragomir Radev
University of Michigan

Ann Arbor, MI
radev@umich.edu

Abstract

A mixture of positive (friendly) and nega-
tive (antagonistic) relations exist among users
in most social media applications. However,
many such applications do not allow users to
explicitly express the polarity of their interac-
tions. As a result most research has either ig-
nored negative links or was limited to the few
domains where such relations are explicitly
expressed (e.g. Epinions trust/distrust). We
study text exchanged between users in online
communities. We find that the polarity of the
links between users can be predicted with high
accuracy given the text they exchange. This
allows us to build a signed network represen-
tation of discussions; where every edge has
a sign: positive to denote a friendly relation,
or negative to denote an antagonistic relation.
We also connect our analysis to social psy-
chology theories of balance. We show that the
automatically predicted networks are consis-
tent with those theories. Inspired by that, we
present a technique for identifying subgroups
in discussions by partitioning singed networks
representing them.

1 Introduction

Most online communities involve a mixture of pos-
itive and negative relations between users. Positive
relations may indicate friendship, agreement, or ap-
proval. Negative relations usually indicate antago-
nism, opposition, or disagreement.

Most of the research on relations in social media
applications has almost exclusively focused on pos-
itive links between individuals (e.g. friends, fans,
followers, etc.). We think that one of the main rea-
sons, of why the interplay of positive and negative
links did not receive enough attention, is the lack of
a notion for explicitly expressing negative interac-
tions. Recently, this problem has received increas-
ing attention. However, all studies have been limited
to a handful of datasets from applications that allow
users to explicitly label relations as either positive or

negative (e.g. trust/distrust on Epinion (Leskovec et
al., 2010b) and friends/foes on Slashdot (Kunegis et
al., 2009)).

Predicting positive/negative relations between
discussants is related to another well studied prob-
lem, namely debate stance recognition. The ob-
jective of this problem is to identify which partic-
ipants are supporting and which are opposing the
topic being discussed. This line of work does not
pay enough attention to the relations between par-
ticipants, rather it focuses on participant’s stance to-
ward the topic. It also assumes that every partici-
pant either supports or opposes the topic being dis-
cussed. This is a simplistic view that ignore the
nature of complex topics that has many aspects in-
volved which may result in more than two subgroups
with different opinions.

In this work, we apply Natural Language Pro-
cessing techniques to text correspondences ex-
changed between individuals to identify the under-
lying signed social structure in online communities.
We present a method for identifying user attitude
and for automatically constructing a signed social
network representation of discussions. We apply
the proposed methods to a large set of discussion
posts. We evaluate the performance using a manu-
ally labeled dataset. We also conduct a large scale
evaluation by showing that predicted links are con-
sistent with the principals of social psychology the-
ories, namely the Structural Balance Theory (Hei-
der, 1946). The balance theory has been shown to
hold both theoretically (Heider, 1946) and empiri-
cally (Leskovec et al., 2010c) for a variety of social
community settings. Finally, we present a method
for identifying subgroups in online discussions by
identifying groups with high density of intra-group
positive relations and high density of inter-group
negative relations. This method is capable of identi-
fying subgroups even if the community splits into
more than two subgroups which is more general
than stance recognition which assumes that only two
groups exist.

59



B 

C 

D 

A E 

F 
G 

I 

H 

Positive 
Negative 

Source Target Sign Evidence from Text 

A E - I have to disagree with what you are saying.  

G A - You are missing the entire point, he is putting lives at risk. 

D I - and you manufacture lies for what reason? 

E G + you have explained your position very well. 

C H + I am neutral on this, but I agree with your assessment! 

Figure 1: An example showing a signed social network
along with evidence from text that justifies edge signs.

The input to our algorithm is a set of text corre-
spondences exchanged between users (e.g. posts or
comments). The output is a signed network where
edges signify the existence of an interaction between
two users. The resulting network has polarity asso-
ciated with every edge. Edge polarity is a means for
indicating positive or negative affinity between two
individuals.

Figure 1 shows a signed network representation
for a subset of posts from a long discussion thread.
The thread discussed the November 2010 Wikileaks
cable release. We notice that participants split into
two groups, one supporting and one opposing the
leak. We also notice that most negative edges are
between groups, and most positive edges are within
groups. It is worth mentioning that networks gen-
erated from larger datasets (i.e. with thousands of
posts) have much more noise compared to this ex-
ample.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In
section 2, we review some of the related prior work
on mining sentiment from text, mining online dis-
cussions, extracting social networks from text, and
analyzing signed social networks. We define our
problem and explain our approach in Section 3. Sec-
tion 4 describes our dataset. Results and discussion
are presented in Section 5. We present a method for
identifying subgroups in online discussions in Sec-
tion 3.3. We conclude in Section 6.

2 Related Work

In this section, we survey several lines of research
that are related to our work.

2.1 Mining Sentiment from Text
Our general goal of mining attitude from one indi-
vidual toward another makes our work related to a
huge body of work on sentiment analysis. One such
line of research is the well-studied problem of iden-
tifying the polarity of individual words (Hatzivas-
siloglou and McKeown, 1997; Turney and Littman,
2003; Kim and Hovy, 2004; Takamura et al., 2005).
Subjectivity analysis is yet another research line that
is closely related to our general goal of mining at-
titude. The objective of subjectivity analysis is to
identify text that presents opinion as opposed to ob-
jective text that presents factual information (Wiebe,
2000; Hatzivassiloglou and Wiebe, 2000; Banea et
al., 2008; Riloff and Wiebe, 2003). Our work is dif-
ferent from subjectivity analysis because we are not
only interested in discriminating between opinions
and facts. Rather, we are interested in identifying
the polarity of interactions between individuals. Our
method is not restricted to phrases or words, rather it
generalizes this to identifying the polarity of an in-
teraction between two individuals based on several
posts they exchange.

2.2 Stance Classification
Perhaps the closest work to this paper is the work on
stance classification. We notice that most of these
methods focus on the polarity of the written text as-
suming that anyone using positive text belongs to
one group and anyone using negative text belongs
to another. This works well for single-aspect topics
or entities like the ones used in (Tan et al., 2011)
(e.g. Obama, Sara Palin, Lakers, etc.). In this sim-
ple notion of topics, it is safe to assume that text
polarity is a good enough discriminator. This unfor-
tunately is not the case in online discussions about
complex topics having many aspects (e.g. abortion,
health care, etc.). In such complex topics, people use
positive and negative text targeting different aspects
of the topic, for example in the health care bill topic,
discussants expressed their opinion regarding many
aspects including: the enlarged coverage, the insur-
ance premiums, Obama, socialism, etc. This shows
that simply looking at text polarity is not enough to
identify groups.

Tan et al. (2011) studied how twitter following re-
lations can be used to improve stance classification.
Their main hypothesis is that connected users are
more likely to hold similar opinions. This may be
correct for the twitter following relations, but it is
not necessarily correct for open discussions where

60



no such relations exist. The only criterion that can be
used to connect discussants is how often they reply
to each other’s posts. We will show later that while
many people reply to people with similar opinions,
many others reply to people with different opinions
as well.

Thomas et al. (2006) address the same problem
of determining support and opposition as applied to
congressional floor-debates. They assess the agree-
ment/disagreement between different speakers by
training a text classifier and applying it to a win-
dow surrounding the names of other speakers. They
construct their training data by assuming that if two
speaker have the same vote, then every reference
connecting them is an agreement and vice versa.
We believe this will result in a very noisy train-
ing/testing set and hence we decided to recruit hu-
man annotators to create a training set. We found
out that many instances with references to other
discussants were labeled as neither agreement nor
disagreement regardless of whether the discussants
have similar or opposing positions. We will use this
system as a baseline and will show that the exis-
tence of positive/negative words close to a person
name does not necessarily show agreement or dis-
agreement with that person.

Hassan et al. (2010) use a language model based
approach for identifying agreement and disagree-
ment sentences in discussions. This work is limited
to sentences. It does not consider the overall rela-
tion between participants. It also does not consider
subgroup detection. We will use this method as a
baseline for one of our components and will show
that the proposed method outperforms it.

Murakami and Raymond (2010) present another
method for stance recognition. They use a small
number of hand crafted rules to identify agreement
and disagreement interactions. Hand crafted rules
usually result in systems with very low recall caus-
ing them to miss many agreement/disagreement in-
stances (they report 0.26 recall at the 0.56 preci-
sion level). We present a machine learning system
to solve this problem and achieve much better per-
formance. Park et al. (2011) propose a method for
finding news articles with different views on con-
tentious issues. Mohit et al. (2008) present a set
of heuristics for including disagreement informa-
tion in a minimum cut stance classification frame-
work. Galley et al. (2004) show the value of us-
ing durational and structural features for identify-
ing agreement and disagreement in spoken conver-

sational speech. They use features like duration of
spurts, speech rate, speaker overlap, etc. which are
not applicable to written language.

Our approach is different from agree-
ment/disagreement identification because we
not only study sentiment at the local sentiment
level but also at the global level that takes into
consideration many posts exchanged between
participants to build a signed network representation
of the discussion. Research on debate stance
recognition attempts to perform classification under
the “supporting vs. opposing” paradigm. However
such simple view might not always be accurate
for discussions on more complex topics with
many aspects. After building the signed network
representation of discussions, we present a method
that can detect how the large group could split into
many subgroups (not necessarily two) with coherent
opinions.

2.3 Extracting Social Networks from Text
Little work has been done on the front of extracting
social relations between individuals from text. El-
son et al. (2010) present a method for extracting so-
cial networks from nineteenth-century British nov-
els and serials. They link two characters based on
whether they are in conversation or not. McCal-
lum et al. (2007) explored the use of structured data
such as email headers for social network construc-
tion. Gruzd and Hyrthonthwaite (2008) explored the
use of post text in discussions to study interaction
patterns in e-learning communities. Extracting so-
cial power relations from natural language (i.e. who
influences whom) has been studied in (Bramsen et
al., 2011; Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al., 2011).

Our work is related to this line of research because
we employ natural language processing techniques
to reveal embedded social structures. Despite sim-
ilarities, our work is uniquely characterized by the
fact that we extract signed social networks with both
positive and negative links from text.

2.4 Signed Social Networks
Most of the work on social networks analysis has
only focused on positive interactions. A few recent
papers have taken the signs of edges into account.

Brzozowski et al. (2008) study the positive and
negative relationships between users of Essembly.
Essembly is an ideological social network that dis-
tinguishes between ideological allies and nemeses.
Kunegis et al. (2009) analyze user relationships in

61



the Slashdot technology news site. Slashdot allows
users of the website to tag other users as friends or
foes, providing positive and negative endorsements.
Leskovec et al. (2010b) study signed social networks
generated from Slashdot, Epinions, and Wikipedia.
They also connect their analysis to theories of signed
networks from social psychology. A similar study
used the same datasets for predicting positive and
negative links given their context (Leskovec et al.,
2010a).

All this work has been limited to analyzing a
handful of datasets for which an explicit notion of
both positive and negative relations exists. Our work
goes beyond this limitation by leveraging the power
of natural language processing to automate the dis-
covery of signed social networks using the text em-
bedded in the network.

The research presented in this paper extends this
previous work in a number of ways: (i) we present
a method based on linguistic analysis that finds in-
stances of showing positive or negative attitude be-
tween participants (ii) we propose a technique for
representing discussions as signed networks where a
sign is associated with every edge to denote whether
the relation is friendly or antagonistic (iii) we eval-
uate the proposed methods using human annotated
data and also conduct a large scale evaluation based
on social psychology theories; (iv) finally we present
a method for identifying subgroups that globally
splits the community involved in the discussion by
utilizing the dynamics of the local interactions be-
tween participants.

3 Approach

3.1 Identifying Attitude from Text

To build a signed network representation of discus-
sants, we start by trying to identify sentences that
show positive or negative attitude from the writer to
the addressee. The first step toward identifying at-
titude is to identify words with positive/negative se-
mantic orientation. The semantic orientation or po-
larity of a word indicates the direction the word devi-
ates from the norm (Lehrer, 1974). We use Opinion-
Finder (Wilson et al., 2005a) to identify words with
positive or negative semantic orientation. The polar-
ity of a word is also affected by the context where
the word appears. For example, a positive word that
appears in a negated context should have a negative
polarity. Other polarized words sometimes appear as
neutral words in some contexts. To identify contex-

tual polarity of words, a large set of features is used
including words, sentences, structure, and other fea-
tures similar to the method described in (Wilson et
al., 2005b).

Our overall objective is to find the direct attitude
between participants. Hence after identifying the se-
mantic orientation of individual words, we move on
to predicting which polarized expressions target the
addressee and which do not.

Text polarity alone cannot be used to identify at-
titude between participants. Sentences that show
an attitude are different from subjective sentences.
Subjective sentences are sentences used to express
opinions, evaluations, and speculations (Riloff and
Wiebe, 2003). While every sentence that shows an
attitude is a subjective sentence, not every subjective
sentence shows an attitude toward the recipient.

In this method, we address the problem of iden-
tifying sentences with attitude as a relation detec-
tion problem in a supervised learning setting. We
study sentences that has mentions to the addressee
and polarized expressions (negative/positive words
or phrases). Mentions could either be names of other
participants or second person pronouns (you, your,
yours) used in text posted as a reply to another par-
ticipant. Reply structure (i.e. who replies to whom)
is readily available in many discussion forums. In
cases where reply structure is not available, we can
use a method like the one in (Lin et al., 2009) to re-
cover it.

We predict whether the mention is related to the
polarized expression or not. We regard the mention
and the polarized expression as two entities and try
to learn a classifier that predicts whether the two en-
tities are related or not.

The text connecting the two entities offers a very
condensed representation of the information needed
to assess whether they are related or not. For ex-
ample the two sentences “you are completely un-
qualified” and “you know what, he is unqualified ...”
show two different ways the words “you”, and “un-
qualified” could appear in a sentence. In the first
case the polarized word “unqualified” refers to the
word “you”. In the second case, the two words are
not related. The information in the shortest path
between two entities in a dependency tree can be
used to assert whether a relationship exists between
them (Bunescu and Mooney, 2005).

The sequence of words connecting the two enti-
ties is a very good predictor of whether they are re-
lated or not. However, these paths are completely

62



lexicalized and consequently their performance will
be limited by data sparseness. To alleviate this prob-
lem, we use higher levels of generalization to rep-
resent the path connecting the two tokens. These
representations are the part-of-speech tags, and the
shortest path in a dependency graph connecting the
two tokens. We represent every sentence with sev-
eral representations at different levels of generaliza-
tion. For example, the sentence “your ideas are very
inspiring” will be represented using lexical, polar-
ity, part-of-speech, and dependency information as
follows:

LEX: “YOUR ideas are very POS”
POS: “YOUR NNS VBP RB JJ POS”
DEP: “YOUR poss nsubj POS”

The set of features we use are the set of unigrams,
and bigrams representing the words, part-of-speech
tags, and dependency relations connecting the two
entities. For example the following features will be
set for the previous example:

YOUR ideas, YOUR NNS, YOUR poss,
poss nsubj, ...., etc.

We use Support Vector Machines (SVM) as a
learning system because it is good with handling
high dimensional feature spaces.

3.2 Extracting the Signed Network
In this subsection, we describe the procedure we
used to build the signed network given the compo-
nent we described in the previous subsection. This
procedure consists of two main steps. The first is
building the network without signs, and the second
is assigning signs to different edges.

To build the network, we parse our data to identify
different threads, posts and senders. Every sender is
represented with a node in the network. An edge
connects two nodes if there exists an interaction be-
tween the corresponding participants. We add a di-
rected edgeA→ B, ifA replies toB’s posts at least
n times in m different threads. We set m, and n to
2 in all of our experiments. The interaction infor-
mation (i.e. who replies to whom) can be extracted
directly from the thread structure. Alternatively, as
mentioned earlier, we can use a method similar to
the one presented in (Lin et al., 2009) to recover the
reply structure if it is not readily available.

Once we build the network, we move to the more
challenging task in which we associate a sign with

Participant Features
Number of posts per month for A (B)
Percentage of positive posts per month for A (B)
Percentage of negative posts per month for A (B)
gender
Interaction Features
Percentage/number of positive (negative) sentences per post
Percentage/number of positive (negative) posts per thread
Discussion Domain (e.g. politics, science, etc.)

Table 1: Features used by the Interaction Sign Classifier.

every edge. We have shown in the previous section
how sentences with positive and negative attitude
can be extracted from text. Unfortunately the sign
of an interaction cannot be trivially inferred from the
polarity of sentences. For example, a single negative
sentence written by A and directed to B does not
mean that the interaction between A and B is neg-
ative. One way to solve this problem would be to
compare the number of negative sentences to posi-
tive sentences in all posts betweenA andB and clas-
sify the interaction according to the plurality value.
We will show later, in our experiments section, that
such a simplistic method does not perform well in
predicting the sign of an interaction.

As a result, we decided to pose the problem as a
classical supervised learning problem. We came up
with a set of features that we think are good predic-
tors of the interaction sign, and we trained a classi-
fier using those features on a labeled dataset. Our
features include numbers and percentages of pos-
itive/negative sentences per post, posts per thread,
and so on. A sentence is labeled as positive/negative
if a relation has been detected in this sentence be-
tween a mention referring to the addressee and a
positive/negative expression. A post is considered
positive/negative based on the majority of relations
detected in it. We use two sets of features. The first
set is related to A only or B only. The second set
is related to the interactions between A and B. The
features are summarized in Table 1.

3.3 Sub-Group Detection

In any discussion, different subgroups may emerge.
Members of every subgroup usually have a common
focus (positive or negative) toward the topic being
discussed. Each member of a group is more likely
to show positive attitude to members of the same
group, and negative attitude to members of opposing
groups. The signed network representation could
prove to be very useful for identifying those sub-
groups. To detect subgroups in a discussion thread,

63



we would like to partition the corresponding signed
network such that positive intra-group links and neg-
ative inter-group links are dense.

This problem is related to the constrained cluster-
ing (Wagstaff et al., 2001) and the correlation clus-
tering problem (Bansal et al., 2004). In constrained
clustering, a pairwise similarity metric (which is
not available in our domain), and a set of must-
link/cannot-link constraints are used with a standard
data clustering algorithm. Correlation clustering op-
erates in a scenario where given a signed graph
G = (V,E) where the edge label indicates whether
two nodes are similar (+) or different (-), the task
is to cluster the vertices so that similar objects are
grouped together. Bansal et. al (2004) proved NP-
hardness and gave constant-factor approximation al-
gorithms for the special case in which the graph
is complete (full information) and every edge has
weight +1 or -1 which is not the case in our network.
Alternatively, we can use a greedy optimization al-
gorithm to find partitions. A criterion function for
a local optimization partitioning procedure is con-
structed such that positive links are dense within
groups and negative links are dense between groups.

For any potential partition C, we seek to optimize
the following function: P (C) = α

∑
n +(1−α)

∑
p

where
∑

n is the number of negative links between
nodes in the same subgroup,

∑
p is the number of

positive links between nodes in different subgroups,
and α is a trade factor that represents the importance
of the two terms. We set α to 0.5 in all our experi-
ments.

Clusters are selected such that: C∗ =
arg minP (C). A greedy optimization framework
is used to minimize P (C). Initially, nodes are ran-
domly partitioned into t different clusters and the
criterion function P is evaluated for that cluster. Ev-
ery cluster has a set of neighbors in the cluster space.
A neighbor cluster is obtained by moving one node
from one cluster to another, or by exchanging two
nodes in two different clusters. Neighbor partitions
are evaluated, and if one with a lower value for the
criterion function is found, it is set as the current
partition. This greedy procedure is repeated with
random restarts until a minimal solution is found.
To determine the number of subgroups t, we select
t that minimizes the optimization function P (C). In
all experiments we used an upper limit of t = 5.
This technique was able to identify the correct num-
ber of subgroups in 77% of the times. In the rest of
the cases, the number was different from the correct

number by at most 1 except for a single case where
it was 2.

4 Data

4.1 Signed Network Extraction

Our data consists of a large amount of discussion
threads collected from online discussion forums. We
collected around 41, 000 topics (threads) and 1.2M
posts from the period between the end of 2008 and
the end of 2010. All threads were in English and had
5 posts or more. They covered 11 different domains
including: politics, religion, science, etc. The aver-
age number of participants per domain is 1320 and
per topic is 52. The data was tokenized, sentence-
split, and part-of-speech tagged with the OpenNLP
toolkit. It was parsed with the Stanford parser (Klein
and Manning, 2003).

We randomly selected around 5300 posts (1000
interactions), and asked human annotators to label
them. Our annotators were instructed to read all the
posts exchanged between two participants and de-
cide whether the interaction between them is posi-
tive or negative. We used Amazon Mechanical Turk
for annotations. Following previous work (Callison-
Burch, 2009; Akkaya et al., 2010), we took sev-
eral precautions to maintain data integrity. We re-
stricted annotators to those based in the US to main-
tain an acceptable level of English fluency. We also
restricted annotators to those who have more than
95% approval rate for all previous work. Moreover,
we asked three different annotators to label every in-
teraction. The label was computed by taking the ma-
jority vote among the three annotators. We refer to
this data as the Interactions Dataset.

We ran a different annotation task where we se-
lected sentences including mentions referring to dis-
cussants (names or pronouns) and polarized expres-
sions. Annotators were asked to select sentences
where the polarized attribute is referring to the men-
tion and hence show a positive or negative attitude
toward other discussion participants. This resulted
in a set of 5000 manually annotated sentences. We
refer to this data as the Sentences Dataset.

We asked three different annotators to label ev-
ery instance. The kappa measure between the three
groups of annotations was 0.62 for the Interactions
Dataset and 0.64 for the Sentences Dataset. To bet-
ter assess the quality of the annotations, we asked a
trained annotator to label 10% of the data. We mea-
sured the agreement between the expert annotator

64



Logistic Reg.

Class Pos. Neg. Weigh. Avg.
Precision 0.848 0.724 0.809

Recall 0.884 0.657 0.812
F-Measure 0.866 0.689 0.81
Accuracy - - 0.812

SVM

Precision 0.906 0.71 0.844
Recall 0.847 0.809 0.835

F-Measure 0.875 0.756 0.838
Accuracy - - 0.835

Table 2: Interaction sign classifier performance.

Classifier Random Thresh-Num Thresh-Perc. SVM
Accuracy 65% 69% 71% 83.5%

Table 3: A comparison of different sign interaction clas-
sifiers.

and the majority label from Mechanical Turk. The
kappa measure was 0.69 for the Interactions Dataset
and 0.67 for the Sentences Dataset.

4.2 Sub-group Detection
We used a dataset of more than 42 topics and ap-
proximately 9000 posts collected from two political
forums (Createdebate1 and Politicalforum2). The fo-
rum administrators ran a poll asking participants to
select their stance from a set of possible answers
and hence the dataset was self-labeled with respect
to groups. We also used a set of discussions from
the Wikipedia discussion section. When a topic on
Wikipedia is disputed, the editors of that topic start a
discussion about it. We collected 117 Wikipedia dis-
cussion threads. The threads contain a total of 1,867
posts. The discussions were annotated by an expert
annotator (a professor in sociolinguistics, not an au-
thor of the paper) who was instructed to read each
of the Wikipedia discussion threads in its entirety
and determine whether the discussants split into sub-
groups, in which case he was asked to identify the
subgroup membership for each discussant. In to-
tal, we had 159 topics with an average of approxi-
mately 500 posts, 60 participants and 2.7 subgroups
per topic. Examples of the topics include: Arizona
immigration law, airport security, oil spill, evolution,
Ireland partitions, abortion and many others.

5 Results and Discussion

We performed experiments on the data described
in the previous section. We trained and tested the
sentence with the attitude detection classifiers de-
scribed in Section 3.1 using the Sentences Dataset.

1www.createdebate.com
2www.politicalforum.com

We also trained and tested the interaction sign clas-
sifier described in Section 3.2 using the Interactions
Dataset. We built one signed social network for ev-
ery domain (e.g. politics, economics, etc.). We de-
cided to build a network for every domain as op-
posed to one single network because the relation be-
tween any two individuals may vary across domains
(e.g. politics vs. science). In the rest of this section,
we will describe the experiments we did to assess the
performance of the sentences with attitude detection
and interaction sign prediction steps.

In addition to classical evaluation, we evaluate
our results using the structural balance theory which
has been shown to hold both theoretically (Heider,
1946) and empirically (Leskovec et al., 2010c). We
validate our results by showing that the automati-
cally extracted networks mostly agree with the the-
ory. We evaluated the approach using the structural
balance theory because it presents a global (pertain-
ing to relations between multiple edges) and large-
scale (used millions of posts and thousands of users)
evaluation of the results as opposed to traditional
evaluation which is local in nature (only considers
one edge at a time) and smaller in scale (used thou-
sands of posts).

5.1 Identifying Sentences with Attitude
We compare the proposed methods to two baselines.
The first baseline is based on the work of (Thomas
et al., 2006). We used the speaker agreement com-
ponent presented in (Thomas et al., 2006) as a base-
line. The speaker agreement component is one step
in their approach. In this component, they used
an SVM classifier trained using a window of text
surrounding references to other speakers to predict
agreement/disagreement between speakers.

We build an SVM text classifier trained on the
sentence at which the mention referring to the other
participant occurred. We refer to this baseline as
the Text Classification approach. The second base-
lines adopts the language model approach presented
in (Hassan et al., 2010). Two language models
are trained using a stream of words, part-of-speech
tags, and dependency relations, one for sentences
that show an attitude and one for sentences that do
not. New sentences are classified based on gener-
ation likelihoods. We refer to this baseline as the
Language Models approach.

We tested this component using the Sentences
Dataset described in Section 4. We compared the
performance of the proposed method and the two

65



Extracted Networks Random Networks
Domain (+ + +) (+ +−) (+−−) (−−−) (+ + +) (+ +−) (+−−) (−−−)
abortion 51.67 26.31 18.92 0.48 35.39 43.92 18.16 2.52
current-events 67.36 22.26 8.76 0.23 54.08 36.90 8.39 0.64
off-topic-chat 65.28 23.54 9.45 0.25 58.07 34.59 6.88 0.46
economics 72.68 18.30 7.77 0.00 66.50 29.09 4.22 0.20
political opinions 60.60 24.24 12.81 0.43 45.97 40.79 12.06 1.19
environment 47.46 32.54 17.26 0.30 37.38 43.61 16.89 2.12
latest world news 58.29 22.41 16.33 0.62 42.26 42.20 13.98 1.56
religion 47.17 25.89 22.56 1.42 39.68 42.94 15.51 1.87
science-technology 57.53 26.03 14.33 0.00 50.14 38.93 10.05 0.87
terrorism 64.96 23.36 9.46 0.73 41.54 42.42 14.36 1.68

Table 4: Percentage of different types of triangles in the extracted networks vs. the random networks.

Method Accuracy Precision Recall F1
Text Classification 60.4 61.1 60.2 60.6
Language Models 80.3 81.0 79.4 80.2
Relation Extraction 82.3 82.3 82.3 82.3

Table 5: Comparison of attitude identification methods.

baselines. Table 5 compares the precision, recall,
F1, and accuracy for the three methods. The text
classification based approach does much worse than
others. The reasons is that it ignores the structure
and uses much less information (part-of-speech tags
and dependency trees are not used) compared to the
other methods. Additionally, the short length of the
sentences compared to what is typical in text clas-
sification may have had a bad effect on the perfor-
mance. Both other models try to learn the char-
acteristics of the path connecting the mention and
the polarized expression. We notice that optimizing
the weights for unigram and bigrams features using
SVM results in a better performance compared to
language models because it does not have the con-
straints imposed by the former model on the learned
weights.

We evaluated the importance of the feature types
(i.e. dependency vs. pos tags vs words) by measur-
ing the chi-squared statistic for every feature with
respect to the class. Dependency features were most
helpful, but other types of features helped improve
the performance as well.

5.2 Interaction Sign Classifier

We used the relation detection classifier described in
Section 3.1 to find sentences with positive and nega-
tive attitude. The output of this classifier was used to
compute the features described in Section 3.2, which
were used to train a classifier that predicts the sign
of an interaction between any two individuals.

We used both Support Vector Machines (SVM)
and logistic regression to train the sign interaction

classifier. We report several performance metrics for
them in Table 2. We notice that the SVM classifier
performs better with an accuracy of 83.5% and an
F-measure of 81%. All results were computed using
10 fold cross validation on the labeled data. To bet-
ter assess the performance of the proposed classifier,
we compare it to a baseline that labels the relation as
negative if the percentage of negative sentences ex-
ceeds a particular threshold, otherwise it is labeled
as positive. The thresholds were empirically esti-
mated using a separate development set. The accu-
racy of this baseline is only 71%.

To better assess the performance of the proposed
classifier, we compare it to three baselines. The first
is a random baseline that predicts an interaction as
positive with probability p that equals the proportion
of positive instances to all instances in the training
set. The second classifier (Thresh-Num) labels the
edge as negative if the number of negative instances
exceeds a threshold Tn. The third classifier (Thresh-
Perc) labels the edge as negative if the percentage of
negative instances to all instances exceeds a thresh-
old Tp. The cutoff thresholds were estimated using
a separate development set.

The 3 baselines were tested using the entire la-
beled dataset. The SVM classifier was tested using
10 fold cross validation. The accuracy of the ran-
dom classifier, the two based on a cut off number
and percentage , and the SVM classifier are shown
in Table 3. We notice that the random classifier per-
forms worst, and the classifier based on percentage
cutoff outperforms the one based on number cut-
off. The SVM classifier significantly outperforms all
other classifiers. We tried to train a classifier using
both the number and percentage of negative and pos-
itive posts. The improvement over using the baseline
using the percentage of negative posts was not sta-
tistically significant.

We evaluated the importance of the features listed

66



in Table 1 by measuring the chi-squared statistic for
every feature with respect to the class. We found
out that the features describing the interaction be-
tween the two participants are more informative than
the ones describing individuals characteristics. The
later features are still helpful though and they im-
prove the performance by a statistically significant
amount. We also noticed that all features based on
percentages are more informative than those based
on counts. The most informative features are: per-
centage of negative posts per tread, percentage of
negative sentences per post, percentage of positive
posts per thread, number of negative posts, and dis-
cussion domain.

5.3 Structural Balance Theory
The structural balance theory is a psychological the-
ory that tries to explain the dynamics of signed so-
cial interactions. It has been shown to hold both the-
oretically (Heider, 1946) and empirically (Leskovec
et al., 2010c). In this section, we study the agree-
ment between the theory and our automatically ex-
tracted networks. The theory has its origins in the
work of Heider (1946). It was then formalized in
a graph theoretic form by (Cartwright and Harary,
1956). The theory is based on the principles that “the
friend of my friend is my friend”, “the enemy of my
friend is my enemy”, “the friend of my enemy is
my enemy”, and variations on these. The structural
balance theory states that triangles that have an odd
number of positive signs (+ + + and + - -) are bal-
anced, while triangles that have an even number of
positive signs (- - - and + + -) are not.

In this section, we compare the predictions of
edge signs made by our system to the structural bal-
ance theory by counting the frequencies of differ-
ent types of triangles in the predicted network. Ta-
ble 4 shows the frequency of every type of trian-
gle for 10 different domains. To better understand
these numbers, we compare them to the frequencies
of triangles in a set of random networks. We shuf-
fle the signs for all edges on every network keeping
the fractions of positive and negative edges constant.
We repeat shuffling for 1000 times and report the av-
erage.

We find that the all-positive triangle (+ + +) is
overrepresented in the generated network compared
to chance across all domains. We also see that the
triangle with two positive edges (+ + −), and the
all-negative triangle (− − −) are underrepresented
compared to chance across all domains. The tri-

angle with a single positive edge is slightly over-
represented in most but not all of the topics com-
pared to chance. This shows that the predicted net-
works mostly agree with the structural balance the-
ory. The slightly non standard behavior of the tri-
angle with one positive edge could be explained in
light of the weak balance theory. In this theory,
Davis (1967) states that this triangle, which corre-
sponds to the “enemy of enemy is my friend” propo-
sition, holds only if the network can be partitioned
into exactly two subsets, but not when there are more
than two. In general, the percentage of balanced tri-
angles in the predicted networks is higher than in
the shuffled networks, and hence the balanced trian-
gles are significantly overrepresented compared to
chance showing that our automatically constructed
network is similar to explicit signed networks in that
they both mostly agree with the balance theory.

5.4 Sub-Group Detection
We compare the performance of the sub-group de-
tection method to three baselines. The first base-
line uses graph clustering (GC) to partition a net-
work based on the frequency of interaction between
participants. We build a graph where each node
represents a participant. Edges link participants if
they exchange posts, and edge weights are based on
the number of posts exchanged. The second base-
line (TC) is based on the premise that participants
with similar text are more likely to belong to the
same subgroup. We measure text similarity by com-
puting the cosine similarity between the tf-idf rep-
resentations of the text in a high dimensional vec-
tor space. We tried two methods for partitioning
those graphs: spectral partitioning (Luxburg, 2007)
and a hierarchical agglomeration algorithm which
works by greedily optimizing the modularity for
graphs (Clauset et al., 2004). The third baseline is
based on stance classification approaches (e.g. (Tan
et al., 2011)). In this baseline we put all the partic-
ipants who use more positive text in one subgroup
and the participants who use more negative text in
another subgroup. Text polarity is identified using
the method described in Section 3.1.

Table 6 shows the average purity (Purity), entropy
(Entropy), Normalizes Mutual Information (NMI),
and Rand Index (RandIndex) values of the method
based on signed networks and the baselines using
different partitioning algorithms. The differences in
the results shown in the table are statistically sig-
nificant at the 0.05 level (as indicated by a 2-tailed

67



Figure 2: A signed network representing participants in a discussion about the “Health Care Reform Bill”. Blue (dark)
nodes represent participants with the bill, Yellow (light) nodes represent participants against the bill, red (solid) edges
represent negative attitude, while green (dashed) edges represent positive attitude.

Createdebate Politicalforum Wikipedia
Method Purity Entropy NMI RandIndex Purity Entropy NMI RandIndex Purity Entropy NMI RandIndex
GC - Spectral 0.50 0.85 0.28 0.40 0.50 0.88 0.27 0.39 0.49 0.89 0.33 0.35
GC - Hierarchical 0.48 0.86 0.30 0.41 0.47 0.89 0.31 0.40 0.49 0.87 0.38 0.39
TC - Spectral 0.50 0.85 0.31 0.43 0.48 0.90 0.30 0.45 0.51 0.87 0.40 0.46
TC - Hierarchical 0.49 0.90 0.35 0.46 0.48 0.91 0.33 0.49 0.53 0.80 0.40 0.49
Text Polarity 0.55 0.80 0.38 0.49 0.54 0.91 0.31 0.38 0.34 0.95 0.30 0.40
Signed Networks 0.64 0.74 0.46 0.59 0.58 0.80 0.43 0.55 0.65 0.54 0.51 0.60

Table 6: Comparison of the sub-group detection method to baseline systems

paired t-test).

We notice that partitioning the signed network
that was automatically extracted from text results in
significantly better partitions on the three datasets as
indicated by the higher Purity, NMI, and RandIndex
and the lower Entropy values it achieves. We believe
that the first two baselines performed poorly because
the interaction frequency and the text similarity are
not key factors in identifying subgroup structures.
Many people would respond to people they disagree
with more, while others would mainly respond to
people they agree with most of the time. Also, peo-
ple in opposing subgroups tend to use very similar
text when discussing the same topic and hence text
clustering does not work as well. The baseline that
classifies the stance of discussants based on the po-
larity of their text performed bad too because it over-
looks the fact that most of the discussed topics in our
datasets have multiple aspects and a discussant may
use both positive and negative text targeting differ-
ent aspects of the topic. An example of a signed net-
work and the corresponding subgtoups as extracted
from real data is showm in Figure 2.

6 Conclusions

In this paper, we have shown that natural language
processing techniques can be reliably used to extract
signed social networks from text correspondences.
We believe that this work brings us closer to un-
derstanding the relation between language use and
social interactions and opens the door to further re-
search efforts that go beyond standard social net-
work analysis by studying the interplay of positive
and negative connections. We rigorously evaluated
the proposed methods on labeled data and connected
our analysis to social psychology theories to show
that our predictions mostly agree with them. Finally,
we presented potential applications that benefit from
the automatically extracted signed network.

Acknowledgments

This research was funded in part by the Office of the
Director of National Intelligence, Intelligence Ad-
vanced Research Projects Activity. All statements
of fact, opinion or conclusions contained herein are
those of the authors and should not be construed as
representing the official views or policies of IARPA,
the ODNI or the U.S. Government

68



References

Cem Akkaya, Alexander Conrad, Janyce Wiebe, and
Rada Mihalcea. 2010. Amazon mechanical turk for
subjectivity word sense disambiguation. In Proceed-
ings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Creating
Speech and Language Data with Amazon’s Mechani-
cal Turk, CSLDAMT ’10, pages 195–203.

Carmen Banea, Rada Mihalcea, and Janyce Wiebe.
2008. A bootstrapping method for building subjec-
tivity lexicons for languages with scarce resources. In
LREC’08.

Nikhil Bansal, Avrim Blum, and Shuchi Chawla. 2004.
Correlation Clustering. Machine Learning, 56(1):89–
113.

Mohit Bansal, Claire Cardie, and Lillian Lee. 2008.
The power of negative thinking: Exploiting label dis-
agreement in the min-cut classification framework. In
Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on
Computational Linguistics: Posters.

Philip Bramsen, Martha Escobar-Molano, Ami Patel, and
Rafael Alonso. 2011. Extracting social power rela-
tionships from natural language. In Proceedings of the
49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies -
Volume 1, pages 773–782.

Michael J. Brzozowski, Tad Hogg, and Gabor Szabo.
2008. Friends and foes: ideological social network-
ing. In Proceeding of the twenty-sixth annual SIGCHI
conference on Human factors in computing systems,
pages 817–820, New York, NY, USA.

Razvan C. Bunescu and Raymond J. Mooney. 2005. A
shortest path dependency kernel for relation extrac-
tion. In Proceedings of the conference on Human
Language Technology and Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing, HLT ’05, pages 724–731,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Chris Callison-Burch. 2009. Fast, cheap, and creative:
evaluating translation quality using amazon’s mechan-
ical turk. In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
Volume 1 - Volume 1, EMNLP ’09, pages 286–295.

Dorwin Cartwright and Frank Harary. 1956. Structure
balance: A generalization of heiders theory. Psych.
Rev., 63.

Aaron Clauset, Mark E. J. Newman, and Cristopher
Moore. 2004. Finding community structure in very
large networks. Phys. Rev. E, 70:066111.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Lillian Lee, Bo Pang,
and Jon M. Kleinberg. 2011. Echoes of power: Lan-
guage effects and power differences in social interac-
tion. CoRR.

J. A. Davis. 1967. Clustering and structural balance in
graphs. Human Relations, 20:181–187.

David Elson, Nicholas Dames, and Kathleen McKeown.
2010. Extracting social networks from literary fiction.
In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 138–147,
Uppsala, Sweden, July.

Michel Galley, Kathleen McKeown, Julia Hirschberg,
and Elizabeth Shriberg. 2004. Identifying agree-
ment and disagreement in conversational speech: use
of bayesian networks to model pragmatic dependen-
cies. In Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting on
Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL ’04,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Anatoliy Gruzd and Caroline Haythornthwaite. 2008.
Automated discovery and analysis of social networks
from threaded discussions. In Proceedings of the In-
ternational Network of Social Network Analysis (IN-
SNA), St. Pete Beach, Florida.

Ahmed Hassan, Vahed Qazvinian, and Dragomir Radev.
2010. What’s with the attitude?: identifying sentences
with attitude in online discussions. In Proceedings of
the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 1245–1255.

Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou and Kathleen R. McKeown.
1997. Predicting the semantic orientation of adjec-
tives. In EACL’97, pages 174–181.

Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou and Janyce Wiebe. 2000. Ef-
fects of adjective orientation and gradability on sen-
tence subjectivity. In COLING, pages 299–305.

Fritz Heider. 1946. Attitudes and cognitive organization.
Journal of Psychology, 21:107–112.

Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy. 2004. Determining the
sentiment of opinions. In COLING, pages 1367–1373.

Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Accurate
unlexicalized parsing. In ACL’03, pages 423–430.

Jérôme Kunegis, Andreas Lommatzsch, and Christian
Bauckhage. 2009. The slashdot zoo: mining a so-
cial network with negative edges. In Proceedings of
the 18th international conference on World wide web,
pages 741–750, New York, NY, USA.

Adrienne Lehrer. 1974. Semantic fields and lezical struc-
ture. North Holland, Amsterdam and New York.

Jure Leskovec, Daniel Huttenlocher, and Jon Kleinberg.
2010a. Predicting positive and negative links in online
social networks. In Proceedings of the 19th interna-
tional conference on World wide web, pages 641–650,
New York, NY, USA.

Jure Leskovec, Daniel Huttenlocher, and Jon Kleinberg.
2010b. Signed networks in social media. In Proceed-
ings of the 28th international conference on Human
factors in computing systems, pages 1361–1370, New
York, NY, USA.

69



Jure Leskovec, Daniel Huttenlocher, and Jon Kleinberg.
2010c. Signed networks in social media. In CHI 2010,
pages 1361–1370, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Chen Lin, Jiang-Ming Yang, Rui Cai, Xin-Jing Wang,
and Wei Wang. 2009. Simultaneously modeling se-
mantics and structure of threaded discussions: a sparse
coding approach and its applications. In SIGIR ’09,
pages 131–138.

Ulrike Luxburg. 2007. A tutorial on spectral clustering.
Statistics and Computing, 17:395–416, December.

Andrew McCallum, Xuerui Wang, and Andrés Corrada-
Emmanuel. 2007. Topic and role discovery in so-
cial networks with experiments on enron and academic
email. J. Artif. Int. Res., 30:249–272, October.

Akiko Murakami and Rudy Raymond. 2010. Support or
oppose?: classifying positions in online debates from
reply activities and opinion expressions. In Proceed-
ings of the 23rd International Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics: Posters, pages 869–875.

Souneil Park, KyungSoon Lee, and Junehwa Song. 2011.
Contrasting opposing views of news articles on con-
tentious issues. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: Human Language Technologies - Volume 1, pages
340–349.

Ellen Riloff and Janyce Wiebe. 2003. Learning
extraction patterns for subjective expressions. In
EMNLP’03, pages 105–112.

Hiroya Takamura, Takashi Inui, and Manabu Okumura.
2005. Extracting semantic orientations of words using
spin model. In ACL’05, pages 133–140.

Chenhao Tan, Lillian Lee, Jie Tang, Long Jiang, Ming
Zhou, and Ping Li. 2011. User-level sentiment anal-
ysis incorporating social networks. In Proceedings
of the 17th ACM SIGKDD international conference
on Knowledge discovery and data mining, KDD ’11,
pages 1397–1405.

Matt Thomas, Bo Pang, and Lillian Lee. 2006. Get out
the vote: Determining support or opposition from con-
gressional floor-debate transcripts. In In Proceedings
of EMNLP, pages 327–335.

Peter Turney and Michael Littman. 2003. Measuring
praise and criticism: Inference of semantic orientation
from association. ACM Transactions on Information
Systems, 21:315–346.

Kiri Wagstaff, Claire Cardie, Seth Rogers, and Stefan
Schrödl. 2001. Constrained k-means clustering with
background knowledge. In Proceedings of the Eigh-
teenth International Conference on Machine Learning,
pages 577–584.

Janyce Wiebe. 2000. Learning subjective adjectives
from corpora. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence and

Twelfth Conference on Innovative Applications of Ar-
tificial Intelligence, pages 735–740.

Theresa Wilson, Paul Hoffmann, Swapna Somasun-
daran, Jason Kessler, Janyce Wiebe, Yejin Choi,
Claire Cardie, Ellen Riloff, and Siddharth Patward-
han. 2005a. Opinionfinder: a system for subjectiv-
ity analysis. In Proceedings of HLT/EMNLP on Inter-
active Demonstrations, HLT-Demo ’05, pages 34–35,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005b. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-
level sentiment analysis. In HLT/EMNLP’05, Vancou-
ver, Canada.

Bo Yang, William Cheung, and Jiming Liu. 2007. Com-
munity mining from signed social networks. IEEE
Trans. on Knowl. and Data Eng., 19(10):1333–1348.

70


