










































An Entity-Topic Model for Entity Linking


Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational Natural
Language Learning, pages 105–115, Jeju Island, Korea, 12–14 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

An Entity-Topic Model for Entity Linking 

Xianpei Han        Le Sun 
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences 

HaiDian District, Beijing, China. 
{xianpei, sunle}@nfs.iscas.ac.cn 

 
 

Abstract 

Entity Linking (EL) has received 
considerable attention in recent years. 
Given many name mentions in a document, 
the goal of EL is to predict their referent 
entities in a knowledge base. Traditionally, 
there have been two distinct directions of 
EL research: one focusing on the effects of 
mention’s context compatibility, assuming 
that “the referent entity of a mention is 
reflected by its context”; the other dealing 
with the effects of document’s topic 
coherence, assuming that “a mention’s 
referent entity should be coherent with the 
document’s main topics”. In this paper, we 
propose a generative model – called entity-
topic model, to effectively join the above 
two complementary directions together. By 
jointly modeling and exploiting the context 
compatibility, the topic coherence and the 
correlation between them, our model can 
accurately link all mentions in a document 
using both the local information (including 
the words and the mentions in a document) 
and the global knowledge (including the 
topic knowledge, the entity context 
knowledge and the entity name knowledge). 
Experimental results demonstrate the 
effectiveness of the proposed model. 

1 Introduction 
Entity Linking (EL) has received considerable 
research attention in recent years (McNamee & 
Dang, 2009; Ji et al., 2010). Given many name 
mentions in a document, the goal of EL is to 
predict their referent entities in a given knowledge 
base (KB), such as the Wikipedia1. For example, as 
                                                           
1 www.wikipedia.org 

shown in Figure 1, an EL system should identify 
the referent entities of the three mentions WWDC, 
Apple and Lion correspondingly are the entities 
Apple Worldwide Developers Conference, Apple 
Inc. and Mac OS X Lion in KB. The EL problem 
appears in many different guises throughout the 
areas of natural language processing, information 
retrieval and text mining. For instance, in many 
applications we need to collect all appearances of a 
specific entity in different documents, EL is an 
effective way to resolve such an information 
integration problem. Furthermore, EL can bridge 
the mentions in documents with the semantic 
information in knowledge bases (e.g., Wikipedia 
and Freebase 2 ), thus can provide a solid 
foundation for knowledge-rich methods. 

 
Figure 1. A Demo of Entity Linking 

Unfortunately, the accurate EL is often hindered 
by the name ambiguity problem, i.e., a name may 
refer to different entities in different contexts. For 
example, the name Apple may refer to more than 
20 entities in Wikipedia, such as Apple Inc., Apple 
(band) and Apple Bank. Traditionally, there have 
been two distinct directions in EL to resolve the 
name ambiguity problem: one focusing on the 
effects of mention’s context compatibility and the 
other dealing with the effects of document’s topic 
coherence. EL methods based on context 

                                                           
2 www.freebase.com 

At the WWDC 
conference, 

Apple  
introduces its 
new operating 

system release - 
Lion. 

Document Knowledge Base

Apple Inc. 

MAC OS X Lion 

Steve Jobs 

iPhone

Apple Worldwide 
Developers 
Conference 

California

105



compatibility assume that “the referent entity of a 
mention is reflected by its context”(Mihalcea & 
Cosomai, 2007; Zhang et al., 2010; Zheng et al., 
2010; Han & Sun, 2011; Kataria et al., 2011; Sen 
2012). For example, the context compatibility 
based methods will identify the referent entity of 
the mention Lion in Figure 1 is the entity Mac OS 
X Lion, since this entity is more compatible with its 
context words operating system and release than 
other candidates such as Lion(big cats) or 
Lion(band). EL methods based on topic coherence 
assume that “a mention’s referent entity should be 
coherent with document’s main topics” (Medelyan 
et al., 2008; Milne & Witten, 2008; Kulkarni et al., 
2009; Han et al., 2011). For example, the topic 
coherence based methods will link the mention 
Apple in Figure 1 to the entity Apple Inc., since it 
is more coherent with the document’s topic MAC 
OS X Lion Release than other referent candidates 
such as Apple (band) or Apple Bank. 

In recent years, both of the above two EL 
directions have shown their effectiveness to some 
extent, and obviously they are complementary to 
each other. Therefore we believe that bring the 
above two directions together will enhance the EL 
performance. Traditionally, the above two 
directions are usually be brought together using a 
hybrid method (Zhang and Sim, 2011; Ratinov et 
al., 2011; Han et al., 2011), i.e., the context 
compatibility and the topic coherence are first 
separately modeled, then their EL evidence are 
combined through an additional model. For 
example, Zhang and Sim (2011) first models the 
context compatibility as a context similarity and 
the topic coherence as a similarity between the 
underlying topics of documents and KB entries, 
then these two similarities are combined through 
an additional SVM classifier for the final EL 
decision. 

The main drawback of these hybrid methods, 
however, is that they model the context 
compatibility and the topic coherence separately, 
which makes it difficult to capture the mutual 
reinforcement effect between the above two 
directions. That is, the topic coherence and the 
context compatibility are highly correlated and 
their evidence can be used to reinforce each other 
in EL decisions. For example, in Figure 1, if the 
context compatibility gives a high likelihood the 
mention Apple refers to the entity Apple Inc., then 
this likelihood will give more evidence for this 

document’s topic is about MAC OS X Lion, and it 
in turn will reinforce the topic coherence between 
the entity MAC OS X Lion and the document. In 
reverse, once we known the topic of this document 
is about MAC OS X Lion, the context compatibility 
between the mention Apple and the entity Apple 
Inc. can be improved as the importance of the 
context words operating system and release will be 
increased using the topic knowledge. In this way, 
we believe that modeling the above two directions 
jointly, rather than separately, will further improve 
the EL performance by capturing the mutual 
reinforcement effect between the context 
compatibility and the topic coherence. 

In this paper, we propose a method to jointly 
model and exploit the context compatibility, the 
topic coherence and the correlation between them 
for better EL performance. Specifically, we 
propose a generative probabilistic model – called 
entity-topic model, which can uniformly model the 
text compatibility and the topic coherence as the 
statistical dependencies between the mentions, the 
words, the underlying entities and the underlying 
topics of a document by assuming that each 
document is generated according to the following 
two assumptions: 

1) Topic coherence assumption: All entities 
in a document should be centered around the main 
topics of the document. For example, the entity 
Apple Inc. tends to occur in documents about IT, 
but the entity Apple Bank  will more likely to occur 
in documents about bank or investment. 

2) Context compatibility assumption: The 
context words of a mention should be centered on 
its referent entity. For example, the words 
computer, phone and music tends to occur in the 
context of the entity Apple Inc., meanwhile the 
words loan, invest and deposit will more likely to 
occur in the context of the entity Apple Bank. 

In this way, the entity-topic model uniformly 
models the context compatibility, the topic 
coherence and the correlation between them as the 
dependencies between the observed information 
(the mentions and the words) in a document and 
the hidden information we want to know (the 
underlying topics and entities) through the global 
knowledge (including the topic knowledge, the 
entity name knowledge and the entity context 
knowledge). And the EL problem can now be 
decomposed into the following two inference tasks: 

106



1) Predicting the underlying topics and the 
underlying entities of a document based on the 
observed information and the global knowledge. 
We call such a task the prediction task; 

2) Estimating the global knowledge from data. 
Notice that the topic knowledge, the entity 
name knowledge and the entity context 
knowledge are all not previously given, thus we 
need to estimate them from data. We call such a 
task the knowledge discovery task. 

Because the accurate inference of the above two 
tasks is intractable in our entity-topic model, this 
paper also develops an approximate inference 
algorithm – the Gibbs sampling algorithm to solve 
them. 

Contributions. The main contributions of this 
paper are summarized below: 

 We propose a generative probabilistic 
model, the entity-topic model, which can jointly 
model and exploit the context compatibility, the 
topic coherence and the correlation between them 
for better EL performance; 

 We develop a Gibbs sampling algorithm to 
solve the two inference tasks of our model: 1) 
Discovering the global knowledge from data; and 2) 
Collectively making accurate EL decisions. 

This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
describes the proposed entity-topic model. Section 
3 demonstrates the Gibbs sampling algorithm. The 
experimental results are presented and discussed in 
Section 4. The related work is reviewed in Section 
5. Finally we conclude this paper in Section 6. 

2 The Entity-Topic Model for Entity 
Linking 

In this section, we describe the proposed entity-
topic model. In following we first demonstrate how 
to capture the context compatibility, the topic 
coherence and the correlation between them in the 
document generative process, then we incorporate 
the global knowledge generation into our model 
for knowledge estimation from data. 

2.1 Document Generative Process 
As shown in Section 1, we jointly model the 
context compatibility and the topic coherence as 
the statistical dependencies in the entity-topic 
model by assuming that all documents are 
generated in a topical coherent and context 

compatible way. In following we describe the 
document generative process. 

In our model, each document d is assumed 
composed of two types of information, i.e., the 
mentions and the words. Formally, we represent a 
document as: 

A document is a collection of M mentions and 
N words, denoted as d = {m1, …, mM; w1, …, 
wN}, with mi the ith mention and wj the jth word. 
For example, the document in Figure 1 is 

represented as d = {WWDC, Apple, Lion;   at, the, 
conference, …}, where WWDC, Apple, Lion are 
the three mentions and the other are the words. 

To generate a document, our model relies on 
three types of global knowledge, including: 

 Topic Knowledge ÁÁ  (The entity 
distribution of topics): In our model, all entities in 
a document are generated based on its underlying 
topics, with each topic is a group of semantically 
related entities. Statistically, we model each topic 
as a multinomial distribution of entities, with the 
probability indicating the likelihood an entity to be 
extracted from this topic. For example, we may 
have a topic ÁApple Inc:ÁApple Inc:= {Steve Jobs0.12, iPhone0.07, 
iPod0.08, …}, indicating the likelihood of the entity 
Steve Jobs be extracted from this topic is 0.12, etc. 

 Entity Name Knowledge ÃÃ  (The name 
distribution of entities): In our model, all name 
mentions are generated using the name knowledge 
of its referent entity. Specifically, we model the 
name knowledge of an entity as a multinomial 
distribution of its names, with the probability 
indicating the likelihood this entity is mentioned 
by the name. For example, the name knowledge of 
the entity Apple Inc. may be ÃApple Inc:ÃApple Inc: = {Apple0.51, 
Apple Computer Inc.0.10, Apple Inc.0.07, …}, indicating 
that the entity Apple Inc. is mentioned by the name 
Apple with probability 0.51, etc. 

 Entity Context Knowledge »» (The context 
word distribution of entities): In our model, all 
context words of an entity’s mention are generated 
using its context knowledge. Concretely, we model 
the context knowledge of an entity as a 
multinomial distribution of words, with the 
probability indicating the likelihood a word 
appearing in this entity’s context. For example, we 
may have »Apple Inc:»Apple Inc:= {phone0.07, computer0.10, IT0.06, 
phone0.002, …}, indicating that the word computer 
appearing in the context of the entity Apple Inc. 
with probability 0.1, etc. 

107



 
Figure 2. The document generative process, with 
Dir(:)Dir(:), Mult(:)Mult(:) and Unif(:)Unif(:) correspondingly 

Dirichlet, Multinomial and Uniform distribution 

Given the entity list E = {e1, e2, …, eE} in the 
knowledge base, the word list V = {w1, w2, …, wv}, 
the entity name list K = {n1, n2, …, nK} and the 
global knowledge described in above, the 
generation process of a document collection 
(corpus) D = {d1, d2, …, dD} is shown in Figure 2.  
To demonstrate the generation process, we also 
demonstrate how the document in Figure 1 can be 
generated using our model in following steps: 

Step 1: The model generates the topic 
distribution of the document as μdμd = {Apple Inc.0.45, 
Operating System(OS)0.55}; 

Step 2: For the three mentions in the document: 
i. According to the topic distribution  μdμd, the 

model generates their topic assignments as 
z1=Apple Inc., z2 = Apple Inc., z3 = OS; 

ii. According to the topic knowledge ÁÁApple Inc. , 
ÁÁOS  and the topic assignments z1, z2, z3, the model 
generates their entity assignments as e1 = Apple 
Worldwide Developers Conference, e2 = Apple Inc., 
e3 = Mac OS X Lion; 

iii. According to the name knowledge of the 
entities Apple Worldwide Developers Conference, 
Apple Inc. and Mac OS X Lion, our model 
generates the three mentions as m1=WWDC, m2 = 
Apple, m3 = Lion; 

Step 3: For all words in the document: 
i. According to the referent entity set in 

document ed = {Apple Worldwide Developers 
Conference, Apple Inc., Mac OS X Lion}, the 
model generates the target entity they describes as 

a3=Apple Worldwide Developers Conference and 
a4=Apple Inc.; 

ii. According to their target entity and the 
context knowledge of these entities, the model 
generates the context words in the document. For 
example, according to the context knowledge of 
the entities Apple Worldwide Developers 
Conference, the model generates its context word 
w3 =conference, and according to the context 
knowledge of the entity Apple Inc., the model 
generates its context word w4 = introduces. 

Through the above generative process, we can 
see that all entities in a document are extracted 
from the document’s underlying topics, ensuring 
the topic coherence; and all words in a document 
are extracted from the context word distributions 
of its referent entities, resulting in the context 
compatibility. Furthermore, the generation of 
topics, entities, mentions and words are highly 
correlated, thus our model can capture the 
correlation between the topic coherence and the 
context compatibility. 

2.2 Global Knowledge Generative Process 
The entity-topic model relies on three types of 
global knowledge (including the topic knowledge, 
the entity name knowledge and the entity context 
knowledge) to generate a document. Unfortunately, 
all three types of global knowledge are unknown 
and thus need to be estimated from data. In this 
paper we estimate the global knowledge through 
Bayesian inference by also incorporating the 
knowledge generation process into our model. 

Specifically, given the topic number T, the entity 
number E, the name number K and the word 
number V, the entity-topic model generates the 
global knowledge as follows: 

1) Áj¯ » Dir(¯)Áj¯ » Dir(¯) 
For each topic z, our model samples its entity 
distribution ÁzÁz from an E-dimensional Dirichlet 
distribution with hyperparameter ¯̄. 

2) Ãj° » Dir(°)Ãj° » Dir(°) 
For each entity e, our model samples its name 
distribution ÃeÃe from a K-dimensional Dirichlet 
distribution with hyperparameter °°. 

3) »j± » Dir(±)»j± » Dir(±) 

Given the topic knowledge ÁÁ , the entity name 
knowledge ÃÃ and the entity context knowledge »»: 
1. For each doc d in D, sample its topic distribution
μd » Dir(®); 

2. For each of the Md mentions mi in doc d: 
a) Sample a topic assignment zi » Mult(μd); 
b) Sample an entity assignment ei » Mult(Ázi);
c) Sample a mention mi » Mult(Ãei); 

3. For each of the Nd words wi in doc d: 
a) Sample a target entity it describes from d’s 
referent entities ai » Unif(em1 ; em2 ;¢ ¢ ¢ ; emd);
b) Sample a describing word using aiai’s context 
word distribution wi » Mult(»ai). 

108



For each entity e, our model samples its context 
word distribution »e»e  from a V-dimensional 
Dirichlet distribution with hyperparameter ±±. 

Finally, the full entity-topic model is shown in 
Figure 3 using the plate representation. 

ÁÁ

±±
 

Figure 3. The plate representation of the entity-
topic model 

2.3 The Probability of a Corpus 
Using the entity-topic model, the probability of 
generating a corpus D={d1, d2, …, dD} given 
hyperparameters ®®, ¯̄, °° and ±± can be expressed as: 

P (D;®; ¯; °; ±) =
Y
d

P (md;wd; ®; ¯; °; ±)

=
Y
d

X
ed

P (edj®; ¯)P (mdjed; °)P (wdjed; ±)

=

Z
Á

P (Áj¯)
Z

Ã

P (Ãj°)
Y
d

X
ed

P (mdjed; Ã)

£
Z

»

P (»j±)
X
ad

P (adjed)P (wdjad; »)

£
Z
μ

P (μj®)P (edjμ; Á)dμd»dÃdÁ (2:1)

P (D;®; ¯; °; ±) =
Y
d

P (md;wd; ®; ¯; °; ±)

=
Y
d

X
ed

P (edj®; ¯)P (mdjed; °)P (wdjed; ±)

=

Z
Á

P (Áj¯)
Z

Ã

P (Ãj°)
Y
d

X
ed

P (mdjed; Ã)

£
Z

»

P (»j±)
X
ad

P (adjed)P (wdjad; »)

£
Z
μ

P (μj®)P (edjμ; Á)dμd»dÃdÁ (2:1)

 

where mdmd  and eded  correspondingly the set of 
mentions and their entity assignments in document 
d, wdwd and adad correspondingly the set of words and 
their entity assignments in document d. 

3 Inference using Gibbs Sampling 
In this section, we describe how to resolve the 
entity linking problem using the entity-topic model. 
Overall, there were two inference tasks for EL: 

1) The prediction task. Given a document d, 
predicting its entity assignments (eded for mentions 
and adad  for words) and topic assignments ( zdzd ). 
Notice that here the EL decisions are just the 
prediction of per-mention entity assignments (eded). 

2) The knowledge discovery task. Given a 
corpus D={d1, d2, …, dD}, estimating the global 
knowledge (including the entity distribution of 
topics ÁÁ, the name distribution ÃÃ and the context 
word distribution »» of entities) from data. 

Unfortunately, due to the heaven correlation 
between topics, entities, mentions and words (the 
correlation is also demonstrated in Eq. (2.1), where 
the integral is intractable due to the coupling 
between μμ , ÁÁ, ÃÃ and »» ), the accurate inference of 
the above two tasks is intractable. For this reason, 
we propose an approximate inference algorithm – 
the Gibbs sampling algorithm for the entity-topic 
model by extending the well-known Gibbs 
sampling algorithm for LDA (Griffiths & Steyvers, 
2004). In Gibbs sampling, we first construct the 
posterior distribution P (z; e;ajD)P (z; e;ajD) , then this 
posterior distribution is used to: 1) estimate μμ, ÁÁ, ÃÃ 
and »»; and 2) predict the entities and the topics of 
all documents in D. Specifically, we first derive the 
joint posterior distribution from Eq. (2.1) as: 

P (z; e; ajD) / P (z)P (ejz)P (mje)P (aje)P (wja)P (z; e; ajD) / P (z)P (ejz)P (mje)P (aje)P (wja) 
where 

P (z) = (
¡(T®)

¡(®)T
)D

DY
d=1

Q
t ¡(® + C

DT
dt )

¡(T® + CDTd¤ )
P (z) = (

¡(T®)

¡(®)T
)D

DY
d=1

Q
t ¡(® + C

DT
dt )

¡(T® + CDTd¤ )
       (3.1) 

is the probability of the joint topic assignment z to 
all mentions m in corpus D, and 

P (ejz) = (¡(E¯)
¡(¯)E

)T
TY

t=1

Q
e ¡(¯ + C

TE
te )

¡(E¯ + CTEt¤ )
P (ejz) = (¡(E¯)

¡(¯)E
)T

TY
t=1

Q
e ¡(¯ + C

TE
te )

¡(E¯ + CTEt¤ )
     (3.2) 

is the conditional probability of the joint entity 
assignments ee to all mentions m in corpus D given 
all topic assignments zz, and 

P (mje) = (¡(K°)
¡(°)K

)E
EY

e=1

Q
m ¡(° + C

EM
em )

¡(K° + CEMe¤ )
P (mje) = (¡(K°)

¡(°)K
)E

EY
e=1

Q
m ¡(° + C

EM
em )

¡(K° + CEMe¤ )
   (3.3) 

is the conditional probability of all mentions mm 
given all per-mention entity assignments ee, and 

P (aje) =
DY

d=1

Y
e½ed

¡CDEde
CDEd¤

¢CDAdeP (aje) = DY
d=1

Y
e½ed

¡CDEde
CDEd¤

¢CDAde              (3.4) 
is the conditional probability of the joint entity  
assignments aa to all words w in corpus D given all 
per-mention entity assignments ee, and 

109



P (wja) = (¡(V ±)
¡(±)V

)E
EY

e=1

Q
w ¡(± + C

EW
ew )

¡(V ± + CEWe¤ )
P (wja) = (¡(V ±)

¡(±)V
)E

EY
e=1

Q
w ¡(± + C

EW
ew )

¡(V ± + CEWe¤ )
    (3.5) 

is the conditional probability of all words ww given 
all per-word entity assignments aa . In all above 
formulas, ¡(:)¡(:) is the Gamma function, CDTdtC

DT
dt  is the 

times topic t has been assigned for all mentions in 
document d, CDTd¤ =

P
t C

DT
dtC

DT
d¤ =

P
t C

DT
dt  is the topic number 

in document d, and CTEteCTEte , CEMemCEMem ,CDEdeC
DE
de , C

DA
deC
DA
de , C

EW
ewC
EW
ew  

have similar explanation. 
Based on the above joint probability, we 

construct a Markov chain that converges to the 
posterior distribution P (z; e;ajD)P (z; e;ajD) and then draw 
samples from this Markov chain for inference. For 
entity-topic model, each state in the Markov chain 
is an assignment (including topic assignment to a 
mention, entity assignment to a mention and entity 
assignment to a word). In Gibbs sampling, all 
assignments are sequentially sampled conditioned 
on all the current other assignments. So here we 
only need to derive the following three fully 
conditional assignment distributions: 

1) P (zi = tjz¡i; e;a;D)P (zi = tjz¡i; e;a;D): the topic assignment 
distribution to a mention given the current 
other topic assignments z¡iz¡i , the current 
entity assignments ee and aa; 

2) P (ei = ejz; e¡i;a;D)P (ei = ejz; e¡i;a;D) : the entity 
assignment distribution to a mention given 
the current entity assignments of all other 
mentions e¡ie¡i, the current topic assignments 
zz  and the current entity assignments of 
context words aa; 

3) P (ai = ejz; e; a¡i;D)P (ai = ejz; e; a¡i;D) : the entity 
assignment distribution to a context word 
given the current entity assignments of all 
other context words a¡ia¡i, the current topic 
assignments  zz  and the current entity 
assignments ee of mentions. 

Using the Formula 3.1-3.5, we can derive the 
above three conditional distributions as (where mi 
is contained in doc d): 

P (zi = tjz¡i;e;a;D) /
CDT(¡i)dt + ®

CDT(¡i)d¤ + T®
£

CTE(¡i)te + ¯

CTE(¡i)t¤ + E¯
P (zi = tjz¡i;e;a;D) /

CDT(¡i)dt + ®

CDT(¡i)d¤ + T®
£

CTE(¡i)te + ¯

CTE(¡i)t¤ + E¯
 

where the topic assignment to a mention is 
determined by the probability this topic appearing 
in doc d (the 1st term) and the probability the 
referent entity appearing in this topic (the 2nd term); 

P (ei = ejz; e¡i;a;D) /
CTE(¡i)te + ¯

CT E(¡i)t¤ + E¯
£

CEM(¡i)em + °

CEM(¡i)e¤ + K°
£ ¡CDE(¡i)de + 1

CDE(¡i)de

¢CDAde
P (ei = ejz; e¡i;a;D) /

CTE(¡i)te + ¯

CT E(¡i)t¤ + E¯
£

CEM(¡i)em + °

CEM(¡i)e¤ + K°
£ ¡CDE(¡i)de + 1

CDE(¡i)de

¢CDAde  
where the entity assignment to a mention is 
determined by the probability this entity extracted 
from the assigned topic (the 1st term), the 
probability this entity is referred by the name m 
(the 2nd term) and the contextual words describing 
this entity in doc d (the 3rd term); 

P (ai = ejz; e;a¡i;D) / C
DE
de

CDEd¤
£

CEW(¡i)ew + ±

CEW(¡i)e¤ + V ±
P (ai = ejz; e;a¡i;D) / C

DE
de

CDEd¤
£

CEW(¡i)ew + ±

CEW(¡i)e¤ + V ±
 

where the entity assignment to a word is 
determined by the number of times this entity has 
been assigned to mentions in doc d (the 1st term) 
and the probability the word appearing in the 
context of this entity (the 2nd term). 

Finally, using the above three conditional 
distributions, we iteratively update all assignments 
of corpus D until coverage, then the global 
knowledge is estimated using the final assignments, 
and the final entity assignments are used as the 
referents of their corresponding mentions. 

Inference on Unseen Documents. When 
unseen documents are given, we predict its entities 
and topics using the incremental Gibbs sampling 
algorithm described in (Kataria et al., 2011), i.e., 
we iteratively update the entity assignments and 
the topic assignments of an unseen document as 
the same as the above inference process, but with 
the previously learned global knowledge fixed. 

Hyperparameter setting. One still problem 
here is the setting of the hyperparameters ®®, ¯̄, °° 
and ±±. For ®® and ¯̄ , this paper empirically set the 
value of them to ® = 50=T® = 50=T  and ¯ = 0:1¯ = 0:1  as in 
Griffiths & Steyvers(2004). For °°, we notice that 
K°K° is the number of pseudo names added to each 
entity, when ° = 0° = 0  our model only mentions an 
entity using its previously used names. Observed 
that an entity typically has a fixed set of names, we 
set °° to a small value by setting K° = 1:0K° = 1:0. For ±±, 
we notice that V ±V ± is the number of pseudo words 
added to each entity, playing the role of smoothing 
its context word distribution. As there is typically a 
relatively loose correlation between an entity and 
its context words, we set ±±  to a relatively large 
value by fixing the total smoothing words added to 
each entity, a typical value is V ±V ± = 2000. 

110



4 Experiments 
In this section, we evaluate our method and 
compare it with the traditional EL methods. We 
first explain the experimental settings in Section 
4.1-4.4, then discuss the results in Section 4.5. 

4.1 Knowledge Base 
In our experiments, we use the Jan. 30, 2010 
English version of Wikipedia as the knowledge 
base, which contains over 3 million entities. Notice 
that we also take the general concepts in Wikipedia 
(such as Apple, Video, Computer, etc.) as entities, 
so the entity in this paper may not strictly follow 
its definition. 

4.2 Data Sets 
There are two standard data sets for EL: IITB3 and 
TAC 2009 EL data set (McNamee & Dang, 2009), 
where IITB focuses on aggressive recall EL and 
TAC 2009 focuses on EL on salient mentions. Due 
to the collective nature of our method, we mainly 
used the IITB as the primary data set as the same 
as Kulkarni et al.(2009) and Han et al.(2011). But 
we also give the EL accuracies on the TAC 2009 in 
Sect. 4.5.4 as auxiliary results.  

Overall, the IITB data set contains 107 web 
documents. For each document, the name 
mentions’ referent entities in Wikipedia are 
manually annotated to be as exhaustive as possible. 
In total, 17,200 name mentions are annotated, with 
161 name mentions per document on average. In 
our experiments, we use only the name mentions 
whose referent entities are contained in Wikipedia. 

4.3 Evaluation Criteria 
This paper adopted the same performance metrics 
used in the Kulkarni et al. (2009), which includes 
Recall, Precision and F1. Let M* be the golden 
standard set of the EL results (each EL result is a 
pair (m, e), with m the mention and e its referent 
entity), M be the set of EL results outputted by an 
EL system, then these metrics are computed as: 

Precision = jM\M
¤j

jMjPrecision =
jM\M¤j
jMj  

Recall = jM\M
¤j

jM¤jRecall =
jM\M¤j
jM¤j  

where two EL results are considered equal if and 
only if both their mentions and referent entities are 
equal. As the same as Kulkarni et al.(2009), 
                                                           
3 http://www.cse.iitb.ac.in/~soumen/doc/QCQ/ 

Precision and Recall are averaged across 
documents and overall F1 is used as the primary 
performance metric by computing from average 
Precision and Recall. 

4.4 Baselines 
We compare our method with five baselines which 
are described as follows: 

Wikify!. This is a context compatibility based 
EL method using vector space model (Mihalcea & 
Csomai, 2007). Wikify! computes the context 
compatibility using the word overlap between the 
mention’s context and the entity’s Wikipedia entry. 

EM-Model. This is a statistical context 
compatibility based EL method described in Han 
& Sun(2011), which computes the compatibility by 
integrating the evidence from the entity popularity, 
the entity name knowledge and the context word 
distribution of entities. 

M&W. This is a relational topic coherence based 
EL method described in Milne & Witten(2008). 
M&W measures an entity’s topic coherence to a 
document as its average semantic relatedness to the 
unambiguous entities in the document. 

CSAW. This is an EL method which combines 
context compatibility and topic coherence using a 
hybrid method (Kulkarni et al., 2009), where 
context compatibility and topic coherence are first 
separated modeled as context similarity and the 
sum of all pair-wise semantic relatedness between 
the entities in the document, then the entities which 
can maximize the weighted sum of the context 
compatibility and the topic coherence are identified 
as the referent entities of the document. 

EL-Graph. This is a graph based hybrid EL 
method described in Han et al. (2011), which first 
models the context compatibility as text similarity 
and the topic coherence of an entity as its node 
importance in a referent graph which captures all 
mention-entity and entity-entity relations in a 
document, then a random walk algorithm is used to 
collectively find all referent entities of a document. 

Except for CSAW and EL-Graph, all other 
baselines are designed only to link the salient name 
mentions (i.e., key phrases) in a document. In our 
experiment, in order to compare the EL 
performances on also the non-salient name 
mentions, we push these systems’ recall by 
reducing their respective importance thresholds of 
linked mentions. 

111



4.5 Experimental Results 
4.5.1 Overall Performance 
We compared our method with all the above five 
baselines. For our method, we estimate the global 
knowledge using all the articles in the Jan. 30, 
2010 English version of Wikipedia, and totally 
there were 3,083,158 articles. For each article, the 
mentions within it are detected using the methods 
described in Medelyan et al.(2008) and all terms in 
an article are used as context words, so a term may 
both be a mention and a context word. The topic 
number of our model is T = 300T = 300  (will be 
empirically set in Sect 4.5.2). To train the entity-
topic model, we run 500500  iterations of our Gibbs 
sampling algorithm to converge. The training time 
of our model is nearly one week on our server 
using 20 GB RAM and one core of 3.2 GHz CPU. 
Since the training can be done offline, we believe 
that the training time is not critical to the real-
world usage as the online inference on new 
document is very quick. Using the above settings, 
the overall results are shown in Table 1. 

 Precision Recall F1 
Wikify! 0.55 0.28 0.37 

EM-Model 0.82 0.48 0.61 
M&W 0.80 0.38 0.52 
CSAW 0.65 0.73 0.69 

EL-Graph 0.69 0.76 0.73 
Our Method 0.81 0.80 0.80 

Table 1. The overall results on IITB data set 

From the overall results in Table 1, we can see that: 
1) By jointly modeling and exploiting the 

context compatibility and the topic coherence, our 
method can achieve competitive performance: ○1  
compared with the context compatibility baselines 
Wikify! and EM-Model, our method 
correspondingly gets 43% and 19% F1 
improvement; ○2  compared with the topic 
coherence baselines M&W, our method achieves 
28% F1 improvement; ③  compared with the 
hybrid baselines CSAW and EL-Graph, our method 
correspondingly achieves 11% and 7% F1 
improvement. 

2) Compared with the context compatibility 
only and the topic coherence only methods, the 
main advantage of our method is that, rather than 
only achieved high entity linking precision on 
salient mentions, it can also effectively link the 

non-salient mentions in a document: this is 
demonstrated in our method’s significant Recall 
improvement: a 32~52% Recall improvement over 
baselines Wikify!, EM-Model and M&W. We 
believe this is because a document usually contains 
little evidence for EL decisions on non-salient 
mentions, so with either only context compatibility 
or only topic coherence the evidence is not enough 
for EL decisions on these non-salient mentions, 
and bring these two directions together is critical 
for the accurate EL on these mentions. 

3) Compared with the hybrid methods, the 
main advantage of our method is the improvement 
of EL precision (a 11~16% improvement over 
baselines CSAW and EL-Graph), we believe this is 
because: ○1 Our method can further capture the 
mutual reinforcement effect between the context 
compatibility and the topic coherence; ○2 The 
traditional hybrid methods usually determine the 
topic coherence of an entity to a document using 
all entities in the document, in comparison our 
method uses only the entities in the same topic, we 
believe this is more reasonable for EL decisions. 

4.5.2 Parameter Tuning 
One still parameter of our method is the topic 
number T. An appropriate T will distribute entities 
into well-organized topics, in turn it will capture 
the co-occurrence information of entities. Figure 4 
plots the F1 at different T values. We can see that 
the F1 is not very sensitive to the topic number and 
with T = 300T = 300  our method achieves its best F1 
performance. 

0 200 400 600 800 1000

0.770

0.775

0.780

0.785

0.790

0.795

0.800

F1

T  
Figure 4. The F1 vs. the topic number T 

4.5.3 Detailed Analysis 
In this section we analyze why and how our 
method works well in detail. Generally, we believe 
the main advantages of our method are: 

1) The effects of topic knowledge. One main 
advantage of our model is that the topic knowledge 

112



can provide a document-specific entity prior for EL. 
Concretely, using the topic knowledge and the 
topic distribution of documents, the prior for an 
entity appearing in a document d is highly related 
to the document’s topics: 

P (ejd) = Pz P (zjd)P (ejz)P (ejd) = Pz P (zjd)P (ejz) 
This prior is obviously more reasonable than the 
“information less prior” (i.e., all entities have equal 
prior) or “a global entity popularity prior” (Han & 
Sun, 2011). To demonstrate, Table 2-3 show the 3 
topics where the Apple Inc. and the fruit Apple 
have the largest generation probability P(e|z) from 
these topics. We can see that the topic knowledge 
can provide a reasonable prior for entities 
appearing in a document: the Apple Inc. has a large 
prior in documents about Computer, Video and 
Software, and the fruit Apple has a large prior in 
documents about Wine, Food and Plant. 

Topic(Computer) Topic(Video) Topic(Software) 
Computer 

CPU 
Hardware 

Personal computer 

Video 
Mobile phone 
Mass media 

Music 

Computer software
Microsoft Windows

Linux 
Web browser 

Computer memory Television Operating system
Table 2. The 3 topics where the Apple Inc. has the 

largest P(e|z) 
Topic(Wine) Topic(Food) Topic(Plant) 

Wine 
Grape 

Vineyard 
Winery 

Food 
Restaurant 

Meat 
Cheese 

Plant 
Flower 

Leaf 
Tree 

Apple Vegetable Fruit 
Table 3. The 3 topics where the fruit Apple has the 

largest P(e|z) 
2) The effects of a fine-tuned context model. 

The second advantage of our model is that it 
provides a statistical framework for fine-tuning the 
context model from data. To demonstrate such an 
effect, Table 4 compares the EL performance of  
① the entity-topic model with no context model is 
used (No Context), i.e., we determine the referent 
entity of a mention by deleting the 3rd term of the 
formula P (ei = ejz;e¡i;a;D)P (ei = ejz;e¡i;a;D) in Section 3; ② with 
the context model estimated using the entity’s 
Wikipedia page (Article Content), ③ with the 
context model estimated using the 50 word 
window of all its mentions in Wikipedia (Mention 
Context) and; ④  with the context model in the 
original entity-topic model (Entity-Topic Model). 
From Table 4 we can see that a fine-tuned context 
model will result in a 2~7% F1 improvement. 

Context Model F1 
No Context 0.73 

Article Content 
Mention Context 

Entity-Topic Model 

0.75 
0.78 
0.80 

Table 4. The F1 using different context models 
3) The effects of joint model. The third 

advantage of our model is that it jointly model the 
context compatibility and the topic coherence, 
which bring two benefits: ①  the mutual 
reinforcement between the two directions can be 
captured in our model; ② the context compatibility 
and the topic coherence are uniformly modeled and 
jointly estimated, which makes the model more 
accurate for EL. 

4.5.4 EL Accuracies on TAC 2009 dataset 
We also compare our method with the top 5 EL 
systems in TAC 2009 and the two state-of-the-art 
systems (EM-Model and EL-Graph) on TAC 2009 
data set in Figure 5 (For EL-Graph and our method, 
a NIL threshold is used to detect whether the 
referent entity is contained in the knowledge base, 
if the knowledge base not contains the referent 
entity, we assign the mention to a NIL entity). 
From Figure 5, we can see that our method is 
competitive: 1) Our method can achieve a 3.4% 
accuracy improvement over the best system in 
TAC 2009; 2) Our method, EM-Model and EL-
Graph get very close accuracies (0.854, 0.86 and 
0.838 correspondingly), we believe this is because: 
○1  The mentions to be linked in TAC data set are 
mostly salient mentions; ○2  The influence of the 
NIL referent entity problem, i.e., the referent entity 
is not contained in the given knowledge base: Most 
referent entities (67.5%) on TAC 2009 are NIL 
entity and our method has no special handling on 
this problem, rather than other methods such as the 
EM-Model, which affects the overall performance 
of our method. 

0.72

0.74

0.76

0.78

0.8

0.82

0.84

0.86

0.88

 
Figure 5. The EL accuracies on TAC 2009 dataset 

113



5 Related Work 
In this section, we briefly review the related work 
of EL. Traditionally, the context compatibility 
based methods link a mention to the entity which 
has the largest compatibility with it. Cucerzan 
(2007) modeled the compatibility as the cosine 
similarity between the vector space representation 
of mention’s context and of entity’s Wikipedia 
entry. Mihalcea & Csomai (2007), Bunescu & 
Pasca (2006), Fader et al. (2009), Gottipati et 
al.(2011) and Zhang et al.(2011) extended the 
vector space model with more information such as 
the entity category and the acronym expansion, etc. 
Han & Sun (2011) proposed a generative model 
which computes the compatibility using the 
evidences from entity’s popularity, name 
distribution and context word distribution. Kataria 
et al.(2011) and Sen (2012) used a latent topic 
model to learn the context model of entities. Zheng 
et al. (2010), Dredze et al. (2010), Zhang et al. 
(2010), Zhou et al. (2010) and Ji & Chen(2011) 
employed the ranking techniques to further take 
relations between candidate entities into account. 

On the other side, the topic coherence based 
methods link a mention to the entity which are 
most coherent to the document containing it. 
Medelyan et al. (2008) measured the topic 
coherence of an entity to a document as the 
weighted average of its relatedness to the 
unambiguous entities in the document. Milne and 
Witten (2008) extended Medelyan et al. (2008)’s 
coherence by incorporating commonness and 
context quality. Bhattacharya and Getoor (2006) 
modeled the topic coherence as the likelihood an 
entity is generated from the latent topics of a 
document. Sen (2012) modeled the topic coherence 
as the groups of co-occurring entities. Kulkarni et 
al. (2009) modeled the topic coherence as the sum 
of all pair-wise relatedness between the referent 
entities of a document. Han et al.(2011) and 
Hoffart et al.(2011) modeled the topic coherence of 
an entity as its node importance in a graph which 
captures all mention-entity and entity-entity 
relations in a document. 

6 Conclusions and Future Work 
This paper proposes a generative model, the entity-
topic model, for entity linking. By uniformly 
modeling context compatibility, topic coherence 
and the correlation between them as statistical 

dependencies, our model provides an effective way 
to jointly exploit them for better EL performance. 

In this paper, the entity-topic model can only 
link mentions to the previously given entities in a 
knowledge base. For future work, we want to 
overcome this limit by incorporating an entity 
discovery ability into our model, so that it can also 
discover and learn the knowledge of previously 
unseen entities from a corpus for linking name 
mentions to these entities. 

Acknowledgments 
The work is supported by the National Natural 
Science Foundation of China under Grants no.  
90920010 and 61100152. Moreover, we sincerely 
thank the reviewers for their valuable comments. 

References 
Adafre, S. F. & de Rijke, M. 2005. Discovering missing 

links in Wikipedia. In: Proceedings of the 3rd 
international workshop on Link discovery. 

Bhattacharya, I. and L. Getoor. 2006. A latent dirichlet 
model for unsupervised entity resolution. In: 
Proceedings of SIAM International Conference on 
Data Mining. 

Blei, D. M. and A. Y. Ng, et al. (2003). Latent dirichlet 
allocation. In: The Journal of Machine Learning 
Research 3: 993--1022. 

Bunescu, R. & Pasca, M. 2006. Using encyclopedic 
knowledge for named entity disambiguation. In: 
Proceedings of EACL, vol. 6. 

Brown,  P., Pietra, S. D.,  Pietra, V. D., and Mercer, R.  
1993. The mathematics of statistical machine 
translation: parameter estimation. Computational 
Linguistics, 19(2), 263-31. 

Chen, S. F. & Goodman, J. 1999. An empirical study of 
smoothing techniques for language modeling.  In 
Computer Speech and Language, London; Orlando: 
Academic Press, c1986-, pp. 359-394. 

Cucerzan, S. 2007. Large-scale named entity 
disambiguation based on Wikipedia data. In:  
Proceedings of EMNLP-CoNLL, pp. 708-716. 

De Beaugrande, R. A. and W. U. Dressler. 1981. 
Introduction to text linguistics, Chapter V, Longman 
London. 

Dredze, M., McNamee, P., Rao, D., Gerber, A. & Finin, 
T. 2010. Entity Disambiguation for Knowledge Base 
Population. In: Proceedings of the 23rd International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics. 

114



Fader, A., Soderland, S., Etzioni, O. & Center, T. 2009. 
Scaling Wikipedia-based named entity 
disambiguation to arbitrary web text. In: Proceedings 
of  Wiki-AI Workshop at IJCAI, vol. 9. 

Gottipati, S., Jiang, J. 2011. Linking Entities to a 
Knowledge Base with Query Expansion. In: 
Proceedings of EMNLP. 

Griffiths, T. L. and M. Steyvers. 2004. Finding 
scientific topics. In: Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America. 

Han, X., Sun, L. and Zhao J. 2011. Collective Entity 
Linking in Web Text: A Graph-Based Method. In: 
Proceedings of 34th Annual ACM SIGIR Conference. 

Han, X. and Sun, L. 2011. A Generative Entity-Mention 
Model for Linking Entities with Knowledge Base. In: 
Proceedings of ACL-HLT. 

Hoffart, J., Yosef, M. A., et al. 2011. Robust 
Disambiguation of Named Entities in Text. In: 
Proceedings of EMNLP. 

Jelinek, Frederick and Robert L. Mercer. 1980. 
Interpolated estimation of Markov source parameters 
from sparse data. In: Proceedings of the Workshop 
on Pattern Recognition in Practice. 

Kataria, S. S., Kumar, K. S. and Rastogi, R. 2011. Entity 
Disambiguation with Hierarchical Topic Models. In: 
Proceedings of KDD. 

Kulkarni, S., Singh, A., Ramakrishnan, G. & 
Chakrabarti, S. 2009. Collective annotation of 
Wikipedia entities in web text. In: Proceedings of the 
15th ACM SIGKDD international conference on 
Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 457-466. 

Li, X., Morie, P. & Roth, D. 2004. Identification and 
tracing of ambiguous names: Discriminative and 
generative approaches. In: Proceedings of the 
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 
419-424. 

McNamee, P. & Dang, H. T. 2009.  Overview of the 
TAC 2009 Knowledge Base Population Track. In: 
Proceeding of Text Analysis Conference. 

Ji, H., et al. 2010. Overview of the TAC 2010 knowledge 
base population track. In: Proceedings of Text 
Analysis Conference. 

Ji, H. and Chen, Z. 2011. Collaborative Ranking: A 
Case Study on Entity Linking. In: Proceedings of 
EMNLP. 

Milne, D. & Witten, I. H. 2008. Learning to link with 
Wikipedia. In: Proceedings of the 17th ACM 

conference on Conference on information and 
knowledge management. 

Milne, D., et al.  2006. Mining Domain-Specific 
Thesauri from Wikipedia: A case study. In Proc. of 
IEEE/WIC/ACM WI. 

Medelyan, O., Witten, I. H. & Milne, D. 2008. Topic 
indexing with Wikipedia. In: Proceedings of the 
AAAI WikiAI workshop. 

Mihalcea, R. & Csomai, A. 2007. Wikify!: linking 
documents to encyclopedic knowledge. In: 
Proceedings of the sixteenth ACM conference on 
Conference on information and knowledge 
management, pp. 233-242. 

Pedersen, T., Purandare, A. & Kulkarni, A. 2005. Name 
discrimination by clustering similar contexts. 
Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text 
Processing, pp. 226-237. 

Ratinov, L. and D. Roth, et al. 2011. Local and Global 
Algorithms for Disambiguation to Wikipedia. In: 
Proceedings of ACL. 

Sen, P. 2012. Collective context-aware topic models for 
entity disambiguation. In Proceedings of WWW '12, 
New York, NY, USA, ACM. 

Zhang, W., Su, J., Tan, Chew Lim & Wang, W. T. 2010. 
Entity Linking Leveraging Automatically Generated 
Annotation. In: Proceedings of the 23rd International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics (Coling 
2010). 

Zheng, Z., Li, F., Huang, M. & Zhu, X. 2010. Learning 
to Link Entities with Knowledge Base. In: The 
Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the North 
American Chapter of the ACL. 

Zhou, Y., Nie, L., Rouhani-Kalleh, O., Vasile, F. & 
Gaffney, S. 2010. Resolving Surface Forms to 
Wikipedia Topics. In: Proceedings of the 23rd 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics (Coling 2010),  pp. 1335-1343. 

Zhang, W. and Sim, Y. C., et al.  2011. Entity Linking 
with Effective Acronym Expansion, Instance 
Selection and Topic Modeling. In: Proceedings of 
IJCAI. 

 

115


