










































Excitatory or Inhibitory: A New Semantic Orientation Extracts Contradiction and Causality from the Web


Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational Natural
Language Learning, pages 619–630, Jeju Island, Korea, 12–14 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Excitatory or Inhibitory: A New Semantic Orientation Extracts
Contradiction and Causality from the Web

Chikara Hashimoto∗ Kentaro Torisawa† Stijn De Saeger‡
Jong-Hoon Oh§ Jun’ichi Kazama¶

National Institute of Information and Communications Technology
Kyoto, 619-0289, JAPAN

{∗ ch, † torisawa, ‡ stijn, § rovellia, ¶kazama}@nict.go.jp

Abstract

We propose a new semantic orientation, Ex-
citation, and its automatic acquisition method.
Excitation is a semantic property of predicates
that classifies them into excitatory, inhibitory
and neutral. We show that Excitation is useful
for extracting contradiction pairs (e.g., destroy
cancer ⊥ develop cancer) and causality pairs
(e.g., increase in crime ⇒ heighten anxiety).
Our experiments show that with automatically
acquired Excitation knowledge we can extract
one million contradiction pairs and 500,000
causality pairs with about 70% precision from
a 600 million page Web corpus. Furthermore,
by combining these extracted causality and
contradiction pairs, we can generate one mil-
lion plausible causality hypotheses that are not
written in any single sentence in our corpus
with reasonable precision.

1 Introduction

Recognizing semantic relations between events in
texts is crucial for such NLP tasks as question an-
swering (QA). For example, to answer the question
“What ruined the crops in Japan?” a QA system
must recognize that the sentence “the Fukushima
nuclear power plant caused radioactive pollution
and contaminated the crops in Japan” contains a
causal relation and that contaminate crops entails
ruin crops but contradicts preserve crops.

To facilitate the acquisition of causality, contra-
diction, paraphrase and entailment relations between
events we propose a new semantic orientation, Ex-
citation, that classifies unary predicates (templates,
hereafter) into excitatory, inhibitory and neutral. An
excitatory template entails that the main function or

effect of the referent of its argument is activated or
enhanced (e.g., cause X, preserve X), while an in-
hibitory template entails that it is deactivated or sup-
pressed (e.g., ruin X, contaminate X, prevent X).

Excitation is useful for extracting contradiction;
if two templates with similar distributional profiles
have opposite Excitation polarities, they tend to be
contradictions (e.g., contaminate crops and preserve
crops). With extracted contradictions we can distin-
guish paraphrases from contradictions among distri-
butionally similar phrases. Furthermore, contradic-
tion in itself is important knowledge for Recogniz-
ing Textual Entailment (RTE) (Voorhees, 2008).

Excitation is also a powerful indicator of causal-
ity. In the physical world, the activation or de-
activation of one thing often causes the activation
or deactivation of another. Two excitatory or in-
hibitory templates that co-occur in some temporal
or logical order in the same narrative often describe
a causal chain of events, like “the Fukushima nu-
clear power plant caused radioactive pollution and
contaminated crops in Japan”.

In this paper we propose both the concept of Ex-
citation and an automatic method for its acquisition.
Our method acquires Excitation templates based on
certain natural, language independent constraints on
narrative structures found in text. We also propose
acquisition methods for contradiction and causal-
ity relations based on Excitation. Our methods ex-
tract one million contradiction pairs with over 70%
precision, and 500,000 causality pairs with about
70% precision from a 600 million page Web corpus.
Moreover, by combining these extracted causality
pairs and contradiction pairs, we generated one mil-
lion plausible causality hypotheses that were not

619



written in any single sentence in our corpus with rea-
sonable precision. For example, a causality hypoth-
esis prevent radioactive pollution ⇒ preserve crops
can be generated from an extracted causality cause
radioactive pollution ⇒ contaminate crops.

We target the Japanese language in this paper.

2 What is Excitation?

Excitation classifies templates into excitatory, in-
hibitory, and neutral, as explained below.

excitatory templates entail that the function, ef-
fect, purpose or role of their argument’s refer-
ent is activated or enhanced. (e.g., cause X, buy
X, produce X, import X, increase X, enable X)

inhibitory templates entail that the function, ef-
fect, purpose or role of their argument’s refer-
ent is deactivated or suppressed. (e.g., prevent
X, discard X, remedy X, decrease X, disable X)

neutral templates are neither excitatory nor in-
hibitory. (e.g., consider X, proportional to X,
related to X, evaluate X, close to X)

For example, when fire fills the X slot of cause X,
it suggests that the effect of fire is activated. If pre-
vent X’s slot is filled with flu, the effect of flu is sup-
pressed. In this study, we aim to acquire excitatory
and inhibitory templates that are useful for extract-
ing contradiction and causality, though neutral tem-
plates are the most frequent in our data (See Section
5.1). Collectively we call excitatory and inhibitory
templates Excitation templates, and excitatory and
inhibitory two opposite polarities.

Excitation is independent of the good/bad seman-
tic orientation. (Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown,
1997; Turney, 2002; Rao and Ravichandran, 2009).
For example, sophisticate X and complicate X are
both excitatory, but only the former has a positive
connotation. Similarly, remedy X and degrade X are
both inhibitory but only the latter is negative.

General Inquirer (Stone et al., 1966) deals with
semantic factors some of which were proposed by
Osgood et al. (1957). Their ‘activity’ factor involves
binary opposition between ‘active’ and ‘passive.’
Notice that activity and Excitation are independent.
In General Inquirer, both accelerate X and abolish
X are active, but only the former is excitatory. Both
accept X and abate X are passive, but only the lat-
ter is inhibitory. Pustejovsky (1995) proposed telic

and agentive roles, which inspired our excitatory no-
tion, but they have no corresponding notion of in-
hibitory. Andreevskaia and Bergler (2006) acquired
the increase/decrease semantic orientation, which is
a subclass of Excitation.

Excitation is inverted if a template’s predicate is
negated. For example, preserve X is excitatory,
while don’t preserve X is inhibitory. We acknowl-
edge that this may seem somewhat counter-intuitive
and will address this issue in future work.

3 Excitation Template Acquisition

This section presents our acquisition method of Ex-
citation templates. We introduce constraints in the
co-occurrence of templates in text that seem both ro-
bust and language independent in Section 3.1. Our
method exploits these constraints for the acquisition
of Excitation templates. First we construct a tem-
plate network where nodes are templates and links
represent that two connected templates have either
SAME or OPPOSITE polarities. Given 46 manually
prepared seed templates we calculate the Excitation
value of each template, a value in range [−1, 1] that
is positive if the template is excitatory and negative
if it is inhibitory. Technically, our method treats all
templates as excitatory or inhibitory, and, upon com-
pletion, regards templates with small absolute Exci-
tation values as neutral.

The whole method is a bootstrapping process.
Each iteration expands the network and the Excita-
tion value of each template is (re-)calculated.

3.1 Characteristics of Excitation Templates
Our method exploits natural discourse constraints on
the possible combinations of (a) the polarity of co-
occurring templates, (b) the nouns that fill their ar-
gument slots and (c) the connectives that link the
templates in a given sentence. Table 1 shows the
constraints and Figure 1 shows examples that will
be explained shortly. Though our target is Japanese
we believe these constraints are universal discourse
principles, and as such not language dependent. Ex-
amples are given in English for ease of explanation.

We first identify two categories of connectives
in our target sentences: AND/THUS-type (e.g., and,
thus and since) and BUT-type (e.g., but and though).
Both types suggest a sort of consistency or inconsis-
tency between predicates. We manually classified
169 frequently used connectives into AND/THUS-

620



(1) He smoked cigarettes, AND/THUS he suffered lung
cancer. (Both smoke X and suffer X are excitatory.)

(2) He quit cigarettes, AND/THUS was immune from lung
cancer. (quit X and immune from X are inhibitory.)

(3) He smoked cigarettes, BUT didn’t suffer lung cancer.
(smoke X is excitatory, not suffer X is inhibitory.)

(4) He quit cigarettes, BUT he suffered lung cancer. (quit
X is inhibitory, but suffer X is excitatory.)

(5) He underwent cancer treatment, AND/THUS he could
cure the cancer. (undergo X is excitatory, cure X is
inhibitory.)

(6) He underwent cancer treatment, BUT still had cancer.
(Both undergo X and have X are excitatory.)

(7) Unnatural: He smoked cigarettes, BUT he suffered
lung cancer. (smoke X and suffer X are excitatory.)

Figure 1: Examples of constraints: (cigarettes, lung can-
cer) is PNP and (cancer treatment, cancer) is NNP.

PNPs NNPs others
AND/THUS SAME OPPOSITE N/A

BUT OPPOSITE SAME N/A

Table 1: Constraint matrix.

and BUT-type (See supplementary materials).
Next we extract sentences from the Web in which

two templates co-occur and are joined by one of
these connectives, and then classify the noun pairs
filling the templates’ argument slots into “positively-
associated” and “negatively-associated” noun pairs
(PNPs and NNPs). Mirroring our definition of Excita-
tion, PNPs are noun pairs in which the referent of the
first noun facilitates the emergence of the referent
of the second noun. PNPs can range from causally
related noun pairs like (cigarettes, lung cancer) to
“material-product” relation pairs like (semiconduc-
tor, electronic circuit). We found that PNPs only
fill the argument slots of (a) same Excitation polar-
ity templates connected by AND/THUS-type connec-
tives (examples 1 and 2 in Figure 1), or (b) opposite
Excitation polarity templates connected by a BUT-
type connectives (examples 3 and 4). Violating such
constraints (example 7) seems unnatural. Similarly,
NNPs are noun pairs in which the referent of one
noun suppresses the emergence of the referent of the
other noun. Examples include such “inverse causal-
ity” pairs as (cancer treatment, cancer). NNPs only
fill the argument slots of (a) opposite Excitation po-
larity templates connected by AND/THUS-type con-
nectives (example 5), or (b) same polarity templates
connected by a BUT-type connective (example 6).

All these constraints are summarized in Table 1,

which we will call the constraint matrix. Accord-
ing to the constraint matrix, we can know whether
two templates’ polarities are the same or opposite if
we know whether a noun pair filling the two tem-
plates’ slots is PNP or NNP. Conversely, we can
know whether a noun pair is PNP or NNP if we know
whether two templates whose slots are filled with
the noun pair have the same or opposite polarities.
We believe these constraints capture certain univer-
sal principles of discourse, since it is difficult in any
language to produce natural sounding sentences that
violate these constraints. We empirically confirm
their validity for Japanese in Section 5.1.

3.2 Bootstrapping Approach to Excitation
Template Acquisition

To calculate the Excitation values for the templates,
we construct a template network where templates
are connected by links indicating polarity agreement
between two connected templates (either SAME or
OPPOSITE polarity), as determined by the constraint
matrix. Excitation values are determined by spread-
ing activation applied to the network, given a small
number of manually prepared seed templates.

However, we cannot construct the network unless
we know whether each noun pair is PNP or NNP, due
to the configuration of the constraint matrix, and cur-
rently we have no feasible method to classify all of
them into PNPs and NNPs in advance. We therefore
adopt a bootstrapping method (Figure 2) that starts
from manually prepared excitatory and inhibitory
seed templates (Step 1 in Figure 2). Our method
begins by extracting noun pairs from the Web that
co-occur with two seed templates connected by a
AND/THUS- or BUT-type connective, and classifies
these noun pairs into PNPs and NNPs based on the
constraint matrix (Steps 2 and 3). Next, we automat-
ically extract additional (non-seed) template pairs
from the Web that co-occur with these PNPs and
NNPs. Links (either SAME or OPPOSITE) between
all template pairs are determined by the constraint
matrix (Step 4), and we construct a template network
from both seed and non-seed template pairs (Step 5).

Our method calculates the Excitation values for
all the templates in the network by first assign-
ing Excitation values +1 and −1 to the excitatory
and inhibitory seed templates, and applies a spread-
ing activation method proposed by Takamura et al.
(2005) (Step 6) to the network. This method calcu-

621



1. Prepare initial seed templates with fixed excitation values (either
+1 or −1).

2. Make seed template pairs that are combinations of two seed tem-
plates and a connective (either AND/THUS-type or BUT-type).

3. Extract noun pairs that co-occur with one of the seed template
pairs from the Web. Classify the noun pairs into PNPs and NNPs
based on the constraints matrix. Filter out those noun pairs that
appear as both PNP and NNP on the Web or those whose occur-
rence frequency is less than or equal to F, which is set to 5.

4. Extract additional (non-seed) template pairs that are filled by one
of the PNPs or NNPs from the Web. Determine the link type
(SAME or OPPOSITE) for each template pair based on the con-
straint matrix. If a template pair appears on the Web as having
both link types, we determine its link type by majority vote.

5. Construct the template network from all the template pairs. Re-
move from the network those templates whose number of linked
templates is less than D, which is set to 5.

6. Apply Takamura et al.’s method to the network and fix the Exci-
tation value of each template.

7. Extract the top- and bottom-ranked N × i templates from the
result of Takamura et al.’s method. N is a constant, which is
set to 30. i is the iteration number. They are used as additional
seed templates for the next iteration. The top-ranked templates
are given Excitation value +1 and the bottom-ranked templates
are assigned −1. Go to Step 2.

Figure 2: Bootstrapping for template acquisition.

lates all templates’ excitation values by solving the
network constraints imposed by the SAME and OP-
POSITE links, and the Excitation values of the seed
templates (This method is detailed in Section 3.3).
In each iteration i, our method selects the N × i top-
ranked and bottom-ranked templates as additional
seed templates for the next iteration (N is set to 30)
(Step 7). Our method then constructs a new tem-
plate network using the augmented seed templates
and restarts the calculation process. Figure 2 sum-
marizes our bootstrapping process.

Bootstrapping stops after M iterations, with M
set to 7 based on our preliminary experiments.

To prepare the initial seed templates we con-
structed a maximal template network that could in
theory be created by our bootstrapping method. This
maximal network consists of any two templates that
co-occur in a sentence with any connective, regard-
less of their arguments. We manually selected 36
excitatory and 10 inhibitory seed templates from
among 114 templates with the most links in the net-
work (See supplementary materials).

3.3 Determining Excitation in the Network
This section details Step 6 of our bootstrapping
method, i.e., how Takamura et al.’s method calcu-
lates the Excitation value of each template. Their
method is based on the spin model in physics, where
each electron has a spin of either up or down. We

chose this method due to the straightforward parallel
between the spin model and our Excitation template
model. Both models capture the spreading of acti-
vation (either spin direction or excitation polarity)
between neighboring objects in a network. Deter-
mining the optimal algorithm for this task is beyond
our current scope, but for the purpose of our experi-
ments we found that Takamura et al.’s method gave
satisfactory results.

The spin model defines an energy function on a
spin network, and each electron’s spin can be esti-
mated by minimizing this function:

E(x,W ) = −1/2× Σijwijxixj

Here, xi, xj ∈ x are spins of electrons i and j, and
matrix W = {wij} assigns weights to links between
electrons. We regard templates as electrons and Ex-
citation polarities as their spins (up and down corre-
spond to excitatory and inhibitory). We define the
weight wij of the link between templates i and j as:

wij =
{

1/
√

d(i)d(j) if SAME(i, j)
−1/

√
d(i)d(j) if OPPOSITE(i, j)

Here, d(i) denotes the number of templates linked
to i. SAME(i, j) (OPPOSITE(i, j)) indicates a SAME
(OPPOSITE) link exists between i and j. We obtain
excitation values by minimizing the above energy
function. Note that after minimizing E, xi and xj
tend to get the same polarity when wij is positive.
When wij is negative, xi and xj tend to have op-
posite polarities. Initially seed templates are given
values +1 or −1 depending on whether they are ex-
citatory or inhibitory, and others are given 0.

We used SUPPIN (http://www.lr.pi.titech.
ac.jp/∼takamura/pubs/SUPPIN-0.01.tar.gz),
an implementation of Takamura et al.’s method. Its
parameter β is set to the default value (0.75).

4 Knowledge Acquisition by Excitation

This section shows how the concept of Excitation
can be used for automatic knowledge acquisition.

4.1 Contradiction Extraction

Our first knowledge acquisition method extracts
contradiction pairs like destroy cancer ⊥ develop
cancer, based on our assumption that they often con-
sist of distributionally similar templates that have a
sharp contrast in Excitation value. Concretely, we

622



extract two phrases as a contradiction pair if (a)
their templates have opposite Excitation polarities,
(b) they share the same argument noun, and (c) the
part-of-speech of their predicates is the same. Then
the contradiction pairs are ranked by Ct:

Ct(p1, p2) = |s1| × |s2| × sim(t1, t2)

Here p1 and p2 are two phrases that satisfy condi-
tions (a), (b) and (c) above, t1 and t2 are their re-
spective templates, and |s1| and |s2| are the absolute
values of t1 and t2’s excitation values. sim(t1, t2) is
the distributional similarity proposed by Lin (1998).

Note that “contradiction” here includes what we
call “quasi-contradiction.” This consists of two
phrases such that, if the tendencies of the events they
describe get stronger, they eventually become con-
tradictions. For example, the pair emit smells ⊥ re-
duce smells is not logically contradictory since the
two events can happen at the same time. However,
they become almost contradictory when their ten-
dencies get stronger (i.e., emit smells more strongly
⊥ thoroughly reduce smells). We believe quasi-
contradictions are useful for NLP tasks.

4.2 Causality Extraction

Our second knowledge acquisition method extracts
causality pairs like increase in crime ⇒ heighten
anxiety that co-occur with AND/THUS-type connec-
tives in a sentence. The assumption is that if two
templates (t1 and t2) with a strong Excitation ten-
dency are connected by an AND/THUS-type connec-
tive in a sentence, the event described by t1 and its
argument n1 tends to be a cause of the event de-
scribed by t2 and its argument n2. Here, Excitation
strength is expressed by absolute Excitation values.
The intuition is that, if the referent of n1 is strongly
activated or suppressed, it tends to have some causal
effect on the referent of n2 in the same sentence.

We focus on extracting causality pairs that co-
occur with only “non-causal connectives” like and,
which are AND/THUS-type connectives that do NOT
explicitly signal causality, since causal connectives
like thus can mask the effectiveness of Excitation.
We prepared 139 non-causal connectives (See sup-
plementary materials). We extract two templates
such as increase in X and heighten Y co-occurring
with only non-causal connectives, as well as the
noun pair that fills the two templates’ slots (e.g.,
(crime, anxiety)) to obtain causal phrase pairs. In

Japanese, the temporal order between events is usu-
ally determined by precedence in the sentence. Cs
ranks the obtained causality pairs:

Cs(p1, p2) = |s1| × |s2|

Here p1 and p2 are the phrases of causality pair, and
|s1| and |s2| are absolute Excitation values of p1’s
and p2’s templates. As is common in the literature,
this notion of causality should be interpreted prob-
abilistically rather than logically, i.e., we interpret
causality A ⇒ B as “if A happens, the probability of
B increases”. This interpretation is often more use-
ful for NLP tasks than a strict logical interpretation.

4.3 Causality Hypothesis Generation
Our third knowledge acquisition method generates
plausible causality hypotheses that are not written in
any single sentence using the previously extracted
contradiction and causality pairs. We assume that if
a causal relation (e.g., increase in crime ⇒ heighten
anxiety ) is valid, its inverse (e.g., decrease in crime
⇒ diminish anxiety ) is often valid as well. From
a logical definition of causation, taking the inverse
of an implication obviously does not preserve valid-
ity. However, at least under our probabilistic inter-
pretation, taking the inverse of a given causality pair
using the extracted contradiction pairs proves to be
a viable strategy for generating non-trivial causality
hypotheses, as our experiments in Section 5.4 show.

For an extracted causality pair, we generate its
inverse as a causality hypothesis by replacing both
phrases in the original pair with their contradiction
counterparts. For instance, a causality hypothesis
decrease in crime ⇒ diminish anxiety is generated
from a causality increase in crime ⇒ heighten anxi-
ety by two contradictions, decrease in crime ⊥ in-
crease in crime and diminish anxiety ⊥ heighten
anxiety. Since we are interested in finding new
causal hypotheses, we filter out hypotheses whose
phrase pair co-occurs in a sentence in our corpus.
Remaining causality hypotheses are ranked by Hp.

Hp(q1, q2) = Ct(p1, q1)× Ct(p2, q2)× Cs′(p1, p2)

Here, q1 and q2 are two phrases of a causality hy-
pothesis. p1 and p2 are two phrases of a hypothesis’s
original causality. That is, p1 ⊥ q1 and p2 ⊥ q2 are
contradiction pairs, and Ct(p1, q1) and Ct(p2, q2)
are their contradiction scores. Cs′(p1, p2) is the
original causality’s causality score. Cs′ can be Cs

623



from Section 4.2, but based on preliminary experi-
ments we found the following score works better:

Cs′(p1, p2) = |s1| × |s2| × npfreq(n1, n2)

|s1| and |s2| are absolute Excitation values of p1’s
and p2’s templates, whose slots are filled with n1 and
n2. npfreq(n1, n2) is the co-occurrence frequency
of (n1, n2) with polarity-identical template pairs (if
(n1, n2) is PNP) or with polarity-opposite template
pairs (if (n1, n2) is NNP). Thus, npfreq indicates a
sort of association strength between two nouns.

5 Experiments

This section shows that our template acquisition
method acquired many Excitation templates. More-
over, using only the acquired templates we extracted
one million contradiction pairs with more than 70%
precision, and 500,000 causality pairs with about
70% precision. Further, using only these extracted
contradiction and causality pairs we generated one
million causality hypotheses with 57% precision.

In our experiments we removed evaluation sam-
ples containing the initial seed templates and exam-
ples used for annotation instruction from the evalua-
tion data. Three annotators (not the authors) marked
all evaluation samples, which were randomly shuf-
fled so that they could not identify which sample was
produced by which method. Information about the
predicted labels or ranks was also removed from the
evaluation data. Final judgments were made by ma-
jority vote between the annotators. They were non-
experts without formal training in linguistics or se-
mantics. See supplementary materials for our anno-
tation manuals (translated into English).

We used 600 million Japanese Web pages
(Akamine et al., 2010) parsed by KNP (Kawahara
and Kurohashi, 2006) as a corpus. We restricted
the argument positions of templates to ha (topic),
ga (nominative), wo (accusative), ni (dative), and de
(instrumental). We discarded templates appearing
fewer than 20 times in compound sentences (regard-
less of connectives) in our corpus.

5.1 Excitation Template Acquisition
We show that our proposed method for template ex-
traction (PROPtmp) successfully acquired many Ex-
citation templates from which we obtained a huge
number of contradiction and causality pairs, and that
Excitation is a reasonably comprehensible notion

even for non-experts. We also show that PROPtmp
outperformed two baselines by a large margin.

The template network constructed by PROPtmp
contained 10,825 templates. Among these, the boot-
strapping process classified 8,685 templates as exci-
tatory and 2,140 as inhibitory. Note that these can-
didates in fact also contain neutral templates, as ex-
plained at the beginning of Section 3.

Baselines The baseline methods are ALLEXC and
SIM. ALLEXC regards all templates that are ran-
domly extracted from the Web as excitatory, since in
our data excitatory templates outnumber inhibitory
ones. Actually, in our data neutral templates rep-
resent the most frequent class, but since our objec-
tive is to acquire excitatory and inhibitory templates,
a baseline marking all templates as neutral would
make little sense. SIM is a distributional similarity
baseline that takes as input the same 10,825 tem-
plates of PROPtmp above, constructs a network by
connecting two templates whose distributional simi-
larity is greater than zero, and regards two connected
templates as having the same polarity. The weight
of the links between templates is set to their distri-
butional similarity based on Lin (1998). Then SIM
is given the same initial seed templates as PROPtmp,
by which it calculates the Excitation values of tem-
plates using Takamura et al.’s method. As a result,
SIM assigned positive Excitation values to all tem-
plates, and except for the 10 inhibitory initial seed
templates no templates were regarded inhibitory.

Evaluation scheme We randomly sampled 100
templates each from PROPtmp’s 8,685 excitatory
candidates, PROPtmp’s 2,140 inhibitory candidates,
all the ALLEXC’s templates, and all the SIM’s tem-
plates, i.e., 400 templates in total. To make the an-
notators’ judgements easier, we randomly filled the
argument slot of each template with a noun filling its
argument slot in our Web corpus. Three annotators
labeled each sample (a combination of a template
and a noun) as ‘excitatory,’ ‘inhibitory,’ ‘neutral,’ or
‘undecided’ if they were not sure about its label.

Results for excitatory In the top graph in Fig-
ure 3, ‘Proposed’ shows PROPtmp’s precision curve.
The curve is drawn from its 100 samples whose X-
axis positions represent their ranks. We plot a dot for
every 5 samples. Among the 100 samples, 37 were
judged as excitatory, 6 as inhibitory, 45 as neutral,
and 6 as ‘undecided’. For the remaining 6 samples,

624



 0

 0.2

 0.4

 0.6

 0.8

 1

 0  2000  4000  6000  8000  10000

P
re

ci
si

on

’Proposed’
’Sim’

’Allexc’

 0.4

 0.6

 0.8

 1

 0  500  1000  1500  2000  2500

P
re

ci
si

on

Top-N

’Proposed’

Figure 3: Precision of template acquisition: excitatory
(top) and inhibitory (bottom).

the three annotators gave three different labels and
the label was not fixed (‘split-votes’ hereafter). For
calculating precision, only the 37 samples labeled
excitatory were regarded as correct. PROPtmp out-
performed all baselines by a large margin, with an
estimated 70% precision for the top 2,000 templates.
‘Allexc’ and ‘Sim’ in Figure 3 denote ALLEXC and
SIM. Among ALLEXC’s 100 samples, 19 were
judged as excitatory, 5 as inhibitory, 74 as neutral,
and 2 as ‘undecided’. SIM’s low performance re-
flects the fact that templates with opposite polarities
are sometimes distributionally similar, and as a re-
sult get connected by SAME links.

Results for inhibitory ‘Proposed’ in the bottom
graph in Figure 3 shows the precision curve drawn
from the 100 samples of PROPtmp’s inhibitory can-
didates. Among the 100 samples, 41 were judged as
inhibitory, 15 as excitatory, 32 as neutral, 4 as ‘unde-
cided’, and 8 as ’split-votes’. Only the 41 inhibitory
samples were regarded as correct. From the curve
we estimate that PROPtmp achieved about 70% pre-
cision for the top 500. Note that SIM could not ac-
quire any inhibitory templates, yet we can think of
no other reasonable baseline for this task.

Inter-annotator agreement The Fleiss’ kappa
(Fleiss, 1971) of annotator judgements was 0.48
(moderate agreement (Landis and Koch, 1977)). For
training, the annotators were given a one-page anno-
tation manual (see supplementary materials), which
basically described the same contents in Section 2,

in addition to 14 examples of excitatory, 14 exam-
ples of inhibitory, and 6 examples of neutral tem-
plates that were manually prepared by the authors.
Using the manual and the examples, we instructed
all the annotators face-to-face for a few hours. We
also made sure the evaluation data did not contain
any examples used during instruction.

Observations about argument positions Among
the 200 evaluation samples of PROPtmp (for both ex-
citatory and inhibitory evaluations), 52 were judged
as excitatory, 47 as inhibitory, and 77 as neutral. For
the excitatory templates, the numbers of nominative,
topic, accusative, dative, and instrumental argument
positions are 15, 11, 10, 8, and 8, respectively. For
the inhibitory templates, the numbers are 17, 11, 16,
3, and 0. For the neutral templates, the numbers are
8, 23, 17, 21, and 8. Accordingly, we found no no-
ticeable bias with regard to their numbers. Likewise,
we found no noticeable bias regarding their useful-
ness for contradiction and causality acquisition re-
ported shortly, too.

Summary PROPtmp works well, as it outperforms
the baselines. Its performance demonstrates the va-
lidity of our constraint matrix in Table 1. Besides,
since our annotators were non-experts but showed
moderate agreement, we conclude that Excitation is
a reasonably comprehensible notion.

5.2 Contradiction Extraction
This section shows that our proposed method for
contradiction extraction (PROPcont) extracted one
million contradiction pairs with more than 70% pre-
cision, and that Excitation values are useful for con-
tradiction ranking. As input for PROPcont we took
the top 2,000 excitatory and the top 500 inhibitory
templates from the previous experiment (i.e., the
other templates were regarded as neutral).

Baselines Our baseline methods are RANDcont
and PROPcont-NE. RANDcont randomly combines
two phrases, each consisting of a template and a
noun that they share. It does not rank its output.
PROPcont-NE is the same as PROPcont except that it
does not use Excitation values; ranking is based only
on sim(t1, t2). PROPcont-NE does combine phrases
with opposite template polarities, just like PROPcont.

Evaluation scheme We randomly sampled 200
phrase pairs from the top one million results of each

625



 0

 0.2

 0.4

 0.6

 0.8

 1

 0  200000  400000  600000  800000  1e+06

P
re

ci
si

on

Top-N

’Proposed’
’Proposed-ne’

’Random’

Figure 4: Precision of contradiction extraction.

PROPcont and PROPcont-NE, and 100 samples from
the output of RANDcont’s output, giving 500 sam-
ples. Three annotators labeled whether the samples
are contradictions. Fleiss’ kappa was 0.78 (substan-
tial agreement).

Results ‘Proposed’ in Figure 4 shows the preci-
sion curve of PROPcont. PROPcont achieved an esti-
mated 70% precision for its top one million results.
Readers might wonder whether PROPcont’s output
consists of a small number of template pairs that are
filled with many different nouns. If this were the
case, PROPcont’s performance would be somewhat
misleading. However, we found that PROPcont’s 200
samples contained 194 different template pairs, sug-
gesting that our method can acquire a large variety
of contradiction phrases. ‘Proposed-ne’ is the pre-
cision curve for PROPcont-NE. Its precision is more
than 10% lower than PROPcont at the top one million
results. ‘Random’ shows that RANDcont’s precision
is only 4%. Table 2 shows examples of PROPcont’s
outputs and their English translation. The labels
‘Cont,’ ‘Quasi’ and ‘6’ denote whether a pair is con-
tradictory, quasi-contradictory, or not contradictory.
Among PROPcont’s 145 samples judged by the an-
notators as contradiction, 46 were judged as quasi-
contradictory by one of the authors. The first 6
case in Table 2 was caused by the template, Xを改
善する (improve X). It is tricky since it is excitatory
when taking arguments like function, while it is in-
hibitory when taking arguments like disorder. How-
ever, PROPtmp currently cannot distinguish these us-
ages and judged it as inhibitory in our experiments
in Section 5.1, though it must be interpreted as ex-
citatory for the 6 case. The second 6 case was due
to PROPtmp’s error; it incorrectly judged the neutral
template, Xが関係する (related to X), as inhibitory.

Rank Contradiction Pairs Label
8,767 アンバランスを是正する ⊥アンバランスを生じさせる Cont

repair imbalance ⊥ become imbalanced
103,581 運転を助ける ⊥運転を妨げる Cont

assist the driver ⊥ disturb the driver
151,338 緊張感が緩和される ⊥緊張を伴う Quasi

calm tension ⊥ feel tension
184,014 機能を改善する ⊥機能を高める 6

improve function ⊥ boost function
316,881 円安が止まる ⊥円安が進行する Cont

yen depreciation stops ⊥ yen depreciation develops
317,028 騒音がひどくなる ⊥騒音は減少する Cont

noise gets worse ⊥ noise abates
334,642 酸味がます ⊥酸味が消える Cont

a sour taste is augmented ⊥ a sour taste is lost
487,496 痛みが発症する ⊥痛みを減らす Quasi

feel pain ⊥ reduce pain
529,173 アクセスが生ずる ⊥アクセスを抑制する Cont

access occurs ⊥ curb access
555,049 原発をなくす ⊥原発を増やす Cont

lose nuclear plants ⊥ augment nuclear plants
608,895 放射能が放出される ⊥放射能が減る Quasi

radioactivity is released ⊥ radioactivity is reduced
638,092 ユーロが下落する ⊥ユーロが強くなる Cont

Euro falls ⊥ Euro gets strong
757,423 シェアを有する ⊥シェアが低下する Quasi

have share (in market) ⊥ share decreases
833,941 活性酸素が放出される ⊥活性酸素が関係する 6

generate active oxygen ⊥ related to active oxygen
848,331 ガンを破壊する ⊥ガンを進行させる Cont

destroy cancer ⊥ develop cancer
982,980 ウイルスが死滅する ⊥ウイルスが活性化する Cont

virus becomes extinct ⊥ virus is activated

Table 2: Examples of PROPcont’s outputs.

Summary PROPcont is a low cost but high perfor-
mance method, since it acquired one million con-
tradiction pairs with over 70% precision from only
the 46 initial seed templates. Besides, Excitation
contributes to contradiction ranking since PROPcont
outperformed PROPcont-NE by a 10% margin for the
top one million results. Thus we conclude that our
assumption on contradiction extraction is valid.

5.3 Causality Extraction

We show that our method for causality extraction
(PROPcaus) extracted 500,000 causality pairs with
about 70% precision, and that Excitation values con-
tribute to the ranking of causal pairs. PROPcaus took
as input all 10,825 templates classified by PROPtmp.

Baselines RANDcaus randomly extracts two
phrases that co-occur in a sentence with one of the
AND/THUS-type connectives, i.e., it uses not only
non-causal connectives but also causal ones like
thus. FREQ is the same as PROPcaus except that it
ranks its output by the phrase pair co-occurrence
frequency rather than Excitation values.

626



 0

 0.2

 0.4

 0.6

 0.8

 1

 0  200000  400000  600000  800000  1e+06

P
re

ci
si

on

Top-N

’Proposed’
’Freq’

’Random’

Figure 5: Precision of causality extraction.

Evaluation scheme We randomly sampled 100
pairs each from the top one million results of
PROPcaus and FREQ, and all RANDcaus’s output.
The annotators were shown the original sentences
from which the samples were extracted. Fleiss’
kappa was 0.68 (substantial agreement).

Results ‘Proposed’ in Figure 5 is the precision
curve for PROPcaus. From this curve the estimated
precision of PROPcaus is about 70% around the top
500,000. Note that PROPcaus outperformed FREQ
by a large margin, and extracted a large variety of
causal pairs since its 100 samples contained 91 dif-
ferent template pairs. Table 3 shows examples of
PROPcaus’s output along with English translations.
The labels ‘4’ and ‘6’ denote whether a pair is
causality or not. The 6 cases in Table 3 were
exceptions to our assumption described in Section
4.2; even if two Excitation templates co-occur in a
sentence with an AND/THUS-type connective, they
sometimes do not constitute causality. Actually, the
first 6 case consists of two phrases that co-occurred
in a sentence with a (non-causal) AND/THUS-type
connective but described two events that happen as
the effects of introducing the RAID storage system;
both are caused by the third event. In the second 6
case, the two phrases co-occurred in a sentence with
a (non-causal) AND/THUS-type connective but just
described two opposing events.

Summary PROPcaus performs well since it ex-
tracted 500,000 causality pairs with about 70%
precision. Moreover, Excitation values contribute
to causality ranking since PROPcaus outperformed
FREQ by a large margin. Then we conclude that our
assumption on causality extraction is confirmed.

Rank Causality Pairs Label
1,036 基礎代謝を高める⇒脂肪燃焼力を高める 4

increase basal metabolism ⇒ enhance fat-burning ability
2,128 学習意欲を高める⇒自己学習を促進する 4

increase desire to learn ⇒ facilitate self-learning
6,471 信頼性を高める⇒容量を増やす 6

improve reliability ⇒ increase capacity
29,638 血中甲状腺ホルモン濃度が高まる⇒新陳代謝が高まる 4

circulating thyroid hormone level increases ⇒ improves metabolism
56,868 輸出が増える⇒ＧＤＰが増加する 4

exports increase ⇒ GDP grows
267,364 血行を促進する⇒新陳代謝を助ける 4

promote blood circulation ⇒ improve metabolism
268,670 ＢＳＥが発生する⇒輸入禁止になる 4

BSE outbreak occurs ⇒ import ban (on beef) is issued
290,846 視界が良くなる⇒作業効率が向上する 4

improve the view ⇒ improve the efficiency of work
322,121 大地震が発生する⇒メルトダウンを起こす 4

giant earthquake occurs ⇒ meltdown is triggered
532,106 熱効率が良い⇒暖房効果を高める 4

good at thermal efficiency ⇒ enhance heating efficiency
563,462 インフレを起こす⇒円安が進行する 4

promote inflation (in Japan) ⇒ yen depreciation develops
591,175 利益をもたらす⇒不利益をもたらす 6

bring profit ⇒ bring detriment
657,676 体力が落ちる⇒免疫力が下がる 4

physical strength declines ⇒ immune system weakens
676,902 国債先物急落を受ける⇒金利が上昇する 4

sharp fall in government bond futures occurs ⇒ interest rates increase
914,101 誤差が出る⇒めいわくをかける 4

have a margin of error ⇒ cause trouble

Table 3: Examples of PROPcaus’s outputs.

5.4 Causality Hypothesis Generation

Here we show that our causality hypothesis genera-
tion method in Section 4.3 (PROPhyp) extracted one
million hypotheses with about 57% precision.

This experiment took the top 100,000 results of
PROPcaus as input, generated hypotheses from them,
and randomly selected 100 samples from the top one
million hypotheses. We evaluated only PROPcaus,
since we could not think of any reasonable baseline
for this task. Randomly coupling two phrases might
be a baseline, but it would perform so poorly that it
could not be a reasonable baseline.

The annotators judged each sample in the same
way as Section 5.3, except that we presented them
with source causality pairs from which hypotheses
were generated, as well as the original sentences of
these source pairs. Fleiss’ kappa was 0.51 (moderate
agreement).

As a result, PROPhyp generated one million hy-
potheses with 57% precision. It generated various
kinds of hypotheses, since these 100 samples con-
tained 99 different template pairs. Table 4 shows
some causal hypotheses generated by PROPhyp. The
source causal pair is shown in parentheses. The la-

627



bels ‘4’ and ‘6’ denote whether a pair is causality
or not. The first 6 case was due to an error made by

Rank Causality Hypotheses (and their Origin) Label
18,886 ストレスが減少する⇒不眠が改善される 4

(ストレスが増加する⇒不眠が続く) 4
alleviate stress ⇒ remedy insomnia
(increase stress ⇒ continue to have insomnia)

93,781 デフレを阻止する⇒税収が増加する 4
(デフレが進む⇒税収が減る) 4
halt deflation ⇒ tax revenue increases
(deflation is promoted ⇒ tax revenes declines)

121,163 楽しみが増大する⇒ストレスが減少する 4
(楽しみが減る⇒ストレスが高まる) 4
enjoyment increases ⇒ stress decreases
(enjoyment decreases ⇒ stress grows)

205,486 犯罪を減らす⇒不安が無くなる 4
(犯罪が増加する⇒不安が高まる) 4
decrease in crime ⇒ diminish anxiety
(increase in crime ⇒ heighten anxiety)

253,531 塩素を減らす⇒バクテリアは増殖する 4
(塩素を発生させる⇒バクテリアを死滅させる) 4
reduce chlorine ⇒ bacteria grow
(generate chlorine ⇒ bacteria extinct)

450,353 需要が拡大する⇒失業を減少させる 4
(需要が減る⇒失業が増える) 4
expand demand ⇒ decrease unemployment rate
(decrease demand ⇒ increase unemployment rate)

464,546 消化が悪くなる⇒コレステロールを増やす 6
(消化を助ける⇒コレステロールを減らす) 6
(ability of) digestion deteriorates ⇒ cholesterol increases
(aid digestion ⇒ decrease cholesterol)

538,310 疲れを軽減する⇒免疫を増強する 4
(疲れがたまる⇒免疫が弱まる) 4
relieve fatigue ⇒ improve immunity
(feel fatigued ⇒ immunity is weakened)

789,481 調子があがる⇒トラブルを防げる 4
(調子が悪くなる⇒トラブルが起きる) 4
conditions improve ⇒ prevent troubles
(conditions become bad ⇒ cause troubles)

837,850 景気をコントロールする⇒問題を伴う 6
(景気が良くなる⇒問題が解消される) 4
control economic conditions ⇒ accompany problems
(economic conditions improve ⇒ problems are solved)

Table 4: Examples of causality hypotheses.

our causality extraction method PROPcaus; the case
was erroneous since its original causality was erro-
neous. The second 6 case was due to the fact that
one of the contradiction phrase pairs used to gener-
ate the hypothesis was in fact not contradictory (景
気をコントロールする 6⊥ 景気が良くなる ‘con-
trol economic conditions 6⊥ economic conditions im-
prove’).

From these results, we conclude that our assump-
tion on causality hypothesis generation is valid.

6 Related Work

While the semantic orientation involving good/bad
(or desirable/undesirable) has been extensively stud-

ied (Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown, 1997; Turney,
2002; Rao and Ravichandran, 2009; Velikovich et
al., 2010), we believe Excitation represents a gen-
uinely new semantic orientation.

Most previous methods of contradiction extrac-
tion require either thesauri like Roget’s or WordNet
(Harabagiu et al., 2006; Mohammad et al., 2008; de
Marneffe et al., 2008) or large training data for su-
pervision (Turney, 2008). In contrast, our method
requires only a few seed templates. Lin et al. (2003)
used a few “incompatibility” patterns to acquire
antonyms, but they did not report their method’s per-
formance on the incompatibility identification task.

Many methods for extracting causality or script-
like knowledge between events exist (Girju, 2003;
Torisawa, 2005; Torisawa, 2006; Abe et al., 2008;
Chambers and Jurafsky, 2009; Do et al., 2011; Shi-
bata and Kurohashi, 2011), but none uses a notion
similar to Excitation. As we have shown, we expect
that Excitation will improve their performance.

Regarding the acquisition of semantic knowledge
that is not explicitly written in corpora, Tsuchida et
al. (2011) proposed a novel method to generate se-
mantic relation instances as hypotheses using auto-
matically discovered inference rules. We think that
automatically generating plausible semantic knowl-
edge that is not written (explicitly) in corpora as hy-
potheses and augmenting semantic knowledge base
is important for the discovery of so-called “unknown
unknowns” (Torisawa et al., 2010), among others.

7 Conclusion

We proposed a new semantic orientation, Excitation,
and its acquisition method. Our experiments showed
that Excitation allows to acquire one million con-
tradiction pairs with over 70% precision, as well as
causality pairs and causality hypotheses of the same
volume with reasonable precision from the Web. We
plan to make all our acquired knowledge resources
available to the research community soon (Visit
http://www.alagin.jp/index-e.html).

We will investigate additional applications of Ex-
citation in future work. For instance, we expect that
Excitation and its related semantic knowledge ac-
quired in this study will improve the performance
of Why-QA system like the one proposed by Oh et
al. (2012).

628



References
Shuya Abe, Kentaro Inui, and Yuji Matsumoto. 2008.

Two-phrased event relation acquisition: Coupling the
relation-oriented and argument-oriented approaches.
In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference
on Computational Linguistics (COLING 2008), pages
1–8.

Susumu Akamine, Daisuke Kawahara, Yoshikiyo Kato,
Tetsuji Nakagawa, Yutaka I. Leon-Suematsu, Takuya
Kawada, Kentaro Inui, Sadao Kurohashi, and Yutaka
Kidawara. 2010. Organizing information on the web
to support user judgments on information credibil-
ity. In Proceedings of 2010 4th International Uni-
versal Communication Symposium Proceedings (IUCS
2010), pages 122–129.

Alina Andreevskaia and Sabine Bergler. 2006. Semantic
tag extraction from wordnet glosses. In Proceedings
of the 5th International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2006).

Nathanael Chambers and Dan Jurafsky. 2009. Unsu-
pervised learning of narrative schemas and their par-
ticipants. In Proceedings of the 47th Annual Meeting
of the ACL and the 4th IJCNLP of the AFNLP (ACL-
IJCNLP 2009), pages 602–610.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Anna Rafferty, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2008. Finding contradiction
in text. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of
the Association of Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies (ACL-08: HLT), pages 1039–
1047.

Quang Xuan Do, Yee Seng Chan, and Dan Roth. 2011.
Minimally supervised event causality identification.
In Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP
2011), pages 294–303.

Joseph L. Fleiss. 1971. Measuring nominal scale agree-
ment among many raters. Psychological Bulletin,
76(5):378–382.

Roxana Girju. 2003. Automatic detection of causal re-
lations for question answering. In Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL 2003), Workshop on Multi-
lingual Summarization and Question Answering - Ma-
chine Learning and Beyond, pages 76–83.

Sanda Harabagiu, Andrew Hickl, and Finley Lacatusu.
2006. Negation, contrast and contradiction in text pro-
cessing. In Proceedings of the 21st National Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-06), pages 755–
762.

Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou and Kathleen R. McKeown.
1997. Predicting the semantic orientation of adjec-
tives. In Proceedings of the 35 Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics and the

8the Conference of the European Chapter of the Asso-
ciation of Computational Linguistics, pages 174–181.

Daisuke Kawahara and Sadao Kurohashi. 2006. A fully-
lexicalized probabilistic model for Japanese syntactic
and case structure analysis. In Proceedings of the Hu-
man Language Technology Conference of the North
American Chapter of the ACL (HLT-NAACL2006),
pages 176–183.

J. Richard Landis and Gary G. Koch. 1977. The mea-
surement of observer agreement for categorical data.
Biometrics, 33(1):159–174.

Dekang Lin, Shaojun Zhao Lijuan Qin, and Ming Zhou.
2003. Identifying synonyms among distributionally
similar words. In Proceedings of the 18th Inter-
national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(IJCAI-03), pages 1492–1493.

Dekang Lin. 1998. Automatic retrieval and clustering
of similar words. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics and 17th International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (COLING-ACL1998), pages 768–
774.

Saif Mohammad, Bonnie Dorr, and Greame Hirst. 2008.
Computing word-pair antonymy. In Proceedings of
the 2008 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 982–991.

Jong-Hoon Oh, Kentaro Torisawa, Chikara Hashimoto,
Takuya Kawada, Stijn De Saeger, Junichi Kazama, and
Yiou Wang. 2012. Why question answering using
sentiment analysis and word classes. In Proceedings
of EMNLP-CoNLL 2012: Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and Natural
Language Learning.

Charles E. Osgood, George J. Suci, and Percy H. Tannen-
baum. 1957. The measurement of meaning. Univer-
sity of Illinois Press.

James Pustejovsky. 1995. The Generative Lexicon. MIT
Press.

Delip Rao and Deepak Ravichandran. 2009. Semi-
supervised polarity lexicon induction. In Proceedings
of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of the
ACL, pages 675–682.

Tomohide Shibata and Sadao Kurohashi. 2011. Acquir-
ing strongly-related events using predicate-argument
co-occurring statistics and case frames. In Proceed-
ings of the 5th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (IJCNLP 2011), pages 1028–
1036.

Philip J. Stone, Dexter C. Dunphy, Marshall S. Smith,
and Daniel M. Ogilvie. 1966. The General Inquirer:
A Computer Approach to Content Analysis. MIT
Press.

Hiroya Takamura, Takashi Inui, and Manabu Okumura.
2005. Extracting semantic orientation of words using

629



spin model. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meet-
ing of the ACL, pages 133–140.

Kentaro Torisawa, Stijn De Saeger, Jun’ichi Kazama,
Asuka Sumida, Daisuke Noguchi, Yasunari Kakizawa,
Masaki Murata, Kow Kuroda, and Ichiro Yamada.
2010. Organizing the web’s information explosion
to discover unknown unknowns. New Generation
Computing (Special Issue on Information Explosion),
28(3):217–236.

Kentaro Torisawa. 2005. Automatic acquisition of ex-
pressions representing preparation and utilization of
an object. In Proceedings of the Recent Advances
in Natural Language Processing (RANLP05), pages
556–560.

Kentaro Torisawa. 2006. Acquiring inference rules
with temporal constraints by using japanese coordi-
nated sentences and noun-verb co-occurrences. In
Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the ACL
(HLT-NAACL2006), pages 57–64.

Masaaki Tsuchida, Kentaro Torisawa, Stijn De Saeger,
Jong-Hoon Oh, Jun’ichi Kazama, Chikara Hashimoto,
and Hayato Ohwada. 2011. Toward finding semantic
relations not written in a single sentence: An inference
method using auto-discovered rules. In Proceedings
of the 5th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (IJCNLP 2011), pages 902–910.

Peter D. Turney. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down?
semantic orientation applied to unsupervised classifi-
cation of reviews. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (ACL 2002), pages 417–424.

Peter Turney. 2008. A uniform approach to analogies,
synonyms, antonyms, and associations. In Proceed-
ings of the 22nd International Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics (COLING 2008), pages 905–912.

Leonid Velikovich, Sasha Blair-Goldensohn, Kerry Han-
nan, and Ryan McDonald. 2010. The viability of web-
derived polarity lexicons. In Human Language Tech-
nologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the North
American Chapter of the ACL, pages 777–785.

Ellen M. Voorhees. 2008. Contradictions and justifica-
tions: Extensions to the textual entailment task. In
Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation of Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies (ACL-08: HLT), pages 63–71.

630


