










































Lexical Differences in Autobiographical Narratives from Schizophrenic Patients and Healthy Controls


Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational Natural
Language Learning, pages 37–47, Jeju Island, Korea, 12–14 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Lexical Differences in Autobiographical Narratives from Schizophrenic
Patients and Healthy Controls

Kai Hong1, Christian G. Kohler2, Mary E. March2, Amber A. Parker3, Ani Nenkova1
University of Pennsylvania

Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA
1{hongkai1,nenkova}@seas.upenn.edu

2{kohler,memarch}@mail.med.upenn.edu
3{parker}@sas.upenn.edu

Abstract

We present a system for automatic
identification of schizophrenic patients
and healthy controls based on narratives
the subjects recounted about emotional
experiences in their own life. The focus of the
study is to identify the lexical features that
distinguish the two populations. We report the
results of feature selection experiments that
demonstrate that the classifier can achieve
accuracy on patient level prediction as high as
76.9% with only a small set of features. We
provide an in-depth discussion of the lexical
features that distinguish the two groups and
the unexpected relationship between emotion
types of the narratives and the accuracy of
patient status prediction.

1 Introduction

Recent studies have shown that automatic language
analysis can be successfully applied to detect
cognitive impairment and language disorders. Our
work further extends this line of investigation with
analysis of the lexical differences between patients
suffering from schizophrenia and healthy controls.

Prior work has reported on characteristic
language peculiarities exhibited by schizophrenia
patients. There are more repetitions in speech
of patients compared to controls (Manschreck et
al., 1985). Patients also tend to repeatedly refer
back to themselves (Andreasen., 1986). Deviations
from normal language use in patients on different
levels, including phonetics and syntax, have been
documented (Covington et al., 2005), however

lexical differences have not been investigated in
detail.

In this paper we introduce a dataset of
autobiographical narratives told by schizophrenic
patients and by healthy controls. The narratives
are related to emotional personal experiences of the
subjects for five basic emotions: ANGER, SAD,
HAPPY, DISGUST, FEAR. We train an SVM
classifier to predict subject status. Our good results
on the relatively small dataset indicate the potential
of the approach. An automatic system for predicting
patient status from autobiographical narratives can
aid psychiatrists in tracking patients over time and
can serve as an easy way to administer large
scale screening. The detailed feature analysis we
performed also pinpoints key differences between
the two populations.

We study a range of lexical features including
individual words, repetitions as well as classes
of words defined in specialized dictionaries
compiled by psychologists (Section 4). We use
several approaches for feature analysis to identify
statistically significant differences in the two
populations. There are 169 significant features
among all of the 6057 features we examined.
Through feature selection we are able to obtain a
small set of 25 highly predictive features which
lead to status classification accuracy significantly
better than chance (Section 6.3). We also show
that differences between patients and controls are
revealed best in stories related to SAD and ANGRY
narratives, they are decent in HAPPY stories, and
that distinctions are poor for DISGUST and FEAR
(Section 6.5).

37



2 Related Work

Research in psychometrics has studied patterns
of lexical usage in a large variety of scenarios.
A popular tool used for psychometric analysis
is Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC)
(Pennebaker et al., 2007). One of the most
interesting discoveries in that line of research is that
people with physical or emotional pain are likely to
use first-person singular pronouns more often than
the general population (Rude et al., 2004). In the
view of therapy, Pennebaker discovered that writing
emotional experiences can be helpful in therapeutic
process (Pennebaker, 1997). It has also been shown
that the usage of pronouns and function words can
be indicators of writing styles, physical health and
other distinctions (Tausczik and Pennebaker, 2010).

The combination of natural language processing
(NLP) and machine learning (ML) has been
explored in many psychology related projects,
and is gaining popularity. It has been shown
that features from language models (LMs) can
be used to detect impairment in monolingual
and bilingual children (Gabani et al., 2009).
Even better results are achieved when features
derived from LMs are combined with other surface
features to predict language impairment. Similarly,
studies on child language development and autism
have shown that n-gram cross-entropy from LMs
representative of healthy and impaired subjects is
a highly significant feature predictive of language
impairment (Prud’hommeaux et al., 2011). The
feasibility of making use of lexical features
to analyze language dominance among bilingual
children has also been confirmed (Solorio et al.,
2011).

In non-medically related research, LIWC and
lexical features have been used to recognize
different personalities such as introvert vs extrovert,
openness vs experience, conscientiousness vs
unconscientiousness, etc. (Mairesse et al., 2007).
Similar features have been applied to differentiate
author personality of e-mails (Gill et al., 2006),
blogs (Gill et al., 2009) and other documents.

Speech-related features and interactional aspects
of dialog behavior such as pauses, fillers, etc,
have also been found helpful in identifying autistic
patients (Heeman et al., 2010).

Variables Schizophrenia Control
(# Subjects) (n=23) (n=16)
Mean age (SD) 33.81 (9.65) 32.29 (6.59)
Mean number of
words per story (SD)

192.22 (122.4) 180.79 (95.87)

Table 1: Basic demographic information

Syntax features have been used in approaches
of automatic detection of neurological problems.
Parsing texts produced by subjects and using
bag of rules as features have been applied in
analyzing language dominance (Solorio et al.,
2011). Methods that quantify syntactic complexity
like Yngve score and Fraizer score have been used
to analyze autism (Prud’hommeaux et al., 2011).
Moreover, there has been research on detecting mild
cognitive impairment, which could be an earlier
state of Alzheimer’s disease: five different ways
of evaluating syntactic complexity measures were
introduced in their paper (Roark et al., 2011).

In our own work, we focus our analysis
exclusively on lexical features. Similarly to prior
work, we present the most significant features
related to differences between schizophrenic
patients and healthy controls. Unlike prior work,
instead of doing class ablation studies we perform
feature selection from the full set of available
features and identify a small set of highly predictive
features which are sufficient to achieve the top
performance we report. Such targeted analysis
is more helpful for medical professionals as they
search to develop new therapies and ways to track
patient status between visits.

3 Data

For our experiments we collected autobiographical
narratives from 39 speakers. The speakers are
asked to tell their experience involving the following
emotions: HAPPY, ANGER, SAD, FEAR and
DISGUST, which comprise the set of the five basic
emotions (Cowie, 2000). Most subjects told a single
story for each of the emotions, some told two. The
total number of stories in the dataset is 201.

The stories were narrated in the doctor’s office.
The recordings of the narratives were manually
transcribed in plain text format. We show age and
length in words of the told stories for the two groups

38



in Table 1. There are 23 patients with schizophrenia
and 16 healthy controls, telling 120 and 81 stories
respectively.

4 Features

Here we introduce the large set of lexical features
that we group in three classes: a large class of
features computed for individual lexical items, basic
features, features derived on the basis of pre-existing
dictionaries and language model features. We also
detail the way we performed feature normalization
and feature selection.

4.1 Surface Features
4.1.1 Basic Features

Basic features include token to type ratio to
capture vocabulary diversity, letters per word, words
per sentence, sentences per document and words
per document. These features describe the general
properties of the language used by the subject,
without focus on specific words.

Repetitions, revisions, large amount of fillers
or disfluencies can be indicators for language
impairment. In our basic features we detect the
number of repetitions in words, punctuations and
sentences for each transcript. Then these three
measures are normalized by total number of words
or sentences.

We define repetitions as the occurrence of the
same token in a sliding window of five items
within the same sentence. We count repetitions of
words and punctuation separately. The repetition
of punctuation, mostly commas and full-stops, are
indicative of phrasing in speech which has been
indirectly captured in the transcript. Repetition of
any word is counted, regardless of which specific
word was repeated. For example, for the sentence I
am, am, afraid, that something bad would happen.
am is counted as repeated once, and comma is
counted as repeated twice. Finally, sentence
repetition captures the amount of overlapping at the
beginning of two adjacent sentences, defined as the
number of tokens from the beginning of the sentence
until the first token where the two sentences differ.

4.1.2 Lexical Features
For words in the vocabulary: we use a real

value feature equal to the word frequency for each

document. Of particular interest we track the use
of pronouns because early research has reported that
people with cognitive impairment have a tendency
to use subjective words or referring to themselves
(Rude et al., 2004).

In addition, for each word in the vocabulary,
we apply the presence of the repetition about one
particular word.

4.1.3 Perplexity from Language Models
Inspired by the predictive power of language

model reported in prior work, we also include
several language model features. We build language
models on words as well as part-of-speech (POS)
tags from Stanford POS-tagger (Toutanova et al.,
2003). We tried unigram, bigram and trigram
language models by word and POS tag. Experiments
showed that bigram performed better than random,
and the other two performed below random. Thus
in the experiments we report later we train one
model for patients and one for controls and use the
perplexity of a given text according to the bigram
language models on word and POS as features in
prediction.

4.2 Dictionaries: LIWC and Diction

Text analysis packages have been widely used in
research related to personality analysis, sentimental
analysis and psychometric studies. We use two
dictionary-based systems, LIWC (Pennebaker et al.,
2007)1 and Diction2, which both give scores to
transcripts based on broad categories.

4.2.1 Linguistic Inquiry&Word Count(LIWC)
LIWC calculates the degree to which people use

different categories of words. Several manually
compiled dictionaries are at the heart of the
application. Each word or word stem could be in
one or more word categories or sub-dictionaries.
For instance, the word “cried” is part of the
following categories: sadness, negative emotion,
overall affect, verb, and past tense verb. When
a narrative contains the word “cried”, the scale
scores corresponding to these five subcategories are
incremented. The final output for each narrative is a
real value score for each of the 69 categories.

1See http://www.liwc.net
2See http://www.dictionsoftware.com

39



Because of the elaborate development of
dictionaries and categories, LIWC has been used
for predicting emotional and cognitive problems
from subject’s spoken and written samples.
Representative applications include studying
attention focus through personal pronouns, studying
honesty and deception by emotion words and
exclusive words and identifying thinking styles
(Tausczik and Pennebaker, 2010). Thus it is
reasonable to expect that LIWC derived features
would be helpful in identifying schizophrenia
patients. In Section 6.4 we discuss in more detail
the features which turned out to be significantly
different between patients and controls within
LIWC.

4.2.2 Diction
We also use Diction to analyze the lexical

characteristics of the transcripts. Similar to
LIWC, Diction scores are computed with reference
to manually compiled dictionaries. The master
variable scores in Diction include activity, certainty,
commonality, optimism and realism. These five
main scores are computed with 33 dictionaries that
define pertinent subcategories. The master variable
scores are constructed as follows: Sm =

∑n
i=1 ai −∑m

j=1 sj , where ai are additive traits, sj are
subtractive traits (giving positive/negative evidence
for the presence of the feature, respectively).
For example, Certainty and Realism scores are
calculated as follows:
Realism = [Familiarity + Spatial Awareness +
Temporal Awareness + Present Concern + Human
Interest + Concreteness] - [Past Concern +
Complexity]
Certainty = [Tenacity + Leveling + Collectives +
Insistence] - [Numerical Terms + Ambivalence +
Self Reference + Variety]

We also give definitions for some important
categories. The complete description of categories
is available in the Diction manual (Hart, 2000).
Cognition: Words referring to cerebral processes,
both functional and imaginative.
Satisfaction: Terms associated with positive
affective states.
Insistence: A measure of code-restriction and
contentedness, with the assumption that the
repetition of key terms indicates a preference for a

limited, ordered world.
Diversity: Words describing individuals or groups
of individuals differing from the norm.
Familiarity: Consisted of the most common words
in English.
Certainty: Language indicating resoluteness,
inflexibility, and completeness and a tendency to
speak ex cathedra.
Realism: Language describing tangible, immediate,
recognizable matters that affect people’s everyday
lives.

4.3 Feature normalization
We use two feature normalization approaches:
projection normalization and binary normalization.
Both of the two approaches are applied to basic
features, dictionary features and word features. As
for repetition, we don’t use normalization, because
it is in itself binary. For transcript i, we denote
the value of the jth feature as vij . We denote
minj , maxj , averagej as the minimum, maximum
and average value for each feature in the training
corpus, respectively. Thus for each feature j,
we have: averagej = 1n

∑n
i=1 vij minj =

mini{vij},maxj = maxi{vij}.

4.3.1 Projection Normalization
Here we simply normalize all feature values to a

range of [0, 1], where 0 corresponds to the smallest
observed value and 1 to the largest observed value
across all transcripts. Then we could have pij =

vij−minj
maxj−minj , where pij is the feature value after
normalization.

4.3.2 Binary normalization
Here all features are converted to binary values,

reflecting whether the value falls below or above the
average value for that feature observed in training.
The value pij of j-th feature for the i-th instance is
as below:

pij =

{
0 vij <

1
n

∑n
i=1 vij

1 otherwise

4.3.3 Prediction on the Test Set
All of the previous values, averagej , maxj and

minj are derived from the training set. While
doing classification, for a new testing instance, we
denote the feature vector as f = (f1, f2, . . . fn).

40



fj is then compared with averagej to do binary
normalization. We also use pj =

fj−minj
maxj−minj to do

projection normalization. If pj < 0, we change pj
into 0; if pj > 1, we change pj into 1. For the
words or features that are not seen in training, we
just ignore this dimension.

4.4 Feature selection

All lexically based analysis is plagued by data
sparsity problems. In the medical domain this
problem is even more acute because collecting
patient data is difficult. The number of features
we defined outnumbers our samples by orders
of magnitude. Therefore, in our classification
procedure, we perform feature selection by doing
two-sided T-test to compare the values of features
in the patient and control groups. The features with
p-value ≤ 0.05 are considered as indicative and are
selected for later machine learning experiments, in
which 169 out of 6057 features have been selected.
We discuss the significant features in the full set in
Section 6.4 .

Note however that we don’t use the features
selected on the full dataset for machine learning
experiments because when T-tests are applied
on the full dataset feature selection decisions
would include information about the test set as
well. Therefore, we adopt a leave-one-subject-out
(LOSO) evaluation approach instead. In each
iteration, we set aside one subject as test set. The
data from the remaining subjects form the training
set. Feature selection is done on the training set only
and a model is trained. The predictions are tested on
the held out subject. The procedure is repeated for
every subject as test set.

The choice of p-value cut-off allows us to relax
and tighten the requirement on significance of the
features and thus the size of the feature set. We
report results with different p-values in Table 3.
We also explore alternative feature ranking and
feature selection procedures in Section 6.3. In
each fold different features may be selected. For
ease of discussing feature differences we present
a discussion of the 169 significant features on the
entire dataset.

5 Our approach

The goal of our system is to classify the person who
told a story in one of two categories: Schizophrenia
group (SC) and Control group (CO). In order to
do this, we give labels to the stories told by each
subject. Therefore we could use our model to
identify the status of the person who told each
individual story, the task is to answer the question
“Was the subject who told this story a patient or
control?”. Then we combine the predictions for
stories to predict status of each subject, and the
task becomes answering the question “Is this subject
a patient or control given that they told these five
stories?”. Thus in story level prediction we use no
information about the fact that subjects told more
than one story, while in subject-level prediction we
do use this information.

First we present an experiment that relies only
on language models for the prediction. Then we
present the complete learning-based system that
uses the full set of features. Finally, we describe
the decision making approach to combine the story
level predictions to derive a subject-level prediction.

5.1 Language Model
Language models have been used previously for
language impairment on children (Gabani et al.,
2009) and language dominance prediction (Solorio
et al., 2011). Patients with speaking disorder
or cognitive impairment express themselves in
atypical ways. Language models (LMs) give a
straightforward way of estimating the probability
of the productions of a given subject. We expect
that the approach would be useful for the study of
schizophrenia as well and so start with a description
of the LM experiments.

We use LMs on words to recognize the difference
between patients and controls in vocabulary use.
We also trained a LM on POS tags because
it could reduce sparsity and focus more on
grammatical patterns. Two separate LMs are
trained on transcripts of schizophrenia and controls
respectively, using leave-one-subject-out protocol.

Story-level decisions are made by assigning the
class whose language model yields lower perplexity:

s(t) =

{
SC PERSC(t) ≤ PERCO(t)
CO otherwise

41



by Story (%) SC-F CO-F Accuracy Macro-F
Random 54.4 44.6 50.0 49.5
Majority 74.8 0.0 59.7 37.4
2-gram 62.5 44.4 55.2 53.5

2-gram-Pos 62.2 53.3 58.2 57.8

by Subject (%) SC-F CO-F Accuracy Macro-F
Random 54.1 45.1 50.0 49.6
Majority 74.2 0.0 59.1 37.1
2-gram 65.2 50.0 58.9 57.6

2-gram-Pos 66.7 54.5 61.5 60.6

Table 2: Language model performance

Here t means a transcript from a subject, while
PERSC and PERCO are perplexities for patients
and controls, respectively. We experimented with
unigram, bigram and trigram LMs on words and
POS tags. Laplace smoothing is used when
generating word probabilities.

5.2 Classification Phase

Language models are convenient because they
summarize information from patterns in lexical and
POS use into a single number. However, most of the
successful applications of LMs require large amount
of training data while our dataset is relatively small.
Moreover, we would like to analyze more specific
differences between the patient and control group
and this would be more appropriately done using a
larger set of features.

We have described our features and feature
selection process in Section 4. We use SVM-light
(Joachims, 1999) for our machine learning
algorithm, as its effectiveness has been proved in
various learning-based clinical tasks compared to
other classifiers (Gabani et al., 2009) .

5.3 Status Decision

Story level predictions are made for each transcript
either based on LM perplexity or SVM prediction.
The most intuitive way to obtain a subject-level
prediction is by voting from story-level predictions
between the stories told by the particular subject.
The subject-level prediction is simply set to equal
the majority prediction from individual stories. On
the few occasions where there are equal votes for
schizophrenia and control, the system makes a
preference towards schizophrenia, because it is more

P-value cut-off by Story by Subject # Features
0.15 59.0 58.9 450
0.10 61.7 64.1 341
0.05 62.7 64.1 169
0.01 57.7 65.4 44
0.005 64.2 71.6 32
0.001 65.7 75.6 18

0.0005 61.7 66.7 14

Table 3: Performance by subject after T-test feature
selection in different confidence levels.

dangerous to omit a potential patient.

6 Experiments and Results

We perform our experiments on the 201 transcripts
of the 39 speakers. The two baselines we
compare with are doing random assignments and
majority class, which for our datasets correspond to
predicting all subjects into the Schizophrenia group.

We report precision, recall and F-measure for
both patient and control groups, as well as overall
accuracy and Macro-F value. We get predictions
in leave-one-subject-out fashion and compute the
results over the complete set of predictions.

6.1 Language Model Performance

Our first experiment relies only on the perplexity
from language models to make the prediction.
We use the 1,2,3-gram models on word and POS
sequences. From the result in Table 2 we can
see bigram LM performed better than random
baseline for both story and subject level prediction.
3-gram and 1-gram LM did not give a credible
performance, with results worse than that of the
baselines. Because of space constraints we do not
report the specific numbers.

6.2 Classification Result after Feature Selection

Next we evaluate the performance of classification
with different number of features from the classes
we define in Section 4. As discussed above, we
performed feature selection by choosing different
levels of significance for the p-value cut-off. Feature
selection is performed 39 times for each LOSO
training fold. On the standard cut-off p-value ≤
0.05, our system could achieve 62.7% accuracy on
story and 64.1% on patient level prediction. The best
performance is achieved when the cut-off p-value is

42



Schizophrenia Control General
Measurement P (%) R (%) F (%) P (%) R (%) F (%) Accuracy (%) Macro-F (%)

Story Random 59.7 50.0 54.4 40.5 50.0 44.6 50.0 49.5
Majority 59.7 100.0 74.8 NA 0.0 0.0 (NA) 59.7 37.4

25-Features 68.7 75.0 71.7 57.1 49.4 52.9 64.7 62.3
Subject Random 59.0 50.0 54.1 41.0 50.0 45.0 50.0 49.6

Majority 59.0 100.0 74.2 NA 0.0 0.0 (NA) 59.0 37.1
25-Features 75.0 91.3 82.4 81.8 56.3 66.7 76.9 74.6

Table 4: Performance on best feature-set by feature ranking using signal to noise

stricter, 0.001, where an accuracy of 75.6% can be
reached. In this case only about 18 features are used
for the classification. Detailed results are shown in
Table 3.

6.3 Performance with Different Feature Size

Next we investigate the relationship between feature
set size and accuracy of prediction. We are
interested in identifying the smallest possible set
of features which gives performance close to the
one reported on the full set of significant features.
Narrowing the feature set as much as possible will
be most useful for clinicians as they understand
the differences between the groups and look for
indicators of the illness they need to track during
regular patient visits. Physicians and psychologists
are also interested to know the most significant
lexical differences revealed by the stories.

As an alternative to ranking features by p-value,
we use the Challenge Learning Object Package
(CLOP) 3 (Guyon et al., 2006) . It is a toolkit
with a combination of preprocessing and feature
selection. We experiment with signal-to-noise (s2n),
Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization and Recursive
Feature Elimination for finding a subset of indicative
features (Guyon and Elisseeff, 2003). The
signal-to-noise method gives better results than the
other two by at least 6% for the top performance
feature set. Thus we pick the best k features
according to the s2n result and use only those k
features for classification.

Figure 1 shows how prediction accuracy changes
with feature sets of different sizes. From the plot
we clearly see that our top performance is achieved
with 25 to 40 features, after which performance
drops. The peak performance is achieved when

3See http://clopinet.com/CLOP/

Figure 1: Story and Subject prediction accuracy

there are 25 features, where we could reach 75.0%
precision, 91.3% recall, 82.4% F-measure for
patient, and 76.9% accuracy for overall, as shown
in Table 4. Detailed information about the top
30 features can be found in Table 5. ‘+’ and ‘-’
means more prevalent for patient and control, while
‘prj’ and ‘01’ correspond to the two normalization
approaches in Section 4.3, projection and binary
respectively.

6.4 Analysis of Significant Features
In this section we discuss the specific features that
were revealed as most predictive by the feature
selection methods that we employed. We have seen
that it only requires about 25-40 features to obtain
peak performance.

First we briefly review the features that turned
out to be statistically significant (for 0.05 p-value
cut-off). Table 7 provides a list of the features
with higher values for Schizophrenia and Control
respectively. 4 We group the significant features
according to the feature classes we introduced in

4LM1 is defined as the ratio of CO perplexity and
SC perplexity from LMs, LM7 comes from projection
normalization of LM1. If LM perplexity for CO is smaller than
that of SC, then we set LM3 as 1; otherwise we set LM4 as 1.

43



Rank Feature Category P-value
1 Prj-Self + Diction 5.33E-06
2 01-Self + Diction 7.34E-06
3 Prj-punctuation - Basic 1.33E-05
4 01-I + LIWC 2.73E-05
5 01-sorry - Lexical 0.007
6 01-money + Lexical 6.95E-05
7 01-punctuation - Basic 4.88E-05
8 prj-I + LIWC 5.12E-05
9 01-extremely + Lexical 5.10E-05
10 prj-mildly + Lexical 0.0006
11 prj-sorry - Lexical 0.011
12 prj-I + Lexical 0.0002
13 LM1 + LM 0.0002
14 LM7 + LM 0.0002
15 I + Repeat 0.0003

Rank Feature Category P-value
16 and + Repeat 0.0002
17 01-mildly + Lexical 0.0004
18 prj-adverb - LIWC 0.0006
19 01-relationship - Lexical 0.024
20 01-late - Lexical 0.024
21 prj-comma - Lexical 0.001
22 Repeat word - Basic 0.001
23 prj-late - Lexical 0.034
24 prj-very - Lexical 0.007
25 prj-extremely + Lexical 0.001
26 01-couldn’t + Lexical 0.001
27 prj-relationship - Lexical 0.037
28 very - Repeat 0.007
29 prj-? + Lexical 0.002
30 prj-moderately + Lexical 0.006

Table 5: Table of the top 30 features by signal-to-noise ranking

Section 4. Of the 169 significant features, 111 are
more prevalent in patients, 58 are more prevalent
among the controls. If a feature was significant with
both normalizations we use, we list it only once in
Table 7.

Among the words indicative of schizophrenia,
subjective words such as I and LIWC category
self are among the most significant. This finding
conforms with prior research that patients with
mental disorders refer to themselves more often than
regular people. Patients produce more questions (as
indicated by the significance of the question mark
as a feature). It is possible that this indicates a
disruption in their thought process and they forget
what they are talking about. Further work will be
needed to understand this difference better.

In terms of words, patients talked more about
money, trouble, and used adverbs like moderately
and basically. Repetition in language is also a
revealing characteristic of the patient narratives.
There is a substantial difference in the appearance
of repetitions between the two groups, as well as
repetition of specific words: I, and, and repetition
of filled pauses um. As patients focus more on their
own feelings, they talked a lot about their family,
using words such as son, grandfather and even dogs.

Diction features revealed some unexpected
differences. The schizophrenia group scores
higher in the Self, Cognition, Past, Insistence and
Satisfaction categories. This indicates that they are
more likely to talk about past experience, using
cognitive terms and having a repetition of key

terms. We were particularly curious to understand
why patients score higher on Satisfaction ratings.
On closer inspection we discovered that patients’
stories were rated higher in Satisfaction when
they were telling SAD stories. This finding has
important clinical implications because one of the
diagnostic elements for the disease is inappropriate
emotion expression. Our study is the first to apply
an automatic measure to detect such anomaly in
patients’ emotional narratives. Prompted by this
discovery, we take a closer look at the interaction
between the emotion expressed in a story and the
accuracy of status prediction in the next section.

The control group exhibited more word
complexity, sentence complexity and thoughtfulness
in their stories. They use more adverbs and exclusive
words (e.g. but, without, exclude) on general trend.
They use the word sorry significantly more often
than patients.

6.5 Status Prediction by Emotion

We also investigate if classification accuracy differs
depending on the type of conveyed emotion.
Accuracy per emotion with three feature selection
methods is shown in Table 6. When using
signal-to-noise, we can see that on SAD stories the
two groups can be distinguished better. Story-level
accuracies on HAPPY stories reach 72.5%, and
that the accuracy on HAPPY stories is the next
highest one. When applying the 0.05 p-value
cut-off to select significant features, ANGER stories
become the ones for which the status of a subject

44



Accuracy (%) s2n (25) T-test (0.05) T-test (0.001)
Happy 66.7 59.0 71.8
Disgust 63.4 61.0 51.2
Anger 61.0 70.7 70.7
Fear 60.0 55.0 67.5
Sad 72.5 60.0 67.5

Story 64.7 62.9 65.7
Patient 76.9 64.1 74.4

Majority 59.0 59.0 59.0

Table 6: Accuracy per emotion by different feature-sets

can be predicted most accurately. Using the
threshold of 0.001 for selection gives the best overall
prediction. In that case, HAPPY and ANGER are
the emotions for which recognition is best. The
changes in the recognition accuracy depending on
feature selection suggests that in future studies it
may be more beneficial to perform feature selection
only on stories from a given type because obviously
indicative features exist at least for the SAD, ANGER
and HAPPY stories.

Regardless of the feature selection approach, it
is more difficult to tell the two groups apart when
they tell DISGUST and FEAR stories. These results
seem to indicate that when talking about certain
emotions patients and controls look much more alike
than when other emotions are concerned. Future
data acquisition efforts can focus only on collecting
autobiographical narratives relevant to the emotions
for which patients and controls differ most.

Figure 2: Number of significant features by P-value
selection on different thresholds (per emotion)

In future work we would like to use only stories
from a given emotion to classify between patients

Types Significant features more common in SCH
Basic repeat-word, sentence/document
LIWC I, insight, personal-pronoun
Diction self, cognition, past, insistence, satisfaction
Lexical ?, ain’t, alone, at, aw, become, before, behind

care, chance, confused, couldn’t, December, dog
dogs, extreme, extremely, feeling, forty, friends
god, got, grandfather, guess, guy, hand, hanging
hearing, hundred, increased, looking, loved
mental, met, mild, mildly, moderate, moderately
money, my, myself, outside, paper, passed, piece
remember, sister, son, stand, step, story, take
taken, throwing, took, trouble, use, wake
wanna, way

Repeat a, and, I, um, was
LM LM1, LM4, LM7

Types Significant features more common in CO
Basic length/word, words/sentence
LIWC ≥6-letters, adverb, exclusive words, inhibitive
Diction certainty, cooperation, diversity

familiarity, realism
Lexical ”,”, able, actually, are, basically, be, being, get’s

in, late, not, really, relationship, result, she’s
sleep, sorry, tell, their, there’s, very, weeks

Repeat very, ”,”
LM LM3

Table 7: Significant features (p-value ≤ 0.05)

and controls. Doing this with our current dataset
is not feasible because there are only about 40
transcripts per emotion. Therefore, we use our
data to identify significant features that distinguish
patients from controls only on narratives from a
particular emotion. For example, we compare the
differences of SAD stories told by patients and
controls. We count the number of significant
features between patients and controls with 11
different p-value cut-offs, and provide a plot that
visualizes the results in Figure 2. From the graph,
it is clear that there are many more differences
between the two groups in ANGER and SAD
narratives. HAPPY comes next, then DISGUST and
FEAR. However, at lower confidence levels, HAPPY
has equal number of significant features as ANGER
and SAD, which is in line with the result in Table 6.

The feature analysis performed by emotion
reveals more differences between patients and
controls, beyond common features such as self,
I, etc. For HAPPY stories, patients talk more
about their friends and relatives; they also have a

45



higher tendency of being ambivalent. For DISGUST
stories, patients are more disgusted with dogs, and
they talk more about health. The control group
shows a higher communication score, referring to
a better social interaction. ANGER is one of the
emotions that best reveals the differences between
groups, and schizophrenia patients show more
aggression and cognition while talking, according
to features derived from Diction. The control
group sometimes talks more about praise. In FEAR
stories patients talk about money more often than
controls. Meanwhile, the control group uses more
inhibition words, for instance: block, constrain and
stop. An interesting phenomenon happens in SAD
narratives. When talking about sad experiences,
patients sometimes show satisfaction and insistence,
while the controls talked more about working
experiences.

7 Conclusion

In this paper, we analyzed the predictive power
of different kinds of features for distinguishing
schizophrenia patients from healthy controls. We
provided an in-depth analysis of features that
distinguish patients from controls and showed that
the type of emotion conveyed by the personal
narratives is important for the distinction and that
stories for different emotions give different sets
indicators for subject status. We report classification
results as high as 76.9% on the subject level,
with 75.0% precision and 91.3% on recall for
schizophrenia patients.

We consider the results presented here to be
a pilot study. We are currently collecting and
transcribing additional stories from the two groups
which we would like to use as a definitive test
set to verify the stability of our findings. We
plan to explore syntactic and coherence models to
analyze the stories, as well as emotion analysis of
the narratives.

References
Nancy C. Andreasen. 1986. Scale for the assessment

of thought, language, and communication (TLC).
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 12:473 – 482.

Michael A. Covington, Congzhou He, Cati Brown,
Lorina Naci, Jonathan T. McClain, Bess Sirmon

Fjordbak, James Semple, and John Brown. 2005.
Schizophrenia and the structure of language: The
linguist’s view. Schizophrenia Research, 77(1):85 –
98.

Roddy Cowie. 2000. Describing the emotional states
expressed in speech. In Proceedings of the ISCA
Workshop on Speech and Emotion.

Keyur Gabani, Melissa Sherman, Thamar Solorio, Yang
Liu, Lisa Bedore, and Elizabeth Peña. 2009.
A corpus-based approach for the prediction of
language impairment in monolingual english and
spanish-english bilingual children. In Proceedings of
HLT-NAACL, pages 46–55.

Alastair J. Gill, Jon Oberlander, and Elizabeth Austin.
2006. Rating e-mail personality at zero acquaintance.
Personality and Individual Differences, 40(3):497 –
507.

Alastair J. Gill, Scott Nowson, and Jon Oberlander. 2009.
What are they blogging about? personality, topic and
motivation in blogs. In Proceedings of the AAAI
ICWSM’09.

Isabelle Guyon and André Elisseeff. 2003. An
introduction to variable and feature selection. J. Mach.
Learn. Res., 3:1157–1182, March.

Isabelle Guyon, Jiwen Li, Theodor Mader, Patrick A.
Pletscher, Georg Schneider, and Markus Uhr. 2006.
Feature selection with the CLOP package. Technical
report, http://clopinet.com/isabelle/Projects/ETH/
TM-fextract-class.pdf.

Rodrick Hart. 2000. Diction 5.0, the text-analysis
program user’s manual, Scolari Software, Sage Press.
http://www.dictionsoftware.com/.

Peter A. Heeman, Rebecca Lunsford, Ethan Selfridge,
Lois M. Black, and Jan P. H. van Santen. 2010.
Autism and interactional aspects of dialogue. In
Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2010 Conference, pages
249–252.

T. Joachims. 1999. Making large–scale SVM learning
practical. In B. Schölkopf, C. J. C. Burges, and
A. J. Smola, editors, Advances in Kernel Methods —
Support Vector Learning, pages 169–184, Cambridge,
MA. MIT Press.

F. Mairesse, M. A. Walker, M. R. Mehl, and R. K.
Moore. 2007. Using Linguistic Cues for the
Automatic Recognition of Personality in Conversation
and Text. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
30:457–500.

Theo C. Manschreck, Brendan A. Maher, Toni M.
Hoover, and Donna Ames. 1985. Repetition in
schizophrenic speech. Language & Speech, 28(3):255
– 268.

J.W. Pennebaker, R.J. Booth, and Francis. 2007.
Linguistic inquiry and word count (LIWC

46



2007): A text analysis program. Austin, Texas.
http://www.liwc.net/.

James W. Pennebaker. 1997. Writing about Emotional
Experiences as a Therapeutic Process. Psychological
Science, 8(3):162–166.

Emily T. Prud’hommeaux, Brian Roark, Lois M. Black,
and Jan van Santen. 2011. Classification of atypical
language in autism. In Proceedings of the 2nd
Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Computational
Linguistics, CMCL’11, pages 88–96.

Brian Roark, Margaret Mitchell, John-Paul Hosom,
Kristy Hollingshead, and Jeffrey Kaye. 2011.
Spoken language derived measures for detecting mild
cognitive impairment. IEEE Transactions on Audio,
Speech & Language Processing, 19(7):2081–2090.

Stephanie Rude, Eva-Maria Gortner, and James
Pennebaker. 2004. Language use of depressed and
depression-vulnerable college students. Cognition &
Emotion, 18(8):1121–1133.

Thamar Solorio, Melissa Sherman, Y. Liu, Lisa Bedore,
Elizabeth Peña, and A. Iglesias. 2011. Analyzing
language samples of spanish-english bilingual children
for the automated prediction of language dominance.
Natural Language Engineering, 17(3):367–395.

Yla R. Tausczik and James W. Pennebaker. 2010.
The Psychological Meaning of Words: LIWC and
Computerized Text Analysis Methods. Journal
of Language and Social Psychology, 29(1):24–54,
March.

Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, and Christopher D.
Manning. 2003. Feature-rich part-of-speech tagging
with a cyclic dependency network. In Proceedings of
HLT-NAACL 03.

47


