










































Application of Localized Similarity for Web Documents


Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1399–1404,
Seattle, Washington, USA, 18-21 October 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Application of Localized Similarity for Web Documents

Peter Reberšek
Zemanta

Celovška cesta 32
Ljubljana, Slovenia

peter.rebersek@zemanta.com

Mateja Verlič
Zemanta

Celovška cesta 32
Ljubljana, Slovenia

mateja.verlic@zemanta.com

Abstract

In this paper we present a novel approach to
automatic creation of anchor texts for hyper-
links in a document pointing to similar doc-
uments. Methods used in this approach rank
parts of a document based on the similarity
to a presumably related document. Ranks are
then used to automatically construct the best
anchor text for a link inside original document
to the compared document. A number of dif-
ferent methods from information retrieval and
natural language processing are adapted for
this task. Automatically constructed anchor
texts are manually evaluated in terms of relat-
edness to linked documents and compared to
baseline consisting of originally inserted an-
chor texts. Additionally we use crowdsourc-
ing for evaluation of original anchors and au-
tomatically constructed anchors. Results show
that our best adapted methods rival the preci-
sion of the baseline method.

1 Introduction

One of the features of hypertext documents are hy-
perlinks that point to other resources – pictures,
videos, tweets, or other hypertext documents. A
fairly familiar category of the latter is related arti-
cles; these usually appear at the end of a news article
or a blog post with the title of the target document as
anchor text. The target document is similar in con-
tent to original document; it may tell the story from
another point of view, it may be a more detailed ver-
sion of a part of the events in the original document,
etc. Another category are the in-text links; these ap-
pear inside the main body of text and use some of

the existing text as anchor. Ideally the anchor text is
selected in such a way that it conveys some informa-
tion about the target document; in reality sometimes
just an adverb (e.g. here, there) is used, or even the
destination URL may serve as anchor.

Our goal is to develop a system that automatically
constructs in-text links, i.e. for a query document
finds a target document and an appropriate part of
the text of the query document that serves as the an-
chor text for the hyperlink. We want the target docu-
ment to be similar in content to the query document
and the anchor text to indicate that content.

There are many potential uses for such a system,
especially for simplifying and streamlining docu-
ment creation. This includes authors of blogs that
may use the system for adding related content from
other sources without exhausting manual search for
such material. It may also be used when writing
a scientific paper, automatically adding citations to
other relevant papers inside the main body. This ac-
celerates the writing, again reducing the time spent
searching for possible existing research in the field.
A citation can be considered an in-text link without
a defined starting point.

We have addressed the problem in two steps, sep-
arately finding a similar document, and finding the
anchor text for it. Since the retrieval of similar doc-
uments was a research focus for many years and is
thus better researched, we have decided in this pa-
per to focus on the placement of the anchor text for
a link to a preselected document.

This paper is organized as follows: related work
is discussed in Section 2, the methods, corpus, and
evaluation are described in Section 3, followed by

1399



results and discussion in Section 4 and ending with
conclusions in Section 5.

2 Related Work

Semantic similarity of textual documents offers a
way to organize the increasing number of available
documents. It can be used in many applications such
as summarization, educational systems, finding du-
plicated bug reports in software testing (Lintean et
al., 2010), plagiarism detection (Kasprzak and Bran-
dejs, 2010), and research of a scientific field (Kober-
stein and Ng, 2006). Documents can vary in length
from microblogs (Twitter) and sentences (Li et al.,
2006; Koberstein and Ng, 2006) to paragraphs (Lin-
tean et al., 2010) and larger documents (Budanitsky
and Hirst, 2006).

There is also commercial software such as nRe-
late1, Zemanta2 and OpenCalais3 with functionality
that ranges from named entity recognition (NER)
and event detection to related content. Publishers
use in-house tools that offer automatic retrieval of
in-house similar documents.

Most of the methods for comparing documents fo-
cus on the query document as a whole. The calcu-
lated score therefore belongs to the whole document
and nothing can be said about more or less similar
parts of the document. Our goal is to localize the
similarity to a part of the query document, a para-
graph, sentence, or even a part of the sentence that is
most similar to another document. This part of the
query document can then serve as anchor text for a
hyperlink connection to the similar document.

Plagiarism detection methods (Alzahrani et al.,
2012; Monostori et al., 2002) have a task of veri-
fying the originality of the document. Extrinsic pla-
giarism detection methods compare two documents
to determine if some of the material in one is pla-
giarised from the other. Methods range from sim-
ple exact substring matching to more advanced ones
like semantic based methods that are able to recog-
nize paraphrasing and refactoring (Alzahrani et al.,
2012). These methods have localization of similarity
already built-in as they are searching for parts of the
text that seem to be plagiarised. We have focused on

1nRelate: http://www.nrelate.com/
2Zemanta: http://www.zemanta.com/
3OpenCalais: http://www.opencalais.com/

one such method, the winner of the PAN 2010 chal-
lenge (Kasprzak and Brandejs, 2010). This method
uses shared n-grams from the two documents in or-
der to determine if one of them is plagiarised.

Another similar research is automatic citation
placement for scientific papers. Most of the work
(Strohman et al., 2007; McNee et al., 2002) is con-
cerned with putting citations at the end of the paper
(non-localized), which is a task similar to inserting
related articles for a news article at the of the text.
There have been some attempts to place the citations
in the main body of text (Tang and Zhang, 2009; He
et al., 2011), typically used when referring to an idea
or method.

Tang and Zang (2009) used a placeholder con-
straint: the query document must contain placehold-
ers for citations, i.e. the places in text where citation
might be inserted. Their method then just ranks all
possible documents for a particular placeholder and
chooses the best ranked document as a result. Doc-
uments are ranked on the basis of a learned topic
model, obtained by a two-layer Restricted Boltz-
mann Machine.

He et al.(2011) made a step further towards gen-
erality of a citation location; they divide the text into
overlapping windows and then decide which win-
dows are viable citation context. The best method
for deciding which citation context to use was a de-
pendency feature model, an ensemble method using
17 different features and decision trees.

Named entity recognition (NER) also offers a use-
ful insight into document similarity. If two docu-
ments share a named entity (NE), it is more likely
they are similar. Detected NEs may also serve as an-
chor text for the link. NER is a fairly researched field
(Finkel et al., 2005; Ratinov et al., 2011; Bunescu
and Pasca, 2006; Kulkarni et al., 2009; Milne and
Witten, 2008) and is also used in several commer-
cial applications such as Zemanta, OpenCalais and
AlchemyAPI4, which are able to automatically in-
sert links for a NE pointing to a knowledge base such
as Wikipedia or IMDB. However, at this point they
are unable to link to arbitrary documents, but may
be useful in conjunction with other methods.

4AlchemyAPI: http://www.alchemyapi.com/

1400



3 Methodology

3.1 Corpus

We have chosen 100 web articles (posts) at ran-
dom from the end of January 2012. We extracted
the body and title of each document. All the
present in-text links were also extracted and filtered.
First, automatic filtering was applied to remove un-
wanted categories of links (videos, definition pages
on wikipedia and imdb, etc.), and articles that were
deemed too short for similarity comparison. The
threshold was set at 200 words of automatically
scraped body text of a linked document.

All the remaining links were manually checked
to ensure the integrity of link targets. This way we
collected 265 articles (hereinafter related articles -
RA). A number of different methods were then used
to calculate similarity rank and select the best part of
the post text to be used as anchor text for a hyperlink
pointing to the originally linked RA.

We have used CrowdFlower5, a crowdsourcing
platform, to evaluate how many of the 265 post–RA
pairs were really related; the final corpus thus con-
sisted of 236 pairs.

3.2 Evaluation

We have used each of the methods described in Sub-
section 3.3 to automatically construct anchor text for
each of the 236 pairs of documents in the final cor-
pus. If a method could not find a suitable anchor,
no result was returned; on average there were 147
anchors per method. All the automatically created
links were then manually scored by the authors with
an in-house evaluation tool using scores and guide-
lines summarized in Table 1. To calculate precision
and recall, we have counted scores 2 and 3 as posi-
tive result.

Additionally we crowdsourced the evaluation of
results for some of the methods. For this task we pre-
pared a special description of evaluation tasks and
defined a set of questions for collecting results. We
provided simplified guidelines for assigning scores
to automatically created anchors and set a confi-
dence threshold of 0.55 for an assignment to be con-
sidered valid. It is important to mention that the use
of crowdsourcing for such tasks has to be carefully

5CrowdFlower: http://crowdflower.com/

Score Description
0 Anchor does not signify anything about

RA or gets it wrong
1 Some connection can be established (an-

chor is a shared Named Entity, Noun
Phrase, Verb Phrase, etc.)

2 Anchor is a good estimation of RA top-
ics, but not wholly (anchor is a non-main
topic in RA)

3 RA topics can be directly inferred from
the anchor

Table 1: Scores used for internal evaluation of automati-
cally created anchors

planned, because many issues related to monetary
incentives, which are out of the scope of this paper,
may arise.

3.3 Methods for constructing anchor texts

We have adapted a number of methods from a vari-
ety of sources to test how they perform for our exact
purpose. Below is a short overview of the different
methods used in this work.

3.3.1 Longest chunk
This method is based on natural language pro-

cessing and extensively uses NLTK package (Bird
et al., 2009); the text is first tokenized with the de-
fault NLTK tokenizer, and then POS tagged with one
of the included POS taggers. After much testing, we
have decided on a combination of Brill – Trigram –
Bigram – Unigram – Affix – Regex backoff tagger
with noun as default tag. The trainable parts of the
tagger were trained on the included CoNLL 2000
tagged corpus.

Before chunking was applied, we also simplified
some tags and removed some others to get a simpler
structure of POS tags. We then used a regex chun-
ker to find a sequence of a proper noun and a verb
separated by zero or more other tokens. We have
also tested a proper noun - verb - proper noun com-
bination, but there were even fewer results, so this
direction was abandoned.

3.3.2 Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) based
A corpus is represented in LSI (Deerwester et

al., 1990) as a large matrix of term occurrences

1401



in individual documents. The rank of the matrix
is then reduced using singular value decomposition
that groups together terms that occur in similar con-
text which should therefore account for synonyms.

We have used a tool called gensim (Řehůřek and
Sojka, 2010) that enabled us to quickly train a LSI
model using the whole corpus and index just the re-
lated articles. In order to localize the similarity and
place an anchor, we split the source document into
paragraphs and compute similarity scores between
target document and each paragraph of the source
document. We then split the paragraph with the
highest score into sentences and again obtain scores
for each. The sentence with the best score is then
chosen as the result.

3.3.3 Sorted n-grams

Drawing on plagiarism detection, the winning
method from the PAN 2010 (Kasprzak and Bran-
dejs, 2010) seemed a viable choice. The basis of
the method is comparing n-grams of the source and
the destination documents. First, the text was again
tokenized with NLTK, removed stopwords and to-
kens with two or less characters. Then overlapping
n-grams were constructed. We have deviated from
Kasprzak’s merging policy and decided to merge
two results if they are less than 20 tokens apart. We
also required only one shared n-gram to consider the
documents similar. Results were ranked based on
the number of shared tokens within each.

3.3.4 Unigrams tf*idf

This method uses unigram tf*idf weighted scores.
Since we had a closed system, we used corpus-wide
frequencies; stopwords were also removed. We have
scored tokens in the source document with tf*idf
summary of the destination document; tokens not
in summary are given a zero weight. We have ex-
perimentally determined that a summary of just top
150 tokens improves results. Sentences were ranked
based on the sum of its tokens weights. We also in-
cluded NEs from Zemanta API response for both
source and destination document. Sentences con-
taining shared NEs get their score multiplied by the
sum of shared NE tf*idf weights. The result was
then the sentence with the highest score.

Manual CrowdFlower
P R P R

Original links 0.691 0.691 0.981 0.432
Sorted 5-grams 0.822 0.254
Sorted 4-grams 0.741 0.352
Sorted 3-grams 0.680 0.424 0.956 0.275
Longest Chunk 0.080 0.075 0.907 0.165
Unigrams tf*idf 0.626 0.242 0.882 0.127
LSI based 0.648 0.640

Table 2: Precision and recall for manual and Crowd-
Flower evaluation

3.3.5 Baseline
Our baseline was a method that inserted links that

were originally present in the source documents.
This method was used to compare our automatic
methods to what people are actually linking in the
real world.

4 Evaluation Results and Discussion

Results are presented as precision and recall for
different methods and both evaluations in Table 2.
Empty cells in the table indicate that these methods
were not evaluated using CrowdFlower. Recall is
the fraction of relevant results out of all the possible
results (236) and precision is the fraction of relevant
results out of all the retrieved results.

The first thing we notice is the general disagree-
ment between results from the authors and Crowd-
Flower workers; the latter tend to give higher scores,
which leads to higher precision and recall. The rea-
son for this might be in the authors’ background
knowledge and thus higher expectations.

As a contrast almost half of CrowdFlower work-
ers stated they don’t blog and of the rest, more than
a third of them don’t link out, i.e. do not use re-
lated articles. We also have only 74% median inter-
annotator agreement leading us to believe that some
of the annotators answered without being familiar
with the question (monetary incentive issue).

Furthermore, CrowdFlower results for original
links (our baseline) indicate that almost all of them
were recognized as relevant, while our evaluators
discarded 30% of them. Clearly seen in the re-
sults of different sorted n-grams methods is also the
precision-recall trade-off.

1402



5 Conclusion

Based on evaluation results and despite differences
between the evaluators with background knowledge
and the crowds, we can conclude that that our ap-
proach for automatic construction of in-text links
rivals manual creation by professional writers and
bloggers and is thus a promising direction for fur-
ther research.

Acknowledgement

This work was partially funded by the Slovenian
Ministry of Higher Education, Science and Technol-
ogy, and the European Union – European Regional
Development Fund.

References
S.M. Alzahrani, N. Salim, and A. Abraham. 2012. Un-

derstanding plagiarism linguistic patterns, textual fea-
tures, and detection methods. Systems, Man, and Cy-
bernetics, Part C: Applications and Reviews, IEEE
Transactions on, 42(2):133–149.

Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. 2009. Nat-
ural Language Processing with Python. O’Reilly Me-
dia.

Alexander Budanitsky and Graeme Hirst. 2006. Evalu-
ating wordnet-based measures of lexical semantic re-
latedness. Comput. Linguist., 32(1):13–47, March.

Razvan Bunescu and Marius Pasca. 2006. Using ency-
clopedic knowledge for named entity disambiguation.
In Proceedings of the 11th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (EACL-06), pages 9–16, Trento, Italy.

Scott Deerwester, Susan T. Dumais, George W Furnas,
Thomas K Landauer, and Richard Harshman. 1990.
Indexing by latent semantic analysis. Journal of the
American society for information science, 41(6):391–
407.

Jenny Rose Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher
Manning. 2005. Incorporating non-local informa-
tion into information extraction systems by gibbs sam-
pling. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting on
Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL ’05,
pages 363–370, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Qi He, Daniel Kifer, Jian Pei, Prasenjit Mitra, and C. Lee
Giles. 2011. Citation recommendation without author
supervision. In Proceedings of the fourth ACM inter-
national conference on Web search and data mining,
WSDM ’11, pages 755–764, New York, NY, USA.
ACM.

Jan Kasprzak and Michal Brandejs. 2010. Improving the
reliability of the plagiarism detection system lab report
for pan at clef 2010.

Jonathan Koberstein and Yiu-Kai Ng. 2006. Us-
ing word clusters to detect similar web documents.
In Proceedings of the First international conference
on Knowledge Science, Engineering and Manage-
ment, KSEM’06, pages 215–228, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Springer-Verlag.

Sayali Kulkarni, Amit Singh, Ganesh Ramakrishnan, and
Soumen Chakrabarti. 2009. Collective annotation
of wikipedia entities in web text. In Proceedings
of the 15th ACM SIGKDD international conference
on Knowledge discovery and data mining, KDD ’09,
pages 457–466, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Yuhua Li, David McLean, Zuhair A. Bandar, James D.
O’Shea, and Keeley Crockett. 2006. Sentence sim-
ilarity based on semantic nets and corpus statistics.
IEEE Trans. on Knowl. and Data Eng., 18(8):1138–
1150, August.

Mihai Lintean, Cristian Moldovan, Vasile Rus, and
Danielle McNamara. 2010. The role of local and
global weighting in assessing the semantic similarity
of texts using latent semantic analysis. In Proceedings
of the 23rd International Florida Artificial Intelligence
Research Society Conference, Daytona Beach, FL.

Sean M. McNee, Istvan Albert, Dan Cosley, Prateep
Gopalkrishnan, Shyong K. Lam, Al Mamunur Rashid,
Joseph A. Konstan, and John Riedl. 2002. On the rec-
ommending of citations for research papers. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2002 ACM conference on Computer
supported cooperative work, CSCW ’02, pages 116–
125, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

David Milne and Ian H. Witten. 2008. Learning to link
with wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM con-
ference on Information and knowledge management,
CIKM ’08, pages 509–518, New York, NY, USA.
ACM.

Krisztián Monostori, Raphael Finkel, Arkady Zaslavsky,
Gábor Hodász, and Máté Pataki. 2002. Comparison
of overlap detection techniques. In PeterM.A. Sloot,
AlfonsG. Hoekstra, C.J.Kenneth Tan, and JackJ. Don-
garra, editors, Computational Science — ICCS 2002,
volume 2329 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 51–60. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

Lev Ratinov, Dan Roth, Doug Downey, and Mike An-
derson. 2011. Local and global algorithms for dis-
ambiguation to Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 49th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies - Volume
1, HLT ’11, pages 1375–1384, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Radim Řehůřek and Petr Sojka. 2010. Software Frame-
work for Topic Modelling with Large Corpora. In Pro-

1403



ceedings of the LREC 2010 Workshop on New Chal-
lenges for NLP Frameworks, pages 45–50, Valletta,
Malta, May. ELRA.

Trevor Strohman, W. Bruce Croft, and David Jensen.
2007. Recommending citations for academic papers.
In In Proceedings of the 30th Annual International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Develop-
ment in Information Retrieval (SIGIR’07, pages 705–
706.

Jie Tang and Jing Zhang. 2009. A discriminative ap-
proach to topic-based citation recommendation. In
Thanaruk Theeramunkong, Boonserm Kijsirikul, Nick
Cercone, and Tu-Bao Ho, editors, Advances in Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining, volume 5476 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 572–579.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

1404


