










































Gender Inference of Twitter Users in Non-English Contexts


Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1136–1145,
Seattle, Washington, USA, 18-21 October 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Gender Inference of Twitter Users in Non-English Contexts

Morgane Ciot
School of Computer Science

McGill University
Montreal, Quebec, Canada

morgane.ciot@mail.mcgill.ca

Morgan Sonderegger
Department of Linguistics

McGill University
Montreal, Quebec, Canada

morgan.sonderegger@mcgill.ca

Derek Ruths
School of Computer Science

McGill University
Montreal, Quebec, Canada

derek.ruths@mcgill.ca

Abstract

While much work has considered the problem
of latent attribute inference for users of social
media such as Twitter, little has been done on
non-English-based content and users. Here,
we conduct the first assessment of latent at-
tribute inference in languages beyond English,
focusing on gender inference. We find that
the gender inference problem in quite diverse
languages can be addressed using existing ma-
chinery. Further, accuracy gains can be made
by taking language-specific features into ac-
count. We identify languages with complex
orthography, such as Japanese, as difficult for
existing methods, suggesting a valuable direc-
tion for future research.

1 Introduction

A 2012 study reported that US-based Twitter users
now account for only 28% of all active accounts on
the platform (Semiocast, 2012). Brazil, Japan, India,
and Indonesia all rank in the top 10, each with over
5% of all users. These and other findings confirm
that Twitter enjoys widespread international popu-
larity and usage. This is also reflected in the multi-
national community of researchers who study hu-
man behavior on Twitter and related platforms, e.g.
(Sakaki et al., 2010; Tumasjan et al., 2010; Kim and
Park, 2012).

It is remarkable, then, that advances in la-
tent attribute inference on social media have been
largely confined to English content, e.g. (Liu and
Ruths, 2013; Zamal et al., 2012; Pennacchiotti and
Popescu, 2011; Conover et al., 2011a). This bias
may be partially explained in the context of the re-
search being conducted largely by anglophone re-

searchers. Nonetheless, it has created a notable
silence in the literature concerning the large-scale
analysis of languages, cultures, and people on social
media who do not employ English.

In this paper, we examine the problem of latent at-
tribute inference outside the English-language con-
text. To our knowledge, this is the first such study
ever conducted. Here we specifically focus on gen-
der inference, as it has been the basis for significant
work in recent years (Liu et al., 2012; Zamal et al.,
2012; Pennacchiotti and Popescu, 2011; Rao et al.,
2010; Burger et al., 2011). Our work makes two
contributions. First, we quantify the extent to which
established gender inference methods can be used
with non-English Twitter content. Second, we ex-
plore the capacity for unique features of other lan-
guages (besides English) to improve inference ac-
curacy. This second aspect, in particular, acknowl-
edges the fact that latent attribute inference may be
easier in some languages due not to conventions in
word usage, but to syntactic structure.

In order to assess the extent to which existing gen-
der inference machinery works for users who use
languages other than English, we assembled Twit-
ter datasets for languages that are both prevalent on
Twitter and representative of diverse language fam-
ilies: Japanese, Indonesian, Turkish, and French.
Each dataset consisted of approximately 1000 users
who tweeted primarily in a given language. We used
Amazon Mechanical Turk to manually label each
user with their gender, using a language-agnostic la-
beling strategy (Liu and Ruths, 2013). For classi-
fication, we employed a performant support vector
machine-based (SVM) technique that has been used
in a range of studies, e.g. (Rao et al., 2010; Burger
et al., 2011; Zamal et al., 2012).

1136



We found that, without any modification to the
types of features given to the SVM, the classifier ac-
curacy was comparable on English, French, and In-
donesian. Turkish actually performed much better,
achieving 87% on average. Gender in Japanese, in
contrast, could not be reliably inferred with any rea-
sonable accuracy (61% on average) despite numer-
ous attempts to preprocess the tweets and tune the
classifier to accommodate the language’s complex
orthography. This indicates that existing approaches
may not generalize well to language systems with
thousands of distinct unigrams (as opposed to tens
or hundreds in the other languages considered).1

To evaluate the extent to which language-specific
features might be used to boost the accuracy of
the SVM classifier further, we focused on French.
French is a valuable case study because, unlike En-
glish, it has a number of syntax-based mechanisms
that can encode the gender of the speaker. The
most common instantiation of gender marking is the
modification of adjective and some past participle
endings to match the gender of the subject in con-
structions beginning with “je suis” (trans. “I am”)
constructions. A classifier based on this insight
achieved average accuracy of 90% on the vast ma-
jority of French users, surpassing the accuracy of
standard techniques on English or French.

Overall, our results show that, with little modifi-
cation, existing gender inference machinery can per-
form comparably to English on several other lan-
guages. There are clear areas for substantial im-
provement: incorporating language-specific features
and, in the case of Japanese, finding better ways
of accommodating the complex orthography. These
findings identify promising directions for future re-
search and will, hopefully, call attention to an im-
portant area in the latent attribute inference domain
in need of further work.

2 Background

Non-English Twitter data mining and studies.
Existing work on non-English Twitter content can
been divided into two groups: surveys of the use of
several languages on the platform and studies of a
social phenomenon in a non-English body of tweets.

1In this work, unigram, bigram, and k-gram refer to one,
two, and k-character sequences in a language’s written form.

To our knowledge, only a handful of the former va-
riety exist. One recent paper characterized the re-
lationship between language and geography (Mo-
canu et al., 2012). Another measured how high-level
tweet features (i.e., link, mention, and hashtag fre-
quencies) vary across languages (Weerkamp et al.,
2011). These papers show that tweet structure and
content can differ widely across languages.

More work has been done in the latter category:
analysis of social phenomena in a non-English con-
text. A well-known study evaluated usage of Twit-
ter in the aftermath of the 2010 earthquake in Japan
(Sakaki et al., 2010). Another Japanese-oriented
study evaluated the impact of television on tweeted
content (Akioka et al., 2010). Within this cate-
gory, another recurring research topic is the anal-
ysis of political discussion and elections. Outside
of English-based analysis, some attention has been
given to European and East Asian elections, e.g.
(Tumasjan et al., 2010; Giglietto, 2012; Kim and
Park, 2012). However, few of these studies have
considered measures beyond simple hashtag fre-
quencies, relative mention counts among politicians,
and retweet counts. The only study using more
complex features for computational text analysis in-
volved sentiment analysis of a set of German tweets
(Tumasjan et al., 2010). However, the tweets in
this study (conducted at a German university) were
translated into English prior to analysis, a step which
underscores the significant bias towards English in
the literature on analyzing microtext, and the tools
available to researchers in this domain.

Gender inference methods. Gender inference is a
field of research situated with the broader area of la-
tent attribute inference. The majority of recent work
in this area has focused on Twitter users (Rao et al.,
2010; Pennacchiotti and Popescu, 2011; Conover et
al., 2011b; Burger et al., 2011; Rao and Yarowsky,
2010; Liu and Ruths, 2013; Liu et al., 2012; Zamal
et al., 2012). Classifiers have been built, predomi-
nantly, using support vector machines, e.g. (Rao et
al., 2010; Pennacchiotti and Popescu, 2011; Burger
et al., 2011; Zamal et al., 2012), though boosted de-
cision trees and latent dirichlet allocation systems
have also been evaluated, e.g. (Pennacchiotti and
Popescu, 2011; Conover et al., 2011b). With one
exception, gender inference accuracy has been re-

1137



ported between 80% and 85%. The one study which
reported 90% accuracy involved the use of a dataset
which has been shown to be quite different from typ-
ical anglophone Twitter users (Burger et al., 2011).
This same study did involve non-English Twitter
users, but did not analyze the performance of the
classifier on different languages (e.g. break down
performance by language, examine to what extent
its results were due to better performance on some
languages), or indeed discuss fully which languages
were present in their sample. Thus, little can be in-
ferred from Burger et al.’s study about the relative
performance of attribute inference methods on dif-
ferent languages, which is the focus of our paper.

Language families. Human languages can be
classified into different language families, defined
as a set of languages which are all descended from a
single, ancient parent language. Languages which
are genetically related (in the same family), how-
ever distantly, tend to share many more character-
istics than languages from different families.

Each language considered in this paper belongs
to a different language family: French to Indo-
European, Turkish to Altaic, Japanese to Japonic,
and Indonesian to Austronesian. Thus, these lan-
guages are completely genetically unrelated, by def-
inition. Further, they are both geographically and
culturally dispersed. While they all have some loan-
words from English, these constitute a tiny fraction
of each language’s vocabulary. This selection of lan-
guages allows us to conduct the most far-reaching
survey of non-English latent attribute inference per-
formance to date.

A variety of features make each language se-
lected interesting within the gender inference con-
text. French is noteworthy for its grammatical gen-
der. All nouns, including people, are grammati-
cally “male” or “female.” English, in contrast, has
separate pronouns for people of different genders
(e.g., “he”, “she”), but does not have grammati-
cal gender. (Besides a handful of exceptions like
“waiter”/“waitress”, there are no words besides pro-
nouns which have different “masculine” and “femi-
nine” forms.) Indonesian, Turkish, and Japanese are
all so-called genderless languages. Like many lan-
guages of the world, they do not have distinct male
and female pronouns (like English and French), or

grammatical gender (like French).

3 General Gender Inference

In order to evaluate the extent to which existing gen-
der inference machinery can be used on users whose
tweets are in languages other than English, we de-
veloped gender-labeled datasets of Twitter users for
each language and then evaluated the performance
of a classifier on each.

3.1 Data
The core data for this project consisted of four
datasets of content from Twitter users who tweeted
predominantly in one of four languages—French,
Indonesian, Turkish, and Japanese—collected using
the methods described below.

Data collection. In order to identify users for can-
didate inclusion in a particular language’s (hereafter
the target language) dataset, we walked the stream-
ing output of the Twitter firehose and evaluated the
language of each tweet using the language mod-
els provided by the Natural Language Toolkit (Bird,
2006). Users associated with tweets written in the
target language were added to a list. 5000 such users
were identified for each language. The latest 1000
tweets for each user were downloaded. This com-
prised the base for the target language dataset.

Assigning gender labels. In prior work, e.g. (Rao
et al., 2010; Pennacchiotti and Popescu, 2011; Za-
mal et al., 2012), the dominant way of obtain-
ing datasets consisting of Twitter users with high-
confidence gender-labels is to use gender-name as-
sociations. The use of name-gender associations are
problematic when non-English content is considered
because databases of anglophone name-gender asso-
ciations are no longer useful (Mislove et al., 2011).
We instead used Amazon Mechanical Turk workers
to identify the gender of the person shown in the pro-
file picture associated with a user’s account (Liu and
Ruths, 2013). In our datasets, each user’s profile pic-
ture was coded by 5 separate workers. Users with
non-photographic or celebrity-based profile pictures
was discarded, as well as any users with profile pic-
tures where the gender could not be confidently as-
sessed (less than 4 out of 5 votes for one gender).

Table 1 shows the final composition of each
dataset. In Japanese and Indonesian, we observed

1138



Table 1: The composition of the different language
datasets used in this study.

Language # Males # Females Total Size
French 437 506 943
Indonesian 977 2260 3237
Turkish 1672 1937 3609
Japanese 309 520 829

a notable difference in the number of males and fe-
males in the dataset. Measures were taken to ensure
that classifier results were not biased by these differ-
ences within the datasets.

3.2 Methods
The majority of prior work in gender inference (and
latent inference in general) has used support vector
machines (SVMs). We followed prior work in this
regard, particularly since our intent here is to eval-
uate the relevance of existing gender inference ma-
chinery on other languages. For the present study,
we adopted an SVM-based classifier, described in
(Zamal et al., 2012), that incorporated nearly all fea-
tures used in prior work and showed comparable
(and sometimes better) accuracy than other methods.
Parameter values and kernel choices for the SVM
are discussed in the source paper.

Feature set. SVM classifiers require that
each object to be classified be represented by
a fixed-length feature vector. The features we
employed were: k-top words, k-top digrams
and trigrams, k-top hashtags, k-top mentions,
tweet/retweet/hashtag/link/mention frequencies,
and out/in-neighborhood size. Note that “k-top X
features” (e.g., k-top hashtags) refers to the k most
discriminating items of that type for each label (i.e.,
Male/Female). Thus, k-top words is actually 2k
features: the k words most associated with males
and the k words most associated with females.

This list of features is the same set of features used
in (Zamal et al., 2012), except that k-top stems and
k-top co-stems were both dropped in our version.
Both of these feature types are specific to English.
Of course, word stems do exist in other languages,
however we found that stemmers (the algorithms
that identify and extract the appropriate stem from
a word) were not available across the whole bank
of languages. Therefore, we omitted these stem and

co-stem features. We also added features for the us-
age frequencies of Eastern-style and Western-style
emoticons but saw no discernible change in accu-
racy; thus, these features are not discussed further.

It is important to note that all features included
in our classifier are language-agnostic. An n-gram
is simply an n-character sequence drawn from the
alphabet and additional symbols (numbers, punctu-
ation, etc.) present in tweets written in the target
language. Words are sequences of characters that
are bounded by whitespace or punctuation. Hash-
tags are words proceeded by a pound (“#”) character,
mentions by an “@” symbol. A system that properly
supports unicode strings can implement all of these
notions without knowing anything about the target
language it is operating on.

Tokenization of Japanese. While all the defini-
tions provided above for the SVM features are op-
erational, there is a glaring disconnect between the
whitespace-border definition of a word and written
conventions in Japanese. Specifically, in Japanese
words are generally not separated by whitespace.

We used a tokenizer to insert whitespace into
Japanese text to break up words. Tokenization
was done using Kuromoji, the software Japanese
morphological analyzer used and supported by the
Apache software Foundation (Atilika, 2012). No-
tably, this tool tokenizes the mixed character sets
that are often used in informal Japanese writing.

As tokenization does involves some language-
specific processing, its use here somewhat under-
mines the objective set out for this project. Thus, we
report the accuracy achieved for both untokenized
and tokenized Japanese tweets. Curiously, tokeniza-
tion was found to not make a difference in overall
average accuracy.

3.3 Results

For each dataset, 5-fold cross validation was used
to assess the classifier’s performance. The value of
k = 20 was used for all k-top features, though the
results reported are robust to changes of this value
within reason (between 10 and 30). If the num-
bers of male and female users were unbalanced in
a dataset, the larger set was subsampled randomly
to obtain a set of users the same size as the smaller
labeled set. During the training process, the actual

1139



Table 2: The accuracy of the SVM-based classifier on
each of the language datasets. In the case of Japanese,
the performance is given for both the tokenized and un-
tokenized versions of the dataset. (Note that tokenization
did not affect overall accuracy.)

Language Male Female Overall
French 0.79 0.73 0.76
Indonesian 0.87 0.80 0.83
Turkish 0.89 0.85 0.87
Japanese (t) 0.50 0.76 0.63
Japanese (u) 0.58 0.68 0.63

values of the features were extracted from the train-
ing users (e.g., the k-top differentiating words for
males and females were identified). In this way,
the gender model implemented by the SVM was
language-specific, in the sense that a particular lan-
guage’s gender model contained a different set of
features. We call our method language-agnostic on
the grounds that, given a labeled set of users and
tweets drawn from a particular language, a model
can be built without any knowledge of the structure
or content of the language itself.

Tables in Supplementary Material show the fea-
tures for the classifier built over each language’s en-
tire dataset. Note that to conduct the cross-fold eval-
uation, new models (and hence different features)
were recomputed for each fold. As a result, the fea-
tures reported are slightly different from those that
might have appeared in the models for a given fold.
Manual inspection, however, revealed that differ-
ences were slight. The features reported in the Sup-
plementary Material can be safely considered a con-
sensus among the models for the individual folds.

The accuracy of the classifier for each language
is shown in Table 2. Overall, the classifier demon-
strated good performance on all languages ex-
cept for Japanese. Below, we consider the re-
sults for each of the four languages in turn. In
each case we discuss language-specific trends in
which words were most informative for inferring
user gender, and thus help explain the classifier’s
performance. Throughout, we omit discussion of
non-alphanumeric “words” (such as punctuation or
emoticons), and call the k-top discriminating words
for male and female users the k-top male words and
k-top female words.

French. The k-top words for men and women are
of very different grammatical types. Most male
words are prepositions or articles (16/25; e.g. de
‘of’, un ‘a/one’); a few others are basic grammati-
cal words (ne ‘[part of] not’, et ‘and’), or pronouns
or verb forms referring to a single person or object
(he/she/it), as well as one noun (France). In con-
trast, many female words (11/25) are pronouns or
basic verb forms referring to the speaker or a single
addressee (je ‘I’, mon/mes/ma ‘my’, tu ‘you’, j’ai
‘I have’). Others are pronouns or basic verbs re-
fer to a single person or object (elle, ‘she/it’, c’est
‘it’s’), as well as a few other frequent words (trop
‘too much’, pas ‘[part of] not’, oui ‘yes’). The most
salient pattern is that use of words (pronouns, basic
verbs) associated with talking about the speaker or
addressee indicates a tweet is more likely to be from
a female user. Heavy use of other common function
words, specifically prepositions and articles, sug-
gests a male user. These patterns reflect known gen-
der differences in word usage by male and female
French speakers (Witsen, 1981).

Indonesian. Indonesian achieved performance
closest to the inference accuracy for English re-
ported in the literature. The k-top lists for men and
women give some justification for why the classifier
performed well. Some differences can be tentatively
linked to general trends in how men and women use
language differently across cultures. 5/25 of men’s
k-top words are nouns which are either related to
soccer (vs ‘versus’, chelsea ‘[name of UK soccer
team]’, pemain ‘player’) or which could be related
to soccer (jakarta, indonesia, malam ‘night’); in
contrast, no women’s words are nouns. It seems
plausible that men tweet about soccer significantly
more than women. In such a situation, a reasonable
concern is that our classifier discriminated soccer
from non-soccer enthusiasts rather than males from
females. To address this, we confirmed that these
topic-based words were not required for accurate
classification: a classifier in which soccer words
were explicitly removed performed just as well
(83.8% vs. 83.3%).

More interestingly, many of the k-top words cor-
respond to men and women using different terms
of address and self-reference. Among the k-top
words, 7/25 for men and 4/25 for women are terms

1140



of address or self-reference. The terms men use are
mostly highly informal, including the slang term lu
(you) and the English borrowing bro; the address
terms women use are mostly medium-formality,
such as aku (I) and kamu (you). Thus, women seem
to be using “more polite” self-reference and address
terms than men on average on Indonesian Twitter,
in line with the more general tendency for women
to use polite forms more frequently than men cross-
culturally (Holmes, 1995).

Turkish. Turkish achieved notably high accuracy:
the highest of all four languages considered. In
fact, to our knowledge, this is the highest accuracy
achieved in the entire Twitter gender inference lit-
erature on a dataset drawn from the Twitter gen-
eral population. The k-top lists of male and female
words again give some justification for the classi-
fier’s performance. Many differences between the
male and female lists can be linked to men and
women talking about different topics, or to differ-
ent people. Several of the male words refer to soc-
cer (gol ‘goal’, galatasaray ‘popular Istanbul team’,
maç ‘match’, at ‘[part of imperative for] score’),
which men plausibly tweet about more. As with In-
donesian, a concern is that topics represent a biased
sample of the population. Thus, we tested a classi-
fier with soccer-specific terms removed, and again
found no difference in accuracy (86% vs. 87%).
Many other k-top words are familiar terms of ad-
dress for men (lan, abi, karde sim, adam, kanka) or
a greeting used mainly between men (eyvallah), sug-
gesting that male users are addressing or discussing
men more often than female users are. In contrast,
9/25 of the k-top female words are pronouns refer-
ring to the speaker, a familiar addressee, or a third
party (he/she/it), while none of the k-top male words
are, suggesting female users are more often talking
directly about themselves or to others. Finally, 2/25
of the k-top male words are profanity (amk, ulan),
while none of the female k-top words are, suggest-
ing male users swear more.

Japanese. Beyond the Japanese classifier’s gener-
ally poor accuracy, it is striking that tokenization
did not improve overall accuracy. This indicates
that once words were properly tokenized, no ad-
ditional gender-distinguishing signal could be ex-
tracted. This may be an indication that word-based

features carry little information in languages with
complex orthography, such as Japanese (with many
thousands of unigrams).

Despite the classifier’s poor performance, the k-
top discriminating words for male and female users
differ in interesting ways. Some differences can be
understood as resulting from known general trends
in how Japanese men and women’s use language.
Japanese speakers have a choice of many first-
person singular pronouns (equivalent to “I”), which
signal different levels of politeness and of male ver-
sus female speech. The pronoun boku (僕) is asso-
ciated with informal male speech; accordingly, it is
among the k-top male words. Japanese also uses an
extensive system of verb forms corresponding to dif-
ferent levels of politeness, and honorifics (affixes for
names used when referring to others). Women tend
to use polite verb forms and honorifics more fre-
quently than men in Japanese speech (Peng, 1981).
In agreement with this pattern, several polite verb
forms (-masu, -mashi) and a polite honorific (o-) are
among the k-top female words, as is a diminutive
honorific often used to refer to women (-chan).

4 Language-specific Features and
Inference

While the classifier performed well across a diverse
set of languages, recall that all features used by the
SVM were language-agnostic. A natural question
concerns the extent to which language-specific fea-
tures relevant to the attribute of interest (e.g., gen-
der) might improve the classifier’s performance.

We examine this question within the context of
French. Where gender inference is concerned,
French is quite interesting because information
about the gender of nouns (including the speaker) is
often obligatorily marked in the syntax: many words
have different ‘masculine’ and ‘feminine’ forms for
referring to male and female nouns, including the
speaker. Thus, it is in principle often possible to in-
fer the gender of the speaker by which form they use,
although it is not clear a priori that this method will
work for Twitter data.

4.1 Method

French grammar dictates that which forms of words
are used often reflects the gender of the speaker.

1141



Adjectives and past participles all have masculine
and feminine forms, which are often spelled dif-
ferently, and in addition often pronounced differ-
ently.Adjectives must agree in gender with the noun
they refer to. For example, “I am happy” would
be je suis heureuse for a female speaker and je suis
heureux for a male speaker (literally “I-am-happy”);
heureuse and heureux are the feminine and mascu-
line singular forms of the adjective, and are pro-
nounced differently. Past participles of verbs also
agree with the gender of the subject or object of the
verb, for certain verbs and constructions. For ex-
ample, “I went” would be je suis allée for a female
speaker and je suis allé for a male speaker (here suis
is used to form the simple past of the verb aller,
‘to go’); allé and allée are the masculine and fem-
inine forms of the past participle of aller, and are
pronounced the same.

Note that the phrase je suis (“I am”) occurs in both
the adjectival and verbal constructions referring to
the speaker; however, the function of suis differs be-
tween the two. suis is the first-person singular form
of the verb être (“to be”), and functions as a cop-
ula when followed by an adjective (“I am happy”)
but as an auxiliary verb to mark the past tense, when
followed by the past participle of certain verbs (“I
went”). For our purposes, what is important is that,
in both cases, a following adjective or past participle
will take on the gender of the speaker.

When this construction occurs in a tweet, it is
likely that je is referring to the author of the tweet,
and the rules of French grammar dictate that the
gender of the associated adjective or past partici-
ple should reflect the gender of the tweet’s author.
We implemented a classifier that used this logic to
classify the gender of francophone Twitter users. It
is worth emphasizing that the existence of adjec-
tives and participles which reflect the speaker’s gen-
der does not automatically make gender identifica-
tion in French tweets a trivial task. First, given the
prevalence of non-standard spelling and grammar
on Twitter and other online platforms, French users
may sometimes not use the ‘correct’ gender marked
form reflecting their actual gender—especially given
that the male and female forms for a given adjective
or participle are often pronounced the same. Sec-
ond, even if gender-marked constructions are used
correctly, they may not occur sufficiently often in

Table 3: The set of patterns that were considered to be
suis-constructions when encountered in a tweet.

jn suis pas, jm suis, jmsuis, jnmsuis pas, jnsuis pas,
je ne suis pas, je suis pas, jsuis, jensuis pas, jemsuis,
jnesuis pas, jmesuis, je me suis, je ne me suis pas

tweets to be a reliably used for speaker gender iden-
tification. Both of these concerns are borne out in
our French dataset, as described further below; the
question addressed in the experiment is how useful
the signal provided by gender-marked forms is, de-
spite these two sources of noise.

Unlike the probabilistic SVM classifier, the suis-
construction classifier can be made entirely deter-
ministic. For a given user, the set of tweets con-
taining a suis-construction are identified, Tsuis(u).
Of these, we can identify the number of those tweets
that involve an adjective or past participle with a fe-
male ending TFsuis(u) ⊆ Tsuis(u). Labeling a user
involves selecting a threshold based on TFsuis(u) and
Tsuis(u) below which a user receives one label and
above which the user receives the other label.

Detecting suis-constructions. As expected, cur-
sory inspection of tweets revealed that Twitter
users often employed shorthand forms of the suis-
construction. We accounted for this by conduct-
ing a manual survey of the shorthand forms of
the suis-construction. A catalog of regular expres-
sions was drawn up that matched the different suis-
construction forms we identified, shown in Table 3.

Recognizing the gender of the adjective or past
participle involved in a suis-construction required
a second processing stage. The Lexique lexical
database was used to tag the word trailing the suis-
construction (New and Landing, 2012). If the tag
was not an adjective or verb, the construction was
discarded as it would not contain a gender indica-
tion. If the word was recognized as an adjective or
verb, Lexique would also return the gender, which
would be returned as the gender indication for that
particular suis-construction.

Threshold selection. We evaluated a number of
policies for assigning the user’s gender based on
the relative values of TFsuis(u) and Tsuis(u). In the
end, however, the best performing threshold was
TFsuis(u) > 1: simply labeling as female any user

1142



Table 4: The component-wise and overall accuracy of the
combined suis-construction and SVM classifier.

Component # Male Female Overall
users Acc Acc Acc

suis-const. 723 0.91 0.90 0.90
SVM 220 0.70 0.54 0.62
Overall 943 0.86 0.82 0.83

who employed the female construction even once.
This threshold makes sense given the plausible intu-
ition that females will (almost always) be the only
users to employ a female suis-construction; how-
ever, it is quite sensitive to uses of female suis-
constructions by males.

Mixed classifier. Since not all users had tweets
which contained suis-constructions, we combined
the SVM-based classifier used previously with the
suis-construction-based classifier. The SVM com-
ponent was applied to any users who lacked suis-
constructions entirely in their tweet history. Any
user who used even one suis-construction would be
labeled according to the TFsuis(u) > 1 threshold.

4.2 Results

We ran our classifier on the French dataset, obtain-
ing the results shown in Table 4.

Coverage of the suis-construction. In spite of
our concerns over the occurrence frequency and de-
tectability of the suis-construction in tweets, our
results show that suis-constructions were found in
tweets belonging to nearly 75% of all users in the
dataset. This suggests that the suis-construction
classifier has quite broad coverage of the popula-
tion. Of course, given the essential role of the verb
“être” in French (like the role of “to be” in En-
glish), its frequent use is expected. Nonetheless,
the flexible use of grammar and spelling in Twitter
and other online contexts raised a genuine concern
that occurrences of the suis-construction might not
be detected. In fact, when we looked through the
tweets of users who were flagged as not having use-
ful suis-constructions in their tweets, we discovered
that many actually did. The issue was that they em-
ployed highly irregular spellings that our implemen-
tation was not able to pick up. Thus, with additional
refinement, it may be possible to improve the suis-

construction coverage further, well beyond 80%.

Performance of the suis-construction classifier.
On the set of users for which the suis-construction
was detected, the classifier did very well, achiev-
ing an average accuracy of 90%. Recall that the
threshold used to generate the results in Table 4 was
TFsuis(u) > 1. We tested other (larger) thresholds
and found that the performance of the method dra-
matically and monotonically decreased. This was
largely due to female users being misclassified as
males, indicating that females do not exclusively
use female suis-constructions (this was confirmed
via manual inspection of a number of female tweet
histories). This is different from males, most of
whom are quite strict about using only male suis-
constructions. Since forming the female form of
an adjective or participle typically requires adding
an additional character (or more) to the base of the
word, this may reflect a tendency towards dropping
gender modifiers in favor of typing less.

Performance of the SVM classifier. While the
suis-construction classifier performed well, the
SVM component did not do nearly as well on the
Twitter users that could not be labeled using the suis-
construction, achieving an average performance of
62%. At this level of accuracy, the classifier is per-
forming barely better than a random classifier, which
would have achieved around 50% accuracy on the
label-balanced testing data. This result stands in
opposition to our earlier finding that French users
could be labeled with 75% accuracy. This disparity
suggests that the non-suis-construction users com-
prise a particularly difficult-to-classify group.

The suis-construction as a filter. The finding that
the SVM classifier performed poorly in the com-
bined classification setting suggests that the suis-
construction classifier is acting as a very effective fil-
ter for users that are hard for it to classify. While we
might have preferred better classification accuracy
all around, this result is still interesting and useful.
Such filters can decrease classification error by sim-
ply flagging those users who cannot be easily clas-
sified, leaving them to be handled more carefully by
more powerful classifiers or human coding. This is
precisely the function that the suis-construction clas-
sifier appears to play (in addition to classifying the

1143



other users).
This result suggests a question for future work:

whether it is possible to build classifiers that accu-
rately label the sets of users that are discarded by
the suis-construction classifier.

Performance of the combined classifier. Despite
the relatively poor performance of the SVM com-
ponent, the accuracy of the combined classifier im-
proved on the original SVM-only classifier by 8%,
which is a substantial increase in accuracy. With
some additional focus on classifying the difficult
users who could not be labeled by suis-construction
usage, we feel that this accuracy can be increased
upwards of 90%.

5 Discussion

In this project, we have extended, for the first time,
the latent attribute inference problem to users who
tweet primarily in languages other than English. Our
study offers several notable insights.

Existing approaches generalize. While accuracy
levels certainly vary across languages, overall an ex-
isting SVM-based classifier, when trained on users
from a given language, can classify the gender of
other users from that same language with accuracy
comparable to performance reported for English.
We suspect that this result will generalize to the in-
ference of other demographic characteristics (e.g.,
age and political orientation), though this must be
explored in future work.

Complex orthography creates unique issues.
Japanese stands out as being utterly unclassifiable
using existing SVM-based approaches and feature
sets. Even efforts to bridge some of the orthographic
disconnects between the Japanese language and the
assumptions made by the SVM failed to improve
performance. This stands out as a clear direction for
future work, particularly since apparent issues with
the large number of unigrams used by Japanese will
create issues for handling (Mandarin) Chinese, the
world’s most-spoken language.

Language-specific features boost performance.
While unsurprising that customizing a classifier to
the peculiarities of a given language boosts perfor-
mance, our use of the suis-construction in French

highlights how particular linguistic features may be
uniquely well suited to the inference of particular
attributes. The results obtained for French stand in
contrast to various, relatively unsuccessful attempts
to boost gender inference by incorporating syntac-
tic features of English into the classifier (e.g., us-
ing stems and co-stems). It seems that some lan-
guages have features better suited for certain classi-
fication tasks. Identifying and leveraging such fea-
tures will be an interesting and fruitful direction for
future work.

Classifiers as a linguist’s tool. In each language,
a number of the k-top words align with or sug-
gest gender-specific conventions in that particular
language. That a language-agnostic classifier pro-
vided such insights highlights its potential for ex-
ploring language-specific word usage patterns and
nuances. For example, sociolinguistics (a subfield of
linguistics) has long studied the different ways men
and women use language, especially in spontaneous
speech (Eckert and McConnell-Ginet, 2003); recent
work has begun to examine how language is used
differently by men and women online as well (Bam-
man et al., 2012). Such studies could be radically
scaled up in terms of the number of languages con-
sidered using a language-agnostic gender classifier.

6 Conclusion

Though there has been relatively little investigation
into latent attribute inference outside of English-
language content, we consider it both a fruitful
and important area for future research. Here, we
have evaluated the capacity for existing inference
methods to be used outside their intended English-
language context. Furthermore, we have shown how
language-specific features might be incorporated in
order to boost classifier accuracy further. The posi-
tive results suggest that latent attribute inference in
the non-English context as a research direction wor-
thy of further attention.

7 Acknowledgements

The authors gratefully acknowledge three anony-
mous reviewers whose feedback improved the clar-
ity and correctness of the manuscript. The study
was supported by grants from the Social Sciences

1144



and Humanities and Natural Sciences and Engi-
neering Research Councils of Canada (SSHRC In-
sight Grant #435-2012-1802 and NSERC Discovery
Grant #125517855) and the Public Safety Canada
Kanishka Program.

References
S. Akioka, N. Kato, Y. Muraoka, and H. Yamana. 2010.

Cross-media impact on Twitter in Japan. In Proceed-
ings of the International Workshop on Search and Min-
ing User-generated Contents.

Atilika. 2012. Kuromoji morphological analyzer.
http://www.atilika.org.

D. Bamman, J. Eisenstein, and T. Schnoebelen. 2012.
Gender in Twitter: Styles, stances, and social net-
works. arXiv preprint arXiv:1210.4567.

S Bird. 2006. Nltk: the natural language toolkit. In Pro-
ceedings of the COLING/ACL Interactive Presentation
Sessions.

J.D. Burger, J. Henderson, and G. Zarrella. 2011. Dis-
criminating gender on Twitter. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing.

M. Conover, B. Gonçalves, J. Ratkiewicz, A. Flammini,
and F. Menczer. 2011a. Predicting the politial align-
ment of Twitter users. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on Social Computing.

M.D. Conover, J. Ratkiewicz, M. Francisco,
B. Gonçalves, F Menczer, and A Flammini. 2011b.
Political polarization on Twitter. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Weblogs and Social
Media.

P. Eckert and S. McConnell-Ginet. 2003. Language and
gender. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

F. Giglietto. 2012. If likes were votes: An empirical
study of the 2011 Italian administrative elections. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on We-
blogs and Social Media.

J. Holmes. 1995. Women, men and politeness. Long-
man, London.

M. Kim and H.W. Park. 2012. e-measuring Twitter-
based political participation and deliberation in the
South Korean context by using social network and
Triple Helix indicators. Scientometrics, 90(1):121–
140.

W. Liu and D. Ruths. 2013. What’s in a name? Using
first names as features for gender inference in Twit-
ter. In Analyzing Microtext: 2013 AAAI Spring Sym-
posium.

W. Liu, F.A. Zamal, and D. Ruths. 2012. Using so-
cial media to infer gender composition from commuter

populations. In Proceedings of the When the City
Meets the Citizen Worksop.

A. Mislove, S. Lehmann, Y.Y. Ahn, J.P. Onnela, and J.N.
Rosenquist. 2011. Understanding the demographics
of Twitter users. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media.

D. Mocanu, A. Baronchelli, B. Gonçalves, N. Perra, and
A. Vespignani. 2012. The Twitter of Babel: Map-
ping world languages through microblogging plat-
forms. ArXiv e-prints, December.

B. New and C. Landing. 2012. Lexique 3.
http://www.lexique.org/telLexique.php.

F.C.C. Peng, editor. 1981. Male/female differences in
Japanese. The East-West Sign Language Association,
Tokyo.

M. Pennacchiotti and A.M. Popescu. 2011. A machine
learning approach to Twitter user classification. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on We-
blogs and Social Media.

D. Rao and D. Yarowsky. 2010. Detecting latent user
properties in social media. In Proceedings of the NIPS
workshop on Machine Learning for Social Networks.

D. Rao, D. Yarowsky, A. Shreevats, and M. Gupta. 2010.
Classifying latent user attributes in Twitter. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Workshop on Search and
Mining User-generated Contents.

T. Sakaki, M. Okazaki, and Y. Matsuo. 2010. Earth-
quake shakes Twitter users: Real-time event detection
by social sensors. In Proceedings of the International
World Wide Web Conference.

Semiocast. 2012. Brazil becomes the 2nd country on
Twitter, Japan 3rd, Netherlands most active country.
http://semiocast.com/publications/
2012 01 31 Brazil becomes 2nd country on
Twitter superseds Japan.

A. Tumasjan, T.O. Sprenger, P.G. Sandner, and I.M.
Welpe. 2010. Predicting elections with Twitter: What
140 characters reveal about political sentiment. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on We-
blogs and Social Media.

W. Weerkamp, S. Carter, and M. Tsagkias. 2011. How
people use Twitter in different languages. In Proceed-
ings of the Web Science Conference.

R. Schenk-Van Witsen. 1981. Les différences sex-
uelles dans le français parlé: une étude-pilote des
différences lexicales entre hommes et femmes. Lan-
gage et société, 17(1):59–78.

F.A. Zamal, W. Liu, and D. Ruths. 2012. Homophily and
latent attribute inference: Inferring latent attributes of
Twitter users from neighbors. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Weblogs and Social Me-
dia.

1145


