










































Connecting Language and Knowledge Bases with Embedding Models for Relation Extraction


Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1366–1371,
Seattle, Washington, USA, 18-21 October 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Connecting Language and Knowledge Bases with Embedding Models
for Relation Extraction

Jason Weston
Google

111 8th avenue
New York, NY, USA
jweston@google.com

Antoine Bordes
Heudiasyc

UT de Compiègne
& CNRS

Compiègne, France
bordesan@utc.fr

Oksana Yakhnenko
Google

111 8th avenue
New York, NY, USA
oksana@google.com

Nicolas Usunier
Heudiasyc

UT de Compiègne
& CNRS

Compiègne, France
nusunier@utc.fr

Abstract

This paper proposes a novel approach for rela-
tion extraction from free text which is trained
to jointly use information from the text and
from existing knowledge. Our model is based
on scoring functions that operate by learning
low-dimensional embeddings of words, enti-
ties and relationships from a knowledge base.
We empirically show on New York Times ar-
ticles aligned with Freebase relations that our
approach is able to efficiently use the extra in-
formation provided by a large subset of Free-
base data (4M entities, 23k relationships) to
improve over methods that rely on text fea-
tures alone.

1 Introduction

Information extraction (IE) aims at generating struc-
tured data from free text in order to populate Knowl-
edge Bases (KBs). Hence, one is given an incom-
plete KB composed of a set of triples of the form
(h, r , t); h is the left-hand side entity (or head), t
the right-hand side entity (or tail) and r the relation-
ship linking them. An example from the Freebase
KB1 is (/m/2d3rf ,<director-of>, /m/3/324), where
/m/2d3rf refers to the director “Alfred Hitchcock"
and /m/3/324 to the movie “The Birds".

This paper focuses on the problem of learning to
perform relation extraction (RE) under weak super-
vision from a KB. RE is sub-task of IE that consid-
ers that entities have already been detected by a dif-
ferent process, such as a named-entity recognizer.
RE then aims at assigning to a relation mention m

1www.freebase.com

(i.e. a sequence of text which states that some rela-
tion is true) the corresponding relationship from the
KB, given a pair of extracted entities (h, t) as con-
text. For example, given the triple (/m/2d3rf ,“wrote
and directed", /m/3/324), a system should predict
<director-of>. The task is said to be weakly super-
vised because for each pair of entities (h, t) detected
in the text, all relation mentions m associated with
them are labeled with all the relationships connect-
ing h and t in the KB, whether they are actually ex-
pressed by m or not.

Our key contribution is a novel model that em-
ploys not only weakly labeled text mention data, as
most approaches do, but also leverages triples from
the known KB. The model thus learns the plausi-
bility of new (h, r , t) triples by generalizing from
the KB, even though this triple is not present. A
ranking-based embedding framework is used to train
our model. Thereby, relation mentions, entities and
relationships are all embedded into a common low-
dimensional vector space, where scores are com-
puted. We show that our method can successfully
take into account information from a large-scale KB
(Freebase: 4M entities, 23k relationships) to im-
prove over systems that are only using text features.

This paper is organized as follows: Section 2
presents related work, Section 3 introduces our
model and its main influences, and experimental re-
sults are displayed in Section 4.

2 Previous Work

Learning under weak supervision is common in nat-
ural language processing, especially for tasks where
the annotation costs are significant such as in se-

1366



mantic parsing (Kate and Mooney, 2007; Liang et
al., 2009; Bordes et al., 2010; Matuszek et al.,
2012). This is also naturally used in IE, since it
allows to train large-scale systems without requir-
ing to label numerous texts. The idea was intro-
duced by (Craven et al., 1999), which matched the
Yeast Protein Database with PubMed abstracts. It
was also used to train open extractors based on
Wikipedia infoboxes and corresponding sentences
(Wu and Weld, 2007; Wu and Weld, 2010). Large-
scale open IE projects (e.g. (Banko et al., 2007))
also rely on weak supervision, since they learn mod-
els from a seed KB in order to extend it.

Weak supervision is also a popular option for RE:
Mintz et al. (2009) used Freebase to train weakly su-
pervised relational extractors on Wikipedia, an ap-
proach generalized by the multi-instance learning
frameworks (Riedel et al., 2010; Hoffmann et al.,
2011; Surdeanu et al., 2012). All these works only
use textual information to perform extraction.

Lao et al. (2012) proposed the first work aiming to
perform RE employing both KB data and text, using
a rule-based random walk method. Recently, Riedel
et al. (2013) proposed another joint approach based
on collaborative filtering for learning entity embed-
dings. This approach connects text with Freebase
by learning shared embeddings of entities through
weak supervision, in contrast to our method where
no joint learning is performed. We do not compare
to these two approaches since they use two different
evaluation protocols that greatly differ from those
used in all aforementioned previous works. Never-
theless, our method is easier to integrate into exist-
ing systems than those, since KB data is used via
the addition of a scoring term, which is trained sepa-
rately beforehand (with no shared embeddings). Be-
sides, we demonstrate in our experimental section
that our system can handle a large number of rela-
tionships, significantly larger than that presented in
(Lao et al., 2012; Riedel et al., 2013).

3 Embedding-based Framework

Our work concerns energy-based methods, which
learn low-dimensional vector representations (em-
beddings) of atomic symbols (words, entities, re-
lationships, etc.). In this framework, we learn two
models: one for predicting relationships given re-

lation mentions and another one to encode the in-
teractions among entities and relationships from the
KB. The joint action of both models in prediction
allows us to use the connection between the KB and
text to perform relation extraction. One could also
share parameters between models (via shared em-
beddings), but this is not implemented in this work.
This approach is inspired by previous work designed
to connect words and Wordnet (Bordes et al., 2012).

Both submodels end up learning vector embed-
dings of symbols, either for entities or relationships
in the KB, or for each word/feature of the vocabulary
(denoted V). The set of entities and relationships in
the KB are denoted by E and R, and nv , ne and nr
denote the size of V , E and R respectively. Given
a triple (h, r , t) the embeddings of the entities and
the relationship (vectors in Rk ) are denoted with the
same letter, in boldface characters (i.e. h, r, t).

3.1 Connecting Text and Relationships
The first part of the framework concerns the learn-
ing of a function Sm2r (m, r), based on embeddings,
that is designed to score the similarity of a relation
mention m and a relationship r .

Our scoring approach is inspired by previous
work for connecting word labels and images (We-
ston et al., 2010), which we adapted, replacing im-
ages by mentions and word labels by relationships.
Intuitively, it consists of first projecting words and
features into the embedding space and then comput-
ing a similarity measure (the dot product in this pa-
per) between this projection and a relationship em-
bedding. The scoring function is then:

Sm2r (m, r) = f(m)
>r

with f a function mapping words and features into
Rk , f(m) = W>Φ(m). W is the matrix of Rnv×k
containing all word embeddings w, Φ(m) is the
(sparse) binary representation of m (∈ Rnv ) indi-
cating absence or presence of words/features, and
r ∈ Rk is the embedding of the relationship r .

This approach can be easily applied at test time to
score (mention, relationship) pairs. Since this type
of learning problem is weakly supervised, Bordes et
al. (2010) showed that a convenient way to train it
is by using a ranking loss. Hence, given a data set
D = {(mi , ri ), i = 1, ... , |D|} consisting of (men-
tion, relationship) training pairs, one could learn the

1367



embeddings using constraints of the form:

∀i , ∀r ′ 6= ri , f(mi )>ri > 1 + f(mi )>r′ , (1)

where 1 is the margin. That is, we want the re-
lation that (weakly) labels a given mention to be
scored higher than other relation by a margin of 1.
Then, given any mention m one can predict the cor-
responding relationship r̂(m) with:

r̂(m) = arg max
r ′∈R

Sm2r (m, r
′) = arg max

r ′∈R

(
f(m)>r′

)
.

Learning Sm2r (·) under constraints (1) is well
suited when one is interested in building a per-
mention prediction system. However, performance
metrics of relation extraction are sometimes mea-
sured using precision recall curves aggregated for
all mentions concerning the same pair of entities,
as in (Riedel et al., 2010). In that case the scores
across predictions for different mentions need to be
calibrated so that the most confident ones have the
higher scores. This can be better encoded with con-
straints of the following form:

∀i , j , ∀r ′ 6= ri , rj , f(mi )>ri > 1 + f(mj)>r′ .

In this setup, scores of pairs observed in the training
set should be larger than that of any other prediction
across all mentions. In practice, we use “soft” rank-
ing constraints (optimizing the hinge loss), i.e. we
minimize:

∀i , j , ∀r ′ 6= ri , rj , max(0, 1−f(mi )>ri +f(mj)>r′).

Finally, we also enforce a (hard) constraint on the
norms of the columns of W and r, i.e. ∀i , ||Wi ||2 ≤
1 and ∀j , ||rj ||2 ≤ 1. Training is carried out by
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), updating W
and r at each step, following (Weston et al., 2010;
Bordes et al., 2013). That is, at the start of training
the parameters to be learnt (the nv × k word/feature
embeddings in W and the nr × k relation embed-
dings r ) are initialized to random weights. We ini-
tialize each k-dimensional embedding vector ran-
domly with mean 0, standard deviation 1k . Then, we
iterate the following steps to train them:

1. Select at random a positive training pair
(mi , ri ).

2. Select at random a secondary training pair
(mj , rj), used to calibrate the scores.

3. Select at random a negative relation r ′ such that
r ′ 6= ri and r ′ 6= rj .

4. Make a stochastic gradient step to minimize
max(0, 1− f(mi )>ri + f(mj)>r′).

5. Enforce the constraint that each embedding
vector is normalized, i.e. if ||Wi ||2 > 1 then
Wi ←Wi/||Wi ||2.

3.2 Encoding Structured Data of KBs

Using only weakly labeled text mentions for train-
ing ignores much of the prior knowledge we can
leverage from a large KB such as Freebase. In or-
der to connect this relational data with our model,
we propose to encode its information into entity and
relationship embeddings. This allows us to build a
model which can score the plausibility of new en-
tity relationship triples which are missing from Free-
base. Several models have been recently developed
for that purpose (e.g. in (Nickel et al., 2011; Bor-
des et al., 2011; Bordes et al., 2012)): we chose in
this work to follow the approach of (Bordes et al.,
2013), which is simple, flexible and has shown very
promising results on Freebase data.

Given a training set S = {(hi , ri , ti ), i =
1, ... , |S|} of relations extracted from the KB, this
model learns vector embeddings of the entities and
of the relationships using the idea that the func-
tional relation induced by the r -labeled arcs of the
KB should correspond to a translation of the em-
beddings. That is, given a k-dimensional embed-
ding of the left-hand side (head) entity, adding the
k-dimensional embedding of a given relation should
yield the point (or close to the point) of the k-
dimensional embedding of the right-hand side (tail)
entity. Hence, this method enforces that h + r ≈ t
when (h, r , t) holds, while h + r should be far away
from t otherwise. The model thus gives the follow-
ing score for the plausibility of a relation:

Skb(h, r , t) = −||h + r − t||22 .

A ranking loss is also used for training Skb. The
ranking objective is designed to assign higher scores

1368



to existing relations versus any other possibility:

∀i ,∀h′ 6= hi , Skb(hi , ri , ti ) ≥ 1 + Skb(h′, ri , ti ),
∀i ,∀r ′ 6= ri , Skb(hi , ri , ti ) ≥ 1 + Skb(hi , r ′, ti ),
∀i ,∀t ′ 6= ti , Skb(hi , ri , ti ) ≥ 1 + Skb(hi , ri , t ′).

That is, for each known triple (h, r , t), if we re-
placed the (i) head, (ii) relation or (iii) tail with some
other possibility, the modified triple should have a
lower score (i.e. be less plausible) than the original
triple. The three sets of constraints defined above
encode the three types of modification. As in Sec-
tion 3.1 we use soft constraints via the hinge loss,
enforce constraints on the norm of embeddings, i.e.
∀h,r ,t , ||h||2 ≤ 1, ||r ||2 ≤ 1, ||t||2 ≤ 1, and training
is performed using SGD, as in (Bordes et al., 2013).

At test time, one may again need to calibrate the
scores Skb across entity pairs. We propose a sim-
ple approach: we convert the scores by ranking all
relationshipsR by Skb and instead output:

S̃kb(h, r , t)=Φ
(∑

r ′ 6=r
δ(Skb(h, r , t)>Skb(h, r

′, t))
)
,

i.e. a function of the rank of r . We chose the simpli-
fied model Φ(x) = 1 if x < τ and 0 otherwise; δ(·)
is the Kronecker function.

3.3 Implementation for Relation Extraction
Our framework can be used for relation extraction
in the following way. First, for each pair of entities
(h, t) that appear in the test set, all the correspond-
ing mentionsMh,t in the test set are collected and a
prediction is performed with:

r̂h,t = argmax
r∈R

∑
m∈Mh,t

Sm2r (m, r) .

The predicted relationship can either be a valid re-
lationship or NA – a marker that means that there is
no relation between h and t (NA is added to R dur-
ing training and is treated like other relationships).
If r̂h,t is a relationship, a composite score is defined:

Sm2r+kb(h, r̂h,t , t)=
∑

m∈Mh,t

Sm2r (m, r̂h,t)+S̃kb(h, r̂h,t , t)

That is, only the top scoring non-NA predictions are
re-scored. Hence, our final composite model favors
predictions that agree with both the mentions and the
KB. If r̂h,t is NA, the score is unchanged.

4 Experiments

We use the training and test data, evaluation frame-
work and baselines from (Riedel et al., 2010; Hoff-
mann et al., 2011; Surdeanu et al., 2012).

NYT+FB This dataset, developed by (Riedel et
al., 2010), aligns Freebase relations with the New
York Times corpus. Entities were found using the
Stanford named entity tagger (Finkel et al., 2005),
and were matched to their name in Freebase. For
each mention, sentence level features are extracted
which include part of speech, named entity and de-
pendency tree path properties. Unlike some of the
previous methods, we do not use features that aggre-
gate properties across multiple mentions. We kept
the 100,000 most frequent features.There are 52 pos-
sible relationships and 121,034 training mentions of
which most are labeled as no relation (labeled “NA”)
– there are 4700 Freebase relations mentioned in the
training set, and 1950 in the test set.

Freebase Freebase is a large-scale KB that has
around 80M entities, 23k relationships and 1.2B re-
lations. We used a subset restricted to the top 4M
entities for scalability reasons – where top is defined
as the ones with the largest number of relations to
other entities. We used all the 23k possible relation-
ships in Freebase. To make a realistic setting, we
did not choose the entity set using the NYT+FB data
set, so it may not overlap completely. For that rea-
son, we needed to keep the set rather large. Keeping
the top 4M entities gives an overlap of 80% with the
entities in the NYT+FB test set. Most importantly,
we then removed all the entity pairs present in the
NYT+FB test set from Freebase, i.e. all relations
they are involved in independent of the relationship.
This ensures that we cannot just memorize the true
relations for an entity pair – we have to learn to gen-
eralize from other entities and relations.

As the NYT+FB dataset was built on an earlier
version of Freebase we also had to translate the dep-
recated relationships into their new variants (e.g.
“/p/business/company/place_founded ” → “/orga-
nization/organization/place_founded”) to make the
two datasets link (then, the 52 relationships in
NYT+FB are now a subset of the 23k from Free-
base). We then trained the Skb model on the remain-
ing triples.

1369



recall

p
re

ci
si

o
n

0 0.1 0.20

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

Wsabie M2R+FB
MIMLRE
Hoffmann
Wsabie M2R
Riedel
Mintz

recall

p
re

ci
si

o
n

0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09 0.10.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

Wsabie M2R+FB
MIMLRE
Hoffmann
Wsabie M2R
Riedel
Mintz

Figure 1: Top: Aggregate extraction precision/recall
curves for a variety of methods. Bottom: the
same plot zoomed to the recall [0-0.1] region.
WsabieM2R is our method trained only on mentions,
WsabieM2R+FB uses Freebase annotations as well.

Modeling Following (Bordes et al., 2013) we set
the embedding dimension k to 50. The learning rate
for SGD was selected using a validation set: we ob-
tained 0.001 for Sm2r , and 0.1 for Skb. For the cal-
ibration of Ŝkb, τ = 10 (note, here we are ranking
all 23k Freebase relationships). Training Sm2r took
5 minutes, whilst training Skb took 2 days due to the
large scale of the data set.

Results Figure 1 displays the aggregate precision
/ recall curves of our approach WSABIEM2R+FB
which uses the combination of Sm2r + Skb, as well
as WSABIEM2R , which only uses Sm2r , and existing
state-of-the-art approaches: HOFFMANN (Hoffmann

et al., 2011)2, MIMLRE (Surdeanu et al., 2012).
RIEDEL (Riedel et al., 2010) and MINTZ (Mintz et
al., 2009).

WSABIEM2R is comparable to, but slightly worse
than, the MIMLRE and HOFFMANN methods, possi-
bly due to its simplified assumptions (e.g. predict-
ing a single relationship per entity pair). However,
the addition of extra knowledge from other Freebase
entities in WSABIEM2R+FB provides superior per-
formance to all other methods, by a wide margin, at
least between 0 and 0.1 recall (see bottom plot).

Performance of WSABIEM2R and
WSABIEM2R+FB for recall > 0.1 degrades rapidly,
faster than that of other methods. This is also
caused by the simplifications of WSABIEM2R that
prevent it from reaching high precision when the
recall is greater than 0.1. We recall that Freebase
data is not used to detect relationships i.e. to
discriminate between NA and the rest, but only to
select the best relationship in case of detection.
That is WSABIEM2R+FB only improves precision,
not recall, so both versions of Wsabie are similar
w.r.t. recall. This could be improved by borrowing
ideas from HOFFMANN (Hoffmann et al., 2011) or
MIMLRE (Surdeanu et al., 2012) for dealing with
the multi-label case. Our approach, which uses
Freebase to increase precision, is general and could
improve any other method.

5 Conclusion

In this paper we described a framework for leverag-
ing large scale knowledge bases to improve relation
extraction by training not only on (mention, relation-
ship) pairs but using all other KB triples as well. We
empirically showed that it allows to significantly im-
prove precision on extracted relations. Our model-
ing approach is general and should apply to other
settings, e.g. for the task of entity linking.

Acknowledgments

This work was carried out in the framework of
the Labex MS2T (ANR-11-IDEX-0004-02), and
funded by the French National Agency for Research
(EVEREST-12-JS02-005-01).

2There is an error in the plot from (Hoffmann et al., 2011),
which we have corrected. The authors acknowledged this issue.

1370



References
Michele Banko, Michael J Cafarella, Stephen Soderland,

Matthew Broadhead, and Oren Etzioni. 2007. Open
information extraction from the web. In IJCAI, vol-
ume 7, pages 2670–2676.

Antoine Bordes, Nicolas Usunier, and Jason Weston.
2010. Label ranking under ambiguous supervision for
learning semantic correspondences. In Proceedings of
the 27th International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing (ICML-10), pages 103–110.

Antoine Bordes, Jason Weston, Ronan Collobert, and
Yoshua Bengio. 2011. Learning structured embed-
dings of knowledge bases. In Proc. of the 25th Conf.
on Artif. Intel. (AAAI).

Antoine Bordes, Xavier Glorot, Jason Weston, and
Yoshua Bengio. 2012. Joint learning of words and
meaning representations for open-text semantic pars-
ing. In Proc. of the 15th Intern. Conf. on Artif. Intel.
and Stat., volume 22, pages 127–135. JMLR.

Antoine Bordes, Nicolas Usunier, Alberto Garcia-Duran,
Jason Weston, and Oksana Yakhnenko. 2013. Trans-
lating embeddings for modeling multi-relational data.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems (NIPS 26).

Mark Craven, Johan Kumlien, et al. 1999. Constructing
biological knowledge bases by extracting information
from text sources. In ISMB, volume 1999, pages 77–
86.

Jenny Rose Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher
Manning. 2005. Incorporating non-local information
into information extraction systems by gibbs sampling.
In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting on Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, pages 363–370.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Raphael Hoffmann, Congle Zhang, Xiao Ling, Luke
Zettlemoyer, and Daniel S Weld. 2011. Knowledge-
based weak supervision for information extraction of
overlapping relations. In Proceedings of the 49th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, vol-
ume 1, pages 541–550.

Rohit J Kate and Raymond J Mooney. 2007. Learning
language semantics from ambiguous supervision. In
AAAI, volume 7, pages 895–900.

Ni Lao, Amarnag Subramanya, Fernando Pereira, and
William W Cohen. 2012. Reading the web with
learned syntactic-semantic inference rules. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and Com-
putational Natural Language Learning, pages 1017–
1026. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Percy Liang, Michael I Jordan, and Dan Klein. 2009.
Learning semantic correspondences with less supervi-
sion. In Proceedings of the Joint Conference of the

47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Process-
ing of the AFNLP: Volume 1-Volume 1, pages 91–99.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Cynthia Matuszek, Nicholas FitzGerald, Luke Zettle-
moyer, Liefeng Bo, and Dieter Fox. 2012. A joint
model of language and perception for grounded at-
tribute learning. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Machine Learning.

Mike Mintz, Steven Bills, Rion Snow, and Dan Jurafsky.
2009. Distant supervision for relation extraction with-
out labeled data. In Proceedings of the Joint Confer-
ence of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the
4th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing of the AFNLP: Volume 2-Volume 2,
pages 1003–1011. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Maximilian Nickel, Volker Tresp, and Hans-Peter
Kriegel. 2011. A three-way model for collective
learning on multi-relational data. In Proceedings of
the 28th International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing (ICML-11), pages 809–816.

Sebastian Riedel, Limin Yao, and Andrew McCallum.
2010. Modeling relations and their mentions with-
out labeled text. In Machine Learning and Knowledge
Discovery in Databases, pages 148–163. Springer.

Sebastian Riedel, Limin Yao, Andrew McCallum, and
Benjamin M Marlin. 2013. Relation extraction with
matrix factorization and universal schemas. In Pro-
ceedings of NAACL-HLT, pages 74–84.

Mihai Surdeanu, Julie Tibshirani, Ramesh Nallapati, and
Christopher D Manning. 2012. Multi-instance multi-
label learning for relation extraction. In Proceedings
of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and Computational
Natural Language Learning, pages 455–465. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Jason Weston, Samy Bengio, and Nicolas Usunier. 2010.
Large scale image annotation: learning to rank with
joint word-image embeddings. Machine learning,
81(1):21–35.

Fei Wu and Daniel S Weld. 2007. Autonomously se-
mantifying wikipedia. In Proceedings of the sixteenth
ACM conference on Conference on information and
knowledge management, pages 41–50. ACM.

Fei Wu and Daniel S Weld. 2010. Open information ex-
traction using wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 48th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 118–127. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

1371


