










































Summarizing Complex Events: a Cross-Modal Solution of Storylines Extraction and Reconstruction


Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1281–1291,
Seattle, Washington, USA, 18-21 October 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Summarizing Complex Events: a Cross-modal Solution of Storylines
Extraction and Reconstruction

Shize Xu
xsz@pku.edu.cn

Shanshan Wang
cheers echo mch@163.com

Yan Zhang∗
zhy@cis.pku.edu.cn

Department of Machine Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China
Key Laboratory on Machine Perception, Ministry of Education, Beijing, China

Abstract

The rapid development of Web2.0 leads to
significant information redundancy. Espe-
cially for a complex news event, it is diffi-
cult to understand its general idea within a
single coherent picture. A complex event of-
ten contains branches, intertwining narratives
and side news which are all called storylines.
In this paper, we propose a novel solution to
tackle the challenging problem of storylines
extraction and reconstruction. Specifically, we
first investigate two requisite properties of an
ideal storyline. Then a unified algorithm is
devised to extract all effective storylines by
optimizing these properties at the same time.
Finally, we reconstruct all extracted lines and
generate the high-quality story map. Exper-
iments on real-world datasets show that our
method is quite efficient and highly compet-
itive, which can bring about quicker, clearer
and deeper comprehension to readers.

1 Introduction

News reports usually consist of various modalities
of tremendous information, especially all kinds of
textual information and visual information, which
make web users dazzled and lost. The situation gets
worse on complex news events. To help readers
quickly grasp the general information of the news,
a more concise and convenient system over multi-
modality information should be provided. For ex-
ample, given a large collection of texts and images
related to a specified news event (e.g., East Japan

∗Corresponding author

Earthquake), such a system should present a terse
and brief summarization about the event by showing
different clues of its development, and thus helping
readers to effectively find out “when, where, what,
how and why” at a glance.

The researches (Goldstein et al., 2000) on auto-
matic multi-document summarization (MDS) have
helped a lot when we generate a description for a
specific event. However, it traditionally exhibits in a
very simple style like a “0-dimensional” point. The
appearance of Timeline (Allan et al., 2001) brings
about a visual progress for massive documents anal-
yses. Readers can not only get the most important
ideas, but also browse the story evolution in chrono-
logical order. Previous news summarization systems
with structured output (Yan et al., 2011) have fo-
cused on timeline generation. Timeline becomes a
“1-dimensional” line. This style of summarization
only works for simple stories, which are linear in na-
ture. However, the structure of complex stories usu-
ally turns out to be non-linear. These stories branch
into storylines, dead ends, intertwining narratives
and side news. To explore these lines, we need a
map to reorganize all the information. Therefore,
a “2-dimensional” story map is in bad need. Fig-
ure 1 shows a part of the story map generated by our
system for representing East Japan Earthquake. We
notice that the whole event evolves into 4 branches.
Each of them focuses on a specific sub-topic and is
distinct from other lines. Figure 2 takes a close look
at the 4 nodes from different lines, and they differ a
lot from each other as expected.

Text information is more precise and exquisite
when compared with images. Nevertheless, as the

1281



 Japan's nuclear safety agency says the 

cooling system of a third nuclear reactor at 

Fukushima has failed. 

    A government spokesman says the blast 

destroyed a building which housed a nuclear 

reactor, but the reactor escaped unscathed. 

    Around 170,000 people have been 

evacuated from a 12-mile radius around the 

Fukushima number one nuclear plant. 

    …….. 

Mar 12 Mar 13 Mar 14 Mar 17, 2011 Mar 15 Mar 16 Mar 11 

    A 9.0 magnitude quake triggers a devastating tsunami off 

northeast Japan, leaving some 19,000 people dead or missing. 

    A massive earthquake, 8.9 on the Richter scale, unleashes a 

huge tsunami which crashes through Japan's eastern 

coastline, sweeping buildings, boats, cars and people miles 

inland. 

    Japan's most powerful earthquake since records began has 

struck the north-east coast, triggering a massive tsunami. 

     …….. 

    A Japanese rescue team member walks through the completely leveled village of Saito, in northeastern Japan. 

    Half a million people have been made homeless by the devastating quake. 

    Fire crews from Greater Manchester and Lancashire have flown out to Japan as part of the UK's International 

Search and Rescue team. 

     …….. 

 
    Japan's cabinet on Friday approved a 

$49 billion budget to help in the 

reconstruction of areas decimated by last 

month's earthquake and tsunami. 

    Japan faces a reconstruction bill of at 

least $180 billion,  or 3 percent of its 

annual economic output. 

    In an televised statement after the blast, 

prime minister Kan urges those within 19 

miles of the area to stay indoors. ···· 

···· 

···· 

             Nuclear Crisis                     Post-disaster                    Rescue                     Tsunamis Blue Green disaster                    Rescue                     TsunamisRed Black 

• Storyline 

• Story node 

• Candidate 

Figure 1: Four storylines are obtained in the story map of “East Japan Earthquake”. They focus on Tsunamis, Nuclear
Crisis, Rescue and Post-disaster respectively.

saying goes, “a picture paints a thousand words”,
an image could provide far more information than
words do. In fact, a summarization including both
texts and images will absolutely yield a more pow-
erful and intuitive description about the news event.
Under this motivation, we study on extracting and
reconstructing tracks with different sub-topics for a
complex event. To the best of our knowledge, the ex-
ploration and analysis of 2-dimensional cross-modal
summarization is academically novel.

We are faced with two main problems. The first
is how to select the most important sentences and
images to make up the final story map. The previ-
ous work by Shahaf et al. presents a 2-D story map
called “metro map”, which summarizes the com-
plex topics (Shahaf et al., 2012). They study on the
document-level, and use the entire news document
as one story node. But on real web, this may con-
front some difficulties. On one hand, news articles
may report the event from different perspectives, es-
pecially those reviews or retrospective reports. This
kind of documents contains many useful saliency in-
formation of different sub-topics, but they cannot
be further subdivided to help understand each bet-
ter. On the other hand, some documents, such as

Line of “Tsunamis” on Mar 11 Line of “Nuclear Explosion” on Mar 12 

Line of “Rescue” on Mar 13  Line “Post-disaster” on Mar 17  

Figure 2: Word distributions vary a lot among nodes in
different storylines

cover news and interviewing reports, contain one or
two famous remarks. Since these documents also in-
clude too much useless information, it’s inappropri-
ate to use the whole document as a story node. So
our work, the sentence-level story map extraction,
is just aimed at this brand new problem. The sec-
ond problem is the way to utilize the cross-modal

1282



information suitably. Our goal is not only to fuse
sentences and images together, but also to provide a
unified framework to improve them mutually.

In this paper, we introduce a novel solution for
the story map summarization problem. All the sen-
tences and images are the candidates for making up
the final map. The analysis of complicated infor-
mation usually requires a semantic-level knowledge
study. We address this in the pre-processing of data
in Section 3.1. The key task of our research is the
extraction of storylines. We reveal two fundamental
properties of an ideal storyline, and propose an op-
timization algorithm in Section 3.2. A highly com-
patible MDS sub-algorithm is also fused in and of-
fers help to the sentences/images selection. In Sec-
tion 3.3, the extracted storylines are reconstructed
as a final story map. The experimental results con-
ducted on four real datasets show that our approach
can perform effectively.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows.
Some related researches are demonstrated in Sec-
tion 2. We introduce our methodology in Section 3.
The experimental results in Section 4 prove the ef-
fectiveness of our approach. Finally, we conclude
this paper and present our future work in Section 5.

2 Related Work

Generally speaking, multi-document summarization
can be either extractive or abstractive. Researchers
mainly focus on the former which extracts the in-
formation deemed most important to the summary.
Various techniques have been used for this type of
MDS (Haghighi and Vanderwende, 2009; Contrac-
tor et al., 2012). Graph-based text summarization
techniques have been widely used for years. The
algorithms, used in TextRank (Mihalcea and Tarau,
2005) and LexPageRank (Radev et al., 2004), which
are meant to compute sentence importance, are sim-
ilar to those in PageRank and HITS.

Recently, timeline becomes a popular style to
present a schedule of events and attracts many re-
searchers consequently. For example, Yan et al.
make use of timestamps to generate an evolutionary
timeline (Yan et al., 2011). Shahaf et al. present a
2-D story map called “metro map” to summarize the
complex topic (Shahaf et al., 2012). But previous
work only studies on the document level, which in-

evitably brings about much information redundancy.
Previous studies show that the use of visual ma-

terials not only leads to the conservation of infor-
mation but also promotes comprehension (Panjwani
et al., 2009). Thus the cross-modal fusion is nec-
essary. Wu et al. propose a framework of multi-
modal information fusion for multimedia data anal-
ysis by learning the optimal combination of multi-
modal information with the superkernel fusion (Wu
et al., 2004). Borrowing the idea of recommendation
in heterogeneous network into the cross-modal news
summarization is also a convincing research. Xu et
al. tackle this task and bring out an 1-D cross-media
timeline generation framework (Xu et al., 2013).

Summarization of multimedia involves researches
on information retrieval of multimedia. Since tex-
tual and visual information are quite different from
each other, how to make a good transformation to
mine latent knowledge from unannotated images is
of great concern. Feng and Lapata (2010) use visual
words to describe visual features and then propose
a probabilistic model based on the assumption that
images and their co-occurring textual data are gen-
erated by mixtures of latent topics.

However, to the best of our knowledge, no exist-
ing research manages to generate a 2-dimensional
story map automatically and integrate images and
texts into a unified framework at the same time.

3 Methodology

The original data of one event is a collection of news
documents on different days, or in a finer granu-
larity, a set of sentences and images with different
timestamps. Each item in the data collection is a
candidate for selection to form the final map. We
denote the data collection as C, and C = Cs ∪ Cv,
where Cs is the subset containing all sentences and
Cv contains all images. In the following elaboration
of our method, dateset C is the important knowl-
edge base. As the ultimate goal for a specific event,
we would like to generate the “2-D” story mapM,
whose main component is a set of “1-D” storylines
L = {L1, L2, . . .}. Each storyline L ∈ L is made
up of a set of “0-D” story nodes, L = {I1, I2, . . .},
each of which is composed of a set of candidates
sharing the same timestamp I = {c1, c2, . . .}. For
more concise, our method can be scheduled with the

1283



following three steps:
1. Prepare semantic knowledge for each candi-

date, and then purify data collection C by eliminat-
ing the noisy candidates;

2. Conduct OPT-LSH algorithm to extract L that
contains all qualified storylines;

3. Reconstruct the storylines as the final mapM.

3.1 Pre-processing
Before we extract the storylines, we have to solve
two problems first. Since our work is cross-modal,
the semantic knowledge under the literal and visual
surface is basically required. Recall from Section 2,
there exist many effective ways to dig into the se-
mantic level of image and text. In this paper, we em-
ploy the approach proposed by Jiang and Tan (2006).
They present a convincing approach which employs
a multilingual retrieval model to apply knowledge
mining on semantic level. The first is the sentence
feature vector generation. With the preprocessing
such as stemming and stop words removal, they ex-
tract the textual TF-IDF feature V ecs of each sen-
tence. The second, also the challenging part, is
the image feature vector generation. In this step,
for each region they extract visual features that are
consisting of 6 color features and 60 gabor features
which have been proven to be useful in many ap-
plications. Color features are the means and vari-
ances of the RGB color spaces. Gabor features are
extracted by calculating the means and variations of
the filtered image regions on 6 orientations. After
the visual feature vectors of the image regions are
extracted, all image regions are clustered using the
k-means algorithm. The generated clusters, called
“visterms” or “visual words”, are treated as a vocab-
ulary for the images. Besides visual features, they
also utilize the context textual feature of each im-
age as the semantic supplement to generate to final
feature vector V ecv.

Based on these feature vector of each canti-
date, they further calculating the intra-modal sim-
ilarity with classical IR methods, they obtain the
inter-modal similarity through the vague transfor-
mation (Mandl T, 1998). We also note that trans-
lation tools such as VIPS (Cai et al., 2003) and We-
bKit1 can help us to segment web documents and

1http://www.webkit.org

pick those text blocks whose coordinates are neigh-
boring to each specified image. In this way we can
successfully obtain images, text contexts and con-
tent sentences. Three kinds of semantic similar-
ity are now ready. They are uniformly denoted as
sim(ci, cj), representing the similarity between two
candidates. ci and cj can be any type of modalities.

Another problem is the noise from irregular data.
We would like to utilize the sentences and images of
high quality. The intuitive assumption is that a good
candidate should have substance in speech, and be
coherent with other good candidates. Fortunately,
many useful measures are now available. They can
be used to choose better candidates. Inspired by the
analysis analogy to information retrieval, we extend
the idea of the classical PageRank algorithm to esti-
mate the authority for each candidate. The similarity
between two candidates is regarded as the weighted
“link” between them.

Inspired by the idea of classic “update summa-
rization” task, we try to avoid those chronologically
ordered documents sets focusing on a constant topic.
Therefore, given the particularity of our task, we
also have to develop the weighting function Γ with
the temporal factor before starting the ranking algo-
rithm. Our fundamental assumption is that the inter-
date and inter-modal “links” have different influence
comparing with the intra ones. Therefore the core
formula calculating the authority of ci is adapted as
follows to make it become weight-compatible:

Auth(ci) =
1− q
|C|

+ q · [ α
∑

cj∈C′
Γ(ci, cj) ·

Auth(cj)

O(cj)

+ (1− α)
∑

ck∈C′′
Γ(ci, ck) ·

Auth(ck)

O(ck)
]

C ′ is the subset of C which only includes the can-
didates of the same modality with ci, and C ′′ is the
cross-modal candidates subset. O(cj) denotes the
out-degree of cj , and smoothing parameter q is set
as the common value 0.85. Parameter α is used to
balance the biases of intra- and inter-modal impact.
If α is set to 1, it means the cross-modal information
is abandoned, and vice versa. Γ(ci, cj) contains two
terms as follows:

Γ(ci, cj) = sim(ci, cj) · e
−∥ci.t−cj .t∥

2σ2

1284



The second term of Γ’s formula is Gaussian Ker-
nel (Aliguliyev R, 2009), which is used to measure
the temporal gap between two candidates (∗.t de-
notes the date-based timestamp). Note that the simi-
larity metric is content-based and time-independent,
since the time decay function is only used to adjust
the ranking impact strength. In this way, we can
give higher authority to the more informative and
coherent candidates. The optimal value of σ, which
controls the spread of kernel curves, is sensitive to
datasets and will be discussed later.

We eliminate the candidates whose authority goes
under threshold. The data collection C is then sig-
nificantly downsized and purified for later work.
Authority is also used to determine the presentation
sequence inside each story node of final map.

3.2 Extraction: LSH-OPT Algorithm

Other traditional relative methods need to pre-decide
how many sub-topics are going to be obtained, like
clustering or other supervised models. They fail
in the unsupervised automatic storylines extraction
problem. In this Section, we propose a concrete al-
gorithm to extract storyline set L from C. Our pro-
posed LSH-based algorithm can automatically op-
timize the number of storylines according to their
self-evaluation.

3.2.1 Task Formalization
Let’s investigate the storyline first. We may think

of some basic attributes as well as many exten-
sion properties. The number of nodes in the sto-
ryline L (denoted as |L|) is intuitively one of its
basic attributes. We would like to define another
basic attribute called the SUPPORT of L. In de-
tail, Support(L) = minIk∈L |Ik|, which denotes
the smallest size among all the story nodes it has.

The most challenging part is to properly model
extension properties. We observe that an effective
storyline should meet three key requirements: (1)
Coherence. Within one storyline, news changes
gradually as time goes and the evolution indicates
consistency among component story nodes. We rely
on the notion of coherence developed in Connect-
the-Dots (Shahaf and Guestrin, 2010) and transform
it to what we exactly need in this research; (2) Di-
versity. According to MMR principle (Goldstein et
al., 1999), though the work is about summary, we

still can draw an analogy and derive that a good sto-
ryline should be concise and contain redundant in-
formation as few as possible, i.e., two sentences pro-
viding information of similar content should not be
presented in different storylines; (3) Coverage. The
extracted storyline set L should keep alignment with
the source collection C, which is intuitive and even
proved to be significant as proposed in (Li et al.,
2009). However, Coverage in some ways is tech-
nically redundant in front of Diversity. We decide
to use the first two criteria in extraction process and
use the last one to verify the effectiveness.

Since a storyline is composed of several nodes,
we can select or abandon nodes mainly according
to these two requirements. In fact, both of them in-
volve a measurement of similarity between two story
nodes, denoted by two word distributions (see Fig-
ure 2). Specifically, for story node Ii, its distribu-
tion probability of word w is estimated as p(w|Ii) =∑

c∈Ii
TF (w)∑

w

∑
c∈Ii

TF (w) where the denominator is used for

normalization. Then Kullback-Leibler divergence is
employed to denote the distance between two nodes
Ii and Ij :

DKL(Ii, Ij) =
∑
w

p(w|Ii) log
p(w|Ii)
p(w|Ij)

In addition, we introduce the decreasing and
increasing variants based on logistic functions,
D♭KL = 1/(1 + e

DKL) and D♯KL = e
DKL/(1 +

eDKL), to map the distance into [0, 1]. Given the
measurement, we can formulate the two properties.

For Coherence, a storyline Li consists of a series
of individual but correlated nodes, which do not nec-
essarily have the serial timestamps. We would like
to choose such a set of nodes {I1, I2, . . .}, and at the
same time guarantee this criterion:

Cor(Li) =
1

|Li|
∑

1≤k<|Li|
D♭KL(Ik, Ik+1)

For Diversity, each storyline Li ∈ L should
demonstrate quite different subtopics with other sto-
rylines. This is the most essential motivation for us
to step into 2-dimensional field. This criterion can
be used to maximize the minimum diversity value
among all storylines:

Div(L) = min
Li,Lj∈L

{
∑

Ik∈Li
∑

Ik′∈Lj
D♯KL(Ik, Ik′)

|Li| · |Lj |
}

1285



Then the problem can be transformed into the fol-
lowing optimization problem. Parameters θ1, θ2 and
θ3 denote the minimum number of nodes in each
line, the smallest size of candidates in each node and
the coherence lower bound respectively. The task is
to extract an optimal L out of C, such that:

∀L ∈ L, |L| ≥ θ1 & Support(L) ≥ θ2;
∀L ∈ L, Cor(L) ≥ θ3;
Div(L) is maximized.

3.2.2 Optimization Algorithm
It can be proved that finding the optimal set L is

an NP-Complete problem (not presented due to the
limited space). Thus the brute-force exhaustive ap-
proach is crashed. We develop a near-optimal al-
gorithm based on locality sensitive hashing (OPT-
LSH). The original LSH solution is a popular tech-
nique used to solve the nearest neighbor search
problems in high dimensions. Its basic idea is to
hash similar input items into the same bucket (i.e.,
uniquely definable hash signature) with high proba-
bility. All potential storylines can be targeted fast if
we make good use of this idea.

LSH performs probabilistic dimension reduction
of high dimensional data by projecting a higher d-
dimensional vector V ecc (recall from Section 3.1)
to a lower d′-dimensional vector (d′<<d), such that
the candidates which are in close proximity in the
higher dimension get mapped into the same item in
the lower dimensional space with high probability.
It guarantees a lower bound on the probability that
two similar input items fall into the same bucket in
the projected space and also the upper bound on the
probability that two dissimilar vectors fall into the
same bucket (Indyk and Motwani, 1998).

One of the key requirements for good perfor-
mance of LSH is the careful selection of the fam-
ily of hashing functions. In OPT-LSH, we use the
hashing scheme proposed by Charikar (Charikar M,
2002). In detail, d′ random unit d-dimensional vec-
tors r⃗1, r⃗2, . . . , r⃗d′ are generated first. Each of the
d entries of r⃗i is drawn from a standardized normal
distribution N(0,1). Then the d′ hashing functions
are defined as:

hi(c) =

{
1, if r⃗i · V ec(c) ≥ 0
0, if r⃗i · V ec(c) < 0

1 ≤ i ≤ d′

We represent the d′-dimensional bucket feature h
for c, h(c) := [h1(c), . . . , hd′(c)]. There are 2d

′
dif-

ferent buckets at most. Each denotes a potential sto-
ryline, so we have to verify the probability of similar
candidates falling into the same bucket, whose lower
bound is given by Charikar (Charikar M, 2002).

Simply filtering and searching among all poten-
tial lines in single pass may lead to empty result
set if in post-processing no bucket satisfies all con-
straints. This could probably happen because the
input parameter d′ is set so large that the optimal
set of candidates is separated into different buck-
ets. However, we will get a suboptimal result in
turn when d′ is too small. We are then motivated
to tune LSH by iterative relaxation that varies d′ in
each iteration. Changing the value of d′ balances
the leverage between expected number of potential
storylines and their properties. We perform a binary
search between 1 and d′ to identify the ideal number
of hash functions to employ. Algorithm 1 shows the
pseudo code of our OPT-LSH algorithm. The LSH
time is bounded by O(d′|C| log |C|) since the binary
search relaxation iteration runs for log |C| times in
the worst case and the hashing time is O(d′|C|).

3.3 Storylines Reconstruction

At last, we manage to reconstruct all the storylines
in Lopt. A real-world storyline may sometimes in-
tertwine with another, educe other branches, and
end its own evolvement. The way to reconstruct a
more effective layout of the story map requires fur-
ther study and provides a good research direction in
the future. However, in this paper we order the sen-
tences/images in each story node according to their
authority scores. Next, all storylines are arranged to
proceed along the timestamps, thus a storyline never
turns back in the map. Then we adjust the structure
to make story nodes sharing the same timestamp stay
close, though they belong to different lines. Figure 1
shows the sample output of our system.

4 Experiments

4.1 Dataset

There is no existing standard evaluation data set for
2-dimensional cross-modal summarization methods.
We randomly choose 4 news topics from 4 selected
news websites: New York Times, BBC, CNN and

1286



Algorithm 1 OPT-LSH Algorithm
Input: Candidate set C, similarity function sim,

bucket dimensions d′

Output: A near-optimal storylines set Lopt

// Main Algorithm
1: Initialize left = 1, right = d′, max = −1
2: repeat
3: d′ = (left + right)/2
4: L ← LSH(C, d′)
5: Revise all word distributions p(w|I) in L
6: if ∀L∈L, |L|≥θ1 and Support(L)≥θ2 and

Cor(L)≥δ3 then
7: if Div(L) > max then
8: Lopt ← L, max← Div(L)
9: end if

10: left = d′ + 1
11: else
12: right = d′ − 1
13: end if
14: until left > right
15: return Lopt

// LSH(C, d′) : Buckets
16: Generate d′ unit vectors randomly
17: for j = 1 to |C| do
18: for i = 1 to d′ do
19: if r⃗i · V ec(cj) ≥ 0 then
20: hi(cj)← 1
21: else
22: hi(cj)← 0
23: end if
24: end for
25: h(cj) = [h1(cj), . . . , hd′(cj)]
26: end for
27: return Buckets← {h(cj)|cj ∈ C}

Reuters. We query each event confined to these sites
and crawl webpages’ html docs. Referring to Sec-
tion 3.1, timestamps, text contents, images and their
text contexts are extracted. Table 1 shows the de-
tails. These 4 datasets all contain massive informa-
tion and complex evolutions.

4.2 Analysis of Our System

Since there is no standard for us to verify the ef-
fectiveness of our solution, we have to utilize con-
vincing criteria based on manual evaluation of ex-

Table 1: Statistics of Datasets.
Event (Query) Document Time Span σ α

EJE 504 Mar 11-Apr 8, 2011 3 0.9
OWS 638 Sept 17-Dec 10, 2011 12 0.7
NBA 489 July 1-Dec 28, 2011 17 0.6
ME 437 June 21-Aug 31, 2011 9 0.7

* Abbreviations EJE, OWS, NBA, ME denote East Japan
Earthquake, Occupy Wall Street, NBA Lockout and Murdock’s
Eavesdropping respectively.

perts, and then we can compare them with other ap-
proaches. In order to setup the system, based on the
optimization problem shown in Section 3.2, we as-
sign the value of 1 to both θ1 and θ2, and empiri-
cally set θ3 as 0.6 which can balance the number of
potential lines and the quality of story map as well.
Then the problem can be re-interpreted in natural
language as follows. Given the data collection, we
manage to find out a set of storylines such that every
line in it contains at least one non-null story node
and keeps self-coherence not less than 0.6. What’s
more, the diversity of the whole set is maximized.
Before comparing OPT-LSH with other systems, we
do some further analysis of inherent properties first.

4.2.1 Compactness
The essential idea of summarization is to reduce

the data size, so that a more concise representation
will be generated and help users to fast grasp the
main points. Therefore the Compactness of a story
map needs to be guaranteed. In the pre-processing
module, we have already excluded significant num-
ber of inferior candidates with the extended PageR-
ank. Nevertheless what we really care is the com-
pactness that OPT-LSH brings about. In the candi-
dates and story nodes selection processes, only the
most saliency and coherent candidates can appear
in the final representation. We count the number of
sentences and images in Lopt, denoted as ||Lopt||,
and then we compare it with the collection size |C|
(both before and after pre-processing) to test the
compactness. Table 2 shows that OPT-LSH further
reduces the representation scale significantly.

4.2.2 Coverage
Obviously, only the verification of compactness

is far from enough. As mentioned in Section 3.2,
the storyline set L we extract should keep alignment
with the source collection, and contain informative
as well as comprehensive information in C. Thus we

1287



Table 2: The compactness of OPT-LSH

Dataset EJE OWS NBA ME
|C|-before 12049 22890 20403 10237
|C|-after 1454 2357 1187 1042
||L|| 87 168 113 92

Downsizing 94.0% 92.9% 90.5% 91.2%

need to verify another property of our summariza-
tion, the Coverage. Inspired by (Shannon C, 2001),
we employ the Information Entropy to represent the
information quantity based on solid mathematical
theory. The less information quantity decreases af-
ter summarizing, the more story comprehensiveness
is maintained. In this way we verify the property of
coverage. Particularly, Shannon denotes the entropy
H as follows of a discrete random variable X , which
in fact is a word distribution. The base knowledge
in our work is the global probability mass function
P (WC) based on the entire vocabulary of C, with
possible values {p(w1), . . . , p(w|WC |)}.

H(X) = E{− log (P (WC))∥X}

= −
∑

wi∈X
p(wi) log (p(wi))

Although different word distributions may have
the same H , we do not focus on the similarity of two
corpora, but the difference of information quantities
they are carrying. So H is an ideal criterion.

Besides the comparison of the entropies of C and
L, it gives us a chance to study different modules’
contributions in our solution. There are two places
that we may simplify the solution. One is the fea-
ture of temporal gap. If we set the parameter σ to
infinity, then we can remove the second term of
the calculation of Γ (i.e. σ←∞) and then bring out
a time-insensitive system. The other is the cross-
modal feature. We set parameter α as 1 to make
the system work in one single modality, and ignore
all images (only the textual sentences are available)
to make up story map. The work then becomes the
study with text-bias. We also implement the sim-
plest system that blocks images as well as tempo-
ral feature. Figure 3 highlights the good perfor-
mance of our system. We are maintaining infor-
mation by a larger proportion of the original data
collection. Considering the property of high com-
pactness, our solution tackles the information re-

H
(X

) 

0 

10 

20 

30 

40 

EJE OWS NBA ME 

Original C 

Our system 

Time-insensitive 

Text-bias modal 

Simplest 

Figure 3: The y-axis denotes the entropy. And the larger
H is, the richer information it brings.

dundancy quite well, and promisingly delivers entire
knowledge with compact structure.

During our experiments on Coverage, we have
some interesting findings. Datasets perform differ-
ently when we take different values of σ and α,
which controls the temporal decaying rate and cross-
modal learning respectively. The events with short
life-cycles prefer a smaller value of σ to dominate
the influence from neighbors, as well as the intra-
modal bias. On the contrary, long-living events pre-
fer lager σ and more inter-modal bias to get informa-
tion replenishment from different dates and modal-
ity. Due to the limited space we don’t present the
tuning details, but the optimal values are shown in
Table 1. In fact, using the cross-modal mutual influ-
ence can, more or less, help to improve the effective-
ness of information extraction and summarization.

4.3 User Study

Before we introduce other existing methods that can
also tackle the cross-modal 2-dimensional summa-
rization problem, we have to setup the appropriate
standards to quantify users’ evaluation.

4.3.1 Metrics
In the user study, we evaluate the effectiveness of

our story maps in aiding users to integrate different
aspects of multi-faceted information. (Shahaf et al.,
2012) also focuses on story map generation and puts
forward two convincing metrics to answer the fol-
lowing questions:
• Micro-Knowledge: Can the maps help users re-
trieve information faster than other methods?
• Macro-Knowledge: Can the maps help users un-
derstand the big picture better than other methods?

1288



For micro-knowledge, we wish to see how maps
help users answer specific questions. We compare
the level of knowledge attained by users using our
method with two other systems: Google News and
TDT. Google News is a computer-generated site that
aggregates headlines from news sources worldwide.
News-viewing tools are dominated by portal and
search approaches, and Google News is a typical
representative of those tools. TDT (Nallapati et al.,
2004) is a successful system which captures the rich
structure and dependencies of news events.

We have noticed that making comparisons be-
tween different systems is not convincing, since the
output of Google News and TDT is different both in
content and in presentation (and in particular, can-
not be double-blind). In order to isolate the effects
of sentence selection vs. map organization, we in-
troduce a hybrid system into the study: the system
with structureless story map displays the same sen-
tences and images as our system but with none of the
structure. Its output is basically the same with our
full system but with a single storyline and merges
node content for each date. And each story nodes
are sorted chronologically and displayed similarly to
Google News. We implement TDT based on (Nalla-
pati et al., 2004) (cos + TD + SimpleThresholding),
and pick a representative article from each cluster.
The purpose of the study is to test a single query.
We also obtain the results from Google News using
the same queries.

We recruit 64 volunteers to browse all the four
events, and one of the four systems is assigned to
each person randomly. After browsing, users are
asked to answer a short questionnaire (8 questions),
composed by domain experts. Users answer as many
questions as possible in limited time (8 minutes).
The statistics of their answers are promised to eval-
uate the micro-knowledge on different systems. In
order to aid in comprehension, we give some exam-
ples about those asked questions. For the event of
EJE, we ask that
1. How many magnitude was initially reported by
the USGS, and what about the finally report?
2. List at least six countries that had dispatched
their rescue teams.
3. . . .

And for OWS, we ask that

Table 3: Macro-knowledge performance on four datasets

Dataset Our System Google News TDT
EJE 56.3% 23.2% 20.5%

OWS 62.2% 22.1% 15.7%
NBA 58.3% 18.9% 22.8%
ME 47.2% 26.3% 26.5%

1. What was the attitude of President Obama about
the protesters on October?
2. When did the protesters begin dressing “corpo-
rate zombies” in New York?
3. . . .

These questions can effectively help us to investi-
gate users’ micro-knowledge about the events.

As for macro-knowledge, unlike the retrieval
study that evaluates users’ ability to answer ques-
tions, we are interested in the use of story maps as
high-level overviews, allowing users to understand
the big picture. We believe that the ability to ex-
plain a certain issue is the only proof of understand-
ing. Therefore, the 64 volunteers are then asked to
write four paragraphs to summarize the four events
respectively. This time, all three systems’ (the struc-
tureless system presents the same content as our sys-
tem) results are provided and we let users choose the
sentences with complete freedom. Then we count
the number of sentences they employed from each
system and derive the average proportions. Accord-
ing to the results we can research on the macro-
knowledge that different systems deliver.

4.3.2 Results

We take the time cost and the average numbers of
correct answers of different systems to evaluate on
the micro-knowledge. Figure 4 shows the results.

We can find out that our system outperforms the
others significantly when users taking less time to
learn the knowledge. The failure of structureless
system proves that our work of storyline reconstruc-
tion makes lots of advantages to help reading.

On the other hand, Table 3 analyzes the statistics
of macro-knowledge. It’s also obvious that users
would like to refer to the sentences that our sys-
tem provides. A reasonable explanation is that the
story maps we generate can clarify users’ thoughts
and views on the complicated events.

1289



minutes 

C
o

r
re

c
t 

N
u

m
b

e
r
 

East Japan Earthquake 

minutes 

C
o

r
re

c
t 

N
u

m
b

e
r
 

Occupy Wall Street 

minutes 

C
o

r
re

c
t 

N
u

m
b

e
r 

NBA Lockout 

minutes 

C
o

r
re

c
t 

N
u

m
b

e
r 

Murdock's Eavesdropping 

Figure 4: Micro-knowledge performance on four datasets

Table 4: Average runtime of different datasets

Dataset EJE OWS NBA ME
|C| 1454 2357 1187 1042

Iterations 3.5 4.7 5.4 3.7
Runtime (ms) 1582 3214 3089 1314

4.4 Runtime Analysis

At last, we analyze the time performance of our
OPT-LSH algorithm on a PC server (16G RAM,
2.67GHz 4-processors CPU). The average iterations
for different initial value of d′ and the runtime are
shown in Table 4. The results are acceptable.

5 Conclusions

In this paper, we study the feasibility of automati-
cally generating cross-modal story maps and present
a novel solution to this challenging problem. Our
works mainly tackle the problems of storylines ex-
traction and reconstruction. Specifically, we inves-
tigate two requisite properties of an ideal storyline,
Coherence and Diversity. Then the convincing cri-
teria are devised to model both. We formalize the
task as an optimization problem and design an al-
gorithm to solve it. Classical IR and text analyzing
techniques like PageRank are fused into the unified
framework, and a near-optimal solution is employed
to deal with the NP-complete problem. Experiments
on web datasets show that our method is quite effi-
cient and competitive. We also verify that it brings
quicker, clearer and deeper comprehension to users.

As a future work, we plan to adapt parame-
ters automatically on the basis of different types of
datasets. Improving the layout quality of story map
by concerning the interactivity of different media
(e.g. images order) is also significant. Furthermore,
our framework is universal, so that the media other
than text and image can be adopted as well.

Acknowledgments

We sincerely thank all the anonymous reviewers for
their valuable comments, which have helped to im-
prove this paper greatly.

This work is supported by NSFC with Grant No.
61073081 and 61370054, and 973 Program with
Grant No. 2014CB340405.

1290



References
Agrawal R, Gollapudi S, Kannan A, et al. 2011 En-

riching textbooks with images. Proceedings of the 20th
ACM International Conference on Information and
Knowledge Management, ACM, pages 1847-1856.

Aliguliyev R M. 2009 A new sentence similarity mea-
sure and sentence based extractive technique for auto-
matic text summarization. Expert Systems with Appli-
cations, 2009, 36(4): 7764-7772.

Allan J, Gupta R, Khandelwal V. 2001 Temporal sum-
maries of new topics. Proceedings of the 24th Annual
International ACM Conference on SIGIR, pages 10-
18.

Cai D, Yu S, Wen J R, et al. 2003 VIPS: a visionbased
page segmentation algorithm. Microsoft Technical Re-
port, MSR-TR-2003-79.

Charikar M S. 2002 Similarity estimation techniques
from rounding algorithms. Proceedings of the 34th
Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing,
ACM, pages 380-388.

Chen Y, Jin O, Xue G R, et al. 2010 Visual contex-
tual advertising: Bringing textual advertisements to
images. Proceedings of the 24th AAAI Conference,
AAAI, pages 1314-1320.

Contractor D, Guo Y, Korhonen A. 2012. Using Argu-
mentative Zones for Extractive Summarization of Sci-
entific Articles. COLING, pages 663-678.

Evans D K, McKeown K, Klavans J L. 2005 Similarity-
based multilingual multi-document summarization.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, pages
1858C1860.

Feng Y, Lapata M. 2010 Topic models for image annota-
tion and text illustration. Human Language Technolo-
gies: The 2010 Annual Conference of NAACL, pages
831-839.

Goldstein J, Mittal V, Carbonell J, Kantrowitz M.
2000 Multi-document summarization by sentence
extraction. Proceedings of the 2000 NAACL-
ANLPWorkshop on Automatic summarization-
Volume 4. Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 40-48.

Goldstein J, Kantrowitz M, Mittal V, et al. 1999 Summa-
rizing text documents: sentence selection and evalua-
tion metrics. Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Interna-
tional ACM Conference on SIGIR, ACM, pages 121-
128.

Haghighi A, Vanderwende L. 2009. Exploring content
models for multi-document summarization. Proceed-
ings of Human Language Technologies: The 2009 An-
nual Conference of NAACL, Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 362-370.

Indyk P, Motwani R. 1998 Approximate nearest neigh-
bors: towards removing the curse of dimensionality.

Proceedings of the 30th Annual ACM Symposium on
Theory of Computing, ACM, pages 604-613.

Jiang T, Tan A H. 2006 Discovering image-text associa-
tions for cross-media web information fusion. Knowl-
edge Discovery in Databases: PKDD 2006, pages 561-
568.

Li L, Zhou K, Xue G R, et al. 2009 Enhancing diver-
sity, coverage and balance for summarization through
structure learning. Proceedings of the 18th Interna-
tional Conference on World Wide Web, ACM, pages
71-80.

Mandl T. 1998 Vague transformations in information
retrieval. ISI 1998, pages 312-325.

Mihalcea R, Tarau P. 2005 A language independent al-
gorithm for single and multiple document summariza-
tion. Proceedings of IJCNLP 2005.

Nallapati R, Feng A, Peng F, et al. 2004 Event threading
within news topics. Proceedings of the 13rd ACM In-
ternational Conference on Information and Knowledge
Management, ACM, pages 446-453.

Panjwani S, Micallef L, Fenech K, et al. 2009 Effects of
integrating digital visual materials with textbook scans
in the classroom. International Journal of Education
and Development using ICT, 2009, 5(3).

Radev D R, Jing H, et al. 2004 Centroid-based summa-
rization of multiple documents. Information Process-
ing & Management, 2004, 40(6): 919-938.

Radev D, Winkel A, Topper M. 2002 Multi document
centroid-based text summarization. ACL Demo Ses-
sion, 2002.

Shahaf D, Guestrin C. 2010 Connecting the dots be-
tween news articles. Proceedings of the 16th ACM
Conference on SIGKDD, ACM, pages 623-632.

Shahaf D, Guestrin C, Horvitz E. 2012 Trains of
thought: Generating information maps. Proceedings
of the 21st International Conference on World Wide
Web, ACM, pages 899-908.

Shannon C E. 2001 A mathematical theory of commu-
nication. ACM SIGMOBILE Mobile Computing and
Communications Review, 2001, 5(1): 3-55.

Wu Y, Chang E Y, Chang K C C, et al. 2004 Optimal
multimodal fusion for multimedia data analysis. Pro-
ceedings of the 12th annual ACM International Con-
ference on Multimedia, ACM, 2004: 572-579.

Xu S, Kong L, Zhang Y. 2013 A cross-media evolution-
ary timeline generation framework based on iterative
recommendation. Proceedings of the 3rd ACM confer-
ence on International Conference on Multimedia Re-
trieval, ACM, pages 73-80.

Yan R, Wan X, Otterbacher J, et al. 2011 Evolution-
ary timeline summarization: a balanced optimization
framework via iterative substitution. Proceedings of
the 34th International ACM Conference on SIGIR,
ACM, pages 745-754.

1291


