










































Chinese Zero Pronoun Resolution: Some Recent Advances


Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1360–1365,
Seattle, Washington, USA, 18-21 October 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Chinese Zero Pronoun Resolution: Some Recent Advances

Chen Chen and Vincent Ng
Human Language Technology Research Institute

University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, TX 75083-0688

{yzcchen,vince}@hlt.utdallas.edu

Abstract

We extend Zhao and Ng's (2007) Chinese
anaphoric zero pronoun resolver by (1) using
a richer set of features and (2) exploiting the
coreference links between zero pronouns dur-
ing resolution. Results on OntoNotes show
that our approach significantly outperforms
two state-of-the-art anaphoric zero pronoun re-
solvers. To our knowledge, this is the first
work to report results obtained by an end-to-
end Chinese zero pronoun resolver.

1 Introduction

A zero pronoun (ZP) is a gap in a sentence that is
found when a phonetically null form is used to refer
to a real-world entity. An anaphoric zero pronoun
(AZP) is a ZP that corefers with one or more preced-
ing noun phrases (NPs) in the associated text. Un-
like overt pronouns, ZPs lack grammatical attributes
that are useful for overt pronoun resolution such as
number and gender. This makes ZP resolution more
challenging than overt pronoun resolution.
We aim to improve the state of the art in Chinese

AZP resolution by proposing two extensions. First,
while previous approaches to this task have primarily
focused on employing positional and syntactic fea-
tures (e.g., Zhao and Ng (2007) [Z&N], Kong and
Zhou (2010) [K&Z]), we exploit a richer set of fea-
tures for capturing the context of an AZP and its
candidate antecedents. Second, to alleviate the diffi-
culty of resolving an AZP to an antecedent far away
from it, we break down the process into smaller, in-
termediate steps, where we allow coreference links
between AZPs to be established.
We apply our two extensions to a state-of-the-art

Chinese AZP resolver proposed by Z&N and eval-

uate the resulting resolver on the OntoNotes cor-
pus. Experimental results show that this resolver sig-
nificantly outperforms both Z&N's resolver and an-
other state-of-the-art resolver proposed by K&Z. It
is worth noting that while previous work on Chinese
ZP resolution has reported results obtained via gold
information (e.g., using gold AZPs and extracting
candidate antecedents and other features from gold
syntactic parse trees), this is the first work to report
the results of an end-to-end Chinese ZP resolver.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-

tion 2 describes the two baselineAZP resolvers. Sec-
tions 3 and 4 discuss our two extensions. We present
our evaluation results in Section 5 and our conclu-
sions in Section 6.

2 Baseline AZP Resolution Systems

An AZP resolution algorithm takes as input a set
of AZPs produced by an AZP identification system.
Below we first describe the AZP identifier we em-
ploy, followed by our two baseline AZP resolvers.

2.1 Anaphoric Zero Pronoun Identification

We employ two steps to identifyAZPs. In the extrac-
tion step, we heuristically extract candidate ZPs. In
the classification step, we train a classifier to distin-
guish AZPs from non-AZPs.
To implement the extraction step, we use Z&N's

and K&Z's observation: ZPs can only occur before a
VP node in a syntactic parse tree. However, accord-
ing to K&Z, ZPs do not need to be extracted from
every VP: if a VP node occurs in a coordinate struc-
ture or is modified by an adverbial node, then only its
parent VP node needs to be considered. We extract
ZPs from all VPs that satisfy the above constraints.

1360



Syntactic
features
(13)

whether z is the first gap in an IP clause; whether z is the first gap in a subject-less IP clause, and if
so, POS(w1); whether POS(w1) is NT; whether t1 is a verb that appears in a NP or VP; whether Pl is
a NP node; whether Pr is a VP node; the phrasal label of the parent of the node containing POS(t1);
whether V has a NP, VP or CP ancestor; whether C is a VP node; whether there is a VP node whose
parent is an IP node in the path from t1 to C.

Lexical
features
(13)

the words surrounding z and/or their POS tags, including w1, w−1, POS(w1), POS(w−1)+POS(w1),
POS(w1)+POS(w2), POS(w−2)+POS(w−1), POS(w1)+POS(w2)+POS(w3), POS(w−1)+w1, and
w−1+POS(w1); whether w1 is a transitive verb, an intransitive verb or a preposition; whether w−1 is
a transitive verb without an object.

Other fea-
tures (6)

whether z is the first gap in a sentence; whether z is in the headline of the text; the type of the clause in
which z appears; the grammatical role of z; whether w−1 is a punctuation; whether w−1 is a comma.

Table 1: Features for AZP identification. z is a zero pronoun. V is the VP node following z. wi is the ith word to the
right of z (if i is positive) or the ith word to the left of z (if i is negative). C is lowest common ancestor of w−1 and
w1. Pl and Pr are the child nodes of C that are the ancestors of w−1 and w1 respectively.

Features
between a
and z (4)

the sentence distance between a and z; the segment distance between a and z, where segments are
separated by punctuations; whether a is the closest NP to z; whether a and z are siblings in the
associated parse tree.

Features
on a (12)

whether a has an ancestor NP, and if so, whether this NP is a descendent of a's lowest ancestor IP;
whether a has an ancestor VP, and if so, whether this VP is a descendent of a's lowest ancestor IP;
whether a has an ancestor CP; the grammatical role of a; the clause type in which a appears; whether
a is an adverbial NP, a temporal NP, a pronoun or a named entity; whether a is in the headline of the
text.

Features
on z (10)

whether V has an ancestor NP, and if so, whether this NP node is a descendent of V's lowest ancestor
IP; whether V has an ancestor VP, and if so, whether this VP is a descendent of V's lowest ancestor IP;
whether V has an ancestor CP; the grammatical role of z; the type of the clause in which V appears;
whether z is the first or last ZP of the sentence; whether z is in the headline of the text.

Table 2: Features for AZP resolution in the Zhao and Ng (2007) baseline system. z is a zero pronoun. a is a candidate
antecedent of z. V is the VP node following z in the parse tree.

To implement the classification step, we train a
classifier using SVMlight (Joachims, 1999) to distin-
guishAZPs from non-AZPs. We employ 32 features,
13 of which were proposed by Z&N and 19 of which
were proposed by Yang and Xue (2010). A brief de-
scription of these features can be found in Table 1.

2.2 Two Baseline AZP Resolvers

The Zhao and Ng (2007) [Z&N] baseline. In
our implementation of the Z&N baseline, we use
SVMlight to train amention-pairmodel for determin-
ing whether an AZP z and a candidate antecedent
of z are coreferent. We consider all NPs preced-
ing z that do not have the same head as its parent
NP in the parse tree to be z's candidate antecedents.
We use Soon et al.'s (2001) method to create train-
ing instances: we create a positive instance between
an AZP, z, and its closest overt antecedent, and we
create a negative instance between z and each of the

intervening candidates. Each instance is represented
by the 26 features employed by Z&N. A brief de-
scription of these features can be found in Table 2.
During testing, we adopt the closest-first resolution
strategy, resolving an AZP to the closest candidate
antecedent that is classified as coreferent with it.1

The Kong and Zhou (2010) [K&Z] baseline.
K&Z employ a tree kernel-based approach to AZP
resolution. Like Z&N, K&Z (1) train a mention-
pair model for determining whether an AZP z and
a candidate antecedent of z are coreferent, (2) use
Soon et al.'s method to create training instances, and
(3) resolve an AZP to its closest coreferent can-
didate antecedent. Unlike Z&N, however, K&Z
use the SVMlight−TK learning algorithm (Moschitti,

1When resolving a goldAZP z, if none of the preceding can-
didate antecedents is classified as coreferent with it, we resolve
it to the candidate that has the highest coreference likelihood
with it. Here, we employ the signed distance from the SVM
hyperplane to measure the coreference likelihood.

1361



2006) to train their model, employing a parse sub-
tree known as a dynamic expansion tree (Zhou et al.,
2008) as a structured feature to represent an instance.

3 Extension 1: Novel Features

We propose three kinds of features to better capture
the context of an AZP, as described below.
Antecedent compatibility. AZPs are omitted sub-
jects that precede VP nodes in a sentence's parse
tree. From the VP node, we can extract its head verb
(Predz) and the head of its object NP (Obj), if any.
Note that Predz and Obj contain important contex-
tual information for an AZP.
Next, observe that if a NP is coreferent with an

AZP, it should be able to fill the AZP's gap and be
compatible with the gap's context. Consider the fol-
lowing example:

E1: 他们 那个服务 那 ∗pro∗
们

(They are trying that service. That means ∗pro∗
hope that our visitors can try it when they come in
September.)

The head of the VP following ∗pro∗ is
(hope). There are two candidate antecedents, 他们
(They) and 那个服务 (that service). If we try us-
ing them to fill this AZP's gap, we know based on
selectional preferences that 他们 (They hope)
makes more sense than那个服务 (that service
hope). We supply the AZP resolver with the fol-
lowing information to help it make these decisions.
First, we find the head word of each candidate an-
tecedent, Headc. Then we form two strings, Headc
+ Predz and Headc + Predz + Obj (if the object
of the VP is present). Finally, we employ them as bi-
nary lexical features, setting their feature values to 1
if and only if they can be extracted from the instance
under consideration. The training data can be used
to determine which of these features are useful.2

Narrative event chains. A narrative event chain is
a partially ordered set of events related by a common
protagonist (Chambers and Jurafsky, 2008). For ex-
ample, we can infer from the chain "borrow-s invest-
s spend-s lend-s" that a person who borrows (pre-

2We tried to apply Kehler et al.'s (2004) and Yang et
al.'s (2005) methods to learn Chinese selectional preferences
from unlabeled data, but without success.

sumably money) can invest it, spend it, or lend it to
other people.3 Consider the following example:

E2: 国家 ∗pro∗

(The country gives our department money, but all
∗pro∗ provides is exactly what we worked for.)

In E2, ∗pro∗ is coreferent with 国家 (The coun-
try), and the presence of the narrative event chain
− (gives−provides) suggests that the subjects
of the two events are likely to be coreferent.
However, given the unavailability of induced or

hand-crafted narrative chains in Chinese4, we make
the simplifying assumption that two verbs form a
lexical chain if they are lexically identical.5 We
create two features to exploit narrative event chains
for a candidate NP, c, if it serves as a subject or
object. Specifically, let the verb governing c be
Predc. The first feature, which encodes whether
narrative chains are present, has three possible val-
ues: 0 if Predc and Predz are not the same; 1 if
Predc and Predz are the same and c is a subject;
and 2 if Predc and Predz are the same and c is an
object. The second feature is a binary lexical fea-
ture, Predc+Predz+Subject/Object; its value is
1 if and only if Predc, Predz , and Subject/Object
can be found in the associated instance, where
Subject/Object denotes the grammatical role of c.
Final punctuation hint. We observe that the punc-
tuation (Punc) at the end of a sentence where an
AZP occurs also provides contextual information,
especially in conversation documents. In conversa-
tions, if a sentence containing an AZP ends with a

3"-s" denotes the fact that the protagonist serves as the gram-
matical subject in these events.

4We tried to construct narrative chains for Chinese using
both learning-based and dictionary-based methods. Specifi-
cally, we induced narrative chains using Chambers and Juraf-
sky's (2008) method, but were not successful owing to the lack
of an accurate Chinese coreference resolver. In addition, we
constructed narrative chains using both lexically identical verbs
and the synonyms obtained from a WordNet-like Chinese re-
source called Tongyicicilin, but they did not help improve reso-
lution performance.

5Experiments on the training data show that if an AZP and
a candidate antecedent are subjects of (different occurrences of)
the same verb, then the probability that the candidate antecedent
is coreferent with the AZP is 0.703. This result suggests that our
assumption, though somewhat simplistic, is useful as far as AZP
resolution is concerned.

1362



A:她
(A: How is her life now? )
B: ∗pro1∗
(B: ∗pro1∗ attitude toward life is plain and simple.)
A:
(A: Yes.)
A: ∗pro2∗ 国
(A: ∗pro2∗ is living in Beijing or the USA?)
B: ∗pro3∗ 国
(B: ∗pro3∗ is living in the USA.)

Figure 1: An illustrative example.

question mark, the mention this AZP refers to is less
likely to be the speaker himself6, as illustrated in the
following example:

E3: ∗pro∗
(Are ∗pro∗ cold in the winter?)

Here, ∗pro∗ refers to the person the speaker talks
with. To capture this information, we create a binary
lexical feature, Headc+Punc, whose value is 1 if
and only if Headc and Punc appear in the instance
under consideration.

4 Extension 2: Zero Pronoun Links

4.1 Motivation
Like an overt pronoun, a ZP whose closest overt
antecedent is far away from it is harder to resolve
than one that has a nearby overt antecedent. How-
ever, a corpus study of our training data reveals that
only 55.2% of the AZPs appear in the same sentence
as their closest overt antecedent, and 22.7% of the
AZPs appear two or more sentences away from their
closest overt antecedent.
Fortunately, we found that some of the difficult-

to-resolve AZPs (i.e., AZPs whose closest overt an-
tecedents are far away from them) are coreferential
with nearby ZPs. Figure 1, which consists of a set of
sentences from a conversation, illustrates this phe-
nomenon. There are three AZPs (denoted by ∗proi∗,
where 1 ≤ i ≤ 3), all of which refer to the overt
pronoun 她 (She) in the first sentence. In this ex-
ample, it is fairly easy to resolve ∗pro1∗ correctly,

6One may wonder whether we can similarly identify con-
straints on the antecedents of a ZP from clause conjunctions.
Our preliminary analysis suggests that the answer is no.

Training Test
Documents 1,391 172
Sentences 36,487 6,083
Words 756,063 110,034
ZPs 23,065 3,658
AZPs 12,111 1,713

Table 3: Statistics on the training and test sets.

since its antecedent is the subject of previous sen-
tence. However, ∗pro3∗ and its closest overt an-
tecedent她 (She) are four sentences apart. Together
with the fact that there are many intervening candi-
date antecedents, it is not easy for a resolver to cor-
rectly resolve ∗pro3∗.
To facilitate the resolution of ∗pro3∗ and difficult-

to-resolve AZPs in general, we propose the follow-
ing idea. We allow an AZP resolver to (1) establish
coreferent links between two consecutive ZPs (i.e.,
∗pro1∗−∗pro2∗ and ∗pro2∗−∗pro3∗ in our exam-
ple), which are presumably easy to establish because
the two AZPs involved are close to each other; and
then (2) treat them as bridges and infer that ∗pro3∗'s
overt antecedent is她 (She).

4.2 Modified Resolution Algorithm

We implement the aforementioned idea by modify-
ing the AZP resolver as follows. Whenwe resolve an
AZP z during testing, we augment the set of candi-
date antecedents for z with the set of AZPs preceding
z. Since we have only specified how to compute fea-
tures for instances composed of an AZP and an overt
candidate antecedent thus far (see Section 2.2), the
question, then, is: how can we compute features for
instances composed of two AZPs?
To answer this question, we first note that the

AZPs in a test text are resolved in a left-to-right man-
ner. Hence, by the time we resolve an AZP z, all the
AZPs preceding z have been resolved. Hence, when
we create a test instance i between z and one of the
preceding AZPs (say y), we create i as if the gap y
was filled with the smallest tree embedding the NP
to which y was resolved.
By allowing coreference links between (presum-

ably nearby) ZPs to be established, we can reason
over the resulting coreference links, treating them as
bridges that can help us find an overt antecedent that
is far away from an AZP.

1363



Gold AZP System AZP System AZP
Gold Parse Tree Gold Parse Tree System Parse Tree

System Variation R P F R P F R P F
K&Z Baseline System 38.0 38.0 38.0 17.7 22.4 19.8 10.6 13.6 11.9
Z&N Baseline System 41.5 41.5 41.5 22.4 24.4 23.3 12.7 14.2 13.4
Z&N Baseline + Contextual Features 46.2 46.2 46.2 25.2 27.5 26.3 14.4 16.1 15.2
Z&N Baseline + Zero Pronoun Links 42.7 42.7 42.7 22.5 24.6 23.5 13.2 14.8 13.9
Full System 47.7 47.7 47.7 25.3 27.6 26.4 14.9 16.7 15.7

Table 4: Resolution results on the test set.

5 Evaluation

5.1 Experimental Setup

Dataset. For evaluation, we employ the portion of
theOntoNotes 4.0 corpus that was used in the official
CoNLL-2012 shared task. The shared task dataset is
composed of a training set, a development set, and
a test set. Since only the training set and the de-
velopment set are annotated with ZPs, we use the
training set for classifier training and reserve the de-
velopment set for testing purposes. Statistics on the
datasets are shown in Table 3. In these datasets, a ZP
is marked as ∗pro∗. We consider a ZP anaphoric if
it is coreferential with a preceding ZP or overt NP.
Evaluation measures. We express the results of
both AZP identification and AZP resolution in terms
of recall (R), precision (P) and F-score (F).

5.2 Results and Discussion

The three major columns of Table 4 show the re-
sults obtained in three settings, which differ in
terms of whether gold/system AZPs and manu-
ally/automatically constructed parse trees are used to
extract candidate antecedents and features.
In the first setting, the resolvers are provided with

gold AZPs and gold parse trees. Results are shown in
column 1. As we can see, the Z&N baseline signifi-
cantly outperforms the K&Z baseline by 3.5% in F-
score.7 Adding the contextual features, the ZP links,
and both extensions to Z&N increase its F-score sig-
nificantly by 4.7%, 1.2% and 6.2%, respectively.
In the next two settings, the resolvers operate on

the system AZPs provided by the AZP identification
component. When gold parse trees are employed,
the recall, precision and F-score of AZP identifica-
tion are 50.6%, 55.1% and 52.8% respectively. Col-
umn 2 shows the results of the resolvers obtained

7All significance tests are paired t-tests, with p < 0.05.

when these automatically identified AZPs are used.
As we can see, Z&N again significantly outperforms
K&Z by 3.5% in F-score. Adding the contextual fea-
tures, the ZP links, and both extensions to Z&N in-
crease its F-score by 3.0%, 0.2% and 3.1%, respec-
tively. The system with contextual features and the
full system both yield results that are significantly
better than those of the Z&N baseline. A closer ex-
amination of the results reveals why the ZP links are
not effective in improving performance: when em-
ploying systemAZPs, many erroneous ZP linkswere
introduced to the system.
Column 3 shows the results of the resolvers when

we employ system AZPs and the automatically gen-
erated parse trees provided by the CoNLL-2012
shared task organizers to compute candidate an-
tecedents and features. Hence, these are end-to-end
ZP resolution results. To our knowledge, these are
the first reported results on end-to-end Chinese ZP
resolution. Using automatic parse trees, the perfor-
mance on AZP identification drops to 30.8% (R),
34.4% (P) and 32.5% (F). In this setting, Z&N still
outperforms K&Z significantly, though by a smaller
margin when compared to the previous settings. In-
corporating the contextual features, the ZP links, and
both extensions increase the F-score by 1.8%, 0.5%
and 2.3%, respectively. The system with contextual
features and the full system both yield results that are
significantly better than those of the Z&N baseline.

6 Conclusions

We proposed two extensions to a state-of-the-
art Chinese AZP resolver proposed by Zhao and
Ng (2007). Experimental results on the OntoNotes
dataset showed that the resulting resolver signifi-
cantly improved both Zhao and Ng's and Kong and
Zhou's (2010) resolvers, regardless of whether gold
or system AZPs and syntactic parse trees are used.

1364



Acknowledgments

We thank the three anonymous reviewers for their
detailed and insightful comments on an earlier draft
of the paper. This work was supported in part by
NSF Grants IIS-1147644 and IIS-1219142. Any
opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this paper are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views or official poli-
cies, either expressed or implied, of NSF.

References
Nathanael Chambers and Dan Jurafsky. 2008. Unsu-

pervised learning of narrative event chains. In Pro-
ceedings of the 46th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, pages 787--797.

Thorsten Joachims. 1999. Making large-scale SVM
learning practical. In Bernhard Scholkopf and Alexan-
der Smola, editors, Advances in Kernel Methods - Sup-
port Vector Learning, pages 44--56. MIT Press.

Andrew Kehler, Douglas Appelt, Lara Taylor, and Alek-
sandr Simma. 2004. Competitive self-trained pronoun
interpretation. In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 2004:
Short Papers, pages 33--36.

Fang Kong and Guodong Zhou. 2010. A tree kernel-
based unified framework for Chinese zero anaphora
resolution. In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 882--891.

Alessandro Moschitti. 2006. Making tree kernels prac-
tical for natural language processing. In Proceedings
of the 11th Conference of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 113-
-120.

Wee Meng Soon, Hwee Tou Ng, and Daniel Chung Yong
Lim. 2001. A machine learning approach to corefer-
ence resolution of noun phrases. Computational Lin-
guistics, 27(4):521--544.

Yaqin Yang and Nianwen Xue. 2010. Chasing the ghost:
recovering empty categories in the Chinese Treebank.
In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference
on Computational Linguistics: Posters, pages 1382--
1390.

Xiaofeng Yang, Jian Su, and Chew Lim Tan. 2005. Im-
proving pronoun resolution using statistics-based se-
mantic compatibility information. In Proceedings of
the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 165--172.

Shanheng Zhao and Hwee Tou Ng. 2007. Identification
and resolution of Chinese zero pronouns: A machine

learning approach. In Proceedings of the 2007 Joint
Conference on Empirical Methods on Natural Lan-
guage Processing and Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning, pages 541--550.

GuoDong Zhou, Fang Kong, and Qiaoming Zhu. 2008.
Context-sensitive convolution tree kernel for pronoun
resolution. In Proceedings of the 3rd International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing,
pages 25--31.

1365


