










































Predicting the Presence of Discourse Connectives


Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 914–923,
Seattle, Washington, USA, 18-21 October 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Predicting the Presence of Discourse Connectives

Gary Patterson and Andrew Kehler
Department of Linguistics

UC San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0108

La Jolla, CA 92093
{gpatterson,akehler}@ucsd.edu

Abstract

We present a classification model that predicts
the presence or omission of a lexical connec-
tive between two clauses, based upon linguis-
tic features of the clauses and the type of dis-
course relation holding between them. The
model is trained on a set of high frequency
relations extracted from the Penn Discourse
Treebank and achieves an accuracy of 86.6%.
Analysis of the results reveals that the most in-
formative features relate to the discourse de-
pendencies between sequences of coherence
relations in the text. We also present results
of an experiment that provides insight into the
nature and difficulty of the task.

1 Introduction

A central goal of natural language generation and
summarization systems is to produce interpretable,
coherent text that rivals material a human would pro-
duce. Doing so requires that systems not only have
the ability to generate clauses that are grammatical
and easy for people to process, but also the ability
to employ the appropriate discourse structuring de-
vices needed to yield fluid transitions between these
clauses. This is a tricky issue in that it requires that
a balance be achieved between the opposing goals
of communicative expressiveness and economy. On
the one hand, insufficient cueing of inter-clausal re-
lationships can lead to a discourse that is at best dif-
ficult to process, and at worst misunderstood. On the
other hand, too much explicit marking can result in
a clunky and even redundant sounding discourse.

Here we consider the question of when to ex-
plicitly mark the COHERENCE RELATIONS in dis-
course, that is, the inter-clausal relationships that

the language producer intends the interpreter to in-
fer between the meanings of clauses (Hobbs, 1979;
Mann and Thompson, 1988; Kehler, 2002; Asher
and Lascarides, 2003). Consider, for example, the
EXPLANATION coherence relation that holds in (1),
in which the second clause provides a cause or rea-
son for the eventuality described in the first:

(1) a. Max will visit Australia this summer be-
cause his father is turning 65.

b. Max will visit Australia this summer. His
father is turning 65.

As example (1) shows, coherence relations can
be marked explicitly—by using lexical connectives
such as coordinating or subordinating conjunctions
(e.g., because in 1a) or certain types of prepositional
or adverbial phrases—or left implicit as in (1b). Ei-
ther way, establishing the relation itself requires the
reader to go through a complex inferential process
necessitating that a variety of assumptions be made,
typically supported by context and/or world knowl-
edge, that are not explicitly asserted by the actual
linguistic material. In (1), for instance, such infer-
ences would include that Max intends to see his fa-
ther when he travels to Australia, that his father re-
sides in that country, and that the birthday will tak-
ing place during the time of the visit. Importantly,
the role of the connective in (1a) is therefore not to
establish that an EXPLANATION relation holds. In-
stead, connectives serve the function of directing the
addressee’s inference processes toward a smaller set
of coherence relations than might otherwise be avail-
able, among other possible roles.

The fact that both (1a) and (1b) are felicitous may
lead us to believe that the choice to insert a connec-
tive between clauses is simply optional. This is not

914



always the case, however. Sometimes the use of a
connective is required, since omitting it would likely
result in incorrect inferences being drawn by the ad-
dressee. For example, the use of when in (2a) im-
plies a backward temporal ordering of events, which
is reversed if the connective is left out, as in (2b).

(2) a. Maggie fell over in shock when Saul of-
fered to help her.

b. Maggie fell over in shock. Saul offered to
help her.

On the other hand, a connective can seem unnec-
essary if the relation between the two clauses is suf-
ficiently implied by other cues in the text. For in-
stance, since the act of throwing a vase against a
concrete wall would normally be expected to cause
the vase to break, the adverbial phrase as a result
in (3a), while felicitous, seems overly verbose and
perhaps even redundant.

(3) a. Susan threw the fragile vase against the
concrete wall. As a result, it broke.

b. Susan threw the fragile vase against the
concrete wall. It broke.

The foregoing examples suggest that the appropri-
ateness of including an explicit connective is inher-
ently gradient, and is in fact correlated with ease of
inference: the more difficult recovering the correct
relation would be without a connective, the more
necessary it is to include one. This characterization
in turn suggests that predicting whether a connec-
tive should be included might be a difficult problem
for an NLP system to address, since current-day sys-
tems lack the requisite world knowledge and capac-
ity for inference that would be necessary to evaluate
the ease with which coherence relations can be es-
tablished on arbitrary examples. However, it is also
possible that the decision to include a connective de-
pends in part on stylistic and other types of factors as
well, such that there might be predictive information
in the kinds of shallow linguistic and textual features
that systems do have access to. This is the question
taken up in this work: Given two adjacent clauses
in a text, the type of coherence relation holding be-
tween them and a candidate connective that could be
used to signal the relation, we ask how well a sys-
tem can predict whether or not that connective was
used by the author of the text. This capability would

be useful to generation systems as a post-cursor to
discourse-level message planning and sentence real-
ization processes, as well as summarization systems
that take existing sentences and have to reconsider
connective placement upon reassembling them.

To our knowledge, there is no work in the lit-
erature that addresses this issue directly. There is
a growing body of research (Sporleder and Las-
carides, 2008; Pitler et al., 2009; Lin et al., 2009;
Zhou et al., 2010) that focuses on building super-
vised models for classifying implicit relations using
a variety of contextual features, such as the polar-
ity of clauses, the semantic class and tense/aspect of
verbs, and information from syntactic parses. With
respect to explicit relations, Elhadad and McKe-
own (1990) sketch a procedure to select an appro-
priate connective to link two propositions as part of
a larger text generation system, using linguistic fea-
tures derived from the sentences. The procedure se-
lects the best connective from a given set of candi-
dates, but does not allow for the option of leaving
the relation implicit. More recently, Asr and Dem-
berg (2012a) look at both explicit and implicit re-
lations, and make the observation that certain rela-
tion types are more likely to be realized explicitly
than others. Relatedly, Asr and Demberg (2012b)
discuss which connectives are the strongest predic-
tors of which relation types. However, there is no
work of which we are aware that specifically pre-
dicts whether connectives should be used or omitted.

2 Classification Model

Our model is a binary classifier trained on data ex-
tracted from the Penn Discourse Treebank (PDTB;
Prasad et al. (2008)), a large-scale corpus of an-
notated discourse coherence relations covering the
one-million-word Wall Street Journal corpus of the
Penn Treebank (Marcus et al., 1993).

2.1 Data

For every relation in the PDTB, the following com-
ponents are annotated: (i) the connective used to
signal the relation; (ii) the textual spans of the two
clausal arguments that constitute the relation; (iii)
the semantic sense of the relation, according to a hi-
erarchical tagset of senses; and (iv) the attribution of
the assertions and beliefs expressed in the text to the

915



relevant individuals. Crucially for our purposes, for
the implicit relations the corpus indicates the most
suitable connective if the relation were instead sig-
naled explicitly. For example, the annotators de-
cided that the best connective to signal the REASON
relation in (4) would be because, rather than other
plausible candidates, such as as or since.

(4) It’s a shame their meeting never took place.
[IMPLICIT=because] Mr. Katzenstein certainly
would have learned something. (WSJ0037)

In total, there are 18,459 explicit and 16,053 im-
plicit relations annotated in the PDTB. We excluded
a subset of these cases in training our model based
on two criteria. First, whereas explicit relations in
the PDTB can hold between spans of text that ei-
ther are or are not adjacent, we excluded the non-
adjacent cases. This was done to ensure consistency
in discourse structure between the relations consid-
ered in the model, since only the implicit relations
between adjacent clauses were annotated. Second,
we excluded relations that have lower frequency se-
mantic senses or use low frequency connectives. As
a result, the model considers only the eight most
common semantic senses of relations, which in to-
tal account for just less than 90% of the relations
in the corpus.1 Further, for each relation, we only
consider the connectives that account for more than
5% of the instances of that relation. After applying
these filters, the resulting corpus comprised 10,039
explicit and 11,690 implicit relations.

Table 1 shows the eight relations that were mod-
eled. The majority of these relations exist at the
middle layer of the three-level hierarchy of seman-
tic senses annotated in the PDTB.2 Relations at the
highest level – representing the four major semantic
categories COMPARISON, CONTINGENCY, EXPAN-
SION and TEMPORAL – were deemed too broad to
be of practical use in a generation system, whereas
the lowest-level senses were considered either un-
necessarily fine-grained or have too few tokens in
the corpus to allow for meaningful statistical model-
ing. Two exceptions were made for REASON and
RESULT relations, which do appear at the lowest

1The next most common relation type, CONDITION, was ex-
cluded because it is always marked explicitly in the corpus.

2For more details of the PDTB sense hierarchy, see Prasad
et al. (2008).

level in the PDTB hierarchy (beneath the CAUSE cat-
egory). These were included because they are both
attested frequently in the corpus and are undeniably
contrastive: with REASON, the second clause pro-
vides an explanation for the proposition expressed
in the first clause, whereas with RESULT, the sec-
ond clause describes a consequence of the first. It
is reasonable to want these relations to be modeled
separately.

Sections 2-22 of the corpus were used as the train-
ing set, and sections 23 and 24 were used as the test
set. Sections 0 and 1 of the corpus were set aside
as a development set for feature design and parame-
ter optimization. The training set comprised 18,218
tokens, distributed as shown in Table 1.

Relation Type Explicit Implicit
Asynchronous 1,120 (70%) 469 (30%)
Conjunction 2,940 (61%) 1,906 (39%)
Contrast 2,044 (66%) 1,054 (34%)
Instantiation 203 (16%) 1,093 (84%)
Reason 771 (28%) 1,938 (72%)
Restatement 76 (4%) 2,081 (96%)
Result 354 (21%) 1,295 (79%)
Synchronous 748 (86%) 126 (14%)
Total 8,256 (45%) 9,962 (55%)

Table 1: Distribution of Training Set

As Table 1 shows, the preference for an overt
connective varies significantly according to the type
of relation. The ASYNCHRONOUS, CONJUNCTION,
CONTRAST and SYNCHRONOUS relations are real-
ized explicitly the majority of the time, whereas IN-
STANTIATION, REASON, RESTATEMENT and RE-
SULT relations are more often left implicit. We can
also see that some relation types (such as RESTATE-
MENT, INSTANTIATION and SYNCHRONOUS) ex-
hibit a strong preference to be realized in a particular
form, whereas other types show more variability in
whether they are realized explicitly or implicitly.

The distribution of tokens in Table 1 can be used
to determine a baseline accuracy against which the
performance of our model is evaluated. A naive
model that uses the semantic type of the coherence
relation as the sole predictive feature makes a bi-
nary classification based simply on the majority cat-
egory for that relation type. A baseline model using
this methodology results in classification accuracy
of 77.0% over the held-out test set.

916



2.2 Model

We built a composite model containing binary logis-
tic regression classifiers for each coherence relation,
trained on a set of linguistic features extracted from
each token in the training set. Logistic regression
was chosen because it produces a model with high
performance and results that are easily interpretable.
The features included in the model fall into the fol-
lowing three broad classes: relation-level, argument-
level, and discourse-level.

Relation-level features
In addition to the semantic type of the relation, we
include as a feature the connective used to signal the
relation in the text (or, for the implicit relations, the
connective indicated by the annotators as most ap-
propriate). This feature (Connect) is included based
upon the observation that connectives vary as to their
rates of being realized explicitly—even for connec-
tives that signal relations with the same semantic
sense. Consequently, given a relation of a partic-
ular semantic type, an indication of the best fitting
connective may be a consistent predictor of whether
or not this relation is realized explicitly.

We also include a feature reflecting the attribution
of the relation. As mentioned above, the PDTB is
annotated to describe the attribution of the proposi-
tions expressed within a relation to individuals or en-
tities in the text. For example, in the relation shown
in (5), the first clause contains a direct quotation,
clearly attributing the proposition expressed to the
individual Rep. Stark. However, the second clause
contains no such indication of attribution to an entity
in the text, and so the proposition is instead assumed
to be asserted by the writer of the article.

(5) “No magic bullet will be discovered next year,
an election year,” says Rep. Stark. But 1991
could be a window for action. (WSJ0314)

Inspection of the corpus data suggests that when one
argument of a relation contains a proposition that is
attributable to an individual in the text (either by di-
rect or indirect quotation) but the other is assumed
by default to be attributed to the author, this rela-
tion is more likely to be realized explicitly. This
may well have an explanation based on sentence
processing: the intervening attribution phrase ‘says
Rep. Stark’ may serve as a distraction, with the re-

sult that the intended coherence relation is harder to
infer without a connective. Consequently, we in-
clude a factor (AttMismatch) indicating if the two
arguments are not attributed to the perspective of the
same individual.

Finally, in any particular genre there may be for-
mulaic prose whose systematic features can be ex-
ploited by a system tasked with generating text
within that same genre. In this case, the genre rep-
resented by the corpus data comprises copy-edited
articles from the Wall Street Journal, many of which
refer to company earnings reports or other financial
events, and are written in a highly prescribed style.
Accordingly, we may suspect that there is a greater
prevalence of implicit relations in these cases, since
the reader is assumed to be habituated to the way
in which the information in this type of article is
presented. Consequently, for the domain at hand
we include a binary feature (Financial) indicating
whether the relation pertains to financial informa-
tion. This feature takes the value 1 if the textual
spans of both arguments in the relation contain per-
centage amounts or dollar figures.

Argument-level features
For each relation, the model includes features cap-
turing the size or complexity of each of its two argu-
ments. The arguments were identified by the annota-
tors according to a principle of minimality, whereby
the annotations indicate the shortest text spans nec-
essary for the appropriate coherence relation to be
interpreted. However, the annotators also indicated
other text that is in some way relevant to the interpre-
tation of the arguments. This supplementary mate-
rial can include unrestricted relative clauses, apposi-
tives, or other parenthetical information. Our obser-
vation of the data indicates that relations which have
supplementary material annotated alongside one or
both of their arguments are more often than not re-
alized explicitly with connectives. As a result, we
include binary features (Supp1, Supp2) indicating
whether the first and second arguments of the rela-
tion include such supplementary information. We
also include features (Length1, Length2) reflecting a
simple measure of the length of each argument, cal-
culated as the log transformed count of the number
of words in the arguments’ minimal text spans.

One measure of the complexity of an argument

917



is the number of clauses it contains. It might be
thought that the greater the syntactic complexity of
an argument, the more likely it is that the relation
containing it is marked explicitly, so as to give the
reader more help in drawing the correct intended
inference between the arguments. As a proxy for
the number of clauses in each argument, we include
features (NPSbj1, NPSbj2) equal to the total num-
ber of main, subordinate, or complement clause sub-
jects included within the textual spans of the re-
spective arguments, determined using the syntactic
parses available in the corpus data.

We also consider whether the underlying richness
of the informational content expressed by the ar-
gument may influence the presence or omission of
a connective. Considering the way in which read-
ers process text in real time, it would intuitively
be more difficult to infer the intended relation be-
tween two clauses without the aid of a connective if
the arguments themselves had greater processing de-
mands owing to increased lexical retrieval, reference
and anaphor resolution requirements, and so forth.
Given this intuition, we may expect that arguments
with higher density of information are correlated
with the increased use of connectives as a means
of facilitating the inference of the relation type and
thereby easing the overall processing burden. Con-
sequently, our model includes features (ContDen-
sity1, ContDensity2) calculated as the ratio of the
count of words in each argument that are content
words (i.e. ignoring articles, prepositions and pro-
nouns), divided by the total number of words, as
well as features (PronDensity1, PronDensity2) cal-
culated as the ratio of pronouns in each argument to
the number of noun phrases.

Finally, the accessibility of the subject of the sec-
ond argument in a relation may play a role in de-
termining whether the relation is explicitly marked.
Specifically, informal observation of the data sug-
gests that there is a tendency for the second ar-
gument of an implicit relation to begin with a
longer, contentful noun phrase, rather than a pro-
noun. Consequently, our model includes a binary
feature (FirstA2Pron) indicating whether the first
word in the second argument is a pronoun.

Discourse-level features
The final class of features takes account of the way

in which a relation fits into the broader discourse
structure in the text. In their work on implicit re-
lation classification, Pitler et al. (2008) identified
various dependencies between bigram sequences of
explicitly- and implicitly-realized relations of differ-
ent semantic types. These results suggest that the
semantic type and the presence of a connective in
one relation may be predictive of whether or not
the following relation in the text is marked with a
connective. Consequently, we include features in-
dicating the semantic type of the relation occurring
immediately prior in the text (PrevSemType), and
whether this relation was marked implicitly or ex-
plicitly (PrevForm).

The other discourse-level features take account of
the dependencies between the relation in question
and its neighboring relations in the text. As part of
a supervised learning model developed to classify
the semantic class of implicit relations in the PDTB,
Lin et al. (2009) found features based on the two
main types of discourse dependency pattern in the
corpus (‘shared’ and ‘fully embedded’ arguments) to
be highly predictive. We speculatively include simi-
lar features in our model to see if they are helpful in
predicting the presence of connectives.

The first type of dependency between adjacent re-
lations is one where the second argument of one re-
lation is also the first argument of the following re-
lation, as in Figure 1. Accordingly, we include two
binary features indicating whether an argument is
shared with the preceding relation (Arg1isPrevArg2)
or the following relation (Arg2isNextArg1) in the
corpus.

Figure 1: Shared argument

The other main type of discourse dependency, a
‘fully embedded’ dependency, is one where an entire
relation (including both of its arguments) is com-
pletely embedded within one argument of an adja-
cent relation in the text, as in Figure 2. To capture

918



this type of dependency structure, we include two
binary features (EmbedNext, EmbedPrev) indicating
whether the current relation is embedded within ei-
ther one of its adjacent relations. We also include
two binary features (Arg1Embed, Arg2Embed) to in-
dicate whether either argument of the current rela-
tion completely contains an embedded relation.

Figure 2: Fully embedded argument

The two relations in (6) exemplify a typical in-
stantiation of this embedded dependency structure.

(6) It is an overwhelming job. [IMPLICIT= be-
cause] There are so many possible proportions
when you consider how many things are made
out of eggs and butter and milk. (WSJ0261)

In this example, there is an implicit REASON relation
holding between the two complete sentences, and
an explicit SYNCHRONOUS relation signaled by the
connective when holding between the two clauses
of the second sentence. Since the REASON relation
fully embeds another relation within its second argu-
ment, the feature Arg2Embed for this relation takes
the value 1. For the SYNCHRONOUS relation, the
feature EmbedPrev takes the value 1 since the entire
relation is fully contained within the second argu-
ment of the preceding relation in the text.

3 Results and Evaluation

3.1 Classification accuracy
The model was evaluated by assessing the accuracy
of its predictions against the unseen test set. The
model achieved an overall accuracy of 86.6%, an im-
provement of 9.6% above baseline.3 Table 2 shows
the model accuracy for each relation type, together
with the baseline performance based on the majority
category for that type.

3During the preparation of the final version of this paper,
a model was trained with an SVM using the same set of fea-
tures, which resulted in a modest improvement in performance
(87.3%). The ensuing discussion of results, however, will con-
tinue to pertain to the regression model.

Relation Type Accuracy Baseline
Asynchronous 91.7% 79.7%
Conjunction 84.5% 78.2%

Contrast 81.1% 65.0%
Instantiation 83.3% 82.5%

Reason 88.2% 68.3%
Restatement 95.2% 95.2%

Result 84.4% 76.9%
Synchronous 96.5% 92.9%

Total 86.6% 77.0%

Table 2: Classification Accuracy by Relation Type

The model achieved an improvement in accuracy
across all relation types but one: RESTATEMENT re-
lations, for which the baseline accuracy was already
close to 100%. The greatest improvement in accu-
racy was seen for REASON relations, for which the
model accuracy was 19.9% above baseline. We now
discuss which of the factors in each of the feature
classes turned out to be the most predictive.

3.2 Significant predictors

We trained the model on subsets of the features to
investigate the predictive power of the different fea-
ture classes. The accuracy assessed against the test
set is shown in Table 3.

Feature Class # Features Accuracy
Relation Level 4 80.4%

Argument Level 11 77.2%
Discourse Level 8 80.9%
Rel + Arg Levels 15 82.8%
Rel + Disc Levels 12 85.1%
Arg + Disc Levels 19 82.4%

All Features 23 86.6%

Table 3: Classification Accuracy by Feature Class

The classes of Relation-level and Discourse-level
features each separately yielded significantly better
performance over baseline (one-sided tests of pro-
portion, z=2.50 and z=2.92, respectively; p<0.01
for both), whereas the Argument-level features alone
performed only marginally better than baseline.
However, all three classes of features are needed to
attain the highest model performance.

Across all relation types, we found that the fea-
tures relating to the discourse dependencies between
a relation and its neighbors were the strongest and

919



most consistent predictors of whether that relation
is explicit or implicit. A relation that is fully em-
bedded within a single argument of an adjacent re-
lation in the text (indicated by the features Em-
bedPrev and EmbedNext) has a much higher like-
lihood of being signaled explicitly. Conversely, a
relation that fully contains another relation within
one of its arguments (indicated by Arg1Embed and
Arg2Embed) has a significantly higher likelihood of
being implicit. The result is consistent with the em-
bedded discourse dependency shown in (6), in which
the implicit REASON relation fully contains an ex-
plicit SYNCHRONOUS relation within its second ar-
gument.

The model also found that the features which in-
dicate whether a relation has shared arguments with
either the preceding or following relations in the text
(Arg1isPrevArg2, Arg2isNextArg1) are both predic-
tors of an implicit outcome. In other words, if a
clause in the text serves as the argument for two ad-
jacent relations, then both of these relations are more
likely to be realized implicitly.

The next most predictive feature was the connec-
tive used to signal the relation (Connect). This fea-
ture was a significant predictor for every relation
type. Eliminating this feature from the final model
reduces the overall accuracy by 2.5%. The other
features in the model were less significantly predic-
tive, and generally worked in the expected direction.
Longer arguments (Length1, Length2) and the in-
dication of a financial genre (Financial) were gen-
erally associated with predicted implicit outcomes,
whereas the presence of supplementary material
(Supp1, Supp2), a mismatch of attribution (AttMis-
match), more ‘content rich’ arguments (ContDen-
sity1, ContDensity2), and a pronoun appearing as
the first word of the second argument (FirstA2Pron)
all tended to increase the odds in favor of a predicted
explicit outcome.

The features indexing syntactic complexity
(NPSbj1 and NPSbj2) were found to be marginally
predictive of an explicit outcome for most relation
types, but the overall effect in the model was rel-
atively small—resulting in only a 0.2% improve-
ment—meaning that the level of performance re-
ported on this task depends very little on the model
having access to full syntactic parses. Somewhat un-
expectedly, the factors indicating the semantic type

of the previous relation in the text (PrevSemType)
and whether or not this relation was explicitly sig-
naled by a connective (PrevForm) were found not to
be significant predictors. Our analysis of the training
data confirmed the findings of Pitler et al. (2008) in
that certain bigrams of coherence relation types are
significantly more prevalent than others. However,
the differences in the frequencies were evidently not
sufficiently correlated with the explicit/implicit dis-
tinction as to make the type or form of the previous
relation a significant feature in the model.

3.3 Error analysis

We analyzed a sample of cases incorrectly predicted
by the model to see if there were any consistent
traits. We focus our attention here on the CONTRAST
relations, which is the type with the lowest model
accuracy. The majority of these errors were cases
where the model predicted that the relation would be
explicit—the most likely outcome for a CONTRAST
relation—whereas in the corpus the intended rela-
tion was signaled by linguistic cues other than an
overt connective. For instance, the strong syntactic
parallelism of the two arguments in (7), and the op-
posite polarity of the lexical items delight and detri-
ment, combine to induce a contrastive relationship
without the need for a connective.

(7) To the delight of some doctors, the bill dropped
a plan passed by the Finance Committee.
[IMPLICIT=but] To the detriment of many low-
income people, efforts to boost Medicaid fund-
ing were also stricken. (WSJ2372)

Other ways that the contrast relation is signaled
implicitly include contrasting temporal modifiers (It
wasn’t so long ago X. Now, Y), repetition of the
predicate in the argument (. . . it could only happen
once. . . . it’s happening again), or even by the use
of punctuation such as a semicolon. Previous work
(Sporleder and Lascarides, 2008; Lin et al., 2009)
has sought to make use of such cues to identify and
classify implicit relations in the text. The results
of this brief error analysis suggest that such indi-
rect cues could also be useful factors in determining
whether to choose to use a connective for a given
relation type when generating text.

920



4 Judgment Study

The system described in the last section outper-
formed a baseline majority-category classifier on the
task of deciding whether a relation should be made
explicit or left implicit. This result might be con-
sidered surprising, for two reasons that we have
previously discussed. First, the system was able
to make this improvement using relatively shallow
features extracted from the text, without access to
the richer types of contextual information and world
knowledge required for establishing coherence rela-
tions during actual discourse comprehension. Sec-
ond, the data suggest that the appropriateness of in-
cluding a connective is not as cut-and-dried as a bi-
nary classification task may suggest, but is instead
gradient, with many cases for which the inclusion
of a connective appears to be optional. Obviously,
the PDTB does not avail us of the opportunity to
evaluate this gradience directly (or even use a 3-
way required/optional/redundant distinction), since
the producer of the actual text samples in the corpus
had to ultimately decide whether or not to use a con-
nective. The apparent optionality of many examples
thus puts limits on how well we can expect a system
to perform, since there is no way to reliably predict
cases in which the decision is made arbitrarily.

This observation leads us to ask how well humans
perform on this same task. Do they make highly
accurate predictions, or does optionality limit their
performance? In order to shed light on this question,
we carried out an experiment to see how consistently
humans choose to use lexical connectives to signal
intended coherence relations between clauses.

4.1 Methodology

We selected a balanced sample of 100 clause-pair
tokens from the test set, reflecting the distribution of
the different major relation types (six relations were
represented in the sample). This sample comprised
44 explicit and 56 implicit tokens, consistent with
the distribution in the overall corpus. The experi-
mental stimulus for each item consisted of two ver-
sions of the same clause pair, one including a con-
nective between the clauses, and the other without.
For relations that were realized explicitly in the cor-
pus, as in (8a), the alternative implicit stimulus omit-
ted the connective and showed the second argument

as a separate sentence, as in (8b).

(8) a. Mr. Nesbit also said the FDA has asked
Bolar Pharmaceutical Co. to recall at the
retail level its urinary tract antibiotic, but
so far the company hasn’t complied with
that request.

b. Mr. Nesbit also said the FDA has asked
Bolar Pharmaceutical Co. to recall at the
retail level its urinary tract antibiotic. So
far the company hasn’t complied with that
request.

For the implicit relations, the alternative explicit
stimulus for the experiment used the connective an-
notated in the PDTB as the one being most appro-
priate. For each item, a short passage was created
including the preceding and following sentences in
the text to serve as context. The relative ordering
of the presentation of the explicit and implicit forms
was randomized, without regard to the actual corpus
outcome for that stimulus.

Using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, judges were
presented with the two passages for each item. They
were told to assume that the passages had the same
intended meaning, and were asked to judge which
of the two sounded more natural. We collected 30
responses for each item.4

4.2 Results

We classified each experimental item as either ex-
plicit or implicit, based on the majority response of
the judges. Using this classification, the judges’ re-
sponses matched the actual outcomes in 68 of the
100 cases.5 The distribution of correctly-judged
items across relation types is shown in Table 4.
The judgments for REASON relations most closely
matched the corpus outcomes, with 9 out of the 12
explicit tokens and all 6 implicit tokens in the cor-

4The data from a small number of judges were discarded
due to an unreasonably fast response time or because their judg-
ments showed a unanimous preference across every experimen-
tal item. This left a total of 2,925 judgments over the 100 ex-
perimental items, from 113 different judges.

5Using the majority response of judges for each item to
measure classification accuracy is consistent with the statisti-
cal model, whereby probabilities are rounded up or down to ar-
rive at a binary classification. If accuracy is instead calculated
in terms of average correctness over the individual responses,
performance drops to 60.4%.

921



pus correctly identified by the judges. The lowest
scoring relation type was CONTRAST, for which 9
of the 10 explicit tokens were judged correctly but
only 4 out of the 11 implicit tokens were correctly
identified.

Relation Type Items Correct Accuracy
Conjunction 22 15 68.2%

Contrast 21 13 61.9%
Instantiation 9 6 66.7%

Reason 18 15 83.3%
Restatement 16 9 62.5%

Result 14 10 64.2%
Total 100 68 68.0%

Table 4: Results of Mechanical Turk study

There were hence 32 experimental items for
which the majority response by the judges did not
match the actual corpus outcome. In two-thirds
(21) of these cases, the judges indicated a prefer-
ence for a connective when the relation in the corpus
was implicit. These mismatches occurred across the
range of relation types. This suggests that the judges
tended to err on the side on inserting a connective,
even when it may not have been strictly necessary.
While the reason for this is not clear, one possibility
is that the texts reflected the genre and the highly-
prescribed editing guidelines for the newspaper arti-
cles that comprise the corpus, under which unneces-
sary or redundant words are excised. Without such
pressures to edit the copy down to a minimal form,
the judges may have preferred to see the relations
signaled explicitly in cases in which either decision
would result in a felicitous passage.

In the remaining 11 cases, for which the relations
in the corpus were explicitly signaled with a connec-
tive, the judges on average indicated a preference to
leave the relation implicit. Interestingly, all of these
cases were either CONJUNCTION or CONTRAST re-
lations, semantic types which are usually signaled
explicitly with a connective. We inspected these
cases to ascertain why judges may have preferred
an outcome opposite to that actually seen in the text.
We found that all 7 of the CONTRAST mismatches
were instances where the second argument of the re-
lation in the corpus was a sentence beginning with
the coordinating conjunction but, as in (9).
Similarly, three of the mismatched CONJUNCTION

(9) At those levels stocks are set up to be ham-
mered by index arbitragers. But nobody knows
at what level the futures and stocks will open
today. (WSJ2300)

relations had a sentential second argument begin-
ning with the conjunction and. The responses of
the judges to these cases may simply reflect a dis-
preference for sentence-initial conjunctions, a prac-
tice which is frowned upon in prescriptive grammar
books, but apparently allowed by the Wall Street
Journal style sheet.

For this sample of 100 relations, the model
achieves a classification accuracy of 84%. This may
seem at first blush to be an odd result, since it ap-
pears that the model is surpassing human perfor-
mance. As we have suggested, however, this could
be the result of our experimental judges having dif-
ferent preferences than the writers and editors at the
Wall Street Journal for cases in which connective
placement is truly optional. We therefore sought to
evaluate the effect of optionality on these results.

If inaccurate predictions are associated with op-
tionality of connective use, we might expect that
both human judges and the classification model
would be less certain about their categorizations of
these examples than for the cases that were cor-
rectly classified. This was indeed the case. First,
there was a significant difference in the variability
of judges’ responses between items that were incor-
rectly classified and those that were correct (66% vs.
73%, respectively; two-sample t test: t=2.60, df =73,
p<0.02). Thus, as a group the judges were less sure
of themselves in those cases in which they incor-
rectly decided to use or omit the connective, sug-
gesting that either option may have been acceptable.
Second, we analyzed the levels of confidence our
model had for its judgments on correctly and incor-
rectly categorized cases, measured in terms of the
probability of the predicted outcome assigned by
the model. The analysis revealed that the average
model confidence for the relations that were incor-
rectly classified was significantly lower than the av-
erage model confidence for the correctly-classified
items (71% vs. 88%, respectively; t=5.65, df =25,
p<0.001). Taken together, these results are consis-
tent with the idea that, at least for a significant por-
tion of the data, the incorrect judgments made by

922



both the judges and the model may have occurred
on passages for which either including or omitting
the connective would have been acceptable.

5 Conclusion

We have presented a model that predicts whether the
coherence relation holding between two clauses is
marked explicitly with a lexical connective or left
implicit. Whereas there is reason to think that an
author’s decision to use a connective is in part in-
fluenced by properties of the extra-linguistic con-
text that are inaccessible to NLP systems (such as
semantics and world knowledge), we find that rel-
atively simple linguistic features derivable from the
clauses and from local discourse dependencies can
be exploited to reach a level of performance signifi-
cantly greater than that achieved by a baseline. The
variability in the judgments of native speakers when
presented with these data suggests that the use of a
connective is in many cases simply optional; in such
cases the decision may reflect lower-level stylistic
choices on the part of the author. This in turn in-
dicates that there may be an inherent upper bound
to the performance of computational systems on this
task.

Acknowledgments

We thank Roger Levy for useful discussions about
this work and three anonymous reviewers for their
helpful feedback.

References

Nicholas Asher and Alex Lascarides. 2003. Logics of
conversation. Cambridge University Press.

Fatemeh Torabi Asr and Vera Demberg. 2012a. Implicit-
ness of discourse relations. In Proceedings of the 24th
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 2669–2684.

Fatemeh Torabi Asr and Vera Demberg. 2012b. Mea-
suring the strength of linguistic cues for discourse re-
lations. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Advances
in Discourse Analysis and its Computational Aspects
(ADACA), pages 33–42.

Michael Elhadad and Kathleen R McKeown. 1990. Gen-
erating connectives. In Proceedings of the 13th Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics-Volume 3, pages
97–101.

Jerry R Hobbs. 1979. Coherence and coreference. Cog-
nitive science, 3(1):67–90.

Andrew Kehler. 2002. Coherence, reference, and the
theory of grammar. CSLI Publications, Stanford.

Ziheng Lin, Min-Yen Kan, and Hwee Tou Ng. 2009.
Recognizing implicit discourse relations in the Penn
Discourse Treebank. In Proceedings of the 2009 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing: Volume 1, pages 343–351.

William C Mann and Sandra A Thompson. 1988.
Rhetorical structure theory: Toward a functional the-
ory of text organization. Text, 8(3):243–281.

Mitchell P Marcus, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz, and Beat-
rice Santorini. 1993. Building a large annotated cor-
pus of English: The Penn Treebank. Computational
Linguistics, 19(2):313–330.

Emily Pitler, Mridhula Raghupathy, Hena Mehta, Ani
Nenkova, Alan Lee, and Aravind K Joshi. 2008. Eas-
ily identifiable discourse relations. In Proceedings of
the 22nd International Conference on Computational
Linguistics.

Emily Pitler, Annie Louis, and Ani Nenkova. 2009. Au-
tomatic sense prediction for implicit discourse rela-
tions in text. In Proceedings of the Joint Conference
of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing of the AFNLP: Volume 2, pages 683–691.

Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Milt-
sakaki, Livio Robaldo, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie
Webber. 2008. The Penn Discourse Treebank 2.0.
In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation.

Caroline Sporleder and Alex Lascarides. 2008. Using
automatically labelled examples to classify rhetorical
relations: An assessment. Natural Language Engi-
neering, 14(3):369–416.

Zhi-Min Zhou, Yu Xu, Zheng-Yu Niu, Man Lan, Jian
Su, and Chew Lim Tan. 2010. Predicting discourse
connectives for implicit discourse relation recognition.
In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference
on Computational Linguistics: Posters, pages 1507–
1514.

923


