










































Fish Transporters and Miracle Homes: How Compositional Distributional Semantics can Help NP Parsing


Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1908–1913,
Seattle, Washington, USA, 18-21 October 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Fish transporters and miracle homes:
How compositional distributional semantics can help NP parsing

Angeliki Lazaridou, Eva Maria Vecchi and Marco Baroni
Center for Mind/Brain Sciences

University of Trento, Italy
first.last@unitn.it

Abstract

In this work, we argue that measures that have
been shown to quantify the degree of semantic
plausibility of phrases, as obtained from their
compositionally-derived distributional seman-
tic representations, can resolve syntactic am-
biguities. We exploit this idea to choose the
correct parsing of NPs (e.g., (live fish) trans-
porter rather than live (fish transporter)). We
show that our plausibility cues outperform
a strong baseline and significantly improve
performance when used in combination with
state-of-the-art features.

1 Introduction

Live fish transporter: A transporter of live fish
or rather a fish transporter that is not dead?
While our intuition, based on the meaning of this
phrase, prefers the former interpretation, the Stan-
ford parser, which lacks semantic features, incor-
rectly predicts the latter as the correct parse.1 The
correct syntactic parsing of sentences is clearly
steered by semantic information (as formal syn-
tacticians have pointed out at least since Fillmore
(1968)), and consequently the semantic plausibil-
ity of alternative parses can provide crucial evidence
about their validity.

An emerging line of parsing research capitalizes
on the advances of compositional distributional se-
mantics (Baroni and Zamparelli, 2010; Guevara,
2010; Mitchell and Lapata, 2010; Socher et al.,
2012). Information related to compositionally-
derived distributional representations of phrases is

1http://nlp.stanford.edu:8080/parser/
index.jsp

integrated at various stages of the parsing process
to improve overall performance.2 We are aware of
two very recent studies exploiting the semantic in-
formation provided by distributional models to re-
solve syntactic ambiguity: Socher et al. (2013) and
Le et al. (2013).

Socher et al. (2013) present a recursive neural net-
work architecture which jointly learns semantic rep-
resentations and syntactic categories of phrases. By
annotating syntactic categories with their distribu-
tional representation, the method emulates lexical-
ized approaches (Collins, 2003) and captures sim-
ilarity more flexibly than solutions based on hard
clustering (Klein and Manning, 2003; Petrov et al.,
2006). Thus, their approach mainly aims at improv-
ing parsing by capturing a richer, data-driven cate-
gorial structure.

On the other hand, Le et al. (2013) work with the
output of the parser. Their hypothesis is that parses
that lead to less semantically plausible interpreta-
tions will be penalized by a reranker that looks at
the composed semantic representation of the parse.
Their method achieves an improvement of 0.2% in
F-score. However, as the authors also remark, be-
cause of their experimental setup, they cannot con-
clude that the improvement is truly due to the se-
mantic composition component, a crucial issue that
is deferred to further investigation.

This work aims at corroborating the hypothesis
that the semantic plausibility of a phrase can in-
deed determine its correct parsing. We develop a
system based on simple and intuitive measures, ex-

2Distributional representations approximate word and
phrase meaning by vectors that record the contexts in which
they are likely to appear in corpora; for a review see, e.g., Tur-
ney and Pantel (2010).

1908



Type of NP # Example
A (N N) 1296 local phone company
(A N) N 343 crude oil sector
N (N N) 164 miracle home run
(N N) N 424 blood pressure medicine

Total 2227 -

Table 1: NP dataset

tracted from the compositional distributional repre-
sentations of phrases, that have been shown to corre-
late with semantic plausibility (Vecchi et al., 2011).

We develop a controlled experimental setup, fo-
cusing on a single syntactic category, that is, noun
phrases (NP), where our task can be formalized as
(left or right) bracketing. Unlike previous work,
we compare our compositional semantic component
against features based on n-gram statistics, which
can arguably also capture some semantic informa-
tion in terms of frequent occurrences of meaningful
phrases. Inspired by previous literature demonstrat-
ing the power of metrics based on Pointwise Mu-
tual Information (PMI) in NP bracketing (Nakov and
Hearst, 2005; Pitler et al., 2010; Vadas and Curran,
2011), we test an approach exploiting PMI features,
and show that plausibility features relying on com-
posed representations can significantly boost accu-
racy over PMI.

2 Setup

Noun phrase dataset To construct our dataset,
we used the Penn TreeBank (Marcus et al., 1993),
which we enriched with the annotation provided by
Vadas and Curran (2007a), since the original tree-
bank does not distinguish different structures inside
the NPs and always marks them as right bracketed,
e.g., local (phone company) but also blood (pressure
medicine). We focus on NPs formed by three ele-
ments, where the first can be an adjective (A) or a
noun (N), the other two are nouns. Table 1 summa-
rizes the characteristics of the dataset.3

Distributional semantic space As our source cor-
pus we use the concatenation of ukWaC, the English
Wikipedia (2009 dump) and the BNC, with a total of

3The dataset is available from: http://clic.cimec.
unitn.it/composes

about 2.8 billion tokens.4 We collect co-occurrence
statistics for the top 8K Ns and 4K As, plus any
other word from our NP dataset that was below this
rank. Our context elements are composed of the top
10K content words (adjectives, adverbs, nouns and
verbs). We use a standard bag-of-words approach,
counting within-sentence collocates for every target
word. We apply (non-negative) Pointwise Mutual
Information as weighting scheme and dimensional-
ity reduction using Non-negative Matrix Factoriza-
tion, setting the number of reduced-space dimen-
sions to 300.5

Composition functions We experiment with vari-
ous composition functions, chosen among those sen-
sitive to internal structure (Baroni and Zamparelli,
2010; Guevara, 2010; Mitchell and Lapata, 2010),
namely dilation (dil), weighted additive (wadd), lex-
ical function (lexfunc) and full additive (fulladd).6

For model implementation and (unsupervised) es-
timation, we rely on the freely available DISSECT
toolkit (Dinu et al., 2013).7 For all methods, vectors
were normalized before composing, both in training
and in generation. Table 2 presents a summary de-
scription of the composition methods we used.

Following previous literature (Mitchell and Lap-
ata, 2010), and the general intuition that adjectival
modification is quite a different process from noun
combination (Gagné and Spalding, 2009; McNally,
2013), we learn different parameters for noun-noun
(NN) and adjective-noun (AN) phrases. As an ex-
ample of the learned parameters, for the wadd model
the ratio of parameters w1 and w2 is 1:2 for ANs,
whereas for NNs it is almost 1:1, confirming the in-
tuition that a non-head noun plays a stronger role in
composition than an adjective modifier.

4http://wacky.sslmit.unibo.it, http://en.
wikipedia.org, http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk

5For tuning the parameters of the semantic space, we com-
puted the correlation of cosines produced with a variety of pa-
rameter settings (SVD/NMF/no reduction, PMI/Local MI/raw
counts/log transform, 150 to 300 dimensions in steps of 50) with
the word pair similarity ratings in the MEN dataset: http:
//clic.cimec.unitn.it/˜elia.bruni/MEN

6We do not consider the popular multiplicative model, as it
produces identical representations for NPs irrespective of their
internal structure.

7http://clic.cimec.unitn.it/composes/
toolkit/

1909



Model Composition function Parameters
wadd w1~u+ w2~v w1, w2
dil ||~u||22~v + (λ− 1)〈~u,~v〉~u λ
fulladd W1~u+W2~v W1,W2 ∈ Rm×m
lexfunc Au~v Au ∈ Rm×m

Table 2: Composition functions of inputs (u, v).

Recursive composition In this study we also ex-
periment with recursive composition; to the best
of our knowledge, this is the first time that these
composition functions have been explicitly used in
this manner. For example, given the left brack-
eted NP (blood pressure) medicine, we want to
obtain its compositional semantic representation,−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
blood pressure medicine. First, basic composition
is applied, in which

−−−→
blood and −−−−−−→pressure are com-

bined with one of the composition functions. Fol-
lowing that, we apply recursive composition; the
output of basic composition, i.e.,

−−−−−−−−−−→
blood pressure,

is fed to the function again to be composed with the
representation of

−−−−−−→
medicine.

The latter step is straightforward for all com-
position functions except lexfunc applied to left-
bracketed NPs, where the first step should return a
matrix representing the left constituent (blood pres-
sure in the running example). To cope with this nui-
sance, we apply the lexfunc method to basic compo-
sition only, while recursive representations are de-
rived by summing (e.g.,

−−−−−−−−−−→
blood pressure is obtained

by multiplying the blood matrix by the pressure vec-
tor, and it is then summed to

−−−−−−→
medicine).

3 Experiments

Semantic plausibility measures We use mea-
sures of semantic plausibility computed on com-
posed semantic representations introduced by Vec-
chi et al. (2011). The rationale is that the correct
(wrong) bracketing will lead to semantically more
(less) plausible phrases. Thus, a measure able to dis-
criminate semantically plausible from implausible
phrases should also indicate the most likely parse.
Considering, for example, the alternative parses of
miracle home run, we observe that home run is
a more semantically plausible phrase than miracle
home. Furthermore, we might often refer to a base-
ball player’s miracle home run, but we doubt that

even a miracle home can run! Given the com-
posed representation of an AN (or NN), Vecchi et
al. (2011) define the following measures:
• Density, quantified as the average cosine of a

phrase with its (top 10) nearest neighbors, cap-
tures the intuition that a deviant phrase should
be isolated in the semantic space.
• Cosine of phrase and head N aims to capture

the fact that the meaning of a deviant AN (or
NN) will tend to diverge from the meaning of
the head noun.
• Vector length should capture anomalous vec-

tors.
Since length, as already observed by Vecchi et al.,
is strongly affected by independent factors such as
input vector normalization and the estimation pro-
cedure, we introduce entropy as a measure of vec-
tor quality. The intuition is that meaningless vec-
tors, whose dimensions contain mostly noise, should
have high entropy.

NP Parsing as Classification Parsing NPs con-
sisting of three elements can be treated as bi-
nary classification; given blood pressure medicine,
we predict whether it is left- ((blood pres-
sure) medicine) or right-bracketed (blood (pressure
medicine)).

We conduct experiments using an SVM with Ra-
dial Basis Function kernel as implemented in the
scikit-learn toolkit.8 Our dataset is split into 10 folds
in which the ratio between the two classes is kept
constant. We tune the SVM complexity parameter
C on the first fold and we report accuracy results on
the remaining nine folds after cross-validation.

Features Given a composition function f , we de-
fine the following feature sets, illustrated with the
usual blood pressure medicine example, which are
used to build different classifiers:
• fbasic consists of the semantic plausibility

measures described above computed for the
two-word phrases resulting from alternative
bracketings, i.e., 3 measures for each bracket-
ing, evaluated on blood pressure and pressure
medicine respectively, for a total of 6 features.
• frec contains 6 features computed on the vec-

tors resulting from the recursive compositions

8http://scikit-learn.org/

1910



Features Accuracy
right 65.6
pos 77.3
lexfuncbasic 74.6
lexfuncrec 74.0
lexfuncplausibility 76.2
waddbasic 75.9
waddrec 78.2
waddplausibility 78.7
pmi 81.2
pmi+lexfuncplausibility 82.9
pmi+waddplausibility 85.6

Table 3: Evaluation of feature sets from Section 3

(blood pressure) medicine and blood (pressure
medicine).
• fplausibility concatenates fbasic and frec.
• pmi contains the PMI scores extracted from

our corpus for blood pressure and pressure
medicine.9

• pmi + fplausibility concatenates pmi and
fplausibility.

Baseline Model Given the skewed bracketing dis-
tribution in our dataset, we implement the following
majority baselines: a) right classifies all phrases
as right-bracketed; b) pos classifies NNN as left-
bracketed (Lauer, 1995), ANN as right-bracketed.

4 Results and Discussion

Table 3 omits results for dil and fulladd since they
were outperformed by the right baseline. That
wadd- and lexfunc-based plausibility features per-
form well above this baseline is encouraging, since
it represents the typical default behaviour of parsers
for NPs, although note that these features perform
comparably to the pos baseline, which would be
quite simple to embed in a parser (for English, at
least). For both models, using both basic and recur-
sive features leads to a boost in performance over
basic features alone. Note that recursive features
(frec) achieve at least equal or better performance
than basic ones (fbasic). We expect indeed that in
many cases the asymmetry in plausibility will be

9Several approaches to computing PMI for these purposes
have been proposed in the literature including the dependency
model (Lauer, 1995) and the adjacency model (Marcus, 1980).
We implement the latter since it has been shown to perform
better (Vadas and Curran, 2007b) on NPs extracted from Penn
TreeBank.

sharper when considering the whole NP rather than
its sub-parts; a pressure medicine is still a conceiv-
able concept, but blood (pressure medicine) makes
no sense whatsoever. Finally, wadd outperforms
both the more informative baseline pos and lexfunc.
The difference between wadd and lexfunc is signif-
icant (p < 0.05)10 only when they are trained with
recursive composition features, probably due to our
suboptimal adaptation of the latter to recursive com-
position (see Section 2).

The pmi approach outperforms the best
plausibility-based feature set waddplausibility.
However, the two make only a small proportion of
common errors (29% of the total waddplausibility
errors, 32% for pmi), suggesting that they are com-
plementary. Indeed the pmi + waddplausibility
combination significantly outperforms pmi alone
(p < 0.001), indicating that plausibility features
can improve NP bracketing on top of the pow-
erful PMI-based approach. The same effect can
also be observed in the combination of pmi +
lexfuncplausibility, which again significantly
outperforms pmi alone (p < 0.05). This behaviour
further suggests that the different types of errors are
not a result of the parameters or type of composi-
tion applied, but rather highlights fundamental dif-
ferences in the kind of information that PMI and
composition models are able to capture.

One hypothesis is that compositional models are
more robust for low-frequency NPs, for which
PMI estimates will be less accurate; results on
those low-frequency trigrams only (20% of the NP
dataset, operationalized as those consisting of bi-
grams with frequency ≤ 100) revealed indeed that
waddplausibility performed 8.1% better in terms
of accuracy than pmi.

5 Conclusion

Our pilot study showed that semantic plausibility,
as measured on compositional distributional repre-
sentations, can improve syntactic parsing of NPs.
Our results further suggest that state-of-the-art PMI
features and the ones extracted from compositional
representations are complementary, and thus, when
combined, can lead to significantly better results.
Besides paving the way to a more general integration

10Significance values are based on t-tests.

1911



of compositional distributional semantics in syntac-
tic parsing, the proposed methodology provides a
new way to evaluate composition functions.

The relatively simple-minded wadd approach out-
performed more complex models such as lexfunc.
We plan to experiment next with more linguistically
motivated ways to adapt the latter to recursive com-
position, including hybrid methods where ANs and
NNs are treated differently. We would also like
to consider more sophisticated semantic plausibility
measures (e.g., supervised ones), and apply them to
other ambiguous syntactic constructions.

6 Acknowledgments

We thank Georgiana Dinu and German Kruszewski
for helpful discussions and the reviewers for use-
ful feedback. This research was supported by the
ERC 2011 Starting Independent Research Grant
n. 283554 (COMPOSES).

References

Marco Baroni and Roberto Zamparelli. 2010. Nouns
are vectors, adjectives are matrices: Representing
adjective-noun constructions in semantic space. In
Proceedings of EMNLP, pages 1183–1193, Boston,
MA.

Michael Collins. 2003. Head-driven statistical models
for natural language parsing. Computational linguis-
tics, 29(4):589–637.

Georgiana Dinu, Nghia The Pham, and Marco Baroni.
2013. DISSECT: DIStributional SEmantics Composi-
tion Toolkit. In Proceedings of the System Demonstra-
tions of ACL 2013, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Charles Fillmore. 1968. The case for case. In Emmon
Bach and Robert Harms, editors, Universals in Lin-
guistic Theory, pages 1–89. Holt, Rinehart and Win-
ston, New York.

Christina Gagné and Thomas Spalding. 2009. Con-
stituent integration during the processing of compound
words: Does it involve the use of relational structures?
Journal of Memory and Language, 60:20–35.

Emiliano Guevara. 2010. A regression model of
adjective-noun compositionality in distributional se-
mantics. In Proceedings of GEMS, pages 33–37, Up-
psala, Sweden.

Dan Klein and Christopher D Manning. 2003. Accurate
unlexicalized parsing. In Proceedings of ACL, pages
423–430. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Mark Lauer. 1995. Corpus statistics meet the noun com-
pound: Some empirical results. In Proceedings of
the Annual Meeting on Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 47–54, Cambridge, MA.

Phong Le, Willem Zuidema, and Remko Scha. 2013.
Learning from errors: Using vector-based composi-
tional semantics for parse reranking. In Proceedings of
the ACL 2013 Workshop on Continuous Vector Space
Models and their Compositionality, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Mitchell P Marcus, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz, and Beat-
rice Santorini. 1993. Building a large annotated cor-
pus of English: The Penn Treebank. Computational
linguistics, 19(2):313–330.

Mitchell P Marcus. 1980. Theory of syntactic recogni-
tion for natural languages. MIT press.

Louise McNally. 2013. Modification. In Maria Aloni
and Paul Dekker, editors, Cambridge Handbook of
Semantics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK. In press.

Jeff Mitchell and Mirella Lapata. 2010. Composition in
distributional models of semantics. Cognitive Science,
34(8):1388–1429.

Preslav Nakov and Marti Hearst. 2005. Search en-
gine statistics beyond the n-gram: Application to noun
compound bracketing. In Proceedings of CoNLL,
pages 17–24, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.

Slav Petrov, Leon Barrett, Romain Thibaux, and Dan
Klein. 2006. Learning accurate, compact, and inter-
pretable tree annotation. In Proceedings of COLING-
ACL, pages 433–440, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.

Emily Pitler, Shane Bergsma, Dekang Lin, and Kenneth
Church. 2010. Using web-scale n-grams to improve
base NP parsing performance. In Proceedings of the
COLING, pages 886–894, Beijing, China.

Richard Socher, Brody Huval, Christopher Manning,
and Andrew Ng. 2012. Semantic compositionality
through recursive matrix-vector spaces. In Proceed-
ings of EMNLP, pages 1201–1211, Jeju Island, Korea.

Richard Socher, John Bauer, Christopher D. Manning,
and Andrew Y. Ng. 2013. Parsing with compositional
vector grammars. In Proceedings of ACL, Sofia, Bul-
garia.

Peter Turney and Patrick Pantel. 2010. From frequency
to meaning: Vector space models of semantics. Jour-
nal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 37:141–188.

David Vadas and James Curran. 2007a. Adding noun
phrase structure to the Penn Treebank. In Proceedings
of ACL, pages 240–247, Prague, Czech Republic.

David Vadas and James R Curran. 2007b. Large-scale
supervised models for noun phrase bracketing. In Pro-
ceedings of the PACLING, pages 104–112.

David Vadas and James R. Curran. 2011. Parsing
noun phrases in the penn treebank. Comput. Linguist.,
37(4):753–809.

1912



Eva Maria Vecchi, Marco Baroni, and Roberto Zampar-
elli. 2011. (Linear) maps of the impossible: Cap-
turing semantic anomalies in distributional space. In
Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Distributional
Semantics and Compositionality, pages 1–9, Portland,
OR.

1913


