










































An Empirical Study Of Semi-Supervised Chinese Word Segmentation Using Co-Training


Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1191–1200,
Seattle, Washington, USA, 18-21 October 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

An Empirical Study Of Semi-Supervised Chinese Word Segmentation
Using Co-Training

Fan Yang
Nuance Communications, Inc.
fan.yang@nuance.com

Paul Vozila
Nuance Communications, Inc.
paul.vozila@nuance.com

Abstract

In this paper we report an empirical study
on semi-supervised Chinese word segmenta-
tion using co-training. We utilize two seg-
menters: 1) a word-based segmenter lever-
aging a word-level language model, and 2)
a character-based segmenter using character-
level features within a CRF-based sequence
labeler. These two segmenters are initially
trained with a small amount of segmented
data, and then iteratively improve each other
using the large amount of unlabelled data.
Our experimental results show that co-training
captures 20% and 31% of the performance
improvement achieved by supervised training
with an order of magnitude more data for the
SIGHAN Bakeoff 2005 PKU and CU corpora
respectively.

1 Introduction

In the literature there exist two general models for
supervised Chinese word segmentation, the word-
based approach and the character-based approach.
The word-based approach searches for all possible
segmentations, usually created using a dictionary,
for the optimal one that maximizes a certain util-
ity. The character-based approach treats segmenta-
tion as a character sequence labeling problem, indi-
cating whether a character is located at the bound-
ary of a word. Typically the word-based approach
uses word level features, such as word n-grams and
word length; while the character-based approach
uses character level information, such as character n-
grams. Both approaches have their own advantages

and disadvantages, and there has been some research
in combining the two approaches to improve the per-
formance of supervised word segmentation.

In this research we are trying to take advantage of
the word-based and the character-based approaches
in the semi-supervised setting for Chinese word seg-
mentation, where there is only a limited amount
of human-segmented data available, but there ex-
ists a relatively large amount of in-domain unseg-
mented data. The goal is to make use of the in-
domain unsegmented data to improve the ultimate
performance of word segmentation. According to
Sun et al. (2009), “the two approaches [word-based
and character-based approaches] are either based on
a particular view of segmentation.” This naturally
motivates the use of co-training, which utilizes two
models trained on different views of the input la-
beled data which then iteratively educate each other
with the unlabelled data. At the end of the co-
training iterations, the initially weak models achieve
improved performance. Co-training has been suc-
cessfully applied in many natural language process-
ing tasks. In this paper we describe an empiri-
cal study of applying co-training to semi-supervised
Chinese word segmentation. Our experimental re-
sults show that co-training captures 20% and 31%
of the performance improvement achieved by super-
vised training with an order of magnitude more data
for the SIGHAN Bakeoff 2005 PKU and CU corpora
respectively.

In section 2 we review the two supervised ap-
proaches and co-training algorithm in more detail.
In section 3 we describe our implementation of the
co-training word segmentation. In section 4 we de-

1191



Figure 1: A search space for word segmenter

scribe our co-training experiments. In section 5 we
conclude the paper.

2 Related Work

In this section, we first review the related research on
the word-based and the character-based approaches
for Chinese word segmentation, and comparatively
analyze these two supervised approaches. We then
review the related research on co-training.

2.1 Supervised Word Segmentation

2.1.1 Word-Based Segmenter
Given a character sequence c1c2...cn, the word-

based approach searches in all possible segmenta-
tions for one that maximizes a pre-defined utility
function, formally represented as in Equation 1. The
search space, GEN(c1c2...cn), can be represented
as a lattice, where each vertex represents a charac-
ter boundary index and each arc represents a word
candidate which is the sequence of characters within
the index range. A dictionary1 can be used to gener-
ate such a lattice. For example, given the character
sequence “发展中国家” and a dictionary that con-
tains the words {发展，中国，国家} and all single
Chinese characters, the search space is illustrated in
Figure 1.

Ŵ = arg max
W∈GEN(c1c2...cn)

Util(W ) (1)

Dynamic programming such as Viterbi decoding
is usually used to search for the optimized segmen-
tation. The utility can be as simple as the negation
of number of words (i.e. Util(W ) = − | W |),

1A dictionary is not a must to create the search space but
it could shrink the search space and also lead to improved seg-
mentation performance.

which gives a reasonable performance if the dictio-
nary used for generating the search space has a good
coverage. Alternatively one can search for the seg-
mentation that maximizes the word sequence prob-
ability P (W ) (i.e. Util(W ) = P (W )). With a
Markov assumption, P (W ) can be calculated using
a language model as in Equation 2.

P (W ) = P (w1w2...wm)

= P (w1).P (w2|w1)...P (wn|w1w2...wn1)
= P (w1)P (w2|w1)...P (wn|wn−1)

(2)

More generally, the utility can be formulated as
a semi-Markov linear model, defined as Equation 3,
in which Φ is the feature function vector, and Θ is
the parameter vector that can be learned from train-
ing data using different techniques: Liang (2005),
Gao et al. (2005), and Zhang and Clark (2007) use
averaged perceptron; Nakagawa (2004) uses general
iterative scaling; Andrew (2006) uses semi-Markov
CRF; and Sun (2010) uses a passive-aggressive
learning algorithm.

Util(W ) = ΘT Φ(c1c2...cn,W ) (3)

2.1.2 Character-Based Segmenter
The character-based approach treats word seg-

mentation as a character sequence labeling problem,
to label each character with its location in a word,
first proposed by Xue (2003).2 The basic label-
ing scheme is to use two tags: ‘B’ for the begin-
ning character of a word and ‘O’ for other charac-
ters (Peng et al., 2004). Xue (2003) use a four-tag
scheme based on some linguistic intuitions: ‘B’ for
the beginning character, ‘I’ for the internal charac-
ters, ‘E’ for the ending character, and ‘S’ for single-
character word. For example, the word sequence “洽
谈会 很 成功” can be labelled as 洽\B 谈\I 会\E
很\S 成\B 功\E. Zhao et al. (2010) further extend
this scheme by using six tags.

Training and decoding of the character labeling
problem is similar to part-of-speech tagging, which

2Teahan et al. (2000) use a character language model to de-
termine whether a word boundary should be inserted after each
character, which can also be considered as a character-based
approach as well.

1192



is also generally formulated as a linear model. Many
machine learning techniques have been explored:
Xue (2003) use a maximum entropy model; Peng et
al. (2004) use linear-chain CRF; Liang (2005) uses
averaged perceptron; Sun et al. (2009) use a discrim-
inative latent variable approach.

2.1.3 Comparison and Combination
It is more natural to use word-level informa-

tion, such as word n-grams and word length, in a
word-based segmenter; while it is more natural to
use character-level information, such as character n-
grams, in a character-based segmenter. Sun (2010)
gives a detailed comparison of the two approaches
from both the theoretical and empirical perspec-
tives. Word-level information has greater represen-
tational power in terms of contextual dependency,
while character-level information is better at mor-
phological analysis in terms of word internal struc-
tures.

On one hand, features in a character-based model
are usually defined in the neighboring n-character
window; and an order-K CRF can only look at the
labels of the previous K characters. Given that many
words contain more than one character, a word-
based model can examine a wider context. Thus
the contextual dependency information encoded in
a character-based model is generally weaker than in
a word-based model. Andrew (2006) also shows
that semi-Markov CRF makes strictly weaker in-
dependence assumptions than linear CRF and so
a word-based segmenter using an order-K semi-
Markov model is more expressive than a character-
based model using an order-K CRF.

On the other hand, Chinese words have internal
structures. Chinese characters can serve some mor-
phological functions in a word. For example, the
character们 usually works as a suffix to signal plu-
ral; the character 者 can also be a suffix meaning a
group of people; and 阿 generally works as a pre-
fix before a person’s nickname that has one charac-
ter. Such morphological information is extremely
useful for identifying unknown words. For exam-
ple, a character-based model can learn that 阿 is
usually tagged as ‘B’ and the next character is usu-
ally tagged as ‘E’. Thus even when 阿甘 is not an
existing word in the training data, a character-based
model might still be able to correctly label it as阿\B

甘\E.
Recent advanced Chinese word segmenters, either

word-based or character-based, have been trying to
make use of both word-level and character-level in-
formation. For example, Nakagawa (2004) inte-
grates the search space of a character-based model
into a word-based model; Andrew (2006) converts
CRF-type features into semi-CRF features in his
semi-Markov CRF segmenter; Sun et al. (2009) add
word identify information into their character-based
model; and Sun (2010) combine the two approaches
at the system level using bootstrap aggregating.

2.2 Co-Training
The co-training approach was first introduced by
Blum and Mitchell (1998). Theoretical analysis of
its effectiveness is given in (Blum and Mitchell,
1998; Dasgupta et al., 2001; Abney, 2002). Co-
training works by partitioning the feature set into
two conditionally independent views (given the true
output). On each view a statistical model can be
trained. The presence of multiple distinct views of
the data can be used to train separate models, and
then each model’s predictions on the unlabeled data
are used to augment the training set of the other
model.

Figure 2 depicts a general co-training framework.
The inputs are two sets of data, a labelled set S and
an unlabelled set U. Generally S is small and U is
large. Two statistical models M1 and M2 are used,
which are built on two sets of data L1 and L2 initial-
ized as S but then incrementally increased in each
iteration. C is a cache holding a small subset of U
to be labelled by both models (Blum and Mitchell,
1998; Abney, 2002). In some applications, C is
not used and both models label the whole set of U
(i.e. C==U) (Collins and Singer, 1999; Nigam and
Ghani, 2000; Pierce and Cardie, 2001). The stop-
ping criteria can be, for example, when U is empty,
or when a certain number of iterations are executed.

In step 5 and 6 during each iteration, some data
labelled by M1 are selected and added to the train-
ing set L2, and vice versa. Several selection algo-
rithms have been proposed. Dasgupta et al. (2001)
and Abney (2002) use a selection algorithm that tries
to maximize the agreement rate between the two
models. The more popular selection algorithm is to
choose the K examples that have the highest con-

1193



Input:
S is the labelled data
U is the unlabelled data

Variables:
L1 is the training data for View One
L2 is the training data for View Two
C is a cache holding a small subset of U

Initialization:
L1 <- S
L2 <- S
C <- randomly sample a subset of U
U <- U - C

REPEAT:
1. Train M1 using L1
2. Train M2 using L2
3. Use M1 to label C
4. Use M2 to label C
5. Select examples labelled by M1, add to L2
6. Select examples labelled by M2, add to L1
7. Randomly move samples from U to C

so that C maintains its size
UNTIL stopping criteria

Figure 2: A generic co-training framework

fidence score (Nigam and Ghani, 2000; Pierce and
Cardie, 2001). In order to balance the class distri-
butions in the training data L1 and L2, Blum and
Mitchell (1998) select P positive examples and Q
negative examples that have the highest confidence
scores respectively. Wang et al. (2007) and Guz et
al. (2007) use disagreement-based selection, which
adds to L2, data that is labeled by M1 and M2 with
high and low confidence respectively, with the in-
tuition that such data are more useful and compen-
satory to M2. Finally, instead of adding the selected
data to the training data, Tur (2009) propose the co-
adaptation approach which linearly interpolates the
existing model with the new model built with the
new selected data.

3 Segmentation With Co-Training

3.1 Design of Two Segmenters

The use of co-training needs two statistical models
that satisfy the following three conditions. First, in
theory these two models need to be built on two con-
ditionally independent views. However this is a very
strong assumption and many large-scale NLP prob-
lems do not have a natural split of features to satisfy
this assumption. In practice it has been shown that
co-training can still achieve improved performance
when this assumption is violated, but conforming to
the conditionally independent assumption leads to

a bigger gain (Nigam and Ghani, 2000; Pierce and
Cardie, 2001). Thus we should strive to have the two
models less correlated. Second, the two models both
need to be effective for the task, that is, each of the
models itself can perform the task reasonably well.
Third, the decoding and training of the two models
need to be efficient, as in co-training we need to seg-
ment the unlabelled data and re-train the models in
each iteration. In the following we describe our de-
sign of the two segmenters.

Word-based segmenter In the word-based seg-
menter, we utilize a statistical n-gram lan-
guage model and try to optimize the language
modeling score together with a word insertion
penalty, as show in Equation 4. K is a per-
word penalty that is pre-determined with 10
fold cross-validation on the SIGhan PKU train-
ing set. We train a Kneser-Ney backoff lan-
guage model from the training data, and extract
a dictionary of words from the training data for
generating the search space. Our pilot study
suggested that a bigram language model is suf-
ficient for this task.

Util(W ) = ln(P (W )) − |W | ∗ K (4)

Character-based segmenter We use an order-1
linear conditional random field to label a char-
acter sequence. Following Xue (2003), we use
the four-tag scheme “BIES”. We use the tool
CRF++3. The features that we use are charac-
ter n-grams within the neighboring 5-character
window and tag bigrams. Given a character c0
in the character sequence c−2c−1c0c1c2, we ex-
tract the following features: character unigrams
c−2, c−1, c0, c1, c2, bigrams c−1c0 and c0c1. L2
regularization is applied in learning.

As can be seen, we build a word-based segmenter
that uses only word level features, and a character-
based segmenter that uses only character level fea-
tures. These two segmenters by no means satisfy
the conditionally independence assumption, but we
have the hope that they are not too correlated as
they use different levels of information and these

3http://crfpp.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/
doc/index.html

1194



different levels of information have been shown to
be complementary in literature. Also the effective-
ness of these two segmenters has been demonstrated
in literature and will be shown again in our results
in Section 4. Finally, both segmenters can decode
and be trained pretty quickly. In our implemen-
tation, running on a Xeon 2.93GHz CPU with 4G
of memory, it takes less than 30 seconds to build a
word-based segmenter and less than 1 hour to build
a character-based segmenter with the SIGhan PKU
training data, and it takes less than 20 seconds to ap-
ply the word-based segmenter or less than 5 seconds
to apply the character-based segmenter to the PKU
testing data.

3.2 Co-Training

We follow the framework in Figure 2 for the co-
training setup. We do not use the cache C, but di-
rectly label the whole unlabelled data set U, because
in our experiment setup (see Section 4) U is not
huge and computationally we can afford to label the
whole set. The stopping criteria we use is when U is
empty. Following Wang et al. (2007) and Guz et al.
(2007), we use disagreement-based data selection.
In every iteration, we pick some sentences that are
segmented by the character-based model with high
confidence but are segmented by the word-based
model with low confidence to add to the training
data of the word-based model, and vice versa. Con-
fidence score is normalized with regard to the length
of the sentence (i.e. number of characters) to avoid
biasing towards short sentences. Confidence scores
between the two segmenters, however, are not di-
rectly comparable. Thus we rank the sentences by
their confidence scores in each segmenter respec-
tively, and calculate the rank difference between the
two segmenters. This rank difference is used as the
indication of the gap of the confidence between the
two segmenters. The sentences of highest rank dif-
ference are assigned to the training data of the word-
based segmenter, with the segmentations from the
character-based model; and the sentences of lowest
rank difference are assigned to the training data of
the character-based model, with segmentations from
the word-based model.

4 Experiments

4.1 Data and Experiment Setup

We conduct a set of experiments to evaluate the per-
formance of our co-training on semi-supervised Chi-
nese word segmentation. Two corpora, the PKU cor-
pus and the CU corpus, from the SIGhan Bakeoff
2005 are used. The PKU corpus contains texts of
simplified Chinese characters, which include 19056
sentences in the training data and 1945 sentences in
the testing data. The CU corpus contains texts of
traditional Chinese characters, which include 53019
sentences in the training data and 1493 sentences in
the testing data. The training data in each corpus is
randomly split into 10 subsets. In each run one set
is used as the labelled data S, and the other nine sets
are combined and used as the unlabelled data U with
segmentations removed. That is, 10% of the training
data is used as segmented data, and 90% are used
as unsegmented data in our semi-supervised train-
ing. This setup resembles our semi-supervised ap-
plication, where there is only a small limited amount
of segmented data but a relatively large amount of
in-domain unsegmented data available. The final
trained character-based and word-based segmenters
from co-training are then evaluated on the testing
data. Results we report in this paper are the aver-
age of the 10 runs. F-measure is used as the per-
formance measurement. A 99% confidence interval
is calculated as ±2.56

√
p(1− F )/N for statistical

significance evaluation, where F is the F-measure
and N is the number of words. Subsequent asser-
tions in this paper about statistical significance indi-
cate whether or not the p-value in question exceeds
1%.

4.2 Co-Training Results

For comparison, we measure the baseline as the
performance of a model trained with the 10%
segmented data only (referred to as BASIC base-
lines). The BASIC baselines, both for the word-
based model and the character-based model, how-
ever, use only the segmented data but leave out the
large amount of available unsegmented data. We
thus measure another baseline (referred to as FOLD-
IN), which naively uses the unsegmented data. In the
FOLD-IN baseline, a model is first trained with the
10% segmented data, and then this model is used

1195



Table 1: Co-training results
PKU CU

char word char word
BASIC 90.4 84.2 89.2 78.4
FOLD-IN 90.5 84.2 89.3 78.5
CEILING 94.5 93.0 94.2 88.9
CO-TRAINING 91.2 90.3 90.2 86.2

Figure 3: Gap filling with different split ratio

to label the unsegmented data. The automatic seg-
mentation is then combined with the segmented data
to build a new model. We also measure the CEIL-
ING as the performance of a model trained with all
the training data available, i.e. we use the true seg-
mentations of the 90% unsegmented data together
with the 10% segmented data to train a model. The
CEILING tells us the oracle performance when we
have all segmented data for training, while the BA-
SIC shows how much performance is dropped when
we only have 10% of the segmented data. The per-
formance of co-training will tell us how much we
can fill the gap by taking advantage of the other 90%
as unsegmented data in the semi-supervised training.
The FOLD-IN baseline further verifies the effective-
ness of co-training, i.e. co-training should perform
better than naively folding in the unsegmented data.

Table 1 presents the results. First, we see that
both the word-based and character-based models

are doing a decent job under the CEILING condi-
tion. This confirms the effectiveness of each in-
dividual model, which is generally a requirement
for running co-training. The character-based seg-
menter, although simple and with character-level
features only, achieves the performance that is close
to the state-of-the-art technologies that are much
more complicated (The best performance is 95.2%
for the PKU corpus and 95.1% for the CU corpus,
see (Sun et al., 2009)). Second, we see that under
all four conditions, the character-based segmenter
performs better than the word-based model. This
is not too surprising as these results are consistent
with those reported in the literature. The word-based
segmenter implemented in this work is less power-
ful, and it needs a good dictionary to achieve good
performance. In our implementation, a dictionary
is extracted from the segmented training set. Thus
the word-based model suffers a lot when the train-
ing data is small. Third, we see that both the word-
based model and the character-based model are im-
proved by co-training, and the improvements are all
statistically significant. It is not surprising for the
word-based model to learn from the more accurate
character-based model, which can also identify new
words to add to the dictionary. More interestingly,
the character-based segmenter is able to benefit from
the less powerful word-based segmenter. For the
character-based model, about 20% of the gap be-
tween BASIC and CEILING is filled by co-training,
consistently in both the PKU and CU corpora. Fi-
nally, comparing FOLD-IN and BASIC, we see that
naively using the unsegmented data does not lead to
a significant improvement. This suggests that co-
training provides a process that effectively makes
use of the unsegmented data.

For completeness, in Figure 3 we also show the
relative gap filling with different splits of the seg-
mented vs unsegmented data. With more data mov-
ing to the segmented set, the absolute improvement
of co-training over BASIC gets smaller, while the
gap between the BASIC and CEILING also becomes
smaller. The relative gap filled, i.e. the improve-
ment relative to the difference between BASIC and
CEILING, as can be seen, consistently falls inside
the section of 15% and 25%.

1196



4.3 Further Analysis

It is not surprising that the word-based segmenter
benefits from co-training since it learns from the
more accurate character-based segmenter. Our fo-
cus, however, is to better understand what benefit
the character-based segmenter gains from the co-
training procedure. The character-based segmenter
treats word segmentation as a character sequence
labelling problem with four tags “B I E S”. As-
suming that segmentation accuracy is proportional
to tag accuracy, we examine the tag accuracy of
the character-based segmenter before and after co-
training.

If a character is labelled with tag T0 initially be-
fore co-training and with tag T1 after co-training,
with the tag T1 different from T0, there can be one
of three cases: 1) T0 is correct; 2) T1 is correct; or
3) neither is correct. The absolute gain from co-
training of switching from tag T0 to T1 is defined
as the number of case 2 instances less case 1 in-
stances. Absolute gain indicates the gain of tag ac-
curacy where co-training learns to switch from T0 to
T1, and it contributes to the overall tag accuracy im-
provement. We also define relative gain of switch-
ing from tag T0 to T1 as the absolute gain divided
by the total number of cases switching from tag T0
to T1. Relative gain indicates how well co-training
learns to switch from T0 to T1.

Results are shown in Table 2. For both absolute
gain and relative gain, 12 ordered switching pairs
can be divided into two pools, a positive pool that
has higher gain including B → E, E → B, S → B,
S → E, E → I , B → I , B → S, and a neutral
pool that has lower or even negative gain including
I → E, I → S, I → B, E → S, S → I . The
S → B, S → E, B → I , E → I in the positive
pool actually suggest that the character-based seg-
menter learns from co-training to combine a single-
character word with it’s neighbour to create a new
longer word; whereas the I → E, I → S, I → B in
the neutral pool suggest that it does not really learn
how to separate a longer words into smaller units.

4.4 Feature Combination

We split the features into two sets, a character-level
feature set used by the character-based segmenter
and a word-level feature set used by the word-based

Table 2: Absolute Gain and Relative Gain
Absolute Gain Relative Gain

T0 T1 PKU CU PKU CU
B I 678 681 0.28 0.59
B E 2331 1727 0.41 0.46
B S 1025 686 0.07 0.08
I B 458 -283 0.07 -0.08
I E 61 -1117 0.01 -0.23
I S 323 -338 0.09 -0.34
E B 2163 1601 0.41 0.46
E I 963 819 0.36 0.62
E S 520 -13 0.03 0.00
S B 1847 892 0.27 0.30
S I 104 47 0.22 0.28
S E 1438 846 0.26 0.55

segmenter. We have shown that these two seg-
menters improve each other via co-training. How-
ever, as reviewed in Section 2.1, there is active re-
search in combining the character-level and word-
level features in a segmenter. When training with
the whole set of data (i.e. under the CEILING con-
dition), a segmenter with combined features tends to
perform better than only using one set of features.
Thus we need to address two problems. First, we
want to understand whether co-training, which splits
the features, can actually beat the BASIC and FOLD-
IN baselines of a segmenter with combined features.
Second, we want to explore whether we can further
improve the final co-training performance by feature
combination.

To address these two problems, we adopt Weiwei
Sun’s character-based segmenter4 in (Sun, 2010).
We use this segmenter because it is publicly avail-
able and it performs well on both the PKU corpus
and CU corpus. It models word segmentation as
a character labelling problem, and solves it with a
passive-aggressive optimization algorithm. It uses
the same feature set as in (Sun et al., 2009), in-
cluding both character-level features and word-level
features. Character-level features include character
uni-grams and bi-grams in the five character win-
dow, and whether the current character is the same
as the next or the one after the next character. Word-

4Available at http://www.coli.uni-
saarland.de/ wsun/ccws.tgz

1197



Table 3: Sun-Segmenter’s performance
PKU CU

BASIC 90.3 89.2
FOLD-IN 90.6 89.7
CEILING 94.8 95.0

Table 4: Results of feature combination
PKU CU

data combination 91.2 90.9
relabelling 91.2 91.0

level features include what word uni-grams or bi-
grams are anchored at the current character. Word
uni-grams and bi-grams are extracted from the la-
beled training data. For more details, please refer
to (Sun et al., 2009) and (Sun, 2010). For ease
of description, we will refer to Weiwei Sun’s seg-
menter with combined features as Sun-Segmenter,
and the character-based segmenter used in our co-
training which uses character-level features as Char-
Segmenter.

Table 3 shows the performance of the Sun-
Segmenter under the three conditions: BASIC,
FOLD-IN, and CEILING. We see that under
the CEILING condition, the Sun-Segmenter out-
performs the Char-Segmenter by 0.3% in the PKU
corpus and 0.8% in the CU corpus. However, un-
der the BASIC condition when there is only 10%
of training data available, the Sun-Segmenter gives
no gain. This probably is due to the fact that the
Sun-Segmenter uses a much larger feature set and
thus correspondingly a larger training set is needed
to avoid under-fitting. The Sun-Segmenter has more
gain when folding in the unsegmented data than the
Char-Segmenter, further suggesting that the Sun-
Segmenter is benefiting from the size of data. For
both corpora, however, the Char-Segmenter after co-
training beats the FOLD-IN baseline of the Sun-
Segmenter by at least 0.5%, and the improvement
is statistically significant. When there is only a
small amount of segmented data available, using a
more advanced segmenter with combined features
still under-performs compared to co-training. These
results justify the split of features for running co-
training.

Next we would like to explore whether we could

further improve the co-training performance, given
that we have a more advanced segmenter using com-
bined features. We try two approaches. In the first
approach, after all the iterations of co-training, the
data are split into two sets, one set for training the
word-based segmenter L1 and the other set for train-
ing the character-based segmenter L2. The segmen-
tations of these two sets of data are probably bet-
ter than the segmentations under the FOLD-IN con-
dition. We thus combine the two sets of data, and
use the combined data to train a new model with the
Sun-Segmenter. In the second approach, we use the
character-based segmenter after co-training, which
has an improved performance, to relabel the set of
unsegmented data U, and then combine it with the
segmented data set S. We then use the combined data
to train a new model with the Sun-Segmenter.

Results are shown in Table 4. In the PKU corpus,
we do not see a gain using either the data combina-
tion approach or the relabelling approach compared
to the performance of the Char-Segmenter after co-
training, probably because the Sun-Segmenter just
modestly improves over the Char-Segmenter under
the CEILING condition. However, in the CU cor-
pus, where under the CEILING condition the Sun-
Segmenter has a much bigger gain over the Char-
Segmenter, there is 0.7% improvement by using the
data combination approach and 0.8% by using the
relabelling approach, and the improvement is statis-
tically significant. Overall, using co-training with
feature combination we are able to cut the gap be-
tween the BASIC baseline and CEILING of the Sun-
Segmenter by 20% in the PKU corpus and 31% in
the CU corpus.

5 Discussion

There has been some research on semi-supervised
Chinese word segmentation. For example, Liang
(2005) derive word cluster features and mutual in-
formation features from unlabelled data, and add
them to supervised discriminative training; Li and
Sun (2009) use punctuation as implicit annotations
of a character starting a word (the character after a
punctation) or ending a word (the character before
a punctuation) in a large unlabelled data set to aug-
ment supervised data; Sun and Xu (2011) derive a
large set of features from unlabelled data, includ-

1198



ing mutual information, accessor variety and punc-
tuation variety to augment the character and word
features derived from labelled data. These research
works aim to use huge amount of unsegmented data
to further improve the performance of an already
well-trained supervised model.

In this paper, we assume a much limited amount
of segmented data available, and try to boost up the
performance by using in-domain unsegmented data.
Chinese word segmentation is domain-sensitive or
application sensitive. For example, a CRF seg-
menter trained on the SIGhan MSR training data,
which achieves an F-measure of 96.5% in the MSR
testing data, only has 83.8% when applied to the
PKU testing data; and the same CRF segmenter
trained on the PKU training data achieves 94.5% on
the PKU testing data. When one starts a new ap-
plication that requires word segmentation in a new
domain, it is likely that there is only a very small
amount of segmented data available.

We propose the approach of co-training for Chi-
nese word segmentation for the semi-supervised set-
ting where there is only a limited amount of human-
segmented data available, but there exists a relatively
large amount of in-domain unsegmented data. We
split the feature set into character-level features and
word-level features, and then build a character-based
segmenter with character-level features and a word-
based segmenter with word-level features, using the
limited amount of available segmented data. These
two segmenters then iteratively educate and improve
each other by making use of the large amount of
unsegmented data. Finally we combine the word-
level and character-level features with an advanced
segmenter to further improve the co-training perfor-
mance. Our experiments show that using 10% data
as segmented data and the other 90% data as unseg-
mented data, co-training reaches 20% performance
improvement achieved by supervised training with
all data in the SIGHAN 2005 PKU corpus and 31%
in the CU corpus.

Acknowledgments

The authors thank Weiwei Sun for helping with
data setup and technical consultation of the Sun-
Segmenter. The authors also thank Christian Mon-
son and Nicola Ueffing for helpful discussions.

References

Steven Abney. 2002. Bootstrapping. In Proceedings of
the 40th Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 360–367.

Galen Andrew. 2006. A hybrid markov/semi-markov
conditional random field for sequence segmentation.
In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 465–
472.

Avrim Blum and Tom Mitchell. 1998. Combining la-
beled and unlabeled data with co-training. In Proceed-
ings of the eleventh annual conference on Computa-
tional learning theory, pages 92–100.

Michael Collins and Yoram Singer. 1999. Unsuper-
vised models for named entity classification. In Joint
SIGDAT Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing and Very Large Corpora, pages
100–110.

Sanjoy Dasgupta, Michael L. Littman, and David
Mcallester. 2001. Pac generalization bounds for co-
training. In Proceedings of Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, pages 375–382.

Jianfeng Gao, Mu Li, Andi Wu, and Chang-Ning Huang.
2005. Chinese word segmentation and named entity
recognition: A pragmatic approach. Computationl
Linguistics, 31(4):574.

Umit Guz, Sebastien Cuendet, Dilek Hakkani-Tur, and
Gokhan Tur. 2007. Co-training using prosodic and
lexical information for sentence segmentation. In pro-
ceedings of INTERSPEECH, pages 2597–2600.

Zhongguo Li and Maosong Sun. 2009. Punctuation as
implicit annotations for chinese word segmentation.
Comput. Linguist., 35:505–512, December.

Percy Liang. 2005. Semi-supervised learning for nat-
ural language. Master’s thesis, MASSACHUSETTS
INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY, May.

Tetsuji Nakagawa. 2004. Chinese and japanese word
segmentation using word-level and character-level in-
formation. In Proceedings of the 20th international
conference on Computational Linguistics.

Kamal Nigam and Rayid Ghani. 2000. Analyzing the
effectiveness and applicability of co-training. In Pro-
ceedings of the ninth international conference on In-
formation and knowledge management, pages 86–93.

Fuchun Peng, Fangfang Feng, and Andrew McCallum.
2004. Chinese segmentation and new word detection
using conditional random fields. In Proceedings of the
20th international conference on Computational Lin-
guistics.

David Pierce and Claire Cardie. 2001. Limitations of
co-training for natural language learning from large
datasets. In In Proceedings of the 2001 Conference on

1199



Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 1–9.

Weiwei Sun and Jia Xu. 2011. Enhancing chinese word
segmentation using unlabeled data. In Proceedings of
the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 970–979, Edinburgh,
Scotland, UK., July.

Xu Sun, Yaozhong Zhang, Takuya Matsuzaki, Yoshimasa
Tsuruoka, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2009. A discrimi-
native latent variable chinese segmenter with hybrid
word/character information. In Proceedings of Human
Language Technologies: The 2009 Annual Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 56–64.

Weiwei Sun. 2010. Word-based and character-based
word segmentation models: comparison and combi-
nation. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics: Posters, pages
1211–1219.

W. J. Teahan, Rodger McNab, Yingying Wen, and Ian H.
Witten. 2000. A compression-based algorithm for
chinese word segmentation. Computational Linguis-
tics, 26(3):375–393, September.

Gokhan Tur. 2009. Co-adaptation: Adaptive co-
training for semi-supervised learning. In proceedings
of ICASSP, pages 3721–3724.

Wen Wang, Zhongqiang Huang, and Mary Harper. 2007.
Semi-supervised learning for part-of-speech tagging of
mandarin transcribed speech. In In ICASSP.

Nianwen Xue. 2003. Chinese word segmentation as
character tagging. Computational Linguistics and
Chinese Language Processing, pages 29–48.

Yue Zhang and Stephen Clark. 2007. Chinese segmenta-
tion with a word-based perceptron algorithm. In Pro-
ceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association
of Computational Linguistics, pages 840–847, Prague,
Czech Republic, June. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Hai Zhao, Chang-Ning Huang, Mu Li, and Bao-Liang
Lu. 2010. A unified character-based tagging frame-
work for chinese word segmentation. ACM Trans-
actions on Asian Language Information Processing,
9(2):5:1–5:32, June.

1200


