










































Multi-Relational Latent Semantic Analysis


Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1602–1612,
Seattle, Washington, USA, 18-21 October 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Multi-Relational Latent Semantic Analysis

Kai-Wei Chang∗
University of Illinois

Urbana, IL 61801, USA
kchang10@illinois.edu

Wen-tau Yih Christopher Meek
Microsoft Research

Redmond, WA 98052, USA
{scottyih,meek}@microsoft.com

Abstract

We present Multi-Relational Latent Seman-
tic Analysis (MRLSA) which generalizes La-
tent Semantic Analysis (LSA). MRLSA pro-
vides an elegant approach to combining mul-
tiple relations between words by construct-
ing a 3-way tensor. Similar to LSA, a low-
rank approximation of the tensor is derived
using a tensor decomposition. Each word in
the vocabulary is thus represented by a vec-
tor in the latent semantic space and each re-
lation is captured by a latent square matrix.
The degree of two words having a specific
relation can then be measured through sim-
ple linear algebraic operations. We demon-
strate that by integrating multiple relations
from both homogeneous and heterogeneous
information sources, MRLSA achieves state-
of-the-art performance on existing benchmark
datasets for two relations, antonymy and is-a.

1 Introduction

Continuous semantic space representations have
proven successful in a wide variety of NLP and IR
applications, such as document clustering (Xu et al.,
2003) and cross-lingual document retrieval (Dumais
et al., 1997; Platt et al., 2010) at the document level
and sentential semantics (Guo and Diab, 2012; Guo
and Diab, 2013) and syntactic parsing (Socher et
al., 2013) at the sentence level. Such representa-
tions also play an important role in applications for
lexical semantics, such as word sense disambigua-
tion (Boyd-Graber et al., 2007), measuring word

∗Work conducted while interning at Microsoft Research.

similarity (Deerwester et al., 1990) and relational
similarity (Turney, 2006; Zhila et al., 2013; Mikolov
et al., 2013). In many of these applications, La-
tent Semantic Analysis (LSA) (Deerwester et al.,
1990) has been widely used, serving as a fundamen-
tal component or as a strong baseline.

LSA operates by mapping text objects, typically
documents and words, to a latent semantic space.
The proximity of the vectors in this space implies
that the original text objects are semantically re-
lated. However, one well-known limitation of LSA
is that it is unable to differentiate fine-grained re-
lations. For instance, when applied to lexical se-
mantics, synonyms and antonyms may both be as-
signed high similarity scores (Landauer and Laham,
1998; Landauer, 2002). Asymmetric relations like
hyponyms and hypernyms also cannot be differenti-
ated. Although there exists some recent work, such
as PILSA which tries to overcome this weakness
of LSA by introducing the notion of polarity (Yih
et al., 2012). This extension, however, can only
handle two opposing relations (e.g., synonyms and
antonyms), leaving open the challenge of encoding
multiple relations.

In this paper, we propose Multi-Relational Latent
Semantic Analysis (MRLSA), which strictly gener-
alizes LSA to incorporate information of multiple
relations concurrently. Similar to LSA or PILSA
when applied to lexical semantics, each word is still
mapped to a vector in the latent space. However,
when measuring whether two words have a specific
relation (e.g., antonymy or is-a), the word vectors
will be mapped to a new space according to the rela-
tion where the degree of having this relation will be

1602



judged by cosine similarity. The raw data construc-
tion in MRLSA is straightforward and similar to the
document-term matrix in LSA. However, instead of
using one matrix to capture all relations, we extend
the representation to a 3-way tensor. Each slice cor-
responds to the document-term matrix in the original
LSA design but for a specific relation. Analogous to
LSA, the whole linear transformation mapping is de-
rived through tensor decomposition, which provides
a low-rank approximation of the original tensor. As
a result, previously unseen relations between two
words can be discovered, and the information en-
coded in other relations can influence the construc-
tion of the latent representations, and thus poten-
tially improves the overall quality. In addition, the
information in different slices can come from het-
erogeneous sources (conceptually similar to (Riedel
et al., 2013)), which not only improves the model,
but also extends the word coverage in a reliable way.

We provide empirical evidence that MRLSA is ef-
fective using two different word relations: antonymy
and is-a. We use the benchmark GRE test of closest-
opposites (Mohammad et al., 2008) to show that
MRLSA performs comparably to PILSA, which was
the pervious state-of-the-art approach on this prob-
lem, when given the same amount of information. In
addition, when other words and relations are avail-
able, potentially from additional resources, MRLSA
is able to outperform previous methods significantly.
We use the is-a relation to demonstrate that MRLSA
is capable of handling asymmetric relations. We
take the list of word pairs from the Class-Inclusion
(i.e., is-a) relations in SemEval-2012 Task 2 (Jur-
gens et al., 2012), and use our model to measure the
degree of two words have this relation. The mea-
sures derived from our model correlate with human
judgement better than the best system that partici-
pated in the task.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We
first survey some related work in Section 2, followed
by a more detailed description of LSA and PILSA
in Section 3. Our proposed model, MRLSA, is pre-
sented in Section 4. Section 5 presents our experi-
mental results. Finally, Section 6 concludes the pa-
per.

2 Related Work

MRLSA can be viewed as a model that derives gen-
eral continuous space representations for capturing
lexical semantics, with the help of tensor decompo-
sition techniques. We highlight some recent work
related to our approach.

The most commonly used continuous space rep-
resentation of text is arguably the vector space
model (VSM) (Turney and Pantel, 2010). In this
representation, each text object can be represented
by a high-dimensional sparse vector, such as a
term-vector or a document-vector that denotes the
statistics of term occurrences (Salton et al., 1975)
in a large corpus. The text can also be repre-
sented by a low-dimensional dense vector derived
by linear projection models like latent semantic
analysis (LSA) (Deerwester et al., 1990), by dis-
criminative learning methods like Siamese neural
networks (Yih et al., 2011), recurrent neural net-
works (Mikolov et al., 2013) and recursive neu-
ral networks (Socher et al., 2011), or by graphical
models such as probabilistic latent semantic anal-
ysis (PLSA) (Hofmann, 1999) and latent Dirichlet
allocation (LDA) (Blei et al., 2003). As a general-
ization of LSA, MRLSA is also a linear projection
model. However, while the words are represented
by vectors as well, multiple relations between words
are captured separately by matrices.

In the context of lexical semantics, VSMs provide
a natural way of measuring semantic word related-
ness by computing the distance between the cor-
responding vectors, which has been a standard ap-
proach (Agirre et al., 2009; Reisinger and Mooney,
2010; Yih and Qazvinian, 2012). These approaches
do not apply directly to the problem of modeling
other types of relations. Existing methods that do
handle multiple relations often use a model com-
bination scheme to integrate signals from various
types of information sources. For instance, mor-
phological variations discovered from the Google
n-gram corpus have been combined with informa-
tion from thesauri and vector-based word related-
ness models for detecting antonyms (Mohammad et
al., 2008). An alternative approach proposed by Tur-
ney (2008) that handles synonyms, antonyms and
associations is to use a uniform approach by first
reducing the problem to determining whether two

1603



pairs of words can be analogous, and then predicting
it using a supervised model with features based on
the frequencies of patterns in the corpus. Similarly,
to measure whether two word pairs have the same
relation, Zhila et al. (2013) proposed to combine het-
erogeneous models, which achieved state-of-the-art
performance. In comparison, MRLSA models mul-
tiple lexical relations holistically. The degree that
two words having a particular relation is estimated
using the same linear function of the corresponding
vectors and matrix.

Tensor decomposition generalizes matrix factor-
ization and has been applied to several NLP applica-
tions recently. For example, Cohen et al. (2013) pro-
posed an approximation algorithm for PCFG pars-
ing that relies on Kruskal decomposition. Van de
Cruys et al. (2013) modeled the composition of
subject-verb-object triples using Tucker decompo-
sition, which results in a better similarity measure
for transitive phrases. Similar to this construction
but used in the community-based question answer-
ing (CQA) scenario, Qiu et al. (2013) represented
triples of question title, question content and answer
as a tensor and applied 3-mode SVD to derive latent
semantic representations for question matching. The
construction of MRLSA bears some resemblance to
the work that use tensors to capture triples. How-
ever, our goal of modeling different relations for lex-
ical semantics is very different from the intended us-
age of tensor decomposition in the existing work.

3 Latent Semantic Analysis

Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) (Deerwester et al.,
1990) is a widely used continuous vector space
model that maps words and documents into a low
dimensional space. LSA consists of two main steps.
First, taking a collection of d documents that con-
tains words from a vocabulary list of size n, it first
constructs a d × n document-term matrix W to en-
code the occurrence information of a word in a docu-
ment. For instance, in its simplest form, the element
Wi,j can be the term frequency of the j-th word in
the i-th document. In practice, a weighting scheme
that better captures the importance of a word in the
document, such as TF×IDF (Salton et al., 1975),
is often used instead. Notice that “document” here
simply means a group of words and has been applied

W V X = U
T

Figure 1: SVD applied to a d×n document-term ma-
trix W. The rank-k approximation, X, is the mul-
tiplication of U, Σ and VT , where U and V are
d × k and n × k orthonormal matrices and Σ is a
k × k diagonal matrix. The column vectors of VT
multiplied by the singular values Σ represent words
in the latent semantic space.

to various texts including news articles, sentences
and bags of words. Once the matrix is constructed,
the second step is to apply singular value decom-
position (SVD) to W in order to derive a low-rank
approximation. To have a rank-k approximation, X
is the reconstruction matrix of W, defined as

W ≈ X = UΣVT (1)

where the dimensions of U and V are d× k and
n× k, respectively, and Σ is a k × k diagonal ma-
trix. In addition, the columns in U and V are or-
thonormal and the elements in Σ are the singular
values and are conventionally reverse-ordered. Fig-
ure 1 illustrates this decomposition.

LSA can be used to compute the similarity be-
tween two documents or two words in the latent
space. For instance, to compare the u-th and v-th
words in the vocabulary, one can compute the co-
sine similarity of the u-th and v-th column vectors
of X, the reconstruction matrix of W. In contrast to
a direct lexical matching via the columns of W, the
similarity measure computed as a result of the SVD
may have a nonzero similarity score even if these
two words do not co-occur in any documents. This
is due to the fact that those words can share some
latent components.

An alternative view of using LSA is to treat the
column vectors of ΣVT as a representation of the
words in a new k-dimensional latent space. This
comes from the observation that the inner product
of every two column vectors in X is the inner prod-
uct of the corresponding column vectors of ΣVT ,

1604



joyfulness

gladden

sad

1

anger

1

-1

0

1

1

0

0

-1

0

1

0

0

-1

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Figure 2: The matrix construction of PILSA. The
vocabulary is {joy, gladden, sorrow, sadden, anger,
emotion, feeling} and target words are {joyfulness,
gladden, sad, anger}. For ease of presentation,
we show the numbers with 0-1 values instead of
TF×IDF scores. The polarity (i.e., sign) indicates
whether the term in the vocabulary is a synonym or
antonym of the target word.

which can be derived from the equations below.

XT X = (UΣVT )T (UΣVT )

= VΣUT UΣVT (Σ is diagonal)

= VΣ2VT (Columns of U are orthonormal)

= (ΣVT )T (ΣVT ) (2)

Thus, the semantic relatedness between the i-th and
j-th words can be computed by cosine similarity1:

cos(X:,i,X:,j) (3)

When used to compare words, one well-known
limitation of LSA is that the score captures the gen-
eral notion of semantic similarity, and is unable
to distinguish fine-grained word relations, such as
antonyms (Landauer and Laham, 1998; Landauer,
2002). This is due to the fact that the raw matrix rep-
resentation only records the occurrences of words in
documents without knowing the specific relation be-
tween the word and document. To address this issue,
Yih et al. (2012) proposed a polarity inducing latent
semantic analysis model recently, which we intro-
duce next.

1Cosine similarity is equivalent to the inner product of the
normalized vectors.

3.1 Polarity Inducing Latent Semantic
Analysis

In order to distinguish antonyms from synonyms,
the polarity inducing LSA (PILSA) model (Yih et
al., 2012) takes a thesaurus as input. Synonyms and
antonyms of the same target word are grouped to-
gether as a “document” and a document-term matrix
is constructed accordingly as done in LSA. Because
each word in a group belongs to either one of the two
opposite relations, synonymy and antonymy, the po-
larity information is induced by flipping the signs of
antonyms. While the absolute value of each element
in the matrix is still the same TF×IDF score, the
elements that correspond to the antonyms become
negative.

This design has an intriguing effect. When com-
paring two words using the cosine similarity (or sim-
ply inner product) of their corresponding column
vectors in the matrix, the score of a synonym pair
remains positive, but the score of an antonym pair
becomes negative. Figure 2 illustrates this design
using a simplified matrix as example.

Once the matrix is constructed, PILSA applies
SVD as done in LSA, which generalizes the model
to go beyond lexical matching. The sign of the co-
sine score of the column vectors of any two words
indicates whether they are close to synonyms or to
antonyms and the absolute value reflects the degree
of the relation. When all the column vectors are nor-
malized to unit vectors, it can also be viewed as syn-
onyms are clustered together and antonyms lie on
the opposite sides of a unit sphere. Although PILSA
successfully extends LSA to handle not just one sin-
gle occurrence relation, the extension is limited to
encoding two opposing relations

4 Multi-Relational Latent Semantic
Analysis

The fundamental reason why it is difficult to handle
multiple relations is due to the 2-dimensional ma-
trix representation. In order to overcome this, we
encode the raw data in a 3-way tensor. Each slice
captures a particular relation and is in the format of
the document-term matrix in LSA. Just as in LSA,
where the low-rank approximation by SVD helps
generalize the representation and discover unseen
relations, we apply a tensor decomposition method,

1605



joyfulness

gladden

sad

1

anger

1

0

0

1

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

(a) Synonym layer

joyfulness

gladden

sad

0

anger

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

(b) Antonym layer

joyfulness

gladden

sad

0

anger

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

1

1

(c) Hypernym layer

Figure 3: The three slices of MRLSA raw tensorW for an example with vocabulary {joy, gladden, sorrow,
sadden, anger, emotion, feeling} and target words {joyfulness, gladden, sad, anger}. Figures 3(a), 3(b), 3(c)
show the matrices W:,:,syn, W:,:,ant, W:,:,hyper, respectively. Rows represent documents (see definition in
text), and columns represent words. For ease of presentation, we show numbers with 0-1 values instead of
TF×IDF scores.

the Tucker decomposition, to the tensor.

4.1 Representing Multi-Relational Data in
Tensors

A tensor is simply a multi-dimensional array. In this
work, we use a 3-way tensor W to encode multi-
ple word relations. An element of W is denoted
by Wi,j,k using its indices, and W:,:,k represents
the k-th slice of W (a slice of a 3-way tensor is
a matrix, obtained by fixing the third index). Fol-
lowing (Kolda and Bader, 2009), a fiber of a ten-
sor W:,j,k is a vector, which is a high order analog
of a matrix row or column.

When constructing the raw tensorW in MRLSA,
each slice is analogous to the document-term ma-
trix in LSA, but created based on the data of a par-
ticular relation, such as synonyms. With a slight
abuse of notation, we sometimes use the value rather
than index when there is no confusion. For in-
stance, W:,“word”,k represents the fiber correspond-
ing to the “word” in slice k, and W:,:,syn refers to
the slice that encodes the synonymy relation. Below
we use an example to compare this construction to
the raw matrix in PILSA, and discuss how it extends
LSA.

Suppose we are interested in representing two re-
lations, synonymy and antonymy. The raw tensor in
MRLSA would then consist of two slices, W:,:,syn
and W:,:,ant, to encode synonyms and antonyms of
target words from a knowledge source (e.g., a the-
saurus). Each row in W:,:,syn represents the syn-

onyms of a target word, and the corresponding
row in W:,:,ant encodes its antonyms. Figures 3(a)
and 3(b) illustrate an example, where “joy”, ”glad-
den” are synonyms of the target word “joyfulness”
and “sorrow” is its antonym. Therefore, the values
of the corresponding entries are 1. Notice that the
matrix W′ = W:,:,syn − W:,:,ant is identical to the
PILSA raw matrix. We can extend the construction
above to enable MRLSA to utilize other semantic
relations (e.g., hypernymy) by adding a slice cor-
responding to each relation of interest. Fig. 3(c)
demonstrates how to add another slice W:,:,hyper to
the tensor for encoding hypernyms.

4.2 Tensor Decomposition

The MRLSA raw tensor encodes relations in one or
more data resources, such as thesauri. However, the
knowledge from a thesaurus is usually noisy and in-
complete. In this section, we derive a low-rank ap-
proximation of the tensor to generalize the knowl-
edge. This step is analogous to the rank-k approxi-
mation in LSA.

Various tensor decomposition methods have been
proposed in literature. Among them, Tucker decom-
position (Tucker, 1966) is recognized as a multi-
dimensional extension of SVD and has been widely
used in many applications. An illustration of this
method is in Fig. 4(a). In Tucker decomposition,
a d× n×m tensor W is decomposed into four
components G,U,V,T. A low-rank approximation

1606



X U VG

T

V
T=W  

(a) Tucker Tensor Decomposition

X U VS:,:,1
T

=

S

(b) Our Reformulation

Figure 4: Fig. 4(a) illustrates the Tucker tensor decomposition method which factors a 3-way tensorW to
three orthogonal matrices, U,V,T, and a core tensor G. We further apply a n-mode matrix product on the
core tensor G with T. Consequently, each slice of the resulted core tensor S (a square matrix) captures a
semantic relation type, and each column of VT is a vector representing a word.

X ofW is defined by

Wi,j,k ≈ Xi,j,k

=

R1∑
r1=1

R2∑
r2=1

R3∑
r3=1

Gr1,r2,r3Ui,r1Vj,r2Tk,r3 ,

where G is a core tensor with dimensionsR1×R2×
R3 and U,V,T are orthogonal matrices with di-
mensions d × R1, n × R2,m × R3, respectively.
The rank parameters R1 ≤ d,R2 ≤ n,R3 ≤ m are
given as input to the algorithm. In MRLSA, m (the
number of relations) is usually small, while d and n
are typically large (often in the scale of hundreds
of thousands). Therefore, we choose R1 = R2 = τ ,
τ � d, n andR3 = m, where τ is typically less than
1000.

To make the analogy to SVD clear, we rewrite the
results of Tucker decomposition by performing a n-
mode matrix product over the core tensor G with the
matrix T. This produces a tensor S where each slice
is a linear combination of the slices of G with coeffi-
cients given by T (see (Kolda and Bader, 2009) for
detail). That is, we have

S:,:,k =
m∑

t=1

Tt,kG:,:,t, ∀k.

An illustration is shown in Fig. 4(b), Then, a
straightforward calculation shows that k-th slice of
tensorW is approximated by

W:,:,k ≈ X:,:,k = US:,:,kVT . (4)

Comparing Eq. (4) to Eq. (1), one can observe
that matrices U and V play similar roles here, and

each slice of the core tensor S is analogous to Σ.
However, the square matrix G:,:,k is not necessary
to be diagonal. As in SVD, the column vectors
of G:,:,kVT (capture both word and relation infor-
mation) behave similarly to the column vectors of
the original tensor sliceW:,:,k.

4.3 Measuring the Degrees of Word Relations
In principle, the raw information in the input ten-
sor W can be used for computing lexical similarity
using the cosine score between the column vectors
for two words from the same slice of the tensor. To
measure the degree of other relations, however, our
approach requires one to specify a pivot slice. The
key role of the pivot slice is to expand the lexical
coverage of the relation of interest to additional lexi-
cal entries and, for this reason, the pivot slice should
be chosen to capture the equivalence of the lexical
entries. In this paper, we use the synonymy relation
as our pivot slice. First we consider measuring the
degree of a relation rel holding between the i-th and
j-th words using the raw tensor W , which can be
computed as

cos
(
W:,i,syn,W:,j,rel

)
. (5)

This measurement can be motivated from the logical
rule: syn(wordi, target) ∧ rel(target,wordj) →
rel(wordi,wordj), where the pivot relation syn ex-
pands the coverage of the relation of interest rel.

Turning to the use of the tensor decomposition,
we use a similar derivation to Eq. (3), and measure
the degree of relation rel between two words by

cos
(
S:,:,synVTi,:,S:,:,relVTj,:

)
. (6)

1607



For instance, the degree of antonymy between
“joy” and “sorrow” is measured by the co-
sine similarity between the respective fibers
cos(X:,“joy”,syn,X:,“sorrow”,ant). We can encode both
symmetric relations (e.g., antonymy and synonymy)
and asymmetric relations (e.g., hypernymy and
hyponymy) in the same tensor representation. For a
symmetric relation, we use both cos(X:,i,syn,X:,j,rel)
and cos(X:,j,syn,X:,i,rel) and measure the degree of
a symmetric relation by the average of these two
cosine similarity scores. However, for asymmetric
relations, we use only cos(X:,i,syn,X:,j,rel).

5 Experiments

We evaluate MRLSA on two tasks: answering the
closest-opposite GRE questions and measuring de-
grees of various class-inclusion (i.e., is-a) relations.
In both tasks, we design the experiments to empir-
ically validate the following claims. When encod-
ing two opposite relations from the same source,
MRLSA performs comparably to PILSA. However,
MRLSA generalizes LSA to model multiple rela-
tions, which could be obtained from both homoge-
neous and heterogeneous data sources. As a result,
the performance of a target task can be further im-
proved.

5.1 Experimental Setup

We construct the raw tensors to encode a particular
relation in each slice based on two data sources.

Encarta The Encarta thesaurus is developed by
Bloomsbury Publishing Plc2. For each target word,
it provides a list of synonyms and antonyms. We
use the same version of the thesaurus as in (Yih et
al., 2012), which contains about 47k words and a
vocabulary list of approximately 50k words.

WordNet We use four types of relations from
WordNet: synonymy, antonymy, hypernymy and
hyponymy. The number of target words and the
size of the vocabulary in our version are 117,791
and 149,400, respectively. WordNet has better vo-
cabulary coverage, but fewer antonym pairs. For
instance, the WordNet antonym slice contains only
46,945 nonzero entries, while the Encarta antonym
slice has 129,733.

2http://www.bloomsbury.com

We apply a memory-efficient Tucker decomposi-
tion algorithm (Kolda and Sun, 2008) implemented
in tensor toolbox v2.5 (Bader et al., 2012)3 to factor
the tensor. The largest tensor considered in this pa-
per can be decomposed in about 3 hours using less
than 4GB of memory with a commodity PC.

5.2 Answering GRE Antonym Questions

The first task is to answer the closest-opposite ques-
tions from the GRE test provided by Mohammad et
al. (2008)4. Each question in this test consists of
a target word and five candidate words, where the
goal is to pick the candidate word that has the most
opposite meaning to the target word. In order to
have a fair comparison, we use the same data split
as in (Mohammad et al., 2008), with 162 questions
used for the development set and 950 for test. Fol-
lowing (Mohammad et al., 2008; Yih et al., 2012),
we report the results in precision (accuracy of the
questions that the system attempts to answer), re-
call (percentage of the questions answered correctly
over all questions) and F1 (the harmonic mean of
precision and recall).

We tune two sets of parameters using the devel-
opment set: (1) the rank parameter τ in the tensor
decomposition and (2) the scaling factors of differ-
ent slices of the tensor. The rank parameter spec-
ifies the number of dimensions of the latent space.
In the experiments, We pick the best value of τ from
{100, 200, 300, 500, 750, 1000}. The scaling factors
adjust the values of each slice of the tensor. The el-
ements of each slice are multiplied by the scaling
factor before factorization. This is important be-
cause Tucker decomposition minimizes the recon-
struction error (the Frobenius norm of the residual
tensor). As a result, the slice with a larger range of
values becomes more influential to U and V. In this
work, we fixW:,:,ant, and search for the scaling fac-
tor of W:,:,syn in {0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 4} and the factors
ofW:,:,hyper andW:,:,hypo in {0.0625, 0.125, 0.25}.

Table 1 summarizes the results of training

3http://www.sandia.gov/˜tgkolda/
TensorToolbox. The Tucker decomposition involves
performing SVD on a large matrix. We modify the MATLAB
code of tensor toolbox to use the built-in svd function instead
of svds. This modification reduces both the running time and
memory usage.

4http://www.saifmohammad.com

1608



Dev. Set Test Set
Prec. Rec. F1 Prec. Rec. F1

WordNet Lookup 0.40 0.40 0.40 0.42 0.41 0.42
WordNet RawTensor 0.42 0.41 0.42 0.42 0.41 0.42
WordNet PILSA 0.63 0.62 0.62 0.60 0.60 0.60
WordNet MRLSA:Syn+Ant 0.63 0.62 0.62 0.59 0.58 0.59
WordNet MRLSA:4-layers 0.66 0.65 0.65 0.61 0.59 0.60
Encarta Lookup 0.65 0.61 0.63 0.61 0.56 0.59
Encarta RawTensor 0.67 0.64 0.65 0.62 0.57 0.59
Encarta PILSA 0.86 0.81 0.84 0.81 0.74 0.77
Encarta MRLSA:Syn+Ant 0.87 0.82 0.84 0.82 0.74 0.78
MRLSA:WordNet+Encarta 0.88 0.85 0.87 0.81 0.77 0.79

Table 1: GRE antonym test results of models based on Encarta and WordNet data in precision, recall and F1.
RawTensor evaluates the performance of the tensor with 2 slices encoding synonyms and antonyms be-
fore decomposition (see Eq. (5)), which is comparable to checking the original data directly (Lookup).
MRLSA:Syn+Ant applies Tucker decomposition to the raw tensor and measures the degree of antonymy
using Eq. (6). The result is similar to that of PILSA (see Sec. 3.1). MRLSA:4-layers adds hypernyms and
hyponyms from WordNet; MRLSA:WordNet+Encarta consists of synonyms/antonyms from Encarta and hy-
pernyms/hyponyms from WordNet, where the target words are aligned using the synonymy relations. Both
models demonstrate the advantage of encoding more relations, from either the same or different resources.

MRLSA using two different corpora, Encarta and
WordNet. The performance of the MRLSA raw
tensor is close to that of looking up the thesaurus.
This indicates the tensor representation is able to
capture the word relations explicitly described in
the thesaurus. After conducting tensor decomposi-
tion, MRLSA:Syn+Ant achieves similar results to
PILSA. This confirms our claim that when giv-
ing the same among of information, MRLSA per-
forms at least comparably to PILSA. However, the
true power of MRLSA is its ability to incorpo-
rate other semantic relations to boost the perfor-
mance of the target task. For example, when
we add the hypernymy and hyponymy relations to
the tensor, these class-inclusion relations provide a
weak signal to help resolve antonymy. We sus-
pect that this is due to the fact that antonyms typ-
ically share the same properties but only have the
opposite meaning on one particular semantic di-
mension. For instance, the antonyms “sadness”
and “happiness” are different forms of emotion.
When two words are hyponyms of a target word,
the likelihood that they are antonyms should thus
be increased. We show that the target relations
and these auxiliary semantic relations can be col-

lected from the same data source (e.g., WordNet
MRLSA:4-layers) or from multiple, heterogeneous
sources (e.g., MRLSA:WordNET+Encarta). In both
cases, the performance of the model improves as
more relations are incorporated. Moreover, our ex-
periments show that adding the hypernym and hy-
ponym layers from WordNet improves modeling
antonym relations based on the Encarta thesaurus.
This suggests that the weak signal from a resource
with a large vocabulary (e.g., WordNet) can help
predict relations between out-of-vocabulary words
and thus improve the recall.

To better understand the model, we examine the
top antonyms for three question words from the
GRE test. The lists below show antonyms and their
MRLSA scores for each of the GRE question words
as determined by the MRLSA:WordNET+Encarta
model. Antonyms that can be found directly in the
Encarta thesaurus are in italics.

inanimate alive (0.91), living (0.90), bodily (0.90), in-
the-flesh (0.89), incarnate (0.89)

alleviate exacerbate (0.68), make-worse (0.67), in-
flame (0.66), amplify (0.65), stir-up (0.64)

relish detest (0.33), abhor (0.33), abominate (0.33), de-
spise (0.33), loathe (0.31)

We can see that from these examples, MRLSA not

1609



Dev. Test
1a (Taxonomic) 1b (Functional) 1c (Singular) 1d (Plural) Avg.

WordNet Lookup 52.9 34.5 41.4 34.3 36.7
WordNet RawTensor 51.0 38.3 50.0 42.1 43.5
WordNet MRLSA:Syn+Hypony 55.8 41.7 (43.2) 51.0 (51.4) 37.5 (44.4) 43.4 (46.3)
WordNet MRLSA:4-layers 52.9 51.5 (53.9) 51.9 (60.0) 43.5 (50.5) 49.0 (54.8)
MRLSA:WordNet+Encarta 62.1 55.3 (58.7) 57.1 (65.7) 48.6 (53.7) 55.8 (60.1)
UTDNB (Rink and Harabagiu, 2012) - 38.3 36.7 28.2 34.4

Table 2: Results of measuring the class-inclusion (is-a) relations in MaxDiff accuracy (see text for de-
tail). RawTensor has synonym and hyponym slices and measures the degree of is-a relation using Eq. (5).
MRLSA:Syn+Hypo factors the raw tensor and judges the relation by Eq. (6). The constructions of
MRLSA:4-layers and MRLSA:WordNet+Encarta are the same as in Sec. 5.2 (see the caption of Table 1
for detail). For MRLSA models, numbers shown in the parentheses are the results when parameters are
tuned using the test sets. UTDNB is the results of the best performing system in SemEval-2012 Task 2.

only preserves the antonyms in the thesaurus, but
also discovers additional ones, such as exacerbate
and inflame for “alleviate”. Another interesting find-
ing is that while the scores are useful in ranking
the candidate words, they might not be comparable
across different question words. This could be an
issue for some applications, which need to make a
binary decision on whether two words are antonyms.

5.3 Measuring degrees of Is-A relations

We evaluate MRLSA using the class-inclusion por-
tion of SemEval-2012 Task 2 data (Jurgens et al.,
2012). Here the goal is to measure the degree
of two words having the is-a relation. Five an-
notated datasets are provided for different subcate-
gories of this relation: 1a-taxonomic, 1b-functional,
1c-singular, 1d-plural, 1e-class individual. We omit
1e because it focuses on real world entities (e.g.,
queen:Elizabeth, river:Nile), which are not included
in WordNet.

Each dataset contains about 100 questions based
on approximately 40 word pairs. The question con-
sists of 4 randomly chosen word pairs and asks the
best and worst pairs that exemplify the specific is-a
relation. The performance is measured by the av-
erage prediction accuracy, also called the MaxDiff
accuracy (Louviere and Woodworth, 1991).

Because the questions are generated from the
same set of word pairs, these questions are not mutu-
ally independent. Therefore, it is not proper to split
the data of each subcategory into the development
and test sets. Alternatively, we follow the setting

of SemEval-2012 Task 2 and use the first subcat-
egory (1a-taxonomy) to tune the model and eval-
uate its performance based on the results on other
datasets. Since the models are tuned and tested on
different types of subcategories, they might not be
the optimal ones when evaluated on the test sets.
Therefore, we show results using the best parame-
ters tuned on the development set and those tuned on
the test set, where the latter suggests a performance
upper-bound. Besides the rank parameter, we tune
the scaling factors of the synonym, hypernym and
hyponym slices from {4, 16, 64}. The scaling factor
of the antonym slice is fixed to 1.

Table 2 shows the performance in MaxDiff accu-
racy. Results show that even the raw tensor repre-
sentation (RawTensor) performs better than Word-
Net lookup. We suspect that this is because the
tensor representation can capture the fact that the
hyponyms of a word are usually synonymous to
each other. By performing Tucker decomposition
on the raw Tensor, MRLSA achieves better per-
formance. MRLSA:4-layers further leverages the
information from antonyms and hypernyms and
thus improves the model. As we notice in the
GRE antonym test, models based on the Encarta
thesaurus perform better in predicting antonyms.
Therefore, it is interesting to check if combining
synonyms and antonyms from Encarta helps. As
a result, MRLSA:WordNet+Encarta improves over
MRLSA:4-layers significantly. This demonstrates
again that MRLSA can leverage knowledge stored in
heterogeneous resources. Notably, MRLSA outper-

1610



forms the best system participated in the SemEval-
2012 task with a large margin, with a difference of
21.4 in MaxDiff accuracy.

Next we examine the top words that have the is-
a relation relative to three question words from the
task. The lists below show the hyponyms and their
respective MRLSA scores for each of the question
words as determined by MRLSA:4-layers.

bird ostrich (0.75), gamecock (0.75), nighthawk (0.75),
amazon (0.74), parrot (0.74)

automobile minivan (0.48), wagon (0.48), taxi (0.46),
minicab (0.45), gypsy cab (0.45)

vegetable buttercrunch (0.61), yellow turnip (0.61), ro-
maine (0.61), chipotle (0.61), chilli (0.61)

Although the model in general does a good job
finding hyponyms, we observe that some suggested
words, such as buttercrunch (a mild lettuce) vs.
“vegetable”, do not seem intuitive (e.g., compared to
carrot). Having one additional slice to capture the
general term co-occurrence relation may help im-
prove the model in this respect.

6 Conclusions

In this paper, we propose Multi-Relational Latent
Semantic Analysis (MRLSA) which generalizes La-
tent Semantic Analysis (LSA) for lexical seman-
tics. MRLSA models multiple word relations by
leveraging a 3-way tensor, where each slice cap-
tures one particular relation. A low-rank approx-
imation of the tensor is then derived using a ten-
sor decomposition. Consequently, words in the vo-
cabulary are represented by vectors in the latent se-
mantic space, and each relation is captured by a
latent square matrix. Given two words, MRLSA
not only can measure their degree of having a spe-
cific relation, but also can discover unknown rela-
tions between them. These advantages have been
demonstrated in our experiments. By encoding re-
lations from both homogeneous or heterogeneous
data sources, MRLSA achieves state-of-the-art per-
formance on existing benchmark datasets for two re-
lations, antonymy and is-a.

For future work, we plan to explore directions that
aim for improving both the quality and word cover-
age of the model. For instance, the knowledge en-
coded by MRLSA can be enriched by adding more
relations from a variety of linguistic resources, in-
cluding the co-occurrence relations from large cor-

pora. On model refinement, we notice that MRLSA
can be viewed as a 3-layer neural network without
applying the sigmoid function. Following the strat-
egy of using Siamese neural networks to enhance
PILSA (Yih et al., 2012), training MRLSA with a
multi-task discriminative learning setting can be a
promising approach as well.

Acknowledgments

We thank Geoff Zweig for valuable discussions and
the anonymous reviewers for their comments.

References
E. Agirre, E. Alfonseca, K. Hall, J. Kravalova, M. Paşca

and A. Soroa. 2009. A study on similarity and re-
latedness using distributional and WordNet-based ap-
proaches. In NAACL ’09, pages 19–27.

Brett W. Bader, Tamara G. Kolda, et al. 2012. Matlab
tensor toolbox version 2.5. Available online, January.

David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, Michael I. Jordan, and
John Lafferty. 2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. Jour-
nal of Machine Learning Research, 3:993–1022.

Jordan L Boyd-Graber, David M Blei, and Xiaojin Zhu.
2007. A topic model for word sense disambiguation.
In EMNLP-CoNLL, pages 1024–1033.

Shay B. Cohen, Giorgio Satta, and Michael Collins.
2013. Approximate PCFG parsing using tensor de-
composition. In NAACL-HLT 2013, pages 487–496.

S. Deerwester, S. Dumais, G. Furnas, T. Landauer, and
R. Harshman. 1990. Indexing by latent semantic anal-
ysis. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science, 41(96).

S. Dumais, T. Letsche, M. Littman, and T. Landauer.
1997. Automatic cross-language retrieval using latent
semantic indexing. In AAAI-97 Spring Symposium Se-
ries: Cross-Language Text and Speech Retrieval.

Weiwei Guo and Mona Diab. 2012. Modeling sentences
in the latent space. In ACL 2012, pages 864–872.

Weiwei Guo and Mona Diab. 2013. Improving lexical
semantics for sentential semantics: Modeling selec-
tional preference and similar words in a latent variable
model. In NAACL-HLT 2013, pages 739–745.

Thomas Hofmann. 1999. Probabilistic latent semantic
analysis. In Proceedings of Uncertainty in Artificial
Intelligence, pages 289–296.

D. Jurgens, S. Mohammad, P. Turney, and K. Holyoak.
2012. SemEval-2012 Task 2: Measuring degrees of
relational similarity. In Proceedings of the Sixth Inter-
national Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval
2012), pages 356–364.

1611



Tamara G. Kolda and Brett W. Bader. 2009. Ten-
sor decompositions and applications. SIAM Review,
51(3):455–500, September.

Tamara G. Kolda and Jimeng Sun. 2008. Scalable ten-
sor decompositions for multi-aspect data mining. In
ICDM 2008, pages 363–372.

T. Landauer and D. Laham. 1998. Learning human-
like knowledge by singular value decomposition: A
progress report. In NIPS 1998.

T. Landauer. 2002. On the computational basis of learn-
ing and cognition: Arguments from lsa. Psychology of
Learning and Motivation, 41:43–84.

Jordan J. Louviere and G. G. Woodworth. 1991. Best-
worst scaling: A model for the largest difference judg-
ments. Technical report, University of Alberta.

Tomas Mikolov, Wen-tau Yih, and Geoffrey Zweig.
2013. Linguistic regularities in continuous space word
representations. In NAACL-HLT 2013.

Saif Mohammad, Bonnie Dorr, and Graeme Hirst. 2008.
Computing word pair antonymy. In Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).

John Platt, Kristina Toutanova, and Wen-tau Yih. 2010.
Translingual document representations from discrimi-
native projections. In Proceedings of EMNLP, pages
251–261.

Xipeng Qiu, Le Tian, and Xuanjing Huang. 2013. Latent
semantic tensor indexing for community-based ques-
tion answering. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 434–439, Sofia,
Bulgaria, August. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Joseph Reisinger and Raymond J. Mooney. 2010. Multi-
prototype vector-space models of word meaning. In
Proceedings of HLT-NAACL, pages 109–117.

Sebastian Riedel, Limin Yao, Andrew McCallum, and
Benjamin M. Marlin. 2013. Relation extraction
with matrix factorization and universal schemas. In
NAACL-HLT 2013, pages 74–84.

Bryan Rink and Sanda Harabagiu. 2012. UTD: Deter-
mining relational similarity using lexical patterns. In
Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2012), pages 413–418,
Montréal, Canada, 7-8 June. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

G. Salton, A. Wong, and C. S. Yang. 1975. A Vector
Space Model for Automatic Indexing. Communica-
tions of the ACM, 18(11).

Richard Socher, Cliff Chiung-Yu Lin, Andrew Y. Ng,
and Christopher D. Manning. 2011. Parsing natural
scenes and natural language with recursive neural net-
works. In ICML ’11.

Richard Socher, John Bauer, Christopher D. Manning,
and Andrew Y. Ng. 2013. Parsing with compositional
vector grammars. In Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL).

Ledyard R Tucker. 1966. Some mathematical
notes on three-mode factor analysis. Psychometrika,
31(3):279–311.

Peter D. Turney and Patrick Pantel. 2010. From fre-
quency to meaning: Vector space models of semantics.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 37(1):141–
188.

P. D. Turney. 2006. Similarity of semantic relations.
Computational Linguistics, 32(3):379–416.

Peter Turney. 2008. A uniform approach to analo-
gies, synonyms, antonyms, and associations. In In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING).

Tim Van de Cruys, Thierry Poibeau, and Anna Korho-
nen. 2013. A tensor-based factorization model of se-
mantic compositionality. In Proceedings of the 2013
Conference of the North American Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, pages 1142–1151, Atlanta, Geor-
gia, June. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Wei Xu, Xin Liu, and Yihong Gong. 2003. Document
clustering based on non-negative matrix factorization.
In Proceedings of the 26th annual international ACM
SIGIR conference on Research and development in in-
formaion retrieval, pages 267–273, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

Wen-tau Yih and Vahed Qazvinian. 2012. Measur-
ing word relatedness using heterogeneous vector space
models. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT, pages 616–
620, Montréal, Canada, June.

Wen-tau Yih, Kristina Toutanova, John C. Platt, and
Christopher Meek. 2011. Learning discriminative
projections for text similarity measures. In Proceed-
ings of the Fifteenth Conference on Computational
Natural Language Learning, pages 247–256, Portland,
Oregon, USA, June. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Wen-tau Yih, Geoffrey Zweig, and John Platt. 2012. Po-
larity inducing latent semantic analysis. In Proceed-
ings of NAACL-HLT, pages 1212–1222, Jeju Island,
Korea, July.

Alisa Zhila, Wen-tau Yih, Christopher Meek, Geoffrey
Zweig, and Tomas Mikolov. 2013. Combining het-
erogeneous models for measuring relational similar-
ity. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies, pages 1000–1009, Atlanta, Georgia, June. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

1612


