










































Dependency-Based Decipherment for Resource-Limited Machine Translation


Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1668–1676,
Seattle, Washington, USA, 18-21 October 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Dependency-Based Decipherment for Resource-Limited Machine
Translation

Qing Dou and Kevin Knight
Information Sciences Institute

Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
{qdou,knight}@isi.edu

Abstract

We introduce dependency relations into deci-
phering foreign languages and show that de-
pendency relations help improve the state-of-
the-art deciphering accuracy by over 500%.
We learn a translation lexicon from large
amounts of genuinely non parallel data with
decipherment to improve a phrase-based ma-
chine translation system trained with limited
parallel data. In experiments, we observe
BLEU gains of 1.2 to 1.8 across three different
test sets.

1 Introduction

State-of-the-art machine translation (MT) systems
apply statistical techniques to learn translation rules
from large amounts of parallel data. However, par-
allel data is limited for many language pairs and do-
mains.

In general, it is easier to obtain non parallel data.
The ability to build a machine translation system
using monolingual data could alleviate problems
caused by insufficient parallel data. Towards build-
ing a machine translation system without a paral-
lel corpus, Klementiev et al. (2012) use non paral-
lel data to estimate parameters for a large scale MT
system. Other work tries to learn full MT systems
using only non parallel data through decipherment
(Ravi and Knight, 2011; Ravi, 2013). However, the
performance of such systems is poor compared with
those trained with parallel data.

Given that we often have some parallel data,
it is more practical to improve a translation sys-
tem trained on parallel corpora with non parallel

Figure 1: Improving machine translation with deci-
pherment (Grey boxes represent new data and process).
Mono: monolingual; LM: language model; LEX: trans-
lation lexicon; TM: translation model.

data. Dou and Knight (2012) successfully apply
decipherment to learn a domain specific translation
lexicon from monolingual data to improve out-of-
domain machine translation. Although their ap-
proach works well for Spanish/French, they do not
show whether their approach works for other lan-
guage pairs. Moreover, the non parallel data used in
their experiments is created from a parallel corpus.
Such highly comparable data is difficult to obtain in
reality.

In this work, we improve previous work by Dou
and Knight (2012) using genuinely non parallel data,

1668



and propose a framework to improve a machine
translation system trained with a small amount of
parallel data. As shown in Figure 1, we use a lexi-
con learned from decipherment to improve transla-
tions of both observed and out-of-vocabulary (OOV)
words. The main contributions of this work are:

• We extract bigrams based on dependency re-
lations for decipherment, which improves the
state-of-the-art deciphering accuracy by over
500%.

• We demonstrate how to improve translations
of words observed in parallel data by us-
ing a translation lexicon obtained from large
amounts of non parallel data.

• We show that decipherment is able to find cor-
rect translations for OOV words.

• We use a translation lexicon learned by de-
ciphering large amounts of non parallel data
to improve a phrase-based MT system trained
with limited amounts of parallel data. In ex-
periments, we observe 1.2 to 1.8 BLEU gains
across three different test sets.

2 Previous Work

Motivated by the idea that a translation lexicon in-
duced from non parallel data can be applied to
MT, a variety of prior research has tried to build a
translation lexicon from non parallel or compara-
ble data (Rapp, 1995; Fung and Yee, 1998; Koehn
and Knight, 2002; Haghighi et al., 2008; Garera et
al., 2009; Bergsma and Van Durme, 2011; Daumé
and Jagarlamudi, 2011; Irvine and Callison-Burch,
2013b; Irvine and Callison-Burch, 2013a). Al-
though previous work is able to build a translation
lexicon without parallel data, little has used the lex-
icon to improve machine translation.

There has been increasing interest in learning
translation lexicons from non parallel data with de-
cipherment techniques (Ravi and Knight, 2011; Dou
and Knight, 2012; Nuhn et al., 2012). Decipher-
ment views one language as a cipher for another and
learns a translation lexicon that produces a good de-
cipherment.

In an effort to build a MT system without a paral-
lel corpus, Ravi and Knight (2011) view Spanish as a

cipher for English and apply Bayesian learning to di-
rectly decipher Spanish into English. Unfortunately,
their approach can only work on small data with lim-
ited vocabulary. Dou and Knight (2012) propose two
techniques to make Bayesian decipherment scalable.

First, unlike Ravi and Knight (2011), who deci-
pher whole sentences, Dou and Knight (2012) deci-
pher bigrams. Reducing a ciphertext to a set of bi-
grams with counts significantly reduces the amount
of cipher data. According to Dou and Knight (2012),
a ciphertext bigram F is generated through the fol-
lowing generative story:

• Generate a sequence of two plaintext tokens
e1e2 with probability P (e1e2) given by a lan-
guage model built from large numbers of plain-
text bigrams.

• Substitute e1 with f1 and e2 with f2 with prob-
ability P (f1|e1) · P (f2|e2).

The probability of any cipher bigram F is:

P (F ) =
∑
e1e2

P (e1e2)
2∏

i=1

P (fi|ei)

Given a corpus of N cipher bigrams F1...FN , the
probability of the corpus is:

P (corpus) =

N∏
j=1

P (Fj)

Given a plaintext bigram language model,
the goal is to manipulate P (f |e) to maximize
P (corpus). Theoretically, one can directly apply
EM to solve the problem (Knight et al., 2006). How-
ever, EM has time complexity O(N · V 2e ) and space
complexity O(Vf · Ve), where Vf , Ve are the sizes
of ciphertext and plaintext vocabularies respectively,
and N is the number of cipher bigrams.

Ravi and Knight (2011) apply Bayesian learning
to reduce the space complexity. Instead of esti-
mating probabilities P (f |e), Bayesian learning tries
to draw samples from plaintext sequences given ci-
phertext bigrams. During sampling, the probability
of any possible plaintext sample e1e2 is given as:

Psample(e1e2) = P (e1e2)
2∏

i=1

Pbayes(fi|ei)

1669



misión de naciones unidas en oriente medio
misión de misión naciones
de naciones naciones unidas
naciones unidas misión en
unidas en en oriente
en oriente oriente medio
oriente medio

Table 1: Comparison of adjacent bigrams (left) and de-
pendency bigrams (right) extracted from the same Span-
ish text

with Pbayes(fi|ei) defined as:

Pbayes(fi|ei) =
αP0(fi|ei) + count(fi, ei)

α+ count(ei)

where P0 is a base distribution, and α is a parameter
that controls how much we trust P0. count(fi, ei)
and count(ei) record the number of times fi, ei and
ei appear in previously generated samples respec-
tively.

At the end of sampling, P (fi|ei) is estimated by:

P (fi|ei) =
count(fi, ei)

count(ei)

However, Bayesian decipherment is still very
slow with Gibbs sampling (Geman and Geman,
1987), as each sampling step requires considering
Ve possibilities. Dou and Knight (2012) solve the
problem by introducing slice sampling (Neal, 2000)
to Bayesian decipherment.

3 From Adjacent Bigrams to Dependency
Bigrams

A major limitation of work by Dou and Knight
(2012) is their monotonic generative story for deci-
phering adjacent bigrams. While the generation pro-
cess works well for deciphering similar languages
(e.g. Spanish and French) without considering re-
ordering, it does not work well for languages that
are more different in grammar and word order (e.g.
Spanish and English). In this section, we first look
at why adjacent bigrams are bad for decipherment.
Then we describe how to use syntax to solve the
problem.

The left column in Table 1 contains adjacent bi-
grams extracted from the Spanish phrase “misión

de naciones unidas en oriente medio”. The cor-
rect decipherment for the bigram “naciones unidas”
should be “united nations”. Since the deciphering
model described by Dou and Knight (2012) does
not consider word reordering, it needs to decipher
the bigram into “nations united” in order to get
the right word translations “naciones”→“nations”
and “unidas”→“united”. However, the English lan-
guage model used for decipherment is built from En-
glish adjacent bigrams, so it strongly disprefers “na-
tions united” and is not likely to produce a sensi-
ble decipherment for “naciones unidas”. The Span-
ish bigram “oriente medio” poses the same prob-
lem. Thus, without considering word reordering, the
model described by Dou and Knight (2012) is not a
good fit for deciphering Spanish into English.

However, if we extract bigrams based on depen-
dency relations for both languages, the model fits
better. To extract such bigrams, we first use de-
pendency parsers to parse both languages, and ex-
tract bigrams by putting head word first, followed
by the modifier.1 We call these dependency bi-
grams. The right column in Table 1 lists exam-
ples of Spanish dependency bigrams extracted from
the same Spanish phrase. With a language model
built with English dependency bigrams, the same
model used for deciphering adjacent bigrams is
able to decipher Spanish dependency bigram “na-
ciones(head) unidas(modifier)” into “nations(head)
united(modifier)”.

We might instead propose to consider word re-
ordering when deciphering adjacent bigrams (e.g.
add an operation to swap tokens in a bigram). How-
ever, using dependency bigrams has the following
advantages:

• First, using dependency bigrams avoids com-
plicating the model, keeping deciphering effi-
cient and scalable.

• Second, it addresses the problem of long dis-
tance reordering, which can not be modeled by
swapping tokens in bigrams.

Furthermore, using dependency bigrams al-
lows us to use dependency types to further

1As use of “del” and “de” in Spanish is much more frequent
than the use of “of” in English, we skip those words by using
their head words as new heads if any of them serves as a head.

1670



improve decipherment. Suppose we have a
Spanish dependency bigram “acceptó(verb) solici-
tud(object)”. Then all of the following English de-
pendency bigrams are possible decipherments: “ac-
cepted(verb) UN(subject)”, “accepted(verb) govern-
ment(subject)”, “accepted(verb) request(object)”.
However, if we know the type of the Spanish depen-
dency bigram and use a language model built with
the same type in English, the only possible decipher-
ment is “accepted(verb) request(object)”. If we limit
the search space, a system is more likely to find a
better decipherment.

4 Deciphering Spanish Gigaword

In this section, we compare dependency bigrams
with adjacent bigrams for deciphering Spanish into
English.

4.1 Data

We use the Gigaword corpus for our decipherment
experiments. The corpus contains news articles from
different news agencies and is available in Spanish
and English. We use only the AFP (Agence France-
Presse) section of the corpus in decipherment ex-
periments. We tokenize the corpus using tools that
come with the Europarl corpus (Koehn, 2005). To
shorten the time required for running different sys-
tems on large amounts of data, we keep only the top
5000 most frequent word types in both languages
and replace all other word types with UNK. We also
throw away lines with more than 40 tokens, as the
Spanish parser (Bohnet, 2010) we use is slow when
processing long sentences. After preprocessing, the
corpus contains approximately 440 million tokens in
Spanish and 350 million tokens in English. To ob-
tain dependency bigrams, we use the Bohnet parsers
(Bohnet, 2010) to parse both the Spanish and En-
glish version of the corpus.

4.2 Systems

Three systems are evaluated in the experiments. We
implement a baseline system, Adjacent, based on
Dou and Knight (2012). The baseline system col-
lects adjacent bigrams and their counts from Spanish
and English texts. It then builds an English bigram
language model using the English adjacent bigrams
and uses it to decipher the Spanish adjacent bigrams.

Dependency Types
Group 1 Verb/Subject
Group 2 Preposition/Preposition-Object,

Noun/Noun-Modifier
Group 3 Verb/Noun-Object

Table 2: Dependency relations divided into three groups

We build the second system, Dependency, using
dependency bigrams for decipherment. As the two
parsers do not output the same set of dependency re-
lations, we cannot extract all types of dependency
bigrams. Instead, we select a subset of dependency
bigrams whose dependency relations are shared by
the two parser outputs. The selected dependency re-
lations are: Verb/Subject, Verb/Noun-Object, Prepo-
sition/Object, Noun/Modifier. Decipherment runs
the same way as in the baseline system.

The third system, DepType, is built using both
dependent bigrams and their dependency types. We
first extract dependency bigrams for both languages,
then group them based on their dependency types.
As both parsers treat noun phrases dependent on
“del”, “de”, and “of” as prepositional phrases, we
choose to divide the dependency bigrams into 3
groups and list them in Table 2. A separate language
model is built for each group of English dependency
bigrams and used to decipher the group of Spanish
dependency bigrams with same dependency type.

For all the systems, language models are built us-
ing the SRILM toolkit (Stolcke, 2002). For the Ad-
jacent system, we use Good-Turing smoothing. For
the other systems, we use a mix of Witten-Bell and
Good-Turing smoothing.

4.3 Sampling Procedure
In experiments, we find that the iterative sam-
pling method described by Dou and Knight (2012)
helps improve deciphering accuracy. We also find
that combining results from different decipherments
helps find more correct translations at each iteration.
Thus, instead of using a single sampling process, we
use 10 different sampling processes at each iteration.
The details of the new sampling procedure are pro-
vided here:

• Extract dependency bigrams from parsing out-
puts and collect their counts.

1671



• Keep bigrams whose counts are greater than a
threshold α. Then start 10 different randomly
seeded and initialized sampling processes. Per-
form sampling.

• At the end of sampling, extract word transla-
tion pairs (f, e) from the final sample. Esti-
mate translation probabilities P (e|f) for each
pair. Then construct a translation table by keep-
ing translation pairs (f, e) seen in more than
one decipherment and use the average P (e|f)
as the new translation probability.

• Lower the threshold α to include more bigrams
into the sampling process. Start 10 differ-
ent sampling processes again and initialize the
first sample using the translation pairs obtained
from the previous step (for each Spanish token
f, choose an English token e whose P (e|f) is
the highest). Perform sampling again.

• Repeat until α = 1.

4.4 Deciphering Accuracy
We choose the first 1000 lines of the monolingual
Spanish texts as our test data. The data contains
37,505 tokens and 6556 word types. We use type ac-
curacy as our evaluation metric: Given a word type
f in Spanish, we find a translation pair (f, e) with
the highest average P (e|f) from the translation ta-
ble learned through decipherment. If the translation
pair (f, e) can also be found in a gold translation
lexicon Tgold, we treat the word type f as correctly
deciphered. Let |C| be the number of word types
correctly deciphered, and |V | be the total number of
word types evaluated. We define type accuracy as
|C|
|V | .

To create Tgold, we use GIZA (Och and Ney,
2003) to align a small amount of Spanish-English
parallel text (1 million tokens for each language),
and use the lexicon derived from the alignment as
our gold translation lexicon. Tgold contains a subset
of 4408 types seen in the test data, among which,
2878 are also top 5000 frequent word types.

4.5 Results
During decipherment, we gradually increase the size
of Spanish texts and compare the learning curves of
three deciphering systems in Figure 2.

Figure 2: Learning curves for three decipherment sys-
tems. Compared with Adjacent (previous state of the art),
systems that use dependency bigrams improve decipher-
ing accuracy by over 500%.

With 100k tokens of Spanish text, the perfor-
mance of the three systems are similar. However, the
learning curve of Adjacent plateaus quickly, while
those of the dependency based systems soar up as
more data becomes available and still rise sharply
when the size of Spanish texts increases to 10 mil-
lion tokens, where the DepType system improves
deciphering accuracy of the Adjacent system from
4.2% to 24.6%. In the end, with 100 million tokens,
the accuracy of the DepType system rises to 27.0%.
The accuracy is even higher (41%), when evaluated
against the top 5000 frequent word types only.

5 Improving Machine Translation with
Decipherment

In this section, we demonstrate how to use a trans-
lation lexicon learned by deciphering large amounts
of in-domain (news) monolingual data to improve
a phrase-based machine translation system trained
with limited out-of-domain (politics) parallel data.

5.1 Data
We use approximately one million tokens of the Eu-
roparl corpus (Koehn, 2005) as our small out-of-
domain parallel training data and Gigaword as our
large in-domain monolingual training data to build
language models and a new translation lexicon to
improve a phrase-based MT baseline system. For
tuning and testing, we use the development data

1672



Parallel
Spanish English

Europarl 1.1 million 1.0 million
Tune-2008 52.6k 49.8k
Test-2009 68.1k 65.6k
Test-2010 65.5k 61.9k
Test-2011 79.4k 74.7k

Non Parallel
Spanish English

Gigaword 894 million 940 million

Table 3: Size of training, tuning, and testing data in num-
ber of tokens

from the NAACL 2012 workshop on statistical ma-
chine translation. The data contains test data in the
news domain from the 2008, 2009, 2010, and 2011
workshops. We use the 2008 test data for tuning and
the rest for testing. The sizes of the training, tuning,
and testing sets are listed in Table 3.

5.2 Systems

5.2.1 Baseline Machine Translation System
We build a state-of-the-art phrase-based MT sys-

tem, PBMT, using Moses (Koehn et al., 2007).
PBMT has 3 models: a translation model, a distor-
tion model, and a language model. We build a 5-
gram language model using the AFP section of the
English Gigaword. We train the other models using
the Europarl corpus. By default, Moses uses the fol-
lowing 8 features to score a candidate translation:

• direct and inverse translation probabilities

• direct and inverse lexical weighting

• a language model score

• a distortion score

• phrase penalty

• word penalty

The 8 features have weights adjusted on the tun-
ing data using minimum error rate training (MERT)
(Och, 2003). PBMT has a phrase table Tphrase.
During decoding, Moses copies out-of-vocabulary
(OOV) words, which can not be found in Tphrase,

directly to output. In the following sections, we de-
scribe how to use a translation lexicon learned from
large amounts of non parallel data to improve trans-
lation of OOV words, as well as words observed in
Tphrase.

5.2.2 Decipherment for Machine Translation
To achieve better decipherment, we:

• Increase the size of Spanish ciphertext from
100 million tokens to 894 million tokens.

• Keep top 50k instead of top 5k most frequent
word types of the ciphertext.

• Instead of seeding the sampling process ran-
domly, we use a translation lexicon learned
from a limited amount of parallel data as seed:
For each Spanish dependency bigram f1, f2,
where both f1 and f2 are found in the seed lex-
icon, we find the English sequence e1, e2 that
maximizes P (e1, e2)P (e1|f1)P (e2|f2). Other-
wise, for any Spanish token f that can be found
in the seed lexicon, we choose English word e,
where P (e|f) is the highest as the initial sam-
ple; for any f that are not seen in the seed lexi-
con, we do random initialization.

We perform 20 random restarts with 10k iter-
ations on each and build a word-to-word transla-
tion lexicon Tdecipher by collecting translation pairs
seen in at least 3 final decipherments with either
P (f |e) ≥ 0.2 or P (e|f) ≥ 0.2.

5.2.3 Improving Translation of Observed
Words with Decipherment

To improve translation of words observed in our
parallel corpus, we simply use Tdecipher as an addi-
tional parallel corpus. First, we filter Tdecipher by
keeping only translation pairs (f, e), where f is ob-
served in the Spanish part and e is observed in the
English part of the parallel corpus. Then we ap-
pend all the Spanish and English words in the fil-
tered Tdecipher to the end of Spanish part and En-
glish part of the parallel corpus respectively. The
training and tuning process is the same as the base-
line machine translation system PBMT. We denote
this system as Decipher-OBSV.

1673



5.2.4 Improving OOV translation with
Decipherment

As Tdecipher is learned from large amounts of in-
domain monolingual data, we expect that Tdecipher
contains a number of useful translations for words
not seen in the limited amount of parallel data (OOV
words). Instead of copying OOV words directly to
output, which is what Moses does by default, we try
to find translations from Tdecipher to improve trans-
lation.

During decoding, if a source word f is in Tphrase,
its translation options are collected from Tphrase ex-
clusively. If f is not in Tphrase but in Tdecipher,
the decoder will find translations from Tdecipher. If
f is not in either translation table, the decoder just
copies it directly to the output. We call this system
Decipher-OOV.

However, when an OOV’s correct translation is
same as its surface form and all its possible transla-
tions in Tdecipher are wrong, it is better to just copy
OOV words directly to output. This scenario hap-
pens frequently, as Spanish and English share many
common words. To avoid over trusting Tdecipher,
we add a new translation pair (f, f) for each source
word f in Tdecipher if the translation pair (f, f) is
not originally in Tdecipher. For each newly added
translation pair, both of its log translation probabil-
ities are set to 0. To distinguish the added transla-
tion pairs from the others learned through decipher-
ment, we add a binary feature θ to each translation
pair in Tdecipher. The final version of Tdecipher has
three feature scores: P (e|f), P (f |e), and θ. Finally,
we tune weights of the features in Tdecipher using
MERT (Och, 2003) on the tuning set.

5.2.5 A Combined Approach
In the end, we build a system Decipher-COMB,

which uses Tdecipher to improve translation of both
observed and OOV words with methods described in
sections 5.2.3 and 5.2.4.

5.3 Results

We tune each system three times with MERT and
choose the best weights based on BLEU scores on
tuning set.

Table 4 shows that the translation lexicon learned
from decipherment helps achieve higher BLEU
scores across tuning and testing sets. Decipher-

OBSV improves BLEU scores by as much as 1.2
points. We analyze the results and find the gain
mainly comes from two parts. First, adding Tdecipher
to small amounts of parallel corpus improves word
level translation probabilities, which lead to better
lexical weighting; second, Tdecipher contains new al-
ternative translations for words observed in the par-
allel corpus.

Moreover, Decipher-OOV also achieves better
BLEU scores compared with PBMT across all tun-
ing and test sets. We also observe that systems us-
ing Tdecipher learned by deciphering dependency bi-
grams leads to larger gains in BLEU scores. When
decipherment is used to improve translation of both
observed and OOV words, we see improvement in
BLEU score as high as 1.8 points on the 2010 news
test set.

The consistent improvement on the tuning and
different testing data suggests that decipherment is
capable of learning good translations for a number
of OOV words. To further demonstrate that our
decipherment approach finds useful translations for
OOV words, we list the top 10 most frequent OOV
words from both the tuning set and testing set as well
as their translations (up to three most likely transla-
tions) in Table 5. P (e|f) and P (f |e) are average
scores over different decipherment runs.

From the table, we can see that decipherment
finds correct translations (bolded) for 7 out of the
10 most frequent OOV words. Moreover, many
OOVs and their correct translations are homographs
, which makes copying OOVs directly to the output
a strong baseline to beat. Nonetheless, decipherment
still finds enough correct translations to improve the
baseline.

6 Conclusion

We introduce syntax for deciphering Spanish into
English. Experiment results show that using de-
pendency bigrams improves decipherment accuracy
by over 500% compared with the state-of-the-art
approach. Moreover, we learn a domain specific
translation lexicon by deciphering large amounts of
monolingual data and show that the lexicon can im-
prove a baseline machine translation system trained
with limited parallel data.

1674



Decipherment System Tune2008 Test2009 Test2010 Test2011
None PBMT (Baseline) 19.1 19.6 21.3 22.1

Adjacent
Decipher-OBSV 19.5 20.1 22.2 22.6
Decipher-OOV 19.4 19.9 21.7 22.5

Decipher-COMB 19.5 20.2 22.3 22.5

Dependency
Decipher-OBSV 19.7 20.5 22.5 23.0
Decipher-OOV 19.9 20.4 22.4 22.9

Decipher-COMB 20.0 20.8 23.1 23.4

Table 4: Systems that use translation lexicons learned from decipherment show consistent improvement over the
baseline system across tuning and testing sets. The best system, Decipher-COMB, achieves as much as 1.8 BLEU
point gain on the 2010 news test set.

Spanish English P (e|f) P (f |e)
obama his 0.33 0.01

bush 0.27 0.07
clinton 0.23 0.11

bush bush 0.47 0.45
yeltsin 0.28 0.81

he 0.24 0.05
festival event 0.68 0.35

festival 0.61 0.72
wikileaks zeta 0.03 0.33

venus venus 0.61 0.74
serena 0.47 0.62

colchones mattresses 0.55 0.73
cars 0.31 0.01

helado frigid 0.52 0.44
chill 0.37 0.14

sandwich 0.42 0.27
google microsoft 0.67 0.18

google 0.59 0.69
cantante singer 0.44 0.92

jackson 0.14 0.33
artists 0.14 0.77

mccain mccain 0.66 0.92
it 0.22 0.00
he 0.21 0.00

Table 5: Decipherment finds correct translations for 7 out
of 10 most frequent OOV word types.

7 Acknowledgments

This work was supported by NSF Grant 0904684
and ARO grant W911NF-10-1-0533. The authors
would like to thank David Chiang, Malte Nuhn,
Victoria Fossum, Ashish Vaswani, Ulf Hermjakob,
Yang Gao, and Hui Zhang (in no particular order)
for their comments and suggestions.

References

Shane Bergsma and Benjamin Van Durme. 2011. Learn-
ing bilingual lexicons using the visual similarity of
labeled web images. In Proceedings of the Twenty-
Second international joint conference on Artificial In-
telligence - Volume Volume Three. AAAI Press.

Bernd Bohnet. 2010. Top accuracy and fast dependency
parsing is not a contradiction. In Proceedings of the
23rd International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics. Coling.

Hal Daumé, III and Jagadeesh Jagarlamudi. 2011. Do-
main adaptation for machine translation by mining un-
seen words. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Qing Dou and Kevin Knight. 2012. Large scale deci-
pherment for out-of-domain machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empir-
ical Methods in Natural Language Processing and
Computational Natural Language Learning. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Pascale Fung and Lo Yuen Yee. 1998. An IR approach
for translating new words from nonparallel, compara-
ble texts. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and 17th International Conference on Computational

1675



Linguistics - Volume 1. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Nikesh Garera, Chris Callison-Burch, and David
Yarowsky. 2009. Improving translation lexicon induc-
tion from monolingual corpora via dependency con-
texts and part-of-speech equivalences. In Proceed-
ings of the Thirteenth Conference on Computational
Natural Language Learning. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Stuart Geman and Donald Geman. 1987. Stochastic re-
laxation, Gibbs distributions, and the Bayesian restora-
tion of images. In Readings in computer vision: is-
sues, problems, principles, and paradigms. Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc.

Aria Haghighi, Percy Liang, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick,
and Dan Klein. 2008. Learning bilingual lexicons
from monolingual corpora. In Proceedings of ACL-
08: HLT. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Ann Irvine and Chris Callison-Burch. 2013a. Combin-
ing bilingual and comparable corpora for low resource
machine translation. In Proceedings of the Eighth
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, August.

Ann Irvine and Chris Callison-Burch. 2013b. Supervised
bilingual lexicon induction with multiple monolingual
signals. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Alexandre Klementiev, Ann Irvine, Chris Callison-
Burch, and David Yarowsky. 2012. Toward statisti-
cal machine translation without parallel corpora. In
Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Kevin Knight, Anish Nair, Nishit Rathod, and Kenji Ya-
mada. 2006. Unsupervised analysis for decipher-
ment problems. In Proceedings of the COLING/ACL
2006 Main Conference Poster Sessions. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Philipp Koehn and Kevin Knight. 2002. Learning a
translation lexicon from monolingual corpora. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL-02 Workshop on Unsupervised
Lexical Acquisition. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard
Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondřej Bojar, Alexandra Con-
stantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: open source
toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL on Interac-
tive Poster and Demonstration Sessions. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: a parallel corpus for sta-
tistical machine translation. In In Proceedings of the
Tenth Machine Translation Summit, Phuket, Thailand.
Asia-Pacific Association for Machine Translation.

Radford Neal. 2000. Slice sampling. Annals of Statis-
tics, 31.

Malte Nuhn, Arne Mauser, and Hermann Ney. 2012.
Deciphering foreign language by combining language
models and context vectors. In Proceedings of the 50th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Long Papers - Volume 1. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A system-
atic comparison of various statistical alignment mod-
els. Comput. Linguist.

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training
in statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 41st Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Reinhard Rapp. 1995. Identifying word translations in
non-parallel texts. In Proceedings of the 33rd annual
meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Sujith Ravi and Kevin Knight. 2011. Deciphering for-
eign language. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: Human Language Technologies. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Sujith Ravi. 2013. Scalable decipherment for machine
translation via hash sampling. In Proceedings of the
51th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM - an extensible language
modeling toolkit. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Spoken Language Processing.

1676


