










































The VerbCorner Project: Toward an Empirically-Based Semantic Decomposition of Verbs


Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1438–1442,
Seattle, Washington, USA, 18-21 October 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

The VerbCorner Project: Toward an Empirically-Based Semantic
Decomposition of Verbs

Joshua K. Hartshorne
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
jkhartshorne@gmail.com

Claire Bonial, Martha Palmer
Department of Linguistics

University of Colorado at Boulder
Hellems 290, 295 UCB

Boulder, CO 80309, USA
{CBonial, MPalmer}@colorado.edu

Abstract

This research describes efforts to use crowd-
sourcing to improve the validity of the seman-
tic predicates in VerbNet, a lexicon of about
6300 English verbs. The current semantic
predicates can be thought of semantic prim-
itives, into which the concepts denoted by a
verb can be decomposed. For example, the
verb spray (of the Spray class), involves the
predicates MOTION, NOT, and LOCATION,
where the event can be decomposed into an
AGENT causing a THEME that was originally
not in a particular location to now be in that
location. Although VerbNet’s predicates are
theoretically well-motivated, systematic em-
pirical data is scarce. This paper describes a
recently-launched attempt to address this issue
with a series of human judgment tasks, posed
to subjects in the form of games.

1 Introduction

One key application of Natural Language Processing
(NLP) is meaning extraction. Of particular impor-
tance is propositional meaning: To understand “Jes-
sica sprayed paint on the wall,” it is not enough to
know who Jessica is, what paint is, and where the
wall is, but that, by the end of the event, some quan-
tity of paint that was not previously on the wall now
is. One must extract not only meanings for individ-
ual words but also the relations between them.

One option is to learn these relations in a largely
bottom-up, data-driven fashion (Chklovski and Pan-
tel, 2004; Poon and Domingos, 2009). For instance,
Poon and Domingos (2009) first extracts depen-
dency trees, converts those into quasi-logical form,

recursively induces lambda expressions from them,
and uses clustering to derive progressively abstract
knowledge.

An alternative is to take a human-inspired ap-
proach, mapping the linguistic input onto the kinds
of representations that linguistic and psychologi-
cal research suggests are the representations em-
ployed by humans. While the exact characteriza-
tion of meaning (and by extension, thought) remains
an area of active research in the cognitive sciences
(Margolis and Laurence, 1999), decades of research
in linguistics and psychology suggests that much of
the meaning of a sentence – as well as its syntactic
structure – can be accounted for by invoking a small
number of highly abstract semantic features (usu-
ally represented as predicates), such as causation,
agency, basic topological relations, and directed mo-
tion (Ambridge et al., 2013; Croft, 2012; Jackend-
off, 1990; Levin and Rappaport Hovav, 2005; Peset-
sky, 1995; Pinker, 1989). For instance, a given verb
can appear in some syntactic frames (Sally broke the
vase. Sally broke the vase with the hammer. The vase
broke.) and not others (*Sally broke the vase to the
floor. *Sally broke John the vase.). When verbs are
classified according to the syntactic frames they can
appear in, most if not all the verbs in a class involve
the same set of abstract semantic features.1

Interestingly, roughly these same features (causa-
tion, etc.) have been singled out by developmental
psychologists as part of “core knowledge” – a set of
early-learned or perhaps innate concepts upon which

1Whether all verbs in a class share the same abstract pred-
icates or merely most is an area of active research (Levin and
Rappaport Hovav, 2005).

1438



the rest of cognition is built (Spelke and Kinzler,
2007). Thus these semantic features/predicates may
be not only crucial to describing linguistic mean-
ing but may be central organizing principles for a
human’s (reasonably successful) thinking about and
conceptualization of the world. As such, they pro-
vide a potentially rewarding target for NLP.

2 VerbNet

2.1 Overview and Structure

Perhaps the most comprehensive implementation
of this approach appears in VerbNet (Kipper et al.,
2008; based on Levin, 1993). VerbNet classifies
verbs based on the syntactic frames they can appear
in, providing a semantic description of each frame
for each class. An example entry is shown below:

Syntactic Frame NP V NP PP.DESTINATION
Example Jessica sprayed the wall.
Syntax AGENT V THEME {+LOC|+DEST CONF}
DESTINATION
Semantics MOTION(DURING(E), THEME)
NOT(PREP(START(E), THEME, DESTINATION))
PREP(END(E), THEME, DESTINATION)
CAUSE(AGENT, E)

The “Syntactic Frame” provides a flat syntactic
parse. “Syntax” provides semantic role labels for
each of the NPs and PPs, which are invoked in “Se-
mantics”. VerbNet decomposes the semantics of
this sentence into four separate predicates: 1) the
THEME (the paint) moves doing the event E; 2) at
the start of the event E, the THEME (the paint) is
not at the DESTINATION (on the wall), whereas 3)
at the end of the event E, the THEME (the paint) is
at the DESTINATION (on the wall), and; 4) the event
is caused by the AGENT (Sally). Note that this cap-
tures only the core aspects of semantics shared by all
verbs in the class; differences between verbs in the
same class (e.g., spray vs. splash) are omitted.

Importantly, the semantics of the sentence is de-
pendent on both the matrix verb (paint) and the syn-
tactic frame. Famously, when inserted in the slightly
different frame NP V NP.DESTINATION PP.THEME
– “Sally sprayed the wall with paint” – “spray” en-
tails that destination (the wall) is now fully painted,
an entailment that does not follow in the example

above (Pinker, 1989).

2.2 Uses and Limitations

VerbNet has been used in a variety of NLP appli-
cations, such as semantic role labeling (Swier and
Stevenson, 2004), inferencing (Zaenen et al., 2008),
verb classification (Joanis et al., 2008), and informa-
tion extraction (Maynard, Funk, and Peters, 2009).

While such applications have been successful thus
far, an important constraint on how well VerbNet-
based NLP applications can be expected to perform
is the accuracy of the semantics encoded in Verb-
Net. Here, several issues arise. Leaving aside mis-
categorized verbs and other inaccuracies, as noted
above VerbNet assumes that all verbs in the same
class share the same core predicates, which may or
may not be empirically justified. Given the number
of semantic predicates (146),2 verb entries (6580),
and unique verb lemmas (6284) it is not feasible for
a single research team to check, particularly since af-
ter a certain number of verbs, intuitions become less
clear. In any case, it may not be ideal to rely solely
on the intuitions of invested researchers, whose in-
tuitions about subtle judgments may be clouded by
theoretical commitments (Gibson and Federenko,
2013); the only way to ensure this is not the case
is through independent validation. Unfortunately, of
the 280 verb classes in VerbNet, this has been done
for only a few (cf Ambridge et al., 2013).

3 VerbCorner

The VerbCorner project was designed to address
these issues by crowd-sourcing the semantic judg-
ments online (gameswithwords.org/VerbCorner/).
Several previous projects have successfully crowd-
sourced linguistic annotations, such as Phrase De-
tectives, where volunteers have contributed 2.5 mil-
lion judgments on anaphoric relations (Poesio et al.,
2012). Below, we outline the VerbCorner project
and describe one specific annotation task in detail.

3.1 Developing Semantic Annotation Tasks

Collecting accurate judgments on subtle questions
from naive participants with limited metalinguistic

2Note that these vary in applicability from those specific to
a small number of verbs (CHARACTERIZE, CONSPIRE) to those
frequently invoked (BEGIN, EXIST).

1439



skills is difficult. Rare is the non-linguist who can
immediately answer the question, “Does the verb
‘throw,’ when used transitively, entail a change of
location on the part of its THEME?” Thus, we began
by developing tasks that isolate semantic features in
a way accessible to untrained annotators.

We converted the metalinguistic judgments
(“Does this verb entail this abstract predicate?”) into
real-world problems, which previous research sug-
gests should be easier (Cosmides and Tooby, 1992).
Each judgment tasks involved a fanciful backstory.
For instance, in “Simon Says Freeze”, a task de-
signed to elicit judgments about movement, the
Galactic Overlord (Simon) decrees “Galactic Stay
Where You Are Day,” during which nobody is al-
lowed to move from their current location. Partici-
pants read descriptions of events and decide whether
anyone violated the rule. In “Explode on Contact”,
designed to elicit judgments about physical contact,
objects and people explode when they touch one an-
other. The participant reads descriptions of events
and decides whether anything has exploded.3

Each task was piloted until inter-coder reliability
was acceptably high and the modal response nearly
always corresponded with researcher intuitions. As
such, these tasks cannot be used to establish whether
researcher intuitions for the pilot stimuli are correct
(this would be circular); however, there is no guar-
antee that agreement with the researcher will gener-
alize to new items (the pilot stimuli cover a trivial
proportion of all verbs in VerbNet).

3.2 Crowd-sourcing Semantic Judgments

The pilot experiments showed that it is possible to
elicit reliable semantic judgments corresponding to
VerbNet predicates from naive participants (see sec-
tion 3.3). At the project website, volunteers choose
one of the tasks from a list and begin tagging sen-
tences. The sentences are sampled smartly, avoid-
ing sentences already tagged by that volunteer and
biased in favor of of the sentences with the fewest

3Note that each task is designed to elicit judgments about
entailments – things that must be true rather than are merely
likely to be true. If John greeted Bill, they might have come
into contact (e.g., by shaking hands), but perhaps they did not.
Previous work suggests that it is entailments that matter, partic-
ularly for explaining the syntactic behavior of verbs (Levin and
Rappaport Hovav, 2005)

judgments so far. Rather than assessing annotator
quality through gold standard trials with known an-
swers (which wastes data – the answers to these tri-
als are known), approximately 150 sentences were
chosen to be “over-sampled.” As the volunteer tags
sentences, approximately one out of every five are
from this over-sampled set until that volunteer has
tagged all of them. This guarantees that any given
volunteer will have tried some sentences targeted
by many other volunteers, allowing inter-annotator
agreement to be used to assess annotator quality.

Following the example of Zooniverse (zooni-
verse.org), a popular “Citizen Science” platform,
volunteers are encouraged but required to register
(requiring registration prior to seeing the tasks was
found to be a significant barrier to entry). Regis-
tration allows collecting linguistic and educational
background from the volunteer, and also makes it
possible to track the same volunteer across sessions.

Multiple gamification elements were incorporated
into VerbCorner in order to recruit and motivate vol-
unteers. Each task has a leaderboard, where the
volunteer can see his/her rank out of all volunteers
in terms of number of contributions made. In ad-
dition, there is a general leaderboard, which sums
across tasks. Volunteers can earn badges, displayed
on their homepage, for answering certain numbers
of questions in each task. Finally, at random inter-
vals bonus points are awarded, with the explanation
for the bonus points tailored to the task’s backstory.

VerbCorner was launched on May 21, 2013. After
six weeks, 555 volunteers had provided at least one
annotation, for a total of 39,274 annotations, demon-
strating the feasibility of collecting large numbers of
annotations through this method.

3.3 Case Study: Equilibrium
“Equilibrium” was designed to elicit judgments
about application of force, frequently argued to be
a core semantic feature in the sense discussed above
(Pinker, 1989). The backstory involves the “Zen Di-
mension,” in which nobody is allowed to exert force
on anything else. The participant reads descriptions
of events (Sally sprayed paint onto the wall) and de-
cides whether they would be allowable in the Zen
Dimension – and, in particular, which participants
in the event are illegally applying force.

In order to minimize unwanted effects of world

1440



knowledge, the verb’s arguments are replaced with
nonsense words or randomly chosen proper names
(Sally sprayed the dax onto the blicket). In the
context of the story, this is explained as necessary
anonymization: You are a government official de-
termining whether certain activities are allowable,
and ensuring anonymity is an important safeguard
against favoritism and corruption. An alternative
wouod be to use multiple different content words,
randomly chosen for each annotator. However, this
greatly increases the number of annotators needed
and quickly becomes infeasible.

3.3.1 Pilot Results

The task was piloted on 138 sentences, which com-
prised all possible syntactic frames for three verbs
from each of five verb classes in VerbNet. After
two rounds of piloting (between the first and second,
wording in the backstory was adjusted for clarity
based on pilot subject feedback and results), Kripp’s
alpha reached .76 for 8 annotators, which represents
a reasonably high level of inter-annotator agreement.
Importantly, the modal response matched the intu-
itions of the researchers in 137 of 138 cases.4

3.3.2 Preliminary VerbCorner Results

“Equillibrium” was one of the first tasks posted on
VerbCorner, with data currently being collected on
12 of the 280 VerbNet classes, for a total of 5,171
sentences. As of writing, 414 users have submitted
14,294 judgments. Individual annotators annotated
anywhere from 1 to 195 sentences (mean=8, me-
dian=4). While most sentences have relatively few
judgments, each of the 194 over-sampled sentences
has between 15 and 20 judgments.5

Comparing the modal response with the re-
searchers’ intuitions resulted in a match for 184 of
194 sentences. In general, where the modal response

4The remaining case was “The crose smashed sondily.” for
which four pilot subjects thought involved the crose applying
force – matching researcher intuition – and four thought did
not involve any application of force, perhaps interpreting the
sentence was a passive.

5These are the same 15 verbs used in the piloting. The num-
ber of sentences is larger in order to test a wider range of pos-
sible arguments. In particular, wherever appropriate, separate
sentences were constructed using animate and inanimate argu-
ments. Compare Sally sprayed the dax onto Mary and Sally
sprayed the dax onto the blicket.

did not match researcher intuitions, the modal re-
sponse was itself not popular, comprising an aver-
age of 53% of responses, compared with an aver-
age of 77% where the modal response matched re-
searcher intuitions. Thus, these appear to be cases of
disagreement, either because the correct intuition re-
quires more work to obtain or because of differences
across idiolects (at the moment, there is no obvious
pattern as to which sentences caused difficulty, but
the sample size is small). Thus, follow-up investi-
gation of sentences with little inter-coder agreement
may be warranted.

4 Conclusion and Future Work

Data-collection is ongoing. VerbNet identifies ap-
proximately 150 different semantic predicates. An-
notating every verb in each of its syntactic frames for
each semantic predicate would take many millions
of judgments. However, most of the semantic predi-
cates employed in VerbNet are very narrow in scope
and only apply to a few classes. Thus, we have be-
gun with broad predicates that are thought to apply
to many verbs and are adding progressively narrower
predicates as work progresses. At the current rate,
we should complete annotation for the half-dozen
most frequent semantic predicates in the space of a
year.

Future work will explore using an individual
annotator’s history across trials to weight that
user’s contributions, something that VerbCorner was
specifically designed to allow (see above). How to
assess annotator quality without gold standard data
is an active area of research (Passonneau and Car-
penter, 2013; Rzhetsky, Shatkay and Wilbur, 2009;
Whitehill et al., 2009). For instance, Whitehill and
colleagues (2009) provide an algorithm for jointly
estimating both annotator quality and annotation
difficulty (including the latter is important because
some annotators will have low agreement with oth-
ers due to their poor luck in being assigned difficult-
to-annotate sentences). This algorithm is shown to
outperform using the modal response.

Note that this necessarily biases against annota-
tors with few responses. In our case study above, ex-
cluding annotators who contributed small numbers
of annotations led to progressively worse match to
researcher intuition, suggesting that the loss in data

1441



caused by excluding these annotations may not be
worth the increased confidence in annotation quality.
Future research will be needed to assess this trade-
off.

The above work shows the feasibility of crowd-
sourcing VerbNet semantic entailments, as has been
shown for a handful of other linguistic judgments
(Artignan, Hascoet and Lafourcade, 2009; Poesio et
al., 2012; Venhuizen et al., 2013). There are many
domains in which gold standard human judgments
are scarce; crowd-sourcing has considerable poten-
tial at addressing this need.

References
B. Ambridge, J. M. Pine, C. F. Rowland, F. Chang, and

A. Bidgood. 2013. The retreat from overgeneral-
ization in child language acquisition: Word learning,
morphology, and verb argument structure. Wiley In-
terdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science. 4:47-62.

G. Artignan, M. Hascoet, and M. Lafourcade. 2009.
Mutliscale visual analysis of lexical networks. Pro-
ceedings of the 13th International Conference on In-
formation Visualisation. Barcelona, Spain.

T. Chklovski and P. Pantel. 2004. VerbOcean: Mining
the Web for fine-grained semantic relations. Proceed-
ings of Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP). Barcelona, Spain.

L. Cosmides and J. Tooby. 1992. Cognitive adaptations
for social exchange. in The Adapted Mind. (J. Barkow,
L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby, Eds.) Oxford University
Press, Oxford, UK.

W. Croft. 2012. Verbs: Aspect and Argument Structure.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.

D. R. Dowty. 1991. Thematic proto-roles and argument
selection. Language. 67:547-619.

E. Gibson and E. Fedorenko. 2013. The need for quanti-
tative methods in syntax and semantics research. Lan-
guage and Cognitive Processes. 28(1-2):88–124.

R. Jackendoff. 1990. Semantic Structures. The MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.

E. Joanis, S. Stevenson, and D. James. 2008. A general
feature space for automatic verb classification. Natu-
ral Language Engineering. 14(3):337-367.

K. Kipper, A. Korhonen, N. Ryant and M. Palmer. 2008.
A large-scale classification of English verbs. Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation Journal, 42:21–40

E. Margolis and S. Laurence 1999. Concepts: Core
Readings. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

B. Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alternations:
A Preliminary Investigation. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.

B. Levin and M. Rappaport Hovav. 2005. Argument
Realization. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK.

D. Maynard, A. Funk, and W. Peters. 2009. Using
lexico-syntactic ontology design patterns for ontology
creation and population. Proceedings of Workshop on
Ontology Patterns (WOP 2009). Washington, DC

R. J. Passonneau and B. Carpenter 2013. The benefits
of a model of annotation. 7th Linguistic Annotation
Workshop and Interoperability with Discourse. Sofia,
Bulgaria.

D. Pesetsky. 1995. Zero Syntax: Experiencers and Cas-
cades. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

S. Pinker. 1989. Learnability and Cognition. The MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.

M. Poesio, J. Camberlain, U. Kruschwitz, L. Robaldo,
and L. Ducceschi. 2012. The Phrase Detective Multi-
lingual Corpus, Release 0.1. Proceedings of the Col-
laborative Resource Development and Delivery Work-
shop. Istanbul, Turkey

H. Poon and P. Domingos. 2009. Unsupervised seman-
tic parsing. Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
Singapore.

A. Rzhetsky, H. Shatkay, and W. J. Wilbur. 2009. How
to get the most out of your curation effort. PLoS Com-
putational Biology, 5(5):1–13.

E. S. Spelke and K. D. Kinzler. 2007. Core knowledge.
Developmental Science, 10(1):89–96.

R. Swier and S. Stevenson. 2004. Unsupervised seman-
tic role labeling. Proceedings of the Generative Lexi-
con Conference, GenLex-09. Pisa, Italy.

N. Venhuizen, V. Basile, K. Evang, and J. Bos. 2013.
Gamification for word sense labeling. Proceedings of
the 10th International Conference on Computational
Semantics (IWCS 2013). Potsdam, Germany

J. Whitehill, P. Ruvolo, T. F. Wu, J. Bergsma. and J.
Movellan. 2009. Whose vote should count more: Op-
timal integration of labels from labelers of unknown
expertise. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 22. Vancouver, Canada

A. Zaenen, C. Condoravdi, and D G. Bobrow. 2008. The
encoding of lexical implications in VN. Proceedings
of LREC 2008. Morocco

1442


