










































Microblog Entity Linking by Leveraging Extra Posts


Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 863–868,
Seattle, Washington, USA, 18-21 October 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Microblog Entity Linking by Leveraging Extra Posts

Yuhang Guo, Bing Qin∗, Ting Liu , Sheng Li
Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval

School of Computer Science and Technology
Harbin Institute of Technology, China

{yhguo, bqin∗, tliu, sli}@ir.hit.edu.cn

Abstract

Linking name mentions in microblog posts to
a knowledge base, namely microblog entity
linking, is useful for text mining tasks on mi-
croblog. Entity linking in long text has been
well studied in previous works. However few
work has focused on short text such as mi-
croblog post. Microblog posts are short and
noisy. Previous method can extract few fea-
tures from the post context. In this paper we
propose to use extra posts for the microblog
entity linking task. Experimental results show
that our proposed method significantly im-
proves the linking accuracy over traditional
methods by 8.3% and 7.5% respectively.

1 Introduction

Microblogging services (e.g. Twitter) are attracting
millions of users to share and exchange their ideas
and opinions. Millions of new microblog posts are
generated on such open broadcasting platforms ev-
ery day 1. Microblog provides a fruitful and instant
channel of global information publication and acqui-
sition.

A necessary step for the information acquisition
on microblog is to identify which entities a post is
about. Such identification can be challenging be-
cause the entity mention may be ambiguous. Let’s
begin with a real post from Twitter.

(1) No excuse for floods tax, says Abbott
URL

∗Corresponding author
1See http://blog.twitter.com/2011/06/ 200-million-tweets-

per-day.html.

This post is about an Australia political lead-
er, Tony Abbot, and his opinion on flood tax
policy. To understand that this post mentions
Tony Abbot is not trivial because the name Ab-
bot can refer to many people and organization-
s. In the Wikipedia page of Abbott, there list-
s more than 20 Abbotts, such as baseball player
Jim Abbott, actor Bud Abbott and company
Abbott Laboratories, etc..

Given a knowledge base (KB) (e.g. Wikipedia),
entity linking is the task to identify the referent KB
entity of a target name mention in plain text. Most
current entity linking techniques are designed for
long text such as news/blog articles (Mihalcea and
Csomai, 2007; Cucerzan, 2007; Milne and Witten,
2008; Han and Sun, 2011; Zhang et al., 2011; Shen
et al., 2012; Kulkarni et al., 2009; Ratinov et al.,
2011). Entity linking for microblog posts has not
been well studied.

Comparing with news/blog articles, microblog
posts are:

short each post contains no more than 140 charac-
ters;

fresh the new entity-related content may have not
been included in the knowledge base;

informal acronyms and spoken language writing
style are common.

Due to these properties, few feature can be ex-
tracted from a post. Without enough features, pre-
vious entity linking methods may fail. In order to
overcome the feature sparseness, we turn to another
property of microblog:

863



redundancy For each day, over 340M short mes-
sages are posted in twitter. Similar information
may be posted in different expressions.

For example, we find the following post,

(2) Julia Gillard and Tony Abbott on
the flood levy just after 8.30am on
@612brisbane!

The content of post (2) is highly related to post
(1). In contrast to the confusing post (1), the text
in post (2) explicitly indicates that the Abbott here
refers to the Australian political leader. This inspires
us to bridge the confusing post and the knowledge
base with other posts.

In this paper, we approach the microblog entity
linking by leveraging extra posts. A straightforward
method is to expand the post context with similar
posts, which we call Context-Expansion-based Mi-
croblog Entity Linking (CEMEL). In this method,
we first construct a query with the given post and
then search for it in a collection of posts. From the
search result, we select the most similar posts for the
context expansion. The disambiguation will benefit
from the extra posts if, hopefully, they are related
to the given post in content and include explicit fea-
tures for the disambiguation.

Furthermore, we propose a Graph-based Mi-
croblog Entity Linking (GMEL) method. In contrast
to CEMEL, the extra posts in GMEL are not directly
added into the context. Instead, they are represented
as nodes in a graph, and weighted by their similarity
with the target post. We use an iterative algorithm
in this graph to propagate the entity weights through
the edges between the post nodes.

We conduct experiments on real microblog da-
ta which we harvested from Twitter. Current enti-
ty linking corpus, such as the TAC-KBP data (M-
cNamee and Dang, 2009), mainly focuses on long
text. And few microblog entity linking corpus is
publicly available. In this work, we manually anno-
tated a microblog entity linking corpus. This corpus
inherit the target names from TAC-KBP2009. So it
is comparable with the TAC-KBP2009 corpus.

Experimental results show that the performance
of previous methods drops on microblog posts com-
paring with on long text. Both of CEMEL and
GMEL can significantly improve the performance

over baselines, which means that entity linking sys-
tem on microblog can be improved by leveraging ex-
tra posts. The results also show that GMEL outper-
forms CEMEL significantly.

We summarize our contributions as follows.

• We propose a context-expansion-based and a
graph-based method for microblog entity link-
ing by leveraging extra posts.

• We annotate a microblog entity linking corpus
which is comparable to an existing long text
corpus.

• We show the inefficiency of previous method
on the microblog corpus and our method can
significantly improve the results.

2 Task defination

The microblog entity linking task is that, for a name
mention in a microblog post, the system is to find the
referent entity of the name in a knowledge base, or
return a NIL mark if the entity is absence from the
knowledge base. This definition is close to the en-
tity linking task in the TAC-KBP evaluation (Ji and
Grishman, 2011) except for the context of the target
name is microblog post whereas in TAC-KBP the
context is news article or web log.

Several related tasks have been studied on mi-
croblog posts. In Meij et al. (2012)’s work, they
link a post, rather than a name mention in the post,
to relevant Wikipedia concepts. Guo et al. (2013a)
and Liu et al. (2013) define entity linking as to first
detect all the mentions in a post and then link the
mentions to the knowledge base. In contrast, our
definition (as well as the TAC-KBP definition) fo-
cuses on a concerned name mention across different
posts/documents.

3 Method

A typical entity linking system can be broken down
into two steps:

candidate generation This step narrows down the
candidate entity range from any entity in the
world to a limited set.

candidate ranking This step ranks the candidates
and output the top ranked entity as the result.

864



Figure 1: An example of the GMEL graph. p1 . . . p4 are
post nodes and c1 . . . c3 are candidate entity nodes. Each
post node is connected to the corresponding candidate n-
odes from the knowledge base. The edges between the
nodes are weighted by the similarity between them.

In this paper, we use the candidate generation
method described in Guo et al.(2013). For the candi-
date ranking, we use a Vector Space Model (VSM)
and a Learning to Rank (LTR) as baselines. VSM
is an unsupervised method and LTR is a supervised
method. Both of them have achieved the state-of-
the-art performances in the TAC-KBP evaluations.

The major challenge in microblog entity linking
is the lack of context in the post. An ideal solu-
tion is to expand the context with the posts which
contain the same entity. However, automatically
judging whether a name mention in two documents
refers to the same entity, namely cross document co-
reference, is not trivial. Here our solution is to rank
the posts by their possibility of co-reference to the
target one and select the most possible co-referent
posts for the expansion.

CEMEL is based on the assumption that, given a
name and two posts where the name is mentioned,
the higher similarity between the posts the high-
er possibility of their co-reference and that the co-
referent posts may contains useful features for the
disambiguation. However, two literally similar posts
may not be co-referent. If such non co-referent post
is expanded to the context, noises may be included.

Take the following post as an example.

(3) AG Abbott says that bullets have
crossed the border from Mexico to
Texas at least four times. URL

This post is similar to post (1) because they both
contains “says” and “URL”. But the Abbott in post
(3) refers to the Texas Attorney General Greg Ab-
bott. In this mean, the expanded context in post (3)

could mislead the disambiguation for post (1). Such
noise can be controlled by setting a strict number of
posts to expand the context or weighting the contri-
bution of this post to the target one.

Our CEMEL method consists of the following
steps: First we construct a query with the terms from
the target post. Second we search for the query in a
microblog post collection using a common informa-
tion retrieval model such as the vector space model.
Note that here we limit the searched posts must con-
tain the target name mention. Then we expand the
target post with top N similar posts and use a typical
entity linking method (such as VSM and LTR) with
the expanded context.

Figure 1 illustrates the graph of GMEL. Each n-
ode of this graph represents an candidate entity (e.g.
c1 . . . c3) or a post of the given target name (e.g.
p1 . . . p4) In this graph, each node represents an en-
tity or a post of the given target name. Between each
pair of post nodes, each pair of entity nodes and each
post node and its candidate entity nodes, there is an
edge. The edge is weighted by the similarity be-
tween the two linked nodes. Entity nodes are labeled
by themselves and candidate nodes are initialized as
unlabeled nodes. For the edges between post node
pairs and entity node pairs, we use cosine similari-
ty. For the edges between a post node and its can-
didate entity nodes, we use the score given by tra-
ditional entity linking methods. We use an iterative
algorithm on this graph to propagate the labels from
the entity nodes to the post nodes. We adapt Label
Propagation (LP) (Zhu and Ghahramani, 2002) and
Modified Adsorption (MAD) (Talukdar and Pereira,
2010) for the iteration over the graph.

4 Experiment

4.1 Data Annotation

Till now, few microblog entity linking data is pub-
licly available. In this work, we manually annotate
a data set on microblog posts2. We collect 15.6 mil-
lion microblog posts in Twitter dated from January
23 to February 8, 2011. In order to compare with ex-
isting entity linking on long text, we select a subset
of target names from TAC-KBP2009 and inherit the
knowledge base in the TAC-KBP evaluation. The

2We published this data so that researchers can reproduce
our results.

865



Figure 2: Percentage of the co-reference posts in the top
N similar posts

Figure 3: Impact of expansion post number in CEMEL

TAC-KBP2009 data set includes 513 target names.
We search for all the target names in the post col-
lection and get 26,643 matches. We randomly sam-
ple 120 posts for each of the top 30 most frequently
matched target names and filter out non-English and
overly short (i.e. less than 3 words) posts. Then
we get 2,258 posts for 25 target names and manual-
ly link the target name mentions in the posts to the
TAC-KBP knowledge base.

In order to evaluate the assumption in CEMEL:
similar posts tend to co-reference, we randomly s-
elect 10 posts for 5 target names respectively and
search for the posts in the post collection. From
the search result of each of the 50 posts, we select
the top 20 posts and manually annotate if they co-
reference with the query post.

4.2 Settings
We generate candidates with the method described
in (Guo et al., 2013b) and use Vector Space Mod-
el (VSM) (Varma et al., 2009) and Learning to Rank
(LTR) (Zheng et al., 2010) as the ranking model. We

Figure 4: Accuracy of GMEL with different rate of extra
post nodes

use Lucene and ListNet with default settings for the
VSM and LTR implementation respectively. We use
bigram feature for VSM and the feature set of (Chen
et al., 2011) for LTR. LTR is evaluated with 10-fold
cross validation. Given a target name, the GMEL
graph includes all the evaluation posts as well as a
set of extra post nodes searched from the post collec-
tion with the query of the target name. We filter out
determiners, interjections, punctuations, emoticon-
s, discourse markers and URLs in the posts with a
twitter part-of-speech tagger (Owoputi et al., 2013).
The similarity between a post and its candidate en-
tities is set with the score given by VSM or LTR
and the similarity between other nodes is set with the
corresponding cosine similarity. We employ junto3

with default settings for the iterative algorithm im-
plementation .

4.3 Results

Figure 2 shows the relationship between similari-
ty and co-reference. From this figure we can see
that the percentage decreases with the growth of N.
When the N is up to 10, about 60% of the similar
posts co-reference with the query post and the de-
crease speed slows down. The Pearson correlation
coefficient between the percentage and the number
of top N is -0.843, which shows a significant corre-
lation between the two variables (with p-value 0.01
under t-test).

Figure 3 shows the impact of the extra post num-
ber for the context expansion in CEMEL. We can see
that the accuracies of VSM and LTR are improved

3See https://github.com/parthatalukdar/junto

866



Figure 5: Label entropy of GMEL with different rate of
extra post nodes

Figure 6: Accuracy of the systems

by CEMEL. The improvements peak with 5-10 ex-
tra posts. Then more extra posts will pull down the
accuracy.

Figure 4 shows the accuracy of GMEL. The x-axis
is the rate of the extra post number over the evalu-
ation post number. We can see that the accuracy of
MAD increases with the number of extra post nodes
at first and then turns to be stable. The accuracy of
LP increases at first and drops when more extra posts
are added into the graph.

Figure 5 shows the information entropy of the la-
bels in LP and MAD. The curves show that the pre-
diction of LP tends to converge into a small number
of labels. This is because LP prefers smoothing la-
belings over the graph (Talukdar and Pereira, 2010).

We also evaluate our baselines on TAC-KBP2009
data set (LTR is trained on TAC-KBP2010 data set).
The accuracy of VSM and LTR are 0.8338 and
0.8372 respectively, which are comparable with the
state-of-the-art result (Hachey et al., 2013).

Figure 6 shows the performances of the systems
on the microblog data. We set the optimal expansion
post number of CEMEL and use MAD algorithm for
GMEL with all searched extra post nodes. From this
figure we can see that the results of VSM and LTR
baselines are comparable and both of them are sig-
nificantly lower than that on TAC-KBP2009 data.
CEMEL improves the VSM and LTR baselines by
4.3% and 2.7% respectively. GMEL improves VSM
and LTR by 8.3% and 7.5% respectively. The results
of GMEL are also significantly better than CEMEL.
All of the improvements are significant under Z-test
with p < 0.05.

5 Conclusion

In this paper we approach microblog entity linking
by leveraging extra posts. We propose a context-
expansion-based and a graph-based method. Exper-
imental results on our data set show that the per-
formance of traditional method drops on the mi-
croblog data. The graph-based method outperform-
s the context-expansion-based method and both of
them significantly improve the accuracy of tradition-
al methods. In the graph-based method the modified
adsorption algorithm performs better than the label
propagation algorithm.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by National Natural
Science Foundation of China (NSFC) via grant
61273321, 61073126, 61133012 and the National
863 Leading Technology Research Project via grant
2012AA011102. We would like to thank to Wanx-
iang Che, Ruiji Fu, Yanyan Zhao, Wei Song and
several anonymous reviewers for their constructive
comments and suggestions.

References
Zheng Chen, Suzanne Tamang, Adam Lee, and Heng Ji.

2011. A toolkit for knowledge base population. In
SIGIR, pages 1267–1268.

Silviu Cucerzan. 2007. Large-scale named entity dis-
ambiguation based on Wikipedia data. In Proceedings
of the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Method-
s in Natural Language Processing and Computational
Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), pages
708–716, Prague, Czech Republic, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

867



Stephen Guo, Ming-Wei Chang, and Emre Kiciman.
2013a. To link or not to link? a study on end-to-
end tweet entity linking. In Proceedings of the 2013
Conference of the North American Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, pages 1020–1030, Atlanta, Geor-
gia, June. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Yuhang Guo, Bing Qin, Yuqin Li, Ting Liu, and Sheng
Li. 2013b. Improving candidate generation for entity
linking. In Elisabeth Mtais, Farid Meziane, Mohamad
Saraee, Vijayan Sugumaran, and Sunil Vadera, edi-
tors, Natural Language Processing and Information
Systems, volume 7934 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 225–236. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

Ben Hachey, Will Radford, Joel Nothman, Matthew Hon-
nibal, and James R. Curran. 2013. Evaluating en-
tity linking with wikipedia. Artificial Intelligence,
194(0):130 – 150. ¡ce:title¿Artificial Intelligence,
Wikipedia and Semi-Structured Resources¡/ce:title¿.

Xianpei Han and Le Sun. 2011. A generative entity-
mention model for linking entities with knowledge
base. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Techologies, pages 945–954, Portland,
Oregon, USA, June. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Heng Ji and Ralph Grishman. 2011. Knowledge base
population: Successful approaches and challenges. In
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, pages 1148–1158, Portland, Ore-
gon, USA, June. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Sayali Kulkarni, Amit Singh, Ganesh Ramakrishnan, and
Soumen Chakrabarti. 2009. Collective annotation
of wikipedia entities in web text. In Proceedings
of the 15th ACM SIGKDD international conference
on Knowledge discovery and data mining, KDD ’09,
pages 457–466, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Xiaohua Liu, Yitong Li, Haocheng Wu, Ming Zhou, Furu
Wei, and Yi Lu. 2013. Entity linking for tweets. In
Proceedings of the 51th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

P. McNamee and H.T. Dang. 2009. Overview of
the tac 2009 knowledge base population track. In
Proceedings of the Second Text Analysis Conference
(TAC2009).

Edgar Meij, Wouter Weerkamp, and Maarten de Rijke.
2012. Adding semantics to microblog posts. In Pro-
ceedings of the fifth ACM international conference on
Web search and data mining, WSDM ’12, pages 563–
572, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Rada Mihalcea and Andras Csomai. 2007. Wikify!: link-
ing documents to encyclopedic knowledge. In CIKM
’07: Proceedings of the sixteenth ACM conference on
Conference on information and knowledge manage-
ment, pages 233–242, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

David Milne and Ian H. Witten. 2008. Learning to link
with wikipedia. In CIKM ’08: Proceeding of the 17th
ACM conference on Information and knowledge man-
agement, pages 509–518, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Olutobi Owoputi, Brendan O’Connor, Chris Dyer, Kevin
Gimpel, Nathan Schneider, and Noah A. Smith. 2013.
Improved part-of-speech tagging for online conver-
sational text with word clusters. In NAACL2013,
pages 380–390, Atlanta, Georgia, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Lev Ratinov, Dan Roth, Doug Downey, and Mike An-
derson. 2011. Local and global algorithms for dis-
ambiguation to wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 49th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computation-
al Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages
1375–1384, Portland, Oregon, USA, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Wei Shen, Jianyong Wang, Ping Luo, and Min Wang.
2012. Linden: linking named entities with knowl-
edge base via semantic knowledge. In Proceedings of
the 21st international conference on World Wide We-
b, WWW ’12, pages 449–458, New York, NY, USA.
ACM.

Partha Pratim Talukdar and Fernando Pereira. 2010.
Experiments in graph-based semi-supervised learning
methods for class-instance acquisition. In Proceed-
ings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 1473–1481, Up-
psala, Sweden, July. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Vasudeva Varma, Vijay Bharat, Sudheer Kovelamudi,
Praveen Bysani, Santosh GSK, Kiran Kumar N, Kran-
thi Reddy, Karuna Kumar, and Nitin Maganti. 2009.
Iiit hyderabad at tac 2009. In Proceedings of the Sec-
ond Text Analysis Conference (TAC 2009), Gaithers-
burg, Maryland, USA, November.

Wei Zhang, Yan Chuan Sim, Jian Su, and Chew Lim Tan.
2011. Entity linking with effective acronym expan-
sion, instance selection, and topic modeling. In Toby
Walsh, editor, IJCAI 2011, pages 1909–1914.

Zhicheng Zheng, Fangtao Li, Minlie Huang, and Xiaoyan
Zhu. 2010. Learning to link entities with knowledge
base. In NAACL2010, pages 483–491, Los Angeles,
California, June. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Xiaojin Zhu and Zoubin Ghahramani. 2002. Learn-
ing from labeled and unlabeled data with label prop-
agation. Technical report, Technical Report CMU-
CALD-02-107, Carnegie Mellon University.

868


