










































Combining Generative and Discriminative Model Scores for Distant Supervision


Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 24–29,
Seattle, Washington, USA, 18-21 October 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Combining Generative and Discriminative Model Scores for Distant
Supervision

Benjamin Roth, Dietrich Klakow
Saarland University

Spoken Language Systems
Saarbrücken, Germany

{benjamin.roth|dietrich.klakow}@lsv.uni-saarland.de

Abstract

Distant supervision is a scheme to generate
noisy training data for relation extraction by
aligning entities of a knowledge base with
text. In this work we combine the output of
a discriminative at-least-one learner with that
of a generative hierarchical topic model to re-
duce the noise in distant supervision data. The
combination significantly increases the rank-
ing quality of extracted facts and achieves
state-of-the-art extraction performance in an
end-to-end setting. A simple linear interpo-
lation of the model scores performs better
than a parameter-free scheme based on non-
dominated sorting.

1 Introduction

Relation extraction is the task of finding relational
facts in unstructured text and putting them into a
structured (tabularized) knowledge base. Training
machine learning algorithms for relation extraction
requires training data. If the set of relations is pre-
specified, the training data needs to be labeled with
those relations.

Manual annotation of training data is laborious
and costly, however, the knowledge base may al-
ready partially be filled with instances from the rela-
tions. This is utilized by a scheme known as distant
supervision (DS) (Mintz et al., 2009): text is au-
tomatically labeled by aligning (matching) pairs of
entities that are contained in a knowledge base with
their textual occurrences. Whenever such a match is
encountered, the surrounding context (sentence) is
assumed to express the relation.

This assumption, however, can fail.
Consider the example given in (Taka-
matsu et al., 2012): If the tuple
place_of_birth(Michael Jackson, Gary)

is contained in the knowledge base, one matching
context could be:

Michael Jackson was born in Gary ...
And another possible context:

Michael Jackson moved from Gary ...
Clearly, only the first context indeed expresses the
relation and should be labeled accordingly.

Three basic approaches have been proposed to
deal with noisy distant supervision instances: The
discriminative at-least-one approach (Riedel et al.,
2010), that requires that at least one of the matches
for a relation-entity tuple indeed expresses the
relation; The generative approach (Alfonseca et
al., 2012) that separates relation-specific distribu-
tions from noise distributions by using hierarchical
topic models; And the pattern correlation approach
(Takamatsu et al., 2012) that assumes that contexts
which match argument pairs have a high overlap in
argument pairs with other patterns expressing the re-
lation.

In this work we combine 1) a discriminative at-
least-one learner, that requires high scores for both
a dedicated noise label and the matched relation, and
2) a generative topic model that uses a feature-based
representation to separate relation-specific patterns
from background or pair-specific noise. We score
surface patterns and show that combining the two
approaches results in a better ranking quality of re-
lational facts. In an end-to-end evaluation we set a
threshold on the pattern scores and apply the pat-

24



Figure 1: Hierarchical topic models. Intertext model
(left) and feature model (right).

terns in a TAC KBP-style evaluation. Although
the surface patterns are very simple (only strings of
tokens), they achieve state-of-the-art extraction re-
sults.

2 Related Work

2.1 At-Least-One Models

The original form of distant supervision (Mintz et
al., 2009) assumes all sentences containing an entity
pair to be potential patterns for the relation holding
between the entities. A variety of models relax this
assumption and only presume that at least one of the
entity pair occurrences is a textual manifestation of
the relation. The first proposed model with an at-
least-one learner is that of Riedel et al. (2010) and
Yao et al. (2010). It consists of a factor graph that
includes binary variables for contexts, and groups
contexts together for each entity pair. MultiR (Hoff-
mann et al., 2011) can be viewed as a multi-label
extension of (Riedel et al., 2010). A further exten-
sion is MIMLRE (Surdeanu et al., 2012), a jointly
trained two-stage classification model.

2.2 Hierarchical Topic Model

The hierarchical topic model (HierTopics) by Alfon-
seca et al. (2012) models the distant supervision data
by a generative model. For each corpus match of an
entity pair in the knowledge base, the corresponding
surface pattern is assumed to be typical for either the
entity pair, the relation, or neither. This principle is
then used to infer distributions over patterns of one
of the following types:

1. For every entity pair, a pair-specific distribu-
tion.

2. For every relation, a relation-specific distribu-
tion.

3. A general background distribution.

The generative process assumes that for each ar-
gument pair in the knowledge base, all patterns
are generated by first choosing a hidden variable z
which can take on three values,B for background,R
for relation and P for pair. Corresponding vocabu-
lary distributions (φbg, φrel, φpair) for generating the
context patterns are chosen according to the value of
z. The Dirichlet-smoothed vocabulary distributions
are shared on the respective levels. Figure 1 shows
the plate diagram of the HierTopics model.

3 Model Extensions and Combination

3.1 Generative Model
We use a feature-based extension (Roth and Klakow,
2013) of Alfonseca et al. (2012) to include bigrams
for a more fine-grained representation of the pat-
terns. For including features in the model, the model
is extended with a second layer of hidden variables.
A variable x represents a choice of B,R or P for
every pattern, i.e. there is one variable x for every
pattern. Each feature is generated conditioned on
a second variable z ∈ {B,R, P}, i.e. there are as
many variables z for a pattern as there are features
for it. First, the hidden variable x is generated, then
all z variables are generated for the corresponding
features (see Figure 1). The values B,R or P of z
depend on the corresponding x by a transition distri-
bution:

P (Zi = z|Xj(i) = x) =

{
psame, if z = x
1−psame

2 , otherwise

where features at indices i are mapped to the corre-
sponding pattern indices by a function j(i); psame
is set to .99 to enforce the correspondence between
pattern and feature topics. 1

3.2 Discriminative Model
As a second feature-based model, we employ a per-
ceptron model that enforces constraints on the labels
for patterns (Roth and Klakow, 2013). The model
consists of log-linear factors for the set of relations

1The hyper-parameters used for the feature-based topic
model are α = (1, 1, 1) and β = (.1, .001, .001).

25



Algorithm 1 At-Least-One Perceptron Training
θ ← 0
for r ∈ R do

for pair ∈ kb pairs(r) do
for s ∈ sentences(pair) do

for r′ ∈ R \ r do
if P (r|s, θ) ≤ P (r′|s, θ) then
θ ← θ + φ(s, r)− φ(s, r′)

if P (NIL|s, θ) ≤ P (r′|s, θ) then
θ ← θ + φ(s,NIL)− φ(s, r′)

if ∀s∈sentences(pair) : P (r|s, θ) ≤ P (NIL|s, θ) then
s∗ = arg maxs

P (r|s,θ)
P (NIL|s,θ)

θ ← θ + φ(s∗, r)− φ(s∗, NIL)

R as well as a factor for the NIL label (no relation).
Probabilities for a relation r given a sentence pat-
tern s are calculated by normalizing over log-linear
factors defined as fr(s) = exp (

∑
i φi(s, r)θi), with

φ(s, r) the feature vector for sentence s and label
assignment r, and θr the feature weight vector.

The learner is directed by the following se-
mantics: First, for a sentence s that has a distant
supervision match for relation r, relation r should
have a higher probability than any other relation
r′ ∈ R \ r. As extractions are expected to be
noisy, high probabilities for NIL are enforced
by a second constraint: NIL must have a higher
probability than any relation r′ ∈ R \ r. Third, at
least one DS sentence for an argument pair is ex-
pected to express the corresponding relation r. For
sentences s for an entity pair belonging to relation
r, this can be written as the following constraints:
∀s,r′ : P (r|s) > P (r′|s) ∧ P (NIL|s) > P (r′|s)

∃s : P (r|s) > P (NIL|s)
The violation of any of the above constraints
triggers a perceptron update. The basic algorithm is
sketched in Algorithm 1.2

3.3 Model Combination

The per-pattern probabilities P (r|pat) are calcu-
lated as in Alfonseca et al. (2012) and aggregated
over all pattern occurrences: For the topic model,
the number of times the relation-specific topic has
been sampled for a pattern is divided by n(pat), the
number of times the same pattern has been observed.
Analogously for the perceptron, the number of times
a pattern co-occurs with entity pairs for r is multi-
plied by the perceptron score and divided by n(pat).

2The weight vectors are averaged over 20 iterations.

Figure 2: Score combination by non-dominated sorting:
Circles indicate patterns on the Pareto-frontier, which are
ranked highest. They are followed by the triangles, the
square indicates the lowest ranked pattern in this exam-
ple.

For the patterns of the form [ARG1] context
[ARG2], we compute the following scores:

• Maximum Likelihood (MLE):
n(pat,r)
n(pat)

• Topic Model:
n(pat,topic(r))

n(pat)

• Perceptron:
n(pat,r)
n(pat) ·

P (r|s,θ)
P (r|s,θ)+P (NIL|s,θ)

• Interpolation:
0.5·n(pat,topic(r))

n(pat) +
0.5·n(pat,r)·P (r|s,θ)

n(pat)·(P (r|s,θ)+P (NIL|s,θ))

The topic model and perceptron approaches are
based on plausible yet fundamentally different prin-
ciples of modeling noise without direct supervision.
It is therefore an interesting question how comple-
mentary the models are and how much can be gained
from a combination. As the two models do not use
direct supervision, we also avoid tuning parameters
for their combination.

We use two schemes to obtain a combined rank-
ing from the two model scores: The first is a rank-
ing based on non-dominated sorting by successively
computing the Pareto-frontier of the 2-dimensional
score vectors (Borzsony et al., 2001; Godfrey et
al., 2007). The underlying principle is that all data
points (patterns in our case) that are not dominated
by another point3 build the frontier and are ranked
highest (see Figure 2), with ties broken by linear

3A data point h1 dominates a data point h2 if h1 ≥ h2 in all
metrics and h1 > h2 in at least one metric.

26



combination. Sorting by computing the Pareto-
frontier has been applied to training machine transla-
tion systems (Duh et al., 2012) to combine the trans-
lation quality metrics BLEU, RIBES and NTER,
each of which is based on different principles. In the
context of machine translation it has been found to
outperform a linear interpolation of the metrics and
to be more stable to non-smooth metrics and non-
comparable scalings. We compare non-dominated
sorting with a simple linear interpolation with uni-
form weights.

4 Evaluation

4.1 Ranking-Based Evaluation

Evaluation is done on the ranking quality according
to TAC KBP gold annotations (Ji et al., 2010) of ex-
tracted facts from all TAC KBP queries from 2009-
2011 and the TAC KBP 2009-2011 corpora. First,
candidate sentences are retrieved in which the query
entity and a second entity with the appropriate type
are contained. Candidate sentences are then used
to provide answer candidates if one of the extracted
patterns matches. The answer candidates are ranked
according to the score of the matching pattern.

The basis for pattern extraction is the noisy DS
training data of a top-3 ranked system in TAC KBP
2012 (Roth et al., 2012). The retrieval component
of this system is used to obtain sentence and an-
swer candidates (ranked according to their respec-
tive pattern scores). Evaluation results are reported
as averages over per-relation results of the standard
ranking metrics mean average precision (map), geo-
metric map (gmap), precision at 5 and at 10 (p@5,
p@10).

The maximum-likelihood estimator (MLE) base-
line scores patterns by the relative frequency they
occur with a certain relation. The hierarchical topic
(hier orig) as described in Alfonseca et al. (2012)
increases the scores under most metrics, however
the increase is only significant for p@5 and p@10.
The feature-based extension of the topic model
(hier feat) has significantly better ranking quality.
Slightly better scores are obtained by the at-least-
one perceptron learner. It is interesting to see that the
model combinations both by non-dominated sorting
perc+hier (pareto) as well as uniform interpolation
perc+hier (itpl) give a further increase in ranking

method map gmap p@5 p@10
MLE .253 .142 .263 .232
hier orig .270 .158 .353* .297*

hier feature .318†* .205†* .363* .321*

perceptron .330†* .210†* .379* .337*

perc+hier (pareto) .340†* .220†* .400* .340*

perc+hier (itpl) .344†* .220†* .426†* .353†*

Table 1: Ranking quality of extracted facts. Significance
(paired t-test, p < 0.05) w.r.t. MLE(*) and hier orig(†).

 0.1

 0.2

 0.3

 0.4

 0.5

 0.6

 0.7

 0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1
P

re
c
is

io
n

Recall

Interpolated Precision/Recall

MLE
hier orig
hier feat

perceptron
perc+hier (itpl)

Figure 3: Precision at recall levels.

quality. The simpler interpolation scheme gener-
ally works best. Figure 3 shows the Precision/Recall
curves of the basic models and the linear interpola-
tion. On the P/R curve, the linear interpolation is
equal or better than the single methods on all recall
levels.

4.2 End-To-End Evaluation
We evaluate the extraction quality of the induced
perc+hier (itpl) patterns in an end-to-end setting.
We use the evaluation setting of (Surdeanu et al.,
2012) and the results obtained with their pipeline for
MIMLRE and their re-implementation of MultiR as
a point of reference.

In Surdeanu et al. (2012) evaluation is done us-
ing a subset of queries from the TAC KBP 2010 and
2011 evaluation. The source corpus is the TAC KBP
source corpus and a 2010 Wikipedia dump. Only
those answers are considered in scoring that are con-
tained in a list of possible answers from their can-
didates (reducing the number of gold answers from
1601 to 576 and thereby considerably increasing the
value of reported recall).

For evaluating our patterns, we take the same

27



queries for testing as Surdeanu et al. (2012). As the
document collection, we use the TAC KBP source
collection and a Wikipedia dump from 07/2009 that
was available to us. From this document collec-
tion, we use our retrieval pipeline of Roth et al.
(2012) and take those sentences that contain query
entities and slot filler candidates according to NE-
tags. We filter out all candidates that are not con-
tained in the list of candidates considered in (Sur-
deanu et al., 2012), and use the same reduced set
of 576 gold answers as the key. We tune a single
threshold parameter t = .3 on held-out development
data and take all patterns with higher scores. Ta-
ble 2 shows that results obtained with the induced
patterns compare well with state-of-the-art relation
extraction systems.

method Recall Precision F1
MultiR .200 .306 .242
MIMLRE .314 .247 .277
perc+hier (itpl) .248 .401 .307

Table 2: TAC Scores on (Surdeanu et al., 2012) queries.

4.3 Illustration: Top-Ranked Patterns
Figure 4 shows top-ranked patterns for per:title
and org:top members employees, the two rela-
tions with most answers in the gold annotations. For
maximum likelihood estimation the score is 1.0 if
the patterns occurs only with the relation in question
– this includes all cases where the pattern is only
found once in the corpus. While this could be cir-
cumvented by frequency thresholding, we leave the
long tail of the data as it is and let the algorithm deal
with both frequent and infrequent patterns.

One can see that while the maximum likelihood
patterns contain some reasonable relational con-
texts, they are less prototypical and more prone to
distant supervision errors. The patterns scored high
by the proposed combination generalize better, vari-
ation at the top is achieved by re-combining ele-
ments that carry relational meaning (“is an”, “vice
president”, “president director”) or are closely cor-
related to the particular relation.

5 Conclusion

We have combined two models based on distinct
principles for noise reduction in distant supervision:

per:title, MLE
[ARG1] , a singing [ARG2]
*[ARG1] Best film : Capote ( as [ARG2]
[ARG1] Nunn ( born October 7 , 1957 in Little Rock , Arkansas
) is an American jazz [ARG2]
*[ARG2] Kevin Weekes , subbing for a rarely rested [ARG1]
[ARG1] Butterfill FRICS ( born February 14 , 1941 , Surrey ) is
a British [ARG2]

per:title, perc+hier (itpl)
[ARG1] , is a Canadian [ARG2]
[ARG1] Hilligoss is an American [ARG2]
[ARG1] , is an American film [ARG2]
[ARG1] , is an American film and television [ARG2]
*[ARG1] for Best [ARG2]

org:top members employees, MLE
[ARG2] remained chairman of [ARG1]
*[ARG2] asks the ball whether he and [ARG1]
[ARG2] was chairman of the [ARG1]
*[ARG1] , Joe Lieberman and [ARG2]
*[ARG1] ’s responsibility to pin down just how the government
decided to front $ 30 billion in taxpayer dollars for the Bear
Stearns deal , “ Chairman [ARG2]

org:top members employees, perc+hier (itpl)
[ARG2] , Vice President of the [ARG1]
[ARG1] Vice president [ARG2]
[ARG1] president director [ARG2]
[ARG1] vice president director [ARG2]
[ARG1] Board member [ARG2]

Figure 4: Top-scored patterns for maximum likelihood
(MLE) and the interpolation (perc+hier itpl) method. In-
exact patterns are marked by *.

a feature-based extension of a hierarchical topic
model, and an at-least-one perceptron. Interpola-
tion increases the quality of extractions and achieves
state-of-the-art extraction performance. A combina-
tion scheme based on non-dominated sorting, that
was inspired by work on combining machine trans-
lation metrics, was not as good as a simple linear
combination of scores. We think that the good re-
sults motivate research into more integrated combi-
nations of noise reduction approaches.

Acknowledgment

Benjamin Roth is a recipient of the Google Europe
Fellowship in Natural Language Processing, and this
research is supported in part by this Google Fellow-
ship.

28



References
Enrique Alfonseca, Katja Filippova, Jean-Yves Delort,

and Guillermo Garrido. 2012. Pattern learning for
relation extraction with a hierarchical topic model. In
Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Short Papers-
Volume 2, pages 54–59. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

S Borzsony, Donald Kossmann, and Konrad Stocker.
2001. The skyline operator. In Data Engineering,
2001. Proceedings. 17th International Conference on,
pages 421–430. IEEE.

Kevin Duh, Katsuhito Sudoh, Xianchao Wu, Hajime
Tsukada, and Masaaki Nagata. 2012. Learning to
translate with multiple objectives. In Proceedings of
the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Long Papers-Volume 1, pages
1–10. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Parke Godfrey, Ryan Shipley, and Jarek Gryz. 2007. Al-
gorithms and analyses for maximal vector computa-
tion. The VLDB JournalThe International Journal on
Very Large Data Bases, 16(1):5–28.

Raphael Hoffmann, Congle Zhang, Xiao Ling, Luke
Zettlemoyer, and Daniel S Weld. 2011. Knowledge-
based weak supervision for information extraction of
overlapping relations. In Proceedings of the 49th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, vol-
ume 1, pages 541–550.

Heng Ji, Ralph Grishman, Hoa Trang Dang, Kira Grif-
fitt, and Joe Ellis. 2010. Overview of the tac 2010
knowledge base population track. In Third Text Anal-
ysis Conference (TAC 2010).

Mike Mintz, Steven Bills, Rion Snow, and Dan Jurafsky.
2009. Distant supervision for relation extraction with-
out labeled data. In Proceedings of the Joint Confer-
ence of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the
4th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing of the AFNLP: Volume 2-Volume 2,
pages 1003–1011. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Sebastian Riedel, Limin Yao, and Andrew McCallum.
2010. Modeling relations and their mentions with-
out labeled text. In Machine Learning and Knowledge
Discovery in Databases, pages 148–163. Springer.

Benjamin Roth and Dietrich Klakow. 2013. Feature-
based models for improving the quality of noisy train-
ing data for relation extraction. In Proceedings of the
22nd ACM International Conference on Information
and Knowledge Management (CIKM). ACM.

Benjamin Roth, Grzegorz Chrupala, Michael Wiegand,
Mittul Singh, and Dietrich Klakow. 2012. General-
izing from freebase and patterns using distant supervi-

sion for slot filling. In Proceedings of the Text Analysis
Conference (TAC).

Mihai Surdeanu, Julie Tibshirani, Ramesh Nallapati, and
Christopher D Manning. 2012. Multi-instance multi-
label learning for relation extraction. In Proceedings
of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and Computational
Natural Language Learning, pages 455–465. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Shingo Takamatsu, Issei Sato, and Hiroshi Nakagawa.
2012. Reducing wrong labels in distant supervi-
sion for relation extraction. In Proceedings of the
50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Long Papers - Volume 1, ACL
’12, pages 721–729, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Limin Yao, Sebastian Riedel, and Andrew McCallum.
2010. Collective cross-document relation extraction
without labelled data. In Proceedings of the 2010 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 1013–1023. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

29


