










































Sarcasm as Contrast between a Positive Sentiment and Negative Situation


Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 704–714,
Seattle, Washington, USA, 18-21 October 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Sarcasm as Contrast between a Positive Sentiment and Negative Situation

Ellen Riloff, Ashequl Qadir, Prafulla Surve, Lalindra De Silva,
Nathan Gilbert, Ruihong Huang

School Of Computing
University of Utah

Salt Lake City, UT 84112
{riloff,asheq,alnds,ngilbert,huangrh}@cs.utah.edu, prafulla.surve@gmail.com

Abstract

A common form of sarcasm on Twitter con-
sists of a positive sentiment contrasted with a
negative situation. For example, many sarcas-
tic tweets include a positive sentiment, such as
“love” or “enjoy”, followed by an expression
that describes an undesirable activity or state
(e.g., “taking exams” or “being ignored”). We
have developed a sarcasm recognizer to iden-
tify this type of sarcasm in tweets. We present
a novel bootstrapping algorithm that automati-
cally learns lists of positive sentiment phrases
and negative situation phrases from sarcastic
tweets. We show that identifying contrast-
ing contexts using the phrases learned through
bootstrapping yields improved recall for sar-
casm recognition.

1 Introduction

Sarcasm is generally characterized as ironic or satir-
ical wit that is intended to insult, mock, or amuse.
Sarcasm can be manifested in many different ways,
but recognizing sarcasm is important for natural lan-
guage processing to avoid misinterpreting sarcastic
statements as literal. For example, sentiment anal-
ysis can be easily misled by the presence of words
that have a strong polarity but are used sarcastically,
which means that the opposite polarity was intended.
Consider the following tweet on Twitter, which in-
cludes the words “yay” and “thrilled” but actually
expresses a negative sentiment: “yay! it’s a holi-
day weekend and i’m on call for work! couldn’t be
more thrilled! #sarcasm.” In this case, the hashtag
#sarcasm reveals the intended sarcasm, but we don’t
always have the benefit of an explicit sarcasm label.

In the realm of Twitter, we observed that many
sarcastic tweets have a common structure that
creates a positive/negative contrast between a senti-
ment and a situation. Specifically, sarcastic tweets
often express a positive sentiment in reference to a
negative activity or state. For example, consider the
tweets below, where the positive sentiment terms
are underlined and the negative activity/state terms
are italicized.

(a) Oh how I love being ignored. #sarcasm

(b) Thoroughly enjoyed shoveling the driveway
today! :) #sarcasm

(c) Absolutely adore it when my bus is late
#sarcasm

(d) I’m so pleased mom woke me up with
vacuuming my room this morning. :) #sarcasm

The sarcasm in these tweets arises from the jux-
taposition of a positive sentiment word (e.g., love,
enjoyed, adore, pleased) with a negative activity or
state (e.g., being ignored, bus is late, shoveling, and
being woken up).

The goal of our research is to identify sarcasm
that arises from the contrast between a positive sen-
timent referring to a negative situation. A key chal-
lenge is to automatically recognize the stereotypi-
cally negative “situations”, which are activities and
states that most people consider to be unenjoyable or
undesirable. For example, stereotypically unenjoy-
able activities include going to the dentist, taking an
exam, and having to work on holidays. Stereotypi-
cally undesirable states include being ignored, hav-
ing no friends, and feeling sick. People recognize

704



these situations as being negative through cultural
norms and stereotypes, so they are rarely accompa-
nied by an explicit negative sentiment. For example,
“I feel sick” is universally understood to be a nega-
tive situation, even without an explicit expression of
negative sentiment. Consequently, we must learn to
recognize phrases that correspond to stereotypically
negative situations.

We present a bootstrapping algorithm that auto-
matically learns phrases corresponding to positive
sentiments and phrases corresponding to negative
situations. We use tweets that contain a sarcasm
hashtag as positive instances for the learning pro-
cess. The bootstrapping algorithm begins with a sin-
gle seed word, “love”, and a large set of sarcastic
tweets. First, we learn negative situation phrases
that follow a positive sentiment (initially, the seed
word “love”). Second, we learn positive sentiment
phrases that occur near a negative situation phrase.
The bootstrapping process iterates, alternately learn-
ing new negative situations and new positive sen-
timent phrases. Finally, we use the learned lists
of sentiment and situation phrases to recognize sar-
casm in new tweets by identifying contexts that con-
tain a positive sentiment in close proximity to a neg-
ative situation phrase.

2 Related Work

Researchers have investigated the use of lexical
and syntactic features to recognize sarcasm in text.
Kreuz and Caucci (2007) studied the role that dif-
ferent lexical factors play, such as interjections (e.g.,
“gee” or “gosh”) and punctuation symbols (e.g., ‘?’)
in recognizing sarcasm in narratives. Lukin and
Walker (2013) explored the potential of a bootstrap-
ping method for sarcasm classification in social di-
alogue to learn lexical N-gram cues associated with
sarcasm (e.g., “oh really”, “I get it”, “no way”, etc.)
as well as lexico-syntactic patterns.

In opinionated user posts, Carvalho et al. (2009)
found oral or gestural expressions, represented us-
ing punctuation and other keyboard characters, to
be more predictive of irony1 in contrast to features
representing structured linguistic knowledge in Por-

1They adopted the term ‘irony’ instead of ‘sarcasm’ to re-
fer to the case when a word or expression with prior positive
polarity is figuratively used to express a negative opinion.

tuguese. Filatova (2012) presented a detailed de-
scription of sarcasm corpus creation with sarcasm
annotations of Amazon product reviews. Their an-
notations capture sarcasm both at the document level
and the text utterance level. Tsur et al. (2010) pre-
sented a semi-supervised learning framework that
exploits syntactic and pattern based features in sar-
castic sentences of Amazon product reviews. They
observed correlated sentiment words such as “yay!”
or “great!” often occurring in their most useful pat-
terns.

Davidov et al. (2010) used sarcastic tweets and
sarcastic Amazon product reviews to train a sarcasm
classifier with syntactic and pattern-based features.
They examined whether tweets with a sarcasm hash-
tag are reliable enough indicators of sarcasm to be
used as a gold standard for evaluation, but found that
sarcasm hashtags are noisy and possibly biased to-
wards the hardest form of sarcasm (where even hu-
mans have difficulty). González-Ibáñez et al. (2011)
explored the usefulness of lexical and pragmatic fea-
tures for sarcasm detection in tweets. They used sar-
casm hashtags as gold labels. They found positive
and negative emotions in tweets, determined through
fixed word dictionaries, to have a strong correlation
with sarcasm. Liebrecht et al. (2013) explored N-
gram features from 1 to 3-grams to build a classifier
to recognize sarcasm in Dutch tweets. They made an
interesting observation from their most effective N-
gram features that people tend to be more sarcastic
towards specific topics such as school, homework,
weather, returning from vacation, public transport,
the church, the dentist, etc. This observation has
some overlap with our observation that stereotypi-
cally negative situations often occur in sarcasm.

The cues for recognizing sarcasm may come from
a variety of sources. There exists a line of work
that tries to identify facial and vocal cues in speech
(e.g., (Gina M. Caucci, 2012; Rankin et al., 2009)).
Cheang and Pell (2009) and Cheang and Pell (2008)
performed studies to identify acoustic cues in sarcas-
tic utterances by analyzing speech features such as
speech rate, mean amplitude, amplitude range, etc.
Tepperman et al. (2006) worked on sarcasm recog-
nition in spoken dialogue using prosodic and spec-
tral cues (e.g., average pitch, pitch slope, etc.) as
well as contextual cues (e.g., laughter or response to
questions) as features.

705



While some of the previous work has identi-
fied specific expressions that correlate with sarcasm,
none has tried to identify contrast between positive
sentiments and negative situations. The novel con-
tributions of our work include explicitly recogniz-
ing contexts that contrast a positive sentiment with a
negative activity or state, as well as a bootstrapped
learning framework to automatically acquire posi-
tive sentiment and negative situation phrases.

3 Bootstrapped Learning of Positive
Sentiments and Negative Situations

Sarcasm is often defined in terms of contrast or “say-
ing the opposite of what you mean”. Our work fo-
cuses on one specific type of contrast that is common
on Twitter: the expression of a positive sentiment
(e.g., “love” or “enjoy”) in reference to a negative
activity or state (e.g., “taking an exam” or “being ig-
nored”). Our goal is to create a sarcasm classifier for
tweets that explicitly recognizes contexts that con-
tain a positive sentiment contrasted with a negative
situation.

Our approach learns rich phrasal lexicons of pos-
itive sentiments and negative situations using only
the seed word “love” and a collection of sarcastic
tweets as input. A key factor that makes the algo-
rithm work is the presumption that if you find a pos-
itive sentiment or a negative situation in a sarcastic
tweet, then you have found the source of the sar-
casm. We further assume that the sarcasm probably
arises from positive/negative contrast and we exploit
syntactic structure to extract phrases that are likely
to have contrasting polarity. Another key factor is
that we focus specifically on tweets. The short na-
ture of tweets limits the search space for the source
of the sarcasm. The brevity of tweets also probably
contributes to the prevalence of this relatively com-
pact form of sarcasm.

3.1 Overview of the Learning Process

Our bootstrapping algorithm operates on the as-
sumption that many sarcastic tweets contain both a
positive sentiment and a negative situation in close
proximity, which is the source of the sarcasm.2 Al-
though sentiments and situations can be expressed

2Sarcasm can arise from a negative sentiment contrasted
with a positive situation too, but our observation is that this is
much less common, at least on Twitter.

Positive
Sentiment
Phrases

Negative
Situation
Phrases

Seed Word
"love"

Sarcastic Tweets

1 2
34

Figure 1: Bootstrapped Learning of Positive Sentiment
and Negative Situation Phrases

in numerous ways, we focus on positive sentiments
that are expressed as a verb phrase or as a predicative
expression (predicate adjective or predicate nomi-
nal), and negative activities or states that can be a
complement to a verb phrase. Ideally, we would
like to parse the text and extract verb complement
phrase structures, but tweets are often informally
written and ungrammatical. Therefore we try to rec-
ognize these syntactic structures heuristically using
only part-of-speech tags and proximity.

The learning process relies on an assumption that
a positive sentiment verb phrase usually appears to
the left of a negative situation phrase and in close
proximity (usually, but not always, adjacent). Picto-
rially, we assume that many sarcastic tweets contain
this structure:

[+ VERB PHRASE] [– SITUATION PHRASE]

This structural assumption drives our bootstrap-
ping algorithm, which is illustrated in Figure 1.
The bootstrapping process begins with a single seed
word, “love”, which seems to be the most common
positive sentiment term in sarcastic tweets. Given
a sarcastic tweet containing the word “love”, our
structural assumption infers that “love” is probably
followed by an expression that refers to a negative
situation. So we harvest the n-grams that follow the
word “love” as negative situation candidates. We se-
lect the best candidates using a scoring metric, and
add them to a list of negative situation phrases.

Next, we exploit the structural assumption in the
opposite direction. Given a sarcastic tweet that con-
tains a negative situation phrase, we infer that the
negative situation phrase is preceded by a positive
sentiment. We harvest the n-grams that precede the
negative situation phrases as positive sentiment can-
didates, score and select the best candidates, and

706



add them to a list of positive sentiment phrases.
The bootstrapping process then iterates, alternately
learning more positive sentiment phrases and more
negative situation phrases.

We also observed that positive sentiments are fre-
quently expressed as predicative phrases (i.e., pred-
icate adjectives and predicate nominals). For ex-
ample: “I’m taking calculus. It is awesome. #sar-
casm”. Wiegand et al. (2013) offered a related ob-
servation that adjectives occurring in predicate ad-
jective constructions are more likely to convey sub-
jectivity than adjectives occurring in non-predicative
structures. Therefore we also include a step in
the learning process to harvest predicative phrases
that occur in close proximity to a negative situation
phrase. In the following sections, we explain each
step of the bootstrapping process in more detail.

3.2 Bootstrapping Data

For the learning process, we used Twitter’s stream-
ing API to obtain a large set of tweets. We col-
lected 35,000 tweets that contain the hashtag #sar-
casm or #sarcastic to use as positive instances of sar-
casm. We also collected 140,000 additional tweets
from Twitter’s random daily stream. We removed
the tweets that contain a sarcasm hashtag, and con-
sidered the rest to be negative instances of sarcasm.
Of course, there will be some sarcastic tweets that do
not have a sarcasm hashtag, so the negative instances
will contain some noise. But we expect that a very
small percentage of these tweets will be sarcastic, so
the noise should not be a major issue. There will also
be noise in the positive instances because a sarcasm
hashtag does not guarantee that there is sarcasm in
the body of the tweet (e.g., the sarcastic content may
be in a linked url, or in a prior tweet). But again, we
expect the amount of noise to be relatively small.

Our tweet collection therefore contains a total of
175,000 tweets: 20% are labeled as sarcastic and
80% are labeled as not sarcastic. We applied CMU’s
part-of-speech tagger designed for tweets (Owoputi
et al., 2013) to this data set.

3.3 Seeding

The bootstrapping process begins by initializing the
positive sentiment lexicon with one seed word: love.
We chose this seed because it seems to be the most
common positive sentiment word in sarcastic tweets.

3.4 Learning Negative Situation Phrases

The first stage of bootstrapping learns new phrases
that correspond to negative situations. The learning
process consists of two steps: (1) harvesting candi-
date phrases, and (2) scoring and selecting the best
candidates.

To collect candidate phrases for negative situa-
tions, we extract n-grams that follow a positive senti-
ment phrase in a sarcastic tweet. We extract every 1-
gram, 2-gram, and 3-gram that occurs immediately
after (on the right-hand side) of a positive sentiment
phrase. As an example, consider the tweet in Figure
2, where “love” is the positive sentiment:

I love waiting forever for the doctor #sarcasm

Figure 2: Example Sarcastic Tweet

We extract three n-grams as candidate negative situ-
ation phrases:

waiting, waiting forever, waiting forever for

Next, we apply the part-of-speech (POS) tagger
and filter the candidate list based on POS patterns so
we only keep n-grams that have a desired syntactic
structure. For negative situation phrases, our goal
is to learn possible verb phrase (VP) complements
that are themselves verb phrases because they should
represent activities and states. So we require a can-
didate phrase to be either a unigram tagged as a verb
(V) or the phrase must match one of 7 POS-based
bigram patterns or 20 POS-based trigram patterns
that we created to try to approximate the recogni-
tion of verbal complement structures. The 7 POS bi-
gram patterns are: V+V, V+ADV, ADV+V, “to”+V,
V+NOUN, V+PRO, V+ADJ. Note that we used
a POS tagger designed for Twitter, which has a
smaller set of POS tags than more traditional POS
taggers. For example there is just a single V tag
that covers all types of verbs. The V+V pattern will
therefore capture negative situation phrases that con-
sist of a present participle verb followed by a past
participle verb, such as “being ignored” or “getting
hit”.3 We also allow verb particles to match a V tag
in our patterns. The remaining bigram patterns cap-
ture verb phrases that include a verb and adverb, an

3In some cases it may be more appropriate to consider the
second verb to be an adjective, but in practice they were usually
tagged as verbs.

707



infinitive form (e.g., “to clean”), a verb and noun
phrase (e.g., “shoveling snow”), or a verb and ad-
jective (e.g., “being alone”). We use some simple
heuristics to try to ensure that we are at the end of an
adjective or noun phrase (e.g., if the following word
is tagged as an adjective or noun, then we assume
we are not at the end).

The 20 POS trigram patterns are similar in nature
and are designed to capture seven general types of
verb phrases: verb and adverb mixtures, an infini-
tive VP that includes an adverb, a verb phrase fol-
lowed by a noun phrase, a verb phrase followed by a
prepositional phrase, a verb followed by an adjective
phrase, or an infinitive VP followed by an adjective,
noun, or pronoun.

Returning to Figure 2, only two of the n-grams
match our POS patterns, so we are left with two can-
didate phrases for negative situations:

waiting, waiting forever

Next, we score each negative situation candidate
by estimating the probability that a tweet is sarcastic
given that it contains the candidate phrase following
a positive sentiment phrase:

| follows(–candidate, +sentiment) & sarcastic |
| follows(–candidate, +sentiment) |

We compute the number of times that the negative
situation candidate immediately follows a positive
sentiment in sarcastic tweets divided by the number
of times that the candidate immediately follows a
positive sentiment in all tweets. We discard phrases
that have a frequency < 3 in the tweet collection
since they are too sparse.

Finally, we rank the candidate phrases based on
this probability, using their frequency as a secondary
key in case of ties. The top 20 phrases with a prob-
ability ≥ .80 are added to the negative situation
phrase list.4 When we add a phrase to the nega-
tive situation list, we immediately remove all other
candidates that are subsumed by the selected phrase.
For example, if we add the phrase “waiting”, then
the phrase “waiting forever” would be removed from
the candidate list because it is subsumed by “wait-
ing”. This process reduces redundancy in the set of

4Fewer than 20 phrases will be learned if < 20 phrases pass
this threshold.

phrases that we add during each bootstrapping itera-
tion. The bootstrapping process stops when no more
candidate phrases pass the probability threshold.

3.5 Learning Positive Verb Phrases

The procedure for learning positive sentiment
phrases is analogous. First, we collect phrases that
potentially convey a positive sentiment by extract-
ing n-grams that precede a negative situation phrase
in a sarcastic tweet. To learn positive sentiment verb
phrases, we extract every 1-gram and 2-gram that
occurs immediately before (on the left-hand side of)
a negative situation phrase.

Next, we apply the POS tagger and filter the n-
grams using POS tag patterns so that we only keep
n-grams that have a desired syntactic structure. Here
our goal is to learn simple verb phrases (VPs) so we
only retain n-grams that contain at least one verb and
consist only of verbs and (optionally) adverbs. Fi-
nally, we score each candidate sentiment verb phrase
by estimating the probability that a tweet is sarcastic
given that it contains the candidate phrase preceding
a negative situation phrase:

| precedes(+candidateVP,–situation) & sarcastic |
| precedes(+candidateVP,–situation) |

3.6 Learning Positive Predicative Phrases

We also use the negative situation phrases to harvest
predicative expressions (predicate adjective or pred-
icate nominal structures) that occur nearby. Based
on the same assumption that sarcasm often arises
from the contrast between a positive sentiment and
a negative situation, we identify tweets that contain
a negative situation and a predicative expression in
close proximity. We then assume that the predicative
expression is likely to convey a positive sentiment.

To learn predicative expressions, we use 24 copu-
lar verbs from Wikipedia5 and their inflections. We
extract positive sentiment candidates by extracting
1-grams, 2-grams, and 3-grams that appear immedi-
ately after a copular verb and occur within 5 words
of the negative situation phrase, on either side. This
constraint only enforces proximity because predica-
tive expressions often appear in a separate clause or
sentence (e.g., “It is just great that my iphone was
stolen” or “My iphone was stolen. This is great.”)

5http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List of English copulae

708



We then apply POS patterns to identify n-grams
that correspond to predicate adjective and predicate
nominal phrases. For predicate adjectives, we re-
tain ADJ and ADV+ADJ n-grams. We use a few
heuristics to check that the adjective is not part of a
noun phrase (e.g., we check that the following word
is not a noun). For predicate nominals, we retain
ADV+ADJ+N, DET+ADJ+N and ADJ+N n-grams.
We excluded noun phrases consisting only of nouns
because they rarely seemed to represent a sentiment.
The sentiment in predicate nominals was usually
conveyed by the adjective. We discard all candidates
with frequency < 3 as being too sparse. Finally,
we score each remaining candidate by estimating the
probability that a tweet is sarcastic given that it con-
tains the predicative expression near (within 5 words
of) a negative situation phrase:

| near(+candidatePRED,–situation) & sarcastic |
| near(+candidatePRED,–situation) |

We found that the diversity of positive senti-
ment verb phrases and predicative expressions is
much lower than the diversity of negative situation
phrases. As a result, we sort the candidates by their
probability and conservatively add only the top 5
positive verb phrases and top 5 positive predicative
expressions in each bootstrapping iteration. Both
types of sentiment phrases must pass a probability
threshold of ≥ .70.

3.7 The Learned Phrase Lists

The bootstrapping process alternately learns pos-
itive sentiments and negative situations until no
more phrases can be learned. In our experiments,
we learned 26 positive sentiment verb phrases, 20
predicative expressions and 239 negative situation
phrases.

Table 1 shows the first 15 positive verb phrases,
the first 15 positive predicative expressions, and the
first 40 negative situation phrases learned by the
bootstrapping algorithm. Some of the negative sit-
uation phrases are not complete expressions, but it
is clear that they will often match negative activities
and states. For example, “getting yelled” was gener-
ated from sarcastic comments such as “I love getting
yelled at”, “being home” occurred in tweets about
“being home alone”, and “being told” is often be-
ing told what to do. Shorter phrases often outranked

longer phrases because they are more general, and
will therefore match more contexts. But an avenue
for future work is to learn linguistic expressions that
more precisely characterize specific negative situa-
tions.

Positive Verb Phrases (26): missed, loves,
enjoy, cant wait, excited, wanted, can’t wait,
get, appreciate, decided, loving, really like,
looooove, just keeps, loveee, ...

Positive Predicative Expressions (20): great,
so much fun, good, so happy, better, my
favorite thing, cool, funny, nice, always fun,
fun, awesome, the best feeling, amazing,
happy, ...

Negative Situations (239): being ignored, be-
ing sick, waiting, feeling, waking up early, be-
ing woken, fighting, staying, writing, being
home, cleaning, not getting, crying, sitting at
home, being stuck, starting, being told, be-
ing left, getting ignored, being treated, doing
homework, learning, getting up early, going to
bed, getting sick, riding, being ditched, get-
ting ditched, missing, not sleeping, not talking,
trying, falling, walking home, getting yelled,
being awake, being talked, taking care, doing
nothing, wasting, ...

Table 1: Examples of Learned Phrases

4 Evaluation

4.1 Data

For evaluation purposes, we created a gold stan-
dard data set of manually annotated tweets. Even
for people, it is not always easy to identify sarcasm
in tweets because sarcasm often depends on con-
versational context that spans more than a single
tweet. Extracting conversational threads from Twit-
ter, and analyzing conversational exchanges, has its
own challenges and is beyond the scope of this re-
search. We focus on identifying sarcasm that is self-
contained in one tweet and does not depend on prior
conversational context.

We defined annotation guidelines that instructed
human annotators to read isolated tweets and label

709



a tweet as sarcastic if it contains comments judged
to be sarcastic based solely on the content of that
tweet. Tweets that do not contain sarcasm, or where
potential sarcasm is unclear without seeing the prior
conversational context, were labeled as not sarcas-
tic. For example, a tweet such as “Yes, I meant that
sarcastically.” should be labeled as not sarcastic be-
cause the sarcastic content was (presumably) in a
previous tweet. The guidelines did not contain any
instructions that required positive/negative contrast
to be present in the tweet, so all forms of sarcasm
were considered to be positive examples.

To ensure that our evaluation data had a healthy
mix of both sarcastic and non-sarcastic tweets, we
collected 1,600 tweets with a sarcasm hashtag (#sar-
casm or #sarcastic), and 1,600 tweets without these
sarcasm hashtags from Twitter’s random streaming
API. When presenting the tweets to the annotators,
the sarcasm hashtags were removed so the annota-
tors had to judge whether a tweet was sarcastic or
not without seeing those hashtags.

To ensure that we had high-quality annotations,
three annotators were asked to annotate the same set
of 200 tweets (100 sarcastic + 100 not sarcastic).
We computed inter-annotator agreement (IAA) be-
tween each pair of annotators using Cohen’s kappa
(κ). The pairwise IAA scores were κ=0.80, κ=0.81,
and κ=0.82. We then gave each annotator an addi-
tional 1,000 tweets to annotate, yielding a total of
3,200 annotated tweets. We used the first 200 tweets
as our Tuning Set, and the remaining 3000 tweets as
our Test Set.

Our annotators judged 742 of the 3,200 tweets
(23%) to be sarcastic. Only 713 of the 1,600 tweets
with sarcasm hashtags (45%) were judged to be sar-
castic based on our annotation guidelines. There are
several reasons why a tweet with a sarcasm hash-
tag might not have been judged to be sarcastic. Sar-
casm may not be apparent without prior conversa-
tional context (i.e., multiple tweets), or the sarcastic
content may be in a URL and not the tweet itself, or
the tweet’s content may not obviously be sarcastic
without seeing the sarcasm hashtag (e.g., “The most
boring hockey game ever #sarcasm”).

Of the 1,600 tweets in our data set that were ob-
tained from the random stream and did not have a
sarcasm hashtag, 29 (1.8%) were judged to be sar-
castic based on our annotation guidelines.

4.2 Baselines

Overall, 693 of the 3,000 tweets in our Test Set
were annotated as sarcastic, so a system that classi-
fies every tweet as sarcastic will have 23% precision.
To assess the difficulty of recognizing the sarcastic
tweets in our data set, we evaluated a variety of base-
line systems.

We created two baseline systems that use n-gram
features with supervised machine learning to create
a sarcasm classifier. We used the LIBSVM (Chang
and Lin, 2011) library to train two support vector
machine (SVM) classifiers: one with just unigram
features and one with both unigrams and bigrams.
The features had binary values indicating the pres-
ence or absence of each n-gram in a tweet. The clas-
sifiers were evaluated using 10-fold cross-validation.
We used the RBF kernel, and the cost and gamma
parameters were optimized for accuracy using un-
igram features and 10-fold cross-validation on our
Tuning Set. The first two rows of Table 2 show the
results for these SVM classifiers, which achieved F
scores of 46-48%.

We also conducted experiments with existing sen-
timent and subjectivity lexicons to see whether they
could be leveraged to recognize sarcasm. We exper-
imented with three resources:

Liu05 : A positive and negative opinion lexicon
from (Liu et al., 2005). This lexicon contains
2,007 positive sentiment words and 4,783 neg-
ative sentiment words.

MPQA05 : The MPQA Subjectivity Lexicon that
is part of the OpinionFinder system (Wilson et
al., 2005a; Wilson et al., 2005b). This lexicon
contains 2,718 subjective words with positive
polarity and 4,910 subjective words with nega-
tive polarity.

AFINN11 The AFINN sentiment lexicon designed
for microblogs (Nielsen, 2011; Hansen et al.,
2011) contains 2,477 manually labeled words
and phrases with integer values ranging from -5
(negativity) to 5 (positivity). We considered all
words with negative values to have negative po-
larity (1598 words), and all words with positive
values to have positive polarity (879 words).

We performed four sets of experiments with each
resource to see how beneficial existing sentiment

710



System Recall Precision F score
Supervised SVM Classifiers

1grams .35 .64 .46
1+2grams .39 .64 .48

Positive Sentiment Only
Liu05 .77 .34 .47
MPQA05 .78 .30 .43
AFINN11 .75 .32 .44

Negative Sentiment Only
Liu05 .26 .23 .24
MPQA05 .34 .24 .28
AFINN11 .24 .22 .23

Positive and Negative Sentiment, Unordered
Liu05 .19 .37 .25
MPQA05 .27 .30 .29
AFINN11 .17 .30 .22

Positive and Negative Sentiment, Ordered
Liu05 .09 .40 .14
MPQA05 .13 .30 .18
AFINN11 .09 .35 .14

Our Bootstrapped Lexicons
Positive VPs .28 .45 .35
Negative Situations .29 .38 .33
Contrast(+VPs, –Situations), Unordered .11 .56 .18
Contrast(+VPs, –Situations), Ordered .09 .70 .15

& Contrast(+Preds, –Situations) .13 .63 .22
Our Bootstrapped Lexicons ∪ SVM Classifier

Contrast(+VPs, –Situations), Ordered .42 .63 .50
& Contrast(+Preds, –Situations) .44 .62 .51

Table 2: Experimental results on the test set

lexicons could be for sarcasm recognition in tweets.
Since our hypothesis is that sarcasm often arises
from the contrast between something positive and
something negative, we systematically evaluated the
positive and negative phrases individually, jointly,
and jointly in a specific order (a positive phrase fol-
lowed by a negative phrase).

First, we labeled a tweet as sarcastic if it con-
tains any positive term in each resource. The Pos-
itive Sentiment Only section of Table 2 shows that
all three sentiment lexicons achieved high recall (75-
78%) but low precision (30-34%). Second, we la-
beled a tweet as sarcastic if it contains any negative
term from each resource. The Negative Sentiment
Only section of Table 2 shows that this approach
yields much lower recall and also lower precision
of 22-24%, which is what would be expected of a
random classifier since 23% of the tweets are sar-
castic. These results suggest that explicit negative

sentiments are not generally indicative of sarcasm.
Third, we labeled a tweet as sarcastic if it contains

both a positive sentiment term and a negative senti-
ment term, in any order. The Positive and Negative
Sentiment, Unordered section of Table 2 shows that
this approach yields low recall, indicating that rela-
tively few sarcastic tweets contain both positive and
negative sentiments, and low precision as well.

Fourth, we required the contrasting sentiments to
occur in a specific order (the positive term must pre-
cede the negative term) and near each other (no more
than 5 words apart). This criteria reflects our obser-
vation that positive sentiments often closely precede
negative situations in sarcastic tweets, so we wanted
to see if the same ordering tendency holds for neg-
ative sentiments. The Positive and Negative Senti-
ment, Ordered section of Table 2 shows that this or-
dering constraint further decreases recall and only
slightly improves precision, if at all. Our hypothe-

711



sis is that when positive and negative sentiments are
expressed in the same tweet, they are referring to
different things (e.g., different aspects of a product).
Expressing positive and negative sentiments about
the same thing would usually sound contradictory
rather than sarcastic.

4.3 Evaluation of Bootstrapped Phrase Lists

The next set of experiments evaluates the effective-
ness of the positive sentiment and negative situa-
tion phrases learned by our bootstrapping algorithm.
The results are shown in the Our Bootstrapped Lex-
icons section of Table 2. For the sake of compar-
ison with other sentiment resources, we first eval-
uated our positive sentiment verb phrases and neg-
ative situation phrases independently. Our positive
verb phrases achieved much lower recall than the
positive sentiment phrases in the other resources, but
they had higher precision (45%). The low recall
is undoubtedly because our bootstrapped lexicon is
small and contains only verb phrases, while the other
resources are much larger and contain terms with
additional parts-of-speech, such as adjectives and
nouns.

Despite its relatively small size, our list of neg-
ative situation phrases achieved 29% recall, which
is comparable to the negative sentiments, but higher
precision (38%).

Next, we classified a tweet as sarcastic if it con-
tains both a positive verb phrase and a negative sit-
uation phrase from our bootstrapped lists, in any
order. This approach produced low recall (11%)
but higher precision (56%) than the sentiment lex-
icons. Finally, we enforced an ordering constraint
so a tweet is labeled as sarcastic only if it contains
a positive verb phrase that precedes a negative situa-
tion in close proximity (no more than 5 words apart).
This ordering constraint further increased precision
from 56% to 70%, with a decrease of only 2 points
in recall. This precision gain supports our claim that
this particular structure (positive verb phrase fol-
lowed by a negative situation) is strongly indicative
of sarcasm. Note that the same ordering constraint
applied to a positive verb phrase followed by a neg-
ative sentiment produced much lower precision (at
best 40% precision using the Liu05 lexicon). Con-
trasting a positive sentiment with a negative situa-
tion seems to be a key element of sarcasm.

In the last experiment, we added the positive pred-
icative expressions and also labeled a tweet as sar-
castic if a positive predicative appeared in close
proximity to (within 5 words of) a negative situa-
tion. The positive predicatives improved recall to
13%, but decreased precision to 63%, which is com-
parable to the SVM classifiers.

4.4 A Hybrid Approach

Thus far, we have used the bootstrapped lexicons
to recognize sarcasm by looking for phrases in our
lists. We will refer to our approach as the Contrast
method, which labels a tweet as sarcastic if it con-
tains a positive sentiment phrase in close proximity
to a negative situation phrase.

The Contrast method achieved 63% precision but
with low recall (13%). The SVM classifier with un-
igram and bigram features achieved 64% precision
with 39% recall. Since neither approach has high
recall, we decided to see whether they are comple-
mentary and the Contrast method is finding sarcastic
tweets that the SVM classifier overlooks.

In this hybrid approach, a tweet is labeled as sar-
castic if either the SVM classifier or the Contrast
method identifies it as sarcastic. This approach im-
proves recall from 39% to 42% using the Contrast
method with only positive verb phrases. Recall im-
proves to 44% using the Contrast method with both
positive verb phrases and predicative phrases. This
hybrid approach has only a slight drop in precision,
yielding an F score of 51%. This result shows that
our bootstrapped phrase lists are recognizing sarcas-
tic tweets that the SVM classifier misses.

Finally, we ran tests to see if the performance of
the hybrid approach (Contrast ∪ SVM) is statisti-
cally significantly better than the performance of the
SVM classifier alone. We used paired bootstrap sig-
nificance testing as described in Berg-Kirkpatrick
et al. (2012) by drawing 106 samples with repeti-
tion from the test set. These results showed that the
Contrast ∪ SVM system is statistically significantly
better than the SVM classifier at the p < .01 level
(i.e., the null hypothesis was rejected with 99% con-
fidence).

4.5 Analysis

To get a better sense of the strength and limitations
of our approach, we manually inspected some of the

712



tweets that were labeled as sarcastic using our boot-
strapped phrase lists. Table 3 shows some of the sar-
castic tweets found by the Contrast method but not
by the SVM classifier.

i love fighting with the one i love
love working on my last day of summer
i enjoy tweeting [user] and not getting a reply
working during vacation is awesome .
can’t wait to wake up early to babysit !

Table 3: Five sarcastic tweets found by the Contrast
method but not the SVM

These tweets are good examples of a positive sen-
timent (love, enjoy, awesome, can’t wait) contrast-
ing with a negative situation. However, the negative
situation phrases are not always as specific as they
should be. For example, “working” was learned as
a negative situation phrase because it is often neg-
ative when it follows a positive sentiment (“I love
working...”). But the attached prepositional phrases
(“on my last day of summer” and “during vacation”)
should ideally have been captured as well.

We also examined tweets that were incorrectly la-
beled as sarcastic by the Contrast method. Some
false hits come from situations that are frequently
negative but not always negative (e.g., some peo-
ple genuinely like waking up early). However, most
false hits were due to overly general negative situa-
tion phrases (e.g., “I love working there” was labeled
as sarcastic). We believe that an important direction
for future work will be to learn longer phrases that
represent more specific situations.

5 Conclusions

Sarcasm is a complex and rich linguistic phe-
nomenon. Our work identifies just one type of sar-
casm that is common in tweets: contrast between a
positive sentiment and negative situation. We pre-
sented a bootstrapped learning method to acquire
lists of positive sentiment phrases and negative ac-
tivities and states, and show that these lists can be
used to recognize sarcastic tweets.

This work has only scratched the surface of pos-
sibilities for identifying sarcasm arising from posi-
tive/negative contrast. The phrases that we learned
were limited to specific syntactic structures and we
required the contrasting phrases to appear in a highly

constrained context. We plan to explore methods for
allowing more flexibility and for learning additional
types of phrases and contrasting structures.

We also would like to explore new ways to iden-
tify stereotypically negative activities and states be-
cause we believe this type of world knowledge is
essential to recognize many instances of sarcasm.
For example, sarcasm often arises from a descrip-
tion of a negative event followed by a positive emo-
tion but in a separate clause or sentence, such as:
“Going to the dentist for a root canal this after-
noon. Yay, I can’t wait.” Recognizing the intensity
of the negativity may also be useful to distinguish
strong contrast from weak contrast. Having knowl-
edge about stereotypically undesirable activities and
states could also be important for other natural lan-
guage understanding tasks, such as text summariza-
tion and narrative plot analysis.

6 Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the Intelligence Ad-
vanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA) via De-
partment of Interior National Business Center (DoI
/ NBC) contract number D12PC00285. The U.S.
Government is authorized to reproduce and dis-
tribute reprints for Governmental purposes notwith-
standing any copyright annotation thereon. The
views and conclusions contained herein are those
of the authors and should not be interpreted as
necessarily representing the official policies or en-
dorsements, either expressed or implied, of IARPA,
DoI/NBE, or the U.S. Government.

References

Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, David Burkett, and Dan Klein.
2012. An empirical investigation of statistical signifi-
cance in nlp. In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing and Computational Natural Language Learn-
ing, EMNLP-CoNLL ’12, pages 995–1005.

Paula Carvalho, Luı́s Sarmento, Mário J. Silva, and
Eugénio de Oliveira. 2009. Clues for detecting irony
in user-generated contents: oh...!! it’s ”so easy” ;-). In
Proceedings of the 1st international CIKM workshop
on Topic-sentiment analysis for mass opinion, TSA
2009.

Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin. 2011. LIBSVM:
A library for support vector machines. ACM Transac-

713



tions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 2:27:1–
27:27.

Henry S. Cheang and Marc D. Pell. 2008. The sound of
sarcasm. Speech Commun., 50(5):366–381, May.

Henry S. Cheang and Marc D. Pell. 2009. Acous-
tic markers of sarcasm in cantonese and english.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
126(3):1394–1405.

Dmitry Davidov, Oren Tsur, and Ari Rappoport. 2010.
Semi-supervised recognition of sarcastic sentences in
twitter and amazon. In Proceedings of the Four-
teenth Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning, CoNLL 2010.

Elena Filatova. 2012. Irony and sarcasm: Corpus gener-
ation and analysis using crowdsourcing. In Proceed-
ings of the Eight International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12).

Roger J. Kreuz Gina M. Caucci. 2012. Social and par-
alinguistic cues to sarcasm. online 08/02/2012, 25:1–
22, February.

Roberto González-Ibáñez, Smaranda Muresan, and Nina
Wacholder. 2011. Identifying sarcasm in twitter: A
closer look. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies.

Lars Kai Hansen, Adam Arvidsson, Finn Arup Nielsen,
Elanor Colleoni, and Michael Etter. 2011. Good
friends, bad news - affect and virality in twitter. In
The 2011 International Workshop on Social Comput-
ing, Network, and Services (SocialComNet 2011).

Roger Kreuz and Gina Caucci. 2007. Lexical influences
on the perception of sarcasm. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Computational Approaches to Figurative
Language.

Christine Liebrecht, Florian Kunneman, and Antal
Van den Bosch. 2013. The perfect solution for detect-
ing sarcasm in tweets #not. In Proceedings of the 4th
Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjec-
tivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analysis, WASSA
2013.

Bing Liu, Minqing Hu, and Junsheng Cheng. 2005.
Opinion observer: Analyzing and comparing opinions
on the web. In Proceedings of the 14th International
World Wide Web conference (WWW-2005).

Stephanie Lukin and Marilyn Walker. 2013. Really?
well. apparently bootstrapping improves the perfor-
mance of sarcasm and nastiness classifiers for online
dialogue. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Lan-
guage Analysis in Social Media.

Finn Arup Nielsen. 2011. A new anew: Evaluation of
a word list for sentiment analysis in microblogs. In
Proceedings of the ESWC2011 Workshop on ’Making
Sense of Microposts’: Big things come in small pack-
ages (http://arxiv.org/abs/1103.2903).

Olutobi Owoputi, Brendan O’Connor, Chris Dyer, Kevin
Gimpel, Nathan Schneider, and Noah A. Smith. 2013.
Improved part-of-speech tagging for online conversa-
tional text with word clusters. In The 2013 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies (NAACL 2013).

Katherine P. Rankin, Andrea Salazar, Maria Luisa Gorno-
Tempini, Marc Sollberger, Stephen M. Wilson, Dani-
jela Pavlic, Christine M. Stanley, Shenly Glenn,
Michael W. Weiner, and Bruce L. Miller. 2009. De-
tecting sarcasm from paralinguistic cues: Anatomic
and cognitive correlates in neurodegenerative disease.
Neuroimage, 47:2005–2015.

Joseph Tepperman, David Traum, and Shrikanth
Narayanan. 2006. ”Yeah right”: Sarcasm recogni-
tion for spoken dialogue systems. In Proceedings of
the INTERSPEECH 2006 - ICSLP, Ninth International
Conference on Spoken Language Processing.

Oren Tsur, Dmitry Davidov, and Ari Rappoport. 2010.
ICWSM - A Great Catchy Name: Semi-Supervised
Recognition of Sarcastic Sentences in Online Product
Reviews. In Proceedings of the Fourth International
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM-
2010), ICWSM 2010.

Michael Wiegand, Josef Ruppenhofer, and Dietrich
Klakow. 2013. Predicative adjectives: An unsuper-
vised criterion to extract subjective adjectives. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2013 Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 534–
539, Atlanta, Georgia, June. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

T. Wilson, P. Hoffmann, S. Somasundaran, J. Kessler,
J. Wiebe, Y. Choi, C. Cardie, E. Riloff, and S. Patward-
han. 2005a. OpinionFinder: A System for Subjec-
tivity Analysis. In Proceedings of HLT/EMNLP 2005
Interactive Demonstrations, pages 34–35, Vancouver,
Canada, October.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005b. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-
level sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 2005
Human Language Technology Conference / Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing.

714


