










































Learning Topics and Positions from Debatepedia


Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1858–1868,
Seattle, Washington, USA, 18-21 October 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Learning Topics and Positions from Debatepedia

Swapna Gottipati† Minghui Qiu† Yanchuan Sim‡ Jing Jiang† Noah A. Smith‡
†School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore

‡Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
†{swapnag.2010,minghui.qiu.2010,jingjiang}@smu.edu.sg

‡{ysim,nasmith}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

We explore Debatepedia, a community-
authored encyclopedia of sociopolitical de-
bates, as evidence for inferring a low-
dimensional, human-interpretable representa-
tion in the domain of issues and positions. We
introduce a generative model positing latent
topics and cross-cutting positions that gives
special treatment to person mentions and opin-
ion words. We evaluate the resulting repre-
sentation’s usefulness in attaching opinionated
documents to arguments and its consistency
with human judgments about positions.

1 Introduction

The social web has evolved into a forum for large
portions of the population to discuss and debate
complex issues of societal importance. Websites like
Debatepedia,1 an online, community-authored ency-
clopedia of debates (§2), seek to organize some of
this exchange into structured information resources
that summarize arguments and link externally to
texts (editorials, blog posts, etc.) that express and
evoke them. Empirical NLP, we propose, has a
role to play in creating a more compact and easily-
interpretable way to understand the opinion space.
In particular, we envision applications to computa-
tional journalism, where there is high demand for
transformation of and pattern discovery in unman-
ageable, unstructured, evolving data (including text)
to inform the public (Cohen et al., 2011).

In this paper, we develop a generative model for
discovering such a representation (§3), using De-
batepedia as a corpus of evidence. We draw in-
spiration from Lin et al. (2008) and Ahmed and

1http://dbp.idebate.org

Xing (2010), who used generative models to infer
topics—distributions over words—and other word-
associated variables representing perspectives or
ideologies. We view topics as lexicons, and propose
that grounding a topic model with evidence beyond
bags of words can lead to more lexicon-like repre-
sentations. Specifically, our generative topic model
grounds topics using the hierarchical organization
of arguments within Debatepedia. Further, we use
named entity recognition as a preprocessing step, an
existing sentiment lexicon to construct an informed
prior, and we incorporate a latent, discrete position
variable that cuts across debates.2

We evaluate the model informally and formally
(§4). Subjectively, the model identifies reasonable
topic and perspective terms, and it associates topics
sensibly with important public figures. In quanti-
tative evaluations, we find the model’s representa-
tion superior to topics from vanilla latent Dirichlet
allocation (Blei et al., 2003) and the joint sentiment
topic model (Lin and He, 2009) in matching external
texts to debates. Further, the position variables can
be used to infer the side of an argument within a de-
bate; our model performs with an accuracy of 86%
on position prediction of the debate argument. The
cross-cutting position variable is not especially con-
sistent with human judgments, suggesting that fur-
ther knowledge sources may be required to improve
interpretability across issues.

2 Data

Debatepedia, like Wikipedia, is constructed by vol-
unteer contributors and has a system of community

2This variable might serve to cluster debate sides according
to “abstract beliefs commonly shared by a group of people,”
sometimes called ideologies (Van Dijk, 1998). We do not claim
that our model infers ideologies (see §4).

1858



Debate: Gun control; should laws be passed to limit gun ownership further?
Question: Self-defense – Is self-defense a good reason for gun ownership?

Side: Yes Side: No
Argument: A citizen has a “right” to guns as a means
to self-defense: Many groups argue that a citizen
should have the “right” to defend themselves, and that
a gun is frequently the . . .

Argument: The protection of property is not a good
justification for yielding a lethal weapon. While peo-
ple have a right to their property, this should not justify
wielding a lethal . . .

Argument: Gun restrictions and bans disadvantage cit-
izens against armed criminals. Citizens that are not al-
lowed to carry guns are disadvantaged against lawless
criminals that . . .

Argument: Robert F. Drinan, Former Democratic US
Congressman, “Gun Control: The Good Outweighs
the Evil”, 1976 – “These graphic examples of individ-
ual instances of . . .

Question: Economic benefits – Is gun control economically beneficial?
Side: Yes Side: No

Argument: Lax gun control laws are economically
costly. The Coalition for Gun Control claims that, “in
Canada, the costs of firearms death and injury alone
have been estimated at . . .

Argument: Gun sports have economic benefits. Field
sports bring money into poor rural economies and pro-
vide a motivation for landowners to value environmen-
tal protection.

Table 1: An example of a Debatepedia debate on the topic “Gun control.”

moderation. Many of the debate issues covered are
controversial and salient in current public discourse.
Because it is primarily expressed as text, Debatepe-
dia is a corpus of debate topics, but it is organized
hierarchically, with multiple issues in each debate
topic, questions within each issue, and arguments on
two sides of each question. An important feature of
the corpus is the widespread quotation and linking to
external articles on the web, including news stories,
blog postings, wiki pages, and social media forums;
here we use these external articles in evaluation (§4).

Table 1 shows excerpts from a debate page3 from
Debatepedia. Each debate contains “questions,”
which reflect the different aspects of a debate. In this
particular debate, there are 13 questions (2 shown),
ranging from economic benefits to enforceability to
social impacts. For each question, there are two dis-
tinct sides, each with its own set of supporting argu-
ments. Many of these arguments also contains links
to online articles where the quotes are extracted from
(not shown in Table 1). For example, in the second
argument on the “No” side, there is an inline link to
the article written by Congressman Drinan.4

Within a debate topic, the sides cut across differ-
ent questions, aligning arguments together. In gen-

3http://dbp.idebate.org/en/index.php/
Debate:_Gun_control

4http://www.saf.org/LawReviews/Drinan1.
html

Debates 1,303
Arguments 33,556
Articles linked by exactly one argument 3,352
Tokens 1,710,814
Types (excluding NE mentions) 59,601
Person named entity mentions 9,496

Table 2: Debatepedia corpus statistics. Types and tokens
include unigrams, bigrams and person named entities.

eral, the questions are phrased so that a consistent
“pro” and “con” structure is apparent throughout
each debate, aligned to a high-level question (i.e.,
the “Yes” sides of all the questions are consistent
with the same side of the larger debate). The ex-
ample of Table 1 deviates from this pattern, with the
self-defense “Yes” arguing “no” to the high-level de-
bate question—Should laws be passed to limit gun
ownership further?—and the economic “Yes” argu-
ing “yes” to the high-level question.

Table 2 presents statistics of our corpus.

2.1 Preprocessing

We scraped the Debatepedia website and extracted
the debate, question, argument, and side structure
of the debate topics. We crawled the external
web articles that were linked from the Debatepe-
dia arguments. For the web articles, we extracted
the main text content (ignoring boilerplate elements
such as navigation and advertisments) using Boil-

1859



erpipe (Kohlschütter et al., 2010).5 We tokenized
the text and filtered stopwords.6 We considered both
unigrams and bigrams in our model, keeping all uni-
grams and removing bigram types that appeared less
than 5 times in the corpus. Although our modeling
approach ultimately treats texts as bags of terms (un-
igrams and bigrams), one important preprocessing
step was taken to further improve the interpretabil-
ity of the inferred representation: named entity men-
tions of persons. We identified these mentions of
persons using Stanford NER (Finkel et al., 2005)
and treated each person mention as a single token. In
our qualitative analysis of the model (§4.2), we will
show how this special treatment of person mentions
enables the association of well-known individuals
with debate topics. Though not part of our exper-
imental evaluation in this paper, such associations
are, we believe, an interesting direction for future
applications of the model.

3 Model

Our model defines a probability distribution over
terms7 that are observed in the corpus. Each term
occurs in a context defined by the tuple 〈d, q, s, a〉
(respectively, a debate, a question within the debate,
a side within the debate, and an argument). At each
level of the hierarchy is a different latent variable:
• Each question q within debate d is associated

with a distribution over topics, denoted θd,q.8

• Each side s of the debate d is associated with a
position, denoted id,s and we posit a global dis-
tribution ι that cuts across different questions
and arguments. In our experiments, there are
two positions, and the two sides of a debate
are constrained to associate with opposing po-
sitions. As illustrated by Table 1, this assump-

5http://code.google.com/p/boilerpipe
6www.ranks.nl/resources/stopwords.html
7Recall that our model includes bigrams. We treat each un-

igram and bigram token (after filtering discussed in §2.1) as a
separate term.

8In future work, more sharing across questions within a
debate, or more differentiation among the topic distributions
for arguments under a question, might be explored. Wallach
(2006) describes suitable techniques using hierarchical Dirich-
let draws, and Eisenstein et al. (2011) suggests the use of sparse
shocks to log-odds at different levels. Here we work on the
assumption that Debatepedia’s questions are the most topically
coherent level, and work with a single topic mixture at this level.

wz y

Nd,q,s,a

Ad,q,s

θ

α

Qd

µ

γ

φttφ
o
i,tφii φ

e
t

K TKT

φb

ηi ηo ηt η
e

ηb

i

ι

β

Sd

D

Figure 1: Plate diagram. K is the number of positions,
and T is number of topics. The shaded variables are ob-
served and dashed variables are marginalized. α,β,γ
and all η are fixed hyperparameters (§3.1).

tion is not always correct, though it tends to
hold most of the time.
• Each term wd,q,s,a,n (n is the position index

of the term within an argument) is associated
with one of five functional term types, denoted
yd,q,s,a,n. This variable is latent, except when it
takes the value “entity” (e) for terms marked as
named entity mentions. When it is not an en-
tity, it takes one of the other four values: “gen-
eral position” (i), “topic-specific position” (o),
“topic” (t), or “background” (b). Thus, every
term w is drawn from one of these 5 types of
bags, and y acts as a switching variable to se-
lect the type of bag.
• For some term types (the ones where y ∈
{o, t}), each term wd,q,s,a,n is associated with
one of T discrete topics, as indexed by
zd,q,s,a,n.

Figure 1 illustrates the plate diagram for the
graphical model underlying our approach. The gen-
erative story is given in Figure 2.

3.1 Priors
Typical probabilistic topic models assume a sym-
metric Dirichlet prior over its term distributions or

1860



1. ∀ topics t, draw topic-term distribution φtt ∼ Dirichlet(ηt) and topic-entity distribution φet ∼ Dirichlet(ηe).
2. ∀ positions i, draw position-term distribution φii ∼ Dirichlet(ηi).
3. ∀ topics t, ∀ positions i, draw topic-position term distribution φoi,t ∼ Dirichlet(ηo).
4. Draw background term distribution φb ∼ Dirichlet(ηb).
5. Draw functional term type distribution µ ∼ Dirichlet(γ).
6. Draw position distribution ι ∼ Dirichlet(β).
7. ∀ debates d:

a. Draw id,1, id,2 ∼ Multinomial(ι), assigning each of the two sides to a position.
b. ∀ questions q in d:

i. Draw topic mixture proportions θd,q ∼ Dirichlet(α).
ii. ∀ arguments a under question q and term positions n in a:

A. Draw topic label zd,q,s,a ∼ Multinomial(θd,q).
B. Draw functional term type yd,q,s,a ∼ Multinomial(µ).
C. Draw term wd,q,s,a ∼ Multinomial (φyd,q,s,a | id,1, id,2, zd,q,s,a).

Figure 2: Generative story for our model of Debatepedia.

apply empirical Bayesian techniques to estimate the
hyperparameters. Motivated by past efforts to ex-
ploit prior knowledge (Zhao et al., 2010; Lin and
He, 2009), we use the OpinionFinder sentiment lex-
icon9 (Wilson et al., 2005) to construct ηi and ηo.
Specifically, terms w in the lexicon were given pa-
rameters ηiw = η

o
w = 0.01, and other terms were

given ηiw = η
o
w = 0.001, capturing our prior belief

that opinion-expressing terms are likely to be used
in expressing positions. 5,451 types were given a
“boost” through this prior.

Information retrieval has long exploited the ob-
servation that a term’s document frequency (i.e., the
number of documents a term occurs in) is inversely
related its usefulness in retrieval (Jones, 1972). We
encode this in ηb, the prior over the background
term distribution, by setting each value to the log-
arithm of the term’s argument frequency.

The other priors were set to be symmetric: ηe =
0.01 (entity topics), ηt = 0.001 (topics), α =
50/T = 1.25 (topic mixture coefficients), β = 0.01
(positions), and γ = 0.01 (functional term types).
Preliminary tests showed that final topics are rela-
tively insensitive to the values of the hyperparame-
ters.

3.2 Inference and Parameter Estimation

Exact inference under this model, like most latent-
variable topic models, is intractable. We apply col-
lapsed Gibbs sampling, a standard approach for such

9http://mpqa.cs.pitt.edu/lexicons/subj_
lexicon/

models (Griffiths and Steyvers, 2004).10 The no-
table deviations from typical uses of collapsed Gibbs
sampling are: (i) we jointly sample id,1 and id,2 to
respect the constraint that they differ; and (ii) we
fix the priors, in some cases to be asymmetric, as
discussed in §3.1. We perform Gibbs sampling for
2,000 iterations over the dataset, discarding the first
500 iterations for burn-in, and averaging over every
10th iteration thereafter to get estimates for our term
distributions.

3.3 T and K
In all experiments, we use T = 40 topics andK = 2
positions. We did not extensively explore different
values for T and K; preliminary exploration sug-
gested that interpretability, gauged informally by the
authors, degraded for higher values of either.

4 Evaluation

Recall that the aim of this work is to infer a low-
dimensional representation of debate text. We esti-
mated our model on the Debatepedia debates (not in-
cluding hyperlinked articles), and conducted several
evaluations of the model, each considering a differ-
ent aspect of the goal. We exploit external articles
hyperlinked from Debatepedia described in §2 as
supporting texts for arguments, treating each one’s
association to an argument as variable to be pre-
dicted. Firstly, we evaluate our model on the article
associating task. Secondly, we evaluate our model
on the position prediction task. Then, we compare

10Because this technique is well known in NLP, details are
relegated to supplementary material.

1861



 0
 200
 400
 600
 800

 1000
 1200
 1400

 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  1

N
o 

of
 A

rt
ic

le
s

JS Divergence

LDA
JST

Our Model

Figure 3: The distribution over Jensen-Shannon diver-
gences between a hyperlinked article and the correspond-
ing Debatepedia argument, n = 3, 352.

our model’s positional assignment of arguments to
human annotated clusterings. Finally, we present
qualitative discussion.

4.1 Quantitative Evaluation

4.1.1 Topics
As described in §2, our corpus includes 3,352 ar-

ticles hyperlinked by Debatepedia arguments.11 Our
model can be used to infer the posterior over top-
ics associated with such an article, and we compare
that distribution to that of the Debatepedia article
that links to it. Calculating the similarity of these
distributions, we get an estimate of how closely our
model can associate text related to a debate with the
specific argument that linked to it. We compare with
LDA (Blei et al., 2003), which ignores sentiment,
and the joint sentiment topic (JST) model (Lin and
He, 2009), an unsupervised model that jointly cap-
tures sentiment and topic.12 Using Jensen-Shannon
divergence, we find that our approach embeds these
pairs significantly closer than LDA and JST (also
trained with 40 topics), under a Wilcoxon signed
rank test (p < 0.001). Figure 3 shows the histogram
of divergences between our model, JST, and LDA.

Associating external articles. More challenging,
of course, is selecting the argument to which an
external article should be associated. We used the
Jensen-Shannon divergence between topic distribu-
tions of articles and arguments to rank the latter,
for each article. The mean reciprocal rank scores
(Voorhees, 1999) for LDA, JST, and our model were

11We consider only those articles linked by a single Debate-
pedia argument.

12JST multiplies topics out by the set of sentiment labels, as-
signing each token to both a topic and a sentment. We use the
OpinionFinder lexicon in JST’s prior in the same way it is used
in our model.

 0.08

 0.1

 0.12

 0.14

 0.16

 0.18

5 10 15 20 25 inf

M
R

R

K

LDA
JST

Our Model

Figure 4: Mean reciprocal ranks for the association task.

0.1272, 0.1421, and 0.1507, respectively; the differ-
ence is significant (Wilcoxon signed rank test, p <
0.001). We found the same pattern for MRR@k,
k ∈ {5, 10, 15, 20, 25,∞}, as shown in Figure 4.

It is likely possible to engineer more accurate
models for attaching articles to arguments, but the
attachment task is our aim only insofar as it con-
tributes to an overall assessment of an inferred rep-
resentation’s quality.

4.1.2 Positions
Positional distance by topic. We next consider
the JS divergences of position term distributions by
topic; for each topic t, we consider the divergence
between inferred values for φo1,t and φ

o
2,t. Figure 5

shows these measurements sorted from most to least
different; these might be taken as evidence for which
issue areas’ arguments are more lexically distin-
guishable by side, perhaps indicating less common
ground in discourse or (more speculatively) greater
controversy. For example, our model suggests that
debates relating to topics like presidential politics,
foreign policy, teachers, women’s health, religion,
and Israel/Palestine are more heated (within the De-
batepedia community at the time the debates took
place) than those about the minimum wage, Iran as
a nuclear threat, or immigration.

Predicting positions for arguments. We tested
our model’s ability to infer the positions of argu-
ments. In this experiment (only), we held out 3,000
arguments during parameter estimation. The held-
out arguments were selected so that every debate
side maintained at least one argument whose in-
ferred side could serve as the correct answer for the
held-out argument. We then inferred i for each held-
out argument from debate d and side s, given the
parameters, and compared it with the value of id,s
inferred during parameter estimation. The model
achieved 86% accuracy (Table 3 shows the confu-

1862



sion matrix). Note that JST does not provide a base-
line for comparison, since it does not capture debate
sides.

i = 1 i = 2
i∗ = 1 1,272 216
i∗ = 2 199 1,313

Table 3: Confusion matrix for position prediction on
held-out arguments.

Predicting positions for external articles. We
can also use the model to predict the position
adopted in an external text. For articles linked from
within Debatepedia, we have a gold standard: from
which side of a debate was it linked? After using
the model to infer a position variable for such a text,
we can check whether the inferred position variable
matches that of the argument that links to it. Table 4
shows that our model does not successfully com-
plete this task, assigning about 60% of both kinds
of articles i = 1.

i = 1 i = 2
i∗ = 1 1,042 623
i∗ = 2 1,043 644

Table 4: Confusion matrix for position prediction on hy-
perlinked articles.

Genre. We manually labeled 500 of these articles
into six genre categories. We had two annotators for
this task (Cohen’s κ = 0.856). These categories,
in increasing order of average Jensen-Shannon di-
vergence, are: blogs, editorials, wiki pages, news,
other, and government. Figure 6 shows the results.
While the only difference between the first and last
groups are surprising by chance, we are encouraged
by our model’s suggestion that blogs and editori-
als may be more “Debatepedia argument-like” than
news and government articles.

Note that our model is learned only from text
within Debatepedia; it does not observe the text of
external linked articles. Future work might incorpo-
rate this text as additional evidence in order to cap-
ture effects on language stemming from the interac-
tion of position and genre.

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
comment, minimum, wage, poverty, capitalism

nuclear, weapons, iran, states, threat
party, vote, republican, political, voters

energy, gas, power, fuel, wind
tax, economic, trade, cost, percent

immigration, cameras, police, immigrants, crime
people, dont, time, lot, make

food, consumers, products, calorie, information
death, crime, punishment, penalty, justice

marijuana, drug, drugs, alcohol, age
marriage, gay, mars, space, moon

rights, law, people, individual, amendment
south, kosovo, independence, state, republic

human, rights, animals, life, animal
children, child, sex, parents, sexual

school, schools, students, education, public
china, tibet, chinese, people, tibetan

global, emissions, climate, carbon, warming
international, court, war, crimes, icc

english, language, violence, people, video
orleans, euthanasia, city, suicide, priests

speech, corporations, corporate, public, money
health, care, insurance, public, private

circumcision, men, sexual, circumcised, foreskin
information, torture, science, evidence, wikipedia

companies, market, industry, business, bailout
law, workers, union, rights, legal

college, cloning, game, football, incest
times, york, ban, june, january

countries, eu, european, international, states
oil, water, production, ethanol, environmental

military, war, iraq, forces, march
economy, financial, spending, economic, government

government, social, governments, state, programs
israel, gaza, hamas, israeli, palestinian

women, religious, abortion, god, life
teachers, pay, test, left, merit

peace, state, west, united, action
united, states, president, administration, foreign

president, washington, obama, american, america

Figure 5: Jensen-Shannon divergences between topic-
specific positional term distributions, for each topic. Top-
ics are labeled by their most frequent terms from φt.

4.1.3 Comparison to Human Judgments of
Positions

We compared our model’s inferred positions to
human judgments. For each of the 11 topics in Ta-
ble 8, we selected two associated debates with more
arguments than average (24.99). The debates were
provided to each of three human annotators,13 who

13All were native English-speaking American graduate stu-
dents not otherwise involved in this research. Each is known
by the authors to have basic literacy with issues and debates in

 0.4

 0.45

 0.5

 0.55

 0.6

 0.65

 0.7

blog(12) edit(14) wiki(11) news(33) other(18) gov(12)

JS
 D

iv
er

ge
nc

e 
S

co
re

Article type(% of articles)

Figure 6: Position prediction on 500 hyperlinked articles
by genre.

1863



“Israel-Palestine” “Same-sex marriage” “Drugs” “Healthcare” “Death penalty” “Abortion”

i1

pre emptive same sex hands free single payer anti death pro choice
israeli palestinian long term performance enhancing so called non violent pro life
open and shut second class in depth self sustaining african american non muslim

i2

two state opposite sex long term government run semi automatic would be
long term well intentioned high speed government approved high profile full time
self destructive day time short term high risk hate crime late term

a. Our model: topic-specific position bigrams associated with six selected topics.

–
war large illegal support death power
assault possibility abuse force penalty limit
disproportionate problems high threat murder civil

+
peace civil disease care power care
independence rights nature universal clean suicide
self-determination affirmative potential uninsured waste death

b. JST: sentiments associated with six selected topics manually aligned to our model’s topics.

Table 6: Terms associated with selected topics. The labels and alignments between the two models’ topics were
assigned manually. (a.) Our model: topic-specific position bigrams which are ranked by comparing the log odds
conditioned on the position and topic: log φoi1,t,w− log φ

o
i2,t,w

. We show the top three terms for each position (b.) JST:
we show the top three terms for each sentiment (negative and positive).

A1 (11) A2 (5) A3 (16)
Model (2) 3.21 2.58 3.45
A1 (11) 2.15 2.15
A2 (5) 2.63

Table 5: Variation of information scores for each pairing
of annotators and model.

were instructed to group the 44 sides of the debates.
The instructions stated:

Our goal is to see what you think about how
the different sides of different debates can be
lined up. You might find it convenient to
think of these in terms of political philoso-
phies, contemporary political party platforms,
or something else. Any of these is fine; we
want you to tell us the grouping you find most
reasonable.

All three annotators (hereafter denoted A1, A2, and
A3) used fairly involved labeling schemes; the an-
notators used 37, 30, and 16 unique labels, respec-
tively.14 A1 used keyword lists to label items; we
coarsened his labels manually by removing or merg-
ing less common keywords (resulting in: Republi-
can, Democrat, science/environment, nanny, politi-
cal reform, fiscal liberal, fiscal conservative, liber-
tarian, Israel, Palestine, and one unlabeled side).
A2 provided a coarse annotation along with each

American politics.
14In a small number of cases, an annotator declined to label

a side. Each unlabeled item received its own cluster.

fine-grained one (liberal, conservative, ?, and two
unlabeled sides). We used 100 samples from our
Gibbs sampler to estimate posteriors for each id,s;
these were always 99% or more in agreement, so we
mapped each debate side into its single most proba-
ble cluster. Recall that the two sides of each debate
must be in different clusters.

Table 5 shows the variation of information mea-
sure (Meila, 2003) for each pairing among the three
annotators and our model. The model agrees with
A2’s coarse clustering most closely, and in fact is
closer to A2’s clustering than A2 is to A3’s; it also
agrees with A2’s coarse clustering better than A2’s
coarse and fine clusterings agree (3.36, not shown
in the table). This is promising, but we do not
have confidence that the positional dimension is be-
ing captured especially well in this model; for those
debate-sides labeled liberal or conservative by A2,
the best match of our two positions was still only in
agreement only about 60% of the time, and agree-
ment with each human annotator is within the inter-
val of what would be expected if each debate’s sides
were assigned uniformly at random to positions.15

Remarks. Within debates and within topics, the
model uses the position variable to distinguish sides
well. For external text, the model performs well
on articles such as blogs and editorials but on oth-
ers the positional categories do not seem meaning-

15This was determined using a Monte Carlo simulation with
1,000 samples.

1864



Topic i = 1 i = 2
None (φi) vice president, c sections, twenty four, cross pressures,

pre dates, anti ballistic, cost effectiveness, anti land-
mine, court appointed, child poverty

cross examination, under runs, hand outs, half million,
non christians, break down, counter argument, seventy
five, co workers, run up

“Israel-
Palestine”

pre emptive, israeli palestinian, open and shut, first
time, hamas controlled, democratically elected

two state, long term, self destructive, secretary general,
right wing, all out, near daily, short term

“Same-sex
marriage”

same sex, long term, second class, blankenhorn rauch,
wrong headed, self denial, left handed

opposite sex, well intentioned, day time, planet wide,
day night, child rearing, low earth, one way, one third

“Drugs” hands free, performance enhancing, in depth, hand
held, best kept, non pharmaceutical, anti marijuana

long term, high speed, short term, peer reviewed, alco-
hol related, mind altering, inner city, long lasting

“Healthcare” single payer, so called, self sustaining, public private,
for profit, long run, high cost, multi payer

government run, government approved, high risk, two
tier, government appointed, low cost, set up

“Death
penalty”

anti death, non violent, african american, self help, cut
and cover, heavy handed, dp equivalent

semi automatic, high profile, hate crime, assault
weapons, military style, high dollar, self protective

“Abortion” pro choice, pro life, non muslim, well educated, anti
abortion, much needed, church state, birth control

would be, full time, late term, judeo christian, life
style, day to day, non christian, child bearing

Table 7: General position (first row) and topic-specific position bigrams associated with six selected topics.
Topic Terms Person entity mentions
“Israel-
Palestine”

israel, gaza, hamas, israeli, pales-
tinian

Benjamin Netanyahu, Al Jazeera, Mavi Marmara, Nicholas Kristoff,
Steven R. David

“Same-sex
marriage”

marriage, gay, mars, space, moon Buzz Aldrin, Andrew Sullivan, Moon Base, Scott Bidstrup, Ted Olson

“Drugs” marijuana, drug, drugs, alcohol, age Four Loko, Evo Morales, Toni Meyer, Sean Flynn, Robert Hahn
“Healthcare” health, care, insurance, public, pri-

vate
Kent Conrad, Paul Hsieh, Paul Krugman, Ezra Klein, Jacob Hacker

“Death
penalty”

death, crime, punishment, penalty,
justice

Adam Bedau, Thomas R. Eddlem, Jeff Jacoby, John Baer, Peter Bronson

“Abortion” women, religious, abortion, god, life Ronald Reagan, John Paul II, Sara Malkani, Mother Teresa, Marcella
Alsan

Table 8: For 6 selected topics (labels assigned manually), top terms (φt) and person entities (φe). Bigrams were
included but did not rank in the top five for these topics. The model has conflated debates relating to same-sex
marriage with the space program.

ful, perhaps due to the less argumentative nature
of other kinds of articles. Noting the vast litera-
ture focusing on ideological positions expressed in
text, we believe this failure suggests (i) that broad-
based positions that hold across many topics may
require richer textual representations (see, e.g., the
“syntactic priming” of Greene and Resnik, 2009),
or (ii) that an alternative representation of positions,
such as the spatial models favored by political sci-
entists (Poole and Rosenthal, 1991), may be more
discoverable. Aside from those issues, a stronger
theory of positions may be required. Such a the-
ory could be encoded in a more informative prior or
weaker independence assumptions across debates.
Finally, exploiting explicitly ideological texts along-
side the moderated arguments of Debatepedia might
also help to identify textual associations with gen-
eral positions (Sim et al., 2013). We leave these di-

rections to future work.

4.2 Qualitative Analysis

Of the T = 40 topics our model inferred, we subjec-
tively judged 37 to be coherent; a glimpse of each is
given in Figure 5. We manually selected six of the
most interpretable topics for further evaluation.

As a generative modeling approach, our model
was designed for the purpose of reducing the dimen-
sionality of the sociopolitical debate space, as evi-
denced by Debatepedia. It is like other topic models
in this regard, but we believe that some effects of our
design choices are noteworthy. Table 6 compares the
positional bigrams of our model to the sentiments in-
ferred by JST. We observe the benefit of our model
in identifying terms associated with positions on so-
cial issues, while JST selects more general sentiment
terms.

1865



Table 7 shows bigrams most strongly associated
with general position distributions φi and selected
topic-position distributions φo.16 We see the poten-
tial benefit of multiword expressions. Although we
have used frequent bigrams as a poor man’s approx-
imation to multiword expression analysis, we find
the topic-specific positions terms to be subjectively
evocative. While somewhat internally coherent, we
do not observe consistent alignment across topics,
and the general distributions φi are not suggestive.

The separation of personal name mentions into
their own distributions, shown for some topics in
Table 8, gives a distinctive characterization of top-
ics based on relevant personalities. Subjectively, the
top individuals are relevant to the subject matter as-
sociated with each topic (though the topics are not
always pure; same-sex marriage and the space pro-
gram are merged, for example).

5 Related Work

Insofar as debates are subjective, our study is related
to opinion mining. Subjective text classification
(Wiebe and Riloff, 2005) leads to opinion mining
tasks such as opinion extraction (Dave et al., 2003),
positive and negative polarity classification (Pang et
al., 2002), sentiment target detection (Hu and Liu,
2004; Ganapathibhotla and Liu, 2008), and feature-
opinion extraction (Wu et al., 2009). The above
studies are conducted mostly on product reviews, a
domain with a simpler opinion landscape and more
concrete rationales for those opinions, compared to
sociopolitical debates.

Generative topic models have been successfully
implemented in opinion mining tasks such as feature
identification (Titov and McDonald, 2008), entity-
topic extraction (Newman et al., 2006), mining con-
tentious expressions and interactions (Mukherjee
and Liu, 2012) and specific aspect-opinion word ex-
traction from labeled data (Zhao et al., 2010). Most
relevant to this research is work on feature-sentiment
extraction (Lin and He, 2009; Mei et al., 2007). Mei
et al. (2007) built on PLSI, which is problematic
for generalizing beyond the training sample. The
JST model of Lin and He (2009) is an LDA-based
topic model in which each word token is assigned
both a sentiment and a topic; they exploited a sen-

16For more topics, please refer to the supplementary notes.

timent lexicon in the prior distribution. Our model
is closely related, but introduces a switching vari-
able that assigns some tokens to positions, some to
topics, and some to both. Unlike Lin and He’s senti-
ments, our model’s positions are associated with the
two sides of a debate, and we incorporate topics at
the level of questions within debates.

Some studies have specifically analyzed con-
trastive viewpoints or stances in general discussion
text.Agrawal et al. (2003) used graph mining based
method to classify authors in to opposite camps for
a given topic. Paul et al. (2010) developed an unsu-
pervised method for summarizing contrastive opin-
ions from customer reviews. Abu-Jbara et al. (2012)
and Dasigi et al. (2012) developed techniques to ad-
dress the problem of automatically detecting sub-
groups of people holding similar stances in a dis-
cussion thread.

Several prior studies have considered debates.
Cabrio and Villata (2012) developed a system based
on argumentation theory which recognizes the en-
tailment and contradiction relationships between
two texts. Awadallah et al. (2011) used a debate
corpus as a seed for extracting person-opinion-topic
tuples from news and other web documents and in
later work classified the quotations to specific top-
ics and polarity using language models (Awadal-
lah et al., 2012). Somasundaran and Wiebe (2009)
and Anand et al. (2011) were interested in ideolog-
ical content in debates, relying on discourse struc-
ture and leveraging sentiment lexicons to recognize
stances.

Closer to the methodology we describe, Lin et
al. (2008) presented a statistical model for politi-
cal discourse that incorporates both topics and ide-
ologies; they used debates on the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. Fortuna et al. (2009) showed that it is pos-
sible to isolate a subset of terms from media content
that are informative of a news organization’s bias to-
wards a particular issue. Ahmed and Xing (2010) in-
troduced multi-level latent Dirichlet allocation, and
Eisenstein et al. (2011) introduced sparse additive
generative models, both conceived as extensions to
well-established probabilistic modeling techniques
(Blei et al., 2003); these were applied to debates
and political blog datasets. Our approach builds on
these models (especially the switching variables of
Ahmed and Xing). We go farther in jointly modeling

1866



text across many debates evidenced by the structure
of Debatepedia, thus grounding our models more
solidly in familiar sociopolitical issues, and in mak-
ing extensive use of existing NLP resources.

6 Conclusion

Using text from Debatepedia, we inferred topics and
position term lexicons in the domain of sociopoliti-
cal debates. Our approach brings together tools from
information extraction and sentiment analysis into a
latent-variable topic model and exploits the hierar-
chical structure of the dataset. Our qualitative and
quantitative evaluations show the model’s strengths
and weaknesses.

Acknowledgments

The authors thank several anonymous reviewers,
Justin Gross, David Kaufer, and members of the
ARK group at CMU for helpful feedback on this
work and gratefully acknowledge the assistance of
the annotators. This research is supported by the
Singapore National Research Foundation under its
International Research Centre@Singapore Funding
Initiative and administered by the IDM Programme
Office, by an A∗STAR fellowship to Y.S., and by
Google’s support of the Reading is Believing project
at CMU.

References
Amjad Abu-Jbara, Mona Diab, Pradeep Dasigi, and

Dragomir Radev. 2012. Subgroup detection in ide-
ological discussions. In Proceedings of ACL.

Rakesh Agrawal, Sridhar Rajagopalan, Ramakrishnan
Srikant, and Yirong Xu. 2003. Mining newsgroups
using networks arising from social behavior. In WWW
’03.

Amr Ahmed and Eric P. Xing. 2010. Staying in-
formed: supervised and semi-supervised multi-view
topical analysis of ideological perspective. In Pro-
ceedings of EMNLP.

Pranav Anand, Marilyn Walker, Rob Abbott, Jean E. Fox
Tree, Robeson Bowmani, and Michael Minor. 2011.
Cats rule and dogs drool!: classifying stance in online
debate. In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on
Computational Approaches to Subjectivity and Senti-
ment Analysis.

Rawia Awadallah, Maya Ramanath, and Gerhard
Weikum. 2011. OpinioNetIt: Understanding the

opinions-people network for politically controversial
topics. In Proceedings of CIKM.

Rawia Awadallah, Maya Ramanath, and Gerhard
Weikum. 2012. PolariCQ: Polarity classification of
political quotations. In Proceedings of CIKM.

David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan.
2003. Latent Dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 3:993–1022.

Elena Cabrio and Serena Villata. 2012. Combining
textual entailment and argumentation theory for sup-
porting online debates interactions. In Proceedings of
ACL.

Sarah Cohen, James T. Hamilton, and Fred Turner. 2011.
Computational journalism. Communications of the
ACM, 54(10):66–71.

Pradeep Dasigi, Weiwei Guo, and Mona Diab. 2012.
Genre independent subgroup detection in online dis-
cussion threads: a pilot study of implicit attitude using
latent textual semantics. In Proceedings of ACL.

Kushal Dave, Steve Lawrence, and David M. Pennock.
2003. Mining the peanut gallery: opinion extraction
and semantic classification of product reviews. In Pro-
ceedings of WWW.

Jacob Eisenstein, Amr Ahmed, and Eric P Xing. 2011.
Sparse additive generative models of text. In Proceed-
ings of ICML.

Jenny Rose Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher
Manning. 2005. Incorporating non-local information
into information extraction systems by gibbs sampling.
In Proceedings of ACL.

Blaz Fortuna, Carolina Galleguillos, and Nello Cristian-
ini. 2009. Detecting the bias in media with statis-
tical learning methods. In Ashok N . Srivastava and
Mehran Sahami, editors, Text Mining: Classification,
Clustering, and Applications, pages 27–50. Chapman
& Hall/CRC.

Murthy Ganapathibhotla and Bing Liu. 2008. Mining
opinions in comparative sentences. In Proceedings of
COLING.

Stephan Greene and Philip Resnik. 2009. More than
words: Syntactic packaging and implicit sentiment. In
Proceedings of HLT-NAACL.

Thomas L. Griffiths and Mark Steyvers. 2004. Find-
ing scientific topics. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 101(Suppl. 1):5228–5235.

Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. 2004. Mining and summariz-
ing customer reviews. In Proceedings of CIKM.

Karen Sparck Jones. 1972. A statistical interpretation of
term specificity and its application in retrieval. Jour-
nal of documentation, 28(1):11–21.

Christian Kohlschütter, Peter Fankhauser, and Wolfgang
Nejdl. 2010. Boilerplate detection using shallow text
features. In Proceedings of WSDM.

1867



Chenghua Lin and Yulan He. 2009. Joint sentiment/topic
model for sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of
CIKM.

Wei-Hao Lin, Eric Xing, and Alexander Hauptmann.
2008. A joint topic and perspective model for ideo-
logical discourse. In Proceedings of ECML-PKDD.

Qiaozhu Mei, Xu Ling, Matthew Wondra, Hang Su, and
ChengXiang Zhai. 2007. Topic sentiment mixture:
modeling facets and opinions in weblogs. In Proceed-
ings of WWW.

Marina Meila. 2003. Comparing clusterings by the vari-
ation of information. In Bernhard Schölkopf and Man-
fred K. Warmuth, editors, Learning Theory and Kernel
Machines, volume 2777 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 173–187. Springer.

Arjun Mukherjee and Bing Liu. 2012. Mining con-
tentions from discussions and debates. In Proceedings
of KDD.

David Newman, Chaitanya Chemudugunta, and Padhraic
Smyth. 2006. Statistical entity-topic models. In Pro-
ceedings of KDD.

Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up?: sentiment classification using ma-
chine learning techniques. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Michael J. Paul, ChengXiang Zhai, and Roxana Girju.
2010. Summarizing contrastive viewpoints in opin-
ionated text. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Keith Poole and Howard Rosenthal. 1991. Patterns of
congressional voting. American Journal of Political
Science, pages 118–178.

Yanchuan Sim, Brice Acree, Justin H. Gross, and
Noah A. Smith. 2013. Measuring ideological propor-
tions in political speeches. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Swapna Somasundaran and Janyce Wiebe. 2009. Rec-
ognizing stances in online debates. In Proceedings of
ACL.

Ivan Titov and Ryan McDonald. 2008. Modeling online
reviews with multi-grain topic models. In Proceedings
of WWW.

Teun A. Van Dijk. 1998. Ideology: A Multidisciplinary
Approach. Sage Publications Limited.

Ellen M. Voorhees. 1999. The trec-8 question answering
track report. In Proceedings of TREC.

Hanna M. Wallach. 2006. Topic modeling: beyond bag-
of-words. In Proceedings of ICML.

Janyce Wiebe and Ellen Riloff. 2005. Creating sub-
jective and objective sentence classifiers from unan-
notated texts. In Proceedings of CICLing.

Theresa Wilson, Paul Hoffmann, Swapna Somasun-
daran, Jason Kessler, Janyce Wiebe, Yejin Choi, Claire
Cardie, Ellen Riloff, and Siddharth Patwardhan. 2005.
Opinionfinder: a system for subjectivity analysis. In
Proceedings of HLT-EMNLP.

Yuanbin Wu, Qi Zhang, Xuanjing Huang, and Lide Wu.
2009. Phrase dependency parsing for opinion mining.
In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Wayne Xin Zhao, Jing Jiang, Hongfei Yan, and Xiaoming
Li. 2010. Jointly modeling aspects and opinions with
a maxent-lda hybrid. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

1868


