










































Event-Based Time Label Propagation for Automatic Dating of News Articles


Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1–11,
Seattle, Washington, USA, 18-21 October 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Event-based Time Label Propagation for Automatic Dating of News Articles

Tao Ge Baobao Chang∗ Sujian Li Zhifang Sui
Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Ministry of Education

School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University
No.5 Yiheyuan Road, Haidian District, Beijing, P.R.China, 100871

{getao,chbb,lisujian,szf}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Since many applications such as timeline sum-
maries and temporal IR involving temporal
analysis rely on document timestamps, the
task of automatic dating of documents has
been increasingly important. Instead of using
feature-based methods as conventional mod-
els, our method attempts to date documents
in a year level by exploiting relative tempo-
ral relations between documents and events,
which are very effective for dating documents.
Based on this intuition, we proposed an event-
based time label propagation model called
confidence boosting in which time label in-
formation can be propagated between docu-
ments and events on a bipartite graph. The ex-
periments show that our event-based propaga-
tion model can predict document timestamps
in high accuracy and the model combined with
a MaxEnt classifier outperforms the state-of-
the-art method for this task especially when
the size of the training set is small.

1 Introduction

Time is an important dimension of any informa-
tion space and can be useful in information re-
trieval, question-answering systems and timeline
summaries. In the applications involving tempo-
ral analysis, document timestamps are very useful.
For instance, temporal information retrieval mod-
els take into consideration the document’s creation
time for document retrieval and ranking (Kalczyn-
ski and Chou, 2005; Berberich et al., 2007) for bet-
ter dealing with time-sensitive queries; some infor-

∗Corresponding author

mation retrieval applications such as Google Scholar
can list articles published during the time a user
specifies for better satisfying users’ needs. In addi-
tion, timeline summarization techniques (Hu et al.,
2011; Binh Tran et al., 2013) and some event-event
ordering models (Chambers and Jurafsky, 2008;
Yoshikawa et al., 2009) also rely on the timestamps.
Unfortunately, many documents on the web do not
have a credible timestamp, as Chambers (2012) re-
ported. Therefore, it is significant to date docu-
ments, that is to predict document creation time.

One typical method for dating document is based
on temporal language models, which were first used
for dating by de Jong et al. (2005). They learned
language models (unigram) for specific time periods
and scored articles with normalized log-likelihood
ratio scores. The other typical approach for the task
was proposed by Nathanael Chambers (2012). In
Chambers’s work, discriminative classifiers – max-
imum entropy (MaxEnt) classifiers were used by
incorporating linguistic features and temporal con-
straints for training, which outperforms the previous
temporal language models on a subset of Gigaword
Corpus (Graff et al., 2003).

However, the conventional methods have some
limitations because they predict creation time of
documents mainly based on feature-based models
without understanding content of documents, which
may lead to wrong predictions in some cases. For
instance, assume that D1 and D2 are documents
whose content is given as follows:

(D1) Sudan last year accused Eritrea of
backing an offensive by rebels in the east-
ern border region.

1



(D2) Two years ago, Sudan accused Er-
itrea of backing an offensive by rebels in
the eastern border region.

SinceD1 andD2 share many important features, the
previous dating methods are very likely to predict
the same timestamp for the two documents. How-
ever, it will be easy to infer that the creation time of
D1 should be one year earlier than that of D2 if we
analyze the content of the two documents.

Unlike the previous methods, this paper exploits
relative temporal relations between events and doc-
uments for dating documents on the basis of an un-
derstanding of document content.

It is known that each event in a news article has
a relative temporal relation with the document. By
analyzing the relative temporal relation, time of the
event can be known if we know the document times-
tamp; on the other hand, if the time of an event is
known, it can also be used to predict the creation
time of documents mentioning the event, which can
be best demonstrated with the above-mentioned ex-
ample of D1 and D2. In the example, “last year”
is an important cue to infer that the event mentioned
by the documents occurred in 2002 if we know the
timestamp of D1 is 2003. With the information that
the event occurred in 2002, it can also be inferred
from the temporal expression “Two years ago” that
D2 was written in 2004. In this way, the timestamp
of the labeled document (D1) is propagated to the
unlabeled document (D2) through the event both of
them mention, which is the main intuition of this pa-
per.

In fact, this intuition seems practical to date doc-
uments on the web because web data is very re-
dundant. Many documents on the web can be con-
nected via events because an event is usually men-
tioned by different documents. According to our
analysis of a collection of news articles spanning 5
years, it is found that an event is mentioned by 3.44
news articles on average; on the other hand, a doc-
ument usually refers to multiple events. Therefore,
if one knows a document timestamp, time of events
the document mentions can be obtained by analyz-
ing the relative temporal relations between the doc-
ument and the events. Likewise, if the time of an
event is known, then it can be used to predict cre-
ation time of the documents which mention it.

Based on the intuition, we proposed an event-
based time label propagation model called confi-
dence boosting in which timestamps are propagated
according to relative temporal relations between
documents and events. In this way, documents can
be dated with an understanding of content so that
this model can date document more credibly. To our
knowledge, it is the first time that the relative tempo-
ral relations between documents and events are ex-
ploited for dating documents, which is proved to be
effective by the experimental results.

2 Event-based Time Label Propogation

As mentioned above, the relative temporal relations
between documents and events are useful for dat-
ing documents. By analyzing the temporal relations,
even if there are only a small number of documents
labeled with timestamps, this information can be
propagated to documents connected with them on a
bipartite graph using breadth first traversal (BFS).

Figure 1: An example of BFS-based propagation

As shown in figure 1, there are two kinds of nodes
in the bipartite graph. A document node is a single
document while an event node represents an event.
The edge between a document node and an event
node means that the document mentions the event.
Also, the edge carries the information of the rela-
tive temporal relation between the document and the
event. The label propagation from node i to node j
will occur if BFS condition which is defined as fol-
lows is satisfied:{

eij ∈ E
i ∈ L and j /∈ L (BFS condition)

When the timestamp of i is propagated to j:
Y (j) = Y (i) + δ(i, j)

L = L ∪ {j}
where E is the set of edges of the bipartite graph,
eij denotes the edge between node i and j, L is the
set of nodes which have been already labeled with
timestamps, Y (i) is the year of node i and δ(i, j) is
the relative temporal relation between node i and j.

2



In figure 1, the timestamp of document D1 is 2003,
which is known. This information can be propagated
to its adjacent nodes i.e. the event nodes it men-
tions according to the relative temporal relations.
Then, these event nodes propagate their timestamps
to other documents which mention them. By re-
peating this process, the timestamp of the document
can be propagated to documents which are reachable
from the initially labeled document on the bipartite
graph.

Although the BFS-based propagation process can
propagate timestamps from few labeled documents
to a large number of unlabeled ones, it has two short-
comings for this task. First, once one timestamp is
propagated incorrectly, this error will lead to more
mistakes in the following propagations. If such an
error occurred at the beginning of the propagation
process, it would lead to propagation of errors. Sec-
ond, BFS-based method cannot address conflict of
predictions during propagation, which is shown in
figure 2.

Figure 2: Conflict of predictions during propagation

To address the problems of the BFS-based
method, we proposed a novel propagation model
called confidence boosting model which improves
the BFS-based model by optimizing the global con-
fidence of the bipartite graph. In the confidence
boosting model, every node in the bipartite graph
has a confidence which measures the credibility of
the predicted timestamp of the node. When the
timestamp of a node is propagated to other nodes,
its confidence will be also propagated to the tar-
get nodes with some loss. The loss of confi-
dence is called confidence decay. Formally, the
confidence decay process is described as follows:

c(j) = c(i)× σ(i, j)
where c(i) denotes confidence of node i and
σ(i, j) is the decay factor from node i to
node j. For guaranteeing that timestamps
can be propagated on the bipartite graph cred-

ibly, we define the following condition which
is called CB (Confidence Boosting) condition:{

eij ∈ E
c(i)× σ(i, j) > c(j) (CB condition)

In the confidence boosting model, propagation from
node i to node j will occur only if CB condition is
satisfied. When timestamps are propagated on the
bipartite graph, timestamps and confidence of nodes
will be updated dynamically. A node with high con-
fidence is more active than nodes with low confi-
dence to propagate its timestamp because a node
with high confidence is more likely to satisfy the CB
condition for propagating its timestamp. Moreover,
a prediction with low confidence can be corrected by
the prediction with high confidence. Therefore, the
confidence boosting model can address both prop-
agation of errors and conflict of predictions which
cannot be tackled by the BFS-based model.

However, there are challenges for running such
propagation models in practice. First, the relative
temporal relations between documents and events
are usually unavailable. Second, events extracted
from different documents do not have any connec-
tion even if they refer to the same event. There-
fore, each event is connected with only one docu-
ment in the bipartite graph and thus cannot prop-
agate its timestamp to other documents unless we
perform event coreference resolution. Third, propa-
gations from generic events are very likely to lead to
propagation errors because generic events can hap-
pen in any year. Also, how to set the confidence and
decay factors reasonably in practice for a confidence
boosting model is worthy of investigation. All these
challenges for the propagation models and their cor-
responding solutions will be discussed in Section 3.

3 Details of Event-based Propagation
Models

In this section, details of the event-based time la-
bel propagation models including challenges and
their corresponding solutions are presented. We first
discuss the event extraction and processing involv-
ing relative temporal relation mining, event coref-
erence resolution and distinguishing specific extrac-
tions from generic ones in Section 3.1. Then, we
show the confidence boosting algorithm in detail in
Section 3.2.

3



3.1 Event extraction and processing
As mentioned in previous sections, events play a key
role in the propagation models. We define an event
as a Subject-Predicate-Object (SPO) triple. To ex-
tract events from raw text, an open information ex-
traction software - ReVerb (Fader et al., 2011) is
used. ReVerb is a program that automatically iden-
tifies and extracts relationships from English sen-
tences. It takes raw text as input and outputs SPO
triples which are called extractions.

However, extractions extracted by ReVerb cannot
be used directly for our propagation models for three
main reasons. First, the relative temporal relations
between documents and the extractions are unavail-
able. Second, the extractions extracted from differ-
ent documents do not have any connection even if
they refer to the same event. Third, propagations
from generic events are very likely to lead to propa-
gation errors.

For addressing the three challenges for the prop-
agation models, we first presented a rule-based
method for mining the relative temporal relations be-
tween extractions and documents in Section 3.1.1.
Then, an efficient event coreference resolution
method is introduced in Section 3.1.2. Finally, the
method for distinguishing specific extractions from
generic ones is shown in Section 3.1.3.

3.1.1 Relative temporal relation mining
We used a rule-based method to extract temporal

expressions and used Stanford parser (De Marneffe
et al., 2006) to analyze association between the tem-
poral expressions and the extractions. Specifically,
we define that an extraction is associated with a tem-
poral expression if there is an arc from the predicate
of the extraction to the temporal expression in the
dependency tree. For a certain extraction, there are
the following four cases whose instances are shown
in table 1 for handling.
Case 1: The extraction is associated with an abso-
lute temporal expressions with year mentions in the
sentence.

In this case, the time of the extraction is equal to
the year mention:

Y (ex) = Y earMention
For the example in table 1, Y (ex) = 1999.

Case 2: The extraction is associated with a relative
temporal expression (not involving year) in the sen-

Case Instance
1 In 1999, South Korea exported 89,000

tons of pork to Japan.

2
In April, however, the BOI investments

showed marked improvement.
Last month, Kazini vowed to resign his

top army job.
3 Julius Erving moved with his family to

Florida three years ago.
4 The meeting focused on ways to revive

the stalled Mideast peace process.

Table 1: Instances of various temporal expressions

tence.
In this case, the time of the extraction is equal to

the creation time of the document:
Y (ex) = Y (d)

Case 3: The extraction is associated with a relative
temporal expression (involving specific year gap) in
the sentence.

In this case, the time of the extraction is computed
as follows:

Y (ex) = Y (d)± Y earGap
For the example in table 1, Y (ex) = Y (d)− 3.

Case 4: The extraction is not associated with any
temporal expression in the sentence or the other
cases.

In this case, it is difficult to recognize the rela-
tive temporal relations. However, timeliness can be
leveraged to determine the relations as a heuristic
method. It is known that timeliness is an important
feature of news so that events reported by a news ar-
ticle usually took place a couple of days or weeks
before the article was written. Therefore, we heuris-
tically consider the year of the extraction is the same
with that of its source document in this case:

Y (ex) = Y (d)

In the cases except case 1, the relative tempo-
ral relation between an extraction and the docu-
ment it comes from can be determined. To evalu-
ate the performance of the rule-based method, we
sampled 3,000 extractions from documents written
in the year of 1995-1999 of Gigaword corpus and
manually labeled these extractions with a timestamp
based on their context and their corresponding docu-
ment timestamps as golden standard. Table 2 shows

4



the accuracy of each case which will be used as a
part of the decay factor in the confidence boosting
model.

Case Accuracy
1 0.774(168/217)
2 0.994(844/849)
3 0.836(281/336)
4 0.861(1376/1598)

Total 0.890(2669/3000)

Table 2: Accuracy of the four cases

We define the set of these determined relative tem-
poral relations R as follows:

R = {rd,ex|d = doc(ex), ex ∈ C2 ∪ C3 ∪ C4}
rd,ex =< d, ex, δ(d, ex) >

δ(d, ex) = −δ(ex, d) = {0,±1,±2,±3, ...}
where Ck is the set of extractions in case k and
doc(ex) is the document which extraction ex comes
from. rd,ex is a triple describing the relative tempo-
ral relation between d and ex. For example, triple
rd,ex =< d, ex,−1 > means that the time of ex-
traction ex is one year before the time of document
d.

3.1.2 Event coreference resolution
Extractions from different documents have no

connections. However, there are a great number of
extractions referring to the same event. For find-
ing such coreferential event extractions efficiently,
hierarchical agglomerative clustering (HAC) is used
to cluster highly similar extractions into one cluster.
We use cosine to measure the similarity between ex-
tractions and select bag of words as features. Note
that it is less meaningful to cluster the extractions
from the same document because coreferential ex-
tractions from the same document are not helpful for
timestamp propagations. For this reason, similarity
between extractions from the same documents is set
to 0.

For HAC, selection of threshold is important. If
the threshold is set too high, only a few extractions
can be clustered despite high purity; on the contrary,
if the threshold is set too low, purity of clusters will
descend. In fact, selection of threshold is a trade-off
between the precision and recall of event corefer-
ence resolution. For selecting a suitable threshold,

extractions from documents written in 1995-1999
are used as a development set.

In practice, it is difficult for us to directly evalu-
ate the performance of the coreference resolution of
event extractions without golden standard which re-
quires much labors for manual annotations. Alterna-
tively, entropy which measures the purity of clusters
is used for evaluation because it can indirectly re-
flect the precision of coreference resolution to some
extent:

Entropy = −
∑

j

nj
n

∑
i

P (i, j)× log2 P (i, j)

where P (i, j) is the probability of finding an extrac-
tion whose timestamp is i in the cluster j, nj is the
number of items in cluster j and n is the total num-
ber of extractions. Note that timestamp of an extrac-
tion is assigned based on its document timestamp
using the method proposed in Section 3.1.1.

Figure 3 shows the effect of selection of the
threshold on cluster performance. It can be found
that when the threshold reaches 0.8, the entropy
starts descending gently and is low enough. Since
we want to find as many coreferential extractions as
possible on the premise that the precision is good,
the threshold is set to 0.8. Note that extractions
which are single in one cluster will be filtered out
because they do not have any connections with any
other documents.

0.6 0.65 0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9
0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

Threshold

E
n
tr

o
p
y

Figure 3: Entropy of clusters under different thresholds

3.1.3 Distinguishing specific events from
generic ones

Not all extractions extracted by ReVerb refer to
a specific event. For instance, the extraction “Ger-
many’s DAX index was down 0.2 percent” is un-
desirable for our task because it refers to a generic

5



event and this event may occur in any year. In other
words, it is not able to indicate a certain timestamp
and thus propagations from a generic event node are
very likely to result in propagation errors. In con-
trast, the extraction “some of the provinces in China
were hit by SARS” refers to a specific event which
took place in 2003. For our task, such specific event
extractions which are associated with one certain
timestamp are desirable. For the sake of distinguish-
ing such extractions from the generic ones, a Max-
Ent classifier is used to classify extractions as either
specific ones or generic ones.

Training Set Generation A training set is indis-
pensable for training a MaxEnt classifier. In order
to generate training examples, we performed HAC
discussed in Section 3.1.2 for event coreference res-
olution on extractions from all documents written
in May and June of 1995-1999 and then analyzed
each cluster. If extractions in a cluster have different
timestamps, then the extractions in this cluster will
be labeled as generic extractions (negative); other-
wise, extractions in the cluster are labeled as spe-
cific ones (positive). In this way, the training set can
be generated without manually labeling. To avoid
bias of positive and negative examples, we sampled
3,500 positive examples and 3,500 negative exam-
ples to train the model.

Feature Selection The following features were se-
lected for training:

Named Entities: People and places are often dis-
cussed during specific time periods, particularly in
news genre. Intuitively, if an extraction contains
specific named entities then this extraction is less
likely to be a generic event. If an extraction con-
tains named entities, types and uninterrupted tokens
of the named entities will be included as features.

Numeral: According to our analysis of the train-
ing set generated by the above-mentioned method,
generic extractions usually contain numerals. For
example, the extraction “15 people died in this ac-
cident” and the extraction “225 people died in this
accident” have the same tokens except numerals and
they are labeled as a generic event because they are
clustered into one group due to high similarity but
they in fact refer to different events happening in
different years. Therefore, if an extraction contains
numerals, the feature “NUM” will be included.

Bag of words: Bag of words can also be an indicator
of specific extractions and generic ones. For exam-
ple, an extraction containing ‘stock’, ‘index’, ‘fell’
and ‘exchange’ is probably a generic one.

The model obtained after training can be used to
predict whether an extraction is a specific one. We
define P (S = 1|ex) as the probability that an ex-
traction is a specific one, which can be provided by
the classifier. Extractions whose probability to be a
specific one is less than 0.05 are filtered out. For the
other extractions, this probability is used as a part of
the decay factor in the confidence boosting model,
which will be discussed in detail in Section 3.2.

3.2 Confidence boosting

After extracting and processing the event extrac-
tions, relative temporal relations between documents
and events can be constructed. This can be for-
mally represented by a bipartite graph G=〈V,E〉.
There are two kinds of nodes on the bipartite graph:
document nodes and event nodes. Slightly dif-
ferent with the event node mentioned in Section
2, an event node in practice is a cluster of coref-
erential extractions and it can be connected with
multiple document nodes. Note that the bipar-
tite graph does not contain any isolate node. For
briefness, we define DNode as the set of docu-
ment nodes and ENode as the set of event nodes.
The set of edges E is formally defined as follows:
E = {eij , eji|i ∈ DNode, j ∈ ENode, ri,j ∈ R}

where R is the set of relative temporal relations de-
fined as Section 3.1.1.

3.2.1 Confidence and decay factor
As mentioned in Section 2, the confidence of a

node measures the credibility of the predicted times-
tamp. According to the definition, we set the confi-
dence of initially labeled nodes to 1 and set confi-
dence of nodes without any timestamp to 0 in prac-
tice. When the timestamp of a node is propagated
to another node, its confidence will be propagated to
the target node with some loss, as discussed in Sec-
tion 2. The confidence loss is caused by two factors
in practice. The first one is the credibility of the rel-
ative temporal relation between two nodes and the
other one depends on whether an extraction refers to
a specific event.

Relative temporal relations between documents

6



and extractions we mined using the rule-based
method in Section 3.1.1 are not absolutely correct.
The credibility of the relations has an effect on the
confidence decay. Formally, we used π(i, j) to de-
note the credibility of the relative temporal relation
between node i and node j. The credibility of a rel-
ative temporal relation in each case can be estimated
through table 2. If the credibility of the relative tem-
poral relation between i and j is low, propagation
from node i to j probably leads to error. Therefore,
the confidence loss should be much in this case. On
contrary, if the relation is highly credible, it will be
less likely that propagation errors occur. Therefore,
the confidence loss should be little.

In addition, whether an extraction refers to a
generic event or a specific one exerts an impact on
the confidence loss. If an extraction refers to a
generic event, then the extractions in the same clus-
ter with it probably have different timestamps. Since
our propagation model assumes that extractions in a
cluster are coreferent and thus they should have the
same timestamp, propagations from a generic event
node are very likely to result in propagation errors.
Therefore, the timestamp of a generic event node
in fact is less credible for propagations and confi-
dence of such event nodes should be low for limiting
propagations from the nodes. For this reason, prop-
agation from a document node to a generic event
node leads to much loss of confidence. We define
the probability that an event node refers to a specific
event as follows:

P (S = 1|enode) = 1
|C|

∑
ex∈C

P (S = 1|ex)

where C is the set of extractions in the event node
and P (S = 1|ex) is the probability that an extrac-
tion refers to a specific event, which can be provided
by the MaxEnt classifier discussed in Section 3.1.3.

Considering the two factors for confidence loss,
we formally define the decay factor by (1).

σ(s, t) = (1){
π(s, t) if t ∈ DNode
π(s, t)× P (S = 1|t) otherwise

3.2.2 Confidence boosting algorithm
In confidence boosting model, the propagation

from i to j will occur only if the CB condition is

Figure 4: Algorithm of confidence boosting

satisfied. The confidence boosting propagation pro-
cess can be described as figure 4.

Whenever timestamps are propagated to other
nodes, the global confidence of the bipartite graph
will increase. For this reason, this propagation pro-
cess is called confidence boosting. In this model,
a node with high confidence is more active than
nodes with low confidence to propagate its times-
tamp. Moreover, a prediction with low confidence
can be corrected by the prediction with high con-
fidence. Therefore, the confidence boosting model
can alleviate the problem of propagation of errors
to some extent and handle conflict of predictions.
Thus, it can propagate timestamps more credibly
than the BFS-based model. It can also be proved
that each node on the bipartite graph must reach the
highest confidence it can reach so that the global
confidence of the bipartite graph must be optimal
when the confidence boosting propagation process
ends regardless of propagation orders, which will be
discussed in Section 3.2.3.

3.2.3 Proof of the optimality of confidence
boosting

Proof by contradiction can be used to prove that
propagation orders do not affect the optimality of the
confidence boosting model.
Proof Assume by contradiction that there is some
node that does not reach its highest confidence it can
reach when a confidence boosting process in propa-
gation order A ends:

∃vt s.t. cA(vt) < c∗(vt)

where cA(vt) is the confidence of vt when the
propagation process in order A ends and c∗(vt) is
the highest confidence that vt can reach. Assume
that (v1, v2, · · · , vt−1, vt) is the optimal propagation

7



path from the propagation source node v1 to the
node vt that leads to the highest confidence of vt,
which means that c∗(vt) = c∗(vt−1) × σ(vt−1, vt),
c∗(vt−1) = c

∗(vt−2) × σ(vt−2, vt−1), ..., c∗(v2) =
c∗(v1) × σ(v1, v2). Then according to CB condi-
tion, since cA(vt−1) × σ(vt−1, vt) ≤ cA(vt) <
c∗(vt) = c

∗(vt−1) × σ(vt−1, vt), the inequality
cA(vt−1) < c

∗(vt−1) must hold. Similarly, it can be
easily inferred that cA(vt−2) < c∗(vt−2) and finally
cA(v1) < c

∗(v1). Since v1 is the source node whose
timestamp is initially labeled and its confidence is 1,
the inequality cA(v1) < c∗(v1) cannot hold. Thus,
the assumption that cA(vt) < c∗(vt) cannot be sat-
isfied. Therefore, it can be proved that each node
on the bipartite graph must reach the highest con-
fidence it can reach so that the global confidence of
the bipartite graph must be optimal when confidence
boosting propagation process ends no matter what
order time labels are propagated in.

4 Experiments

In this section, we evaluate the performance of our
time label propagation models and different auto-
matic document dating models on the Gigaword
dataset. We first present the experimental setting.
Then we show experimental results and perform an
analysis.

4.1 Experimental Setting

Dataset To simulate the environment of the web
where data is very redundant, we use all documents
written in April, June, July and September of 2000-
2004 of Gigaword Corpus as dataset instead of sam-
pling a subset of documents from each period. The
dataset contains 900,199 news articles.
Pre-processing Many extractions extracted by Re-
Verb are short and uninformative and do not carry
any valuable information for propagating temporal
information. Also, some extractions do not refer
to events which already happened. These extrac-
tions may affect the performance of event corefer-
ence resolution and the rule-based method proposed
in Section 3.1.1 for mining relative temporal rela-
tions. Therefore, we filter out these undesirable ex-
tractions in advance with a rule-based method. The
rules are shown in table 3. This preprocessing re-
moves large numbers of “bad” extractions which are

undesirable for our task. As a result, not only com-
putation efficiency but also precision of event coref-
erence resolution will be improved.

Rule1 If the number of tokens of the extrac-
tion is less than 5 then this extraction
will be filtered out.

Rule2 If the maximum idf of terms of the ex-
traction is less than 3.0 then this ex-
traction will be filtered out.

Rule3 If the tense of the extraction is not past
tense then this extraction will be fil-
tered out.

Rule4 If the extraction is the content of di-
rect quotation then this extraction will
be filtered out.

Table 3: Pre-processing Rules

|DNode| 550,124
|ENode| 968,064
|E| 3,104,666

Table 4: Basic information of the bi-partite graph

Basic information of the document-event bipartite
graph constructed is shown in table 4.
Evaluation To evaluate the performance of the
propagation models for the task of dating on differ-
ent sizes of the training set, we used different sizes
of the labeled documents for training and consid-
ered the remaining documents as the test set. Note
that the training set is randomly sampled from the
dataset. To be more persuasive, we repeated above
experiments for five times.

However, in the time label propagation process,
not all documents can be labeled. For those doc-
uments which cannot be labeled in the process of
propagation, a MaxEnt classifier serves as a comple-
mentary approach to predict their timestamps. For
the MaxEnt classifier, unigrams and named entities
are simply selected as features and the initially la-
beled documents as well as documents labeled dur-
ing propagation process are used for training.

Baseline methods are temporal language models
proposed by de Jong et al. (2005) and the state-of-
the-art discriminative classifier with linguistic fea-
tures and temporal constraints which was proposed

8



Initially Labeled 1k 5k 10k 50k 100k 200k 500k
Reached Min 443980 448653 453022 484562 518603 599724 732701
Reached Max 444266 448998 454028 484996 519333 579878 732799
Reached Avg 444107 448742 453786 484622 519110 579835 732758
Prop Ratio 444.1 89.7 45.4 9.7 5.2 2.9 1.5

Prop acc(BFS) 0.438 0.515 0.551 0.646 0.691 0.725 0.775
Prop acc(CB) 0.494 0.569 0.603 0.701 0.746 0.776 0.807

Table 5: Performance of Propagation

Initially Labeled 1k 5k 10k 50k 100k 200k 500k
Temporal LMs 0.277 0.323 0.353 0.412 0.422 0.425 0.420

Maxent(Unigrams) 0.326 0.378 0.407 0.486 0.517 0.553 0.590
Maxent(Unigrams+NER) 0.331 0.383 0.418 0.506 0.549 0.590 0.665

Chambers’s 0.331 0.386 0.423 0.524 0.571 0.615 0.690
BFS+Maxent 0.459 0.508 0.533 0.595 0.626 0.658 0.707
CB+Maxent 0.486 0.535 0.559 0.624 0.655 0.685 0.726

Table 6: Overall accuracy of dating models

by Nathanael Chambers (2012). In Chambers’s joint
model, the interpolation parameter λ is set to 0.35
which is considered optimal in his work.

4.2 Experimental Results

Table 5 shows the performance of propagation mod-
els where Reached denotes the number of docu-
ments labeled when the propagation process ends,
prop ratio and prop accuracy are defined as follows:

Prop Ratio =
#ReachedDocNodes

#LabeledDocNodes
Prop Accuracy =

#CorrectDocNodes−#LabeledDocNodes
#ReachedDocNodes−#LabeledDocNodes

where #LabeledDocNodes is the number of ini-
tially labeled document nodes which are documents
in the training set and #ReachedDocNodes is the
number of document nodes labeled when the propa-
gation process ends.

Note that prop ratio and accuracy in table 5 are
the mean of the prop ratio and accuracy of the five
groups of experiments. It is clear that confidence
boosting model improves the prop accuracy over
BFS-based model. When only 1,000 documents
are initially labeled with timestamps, the confidence
boosting model can propagate their timestamps to
more than 400,000 documents with an accuracy of

0.494, approximately 12.8% relative improvement
over the BFS counterpart, which proves effective-
ness of the confidence boosting model.

However, as shown in table 5, hardly can the prop-
agation process propagate timestamps to all doc-
uments. One reason is that the number of docu-
ment nodes on the bipartite graph is only 550,124,
approximately 61.1% of all documents. The other
documents may not mention events which are also
mentioned by other documents, which means they
are isolate and thus are excluded from the bipartite
graph. Also, the event coreference resolution phase
does not guarantee finding all coreferential extrac-
tions; in other words, recall of event coreference res-
olution is not 100%. The other reason is that some
documents are unreachable from the initially labeled
nodes even if they are in the bipartite graph.

The overall accuracy of different dating models
is shown in table 6. As with table 5, overall accu-
racy in table 6 is the average performance of mod-
els in the five groups of experiments. As reported
by Nathanael Chambers (2012), the discriminative
classifier performs much better than the temporal
language models on the Gigaword dataset. In the
case of 500,000 training examples, the Maxent clas-
sifier using unigram features outperforms the tem-
poral language models by 40.5% relative accuracy.
If the size of the training set is large enough, named

9



entities and linguistic features as well as temporal
constraints will improve the overall accuracy sig-
nificantly. However, if the size of the training set
is small, these features will not result in much im-
provement.

Compared with the previous models, the propaga-
tion models predict the document timestamps much
more accurately especially in the case where the size
of the training set is small. When the size of the
training set is 1,000, our BFS-based model and con-
fidence boosting model combined with the MaxEnt
classifier outperform Chambers’s joint model which
is considered the state-of-the-art model for the task
of automatic dating of documents by 38.7% and
46.8% relative accuracy respectively. This is be-
cause the feature-based methods are not very reli-
able especially when the size of the training set is
small. In contrast, our propagation models can pre-
dict timestamps of documents with an understand-
ing of document content, which allows our method
to date documents more credibly than the baseline
methods. Also, by comparing table 5 with table 6,
it can be found that prop accuracy is almost always
higher than overall accuracy, which also verifies that
the propagation models are more credible for dat-
ing document than the feature-based models. More-
over, data is so redundant that a great number of
documents can be connected with events they share.
Therefore, even if a small number of documents are
labeled, the labeled information can be propagated
to large numbers of articles through the connections
between documents and events according to relative
time relations. Even if the size of the training set
is large, e.g. 500,000, our propagation models still
outperform the state-of-the-art dating method. Ad-
ditionally, some event nodes on the bipartite graph
may be labeled with a timestamp during the process
of propagation as a byproduct. The temporal infor-
mation of the events would be useful for other tem-
poral analysis tasks.

5 Related Work

In addition to work of de Jong et al. (2005) and
Chambers (2012) introduced in previous sections,
there is also other research focusing on the task of
document dating. Kanhabua and Norvag (2009) im-
proved temporal language models by incorporating

temporal entropy and search statistics and apply-
ing two filtering techniques to the unigrams in the
model. Kumar et al. (2011) is also based on the
temporal language models, but more historically-
oriented, which models the timeline from the present
day back to the 18th century. In addition, they used
KL-divergence instead of normalized log likelihood
ratio to measure differences between a document
and a time period’s language model.

However, these methods are based on tempo-
ral language models so they also suffer from the
problem of the method of de Jong et al. (2005).
Therefore, they inevitably make wrong predictions
in some cases, just as mentioned in Section 1. Com-
pared with these methods, our event-based propaga-
tion models exploit relative temporal relations be-
tween documents and events for dating document
on a basis of an understanding of document content,
which is more reasonable and also proved to be more
effective by the experimental results.

6 Conclusion

The main contribution of this paper is exploiting
relative temporal relations between events and doc-
uments for the document dating task. Different
with the conventional work which dates documents
with feature-based methods, we proposed an event-
based time label propagation model called confi-
dence boosting in which timestamps are propagated
on a document-event bipartite graph according to
relative temporal relations between documents and
events for dating documents on a basis of an under-
standing of document content. We discussed chal-
lenges for the propagation models and gave the cor-
responding solutions in detail. The experimental re-
sults show that our event-based propagation model
can predict document timestamps in high accuracy
and the model combined with a MaxEnt classifier
outperforms the state-of-the-art method on a data-
redundant dataset.

Acknowledgements

We thank the anonymous reviewers for their valu-
able suggestions. This paper is supported by
NSFC Project 61075067, NSFC Project 61273318
and National Key Technology R&D Program (No:
2011BAH10B04-03).

10



References
Klaus Berberich, Srikanta Bedathur, Thomas Neumann,

and Gerhard Weikum. 2007. A time machine for
text search. In Proceedings of the 30th annual in-
ternational ACM SIGIR conference on Research and
development in information retrieval, pages 519–526.
ACM.

Giang Binh Tran, Mohammad Alrifai, and Dat
Quoc Nguyen. 2013. Predicting relevant news events
for timeline summaries. In Proceedings of the 22nd
international conference on World Wide Web compan-
ion, pages 91–92. International World Wide Web Con-
ferences Steering Committee.

Nathanael Chambers and Dan Jurafsky. 2008. Jointly
combining implicit constraints improves temporal or-
dering. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empir-
ical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
698–706. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Nathanael Chambers. 2012. Labeling documents with
timestamps: Learning from their time expressions. In
Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Long Papers-
Volume 1, pages 98–106. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

FMG de Jong, Henning Rode, and Djoerd Hiemstra.
2005. Temporal language models for the disclosure
of historical text. Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts
and Sciences.

Marie-Catherine De Marneffe, Bill MacCartney, Christo-
pher D Manning, et al. 2006. Generating typed de-
pendency parses from phrase structure parses. In Pro-
ceedings of LREC, volume 6, pages 449–454.

Anthony Fader, Stephen Soderland, and Oren Etzioni.
2011. Identifying relations for open information ex-
traction. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
1535–1545. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

David Graff, Junbo Kong, Ke Chen, and Kazuaki Maeda.
2003. English gigaword. Linguistic Data Consortium,
Philadelphia.

Po Hu, Minlie Huang, Peng Xu, Weichang Li, Adam K
Usadi, and Xiaoyan Zhu. 2011. Generating
breakpoint-based timeline overview for news topic ret-
rospection. In Data Mining (ICDM), 2011 IEEE 11th
International Conference on, pages 260–269. IEEE.

Pawel Jan Kalczynski and Amy Chou. 2005. Temporal
document retrieval model for business news archives.
Information processing management, 41(3):635–650.

Nattiya Kanhabua and Kjetil Nørvåg. 2009. Us-
ing temporal language models for document dating.
In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in
Databases, pages 738–741. Springer.

Abhimanu Kumar, Matthew Lease, and Jason Baldridge.
2011. Supervised language modeling for temporal res-
olution of texts. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM in-
ternational conference on Information and knowledge
management, pages 2069–2072. ACM.

Katsumasa Yoshikawa, Sebastian Riedel, Masayuki Asa-
hara, and Yuji Matsumoto. 2009. Jointly identifying
temporal relations with markov logic. In Proceedings
of the Joint Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting of
the ACL and the 4th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language: Volume 1-Volume 1, pages 405–
413. Association for Computational Linguistics.

11


