










































Detecting Promotional Content in Wikipedia


Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1851–1857,
Seattle, Washington, USA, 18-21 October 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Detecting Promotional Content in Wikipedia

Shruti Bhosale Heath Vinicombe Raymond J. Mooney
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin

{shruti,vini,mooney}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract

This paper presents an approach for detecting
promotional content in Wikipedia. By incor-
porating stylometric features, including fea-
tures based on n-gram and PCFG language
models, we demonstrate improved accuracy
at identifying promotional articles, compared
to using only lexical information and meta-
features.

1 Introduction

Wikipedia is a free, collaboratively edited encyclo-
pedia. Since normally anyone can create and edit
pages, some articles are written in a promotional
tone, violating Wikipedia’s policy requiring a neu-
tral viewpoint. Currently, such articles are identified
manually and tagged with an appropriate Cleanup
message1 by Wikipedia editors. Given the scale and
rate of growth of Wikipedia, it is infeasible to man-
ually identify all such articles. Hence, we present
an approach to automatically detect promotional ar-
ticles.

Related work in quality flaw detection in
Wikipedia (Anderka et al., 2012) has relied on
meta-features based on edit history, Wikipedia links,
structural features and counts of words, sentences
and paragraphs. However, we hypothesize that there
are subtle differences in the linguistic style that dis-
tinguish promotional tone, which we attempt to cap-
ture using stylometric features, particularly deeper
syntactic features. We model the style of promo-
tional and normal articles using language models

1http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:
Template_messages/Cleanup

based on both n-grams and Probabilistic Context
Free Grammars (PCFGs). We show that using such
stylometric features improves over using only shal-
low lexical and meta-features.

2 Related Work

Anderka et al. (2012) developed a general model for
detecting ten of Wikipedia’s most frequent quality
flaws. One of these flaw types, “Advert”2, refers to
articles written like advertisements. Their classifiers
were trained using a set of lexical, structural, net-
work and edit-history related features of Wikipedia
articles. However, they used no features capturing
syntactic structure, at a level deeper than Part-Of-
Speech (POS) tags.

A related area is that of vandalism detection in
Wikipedia. Several systems have been developed
to detect vandalizing edits in Wikipedia. These fall
into two major categories: those analyzing author in-
formation and edit metadata (Wilkinson and Huber-
man, 2007; Stein and Hess, 2007); and those using
NLP techniques such as n-gram language models
and PCFGs (Wang and McKeown, 2010; Harpalani
et al., 2011). We combine relevant features from
both these categories to train a classifier that distin-
guishes promotional content from normal Wikipedia
articles.

3 Dataset Collection

We extracted a set of about 13,000 articles from
English Wikipedia’s category, “Category:All arti-

2“Advert” is the flaw-type of majority of the articles in the
Category ‘Articles with a promotional tone’.

1851



Content Features
Number of characters
Number of words
Number of sentences
Average Word Length
Average, Minimum, Maximum Sentence Lengths,
Ratio of Maximum to minimum sentence lengths
Ratio of long sentences (>48 words) to Short Sen-
tences (<33 words)
Percentage of Sentences in the passive voice
Relative Frequencies of POS tags for pronouns, con-
junctions, prepositions, auxiliary verbs, modal verbs,
adjectives and adverbs
Percentage of sentences beginning with a pronoun,
article, conjunction, preposition, adjective, adverb
Percentage of special phrases3 such as peacock
terms (‘legendary’, ‘acclaimed’, ‘world-class’),
weasel terms (‘many scholars state’, ‘it is be-
lieved/regarded’, ‘many are of the opinion’, ‘most
feel’, ‘experts declare’, ‘it is often reported’) , edi-
torializing terms (‘without a doubt’, ‘of course’, ‘es-
sentially’)
Percentage of easy words, difficult words (Dale-
Chall List), long words and stop words
Overall Sentiment Score based on SentiWordNet4

Table 1: Content Features of a Wikipedia Article

cles with a promotional tone” as a set of positive
examples. We extracted a set of 26,000 untagged
articles to form a noisy set of negative examples,
which may contain some promotional articles that
have not yet been tagged by Wikipedia editors. To
counter this noise, we repeated the experiment us-
ing Wikipedia’s Featured Articles and Good Articles
(approx. 11,000) as a set of clean negative exam-
ples. We used 70% of the articles in each category
to train language models for each of the three cate-
gories (promotional articles, featured/good articles,
untagged articles), and used the remaining 30% to
evaluate classifier performance using 10-fold cross-
validation.

4 Features

4.1 Content and Meta Features of an Article
We used the content and meta features proposed by
Anderka et al. (2012) as given in Tables 1-4. We also

3http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:
Manual_of_Style/Words_to_watch

4This feature is not included in Anderka et al. (2012)

Structural Features
Number of Sections
Number of Images
Number of Categories
Number of Wikipedia Templates used
Number of References, Number of References per
sentence and Number of references per section

Table 2: Structural Features of a Wikipedia Article

Wikipedia Network Features
Number of Internal Wikilinks (to other Wikipedia
pages)
Number of External Links (to other websites)
Number of Backlinks (i.e. Number of wikilinks from
other Wikipedia articles to an article)
Number of Language Links (i.e. Number of links to
the same article in other languages)

Table 3: Network Features of a Wikipedia Article

added a new feature, “Overall Sentiment Score” for
an article. This feature is the average of the senti-
ment scores assigned by SentiWordnet (Baccianella
et al., 2010) to all positive and negative sentiment
bearing words in an article. In total, this results in
58 basic document features.

4.2 N-Gram Language Models

Language models are commonly used to measure
stylistic differences in language usage between au-
thors. For this work, we employed them to model
the difference in style of neutral vs. promotional
Wikipedia articles. We trained trigram word lan-
guage models and trigram character language mod-
els5 with Witten-Bell smoothing to produce proba-
bilistic models of both classes.

4.3 PCFG Language Models

Probabilistic Context Free Grammars (PCFG) cap-
ture the syntactic structure of language by mod-
eling sentence generation using probabilistic CFG
productions. We hypothesize that sentences in pro-
motional articles and those in neutral articles tend
to have different kinds of syntactic structures and
therefore, we explored the utility of PCFG models
for detecting this difference. Since we do not have
ground-truth parse trees for sentences in our dataset,

5Modeling longer character sequences did not help.

1852



Features based on PCFG models and n-gram Language models
Difference in the probabilities assigned to an article by the positive and the negative class character trigram
language models (LM char trigram)
Difference in the probabilities assigned to an article by the positive and the negative class word trigram language
models (LM word trigram)
Difference in the mean values of the probabilities assigned to sentences of an article by the positive and negative
class PCFG models (PCFG mean)
Difference in the maximum values of the probabilities assigned to sentences of an article by the positive and
negative class PCFG models (PCFG max)
Difference in the minimum values of the probabilities assigned to sentences of an article by the positive and
negative class PCFG models (PCFG min)
Difference in the standard deviation values of the probabilities of sentences of an article by the positive and
negative class PCFG models (PCFG std deviation)

Table 5: Features of a Wikipedia Article based on PCFG models and n-gram Language models

Edit History Features
Age of the article
Days since last revision of the article
Number of edits to the article
Number of unique editors
Number of edits made by registered users and by
anonymous IP addresses
Number of edits per editor
Percentage of edits by top 5% of the top contributors
to the article

Table 4: Edit-History Features of a Wikipedia Article

we followed the method of (Raghavan et al., 2010;
Harpalani et al., 2011), which uses the output of
the Stanford parser to train PCFG models for stylis-
tic analysis. We used the PCFG implementation of
Klein and Manning (2003) to learn a PCFG model
for each category.

4.4 Classification
The n-gram and PCFG language models were used
to create a set of additional document features. We
used the probability assigned by the language mod-
els to each sentence in a test document to calculate
document-wide statistics such as the mean, maxi-
mum, and minimum probability and standard devia-
tion in probabilities of the set of sentences in an arti-
cle. The language-modeling features used are shown
in Table 5.

Since we have a wide variety of features, we
experimented with various ensemble learning tech-
niques and found that LogitBoost performed best
empirically. We used the Weka implementation of

LogitBoost (Friedman et al., 2000) to train a classi-
fier using various combinations of features. We used
Decision Stumps as a base classifier and ran boost-
ing for 500 iterations.

5 Experimental Evaluation

5.1 Methodology
We used 10-fold cross-validation to test the perfor-
mance of our classifier using various combinations
of features. We ran the classifier on the portion
(30%) of the dataset not used for language model-
ing.6 We measured overall classification accuracy
as well as precision, recall, F-measure, and area un-
der the ROC curve for all experiments. We tested
performance in two settings (Anderka et al., 2012):

• Pessimistic Setting: The negative class consists
of articles from the Untagged set. Since some
of these could be manually undetected promo-
tional articles, the accuracy measured in this
setting is probably an under-estimate.

• Optimistic Setting: The negative class consists
of articles from the Featured/Good set. These
articles are at one end of the quality spectrum,
making it relatively easier to distinguish them
from promotional articles.

The true performance of the classifier is likely some-
where between that achieved in these two settings.

6We maintain an equal number of positive and negative test
cases in both the settings.

1853



Features Pessimistic Setting Optimistic SettingP R F1 AUC P R F1 AUC
Bag-of-words Baseline 0.823 0.820 0.821 0.893 0.931 0.931 0.931 0.979
PCFG 0.881 0.870 0.865 0.903 0.910 0.910 0.910 0.961
Character trigrams 0.889 0.887 0.888 0.952 0.858 0.843 0.841 0.877
Word trigrams 0.863 0.863 0.863 0.931 0.887 0.883 0.882 0.931
Character trigrams + Word trigrams 0.89 0.888 0.889 0.952 0.908 0.907 0.907 0.962
PCFG+Char. trigrams+Word trigrams 0.914 0.915 0.914 0.974 0.950 0.950 0.950 0.983
58 Content and Meta Features 0.866 0.867 0.867 0.938 0.986 0.986 0.986 0.996
All Features 0.940 0.940 0.940 0.986 0.989 0.989 0.989 0.997

Table 6: Performance (Precision(P), Recall(R), F1 score, AUC) of the classifier in the two settings

5.2 Results for Pessimistic Setting

From Table 6, we see that all features perform
better than the bag-of-words baseline. We also
see that character trigrams, one of the simplest
features, gives the best individual performance.
However, deeper syntactic features using PCFGs
also performs quite well. Combining all of the
language-modeling features (PCFG + character tri-
grams + Word trigrams) further improves perfor-
mance. Compared to the 58 content and meta fea-
tures utilized by Anderka et al., (2012) described
in Section 4.1, the PCFG and character trigram fea-
tures give much better performance, both individu-
ally and when combined. It is interesting to note
that adding Anderka et al.’s features to the language-
modeling ones gives a fairly small improvement in
performance. This validates our hypothesis that pro-
motional articles tend to have a distinct linguistic
style that is captured well using language models.

5.3 Results for Optimistic Setting

In the Optimistic Setting, as shown in Table 6,
the content and meta features give the best perfor-
mance, which improves only slightly when com-
bined with language-modeling features. The bag-of-
words baseline performs better than all the language
modeling features. This performance could be be-
cause there is a much clearer distinction between
promotional articles and featured/good articles that
can be captured by simple features alone. For exam-
ple, featured/good articles are generally longer than
usual Wikipedia articles and have more references.

5.4 Top Ranked Features and their
Performance

To analyze the performance of different features, we
determined the top ranked features using Informa-
tion Gain. In the Pessimistic Setting, the top six
features are all language-modeling features (charac-
ter trigram model feature works best), followed by
basic meta-features such as character count, word
count, category count and sentence count. The new
feature we introduced, “Overall Sentiment Score” is
the 18th most informative feature in the pessimistic
setting, indicating that the cumulative sentiment of a
bag of words is not as discriminative as we would in-
tuitively assume. Using the 10 top-ranked features,
we get an F1 of 0.93, which is only slightly worse
than that achieved using all features (F1 = 0.94).

In the Optimistic Setting, the top-ranked features
are the number of references and the number of
references per section. This is consistent with the
observation that featured/good articles have very
long and comprehensive lists of references, since
Wikipedia’s fundamental policy is to maintain ver-
ifiability by citing relevant sources. Features based
on the n-gram and PCFG models also appear in the
list of ten best features. Using only the top 10 fea-
tures, gives an F1 of 0.988, which is almost as good
as using all features (F1 = 0.989).

5.5 Optimistic and Pessimistic Settings

In the optimistic setting, there is a clear distinc-
tion between the positive (promotional) and negative
(featured/good) classes. But there are only subtle
differences between the positive and negative (un-
tagged articles) classes in the pessimistic setting.

1854



Best Features in Pessimistic Setting Best Features in Optimistic Setting
LM char trigram Number of References
LM word trigram Number of References per Section
PCFG min LM word trigram
PCFG max Number of Words
PCFG mean PCFG mean
PCFG std deviation Number of Sentences
Number of Characters LM char trigram
Number of Words Number of Words
Number of Categories Number of Characters
Number of Sentences Number of Backlinks

Table 7: Top 10 Features (listed in order) in both Settings ranked using Information Gain

These two classes are superficially similar, in terms
of length, reference count, section count etc. Stylo-
metric features based on the trained language mod-
els are successful at detecting the subtle linguistic
differences in the two types of articles. This is use-
ful because the pessimistic setting is closer to the
real-world setting of articles in Wikipedia.

5.6 Error Analysis
Since the pessimistic setting is close to the real set-
ting of Wikipedia articles, it is useful to do an error
analysis of the classifier’s performance in this set-
ting. There is an approximately equal proportion of
false positives and false negatives.

A significant number of false positives seem to
be cases of manually undetected promotional arti-
cles. This demonstrates the practical utility of our
classifier. But there are also many false positives
that seem to be truly unbiased. These articles ap-
pear to have been poorly written, without following
Wikipedia’s editing policies. Examples include use
of very long lists of nouns, use of ambiguous terms
like ”many believe” and excessive use of superla-
tives. Other common characteristics of most of the
false positives are presence of a considerable num-
ber of complex sentences with multiple subordinate
clauses. These stylistic cues seem to be misleading
the classifier.

A common thread underlying most of the false
negatives is the fact that they are written in a nar-
rative style or they have excessive details in terms of
the content. Examples include narrating a detailed
story of a fictional character in an unbiased manner
or writing a minutely detailed account of the history
of an organization. Another source of false negatives

comes from biographical Wikipedia pages which are
written in a resume style, listing all their qualifi-
cations and achievements. These cues could help
one manually detect that the article, though not pro-
motional in style, is probably written with the view
of promoting the entity. As possible future work,
we could incorporate features derived from language
models for narrative style trained using an appropri-
ate external corpus of narrative text. This might en-
able the classifier to detect some cases of unbiased
promotional articles.

6 Conclusion

Our experiments and analysis show that stylomet-
ric features based on n-gram language models and
deeper syntactic PCFG models work very well for
detecting promotional articles in Wikipedia. Af-
ter analyzing the errors that are made during clas-
sification, we realize that though promotional con-
tent is non-neutral in majority of the cases, there do
exist promotional articles that are neutral in style.
Adding additional features based on language mod-
els of narrative style could lead to a better model of
Wikipedia’s promotional content.

7 Acknowledgements

This research was supported in part by the DARPA
DEFT program under AFRL grant FA8750-13-2-
0026 and by MURI ARO grant W911NF-08-1-
0242. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions
or recommendations expressed in this material are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
view of DARPA, AFRL, ARO, or the US govern-
ment.

1855



References

Maik Anderka, Benno Stein, and Nedim Lipka. 2012.
Predicting quality flaws in user-generated content: the
case of Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 35th Inter-
national ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and de-
velopment in Information Retrieval, SIGIR ’12, pages
981–990, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Stefano Baccianella, Andrea Esuli, and Fabrizio Sebas-
tiani. 2010. Sentiwordnet 3.0: An enhanced lexical
resource for sentiment analysis and opinion mining.
In Proceedings of the 7th Conference on International
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’10), Val-
letta, Malta, May.

Joachim Diederich, Jörg Kindermann, Edda Leopold, and
Gerhard Paass. 2003. Authorship attribution with
support vector machines. Applied Intelligence, 19(1-
2):109–123.

Hugo J Escalante, Thamar Solorio, and M Montes-y
Gómez. 2011. Local histograms of character n-
grams for authorship attribution. In Proceedings of the
49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
volume 1, pages 288–298.

Rudolf Flesch. 1948. A new readability yardstick. The
Journal of Applied Psychology, 32(3):221.

Jerome Friedman, Trevor Hastie, and Robert Tibshirani.
2000. Additive logistic regression: a statistical view
of boosting (with discussion and a rejoinder by the au-
thors). The Annals of Statistics, 28(2):337–407.

Michael Gamon. 2004. Linguistic correlates of style:
Authorship classification with deep linguistic analy-
sis features. In Proceedings of the 20th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics, page 611.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Manoj Harpalani, Michael Hart, Sandesh Singh, Rob
Johnson, and Yejin Choi. 2011. Language of van-
dalism: Improving Wikipedia vandalism detection via
stylometric analysis. In Proceedings of the 49th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies: Short
Papers, volume 2, pages 83–88.

Daniel Hasan Dalip, Marcos André Gonçalves, Marco
Cristo, and Pável Calado. 2009. Automatic qual-
ity assessment of content created collaboratively by
web communities: a case study of Wikipedia. In Pro-
ceedings of the 9th ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference
on Digital libraries, JCDL ’09, pages 295–304, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

Michael Heilman, Kevyn Collins-Thompson, and Max-
ine Eskenazi. 2008. An analysis of statistical models
and features for reading difficulty prediction. In Pro-
ceedings of the Third Workshop on Innovative Use of

NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 71–
79. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Vlado Kešelj, Fuchun Peng, Nick Cercone, and Calvin
Thomas. 2003. N-gram-based author profiles for au-
thorship attribution. In Proceedings of the Conference
Pacific Association for Computational Linguistics, PA-
CLING, volume 3, pages 255–264.

Dan Klein and Christopher D Manning. 2003. Ac-
curate unlexicalized parsing. In Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics-Volume 1, pages 423–430. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Emily Pitler, Annie Louis, and Ani Nenkova. 2010.
Automatic evaluation of linguistic quality in multi-
document summarization. In Proceedings of the 48th
annual meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 544–554. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Sindhu Raghavan, Adriana Kovashka, and Raymond
Mooney. 2010. Authorship attribution using proba-
bilistic context-free grammars. In Proceedings of the
ACL 2010 Conference Short Papers, ACLShort ’10,
pages 38–42, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Congzhou He Ramyaa and Khaled Rasheed. 2004. Us-
ing machine learning techniques for stylometry. In
Proceedings of International Conference on Machine
Learning.

Paul Rayson, Andrew Wilson, and Geoffrey Leech.
2001. Grammatical word class variation within the
british national corpus sampler. Language and Com-
puters, 36(1):295–306.

Klaus Stein and Claudia Hess. 2007. Does it matter who
contributes: a study on featured articles in the German
Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth Confer-
ence on Hypertext and Hypermedia, pages 171–174.
ACM.

Kristina Toutanova and Christopher D Manning. 2000.
Enriching the knowledge sources used in a maximum
entropy part-of-speech tagger. In Proceedings of the
2000 Joint SIGDAT Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and Very Large Cor-
pora: held in conjunction with the 38th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics-
Volume 13, pages 63–70. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, Christopher D Manning,
and Yoram Singer. 2003. Feature-rich part-of-speech
tagging with a cyclic dependency network. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics on Human Language Technology-Volume 1,
pages 173–180. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

1856



William Yang Wang and Kathleen R. McKeown. 2010.
”Got you!”: Automatic vandalism detection in
Wikipedia with web-based shallow syntactic-semantic
modeling. In Proceedings of the 23rd International
Conference on Computational Linguistics, COLING
’10, pages 1146–1154, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Dennis M Wilkinson and Bernardo A Huberman. 2007.
Assessing the value of coooperation in Wikipedia.
arXiv preprint cs/0702140.

1857


