



















































Better Statistical Machine Translation through Linguistic Treatment of Phrasal Verbs


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 196–201,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Better Statistical Machine Translation through Linguistic Treatment of
Phrasal Verbs

Kostadin Cholakov and Valia Kordoni
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany

{kostadin.cholakov,kordonieva}@anglistik.hu-berlin.de

Abstract

This article describes a linguistically in-
formed method for integrating phrasal
verbs into statistical machine translation
(SMT) systems. In a case study involving
English to Bulgarian SMT, we show that
our method does not only improve trans-
lation quality but also outperforms simi-
lar methods previously applied to the same
task. We attribute this to the fact that, in
contrast to previous work on the subject,
we employ detailed linguistic information.
We found out that features which describe
phrasal verbs as idiomatic or composi-
tional contribute most to the better trans-
lation quality achieved by our method.

1 Introduction

Phrasal verbs are a type of multiword expressions
(MWEs) and as such, their meaning is not deriv-
able, or is only partially derivable, from the se-
mantics of their lexemes. This, together with the
high frequency of MWEs in every day communi-
cation (see Jackendoff (1997)), calls for a special
treatment of such expressions in natural language
processing (NLP) applications. Here, we con-
centrate on statistical machine translation (SMT)
where the word-to-word translation of MWEs of-
ten results in wrong translations (Piao et al., 2005).

Previous work has shown that the application
of dedicated methods to identify MWEs and then
integrate them in some way into the SMT pro-
cess often improves translation quality. Gener-
ally, automatically extracted lexicons of MWEs
are employed in the identification step. Further,
various integration strategies have been proposed.
The so called static strategy suggests training the
SMT system on corpora in which each MWE is
treated as a single unit, e.g. call off. This im-
proves SMT indirectly by improving the align-
ment between source and target sentences in the

training data. Various versions of this strategy are
applied in Lambert and Banchs (2005), Carpuat
and Diab (2010), and Simova and Kordoni (2013).
In all cases there is some improvement in transla-
tion quality, caused mainly by the better treatment
of separable PVs, such as in turn the light on.

Another strategy, which is referred to as dy-
namic, is to modify directly the SMT system. Ren
et al. (2009), for example, treat bilingual MWEs
pairs as parallel sentences which are then added
to training data and subsequently aligned with
GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003). Other approaches
perform feature mining and modify directly the
automatically extracted translation table. Ren et
al. (2009) and Simova and Kordoni (2013) employ
Moses1 to build and train phrase-based SMT sys-
tems and then, in addition to the standard phrasal
translational probabilities, they add a binary fea-
ture which indicates whether an MWE is present
in a given source phrase or not. Carpuat and
Diab (2010) employ the same approach but the
additional feature indicates the number of MWEs
in each phrase. All studies report improvements
over a baseline system with no MWE knowledge
but these improvements are comparable to those
achieved by static methods.

In this article, we further improve the dynamic
strategy by adding features which, unlike all previ-
ous work, also encode some of the linguistic prop-
erties of MWEs. Since it is their peculiar linguistic
nature that makes those expressions problematic
for SMT, it is our thesis that providing more lin-
guistic information to the translation process will
improve it. In particular, we concentrate on a spe-
cific type of MWEs, namely phrasal verbs (PVs).
We add 4 binary features to the translation table
which indicate not only the presence of a PV but
also its transitivity, separability, and idiomaticity.
We found that PVs are very suitable for this study
since we can easily extract the necessary informa-

1http://www.statmt.org/moses/

196



tion from various language resources.
To prove our claim, we perform a case study

with an English to Bulgarian SMT system. Bul-
garian lacks PVs in the same form they appear in
English. It is often the case that an English PV is
translated to a single Bulgarian verb. Such many-
to-one mappings cause the so called translation
asymmetries which make the translation of PVs
very problematic.

We perform automated and manual evaluations
with a number of feature combinations which
show that the addition of all 4 features proposed
above improves translation quality significantly.
Moreover, our method outperforms static and dy-
namic methods previously applied to the same test
data. A notable increase in performance is ob-
served for separable PVs where the verb and the
particle(s) were not adjacent in the input English
sentence as well as for idiomatic PVs. This clearly
demonstrates the importance of linguistic informa-
tion for the proper treatment of PVs in SMT.

We would like to point out that we view
the work presented here as a preliminary study
towards a more general linguistically informed
method for handling similar types of translation
asymmetries. The experiments with a single phe-
nomenon, namely PVs, serve as a case study the
purpose of which is to demonstrate the validity of
our approach and the crucial role of properly inte-
grated linguistic information into SMT. Our work,
however, can be immediately extended to other
phenomena, such as collocations and noun com-
pounds.

The remainder of the paper is organised as fol-
lows. Section 2 describes the asymmetries caused
by PVs in English to Bulgarian translation. Sec-
tion 3 provides details about the resources in-
volved in the experiments. Section 4 describes
our method and the experimental setup. Sec-
tion 5 presents the results and discusses the im-
provements in translation quality achieved by the
method. Sections 6 concludes the paper.

2 Translation Asymmetries

We will first illustrate the main issues which arise
when translating English PVs into Bulgarian. For
more convenience, the Bulgarian phrases are tran-
scribed with Latin letters.

An English PV is usually mapped to a single
Bulgarian verb:

(1) Toj
he

otmeni
cancelled

sreshtata.
meeting-the

‘He called off the meeting.’

In the example above the PV called off has to
be mapped to the single Bulgarian verb otmeni,
i.e. there is many-to-one mapping. Other cases
require a many-to-many type of mapping. One
such case is the mapping of an English PV to
a ‘da’-construction in Bulgarian. Such construc-
tions are very frequent in Bulgarian every day
communication since they denote complex verb
tenses, modal verb constructions, and subordinat-
ing conjunctions:

(2) Toj
he

trjabva
should

da skasa
break off

s
with

neja.
her

‘He should break off with her.’

Here, da skasa should be mapped to the PV break
off. Other such cases include Bulgarian reflexive
verb constructions.

Note that such many-to-many mappings in the
case of Bulgarian pose an additional challenge for
the SMT system because, for a good translation, it
needs to guess whether to add a ‘da’ particle or not
which further complicates the treatment of PVs.
Also, Bulgarian is a language with rich morphol-
ogy and often translations with very good seman-
tic quality lack the proper morphological inflec-
tion. This affects negatively both automated and
manual evaluation of translation quality.

3 Language Resources

We employ the data used in the studies reported in
Simova and Kordoni (2013). The authors experi-
mented with both static and dynamic methods for
handling PVs in an English to Bulgarian SMT sys-
tem. This allows us to compare the performance
of our linguistically informed approach to that of
methods which do not make use of the linguistic
properties of PVs.

The data for the experiments are derived from
the SeTimes news corpus2 which contains par-
allel news articles in English and 9 Balkan lan-
guages. The training data consist of approximately
151,000 sentences. Another 2,000 sentences are
used for the tuning. The test set consists of 800
sentences, 400 of which contain one or more in-

2http://www.setimes.com

197



stances of PVs. There are 138 unique PVs with a
total of 403 instances in the test data. Further, a
language model for the target language is created
based on a 50 million words subset of the Bul-
garian National Reference Corpus.3 All English
data are POS tagged and lemmatised using the
TreeTagger (Schmid, 1994). For Bulgarian, these
tasks were performed with the BTB-LPP tagger
(Savkov et al., 2011).

Simova and Kordoni (2013) create automati-
cally a lexicon containing English PVs. It is em-
ployed for the identification of such verbs in the
data used in the experiments. The lexicon is con-
structed from a number of resources: the En-
glish Phrasal Verbs section of Wiktionary,4 the
Phrasal Verb Demon dictionary,5 the CELEX Lex-
ical Database (Baayen et al., 1995), WordNet
(Fellbaum, 1998), the COMLEX Syntax dictio-
nary (Macleod et al., 1998), and the gold standard
data used for the experiments in McCarthy et al.
(2003) and Baldwin (2008). English PVs are iden-
tified in the data using the jMWE library (Kulkarni
and Finlayson, 2011) as well as a post-processing
module implemented in the form of a constrained
grammar (Karlsson et al., 1995) which filters out
spurious PV candidates. For the identification of
PVs, Simova and Kordoni (2013) report 91% pre-
cision (375 correct instances found) and a recall
score of 93% for the 800 test sentences.

The Moses toolkit is employed to build a fac-
tored phrase-based translation model which op-
erates on lemmas and POS tags. Given the rich
Bulgarian morphology, the use of lemma informa-
tion instead of surface word forms allows for a
better mapping between source and target transla-
tion equivalents. The parallel data are aligned with
GIZA++. Further, 2 5-gram language models are
built using the SRILM toolkit6 on the monolingual
Bulgarian data to model lemma and POS n-gram
information. Note that the Bulgarian POS tags are
quite complex, so they can account for a variety
of morphological phenomena. Automated trans-
lation is performed by mapping English lemmas
and POS tags to their Bulgarian equivalents and
then generating the proper Bulgarian word form
by using lemma and POS tag information.

3http://webclark.org/
4http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/

Category:English\_phrasal\_verbs
5http://www.phrasalverbdemon.com/
6http://www-speech.sri.com/projects/

srilm/

1 0

feature 1 PV present no PV
feature 2 transitive intransitive
feature 3 separable inseparable
feature 4 idiomatic (semi-)comp.

Table 1: Values for the 4 new features.

4 Addition of Linguistic Features

The resources from which the PV lexicon is con-
structed also contain various types of linguistic in-
formation. Wiktionary provides the most details
since the entries there contain information about
the valency of the verb (transitive vs intransitive)
and whether a particle can be separated from the
PV in particle verb constructions. Consider fell off
his bike and *fell his bike off vs turn the engine on
and turn on the engine.

Further, Wiktionary indicates whether a given
PV is compositional or idiomatic in nature. The
meaning of (semi-)compositional PVs can be (par-
tially) derived from the meaning of their lexemes,
e.g. carry in. The degree of compositionality af-
fects the productivity with which verbs and parti-
cles combine. Verbs with similar semantics often
combine with the same particle, e.g. bring/carry
in. This is not the case for fully idiomatic PVs, e.g.
get/*obtain over. Therefore, the notion of compo-
sitionality plays a very important role in the treat-
ment of PVs and MWEs in general. The dataset
described in McCarthy et al. (2003) also indicates
whether a PV is idiomatic or not.

We were able to acquire the PV lexicon and
we augmented it with the information obtained
from the various resources. Then, once the sys-
tem is trained, we add 4 binary features to each
entry in the automatically created translation table.
The values those features take are shown in Table
1. If a given property is not specified for some
PV in the lexicon, the value of the corresponding
feature is 0. Naturally, if no PV is identified in
a source phrase, the value of all 4 features is 0.
This is different from previous work where only
one feature is added, indicating the presence of a
PV. By adding those new features, we want to bias
the SMT system towards using phrases that do not
“split” PVs during decoding.

198



with PVs no PVs all
bleu nist bleu nist bleu nist

baseline 0.244 5.97 0.228 5.73 0.237 6.14
static 0.246 6.02 0.230 5.76 0.239 6.18
dynamic-1 0.250 5.92 0.226 5.54 0.244 6.02
dynamic-4 0.267 6.01 0.232 5.74 0.256 6.16

Table 2: Automatic evaluation of translation qual-
ity.

5 Results and Discussion

Automatic Evaluation. Table 2 presents the re-
sults from the automatic evaluation, in terms of
BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) and NIST (Dodding-
ton, 2002) scores, of 4 system setups. The base-
line has no MWE knowledge, while the static and
the dynamic-1 system setups are reproduced from
the experiments described in Simova and Kordoni
(2013). Dynamic-1 includes only a single binary
feature which indicates the presence of a PV while
our method, dynamic-4, includes the 4 features de-
scribed in Table 1.

Our method outperforms all other setups in
terms of BLEU score, thus proving our point that
adding features describing the linguistic properties
of PVs improves SMT even further. Also, the re-
sults for the 400 sentences without PVs show that
the 4 new features do not have a negative impact
for PV-free contexts.

In terms of NIST the static strategy consistently
performs best, followed closely by our method.
NIST is a measure which weights the translated
n-grams according to their informativeness. Due
to the nature of this measure, less frequent cor-
rectly translated n-grams are given more weight
in the evaluation process because NIST considers
them “more informative”. Such less frequent n-
grams, or in our case PVs, are likely to be cap-
tured better by the static setup. Therefore, this
setup achieves the highest NIST scores. This fact
also suggests that dynamic and static strategies in-
fluence the SMT process in different ways, with
our method tending to capture more frequent (and
thus less informative) n-grams. Interestingly, the
other dynamic method, dynamic-1, has the worst
performance of all setups in terms of NIST.

Manual evaluation. To get a better insight on
how the different setups deal with the translation
of PVs, we also performed a manual evaluation.
A native speaker of Bulgarian was asked to judge
the translations of PVs for the 375 test sentences in

good acceptable incorrect

baseline 0.21 0.41 0.38
static 0.25 0.5 0.25
dynamic-1 0.24 0.51 0.25
dynamic-4 0.3 0.5 0.2

Table 3: Manual evaluation of translation quality.

which such verbs were correctly identified during
the identification step. The human subject takes
into account the target PV and a limited context
around it and judges the translation as:

• good - correct translation of the PV, correct
verb inflection

• acceptable - correct translation of the PV but
wrong inflection, or wrongly built da- or re-
flexive construction

• incorrect - wrong translation which changes
the meaning of the sentence

Table 3 shows the results. Our method dynamic-
4 produces more good translations and less incor-
rect ones than all other setups. This illustrates fur-
ther the benefits of adding linguistic features to
the translation model. The results achieved by the
static approach are attributed to the better handling
of separable PVs in sentences where the particle
was not adjacent to the verb. The dynamic-1 ap-
proach and the baseline often interpret the particle
literally in such cases which leads to almost twice
the amount of wrong translations. Our method, on
the other hand, performs slightly lower than the
static approach in this respect but still much better
than the other 2 setups.

Compared to dynamic-1 and the baseline, the
static approach also handles better idiomatic PVs
but performs slightly worse for sentences with
compositional PVs. However, the addition of a
specific feature to encode idiomaticity in the trans-
lation model enables our method dynamic-4 to
achieve the best performance for idiomatic PVs
while still handling successfully many composi-
tional PVs. To summarise, the improved results
of our method in comparison to previous work are
attributed to the better handling of separable PVs
which occur in a split form and even more to the
improved ability to differentiate between compo-
sitional and idiomatic PVs.

Feature combinations. Our method performs
best when all 3 linguistic features described above

199



are taken into account by the SMT system. How-
ever, we also experimented with different combi-
nations of those features in order to get some in-
sight of the way each feature influences the trans-
lation quality. Adding only the feature denot-
ing verb transitiveness did not lead to any sig-
nificant improvement compared to the dynamic-
1 setup. Also, the combination which leaves out
this feature and uses the remaining ones ranks
second, achieving only a slightly worse perfor-
mance than dynamic-4, the setup in which all fea-
tures are employed. It seems that the transitive-
ness feature does not contribute much to the task
at hand. Adding only the feature denoting sepa-
rable vs inseparable PVs and adding only the one
denoting idiomaticity led to results slightly higher
than those of the dynamic-1 and static setups but
still, those results were significantly lower than the
ones presented in Tables 2 and 3.

6 Conclusion and Outlook

In this article, we showed that the addition of lin-
guistically informative features to a phrase-based
SMT model improves the translation quality of a
particular type of MWEs, namely phrasal verbs.
In a case study involving SMT from English to
Bulgarian, we showed that adding features which
encode not only the presence of a PV in a given
phrase but also its transitiveness, separability, and
idiomaticity led to better translation quality com-
pared to previous work which employs both static
and dynamic strategies.

In future research, we will extend our method
to other language pairs which exhibit the same
type of translation asymmetries when it comes to
PVs. Such language pairs include, among others,
English-Spanish and English-Portuguese.

Further, we will apply our linguistically in-
formed method to other phenomena which cause
similar issues for SMT. Immediate candidate phe-
nomena include other types of MWEs, colloca-
tions, and noun compounds. When it comes to
MWEs, we will pay special attention to the com-
positionality aspect since it seems to have con-
tributed most to the good performance achieve by
our method in the study presented here.

References

R H Baayen, R Piepenbrock, and L. Gulikers. 1995.
The CELEX lexical database (CD-ROM).

Timothy Baldwin. 2008. A resource for evaluating the
deep lexical acquisition of english verb-particle con-
structions. In Proceedings of the LREC 2008 Work-
shop: Towards a Shared Task for Multiword Expres-
sions, pages 1–2, Marakesh, Morocco.

Marine Carpuat and Mona Diab. 2010. Task-based
evaluation of multiword expressions: a pilot study
in statistical machine translation. In Human Lan-
guage Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics., HLT ’10., pages
242–245, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

George Doddington. 2002. Automatic evaluation
of machine translation quality using n-gram co-
occurrence statistics. In Proceedings of the second
international conference on Human Language Tech-
nology Research, pages 138–145, San Francisco,
CA, USA.

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An electronic
lexical database. The MIT press.

Ray Jackendoff. 1997. The Architecture of the Lan-
guage Faculty. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Fred Karlsson, Atro Voutilainen, Juha Heikkila, and
Arto Anttila. 1995. Constraint grammar: A
language-independent system for parsing unre-
stricted text. Natural Language Processing, 4.

Nidhi Kulkarni and Mark Alan Finlayson. 2011.
JMWE – a Java toolkit for detecting multiword ex-
pressions. In Proceedings of the 2011 Workshop on
Multiword Expressions, pages 122–124.

Patrik Lambert and Rafael Banchs. 2005. Data in-
ferred multi-word expressions for statistical machine
translation. In Proceedings of the X Machine Trans-
lation Summit, pages 396–403.

Catherine Macleod, Adam Meyers, and Ralph Grish-
man, 1998. COMLEX Syntax Reference Manual.
New York University.

Diana McCarthy, B Keller, and John Carroll. 2003.
Detecting a continuum of compositionality in
phrasal verbs. In Proceedings of the ACL 2003
Workshop on Multiword Expressions: analysis, ac-
quisition and treatment, Sapporo, Japan.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A sys-
tematic comparison of various statistical alignment
models. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: A method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings
of the 40th Annual Meeting on Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 311–318, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA.

200



Scott Songlin Piao, Paul Rayson, and and
Tony McEnery Dawn Archer. 2005. Com-
paring and combining a semantic tagger and a
statistical tool for MWE extraction. Comuter
Speech and Language, 19(4):378–397.

Zhixiang Ren, Yajuan Lu, Jie Cao, Qun Liu, and
Yun Huang. 2009. Improving statistical machine
translation using domain bilingual multiword ex-
pressions. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on
Multiword Expressions: Identification, Interpreta-
tion, Disambiguation and Applications, pages 47–
54, Singapore.

Aleksandar Savkov, Laska Laskova, Petya Osenova,
Kiril Simov, and Stanislava Kancheva. 2011. A
web-based morphological tagger for Bulgarian. In
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference
on Natural Language Processing, Multilinguality,
pages 126–137, Bratislava, Slovakia.

Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech
tagging using decision trees. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on New Methods in Lan-
guage Processing, Manchester, UK.

Iliana Simova and Valia Kordoni. 2013. Improv-
ing English-Bulgarian statistical machine translation
by phrasal verb treatment. In Proceedings of MT
Summit XIV Workshop on Multi-word Units in Ma-
chine Translation and Translation Technology, Nice,
France.

201


