



















































A Model of Individual Differences in Gaze Control During Reading


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1810–1815,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Model of Individual Differences in Gaze Control During Reading

Niels Landwehr1 and Sebastian Arzt1 and Tobias Scheffer1 and Reinhold Kliegl2
1 Department of Computer Science, Universität Potsdam

August-Bebel-Straße 89, 14482 Potsdam, Germany
{landwehr, sarzt, scheffer}@cs.uni-potsdam.de

2 Department of Psychology, Universität Potsdam
Karl-Liebknecht-Straße 24/25, 14476 Potsdam OT/Golm

kliegl@uni-potsdam.de

Abstract
We develop a statistical model of saccadic
eye movements during reading of isolated
sentences. The model is focused on rep-
resenting individual differences between
readers and supports the inference of the
most likely reader for a novel set of eye
movement patterns. We empirically study
the model for biometric reader identifica-
tion using eye-tracking data collected from
20 individuals and observe that the model
distinguishes between 20 readers with an
accuracy of up to 98%.

1 Introduction

During skilled reading, the eyes of a reader do
not move smoothly over a text. Instead, read-
ing proceeds by alternating between brief fixations
on individual words and short ballistic movements
called saccades that move the point of fixation to a
new location. Evidence in psychological research
indicates that patterns of fixations and saccades are
driven partly by low-level visual cues (e.g., word
length), and partly by linguistic and cognitive pro-
cessing of the text (Kliegl et al., 2006; Rayner,
1998).

Eye-movement patterns are frequently studied
in cognitive psychology as they provide a rich
and detailed record of the visual, oculomotor, and
linguistic processes involved in reading. Com-
putational models of eye-movement control de-
veloped in psychology, such as SWIFT (Engbert
et al., 2005; Schad and Engbert, 2012) or E-Z
Reader (Reichle et al., 1998; Reichle et al., 2012),
simulate the generation of eye movements based
on physiological and psychological constraints re-
lated to attention, visual perception, and the ocu-
lomotor system. Recently, the problem of mod-
eling eye movements has also been approached

from a machine-learning perspective. Matties and
Søgaard (2013) and Hara et al. (2012) study con-
ditional random field models to predict which
words in a text are fixated by a reader. Nilsson
and Nivre (2009) use a transition-based log-linear
model to predict a sequence of fixations for a text.

A central observation made by these studies, as
well as by earlier psychological work (Erdmann
and Dodge, 1898; Huey, 1908), is that eye move-
ment patterns vary significantly between individ-
uals. As one example of the strength of indi-
vidual differences in reading eye movements, we
cite Dixon (1951) who compared the reading pro-
cesses of university professors and graduate stu-
dents of physics, education, and history on read-
ing material in their own and the two other fields.
He did not find strong effects of his experimen-
tal variables (i.e., field of research, expertise in re-
search) but “if there is one thing that this study
has shown, it is that individual differences in read-
ing skill existed among the subjects of all depart-
ments. Fast and slow readers were found in every
department, and the overlapping of distributions
from passage to passage was enormous” (p. 173).
Even though it is possible to predict across a large
base of readers with some accuracy whether spe-
cific words will be fixated (Matties and Søgaard,
2013), a strong variation between readers in at-
tributes such as the fraction of skipped words and
total number of saccades has been observed (Hara
et al., 2012).

Some recent work has studied eye movement
patterns as a biometric feature. Most studies are
based on an artificial visual stimulus, such as a
moving (Kasprowski and Ober, 2004; Komogort-
sev et al., 2010; Rigas et al., 2012b; Zhang and
Juhola, 2012) or fixed (Bednarik et al., 2005) dot
on a computer screen, or a specific image stimu-
lus (Rigas et al., 2012a). In the most common use

1810



case of biometric user identification, a decision on
whether access should be granted has to be made
after performing some test that requires the user’s
attention and therefore cannot take a long time. By
contrast, our work is motivated by a less intrusive
scenario in which the user is monitored continu-
ously during access to, for instance, a device or
document. When the accumulated evidence sup-
ports the conclusion that the user is not authorized,
access can be terminated or additional credentials
requested. In this use case, identification has to
be based on saccadic eye movements that occur
while a user is reading an arbitrary text—as op-
posed to movements that occur in response to a
fixed, controlled visual stimulus. Holland and Ko-
mogortsev (2012) study reader recognition based
on a set of aggregate features derived from eye
movements, irrespective of the text being read;
their work will serve as reference in our empiri-
cal study.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 de-
tails the problem setting. Section 3 introduces the
statistical model and discusses parameter estima-
tion and inference. Section 5 presents empirical
results, Section 6 concludes.

2 Problem Setting and Notation

Let R denote a set of readers, and
X = {X1, ...,Xn} a set of texts. Each r ∈ R
generates a set of eye movement patterns
S(r) = {S(r)1 , . . . ,S(r)n } on the set of texts X , by

S(r)i ∼ p(S|Xi, r)

where p(S|X, r) is a reader-specific distribution
over eye movement patterns given a text X. A pat-
tern is a sequence S = ((s1, d1), . . . , (sT , dT )) of
fixations, consisting of a fixation position st (posi-
tion in text that was fixated) and duration dt ∈ R
(length of fixation in milliseconds). In our experi-
ments, individual sentences are presented in a sin-
gle line on a screen, thus we only model a hori-
zontal gaze position st ∈ R.

At test time, we observe novel eye move-
ment patterns S̄ = {S̄1, . . . , S̄m} on a novel set
of texts X̄ = {X̄1, ..., X̄m} generated by an un-
known reader r ∈ R. The goal is to infer

r∗ = arg max
r∈R

p(r|S̄, X̄ ). (1)

−20 −10 0 10 20
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

Amplitude

D
en

si
ty

Refixation

 

 

Empirical Distribution
Gamma Fit

−20 −10 0 10 20
0

0.1

0.2

Amplitude

D
en

si
ty

Next Word Move

 

 

Empirical Distribution
Gamma Fit

−20 −10 0 10 20
0

0.05

0.1

0.15

Amplitude

D
en

si
ty

Forward Skip

 

 

Empirical Distribution
Gamma Fit

−20 −10 0 10 20
0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

Amplitude

D
en

si
ty

Regression

 

 

Empirical Distribution
Gamma Fit

Figure 1: Empirical distributions over amplitudes
and Gamma fits for different saccade types.

3 Statistical Model of Eye Movements

We solve Problem 1 by estimating reader-specific
models p(S|X; θr) for r ∈ R, and solving for

p(r|S̄, X̄ ; Θ) ∝
(

m∏
i=1

p(S̄i|X̄i; θr)
)
p(r) (2)

where all θr are aggregated into a global model Θ.
Assuming a uniform prior p(r) over readers, this
reduces to predicting the reader r that maximizes
the likelihood p(S̄|X̄ ; θr) =

∏m
i=1 p(S̄i|X̄i; θr).

We formulate a model p(S|X; θ) of a sequence
S of fixations given a text X. The model defines
a dynamic probabilistic process that successively
generates the fixation positions st and durations dt
in S, reflecting how a reader generates a sequence
of saccades in response to a text stimulus X. The
joint distribution over all fixation positions and du-
rations is assumed to factorize as

p(s1, . . . , sT , d1, . . . , dT |X; θ)

= p(s1, d1|X; θ)
T−1∏
t=1

p(st+1, dt+1|st,X; θ).

The conditional p(st+1, dt+1|st,X; θ) models the
generation of the next fixation position and du-
ration given the current fixation position st. In
the psychological literature, four different sac-
cadic types are distinguished: a reader can refix-
ate the current word (refixation), fixate the next
word in the text (next word movement), move the

1811



fixation to a word after the next word (forward
skip), or regress to fixate a word occurring ear-
lier than the currently fixated word in the text (re-
gression) (Heister et al., 2012). We observe em-
pirically, that modeling the amplitude as a mixture
of four Gamma distributions matches the empiri-
cal distribution of amplitudes in our data well—
see Figure 1. Modeling the amplitudes as a sin-
gle distribution, instead of a mixture of four dis-
tributions, results in a substantially lower out-
of-sampling likelihood of the model. Therefore,
at each time t, the model first draws a saccadic
type ut+1 ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4} from a multinomial dis-
tribution and then generates a saccade amplitude
at+1 and fixation duration dt+1 from type-specific
Gamma distributions. Formally, the generative
process is given by

ut+1 ∼ p(u|π) = Mult(u|π) (3)
at+1 ∼ p(a|ut+1, st,X; η) (4)
dt+1 ∼ p(d|ut+1; λ). (5)

Afterwards the model updates the fixation position
according to st+1 = st + at+1. The joint param-
eter vector θ concatenates parameters of the indi-
vidual distributions in Equations 3 to 5. Figure 2
shows a slice in the dynamical model.

Given the current fixation position st, the text
X, and the chosen saccadic type ut+1, the am-
plitude is constrained to fall within a specific
interval—for instance, within the characters of the
currently fixated word for refixations. Therefore,
we model the distribution over the saccade ampli-
tude given the saccadic type (Equation 4) as trun-
cated Gamma distributions, given by1

G(x|[l, r];α, β) =
{ G(x|α,β)∫ r

l G(x̄|α,β)dx̄
if x ∈ [l, r]

0 otherwise

where G(x|α, β) = 1
βαΓ(α)

xα−1e
−x
β

is the Gamma distribution with shape parameter
α and scale parameter β, and Γ is the Gamma
function. For x ∼ G(x|α, β) it holds that
G(x|[l, r];α, β) is the conditional distribution of
x given that x ∈ [l, r]. The distribution over a sac-

1The definition is straightforwardly generalized to open
truncation intervals.

tu 1tu 

ta 1ta td 1td 

t 1t 

X

ts 1ts 

Figure 2: Graphical model notation of a slice in
the dynamic model. Parameters are omitted to
avoid notational clutter.

cade amplitude given the saccade type is given by

p(a|ut+1 = 1, st,X; η) ={
µG(a|[0, r];α1, β1) if a > 0
(1− µ)G(−a|[0, l]; ᾱ1, β̄1) otherwise

(6)

where the parameter µ reflects the probability for
a forward saccade within a refixation, and

p(a|ut+1 = 2, st,X; η) = G(a|[l+, r+];α2, β2)
p(a|ut+1 = 3, st,X; η) = G(a|(r+,∞);α3, β3)
p(a|ut+1 = 4, st,X; η) = G(−a|(−l,∞);α4, β4).

(7)

Here, the truncation intervals reflect the con-
straints on the amplitude at+1 given ut+1, st and
X. Let wl (wr) denote the position of the left-
most (right-most) character of the currently fix-
ated word, and let w+l , w

+
r denote these positions

for the word following the currently fixated word.
Then l = wl − st, r = wr − st, l+ = w+l − st,
and r+ = w+r − st. The parameter vector η
contains the parameters µ, ᾱ1, β̄1 and αi, βi for
i ∈ {2, 3, 4}.

The distribution over fixation durations given
saccade type is modeled by a Gamma distribution

p(d|ut+1; λ) = G(d|γut+1 , δut+1)
with type-specific parameters γu, δu for
u ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4} that are concatenated into a
parameter vector λ.

It remains to specify the distribution over initial
fixation positions and durations p(s1, d1|X; θ),
which is given by additional Gamma distributions

s1 ∼ G(d|α0, β0) d1 ∼ G(d|γ0, δ0)

1812



0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

number of training sentences n

id
en

tif
ic

at
io

n 
ac

cu
ra

cy

Accuracy Over Training Sentences n (m=72)

 

 

full model
saccade type + amplitude
saccade type only
Holland & K. (weighted)
Holland & K. (unweighted)
random guessing

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

number of test sentences m

id
en

tif
ic

at
io

n 
ac

cu
ra

cy

Accuracy Over Test Sentences m (n=72)

 

 

full model
saccade type + amplitude
saccade type only
Holland & K. (weighted)
Holland & K. (unweighted)
random guessing

Figure 3: Reader identification accuracy as a function of the number of training sentences (left) and test
sentences (right) read for different model variants. Error bars indicate the standard error.

where the parameters α0, β0, γ0, δ0 are aggregated
into the joint parameter vector θ.

4 Parameter Estimation and Inference

Given a set S(r) of eye movement observations for
reader r ∈ R on texts X , the MAP estimate of the
parameters is

θr = arg max
θ

p(θ|S(r),X )

= arg max
θ

(
n∏
i=1

p(S(r)i |Xi; θ)
)
p(θ). (8)

A Dirichlet distribution (add-one smoothing) is a
natural, conjugate prior for the multinomial distri-
bution; we use uninformative priors for all other
distributions. The structure of the model implies
that the posterior can be maximized by fitting the
parameters π to the observed saccadic types un-
der the Dirichlet prior, and independently fitting
the distributions p(at|ut,X, st; η) and p(dt|ut; λ)
by maximum likelihood to the saccade amplitudes
and durations observed for each saccade type.
The resulting maximum likelihood problems are
slightly non-standard in that we have to fit Gamma
distributions that are truncated differently for each
data point, depending on the textual content at
the position where the saccade occurs (see Equa-
tions 6 and 7). We solve the resulting optimization
problems using a Quasi-Newton method. To avoid
overfitting, we use a backoff-smoothing technique
for p(at|ut,X, st; η) and p(dt|ut; λ): we replace
reader-specific parameter estimates by estimates
obtained from the corresponding data of all read-
ers if the number of data points from which the dis-
tributions are estimated falls below a cutoff value.

The cutoff value is tuned by cross-validation on
the training data.

At test time, we have to infer likelihoods
p(Si|X; θr) (Equation 2). This is done by evalu-
ating the multinomial and (truncated) Gamma dis-
tributions in the model for the corresponding ob-
servations and model parameters.

5 Empirical Study

We empirically study the proposed model and sev-
eral baselines using eye-movement records of 20
individuals (Heister et al., 2012). For each indi-
vidual, eye movements are recorded while read-
ing each of the 144 sentences in the Potsdam Sen-
tence Corpus (Kliegl et al., 2006). The data set
contains fixation positions and durations that have
been obtained from raw eye movement data by
appropriate preprocessing. Eye movements were
recorded with an EyeLink II system with a 500-
Hz sampling rate (SR Research, Osgoode, On-
tario, Canada). All recordings and calibration
were binocular. We randomly sample disjoint
sets of n training sentences and m test sentences
from the set of 144 sentences. Models are esti-
mated on the eye movement records of individu-
als on the training sentences (Equation 8). The
eye-movement records of one individual on all test
sentences constitute a test example; the model in-
fers the most likely individual to have generated
these test observations (Equation 2). Identifica-
tion accuracy is the fraction of times an individ-
ual is correctly inferred; random guessing yields
an accuracy of 0.05. Results are averaged over 20
training and test sets.

We study the model introduced in Section 3

1813



tr
ai

ni
ng

 s
en

te
nc

es
 n

test sentences m

Accuracy Over Training and Test Sentences

 

 

0 20 40 60

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

accuracy

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

0 5 10 15 20
0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

number of individuals

id
en

tif
ic

at
io

n 
ac

cu
ra

cy

Accuracy Over Number of Individuals

 

 

full model
saccade type + amplitude
saccade type only
Holland & K. (weighted)
Holland & K. (unweighted)

Figure 4: Identification accuracy as a function of the number of training and test sentences read for
full model (left). Identification accuracy as a function of the number of individuals that have to be
distinguished for different model variants (right). Error bars indicate the standard error.

(full model), a model variant in which the variable
dt+1 and corresponding distribution is removed
(saccade type + amplitude), and a simple model
that only fits a multinomial distribution to saccade
types (saccade type only). Additionally, we com-
pare against the feature-based reader identification
approach by Holland & Komogortsev (2012). Six
of the 14 features used by Holland & Komogort-
sev depend on saccade velocities and vertical fix-
ation positions. As this information was not avail-
able in the preprocessed data set that we used, we
implemented the remaining features. There is ex-
tensive empirical evidence that saccade velocity
scales with saccade amplitude. Specifically, the
relationship between logarithmic peak saccade ve-
locity and logarithmic saccade amplitude is lin-
ear over a wide range of amplitudes and veloci-
ties; this is known as the main sequence relation-
ship (Bahill et al., 1975). Therefore, we do not ex-
pect that adding saccade velocities would dramat-
ically affect performance of this baseline. Holland
& Komogortsev employ a weighted combination
of features; we report results for the method with
and without feature weighting.

Figure 3 shows identification accuracy as a
function of the number n of training sentences
used to estimate model parameters (left) and as
a function of the number m of test sentences on
which inference of the most likely reader is based
(right, cf. Equation 2). The full model achieves
up to 98.25% accuracy, significantly outperform-
ing the Holland & Komogortsev (2012) baseline
(91.25%, without feature weighting) and simpler
model variants. All methods perform much better

than random guessing. Figure 4 (left) shows iden-
tification accuracy as a function of both training
size n and test size m for the full model.

We finally study how identification accuracy
changes with the number of individuals that have
to be distinguished. To this end, we perform the
same study as above, but with randomly sampled
subsets of the overall set of 20 individuals. In these
experiments, we average over 50 random train-test
splits. Figure 4 (right) shows identification ac-
curacy as a function of the number of individu-
als. We observe that identification accuracy drops
with the number of individuals for all methods;
our model consistently outperforms the baselines.

6 Conclusions

We have developed a model of individual differ-
ences in eye movements during reading, and stud-
ied its application in a biometric task. At test time,
individuals are identified based on eye movements
on novel text. Our approach thus provides poten-
tially unobtrusive biometric identification without
requiring users to react to a specific stimulus. Em-
pirical results show clear advantages over an exist-
ing approach for reader identification.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Christoph Sawade for in-
sightful discussions and help with the eye move-
ment data. We gratefully acknowledge support
from the German Research Foundation (DFG),
grant LA 3270/1-1.

1814



References
A. Terry Bahill, Michael R. Clark, and Lawrence Stark.

1975. The main sequence: a tool for studying hu-
man eye movements. Mathematical Biosciences,
24:191–204.

Roman Bednarik, Tomi Kinnunen, Andrei Mihaila, and
Pasi Fränti. 2005. Eye-movements as a biometric.
In Proceedings of the 14th Scandinavian Conference
on Image Analysis.

W. Robert Dixon. 1951. Studies in the psychology of
reading. In W. S. Morse, P. A. Ballantine, and W. R.
Dixon, editors, Univ. of Michigan Monographs in
Education No. 4. Univ. of Michigan Press.

Ralf Engbert, Antje Nuthmann, Eike M. Richter, and
Reinhold Kliegl. 2005. SWIFT: A dynamical
model of saccade generation during reading. Psy-
chological Review, 112(4):777–813.

Bruno Erdmann and Raymond Dodge. 1898. Psy-
chologische Untersuchungen über das Lesen. Halle:
Max Niemeyer.

Tadayoshi Hara, Daichi Mochihashi, Yoshino Kano,
and Akiko Aizawa. 2012. Predicting word fixations
in text with a CRF model for capturing general read-
ing strategies among readers. In Proceedings of the
First Workshop on Eye-Tracking and Natural Lan-
guage Processing.

Julian Heister, Kay-Michael Würzner, and Reinhold
Kliegl. 2012. Analysing large datasets of eye move-
ments during reading. In James S. Adelman, editor,
Visual word recognition. Vol. 2: Meaning and con-
text, individuals and development, pages 102–130.

Corey Holland and Oleg V. Komogortsev. 2012. Bio-
metric identification via eye movement scanpaths in
reading. In Proceedings of the 2011 International
Joint Conference on Biometrics.

Edmund B. Huey. 1908. The psychology and peda-
gogy of reading. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Pawel Kasprowski and Jozef Ober. 2004. Eye move-
ments in biometrics. In Proceedings of the 2004 In-
ternational Biometric Authentication Workshop.

Reinhold Kliegl, Antje Nuthmann, and Ralf Engbert.
2006. Tracking the mind during reading: The in-
fluence of past, present, and future words on fix-
ation durations. Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy: General, 135(1):12–35.

Oleg V. Komogortsev, Sampath Jayarathna, Cecilia R.
Aragon, and Mechehoul Mahmoud. 2010. Biomet-
ric identification via an oculomotor plant mathemat-
ical model. In Proceedings of the 2010 Symposium
on Eye-Tracking Research & Applications.

Franz Matties and Anders Søgaard. 2013. With blink-
ers on: robust prediction of eye movements across
readers. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on
Empirical Natural Language Processing.

Mattias Nilsson and Joakim Nivre. 2009. Learning
where to look: Modeling eye movements in reading.
In Proceedings of the 13th Conference on Computa-
tional Natural Language Learning.

Keith Rayner. 1998. Eye movements in reading and
information processing: 20 years of research. Psy-
chological Bulletin, 124(3):372–422.

Erik D. Reichle, Tessa Warren, and Kerry McConnell.
2012. Using e-z reader to model the effects of
higher-level language processing on eye movements
during reading. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
16(1):1–21.

Ioannis Rigas, George Economou, and Spiros Fotopou-
los. 2012a. Biometric identification based on
the eye movements and graph matching techniques.
Pattern Recognition Letters, 33(6).

Ioannis Rigas, George Economou, and Spiros Fotopou-
los. 2012b. Human eye movements as a trait for bio-
metrical identification. In Proceedings of the IEEE
5th International Conference on Biometrics: The-
ory, Applications and Systems.

Daniel Schad and Ralf Engbert. 2012. The zoom lens
of attention: Simulating shuffled versus normal text
reading using the swift model. Visual Cognition,
20(4-5):391–421.

Youming Zhang and Martti Juhola. 2012. On biomet-
ric verification of a user by means of eye movement
data mining. In Proceedings of the 2nd Interna-
tional Conference on Advances in Information Min-
ing and Management.

1815


