



















































Keystroke Patterns as Prosody in Digital Writings: A Case Study with Deceptive Reviews and Essays


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1469–1473,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Keystroke Patterns as Prosody in Digital Writings:
A Case Study with Deceptive Reviews and Essays

Ritwik Banerjee Song Feng Jun S. Kang
Computer Science

Stony Brook University
{rbanerjee, songfeng, junkang}

@cs.stonybrook.edu

Yejin Choi
Computer Science & Engineering

University of Washington
yejin@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we explore the use of keyboard
strokes as a means to access the real-time writ-
ing process of online authors, analogously to
prosody in speech analysis, in the context of
deception detection. We show that differences
in keystroke patterns like editing maneuvers
and duration of pauses can help distinguish be-
tween truthful and deceptive writing. Empiri-
cal results show that incorporating keystroke-
based features lead to improved performance
in deception detection in two different do-
mains: online reviews and essays.

1 Introduction
Due to the practical importance of detecting deceit, in-
terest in it is ancient, appearing in papyrus dated back
to 900 B.C. (Trovillo, 1939). In more recent years, sev-
eral studies have shown that the deceiver often exhibits
behavior that belies the content of communication, thus
providing cues of deception to an observer. These in-
clude linguistic (e.g., Newman et al. (2003), Hancock
et al. (2004)) as well as paralinguistic (e.g., Ekman et
al. (1991), DePaulo et al. (2003)) cues. Recognizing
deception, however, remains a hard task for humans,
who perform only marginally better than chance (Bond
and DePaulo, 2006; Ott et al., 2011).

Recent studies suggest that computers can be sur-
prisingly effective in this task, albeit in limited domains
such as product reviews. Prior research has employed
lexico-syntactic patterns (Ott et al., 2011; Feng et al.,
2012) as well as online user behavior (Fei et al., 2013;
Mukherjee et al., 2013). In this paper, we study the
effect of keystroke patterns for deception detection in
digital communications, which might be helpful in un-
derstanding the psychology of deception and help to-
ward trustful online communities. This allows us to in-
vestigate differences in the writing and revisional pro-
cesses of truthful and fake writers. Our work thus
shares intuition with HCI research linking keystroke
analysis to cognitive processes (Vizer et al., 2009; Epp
et al., 2011) and psychology research connecting cog-
nitive differences to deception (Ekman, 2003; Vrij et
al., 2006).

Recent research has shown that lying generally im-
poses a cognitive burden (e.g., McCornack (1997), Vrij

et al. (2006)) which increases in real-time scenar-
ios (Ekman, 2003). Cognitive burden has been known
to produce differences in keytroke features (Vizer et
al., 2009; Epp et al., 2011). Previous research has not,
however, directly investigated any quantitative connec-
tion between keystroke patterns and deceptive writing.

In this paper, we posit that cognitive burdens in
deception may lead to measurable characteristics in
keystroke patterns. Our contributions are as follows:
(1) introducing keystroke logs as an extended linguis-
tic signal capturing the real-time writing process (anal-
ogous to prosody in speech analysis) by measuring the
writing rate, pauses and revision rate. (2) showing
their empirical value in deception detection, (3) provid-
ing novel domain-specific insights into deceptive writ-
ing, and (4) releasing a new corpus of deception writ-
ings in new domains.1

2 Related Work
Prior research has focused mainly on using keystroke
traits as a behvioral biometric. Forsen et al. (1977)
first demonstrated that users can be distinguished by the
way they type their names. Subsequent work showed
that typing patterns are unique to individuals (Leggett
and Williams, 1988), and can be used for authentica-
tion (Cho et al., 2000; Bergadano et al., 2002) and in-
trusion detection (Killourhy and Maxion, 2009).

Keystroke pauses have been linked to linguistic pat-
terns in discourse (e.g. Matsuhashi (1981), van Hell et
al. (2008)) and regarded as indications of cognitive bur-
den (e.g., Johansson (2009), Zulkifli (2013)). In this pa-
per, we present the first empirical study that quantita-
tively measures the deception cues in real-time writing
process as manifested in keystroke logs.

3 Data Collection
As discussed by Gokhman et al. (2012), the crowd-
sourcing approach to soliciting deceptive content sim-
ulates the real world of online deceptive content cre-
ators. We collected the data via Amazon Mechanical
Turk.2 Turkers were led to a separate website where
keylogging was enabled, and asked to write truthful
and deceptive texts (≥ 100 words) on one of three top-

1Available at http://www3.cs.stonybrook.
edu/˜junkang/keystroke/

2https://www.mturk.com/mturk

1469



ArrowKey Del MouseUp

0

5

10

G
ayM

arriage

G
unC

ontrol

R
estaurant

G
ayM

arriage

G
unC

ontrol

R
estaurant

G
ayM

arriage

G
unC

ontrol

R
estaurant

F
re

qu
en

cy
 o

f e
di

tin
g 

ke
ys

tr
ok

es
Deceptive Truthful

Figure 1: Number of keystrokes corresponding to the three
types of edit patterns (E3): (a) use of arrow keys, (b) deletion
(Delete and Backspace) and (c) text selection with mouse.

ics: restaurant review, gay marriage and gun control.
Each Turker was required to agree to their typing be-
ing logged. Since copy/paste operations defeat our pur-
pose of studying keystrokes in the typing process, they
were disabled. This restriction also acts as a hindrance
to plagiarism. All texts were reviewed manually, and
those not meeting the requirements (due to the being
too short, plagiarized content, etc.) were disregarded.
Writing task design: The task was designed such
that each Turker wrote a pair of texts, one truthful and
one deceptive, on the same topic. For restaurant re-
views, they were asked to write a truthful review of
a restaurant they liked, and a deceptive review of a
restaurant they have never been to or did not like. For
the other two topics – ‘gun control’ and ‘gay marriage’
– we asked their opinion: support, neutral, or against.
Then, they were asked to write a truthful and a decep-
tive essay articulating, respectively, their actual opin-
ion and its opposite.3 The tasks further were divided
into two ‘flows’: writing the truthful text before the de-
ceptive one, and vice versa. Each Turker was assigned
only one flow, and was not allowed to participate in the
other. After completing this, each Turker was asked to
copy their own typing, i.e., re-type the two texts.

Finally, in order to get an idea of the cognitive bur-
den associated with truthful and deceptive writing, we
asked the Turkers which task was easier for them. Of
the 196 participants, 152 answered “truthful”, 40 an-
swered “deceptive” and only 4 opted for “not sure”.
What are logged: We deployed a keylogger to cap-
ture the mouse and keyboard events in the “text area”.
The events KeyUp, KeyDown and MouseUp, along with
the keycode and timestamp were logged.4 For the three
topics restaurant review, gay marriage and gun control
we obtained 1000, 800 and 800 texts, respectively.

In the remainder of this paper, kdn and kup denote
the KeyDown and KeyUp events for a key k. For any

3To prevent a change in opinion depending on task avail-
ability, Turkers were redirected to other tasks if their opinion
was neutral, or if we had enough essays of their opinion.

4Printable (e.g., alphanumeric characters) as well as non-
printable keystrokes like (e.g., ‘Backspace’), are logged.

Document Sentence Word Key Press

1.5

2.0

2.5

1.5

2.0

2.5

F
irst−

only
F

irst+
S

econd

G
ayM

arriage

G
unC

ontrol

R
estaurant

G
ayM

arriage

G
unC

ontrol

R
estaurant

G
ayM

arriage

G
unC

ontrol

R
estaurant

G
ayM

arriage

G
unC

ontrol

R
estaurant

T
im

e 
ta

ke
n 

(r
el

. t
o 

co
py

 ta
sk

)

Deceptive Truthful

Figure 2: Average normalized timespan δ̂(e) for documents,
sentences, words and key presses. The top row considers only
the first text, while the bottom row considers both flows.

event e, its timespan, i.e., the time interval between the
beginning and end of e, is denoted by δ(e).

4 Feature Design
Keystroke logging enables the study of two types of in-
formation that go beyond conventional linguistic anal-
ysis. First, it captures editing processes (e.g., deletions,
insertions made by changing cursor position, etc.).
Second, it reveals the temporal aspect of text generation
(e.g., duration, latency). Our exploration of these fea-
tures and their application in deception detection is mo-
tivated by the similarities between text and speech gen-
eration. Editing patterns, for instance, can be viewed as
attempts to veil incoherence in deceptive writing and
temporal patterns like latency or pause can be treated
as analogous to disfluency.

Different people, of course, have varying typing
skills, and some may type faster than others. In or-
der to control for this variation, we normalize all event
timespans δ(e) with respect to the corresponding event
timespan in the copy task: δ̂(e) = δ(e)/δ(ecopy).

4.1 Editing Patterns
In this work, we treat keys that are used only for edit-
ing as different from others. Text editing is done by
employing a small subset of available keys: deletion
keys (‘Backspace’ and ‘Delete’), arrow keys (←, →,
↑ and ↓) and by using the mouse for text selection
(i.e., the ‘MouseUp’ event). The three types of editing
keystrokes are collectively denoted by

E3 = 〈|DEL| , |MSELECT| , |ARROW|〉
where

(i) |DEL| = number of deletion keystrokes
(ii) |MSELECT| = number of ‘MouseUp’ events, and

(iii) |ARROW| = number of arrow keystrokes
The editing differences between truthful and deceptive
writing across all three topics are shown in Fig. 1.

4.2 Temporal Aspects
Each event is logged with a keycode and a timestamp.
In order to study the temporal aspects of digital writ-
ing, we calculate the timespan of different linguistic

1470



Topic Features Flow
First + Second First-only

Restaurants
BoW 73.9 78.8
BoW + T6 74.3 79.1
BoW + T6 + E3 74.6 80.3∗

Gun Control
(Support)

BoW 86.5 80.0
BoW + T6 86.8 82.5∗
BoW + T6 + E3 88.0 § 83.5∗

Gun Control
(Oppose)

BoW 88.5 88.0
BoW + T6 89.8 87.5
BoW + T6 + E3 90.8∗ 89.1

Gay Marriage
(Support)

BoW 92.5 92.0
BoW + T6 93.8 92.5
BoW + T6 + E3 94.3∗ 92.0

Gay Marriage
(Oppose)

BoW 84.5 86.5
BoW + T6 85.0 87.0
BoW + T6 + E3 85.3 86.8

Table 1: SVM classifier performance for truthful vs. de-
ceptive writing. Statistically significant improvements over
the baseline are marked * (p < 0.05) and § (p < 0.1).
E3 = 〈|DEL| , |MSELECT| , |ARROW|〉 denotes the editing
keystrokes, and T6 is the set of normalized timespans of
documents, words (plus preceding keystroke), all keystrokes,
spaces, non-whitespace keystrokes and inter-word intervals:
T6 = {δ̂(D), δ̂(k), δ̂(SP), δ̂(¬SP), δ̂(¬W), δ̂(kprv + W)}

units such as words, sentences and even entire docu-
ments. Further, we separately inspect the timespans
of different parts of speech, function words and con-
tent words. In addition to event timespans, intervals
between successive events (e.g., inter-word and inter-
sentence pauses) and pauses preceding or succeeding
and event (e.g., time interval before and after a function
word) are measured as well.

5 Experimental Results
This section describes our experimental setup and
presents insights based on the obtained results. All
classification experiments use 5-fold cross validation
with 80/20 division for training and testing. In addition
to experimenting on the entire dataset, we also sepa-
rately analyze the texts written first (of the two texts in
each ‘flow’). This additional step is taken in order to
eliminate the possibility of a text being primed by its
preceding text.

Deception cues in keystroke patterns: To empiri-
cally check whether keystroke features can help distin-
guish between truthful and deceptive writing, we de-
sign binary SVM classifiers.5 Unigrams with tf-idf
encoding is used as the baseline. The average baseline
accuracy across all topics is 82.58% when considering
both texts of a flow, and 83.62% when considering only
the first text of each flow. The better performance in the
latter possibly indicates that the second text of a flow
exhibits some amount of lexical priming with the first.

The high accuracy of the baseline is not surprising.
Previous work by Ott et al. (2011) reported similar per-

5We use the LIBLINEAR (Fan et al., 2008) package.

δ̂(W) δ̂(kprv + W)

D > T T > D D > T T > D
our best when one
if get quality other

when well even get
were your on service
it’s fresh by been

quality not me their
dishes my has not

the one also with
i’ve had go friendly
on hat we great

they of had an
we other is our

friendly very at are
has love which really
at service from but

wait great dishes favorite
an really or very
go you re about
is but would will

which been just here

Table 2: Top 20 words in restaurant reviews with greatest
timespan difference between deceptive and truthful writing.

formance of unigram models. The focus of our work
is to explore the completely new feature space of ty-
pographic patterns in deception detection. We draw
motivation from parallels between the text generation
and speech generation processes. Prosodic concepts
such as speed, disfluency and coherence can be real-
ized in typographic behavior by analyzing timestamp
of keystrokes, pauses and editing patterns, respectively.

Based on the differences in the temporal aspects of
keystrokes, we extract six timespan features to improve
this baseline. This set, denoted by T6, comprises of

(i) δ̂(D) = timespan of entire document
(ii) δ̂(kprv+W) = average timespan of word plus pre-

ceding keystroke
(iii) δ̂(k) = average keystroke timespan
(iv) δ̂(SP) = average timespan of spaces
(v) δ̂(¬SP) = average timespan of non whitesp-

ace keystrokes
(vi) δ̂(¬W) = average interval between words.
The improvements attained by adding T6 to the base-
line are shown in Table 1. Adding the edit patterns (E3)
(cf. § 4.1) further improves the performance (with the
exception of two cases) by 0.7–3.5%.

Writing speed, pauses and revisions: To study the
temporal aspect of language units across all topics,
we first consider all texts, and then restrict to only
the first of each ‘flow’. The timespan measurements
are presented in Fig. 2, showing the average duration
of typing documents, sentences, words and individual
keystrokes. The timespans are measured as the inter-
val between the first and the last keystrokes. The sen-
tence timespan, for instance, does not include the gap
between a sentence end and the first keystroke marking
the beginning of the next.

The sentence timespans for “gay marriage” and “gun

1471



DT+TD

120

130

140

150

160

170

All Words

Function Words

Content Words

Nouns
Verbs

Adjectives

Adverbs

T
im

es
pa

n 
(m

s) Deceptive
Truthful

(a)

DT+TD

350

400

450

500

550

Function Words

Content Words

Nouns
Verbs

Adjectives

Adverbs

T
im

es
pa

n 
(m

s) Deceptive
Truthful

(b)
Figure 3: Event timespans in restaurant reviews: (a) language units, and (b) language units including their preceding kdn.

control” are lower in truthful writing, even though the
document timespans are higher. This difference implies
that the writer is spending a longer period of time to
think before commencing the next sentence, but once
started, the actual typing proceeds rapidly.

Apart from restaurant reviews, truthful writers have
typed slower. This may be due to exercising better care
while expressing their honest opinion.

For restaurant reviews, the document, sentence and
word timespans are significantly higher in deceptive
writing. This, however, is not the case for documents
and words in the other two topics. We conjecture that
this is because deception is harder to write for prod-
uct reviews, due to their dependence on factual details.
Gun control and gay marriage, on the other hand, are
topics well discussed in media, and it is possible that
the writers are aware of the arguments that go against
their personal belief. The frequency of revisional oc-
currences (i.e., keys used for editing) shown in Fig. 1,
too, supports the thought that writing fake reviews may
be harder than adopting a fake stance on well-known
issues. Deceptive reviews exhibit a higher number of
revisions than truthful ones, but essays show the oppo-
site trend. Our findings align with previous studies (Ott
et al., 2011) which showed that deception cues are do-
main dependent.
Writing speed variations over word categories:
Next, we investigate whether there is any quantitative
difference in the writing rate over different words with
respect to the deceptive and truthful intent of the author.
In an attempt to understand this, we analyze words
which show the highest timespan difference between
deceptive and truthful writings.

Table 2 presents words in the restaurant review
topic for which deceptive writers took a lot longer
than truthful writers, and vice versa. Some word cat-
egories exhibit common trends across all three top-
ics. Highly subjective words, for instance (e.g., “love”,
“best”, “great”) are words over which truthful writers
spent more time.

Deceptive and truthful texts differ in the typing rate
of first- and second-person pronouns. Deceptive re-
views reveal more time spent in using 2nd-person pro-
nouns, as shown by “you” and “your”. This finding
throws some light on how people perceive text cues.
Toma and Hancock (2012) showed that readers per-

form poorly at deception detection because they rely on
unrelated text cues such as 2nd-person pronouns. Our
analysis indicates that people associate the use of 2nd-
person pronouns more with deception not only while
reading, but while writing as well.

Deceptive reviews also exhibit longer time spans for
1st-person pronouns (e.g., “we”, “me”), which have
been known to be useful in deception detection (New-
man et al., 2003; Ott et al., 2011). Newman et al.
(2003) attributed the less frequent usage of 1st-person
pronouns to psychological distancing. The longer time
taken by deceptive writers in our data is a possible sign
of increased cognitive burden when the writer is unable
to maintain the psychological distance. Deceptive re-
viewers also paused a lot more around relative clauses,
e.g., “if”, “when”, and “which”.

In essays, however, the difference in timespans of
1st-person and 2nd-person pronouns as well as the
timespan difference in relative clauses were insignifi-
cant (< 50ms).

A broader picture of the temporal difference in using
different types of words is presented in Fig. 3, which
shows deceptive reviewers spending less time on ad-
verbs as compared to truthful writers, but more time on
nouns, verbs, adjectives, function words and content
words. They also exhibited significantly longer pauses
before nouns, verbs and function words.

6 Conclusion
In this paper, we investigated the use of typographic
style in deception detection and presented distinct tem-
poral and revisional aspects of keystroke patterns that
improve the characterization of deceptive writing. Our
study provides novel empirically supported insights
into the writing and editing processes of truthful and
deceptive writers. It also presents the first application
of keylogger data used to distinguish between true and
fake texts, and opens up a new range of questions to
better understand what affects these different keystroke
patterns and what they exhibit. It also suggests new
possibilities for making use of keystroke information
as an extended linguistic signal to accompany writings.

Acknowledgements
This research is supported in part by gift from Google.

1472



References
Francesco Bergadano, Daniele Gunetti, and Claudia Pi-

cardi. 2002. User Authentication through Keystroke
Dynamics. ACM Transactions on Information and
System Security (TISSEC), 5(4):367–397.

Charles F Bond and Bella M DePaulo. 2006. Accu-
racy of Deception Judgments. Personality and So-
cial Psychology Review, 10(3):214–234.

Sungzoon Cho, Chigeun Han, Dae Hee Han, and
Hyung-Il Kim. 2000. Web-based Keystroke Dy-
namics Identity Verification Using Neural Network.
Journal of Organizationl Computing and Electronic
Commerce, 10(4):295–307.

Bella M DePaulo, James J Lindsay, Brian E Mal-
one, Laura Muhlenbruck, Kelly Charlton, and Harris
Cooper. 2003. Cues to Deception. Psychological
Bulletin, 129(1):74.

Paul Ekman, Maureen O’Sullivan, Wallace V Friesen,
and Klaus R Scherer. 1991. Invited Article: Face,
Voice and Body in Detecting Deceit. Journal of
Nonverbal Behavior, 15(2):125–135.

Paul Ekman. 2003. Darwin, Deception, and Facial Ex-
pression. Annals of the New York Academy of Sci-
ences, 1000(1):205–221.

Clayton Epp, Michael Lippold, and Regan L Mandryk.
2011. Identifying Emotional States Using Keystroke
Dynamics. In Proc. of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 715–
724. ACM.

Rong-En Fan, Kai-Wei Chang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Xiang-
Rui Wang, and Chih-Jen Lin. 2008. LIBLINEAR:
A Library for Large Linear Classification. The Jour-
nal of Machine Learning Research, 9:1871–1874.

Geli Fei, Arjun Mukherjee, Bing Liu, Meichun Hsu,
Malu Castellanos, and Riddhiman Ghosh. 2013.
Exploiting Burstiness in Reviews for Review Spam-
mer Detection. In ICWSM, pages 175–184.

Song Feng, Ritwik Banerjee, and Yejin Choi. 2012.
Syntactic Stylometry for Deception Detection. In
Proc. 50th Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 171–
175. ACL.

George E Forsen, Mark R Nelson, and Raymond J
Staron Jr. 1977. Personal Attributes Authentication
Techniques. Technical report, DTIC Document.

Stephanie Gokhman, Jeff Hancock, Poornima Prabhu,
Myle Ott, and Claire Cardie. 2012. In Search of a
Gold Standard in Studies of Deception. In Compu-
tational Approaches to Deception Detection, pages
23–30. ACL.

Jeffrey T Hancock, L Curry, Saurabh Goorha, and
Michael T Woodworth. 2004. Lies in Conversa-
tion: An Examination of Deception Using Auto-
mated Linguistic Analysis. In Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society, volume 26, pages
534–540.

Victoria Johansson. 2009. Developmental Aspects of
Text Production in Writing and Speech. Ph.D. thesis,
Lund University.

Kevin S Killourhy and Roy A Maxion. 2009. Compar-
ing Anomaly-Detection Algorithms for Keystroke
Dynamics. In Dependable Systems & Networks,
2009. DSN’09., pages 125–134. IEEE.

John Leggett and Glen Williams. 1988. Verifying
Identity Via Keystroke Characteristics. Interna-
tional Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 28(1):67–
76.

Ann Matsuhashi. 1981. Pausing and Planning: The
Tempo of Written Discourse Production. Research
in the Teaching of English, pages 113–134.

Steven A McCornack. 1997. The Generation of De-
ceptive Messages: Laying the Groundwork for a Vi-
able Theory of Interpersonal Deception. In John O
Greene, editor, Message Production: Advances in
Communication Theory. Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ.

Arjun Mukherjee, Vivek Venkataraman, Bing Liu, and
Natalie Glance. 2013. What Yelp Fake Review Fil-
ter Might be Doing. In ICSWM, pages 409–418.

Matthew L Newman, James W Pennebaker, Diane S
Berry, and Jane M Richards. 2003. Lying Words:
Predicting Deception from Linguistic Styles. Per-
sonality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29(5):665–
675.

Myle Ott, Yejin Choi, Claire Cardie, and Jeffrey T
Hancock. 2011. Finding Deceptive Opinion Spam
by Any Stretch of the Imagination. In Proc. 49th
Annual Meeting of the ACL: HLT, pages 309–319.
ACL.

Catalina L Toma and Jeffrey T Hancock. 2012. What
Lies Beneath: The Linguistic Traces of Deception in
Online Dating Profiles. Journal of Communication,
62(1):78–97.

Paul V Trovillo. 1939. A History of Lie Detection.
Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology (1931-
1951), 29:848–881.

Janet G van Hell, Ludo Verhoeven, and Liesbeth M van
Beijsterveldt. 2008. Pause Time Patterns in Writ-
ing Narrative and Expository Texts by Children and
Adults. Discourse Processes, 45(4-5):406–427.

Lisa M Vizer, Lina Zhou, and Andrew Sears. 2009.
Automated Stress Detection Using Keystroke and
Linguistic Features: An Exploratory Study. In-
ternational Journal of Human-Computer Studies,
67(10):870–886.

Aldert Vrij, Ronald Fisher, Samantha Mann, and
Sharon Leal. 2006. Detecting Deception by Ma-
nipulating Cognitive Load. Trends in Cognitive Sci-
ences, 10(4):141–142.

Putri Zulkifli. 2013. Applying Pause Analysis to Ex-
plore Cognitive Processes in the Copying of Sen-
tences by Second Language Users. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Sussex.

1473


