



















































Modeling Interestingness with Deep Neural Networks


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 2–13,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Modeling Interestingness with Deep Neural Networks 

Jianfeng Gao, Patrick Pantel, Michael Gamon, Xiaodong He, Li Deng 
Microsoft Research 
One Microsoft Way 

Redmond, WA 98052, USA 
{jfgao,ppantel,mgamon,xiaohe,deng}@microsoft.com 

 
 

Abstract 

This paper presents a deep semantic simi-
larity model (DSSM), a special type of 
deep neural networks designed for text 
analysis, for recommending target docu-
ments to be of interest to a user based on a 
source document that she is reading. We 
observe, identify, and detect naturally oc-
curring signals of interestingness in click 
transitions on the Web between source and 
target documents, which we collect from 
commercial Web browser logs. The DSSM 
is trained on millions of Web transitions, 
and maps source-target document pairs to 
feature vectors in a latent space in such a 
way that the distance between source doc-
uments and their corresponding interesting 
targets in that space is minimized. The ef-
fectiveness of the DSSM is demonstrated 
using two interestingness tasks: automatic 
highlighting and contextual entity search. 
The results on large-scale, real-world da-
tasets show that the semantics of docu-
ments are important for modeling interest-
ingness and that the DSSM leads to signif-
icant quality improvement on both tasks, 
outperforming not only the classic docu-
ment models that do not use semantics but 
also state-of-the-art topic models. 

1 Introduction 

Tasks of predicting what interests a user based on 
the document she is reading are fundamental to 
many online recommendation systems. A recent 
survey is due to Ricci et al. (2011). In this paper, 
we exploit the use of a deep semantic model for 
two such interestingness tasks in which document 
semantics play a crucial role: automatic highlight-
ing and contextual entity search. 

Automatic Highlighting. In this task we want 
a recommendation system to automatically dis-
cover the entities (e.g., a person, location, organi-

zation etc.) that interest a user when reading a doc-
ument and to highlight the corresponding text 
spans, referred to as keywords afterwards. We 
show in this study that document semantics are 
among the most important factors that influence 
what is perceived as interesting to the user. For 
example, we observe in Web browsing logs that 
when a user reads an article about a movie, she is 
more likely to browse to an article about an actor 
or character than to another movie or the director. 

Contextual entity search. After identifying 
the keywords that represent the entities of interest 
to the user, we also want the system to recommend 
new, interesting documents by searching the Web 
for supplementary information about these enti-
ties. The task is challenging because the same key-
words often refer to different entities, and interest-
ing supplementary information to the highlighted 
entity is highly sensitive to the semantic context. 
For example, “Paul Simon” can refer to many peo-
ple, such as the singer and the senator. Consider 
an article about the music of Paul Simon and an-
other about his life. Related content about his up-
coming concert tour is much more interesting in 
the first context, while an article about his family 
is more interesting in the second. 

At the heart of these two tasks is the notion of 
interestingness. In this paper, we model and make 
use of this notion of interestingness with a deep 
semantic similarity model (DSSM). The model, 
extending from the deep neural networks shown 
recently to be highly effective for speech recogni-
tion (Hinton et al., 2012; Deng et al., 2013) and 
computer vision (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Mar-
koff, 2014), is semantic because it maps docu-
ments to feature vectors in a latent semantic space, 
also known as semantic representations. The 
model is deep because it employs a neural net-
work with several hidden layers including a spe-
cial convolutional-pooling structure to identify 
keywords and extract hidden semantic features at 
different levels of abstractions, layer by layer. The 
semantic representation is computed through a 
deep neural network after its training by back-
propagation with respect to an objective tailored 

2



to the respective interestingness tasks. We obtain 
naturally occurring “interest” signals by observ-
ing Web browser transitions, from a source docu-
ment to a target document, in Web usage logs of a 
commercial browser. Our training data is sampled 
from these transitions. 

The use of the DSSM to model interestingness 
is motivated by the recent success of applying re-
lated deep neural networks to computer vision 
(Krizhevshy et al. 2012; Markoff, 2014), speech 
recognition (Hinton et al. 2012), text processing 
(Collobert et al. 2011),  and Web search (Huang 
et al. 2013). Among them, (Huang et al. 2013) is 
most relevant to our work. They also use a deep 
neural network to map documents to feature vec-
tors in a latent semantic space. However, their 
model is designed to represent the relevance be-
tween queries and documents, which differs from 
the notion of interestingness between documents 
studied in this paper. It is often the case that a user 
is interested in a document because it provides 
supplementary information about the entities or 
concepts she encounters when reading another 
document although the overall contents of the sec-
ond documents is not highly relevant. For exam-
ple, a user may be interested in knowing more 
about the history of University of Washington af-
ter reading the news about President Obama’s 
visit to Seattle. To better model interestingness, 
we extend the model of Huang et al. (2013) in two 
significant aspects. First, while Huang et al. treat 
a document as a bag of words for semantic map-
ping, the DSSM treats a document as a sequence 
of words and tries to discover prominent key-
words. These keywords represent the entities or 
concepts that might interest users, via the convo-
lutional and max-pooling layers which are related 
to the deep models used for computer vision 
(Krizhevsky et al., 2013) and speech recognition 
(Deng  et al., 2013a) but are not used in Huang et 
al.’s model. The DSSM then forms the high-level 
semantic representation of the whole document 
based on these keywords. Second, instead of di-
rectly computing the document relevance score 
using cosine similarity in the learned semantic 
space, as in Huang et al. (2013), we feed the fea-
tures derived from the semantic representations of 
documents to a ranker which is trained in a super-
vised manner. As a result, a document that is not 
highly relevant to another document a user is read-
ing (i.e., the distance between their derived feature 

                                                            
1 We stress here that, although the click signal is available to 
form a dataset and a gold standard ranker (to be described in 

vectors is big) may still have a high score of inter-
estingness because the former provides useful in-
formation about an entity mentioned in the latter. 
Such information and entity are encoded, respec-
tively, by (some subsets of) the semantic features 
in their corresponding documents. In Sections 4 
and 5, we empirically demonstrate that the afore-
mentioned two extensions lead to significant qual-
ity improvements for the two interestingness tasks 
presented in this paper.  

Before giving a formal description of the 
DSSM in Section 3, we formally define the inter-
estingness function, and then introduce our data 
set of naturally occurring interest signals. 

2 The Notion of Interestingness 

Let  be the set of all documents. Following 
Gamon et al. (2013), we formally define the inter-
estingness modeling task as learning the mapping 
function: 

	 : → 	 		
where the function ,  is the quantified degree 
of interest that the user has  in the target document 
∈  after or while reading the source document 
∈ . 
Our notion of a document is meant in its most 

general form as a string of raw unstructured text. 
That is, the interestingness function should not 
rely on any document structure such as title tags, 
hyperlinks, etc., or Web interaction data. In our 
tasks, documents can be formed either from the 
plain text of a webpage or as a text span in that 
plain text, as will be discussed in Sections 4 and 5. 

2.1 Data 

We can observe many naturally occurring mani-
festations of interestingness on the Web. For ex-
ample, on Twitter, users follow shared links em-
bedded in tweets. Arguably the most frequent sig-
nal, however, occurs in Web browsing events 
where users click from one webpage to another 
via hyperlinks. When a user clicks on a hyperlink, 
it is reasonable to assume that she is interested in 
learning more about the anchor, modulo cases of 
erroneous clicks. Aggregate clicks can therefore 
serve as a proxy for interestingness. That is, for a 
given source document, target documents that at-
tract the most clicks are more interesting than doc-
uments that attract fewer clicks1.  

Section 4), our task is to model interestingness between un-
structured documents, i.e., without access to any document 
structure or Web interaction data. Thus, in our experiments, 

3



We collect a large dataset of user browsing 
events from a commercial Web browser. Specifi-
cally, we sample 18 million occurrences of a user 
click from one Wikipedia page to another during 
a one year period. We restrict our browsing events 
to Wikipedia since its pages tend to contain many 
anchors (79 on average, where on average 42 have 
a unique target URL). Thus, they attract enough 
traffic for us to obtain robust browsing transition 
data2. We group together all transitions originat-
ing from the same page and randomly hold out 
20% of the transitions for our evaluation data 
(EVAL), 20% for training the DSSM described in 
Section 3.2 (TRAIN_1), and the remaining 60% 
for training our task specific rankers described in 
Section 3.3 (TRAIN_2). In our experiments, we 
used different settings for the two interestingness 
tasks. Thus, we postpone the detailed description 
of these datasets and other task-specific datasets 
to Sections 4 and 5. 

3 A Deep Semantic Similarity Model 
(DSSM) 

This section presents the architecture of the 
DSSM, describes the parameter estimation, and 
the way the DSSM is used in our tasks. 

                                                            
we remove all structural information (e.g., hyperlinks and 
XML tags) in our documents, except that in the highlighting 
experiments (Section 4) we use anchor texts to simulate the 
candidate keywords to be highlighted. We then convert each 

3.1 Network Architecture 

The heart of the DSSM is a deep neural network 
with convolutional structure, as shown in Figure 
1. In what follows, we use lower-case bold letters, 
such as , to denote column vectors,  to de-
note the  element of , and upper-case letters, 
such as , to denote matrices. 

Input Layer . It takes two steps to convert a doc-
ument , which is a sequence of words, into a vec-
tor representation  for the input layer of the net-
work: (1) convert each word in  to a word vector, 
and (2) build  by concatenating these word vec-
tors. To convert a word  into a word vector, we 
first represent  by a one-hot vector using a vo-
cabulary that contains  high frequent words 
( 150K in this study). Then, following Huang 
et al. (2013), we map  to a separate tri-letter vec-
tor. Consider the word “#dog#”, where # is a word 
boundary symbol. The nonzero elements in its tri-
letter vector are “#do”, “dog”, and “og#”. We then 
form the word vector of  by concatenating its 
one-hot vector and its tri-letter vector. It is worth 
noting that the tri-letter vector complements the 
one-hot vector representation in two aspects. First, 
different OOV (out of vocabulary) words can be 
represented by tri-letter vectors with few colli-
sions. Second, spelling variations of the same 
word can be mapped to the points that are close to 
each other in the tri-letter space. Although the 
number of unique English words on the Web is 
extremely large, the total number of distinct tri-
letters in English is limited (restricted to the most 
frequent 30K in this study). As a result, incorpo-
rating tri-letter vectors substantially improves the 
representation power of word vectors while keep-
ing their size small.  

To form our input layer  using word vectors, 
we first identify a text span with a high degree of 
relevance, called focus, in  using task-specific 
heuristics (see Sections 4 and 5 respectively). Sec-
ond, we form  by concatenating each word vec-
tor in the focus and a vector that is the summation 
of all other word vectors, as shown in Figure 1. 
Since the length of the focus is much smaller than 
that of its document,  is able to capture the con-
textual information (for the words in the focus) 

Web document into plain text, which is white-space to-
kenized and lowercased. Numbers are retained and no stem-
ming is performed. 
2 We utilize the May 3, 2013 English Wikipedia dump con-
sisting of roughly 4.1 million articles from http://dumps.wiki-
media.org. 

Figure 1: Illustration of the network architec-
ture and information flow of the DSSM 
 

4



useful to the corresponding tasks, with a manage-
able vector size. 
Convolutional Layer . A convolutional layer 
extracts local features around each word 	in a 
word sequence of length  as follows. We first 
generate a contextual vector  by concatenating 
the word vectors of  and its surrounding words 
defined by a window (the window size is set to 3 
in this paper). Then, we generate for each word a 
local feature vector  using a tanh  activation 
function and a linear projection matrix , which 
is the same across all windows  in the word se-
quence, as: 

tanh ,where	 1…  (1) 
Max-pooling Layer . The size of the output  
depends on the number of words in the word se-
quence. Local feature vectors have to be com-
bined to obtain a global feature vector, with a 
fixed size independent of the document length, in 
order to apply subsequent standard affine layers. 
We design  by adopting the max operation over 
each “time”  of the sequence of vectors computed 
by (1), which forces the network to retain only the 
most useful, partially invariant local features pro-
duced by the convolutional layer: 

max,…, u  (2) 
where the max operation is performed for each di-
mension of  across 1,… ,  respectively.  

That convolutional and max-pooling layers are 
able to discover prominent keywords of a docu-
ment can be demonstrated using the procedure in 
Figure 2 using a toy example. First, the convolu-
tional layer of (1) generates for each word in a 5-
word document a 4-dimensional local feature vec-
tor, which represents a distribution of four topics. 
For example, the most prominent topic of  
within its three word context window is the first 
topic, denoted by 1 , and the most prominent 
topic of  is 3 . Second, we use max-pooling 
of (2) to form a global feature vector, which rep-
resents the topic distribution of the whole docu-
ment. We see that 1  and 3  are two promi-
nent topics. Then, for each prominent topic, we 
trace back to the local feature vector that survives 
max-pooling: 

1 max,…, 1 1   
3 max,…, 3 3 .  

Finally, we label the corresponding words of these 
local feature vectors,  and , as keywords of 
the document.  

Figure 3 presents a sample of document snip-
pets and their keywords detected by the DSSM ac-
cording to the procedure elaborated in Figure 2. It 
is interesting to see that many names are identified 
as keywords although the DSSM is not designed 
explicitly for named entity recognition. 
Fully-Connected Layers  and . The fixed 
sized global feature vector  of (2) is then fed to 
several standard affine network layers, which are 
stacked and interleaved with nonlinear activation 
functions, to extract highly non-linear features  
at the output layer. In our model, shown in Figure 
1, we have: 

tanh  (3) 
tanh  (4) 

where  and  are learned linear projection matri-
ces. 

3.2 Training the DSSM 

To optimize the parameters of the DSSM of Fig-
ure 1, i.e., , , , we use a pair-wise 
rank loss as objective (Yih et al. 2011). Consider 
a source document  and two candidate target 
documents 	and , where  is more interesting 
than  to a user when reading . We construct 
two pairs of documents ,  and , , where 
the former is preferred and should have a higher 

u1 u2 u3 u4 u5

w1 w2 w3 w4 w5

2
3
4

1

 

w1 w2 w3 w4 w5

v

2
3
4

1

Figure 2: Toy example of (upper) a 5-word 
document and its local feature vectors ex-
tracted using a convolutional layer, and (bot-
tom) the global feature vector of the document 
generated after max-pooling. 

 
 

5



interestingness score. Let ∆ be the difference of 
their interestingness scores: ∆	 ,

, , where  is the interestingness score, 
computed as the cosine similarity: 

, ≡ sim , ‖ ‖‖ ‖ (5) 
where  and  are the feature vectors of  and , 
respectively, which are generated using the 
DSSM, parameterized by . Intuitively, we want 
to learn  to maximize ∆. That is, the DSSM is 
learned to represent documents as points in a hid-
den interestingness space, where the similarity be-
tween a document and its interesting documents is 
maximized.  

We use the following logistic loss over ∆ , 
which can be shown to upper bound the pairwise 
accuracy: 

∆; log 1 exp ∆  (6) 

                                                            
3 In our experiments, we observed better results by sampling 
more negative training examples (e.g., up to 100) although 
this makes the training much slower. An alternative approach 

The loss function in (6) has a shape similar to the 
hinge loss used in SVMs. Because of the use of 
the cosine similarity function, we add a scaling 
factor  that magnifies ∆ from [-2, 2] to a larger 
range. Empirically, the value of  makes no dif-
ference as long as it is large enough. In the exper-
iments, we set 10. Because the loss function 
is differentiable, optimizing the model parameters 
can be done using gradient-based methods. Due to 
space limitations, we omit the derivation of the 
gradient of the loss function, for which readers are 
referred to related derivations (e.g., Collobert et 
al. 2011; Huang et al. 2013; Shen et al. 2014). 

In our experiments we trained DSSMs using 
mini-batch Stochastic Gradient Descent. Each 
mini-batch consists of 256 source-target docu-
ment pairs. For each source document , we ran-
domly select from that batch four target docu-
ments which are not paired with  as negative 
training samples3. The DSSM trainer is imple-
mented using a GPU-accelerated linear algebra li-
brary, which is developed on CUDA 5.5. Given 
the training set (TRAIN_1 in Section 2), it takes 
approximately 30 hours to train a DSSM as shown 
in Figure 1, on a Xeon E5-2670 2.60GHz machine 
with one Tesla K20 GPU card. 

In principle, the loss function of (6) can be fur-
ther regularized (e.g. by adding a term of 2 norm) 
to deal with overfitting. However, we did not find 
a clear empirical advantage over the simpler early 
stop approach in a pilot study, hence we adopted 
the latter in the experiments in this paper. Our ap-
proach adjusts the learning rate  during the 
course of model training. Starting with 1.0, 
after each epoch (a pass over the entire training 
data), the learning rate is adjusted as 0.5  
if the loss on validation data (held-out from 
TRAIN_1) is not reduced. The training stops if 
either  is smaller than a preset threshold 
(0.0001) or the loss on training data can no longer 
be reduced significantly. In our experiments, the 
DSSM training typically converges within 20 
epochs. 

3.3 Using the DSSM 

We experiment with two ways of using the DSSM 
for the two interestingness tasks. First, we use the 
DSSM as a feature generator. The output layer of 
the DSSM can be seen as a set of semantic fea-
tures, which can be incorporated in a boosted tree 

is to approximate the partition function using Noise Contras-
tive Estimation (Gutmann and Hyvarinen 2010). We leave it 
to future work.  

… the comedy festival formerly known as 
the us comedy arts festival is a comedy 
festival held each year in las vegas 
nevada from its 1985 inception to 2008 
. it was held annually at the wheeler 
opera house and other venues in aspen 
colorado . the primary sponsor of the 
festival was hbo with co-sponsorship by 
caesars palace . the primary venue tbs 
geico insurance twix candy bars and 
smirnoff vodka hbo exited the festival 
business in 2007 and tbs became the pri-
mary sponsor the festival includes 
standup comedy performances appearances 
by the casts of television shows… 
 
… bad samaritans is an american comedy
series produced by walt becker kelly
hayes and ross putman . it premiered on 
netflix on march 31 2013 cast and char-
acters . the show focuses on a community 
service parole group and their parole 
officer brian kubach as jake gibson an 
aspiring professional starcraft player 
who gets sentenced to 2000 hours of com-
munity service for starting a forest 
fire during his breakup with drew prior 
to community service he had no real am-
bition in life other than to be a pro-
fessional gamer and become wealthy 
overnight like mark zuckerberg as in 
life his goal during … 

Figure 3: A sample of document snippets and 
the keywords (in bold) detected by the DSSM. 
 

 

6



based ranker (Friedman 1999) trained discrimina-
tively on the task-specific data. Given a source-
target document pair , , the DSSM generates 
600 features (300 from the output layers  and  
for each  and , respectively). 

Second, we use the DSSM as a direct imple-
mentation of the interestingness function . Re-
call from Section 3.2 that in model training, we 
measure the interestingness score for a document 
pair using the cosine similarity between their cor-
responding feature vectors (  and ). Similarly 
at runtime, we define	 	sim ,  as (5). 
4 Experiments on Highlighting 

Recall from Section 1 that in this task, a system 
must select  most interesting keywords in a doc-
ument that a user is reading. To evaluate our mod-
els using the click transition data described in Sec-
tion 2, we simulate the task as follows. We use the 
set of anchors in a source document  to simulate 
the set of candidate keywords that may be of in-
terest to the user while reading , and treat the text 
of a document that is linked by an anchor in  as a 
target document . As shown in Figure 1, to apply 
DSSM to a specific task, we need to define the fo-
cus in source and target documents. In this task, 
the focus in s is defined as the anchor text, and the 
focus in t is defined as the first 10 tokens in t. 

We evaluate the performance of a highlighting 
system against a gold standard interestingness 
function  which scores the interestingness of an 
anchor as the number of user clicks on  from the 
anchor in  in our data. We consider the ideal se-
lection to then consist of the  most interesting 

anchors according to . A natural metric for this 
task is Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain 
(NDCG) (Jarvelin and Kekalainen 2000). 

We evaluate our models on the EVAL dataset 
described in Section 2. We utilize the transition 
distributions in EVAL to create three other test 
sets, following the stratified sampling methodol-
ogy commonly employed in the IR community, 
for the frequently, less frequently, and rarely 
viewed source pages, referred to as HEAD, 
TORSO, and TAIL, respectively. We obtain 
these sets by first sorting the unique source docu-
ments according to their frequency of occurrence 
in EVAL. We then partition the set so that HEAD 
corresponds to all transitions from the source 
pages at the top of the list that account for 20% of 
the transitions in EVAL; TAIL corresponds to the 
transitions at the bottom also accounting for 20% 
of the transitions in EVAL; and TORSO corre-
sponds to the remaining transitions. 

4.1 Main Results 

Table 1 summarizes the results of various models 
over the three test sets using NDCG at truncation 
levels 1, 5, and 10. 

Rows 1 to 3 are simple heuristic baselines. 
RAND selects  random anchors, 1stK selects 
the first  anchors and LastK the last  anchors.  

The other models in Table 1 are boosted tree 
based rankers trained on TRAIN_2 described in 
Section 2. They vary only in their features. The 
ranker in Row 4 uses Non-Semantic Features 
(NSF) only. These features are derived from the 

 # Models HEAD TORSO TAIL 
   @1 @5 @10 @1 @5 @10 @1 @5 @10 

sr
c 

 o
nl

y 

1 RAND 0.041 0.062 0.081 0.036 0.076 0.109 0.062 0.195 0.258 
2 1stK 0.010 0.177 0.243 0.072 0.171 0.240 0.091 0.274 0.348 
3 LastK 0.170 0.022 0.027 0.022 0.044 0.062 0.058 0.166 0.219
4 NSF 0.215 0.253 0.295 0.139 0.229 0.282 0.109 0.293 0.365 
5 NSF+WCAT 0.438 0.424 0.463 0.194 0.290 0.346 0.118 0.317 0.386 
6 NSF+JTT 0.220 0.302 0.343 0.141 0.241 0.295 0.111 0.300 0.369 
7 NSF+DSSM_BOW 0.312 0.351 0.391 0.162 0.258 0.313 0.110 0.299 0.372 
8 NSF+DSSM 0.362 0.386 0.421 0.178 0.275 0.330 0.116 0.312 0.382 

sr
c+

ta
r 9 NSF+WCAT 0.505 0.475 0.501 0.224 0.304 0.356 0.129 0.324 0.391 

10 NSF+JTT 0.345 0.380 0.418 0.183 0.280 0.332 0.131 0.321 0.390 
11 NSF+DSSM_BOW 0.416 0.393 0.428 0.197 0.274 0.325 0.123 0.311 0.380 
12 NSF+DSSM 0.554 0.524 0.547 0.241 0.317 0.367 0.135 0.329 0.398 

Table 1: Highlighting task performance (NDCG @ K) of interest models over HEAD, TORSO and 
TAIL test sets. Bold indicates statistical significance over all non-shaded results using t-test (
0.05). 

 
 

7



source document s and from user session infor-
mation in the browser log. The document features 
include: position of the anchor in the document, 
frequency of the anchor, and anchor density in the 
paragraph.  

The rankers in Rows 5 to 12 use the NSF and 
the semantic features computed from source and 
target documents of a browsing transition. We 
compare semantic features derived from three dif-
ferent sources. The first feature source comes 
from our DSSMs (DSSM and DSSM_BOW) us-
ing the output layers as feature generators as de-
scribed in Section 3.3. DSSM is the model de-
scribed in Section 3 and DSSM_BOW is the 
model proposed by Huang et al. (2013) where 
documents are view as bag of words (BOW) and 
the convolutional and max-pooling layers are not 
used. The two other sources of semantic features 
are used as a point of comparison to the DSSM. 
One is a generative semantic model (Joint Transi-
tion Topic model, or JTT) (Gamon et al. 2013). 
JTT is an LDA-style model (Blei et al. 2003) that 
is trained jointly on source and target documents 
linked by browsing transitions. JTT generates a 
total of 150 features from its latent variables, 50 
each for the source topic model, the target topic 
model and the transition model. The other seman-
tic model of contrast is a manually defined one, 
which we use to assess the effectiveness of auto-
matically learned models against human model-
ers. To this effect, we use the page categories that 
editors assign in Wikipedia as semantic features 
(WCAT). These features number in the multiple 
thousands. Using features such as WCAT is not a 
viable solution in general since Wikipedia catego-
ries are not available for all documents. As such, 
we use it solely as a point of comparison against 
DSSM and JTT. 

We also distinguish between two types of 
learned rankers: those which draw their features 
only from the source (src only) document and 
those that draw their features from both the source 
and target (src+tar) documents. Although our 
task setting allows access to the content of both 
source and target documents, there are practical 
scenarios where a system should predict what in-
terests the user without looking at the target doc-
ument because the extra step of identifying a suit-
able target document for each candidate concept 
or entity of interest is computationally expensive.  

4.2 Analysis of Results 

As shown in Table 1, NSF+DSSM, which incor-
porates our DSSM, is the overall best performing 

system across test sets. The task is hard as evi-
denced by the weak baseline scores. One reason is 
the large average number of candidates per page. 
On HEAD, we found an average of 170 anchors 
(of which 95 point to a unique target URL). For 
TORSO and TAIL, we found the average number 
of anchors to be 94 (52 unique targets) and 41 (19 
unique targets), respectively. 

Clearly, the semantics of the documents form 
important signals for this task: WCAT, JTT, 
DSSM_BOW, and DSSM all significantly boost 
the performance over NSF alone. There are two 
interesting comparisons to consider: (a) manual 
semantics vs. learned semantics; and (b) deep se-
mantic models vs. generative topic models. On 
(a), we observe somewhat surprisingly that the 
learned DSSM produces features that outperform 
the thousands of features coming from manually 
(editor) assigned Wikipedia category features 
(WCAT), in all but the TAIL where the two per-
form statistically the same. In contrast, features 
from the generative model (JTT) perform worse 
than WCAT across the board except on TAIL 
where JTT and WCAT are statistically tied. On 
(b), we observe that DSSM outperforms a state-
of-the-art generative model (JTT) on HEAD and 
TORSO. On TAIL, they are statistically indistin-
guishable. 

We turn now to inspecting the scenario where 
features are only drawn from the source document 
(Rows 1-8 in Table 1). Again we observe that se-
mantic features significantly boost the perfor-
mance against NSF alone, however they signifi-
cantly deteriorate when compared to using fea-
tures from both source and target documents. In 
this scenario, the manual semantics from WCAT 
outperform all other models, but with a diminish-
ing effect as we move from HEAD through 
TORSO to TAIL. DSSM is the best performing 
learned semantic model. 

Finally, we present the results to justify the two 
modifications we made to extend the model of 
Huang et al. (2013) to the DSSM, as described in 
Section 1. First, we see in Table 1 that 
DSSM_BOW, which has the same network struc-
ture of Huang et al.’s model, is much weaker than 
DSSM, demonstrating the benefits of using con-
volutional and max-pooling layers to extract se-
mantic features for the highlighting task. Second, 
we conduct several experiments by using the co-
sine scores between the output layers of DSSM 
for  and  as features (following the procedure in 
Section 3.3 for using the DSSM as a direct imple-
mentation of ). We found that adding the cosine 

8



features to NSF+DSSM does not lead to any im-
provement. We also combined NSF with solely 
the cosine features from DSSM (i.e., without the 
other semantic features drawn from its output lay-
ers). But we still found no improvement over us-
ing NSF alone. Thus, we conclude that for this 
task it is much more effective to feed the features 
derived from DSSM to a supervised ranker than 
directly computing the interestingness score using 
cosine similarity in the learned semantic space, as 
in Huang et al. (2013). 

5 Experiments on Entity Search 

We construct the evaluation data set for this sec-
ond task by randomly sampling a set of documents 
from a traffic-weighted set of Web documents. In 
a second step, we identify the entity names in each 
document using an in-house named entity recog-
nizer. We issue each entity name as a query to a 
commercial search engine, and retain up to the 
top-100 retrieved documents as candidate target 
documents. We form for each entity a source doc-
ument which consists of the entity text and its sur-
rounding text defined by a 200-word window. We 
define the focus (as in Figure 1) in  as the entity 
text, and the focus in  as the first 10 tokens in . 

The final evaluation data set contains 10,000 
source documents. On average, each source docu-
ment is associated with 87 target documents. Fi-
nally, the source-target document pairs are labeled 
in terms of interestingness by paid annotators. The 
label is on a 5-level scale, 0 to 4, with 4 meaning 
the target document is the most interesting to the 

source document and 0 meaning the target is of no 
interest. 

We test our models on two scenarios. The first 
is a ranking scenario where  interesting docu-
ments are displayed to the user. Here, we select 
the top-  ranked documents according to their in-
terestingness scores. We measure the performance 
via NDCG at truncation levels 1 and 3. The sec-
ond scenario is to display to the user all interesting 
results. In this scenario, we select all target docu-
ments with an interestingness score exceeding a 
predefined threshold. We evaluate this scenario 
using ROC analysis and, specifically, the area un-
der the curve (AUC). 

5.1 Main Results 

The main results are summarized in Table 2. Rows 
1 to 6 are single model results, where each model 
is used as a direct implementation of the interest-
ingness function . Rows 7 to 9 are ranker results, 
where  is defined as a boosted tree based ranker 
that incorporates different sets of features ex-
tracted from source and target documents, includ-
ing the features derived from single models. As in 
the highlighting experiments, all the machine-
learned single models, including the DSSM, are 
trained on TRAIN_1, and all the rankers are 
trained on TRAIN_2. 

5.2 Analysis of Results 

BM25 (Rows 1 and 2 in Table 2) is the classic 
document model (Robertson and Zaragoza 2009). 
It uses the bag-of-words document representation 
and the BM25 term weighting function. In our set-
ting, we define the interestingness score of a doc-
ument pair as the dot product of their BM25-
weighted term vectors. To verify the importance 
of using contextual information, we compare two 
different ways of forming the term vector of a 
source document. The first only uses the entity 
text (Row 1). The second (Row 2) uses both the 
entity text and and its surrounding text in a 200-
word window (i.e., the entire source document). 
Results show that the model using contextual in-
formation is significantly better. Therefore, all the 
other models in this section use both the entity 
texts and their surrounding text. 

WTM (Row 3) is our implementation of the 
word translation model for IR (Berger and Laf-
ferty 1999; Gao et al. 2010). WTM defines the in-
terestingness score as: 

, ∏ ∑ | |∈∈ ,  

# Models @1 @3 AUC 
1 BM25 (entity)  0.133 0.195 0.583 
2 BM25 0.142 0.227 0.675 
3 WTM 0.191 0.287 0.678 
4 BLTM 0.214 0.306 0.704 
5 DSSM 0.259* 0.356* 0.711* 
6 DSSM_BOW 0.223 0.322 0.699 
7 Baseline ranker 0.283 0.360 0.723 
8 7 + DSSM(1) 0.301# 0.385# 0.758# 
9 7 + DSSM(600) 0.327## 0.402## 0.782##

Table 2: Contextual entity search task perfor-
mance (NDCG @ K and AUC). * indicates sta-
tistical significance over all non-shaded single 
model results (Rows 1 to 6) using t-test (
0.05). # indicates statistical significance over re-
sults in Row 7. ## indicates statistical signifi-
cance over results in Rows 7 and 8. 
 
 

 

9



where |  is the unigram probability of word 
 in , and |  is the probability of trans-

lating  into , trained on source-target docu-
ment pairs using EM (Brown et al. 1993). The 
translation-based approach allows any pair of 
non-identical but semantically related words to 
have a nonzero matching score. As a result, it sig-
nificantly outperforms BM25. 

BTLM (Row 4) follows the best performing 
bilingual topic model described in Gao et al. 
(2011), which is an extension of PLSA (Hofmann 
1999). The model is trained on source-target doc-
ument pairs using the EM algorithm with a con-
straint enforcing a source document  and its tar-
get document  to not only share the same prior 
topic distribution, but to also have similar frac-
tions of words assigned to each topic. BLTM de-
fines the interestingness score between s and t as: 

, ∏ ∑ | |∈ .  
The model assumes the following story of gener-
ating  from . First, for each topic  a word dis-
tribution  is selected from a Dirichlet prior with 
concentration parameter . Second, given , a 
topic distribution  is drawn from a Dirichlet 
prior with parameter . Finally,  is generated 
word by word. Each word  is generated by first 
selecting a topic  according to , and then 
drawing a word from . We see that BLTM 
models interestingness by taking into account the 
semantic topic distribution of the entire docu-
ments. Our results in Table 2 show that BLTM 
outperforms WTM by a significant margin in 
both NDCG and AUC. 

DSSM (Row 5) outperforms all the competing 
single models, including the state-of-the-art topic 
model BLTM. Now, we inspect the difference be-
tween DSSM and BLTM in detail. Although both 
models strive to generate the semantic representa-
tion of a document, they use different modeling 
approaches. BLTM by nature is a generative 
model. The semantic representation in BLTM is a 
distribution of hidden semantic topics. Such a dis-
tribution is learned using Maximum Likelihood 
Estimation in an unsupervised manner, i.e., max-
imizing the log-likelihood of the source-target 
document pairs in the training data. On the other 
hand, DSSM represents documents as points in a 
hidden semantic space using a supervised learning 
method, i.e., paired documents are closer in that 
latent space than unpaired ones. We believe that 
the superior performance of DSSM is largely due 
to the fact that the model parameters are discrimi-
natively trained using an objective that is tailored 
to the interestingness task.  

In addition to the difference in training meth-
ods, DSSM and BLTM also use different model 
structures. BLTM treats a document as a bag of 
words (thus losing some important contextual in-
formation such as word order and inter-word de-
pendencies), and generates semantic representa-
tions of documents using linear projection. 
DSSM, on the other hand, treats text as a sequence 
of words and better captures local and global con-
text, and generates highly non-linear semantic 
features via a deep neural network. To further ver-
ify our analysis, we inspect the results of a variant 
of DSSM, denoted as DSSM_BOW (Row 6), 
where the convolution and max-pooling layers are 
removed. This model treats a document as a bag 
of words, just like BLTM. These results demon-
strate that the effectiveness of DSSM can also be 
attributed to the convolutional architecture in the 
neural network, in addition to being deep and be-
ing discriminative. 

We turn now to discussing the ranker results in 
Rows 7 to 9. The baseline ranker (Row 7) uses 158 
features, including many counts and single model 
scores, such as BM25 and WMT. DSSM (Row 5) 
alone is quite effective, being close in perfor-
mance to the baseline ranker with non-DSSM fea-
tures. Integrating the DSSM score computed in (5) 
as one single feature into the ranker (Row 8) leads 
to a significant improvement over the baseline. 
The best performing combination (Row 9) is ob-
tained by incorporating the DSSM feature vectors 
of source and target documents (i.e., 600 features 
in total) in the ranker. 

We thus conclude that on both tasks, automatic 
highlighting and contextual entity search, features 
drawn from the output layers of our deep semantic 
model result in significant gains after being added 
to a set of non-semantic features, and in compari-
son to other types of semantic models used in the 
past. 

6 Related Work 

In addition to the notion of relevance as described 
in Section 1, related to interestingness is also the 
notion of salience (also called aboutness) (Gamon 
et al. 2013; 2014; Parajpe 2009; Yih et al. 2006). 
Salience is the centrality of a term to the content 
of a document. Although salience and interesting-
ness interact, the two are not the same. For exam-
ple, in a news article about President Obama’s 
visit to Seattle, Obama is salient, yet the average 
user would probably not be interested in learning 
more about Obama while reading that article.  

10



There are many systems that identify popular 
content in the Web or recommend content (e.g., 
Bandari et al. 2012; Lerman and Hogg 2010; 
Szabo and Huberman 2010), which is closely re-
lated to the highlighting task. In contrast to these 
approaches, we strive to predict what term a user 
is likely to be interested in when reading content, 
which may or may not be the same as the most 
popular content that is related to the current docu-
ment. It has empirically been demonstrated in 
Gamon et al. (2013) that popularity is in fact a ra-
ther poor predictor for interestingness. The task of 
contextual entity search, which is formulated as an 
information retrieval problem in this paper, is also 
related to research on entity resolution (Stefanidis 
et al. 2013).  

Latent Semantic Analysis (Deerwester et al. 
1990) is arguably the earliest semantic model de-
signed for IR. Generative topic models widely 
used for IR include PLSA (Hofmann 1990) and 
LDA (Blei et al. 2003). Recently, these models 
have been extended to handle cross-lingual cases, 
where there are pairs of corresponding documents 
in different languages (e.g., Dumais et al. 1997; 
Gao et al. 2011; Platt et al. 2010; Yih et al. 2011). 

By exploiting deep architectures, deep learning 
techniques are able to automatically discover from 
training data the hidden structures and the associ-
ated features at different levels of abstraction use-
ful for a variety of tasks (e.g., Collobert et al. 
2011; Hinton et al. 2012; Socher et al. 2012; 
Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Gao et al. 2014). Hinton 
and Salakhutdinov (2010) propose the most origi-
nal approach based on an unsupervised version of 
the deep neural network to discover the hierar-
chical semantic structure embedded in queries and 
documents. Huang et al. (2013) significantly ex-
tends the approach so that the deep neural network 
can be trained on large-scale query-document 
pairs giving much better performance. The use of 
the convolutional neural network for text pro-
cessing, central to our DSSM, was also described 
in Collobert et al. (2011) and Shen et al. (2014) 
but with very different applications. The DSSM 
described in Section 3 can be viewed as a variant 
of the deep neural network models used in these 
previous studies. 

7 Conclusions 

Modeling interestingness is fundamental to many 
online recommendation systems. We obtain natu-
rally occurring interest signals by observing Web 
browsing transitions where users click from one 
webpage to another. We propose to model this 

“interestingness” with a deep semantic similarity 
model (DSSM), based on deep neural networks 
with special convolutional-pooling structure, 
mapping source-target document pairs to feature 
vectors in a latent semantic space. We train the 
DSSM using browsing transitions between docu-
ments. Finally, we demonstrate the effectiveness 
of our model on two interestingness tasks: auto-
matic highlighting and contextual entity search. 
Our results on large-scale, real-world datasets 
show that the semantics of documents computed 
by the DSSM are important for modeling interest-
ingness and that the new model leads to signifi-
cant improvements on both tasks. DSSM is shown 
to outperform not only the classic document mod-
els that do not use (latent) semantics but also state-
of-the-art topic models that do not have the deep 
and convolutional architecture characterizing the 
DSSM. 

One area of future work is to extend our 
method to model interestingness given an entire 
user session, which consists of a sequence of 
browsing events. We believe that the prior brows-
ing and interaction history recorded in the session 
provides additional signals for predicting interest-
ingness. To capture such signals, our model needs 
to be extended to adequately represent time series 
(e.g., causal relations and consequences of ac-
tions). One potentially effective model for such a 
purpose is based on the architecture of recurrent 
neural networks (e.g., Mikolov et al. 2010; Chen 
and Deng, 2014), which can be incorporated into 
the deep semantic model proposed in this paper. 

Additional Authors 

Yelong Shen (Microsoft Research, One Microsoft 
Way, Redmond, WA 98052, USA, email: 
yeshen@microsoft.com). 

Acknowledgments 

The authors thank Johnson Apacible, Pradeep 
Chilakamarri, Edward Guo, Bernhard Kohlmeier, 
Xiaolong Li, Kevin Powell, Xinying Song and 
Ye-Yi Wang for their guidance and valuable dis-
cussions. We also thank the three anonymous re-
viewers for their comments. 

References 

Bandari, R., Asur, S., and Huberman, B. A. 2012. 
The pulse of news in social media: forecasting 
popularity. In ICWSM. 

11



Bengio, Y., 2009. Learning deep architectures for 
AI. Fundamental Trends in Machine Learning, 
2(1):1–127. 

Berger, A., and Lafferty, J. 1999. Information re-
trieval as statistical translation. In SIGIR, pp. 
222-229.  

Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., and Jordan, M. J. 2003. 
Latent Dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine 
Learning Research, 3. 

Broder, A., Fontoura, M., Josifovski, V., and 
Riedel, L. 2007. A semantic approach to contex-
tual advertising. In SIGIR. 

Brown, P. F., Della Pietra, S. A., Della Pietra, V. 
J., and Mercer, R. L. 1993. The mathematics of 
statistical machine translation: parameter esti-
mation. Computational Linguistics, 19(2):263-
311. 

Burges, C., Shaked, T., Renshaw, E., Lazier, A., 
Deeds, M., Hamilton, and Hullender, G. 2005. 
Learning to rank using gradient descent. In 
ICML, pp. 89-96.  

Chen, J. and Deng, L. 2014. A primal-dual method 
for training recurrent neural networks con-
strained by the echo-state property. In ICLR. 

Collobert, R., Weston, J., Bottou, L., Karlen, M., 
Kavukcuoglu, K., and Kuksa, P., 2011. Natural 
language processing (almost) from scratch. 
Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 12. 

Deerwester, S., Dumais, S. T., Furnas, G. W., 
Landauer, T., and Harshman, R. 1990. Indexing 
by latent semantic analysis. Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science, 
41(6): 391-407 

Deng, L., Hinton, G., and Kingsbury, B. 2013. 
New types of deep neural network learning for 
speech recognition and related applications: An 
overview. In ICASSP. 

Deng, L., Abdel-Hamid, O., and Yu, D., 2013a. A 
deep convolutional neural network using heter-
ogeneous pooling for trading acoustic invari-
ance with phonetic confusion. In ICASSP. 

Dumais, S. T., Letsche, T. A., Littman, M. L., and 
Landauer, T. K. 1997. Automatic cross-linguis-
tic information retrieval using latent semantic 
indexing. In AAAI-97 Spring Symposium Series: 
Cross-Language Text and Speech Retrieval. 

Friedman, J. H. 1999. Greedy function approxi-
mation: a gradient boosting machine. Annals of 
Statistics, 29:1189-1232. 

Gamon, M., Mukherjee, A., Pantel, P. 2014. Pre-
dicting interesting things in text. In COLING. 

Gamon, M., Yano, T., Song, X., Apacible, J. and 
Pantel, P. 2013. Identifying salient entities in 
web pages. In CIKM. 

Gao, J., He, X., and Nie, J-Y. 2010. Clickthrough-
based translation models for web search: from 
word models to phrase models. In CIKM. pp. 
1139-1148. 

Gao, J., He, X., Yih, W-t., and Deng, L. 2014. 
Learning continuous phrase representations for 
translation modeling. In ACL. 

Gao, J., Toutanova, K., Yih., W-T. 2011. Click-
through-based latent semantic models for web 
search. In SIGIR. pp. 675-684.  

Graves, A., Mohamed, A., and Hinton, G. 2013. 
Speech recognition with deep recurrent neural 
networks. In ICASSP. 

Gutmann, M. and Hyvarinen, A. 2010. Noise-con-
trastive estimation: a new estimation principle 
for unnormalized statistical models. In Proc. 
Int. Conf. on Artificial Intelligence and Statis-
tics (AISTATS2010). 

Hinton, G., Deng, L., Yu, D., Dahl, G., Mohamed, 
A., Jaitly, N., Senior, A., Vanhoucke, V., Ngu-
yen, P., Sainath, T., and Kingsbury, B., 2012. 
Deep neural networks for acoustic modeling in 
speech recognition. IEEE Signal Processing 
Magazine, 29:82-97. 

Hinton, G., and Salakhutdinov, R., 2010. Discov-
ering binary codes for documents by learning 
deep generative models. Topics in Cognitive 
Science, pp. 1-18. 

Hofmann, T. 1999. Probabilistic latent semantic 
indexing. In SIGIR. pp. 50-57. 

Huang, P., He, X., Gao, J., Deng, L., Acero, A., 
and Heck, L. 2013. Learning deep structured se-
mantic models for web search using click-
through data. In CIKM. 

Jarvelin, K. and Kekalainen, J. 2000. IR evalua-
tion methods for retrieving highly relevant doc-
uments. In SIGIR. pp. 41-48. 

Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I. and Hinton, G. 
2012. ImageNet classification with deep convo-
lutional neural networks. In NIPS. 

Lerman, K., and Hogg, T. 2010. Using a model of 
social dynamics to predict popularity of news. 
In WWW. pp. 621-630. 

Markoff, J. 2014. Computer eyesight gets a lot 
more accurate. In New York Times. 

Mikolov, T.. Karafiat, M., Burget, L., Cernocky, 
J., and Khudanpur, S. 2010. Recurrent neural 
network based language model. In 
INTERSPEECH. pp. 1045-1048. 

Paranjpe, D. 2009. Learning document aboutness 
from implicit user feedback and document 
structure. In CIKM. 

12



Platt, J., Toutanova, K., and Yih, W. 2010. 
Translingual document representations from 
discriminative projections. In EMNLP. pp. 251-
261. 

Ricci, F., Rokach, L., Shapira, B., and Kantor, P. 
B. (eds) 2011. Recommender System Handbook, 
Springer. 

Robertson, S., and Zaragoza, H. 2009. The proba-
bilistic relevance framework: BM25 and be-
yond. Foundations and Trends in Information 
Retrieval, 3(4):333-389. 

Shen, Y., He, X., Gao. J., Deng, L., and Mesnil, G. 
2014. A latent semantic model with convolu-
tional-pooling structure for information re-
trieval. In CIKM. 

Socher, R., Huval, B., Manning, C., Ng, A., 2012. 
Semantic compositionality through recursive 
matrix-vector spaces. In EMNLP. 

Stefanidis, K., Efthymiou, V., Herschel, M., and 
Christophides, V. 2013. Entity resolution in the 
web of data.  CIKM’13 Tutorial. 

Szabo, G., and Huberman, B. A. 2010. Predicting 
the popularity of online content. Communica-
tions of the ACM, 53(8). 

Wu, Q., Burges, C.J.C., Svore, K., and Gao, J. 
2009. Adapting boosting for information re-
trieval measures. Journal of Information Re-
trieval, 13(3):254-270. 

Yih, W., Goodman, J., and Carvalho, V. R. 2006. 
Finding advertising keywords on web pages. In 
WWW. 

Yih, W., Toutanova, K., Platt, J., and Meek, C. 
2011. Learning discriminative projections for 
text similarity measures. In CoNLL. 

 

13


