



















































Using Mined Coreference Chains as a Resource for a Semantic Task


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1447–1452,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Using Mined Coreference Chains as a Resource for a Semantic Task

Heike Adel and Hinrich Schütze
Center for Information and Language Processing

University of Munich
Germany

heike.adel@cis.lmu.de

Abstract

We propose to use coreference chains ex-
tracted from a large corpus as a resource
for semantic tasks. We extract three mil-
lion coreference chains and train word
embeddings on them. Then, we com-
pare these embeddings to word vectors de-
rived from raw text data and show that
coreference-based word embeddings im-
prove F1 on the task of antonym classifi-
cation by up to .09.

1 Introduction

After more than a decade of work on coreference
resolution, coreference resolution systems have
reached a certain level of maturity (e.g., Recasens
et al. (2010)). While accuracy is far from perfect
and many phenomena such as bridging still pose
difficult research problems, the quality of the out-
put of these systems is high enough to be useful
for many applications.

In this paper, we propose to run coreference res-
olution systems on large corpora, to collect the
coreference chains found and to use them as a re-
source for solving semantic tasks. This amounts
to using mined coreference chains as an automat-
ically compiled resource similar to the way cooc-
currence statistics, dependency pairs and aligned
parallel corpora are used in many applications in
NLP. Coreference chains have interesting comple-
mentary properties compared to these other re-
sources. For example, it is difficult to distinguish
true semantic similarity (e.g., “cows” – “cattle”)
from mere associational relatedness (e.g., “cows”
– “milk”) based on cooccurrence statistics. In con-
trast, coreference chains should be able to make
that distinction since only “cows” and “cattle” can
occur in the same coreference chain, not “cows”
and “milk”.

As a proof of concept we compile a resource
of mined coreference chains from the Gigaword

corpus and apply it to the task of identifying
antonyms. We induce distributed representations
for words based on (i) cooccurrence statistics and
(ii) mined coreference chains and show that a com-
bination of both outperforms cooccurrence statis-
tics on antonym identification.

In summary, we make two contributions. First,
we propose to use coreference chains mined from
large corpora as a resource in NLP and publish the
first such resource. Second, in a proof of concept
study, we show that they can be used to solve a se-
mantic task – antonym identification – better than
is possible with existing resources.

We focus on the task of finding antonyms in this
paper since antonyms usually are distributionally
similar but semantically dissimilar words. Hence,
it is often not possible to distinguish them from
synonyms with distributional models only. In con-
trast, we expect that the coreference-based repre-
sentations can provide useful complementary in-
formation to this task. In general, coreference-
based similarity can however be used as an addi-
tional feature for any task that distributional simi-
larity is useful for. Thus, our coreference resource
can be applied to a variety of NLP tasks, e.g. find-
ing alternative names for entities (in a way similar
to Wikipedia anchors) for tasks in the context of
knowledge base population.

The remainder of the paper is organized as fol-
lows. In Section 2, we describe how we create
word embeddings and how our antonym classi-
fier works. The word embeddings are then eval-
uated qualitatively, quantitatively and for the task
of antonym detection (Section 3). Section 4 dis-
cusses related work and Section 5 concludes.

2 System description

2.1 Coreference-based embeddings

Standard word embeddings derived from text data
may not be able to distinguish between semantic

1447



text-based coref.-based
his my, their, her, your, our he, him, himself, zechariah, ancestor
woman man, girl, believer, pharisee, guy girl, prostitute, lupita, betsy, lehia

Table 1: Nearest neighbors of “his” / “woman” for text-based & coreference-based embeddings

association and true synonymy. As a result, syn-
onyms and antonyms may be mapped to similar
word vectors (Yih et al., 2012). For many NLP
tasks, however, information about true synonymy
or antonymy may be important.

In this paper, we develop two different word
embeddings: embeddings calculated on raw text
data and embeddings derived from automatically
extracted coreference chains. For the calcula-
tion of the vector representations, the word2vec
toolkit1 by Mikolov et al. (2013) is applied. We
use the skip-gram model for our experiments be-
cause its results for semantic similarity are better
according to Mikolov et al. (2013). We train a
first model on a subset of English Gigaword data.2

In the following sections, we call the resulting
embeddings text-based. To improve the seman-
tic similarities of the vectors, we prepare another
training text consisting of coreference chains. We
use CoreNLP (Lee et al., 2011) to extract coref-
erence chains from the Gigaword corpus. Then
we build a skip-gram model on these coreference
chains. The extracted coreference chains are pro-
vided as an additional resource to this paper3. Al-
though they have been developed using only a
publicly available toolkit, we expect this resource
to be helpful for other researchers since the pro-
cess to extract the coreference chains of such a
large text corpus takes several weeks on multi-core
machines. In total, we extracted 3.1M coreference
chains. 2.7M of them consist of at least two differ-
ent markables. The median (mean) length of the
chains is 3 (4.0) and the median (mean) length of
a markable is 1 (2.7). To train word embeddings,
the markables of each coreference chain are con-
catenated to one text line. These lines are used as
input sentences for word2vec. We refer to the re-
sulting embeddings as coreference-based.

2.2 Antonym detection
In the following experiments, we use word em-
beddings to discriminate antonyms from non-
antonyms. We formalize this as a supervised clas-

1https://code.google.com/p/word2vec
2LDC2012T21, Agence France-Presse 2010
3https://code.google.com/p/cistern

sification task and apply SVMs (Chang and Lin,
2011).

The following features are used to represent a
pair of two words w and v:

1. cosine similarity of the text-based embed-
dings of w and v;

2. inverse rank of v in the nearest text-based
neighbors of w;

3. cosine similarity of the coreference-based
embeddings of w and v;

4. inverse rank of v in the nearest coreference-
based neighbors of w;

5. difference of (1) and (3);

6. difference of (2) and (4).

We experiment with three different subsets of
these features: text-based (1 and 2), coreference-
based (3 and 4) and all features.

3 Experiments and results

3.1 Qualitative analysis of word vectors
Table 1 lists the five nearest neighbors based on
cosine similarity of text-based and coreference-
based word vectors for “his” and “woman”.

We see that the two types of embeddings cap-
ture different notions of similarity. Unlike the text-
based neighbors, the coreference-based neighbors
have the same gender. The text-based neighbors
are mutually substitutable words, but substitution
seems to change the meaning more than for the
coreference-based neighbors.

In Figure 1, we illustrate the vectors for some
antonyms (connected by lines).

For reducing the dimensionality of the vector
space to 2D, we applied the t-SNE toolkit4. It uses
stochastic neighbor embedding with a Student’s
t-distribution to map high dimensional vectors
into a lower dimensional space (Van der Maaten
and Hinton, 2008). The Figure shows that the
coreference-based word embeddings are able to

4http://homepage.tudelft.nl/19j49/t-SNE.html

1448



1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
1.4

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.2

willingness

innocence

guilt
literacy

unwillingness

toughness

illiteracy

frailty

1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
1.4

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.2

willingness

innocence

guilt

unwillingness

frailty

toughness
literacy

illiteracy

Figure 1: 2D-positions of words in the text-based (top) and coreference-based embeddings (bottom)

enlarge the distance between antonyms (especially
for guilt vs. innocence and toughness vs. frailty)
compared to text-based word vectors.

3.2 Quantitative analysis of word vectors
To verify that coreference-based embeddings bet-
ter represent semantic components relevant to
coreference, we split our coreference resource into
two parts (about 85% and 15% of the data), trained
embeddings on the first part and computed the co-
sine similarity – both text-based and coreference-
based – for each pair of words occurring in the
same coreference chain in the second part. The
statistics in Table 2 confirm that coreference-based
vectors have higher similarity within chains than
text-based vectors.

3.3 Experimental setup
We formalize antonym detection as a binary classi-
fication task. Given a target word w and one of its
nearest neighbors v, the classifier decides whether
v is an antonym of w. Our data set is a set of pairs,
each consisting of a target word w and a candi-
date v. For all word types of our vocabulary, we
search for antonyms using the online dictionary
Merriam Webster.5 The resulting list is provided
as an additional resource6. It contains 6225 words
with antonyms. Positive training examples are col-
lected by checking if the 500 nearest text-based
neighbors of w contain one of the antonyms listed
by Webster. Negative training examples are cre-
ated by replacing the antonym with a random word
from the 500 nearest neighbors that is not listed as

5http://www.merriam-webster.com
6https://code.google.com/p/cistern

an antonym. By selecting both the positive and
the negative examples from the nearest neighbors
of the word vectors, we intend to develop a task
which is hard to solve: The classifier has to find
the small portion of semantically dissimilar words
(i.e., antonyms) among distributionally very simi-
lar words. The total number of positive and nega-
tive examples is 2337 each. The data are split into
training (80%), development (10%) and test (10%)
sets.

In initial experiments, we found only a small
difference in antonym classification performance
between text-based and coreference-based fea-
tures. When analyzing the errors, we realized that
our rationale for using coreference-based embed-
dings only applies to nouns, not to other parts of
speech. This will be discussed in detail below. We
therefore run our experiments in two modes: all
word classification (all pairs are considered) and
noun classification (only pairs are considered for
which the target word is a noun). We use the Stan-
ford part-of-speech tagger (Toutanova et al., 2003)
to determine whether a word is a noun or not.

Our classifier is a radial basis function (rbf) sup-
port vector machine (SVM). The rbf kernel per-
formed better than a linear kernel in initial exper-
iments. The SVM parameters C and γ are opti-
mized on the development set. The representation
of target-candidate pairs consists of the features
described in Section 2.

3.4 Experimental results and discussion

We perform the experiments with the three differ-
ent feature sets described in Section 2: text-based,
coreference-based and all features. Table 3 shows

1449



all word classification noun classification
development set test set development set test set

feature set P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1
text-based .83 .66 .74 .74 .55 .63 .91 .61 .73 .74 .51 .60
coreference-based .67 .42 .51 .65 .43 .52 .86 .47 .61 .77 .45 .57
text+coref .79 .65 .72 .75 .58 .66 .88 .70 .78 .79 .61 .69

Table 3: Results for different feature sets. Best result in each column in bold.

minimum maximum median
text-based vectors -0.350 0.998 0.156
coref.-based vectors -0.318 0.999 0.161

Table 2: Cosine similarity of words in the same
coreference chain

results for development and test sets.
For all word classification, coreference-based

features do not improve performance on the de-
velopment set (e.g., F1 is .74 for text-based vs .72
for text+coref). On the test set, however, the com-
bination of all features (text+coref) has better per-
formance than text-based alone: .66 vs .63.

For noun classification, using coreference-
based features in addition to text-based features
improves results on development set (F1 is .78 vs
.73) and test set (.69 vs .60).

These results show that mined coreference
chains are a useful resource and provide infor-
mation that is complementary to other methods.
Even though adding coreference-based embed-
dings improves performance on antonym classi-
fication, the experiments also show that using
only coreference-based embeddings is almost al-
ways worse than using only text-based embed-
dings. This is not surprising given that the amount
of training data for the word embeddings is differ-
ent in the two cases. Coreference chains provide
only a small subset of the word-word relations that
are given to the word2vec skip-gram model when
applied to raw text. If the sizes of the training data
sets were similar in the two cases, we would ex-
pect performance to be comparable.

In the beginning, our hypothesis was that coref-
erence information should be helpful for antonym
classification in general. When we performed an
error analysis for our initial results, we realized
that this hypothesis only holds for nouns. Other
types of words cooccurring in coreference chains
are not more likely to be synonyms than words
cooccurring in text windows. Two contexts that
illustrate this point are “bright sides, but also dif-

ficult and dark ones” and “a series of black and
white shots” (elements of coreference chains in
italics). Thus, adjectives with opposite meanings
can cooccur in coreference chains just as they can
cooccur in window-based contexts. For nouns, it
is much less likely that the same coreference chain
will contain both a noun and its antonym since –
by definition – markables in a coreference chain
refer to the same identical entity.

4 Related work

Traditionally, words have been represented by
vectors of the size of the vocabulary with a one at
the word index and zeros otherwise (one-hot vec-
tors). However, this approach cannot handle un-
known words (Turian et al., 2010) and similari-
ties among words cannot be represented (Mikolov
et al., 2013). Therefore, distributed word repre-
sentations (embeddings) become more and more
popular. They are low-dimensional, real-valued
vectors. Mikolov et al. (2013) have published
word2vec, a toolkit that provides different possi-
bilities to estimate word embeddings (cbow model
and skip-gram model). They show that the re-
sulting word vectors capture semantic and syntac-
tic relationships of words. Baroni et al. (2014)
show that word embeddings are able to outper-
form count based word vectors on a variety of
NLP tasks. Recently, Levy and Goldberg (2014)
have generalized the skip-gram model to include
not only linear but arbitrary contexts like contexts
derived from dependency parse trees. Andreas and
Klein (2014) investigate the amount of additional
information continuous word embeddings could
add to a constituency parser and find that most
of their information is redundant to what can be
learned from labeled parse trees. In (Yih et al.,
2012), the vector space representation of words is
modified so that high positive similarities are as-
signed to synonyms and high negative similarities
to antonyms. For this, latent semantic analysis is
applied to a matrix of thesaurus entries. The val-

1450



ues representing antonyms are negated.

There has been a great deal of work on apply-
ing the vector space model and cosine similarity
to find synonyms or antonyms. Hagiwara et al.
(2006) represent each word as a vector with cooc-
currence frequencies of words and contexts as el-
ements, normalized by the inverse document fre-
quency. The authors investigate three types of con-
textual information (dependency, sentence cooc-
currence and proximity) and find that a combi-
nation of them leads to the most stable results.
Schulte im Walde and Köper (2013) build a vector
space model on lexico-syntactic patterns and ap-
ply a Rocchio classifier to distinguish synonyms
from antonyms, among other tasks. Van der Plas
and Tiedemann (2006) use automatically aligned
translations of the same text in different languages
to build context vectors. Based on these vectors,
they detect synonyms.

In contrast, there are also studies using linguis-
tic knowledge from external resources: Senellart
and Blondel (2008) propose a method for syn-
onym detection based on graph similarity in a
graph generated using the definitions of a mono-
lingual dictionary. Harabagiu et al. (2006) rec-
ognize antonymy by generating antonymy chains
based on WordNet relations. Mohammad et al.
(2008) look for the word with the highest degree of
antonymy to a given target word among five candi-
dates. For this task, they use thesaurus information
and the similarity of the contexts of two contrast-
ing words. Lin et al. (2003) use Hearst patterns
to distiguish synonyms from antonyms. Work by
Turney (2008) is similar except that the patterns
are learned.

Except for the publicly available coreference
resolution system, our approach does not need ex-
ternal resources such as dictionaries or bilingual
corpora and no human labor is required. Thus,
it can be easily applied to any corpus in any lan-
guage as long as there exists a coreference resolu-
tion system in this language. The pattern-based
approach (Lin et al., 2003; Turney, 2008) dis-
cussed above also needs few resources. In contrast
to our work, it relies on patterns and might there-
fore restrict the number of recognizable synonyms
and antonyms to those appearing in the context of
the pre-defined patterns. On the other hand, pat-
terns could explicitely distinguish contexts typical
for synonyms from contexts for antonyms. Hence,
we plan to combine our coreference-based method

with pattern-based methods in the future.

5 Conclusion

In this paper, we showed that mined corefer-
ence chains can be used for creating word em-
beddings that capture a type of semantic sim-
ilarity that is different from the one captured
by standard text-based embeddings. We showed
that coreference-based embeddings improve per-
formance of antonym classification by .09 F1
compared to using only text-based embeddings.
We achieved precision values of up to .79, recall
values of up to .61 and F1 scores of up to .69.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by DFG (grant SCHU
2246/4-2).

References
Jacob Andreas and Dan Klein. 2014. How much do

word embeddings encode about syntax? In ACL,
pages 822–827.

Marco Baroni, Georgiana Dinu, and Germán
Kruszewski. 2014. Don’t count, predict! a
systematic comparison of context-counting vs.
context-predicting semantic vectors. In ACL, pages
238–247.

Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin. 2011. LIB-
SVM: a library for support vector machines. ACM
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology
(TIST), 2(3):27.

Masato Hagiwara, Yasuhiro Ogawa, and Katsuhiko
Toyama. 2006. Selection of effective contextual
information for automatic synonym acquisition. In
COLING/ACL, pages 353–360.

Sanda Harabagiu, Andrew Hickl, and Finley Lacatusu.
2006. Negation, contrast and contradiction in text
processing. In AAAI, volume 6, pages 755–762.

Heeyoung Lee, Yves Peirsman, Angel Chang,
Nathanael Chambers, Mihai Surdeanu, and Dan Ju-
rafsky. 2011. Stanford’s multi-pass sieve corefer-
ence resolution system at the CoNLL-2011 shared
task. In CoNLL: Shared Task, pages 28–34.

Omer Levy and Yoav Goldberg. 2014. Dependency-
based word embeddings. In ACL, pages 302–308.

Dekang Lin, Shaojun Zhao, Lijuan Qin, and Ming
Zhou. 2003. Identifying synonyms among distribu-
tionally similar words. In IJCAI, pages 1492–1493.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey
Dean. 2013. Efficient estimation of word represen-
tations in vector space. Workshop at ICLR.

1451



Saif Mohammad, Bonnie Dorr, and Graeme Hirst.
2008. Computing word-pair antonymy. In EMNLP,
pages 982–991.

Marta Recasens, Lluı́s Màrquez, Emili Sapena,
M Antònia Martı́, Mariona Taulé, Véronique Hoste,
Massimo Poesio, and Yannick Versley. 2010.
Semeval-2010 task 1: Coreference resolution in
multiple languages. In 5th International Workshop
on Semantic Evaluation, pages 1–8.

Sabine Schulte im Walde and Maximilian Köper. 2013.
Pattern-based distinction of paradigmatic relations
for German nouns, verbs, adjectives. In Language
Processing and Knowledge in the Web, pages 184–
198. Springer.

Pierre Senellart and Vincent D Blondel. 2008. Auto-
matic discovery of similar words. In Survey of Text
Mining II, pages 25–44. Springer.

Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, Christopher Manning,
and Yoram Singer. 2003. Feature-rich part-of-
speech tagging with a cyclic dependency network.
In NAACL-HLT, pages 252–259.

Joseph Turian, Lev Ratinov, and Yoshua Bengio. 2010.
Word representations: a simple and general method
for semi-supervised learning. In ACL, pages 384–
394.

Peter D. Turney. 2008. A uniform approach to analo-
gies, synonyms, antonyms, and associations. In
COLING, pages 905–912.

Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. 2008.
Visualizing data using t-SNE. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 9(11):2579–2605.

Lonneke Van der Plas and Jörg Tiedemann. 2006.
Finding synonyms using automatic word alignment
and measures of distributional similarity. In COL-
ING/ACL, pages 866–873.

Wen-tau Yih, Geoffrey Zweig, and John C Platt.
2012. Polarity inducing latent semantic analysis. In
EMNLP/CoNLL, pages 1212–1222.

1452


