



















































Semi-Supervised Chinese Word Segmentation Using Partial-Label Learning With Conditional Random Fields


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 90–98,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Semi-Supervised Chinese Word Segmentation Using Partial-Label
Learning With Conditional Random Fields

Fan Yang
Nuance Communications Inc.
fan.yang@nuance.com

Paul Vozila
Nuance Communications Inc.

paul.vozila@nuance.com

Abstract

There is rich knowledge encoded in on-
line web data. For example, punctua-
tion and entity tags in Wikipedia data
define some word boundaries in a sen-
tence. In this paper we adopt partial-label
learning with conditional random fields to
make use of this valuable knowledge for
semi-supervised Chinese word segmenta-
tion. The basic idea of partial-label learn-
ing is to optimize a cost function that
marginalizes the probability mass in the
constrained space that encodes this knowl-
edge. By integrating some domain adap-
tation techniques, such as EasyAdapt, our
result reaches an F-measure of 95.98% on
the CTB-6 corpus, a significant improve-
ment from both the supervised baseline
and a previous proposed approach, namely
constrained decode.

1 Introduction

A general approach for supervised Chinese word
segmentation is to formulate it as a character se-
quence labeling problem, to label each charac-
ter with its location in a word. For example,
Xue (2003) proposes a four-label scheme based on
some linguistic intuitions: ‘B’ for the beginning
character of a word, ‘I’ for the internal characters,
‘E’ for the ending character, and ‘S’ for single-
character word. Thus the word sequence “洽谈会
很成功” can be turned into a character sequence
with labels as洽\B谈\I会\E很\S成\B功\E.
A machine learning algorithm for sequence label-
ing, such as conditional random fields (CRF) (Laf-
ferty et al., 2001), can be applied to the labelled
training data to learn a model.

Labelled data for supervised learning of Chi-
nese word segmentation, however, is usually ex-
pensive and tends to be of a limited amount. Re-
searchers are thus interested in semi-supervised

learning, which is to make use of unlabelled data
to further improve the performance of supervised
learning. There is a large amount of unlabelled
data available, for example, the Gigaword corpus
in the LDC catalog or the Chinese Wikipedia on
the web.

Faced with the large amount of unlabelled data,
an intuitive idea is to use self-training or EM, by
first training a baseline model (from the supervised
data) and then iteratively decoding the unlabelled
data and updating the baseline model. Jiao et al.
(2006) and Mann and McCallum (2007) further
propose to minimize the entropy of the predicted
label distribution on unlabeled data and use it as
a regularization term in CRF (i.e. entropy reg-
ularization). Beyond these ideas, Liang (2005)
and Sun and Xu (2011) experiment with deriv-
ing a large set of statistical features such as mu-
tual information and accessor variety from un-
labelled data, and add them to supervised dis-
criminative training. Zeng et al. (2013b) experi-
ment with graph propagation to extract informa-
tion from unlabelled data to regularize the CRF
training. Yang and Vozila (2013), Zhang et al.
(2013), and Zeng et al. (2013a) experiment with
co-training for semi-supervised Chinese word seg-
mentation. All these approaches only leverage
the distribution of the unlabelled data, yet do not
make use of the knowledge that the unlabelled data
might have integrated in.

There could be valuable information encoded
within the unlabelled data that researchers can take
advantage of. For example, punctuation creates
natural word boundaries (Li and Sun, 2009): the
character before a comma can only be labelled
as either ‘S’ or ‘E’, while the character after a
comma can only be labelled as ‘S’ or ‘B’. Fur-
thermore, entity tags (HTML tags or Wikipedia
tags) on the web, such as emphasis and cross refer-
ence, also provide rich information for word seg-
mentation: they might define a word or at least

90



Figure 1: Sausage constraint (partial labels) from natural annotations and punctuation

give word boundary information similar to punc-
tuation. Jiang et al. (2013) refer to such structural
information on the web as natural annotations, and
propose that they encode knowledge for NLP. For
Chinese word segmentation, natural annotations
and punctuation create a sausage1 constraint for
the possible labels, as illustrated in Figure 1. In
the sentence “近年来，人工智能和机器学习迅
猛发展。”, the first character 近 can only be la-
belled with ‘S’ or ‘B’; and the characters来 before
the comma and 展 before the Chinese period can
only be labelled as ‘S’ or ‘E’. “人工智能” and “机
器学习” are two Wikipedia entities, and so they
define the word boundaries before the first char-
acter and after the last character of the entities as
well. The single character 和 between these two
entities has only one label ‘S’. This sausage con-
straint thus encodes rich information for word seg-
mentation.

To make use of the knowledge encoded in the
sausage constraint, Jiang et al. (2013) adopt a con-
strained decode approach. They first train a base-
line model with labelled data, and then run con-
strained decode on the unlabelled data by binding
the search space with the sausage; and so the de-
coded labels are consistent with the sausage con-
straint. The unlabelled data, together with the
labels from constrained decode, are then selec-
tively added to the labelled data for training the
final model. This approach, using constrained de-
code as a middle step, provides an indirect way
of leaning the knowledge. However, the middle
step, constrained decode, has the risk of reinforc-
ing the errors in the baseline model: the decoded
labels added to the training data for building the
final model might contain errors introduced from
the baseline model. The knowledge encoded in

1Also referred to as confusion network.

the data carrying the information from punctuation
and natural annotations is thus polluted by the er-
rorful re-decoded labels.

A sentence where each character has exactly
one label is fully-labelled; and a sentence where
each character receives all possible labels is zero-
labelled. A sentence with sausage-constrained la-
bels can be viewed as partially-labelled. These
partial labels carry valuable information that re-
searchers would like to learn in a model, yet the
normal CRF training typically uses fully-labelled
sentences. Recently, Täckström et al. (2013) pro-
pose an approach to train a CRF model directly
from partial labels. The basic idea is to marginal-
ize the probability mass of the constrained sausage
in the cost function. The normal CRF training us-
ing fully-labelled sentences is a special case where
the sausage constraint is a linear line; while on
the other hand a zero-labelled sentence, where the
sausage constraint is the full lattice, makes no con-
tribution in the learning since the sum of proba-
bilities is deemed to be one. This new approach,
without the need of using constrained re-decoding
as a middle step, provides a direct means to learn
the knowledge in the partial labels.

In this research we explore using the partial-
label learning for semi-supervised Chinese word
segmentation. We use the CTB-6 corpus as the
labelled training, development and test data, and
use the Chinese Wikipedia as the unlabelled data.
We first train a baseline model with labelled data
only, and then selectively add Wikipedia data with
partial labels to build a second model. Because
the Wikipedia data is out of domain and has dis-
tribution bias, we also experiment with two do-
main adaptation techniques: model interpolation
and EasyAdapt (Daumé III, 2007). Our result
reaches an F-measure of 95.98%, an absolute im-
provement of 0.72% over the very strong base-

91



line (corresponding to 15.19% relative error re-
duction), and 0.33% over the constrained decode
approach (corresponding to 7.59% relative error
reduction). We conduct a detailed error analy-
sis, illustrating how partial-label learning excels
constrained decode in learning the knowledge en-
coded in the Wikipedia data. As a note, our result
also out-performs (Wang et al., 2011) and (Sun
and Xu, 2011).

2 Partial-Label Learning with CRF

In this section, we review in more detail the
partial-label learning algorithm with CRF pro-
posed by (Täckström et al., 2013). CRF is an
exponential model that expresses the conditional
probability of the labels given a sequence, as
Equation 1, where y denotes the labels, x denotes
the sequence, Φ(x, y) denotes the feature func-
tions, and θ is the parameter vector. Z(x) =∑

y exp(θ
T Φ(x, y)) is the normalization term.

pθ(y|x) = exp(θ
T Φ(x, y))
Z(x)

(1)

In full-label training, where each item in the se-
quence is labelled with exactly one tag, maximum
likelihood is typically used as the optimization tar-
get. We simply sum up the log-likelihood of the n
labelled sequences in the training set, as shown in
Equation 2.

L(θ) =
n∑

i=1

log pθ(y|x)

=
n∑

i=1

(θT Φ(xi, yi)− log Z(xi))
(2)

The gradient is calculated as Equation 3, in
which the first term 1n

∑n
i=1 Φj is the empirical

expectation of feature function Φj , and the second
term E[Φj ] is the model expectation. Typically a
forward-backward process is adopted for calculat-
ing the latter.

∂

∂θj
L(θ) =

1
n

n∑
i=1

Φj − E[Φj ] (3)

In partial-label training, each item in the se-
quence receives multiple labels, and so for each
sequence we have a sausage constraint, denoted as
Ŷ (x, ỹ). The marginal probability of the sausage
is defined as Equation 4.

pθ(Ŷ (x, ỹ)|x) =
∑

y∈Ŷ (x,ỹ)
pθ(y|x) (4)

The optimization target thus is to maximize the
probability mass of the sausage, as shown in Equa-
tion 5.

L(θ) =
n∑

i=1

logpθ(Ŷ (xi, ỹi)|xi) (5)

A gradient-based approach such as L-BFGS
(Liu and Nocedal, 1989) can be employed to op-
timize Equation 5. The gradient is calculated as
Equation 6, where EŶ (x,ỹ)[Φj ] is the empirical ex-
pectation of feature function Φj constrained by the
sausage, and E[Φj ] is the same model expectation
as in standard CRF. EŶ (x,ỹ)[Φj ] can be calculated
via a forward-backward process in the constrained
sausage.

∂

∂θj
L(θ) = EŶ (x,ỹ)[Φj ]− E[Φj ] (6)

For fully-labelled sentences, EŶ (x,ỹ)[Φj ] =
1
n

∑n
i=1 Φj , and so the standard CRF is actually

a special case of the partial-label learning.

3 Experiment setup

In this section we describe the basic setup for
our experiments of semi-supervised Chinese word
segmentation.

3.1 Data

We use the CTB-6 corpus as the labelled data. We
follow the official CTB-6 guideline in splitting the
corpus into a training set, a development set, and a
test set. The training set has 23420 sentences; the
development set has 2079 sentences; and the test
set has 2796 sentences. These are fully-labelled
data.

For unlabelled data we use the Chinese
Wikipedia. The Wikipedia data is quite noisy
and asks for a lot of cleaning. We first filter out
references and lists etc., and sentences with ob-
viously bad segmentations, for example, where
every character is separated by a space. We
also remove sentences that contain mostly En-
glish words. We then convert all characters into
full-width. We also convert traditional Chinese
characters into simplified characters using the tool

92



mediawiki-zhconverter2. We then randomly select
7737 sentences and reserve them as the test set.

To create the partial labels in the Wikipedia
data, we use the information from cross-reference,
emphasis, and punctuation. In our pilot study we
found that it’s beneficial to force a cross-reference
or emphasis entity as a word when the item has
2 or 3 characters. That is, if an entity in the
Wikipedia has three characters it receives the la-
bels of “BIE”; and if it has two characters it is la-
belled as “BE”.3

3.2 Supervised baseline model

We create the baseline supervised model by using
an order-1 linear CRF with L2 regularization, to
label a character sequence with the four candidate
labels “BIES”. We use the tool wapiti (Lavergne
et al., 2010).

Following Sun et al. (2009), Sun (2010), and
Low et al. (2005), we extract two types of fea-
tures: character-level features and word-level fea-
tures. Given a character c0 in the character se-
quence ...c−2c−1c0c1c2...:

Character-level features :

• Character unigrams: c−2, c−1, c0, c1, c2
• Character bigrams: c−2c−1, c−1c−0,

c0c1, c1c2
• Consecutive character equivalence:

?c−2 = c−1, ?c−1 = c−0 , ?c0 = c1,
?c1 = c2
• Separated character equivalence:

?c−3 = c−1, ?c−2 = c0, ?c−1 = c1,
?c0 = c2, ?c1 = c3
• Whether the current character is a punc-

tuation: ?Punct(c0)
• Character sequence pattern:

T (C−2)T (C−1)T (C0)T (C1)T (C2).
We classify all characters into four
types. Type one has three characters
‘年’ (year) ‘月’ (month) ‘日’ (date).
Type two includes number characters.
Type three includes English characters.
All others are Type four characters.
Thus “去年三月S” would generate the
character sequence pattern “41213”.

2https://github.com/tszming/mediawiki-zhconverter
3Another possibility is to label it as “SS” but we find that

it’s very rare the case.

Word-level features :

• The identity of the string c[s : i] (i−6 <
s < i), if it matches a word from the
list of word unigrams; multiple features
could be generated.
• The identity of the string c[i : e] (i <

e < i+6), if it matches a word; multiple
features could be generated.
• The identity of the bi-gram c[s : i −

1]c[i : e] (i − 6 < s, e < i + 6), if
it matches a word bigram; multiple fea-
tures could be generated.
• The identity of the bi-gram c[s : i]c[i +

1 : e] (i−6 < s, e < i+6), if it matches
a word bigram; multiple features could
be generated.
• Idiom. We use the idiom list from (Sun

and Xu, 2011). If the current character
c0 and its surrounding context compose
an idiom, we generate a feature for c0 of
its position in the idiom. For example, if
c−1c0c1c2 is an idiom, we generate fea-
ture “Idiom-2” for c0.

The above features together with label bigrams
are fed to wapiti for training. The supervised base-
line model is created with the CTB-6 corpus with-
out the use of Wikipedia data.

3.3 Partial-label learning
The overall process of applying partial-label learn-
ing to Wikipedia data is shown in Algorithm 1.
Following (Jiang et al., 2013), we first train the
supervised baseline model, and use it to estimate
the potential contribution for each sentence in the
Wikipedia training data. We label the sentence
with the baseline model, and then compare the
labels with the constrained sausage. For each
character, a consistent label is defined as an ele-
ment in the constrained labels. For example, if
the constrained labels for a character are “SB”,
the label ‘S’ or ‘B’ is consistent but ‘I’ or ‘E’ is
not. The number of inconsistent labels for each
sentence is then used as its potential contribution
to the partial-label learning: higher number indi-
cates that the partial-labels for the sentence con-
tain more knowledge that the baseline system does
not integrate, and so have higher potential contri-
bution. The Wikipedia training sentences are then
ranked by their potential contribution, and the top

93



Figure 2: Encoded knowledge: inconsistency ratio
and label reduction

K sentences together with their partial labels are
then added to the CTB-6 training data to build a
new model, using partial-label learning.4 In our
experiments, we try six data points with K =
100k, 200k, 300k, 400k, 500k, 600k. Figure 2
gives a rough idea of the knowledge encoded in
Wikipedia for these data points with inconsistency
ratio and label reduction. Inconsistency ratio is the
percentage of characters that have inconsistent la-
bels; and label reduction is the percentage of the
labels reduced in the full lattice.

We modify wapiti to implement the partial-label
learning as described in Section 2. Same as base-
line, L2 regularization is adopted.

Algorithm 1 Partial-label learning
1. Train supervised baseline model M0
2. For each sentence x in Wiki-Train:
3. y← Decode(x, M0)
4. diff← Inconsistent(y, Ŷ (x, ỹ))
5. if diff > 0:
6. C← C ∪ (Ŷ (x, ỹ), diff)
7. Sort(C, diff, reverse)
8. Train model Mpl with CTB-6 and top K sen-
tences in C using partial-label learning

3.4 Constrained decode
Jiang et al. (2013) implement the constrained de-
code algorithm with perceptron. However, CRF
is generally believed to out-perform perceptron,
yet the comparison of CRF vs perceptron is out

4Knowledge is sparsely distributed in the Wikipedia data.
Using the Wikipedia data without the CTB-6 data for partial-
label learning does not necessarily guarantee convergence.
Also the CTB-6 training data helps to learn that certain la-
bel transitions, such as “B B” or “E E”, are not legal.

of the scope of this paper. Thus for fair compar-
ison, we re-implement the constrained decode al-
gorithm with CRF.

Algorithm 2 shows the constrained decode im-
plementation. We first train the baseline model
with the CTB-6 data. We then use this baseline
model to run normal decode and constrained de-
code for each sentence in the Wikipedia training
set. If the normal decode and constrained decode
have different labels, we add the constrained de-
code together with the number of different labels
to the filtered Wikipedia training corpus. The fil-
tered Wikipedia training corpus is then sorted us-
ing the number of different labels, and the top K
sentences with constrained decoded labels are then
added to the CTB-6 training data for building a
new model using normal CRF.

Algorithm 2 Constrained decode
1. Train supervised baseline model M0
2. For each sentence x in Wiki-Train:
3. y← Decode(x, M0)
4. ȳ← ConstrainedDecode(x, M0)
5. diff← Difference(y, ȳ)
6. if diff > 0:
7. C← C ∪ (ȳ, diff)
8. Sort(C, diff, reverse)
9. Train model M cd with CTB-6 and top K sen-
tences in C using normal CRF

4 Evaluation on Wikipedia test set

In order to determine how well the models learn
the encoded knowledge (i.e. partial labels) from
the Wikipedia data, we first evaluate the mod-
els against the Wikipedia test set. The Wikipedia
test set, however, is only partially-labelled. Thus
the metric we use here is consistent label accu-
racy, similar to how we rank the sentences in Sec-
tion 3.3, defined as whether a predicted label for
a character is an element in the constrained la-
bels. Because partial labels are only sparsely dis-
tributed in the test data, a lot of characters receive
all four labels in the constrained sausage. Eval-
uating against characters with all four labels do
not really represent the models’ difference as it is
deemed to be consistent. Thus beyond evaluating
against all characters in the Wikipedia test set (re-
ferred to as Full measurement), we also evaluate
against characters that are only constrained with
less than four labels (referred to as Label mea-
surement). The Label measurement focuses on en-

94



coded knowledge in the test set and so can better
represent the model’s capability of learning from
the partial labels.

Results are shown in Figure 3 with the Full
measurement and in Figure 4 with the Label mea-
surement. The x axes are the size of Wikipedia
training data, as explained in Section 3.3. As
can be seen, both constrained decode and partial-
label learning perform much better than the base-
line supervised model that is trained from CTB-6
data only, indicating that both of them are learning
the encoded knowledge from the Wikipedia train-
ing data. Also we see the trend that the perfor-
mance improves with more data in training, also
suggesting the learning of encoded knowledge.
Most importantly, we see that partial-label learn-
ing consistently out-performs constrained decode
in all data points. With the Label measurement,
partial-label learning gives 1.7% or higher abso-
lute improvement over constrained decode across
all data points. At the data point of 600k, con-
strained decode gives an accuracy of 97.14%,
while partial-label learning gives 98.93% (base-
line model gives 87.08%). The relative gain (from
learning the knowledge) of partial-label learning
over constrained decode is thus 18% ((98.93 −
97.14)/(97.14 − 87.08)). These results suggest
that partial-label learning is more effective in
learning the encoded knowledge in the Wikipedia
data than constrained decode.

5 CTB evaluation

5.1 Model adaptation

Our ultimate goal, however, is to determine
whether we can leverage the encoded knowledge
in the Wikipedia data to improve the word seg-
mentation in CTB-6. We run our models against
the CTB-6 test set, with results shown in Fig-
ure 5. Because we have fully-labelled sentences
in the CTB-6 data, we adopt the F-measure as
our evaluation metric here. The baseline model
achieves 95.26% in F-measure, providing a state-
of-the-art supervised performance. Constrained
decode is able to improve on this already very
strong baseline performance, and we see the nice
trend of higher performance with more unlabeled
data for training, indicating that constrained de-
code is making use of the encoded knowledge in
the Wikipedia data to help CTB-6 segmentation.

When we look at the partial-label model, how-
ever, the results tell a totally different story.

Figure 3: Wiki label evaluation results: Full

Figure 4: Wiki label evaluation results: Label

Figure 5: CTB evaluation results

95



First, it actually performs worse than the base-
line model, and the more data added to train-
ing, the worse the performance is. In the previ-
ous section we show that partial-label learning is
more effective in learning the encoded knowledge
in Wikipedia data than constrained decode. So,
what goes wrong? We hypothesize that there is
an out-of-domain distribution bias in the partial la-
bels, and so the more data we add, the worse the
in-domain performance is. Constrained decode
actually helps to smooth out the out-of-domain
distribution bias by using the re-decoded labels
with the in-domain supervised baseline model.
For example, both the baseline model and con-
strained decode correctly give the segmentation
“提供/了/运输/和/给给给排排排水水水/之/便”, while partial-
label learning gives incorrect segmentation “提
供/了/运输/和/给给给/排排排水水水/之/便”. Looking at the
Wikipedia training data, 排水 is tagged as an en-
tity 13 times; and 给排水, although occurs 13
times in the data, is never tagged as an entity.
Partial-label learning, which focuses on the tagged
entities, thus overrules the segmentation of 给排
水. Constrained decode, on the other hand, by us-
ing the correctly re-decoded labels from the base-
line model, observes enough evidence to correctly
segment给排水 as a word.

To smooth out the out-of-domain distribution
bias, we experiment with two approaches: model
interpolation and EasyAdapt (Daumé III, 2007).

5.1.1 Model interpolation

We linearly interpolate the model of partial-label
learning Mpl with the baseline model M0 to create
the final model Mpl+ , as shown in Equation 7. The
interpolation weight is optimized via a grid search
between 0.0 and 1.0 with a step of 0.1, tuned on
the CTB-6 development set. Again we modify
wapiti so that it takes two models and an interpo-
lation weight as input. For each model it creates
a search lattice with posteriors, and then linearly
combines the two lattices using the interpolation
weight to create the final search space for decod-
ing. As shown in Figure 5, model Mpl+ consis-
tently out-performs constrained decode in all data
points. We also see the trend of better performance
with more training data.

Mpl+ = λ ∗M0 + (1− λ) ∗Mpl (7)

5.1.2 EasyAdapt

EasyAdapt is a straightforward technique but has
been shown effective in many domain adaptation
tasks (Daumé III, 2007). We train the model
Mplea with feature augmentation. For each out-of-
domain training instance < xo, yo >, where xo
is the input features and yo is the (partial) labels,
we copy the features and file them as an additional
feature set, and so the training instance becomes <
xo, xo, yo >. The in-domain training data remains
the same. Consistent with (Daumé III, 2007),
EasyAdapt gives us the best performance, as show
in Figure 5. Furthermore, unlike in (Jiang et al.,
2013) where they find a plateau, our results show
no harm adding more training data for partial-label
learning when integrated with domain adaptation,
although the performance seems to saturate after
400k sentences.

Finally, we search for the parameter setting of
best performance on the CTB-6 development set,
which is to use EasyAdapt with K = 600k sen-
tences of Wikipedia data. With this setting, the
performance on the CTB-6 test set is 95.98%
in F-measure. This is 0.72% absolute improve-
ment over supervised baseline (corresponding to
15.19% relative error reduction), and 0.33% ab-
solute improvement over constrained decode (cor-
responding to 7.59% relative error reduction); the
differences are both statistically significant (p <
0.001).5 As a note, this result out-performs (Sun
and Xu, 2011) (95.44%) and (Wang et al., 2011)
(95.79%), and the differences are also statistically
significant (p < 0.001).

5.2 Analysis with examples

To better understand why partial-label learning is
more effective in learning the encoded knowledge,
we look at cases where M0 and M cd have the in-
correct segmentation while Mpl (and its domain
adaptation variance Mpl+ and M

pl
ea) have the cor-

rect segmentation. We find that the majority is
due to the error in re-decoded labels outside of en-
coded knowledge. For example, M0 and M cd give
the segmentation “地震/为/里里里/氏氏氏/6.9/级”, yet the
correct segmentation given by partial-label learn-
ing is “地震/为/里里里氏氏氏/6.9/ 级”. Looking at the
Wikipedia training data, there are 38 tagged enti-
ties of里氏, but there are another 190 mentions of

5Statistical significance is evaluated with z-test using the
standard deviation of

√
F ∗ (1− F )/N , where F is the F-

measure and N is the number of words.

96



里氏 that are not tagged as an entity. Thus for con-
strained decode it sees 38 cases of “里\B 氏\E”
and 190 cases of “里\S 氏\S” in the Wikipedia
training data. The former comes from the encoded
knowledge while the latter comes from re-decoded
labels by the baseline model. The much bigger
number of incorrect labels from the baseline re-
decoding badly pollute the encoded knowledge.
This example illustrates that constrained decode
reinforces the errors from the baseline. On the
other hand, the training materials for partial-label
learning are purely the encoded knowledge, which
is not impacted by the baseline model error. In this
example, partial-label learning focuses only on the
38 cases of “里\B 氏\E” and so is able to learn
that里氏 is a word.

As a final remark, we want to make a point that,
although the re-decoded labels serve to smooth out
the distribution bias, the Wikipedia data is indeed
not the ideal data set for such a purpose, because
it itself is out of domain. The performance tends
to degrade when we apply the baseline model to
re-decode the out-of-domain Wikipedia data. The
errorful re-decoded labels, when being used to
train the model M cd, could lead to further er-
rors. For example, the baseline model M0 is able
to give the correct segmentation “电脑/元元元器器器件件件”
in the CTB-6 test set. However, when it is ap-
plied to the Wikipedia data for constrained de-
code, for the seven occurrences of元器件, three of
which are correctly labelled as “元\B器\I件\E”,
but the other four have incorrect labels. The fi-
nal model M cd trained from these labels then
gives incorrect segmentation “两/市/生产/的/电
脑/元元元/器器器件件件/大量/销往/世界/各地” in the CTB-
6 test set. On the other hand, model interpolation
or EasyAdapt with partial-label learning, focusing
only on the encoded knowledge and not being im-
pacted by the errorful re-decoded labels, performs
correctly in this case. For a more fair comparison
between partial-label learning and constrained de-
code, we have also plotted the results of model in-
terpolation and EasyAdapt for constrained decode
in Figure 5. As can be seen, they improve on con-
strained decode a bit but still fall behind the cor-
respondent domain adaptation approach of partial-
label learning.

6 Conclusion and future work

There is rich information encoded in online web
data. For example, punctuation and entity tags de-

fine some word boundaries. In this paper we show
the effectiveness of partial-label learning in digest-
ing the encoded knowledge from Wikipedia data
for the task of Chinese word segmentation. Unlike
approaches such as constrained decode that use
the errorful re-decoded labels, partial-label learn-
ing provides a direct means to learn the encoded
knowledge. By integrating some domain adap-
tation techniques such as EasyAdapt, we achieve
an F-measure of 95.98% in the CTB-6 corpus, a
significant improvement from both the supervised
baseline and constrained decode. Our results also
beat (Wang et al., 2011) and (Sun and Xu, 2011).

In this research we employ a sausage constraint
to encode the knowledge for Chinese word seg-
mentation. However, a sausage constraint does
not reflect the legal label sequence. For exam-
ple, in Figure 1 the links between label ‘B’ and
label ‘S’, between ‘S’ and ‘E’, and between ‘E’
and ‘I’ are illegal, and can confuse the machine
learning. In our current work we solve this issue
by adding some fully-labelled data into training.
Instead we can easily extend our work to use a lat-
tice constraint by removing the illegal transitions
from the sausage. The partial-label learning stands
the same, by executing the forward-backward pro-
cess in the constrained lattice. In future work we
will examine partial-label learning with this more
enforced lattice constraint in depth.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank Wenbin Jiang, Xi-
aodong Zeng, and Weiwei Sun for helpful discus-
sions, and the anonymous reviewers for insightful
comments.

References
Hal Daumé III. 2007. Frustratingly easy domain adap-

tation. In Annual meetingassociation for computa-
tional linguistics, pages 256–263. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Wenbin Jiang, Meng Sun, Yajuan Lv, Yating Yang,
and Qun Liu. 2013. Discriminative learning with
natural annotations: Word segmentation as a case
study. In Proceedings of The 51st Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 761–769.

Feng Jiao, Shaojun Wang, Chi-Hoon Lee, Russell
Greiner, and Dale Schuurmans. 2006. Semi-
supervised conditional random fields for improved
sequence segmentation and labeling. In Proceed-
ings of the 21st International Conference on Com-

97



putational Linguistics and the 44th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, ACL-44, pages 209–216.

John D. Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando
C. N. Pereira. 2001. Conditional random fields:
Probabilistic models for segmenting and labeling se-
quence data. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning, pages
282–289, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Thomas Lavergne, Olivier Cappé, and François Yvon.
2010. Practical very large scale CRFs. In Proceed-
ings the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages 504–513.
Association for Computational Linguistics, July.

Zhongguo Li and Maosong Sun. 2009. Punctuation as
implicit annotations for Chinese word segmentation.
Computational Linguistics, 35:505–512.

Percy Liang. 2005. Semi-supervised learning for natu-
ral language. Master’s thesis, MASSACHUSETTS
INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY, May.

D. C. Liu and J. Nocedal. 1989. On the limited mem-
ory bfgs method for large scale optimization. Math-
ematical Programming, 45(3):503–528, December.

Jin Kiat Low, Hwee Tou Ng, and Wenyuan Guo. 2005.
A maximum entropy approach to chinese word seg-
mentation. In Proceedings of the Fourth SIGHAN
Workshop on Chinese Language Processing, pages
161–164, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Gideon S. Mann and Andrew McCallum. 2007. Ef-
ficient computation of entropy gradient for semi-
supervised conditional random fields. In Human
Language Technologies 2007: The Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics; Companion Volume,
Short Papers, NAACL-Short ’07, pages 109–112.

Weiwei Sun and Jia Xu. 2011. Enhancing chinese
word segmentation using unlabeled data. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 970–
979, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK., July.

Xu Sun, Yaozhong Zhang, Takuya Matsuzaki, Yoshi-
masa Tsuruoka, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2009. A dis-
criminative latent variable Chinese segmenter with
hybrid word/character information. In Proceedings
of Human Language Technologies: The 2009 An-
nual Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 56–64.

Weiwei Sun. 2010. Word-based and character-based
word segmentation models: comparison and com-
bination. In Proceedings of the 23rd International
Conference on Computational Linguistics: Posters,
pages 1211–1219.

Oscar Täckström, Dipanjan Das, Slav Petrov, Ryan
McDonald, and Joakim Nivre. 2013. Token and
type constraints for cross-lingual part-of-speech tag-
ging. Transactions of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 1:1–12.

Yiou Wang, Jun’ichi Kazama, Yoshimasa Tsuruoka,
Wenliang Chen, Yujie Zhang, and Kentaro Tori-
sawa. 2011. Improving chinese word segmentation
and POS tagging with semi-supervised methods us-
ing large auto-analyzed data. In Proceedings of the
5th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 309–317.

Nianwen Xue. 2003. Chinese word segmentation as
character tagging. Computational Linguistics and
Chinese Language Processing, pages 29–48.

Fan Yang and Paul Vozila. 2013. An empirical study
of semi-supervised Chinese word segmentation us-
ing co-training. In Proceedings of the 2013 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 1191–1200, Seattle, Washington,
USA, October. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Xiaodong Zeng, Derek F. Wong, Lidia S. Chao, and
Isabel Trancoso. 2013a. Co-regularizing character-
based and word-based models for semi-supervised
chinese word segmentation. In Proceedings of The
51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 171–176.

Xiaodong Zeng, Derek F. Wong, Lidia S. Chao,
and Isabel Trancoso. 2013b. Graph-based semi-
supervised model for joint chinese word segmen-
tation and part-of-speech tagging. In Proceedings
of The 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 770–779.

Longkai Zhang, Houfeng Wang, Xu Sun, and Mairgup
Mansur. 2013. Exploring representations from un-
labeled data with co-training for Chinese word seg-
mentation. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 311–321, Seattle, Washington, USA,
October. Association for Computational Linguistics.

98


