



















































Analyzing Stemming Approaches for Turkish Multi-Document Summarization


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 702–706,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Analyzing Stemming Approaches for Turkish Multi-Document
Summarization

Muhammed Yavuz Nuzumlalı Arzucan Özgür
Department of Computer Engineering

Boğaziçi University
TR-34342, Bebek, İstanbul, Turkey

{yavuz.nuzumlali,arzucan.ozgur}@boun.edu.tr

Abstract

In this study, we analyzed the effects of ap-
plying different levels of stemming approaches
such as fixed-length word truncation and mor-
phological analysis for multi-document sum-
marization (MDS) on Turkish, which is an ag-
glutinative and morphologically rich language.
We constructed a manually annotated MDS
data set, and to our best knowledge, reported
the first results on Turkish MDS. Our results
show that a simple fixed-length word trun-
cation approach performs slightly better than
no stemming, whereas applying complex mor-
phological analysis does not improve Turkish
MDS.

1 Introduction

Automatic text summarization has gained more impor-
tance with the enormous growth and easy availability of
the Internet. It is now possible to reach extensive and
continuously growing amount of resources. However,
this situation brings its own challenges such as finding
the relevant documents, and absorbing a large quan-
tity of relevant information (Gupta and Lehal, 2010).
The goal of multi-document summarization (MDS) is
to automatically create a summary of a set of docu-
ments about the same topic without losing the impor-
tant information. Several approaches for MDS have
been proposed in the last decade. However, most of
them have only been applied to a relatively small set
of languages, mostly English, and recently also to lan-
guages like Chinese, Romanian, Arabic, and Spanish
(Giannakopoulos, 2013).

Previous studies have shown that methods proposed
for languages like English do not generally work well
for morphologically rich languages like Finnish, Turk-
ish, and Czech, and additional methods considering the
morphological structures of these languages are needed
(Eryiğit et al., 2008). For instance, Turkish is an ag-
glutinative language where root words can take many
derivational and inflectional affixes. This feature re-
sults in a very high number of different word surface
forms, and eventually leads to the data sparseness prob-
lem. Hakkani-Tür et al. (2000) analyzed the number of
unique terms for Turkish and English and showed that

the term count for Turkish is three times more than En-
glish for a corpus of 1M words.

There are only a few studies for text summariza-
tion on Turkish, all of which are about single-document
summarization (Altan, 2004; Çığır et al., 2009; Özsoy
et al., 2010; Güran et al., 2010; Güran et al., 2011).
Some of these studies applied morphological analysis
methods, but none of them analyzed their effects in de-
tail.

To our best knowledge, this paper reports the first
multi-document summarization study for Turkish. We
used LexRank as the main summarization algorithm
(Erkan and Radev, 2004), applied and analyzed differ-
ent levels of stemming methods such as complex mor-
phological analysis and fixed-length word truncation.
We also created the first manually annotated MDS data
set for Turkish, which has been made publicly available
for future studies.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 2 presents the related work on MDS, as well as
on the applications of morphological analysis on Turk-
ish for different Natural Language Processing (NLP)
and Information Retrieval (IR) problems. In Section
3, we provide a very brief introduction to the Turkish
morphology and present the stemming methods that we
evaluated. The details about the created data set and
our experimental setup are presented in Section 4. We
present and discuss the results in Section 5, and con-
clude in Section 6.

2 Related Work

A large number of methods have been proposed for
multi-document summarization in the last 10-15 years
(e.g. (Erkan and Radev, 2004; Shen and Li, 2010;
Christensen et al., 2013)). While most of these ap-
proaches have only been applied to English, summa-
rization data sets and systems for other languages like
Chinese, Romanian, and Arabic have also been pro-
posed in the recent years (Giannakopoulos, 2013).

Previous studies on automatic summarization for
Turkish only tackled the problem of single-document
summarization (SDS). Altan (2004) and Çığır et al.
(2009) proposed feature-based approaches for Turk-
ish SDS, whereas Özsoy et al. (2010) and Güran et
al. (2010) used Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) based
methods. Güran et al. (2011) applied non-negative ma-

702



Word Analysis
gören (the one who sees) gör+en(DB)
görülen (the one which is seen) gör+ül(DB)+en(DB)
görüş (opinion) gör+üş(DB)
görüşün (your opinion) gör+üş(DB)+ün
görüşler (opinions) gör+üş(DB)+ler
görüşme (negotiation) gör+üş(DB)+me(DB)
görüşmelerin (of negotiations) gör+üş(DB)+me(DB)+ler+in

Table 1: Different word forms and their morphological analysis for the stem “gör” (to see). The derivational
boundaries are marked with (DB).

trix factorization (NMF) and used consecutive words
detection as a preprocessing step.

The effect of morphological analysis for Turkish
was analyzed in detail for Information Retrieval (Can
et al., 2008) and Text Categorization (Akkuş and
Çakıcı, 2013). Can et al. (2008) showed that us-
ing fixed-length truncation methods perform similarly
to lemmatization-based stemming for information re-
trieval. Akkuş and Çakıcı (2013) obtained better results
for text categorization with fixed-length word trunca-
tion rather than complex morphological analysis, but
the difference was not significant. For other morpho-
logically rich languages, there is a case study on Greek
by Galiotou et al. (2013). They applied different stem-
ming algorithms and showed that stemming on Greek
texts improves the summarization performance.

3 Methodology

This section contains detailed information about the ap-
plication of different levels of morphological features
during the summarization process. Before diving into
the details, we provide a very brief description of the
morphological structure of the Turkish language.

3.1 Turkish Morphology

Turkish is an agglutinative language with a productive
morphology. Root words can take one or more deriva-
tional and inflectional affixes; therefore, a root can be
seen in a large number of different word forms. An-
other issue is the morphological ambiguity, where a
word can have more than one morphological parse.

Table 1 shows an example list of different word
forms for the stem “gör” (to see). All the words in the
table have the same root, but the different suffixes lead
to different surface forms which may have similar or
different meanings. When the surface forms of these
words are used in a summarization system, they will be
regarded as totally different words. However, if a mor-
phological analysis method is applied to the sentences
before giving them to the summarization system, words
with similar meanings can match during the sentence
similarity calculations.

3.2 Stemming Policies

In this section, we explain the different stemming meth-
ods that we investigated.

Raw: In this method, we take the surface forms of
words, without applying any stemming.

Root: This method takes the most simple unit of a
word, namely the root form. For example, in Table 1,
the words “gören”, “görüşün”, and “görüşmelerin”
have the same root (gör), so they will match during sen-
tence similarity calculations.

Deriv: Using the Root method may oversimplify
words because some words that are derived from the
same root may have irrelevant meanings. In the above
example, “görüşler” and “gören” have different mean-
ings, but they have the same root (gör). In order to solve
this oversimplification issue, we propose to preserve
derivational affixes, and only remove the inflectional
affixes from the words. In this method, “görüşler”
and “gören” will not match because when we remove
only the inflectional affixes, they become “görüş” and
“gören”. On the other hand, the words “görüşler” and
“görüşün” will match because their Deriv forms are the
same, which is “görüş”.

Prefix: In Turkish, affixes almost always occur as
suffixes, not prefixes. Additionally, applying morpho-
logical analysis methods is a time consuming process,
and may become an overhead for online applications.
Therefore, a fixed-length simplification method is also
tried, since it is both a fast method and can help match
similar words by taking the first n characters of words
which have lengths larger than n.

As the summarization algorithm, we used LexRank
(Erkan and Radev, 2004), which is a salient graph-
based method that achieves promising results for MDS.
In LexRank, first a sentence connectivity graph is con-
structed based on the cosine similarities between sen-
tences, and then the PageRank (Page et al., 1999) algo-
rithm is used to find the most important sentences.

4 Experimental Setup

4.1 Data Set

One of the greatest challenges for MDS studies in Turk-
ish is that there does not exist a manually annotated
data set. In this study, we have collected and manually

703



annotated a Turkish MDS data set, which is publicly
available for future studies1.

In order to match the standards for MDS data sets,
we tried to follow the specifications of the DUC 2004
data set. Our data set consists of 21 clusters, each con-
sisting of around 10 documents. We selected 21 differ-
ent topics from different domains (e.g., politics, eco-
nomics, sports, social, daily, and technology), and se-
lected 10 documents on average for each topic. The
documents were obtained from the websites of various
news sources. The average number of words per doc-
ument is 337, and the average number of letters in a
word is 6.84.

For manual annotation, we divided the 21 clusters
into three groups and sent them to three annotators dif-
ferent from the authors. We required the human sum-
maries not to exceed 120 words for the summary of
each cluster.

4.2 Tools
4.2.1 Turkish Morphological Analysis
In order to perform different levels of morphological
analysis on documents, we used a two-level morpho-
logical analyzer (Oflazer, 1994) and a perceptron-based
morphological disambiguator (Sak et al., 2007), which
is trained with a corpus of about 750, 000 tokens from
news articles. The accuracy of the disambiguator has
been reported as 96% (Sak et al., 2007). The Root and
Deriv forms of words were generated from the disam-
biguator output.

4.2.2 MEAD Summarization Toolkit
We used MEAD (Radev et al., 2004), which is an open-
source toolkit created for extractive MDS, in our exper-
iments. MEAD handles all the necessary processes to
generate a summary document (e.g., sentence ranking,
selection, re-ordering, and etc.).

We used the LexRank implementation that comes
with MEAD as a feature, together with the Cen-
troid and Position features (each feature is equally
weighted). We forced the generated summaries not to
exceed 120 words. However, we define the following
exception in order to preserve the readability and the
grammaticality of the generated summary. For a can-
didate sentence S having n words, if the absolute dif-
ference between the threshold (which is 120) and the
summary length including sentence S (say Nw) is less
than the absolute difference between the threshold and
the summary length excluding sentence S (say Nwo),
and if Nw is less than 132 (which is 120∗1.1), we allow
the summary to exceed the threshold and add sentence
S as the last summary sentence.

We used term frequency (tf) based cosine similarity
as the similarity measure during the sentence selection
step. We also required sentence length to be between

1The data set can be retrieved from the following github
repository: https://github.com/manuyavuz/
TurkishMDSDataSet_alpha

6 and 50 words (which we found empirically) in or-
der to increase the readability of the summaries. The
reason behind applying this filtering is that very short
sentences generally do not contain much information
to become a summary sentence, whereas very long sen-
tences decrease the readability and fill a significant per-
centage of the summary limit.

4.2.3 ROUGE
For evaluation, we used ROUGE, which is a standard
metric for automated evaluation of summaries based
on n-gram co-occurrence. We used ROUGE-1 (based
on uni-grams), ROUGE-2 (based on bi-grams), and
ROUGE-W (based on longest common sub-sequence
weighted by length) in our experiments. Among these,
ROUGE-1 has been shown to agree with human judges
the most (Lin and Hovy, 2003), so we give importance
to it while interpreting the results.

5 Evaluation and Results
We ran MEAD with the proposed stemming policies
using different levels of cosine similarity threshold val-
ues to analyze the effect of the similarity threshold on
the summarization performance. After the sentences
are ranked using the LexRank method, the similarity
threshold is used to decide whether to include a sen-
tence to the summary. A sentence is not included to the
summary, if its similarity to a previously picked sen-
tence is larger than the similarity threshold.

In our preliminary experiments, we used the default
similarity threshold 0.7, which was found empirically
by the MEAD developers for English. However, it pro-
duced poor results on the Turkish data set.

Policy ROUGE-1 ROUGE-2 ROUGE-W
Prefix10 0.438 0.194 0.197
Prefix12 0.433 0.197 0.195
Prefix9 0.432 0.194 0.194
Prefix4 0.432 0.178 0.190
Prefix7 0.431 0.189 0.190
Prefix5 0.431 0.183 0.190
Prefix6 0.430 0.185 0.189

Raw 0.428 0.189 0.191
Deriv 0.428 0.178 0.188

Prefix8 0.427 0.187 0.188
Prefix11 0.427 0.190 0.193

Root 0.420 0.186 0.185

Table 2: Best scores for different policies

Figure 1 shows the F-1 scores for the ROUGE-1
metric for policies with different thresholds. After the
threshold exceeds 0.5, the performances for all poli-
cies start to decrease, so we don’t report the values
here to make the chart more readable. In general, Raw
and Prefix10 (taking the first 10 letters of the words)
achieve better performances with lower threshold val-
ues, whereas Root and Deriv operate better with rel-
atively higher threshold values. As we stated earlier,
in Turkish, words with similar meanings can occur in

704



0.32	  

0.34	  

0.36	  

0.38	  

0.4	  

0.42	  

0.44	  

0.46	  

0.15	   0.2	   0.25	   0.3	   0.35	   0.4	   0.45	   0.5	  

RO
U
G
E-­‐
1	  
F-­‐
1	  
Sc
or
es
	  

Similarity	  Thresholds	  

Raw	   Deriv	   Root	   Prefix	  10	  

Figure 1: F-1 scores for different similarity threshold values

text with different surface forms due to their inflec-
tions. Such words can not be matched during similar-
ity computation if morphological analysis is not per-
formed. Therefore, using higher similarity threshold
values cause very similar sentences to occur together
in the summaries, and eventually, result in poor scores.

Table 2 shows the best scores obtained by each pol-
icy. The Prefix policy generally outperforms the Raw
policy. The Prefix10 policy achieves the best ROUGE-
1 score. On the other hand, the policies that apply com-
plex morphological analysis (i.e. Root and Deriv) are
not able to outperform the simple Prefix and Raw poli-
cies. The Deriv policy performs similarly to the Raw
and Prefix policies, whereas the Root policy obtains the
lowest ROUGE-1 score.

5.1 Discussion

The results show that using a simple fixed-length pre-
fix policy outperforms all other methods, and apply-
ing complex morphological analysis does not improve
Turkish MDS. The poor performance of the Root pol-
icy is somewhat expected due to the fact that, if we pre-
serve only the roots of the words, we lose the semantic
differences among the surface forms provided by the
derivational affixes. On the other hand, the reason be-
hind the observation that Deriv and Raw obtain similar
performances is not obvious.

In order to further analyze this observation, we
used an entropy based measure, which is calculated as
shown below, to quantify the homogeneity of the clus-
ters in the data set in terms of the variety of the surface
forms corresponding to the Deriv forms of each word
in the cluster. We first compute the entropy for each
Deriv form in a cluster. The entropy of a Deriv form
is lower, if it occurs with fewer different surface forms
in the cluster. The entropy of a cluster is computed by

summing the entropies of the Deriv forms in the clus-
ter and dividing the sum by the number of words in the
cluster (i.e. N).

DDerivi = {t | t inflected from Deriv i}
H(Derivi) =

∑
t∈DDerivi

p(t) log p(t)

H(C) =
∑

i

H(Derivi)
N

To compare with the data set clusters, we generated
random document clusters by randomly selecting 10
different clusters and then randomly selecting one doc-
ument from each selected cluster. The average entropy
value for the data set clusters and the random clusters
were 4.99 and 7.58, respectively. Due to this signifi-
cant difference, we can hypothesize that the documents
about the same topic show a more homogeneous struc-
ture. In other words, a Deriv form is usually seen in the
same surface form in a cluster of documents which are
about the same topic. Therefore, the Deriv policy and
the Raw policy achieve similar results for summarizing
documents about the same topic.

During evaluation, we ran ROUGE with the Deriv
versions of the human summaries and the system sum-
maries in order to match semantically similar words
having different surface forms. We also experimented
with ROUGE using the Raw versions, but the results
followed very similar patterns, so those results were not
reported.

6 Conclusion
In this paper, we reported the first steps for a multi-
document summarization system for Turkish. A manu-
ally annotated data set has been constructed from news

705



articles, and made publicly available for future stud-
ies. We utilized the LexRank summarization algorithm,
and analyzed the effects of different stemming poli-
cies for Turkish MDS. Our results show that simple
fixed-length truncation methods with high limits (such
as taking the first 10 letters) improves summarization
scores. In contrast to our expectation, using morpho-
logical analysis does not enhance Turkish MDS, possi-
bly due to the homogeneousness of the documents in a
cluster to be summarized. As future work, we plan to
extend the data set with more clusters and more refer-
ence summaries, as well as to develop sentence com-
pression methods for Turkish MDS.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Ferhat Aydın for his contri-
butions during the data set corpus collection and an-
notation process. We would also like to thank Burak
Sivrikaya and Serkan Bugur for their help in generat-
ing the human summaries for the data set.

References
Burak Kerim Akkuş and Ruket Çakıcı. 2013. Catego-

rization of turkish news documents with morpholog-
ical analysis. In ACL (Student Research Workshop),
pages 1–8. The Association for Computer Linguis-
tics.

Zeynep Altan. 2004. A turkish automatic text sum-
marization system. In Proceedings of the IASTED
International Conference Artificial Intelligence and
Applications, pages 74–83.

Fazlı Can, Seyit Koçberber, Erman Balçık, Cihan Kay-
nak, H Cağdaş Öcalan, and Onur M Vursavaş. 2008.
Information retrieval on turkish texts. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Tech-
nology, 59(3):407–421.

Janara Christensen, Stephen Soderland Mausam, and
Oren Etzioni. 2013. Towards coherent multi-
document summarization. In Proceedings of
NAACL-HLT, pages 1163–1173.

Güneş Erkan and Dragomir R. Radev. 2004. Lex-
pagerank: Prestige in multi-document text summa-
rization. In EMNLP, pages 365–371. ACL.

Gülşen Eryiğit, Joakim Nivre, and Kemal Oflazer.
2008. Dependency parsing of turkish. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 34(3):357–389.

Eleni Galiotou, Nikitas Karanikolas, and Christodou-
los Tsoulloftas. 2013. On the effect of stemming al-
gorithms on extractive summarization: a case study.
In Panayiotis H. Ketikidis, Konstantinos G. Margari-
tis, Ioannis P. Vlahavas, Alexander Chatzigeorgiou,
George Eleftherakis, and Ioannis Stamelos, editors,
Panhellenic Conference on Informatics, pages 300–
304. ACM.

George Giannakopoulos. 2013. Multi-document mul-
tilingual summarization and evaluation tracks in acl
2013 multiling workshop. MultiLing 2013, page 20.

Vishal Gupta and Gurpreet Singh Lehal. 2010. A
survey of text summarization extractive techniques.
Journal of Emerging Technologies in Web Intelli-
gence, 2(3).

Aysun Güran, Eren Bekar, and S Akyokuş. 2010.
A comparison of feature and semantic-based sum-
marization algorithms for turkish. In International
Symposium on Innovations in Intelligent Systems
and Applications. Citeseer.

A Güran, NG Bayazıt, and E Bekar. 2011. Au-
tomatic summarization of turkish documents using
non-negative matrix factorization. In Innovations in
Intelligent Systems and Applications (INISTA), 2011
International Symposium on, pages 480–484. IEEE.

Dilek Z. Hakkani-Tür, Kemal Oflazer, and Gökhan Tür.
2000. Statistical morphological disambiguation for
agglutinative languages. In COLING, pages 285–
291. Morgan Kaufmann.

Chin-Yew Lin and Eduard H. Hovy. 2003. Au-
tomatic evaluation of summaries using n-gram co-
occurrence statistics. In HLT-NAACL.

Kemal Oflazer. 1994. Two-level description of turk-
ish morphology. Literary and linguistic computing,
9(2):137–148.

Lawrence Page, Sergey Brin, Rajeev Motwani, and
Terry Winograd. 1999. The pagerank citation rank-
ing: Bringing order to the web. Stanford InfoLab.

Dragomir Radev, Timothy Allison, Sasha Blair-
Goldensohn, John Blitzer, Arda Celebi, Stanko Dim-
itrov, Elliott Drabek, Ali Hakim, Wai Lam, Danyu
Liu, et al. 2004. Mead-a platform for multidocu-
ment multilingual text summarization. Proceedings
of the 4th International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2004).

Haşim Sak, Tunga Güngör, and Murat Saraçlar. 2007.
Morphological disambiguation of turkish text with
perceptron algorithm. In Alexander F. Gelbukh, edi-
tor, CICLing, volume 4394 of Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, pages 107–118. Springer.

Chao Shen and Tao Li. 2010. Multi-document sum-
marization via the minimum dominating set. In Pro-
ceedings of the 23rd International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, pages 984–992. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Celal Çığır, Mücahid Kutlu, and İlyas Çiçekli. 2009.
Generic text summarization for turkish. In ISCIS,
pages 224–229. IEEE.

Makbule Gülçin Özsoy, İlyas Çiçekli, and Ferda Nur
Alpaslan. 2010. Text summarization of turkish texts
using latent semantic analysis. In Chu-Ren Huang
and Dan Jurafsky, editors, COLING, pages 869–876.
Tsinghua University Press.

706


