



















































Sensicon: An Automatically Constructed Sensorial Lexicon


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1511–1521,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Sensicon: An Automatically Constructed Sensorial Lexicon

Serra Sinem Tekiroğlu
University of Trento

Fondazione Bruno Kessler
Trento, Italy

tekiroglu@fbk.eu

Gözde Özbal
Trento RISE
Trento, Italy

gozbalde@gmail.com

Carlo Strapparava
Fondazione Bruno Kessler

Trento, Italy
strappa@fbk.eu

Abstract

Connecting words with senses, namely,
sight, hearing, taste, smell and touch, to
comprehend the sensorial information in
language is a straightforward task for hu-
mans by using commonsense knowledge.
With this in mind, a lexicon associating
words with senses would be crucial for the
computational tasks aiming at interpreta-
tion of language. However, to the best of
our knowledge, there is no systematic at-
tempt in the literature to build such a re-
source. In this paper, we present a senso-
rial lexicon that associates English words
with senses. To obtain this resource, we
apply a computational method based on
bootstrapping and corpus statistics. The
quality of the resulting lexicon is evaluated
with a gold standard created via crowd-
sourcing. The results show that a sim-
ple classifier relying on the lexicon out-
performs two baselines on a sensory clas-
sification task, both at word and sentence
level, and confirm the soundness of the
proposed approach for the construction of
the lexicon and the usefulness of the re-
source for computational applications.

1 Introduction

Sensorial information interpenetrates languages
with various semantic roles in different levels since
the main interaction instrument of humans with the
outside world is the sensory organs. The trans-
formation of the raw sensations that we receive
through the sensory organs into our understand-
ing of the world has been an important philo-
sophical topic for centuries. According to a clas-
sification that dates back to Aristotle (Johansen,
1997), senses can be categorized into five modali-
ties, namely, sight, hearing, taste, smell and touch.
With the help of perception, we can process the

data coming from our sensory receptors and be-
come aware of our environment. While interpret-
ing sensory data, we unconsciously use our exist-
ing knowledge and experience about the world to
create a private experience (Bernstein, 2010).
Language has a significant role as our main

communication device to convert our private ex-
periences to shared representations of the environ-
ment that we perceive (Majid and Levinson, 2011).
As a basic example, onomatopoeic words, such as
knock or woof, are acquired by direct imitation of
the sounds allowing us to share the experience of
what we hear. As another example, where an im-
itation is not possible, is that giving a name to a
color, such as blue, provides a tool to describe a
visual feature of an object. In addition to the words
that describe the direct sensorial features of ob-
jects, languages include many other lexical items
that are connected to sensory modalities in various
semantic roles. For instance, while some words
can be used to describe a perception activity (e.g.,
to sniff, to watch, to feel), others can simply be
physical phenomena that can be perceived by sen-
sory receptors (e.g., light, song, salt, smoke).
Common usage of language, either written or

spoken, can be very dense in terms of sensorial
words. As an example, the sentence “I felt the cold
breeze.” contains three sensorial words: to feel as
a perception activity, cold as a perceived sensorial
feature and breeze as a physical phenomenon. The
connection to the sense modalities of the words
might not be mutually exclusive, that is to say a
word can be associated with more than one senses.
For instance, the adjective sweet could be associ-
ated with both the senses of taste and smell. While
we, as humans, have the ability to connect words
with senses intuitively by using our commonsense
knowledge, it is not straightforward for machines
to interpret sensorial information.
Making use of a lexicon containing sensorial

words could be beneficial for many computa-
tional scenarios. Rodriguez-Esteban and Rzhetsky

1511



(2008) report that using words related to senses
in a text could clarify the meaning of an abstract
concept by facilitating a more concrete imagina-
tion. To this respect, an existing text could be au-
tomatically modified with sensory words for vari-
ous purposes such as attracting attention or biasing
the audience towards a specific concept. Addition-
ally, sensory words can be utilized to affect private
psychology by inducing a positive or negative sen-
timent (Majid and Levinson, 2011). For instance,
de Araujo et al. (2005) show that the pleasantness
level of the same odor can be altered by labeling it
as body odor or cheddar cheese. As another moti-
vation, the readability and understandability of text
could also be enhanced by using sensory words
(Rodriguez-Esteban and Rzhetsky, 2008). A com-
pelling use case of a sensorial lexicon is that auto-
matic text modification to change the density of a
specific sense could help people with sensory dis-
abilities. For instance, while teaching a concept to
a congenitally blind child, an application that elim-
inates color-related descriptions would be benefi-
cial. A sensorial lexicon could also be exploited by
search engines to personalize the results according
to user needs.
Advertising is another broad area which would

benefit from such a resource especially by using
synaesthesia1, as it strengthens creative thinking
and it is commonly exploited as an imagination
boosting tool in advertisement slogans (Pricken,
2008). As an example, we can consider the slogans
“The taste of a paradise” where the sense of sight
is combined with the sense of taste or “Hear the
big picture” where sight and hearing are merged.
Various studies have been conducted both

in computational linguistics and cognitive sci-
ence that build resources associating words with
several cognitive features such as abstractness-
concreteness (Coltheart, 1981; Turney et al.,
2011), emotions (Strapparava and Valitutti, 2004;
Mohammad and Turney, 2010), colors (Özbal et
al., 2011; Mohammad, 2011) and imageability
(Coltheart, 1981). However, to the best of our
knowledge, there is no attempt in the literature to
build a resource that associates words with senses.
In this paper, we propose a computational method
to automatically generate a sensorial lexicon that
associates words in English with senses. Our
method consists of two main steps. First, we gen-

1American Heritage Dictionary (http://
ahdictionary.com/) defines synaesthesia in linguis-
tics as the description of one kind of sense impression by
using words that normally describe another.

erate a set of seed words for each sense category
with the help of a bootstrapping approach. In the
second step, we exploit a corpus based probabilis-
tic technique to create the final lexicon. We eval-
uate this lexicon with the help of a gold standard
that we obtain by using the crowdsourcing service
of CrowdFlower2.
The sensorial lexicon, which we named Sen-

sicon, embodies 22,684 English lemmas together
with their part-of-speech (POS) information that
have been linked to one or more of the five senses.
Each entry in this lexicon consists of a lemma-POS
pair and a score for each sensory modality that in-
dicates the degree of association. For instance, the
verb stink has the highest score for smell as ex-
pected while the scores for the other four senses
are very low. The noun tree, which is a concrete
object and might be perceived by multiple senses,
has high scores for sight, touch and smell.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.

We first review previous work relevant to this task
in Section 2. Then in Section 3, we describe the
proposed approach in detail. In Section 4, we ex-
plain the annotation process that we conducted and
the evaluation strategy that we employed. Finally,
in Section 5, we draw our conclusions and outline
possible future directions.

2 Related Work

Since to the best of our knowledge there is no at-
tempt in the literature to automatically associate
words with human senses, in this section we will
summarize the most relevant studies that focused
on linking words with various other cognitive fea-
tures.
There are several studies focusing on word-

emotion associations. WordNet Affect Lexicon
(Strapparava and Valitutti, 2004) maps WordNet
(Fellbaum, 1998) synsets to various cognitive fea-
tures (e.g., emotion, mood, behaviour). This re-
source is created by using a small set of synsets
as seeds and expanding them with the help of se-
mantic and lexical relations among these synsets.
Yang et al. (2007) propose a collocation model
with emoticons instead of seed words while creat-
ing an emotion lexicon from a corpus. Perrie et al.
(2013) build a word-emotion association lexicon
by using subsets of a human-annotated lexicon as
seed sets. The authors use frequencies, counts, or
unique seed words extracted from an n-gram cor-
pus to create lexicons in different sizes. They pro-

2http://www.crowdflower.com/

1512



pose that larger lexicons with less accurate genera-
tion method perform better than the smaller human
annotated lexicons. While a major drawback of
manually generated lexicons is that they require a
great deal of human labor, crowdsourcing services
provide an easier procedure for manual annota-
tions. Mohammad and Turney (2010) generate an
emotion lexicon by using the crowdsourcing ser-
vice provided by Amazon Mechanical Turk3 and
it covers 14,200 term-emotion associations.

Regarding the sentiment orientations and sub-
jectivity levels of words, Sentiwordnet (Esuli and
Sebastiani, 2006) is constructed as an extension
to WordNet and it provides sentiments in synset
level. Positive, negative and neutral values are as-
signed to synsets by using ternary classifiers and
synset glosses. Another study that has been inspi-
rational for the design of our approach is Banea
et al. (2008). The authors generate a subjectivity
lexicon starting with a set of seed words and then
using a similarity measure among the seeds and the
candidate words.

Another cognitive feature relevant to sensorial
load of the words is the association between col-
ors and words. Mohammad (2011) builds a color-
word association lexicon by organizing a crowd-
sourcing task on Amazon Mechanical Turk. In-
stead, Özbal et al. (2011) aim to automate this
process and propose three computational methods
based on image analysis, language models and la-
tent semantic analysis (LSA) (Landauer and Du-
mais, 1997). The authors compare these meth-
ods against a gold standard obtained by the crowd-
sourcing service of Amazon Mechanical Turk.
The best performance is obtained by using image
features while LSA performs slightly better than
the baseline.

Finally, there have been efforts in the liter-
ature about the association of words with their
abstractness-concreteness and imageability levels.
MRC Psycholinguistic Database (Coltheart, 1981)
includes abstractness-concreteness and imageabil-
ity ratings of a small set of words determined
according to psycholinguistic experiments. Tur-
ney et al. (2011) propose to use LSA similarities
of words with a set of seed words to automati-
cally calculate the abstractness and concreteness
degrees of words.

3http://www.mturk.com/mturk

3 Automatic Association of Senses with
Words

We adopt a two phased computational approach to
construct a large sensorial lexicon. First, we em-
ploy a bootstrapping strategy to generate a suffi-
cient number of sensory seed words from a small
set of manually selected seed words. In the sec-
ond phase, we perform a corpus based probabilistic
method to estimate the association scores to build
a larger lexicon.

3.1 Selecting Seed Words
The first phase of the lexicon construction pro-
cess aims to collect sensorial seed words, which
are directly related to senses (e.g., sound, tasty
and sightedness). To achieve that, we utilized
a lexical database called FrameNet (Baker et al.,
1998), which is built upon semantic frames of con-
cepts in English and lexical units (i.e., words) that
evoke these frames. The basic idea behind this
resource is that meanings of words can be under-
stood on the basis of a semantic frame. A semantic
frame consists of semantic roles called frame ele-
ments, which are manually annotated in more than
170,000 sentences. We have considered FrameNet
to be especially suitable for the collection of sen-
sorial seed words since it includes semantic roles
and syntactic features of sensational and percep-
tional concepts.
In order to determine the seed lemma-POS pairs

in FrameNet, we first manually determined 31
frames that we found to be highly connected to
senses such as Hear, Color, Temperature and Per-
ception_experience. Then, we conducted an an-
notation task and asked 3 annotators to determine
which senses the lemma-POS pairs evoking the
collected frames are associated with. At the end of
this task, we collected all the pairs (i.e. 277) with
100% agreement to constitute our initial seed set.
This set contains 277 lemma-POS pairs associated
with a specific sense such as the verb click with
hearing, the noun glitter with sight and aromatic
with smell.

3.2 Seed Expansion via Bootstrapping
In this step, we aim to extend the seed list that we
obtained from FrameNet with the help of a boot-
strapping approach. To achieve that, we adopt a
similar approach to Dias et al. (2014), who pro-
pose a repetitive semantic expansion model to au-
tomatically build temporal associations of synsets
in WordNet. Figure 1 provides an overview of
the bootstrapping process. At each iteration, we

1513



WordNet

MapNet

SVM Cross-

validation

Synset Set

Expansion

Sense

Seed

Synsets

FrameNet

Break-Point

Detection

Figure 1: Bootstrapping procedure to expand the
seed list.

first expand the seed list by using semantic rela-
tions provided by WordNet. We then evaluate the
accuracy of the new seed list for sense classifica-
tion by means of cross-validation against WordNet
glosses. For each sense, we continue iterating un-
til the cross-validation accuracy becomes stable or
starts to decrease. The following sections explain
the whole process in detail.

3.2.1 Extending the Seed List with WordNet
While the initial sensory seed list obtained from
FrameNet contains only 277 lemma-POS pairs,
we extend this list by utilizing the semantic re-
lations provided by WordNet. To achieve that,
we first map each lemma-POS pair in the seed
list to WordNet synsets with the help of Map-
Net (Tonelli and Pighin, 2009), which is a re-
source providing direct mapping between Word-
Net synsets and FrameNet lexical units. Then, we
add to the list the synsets that have WordNet re-
lations direct antonymy, similarity, derived-from,
derivationally-related, pertains-to, attribute and
also-see with the already existing seeds. For in-
stance, we add the synset containing the verb laugh
for the synset of the verb cry with the relation di-
rect antonymy, or the synset containing the ad-
jective chilly for the synset of the adjective cold
with the relation similarity. We prefer to use these
relations as they might allow us to preserve the
semantic information as much as possible during
the extension process. It is worth mentioning that
these relations were also found to be appropriate
for preserving the affective connotation by Vali-
tutti et al. (2004). Additionally, we use the rela-
tions hyponym and hyponym-instance to enrich the
seed set with semantically more specific synsets.
For instance, for the noun seed smell, we expand
the list with the hyponyms of its synset such as the
nouns bouquet, fragrance, fragrancy, redolence

and sweetness.

3.2.2 Cross-validation of Sensorial Model
After obtaining new synsets with the help ofWord-
Net relations in each bootstrapping cycle, we build
a five-class sense classifier over the seed synsets
defined by their glosses provided in WordNet.
Similarly to Dias et al. (2014), we assume that
the sense information of sensorial synsets is pre-
served in their definitions. Accordingly, we em-
ploy a support vector machine (SVM) (Boser et
al., 1992; Vapnik, 1998) model with second de-
gree polynomial kernel by representing the gloss
of each synset as a vector of lemmas weighted by
their counts. For each synset, its gloss is lemma-
tized by using Stanford Core NLP4 and cleaned
from the stop words. After each iteration cycle, we
perform a 10-fold cross-validation in the updated
seed list to detect the accuracy of the new sensorial
model. For each sense class, we continue iterating
and thereby expanding the seed list until the clas-
sifier accuracy steadily drops.
Table 1 lists the precision (P), recall (R) and

F1 values obtained for each sense after each it-
eration until the bootstrapping mechanism stops.
While the iteration number is provided in the first
column, the values under the last column group
present the micro-average of the resulting multi-
class classifier. The change in the performance
values of each class in each iteration reveals that
the number of iterations required to obtain the seed
lists varies for each sense. For instance, the F1
value of touch continues to increase until the fourth
cycle whereas hearing records a sharp decrease af-
ter the first iteration.
After the bootstrapping process, we create the

final lexicon by repeating the expansion for each
class until the optimal number of iterations is
reached. The last row of Table 1, labeled as Final,
demonstrates the accuracy of the classifier trained
and tested on the final lexicon, i.e., using the seeds
selected after iteration 2 for Sight, iteration 1 for
Hearing, iteration 3 for Taste and Smell and it-
eration 4 for Touch. According to F1 measure-
ments of each iteration, while hearing and taste
have a lower value for the final model, sight, smell
and touch have higher results. It should also be
noted that the micro-average of the F1 values of
the final model shows an increase when compared
to the third iteration, which has the highest av-
erage F1 value among the iterations. At the end

4http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/corenlp.
shtml

1514



of this step we have a seed synset list consisting
of 2572 synsets yielding the highest performance
when used to learn a sensorial model.

3.3 Sensorial Lexicon Construction Using
Corpus Statistics

After generating the seed lists consisting of synsets
for each sense category with the help of a set of
WordNet relations and a bootstrapping process, we
use corpus statistics to create our final sensorial
lexicon. More specifically, we exploit a proba-
bilistic approach based on the co-occurrence of
the seeds and the candidate lexical entries. Since
working on the synset level would raise the data
sparsity problem in synset tagged corpora such as
SemCor (Miller et al., 1993) and we need a cor-
pus that provides sufficient statistical information,
we migrate from synset level to lexical level. Ac-
cordingly, we treat each POS role of the same lem-
mas as a distinct seed and extract 4287 lemma-POS
pairs from 2572 synsets. In this section, we explain
the steps to construct our final sensorial lexicon in
detail.

3.3.1 Corpus and Candidate Words
As a corpus, we use a subset of English Giga-
Word 5th Edition released by Linguistic Data Con-
sortium (LDC)5. This resource is a collection of
almost 10 million English newswire documents
collected in recent years, whose content sums up
to nearly 5 billion words. The richly annotated
GigaWord data comprises automatic parses ob-
tained with the Stanford parser (Klein and Man-
ning, 2003) so that we easily have access to the
lemma and POS information of each word in the
resource. For the scope of this study, we work
on a randomly chosen subset that contains 79800
sentences and we define a co-occurrence event as
the co-existence of a candidate word and a seed
word within a window of 9 words(the candidate
word, 4 words to its left and 4 words to its right).
In this manner, we analyze the co-occurrence of
each unique lemma-POS pair in the corpuswith the
sense seeds. We eliminate the candidates which
have less than 5 co-occurrences with the sense cat-
egories.

3.3.2 Normalized Pointwise Mutual
Information

For the co-occurrence analysis of the candidate
words and seeds, we use pointwise mutual in-
formation (PMI), which is simply a measure of

5http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Catalog/
catalogEntry.jsp?catalogId=LDC2011T07

association between the probability of the co-
occurrence of two events and their individual prob-
abilities when they are assumed to be independent
(Church and Hanks, 1990). PMI can be exploited
as a semantic similarity measure (Han et al., 2013)
and it is calculated as:

PMI(x, y) = log
[

p(x, y)
p(x)p(y)

]
(1)

To calculate the PMI value of a candidate word
and a specific sense, we consider p(x) as the proba-
bility of the candidate word to occur in the corpus.
Therefore, p(x) is calculated as p(x) = c(x)/N ,
where c(x) is the total count of the occurrences of
the candidate word x in the corpus and N is the to-
tal co-occurrence count of all words in the corpus.
Similarly, we calculate p(y) as the total occurrence
count of all the seeds for the sense considered (y).
p(y) can thus be formulated as c(y)/N . p(x,y) is
the probability of the co-occurrence of a candidate
word x with a sense event y.
Amajor shortcoming of PMI is its sensitivity for

low frequency data (Bouma, 2009). As one pos-
sible solution, the author introduces Normalized
PointwiseMutual Information (NPMI), which nor-
malizes the PMI values to the range (-1, +1) with
the following formula:

NPMI(x, y) =
PMI(x, y)
− log p(x, y) (2)

We adopt the proposed solution and calculate
NPMI values for each candidate word and five
sense events in the corpus. Sensicon covers 22,684
lemma-POS pairs and a score for each sense class
that denotes their association degrees.

4 Evaluation

To evaluate the performance of the sensorial clas-
sification and the quality of Sensicon, we first cre-
ated a gold standard with the help of a crowdsourc-
ing task. Then, we compared the decisions com-
ing from Sensicon against the gold standard. In
this section, we explain the annotation process that
we conducted and the evaluation technique that we
adopted in detail. We also provide a brief discus-
sion about the obtained results.

4.1 Crowdsourcing to Build a Gold Standard
The evaluation phase of Sensicon requires a gold
standard data to be able to conduct a meaningful
assessment. Since to our best knowledge there is
no resource with sensory associations of words or

1515



Sight Hearing Taste Smell Touch Micro-average
It# P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1

1 .873 .506 .640 .893 .607 .723 .716 .983 .828 .900 .273 .419 .759 .320 .451 .780 .754 .729
2 .666 .890 .762 .829 .414 .552 .869 .929 .898 .746 .473 .579 .714 .439 .543 .791 .787 .772
3 .643 .878 .742 .863 .390 .538 .891 .909 .900 .667 .525 .588 .720 .482 .578 .796 .786 .776
4 .641 .869 .738 .832 .400 .540 .866 .888 .877 .704 .500 .585 .736 .477 .579 .784 .774 .765
5 .640 .869 .737 .832 .400 .540 .866 .888 .877 .704 .500 .585 .738 .474 .578 .784 .774 .764

Final .805 .827 .816 .840 .408 .549 .814 .942 .873 .685 .534 .600 .760 .582 .659 .800 .802 .790

Table 1: Bootstrapping cycles with validation results.

majority class 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

word 0 0.98 3.84 9.96 11.63 16.66 34.41 12.42
sentence 0.58 2.35 7.07 10.91 13.27 15.63 21.23 16.51

Table 2: Percentage of words and sentences in each majority class.

sentences, we designed our own annotation task
using the crowdsourcing service of CrowdFlower.
For the annotation task, we first compiled a col-
lection of sentences to be annotated. Then, we de-
signed two questions that the annotators were ex-
pected to answer for a given sentence. While the
first question is related to the sense association of a
whole sentence, the second asks the annotators to
collect a fine-grained gold standard for word-sense
associations.
We collected a dataset of 340 sentences consist-

ing of 300 advertisement slogans from 11 adver-
tisement categories (e.g., fashion, food, electron-
ics) and 40 story sentences from a story corpus. We
collected the slogans from various online resources
such as http://slogans.wikia.com/wiki and
http://www.adslogans.co.uk/. The story
corpus is generated as part of a dissertation re-
search (Alm, 2008) and it provides stories as a col-
lection of sentences.
In both resources, we first determined the can-

didate sentences that had at least five tokens and
contained at least one adjective, verb or noun. In
addition, we replaced the brand names in the ad-
vertisement slogans with X to prevent any bias.
For instance, the name of a well-known restaurant
in a slogan might cause a bias towards taste. Fi-
nally, the slogans used in the annotation task were
chosen randomly among the candidate sentences
by considering a balanced number of slogans from
each category. Similarly, 40 story sentences were
selected randomly among the candidate story sen-
tences. To give a more concrete idea, for our
dataset we obtained an advertisement slogan such
as “X’s Sugar Frosted Flakes They’re Great!” or a
story sentence such as “The ground is frozen, and
besides the snow has covered everything.”

In the crowdsourcing task we designed, the an-
notators were required to answer 2 questions for
a given sentence. In the first question, they were
asked to detect the human senses conveyed or di-
rectly described by a given sentence. To exemplify
these cases, we provided two examples such as “I
saw the cat” that directly mentions the action of
seeing and “The sun was shining on the blue wa-
ter.” that conveys the sense of sight by using vi-
sual descriptions or elements like “blue” or “shine”
which are notable for their visual properties. The
annotators were able to select more than one sense
for each sentence and together with the five senses
we provided another option as None which should
be selected when an annotator could not associate
a sentence with any sense. The second question
was devoted do determining word-sense associa-
tions. Here, the annotators were expected to asso-
ciate the words in each sentence with at least one
sense. Again, annotators could choose None for
every word that they could not confidently asso-
ciate with a sense.
The reliability of the annotators was evaluated

on the basis of 20 control sentences which were
highly associated with a specific sense and which
included at least one sensorial word. For instance,
for the control sentence “The skin you love to
touch”, we only considered as reliable the anno-
tators who associated the sentence with touch and
the word touch with the sense touch6. Similarly,
for the slogan “The most colourful name in cos-
metics.”, an annotator was expected to associate
the sentence with at least the sense sight and the
word colorful to at least the sense sight. The raters
who scored at least 70% accuracy on average on

6If the annotators gave additional answers to the expected
ones, we considered their answers as correct.

1516



the control questions for the two tasks were con-
sidered to be reliable. Each unit was annotated by
at least 10 reliable raters.
Similarly to Mohammad (2011) and Özbal et al.

(2011), we calculated the majority class of each
annotated item to measure the agreement among
the annotators. Table 2 demonstrates the observed
agreement at both word and sentence level. Since
10 annotators participated in the task, the annota-
tions with a majority class greater than 5 can be
considered as reliable (Özbal et al., 2011). In-
deed, for 85.10% of the word annotations the ab-
solute majority agreed on the same decision, while
77.58% of the annotations in the sentence level
have majority class greater than 5. The high agree-
ment observed among the annotators in both cases
confirms the quality of the resulting gold standard
data.
In Table 3, we present the results of the anno-

tation task by providing the association percent-
age of each category with each sense, namely sight
(Si), hear (He), taste (Ta), smell (Sm) and touch
(To). As demonstrated in the table, while the sense
of sight can be observed in almost every advertise-
ment category and in story, smell and taste are very
rare. We observe that the story sentences invoke all
sensory modalities except taste, although the per-
centage of sentences annotated with smell is rela-
tively low. Similarly, personal care category has
an association with four of the senses while the
other categories have either very low or no asso-
ciation with some of the sense classes. Indeed, the
perceived sensorial effects in the sentences vary
according to the category such that the slogans in
the travel category are highly associated with sight
whereas the communication category is highly as-
sociated with hearing. While the connection of the
food and beverages categories with taste is very
high as expected, they have no association with the
sense of smell. This kind of analysis could be use-
ful for copywriters to decide which sensorymodal-
ities to invoke while creating a slogan for a specific
product category.

4.2 Evaluation Measures

Based on the annotation results of our crowdsourc-
ing task, we propose an evaluation technique con-
sidering that a lemma-POS or a sentence might be
associated with more than one sensory modalities.
Similar to the evaluation framework defined by
Özbal et al. (2011), we adapt the evaluation mea-
sures of SemEval-2007 English Lexical Substitu-
tion Task (McCarthy and Navigli, 2007), where

Category Si He Ta Sm To

personal care 49.36 10.75 0.00 13.29 26.58
travel 58.18 0.00 29.09 0.00 12.72
fashion 43.47 0.00 0.00 26.08 30.43
beauty 84.56 0.00 0.00 0.00 15.43
computing 32.25 59.13 0.00 0.00 8.60
food 0.00 5.46 94.53 0.00 0.00
beverages 22.68 0.00 59.79 0.00 17.52
communications 25.00 67.50 0.00 0.00 0.075
electronics 45.94 54.05 0.00 0.00 0.00
education 28.57 42.85 0.00 0.00 28.57
transport 61.81 38.18 0.00 0.00 0.00

story 58.37 20.81 0.00 7.23 13.57

Table 3: The categories of the annotated data and
their sense association percentages.

a system generates one or more possible substitu-
tions for a target word in a sentence preserving its
meaning.

For a given lemma-POS or a sentence, which
we will name as item in the rest of the section, we
allow our system to provide as many sensorial as-
sociations as it determines by using a specific lex-
icon. While evaluating a sense-item association of
a method, a best and an oot score are calculated by
considering the number of the annotators who as-
sociate that sense with the given item, the number
of the annotators who associate any sense with the
given item and the number of the senses the sys-
tem gives as an answer for that item. More specif-
ically, best scoring provides a credit for the best
answer for a given item by dividing it to the num-
ber of the answers of the system. oot scoring, on
the other hand, considers only a certain number of
system answers for a given item and does not di-
vide the credit to the total number of the answers.
Unlike the lexical substitution task, a limited set
of labels (i.e., 5 sense labels and none) are allowed
for the sensorial annotation of sentences or lemma-
POS pairs. For this reason, we reformulate out-of-
ten (oot) scoring used by McCarthy and Navigli
(2007) as out-of-two.

In Equation 3, best score for a given item i from
the set of items I, which consists of the items an-
notated with a specific sense by a majority of 5
annotators, is formulated where Hi is the multiset
of gold standard sense associations for item i and
Si is the set of sense associations provided by the
system. oot scoring, as formulated in Equation 4,
accepts up to 2 sense associations s from the an-
swers of system Si for a given item i and the credit
is not divided by the number of the answers of the

1517



system.

best (i) =

∑
s∈Si freq (s ∈ Hi)

|Hi| · |Si| (3)

oot (i) =

∑
s∈Si freq (s ∈ Hi)

|Hi| (4)

As formulated in Equation 5, to calculate the
precision of an item-sense association task with a
specific method, the sum of the scores (i.e., best
or oot) for each item is divided by the number of
items A, for which the method can provide an an-
swer. In recall, the denominator is the number of
the items in the gold standard for which an answer
is given by the annotators.

P =
∑

i∈A scorei
|A| R =

∑
i∈I scorei
|I| (5)

4.3 Evaluation Method
For the evaluation, we compare the accuracy of
a simple classifier based on Sensicon against two
baselines on a sense classification task both at
word and sentence level. To achieve that, we use
the gold standard that we obtain from the crowd-
sourcing task and the evaluation measures best and
oot. The lexicon-based classifier simply assigns
to each word in a sentence the sense values found
in the lexicon. The first baseline assigns the most
frequently annotated sensory modality, which is
sight, via crowdsourcing task with a float value of
1.0 to each lemma-POS pair in the sensorial lexi-
con. The second baseline instead builds the associ-
ations by using a Latent Semantic Analysis space
generated from the same subset of LDC that we ex-
ploit for constructing Sensicon. More specifically,
this baseline calculates the LSA similarities be-
tween each candidate lemma-POS pair and sense
class by taking the cosine similarity between the
vector of the target lemma-POS pair and the aver-
age of the vectors of the related sensory word (i.e.,
see, hear, touch, taste, and smell) for each possi-
ble POS tag. For instance, to get the association
score of a lemma-POS pair with the sense sight,
we first average the vectors of see (noun) and see
(verb) before calculating its cosine similarity with
the target lemma-POS pair.
For the first experiment, i.e., word-sense as-

sociation, we automatically associate the lemma-
POS pairs obtained from the annotated dataset with
senses by using i) Sensicon, ii) the most-frequent-
sense baseline (MFS), iii) the LSA baseline. To

achieve that, we lemmatize and POS tag each sen-
tence in the dataset by using Stanford Core NLP.
In the end, for each method and target word, we
obtain a list of senses sorted according to their
sensorial association values in decreasing order.
It is worth noting that we only consider the non-
negative sensorial associations for Sensicon and
both baselines. For instance, Sensicon associates
the noun wine with [smell, taste, sight]. In this
experiment, best scoring considers the associated
senses as the best answer, smell, taste, sight ac-
cording to the previous example, and calculates a
score with respect to the best answer in the gold
standard and the number of the senses in this an-
swer. Instead, oot scoring takes the first two an-
swers, smell and taste according to the previous
example, and assigns the score accordingly.
To determine the senses associated with a sen-

tence for the second experiment, we use a method
similar to the one proposed by Turney (2002). For
each sense, we simply calculate the average score
of the lemma-POS pairs in a sentence. We set a
threshold value of 0 to decide whether a sentence
is associated with a given sense. In this manner,
we obtain a sorted list of average sensory scores
for each sentence according to the three methods.
For instance, the classifier based on Sensicon as-
sociates the sentence Smash it to pieces, love it to
bits. with [touch, taste]. For the best score, only
touch would be considered, whereas oot would
consider both touch and taste.

4.4 Evaluation Results

In Table 4, we list the F1 values that we obtained
with the classifier using Sensicon and the two base-
lines (MFS and LSA) according to both best and
oot measures. In addition, we provide the perfor-
mance of Sensicon in two preliminary steps, before
bootstrapping (BB) and after bootstrapping (AB)
to observe the incremental progress of the lexicon
construction method. As can be observed from the
table, the best performance for both experiments is
achieved by Sensicon when compared against the
baselines.
While in the first experiment the lexicon gen-

erated after the bootstrapping step (AB) provides
a very similar performance to the final lexicon
according to the best measure, it can only build
sense associations for 69 lemmas out of 153 ap-
pearing in the gold standard. Instead, the final lex-
icon attempts to resolve 129 lemma-sense associa-
tions and results in a better recall value. Addition-
ally, AB yields a very high precision as expected,

1518



since it is created by a controlled semantical ex-
pansion from manually annotated sensorial words.
BB lexicon includes only 573 lemmas which are
collected from 277 synsets and we can not ob-
tain 2 sense association scores for oot in this lexi-
con since each lemma is associated with only one
sense with a value of 1. The LSA baseline yields
a very low performance in the best measure due to
its tendency to derive positive values for all sen-
sorial associations of a given lemma-POS tuple.
Another observed shortcoming of LSA is its fail-
ure to correlate the names of the colors with sight
while this association is explicit for the annotators.
On the other hand, LSA baseline significantly im-
proves the MFS baseline with a p-value of 0.0009
in oot measures. This result points out that even
though LSA provides very similar positive asso-
ciation values for almost all the sensory modali-
ties for a given item, the first two sensorial asso-
ciations with the highest values yield a better per-
formance on guessing the sensorial characteristics
of a lemma-POS. Nevertheless, Sensicon signifi-
cantly outperforms the LSA baseline in both best
and oot measures with the p-values of 0.0009 and
0.0189 respectively. The statistical significance
tests are conducted using one-sided bootstrap re-
sampling (Efron and Tibshirani, 1994).
Concerning the sentence classification experi-

ment, the classifier using Sensicon yields the high-
est performance in both measures. The very high
F1 value obtained with the oot scoring indicates
that the right answer for a sentence is included
in the first two decisions in many cases. Sensi-
con significantly outperforms the LSA baseline on
the best measure (p-value = 0.0069). On the other
hand, when systems are allowed to provide two an-
swers (oot), the performance of LSA comes close
to Sensicon in terms of F1 measure.
After the manual analysis of Sensicon and gold

standard data, we observe that the sensorial clas-
sification task could be nontrivial. For instance, a
story sentence “He went to sleep again and snored
until the windows shook.” has been most fre-
quently annotated as hearing. While the sensorial-
lexicon classifier associates this sentence with
touch as the best answer, it can provide the cor-
rect association hearing as the second best answer.
To find out the best sensorial association for a sen-
tence, a classification method which exploits var-
ious aspects of sensorial elements in a sentence,
such as the number of sensorial words or their de-
pendencies, could be a better approach than using
only the average sensorial values.

Lemma Sentence
Model best oot best oot
Most-Frequent-Sense 33.33 33.33 38.90 38.90
LSA 18.80 70.38 53.44 76.51

Lexicon-BB 45.22 45.22 49.60 51.12
Lexicon-AB 55.85 55.85 59.89 63.21
Sensicon 55.86 80.13 69.76 80.73

Table 4: Evaluation results.

Based on our observations of the error cases,
we believe that synaesthesia, which is one of the
most common metaphoric transfers in language
(Williams, 1976), should be further explored for
sense classification. As an example observation,
the advertisement slogan “100% pure squeezed
sunshine” is associated with touch as the best an-
swer by Sensicon and taste by LSA baseline while
it is most frequently annotated as sight in the
gold standard. This slogan is an example usage
of synaesthesia and metaphors in advertising lan-
guage. To clarify, a product from the category of
beverages, which might be assumed to have a taste
association, is described by a metaphorical substi-
tution of a taste-related noun, most probably the
name of a fruit, with a sight-related noun; sun-
shine. This metaphorical substitution, then used
as the object of a touch-related verb, to squeeze,
produces a synaesthetic expression with touch and
sight.

5 Conclusion

In this paper we have presented the construction
of Sensicon, a sensorial lexicon, which associates
words with sensory modalities. This novel aspect
of word semantics is captured by employing a two-
step strategy. First, we collected seed words by
using a bootstrapping approach based on a set of
WordNet relations. Then, we performed a cor-
pus based statistical analysis to produce the final
lexicon. Sensicon consists of 22,684 lemma-POS
pairs and their association degrees with five sen-
sory modalities. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first systematic attempt to build a sen-
sorial lexicon and we believe that our contribution
constitutes a valid starting point for the commu-
nity to consider sensorial information conveyed by
text as a feature for various tasks and applications.
The results that we obtain by comparing our lexi-
con against the gold standard and two baselines are
promising even though not conclusive. The results
confirm the soundness of the proposed approach
for the construction of the lexicon and the useful-

1519



ness of the resource for text classification and pos-
sibly other computational applications.
Sensicon is publicly available upon request to

the authors so that the community can benefit from
it for relevant tasks. From a resource point of
view, we would like to explore the effect of us-
ing different kinds of WordNet relations during
the bootstrapping phase. It would also be interest-
ing to experiment with relations provided by other
resources such as ConceptNet (Liu and Singh,
2004), which is a semantic network containing
common sense, cultural and scientific knowledge.
We would also like to use the sensorial lexicon for
various applicative scenarios such as slanting ex-
isting text towards a specific sense with text modi-
fication. We believe that our resource could be ex-
tremely useful for automatic content personaliza-
tion according to user profiles. As an example, one
can imagine a system that automatically replaces
hearing based expressions with sight based ones in
pieces of texts for a hearing-impaired person. Au-
tomating the task of building sensorial associations
could also be beneficial for various tasks that need
linguistic creativity. For instance, copywriters can
take advantage of a system detecting the sensorial
load of a piece of text to generate more appropri-
ate advertisement slogans for specific product cat-
egories. Finally, we plan to investigate the impact
of using sensory information for metaphor detec-
tion and interpretation based on our observations
during the evaluation. For instance, the synaes-
thetic metaphor bittersweet symphony could be de-
tected by determining the sensorial characteriza-
tions of its components.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Daniele Pighin for his in-
sightful comments and valuable suggestions.
This work was partially supported by the PerTe
project (Trento RISE).

References
Ebba Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm. 2008. Affect in Text

and Speech. Ph.D. thesis, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign.

Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe.
1998. The berkeley framenet project. pages 86–90.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Carmen Banea, Rada Mihalcea, and Janyce Wiebe.
2008. A bootstrapping method for building subjec-
tivity lexicons for languages with scarce resources.
In LREC.

Douglas A. Bernstein. 2010. Essentials of Psychol-
ogy. PSY 113 General Psychology Series. Cengage
Learning.

Bernhard E. Boser, Isabelle Guyon, and Vladimir Vap-
nik. 1992. A Training Algorithm for Optimal Mar-
gin Classifiers. In Proceedings of the 5th Annual
Workshop on Computational learning theory.

Gerlof Bouma. 2009. Normalized (pointwise) mutual
information in collocation extraction. Proceedings
of GSCL, pages 31–40.

Kenneth Ward Church and Patrick Hanks. 1990. Word
association norms, mutual information, and lexicog-
raphy. Comput. Linguist., 16(1):22–29, March.

Max Coltheart. 1981. The mrc psycholinguistic
database. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 33(4):497–505.

Ivan E. de Araujo, Edmund T. Rolls, Maria Inés Ve-
lazco, Christian Margot, and Isabelle Cayeux. 2005.
Cognitive modulation of olfactory processing. Neu-
ron, 46(4):671–679.

Gaël Harry Dias, Mohammed Hasanuzzaman,
Stéphane Ferrari, and Yann Mathet. 2014.
Tempowordnet for sentence time tagging. In
Proceedings of the Companion Publication of the
23rd International Conference on World Wide Web
Companion, WWW Companion ’14, pages 833–
838, Republic and Canton of Geneva, Switzerland.
InternationalWorldWideWeb Conferences Steering
Committee.

Bradley Efron and Robert J. Tibshirani. 1994. An in-
troduction to the bootstrap, volume 57. CRC press.

Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2006. Senti-
wordnet: A publicly available lexical resource for
opinion mining. In Proceedings of LREC, volume 6,
pages 417–422.

Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA ; London.

Lushan Han, Tim Finin, Paul McNamee, Anupam
Joshi, and Yelena Yesha. 2013. Improving word
similarity by augmenting pmi with estimates of word
polysemy. Knowledge and Data Engineering, IEEE
Transactions on, 25(6):1307–1322.

Thomas Kjeller Johansen. 1997. Aristotle on the
Sense-organs. Cambridge University Press.

Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Ac-
curate unlexicalized parsing. In Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics - Volume 1, ACL ’03, pages 423–
430, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

1520



Thomas K. Landauer and Susan T. Dumais. 1997.
A solution to plato’s problem: The latent semantic
analysis theory of acquisition, induction, and rep-
resentation of knowledge. Psychological review,
104(2):211.

Hugo Liu and Push Singh. 2004. Conceptnet - a practi-
cal commonsense reasoning tool-kit. BT Technology
Journal, 22(4):211–226, October.

Asifa Majid and Stephen C. Levinson. 2011. The
senses in language and culture. The Senses and So-
ciety, 6(1):5–18.

Diana McCarthy and Roberto Navigli. 2007. Semeval-
2007 task 10: English lexical substitution task. In
Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluations, pages 48–53. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

George A. Miller, Claudia Leacock, Randee Tengi, and
Ross T. Bunker. 1993. A semantic concordance. In
Proceedings of the workshop on Human Language
Technology, HLT ’93, pages 303–308, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Saif M. Mohammad and Peter D. Turney. 2010. Emo-
tions evoked by common words and phrases: Using
mechanical turk to create an emotion lexicon. In
Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on
Computational Approaches to Analysis and Gener-
ation of Emotion in Text, pages 26–34. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Saif M. Mohammad. 2011. Colourful language: Mea-
suring word-colour associations. In Proceedings of
the 2nd Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 97–106. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Gözde Özbal, Carlo Strapparava, Rada Mihalcea, and
Daniele Pighin. 2011. A comparison of unsuper-
vised methods to associate colors with words. In Af-
fective Computing and Intelligent Interaction, pages
42–51. Springer.

Jessica Perrie, Aminul Islam, Evangelos Milios, and
Vlado Keselj. 2013. Using google n-grams to ex-
pand word-emotion association lexicon. In Compu-
tational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing,
pages 137–148. Springer.

Mario Pricken. 2008. Creative Advertising Ideas
and Techniques from the World’s Best Campaigns.
Thames & Hudson, 2nd edition.

Raul Rodriguez-Esteban and Andrey Rzhetsky. 2008.
Six senses in the literature. The bleak sensory land-
scape of biomedical texts. EMBO reports, 9(3):212–
215, March.

Carlo Strapparava and Alessandro Valitutti. 2004.
WordNet-Affect: an affective extension ofWordNet.
In Proceedings of LREC, volume 4, pages 1083–
1086.

Sara Tonelli and Daniele Pighin. 2009. New features
for framenet - wordnet mapping. In Proceedings of
the Thirteenth Conference on Computational Natu-
ral Language Learning (CoNLL’09), Boulder, CO,
USA.

Peter D. Turney, Yair Neuman, Dan Assaf, and Yohai
Cohen. 2011. Literal and metaphorical sense iden-
tification through concrete and abstract context. In
Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on the Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
680–690.

Peter D. Turney. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down?:
semantic orientation applied to unsupervised classi-
fication of reviews. In Proceedings of the 40th an-
nual meeting on association for computational lin-
guistics, pages 417–424. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Alessandro Valitutti, Carlo Strapparava, and Oliviero
Stock. 2004. Developing affective lexical resources.
PsychNology Journal, 2(1):61–83.

Vladimir N. Vapnik. 1998. Statistical Learning The-
ory. Wiley-Interscience.

Joseph M. Williams. 1976. Synaesthetic adjectives: A
possible law of semantic change. Language, pages
461–478.

Changhua Yang, Kevin Hsin-Yih Lin, and Hsin-Hsi
Chen. 2007. Building emotion lexicon from weblog
corpora. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting
of the ACL on Interactive Poster and Demonstration
Sessions, pages 133–136. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

1521


