



















































Building Chinese Discourse Corpus with Connective-driven Dependency Tree Structure


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 2105–2114,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Building Chinese Discourse Corpus with Connective-driven 

Dependency Tree Structure 
 

Yancui Li
1,2

 Wenhe Feng
2
 Jing Sun

1
 Fang Kong

1
 Guodong Zhou

1
 

1
Natural Language Processing Lab, School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow 

University, Suzhou 215006, China 
2
Henan Institute of Science and Technology, Xinxiang 453003, China 

{yancuili, wenhefeng}@gmail.com {20104027009, kongfang, gdzhou}@suda.edu.cn 
 

 

 

 

 

Abstract 

In this paper, we propose a Connective-

driven Dependency Tree (CDT) scheme 

to represent the discourse rhetorical 

structure in Chinese language, with ele-

mentary discourse units as leaf nodes 

and connectives as non-leaf nodes, large-

ly motivated by the Penn Discourse 

Treebank and the Rhetorical Structure 

Theory. In particular, connectives are 

employed to directly represent the hier-

archy of the tree structure and the rhetor-

ical relation of a discourse, while the nu-

clei of discourse units are globally de-

termined with reference to the depend-

ency theory. Guided by the CDT scheme, 

we manually annotate a Chinese Dis-

course Treebank (CDTB) of 500 docu-

ments. Preliminary evaluation justifies 

the appropriateness of the CDT scheme 

to Chinese discourse analysis and the 

usefulness of our manually annotated 

CDTB corpus. 

1 Introduction 

It is well-known that interpretation of a text re-

quires understanding of its rhetorical relation 

hierarchy since discourse units rarely exist in 

isolation. Such discourse structure is fundamen-

tal to many text-based applications, such as 

summarization (Marcu, 2000) and question-

answering (Verberne et al., 2007). Due to the 

wide and potential use of discourse structure, 

constructing discourse resources has been at-

tracting more and more attention in recent years. 

In comparison with English, there are much 

fewer discourse resources for Chinese which 

largely restricts the researches in Chinese dis-

course analysis. 

The general notion of discourse structure 

mainly consists of discourse unit, connective, 

structure, relation and nuclearity. However, pre-

vious studies on discourse failed to fully express 

these kinds of information. For example, the 

Rhetorical Structure Theory (RST) (Mann and 

Thompson, 1988) represents a discourse as a 

tree with phrases or clauses as elementary dis-

course units (EDUs). However, RST ignores the 

importance of connectives to a great extent. Fig-

ure 1 gives an example tree structure with four 

EDUs (e1-e4). In comparison, Penn Discourse 

Treebank (PDTB) (Prasad et al., 2008) adopts 

the predicate-argument view of discourse rela-

tion, with discourse connective as predicate and 

two text spans as its arguments. Example (1) 

shows an explicit reason relation signaled by the 

discourse connective “particularly if” and an 

implicit result relation represented by the insert-

ed discourse connective “so”, with Arg1 in ital-

ics and Arg2 in bold. However, as a connective 

and its arguments are determined in a local con-

textual window, it is normally difficult to deduce 

a complete discourse structure from such a con-

nective-argument scheme. In this sense, the 

PDTB at best only provides a partial solution to 

the discourse structure. 

[Catching up with commercial competitors in retail 

banking and financial services,] e1 [they argue,] e2 

[will be difficult,] e3 [particularly if market condi-

tions turn sour.]e4 

e4

e2

e3

condition

same-unit

e1-e4

e1-e3

attributione1-e2

e1  
Figure 1: An example of discourse structure in RST 
 

Example (1): An example of the connective-argument 

scheme in PDTB 

A)[Catching up with commercial competitors in retail 

banking and financial services will be difficult ]Arg1, 
they argue, will be difficult, particularly if [market 

2105



 

conditions turn sour ] Arg2. (Contingency.Condition. 

Hypothetical) (0616) 

B) So much of the stuff poured into its Austin, Texas, 

offices [that its mail rooms there simply stopped de-

livering it.]Arg1 (Implicit = so)[Now, thousands of 

mailers, catalogs and sales pitches go straight into 

the trash.]Arg2 (Contingency.Cause. Result) (0989) 

Obviously, both RST and PDTB have their 

own advantages and disadvantages in represent-

ing different characteristics of the discourse 

structure. In this paper, we attempt to propose a 

new scheme to Chinese discourse structure, 

adopt advantages of the tree structure from RST 

and connective from PDTB. Meanwhile, the 

special characteristics of Chinese discourse 

structure are well addressed. 

First, it is difficult to define EDU in Chinese 

due to the frequent occurrence of the ellipsis of 

subjects, objects and predicates, and the lack of 

functional marks for EDU. Second, the connec-

tives in Chinese omit much more frequently than 

those in English with about 82.0% vs. 54.5% in 

Zhou and Xue (2012). In Example (2), there are 

even no explicit connectives. Third, previous 

studies have shown the difference in classifying 

Chinese discourse relations from English (Xing, 

2001; Huang and Liao, 2011). This suggests that 

the discourse relations defined for English (both 

RST and PDTB) are not readily suitable for 

Chinese. Finally, the nucleus of a Chinese dis-

course relation is normally not directly related to 

a particular relation type but should be dynami-

cally determined from the global meaning of a 

discourse. 

Example (2): An example of discourse with 4 EDUs 

[       据悉，                东莞        海关     共      接受     
According to reports,Dongguan Customs  total accept 

企业 合同      备案   八千四百多份，]e1 [比     试点     
company contract record 8400 plus class, than  pilot 

前    略 有   上升，]e2 [   企业       反应   良好，]e3 
before a slight increase, company responses well,  

[普遍             表示            接受。]e4 
generally acknowledge acceptance. 

“[According to reports, Dongguan District Cus-

toms accepted more than 8400 records of company 

contracts,] e1 [a slight increase from before the pi-

lot.]e2 [Companies responded well,]e3 [generally 

acknowledging acceptance.]e4” 

In this paper, we present a Connective-driven 

Dependency Tree (CDT) discourse representa-

tion scheme, which takes advantage of both RST 

and PDTB, with elementary discourse units 

(limited to clauses) as leaf nodes and connec-

tives as non-leaf nodes. Especially, we define 

EDU from three aspects, and employ the con-

nective’ level and semantic to indicate the rhe-

torical structure and the discourse relation. Be-

sides, the nuclearity of discourse units in a dis-

course relation is decided on the overall dis-

course meaning. On the basis, we adopt the CDT 

scheme to annotate a certain scale corpus, called 

Chinese Discourse Treebank (CDTB) thereafter 

in this paper. Evaluation shows the appropriate-

ness of the CDT scheme to Chinese discourse 

analysis. 

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. 

Section 2 overviews related work. In Section 3, 

we present the CDT discourse representation 

scheme. In Section 4, we describe the annotation 

of the CDTB corpus. Section 5 compares CDTB 

with other major discourse corpora. Section 6 

gives the experimental results on EDU recogni-

tion, the crucial step for discourse parsing. Final-

ly, conclusion is given in section 7. 

2 Related Work 

In the past decade, several discourse corpora for 

English have emerged, with the Rhetorical 

Structure Theory Discourse Treebank (RST-DT) 

(Carlson et al., 2003) and the Penn Discourse 

Treebank (PDTB) (Prasad et al., 2008) most 

prevalent. 

In the RST framework, a text is represented as 

a discourse tree, with non-overlapping text spans 

(either phrases or clauses) as leaves, and adja-

cent nodes are related through particular rhetori-

cal relations to form a discourse sub-tree, which 

is then related to other adjacent nodes in the tree 

structure. According to RST, there are two types 

of discourse relations, mononuclear and multi-

nuclear. Figure 1 shows an example of discourse 

tree representation, following the notational 

convention of RST. Among the four EDUs (e1-

e4), e1 and e2 are connected by a mononuclear 

relation “attribution”, where e1 is the nucleus, 

the span (e1-e2) and the EDU e3 are further 

connected by a multi-nuclear relation “same-

unit”, where they are equally salient. Annotated 

according to the RST framework, the RST-DT 

consists of 385 documents from the Wall Street 

Journal (WSJ). Besides, the original 24 dis-

course relations defined by Mann and Thompson 

(1988) are further divided into a set of 18 rela-

tion classes with 78 finer grained rhetorical rela-

tions in RST-DT. 

As the largest discourse corpus so far, the 

Penn Discourse Treebank (PDTB) contains over 

one million words from WSJ. With EDUs lim-

ited to clauses, the PDTB adopts the predicate-

2106



 

argument view of discourse relations, with con-

nective as predicate and two text spans as its 

arguments. Example (1) shows two annotation 

tokens for the connective “particularly if” and 

“so”. The current version of PDTB 2.0 annotates 

40600 tokens, including 18459 explicit relations 

of 100 distinct types (e.g. “particularly if” and 

“if” are the same type) and 16224 implicit dis-

course relations of 102 distinct token types. Be-

sides, PDTB provides a three level hierarchy of 

relation tags with the first level consisting of 

four major relation classes (Temporal, Contin-

gency, Comparison, and Expansion), which are 

further divided into 16 types and 23 subtypes. 

In comparison, there are few researches on 

Chinese discourse annotation (Xue, 2005a; Chen, 

2006; Yue, 2008; Huang and Chen, 2011; Zhou 

and Xue, 2012), with no exception employing 

existing RST or PDTB frameworks. For exam-

ple, Zhou and Xue (2012) use the PDTB annota-

tion guidelines to annotate Chinese discourse 

with 98 files from Chinese Treebank (Xue et al., 

2005b) of Xinhua newswire. In particular, they 

adopt a lexically grounded approach and make 

some adaptation based on the linguistic and sta-

tistical characteristics of Chinese text, with Arg1 

and Arg2 defined semantically and the senses of 

discourse relations annotated besides connec-

tives and their lexical alternatives. The agree-

ment on relation types reaches 95.1% and the 

agreement on implicit relations with exact span 

match reaches 76.9%. 

Instead, Chen (2006) and Yue (2008) use RST 

to annotate Chinese discourse. Chen (2006) se-

lects comma as the segmentation signal of EDUs 

(in Example (2), “据悉(According to reports)” 
will be segmented as an EDU), and finds that 

RST fails to deal with some special features of 

Chinese. Yue (2008) manually annotates a set of 

97 texts according to RST and shows the cross-

lingual transferability of RST to Chinese. How-

ever, it also shows that EDUs in Chinese are 

much different from those in English, and many 

relation types in Chinese have no correspond-

ence to English, and vice versa. 

3 Connective-driven Dependency Tree 

An appropriate representation scheme is funda-

mental to linguistic resource construction. With 

reference to various theories and representation 

scheme on the tree structure and nuclearity of 

RST, the connective, relation and discourse 

structure of Chinese complex sentence (Xing, 

2001), the sentence-group theory (Cao, 1984), 

the connective treatment of PDTB, the conjunc-

tion dependent analysis (Feng and Ji, 2011) and 

the center theory of dependency grammar (Hays, 

1964), we propose a new discourse representa-

tion scheme for Chinese, called Connective-

driven Dependency Tree (CDT), with EDUs as 

leaf nodes and connectives as non-leaf nodes, to 

accommodate the special characteristics of the 

Chinese language in discourse structure. 

For instance, Example (3) consists of 2 sen-

tences, which is part of a paragraph from 

“chtb_0001”, and its corresponding CDT repre-

sentation is shown in Figure 2. Here, the number 

of “|” in Example (3) stands for the level of 

EDUs in CDT and the numbers marked in Fig-

ure 2 (such as 1, 2 etc.) distinguish EDUs. While 

an arrow points to the main EDU or main dis-

course unit (called nucleus), the combination of 

different EDUs can be considered as EDUs in a 

higher level and the new discourse units can thus 

be combined into higher-level units from bottom 

to up. In this way, the discourse structure can be 

expressed as a tree structure via bottom-up com-

bination of EDUs.  

Obviously, such discourse structure is con-

structed by two kinds of basic units, EDUs (leaf 

nodes) and connectives (non-leaf nodes). On the 

one hand, connectives can represent the dis-

course structure by its hierarchical level in the 

tree. The discourse structure is independent on 

the connective level essentially, rather than the 

reverse. On the other hand, connectives them-

selves can represent the discourse relation. This 

is why we call the scheme “Connective-driven”. 

As for the abstract discourse relation, we can 

construct a set of discourse relations, mapping a 

connective to discourse relation, according to the 

users’ specific requirements. 

Example (3): CDT example from CTB 

1 浦东    开发   开放    是   一项    振兴  上海，建设 
Pudong development open up is a promote Shanghai, construct 

现代化          经济、贸易、   金融       中心   的     跨世纪 
modern economy, trade, financial century De cross-century 

工程，|| 2 (因此)     大量             出现的是    以前      不曾 
project, therefore a large number arisen De previously never 

遇到过的   新   情 况、新问题。|  3 (对此)，  浦东  {不是} 
encounter DE new situation, new problem.To this, Pudong not 

简单    的    采取    “干        一段      时间，等       积累    了 
simply DE adopting “does a period time, wait accumulate Le 

   经验     以后再制定    法规   条例” 的    做法，|| 4{而是} 
experience after re-enactment laws regulations De approach,but  

借鉴  发达          国家     和           深圳      等      特区      的  
learn developed countries and Shenzhen etc. special zone DE 

经验     教训，|||| 5<并且>聘请          国内外       有关专家 
experience lesson, Invite at home and abroad revlant expert 

学者，|||| 6<并且>积极、及时地         制定  和       推出 

2107



 

scholars,               actively, timely DI formulate and issuing 

法规性  文件，||| 7 {使} 这些    经济  活动    一    出现就  被 
statutory file, make these economic activity as soon as appear bei 

 纳入      法制  轨道。  
bring into legality track. 

“1 Pudong's development and opening up is a century-
spanning undertaking for vigorously promoting Shanghai and 

constructing a modern economic, trade, and financial center. || 

2 Because of this, new situations and new questions that have 

not been encountered before are emerging in great numbers. | 3 

In response to this, Pudong is not simply adopting an approach 

of "work for a short time and then draw up laws and regula-

tions only after experience has been accumulated.”|| 4 Instead, 

Pudong is taking advantage of the lessons from experience of 

developed countries and special regions such as Shenzhen, ||||5 

by hiring appropriate domestic and foreign specialists and 

scholars, ||||6 actively and promptly formulating and issuing 

regulatory documents. ||| 7 So these economic activities are 

incorporated into the sphere of influence of the legal system as 

soon as they appear.” 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7

因此(therefore）
{can be deleted}

对此  (for this) 
{can be deleted}

 并且(and)
 <inserted, bad language sense>

使(cause)
{cann’t be deleted}

不是...而是(is not... but)
{cann’t be deleted}

 

Figure 2: CDT representation of Example (3) 

3.1 Elementary Discourse Unit 

As the leaf nodes of CDT, EDUs are limited to 

clauses. In principle, EDUs play a crucial role to 

discourse analysis. Since from bottom-up dis-

course combination, EDUs are the start of dis-

course analysis, while from top-down discourse 

segmentation, they are the end of discourse 

analysis. Unfortunately, since there lacks obvi-

ous distinction between Chinese sentence struc-

ture and phrase structure, it is rather difficult to 

define Chinese EDU (clause). Till now, there is 

still no widely accepted definition in the Chinese 

linguistics community (Wang, 2010). Inspired 

by Li et al. (2013a), we give the definition of 

Chinese EDU from three perspectives. First, 

from the syntactic structure perspective, an EDU 

should contain at least one predicate and express 

at least one proposition. Second, from the func-

tional perspective, an EDU should be related to 

other EDUs with some propositional function, 

i.e. not act as a grammatical element of other 

EDUs. Finally, from the morphological perspec-

tive, an EDU should be segmented by some 

punctuation, e.g. comma, semicolon and period. 

We use punctuation because there usually has a 

pause between clauses (EDUs), which can be 

shown in written commas, semicolons etc 

(Huang and Liao, 2011). Normally, it is easy to 

handle complex sentences and special sentence 

patterns (e.g. serial predicate sentences). For 

Example (4), A) is a single sentence with serial 

predicate; B) is complex sentence with two 

EDUs (clauses): 

Example (4): EDU examples 

A) He opened the door and went out. (single sentence, 

serial predicate, one EDU) 

B) 1 He opened the door,| 2 and went out. (complex sen-

tence, two EDUs) 

Take as example, there exist 7 EDUs in Ex-

ample (3), each marked with a number in front. 

According to our definition, the fragment “干一

段时间， … 法规条例 ”(“work for a short 
time…has been accumulated” ) in EDU 3 is not 

segmented as a EDU since: 1) it acts as a gram-

matical element of other EDUs and has no direct 

relationship with other EDUs on propositional 

function; 2) it is marked by a pair of quotation 

marks and does not end with any punctuation. In 

contrast, the fragment “而是借鉴发达…法制轨

道 ”(“but learn developed…legality track.”) is 
segment as 4 EDUs since it meets the three crite-

ria in our EDU definition. 

3.2 Connective 

As non-leaf nodes in the CDT representation, 

connectives connect EDUs or discourse units. 

Thus, the main criterion of determining whether 

an expression is a connective is to check wheth-

er the two fragments it connects are EDUs (or 

discourse units). In our scheme, the list of ex-

plicit discourse connectives is judged by a data 

driven approach, i.e. with any discourse-like 

word or phrase marked as connective in the an-

notation practice, e.g. “因此(therefore)”, “对此

(to this)”, “不是...而是...(is not...but....)”, “使(so 

that), “正因为(just because)” in Example (3), 

“先 ...然后(first...then) ”, “同时也(and at the 
same time)” in Example (5). 

Example (5): Connective examples from CTB 

A) 1<如果；只要>建筑公司进区，| 2 有关部门先送

上这些法规性文件，|| 3然后有专门队伍进行监督检

查。(chtb_0001) 
1<If ; As long as>The construction company enters the 

region, |2 first the appropriate bureau delivers these regu-

latory documents,|| 3 Then there is a specialized contin-

gent that carries out a supervisory inspection. 

B) 1加工贸易…, 2同时 也 是粤港澳台经贸合作的

重要内容。(chtb_0031) 

2108



 

1 The processing trade …, | 2 and at the same time 

is important content in the economic and trade coop-

eration between Guangdong, Hong Kong, Macao and 

Taiwan. 

It is worthy of mention that from the part-of-

speech perspective, connectives are not 

necessarily conjunctions. For example, in 

Example (3) and (5), adverbs “先...然后(first… 

then)”, verb phrases “不是…而是(is not…but)”, 

and preposition phrases “ 对此 (to this)” are 
determined as connectives. From the 

morphological perspective, a connective may 

contain more than one word, even discontinuous. 

As a common occurring phenomenon in Chinese 

discourse, there exist many paired Chinese 

connectives, e.g. “不是…而是 (is not…but)” in 
Figure 2. Even in some paired connectives, such 

as “因为…所以 (because…so)”, a word in a 
paired connective can appear independently as a 

connective. Please note that this may not be 

applied to other cases, e.g. “不是…而是  (is 
not…but)” as appeared in Example (3). Moreo-

ver, in many cases whether an expression is a 

connective or not depends on its meaning, e.g., 

“为  (in order to)” is a connective, while “为 
(for)” is not. For the positional distribution, a 

connective may appear anywhere, i.e. in the be-

ginning, middle, or the end of the first or second 

EDU. Example (3) and (5) show some of cases 

in different positions. The above characteristics 

pose special challenges on connective determi-

nation in Chinese language.  

According to the appearance of a connective 

or not, a discourse relation can be either explicit 

or implicit. Previous studies have shown the dif-

ficulty of implicit relation recognition in English 

due to the omission of connectives (Pitler et al., 

2009; Lin et al., 2009). This becomes even 

worse in Chinese since compared with the im-

plicit ratio of 54.5% in English connectives, this 

ratio rises up to about 82% in Chinese (Zhou and 

Xue, 2012). It is worth noting that the majority 

of discourse relations in Chinese are implicit, so 

the insertion of a connective in an implicit posi-

tion can significantly ease the understanding of 

the discourse. That is, a connective driven repre-

sentation scheme is still applicable to a discourse 

with implicit connectives. To help determine 

implicit relations, two special strategies are pro-

posed. 

First, for each explicit connective, a decision 

is made whether or not it can be deleted without 

changing the rhetorical relation of a discourse. It 

should be emphasized that this constraint is 

largely semantic. The motivation behind the re-

moval of explicit connectives is to enlarge im-

plicit instances and help recognize implicit rela-

tions. As shown in Figure 2, we use the paired 

mark “()” to indicate that a connective can be 

deleted, e.g. connectives “(对此 to this)”, “(因此 

therefore)”, “(正因此 just because)”, and the 
paired mark “{}” to indicate that a connective 

cannot be deleted, e.g. connectives “{ 使 so 

that}”, “{不是…而是 is not…but}”. 
Second, since a connective can be inserted to 

represent an implicit relation, our scheme tries to 

insert a connective which can be easily inter-

preted from the semantic perspective with little 

ambiguity into the most appropriate place. Most 

of the connective insertions for implicit relations 

occur between adjacent discourse spans. It is 

worth noting that not all implicit connectives are 

subjective to the language sense. To mark this 

difference, we cluster implicit connectives into 

two categories according to their language sens-

es, either “good language intuition” or “bad lan-

guage intuition”. In our scheme, we use the 

paired mark “<>”to indicate inserted implicit 

connectives, e.g. connectives“<例如 e.g.>”, “<

却 but>” with “good language sense”, connec-

tive “<并且 and>” with “bad language sense”, as 
shown in Figure 2. 

In some cases, it is possible that there exist 

several insertion options for an implicit connec-

tive due to the ambiguity in a discourse. For ex-

ample, in Example (5A), connectives “如果 (if)” 

and “只要 (as long as)” are inserted into the first 
level to show the two discourse relation options. 

As far as this happens, connectives are inserted 

and ordered according to annotators’ first intui-

tion. 

3.3 Discourse Structure 

In Figure 2, the paragraph is organized as a tree 

structure, in which EDUs appear in the leaf 

nodes and the connectives appear in the non-leaf 

ones. The adoption of tree structure conforms to 

traditional Chinese discourse theories and prac-

tice. For example, a native Chinese speaker 

tends to determine the overall level boundary 

first and then the analysis goes on step by step to 

the individual clauses, when understanding a 

complex sentence. This process naturally forms 

a tree structure. Besides, tree structure is easier 

to formalize, compared with graph.  

More specifically, the hierarchical structure of 

connectives indicates the hierarchical structure 

of discourse units. Apparently, discourse struc-

2109



 

ture analysis can be viewed as hierarchical anal-

ysis of connectives, with hierarchical connective 

structure reflecting hierarchical combination of 

discourse units. Essentially, the discourse hierar-

chy indicates the correlation degrees of semantic 

relations in the discourse, the deeper tree level of 

two discourse units, the higher correlation de-

gree of their semantic relation. Therefore, a dis-

course relation is the ultimate factor for the 

choice of hierarchical discourse structure. For a 

reference, please take Sentence 2 in Figure 2 as 

an example. 

3.4 Discourse Relation  

For discourse relation representation, a general 

approach is to assign an abstract relation type to 

a discourse relation directly, such as cause, con-

junction, condition, purpose, etc, as done in 

RST-DT and PDTB. In our CDT scheme, we 

avoid to directly assign an abstract relation type 

to a discourse relation. Instead, we use the con-

nective itself to express the discourse relation, as 

shown in Figure 2. In this way, the difficulty of 

pre-defining a set of acknowledged discourse 

relations and selecting an exact discourse rela-

tion can be avoided during the corpus annotation 

process. Since a Chinese discourse relation is 

largely controlled by connective (Xing, 2001), 

the key to determine a relation is to identify a 

suitable connective. Normally, most of relation 

annotations can easily map from connectives to 

abstract semantic classes of relations, if neces-

sary, with the help of the discourse context. The 

majority of discourse relations in Chinese are 

implicit, but it makes sense to insist on a con-

nective driven representation. With connective 

as a bridge, at least it makes discourse represen-

tation easier. 

For the abstraction of discourse relations, we 

leave it in a later separate stage. Of course, there 

are cases where a connective may represent 

more than one discourse relation. For example, 

connective “而” can denotes the continuous rela-

tion “而 (especially)” and the transitional rela-

tion “而 (however)”. Compared with annotating 
discourse relation directly, annotator's intuition 

is more accurate for specific connective. We 

don't object to label discourse relation, referring 

to the general work and Chinese analysis prac-

tice, give a set of relations (Figure 3), regarding 

it as connective's semantics, and then annotate 

the connective with it. In this way, we can obtain 

a general relation set and resolve the connec-

tive's polysemy problem. We believe that the 

connective itself is the foundation of discourse 

relation, and the relation set can be adjusted dy-

namically according to the application require-

ments. 

Figure 3 shows a three-level set of discourse 

relations example. In the first level, this set con-

tains four relations of causality, coordination, 

transition and explanation, which are further 

clustered into 17 sub-relations in the second lev-

el. For example, relation causality contains 6 

sub-relations, i.e. cause-result, inference, hypo-

thetical, purpose, condition and background. In 

the third level, the connectives are under each 

sub-relation. For example, cause-result relation 

can be represented by “because”, 'therefore' etc. 

The numbers shown in the parentheses illustrate 

the distributions of different relations in our cor-

pus. For example, there are 1335 causality rela-

tions in the first level, including 686 cause-result 

relations, 38 inference relations, 70 hypothetical 

relations, 335 purpose relations, 72 condition 

relations and 134 background relations. 

causality(1335) coordination(4148)  

cause-result(686) 
because... 

inference(38) 
so that... 

hypothetical(70) 
if... 

purpose(335) 
in order to... 

condition(72) 
only… 

background(134) 
background... 

transition(217) 

transition (200) 
but... 

concessive(17) 
altough... 

coordination(3503) 
and... 

continue(517) 
first...second... 

progressive(59) 
in addition.. 

selectional(10) 
or... 

inverse(59) 
compared with... 

explanation(1617) 

explanation(911) 
which including... 

summary-

elaboration 
in a word... 

(234) 

example(252) 
e.g.... 

evaluation (220) 
evaluation ... 

Figure 3: A three-level set of discourse relations 

3.5 Nucleus and Satellite 

Once discourse units are determined, adjacent 

spans are linked together via connectives to 

build a hierarchical structure. As stated above, 

discourse relations may be either mononuclear 

or multi-nuclear. A mononuclear relation holds 

between a nucleus and a satellite unit. Normally, 

the nucleus usually reflects the intention focus of 

the discourse and is thus more salient in the dis-

course structure, while the satellite usually rep-

resents supportive information for the nucleus. 

In comparison, a multi-nuclear relation usually 

2110



 

holds two or more discourse units of equal 

weight in the discourse structure.  

For nucleus determination, we adopt the de-

pendency grammar, and select the unit which 

can stand for the relationship with other dis-

course units in a discourse. As shown in Figure 

2, on the first level, discourse relation “对此 (to 

this)” has the latter unit “浦东…法制轨道
(Pudong…as soon as they appear.)” as nucleus and 

the former unit “浦东…新问题 (Pudong …new 
problem)” as satellite, since the latter unit agrees 

with the main purpose of the discourse, which 

emphasizes some methods for the progress of 

Pudong. Moreover, since the combination of 4, 5 

and 6 has the cause relation with 7, we choose 7 

as nucleus because it can stand for the combina-

tion of 4, 5, 6 and 7, and has the selection rela-

tionship with 3. 

4 Chinese Discourse Treebank 

Given above the CDT scheme, we choose 500 

Xinhua newswire documents from the Chinese 

Treebank (Xue et al., 2005b) in our Chinese 

Discourse Treebank (CDTB) annotation. In par-

ticular, we annotate one discourse tree for each 

paragraph. 

In this section, we address the key issues with 

the CDTB annotation, such as annotator training, 

tagging strategies, corpus quality, along with the 

statistics of the CDTB corpus. 

4.1 Annotator Training 

The annotator team consists of a Ph.D. in Chi-

nese linguistics as the supervisor (senior annota-

tor) and four undergraduate students in Chinese 

linguistics as annotators (two pairs). The annota-

tion is done in four phases. In the first phase, the 

annotators spend 3 months on learning the prin-

ciples of CDT and the use of our developed dis-

course annotation tool. In the second phase, the 

annotators spend 2 months on independently 

annotating the same 50 documents (about 260 

paraphrases), and another 2 months on cross-

checking to resolve the difference and to revise 

the guidelines. In the third phase, the annotators 

spend 9 months on annotating the remaining 450 

documents. In the final phase, the supervisor 

spends 3 months carefully proofread all 500 

documents. 

4.2 Tagging Strategies 

In the CDTB annotation, we employ a top-down 

strategy. That is, we determine the overall level 

first and then the analysis goes on step by step to 

the individual EDUs. This strategy is adopted in 

our annotation tool. The advantages of the top-

down strategy are three folds. First, such a strat-

egy can easily grasp the whole discourse struc-

ture. This conforms to the global nature of dis-

course analysis. Second, due to the lack of clear 

difference between Chinese sentence and phrase 

structure, such a strategy can largely avoid the 

error propagation in Chinese EDU segmentation. 

Since in such a top-down strategy, EDU seg-

mentation becomes an end question, and even if 

an EDU segmentation error happens, its impact 

is localized, i.e. with little impact on the whole 

discourse structure. Our annotation practice 

shows that such strategy is effective. Third, such 

a strategy accords with the cognitive of Chinese 

characteristics, and conforms to the mental pro-

cess of Chinese discourse understanding (Huang 

and Liao, 2011). However, we do not exclude 

the bottom-up strategy. In some cases, on the 

cognitive psychological process, annotator is 

combine top-down and bottom-up strategies. 

Take Example (3) as an example, an annotator 

first finds the first level, with the period at the 

end of sentence 1, and chooses discourse rela-

tion (either explicit or implicit), connective, and 

connective related information (e.g. whether can 

be added, deleted, and the language sense, etc.), 

nuclearity etc. Then, the annotator turns to sen-

tence 1 and marks the second comma as level 2 

with necessary information annotated, and goes 

on to sentence 2, recursively, until all EDUs are 

marked. In this way, a discourse tree with the 

CDT representation is constructed. 

4.3 Quality Assurance 

A number of steps are taken to ensure the quality 

of CDTB. These involve two tasks: checking the 

validity of the trees and tracking inter-annotator 

consistency. 

4.3.1 Tree validation 

We first manually check if a tree has a single 

root node and compare the tree with the docu-

ment to check for missing sentence or fragments 

from the end of text. Then we check the attached 

information such as connectives, relations and 

nuclearity in the tree. We also check the tree 

with a tree traversal program to find the errors 

undetected by the manual validation process. 

Finally, all of the trees work successfully.  

4.3.2 Consistency 

To ensure the quality of CDTB, we adopt the 

inter-annotator consistency using Agreement 

and kappa on 60 documents (chtb0041-chtb 

2111



 

0100). Table 1 illustrates the inter-annotator 

consistency in details. 

As shown in Table 1, we measure the agree-

ment of EDU segmentation by determining 

whether punctuation (all period, comma etc. are 

considered) is treated as an EDU boundary. It 

shows that the agreement reaches 91.7% with 

Cohen's kappa value (Cohen, 1960) 0.91. This 

justifies the appropriateness of our EDU defini-

tion. Explicit or Implicit agreement 94.7% is 

calculate by the same EDU boundary (intersec-

tion) of two annotators. For the same explicit 

relation, the connective identification agreement 

is 82.3%, because this is strict measure when 

two annotators choose the same connective word. 

If we relax the measure to contain the same 

word, the agreement can reach 98%. For exam-

ple, one annotate “也…并(also…and)”, and the 

other annotate “并(and)” is wrong with our strict 
measure. 

 Agreement  Kappa 

EDU segmentation 

Explicit or Implicit 

Explicit connective identifi-

cation 

Implicit connective insertion 

Mononuclear or Multinuclear 

Nuclearity 

Structure 

91.7      0.91 

94.7      0.81 

82.3        -- 

 

74.6        -- 

80.8        -- 

82.4        -- 

77.4        -- 

Table 1: Inter-annotator consistency 

It is not surprising that the agreement on im-

plicit connective insertion with the same posi-

tion and the same connective only reaches 

74.6% since for some discourse relations, there 

may existing several connective alternatives. For 

example, both “so” and “therefore” can express 

the same causation relation. If we relax the con-

straint to the compatible connective, the agree-

ment on implicit connective insertion can reach 

up to 84.5%. 

Finally, it shows that the agreement on overall 

discourse structure (with the same connectives 

as non-leaf nodes, the same EDUs as leaf nodes) 

reaches 77.4%. This justifies the appropriateness 

of our CDT scheme, given the inherent ambigui-

ty in Chinese discourse structure. 

4.4 Corpus Statistics 

Currently, the CDTB corpus consists of 500 

newswire articles from Chinese Treebank, which 

are further divided into 2342 paragraphs with a 

CDT representation for one paragraph.  

 For EDUs, CDTB contains 10650 EDUs with 
an average of 4.5 EDUs per tree. On average, 

there are 2 EDUs per sentence and 22 Chi-

nese characters per EDU. 

 For discourse relations, CDTB contains 7310 
relations, of which 1812 are explicit relations 

(24.8%) and 5498 are implicit relations 

(75.2%). This indicates that implicit relations 

occur much more frequently in Chinese than 

in English, e.g. 75.2% in CDTB (Chinese) vs. 

~50% in PDTB (English). 

 With the deepest level of 9, most (98.5%) of 
discourse relations occur in level 1 (2342), 

level 2(2372), level 3(1532), level 4(712), 

and level 5(242). It also shows that 3557 

(48.7%) relations are mononuclear relations 

with 2110 nucleus ahead, while the remain-

ing 3754 relations are multi-nuclear. The 

numbers shown in the parentheses of Figure 

3 illustrate the distributions of different rela-

tions. In comparison with the top 2 most fre-

quently occurring relations in PDTB (Eng-

lish), i.e. the coordination and explanation re-

lations, there exist 3503 (47.9%) and 911 in-

stances respectively, with regard to the ab-

stract relation set as shown in Figure 3. 

 CDTB contains 282 connectives, among 
which 274 (140 can be deleted) appears as 

explicit connectives and 44 can be inserted in 

place of implicit connectives. Table 2 lists 

the top 10 frequent explicit connectives and 

implicit connectives. 

Explicit connectives Implicit connectives 

connectives   frequency connectives   frequency 

并(and)                     208 

其中(among them)   154 

也(also)                     131 

而(however)              70 

但(but)                       69 

还(also)                      68 

使(so that)                  56 

以(in order to)            52 

为(in order to)            49 

同时(meanwhile)       46 

因此(so)                    368 

并(and)                      354 

并且(and)                  259 

例如(e.g)                   140 

来(in order to)             68 

以(in order to)             61 

然后(then)                   55 

其中(among them)      48 

而(while)                     47 

因为(because)             32 

Table 2: The most frequent connectives in CDTB 

5 Comparison with other Discourse 
Banks 

Table 3 compares the difference of CDTB with 

RST-DT and PDTB from various perspectives, 

such as EDU, connective, relation, structure and 

nuclearity. 

2112



 

 

 RST-DB PDTB CDTB 

EDU 

Clear defined; start of 

combination; one relation 

has two or more EDUs 

Predicate-argument 

view; one relation 

has two arguments 

Clear defined from three aspects; end of 

top-down segmentation; one relation has 

two or more EDUs 

Connective -- 

Mark explicit con-

nectives and insert 

implicit connectives 

Mark whether an connective can be deleted 

without changing the rhetorical relation; 

insert implicit connective with good intui-

tion and bad intuition differentiated 

Relation 

Abstract set of relation 

types; annotate the rela-

tion types 

Abstract set of rela-

tion types; annotate 

connective and rela-

tion type 

Represent relation by connective; annotate 

connective and it’s attribute; mapping of 

connective to the set of discourse relations 

in a later stage 

Structure Complete tree 

Partial tree, deduced 

by connective and 

it’s argument 

Complete tree; top-down segmentation; 

structure can be represented by the connec-

tive hierarchy 

Nuclearity 
Determined by certain 

rhetorical relation 
-- 

Determined by the global meaning of a 

discourse 

Table 3: The comparison of RST-DT, PDTB and CDTB 

 

6 Preliminary Experimentation 

In order to evaluate the computability of CDTB, 

we give the experimental results on EDU recog-

nition, which is crucial in discourse parsing. Af-

ter excluding sentence end punctuations (such as 

period, question mark, and exclamatory mark), 

which are certainly EDU boundaries, there re-

mains 7625 punctuations as EDU boundaries 

(positive instances) and 4876 punctuations as 

non-EDU boundaries (negative instances). With 

various features as adopted in Xue and Yang 

(2011) and Li et al. (2013b), Table 4 shows the 

performance of EDU recognition on the CDTB 

corpus with 10-fold cross validation.  

 Gold standard parse      Automatic parse 

Accuracy  F1(+)  F1(-)  Accuracy  F1(+)  F1(-) 

MaxEnt 90.6     91.1   90.5 89.0    90.3    87.2 

C45 90.2    90.5    90.1 88.7    90.0    87.7 

NiveBayes 90.2    89.9   88.9 88.0    89.0    86.9 

Table 4: Performance of EDUs recognition 

As shown in Table 4, MaxEnt performs best, 

with accuracy up to 90.6% on gold standard 

parse tree, close to human agreement of 91.7%, 

and with accuracy up to 89% on automatic parse 

tree. This suggests the appropriateness of our 

definition of clause as EDU. Table 4 also gives 

the performance on both positive and negative 

instances. It shows better F1-measure on recog-

nizing positive instances than negative instances. 

7 Conclusions 

In this paper, we propose a Connective-driven 

Dependency Tree (CDT) structure as a represen-

tation scheme for Chinese discourse structure. 

CDT takes advantage of both RST and PDTB, 

and well adapts to the special characteristics of 

Chinese discourse. In particular, we describe 

CDT in detail from various perspectives, such as 

EDU, connective, structure, relation and nucle-

arity. Given the CDT scheme, we annotate 500 

documents in a top-down segmentation process 

to keep consistent with Chinese native’s cogni-

tive habit. Evaluation of the CDTB corpus on 

EDU recognition justifies the appropriateness of 

the CDT scheme to Chinese discourse structure 

and the usefulness of our CDTB corpus. 

In the future work, we will focus on enlarging 

the scale of the corpus annotation and develop-

ing a complete Chinese discourse parser. 

Acknowledgments 

This research is supported by the Project 

2012AA011102 under the National 863 High-

Tech Program of China, by the National Natural 

Science Foundation of China, No.61331011, 

No.61273320. 

Classifier 

2113



 

The contact author of this paper, according to 

the meaning given to this role by Soochow Uni-

versity, is Guodong Zhou. The complete corpus 

is available for research purpose upon request. 

Reference 

Zheng Cao.1984. Primary exploration on sentence 

group. Zhejiang Education Press, Hangzhou,CN(in 

Chinese). 

Lynn Carlson, Daniel Marcu, and Mary Ellen Oku-

rowski. 2003. Building a Discourse-tagged Corpus 

in the Framework of Rhetorical Structure Theory. 

Springer Netherlands. 

LiPing Chen. 2006. English and Chinese discourse 

structure dimension theory and practice. Ph.D. 

thesis, Shanghai international studies university 

doctoral dissertation. 

Liping Chen. 2008. Chinese text structure annotation 

theory support，Journal of Nanjing university of 
aeronautics and astronautics, 10(3):69-71(in Chi-

nese). 

Jacob Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for 

nominal scales. Educational and Psychological 

Measurement, 20 (1): 37–46. 

Wenhe Feng and Donghong Ji. 2011. Parallel struc-

ture analysis of the coordination structure and the 

controller status of connective. Linguistic Sciences, 

2:168-181(in Chinese). 

David G Hays. 1964. Dependency theory: formalism 

and some observations. Language, 40(4):511-525. 

Hen-Hsen Huang and Hsin-Hsi Chen. 2011. Chinese 

Discourse Relation Recognition. In Proceedings of 

5th International Joint Conference on Natural 

Language Process, pages 1442–1446, Chiang Mai, 

Thailand, November 2011. 

Borong Huang and Xudong Liao. 2011. Morden Chi-

nese (volume two, updated 5th edition). Higher 

Education Press. Beijing,CN(in Chinese). 

Yancui Li, Wenhe Feng, and Guodong Zhou. 2013a. 

Elementary discourse unit in Chinese discourse 

structure analysis. In Chinese Lexical Semantics, 

pages 186-198, Wuhan, China, Springer Berlin 

Heidelberg. 

Yancui Li, Wenhe Feng, and Guodong Zhou et al. 

2013b. Research of Chinese Clause Identification 

Based on Comma. Acta Scientiarum Naturalium 

Universitatis Pekinensis, 49(1):7-14 (in Chinese 

with English abstract). 

Ziheng Lin, Min-Yan Kan, and Hwee Tou Ng. 2009. 

Recognizing implicit discourse relations in the 

Penn Discourse Treebank. In Proceedings of the 

2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 

Language Processing, pages 343–351, Singapore, 

6-7 August 2009. 

Daniel Marcu. 2000. The theory and practice of dis-

course parsing and summarization. MIT Press. 

William Mann and Sandra Thompson. 1988. Rhetori-

cal structure theory: Toward a functional theory of 

text organization. Text, 8(3):243-281. 

Emily Pitler, Annie Louis, and Ani Nenkova. Auto-

matic sense prediction for implicit discourse rela-

tions in text. 2009. In Proceedings of the 47th An-

nual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th IJCNLP of 

the AFNLP, pages 683–691, Suntec, Singapore, 2-

7 August 2009. 

Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, and Lee et al. 2008. 

The Penn Discourse TreeBank 2.0. In Pro-

cessdings of Sixth International Conference on 

Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), 

pages 2961-2968, Marrakech, Morocco. 

Susan Verberne, Lou Boves, Nelleke Oostdijk, and 

Peter-Arno Coppen. 2007. Discourse-based an-

swering of why-questions. Traitement Automa-

tique des Langues, special issue on Computational 

Approaches to Discourse and Document Pro-

cessing, 47(2):21-41.  

Wenge Wang. 2010. The Current Research Situation 

of the Clause in Modern Chinese. Chinese Lan-

guage Learning, (1): 67–76(in Chinese). 

Fuyi Xing. 2003. Research of Chinese complex sen-

tence. The Commercial Press, Beijing, CN (in 

Chinese). 

Nianwen Xue. 2005a. Annotating the Discourse Con-

nectives in the Chinese Treebank. In Proceedings 

of the ACL Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus An-

notation, pages 84-91, Ann Arbor, Michigan. 

Nianwen Xue, Fei Xia, Fu-Dong Chiou, and Martha 

Palmer. 2005b. The Penn Chinese Treebank: 

Phrase Structure Annotation of a Large Corpus. 

Natural Language Engineering, 11(2): 207-238. 

Nianwen Xue and Yaqin Yang. 2011. Chinese sen-

tence segmentation as comma classification. In 

Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the As-

sociation for Computational Linguistics:Human 

Language Technologies, pages 631-635, Portland, 

Oregon,USA, June 2011. 

Ming Yue. 2008. Rhetorical Structure Annotation of 

Chinese News Commentaries. Journal of Chinese 

Information Processing, 22(4): 19-23(in Chinese 

with English abstract). 

Yuping Zhou and Nianwen Xue. 2012. PDTB-style 

discourse annotation of Chinese text. In Proceed-

ings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association 

for Computational Linguistics, pages 69-77, Jeju, 

Republic of Korea, 8-14 July 2012.  

 

2114


