



















































Invited Talk: Learning from Rational Behavior


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), page 707,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Learning from Rational∗ Behavior

Thorsten Joachims
Department of Computer Science and
Department of Information Science

Cornell University
tj@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract

The ability to learn from user interactions
can give systems access to unprecedented
amounts of knowledge. This is evident
in search engines, recommender systems,
and electronic commerce, and it can be
the key to solving other knowledge in-
tensive tasks. However, extracting the
knowledge conveyed by user interactions
is less straightforward than standard ma-
chine learning, since it requires learning
systems that explicitly account for human
decision making, human motivation, and
human abilities.

In this talk, I argue that the design space of
such interactive learning systems encom-
passes not only the machine learning algo-
rithm itself, but also the design of the inter-
action under an appropriate model of user
behavior. To this effect, the talk explores
how integrating microeconomic models of
human behavior into the learning process
leads to new interaction models and their
associated learning algorithms, leading to
systems that have provable guarantees and
that perform robustly in practice.

About the Speaker

Thorsten Joachims is a Professor in the Depart-
ment of Computer Science and the Department of
Information Science at Cornell University. His re-
search interests center on a synthesis of theory and
system building in machine learning, with appli-
cations in information access, language technol-
ogy, and recommendation. His past research fo-
cused on support vector machines, text classifi-
cation, structured output prediction, convex opti-
mization, learning to rank, learning with prefer-
ences, and learning from implicit feedback. In

∗∗ Restrictions apply. Some modeling is required.

2001, he finished his dissertation advised by Prof.
Katharina Morik at the University of Dortmund.
From there he also received his Diploma in Com-
puter Science in 1997. Between 2000 and 2001 he
worked as a PostDoc at the GMD Institute for Au-
tonomous Intelligent Systems. From 1994 to 1996
he was a visiting scholar with Prof. Tom Mitchell
at Carnegie Mellon University.

707


