



















































Aligning context-based statistical models of language with brain activity during reading


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 233–243,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Aligning context-based statistical models of language
with brain activity during reading

Leila Wehbe1,2, Ashish Vaswani3, Kevin Knight3 and Tom Mitchell1,2
1 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA

2 Center for the Neural Basis of Computation, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA
3 Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA
lwehbe@cs.cmu.edu, vaswani@usc.edu, knight@isi.edu, tom.mitchell@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

Many statistical models for natural language pro-
cessing exist, including context-based neural net-
works that (1) model the previously seen context
as a latent feature vector, (2) integrate successive
words into the context using some learned represen-
tation (embedding), and (3) compute output proba-
bilities for incoming words given the context. On
the other hand, brain imaging studies have sug-
gested that during reading, the brain (a) continu-
ously builds a context from the successive words
and every time it encounters a word it (b) fetches its
properties from memory and (c) integrates it with
the previous context with a degree of effort that is
inversely proportional to how probable the word is.
This hints to a parallelism between the neural net-
works and the brain in modeling context (1 and a),
representing the incoming words (2 and b) and in-
tegrating it (3 and c). We explore this parallelism to
better understand the brain processes and the neu-
ral networks representations. We study the align-
ment between the latent vectors used by neural net-
works and brain activity observed via Magnetoen-
cephalography (MEG) when subjects read a story.
For that purpose we apply the neural network to the
same text the subjects are reading, and explore the
ability of these three vector representations to pre-
dict the observed word-by-word brain activity.

Our novel results show that: before a new word i
is read, brain activity is well predicted by the neural
network latent representation of context and the pre-
dictability decreases as the brain integrates the word
and changes its own representation of context. Sec-
ondly, the neural network embedding of word i can
predict the MEG activity when word i is presented
to the subject, revealing that it is correlated with the
brain’s own representation of word i. Moreover, we
obtain that the activity is predicted in different re-
gions of the brain with varying delay. The delay is
consistent with the placement of each region on the
processing pathway that starts in the visual cortex
and moves to higher level regions. Finally, we show
that the output probability computed by the neural
networks agrees with the brain’s own assessment of
the probability of word i, as it can be used to predict
the brain activity after the word i’s properties have
been fetched from memory and the brain is in the
process of integrating it into the context.

1 Introduction

Natural language processing has recently seen a
surge in increasingly complex models that achieve

impressive goals. Models like deep neural net-
works and vector space models have become pop-
ular to solve diverse tasks like sentiment analy-
sis and machine translation. Because of the com-
plexity of these models, it is not always clear how
to assess and compare their performances as they
might be useful for one task and not the other.
It is also not easy to interpret their very high-
dimensional and mostly unsupervised representa-
tions. The brain is another computational system
that processes language. Since we can record brain
activity using neuroimaging, we propose a new di-
rection that promises to improve our understand-
ing of both how the brain is processing language
and of what the neural networks are modeling by
aligning the brain data with the neural networks
representations.

In this paper we study the representations of two
kinds of neural networks that are built to predict
the incoming word: recurrent and finite context
models. The first model is the Recurrent Neural
Network Language Model (Mikolov et al., 2011)
which uses the entire history of words to model
context. The second is the Neural Probabilistic
Language Model (NPLM) which uses limited con-
text constrained to the recent words (3 grams or 5
grams). We trained these models on a large Harry
Potter fan fiction corpus and we then used them to
predict the words of chapter 9 of Harry Potter and
the Sorcerer’s Stone (Rowling, 2012). In paral-
lel, we ran an MEG experiment in which 3 subject
read the words of chapter 9 one by one while their
brain activity was recorded. We then looked for
the alignment between the word-by-word vectors
produced by the neural networks and the word-by-
word neural activity recorded by MEG.

Our neural networks have 3 key constituents:
a hidden layer that summarizes the history of the
previous words ; an embeddings vector that sum-
marizes the (constant) properties of a given word
and finally the output probability of a word given

233



Reading comprehension is reflected in the subsequent acti-
vation of the left superior temporal cortex at 200–600 ms
(Halgren et al., 2002; Helenius et al., 1998; Pylkkänen
et al., 2002, 2006; Pylkkänen and Marantz, 2003; Simos
et al., 1997). This sustained activation differentiates
between words and nonwords (Salmelin et al., 1996; Wil-
son et al., 2005; Wydell et al., 2003). Apart from lexical-se-
mantic aspects it also seems to be sensitive to phonological
manipulation (Wydell et al., 2003).

As discussed above, in speech perception activation is
concentrated to a rather small area in the brain and we
have to rely on time information to dissociate between dif-
ferent processes. Here, the different processes are separable
both in timing and location. Because of that, one might
think that it is easier to characterize language-related pro-
cesses in the visual than auditory modality. However, here
the difficulties appear at another level. In reading, activa-
tion is detected bilaterally in the occipital cortex, along
the temporal lobes, in the parietal cortex and, in vocalized
reading, also in the frontal lobes, at various times with
respect to stimulus onset. Interindividual variability further
complicates the picture, resulting in practically excessive
amounts of temporal and spatial information. The areas
and time windows depicted in Fig. 5, with specific roles
in reading, form a limited subset of all active areas
observed during reading. In order to perform proper func-
tional localization one needs to vary the stimuli and tasks
systematically, in a parametric fashion. Let us now consid-
er how one may extract activation reflecting pre-lexical let-
ter-string analysis and lexical-semantic processing.

3.2. Pre-lexical analysis

In order to tease apart early pre-lexical processes in
reading, Tarkiainen and colleagues (Tarkiainen et al.,
1999) used words, syllables, and single letters, imbedded

in a noisy background, at four different noise levels
(Fig. 6). For control, the sequences also contained symbol
strings. One sequence was composed of plain noise stimuli.
The stimuli were thus varied along two major dimensions:
the amount of features to process increased with noise and
with the number of items, letters or symbols. On the other
hand, word-likeness was highest for clearly visible complete
words and lowest for symbols and noise.

At the level of the brain, as illustrated in Fig. 7, the data
showed a clear dissociation between two processes within
the first 200 ms: visual feature analysis occurred at about
100 ms after stimulus presentation, with the active areas
around the occipital midline, along the ventral stream. In
these areas, the signal increased with increasing noise and
with the number of items in the string, similarly for letters
and symbols. Only 50 ms later, at about 150 ms, the left
inferior occipitotemporal cortex showed letter-string spe-
cific activation. This signal increased with the visibility of
the letter strings. It was strongest for words, weaker for syl-
lables, and still weaker for single letters. Crucially, the acti-
vation was significantly stronger for letter than symbol
strings of equal length.

Bilateral occipitotemporal activation at about 200 ms
post-stimulus is consistently reported in MEG studies of
reading (Cornelissen et al., 2003b; Pammer et al., 2004; Sal-
melin et al., 1996, 2000b) but, interestingly, functional
specificity for letter-strings is found most systematically
in the left hemisphere. The MEG data on letter-string spe-
cific activation are in good agreement with intracranial
recordings, both with respect to timing and location and
the pre-lexical nature of the activation (Nobre et al., 1994).

3.3. Lexical-semantic analysis

To identify cortical dynamics of reading comprehension,
Helenius and colleagues (Helenius et al., 1998) employed a

Visual feature
analysis

Non-specific Words =
Nonwords Nonwords

Letter-string
analysis

Time (ms)

0 400 800 0 400 800 0 400 800

Lexical-semantic
analysis

Fig. 5. Cortical dynamics of silent reading. Dots represent centres of active cortical patches collected from individual subjects. The curves display the
mean time course of activation in the depicted source areas. Visual feature analysis in the occipital cortex (!100 ms) is stimulus non-specific. The stimulus
content starts to matter by !150 ms when activation reflecting letter-string analysis is observed in the left occipitotemporal cortex. Subsequent activation
of the left superior temporal cortex at !200–600 ms reflects lexical-semantic analysis and, probably, also phonological analysis. Modified from Salmelin
et al. (2000a).

!
L
ip
p
in
co
tt

W
ill
ia
m
s
&

W
ilk

in
s
20
00

R. Salmelin / Clinical Neurophysiology xxx (2006) xxx–xxx 5

ARTICLE IN PRESS

Please cite this article as: Riitta Salmelin, Clinical neurophysiology of language: The MEG approach, Clinical Neurophysiology
(2006), doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2006.07.316

Figure 1: Cortical dynamics of silent reading. This figure
is adapted from (Salmelin, 2007). Dots represent projected
sources of activity in the visual cortex (left brain sketch) and
the temporal cortex (right brain sketch). The curves display
the mean time course of activation in the depicted source ar-
eas for different conditions. The initial visual feature anal-
ysis in the visual cortex at ∼100 ms is non-specific to lan-
guage. Comparing responses to letter strings and other vi-
sual stimuli reveals that letter string analysis occurs around
150 ms. Finally comparing the responses to words and non-
words (made-up words) reveals lexical-semantic analysis in
the temporal cortex at ∼200-500ms.

the context. We set out to find the brain analogs
of these model constituents using an MEG decod-
ing task. We compare the different models and
their representations in terms of how well they
can be used to decode the word being read from
MEG data. We obtain correspondences between
the models and the brain data that are consistent
with a model of language processing in which
brain activity encodes story context, and where
each new word generates additional brain activity,
flowing generally from visual processing areas to
more high level areas, culminating in an updated
story context, and reflecting an overall magnitude
of neural effort influenced by the probability of
that new word given the previous context.

1.1 Neural processes involved in reading
Humans read with an average speed of 3 words
per second. Reading requires us to perceive in-
coming words and gradually integrate them into
a representation of the meaning. As words are
read, it takes 100ms for the visual input to reach
the visual cortex. 50ms later, the visual input is
processed as letter strings in a specialized region
of the left visual cortex (Salmelin, 2007). Be-
tween 200-500ms, the word’s semantic properties
are processed (see Fig. 1). Less is understood
about the cortical dynamics of word integration, as
multiple theories exist (Friederici, 2002; Hagoort,
2003).

Magnetoencephalography (MEG) is a brain-
imaging tool that is well suited for studying lan-

guage. MEG records the change in the magnetic
field on the surface of the head that is caused by
a large set of aligned neurons that are changing
their firing patterns in synchrony in response to
a stimulus. Because of the nature of the signal,
MEG recordings are directly related to neural ac-
tivity and have no latency. They are sampled at
a high frequency (typically 1kHz) that is ideal for
tracking the fast dynamics of language processing.

In this work, we are interested in the mecha-
nism of human text understanding as the meaning
of incoming words is fetched from memory and
integrated with the context. Interestingly, this is
analogous to neural network models of language
that are used to predict the incoming word. The
mental representation of the previous context is
analogous to the latent layer of the neural network
which summarizes the relevant context before see-
ing the word. The representation of the meaning
of a word is analogous to the embedding that the
neural network learns in training and then uses.
Finally, one common hypotheses is that the brain
integrates the word with inversely proportional ef-
fort to how predictable the word is (Frank et al.,
2013). There is a well studied response known as
the N400 that is an increase of the activity in the
temporal cortex that has been recently shown to be
graded by the amount of surprisal of the incoming
word given the context (Frank et al., 2013). This is
analogous to the output probability of the incom-
ing word from the neural network.

Fig. 2 shows a hypothetical activity in an MEG
sensor as a subject reads a story in our experi-
ment, in which words are presented one at a time
for 500ms each. We conjecture that the activity in
time window a, i.e. before word i is understood, is
mostly related to the previous context before see-
ing word i. We also conjecture that the activity in
time window b is related to understanding word i
and integrating it into the context, leading to a new
representation of context in window c.

Using three types of features from neural net-
works (hidden layer context representation, output
probabilities and word embeddings) from three
different models of language (one recurrent model
and two finite context models), we therefore set to
predict the activity in the brain in different time
windows. We want to align the brain data with the
various model constituents to understand where
and when different types of processes are com-
puted in the brain, and simultaneously, we want to

234



Harry'

Harry'

had'

had'

never'

never'

embedding(iC1)' embedding(i)' embedding(i+1)'

context(iC1)'context(iC2)' context(i)'

out.'prob.(iC1)' out.'prob.(i)' out.'prob.(i+1)'

Studying'the'construc<on'of'meaning'

3'

word i+1 word i-1 word i 
0.5's'0.5's' 0.5's'

a

b

c

Leila'Wehbe'

'…''Harry'''''''had''''''''never'…''

Figure 2: [Top] Sketch of the updates of a neural network
reading chapter 9 after it has been trained. Every word cor-
responds to a fixed embedding vector (magenta). A context
vector (blue) is computed before the word is seen given the
previous words. Given the context vector, the probability of
every word can be computed (symbolized by the histogram
in green). We only use the output probability of the actual
word (red circle). [Bottom] Hypothetical activity in an MEG
sensor when the subject reads the corresponding words. The
time periods approximated as a, b and c can be tested for in-
formation content relating to: the context of the story before
seeing word i (modeled by the context vector at i), the repre-
sentation of the properties of word i (the embedding of word
i) and the integration of word i into the context (the output
probability of word i). The periods drawn here are only a
conjecture on the timings of such cognitive events.

use the brain data to shed light on what the neural
network vectors are representing.

Related work
Decoding cognitive states from brain data is a
recent field that has been growing in popularity.
Most decoding studies that study language use
functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI),
while some studies use MEG. MEG’s high tempo-
ral resolution makes it invaluable for looking at the
dynamics of language understanding. (Sudre et
al., 2012) decode from MEG the word a subject is
reading. The authors estimate from the MEG data
the semantic features of the word and use these as
an intermediate step to decode what the word is.
This is in principle similar to the classification ap-

proach we follow, as we will also use the feature
vectors as an intermediate step for word classifica-
tion. However the experimental paradigm in (Su-
dre et al., 2012) is to present to the subjects sin-
gle isolated words and to find how the brain rep-
resents their semantic features; whereas we have a
much more complex and “naturalistic” experiment
in which the subjects read a non-artificial passage
of text, and we look at processes that exceed in-
dividual word processing: the construction of the
meanings of the successive words and the predic-
tion/integration of incoming words.

In (Frank et al., 2013), the amount of surprisal
that a word has given its context is used to pre-
dict the intensity of the N400 response described
previously. This is the closest study we could find
to our approach. This study was concerned with
analyzing the brain processes related only to sur-
prisal while we propose a more integral account
of the processes in the brain. The study also didn’t
address the major contribution we propose here,
which is to shed light on the inner constituents of
language models using brain imaging.

1.2 Recurrent and finite context neural
networks

Similar to standard language models, neural lan-
guage models also learn probability distributions
over words given their previous context. However,
unlike standard language models, words are rep-
resented as real-valued vectors in a high dimen-
sional space. These word vectors, referred to as
word embeddings, can be different for input and
output words, and are learned from training data.
Thus, although at training and test time, the in-
put and output to the neural language models are
one-hot representation of words, it is their em-
beddings that are used to compute word proba-
bility distributions. After training the embedding
vectors are fixed and it is these vectors that we
will use later on to predict MEG data. To predict
MEG data, we will also use the latent vector rep-
resentations of context that these neural networks
produce, as well as the probability of the current
word given the context. In this section, we will
describe how recurrent neural network language
models and feedforward neural probabilistic lan-
guage models compute word probabilities. In the
interest of space, we keep this description brief,
and for details, the reader is requested to refer to
the original papers describing these models.

235



w(t) s(t− 1)

y(t) c(t)

hidden
s(t)

output
P (wt+1 | s(t))

D W

D′ X

Figure 3: Recurrent neural network language model.

Recurrent Neural Network Language Model
Unlike standard feedforward neural language
models that only look at a fixed number of past
words, recurrent neural network language models
use all the previous history from position 1 to t−1
to predict the next word. This is typically achieved
by feedback connections, where the hidden layer
activations used for predicting the word in posi-
tion t − 1 are fed back into the network to com-
pute the hidden layer activations for predicting the
next word. The hidden layer thus stores the history
of all previous words. We use the RNNLM archi-
tecture as described in Mikolov (2012), shown in
Figure 3. The input to the RNNLM at position t
are the one-hot representation of the current word,
w(t), and the activations from the hidden layer at
position t − 1, s(t − 1). The output of the hidden
layer at position t− 1 is

s(t) = φ (Dw(t) + Ws(t− 1)) ,
where D is the matrix of input word embeddings,
W is a matrix that transforms the activations from
the hidden layer in position t − 1, and φ is a
sigmoid function, defined as φ(x) = 11+exp(−x) ,
that is applied elementwise. We need to compute
the probability of the next word w(t + 1) given
the hidden state s(t). For fast estimation of out-
put word probabilities, Mikolov (2012) divides the
computation into two stages: First, the probability
distribution over word classes is computed, after
which the probability distribution over the subset
of words belonging to the class are computed. The
class probability of a particular class with indexm
at position t is computed as:

P (cm(t) | s(t)) = exp (s(t)Xvm)∑C
c=1 (exp (s(t)Xvc))

,

where X is a matrix of class embeddings and vm
is a one-hot vector representing the class with in-
dex m. The normalization constant is computed

u1 u2

input
words

input
embeddings

hidden
h1

hidden
h2

output
P (w | u)

D′

M
C1 C2

D

Figure 4: Neural probabilistic language model

over all classes C. Each class specifies a subset
V ′ of words, potentially smaller than the entire vo-
cabulary V . The probability of an output word l at
position t + 1 given that its class is m is defined
as:

P (yl(t+ 1) | cm(t), s(t)) =
exp (s(t)D′vl)∑V ′

k=1 (exp (s(t)D′vk))
,

where D′ is a matrix of output word embeddings
and vl is a one hot vector representing the word
with index l. The probability of the word w(t+1)
given its class ci can now be computed as:

P (w(t+ 1) | s(t)) =P (w(t+ 1) | ci, s(t))
P (ci | s(t)).

Neural Probabilistic Language Model
We use the feedforward neural probabilistic lan-
guage model architecture of Vaswani et al. (2013),
as shown in Figure 4. Each context u comprises
a sequence of words uj (1 ≤ j ≤ n − 1) repre-
sented as one-hot vectors, which are fed as input
to the neural network. At the output layer, the neu-
ral network computes the probability P (w | u) for
each word w, as follows.

The output of the first hidden layer h1 is

h1 = φ

n−1∑
j=1

CjDuj + b1

 ,
where D is a matrix of input word embeddings
which is shared across all positions, the Cj are the
context matrices for each word in u, b1 is a vec-
tor of biases with the same dimension as h1, and φ
is applied elementwise. Vaswani et al. (2013) use
rectified linear units (Nair and Hinton, 2010) for

236



the hidden layers h1 and h2, which use the activa-
tion function φ(x) = max(0, x).

The output of the second layer h2 is

h2 = φ (Mh1 + b2) ,

where M is a weight matrix between h1 and h2
and b2 is a vector of biases for h2. The probabil-
ity of the output word is computed at the output
softmax layer as:

P (w | u) = exp
(
vwD′h2 + bT vw

)∑V
w′=1 exp (vw′D′h2 + bT vw′)

,

where D′ is the matrix of output word embed-
dings, b is a vector of biases for every output word
and vw its the one hot representation of the word
w in the vocabulary.

2 Methods

We describe in this section our approach. In sum-
mary, we trained the neural network models on
a Harry Potter fan fiction database. We then ran
these models on chapter 9 of Harry Potter and the
Sorcerer’s Stone (Rowling, 2012) and computed
the context and embedding vectors and the output
probability for each word. In parallel, 3 subjects
read the same chapter in an MEG scanner. We
build models that predict the MEG data for each
word as a function of the different neural network
constituents. We then test these models with a
classification task that we explain below. We de-
tect correspondences between the neural network
components and the brain processes that under-
lie reading in the following fashion. If using a
neural network vector (e.g. the RNNLM embed-
ding vector) allows us to classify significantly bet-
ter than chance in a given region of the brain at
a given time (e.g. the visual cortex at time 100-
200ms), then we can hypothesize a relationship
between that neural network constituent and the
time/location of the analogous brain process.

2.1 Training the Neural Networks

We used the freely available training tools pro-
vided by Mikolov (2012)1 and Vaswani et al.
(2013)2 to train our RNNLM and NPLM models
used in our brain data classification experiments.
Our training data comprised around 67.5 million

1http://rnnlm.org/
2http://nlg.isi.edu/software/nplm

words for training and 100 thousand words for val-
idation from the Harry Potter fan fiction database
(http://harrypotterfanfiction.com). We restricted
the vocabulary to the top 100 thousand words
which covered all but 4 words from Chapter 9 of
Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone.

For the RNNLM, we trained models with differ-
ent hidden layers and learning rates and found the
RNNLM with 250 hidden units to perform best on
the validation set. We extracted our word embed-
dings from the input matrix D (Figure 3). We used
the default settings for all other hyper parameters.

We trained 3-gram and 5-gram NPLMs with
150 dimensional word embeddings and experi-
mented with different number of units for the first
hidden layer (h1 in Figure 4), and different learn-
ing rates. For both the 3-gram and 5-gram mod-
els, we found 750 hidden units to perform the best
on the validation set and chose those models for
our final experiments. We used the output word
embeddings D′ in our experiments. We visually
inspected the nearest neighbors in the 150 dimen-
sional word embedding space for some words and
didn’t find the neighbors from D′ or D to be dis-
tinctly better than each other. We leave the com-
parison of input and output embeddings on brain
activity prediction for future work.

2.2 MEG paradigm

We recorded MEG data for three subjects (2 fe-
males and one male) while they read chapter 9
of Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone (Rowl-
ing, 2012). The participants were native English
speakers and right handed. They were chosen to
be familiar with the material: we made sure they
had read the Harry Potter books or seen the movies
series and were familiar with the characters and
the story. All the participants signed the consent
form, which was approved by the University of
Pittsburgh Institutional Review Board, and were
compensated for their participation.

The words of the story were presented in rapid
serial visual format (Buchweitz et al., 2009):
words were presented one by one at the center
of the screen for 0.5 seconds each. The text was
shown in 4 experimental blocks of ∼11 minutes.
In total, 5176 words were presented. Chapter 9
was presented in its entirety without modifications
and each subject read the chapter only once.

One can think of an MEG machine as a large
helmet, with sensors located on the helmet that

237



record the magnetic activity. Our MEG recordings
were acquired on an Elekta Neuromag device at
the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center Pres-
byterian Hospital. This machine has 306 sensors
distributed into 102 locations on the surface of the
subject’s head. Each location groups 3 sensors or
two types: one magnometer that records the in-
tensity of the magnetic field and two planar gra-
diometers that record the change in the magnetic
field along two orthogonal planes3.

Our sampling frequency was 1kHz. For prepro-
cessing, we used Signal Space Separation method
(SSS, (Taulu et al., 2004)), followed by its tempo-
ral extension (tSSS, (Taulu and Simola, 2006)).

For each subject, the experiment data consists
therefore of a 306 dimensional time series of
length∼45 minutes. We averaged the signal in ev-
ery sensor into 100ms non-overlapping time bins.
Since words were presented for 500ms each, we
therefore obtain for every word p = 306 × 5 val-
ues corresponding to 306 vectors of 5 points.

2.3 Decoding experiment
To find which parts of brain activity are related to
the neural network constituents (e.g. the RNNLM
context vector), we run a prediction and classifica-
tion experiment in a 10-fold cross validated fash-
ion. At every fold, we train a linear model to pre-
dict MEG data as a function of one of the feature
sets, using 90% of the data. On the remaining 10%
of the data, we run a classification experiment.

MEG data is very noisy. Therefore, classify-
ing single word waveforms yields a low accuracy,
peaking at 60%, which might lead to false nega-
tives when looking for correspondences between
neural network features and brain data. To reveal
informative features, one can boost signal by ei-
ther having several repetitions of the stimuli in the
experiment and then averaging (Sudre et al., 2012)
or by combining the words into larger chunks (We-
hbe et al., 2014). We chose the latter because the
former sacrifices word and feature diversity.

At testing, we therefore repeat the following
300 times. Two sets of words are chosen ran-
domly from the test fold. To form the first set, 20
words are sampled without replacement from the
test sample (unseen by the classifier). To form the
second set, the kth word is chosen randomly from
all words in the test fold having the same length as

3In this paper, we treat these three different sensors as
three different dimensions without further exploiting their
physical properties.

the kth word of the first set. Since every fold of
the data was used 9 times in the training phase and
once in the testing phase, and since we use a high
number of randomized comparisons, this averages
out biases in the accuracy estimation. Classifying
sets of 20 words improves the classification accu-
racy greatly while lowering its variance and makes
it dissociable from chance performance. We com-
pare only between words of equal length, to mini-
mize the effect of the low level visual features on
the classification accuracy.

After averaging out the results of multiple folds,
we end up with average accuracies that reveal how
related one of the models’ constituents (e.g. the
RNNLM context vector) is to brain data.

2.3.1 Annotation of the stimulus text
We have 9 sets of annotations for the words of the
experiment. Each set j can be described as a ma-
trix Fj in which each row i corresponds to the vec-
tor of annotations of word i. Our annotations cor-
respond to the 3 model constituents for each of the
3 models: the hidden layer representation before
word i, the output probability of word i and the
learned embeddings for word i.

2.3.2 Classification
In order to align the brain processes and the differ-
ent constituents of the different models, we use a
classification task. The task is to classify the word
a subject is reading out of two possible choices
from its MEG recording. The classifier uses one
type of feature in an intermediate classification
step. For example, the classifier learns to predict
the MEG activity for any setting of the RNNLM
hidden layer. Given an unseen MEG recording for
an unknown word i and two possible story words
i′ and i′′ (one of which being the true word i), the
classifier predicts the MEG activity when reading
i′ and i′′ from their hidden layer vectors. It then
assigns the label i′ or i′′ to the word recording i
depending on which prediction is the closest to the
recording. The following are the detailed steps of
this complex classification task. However, for the
rest of the paper the most useful point to keep in
mind is that the main purpose of the classification
is to find a correspondence between the brain data
and a given feature set j.

1. Normalize the columns of M (zero mean,
standard deviation = 1). Pick feature set Fj
and normalize its columns to a minimum of 0
and a maximum of 1.

238



2. Divide the data into 10 folds, for each fold b:

(a) Isolate Mb and Fbj as test data. The re-
mainder M−b and F−bj will be used for
training4.

(b) Subtract the mean of the columns of
M−b from Mb and M−b and the mean
of the columns of F−bj from F

b
j and F

−b
j

(c) Use ridge regression to solve
M−b = F−bj × βtj

by tuning the λ parameter to every one
of the p output dimensions indepen-
dently. λ is chosen via generalized cross
validation (Golub et al., 1979).

(d) Perform a binary classification. Sample
from the set of words in b a set c of 20
words. Then sample from b another set
of 20 words such that the kth word in c
and d have the same number of letters.
For every sample (c,d):

i. predict the MEG data for c and d as:
Pc = Fcj × Γbj and Pd = Fdj × Γbj

ii. assign to Mc the label c or d depend-
ing on which of Pc or Pd is closest
(Euclidean distance).

iii. assign to Md the label c or d de-
pending on which of Pc or Pd is
closest (Euclidean distance).

3. Compute the average accuracy.

2.3.3 Restricting the analysis spatially: a
searchlight equivalent

We adapt the searchlight method (Kriegeskorte et
al., 2006) to MEG. The searchlight is a discovery
procedure used in fMRI in which a cube is slid
over the brain and an analysis is performed in each
location separately. It allows to find regions in the
brain where a specific phenomenon is occurring.
In the MEG sensor space, for every one of the 102
sensor locations `, we assign a group of sensors g`.
For every location `, we identify the locations that
immediately surround it in any direction (Anterior,
Right Anterior, Right etc...) when looking at the
2D flat representation of the location of the sensors
in the MEG helmet (see Fig. 9 for an illustration of
the 2D helmet). g` therefore contains the 3 sensors
at location ` and at the neighboring locations. The
maximum number of sensors in a group is 3 × 9.

4The rows from M−b and F−bj that correspond to the five
words before or after the test set are ignored in order to make
the test set independent.

The locations at the edge of the helmet have fewer
sensors because of the missing neighbor locations.

2.3.4 Restricting the analysis temporally
Instead of using the entire time course of the word,
we can use only one of the corresponding 100ms
time windows. Obtaining a high classification ac-
curacy using one of the time windows and feature
set j means that the analogous type of information
is encoded at that time.

2.3.5 Classification accuracy by time and
region

The above steps compute whole brain accuracy us-
ing all the time series. In order to perform a more
precise spatio-temporal analysis, one can use only
one time windowm and one location ` for the clas-
sification. This can answer the question of when
and where different information is represented by
brain activity. For every location, we will use only
the columns corresponding to the time pointm for
the sensors belonging to the group g`. Step (d) of
the classification procedure is changed as such:

(d) Perform a binary classification. Sample from
the set of words in b a set c of 20 words. Then
sample from b another set of 20 words such
that the kth word in c and d have the same
number of letters. For every sample (c,d), and
for every setting of {m, `}:

i. predict the MEG data for c and d as:
Pc{m,`} = F

c
j × Γbj,{m,`} and

Pd{m,`} = F
d
j × Γbj,{m,`}

ii. assign to Mc{m,`} the label c or d depend-
ing on which of Pc{m,`} or P

d
{m,`} is clos-

est (Euclidean distance).
iii. assign to Md{m,`} the label c or d depend-

ing on which of Pc{m,`} or P
d
{m,`} is clos-

est (Euclidean distance).

2.3.6 Statistical significance testing
We determine the distribution for chance perfor-
mance empirically. Because the successive word
samples in our MEG and feature matrices are not
independent and identically distributed, we break
the relationship between the MEG and feature ma-
trices by shifting the feature matrices by large de-
lays (e.g. 2000 to 2500 words) and we repeat
the classification using the delayed matrices. This
simulates chance performance more fairly than a
permutation test because it keeps the time struc-
ture of the matrices. It was used in (Wehbe et al.,

239



2014) and inspired by (Chwialkowski and Gret-
ton, 2014). For every {m, `} setting we can there-
fore compute a standardized z-value by subtract-
ing the mean of the shifted classifications and di-
viding by the standard deviation. We then com-
pute the p-value for the true classification accu-
racy being due to chance. Since the three p-values
for the three subjects for a given {m, `} are inde-
pendent, we combine them using Fisher’s method
for independent test statistics (Fisher, 1925). The
statistics we obtain for every {m, `} are depen-
dent because they comprise nearby time and space
windows. We control the false discovery rate us-
ing (Benjamini and Yekutieli, 2001) to adjust for
the testing at multiple locations and time windows.
This method doesn’t assume any kind of indepen-
dence or positive dependence.

3 Results

We present in Fig. 5 the accuracy using all the time
windows and sensors. In Fig. 6 we present the
classification accuracy when running the classifi-
cation at every time window exclusively. In Fig. 9
we present the accuracy when running the classifi-
cation using different time windows and groups of
sensors centered at every one of the 102 locations.

It is important to lay down some conventions
to understand the complex results in these plots.
To recap, we are trying to find parallels between
model constituents and brain processes. We use:

• a subset of the data (for example the time
window 0-100ms and all the sensors)

• one type of feature (for example the hidden
context layer from the NPLM 3g model)

and we obtain a classification accuracy A. If A
is low, there is probably no relationship between
the feature set and the subset of data. If A is high,
it hints to an association between the subset of data
and the mental process that is analogous to the fea-
ture set. For example, when using all the sensors
and time window 0-100ms, along with the NPLM
3g hidden layer, we obtain an accuracy of 0.70
(higher than chance with p < 10−14, see Fig. 6).
Since the NPLM 3g hidden layer summarizes the
context of the story before seeing word i, this sug-
gests that the brain is still processing the context
of the story before word i between 0-100ms.

Fig. 6 shows the accuracy for different types
of features when using all of the time points and
all the sensors to classify a word. We can see

NPLM 3g NPLM 5g RNNLM

0.6

0.8

1

c
la

s
s
if
ic

a
ti
o

n
 a

c
c
u

ra
c
y

 

 

hidden layer output probability embeddings

hidden layer output probability embeddings

0.6

0.8

1

c
la

s
s
if
ic

a
ti
o

n
 a

c
c
u

ra
c
y

 

 

NPLM 3g NPLM 5g RNNLM

Figure 5: Average accuracy using all time windows and
sensors, grouped by model (top) and type of feature (bot-
tom). All accuracies are significantly higher than chance
(p < 10−8).

0 200 400

0.5

0.6

0.7

NPLM 3g

0 200 400

0.5

0.6

0.7

NPLM 5g

0 200 400

0.5

0.6

0.7

RNNLM

 

 

hidden layer

output probability

embeddings

Figure 6: Average accuracy in different time windows
when using different types of features as input to the clas-
sifier, for different models. Accuracy is plotted in the center
of the respective time window. Points marked with a circle
are significantly higher than chance accuracy for the given
feature set and time window after correction.

similar classification accuracies for the three types
of models, with RNNLM ahead for the hidden
layer and embeddings and behind for the output
probability features. The hidden layer features
are the most powerful for classification. Between
the three types of features, the hidden layer fea-
tures are the best at capturing the information con-
tained in the brain data, suggesting that most of
the brain activity is encoding the previous context.
The embedding features are the second best. Fi-
nally the output probability have the smallest ac-
curacies. This makes sense considering that they
capture much less information than the other two
high dimensional descriptive vectors, as they do
not represent the complex properties of the words,
only a numerical assessment of their likelihood.

Fig. 6 shows the accuracy when using different
windows of time exclusively, for the 100ms time

240



windows starting at 0, 100 . . . 400ms after word
presentation. We can see that using the embed-
ding vector becomes increasingly more useful for
classification until 300-400ms, and then its perfor-
mance starts decreasing. This results aligns with
the following hypothesis: the word is being per-
ceived and understood by the brain gradually after
its presentation, and therefore the brain represen-
tation of the word becomes gradually similar to the
neural network representation of the word (i.e. the
embedding vector). The output probability feature
accuracy peaks at a later time than the embeddings
accuracy. Obtaining a higher than chance accu-
racy at time window m using the output probabil-
ity as input to the classifier suggests strongly that
the brain is integrating the word at time window
m, because it is responding differently for pre-
dictable and unpredictable words5. The integra-
tion step happens after the perception step, which
is probably why the output probability curves peak
later than the embeddings curves.

−500 0 500 1000

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

Hidden Layer

 

 

NPLM 3G
NPLM 5G
RNNLM

Figure 7: Average accuracy in time for the different hidden
layers. The analysis is extended to the time windows before
and after the word is presented, the input feature is restricted
to be the hidden layer before the central word is seen. The
first vertical bar indicates the onset of the word, the second
one indicates the end of its presentation.

−1000 0 1000

0.6

0.8

Subject 1

−1000 0 1000

0.6

0.8

Subject 2

−1000 0 1000

0.6

0.8

Subject 3

 

 

hidden layer output probability embeddings

Figure 8: Accuracy in time when using the RNNLM fea-
tures for each of the three subjects.

To understand the time dynamics of the hidden
layer accuracy we need to see a larger time scale
than the word itself. The hidden layer captures the

5the fact that we can classify accurately during windows
300-400ms indicates that the classifier is taking advantage of
the N400 response discussed in the introduction

context before word i is seen. Therefore it seems
reasonable that the hidden layer is not only related
to the activity when the word is on the screen, but
also related to the activity before the word is pre-
sented, which is the time when the brain is inte-
grating the previous words to build that context.
On the other hand, as the word i and subsequent
words are integrated, the context starts diverging
from the context of word i (computed before see-
ing word i). We therefore ran the same analysis
as before, but this time we also included the time
windows before and after word i in the analysis,
while maintaining the hidden layer vector to be the
context before word i is seen. We see the behav-
ior we predicted in the results: the context before
seeing word i becomes gradually more useful for
classification until word i is seen, and then it grad-
ually decreases until it is no longer useful since
the context has changed. We observe the RNNLM
hidden layer has a higher classification accuracy
than the finite context NPLMs. This might be due
to the fact that the RNNLM has a more complete
representation of context that captures more of the
properties of the previous words.

To show the consistency of the results, we plot
as illustration the three curves we obtain for each
subject for the RNNLM (Fig. 8). The patterns
seem very consistent indicating the phenomena we
described can be detected at the subject level.

We now move on to the spatial decomposition
of the analysis. When the visual input enters the
brain, it first reaches the visual cortex at the back
of the head, and then moves anteriorly towards the
left and right temporal cortices and eventually the
frontal cortex. As it flows through these areas, it
is processed to higher levels of interpretations. In
Fig. 9, we plot the accuracy for different regions
of the brain and different time windows for the
RNNLM features. To make the plots simpler we
multiplied by zero the accuracies which were not
significantly higher than chance. We expand a few
characteristic plots. We see that in the back of the
head the embedding features have an accuracy that
seems to peak very early on. As we move forward
in the brain towards the left and right temporal cor-
tices, we see the embeddings accuracy peaking at
a later time, reflecting the delay it takes for the in-
formation to reach this part of the brain. The out-
put probability start being useful for classification
after the embeddings, and specifically in the left
temporal cortex which is the cite where the N400

241



Back%

 

 

hidden layer

output probability

embeddings
0 500

0.5
0.6
0.7

time (s)

a
cc

u
ra

cy

Le(% Right%

 

 

hidden layer

output probability

embeddings
0 500

0.5
0.6
0.7

time (s)

a
cc

u
ra

cy

 

 

hidden layer

output probability

embeddings
0 500

0.5
0.6
0.7

time (s)

a
cc

u
ra

cy

 

 

hidden layer

output probability

embeddings
0 500

0.5
0.6
0.7

time (s)

a
cc

u
ra

cy

 

 

hidden layer

output probability

embeddings
0 500

0.5
0.6
0.7

time (s)

a
cc

u
ra

cy

 

 

hidden layer

output probability

embeddings
0 500

0.5
0.6
0.7

time (s)

a
cc

u
ra

cy

Figure 9: Average accuracy in time and space on the MEG helmet when using the RNNLM features. For each of the 102
locations the average accuracy for the group of sensors centered at that location is plotted versus time. The axes are defined
in the rightmost, empty plot. Three plots have been magnified to show the increasing delay in high accuracy when using the
embeddings feature, reflecting the delay in processing the incoming word as information travels through the brain. A sensor
map is provided in the lower right corner: visual cortex = cyan, temporal = red, frontal = dark green.

is reported in the literature. Finally, as we reach
the frontal cortex, we see that the embeddings fea-
tures have an even later accuracy peak.

4 Conclusion and contributions

Novel brain data exploration We present here
a novel and revealing approach to shed light on
the brain processes involved in reading. This is a
departure from the classical approach of control-
ling for a few variables in the text (e.g. showing
a sentence with an expected target word versus an
unexpected one). While we cannot make clear cut
causal claims because we did not control for our
variables, we are able to explore the data much
more and offer a much richer interpretation than
is possible with artificially constrained stimuli.

Comparing two models of language Adding
brain data into the equation allowed us to com-
pare the performance of the models and to identify
a slight advantage for the RNNLM in capturing
the text contents. Numerical comparison is how-
ever a secondary contribution of our approach. We
showed that it might be possible to use brain data
to understand, interpret and illustrate what exactly
is being encoded by the obscure vectors that neural
networks compute, by drawing parallels between
the models constituents and brain processes.

Anecdotally, in the process of running the ex-
periments, we noticed that the accuracy for the
hidden layer of the RNNLM was peaking in the
time window corresponding to word i−2, and that
it was decreasing during word i − 1. Since this
was against our expectations, we went back and
looked at the code and found that it was indeed
returning a delayed value and corrected the fea-
tures. We therefore used the brain data in order to
correct a mis-specification in our neural network
model. This hints if not proves the potential of our
approach for assessing language models.

Future Work The work described here is our
first attempt along the promising endeavor of
matching complex computational models of lan-
guage with brain processes using brain recordings.
We plan to extend our efforts by (1) collecting data
from more subjects and using various types of text
and (2) make the brain data help us with training
better statistical language models by using it to de-
termine whether the models are expressive enough
or have reached a sufficient degree of convergence.

Acknowledgements

This research was supported in part by NICHD
grant 5R01HD07328-02. We thank Nicole Rafidi
for help with data acquisition.

242



References
Yoav Benjamini and Daniel Yekutieli. 2001. The con-

trol of the false discovery rate in multiple testing un-
der dependency. Annals of statistics, pages 1165–
1188.

Augusto Buchweitz, Robert A Mason, Lêda Tomitch,
and Marcel Adam Just. 2009. Brain activation
for reading and listening comprehension: An fMRI
study of modality effects and individual differences
in language comprehension. Psychology & neuro-
science, 2(2):111–123.

Kacper Chwialkowski and Arthur Gretton. 2014.
A kernel independence test for random processes.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1402.4501.

Ronald Aylmer Fisher. 1925. Statistical methods for
research workers. Genesis Publishing Pvt Ltd.

Stefan L Frank, Leun J Otten, Giulia Galli, and
Gabriella Vigliocco. 2013. Word surprisal predicts
N400 amplitude during reading. In Proceedings of
the 51st annual meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 878–883.

Angela D Friederici. 2002. Towards a neural basis
of auditory sentence processing. Trends in cognitive
sciences, 6(2):78–84.

Gene H Golub, Michael Heath, and Grace Wahba.
1979. Generalized cross-validation as a method for
choosing a good ridge parameter. Technometrics,
21(2):215–223.

Peter Hagoort. 2003. How the brain solves the binding
problem for language: a neurocomputational model
of syntactic processing. Neuroimage, 20:S18–S29.

Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Rainer Goebel, and Peter Ban-
dettini. 2006. Information-based functional brain
mapping. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America,
103(10):3863–3868.

Tomas Mikolov, Stefan Kombrink, Anoop Deoras,
Lukar Burget, and J Cernocky. 2011. RNNLM-
recurrent neural network language modeling toolkit.
In Proc. of the 2011 ASRU Workshop, pages 196–
201.

Tomas Mikolov. 2012. Statistical Language Models
Based on Neural Networks. Ph.D. thesis, Brno Uni-
versity of Technology.

Vinod Nair and Geoffrey E. Hinton. 2010. Rectified
linear units improve restricted Boltzmann machines.
In Proceedings of ICML, pages 807–814.

Joanne K. Rowling. 2012. Harry Potter and the Sor-
cerer’s Stone. Harry Potter US. Pottermore Limited.

Riitta Salmelin. 2007. Clinical neurophysiology of
language: the MEG approach. Clinical Neurophysi-
ology, 118(2):237–254.

Gustavo Sudre, Dean Pomerleau, Mark Palatucci, Leila
Wehbe, Alona Fyshe, Riitta Salmelin, and Tom
Mitchell. 2012. Tracking neural coding of percep-
tual and semantic features of concrete nouns. Neu-
roImage, 62(1):451–463.

Samu Taulu and Juha Simola. 2006. Spatiotem-
poral signal space separation method for rejecting
nearby interference in MEG measurements. Physics
in medicine and biology, 51(7):1759.

Samu Taulu, Matti Kajola, and Juha Simola. 2004.
Suppression of interference and artifacts by the sig-
nal space separation method. Brain topography,
16(4):269–275.

Ashish Vaswani, Yinggong Zhao, Victoria Fossum, and
David Chiang. 2013. Decoding with large-scale
neural language models improves translation.

Leila Wehbe, Brian Murphy, Partha Talukdar, Alona
Fyshe, Aaditya Ramdas, and Tom Mitchell. 2014.
Simultaneously uncovering the patterns of brain re-
gions involved in different story reading subpro-
cesses. in press.

243


