



















































Type-Aware Distantly Supervised Relation Extraction with Linked Arguments


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1891–1901,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Type-Aware Distantly Supervised Relation Extraction
with Linked Arguments

Mitchell Koch John Gilmer Stephen Soderland Daniel S. Weld
Department of Computer Science & Engineering

University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195, USA

{mkoch,jgilme1,soderlan,weld}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract

Distant supervision has become the lead-
ing method for training large-scale rela-
tion extractors, with nearly universal adop-
tion in recent TAC knowledge-base pop-
ulation competitions. However, there are
still many questions about the best way
to learn such extractors. In this paper we
investigate four orthogonal improvements:
integrating named entity linking (NEL)
and coreference resolution into argument
identification for training and extraction,
enforcing type constraints of linked argu-
ments, and partitioning the model by rela-
tion type signature.

We evaluate sentential extraction perfor-
mance on two datasets: the popular set of
NY Times articles partially annotated by
Hoffmann et al. (2011) and a new dataset,
called GORECO, that is comprehensively
annotated for 48 common relations. We
find that using NEL for argument identi-
fication boosts performance over the tra-
ditional approach (named entity recogni-
tion with string match), and there is further
improvement from using argument types.
Our best system boosts precision by 44%
and recall by 70%.

1 Introduction

Relation extractors are commonly trained by dis-
tant supervision (also known as knowledge-based
weak supervision (Hoffmann et al., 2011)), an au-
tonomous technique that creates a labeled train-
ing set by heuristically matching the contents of a
knowledge base (KB) to mentions (substrings) in
a textual corpus. For example, if a KB contained
the ground tuple BornIn(Albert Einstein, Ulm) then

Training Extraction

KB

Argument 
Identification

Matching

Train Extractor Extractor

Argument 
Identification

Figure 1: Distantly supervised extraction pipeline.

a distant supervision system might label the sen-
tence “While [Einstein]1 was born in [Ulm]2, he
moved to Munich at an early age.” as a positive
training instance of the BornIn relation. Although
distant supervision is a simple idea and often cre-
ates data with false positives, it has become ubiq-
uitous; for example, all top-performing systems in
recent TAC-KBP slot filling competitions used the
method.

Surprisingly, however, many aspects of distant
supervision are poorly studied. In response we
perform an extensive search of ways to improve
distant supervision and the extraction process, in-
cluding using named entity linking (NEL) and
coreference to identify arguments for distant su-
pervision and extraction, as well as using type con-
straints and partitioning the trained model by rela-
tion type signatures.

The first step in the distant supervision process
is argument identification (Figure 1) — finding
textual mentions referring to entities that might be
in some relation. Next comes matching, where KB
facts, e.g. tuples such as R(e1, e2), are associated
with sentences mentioning entities e1 and e2 in
the assumption that many of these sentences de-
scribe the relation R. Most previous systems per-
form these steps by first using named entity recog-
nition (NER) to identify possible arguments and
then using a simple string match, but this crude

1891



approach misses many possible instances. Since
the separately-studied task of named entity linking
(NEL) is precisely what is needed to perform dis-
tant supervision, it is interesting to see if today’s
optimized linkers lead to improved performance
when used to train extractors.

Coreference, the task of clustering mentions
that describe the same entity, may also be use-
ful for increasing the number of candidate argu-
ments. Consider the following variant of our pre-
vious example: “While [he]1 was born in [Ulm]2,
[Einstein]3 moved to Munich at an early age.”
Since mentions 1 and 3 corefer, one could con-
sider using either the pair 〈1, 2〉 or 〈3, 2〉 (or both)
for training. Intuitively, it seems that 〈1, 2〉 is more
representative of BornIn and might generalize bet-
ter, so we consider the use of coreference at both
training and extraction time.

Semantic relations often have selectional prefer-
ences (also known as type signatures); for exam-
ple, BornIn holds between people and locations.
Therefore, it seems promising to include entity
types, whether coarse or fine grained in the dis-
tantly supervised relation extraction process. We
consider two ways of adding this information. By
using NEL to get linked entities, we can impose
type constraints on the relation extraction system
to only allow relations over appropriately typed
mentions. We also investigate using coarse types
from NER to learn separate models for different
relation type signatures in order to make the mod-
els more effective.

In summary, this paper represents the following
contributions:

• We explore several dimensions for improv-
ing distantly supervised relation extraction,
including better argument identification dur-
ing training and extraction using both NEL
and coreference, partitioning the model by
relation type signatures, and enforcing type
constraints of linked arguments as a post-
processing step. While some of these ideas
may seem straightforward, to our knowledge
they have not been systematically studied.
And, as we show, they lead to dramatic im-
provements.

• Since previous datasets are incapable of mea-
suring an extractor’s true recall, we intro-
duce GORECO, a new exhaustively-labeled
dataset with gold annotations for sentential

instances of 48 relations across 128 newswire
documents from the ACE 2004 corpus (Dod-
dington et al., 2004).

• We demonstrate that NEL argument identifi-
cation boosts both precision and recall, and
using type constraints with linked arguments
further boosts precision, yielding a 43% in-
crease in precision and 27% boost to re-
call. Using coreference during training ar-
gument identification gives an additional 7%
improvement to precision and further boosts
recall by 9%. Partitioning the model by rela-
tion type signature offers further benefits, so
our best system yields a total boost of 44% to
precision and 70% to recall.

2 Distantly Supervised Extraction

At a sentence-level, the goal for relation extrac-
tion is to determine for each sentence, what facts
are expressed. We describe these as relation an-
notations of the form s→R(m1,m2), where s is
a sentence, R ∈ R is a relation name, R is our
finite set of target relations, and m1 and m2 are
grounded entity mentions of the form (s, t1, t2, e),
where t1 and t2 delimit a text span in the sentence,
and e is a grounded entity.

2.1 Training
During training, the contents of the KB are heuris-
tically matched to the training corpus according
to the distant supervision hypothesis: if a relation
holds between two entities, any sentence contain-
ing those two entities is likely to express that rela-
tion.

The training KB ∆ contains fact tuples of form
R(e1, e2), where R ∈ R is a relation name, R is
our finite set of target relations, and e1 and e2 are
ground entities. The training text corpus Σ con-
tains documents, which contain sentences. Argu-
ment identification is performed over the text cor-
pus to get grounded mentionsm. Then during sen-
tential instance generation, sentential instances of
the form (s,m1,m2) are generated representing
a sentence with two grounded mentions. At this
point, these sentential instances can be matched
to the seed KB, yielding candidate relation anno-
tations of the form s→R(m1,m2) by finding all
relations that hold over the entities in a sentential
instance. These candidate relation annotations are
all positive instances to use for training. Negative
instance generation is also performed, generating

1892



negative examples of the form s→NA(m1,m2) in-
dicating that no relation holds between m1 and
m2. There are several heuristics for generating
negative instances, and the number of negative ex-
amples and how they are treated can greatly affect
performance (Min et al., 2013).

Because the distant supervision hypothesis of-
ten does not hold, this training data is noisy. That
a fact is in the KB does not imply that the sen-
tence in question is expressing the relation. There
has been much work in combating noise in dis-
tant supervision training data, but one of the most
successful ideas is to train a multi-instance classi-
fier which assumes at-least-one relation holds for
positive bags. We use Hoffmann et al. (2011)’s
MULTIR system, which uses a probabilistic graph-
ical model to jointly reason at the corpus-level
and sentence-level, handles overlapping relations
in the KB so that multiple relations can hold over
an entity pair, and scales to large datasets.

2.2 Extraction

The trained relation extractor can assign a most
likely relation and a confidence score to a senten-
tial instance (s,m1,m2). To get these sentential
instances, argument identification and sentential
instance generation are applied to new documents.
Then the relation extractor potentially yields a re-
lation annotation of the form s→R(m1,m2), or
potentially no relation. At extraction time a men-
tion m might have a NIL link if a correspond-
ing ground entity was not found during argument
identification (meaning the entity is not in the KB).
The relation annotations have associated confi-
dence scores, so a threshold can be chosen to only
use high-confidence relation annotations.

3 Argument Identification

An important piece of relation extraction is deter-
mining what can be an argument, and how to form
a semantic representation of it. We define an argu-
ment identification function ArgIdent∆(D), which
takes a document D, finds potential arguments,
and links them to entities in ∆ if possible, yield-
ing m, a set of grounded mentions in D. Pre-
vious relation extraction systems have based this
on NER. We evaluate NER-based argument iden-
tification against argument identification based on
NEL, as well as NEL with coreference.

3.1 Named Entity Recognition

Named entity recognition (NER) tags spans of to-
kens with basic types such as PERSON, ORGANI-
ZATION, LOCATION, and MISC. This is a high
accuracy tagging task often performed using a
sequence classifier (Finkel et al., 2005). Rela-
tion extraction systems can base their argument
identification on NER, by using NER to identify
text spans indicating entities and then find corre-
sponding entities in the KB through exact string
match (Riedel et al., 2010). Some downsides of
using NER with exact string match for relation ex-
traction is that it does not allow for overlapping
mentions, it can only capture arguments with full
names, and it can only capture arguments with
types of the NER system, e.g., “politician” might
not be captured.

3.2 Named Entity Linking

Named entity linking (NEL) is the task of ground-
ing textual mentions to entities in a KB, such as
Wikipedia. Thus “named entity” here, has a some-
what broader definition than in NER — these are
any entities in the KB, not just those expressed
with proper names. Hachey et al. (2013) define
three stages that NEL systems take to perform
this task: extraction (mention detection), search
(generating candidate KB entities for a mention),
and disambiguation (selecting the best entity for a
mention). There has been much work on the task
of NEL in recent years (Milne and Witten, 2008;
Kulkarni et al., 2009; Ratinov et al., 2011; Cheng
and Roth, 2013).

Our definition of a function ArgIdent(D) is
completely served by an NEL system. It can
find any entity in the KB, and those entities are
grounded. Additionally, NEL can have overlap-
ping mentions as well as support for abbreviated
mentions like “Obama”, or acronyms like “US”.
NEL does not seek to capture anaphoric mentions,
however.

3.3 Coreference Resolution

Coreference resolution is the task of clustering
mentions of entities together, typically within a
single document. Using coreference, we can find
even more mentions than NEL, since it can find
pronouns and anaphoric mentions. We seek to use
coreference to add additional arguments to those
found by NEL, and we refer to this combined ar-
gument identification method as NEL+Coref. Tak-

1893



ing in arguments from NEL argument identifica-
tion and coreference clusters, we ground the clus-
ters by picking the most common grounded entity
from NEL mentions that occur in a coreference
cluster. A difficulty is that mentions from NEL
and coreference can have small differences in text
spans, such as whether determiners are included.
We try to assign each NEL argument to a corefer-
ence cluster, first looking for an exact span match,
then by looking for the shortest coreference men-
tion that contains it. If the coreference cluster al-
ready has matched an NEL argument through ex-
act span match that is different from the one found
by looking for the shortest containing coreference
mention, the new NEL argument is not added.
This gives for each coreference cluster a possible
grounding to an entity in the KB. What is provided
as final arguments for NEL+Coref argument iden-
tification are, in order, grounded NEL arguments,
grounded coreference arguments that do not over-
lap with previous arguments, NIL arguments from
NEL that do not overlap with previous arguments,
and NIL arguments from coreference that do not
overlap with previous arguments.

4 Type-Awareness

Relations have expected types for each argument.
Entity types, whether coarse-grained, such as from
NER, or fine-grained, such as from Freebase enti-
ties, are an important source of information that
can be useful for making decisions in relation ex-
traction. We bring type-awareness into the system
through partitioning the model, as well as by en-
forcing type constraints on output relation annota-
tions.

Model Partitioning Instead of building a single
relation extractor that can generate sentential in-
stances and then relation annotations with argu-
ments of any type, we can instead build separate
relation extractors for each possible coarse type
signature, e.g., (PERSON, PERSON), (PERSON, LO-
CATION), etc., and combine the extractions from
the extractor for each type signature. This modi-
fication allows each trained model to only handle
instances of specific types, and thus relations of
that type signature, allowing each to do a better job
of choosing relations within the type signature.

Type Constraints We can additionally reject re-
lation annotations where the types of the argu-
ments do not agree with the expected types of the

relation. That is, we only accept a relation annota-
tion s→R(m1,m2) when EntityTypes(e1) ∩ τ1 6=
∅ and EntityTypes(e2)∩τ2 6= ∅, wherem1 is linked
to e1, m2 is linked to e2, EntityTypes provides the
set of valid types for an entity, τ1 is the set of al-
lowed types for the first argument of target relation
r, and τ2 for the second argument.

5 Evaluation Setups

Relation extraction is often evaluated from a
macro-reading perspective (Mitchell et al., 2009),
in which the extracted facts, R(e1, e2), are judged
true or false independent of any supporting sen-
tence. For these experiments, however, we take a
micro-reading approach in order to strictly eval-
uate whether a relation extractor is able to extract
every fact expressed by a sentence s→R(m1,m2).
Micro-reading is more difficult, but it provides
fully semantic information at the sentence and
document level allowing detailed justifications,
and, for our purposes, allows us to better under-
stand the effects of our modifications. In order
to fairly evaluate different systems, even those us-
ing different methods of argument identification,
we want to use gold evaluation data allowing for
varying mention types. We additionally use Hoff-
mann et al. (2011)’s sentential evaluation as-is in
order to better compare with prior work. For our
training corpus, we use the TAC-KBP 2009 (Mc-
Namee and Dang, 2009) English newswire corpus
containing one million documents with 27 million
sentences.

5.1 Hoffmann et al. Sentential Evaluation

Hoffmann et al. (2011) generated their gold data
by taking the union of sentential instances where
some system being evaluated extracted a relation
as well as the sentential instances matching ar-
guments in the KB. They took a random sample
of these sentential instances and manually labeled
them with either a single relation or NA. Although
this process provides good coverage, since is is
sampled from extractions over a large corpus, it
does not allow one to measure true recall. Indeed,
Hoffmann’s method significantly overestimates re-
call, since the random sample is only over senten-
tial instances where a program detected an extrac-
tion or a KB match was found. Furthermore, this
test set only contains sentential instances in which
arguments are marked using NER, which makes
it impossible to determine if the use of NEL or

1894



coreference confers any benefit.
Finally, it does not allow for the possibility that

there may be multiple relations that should be ex-
tracted for a pair of arguments. For example, a
CeoOf relation, and an EmployedBy relation might
both be present for (Larry Page, Google). To ad-
dress these issues, we manually annotate a full set
of documents with relation annotations. Because
we are evaluating changing various aspects of the
distant supervision process, we cannot use Riedel
et al. (2010)’s distant supervision data as-is as oth-
ers did on the Hoffmann et al. (2011) sentential
evaluation. Instead, we use the TAC-KBP data de-
scribed above.

5.2 GoReCo Evaluation

In order to allow for variations on mentions (NER,
NEL, and coreference each has its own definition
of what a mention boundary should be), we want
gold relation annotations over coreference clus-
ters broadly defined to allow mentions obtained
from NER and NEL, as well as gold coreference
mentions. So as long as a relation extraction sys-
tem extracts a relation annotation s→R(m1,m2)
where m1 and m2 are allowed options (based on
text spans), it will get credit for extracting the
relation annotation. We introduce the GORECO
(gold relations and coreference) evaluation to sat-
isfy these constraints.

We start with an existing gold coreference
dataset, ACE 2004 (Doddington et al., 2004)
newswire, consisting of 128 documents. To get
relation annotations over coreference clusters, we
define two human annotation tasks and use the
BRAT (Stenetorp et al., 2012) tool for visualization
and relation and coreference annotations.

Relation Annotation The annotator is pre-
sented with a document with gold mentions indi-
cated and asked to determine for each sentence,
what facts involving target relations are expressed
by the sentence. They draw an arrow for each fact
and label it with the relation. They also have the
ability to add mentions not present (ReAnn men-
tions).

Supplemental Coreference Mentions from
NER and NEL are displayed along with ACE and
ReAnn mentions from the previous task. The
annotator draws coreference links from NER or
NEL mentions to an ACE or ReAnn mention if
they are coreferent.

We randomly shuffle the 128 ACE 2004
newswire documents and use 64 as a development
set and 64 as a test set. To complete annotations
of these documents, we only used one original hu-
man annotator (hired using the oDesk crowdsourc-
ing platform) and found mistakes by having others
check the work, as well as checking false positives
of relation extractors on the development set to
find patterns of annotation mistakes. On average,
there are 7 relation annotations per document.

For the GORECO evaluation, we define our
train/test split (with the separate TAC-KBP corpus
used for training) such that each has a different set
of documents and entities, in order to evaluate how
well the system performs on unseen entities. To do
this, we remove entities found in the gold evalua-
tion set from the training KB. (We do not remove
entities for the Hoffmann et al. (2011) evaluation,
since they do not.) We choose the threshold con-
fidence score for each system using the develop-
ment set to optimize for F1 and report results on
the test set.

5.2.1 Target Relations
Since we use a different evaluation, we also seek to
choose a more comprehensive and interesting set
of relations than prior work. Riedel et al. (2010),
whose train and test data is also used by Hoff-
mann et al. (2011) and Surdeanu et al. (2012), use
Freebase properties under domains /people, /busi-
ness, and /location. Since /location relations such
as /location/location/contains dominate the results
(and are relatively uninteresting in that they rarely
change), we do not use any /location relations, and
instead use the domains /people, /business, and
/organization (Google, 2012).

Since many Freebase properties are between
an entity and a table instead of another
entity, we also use joined relations, such
as /people/person/employment_history ./ /busi-
ness/employment_tenure/company , in this case
representing employment. We bring in an addi-
tional 20 relations of this form, also under /person,
/business, and /organization. Additionally we use
NELL (Carlson et al., 2010a) relations mapped to
Freebase by Zhang et al. (2012).

We only include a relation in our set of target
relations if both of its entity arguments are con-
tained in the set of entities found via NER with
exact string match or NEL over the training cor-
pus. We also remove inverse relations, since they
represent needless duplication. This gives us a set

1895



R of 105 target relations based on joins and unions
of Freebase properties. Of the 105 target relations,
48 were used at least once in the GORECO data.

6 Experiments and Results

We conduct experiments to determine how chang-
ing distantly supervised relation extraction along
various dimensions affects performance. We ex-
amine the choice of argument identification dur-
ing training and extraction, as well as the effects
of model type partitioning, and type constraints.
We consider the space of all combinations of these
dimensions, but focus on specific combinations
where we find improvements.

6.1 Relation Extraction Setup

We use and modify Hoffmann et al. (2011)’s sys-
tem MULTIR to control our experiments and as
a baseline. For NER argument identification as
well as for the use of NER in the features, we use
use Stanford NER (Finkel et al., 2005). For NEL
argument identification we use Wikipedia Miner
with the default threshold 0.5, and allowing re-
peated mentions (Milne and Witten, 2008). Since
Wikipedia Miner does not support NIL links, we
use non-overlapping NER mentions as NIL links.
For coreference, we use Stanford’s sieve-based de-
terministic coreference system (Lee et al., 2013).
For sentential instance generation, we take all
pairs of non-overlapping arguments in a sentence
(in either order). If the arguments have KB links,
we do not allow sentential instances where both
arguments represent the same entity. We use the
same lexical and syntactic features as MULTIR,
based on the features of Mintz et al. (2009). As
required for features, we use Stanford CoreNLP’s
tokenizer, part of speech tagger (Toutanova et al.,
2003), and dependency parser (de Marneffe and
Manning, 2008), and use the Charniak Johnson
constiuent parser (Charniak and Johnson, 2005).
For negative training generation, we take a simi-
lar approach to Riedel et al. (2010) and define a
percentage parameter n of the number of nega-
tive instances divided by the number of total in-
stances. Experimenting with n ∈ {0, 20%, 80%},
we find that n = 20% works best for our evalua-
tions, optimizing for F1, although using 80% neg-
ative training gives high precision at lower recall.
We use frequency-based feature selection to elimi-
nate features that appear less than 10 times, which
is helpful both for reducing overfitting as well as

0.60 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5

1

0.7

0.8

0.9

Relative Recall

Pr
ec

is
io

n

Hoffmann et al. (2011)

NER+LT
NER

NER+LT+CT

Figure 2: Methods evaluated in the context of
Hoffmann et al. (2011)’s sentential extraction
evaluation. NER: our NER baseline used for
training and extraction, LT: use NEL for train-
ing only, CT: use coreference for training only.
(NER+LT+CT means we use NER for extraction,
and NEL+Coref for training.)

constraining memory usage. Since the perceptron
learning of MULTIR is sensitive to instance order-
ing, we perform 10 random shuffles and average
the models.

For model type partitioning, when training with
NER, we ensure that the NER types match the
coarse relation type signatures. For NEL, we at-
tempt to use NER for coarse types of arguments,
but if an NER type is not present, we map the Free-
base type to its FIGER type (Ling and Weld, 2012)
to its coarse type. For type constraints, we use
Freebase’s expected input and output types for re-
lations. For NIL links, we use the NER type of
PERSON, ORGANIZATION, or LOCATION, if avail-
able, mapping it to appropriate Freebase types.

6.2 NER Baseline

As a result of a larger training set, as well as model
averaging, our baseline, which is otherwise equiv-
alent to the methods of Hoffmann et al. (2011)
and uses their MULTIR system, has slightly higher
precision as shown in Figure 2, curve NER. It is
also higher than that of Xu et al. (2013), who
achieved higher performance than Hoffmann et
al. (2011); our baseline gets 89.9% precision and
59.6% relative recall, while Xu et al. (2013)’s sys-
tem gets 84.6% precision and 56.1% relative re-
call. See Figure 3 and Table 1 for results on
GORECO.

6.3 NEL and Type Constraints

On GORECO, using NEL argument identification
increases recall and gives higher precision over the
entire curve. We further find that filtering results
using type constraints gives a large boost in pre-

1896



cision at a small cost to recall. Note the increase
in performance from NER to NEL to NEL+TC in
Figure 3a, as well as in Table 1. Using NEL gives
more recall, since it is able to capture arguments
that NER cannot, such as professions like “pa-
leontologist”. The decrease in recall from type
constraints comes from false positives in the type
constraints process including from non-ideal links,
e.g., “paleontologist” might get linked to the entity
Paleontology, so will not have the type required for
the Profession relation.

On the Hoffmann et al. (2011) sentential evalu-
ation, we were not able to use NEL argument iden-
tification at extraction time, because the instances
in the test set are from NER argument identifica-
tion. We tried using NEL only at training time
and found that it got similar performance to using
NER (Figure 2, curve NER+LT). Doing the same
on GORECO yielded slightly lower recall, because
of the mismatch of features learned from NEL ar-
guments (Figure 3b, curve NER+LT).

6.4 NEL+Coref Argument Identification

Using NEL+Coref for both training and extrac-
tion (see Table 1) introduces noise from arguments
not encountered during training time, but using
NEL+Coref just for training results in a decrease
in recall but similar precision (Figures 2 and 3b).

We found using NEL+Coref at test time unhelp-
ful for this dataset, because there were no exam-
ples we could find where coreference could re-
cover arguments that NEL could not. There were
three true positives from NEL+Coref involving
pronouns in the GORECO development set, but
there were also proper name versions of the ar-
guments nearby in the same sentences, making
coreference unnecessary. Additionally, corefer-
ence brings in many mentions such as times like
“Friday” or “1954” that do not have corresponding
KB matches during training time. These sentential
instances have similar features to others involv-
ing coreference mentions, and there are not neg-
ative instances to weigh against these, since these
types do not appear in the training data. Better fea-
tures more suited to coreference mentions could be
helpful here.

At both training and extraction time, corefer-
ence can cluster together mentions that can be con-
sidered to be separate, such as in “Brian Kain, a
33-year-old accountant”, “Brian Kain” and “ac-
countant” are coreferent in the gold ACE 2004

770 10 20 30 40 50 60 70

1

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

True Positives Count

Pr
ec

is
io

n

NER

NEL+TC

NEL
NER+TP

NEL+TC+TP

(a)

770 10 20 30 40 50 60 70

1

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

True Positives Count

Pr
ec

is
io

n

NER

NER+LT

NER+LT+CT

NEL+TC+CT+TP

NEL+TP

NEL+TC

NEL+TC+TP

NEL+CT

NEL+TC+CT

(b)

Figure 3: Precision versus true positives count
curves for different versions of the system evalu-
ated on the GORECO test set, containing 470 gold
instances. NER/NEL: argument identification used
in training and extraction, LT: use NEL for train-
ing only, CT: use coreference for training only, TC:
type constraints, TP: model type partitioning.

dataset. This means that type constraints will
disregard a Profession annotation between these
when it should not, because “Brian Kain” (which
would have been a NIL link) gets the link of “ac-
countant”. This effect contributes to the decrease
in recall.

6.5 Model Type Partitioning

Using type partitioning helps both NER and NEL
based models as shown with the +TP curves in
Figure 3). Partitioning by type signature results in
each model being able to better choose relations
for sentential instances of that type signature. In
the Partitioned columns of Table 1, removing type
partitioning from the best system (NEL training

1897



Single Partitioned

R P F1 R P F1

NER training
NER extraction 7.9 21.8 11.6 11.3 21.0 14.7
NEL extraction 8.5 21.4 12.2 9.8 19.7 13.1

NEL training
NER extraction 9.6 21.1 13.2 8.9 25.1 13.2
NEL extraction 10.0 30.5 15.1 15.3 16.7 16.0
NEL w/TC extraction 11.7 31.1 17.0 13.4 31.3 18.8

NEL+Coref training
NER extraction 9.4 19.2 12.6 6.8 28.3 11.0
NEL extraction 12.1 27.5 16.8 11.1 21.6 14.6
NEL w/TC extraction 12.8 33.3 18.5 12.1 34.1 17.9
NEL+Coref extraction 10.6 20.4 14.0 10.0 12.9 11.3
NEL+Coref w/TC extraction 9.4 22.7 13.3 7.9 19.1 11.1

Table 1: Evaluation of different versions of the relation extraction system on the GORECO test set. For
nearly all systems, partitioning the model by argument types boosts F1, as does using NEL at either
training or extraction time, and using coreference at training time with type constraints (w/TC) raises F1
except with coreference at extraction time and when combined with type partitioning.

and extraction, with type constraints, Partitioned)
results in a decrease in F1 from 18.8% to 17.0%.
Table 2 shows by-relation performance results for
the best system (curve NEL+TC+TP in Figure 3a).

6.6 Other Dimensions Explored
We also experimented with adding generalized
features that replaced lexemes with WordNet
classes (Fellbaum, 1998), which had uneven re-
sults. We observed a small but consistent improve-
ment on the NER baseline (11.6% F1 to 12.7%
F1 on GORECO), but after introducing NEL argu-
ment identification and partitioning, we no longer
observed the improvement. For some relations,
there was a small gain in recall that was offset by
a loss in precision, but for others, the gain in recall
outweighed the loss of precision.

We experimented with a negative instance feed-
back loop that ran a trained extractor over the
training corpus and tested whether each extrac-
tion made was in fact a negative example. Even
though the training corpus contains one million
documents, this method only yielded a few thou-
sand new negative instances due to the difficulty
of being certain an extraction should be negative.
A naïve approach would simply ensure that both
entities participate in a relation in the KB; this is
troublesome, because of KB incompleteness and
because of type errors. For example Freebase con-
tains BornIn(Barack Obama, Honolulu), but our ex-
tractor extracted BornIn(Barack Obama, Hawaii).
To avoid labeling this true extraction as a nega-
tive instance we have to be robust about location

semantics. We selected new negative instances
NA(e1, e2) from our initial extractor that had e1
in the knowledge base, with e1 participating as the
first argument in the extracted relation but with-
out e2 as the second argument. The results were
promising for some relations but overall inconclu-
sive as identifying true negatives is quite difficult.

Relation #Extractions #TP #FP

Nationality 50 11 38
Profession 43 23 20

EmployedBy 27 17 10
Spouse 22 2 20
LivedIn 6 4 2

OrgInCitytown 4 3 1
AthletePlaysForTeam 2 2 0

OrgType 1 1 0

Table 2: By-relation evaluation of the best system
(NEL with type constraints and type partitioning)
on the GORECO test set. The true positives (TP)
are the number of gold relations over coreference
clusters that matched, so multiple extractions can
match a single true positive.

7 Related Work

There has been much recent work on distantly su-
pervised relation extraction. Mintz et al. (2009)
use Freebase to train relation extractors over
Wikipedia without labeled data using multi-class
logistic regression and lexical and syntactic fea-
tures. Hoffmann et al. (2011) use a probabilis-
tic graphical model for multi-instance, multi-label

1898



learning and extract over newswire text using
Freebase relations. Surdeanu et al. (2012) take a
similar approach and use soft constraints and lo-
gistic regression. Riedel et al. (2013) integrate
open information extraction with schema-based,
proposing a universal schema approach, including
using features based on latent types. There has
also been recent work on reducing noise in dis-
tantly supervised relation extraction (Nguyen and
Moschitti, 2011; Takamatsu et al., 2012; Roth et
al., 2013; Ritter et al., 2013). Xu et al. (2013) and
Min et al. (2013) improve the quality of distant su-
pervision training data by reducing false negative
examples.

Distant supervision is related to semi-
supervised bootstrap learning work such as
Carlson et al. (2010b) and many others. Note that
distant supervision can be viewed as a subroutine
of bootstrap learning; bootstrap learning can
continue the process of distant supervision by
taking the new tuples found and then training on
those again, and repeating the process.

There has also been work on performing NEL
and coreference jointly (Cucerzan, 2007; Ha-
jishirzi et al., 2013), however these systems do not
perform relation extraction. Singh et al. (2013)
performs joint relation extraction, NER, and coref-
erence in a fully-supervised manner. They get
slight improvement by adding coreference, but do
not use NEL. Ling and Weld (2013) extend MUL-
TIR to find meronym relations in a biology text-
book. They get slight improvement over NER by
using coreference to pick the best mention of an
entity in the sentence for the meronym relation at
training and extraction time.

8 Conclusions and Future Work

Given the growing importance of distant supervi-
sion, a comprehensive understanding of its vari-
ants is crucial. While some of the optimizations
we propose may seem intuitive, they have not pre-
viously been systematically explored. Our experi-
ments show that NEL, type constraints, and type
partitioning are extremely important in order to
best take advantage of the seed KB during training
as well as known information at extraction time.
Our best system results in a 44% increase in pre-
cision, and a 70% increase in recall over our NER
baseline using GORECO. While we were not able
to evaluate all our methods on Hoffmann et al.
(2011)’s sentential evaluation, our baseline per-

forms significantly better than previous methods,
especially in precision, and training-only modifi-
cations perform similarly in both evaluations.

Future work will explore the use of NEL in dis-
tantly supervised relation extraction further, tun-
ing a confidence parameter for the NEL system,
and determining whether different confidence pa-
rameters should be used for training and extrac-
tion. Another possible direction is interleaving
NEL with relation extraction by using newly ex-
tracted facts to try to improve NEL performance.

We freely distribute GORECO a new gold stan-
dard evaluation for relation extraction consisting
of exhaustive annotations of the 128 documents
from ACE 2004 newswire for 48 relations. The
source code of our system, its output, as well as
our gold data are available at
http://cs.uw.edu/homes/mkoch/re.

Acknowledgements

We thank Raphael Hoffmann, Luke Zettlemoyer,
Mausam, Xiao Ling, Congle Zhang, Hannaneh
Hajishirzi, Leila Zilles, and the anonymous re-
viewers for helpful feedback. Additionally, we
thank Anand Mohan and Graeme Britz for annota-
tions and revisions of the GORECO dataset. This
work was supported by Defense Advanced Re-
search Projects Agency (DARPA) Machine Read-
ing Program under Air Force Research Labora-
tory (AFRL) prime contract no. FA8750-09-C-
0181, ONR grant N00014-12-1-0211, a gift from
Google, a grant from Vulcan, and the WRF / TJ
Cable Professorship. This material is based upon
work supported by the National Science Founda-
tion Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant
No. DGE-1256082.

References

Andrew Carlson, Justin Betteridge, Bryan Kisiel, Burr
Settles, Estevam R. Hruschka Jr., and Tom M.
Mitchell. 2010a. Toward an architecture for never-
ending language learning. In Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-
10).

Andrew Carlson, Justin Betteridge, Richard C. Wang,
Estevam R. Hruschka, Jr., and Tom M. Mitchell.
2010b. Coupled semi-supervised learning for infor-
mation extraction. In Proceedings of the Third ACM
International Conference on Web Search and Data
Mining, WSDM ’10, pages 101–110, New York,
NY, USA. ACM.

1899



Eugene Charniak and Mark Johnson. 2005. Coarse-
to-fine n-best parsing and maxent discriminative
reranking. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meet-
ing on Association for Computational Linguistics,
ACL ’05, pages 173–180, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Xiao Cheng and Dan Roth. 2013. Relational inference
for wikification. In EMNLP.

Silviu Cucerzan. 2007. Large-scale named entity dis-
ambiguation based on wikipedia data. In EMNLP-
CoNLL, pages 708–716.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2008. The stanford typed dependencies rep-
resentation. In Coling 2008: Proceedings of the
Workshop on Cross-Framework and Cross-Domain
Parser Evaluation, CrossParser ’08, pages 1–8,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

George R. Doddington, Alexis Mitchell, Mark A. Przy-
bocki, Lance A. Ramshaw, Stephanie Strassel, and
Ralph M. Weischedel. 2004. The automatic content
extraction (ace) program-tasks, data, and evaluation.
In LREC.

Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: an elec-
tronic lexical database. MIT Press.

Jenny Rose Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher
Manning. 2005. Incorporating non-local informa-
tion into information extraction systems by gibbs
sampling. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meet-
ing on Association for Computational Linguistics,
ACL ’05, pages 363–370, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Google. 2012. Freebase data dumps.
https://developers.google.com/
freebase/data.

Ben Hachey, Will Radford, Joel Nothman, Matthew
Honnibal, and James R. Curran. 2013. Evalu-
ating entity linking with wikipedia. Artif. Intell.,
194:130–150, January.

Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Leila Zilles, Daniel S. Weld, and
Luke S. Zettlemoyer. 2013. Joint coreference res-
olution and named-entity linking with multi-pass
sieves. In EMNLP, pages 289–299. ACL.

Raphael Hoffmann, Congle Zhang, Xiao Ling,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Daniel S. Weld. 2011.
Knowledge-based weak supervision for information
extraction of overlapping relations. In ACL-HLT,
pages 541–550.

Sayali Kulkarni, Amit Singh, Ganesh Ramakrishnan,
and Soumen Chakrabarti. 2009. Collective annota-
tion of wikipedia entities in web text. In Proceed-
ings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD International Con-
ference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
KDD ’09, pages 457–466, New York, NY, USA.
ACM.

Heeyoung Lee, Angel Chang, Yves Peirsman,
Nathanael Chambers, Mihai Surdeanu, and Dan Ju-
rafsky. 2013. Deterministic coreference resolu-
tion based on entity-centric, precision-ranked rules.
Comput. Linguist., 39(4):885–916, December.

Xiao Ling and Daniel S. Weld. 2012. Fine-grained
entity recognition. In Proceedings of the 26th Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI).

Xiao Ling and Daniel S. Weld. 2013. Extracting
meronyms for a biology knowledge base using dis-
tant supervision. In Automated Knowledge Base
Construction (AKBC) 2013: The 3rd Workshop on
Knowledge Extraction at CIKM.

Paul McNamee and Hoa Trang Dang. 2009. Overview
of the tac 2009 knowledge base population track. In
Text Analysis Conference (TAC), volume 17, pages
111–113.

David Milne and Ian H. Witten. 2008. Learning to link
with wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM
Conference on Information and Knowledge Man-
agement, CIKM ’08, pages 509–518, New York,
NY, USA. ACM.

Bonan Min, Ralph Grishman, Li Wan, Chang Wang,
and David Gondek. 2013. Distant supervision for
relation extraction with an incomplete knowledge
base. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT, pages 777–
782.

Mike Mintz, Steven Bills, Rion Snow, and Daniel Ju-
rafsky. 2009. Distant supervision for relation ex-
traction without labeled data. In Proceedings of the
47th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL-2009), pages 1003–1011.

Tom M. Mitchell, Justin Betteridge, Andrew Carlson,
Estevam Hruschka, and Richard Wang. 2009. Pop-
ulating the semantic web by macro-reading internet
text. In The Semantic Web-ISWC 2009, pages 998–
1002. Springer.

Truc-Vien T. Nguyen and Alessandro Moschitti. 2011.
End-to-end relation extraction using distant super-
vision from external semantic repositories. In Pro-
ceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies: Short Papers - Volume 2, HLT
’11, pages 277–282, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Lev Ratinov, Dan Roth, Doug Downey, and Mike
Anderson. 2011. Local and global algorithms
for disambiguation to wikipedia. In Proceedings
of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies - Volume 1, HLT ’11, pages 1375–1384,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Sebastian Riedel, Limin Yao, and Andrew McCallum.
2010. Modeling relations and their mentions with-
out labeled text. In ECML/PKDD (3), pages 148–
163.

1900



Sebastian Riedel, Limin Yao, Benjamin M. Marlin, and
Andrew McCallum. 2013. Relation extraction with
matrix factorization and universal schemas. In Joint
Human Language Technology Conference/Annual
Meeting of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (HLT-NAACL
’13), June.

Alan Ritter, Luke Zettlemoyer, Mausam, and Oren Et-
zioni. 2013. Modeling missing data in distant super-
vision for information extraction. TACL, 1:367–378.

Benjamin Roth, Tassilo Barth, Michael Wiegand, and
Dietrich Klakow. 2013. A survey of noise reduction
methods for distant supervision. In Proceedings of
the 2013 Workshop on Automated Knowledge Base
Construction, AKBC ’13, pages 73–78, New York,
NY, USA. ACM.

Sameer Singh, Sebastian Riedel, Brian Martin, Jiaping
Zheng, and Andrew McCallum. 2013. Joint infer-
ence of entities, relations, and coreference. In CIKM
Workshop on Automated Knowledge Base Construc-
tion (AKBC).

Pontus Stenetorp, Sampo Pyysalo, Goran Topić,
Tomoko Ohta, Sophia Ananiadou, and Jun’ichi Tsu-
jii. 2012. brat: a Web-based Tool for NLP-Assisted
Text Annotation. In Proceedings of the Demonstra-
tions at the 13th Conference of the European Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA, April. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Mihai Surdeanu, Julie Tibshirani, Ramesh Nallapati,
and Christopher D. Manning. 2012. Multi-instance
multi-label learning for relation extraction. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and Com-
putational Natural Language Learning, pages 455–
465. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Shingo Takamatsu, Issei Sato, and Hiroshi Nakagawa.
2012. Reducing wrong labels in distant supervi-
sion for relation extraction. In Proceedings of the
50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Long Papers - Volume 1, ACL
’12, pages 721–729, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, Christopher D. Man-
ning, and Yoram Singer. 2003. Feature-rich part-of-
speech tagging with a cyclic dependency network.
In Proceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics on Human Language Technology
- Volume 1, NAACL ’03, pages 173–180, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Wei Xu, Zhao Le, Raphael Hoffmann, and Ralph Gr-
ishman. 2013. Filling knowledge base gaps for dis-
tant supervision of relation extraction. In Proceed-
ings of the 2013 Conference of the Association for

Computational Linguistics (ACL 2013), Sofia, Bul-
garia, July. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Congle Zhang, Raphael Hoffmann, and Daniel S.
Weld. 2012. Ontological smoothing for relation ex-
traction with minimal supervision. In AAAI.

1901


