



















































Brighter than Gold: Figurative Language in User Generated Comparisons


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 2008–2018,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Brighter than Gold: Figurative Language in User Generated Comparisons

Vlad Niculae and Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil
MPI-SWS

Cornell University
vniculae@mpi-sws.org, cristian@mpi-sws.org

Abstract

Comparisons are common linguistic de-
vices used to indicate the likeness of two
things. Often, this likeness is not meant
in the literal sense—for example, “I slept
like a log” does not imply that logs ac-
tually sleep. In this paper we propose a
computational study of figurative compar-
isons, or similes. Our starting point is a
new large dataset of comparisons extracted
from product reviews and annotated for
figurativeness. We use this dataset to char-
acterize figurative language in naturally
occurring comparisons and reveal linguis-
tic patterns indicative of this phenomenon.
We operationalize these insights and ap-
ply them to a new task with high relevance
to text understanding: distinguishing be-
tween figurative and literal comparisons.
Finally, we apply this framework to ex-
plore the social context in which figurative
language is produced, showing that simi-
les are more likely to accompany opinions
showing extreme sentiment, and that they
are uncommon in reviews deemed helpful.

1 Introduction
In argument similes are like songs in love; they
describe much, but prove nothing.

— Franz Kafka

Comparisons are fundamental linguistic devices
that express the likeness of two things—be it en-
tities, concepts or ideas. Given that their work-
ing principle is to emphasize the relation between
the shared properties of two arguments (Bredin,
1998), comparisons can synthesize important se-
mantic knowledge.

Often, comparisons are not meant to be under-
stood literally. Figurative comparisons are an im-
portant figure of speech called simile. Consider the

following two examples paraphrased from Ama-
zon product reviews:

(1) Sterling is much cheaper than gold.
(2) Her voice makes this song shine brighter than gold.

In (1) the comparison draws on the relation be-
tween the price property shared by the two metals,
sterling and gold. While (2) also draws on a com-
mon property (brightness), the polysemantic use
(vocal timbre vs. light reflection) makes the com-
parison figurative.

Importantly, there is no general rule separating
literal from figurative comparisons. More gen-
erally, the distinction between figurative and lit-
eral language is blurred and subjective (Hanks,
2006). Multiple criteria for delimiting the two
have been proposed in the linguistic and philo-
sophical literature—for a comprehensive review,
see Shutova (2010)—but they are not without ex-
ceptions, and are often hard to operationalize in a
computational framework. When considering the
specific case of comparisons, such criteria cannot
be directly applied.

Recently, the simile has received increasing at-
tention from linguists and lexicographers (Moon,
2008; Moon, 2011; Hanks, 2013) as it became
clearer that similes need to be treated separately
from metaphors since they operate on funda-
mentally different principles (Bethlehem, 1996).
Metaphors are linguistically simple structures hid-
ing a complex mapping between two domains,
through which many properties are transferred.
For example the conceptual metaphor of life as
a journey can be instantiated in many particular
ways: being at a fork in the road, reaching the end
of the line (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980). In contrast,
the semantic context of similes tends to be very
shallow, transferring a single property (Hanks,
2013). Their more explicit syntactic structure al-
lows, in exchange, for more lexical creativity. As
Hanks (2013) puts it, similes “tend to license all

2008



sorts of logical mayhem.” Moreover, the over-
lap between the expressive range of similes and
metaphors is now known to be only partial: there
are similes that cannot be rephrased as metaphors,
and the other way around (Israel et al., 2004). This
suggests that figurativeness in similes should be
modeled differently than in metaphors. To further
underline the necessity of a computational model
for similes, we give the first estimate of their fre-
quency in the wild: over 30% of comparisons are
figurative.1 We also confirm that a state of the art
metaphor detection system performs poorly when
applied directly to the task of detecting similes.

In this work we propose a computational study
of figurative language in comparisons. To this end,
we build the first large collection of naturally oc-
curring comparisons with figurativeness annota-
tion, which we make publicly available. Using
this resource we explore the linguistic patterns that
characterize similes, and group them in two con-
ceptually distinctive classes. The first class con-
tains cues that are agnostic of the context in which
the comparison appears (domain-agnostic cues).
For example, we find that the higher the seman-
tic similarity between the two arguments, the less
likely it is for the comparison to be figurative—in
the examples above, sterling is semantically very
similar to gold, both being metals, but song and
gold are semantically dissimilar. The second type
of cues are domain-specific, drawing on the in-
tuition that the domain in which a comparison is
used is a factor in determining its figurativeness.
We find, for instance, that the less specific a com-
parison is to the domain in which it appears, the
more likely it is to be used in a figurative sense
(e.g., in example (2), gold is very unexpected in
the musical domain).

We successfully exploit these insights in a new
prediction task relevant to text understanding: dis-
criminating figurative comparisons from literal
ones. Encouraged by the high accuracy of our
system—which is within 10% of that obtained by
human annotators—we automatically extend the
figurativeness labels to 80,000 comparisons occur-
ring in product reviews. This enables us to conduct
a fine-grained analysis of how comparison usage
interacts with their social context, opening up a
research direction with applications in sentiment
analysis and opinion mining. In particular we find

1This estimate is based on the set of noun-noun compar-
isons with non-identical arguments collected for this study
from Amazon.com product reviews.

that figurative comparisons are more likely to ac-
company reviews showing extreme sentiment, and
that they are uncommon in opinions deemed as be-
ing helpful. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first time figurative language is tied to the so-
cial context in which it appears.

To summarize, the main contributions of this
work are as follows:

• it introduces the first large dataset of compar-
isons with figurativeness annotations (Sec-
tion 3);

• it unveils new linguistic patterns characteriz-
ing figurative comparisons (Section 4);

• it introduces the task of distinguishing figura-
tive from literal comparisons (Section 5);

• it establishes the relation between figurative
language and the social context in which it
appears (Section 6).

2 Further Related Work

Corpus studies on figurative language in compar-
isons are scarce, and none directly address the
distinction between figurative and literal compar-
isons. Roncero et al. (2006) observed, by search-
ing the web for several stereotypical comparisons
(e.g., education is like a stairway), that similes
are more likely to be accompanied by explana-
tions than equivalent metaphors (e.g., education
is a stairway). Related to figurativeness is irony,
which Veale (2012a) finds to often be lexically
marked. By using a similar insight to filter out
ironic comparisons, and by assuming that the rest
are literal, Veale and Hao (2008) learn stereotyp-
ical knowledge about the world from frequently
compared terms. A similar process has been ap-
plied to both English and Chinese by Li et al.
(2012), thereby encouraging the idea that the trope
behaves similarly in different languages. A related
system is the Jigsaw Bard (Veale and Hao, 2011),
a thesaurus driven by figurative conventional sim-
iles extracted from the Google N-grams. This sys-
tem aims to build and generate canned expressions
by using items frequently associated with the sim-
ile pattern above. An extension of the principles of
the Jigsaw Bard is found in Thesaurus Rex (Veale
and Li, 2013), a data-driven partition of words into
ad-hoc categories. Thesaurus Rex is constructed
using simple comparison and hypernym patterns

2009



and is able to provide weighted lists of categories
for given words.

In text understanding systems, literal compar-
isons are used to detect analogies between related
geographical places (Lofi et al., 2014). Tandon et
al. (2014) use relative comparative patterns (e.g.,
X is heavier than Y) to enrich a common-sense
knowledge base. Jindal and Liu (2006) extract
graded comparisons from various sources, with
the objective of mining consumer opinion about
products. They note that identifying objective vs.
subjective comparisons—related to literality—is
an important future direction. Given that many
comparisons are figurative, a system that discrim-
inates literal from figurative comparisons is essen-
tial for such text understanding and information
retrieval systems.

The vast majority of previous work on figu-
rative language focused on metaphor detection.
Tsvetkov et al. (2014a) propose a cross-lingual
system based on word-level conceptual features
and they evaluate it on Subject-Verb-Object triples
and Adjective-Noun pairs. Their features include
and extend the idea of abstractness used by Turney
et al. (2011) for Adjective-Noun metaphors. Hovy
et al. (2013) contribute an unrestricted metaphor
corpus and propose a method based on tree ker-
nels. Bridging the gap between metaphor identifi-
cation and interpretation, Shutova and Sun (2013)
proposed an unsupervised system to learn source-
target domain mappings. The system fits concep-
tual metaphor theory (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980)
well, at the cost of not being able to tackle figu-
rative language in general, and similes in particu-
lar, as similes do not map entire domains to one
another. Since similes operate on fundamentally
different principles than metaphors, our work pro-
poses a computational approach tailored specifi-
cally for comparisons.

3 Background and Data

3.1 Structure of a comparison

Unlike metaphors, which are generally unre-
stricted, comparisons are more structured but also
more lexically and semantically varied. This en-
ables a more structured computational representa-
tion of which we take advantage. The constituents
of a comparison according to Hanks (2012) are:

• the TOPIC, sometimes called tenor: it is usu-
ally a noun phrase and acts as logical subject;

• the VEHICLE: it is the object of the compari-
son and is also usually a noun phrase;

• the shared PROPERTY or ground: it expresses
what the two entities have in common—it can
be explicit but is often implicit, left for the
reader to infer;

• the EVENT (eventuality or state): usually a
verb, it sets the frame for the observation of
the common property;

• the COMPARATOR: commonly a preposition
(like) or part of an adjectival phrase (better
than), it is the trigger word or phrase that
marks the presence of a comparison.

The literal example (1) would be segmented as:

[Sterling /TOPIC] [is /EVENT] much [cheaper
/PROPERTY] [than /COMPARATOR] [gold /VE-
HICLE]

3.2 Annotation

People resort to comparisons often when mak-
ing descriptions, as they are a powerful way of
expressing properties by example. For this rea-
son we collect a dataset of user-generated compar-
isons in Amazon product reviews (McAuley and
Leskovec, 2013), where users have to be descrip-
tive and precise, but also to express personal opin-
ion. We supplement the data with a smaller set of
comparisons from WaCky and WaCkypedia (Ba-
roni et al., 2009) to cover more genres. In pre-
liminary work, we experimented with dependency
parse tree patterns for extracting comparisons and
labeling their parts (Niculae, 2013). We use the
same approach, but with an improved set of pat-
terns, to extract comparisons with the COMPARA-
TORS like, as and than.2 We keep only the matches
where the TOPIC and the VEHICLE are nouns, and
the PROPERTY, if present, is an adjective, which
is the typical case. Also, the head words of the
constituents are constrained to occur in the distri-
butional resources used (Baroni and Lenci, 2010;
Faruqui and Dyer, 2014).3

2We process the review corpus with part-of-speech tag-
ging using the IRC model for TweetNLP (Owoputi et al.,
2013; Forsyth and Martell, 2007) and dependency parsing
using the TurboParser standard model (Martins et al., 2010).

3Due to the strong tendency of comparisons with the same
TOPIC and VEHICLE to be trivially literal in the WaCky
examples, we filtered out such examples from the Amazon
product reviews. We also filtered proper nouns using a capi-
talization heuristic.

2010



We proceed to validate and annotate for figu-
rativeness a random sample of the comparisons
extracted using the automated process described
above. The annotation is performed using crowd-
sourcing on the Amazon Mechanical Turk plat-
form, in two steps. First, the annotators are asked
to determine whether a displayed sentence is in-
deed a comparison between the highlighted words
(TOPIC and VEHICLE). Sentences qualified by
two out of three annotators as comparisons are
used in the second round, where the task is to
rate how metaphorical a comparison is. We use
a scale of 1 to 4 following Turney et al. (2011),
and then binarize to consider scores of 1–2 as lit-
eral and 3–4 as figurative. Finally, in this work we
only consider comparisons where all three annota-
tors agree on this binary notion of figurativeness.
For both tasks, we provide guidelines mostly in
the form of examples and intuition, motivated on
one hand by the annotators not having specialized
knowledge, and on the other hand by the observa-
tion that the literal-figurative distinction is subjec-
tive. All annotators have the master worker qual-
ification, reside in the U.S. and completed a lin-
guistic background questionnaire that verifies their
experience with English. In both tasks, control
sentences with confidently known labels are used
to filter low quality answers; in addition, we test
annotators with a simple paraphrasing task shown
to be effective for eliciting and verifying linguis-
tic attention (Munro et al., 2010). Both tasks
seem relatively difficult for humans, with inter-
annotator agreement given by Fleiss’ k of 0.48
for the comparison identification task and of 0.54
for the figurativeness annotation after binarization.
This is comparable to 0.57 reported by Hovy et al.
(2013) for general metaphor labeling. We show
some statistics about the collected data in Table 1.
Overall, this is a costly process: out of 2400 auto-
matically extracted comparison candidates, about
60% were deemed by the annotators to be actual
comparisons and only 12% end up being selected
confidently enough as figurative comparisons.

Our dataset of human-filtered comparisons,
with the scores given by the three annotators,
is made publicly available to encourage further
work.4 This also includes about 400 comparisons
where the annotators do not agree perfectly on bi-
nary figurativeness. Such cases can be interest-
ing to other analyses, even if we don’t consider

4http://vene.ro/figurative-comparisons/

Domain fig. lit. % fig.

Books 177 313 36%
Music 45 68 40%

Electronics 23 105 18%
Jewelery 9 126 7%

WaCky 19 79 19%

Total 273 609 31%

Table 1: Figurativeness annotation results. Only
comparisons where all three annotators agree are
considered.

them in our experiments. It is worth noting that
the existing corpora annotated for metaphor can-
not be directly used to study comparisons. For ex-
ample, in TroFi (Birke and Sarkar, 2006), a cor-
pus of 6436 sentences annotated for figurative-
ness, we only find 42 noun-noun comparisons with
sentence-level (thus noisy) figurativeness labels.

4 Linguistic Insights

We now proceed to exploring the linguistic pat-
terns that discriminate figurative from literal com-
parisons. We consider two broad classes of cues,
which we discuss next.

4.1 Domain-specific cues
Figurative language is often used for striking ef-
fects, and comparisons are used to describe new
things in terms of something given (Hanks, 2013).
Since the norms that define what is surprising and
what is well-known vary across domains, we ex-
pect that such contextual information should play
an important role in figurative language detection.
This is a previously unexplored dimension of figu-
rative language, and Amazon product reviews of-
fer a convenient testbed for this intuition since cat-
egory information is provided.

Specificity To estimate whether a compari-
son can be considered striking in a particular
domain—whether it references images or ideas
that are unexpected in its context—we employ a
simple measure of word specificity with respect to
a domain: the ratio of the word frequency within
the domain and the word frequency in all domains
being considered.5 It should be noted that speci-
ficity is not purely a function of the word, but

5We measure specificity for the VEHICLE, PROPERTY
and EVENT.

2011



figurative literal
0.4

0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

1.4

sp
ec

ifi
ci
ty

(a) VEHICLE specificity.

figurative literal
0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

si
m
ila

rit
y

(b) TOPIC-VEHICLE similarity.

figurative literal
0.4

0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

1.4

im
ag

ea
bi
lit
y

(c) Imageability of the PROPERTY.

Figure 1: Distribution of some of the features we use, across literal and figurative comparisons in the test
set. The profile of the plot is a kernel density estimation of the distribution, and the markers indicate the
median and the first and third quartiles.

of the word and the context in which it appears.
A comparison in the music domain that involves
melodies is not surprising:

But the title song really feels like a pretty bland
vocal melody [...]

But the same word can play a very different role
in another context, for example, book reviews:

Her books are like sweet melodies that flow
through your head.

Indeed, the word melody has a specificity of 96%
in the music domain and only of 3% in the books
domain.

An analysis on the labeled data confirms that
literal comparisons do indeed tend to have more
domain-specific VEHICLES (Mann-Whitney U
test, p < 0.01) than figurative ones. Further-
more, the distribution of specificity across both
types of comparisons, as shown in Figure 1a, has
the appearance of a mixture model of general and
specific words. Figurative comparison VEHICLES
largely exhibit only the general component of the
mixture.6

Domain label An analysis of the annotation re-
sults reveals that the percentage of comparisons
that are figurative differs widely across domains,
as indicated in the last column in Table 1. This
suggests that simply knowing the domain of a
text can serve to adjust some prior expectation
about figurative language presence and therefore
improve detection. We test this hypothesis using

6The mass around 0.25 in Figure 1a is largely explained
by generic words such as thing, others, nothing, average and
barely specific words like veil, reputation, dream, garbage.

a Z-test comparing all Amazon categories. With
the exception of books and music reviews, that
have similar ratios, all other pairs of categories
show significantly different proportions of figura-
tive comparisons (p < 0.01).

4.2 Domain-agnostic cues

Linguistic studies of figurative language suggest
that there is a fundamental generic notion of fig-
urativeness. We attempt to capture this notion in
the context of comparisons using syntactic and se-
mantic information.

Topic-Vehicle similarity The default role of lit-
eral comparisons is to assert similarity of things.
Therefore, we expect that a high semantic simi-
larity between the TOPIC and the VEHICLE of a
comparison is a sign of literal usage, as we pre-
viously hypothesized in preliminary work (Nicu-
lae, 2013). To test this hypothesis, we compute
TOPIC-VEHICLE similarity using Distributional
Memory (Baroni and Lenci, 2010), a freely avail-
able distributional semantics resource that cap-
tures word relationships through grammatical role
co-occurrence.

By applying this measure to our data, we find
that there is indeed an important difference be-
tween the distributions of TOPIC-VEHICLE simi-
larity in figurative and literal comparisons (shown
in Figure 1b); the means of the two distribu-
tions are significantly different (Mann-Whitney
p < 0.01).

Metaphor-inspired features We also seek to
understand to what extent insights provided by
computational work on metaphor detection can be

2012



more concrete less concrete

more imageable cinnamon, kiss devil, happiness
less imageable casque, pugilist aspect, however

Table 2: Examples of words with high and low
concreteness and imageability scores from the
MRC Psycholinguistic Database.

applied in the context of comparisons. To that end
we consider features shown to provide state of the
art performance in the task of metaphor detection
(Tsvetkov et al., 2014a): abstractness, imageabil-
ity and supersenses.

Abstractness and imageability features are de-
rived from the MRC Psycholinguistic Database
(Coltheart, 1981), a dictionary based on manually
annotated datasets of psycholinguistic norms. Im-
ageability is the property of a word to arouse a
mental image, be it in the form of a mental pic-
ture, sound or any other sense. Concreteness is
defined as “any word that refers to objects, materi-
als or persons,” while abstractness, at the other end
of the spectrum, is represented by words that can-
not be usually experienced by the senses (Paivio
et al., 1968). Table 2 shows a few examples of
words with high and low concreteness and image-
ability scores. Supersenses are a very coarse form
of meaning representation. Tsvetkov et al. (2014a)
used WordNet (Miller, 1995) semantic classes
for nouns and verbs, for example noun.body,
noun.animal, verb.consumption, or verb.motion.
For adjectives, Tsvetkov et al. (2014b) developed
and made available a novel classification in the
same spirit.7 We compute abstractness, image-
ability and supersenses for the TOPIC, VEHICLE,
EVENT, and PROPERTY.8 We concatenate these
features with the raw vector representations of the
constituents, following Tsvetkov et al. (2014a).

We find that such features relate to figurative
comparisons in a meaningful way. For example,
out of all comparisons with explicit properties, fig-
urative comparisons tend to have properties that

7Following Tsvetkov et al. (2014a) we train a classifier to
predict these features from a vector space representation of a
word. We use the same cross-lingually optimized represen-
tation from Faruqui and Dyer (2014) and a simpler classifier,
a logistic regression, which we find to perform as well as the
random forests used in Tsvetkov et al. (2014a). We treat su-
persense prediction as a multi-label problem and apply a one-
versus-all transformation, effectively learning a linear classi-
fier for each supersense.

8If the PROPERTY is implicit, all corresponding features
are set to zero. An extra binary feature indicates whether the
PROPERTY is explicit or implicit.

are more imageable (Mann-Whitney p < 0.01), as
illustrated by Figure 1c. This is in agreement with
Hanks (2005), who observed that similes are char-
acterized by their appeal to sensory imagination.

Definiteness We introduce another simple but
effective syntactic cue that relates to concreteness:
the presence of a definite article versus an indefi-
nite one (or none at all). We search for the indefi-
nite articles a and an and the definite article the in
each component of a comparison.

We find that similes tend to have indefinite arti-
cles in the VEHICLE more often and definite arti-
cles less often (Mann-Whitney p < 0.01). In par-
ticular, 59% of comparisons where the VEHICLE
has a indefinite article are figurative, as opposed
to 13% of the comparisons where VEHICLE has a
definite article.

5 Prediction Task

We now turn to the task of predicting whether a
comparison is figurative or literal. Not only does
this task allow us to assess and compare the effi-
ciency of the linguistic cues we discussed, but it is
also highly relevant in the context of natural lan-
guage understanding systems.

We conduct a logistic regression analysis, and
compare the efficiency of the features derived
from our analysis to a bag of words baseline.
In addition to the features inspired by the pre-
viously described linguistic insights, we also try
to computationally capture the lexical usage pat-
terns of comparisons using a version of bag of
words adapted to the comparison structure. In this
slotted bag of words system, features correspond
to occurrence of words within constituents (e.g.,
bright ∈ PROPERTY).

We perform a stratified split of our compari-
son dataset into equal train and test sets (each set
containing 408 comparisons, out of which 134 are
figurative),9 and use a 5-fold stratified cross vali-
dation over the training set to choose the optimal
value for the logistic regression regularization pa-
rameter and the type of regularization (ℓ1 or ℓ2) for
each feature set.10

9The entire analysis described in Section 4 is only con-
ducted on the training set. Also, in order to ensure that we are
assessing the performance of the classifier on unseen com-
parisons, we discard from our dataset all those with the same
TOPIC and VEHICLE pair.

10We use the logistic regression implementation
of liblinear (Fan et al., 2008) wrapped by the
scikit-learn library (Pedregosa et al., 2011).

2013



Model # features Acc. P R F1 AUC

Bag of words 1970 0.79 0.63 0.84 0.72 0.87
Slotted bag of words 1840 0.80 0.64 0.90 0.75 0.89

Domain-agnostic cues 357 0.81 0.70 0.74 0.72 0.90
only metaphor inspired 345 0.75 0.60 0.72 0.65 0.84

Domain-specific cues 8 0.69 0.51 0.81 0.63 0.76
All linguistic insight cues 365 0.86 0.76 0.83 0.79 0.92

Full 2202 0.88 0.80 0.84 0.82 0.94

Human - 0.96 0.92 0.96 0.94 -

Table 3: Classification performance on the test set for the different sets of features we considered; human
performance is shown for reference.

Classifier performance The performance on
the classification task is summarized in Table 3.
We note that the bag of words baseline is remark-
ably strong, because of common idiomatic simi-
les that can be captured through keywords. Our
full system (which relies on our linguistically in-
spired cues discussed in Section 4 in addition to
slotted bag of words) significantly outperforms the
bag of words baseline and the slotted bag of words
system in terms of accuracy, F1 score and AUC
(p < 0.05),11 suggesting that linguistic insights
complement idiomatic simile matching. Impor-
tantly, a system using only our linguistic insight
cues also significantly improves over the baseline
in terms of accuracy and AUC and it is not signif-
icantly different from the full system in terms of
performance, in spite of having about an order of
magnitude fewer features. It is also worth noting
that the domain-specific cues play an important
role in bringing the performance to this level by
capturing a different aspect of what it means for a
comparison to be figurative.

The features used by the state of the art
metaphor detection system of Tsvetkov et al.
(2014a), adapted to the comparison structure, per-
form poorly by themselves and do not improve
significantly over the baseline. This is consis-
tent with the theoretical motivation that figura-
tiveness in comparisons requires special compu-
tational treatment, as discussed in Section 1. Fur-
thermore, the linguistic insight features not only
significantly outperform the metaphor inspired
features (p < 0.05), but are also better at exploit-
ing larger amounts of data, as shown in Figure 2.

11All statistical significance results in this paragraph are
obtained from 5000 bootstrap samples.

20 40 60 80 100
Percentage of training data used

0.65

0.70

0.75

0.80

0.85

Ac
cu

ra
cy

all linguistic insights
metaphor inspired

Figure 2: Learning curves. Each point is obtained
by fitting a model on 10 random subsets of the
training set. Error bars show 95% confidence in-
tervals.

Comparison to human performance To gauge
how well humans would perform at the classifica-
tion task on the actual test data, we perform an-
other Amazon Mechanical Turk evaluation on 140
examples from the test set. For the evaluation,
we use majority voting between the three anno-
tators,12 and compare to the agreed labels in the
dataset. Estimated human accuracy is 96%, plac-
ing our full system within 10% of human accuracy.

Feature analysis The predictive analysis we
perform allows us to investigate to what extent the
features inspired by our linguistic insights have
discriminative power, and whether they actually
cover different aspects of figurativeness.

12Majority voting helps account for the noise inherent to
crowdsourced annotation, which is less accurate than profes-
sional annotation. Taking the less optimistic invididual turker
answers, human performance is on the same level as our full
system.

2014



Feature Coef. Example where the feature is positively activated

TOPIC-VEHICLE similarity −11.3 the older man was wiser and stronger than the boy
VEHICLE specificity −5.8 the cord is more durable than the adapter [Electronics]
VEHICLE imageability 4.9 the explanations are as clear as mud
VEHICLE communication supersense −4.6 the book reads like six short articles
VEHICLE indefiniteness 4.0 his fame drew foreigners to him like a magnet

life ∈ VEHICLE 7.1 the hero is truly larger than life: godlike, yet flawed
picture ∈ VEHICLE −6.0 the necklace looks just like the picture
other ∈ VEHICLE −5.9 this one is just as nice as the other
others ∈ VEHICLE −5.5 some songs are more memorable than others
crap ∈ VEHICLE 4.7 the headphones sounded like crap

Table 4: Top 5 linguistic insight features (top) and slotted bag of words features (bottom) in the full model
and their logistic regression coefficients. A positive coefficient means the feature indicates figurativeness.

Table 4 shows the best linguistic insight and
slotted bag of words features selected by the full
model. The strongest feature by far is the seman-
tic similarity between the TOPIC and the VEHI-
CLE. By itself, this feature gets 70% accuracy and
61% F1 score.

The rest of the top features involve mostly the
VEHICLE. This suggests that the VEHICLE is the
most informative element of a comparison when it
comes to figurativeness. Features involving other
constituents also get selected, but with slightly
lower weights, not making it to the top.

VEHICLE specificity is one of the strongest fea-
tures, with positive values indicating literal com-
parisons. This confirms our intuition that domain
information is important to discriminate figurative
from literal language.

Of the adapted metaphor features, the noun
communication supersense and the imageability
of the VEHICLE make it to the top. Nouns with
low communication rating occurring in the train-
ing set include puddles, arrangements, carbohy-
drates while nouns with high communication rat-
ing include languages and subjects.

Presence of an indefinite article in the VEHICLE
is a strong indicator of figurativeness. By them-
selves, the definiteness and indefiniteness features
perform quite well, attaining 78% accuracy and
67% F1 score.

The salient bag of words features correspond to
specific types of comparisons. The words other
and others in the VEHICLE indicate comparisons
between the same kind of arguments, for exam-
ple some songs are more memorable than others,
and these are likely to be literal. The word pic-

ture is specific to the review setting, as products
are accompanied by photos, and for certain kinds
of products, the resemblance of the product with
the image is an important factor for potential buy-
ers.13 The bag of words systems are furthermore
able to learn idiomatic comparisons by identify-
ing common figurative VEHICLES such as life and
crap, corresponding to fixed expressions such as
larger than life.

Error analysis Many of the errors made by our
full system involve indirect semantic mechanisms
such as metonymy. For example, the false pos-
itive the typeface was larger than most books
really means larger than the typefaces found in
most books, but without the implicit expansion the
meaning can appear figurative. A similar kind of
ellipsis makes the example a lot [of songs] are
even better than sugar be wrongly classified as
literal. Another source of error is polysemy. Ex-
amples like the rejuvelac formula is about 10 times
better than yogurt are misclassified because of the
multiple meanings of the word formula, one being
closely related to yogurt and food, but the more
common ones being general and abstract, suggest-
ing figurativeness.

6 Social Correlates

The advantage of studying comparisons situated
in a social context is that we can understand how
their usage interacts with internal and external hu-
man factors. An internal factor is the sentiment of

13This feature is highly correlated with the domain: it ap-
pears 25 times in the training set, 24 of which in the jewelery
domain and once in book reviews.

2015



1 2 3 4 5
stars

0.30

0.32

0.34

0.36

0.38
fig

ur
at

iv
e 

co
m

pa
ris

on
 ra

tio

(a) Figurative comparisons are more likely to be found in re-
views with strongly polarized sentiment.

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
helpfulness ratio

0.30

0.35

0.40

0.45

0.50

fig
ur

at
iv

e 
co

m
pa

ris
on

 ra
tio

(b) Helpful reviews are less likely to contain figurative compar-
isons.

Figure 3: Interaction between figurative language and social context aspects. Error bars show 95%
confidence intervals. The dashed horizontal line marks the average proportion of figurative comparisons.
In Figure 3b the average proportion is different because we only consider reviews rated by at least 10
readers.

the user towards the reviewed product, indicated
by the star rating of the review. An external factor
present in the data is how helpful the review is per-
ceived by other users. In this section we analyze
how these factors interact with figurative language
in comparisons.

To gain insight about fine grained interactions
with human factors at larger scale, we use our clas-
sifier to find over 80,000 figurative and literal com-
parisons from the same four categories. The trends
we reveal also hold significantly on the manually
annotated data.

Sentiment While it was previously noted that
similes often transmit strong affect (Hanks, 2005;
Veale, 2012a; Veale, 2012b), the connection be-
tween figurativeness and sentiment was never em-
pirically validated. The setting of product reviews
is convenient for investigating this issue, since
the star ratings associated with the reviews can
be used as sentiment labels. We find that com-
parisons are indeed significantly more likely to
be figurative when the users express strong opin-
ions, i.e., in one-star or five-star reviews (Mann-
Whitney p < 0.02 on the manually annotated
data). Figure 3a shows how the proportion of fig-
urative comparisons varies with the polarity of the
review.

Helpfulness It is also interesting to understand
to what extent figurative language relates to the
external perception of the content in which it ap-

pears. We find that comparisons in helpful re-
views14 are less likely to be figurative. Figure 3b
shows a near-constant high ratio of figurative com-
parisons among unhelpful and average reviews; as
helpfulness increases, figurative comparisons be-
come less frequent. We further validate that this
effect is not a confound of the distribution of help-
fulness ratings across reviews of different polarity
by controlling for the star rating: given a fixed star
rating, the proportion of figurative comparisons is
still lower in helpful (helpfulness over 50%) than
in unhelpful (helpfulness under 50%) reviews; this
difference is significant (Mann-Whitney p < 0.01)
for all classes of ratings except one-star. The
size of the manually annotated data does not al-
low for star rating stratification, but the overall dif-
ference is statistically significant (Mann-Whitney
p < 0.01). This result encourages further exper-
imentation to determine whether there is a causal
link between the use of figurative language in user
generated content and its external perception.

7 Conclusions and Future Work

This work proposes a computational study of fig-
urative language in comparisons. Starting from
a new dataset of naturally occurring comparisons
with figurativeness annotation (which we make
publicly available) we explore linguistic patterns
that are indicative of similes. We show that these

14In order to have reliable helpfulness scores, we only con-
sider reviews that have been rated by at least by ten readers.

2016



insights can be successfully operationalized in a
new prediction task: distinguishing literal from
figurative comparisons. Our system reaches ac-
curacy that is within 10% of human performance,
and is outperforming a state of the art metaphor
detection system, thus confirming the need for
a computational approach tailored specifically to
comparisons. While we take a data-driven ap-
proach, our annotated dataset can be useful for
more theoretical studies of the kinds of compar-
isons and similes people use.

We discover that domain knowledge is an im-
portant factor in identifying similes. This suggests
that future work on automatic detection of figura-
tive language should consider contextual parame-
ters such as the topic and community where the
content appears.

Furthermore, we are the first to tie figurative
language to the social context in which it is pro-
duced and show its relation to internal and exter-
nal human factors such as opinion sentiment and
helpfulness. Future investigation into the causal
effects of these interactions could lead to a better
understanding of the role of figurative language in
persuasion and rhetorics.

In our work, we consider common noun TOP-
ICS and VEHICLES and adjectival PROPERTIES.
This is the most typical case, but supporting other
parts of speech—such as proper nouns, pronouns,
and adverbs—can make a difference in many ap-
plications. Capturing compositional interaction
between the parts of the comparison could lead to
more flexible models that give less weight to the
VEHICLE.

This study is also the first to estimate how
prevalent similes are in the wild, and reports that
about one third of the comparisons we consider are
figurative. This is suggestive of the need to build
systems that can properly process figurative com-
parisons in order to correctly harness the semantic
information encapsulated in comparisons.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Yulia Tsvetkov for con-
structive discussion about figurative language and
about her and her co-authors’ work. We are grate-
ful for the suggestions of Patrick Hanks, Con-
stantin Orăsan, Sylviane Cardey, Izabella Thomas,
Ekaterina Shutova, Tony Veale, and Niket Tan-
don. We extend our gratitude to Julian McAuley
for preparing and sharing the Amazon review

dataset. We are thankful to the anonymous review-
ers, whose comments were like a breath of fresh
air. We acknowledge the help of the Amazon Me-
chanical Turk annotators and of the MPI-SWS stu-
dents involved in pilot experiments.

Vlad Niculae was supported in part by the
European Commission, Education & Training,
Erasmus Mundus: EMMC 2008-0083, Erasmus
Mundus Masters in NLP & HLT.

References
Marco Baroni and Alessandro Lenci. 2010. Dis-

tributional memory: A general framework for
corpus-based semantics. Computational Linguis-
tics, 36(4):673–721.

Marco Baroni, Silvia Bernardini, Adriano Ferraresi,
and Eros Zanchetta. 2009. The WaCky wide web:
A collection of very large linguistically processed
web-crawled corpora. Language Resources and
Evaluation, 43(3):209–226.

Louise Shabat Bethlehem. 1996. Simile and figurative
language. Poetics Today, 17(2):203–240.

Julia Birke and Anoop Sarkar. 2006. A clustering ap-
proach for nearly unsupervised recognition of non-
literal language. In Proceedings of EACL.

Hugh Bredin. 1998. Comparisons and similes. Lin-
gua, 105(1):67–78.

Max Coltheart. 1981. The MRC psycholinguistic
database. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 33(4):497–505.

Rong-En Fan, Kai-Wei Chang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Xiang-
Rui Wang, and Chih-Jen Lin. 2008. LIBLINEAR:
A library for large linear classification. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 9:1871–1874.

Manaal Faruqui and Chris Dyer. 2014. Improving
vector space word representations using multilingual
correlation. In Proceedings of EACL.

Eric N Forsyth and Craig H Martell. 2007. Lexical and
discourse analysis of online chat dialog. In Proceed-
ings of ICSC.

Patrick Hanks. 2005. Similes and sets: The English
preposition ‘like’. In R. Blatná and V. Petkevic, ed-
itors, Languages and Linguistics: Festschrift for Fr.
Cermak. Charles University, Prague.

Patrick Hanks. 2006. Metaphoricity is grad-
able. Trends in Linguistic Studies and Monographs,
171:17.

Patrick Hanks. 2012. The roles and structure of com-
parisons, similes, and metaphors in natural language
(an analogical system). Presented at the Stockholm
Metaphor Festival.

2017



Patrick Hanks. 2013. Lexical Analysis: Norms and
Exploitations. MIT Press.

Dirk Hovy, Shashank Srivastava, Sujay Kumar Jauhar,
Mrinmaya Sachan, Kartik Goyal, Huiying Li, Whit-
ney Sanders, and Eduard Hovy. 2013. Identifying
metaphorical word use with tree kernels. In Pro-
ceedings of the NAACL Workshop on Metaphors for
NLP.

M. Israel, J.R. Harding, and V. Tobin. 2004. On simile.
Language, Culture, and Mind. CSLI Publications.

Nitin Jindal and Bing Liu. 2006. Identifying compara-
tive sentences in text documents. In Proceedings of
SIGIR.

George Lakoff and Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors
we live by. University of Chicago Press.

Bin Li, Jiajun Chen, and Yingjie Zhang. 2012. Web
based collection and comparison of cognitive prop-
erties in English and Chinese. In Proceedings of the
Joint Workshop on Automatic Knowledge Base Con-
struction and Web-scale Knowledge Extraction.

Christoph Lofi, Christian Nieke, and Nigel Collier.
2014. Discriminating rhetorical analogies in social
media. In Proceedings of EACL.

André FT Martins, Noah A Smith, Eric P Xing, Pe-
dro MQ Aguiar, and Mário AT Figueiredo. 2010.
Turbo parsers: Dependency parsing by approximate
variational inference. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Julian McAuley and Jure Leskovec. 2013. Hidden fac-
tors and hidden topics: Understanding rating dimen-
sions with review text. In Proceedings of RecSys.

George A Miller. 1995. WordNet: a lexical
database for English. Communications of the ACM,
38(11):39–41.

Rosamund Moon. 2008. Conventionalized as-similes
in English: A problem case. International Journal
of Corpus Linguistics, 13(1):3–37.

Rosamund Moon. 2011. Simile and dissimilarity.
Journal of Literary Semantics, 40(2):133–157.

Robert Munro, Steven Bethard, Victor Kuperman,
Vicky Tzuyin Lai, Robin Melnick, Christopher
Potts, Tyler Schnoebelen, and Harry Tily. 2010.
Crowdsourcing and language studies: The new gen-
eration of linguistic data. In Proceedings of the
NAACL Workshop on Creating Speech and Lan-
guage Data with Amazon’s Mechanical Turk.

Vlad Niculae. 2013. Comparison pattern matching and
creative simile recognition. In Proceedings of the
Joint Symposium on Semantic Processing.

Olutobi Owoputi, Brendan O’Connor, Chris Dyer,
Kevin Gimpel, Nathan Schneider, and Noah A
Smith. 2013. Improved part-of-speech tagging for
online conversational text with word clusters. In
Proceedings of NAACL-HLT.

Allan Paivio, John C Yuille, and Stephen A Madigan.
1968. Concreteness, imagery, and meaningfulness
values for 925 nouns. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology, 76(1p2):1.

Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gram-
fort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier
Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron
Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, et al. 2011. Scikit-learn:
Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 12:2825–2830.

Carlos Roncero, John M Kennedy, and Ron Smyth.
2006. Similes on the internet have explanations.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 13(1):74–77.

Ekaterina Shutova and Lin Sun. 2013. Unsupervised
metaphor identification using hierarchical graph fac-
torization clustering. In Proceedings of NAACL-
HLT.

Ekaterina Shutova. 2010. Models of metaphor in NLP.
In Proceedings of ACL.

Niket Tandon, Gerard de Melo, and Gerhard Weikum.
2014. Smarter than you think: Acquiring compara-
tive commonsense knowledge from the web. In Pro-
ceedings of AAAI.

Yulia Tsvetkov, Leonid Boytsov, Anatole Gershman,
Eric Nyberg, and Chris Dyer. 2014a. Metaphor de-
tection with cross-lingual model transfer. In Pro-
ceedings of ACL.

Yulia Tsvetkov, Nathan Schneider, Dirk Hovy, Archna
Bhatia, Manaal Faruqui, and Chris Dyer. 2014b.
Augmenting English adjective senses with super-
senses. In Proceedings of LREC.

Peter D Turney, Yair Neuman, Dan Assaf, and Yohai
Cohen. 2011. Literal and metaphorical sense iden-
tification through concrete and abstract context. In
Proceedings of EMNLP.

Tony Veale and Yanfen Hao. 2008. A context-sensitive
framework for lexical ontologies. Knowledge Engi-
neering Review, 23(1):101–115.

Tony Veale and Yanfen Hao. 2011. Exploiting ready-
mades in linguistic creativity: A system demonstra-
tion of the Jigsaw Bard. In Proceedings of ACL (Sys-
tem Demonstrations).

Tony Veale and Guofu Li. 2013. Creating similarity:
Lateral thinking for vertical similarity judgments. In
Proceedings of ACL.

Tony Veale. 2012a. A computational exploration of
creative similes. Metaphor in Use: Context, Cul-
ture, and Communication, 38:329.

Tony Veale. 2012b. A context-sensitive, multi-faceted
model of lexico-conceptual affect. In Proceedings
of ACL.

2018


