



















































A Rule-Based System for Unrestricted Bridging Resolution: Recognizing Bridging Anaphora and Finding Links to Antecedents


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 2082–2093,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Rule-Based System for Unrestricted Bridging Resolution:
Recognizing Bridging Anaphora and Finding Links to Antecedents

Yufang Hou1, Katja Markert2, Michael Strube1
1 Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical Studies gGmbH, Heidelberg, Germany

(yufang.hou|michael.strube)@h-its.org
2School of Computing, University of Leeds, UK

scskm@leeds.ac.uk

Abstract

Bridging resolution plays an important
role in establishing (local) entity coher-
ence. This paper proposes a rule-based
approach for the challenging task of unre-
stricted bridging resolution, where bridg-
ing anaphors are not limited to defi-
nite NPs and semantic relations between
anaphors and their antecedents are not re-
stricted to meronymic relations. The sys-
tem consists of eight rules which target
different relations based on linguistic in-
sights. Our rule-based system significantly
outperforms a reimplementation of a pre-
vious rule-based system (Vieira and Poe-
sio, 2000). Furthermore, it performs better
than a learning-based approach which has
access to the same knowledge resources
as the rule-based system. Additionally,
incorporating the rules and more features
into the learning-based system yields a mi-
nor improvement over the rule-based sys-
tem.

1 Introduction

Bridging resolution recovers the various non-
identity relations between anaphora and an-
tecedents. It plays an important role in establish-
ing entity coherence in a text. In Example 1, the
links between the bridging anaphors (The five as-
tronauts and touchdown) and the antecedent (The
space shuttle Atlantis) establish (local) entity co-
herence.1

(1) The space shuttle Atlantis landed at a desert
air strip at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif.,
ending a five-day mission that dispatched
the Jupiter-bound Galileo space probe. The

1Examples are from OntoNotes (Weischedel et al., 2011).
Bridging anaphora are typed in boldface; antecedents in ital-
ics.

five astronauts returned to Earth about three
hours early because high winds had been pre-
dicted at the landing site. Fog shrouded the
base before touchdown.

Bridging or associative anaphora has been
widely discussed in the linguistic literature (Clark,
1975; Prince, 1981; Gundel et al., 1993;
Löbner, 1998). Poesio and Vieira (1998) and
Bunescu (2003) include cases where antecedent
and anaphor are coreferent but do not share the
same head noun (different-head coreference). We
follow our previous work (Hou et al., 2013b) and
restrict bridging to non-coreferential cases. We
also exclude comparative anaphora (Modjeska et
al., 2003).

Bridging resolution includes two subtasks: (1)
recognizing bridging anaphors and (2) finding the
correct antecedent among candidates. In recent
empirical work, these two subtasks have been
tackled separately: (Markert et al., 2012; Cahill
and Riester, 2012; Rahman and Ng, 2012; Hou et
al., 2013a) handle bridging recognition as part of
information status (IS) classification, while (Poe-
sio et al., 1997; Poesio et al., 2004; Markert et
al., 2003; Lassalle and Denis, 2011; Hou et al.,
2013b) concentrate on antecedent selection only,
assuming that bridging recognition has already
been performed. One exception is Vieira and Poe-
sio (2000). They propose a rule-based system for
processing definite NPs. However, they include
different-head coreference into bridging. They re-
port results for the whole anaphora resolution but
do not report results for bridging resolution only.
Another exception is Rösiger and Teufel (2014).
They apply a coreference resolution system with
several additional semantic features to find bridg-
ing links in scientific text where bridging anaphors
are limited to definite NPs. They report prelim-
inary results using the CoNLL scorer. However,
we think the coreference resolution system and the
evaluation metric for coreference resolution are

2082



not suitable for bridging resolution since bridging
is not a set problem.

Another vein of research for bridging resolu-
tion focuses on formal semantics. Asher and Las-
carides (1998) and Cimiano (2006) model bridg-
ing by integrating discourse structure and seman-
tics from a formal semantics viewpoint. However,
the implementation of such a theoretical frame-
work is beyond the current capabilities of NLP
since it depends heavily on commonsense entail-
ment.

In this paper, we propose a rule-based system
for unrestricted bridging resolution. The system
consists of eight rules which we carefully design
based on linguistic intuitions, i.e., how the nature
of bridging is reflected by various lexical, syntac-
tic and semantic features. We evaluate our rule-
based system on a corpus where bridging is reli-
ably annotated. We find that our rule-based sys-
tem significantly outperforms a reimplementation
of a previous rule-based system (Vieira and Poe-
sio, 2000). We further notice that our rule-based
system performs better than a learning-based ap-
proach which has access to the same knowledge
resources as the rule-based system. Surprisingly,
incorporating the rules and more features into the
learning-based approach only yields a minor im-
provement over the rule-based system. We ob-
serve that diverse bridging relations and relatively
small-scale data for each type of relations make
generalization difficult for the learning-based ap-
proach. This work is – to the best of our
knowledge – the first system recognizing bridging
anaphora and finding links to antecedents for unre-
stricted phenomenon where bridging anaphors are
not limited to definite NPs and semantic relations
between anaphors and their antecedents are not re-
stricted to meronymic relations.

2 Data

All the data used throughout the paper come
from the ISNotes corpus2 released by Hou et al.
(2013b). This corpus contains around 11,000 NPs
annotated for information status including 663
bridging NPs and their antecedents in 50 texts
taken from the WSJ portion of the OntoNotes cor-
pus (Weischedel et al., 2011). ISNotes is reli-
ably annotated for bridging: for bridging anaphor
recognition, κ is over 60 for all three possible an-

2http://www.h-its.org/english/research/nlp/download/
isnotes.php

notator pairings (κ is over 70 for two expert anno-
tators); for selecting bridging antecedents, agree-
ment is around 80% for all annotator pairings.

It is notable that bridging anaphors in ISNotes
are not limited to definite NPs as in previous work
(Poesio et al., 1997; Poesio et al., 2004; Lassalle
and Denis, 2011). Table 1 shows the bridging

Bridging Anaphors 663
Non-determiner 44.9%
Definite 38.5%
Indefinite 15.4%
Other-determiner 1.2%

Table 1: Bridging anaphora distribution w.r.t. de-
terminers in ISNotes.

anaphora distribution with regard to determiners in
ISNotes: only around 38% of bridging anaphors
are definite NPs (NPs modified by the); 15.4%
of bridging anaphors are modified by determiners
such as a, an or one which normally indicate in-
definite NPs. Most bridging anaphors (43%) are
not modified by any determiners, such as touch-
down in Example 1. A small fraction of bridging
anaphors (1.2%) are modified by other determin-
ers, such as demonstratives.

The semantic relations between anaphor and
antecedent in the corpus are extremely diverse:
only 14% of anaphors have a part-of/attribute-
of relation with the antecedent (see Example 2)
and only 7% of anaphors stand in a set relation-
ship to the antecedent (see Example 3). 79%
of anaphors have “other” relations with their an-
tecedents (without further distinction), including
encyclopedic relations such as The space shut-
tle Atlantis-The five astronauts (see Example 1)
as well as context-specific relations such as The
space shuttle Atlantis-touchdown (Example 1).

(2) At age eight, Josephine Baker was sent by
her mother to a white women’s house to do
chores in exchange for meals and a place to
sleep – a place in the basement with coal.

(3) This creates several problems. One is that
there are not enough police to satisfy small
businesses.

In ISNotes, bridging anaphora with distant an-
tecedents are common when the antecedent is the
global focus of a document. 29% of the anaphors
in the corpus have antecedents that are three or
more sentences away.

2083



Bridging resolution is an extremely challeng-
ing task in ISNotes. In contrast with surface clues
for coreference resolution, there are no clear sur-
face clues for bridging resolution. In Example 4,
the bridging anaphor low-interest disaster loans
associates to the antecedent the Carolinas and
Caribbean, whereas in Example 5 the NP loans is
a generic use. In Example 6, the bridging anaphor
The opening show associates to the antecedent
Mancuso FBI, whereas the NP the show is coref-
erent with its antecedent Mancuso FBI.

(4) The $2.85 billion measure comes on top of
$1.1 billion appropriated after Hugo stuck
the Carolinas and Caribbean last month, and
these totals don’t reflect the additional benefit
of low-interest disaster loans.

(5) Many states already have Enterprise Zones
and legislation that combines tax incentives,
loans, and grants to encourage investment in
depressed areas.

(6) Over the first few weeks, Mancuso FBI has
sprung straight from the headlines. The
opening show featured a secretary of defense
designate accused of womanizing (a la John
Tower).
. . .
Most of all though, the show is redeemed
by the character of Mancuso.

Our previous work on bridging resolution on
this corpus only focuses on its subtasks. In
Hou et al. (2013a) we model bridging anaphora
recognition as a subtask of learning fine-grained
information status. We report an F-measure
of 0.42 for bridging anaphora recognition. In
Hou et al. (2013b) we propose a joint inference
framework for antecedent selection by exploring
Markov logic networks. We report an accuracy
of 0.41 for antecedent selection given gold bridg-
ing anaphora. In this paper, we aim to solve these
two substasks together, i.e., recognizing bridging
anaphora and finding links to antecedents.

3 Method

In this section, we describe our rule-based system
for unrestricted bridging resolution. We choose
ten documents randomly from the corpus as the
development set. Then we carefully design rules
for finding “bridging links” among all NPs in a

document based on the generalizations of bridg-
ing in the linguistic literature as well as our in-
spections of bridging annotations in the develop-
ment set. The system consists of two components:
bridging link prediction and post processing.

3.1 Bridging Link Prediction
The bridging link prediction component consists
of eight rules. Löbner (1985; 1998) interprets
bridging anaphora as a particular kind of func-
tional concept, which in a given situation assign
a necessarily unique correlate to a (implicit) pos-
sessor argument. He distinguishes between rela-
tional nouns (e.g. parts terms, kinship terms, role
terms) and sortal nouns and points out that rela-
tional nouns are more frequently used as bridg-
ing anaphora than sortal nouns. Rule1 to Rule4 in
our system aim to resolve such relational nouns.
We design Rule5 and Rule6 to capture set bridg-
ing. Finally, Rule7 and Rule8 are motivated by
previous work on implicit semantic role labeling
(Laparra and Rigau, 2013) which focuses on few
predicates.

For all NPs in a document, each rule r is applied
separately to predict a set of potential bridging
links. Every rule has its own constraints on bridg-
ing anaphora and antecedents respectively. Bridg-
ing anaphors are diverse with regard to syntactic
form and function: they can be modified by def-
inite or indefinite determiners (Table 1), further-
more they can take the subject (e.g. Example 3
and Example 6) or other positions (e.g. Example
2 and Example 4) in sentences. The only fre-
quent syntactic property shared is that bridging
anaphors most often have a simple internal struc-
ture concerning modification. Therefore we first
create an initial list of potential bridging anaphora
A which excludes NPs which have a complex syn-
tactic structure. An NP is added to A if it does
not contain any other NPs and do not have modifi-
cations strongly indicating comparative NPs (such
as other symptoms)3. Since head match is a strong
indicator of coreference anaphora for definite NPs
(Vieira and Poesio, 2000; Soon et al., 2001), we
further exclude definite NPs from A if they have
the same head as a previous NP. Then a set of
potential bridging anaphors Ar is chosen from A
based on r’s constraints on bridging anaphora. Fi-
nally, for each potential bridging anaphor ana ∈

3A small list of 10 markers such as such, another . . . and
the presence of adjectives or adverbs in the comparative form
are used to predict comparative NPs.

2084



Ar, a single best antecedent ante from a list of
candidate NPs (Cana) is chosen if the rule’s con-
straint on antecedents is applied successfully.

Every rule has its own scope to form the
antecedent candidate set Cana. Instead of using
a static sentence window to construct the list of
antecedent candidates like most previous work for
resolving bridging anaphora (Poesio et al., 1997;
Markert et al., 2003; Poesio et al., 2004; Lassalle
and Denis, 2011), we use the development set
to estimate the proper scope for each rule. The
scope is influenced by the following factors: (1)
the nature of the target bridging link (e.g., set
bridging is a local coherence phenomenon where
the antecedent often occurs in the same or up
to two sentences prior to the anaphor); and (2)
the strength of the rule’s constraint to select the
correct antecedent (e.g., in Rule8, the ability
to select the correct antecedent decreases with
increasing the scope to contain more antecedent
candidates). In the following, we describe the mo-
tivation for each rule and their constraints in detail.

Rule1: building part NPs. To capture typical
part-of bridging (see Example 2), we extract a
list of 45 nouns which specify building parts (e.g.
room or roof ) from the General Inquirer lexicon
(Stone et al., 1966). A common noun phrase from
A is added to Ar1 if: (1) its head appears in the
building part list; and (2) it does not contain any
nominal pre-modifications. Then for each poten-
tial bridging anaphor ana ∈ Ar1, the NP with
the strongest semantic connectivity to the potential
anaphor ana among all NPs preceding ana from
the same sentence as well as from the previous two
sentences is predicted to be the antecedent.

The semantic connectivity of an NP to a po-
tential anaphor is measured via the hit counts of
the preposition pattern query (anaphor preposi-
tion NP) in big corpora4. An initial effort to ex-
tract partOf relations using WordNet yields low
recall on the development set. Therefore we use
semantic connectivity expressed by prepositional
patterns (e.g. the basement of the house) to cap-
ture underlying semantic relations. Such syntactic
patterns are also explored in Poesio et al. (2004) to
resolve meronymy bridging.

4We use Gigaword (Parker et al., 2011) with automatic
POS tag and NP chunk information.

Rule2: relative person NPs. This rule is used
to capture the bridging relation between a relative
(e.g. The husband) and its antecedent (e.g. She).
A list of 110 such relative nouns is extracted from
WordNet. However, some relative nouns are fre-
quently used generically instead of being bridging,
such as children. To exclude such cases, we com-
pute the argument taking ratio α for an NP using
NomBank (Meyers et al., 2004). For each NP, α is
calculated via its head frequency in the NomBank
annotation divided by the head’s total frequency
in the WSJ corpus in which the NomBank anno-
tation is conducted. The value of α reflects how
likely an NP is to take arguments. For instance,
the value of α is 0.90 for husband but 0.31 for
children. To predict bridging anaphora more ac-
curately, a conservative constraint is used. An NP
from A is added to Ar2 if: (1) its head appears in
the relative person list; (2) its argument taking ra-
tio α is bigger than 0.5; and (3) it does not contain
any nominal or adjective pre-modifications. Then
for each potential bridging anaphor ana ∈ Ar2,
the closest non-relative person NP among all NPs
preceding ana from the same sentence as well as
from the previous two sentences is chosen as its
antecedent.

Rule3: GPE job title NPs. In news articles, it is
common that a globally salient geo-political entity
(hence GPE, e.g. Japan or U.S.) is introduced in
the beginning, then later a related job title NP (e.g.
officials or the prime minister) is used directly
without referring to this GPE explicitly. To resolve
such bridging cases accurately, we compile a list
of twelve job titles which are related to GPEs (e.g.
mayor or official). An NP from A is added to Ar3
if its head appears in this list and does not have a
country pre-modification (e.g. the Egyptian pres-
ident). Then for each potential bridging anaphor
ana ∈ Ar3, the most salient GPE NP among all
NPs preceding ana is predicted as its antecedent.
We use the NP’s frequency in the whole document
to measure its salience throughout the paper. In
case of a tie, the closest one is chosen to be the
predicted antecedent.

Rule4: role NPs. Compared to Rule3, Rule4
is designed to resolve more general role NPs to
their implicit possessor arguments. We extract a
list containing around 100 nouns which specify
professional roles from WordNet (e.g. chairman,
president or professor). An NP from A is added to

2085



Ar4 if its head appears in this list. Then for each
potential bridging anaphor ana ∈ Ar4, the most
salient proper name NP which stands for an orga-
nization among all NPs preceding ana from the
same sentence as well as from the previous four
sentences is chosen as its antecedent (if such an
NP exists). Recency is again used to break ties.

Rule5: percentage NPs. In set bridging as
shown in Example 7, the anaphor (Seventeen per-
cent) is indicated by a percentage expression from
A, which is often in the subject position. The an-
tecedent (the firms) is predicted to be the closest
NP which modifies another percentage NP via the
preposition “of” among all NPs occurring in the
same or up to two sentences prior to the potential
anaphor.

(7) 22% of the firms said employees or owners
had been robbed on their way to or from
work. Seventeen percent reported their cus-
tomers being robbed.

Rule6: other set member NPs. In set bridg-
ing, apart from percentage expressions, numbers
or indefinite pronouns are also good indicators for
bridging anaphora. For such cases, the anaphor
is predicted if it is: (1) a number expression (e.g.
One in Example 3) or an indefinite pronoun(e.g.
some, as shown in Example 8) from A; and (2) a
subject NP. The antecedent is predicted to be the
closest NP among all plural, subject NPs preced-
ing the potential anaphor from the same sentence
as well as from the previous two sentences (e.g.
Reds and yellows in Example 8). If such an NP
does not exist, the closest NP among all plural, ob-
ject NPs preceding the potential anaphor from the
same sentence as well as from the previous two
sentences is chosen to be the predicted antecedent
(e.g. several problems in Example 3).

(8) Reds and yellows went about their business
with a kind of measured grimness. Some
frantically dumped belongings into pillow-
cases.

Rule7: argument-taking NPs I. Laparra and
Rigau (2013) found that different instances of the
same predicate in a document likely maintain the
same argument fillers. Here we follow this as-
sumption but apply it to nouns and their nomi-
nal modifiers only: different instances of the same
noun predicate likely maintain the same argument
fillers indicated by nominal modifiers. First, a

common noun phrase from A is added to Ar7 if:
(1) its argument taking ratio α is bigger than 0.5;
(2) it does not contain any nominal or adjective
pre-modifications; and (3) it is not modified by in-
definite determiners5 which usually introduce new
discourse referents (Hawkins, 1978). Then for
each potential bridging anaphor ana ∈ Ar7, we
choose the antecedent by performing the follow-
ing steps:

1. We take ana’s head lemma form anah
and collect all its syntactic modifications in
the document. We consider nominal pre-
modification, possessive modification as well
as prepositional post-modification. All real-
izations of these modifications which precede
ana form the antecedent candidates setCana.

2. We choose the most recent NP from Cana
as the predicted antecedent for the potential
bridging anaphor ana.

In Example 9, we first predict the two occur-
rences of residents as bridging anaphors. Since
in the text, other occurrences of the lemma “res-
ident” are modified by “Marina” (supported by
Marina residents) and “buildings” (supported by
some residents of badly damaged buildings), we
collect all NPs whose syntactic head is “Ma-
rina” or “buildings” in Cana (i.e. Marina, badly
damaged buildings and buildings with substan-
tial damage). Then among all NPs in Cana, the
most recent NP is chosen to be the antecedent (i.e.
buildings with substantial damage).

(9) She finds the response of Marina residents to
the devastation of their homes “incredible”.
. . .
Out on the streets, some residents of badly
damaged buildings were allowed a 15 minute
scavenger hunt through their possessions.
. . .
After being inspected, buildings with sub-
stantial damage were color - coded.
Green allowed residents to re-enter; red
allowed residents one last entry to gather
everything they could within 15 minutes.

Rule8: argument-taking NPs II. Prince (1992)
found that discourse-old entities are more likely

5We compile a list of 17 such determiners, such as a, an
or one.

2086



to be represented by NPs in subject position.
Although she could not draw a similar conclu-
sion when collapsing Inferrable (= bridging) with
Discourse-old Nonpronominal, we find that in the
development set, an argument-taking NP in the
subject position is a good indicator for bridging
anaphora (e.g. participants in Example 10). A
common noun phrase from A is collected in Ar8
if: (1) its argument taking ratio α is bigger than
0.5; (2) it does not contain any nominal or adjec-
tive pre-modifications; and (3) it is in the subject
position. Semantic connectivity again is used as
the criteria to choose the antecedent: for each po-
tential bridging anaphor ana ∈ Ar8, the NP with
the strongest semantic connectivity to ana among
all NPs preceding ana from the same sentence as
well as from the previous two sentences is pre-
dicted to be the antecedent.

(10) Initial steps were taken at Poland’s first in-
ternational environmental conference, which
I attended last month. . . . While Polish data
have been freely available since 1980, it was
no accident that participants urged the free
flow of information.

3.2 Post-processing
In the bridging link prediction component, each
rule is applied separately. To resolve the conflicts
between different rules (e.g., two rules predict dif-
ferent antecedents for the same potential anaphor),
a post processing step is applied. We first order
the rules according to their precision for predicting
bridging pairs (i.e., recognizing bridging anaphors
and finding links to antecedents) in the develop-
ment set. When a conflict happens, the rule with
the highest order has the priority to decide the an-
tecedent. Table 2 summarizes the rules described
in Section 3.1, the numbers in square brackets in
the first column indicate the order of the rules. Ta-
ble 3 shows the precisions of bridging anaphora
recognition and bridging pairs prediction for each
rule in the development set. Firing rate is the
proportion of bridging links predicted by rule r
among all predicted links.

4 Experiments and Results

4.1 Experimental Setup
We conduct all experiments on the ISNotes cor-
pus. We use the OntoNotes named entity and syn-
tactic annotations to extract features. Ten doc-
uments containing 113 bridging anaphors from

the ISNotes corpus are set as the development set
to estimate parameters for the rule-based system.
The remaining 40 documents are used as the test
set. In order to compare the results of different
systems directly, we evaluate all systems on the
test set.

4.2 Evaluation Metric

In ISNotes, bridging is annotated mostly between
an NP (anaphor) and an entity (antecedent)6, so
that a bridging anaphor could have multiple links
to different instantiations of the same entity (entity
information is based on the Ontonotes coreference
annotation). For bridging resolution, we use an
evaluation metric based on bridging anaphors in-
stead of all links between bridging anaphors and
their antecedent instantiations. A link predicted by
the system is counted as correct if it recognizes the
bridging anaphor correctly and links the anaphor
to any instantiation of the right antecedent entity
preceding the anaphor.

In the evaluation metric, recall is calculated
via the number of the correct links predicted by
the system (one unique link per each predicted
anaphor) divided by the total number of the gold
bridging anaphors, precision is calculated via the
number of the correct links predicted by the sys-
tem divided by the total links predicted by the sys-
tem.

4.3 A Learning-based Approach

To compare our rule-based system (hence ruleSys-
tem, described in Section 3) with other ap-
proaches, we implement a learning-based system
for unrestricted bridging resolution. We adapt the
pairwise model which is widely used in corefer-
ence resolution (Soon et al., 2001). Similar to
the rule-based system, we first create an initial list
of possible bridging anaphora Aml with one more
constraint. The purpose is to exclude as many ob-
vious non-bridging anaphoric NPs from the list
as possible. An NP is added to Aml if: (1) it
does not contain any other NPs; (2) it is not mod-
ified by pre-modifications which strongly indicate
comparative NPs; and (3) it is not a pronoun or a
proper name. Then for each NP a ∈ Aml, a list
of antecedent candidates Ca is created by includ-
ing all NPs preceding a from the same sentence

6There are a few cases where bridging is annotated be-
tween an NP and a non-NP antecedent (e.g. verbs or clauses).

2087



antecedentrule anaphor antecedent
candidates scope

rule1 [2] building part NPs the NP with the strongest semantic connectivity to the two
potential anaphor

rule2 [5] relative person NPs the closest person NP which is not a relative NP two
rule3 [6] GPE job title NPs the most salient GPE NP all
rule4 [7] role NPs the most salient organization NP four
rule5 [1] percentage NPs the closest NP which modifies another percentage NP two

via the preposition “of”
rule6 [3] other set member NPs the closest subject, plural NP; two

otherwise the closest object, plural NP
rule7 [4] argument-taking NPs I the closest NP whose head is an unfilled role of the potential all

anaphor (such a role is predicted via syntactic modifications of NPs
which have the same head as the potential anaphor)

rule8 [8] argument-taking NPs II the NP with the strongest semantic connectivity to the two
potential anaphor

Table 2: Rules for unrestricted bridging resolution. Antecedent candidates scope are verified in the
development set: “all” represents all NPs preceding the potential anaphor from the whole document,
“four” NPs occurring in the same or up to four sentences prior to the potential anaphor, “two” NPs
occurring in the same or up to two sentences prior to the potential anaphor.

anaphora recognition bridging pairs predictionrule anaphora
precision precision

firing rate

rule1 [2] building part NPs 75.0% 50.0% 6.1%
rule2 [5] relative person NPs 69.2% 46.2% 6.1%
rule3 [6] GPE job title NPs 52.6% 44.7% 19.4%
rule4 [7] role NPs 61.7% 32.1% 28.6%
rule5 [1] percentage NPs 100.0% 100.0% 2.6%
rule6 [3] other set member NPs 66.7% 46.7% 7.8%
rule7 [4] argument-taking NPs I 53.8% 46.4% 6.1%
rule8 [8] argument-taking NPs II 64.5% 25.0% 25.5%

Table 3: Precision of bridging anaphora recognition and bridging pairs prediction for each rule in the
development set. The numbers in square brackets in the first column indicate the order of the rules.

as well as from the previous two sentences7. We
create a pairwise instance (a, c) for every c ∈ Ca.
We also add extra pairwise instances from the pre-
diction of ruleSystem to the learning-based sys-
tem. In the decoding stage, the best first strat-
egy (Ng and Cardie, 2002) is used to predict the
bridging links. Specifically, for each a ∈ Aml, we
predict the bridging link to be the most confident
pair (a, cante) among all instances with the posi-
tive prediction. We use SVMlight to conduct the
experiments8. All experiments are conducted via
10-fold cross-validation on the whole corpus9.

7In ISNotes, 71% of NP antecedents occur in the same
or up to two sentences prior to the anaphor. Initial experi-
ments show that increasing the window size more than two
sentences decreases the performance.

8To deal with data imbalance, the SVMlight parameter
is set according to the ratio between positive and negative
instances in the training set.

9To compare the learning-based approach to the rule-
based system described in Section 3 directly, we report the

mlSystem ruleFeats We provide mlSys-
tem ruleFeats with the same knowledge resources
as the rule-based system. All rules from the
rule-based system are incorporated into mlSys-
tem ruleFeats as the features.

mlSystem ruleFeats + atomFeats We augment
mlSystem ruleFeats with more features from our
previous work (Markert et al., 2012; Hou et al.,
2013a; Hou et al., 2013b) on bridging anaphora
recognition and antecedent selection. Some of
these features overlap with the atomic features
used in the rule-based system.

Table 4 shows all the features we use for rec-
ognizing bridging anaphora. “∗” indicates the re-
sources are used in the rule-based system. We ap-
ply them to the first element a of a pairwise in-
stance (a, c). Markert et al. (2012) and Hou et

results of learning-based approaches on the same test set as
the rule-based system.

2088



Markert et al. local feature set
f1 FullPrevMention (b) ∗ f2 FullPreMentionTime (n) f3 PartialPreMention (b)
f4 ContentWordPreMention (b) f5 Determiner (n) ∗ f6 NPtype (n) ∗
f7 NPlength (int) f8 GrammaticalRole (n) ∗ f9 NPNumber (n) ∗
f10 PreModByCompMarker (b) ∗
Hou et al. local feature set
features to identify bridging anaphora
f1 IsCoherenceGap (b) f2 IsSentFirstMention (b) f3 IsDocFirstMention (b)
f4 IsWordNetRelationalNoun (b) ∗ f5 IsInquirerRoleNoun (b) f6 IsBuildingPart (b) ∗
f7 IsSetElement (b) ∗ f8 PreModSpatialTemporal (b) f9 IsYearExpression (b)
f10 PreModifiedByCountry (b) ∗ f11 AppearInIfClause (b) f12 VerbPosTag (l)
f13 IsFrequentGenericNP (b) f14 WorldKnowledgeNP (l) f15 Unigrams (l)
f16 PreModByGeneralQuantifier (b) f17 BridgingHeadNP (l) f18 HasChildNP (b) ∗
features to identify function and worldKnowledge NPs
f20 DependOnChangeVerb (b) f21 IsFrequentProperName (b)

Table 4: Features for bridging anaphora recognition from Markert et al. (2012) and Hou et al. (2013a).
“b” indicates binary, “n” nominal, “l” lexical features, “∗” resources used in the rule-based system.

Group Feature Value
semantic f1 preposition pattern ∗ the normalized hit counts of the preposition pattern query

a prep. c (e.g. participants of the conference) in big corpora
f2 verb pattern the normalized hit counts of the verb pattern query c verba or

verba c in big corpora (for set bridging in Example 7, the
pattern query is the firms reported)

f3 WordNet partOf whether a partOf relation holds between a and c in WordNet
f4 semantic class ∗ 16 classes, e.g. location, organization, GPE, rolePerson,

relativePerson, product, date, money, percent
salience f5 document span the normalized value of the span of text in which c is mentioned

f6 utterance distance the sentence distance between a and c
f7 local first mention whether c is the first mention within the previous five sentences
f8 global first mention whether c is the first mention in the whole document

syntactic f9 isSameHead whether a and c share the same head
& (exclude coreferent antecedent candidates)
lexical f10 isWordOverlap whether a is prenominally modified by the head of c (for

bridging where the anaphor is a compound noun, such as
the mine-mine security)

f11 isCoArgument whether subject c and object a are dependent on the same verb
(the subject can not be the bridging antecedent of the object
in the same clause)

f12 WordNet distance the inverse value of the shortest path length between a and c
in WordNet

Table 5: Features for antecedent selection from Hou et al. (2013b). “∗” indicates resources used in the
rule-based system.

al. (2013a) classify eight fine-grained information
status (IS) categories for NPs: old, new and 6
mediated categories (syntactic, worldKnowledge,
bridging, comparative, aggregate and function).
Features from Markert et al. (2012) work well to

identify old, new and several mediated categories
but fail to recognize most bridging anaphora. Hou
et al. (2013a) remedy this by adding discourse
structure features (f1-f3), semantic features (f4-
f10) and features to detect generic nouns (f11-

2089



Feature Value
for anaphor candidate a
f1 preModByNominal whether a contains any nominal pre-modifications
f2 preModByAdj whether a contains any adjective modifications
f3 isGPEJobTitle whether a is a job title about GPE (e.g. mayor or official)
f4 isArgumentTakingNP whether the argument taking ratio of a is bigger than 0.5
for antecedent candidate c
f5 fullMentionTime the normalized value of the frequency of c in the whole document
for pairwise instance (a, c)
f6 word distance the token distance between a and c

Table 6: Additional atomic features from the rule-based system.

f14 and f16).
Table 5 shows all features we use for selecting

antecedents for bridging anaphora. “∗” indicates
the resources that are used in the rule-based sys-
tem. These features are from Hou et al. (2013b)’s
local pairwise model. They try to model: (1) the
semantic relations between bridging anaphors and
their antecedents (f1 to f4); (2) the salience of
an antecedent from different perspectives (f5 to
f8); and (3) the syntactic and lexical constraints
between anaphor and antecedent (f9 to f12).

Apart from the features shown in Table
4 and Table 5, we further enrich mlSys-
tem ruleFeats+atomFeats with additional atomic
features used in the rule-based system (Table 6).

mlSystem atomFeats Based on mlSys-
tem ruleFeats+atomFeats, the rule features
from the rule-based system are removed.

4.4 Baseline
We also reimplement the rule-based system from
Vieira and Poesio (2000) as a baseline. The origi-
nal algorithm focuses on processing definite NPs.
It classifies four categories for the definite NPs:
discourse new, direct anaphora (same-head coref-
erent anaphora), lenient bridging and Unknown.
This algorithm also finds antecedents for NPs
which belong to direct anaphora or lenient bridg-
ing.

Since Vieira and Poesio (2000) include
different-head coreference into their lenient
bridging category, we further divide their le-
nient bridging category into two subcategories:
different-head coreference and bridging. Figure
1 shows the details of the division after failing
to classify an NP as discourse new or direct
anaphora. For more details about the whole
system, see Vieira and Poesio (2000). We then

apply this slightly revised algorithm to process
all NPs in the initial list of potential bridging
anaphoraA from ruleSystem (described in Section
3.1).

4.5 Results and Discussion

Table 7 shows the results on the same test set of
different approaches for unrestricted bridging res-
olution. The results reveal the difficulty of the
task, when evaluating on a realistic scenario with-
out constraints on types of bridging anaphora and
bridging relations.

Both our rule-based system and all learning-
based approaches significantly outperform the
baseline at p < 0.01 (randomization test). The
low recall in baseline is predictable, since it
only considers meronymy bridging and compound
noun anaphors whose head is prenominally mod-
ified by the antecedent head. (e.g. the state–
state gasoline taxes). Under the same features,
the learning-based approach (mlSystem ruleFeats)
performs slightly worse than the rule-based sys-
tem (ruleSystem) with regard to the F-score.

R P F
baseline 2.9 13.3 4.8
ruleSystem 11.9 42.9 18.6
mlSystem ruleFeats 12.1 35.0 18.0
mlSystem ruleFeats+atomFeats 16.7 21.2 18.7
mlSystem atomFeats 20.5 10.1 13.5

Table 7: Experimental results for the baseline, the
rule-based system and the learning-based systems.

Surprisingly, incorporating rich features
into the learning-based approach (mlSys-
tem ruleFeats+atomFeats) does not yield much
improvement over the rule-based system (with an

2090



Figure 1: Vieria & Poesio’s (2000) original algorithm for processing definite NPs. We further divide
their lenient bridging category into two subcategories: 2.1 Different-head coreference and 2.2 Bridging.

F-score of 18.7 in mlSystem ruleFeats+atomFeats
compared to 18.6 in ruleSystem). We suppose that
the learning-based system generalizes poorly with
only atomic features in Table 4, Table 5 and Table
6. Results on mlSystem atomFeats support our
assumption: the F-score drops considerably after
removing the rule features. Although ISNotes is
a reasonably sized corpus for bridging compared
to previous work, diverse bridging relations,
especially lots of context specific relations such
as pachinko-devotees or palms-the thieves, lead
to relatively small-scale training data for each
type of relation. Therefore it is difficult for the
learning-based approach to learn effective rules to
predict bridging links.

However, all learning-based systems tend to
have higher recall but lower precision compared
to the rule-based system. This suggests that the
learning-based systems are “greedy” to predict
bridging links. A close look at these links in
mlSystem atomFeats indicates that the learning-
based system predicts more correct bridging
anaphors but fails to find the correct antecedents.
In fact, lots of those “half” correct links sound
reasonable without the specific context, such as
the story-readers (gold bridging link: this novel-
readers) or the executive director’s office-the
desks (gold bridging link: the fund’s building-the
desks).

5 Conclusions

We proposed a rule-based approach for un-
restricted bridging resolution where bridging
anaphora are not limited to definite NPs and the
relations between anaphor and antecedent are not
restricted to meronymic relations. We designed
eight rules to resolve bridging based on linguis-
tic intuition. Our rule-based system performs bet-
ter than a learning-based approach which has ac-
cess to the same knowledge resources as the rule-
based system. Particularly, the learning-based sys-
tem enriched with more features does not yield
much improvement over the rule-based system.
We speculate that the learning-based system could
benefit from more training data. Furthermore, bet-
ter methods to model the semantics of the specific
context need to be explored in the future.

This work is – to our knowledge – the first
bridging resolution system that handles the unre-
stricted phenomenon in a realistic setting.

Acknowledgements

We thank Renata Vieira for excavating part of her
source code for us. We also thank the reviewers
for their helpful comments. Yufang Hou is funded
by a PhD scholarship from the Research Training
Group Coherence in Language Processing at Hei-
delberg University. This work has been partially
funded by the Klaus Tschira Foundation.

2091



References
Nicholas Asher and Alex Lascarides. 1998. Bridging.

Journal of Semantics, 15:83–113.

Razvan Bunescu. 2003. Associative anaphora resolu-
tion: A Web-based approach. In Proceedings of the
EACL 2003 Workshop on The Computational Treat-
ment of Anaphora, Budapest, Hungary, 14 April,
2003, pages 47–52.

Aoife Cahill and Arndt Riester. 2012. Automati-
cally acquiring fine-grained information status dis-
tinctions in German. In Proceedings of the SIGdial
2012 Conference: The 13th Annual Meeting of the
Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue,
Seoul, Korea, 5–6 July 2012, pages 232–236.

Philipp Cimiano. 2006. Ingredients of a first-order ac-
count of bridging. In Proceedings of the 5th Inter-
national Workshop on Inference in Computational
Semantics, Buxton, U.K., 20–21 April 2006, pages
139–144.

Herbert H. Clark. 1975. Bridging. In Proceedings
of the Conference on Theoretical Issues in Natu-
ral Language Processing, Cambridge, Mass., June
1975, pages 169–174.

Jeanette K. Gundel, Nancy Hedberg, and Ron
Zacharski. 1993. Cognitive status and the form
of referring expressions in discourse. Language,
69:274–307.

John A. Hawkins. 1978. Definiteness and indefinite-
ness: A study in reference and grammaticality pre-
diction. Humanities Press, Atlantic Highlands, N.J.

Yufang Hou, Katja Markert, and Michael Strube.
2013a. Cascading collective classification for bridg-
ing anaphora recognition using a rich linguistic fea-
ture set. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, Seattle, Wash., 18–21 October 2013, pages 814–
820.

Yufang Hou, Katja Markert, and Michael Strube.
2013b. Global inference for bridging anaphora res-
olution. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Atlanta, Georgia, 9–14 June 2013, pages
907–917.

Egoitz Laparra and German Rigau. 2013. ImpAr: A
deterministic algorithm for implicit semantic role la-
belling. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4–9 August 2013, pages 1180–
1189.

Emmanuel Lassalle and Pascal Denis. 2011. Leverag-
ing different meronym discovery methods for bridg-
ing resolution in French. In Proceedings of the 8th
Discourse Anaphora and Anaphor Resolution Col-
loquium (DAARC 2011), Faro, Algarve, Portugal, 6–
7 October 2011, pages 35–46.

Sebastian Löbner. 1985. Definites. Journal of Seman-
tics, 4:279–326.

Sebastian Löbner. 1998. Definite associative
anaphora. Unpublished Manuscript, Heinrich-
Heine-Universität Düsseldorf.

Katja Markert, Malvina Nissim, and Natalia N. Mod-
jeska. 2003. Using the web for nominal anaphora
resolution. In Proceedings of the EACL Workshop
on the Computational Treatment of Anaphora. Bu-
dapest, Hungary, 14 April 2003, pages 39–46.

Katja Markert, Yufang Hou, and Michael Strube. 2012.
Collective classification for fine-grained information
status. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, Jeju
Island, Korea, 8–14 July 2012, pages 795–804.

Adam Meyers, Ruth Reeves, Catherine Macleod,
Rachel Szekely, Veronika Zielinska, Brian Young,
and Ralph Grishaman. 2004. Annotating noun ar-
gument structure for NomBank. In Proceedings of
the 4th International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, Lisbon, Portugal, 26–28
May 2004, pages 803–806.

Natalia M. Modjeska, Katja Markert, and Malvina Nis-
sim. 2003. Using the web in machine learning
for other-anaphora resolution. In Proceedings of the
2003 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, Sapporo, Japan, 11–12 July
2003, pages 176–183.

Vincent Ng and Claire Cardie. 2002. Improving ma-
chine learning approaches to coreference resolution.
In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Philadel-
phia, Penn., 7–12 July 2002, pages 104–111.

Robert Parker, David Graff, Junbo Kong, Ke Chen, and
Kazuaki Maeda. 2011. English Gigaword Fifth Edi-
tion. LDC2011T07.

Massimo Poesio and Renata Vieira. 1998. A corpus-
based investigation of definite description use. Com-
putational Linguistics, 24(2):183–216.

Massimo Poesio, Renata Vieira, and Simone Teufel.
1997. Resolving bridging references in unrestricted
text. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Oper-
ational Factors in Practical, Robust Anaphora Res-
olution for Unrestricted Text, Madrid, Spain, July
1997, pages 1–6.

Massimo Poesio, Rahul Mehta, Axel Maroudas, and
Janet Hitzeman. 2004. Learning to resolve bridg-
ing references. In Proceedings of the 42nd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Barcelona, Spain, 21–26 July 2004, pages
143–150.

Ellen F. Prince. 1981. Towards a taxonomy of given-
new information. In P. Cole, editor, Radical Prag-
matics, pages 223–255. Academic Press, New York,
N.Y.

2092



Ellen F. Prince. 1992. The ZPG letter: Subjects, defi-
niteness, and information-status. In W.C. Mann and
S.A. Thompson, editors, Discourse Description. Di-
verse Linguistic Analyses of a Fund-Raising Text,
pages 295–325. John Benjamins, Amsterdam.

Altaf Rahman and Vincent Ng. 2012. Learning the
fine-grained information status of discourse entities.
In Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the Euro-
pean Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, Avignon, France, 23–27 April 2012,
pages 798–807.

Ina Rösiger and Simone Teufel. 2014. Resolving
coreference and associative noun phrases in scien-
tific text. In Proceedings of the Student Research
Workshop at the 14th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Gothenburg, Sweden, 26–30 April 2014,
pages 44–55.

Wee Meng Soon, Hwee Tou Ng, and Daniel
Chung Yong Lim. 2001. A machine learning ap-
proach to coreference resolution of noun phrases.
Computational Linguistics, 27(4):521–544.

Philip J. Stone, Dexter C. Dunphy, Marshall S. Smith,
Daniel M. Ogilvie, and Cambridge Computer Asso-
ciates. 1966. General Inquirer: A Computer Ap-
proach to Content Analysis. MIT Press, Cambridge,
Mass.

Renata Vieira and Massimo Poesio. 2000. An
empirically-based system for processing definite de-
scriptions. Computational Linguistics, 26(4):539–
593.

Ralph Weischedel, Martha Palmer, Mitchell Marcus,
Eduard Hovy, Sameer Pradhan, Lance Ramshaw,
Nianwen Xue, Ann Taylor, Jeff Kaufman, Michelle
Franchini, Mohammed El-Bachouti, Robert Belvin,
and Ann Houston. 2011. OntoNotes release 4.0.
LDC2011T03, Philadelphia, Penn.: Linguistic Data
Consortium.

2093


