



















































Language Transfer Hypotheses with Linear SVM Weights


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1385–1390,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Language Transfer Hypotheses with Linear SVM Weights

Shervin Malmasi
Centre for Language Technology

Macquarie University
Sydney, NSW, Australia

shervin.malmasi@mq.edu.au

Mark Dras
Centre for Language Technology

Macquarie University
Sydney, NSW, Australia

mark.dras@mq.edu.au

Abstract

Language transfer, the characteristic sec-
ond language usage patterns caused by na-
tive language interference, is investigated
by Second Language Acquisition (SLA)
researchers seeking to find overused and
underused linguistic features. In this pa-
per we develop and present a methodology
for deriving ranked lists of such features.
Using very large learner data, we show
our method’s ability to find relevant can-
didates using sophisticated linguistic fea-
tures. To illustrate its applicability to SLA
research, we formulate plausible language
transfer hypotheses supported by current
evidence. This is the first work to ex-
tend Native Language Identification to a
broader linguistic interpretation of learner
data and address the automatic extraction
of underused features on a per-native lan-
guage basis.

1 Introduction

It has been noted in the linguistics literature since
the 1950s that speakers of particular languages
have characteristic production patterns when writ-
ing in a second language. This language transfer
phenomenon has been investigated independently
in a number of fields from different perspectives,
including qualitative research in Second Language
Acquisition (SLA) and more recently though pre-
dictive computational models in NLP.

Motivated by the aim of improving foreign lan-
guage teaching and learning, such analyses are of-
ten done manually in SLA, and are difficult to
perform for large corpora. Smaller studies yield
poor results due to the sample size, leading to
extreme variability (Ellis, 2008). Recently, re-
searchers have noted that NLP has the tools to use
large amounts of data to automate this analysis,

using complex feature types. This has motivated
studies in Native Language Identification (NLI), a
subtype of text classification where the goal is to
determine the native language (L1) of an author
using texts they have written in a second language
(L2) (Tetreault et al., 2013).

Despite the good results in predicting L1s, few
attempts have been made to interpret the features
that distinguish L1s. This is partly because no
methods for an SLA-oriented feature analysis have
been proposed; most work focuses on testing fea-
ture types using standard machine learning tools.

The overarching contribution of this work is to
develop a methodology that enables the transfor-
mation of the NLI paradigm into SLA applications
that can be used to link these features to their un-
derlying linguistic causes and explanations. These
candidates can then be applied in other areas such
as remedial SLA strategies or error detection.

2 Related Work

SLA research aims to find distributional differ-
ences in language use between L1s, often referred
to as overuse, the extensive use of some linguis-
tic structures, and underuse, the underutilization
of particular structures, also known as avoidance
(Gass and Selinker, 2008). While there have been
some attempts in SLA to use computational ap-
proaches on small-scale data,1 these still use fairly
elementary techniques and have several shortcom-
ings, including in the manual approaches to an-
notation and the computational artefacts derived
from these.

Conversely, NLI work has focused on automatic
learner L1 classification using Machine Learning
with large-scale data and sophisticated linguistic
features (Tetreault et al., 2012). Here, feature
ranking could be performed with relevancy meth-
ods such as the F-score:

1E.g. Chen (2013), Lozanó and Mendikoetxea (2010) and
Diéz-Bedmar and Papp (2008).

1385



F (j) ≡
(
x̄

(+)
j − x̄j

)2
+
(
x̄

(−)
j − x̄j

)2
1

n+−1
n+∑
i=1

(
x

(+)
i,j − x̄(+)j

)2
+ 1n−−1

n−∑
i=1

(
x

(−)
i,j − x̄(−)j

)2 (1)

The F-score (Fisher score) measures the ratio
between the intraclass and interclass variance in
the values of feature j, where x represents the fea-
ture values in the negative and positive examples.2

More discriminative features have higher scores.
Another alternative method is Information Gain

(Yang and Pedersen, 1997). As defined in equation
(2), it measures the entropy gain associated with
feature t in assigning the class label c.

G(t) = − ∑m
i=1

Pr (ci) log Pr (ci)

+ Pr (t)
∑m

i=1
Pr (ci|t) log Pr (ci|t)

+ Pr (t̄)
∑m

i=1
Pr (ci|t̄) log Pr (ci|t̄)

(2)

However, these methods are limited: they do not
provide ranked lists per-L1 class, and more impor-
tantly, they do not explicitly capture underuse.

Among the efflorescence of NLI work, a new
trend explored by Swanson and Charniak (2014)
aims to extract lists of candidate language transfer
features by comparing L2 data against the writer’s
L1 to find features where the L1 use is mirrored in
L2 use. This allows the detection of obvious ef-
fects, but Jarvis and Crossley (2012) note (p. 183)
that many transfer effects are “too complex” to ob-
serve in this manner. Moreover, this method is un-
able to detect underuse, is only suitable for syn-
tactic features, and has only been applied to very
small data (4,000 sentences) over three L1s. Ad-
dressing these issues is the focus of the present
work.

3 Experimental Setup

3.1 Corpus
We use TOEFL11, the largest publicly available
corpus of English L2 texts (Blanchard et al.,
2013), containing 11 L1s with 1,100 texts each.3

3.2 Features
Adaptor grammar collocations Per Wong et al.
(2012), we utilize an adaptor grammar to discover
arbitrary length n-gram collocations. We explore
both the pure part-of-speech (POS) n-grams as

2See Chang and Lin (2008) for more details.
3Over 4 million tokens in 12,100 texts.

well as the more promising mixtures of POS and
function words. We derive two adaptor grammars
where each is associated with a different set of vo-
cabulary: either pure POS or the mixture of POS
and function words. We use the grammar pro-
posed by Johnson (2010) for capturing topical col-
locations:

Sentence→ Docj j ∈ 1, . . . ,m
Docj → j j ∈ 1, . . . ,m
Docj → Docj Topici i ∈ 1, . . . , t;

j ∈ 1, . . . ,m
Topici →Words i ∈ 1, . . . , t
Words→Word
Words→Words Word
Word→ w w ∈ Vpos;

w ∈ Vpos+fw
Vpos contains 119 distinct POS tags based on the

Brown tagset and Vpos+fw is extended with 398
function words. The number of topics t is set to
50. The inference algorithm for the adaptor gram-
mars are based on the Markov Chain Monte Carlo
technique made available by Johnson (2010).4

Stanford dependencies We use Stanford de-
pendencies as a syntactic feature: for each
text we extract all the basic dependencies re-
turned by the Stanford Parser (de Marneffe et
al., 2006). We then generate all the variations
for each of the dependencies (grammatical rela-
tions) by substituting each lemma with its cor-
responding POS tag. For instance, a gram-
matical relation of det(knowledge, the)
yields the following variations: det(NN, the),
det(knowledge, DT), and det(NN, DT).

Lexical features Content and function words
are also considered as two feature types related to
learner’s vocabulary and spelling.

3.3 Extracting Linear SVM Feature Weights

Using the extracted features, we train linear Sup-
port Vector Machine (SVM) models for each
L1. We use a one-vs-rest approach to find fea-
tures most relevant to each native language. L2-
regularization is applied to remove noisy features
and reduce the size of the candidate feature list.
More specifically, we employ the LIBLINEAR
SVM package (Fan et al., 2008)5 as it is well-
suited to text classification tasks with large num-
bers of features and texts as is the case here.

4http://web.science.mq.edu.au/%7Emjohnson/Software.htm
5http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/%7Ecjlin/liblinear/

1386



In training the models for each feature, the SVM
weight vector6 is calculated according to (3):

w =
∑

i

αiyixi (3)

After training, the positive and negative weights
are split into two lists and ranked by weight.
The positive weights represent overused features,
while features whose absence (i.e. underuse) is
indicative of an L1 class will have large negative
weights. This yields two candidate language trans-
fer feature lists per L1.

4 Results

We now turn to an analysis of the output from our
system to illustrate its applicability for SLA re-
search. Table 1 lists some elements from the un-
deruse and overuse lists for various L1s. The lists
are of different feature types. They have been cho-
sen to demonstrate all feature types and also a va-
riety of different languages. For reasons of space,
only several of the top features are analysed here.

Hindi L1 writers are distinguished by certain
function words including hence, thus, and etc, and
a much higher usage rate of male pronouns. It has
been observed in the literature (Sanyal, 2007, for
example) that the English spoken in India still re-
tains characteristics of the English that was spoken
during the time of the Raj and the East India Com-
pany that have disappeared from other English va-
rieties, so it sounds more formal to other speakers,
or retains traces of an archaic business correspon-
dence style; the features noted fit that pattern.

The second list includes content words overused
by Arabic L1 learners. Analysis of content words
here, and for other L1s in our data, reveals very
frequent misspellings which are believed to be due
to orthographic or phonetic influences (Tsur and
Rappoport, 2007; Odlin, 1989). Since Arabic does
not share orthography with English, we believe
most of these are due to phonetics. Looking at
items 1, 3 and 5 we can see a common pattern:
the English letter u which has various phonetic re-
alizations is being replaced by a vowel that more
often represents that sound. Items 2 and 5 are also
phonetically similar to the intended words.

For Spanish L1 authors we provide both under-
use and overuse lists of syntactic dependencies.
The top 3 overuse rules show the word that is very
often used as the subject of verbs. This is almost

6See Burges (1998) for a detailed explanation.

certainly a consequence of the prominent syntac-
tic role played by the Spanish word que which, de-
pending on the context, is equivalent to the English
words whom, who, which, and most commonly,
that. The fourth rule shows they often use this as a
determiner for plural nouns. A survey of the cor-
pus reveals many such errors in texts of Spanish
learners, e.g. this actions or this emissions. The
fifth rule shows that the adjectival modifier of a
plural noun is often being incorrectly pluralised to
match the noun in number as would be required in
Spanish, for example, differents subjects.

Turning to the underused features in Spanish L1
texts, we see that four related features rank highly,
showing that these is not commonly used as a de-
terminer for plural nouns and which is rarely used
as a subject. The final feature shows that no is
avoided as a determiner. This may be because
while no mostly has the same role in Spanish as it
does in English, it cannot be used as a determiner;
ningún must be used instead. We hypothesize that
this construction is being avoided as placing no be-
fore a noun in Spanish is ungrammatical. This ex-
ample demonstrates that our two list methodology
can not only help identify overused structures, but
also uncovers the related constructs that are being
underutilized at their expense.

The final list in Table 1 is of underused Adap-
tor Grammar patterns by Chinese learners. The
first three features show that these writers signif-
icantly underuse determiners, here an, other and
these before nouns. This is not unexpected since
Chinese learners’ difficulties with English articles
are well known (Robertson, 2000). More inter-
estingly, we find underuse of features like even if
and might, along with others not listed here such
as could VB7 plus many other variants related to
the subjunctive mood. One explanation is that lin-
guistic differences between Chinese and English
in expressing counterfactuals could cause them to
avoid such constructions in L2 English. Previous
research in this area has linked the absence of sub-
junctive linguistic structures in Chinese to differ-
ent cognitive representations of the world and con-
sequences for thinking counterfactually (Bloom,
2014), although this has been disputed (Au, 1983;
Garbern Liu, 1985).

Adaptor Grammars also reveal frequent use of
the “existential there”8 in German L1 data while

7e.g. could be, could have, could go and other variants
8e.g. There is/are ..., as opposed to the locative there.

1387



Overuse Underuse
Hindi Arabic Spanish Spanish Chinese
#2: thus #2: anderstand #1: nsubj(VBP,that) #2: det(NNS,these) #12: an NN
#4: hence #4: mony #2: nsubj(VBZ,that) #3: nsubj(VBZ,which) #16: other NN
#22: his #6: besy #3: nsubj(VB,that) #6: nsubj(VB,which) #18: these NNS
#30: etc #15: diffrent #4: det(NNS,this) #7: nsubj(VBP,which) #19: even if
#33:rather #38: seccessful #25: amod(NNS,differents) #10: det(NN,no) #68: might

Table 1: Example transfer candidates and rankings from the overuse/underuse lists for various L1s and
features types, in order: Hindi function words, Arabic content words, Spanish dependencies (2) and
Chinese Adaptor Grammars.

English Spanish English Spanish
diferent diferente conclution conclusión
consecuence consecuencia desagree Neg. affix des-
responsability responsabilidad especific especı́fico
oportunity oportunidad necesary necesario

Table 2: Highly ranked English misspellings of
Spanish learners and their Spanish cognates.

they are highly underused in French L1 data. The
literature supports our data: The German equiv-
alent es gibt is common while French use is far
more constrained (Cappelle and Loock, 2013).

Lexical analysis also revealed Spanish–English
orthographic transfer, listed in Table 2. This list
includes many cognates, in contrast with the Ara-
bic L1 data where most misspellings were pho-
netic in nature.

We also observe other patterns which remain
unexplained. For instance, Chinese, Japanese and
Korean speakers make excessive use of phrases
such as however, first and second. One possibil-
ity is that this relates to argumentation styles that
are possibly influenced by cultural norms. More
broadly, this effect could also be teaching rather
than transfer related. For example, it may be case
that a widely-used text book for learning English
in Korea happens to overuse this construction.

Some recent findings from the 2013 NLI Shared
Task found that L1 Hindi and Telugu learners of
English had similar transfer effects and their writ-
ings were difficult to distinguish. It has been
posited that this is likely due to shared culture and
teaching environments (Malmasi et al., 2013).

Despite some clearcut instances of overuse,9

more research is required to determine the causal
factors. We hope to expand on this in future work
using more data.

9More than half of the Korean scripts contained a
sentence-initial however.

5 Discussion and Conclusion

Using the proposed methodology, we generated
lists of linguistic features overused and underused
by English learners of various L1 backgrounds.
Through an analysis of the top items in these
ranked lists, we demonstrated the high applicabil-
ity of the output by formulating plausible language
transfer hypotheses supported by current evidence.
We also showcased the method’s generalizability
to numerous linguistic feature types.

Our method’s output consists of two ranked lists
of linguistic features: one for overuse and the
other for underuse, something which had not been
addressed by research to date. We also found
Adaptor Grammar collocations to be highly infor-
mative for this task.

This work, an intersection of NLP, Machine
Learning and SLA, illustrates how the various dis-
ciplines can complement each other by bringing
together theoretical, experimental and computa-
tional issues. NLP provides accurate and auto-
mated tagging of large corpora with sophisticated
features not available in corpus linguistics, e.g.
with state-of-the-art dependency parsing. Sophis-
ticated machine learning techniques then enable
the processing of large quantities of data (thou-
sands of times the size of manual studies) in a way
that will let SLA researchers explore a variety of
assumptions and theoretical analyses. And con-
versely, NLP can benefit from the long-term study
and language acquisition insights from SLA.

In terms of NLI, this work is the first attempt to
expand NLI to a broad linguistic interpretation of
the data, including feature underuse. NLI systems
achieve classification accuracies of over 80% on
this 11-class task, leading to theoretical questions
about the features that make them so effective.
This work also has a backwards link in this regard
by providing qualitative evidence about the under-
pinning linguistic theories that make NLI work.

1388



The work presented here has a number of ap-
plications; chief among them is the development
of tools for SLA researchers. This would enable
them to not just provide new evidence for previ-
ous findings, but to also perform semi-automated
data-driven generation of new and viable hypothe-
ses. This, in turn, can help reduce expert effort and
involvement in the process, particularly as such
studies expand to more corpora and emerging lan-
guage like Chinese (Malmasi and Dras, 2014b)
and Arabic (Malmasi and Dras, 2014a).

The brief analysis included here represents only
a tiny portion of what can be achieved with this
methodology. We included but a few of the thou-
sands of features revealed by this method; prac-
tical SLA tools based on this would have a great
impact on current research.

In addition to language transfer hypotheses,
such systems could also be applied to aid devel-
opment of pedagogical material within a needs-
based and data-driven approach. Once language
use patterns are uncovered, they can be assessed
for teachability and used to create tailored, L1-
specific exercises and teaching material.

From the examples discussed in Section 4 these
could include highly specific and targeted student
exercises to improve spelling, expand vocabulary
and enrich syntactic knowledge — all relative to
their mother tongue. Such exercises can not only
help beginners improve their fundamental skills
and redress their errors but also assist advanced
learners in moving closer to near-nativeness.

The extracted features and their weights could
also be used to build statistical models for gram-
matical error detection (Leacock et al., 2014).
Contrary to the norm of developing error checkers
for native writers, such models could be specifi-
cally targeted towards learners or even particular
L1–L2 pairs which could be useful in Computer-
Assisted Language Learning (CALL) systems.

One limitation here is that our features may
be corpus-dependent as they are all exam essays.
This can be addressed by augmenting the data with
new learner corpora, as they become available.
While a strength here is that we compared each L1
against others, a paired comparison only against
native texts can be insightful too.

There are several directions for future work.
The first relates to clustering the data within the
lists. Our intuition is that there might be coher-
ent clusters of related features, with these clusters

characterising typical errors or idiosyncrasies, that
are predictive of a particular L1. As shown in our
results, some features are highly related and may
be caused by the same underlying transfer phe-
nomena. For example, our list of overused syntac-
tic constructs by Spanish learners includes three
high ranking features related to the same transfer
effect. The use of unsupervised learning meth-
ods such as Bayesian mixture models may be ap-
propriate here. For parse features, tree kernels
could help measure similarity between the trees
and fragments (Collins and Duffy, 2001).

Another avenue is to implement weight-based
ranking methods to further refine and re-rank the
lists, potentially by incorporating the measures
mentioned in Section 2 to assign weights to fea-
tures. As the corpus we used includes learner
proficiency metadata, it may also be possible to
create proficiency-segregated models to find the
features that characterise errors at each language
proficiency level. Finally, the use of other lin-
guistic features such as Context-free Grammar
phrase structure rules or Tree Substitution Gram-
mars could provide additional insights.

In addition to these further technical investiga-
tions, we see as a particularly useful direction the
development of an SLA research tool to conduct a
large SLA study with a wide range of experts. We
believe that this study makes a contribution to this
area and hope that it will motivate future work.

References

Terry Kit-Fong Au. 1983. Chinese and English coun-
terfactuals: the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis revisited.
Cognition, 15(1):155–187.

Daniel Blanchard, Joel Tetreault, Derrick Higgins,
Aoife Cahill, and Martin Chodorow. 2013.
TOEFL11: A Corpus of Non-Native English. Tech-
nical report, Educational Testing Service.

Alfred H Bloom. 2014. The linguistic shaping of
thought: A study in the impact of language on think-
ing in China and the West. Psychology Press.

Christopher JC Burges. 1998. A tutorial on Support
Vector Machines for Pattern Recognition. Data min-
ing and knowledge discovery, 2(2):121–167.

Bert Cappelle and Rudy Loock. 2013. Is there in-
terference of usage constraints?: A frequency study
of existential there is and its French equivalent il
ya in translated vs. non-translated texts. Target,
25(2):252–275.

1389



Yin-Wen Chang and Chih-Jen Lin. 2008. Feature
ranking using linear svm. Causation and Prediction
Challenge Challenges in Machine Learning, Volume
2, page 47.

Meilin Chen. 2013. Overuse or underuse: A cor-
pus study of English phrasal verb use by Chinese,
British and American university students. Interna-
tional Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 18(3).

Michael Collins and Nigel Duffy. 2001. Convolution
Kernels for Natural Language. In Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems, pages 625–632.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Bill Maccartney, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2006. Generating typed
dependency parses from phrase structure parses. In
Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’06),
pages 449–454, Genoa, Italy.

Marı́a Belén Diéz-Bedmar and Szilvia Papp. 2008.
The use of the English article system by Chinese
and Spanish learners. Language and Computers,
66(1):147–176.

Rod Ellis. 2008. The Study of Second Language Ac-
quisition, 2nd edition. Oxford University Press, Ox-
ford, UK.

Rong-En Fan, Kai-Wei Chang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Xiang-
Rui Wang, and Chih-Jen Lin. 2008. LIBLINEAR:
A library for large linear classification. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 9:1871–1874.

Lisa Garbern Liu. 1985. Reasoning counterfactually
in Chinese: Are there any obstacles? Cognition,
21(3):239–270.

Susan M. Gass and Larry Selinker. 2008. Second Lan-
guage Acquisition: An Introductory Course. Rout-
ledge, New York.

Scott Jarvis and Scott Crossley, editors. 2012. Ap-
proaching Language Transfer Through Text Classi-
fication: Explorations in the Detection-based Ap-
proach. Multilingual Matters, Bristol, UK.

Mark Johnson. 2010. PCFGs, Topic Models, Adaptor
Grammars and Learning Topical Collocations and
the Structure of Proper Names. In Proceedings of
the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 1148–1157, Uppsala,
Sweden, July. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Claudia Leacock, Martin Chodorow, Michael Gamon,
and Joel Tetreault. 2014. Automated grammati-
cal error detection for language learners. Synthesis
Lectures on Human Language Technologies, 7(1):1–
170.

Cristobal Lozanó and Amaya Mendikoetxea. 2010. In-
terface conditions on postverbal subjects: A corpus
study of L2 English. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition, 13(4):475–497.

Shervin Malmasi and Mark Dras. 2014a. Arabic Na-
tive Language Identification. In Proceedings of the
Arabic Natural Language Processing Workshop (co-
located with EMNLP 2014), Doha, Qatar, October.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Shervin Malmasi and Mark Dras. 2014b. Chinese
Native Language Identification. Proceedings of the
14th Conference of the European Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, April.

Shervin Malmasi, Sze-Meng Jojo Wong, and Mark
Dras. 2013. NLI Shared Task 2013: MQ Submis-
sion. In Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on In-
novative Use of NLP for Building Educational Ap-
plications, pages 124–133, Atlanta, Georgia, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Terence Odlin. 1989. Language Transfer: Cross-
linguistic Influence in Language Learning. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Daniel Robertson. 2000. Variability in the use of the
English article system by Chinese learners of En-
glish. Second Language Research, 16(2):135–172.

Jyoti Sanyal. 2007. Indlish: The Book for Every
English-Speaking Indian. Viva Books Private Lim-
ited.

Ben Swanson and Eugene Charniak. 2014. Data
Driven Language Transfer Hypotheses. EACL 2014,
page 169.

Joel Tetreault, Daniel Blanchard, Aoife Cahill, and
Martin Chodorow. 2012. Native Tongues, Lost
and Found: Resources and Empirical Evaluations in
Native Language Identification. In Proceedings of
COLING 2012, pages 2585–2602, Mumbai, India,
December. The COLING 2012 Organizing Commit-
tee.

Joel Tetreault, Daniel Blanchard, and Aoife Cahill.
2013. A report on the first native language identi-
fication shared task. In Proceedings of the Eighth
Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Build-
ing Educational Applications, pages 48–57, Atlanta,
Georgia, June. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Oren Tsur and Ari Rappoport. 2007. Using classifier
features for studying the effect of native language
on the choice of written second language words. In
Proc. Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of Computat.
Language Acquisition, pages 9–16.

Sze-Meng Jojo Wong, Mark Dras, and Mark John-
son. 2012. Exploring Adaptor Grammars for Na-
tive Language Identification. In Proc. Conf. Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), pages 699–709.

Yiming Yang and Jan O Pedersen. 1997. A compara-
tive study on feature selection in text categorization.
In ICML, volume 97, pages 412–420.

1390


