



















































Predicting Dialect Variation in Immigrant Contexts Using Light Verb Constructions


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1391–1395,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Predicting Dialect Variation in Immigrant Contexts
Using Light Verb Constructions

A. Seza Doğruöz
Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study

Wassenaar, Netherlands
a.s.dogruoz@gmail.com

Preslav Nakov
Qatar Computing Research Institute

Tornado Tower
floor 10, P.O. Box 5825, Doha, Qatar

pnakov@qf.org.qa

Abstract

Languages spoken by immigrants change
due to contact with the local languages.
Capturing these changes is problematic for
current language technologies, which are
typically developed for speakers of the
standard dialect only. Even when dialec-
tal variants are available for such technolo-
gies, we still need to predict which di-
alect is being used. In this study, we dis-
tinguish between the immigrant and the
standard dialect of Turkish by focusing on
Light Verb Constructions. We experiment
with a number of grammatical and contex-
tual features, achieving over 84% accuracy
(56% baseline).

1 Introduction

Human languages are in constant evolution, driven
in part by contact with other languages (Uriel,
1953; Thomason, 2008). In immigrant contexts,
bilingual and multilingual speakers act as agents
of change by transmitting borrowed words and ex-
pressions across languages (Grosjean, 2014). De-
pending on social factors such as duration and in-
tensity of contact with the local languages, large-
scale spread of borrowed elements could lead to
differences between the contact and non-contact
dialects of the same language (Winford, 2005).
For example, Spanish spoken by immigrants in
USA sounds different in comparison to Spanish
spoken in South America (Corvalán, 2003).

In this study, we focus on the immigrant di-
alect of Turkish as spoken in the Netherlands
(NL-Turkish), which differs from Turkish spo-
ken in Turkey (TR-Turkish). In contact situa-
tions, it is common for verbs to be borrowed
across languages and integrated as nominal com-
plements of Light Verb Constructions (LVCs) (Ed-
wards and Gardner-Chloros, 2007; Butt, 2010).

NL-Turkish LVCs are changing due to Dutch in-
fluence (Doğruöz and Backus, 2007; Doğruöz and
Backus, 2009; Doğruöz and Gries, 2012). How-
ever, assessing Dutch influence is not always easy
since NL-Turkish LVCs still co-exist with the TR-
Turkish LVCs. This study aims to automatically
identify the features that can distinguish between
NL-Turkish and TR-Turkish LVCs.

Our study would benefit Machine Translation
systems targeting dialectal variation. It differs
from studies concerning the well-established di-
alectal variations of Arabic, e.g., Levantine, Gulf,
Egyptian, Maghrebi (Salloum and Habash, 2012),
EU vs. Brazilian Portuguese (Marujo et al., 2011)
or Turkish vs. Tatar (Altintas and Cicekli, 2002).
In contrast, we are interested in developing lan-
guage technologies for immigrant dialects, which
are often understudied and lack written resources
due to their unofficial status. When immigrant
speakers face communication difficulties (e.g., bu-
reaucratic affairs with the local officials, teacher-
parent meetings, doctor-patient conversations) in
the local languages (e.g., Dutch) of the host coun-
try, they are often provided with translation equiv-
alents in the standard dialect (e.g., TR-Turkish)
of their native languages. However, these trans-
lations ignore the evolution of the immigrant di-
alect.1 By identifying the differences between two
dialects of the same variety, we aim to improve
Machine Translation systems targeting immigrant
speakers. Our contributions are the following:

• We are the first to predict on-going dialect
variation in immigrant contexts as opposed to
studying established dialect variations.

• We are also the first to compare bilingual
LVCs with the monolingual ones across two
dialects of the same language.

1One of the authors failed the driving test in the Nether-
lands due to the dialect variation in the Turkish translation.

1391



• Our comparison of grammatical versus con-
textual features reveals context to be much
more important.

• We experiment with LVCs extracted from
natural spoken data rather than relying on iso-
lated occurences, out of context.

2 Method

We follow Baldwin and Kim (2010) and Butt
(2010) in their definitions of LVCs, which state
that there is a unity between the nominal and the
verbal complements, but the meaning of the verb
is somewhat bleached. In this study, we focus
on Turkish LVCs with the verbal complements of
yapmak/etmek, which both can be translated as
“make/do”. LVCs with these verbal complements
are undergoing change in NL-Turkish (Doğruöz
and Backus, 2009).

We experiment with the following features to
predict NL-Turkish vs. TR-Turkish LVCs.

2.1 Nominal Features
In addition to traditional LVCs (e.g. [ütü yap-
mak] “iron do” (to iron) with both complements
of Turkish origins), there is also foreign influ-
ence on Turkish LVCs. Section 2.1.1 describes
the foreign influence on both NL-Turkish and TR-
Turkish nominal complements based on their ety-
mological origins.

2.1.1 Influence on Nominal Complements
Dutch Influence In example (1), the Dutch verb
overplaats is nominalized through the infinitive
marker (-en) and precedes the Turkish verb yap-
mak to form a Turkish-Dutch bilingual LVC.

Example 1:
O arkadaş [overplaats-en yap-ıl-acak-tı.]

That friend [replace-inf2 do-pass-fut-past].
That friend would have been replaced.

In addition to borrowing nominalized Dutch
verbs to form bilingual LVCs, Dutch LVCs are
also translated as a chunk into NL-Turkish. These
translated LVCs sound unconventional to TR-
Turkish speakers (Doğruöz and Gries, 2012). In
example (2), the LVC [sınav yapmak] “exam do”
is a literal translation of the Dutch [examen doen]
“exam-pl do”, which is used to describe how stu-
dents take high school exams to graduate.

2acc: accusative, fut:future, inf:infinitive, past:past tense,
part: participle, pres: present tense, pl: plural, poss: poss-
esive, prog:progressive tense, sg: singular

In a similar context, TR-Turkish speakers would
have used [sınav-a girmek] “exam enter” instead.
These LVCs are also classified as having their ori-
gins in another language.

Example 2:
Üç gündür [sınav yap-ıyor-uz].

Three day [exam do-prog-1pl].
We are having exams for the last three days.

Other Foreign Influences Although Dutch in-
fluence is clearly present in NL-Turkish LVCs,
TR-Turkish LVCs are also not free of foreign in-
fluence. We have come across Arabic, Persian,
French and English influences on Turkish LVCs
with nominalized foreign verbs or literally trans-
lated LVCs as chunks. Example (3) illustrates how
a borrowed Arabic verb (hitap, “address”) is in-
tegrated as a nominal complement into a Turkish
LVC [hitap etmek] “address do”.

Example 3:
Hoca-m diye [hitap edi-yo-z] biz.
Teacher-poss.1sg like [address do-prog-1pl]

we.
We address (him) as the teacher.

Example (4) illustrates how an English LVC [do
sports] is borrowed into Turkish as a chunk [spor
yapmak] “sports do”.

Example 4:
Yazın [spor yap-ıyo-z].

summer spor do-prog-1pl
We do sports in summer.

We have identified the etymological origins of
LVCs in both corpora using an online etymolog-
ical dictionary.3 Although LVCs of Dutch origin
only occur in NL-Turkish, LVCs borrowed from
other languages (e.g., Arabic, English, French) oc-
cur both in NL-Turkish and in TR-Turkish.

2.1.2 Case Marking
We also came across Turkish [N V] constructions
with “yapmak” and “etmek” where the nominal
complement acts as the object of the verb.

Turkish marks the direct objects with accusative
case marking if they are definite (Enç, 1991). In
example (5), the nominal element is the object of
the verb, and thus it has the accusative marker.

Example 5:
Ben kendi [iş-im-i yap-ıyor-um.]

I own [work-poss.1sg-acc do-prog-1sg].
I do my own work.

3http://www.nisanyansozluk.com/

1392



However, indefinite objects of the verb are left
unmarked for case. In example (6), yapmak takes
an indefinite object (food) as the complement. The
boundary between [N V] constructions with in-
definite nominal objects and LVCs are somewhat
blurry. In both cases, the meaning of the verbal
complement is bleached out and the nominal com-
plement weighs heavier than the verbal one. We
will not dwell further on this subtle distinction, but
we plan future work on this topic following Cook
et al. (2007) and Vincze et al. (2013).

Example 6:
Bazen [yemek yap-ar-dı-m]

Sometimes [food do-pres-past-1sg]
I used to sometimes prepare food.

Since Dutch does not mark objects of the verb
morphologically, NL-Turkish speakers have diffi-
culty (e.g., unnecessary addition or omission of
case markers) in determining the definiteness of
the nominal complements in [N V] constructions
(Doğruöz and Backus, 2009). Therefore, we ex-
pect this feature to differentiate well between NL-
Turkish and TR-Turkish [N V] constructions and
LVCs with yapmak/etmek as verbal complements.

2.2 Verbal Complements

2.2.1 Finiteness
The verbs in LVCs are assumed to be flexible for
inflection (Baldwin and Kim, 2010). However, we
know little about how fineteness contributes to the
formation of LVCs. To the best of our knowledge,
finiteness has not been tested as a feature for iden-
tifying LVCs earlier. Therefore, we encoded the
finiteness on yapmak/etmek as a binary (yes/no)
feature in both data sets. Example (7) illustrates a
non-finite LVC where the verb stem (et) is accom-
panied with an infinitive marker (-mek).

Example 7:
Misafir-ler-e [ikram et-mek] için al-dı-k

Guest-pl-dat [serve do-inf.] for buy-past-1pl
We bought (it) to serve the guests.

2.2.2 Type
NL-Turkish speakers could use other light verbs
than TR-Turkish speakers for the same LVC con-
struction. In example (8), the NL-Turkish speaker
uses [doğum etmek] “birth do” instead of [doğum
yapmak] “birth do”, which is commonly preferred
by TR-Turkish speakers. To capture this differ-
ence between the two dialects, we include the verb
type as a feature as well.

Example 8:
Orda kadın [doğum et-ti].

There lady [birth do-past].
The lady gave birth there.

2.3 Word Order in LVCs
To the best of our knowledge, the influence of
word order in LVCs has not been investigated as
a feature. Although Turkish has a relatively flexi-
ble constituent order, object-verb (OV) is the most
frequent word order for both NL-Turkish and TR-
Turkish (Doğruöz and Backus, 2007). NL-Turkish
speakers have adopted Dutch word order verb-
object (VO) for some syntactic constructions, but
we know little about the word order variation for
LVCs. Encoding the word order of LVCs as a
binary feature (OV vs. VO) could give us clues
about differences or similarities of LVC use in NL-
Turkish and in TR-Turkish. In example (9), the
nominal complement (one thing) follows the ver-
bal complement instead of preceding it as seen in
earlier examples.

Example 9:
[Yap-acak bir şey] yok.

[Do-part. one thing] exist.not
There is nothing to do.

2.4 Context
So far, most studies were carried out ignoring
the context of LVCs but focusing on their inher-
ent grammatical features (e.g., lexical, syntactic,
semantic or morphological). However, the con-
text of an utterance could potentially provide addi-
tional useful cues. Since our data comes from nat-
ural conversations, we also experimented with the
contextual information (words surrounding LVCs)
as a feature for both data sets.

3 Data
Our data comes from spoken NL-Turkish (46
speakers from the Netherlands, 74,461 words)
and TR-Turkish (22 speakers from Turkey, 28,731
words) corpora collected by one of the authors.
LVC’s are automatically extracted from the data
using their stem forms (“yap-”, “et-” without the
infinitive -mEk). Table 1 illustrates the frequency
of [N V] constructions with etmek and yapmak in
both data sets.

# etmek # yapmak # Total
NL-Turkish 449 543 992
TR-Turkish 527 755 1282

Total 976 1298

Table 1: Distribution of etmek and yapmak.

1393



4 Experiments
Our aim is to build a classifier that can determine
whether a particular utterance containing an LVC
(with the verbs yapmak or etmek) is uttered by an
NL-Turkish or a TR-Turkish speaker.

We make use the following features in our
classifier: (1) words from the context of the
LVCs, (2) type of the light verb (yapmak or
etmek), (3) the nominal complements, (4) finite-
ness of the verb (finite/non-finite), (5) case
marking on the nominal complement (yes/no),
(6) word order (VO/OV), and (7) etymolog-
ical origins of the nominal complement (Ara-
bic/Dutch/French/English/Persian/Turkish/mixed).

For the contextual features, we experiment with
two models: (a) we distinguish between a word
extracted from the context to the left or to the right
of the verb (yapmak or etmek) in the feature space,
and (b) we do not make a distinction in terms of
context. The reason to experiment with option
(a) is due to the potential importance of the word
order. While the word order variation is already
modeled through feature (6), we also include the
context as an additional feature to test its effect.
On the down side, adding context doubles the fea-
ture space size and could lead to data sparseness
issues. For the context words, we did not filter out
stopwords since they are part of natural speech.

For our experiments, we used an SVM classifier
as implemented in LibSVM. We used a linear ker-
nel; more complex kernels did not help. We report
results for a 5-fold cross-validation.

5 Results
Table 2 illustrates the results of our experiments.
All models outperform the majority class base-
line of always predicting TR-Turkish (which is
56.38% accuracy) by a sizable margin. Further-
more, splitting the context into left/right yields ap-
proximately 1.5% absolute drop in accuracy.

Split the Context?
Features Left vs. Right No Split
Baseline 56.38
Full model 82.81 84.30
no context 70.67
no nominal complements 82.19 83.64
no info about etymol. origin 82.10 83.99
no finiteness 83.03 84.35
no case marking info 82.76 84.43
no word order info 82.89 84.43
no verb type 82.94 84.39

Table 2: Cross-validation accuracy (5 folds).

The lower part of the table shows the results
when turning off each of the feature types. The
context seems to be the most important feature
since its exclusion leads to a drop from low-to-
mid eighties to about 70% accuracy. Except the
nominal complements and the information about
etymological origins, most other features seem to
have marginal impact on accuracy. Excluding the
two features (nominal complements and etymo-
logical origins) lead to approximately 0.5% ab-
solute drop in accuracy. The impact of the last
four features in the table is tiny; excluding some
of them even leads to a tiny improvement.

Overall, we can conclude that by far the most
important features are the context features (with-
out the left/right context split). The other use-
ful features are the nominal complements and the
information about the etymological origin of the
borrowed LVCs. The remaining four linguistic
features seem to be largely irrelevant.

6 Conclusion and Future Work
Language technologies are usually developed for
standard dialects, ignoring the linguistic differ-
ences in other dialects such as those in immigrant
contexts. One of the reasons for this is the dif-
ficulty of assessing and predicting linguistic dif-
ferences across dialects. This is similar to ef-
forts to translate well-established Arabic dialects
(Bakr et al., 2008; Sawaf, 2010), or to adapt be-
tween Brazilian and European Portuguese (Marujo
et al., 2011), Czech–Slovak (Hajič et al., 2000),
Spanish–Portuguese (Nakov and Ng, 2009; Nakov
and Ng, 2012), Turkish–Crimean Tatar (Altintas
and Cicekli, 2002), Irish–Scottish Gaelic (Scan-
nell, 2006), Bulgarian–Macedonian (Nakov and
Tiedemann, 2012), Malay–Indonesian (Wang et
al., 2012) or Mandarin–Cantonese (Zhang, 1998).

In this work, we have built a classifier that uses
LVCs to differentiate between two different Turk-
ish dialects: standard and immigrant. The results
indicate that contextual features are most useful
for this task. Although this requires further inves-
tigation, we can explain it by the thousands of fea-
tures context generates: each contextual word is a
feature. Thus, it is very hard for our grammatical
features to compete against contextual features but
they do have an impact.

We are planning to extend our study to dialects
in other immigrant settings (e.g., Turkish in Ger-
many) and to other types of multiword expressions
(e.g., [N N] compounds).

1394



References
Kemal Altintas and Ilyas Cicekli. 2002. A machine

translation system between a pair of closely related
languages. In Proceedings of the 17th International
Symposium on Computer and Information Sciences,
ISCIS ’02, pages 192–196, Orlando, FL, USA.

Hitham Abo Bakr, Khaled Shaalan, and Ibrahim
Ziedan. 2008. A hybrid approach for converting
written Egyptian colloquial dialect into diacritized
Arabic. In Proceedings of the 6th International
Conference on Informatics and Systems, INFOS ’08,
Cairo, Egypt.

Timothy Baldwin and Su Nam Kim, 2010. In Nitin
Indurkhya and Fred J. Damerau (eds.), Handbook
of Natural Language Processing, chapter Multiword
expressions, pages 267–292. CRC Press, Boca Ra-
ton, USA, second edition.

Miriam Butt, 2010. In Mengistu Amberber, Brett
Baker, and Mark Harvey (eds.), Complex predi-
cates: cross-linguistic perspectives on event struc-
ture, chapter The light verb jungle: still hacking
away, pages 48–78. Cambridge University Press.

Paul Cook, Afsaneh Fazly, and Suzanne Stevenson.
2007. Pulling their weight: Exploiting syntactic
forms for the automatic identification of idiomatic
expressions in context. In Proceedings of MWE ’07,
pages 41–48, Prague, Czech Republic.

Carmen Silva Corvalán. 2003. Otra mirada a la ex-
presión del sujeto como variable sintáctica. Lengua,
variación y contexto: Estudios dedicados a Hum-
berto López Morales, 2:849–860.

A. Seza Doğruöz and Ad Backus. 2007. Postverbal el-
ements in immigrant Turkish: Evidence of change?
International Journal of Bilingualism, 11(2):185–
220.

A. Seza Doğruöz and Ad Backus. 2009. Innova-
tive constructions in Dutch Turkish: An assessment
of ongoing contact-induced change. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 12(01):41–63.

A. Seza Doğruöz and Stefan Gries. 2012. Spread of
on-going changes in an immigrant language: Turk-
ish in the Netherlands. Review of Cognitive Linguis-
tics, 10(2).

Malcolm Edwards and Penelope Gardner-Chloros.
2007. Compound verbs in codeswitching: Bilin-
guals making do? International Journal of Bilin-
gualism, 11(1):73–91.

Mürvet Enç. 1991. The semantics of specificity. Lin-
guistic Inquiry, 22(1):1–25.

François Grosjean. 2014. Bicultural bilinguals. Inter-
national Journal of Bilingualism, pages 1–15.

Jan Hajič, Jan Hric, and Vladislav Kuboň. 2000. Ma-
chine translation of very close languages. In Pro-
ceedings of ANLP ’00, pages 7–12, Seattle, WA,
USA.

Luı́s Marujo, Nuno Grazina, Tiago Luı́s, Wang Ling,
Luı́sa Coheur, and Isabel Trancoso. 2011. BP2EP -
adaptation of Brazilian Portuguese texts to European
Portuguese. In Proceedings of EAMT ’11, pages
129–136, Leuven, Belgium.

Preslav Nakov and Hwee Tou Ng. 2009. Improved
statistical machine translation for resource-poor lan-
guages using related resource-rich languages. In
Proceedings of EMNLP ’09, pages 1358–1367, Sin-
gapore.

Preslav Nakov and Hwee Tou Ng. 2012. Improving
statistical machine translation for a resource-poor
language using related resource-rich languages. J.
Artif. Intell. Res. (JAIR), 44:179–222.

Preslav Nakov and Jörg Tiedemann. 2012. Combin-
ing word-level and character-level models for ma-
chine translation between closely-related languages.
In Proceedings of ACL ’12, Jeju Island, Korea.

Wael Salloum and Nizar Habash. 2012. Elissa: A di-
alectal to standard Arabic machine translation sys-
tem. In Proceedings of COLING ’12, pages 385–
392, Mumbai, India.

Hassan Sawaf. 2010. Arabic dialect handling in hybrid
machine translation. In Proceedings of AMTA ’10,
Denver, Colorado.

Kevin Scannell. 2006. Machine translation for
closely related language pairs. In Proceedings of the
LREC 2006 Workshop on Strategies for developing
machine translation for minority languages, pages
103–107, Genoa, Italy.

Sarah Thomason. 2008. Social and linguistic factors
as predictors of contact-induced change. Journal of
language contact, 2(1):42–56.

Weinreich Uriel. 1953. Languages in contact: Find-
ings and problems. Publications of the Linguistic
Circle of New York, vol. 1.

Veronika Vincze, István Nagy, and Richárd Farkas.
2013. Identifying English and Hungarian light verb
constructions: A contrastive approach. In Proceed-
ings of ACL ’13, pages 255–261, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Pidong Wang, Preslav Nakov, and Hwee Tou Ng.
2012. Source language adaptation for resource-poor
machine translation. In Proceedings of EMNLP-
CoNLL ’12, pages 286–296, Jeju Island, Korea.

Donald Winford. 2005. Contact-induced changes:
Classification and processes. Diachronica,
22(2):373–427.

Xiaoheng Zhang. 1998. Dialect MT: a case study be-
tween Cantonese and Mandarin. In Proceedings of
the COLING ’98, pages 1460–1464, Montreal, Que-
bec, Canada.

1395


