



















































Extracting Clusters of Specialist Terms from Unstructured Text


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1426–1434,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Extracting Clusters of Specialist Terms from Unstructured Text

Aaron Gerow
Computation Institute
University of Chicago

Chicago, IL, USA
gerow@uchicago.edu

Abstract

Automatically identifying related special-
ist terms is a difficult and important task
required to understand the lexical struc-
ture of language. This paper develops
a corpus-based method of extracting co-
herent clusters of satellite terminology —
terms on the edge of the lexicon — us-
ing co-occurrence networks of unstruc-
tured text. Term clusters are identi-
fied by extracting communities in the co-
occurrence graph, after which the largest
is discarded and the remaining words are
ranked by centrality within a community.
The method is tractable on large corpora,
requires no document structure and min-
imal normalization. The results suggest
that the model is able to extract coher-
ent groups of satellite terms in corpora
with varying size, content and structure.
The findings also confirm that language
consists of a densely connected core (ob-
served in dictionaries) and systematic, se-
mantically coherent groups of terms at the
edges of the lexicon.

1 Introduction

Natural language consists of a number of rela-
tional structures, many of which can be obscured
by lexical idiosyncrasies, regional variation and
domain-specific conventions. Despite this, pat-
terns of word use exhibit loose semantic struc-
ture, namely that proximate words tend to be re-
lated. This distributional hypothesis has been op-
erationalized in a variety of ways, providing in-
sights and solutions into practical and theoretical
questions about meaning, intention and the use of
language. Distributional analyses rely primarily
on observing natural language to build statistical
representations of words, phrases and documents

(Turney and Pantel, 2010). By studying dictio-
naries and thesauri, lexicographic and terminolog-
ical research has proposed that a core lexicon is
used to define the remaining portions of vocabu-
lary (Itô and Mester, 1995; Massé et al., 2008).
Though many words that comprise general lan-
guage use reside in this core lexicon, even the
most general language contains specialist or so-
called “satellite” words. This paper introduces a
method of extracting this peripheral structure, with
co-occurrence networks of unstructured text.

The core-periphery structure has been observed
in dictionaries where definitions tend to use a re-
stricted vocabulary, repetitively employing a core
set of words to define others (Sinclair, 1996; Pi-
card et al., 2013). In the farther regions of the lex-
icon, it is more difficult to find systematic seman-
tic definition with corpus-based techniques due to
the overwhelming number of infrequent words.
Unfortunately, the fringe of the lexicon can be
more important than the core because this is where
domain-specific terminology resides — features
that may be more important than frequent.

Examining dictionaries, (Picard et al., 2013)
propose that the lexicon consists of four main
parts: a core set of ubiquitous words used to de-
fine other words, a kernel that makes up most of
the lexicon, a minimal grounding set that includes
most of the core and some of the kernel, leav-
ing a set of satellites in the periphery. This to-
pography, reproduced in Figure 1, has been found
in the way dictionary entries use words to define
one another. In networks of dictionary defini-
tions, the core component tends to form a strongly
connected component (SCC) leaving satellites in
smaller SCCs with relatively weak links to the
core. This paper explores whether these these
satellites form systematic, cohesive groups and
whether they are observable in natural language.

1426



Figure 1: Dictionary studies have proposed that
the lexicon consists of a strongly connected core,
around which there is a kernel, an asymmetric
grounding set and satellites. Adapted from (Picard
et al., 2013).

Words with relatively specific definitions within
subjects, referred to as terms in lexicographic re-
search, are apparent in nearly all domains of dis-
course. Here, the goal is to explore structure
among these peripheral terms without a dictio-
nary. To do this, a method based on commu-
nity detection in textual co-occurrence networks
is developed. Such graph-based methods have be-
come increasingly popular in a range of language-
related tasks such as word clustering, document
clustering, semantic memory, anaphora resolution
and dependency parsing (see Mihalcea and Radev,
2011 for a review).

This paper seeks to address two important ques-
tions about the observed landscape of the lexicon
in natural language: to investigate whether satel-
lite clusters found in dictionaries can be observed
in text, and more importantly, to explore whether
statistical information in co-occurrence networks
can elucidate this peripheral structure in the lexi-
con. We frame these questions as the task of ex-
tracting clusters of related terms. If satellites are
systematically organized, then we can expect to
find cohesive clusters in this region. Moreover, if
the networked structure of dictionary entries sup-
ports the landscape in Figure 1, a similar structure
may be present in co-occurrence patterns in natu-
ral text.

2 Method

Word clustering, as a means to explore underly-
ing lexical structure, should accommodate fuzzy
and potentially contradictory notions of similarity.
For example, red and green are at once similar,
being colors, but as colors, they are very differ-
ent. Alternatively, the words car, fast, wheel, ex-
port and motorists share a thematic similarity in
their relation to automobiles. One conception of
word clustering is to construct a thesaurus of syn-
onyms (Calvo et al., 2005), but clustering could
allow other lexical semantic relationships. One
such database, WordNet, defines specific seman-
tic relationships and has been used to group words
according to explicit measures of relatedness and
similarity (Miller, 1995; Pedersen et al., 2004).
Distributional, corpus-based techniques that de-
fine words as feature vectors (eg. word-document
co-occurrences), can address many limitations of
manually created lexicons (see Turney et al., 2010
for a review). Clustering nouns by argument struc-
ture can uncover naturally related objects (Hin-
dle, 1990) and spectral methods can relate dis-
tinct classes of nouns with certain kinds of verbs
to induce selectional preferences (Resnik, 1997;
Sun and Korhonen, 2009; Wilks, 1975) and assist
metaphor processing (Shutova et al., 2013).

A pervasive weakness of many existing ap-
proaches to word-clustering, is an underlying pri-
oritization of frequent words. To help address
this sparsity, many models collapse words into
stems, preclude uncommon words, or underesti-
mate the relevance of infrequent words (Dagan
et al., 1999). Probabilistic topic models have
emerged as a uniquely flexible kind of word-
clustering used in content analysis (Steyvers and
Griffiths, 2007), text classification (Wei and Croft,
2006) and provide an extensible framework to ad-
dress other tasks (Blei, 2012). Because the struc-
ture of satellite terms is not likely to rely on spe-
cific (much less consistent) lexical semantic re-
lationships, we adopt a measure of semantic co-
herence, commonly used to qualify the results of
topic models, as an indirect measure of what peo-
ple tend to view as a cohesive set of words. This
measure, which is defined in the next section, is
particularly attractive because it is corpus-based,
does not assume any specific semantic relationship
and correlates with expert evaluations (Mimno et
al., 2011; Newman et al., 2010). Using semantic
coherence provides a way of measuring the qual-

1427



ity of word-associations without appeal to a dic-
tionary or assuming rigid relationships among the
clustered words.

The first step is to construct a co-occurrence
graph from which communities are extracted.
Then the centrality of each word is computed
within a community to generate cluster-specific
rankings. The goal is not to categorize words
into classes, nor to provide partitions that sepa-
rate associated words across a corpus. Instead, the
method is designed to extract qualifiable sets of
specialist terms found in arbitrary text. Crucially,
the method is designed to require no document
structure and minimal pre-processing: stop-words
and non-words are not removed and no phrasal,
sentence or document structure is required. Al-
though stemming or lemmatization could pro-
vide more stream-lined interpretations, the mini-
mal pre-processing allows the method to operate
efficiently on large amounts of unstructured text
of any language.

Co-occurrence networks have been used in a
variety of NLP applications, the basic idea be-
ing to construct a graph where proximate words
are connected. Typically, words are connected
if they are observed in an n-word window. We
set this window to a symmetric 7 words on ei-
ther side of the target and did not use any weight-
ing1. In the resulting network, edge frequen-
cies are set to the number of times the given co-
occurrence is observed. The resulting networks
are typically quite dense and exhibit small-world
structure where most word-pairs are only a few
edges apart (Baronchelli et al., 2013; Ferror i Can-
cho and Solé, 2001). To explore the effect of
this density, different minimum node- and edge-
frequencies were tested (analogous to the word-
and co-occurrence frequencies in text). It was
found that not setting any thresholds provided the
best results (see Figure 2), supporting our minimal
pre-processing approach.

To extract clusters from the co-occurrence ma-
trix, the Infomap community detection algorithm
was used. Infomap is an information-theoretic
method that optimizes a compression dictionary
using it to describe flow through connected nodes
(Rosvall and Bergstrom, 2008). By minimizing a
description of this flow, the algorithm can also ex-
tract nested communities (Rosvall and Bergstrom,

17 was found to be the optimal window-size in terms of
coherence. These preliminary results are available at knowl-
edgelab.org/docs/coherent clusters-data.xls.

Corpus Docs Tokens Nodes Edges
TASA 38,972 10.7M 58,357 1,319,534
NIPS 3,742 5.2M 28,936 1,612,659
enTenTen 92,327 72.2M 69,745 7,721,413

Table 1: Co-occurrence networks of each corpus.

2011). In our experiments, we used the co-
occurrence frequencies as edge-weights and ran
50 trials for each run of the algorithm. Co-
occurrence networks tended to form one mono-
lithic community, corresponding to the lexicon’s
core SCC, surrounded by a number of smaller
communities. The monolithic community is dis-
carded out-right, as it represents the core of the
lexicon where few specialist terms reside. As we
will see, the community detection algorithm nat-
urally identifies this SCC, distinguishing satellite
clusters of terminology. Though we do not explore
its effect, the sensitivity of Infomap can be tuned
to vary the relative size of the core SCC compared
to the satellites, effectively allowing less modular
communities to be considered satellites.

To compare and interpret the resulting clus-
ters, various measures of centrality were tested for
ranking words within their communities. The goal
of this ranking is to find words that typify or de-
fine their community without assuming its under-
lying semantics. The results in the next section
show that a number of common centrality mea-
sures work comparably well for this task. The fi-
nal output of the system is a set of communities,
in which words are ranked by their centrality.

3 Results & Analysis

Three corpora were used for evaluation: the
TASA, NIPS and enTenTen collections. TASA
consists of paragraph-length excerpts from high-
school level, American English texts (Landauer
and Dumais, 1997). The NIPS collection contains
17 volumes of annual proceedings from the con-
ference of the same name. The enTenTen corpus
is a web-based collection of text-heavy, English
web-sites. Table 1 summarizes the collections and
their co-occurrence networks.

The extracted communities, which consist of
word-centrality pairs, are similarly structured to
the output of topic models. Because appeals to
human judgement are expensive and can introduce
issues of consistency (Chang et al., 2009; Hu et al.,
2011), a corpus-based measure of semantic coher-
ence has been proposed (Mimno et al., 2011). Co-

1428



herence is used as a proxy for human judgments.
A general form of semantic coherence can be de-
fined as the mean pair-wise similarity over the top
n words in a topic or cluster t

C(t) =
1
n

n∑
(wi,wj)∈t

i<j

S(wi, wj)

where S is a symmetric measure of similarity.
Newman, et al. (2010) surveyed a number of simi-
larity metrics and found that mean point-wise mu-
tual information (PMI) correlated best to human
judgements. PMI is a commonly used measure of
how much more information co-occurring words
convey together compared to their independent
contributions (Church and Hanks, 1990; Bouma,
2009). Using PMI as S, we can define a version of
coherence, known as UCI Coherence:

CUCI(t) =
1
n

n∑
(wi,wj)∈t

i<j

log
p(wi, wj)

p(wi)p(wj)

where p(w) is estimated as relative frequency in
a corpus: f(w)∑

i f(wi)
. Using coherence to optimize

topic models, Mimno et al. (2011) found that a
simplified measure, termed UMass Coherence, is
more strongly correlated to human judgments than
CUCI . For topic t, CUMass is defined as follows:

CUMass(t) =
1
n

n∑
(wi,wj)∈t

i<j

log
D(wi, wj) + 1

D(wj)

where D(w) is the number of documents con-
taining w, and D(w, w′) is the number of doc-
uments containing both w and w′. Note that D
relies crucially on document segmentation in the
reference corpus, which is not encoded in the co-
occurrence networks derived by the method de-
scribed above. Thus, though the networks be-
ing analyzed and the coherence scores are both
based on co-occurrence information, they are dis-
tinct from one another. Following convention,
we compute coherence for the top 10 words in a
given community. CUMass was used as the mea-
sure of semantic coherence. and D was computed
over the TASA corpus, which means the resulting
scores are not directly comparable to (Mimno et
al., 2011), though comparisons to other published
results are provided below.

3.1 Ranking Functions & Frequency
Thresholds

After communities are extracted from the co-
occurrence graph, words are ranked by their cen-
trality in a community. Six centrality measures
were tested as ranking functions: degree centrality,
closeness centrality, eigenvector centrality, Page-
rank, hub-score and authority-score (Friedl et al.,
2010). Degree centrality uses a node’s degree
as its centrality under the assumption that highly
connected nodes are central. Closeness centrality
measures the average distance between a node and
all other nodes, promoting nodes that are “close”
to the rest of the network. Eigenvector centrality
favors well-connected nodes that are themselves
connected to well-connected nodes. Pagerank is
similar to eigenvector centrality, but also promotes
nodes that mediate connections between strongly
connected nodes. Hub and authority scores mea-
sure interconnectedness (hubs) and connectedness
to interconnected nodes (authorities). Figure 2
shows the average coherence, across all commu-
nities extracted from the TASA corpus, for each
centrality measure. The average coherence scores
are highest using hub-score, though not signifi-
cantly better than auth-score, eigenvector central-
ity or closeness centrality. In the results that fol-
low, hub-scores were used to rank nodes within
communities.

Figure 2: Mean coherence for six centrality mea-
sures. Error-bars are ±2 SE of the mean.

1429



Imposing minimum node and edge frequencies
in the co-occurrence graph was also tested. How-
ever, applying no thresholds provided the high-
est average coherence. Figure 3 shows the aver-
age coherence for eight threshold configurations.
Though we used the TASA corpus for these tests,
we have no reason to believe the results would dif-
fer significantly for the other corpora.

Figure 3: Mean coherence for different mini-
mum node and edge frequencies, corresponding
to thresholds for word and co-occurrence counts.
Error-bars are ±2 SE of the mean.

3.2 Community Coherence
Table 2 shows three communities of specialist
terms extracted from each text collection, with
their normalized hub-scores. Normalizing the
scores preserves their rank-ordering and provides
an indication of relative centrality within the com-
munity itself. For example, compare the first
and last words from the top TASA and NIPS
clusters: the difference between thou and craven
(TASA) is considerably more than model and net-
work (NIPS). In general, higher ranked words ap-
pear to typify their communities, with words like
model, university and nuclear in the NIPS ex-
amples. These clusters are typical of those pro-
duced by the method, though in some cases, the
communities contain less than 10 terms and were
not included in the coherence analysis. Note that
these clusters are not systematic in any lexical se-
mantic sense, though in almost every case there
are discernible thematic relations (middle-English
words, Latin America and seafood in TASA).

TASA NIPS enTenTen
thou 1.00 model 1.00 cortex 1.00
shalt 0.72 learning 0.99 prefrontal 0.88
hast 0.49 data 0.96 anterior 0.41
thyself 0.26 neural 0.94 cingulate 0.33
dost 0.24 using 0.85 medulla 0.28
wilt 0.24 network 0.85 parietal 0.13
canst 0.12 training 0.73 insula 0.13
knowest 0.10 algorithm 0.66 cruciate 0.11
mayest 0.10 function 0.63 striatum 0.11
craven 0.01 networks 0.62 ventral 0.10
peru 1.00 university 1.00 pradesh 1.00
ecuador 0.84 science 0.85 andhra 0.67
bolivia 0.80 computer 0.83 madhya 0.56
argentina 0.67 department 0.74 uttar 0.50
paraguay 0.54 engineering 0.30 bihar 0.21
chile 0.52 report 0.30 rajasthan 0.19
venezuela 0.48 technical 0.29 maharashtra 0.16
uruguay 0.28 institute 0.26 haryana 0.12
lima 0.17 abstract 0.25 himachal 0.10
parana 0.11 california 0.23 arunachal 0.04
clams 1.00 nuclear 1.00 cilia 1.00
crabs 0.87 weapons 0.66 peristomal 0.73
oysters 0.87 race 0.57 stalk 0.62
crab 0.67 countries 0.40 trochal 0.51
lobsters 0.66 rights 0.37 vorticella 0.35
shrimp 0.62 india 0.27 campanella 0.32
hermit 0.50 russia 0.26 hairlike 0.17
mussels 0.27 philippines 0.26 swimmers 0.15
lice 0.23 brazil 0.25 epistylis 0.12
scallops 0.20 waste 0.22 telotroch 0.11

Table 2: Sample clusters from the TASA, NIPS
and enTenTen collections. Shown are the clusters’
top ten words, ranked by their normalized hub-
score within the community. Note the differences
in hub-score distributions between clusters.

Figure 4 shows the average coherence for our
method, compared to that of a 20-topic latent
Dirichlet allocation (LDA) model fit to the same
corpora. Results from an LDA model fit to our
corpora, as well as from a sample of published
topics, are provided as a baseline to calibrate read-
ers’ intuitions about coherence2. Although topics
from LDA do not necessarily consist of special-
ist terms those in the current model, the expec-
tation of coherence remains: probable or central
words should comprise a cohesive group. In every
case, coherence is calculated over the top 10 words
ranked using within-community hub-scores, for
every community of 10 or more words. The results
show that LDA provides relatively consistent co-
herence across collections, though with generally
more variance than the communities of specialist
terms. The term clusters are more coherent for the
enTenTen collection than the others, which may

2Coherence was computed for the published results with
CUMass using TASA as the reference corpus.

1430



be due to its larger size. This up-tick on the largest
corpus may have to do with the proportional size
of the monolithic community for the less struc-
tured documents in enTenTen. Figure 5 depicts
how the proportional size of the core would effect
the number and size of satellite clusters. It was
found that the largest community (the core SCC)
comprised 95% of TASA, 90% of NIPS and 97%
of enTenTen. It may be that specialized language
will have a proportionally smaller core and more
satellite communities, whereas more general lan-
guage will have a larger core and fewer satellites.

A critical question remains as to whether the
method is actually observing the core-periphery
structure of the lexicon or if it is an artifact. To
test this, the frequencies of words in satellite com-
munities were compared to those in the monolithic
cases. If the monolithic community does indeed
correspond to the core proposed in Figure 1, words
in the satellites should have significantly lower fre-
quencies. Indeed, the monolithic community in
every corpus contained words that were signifi-
cantly more frequent than those in the communi-
ties (Wilcoxon rank-sum test; Table 3). Taken with

Figure 4: Mean coherence (CUMass) for satellite
clusters and topics from LDA on the TASA, NIPS
and enTenTen collections (top). Also shown are
the mean coherence of topics found in published
models (LDA, a dynamic topic model, DTM and a
correlated topic model, CTM; bottom). Error-bars
are ±2 SE of the mean.

the coherence scores, these results show that there
is coherent structure in the periphery of the lexi-
con, that can be extracted from unstructured text.

Figure 5: A proportionally larger core SCC (right)
would force satellite communities to be smaller,
less numerous and more isolated. Alternatively,
with a small core (left), satellite communities
would be more numerous and prominent.

Corpus mean fc mean fs W df
TASA 112.3 7.3 39985454 40895
NIPS 211.5 10.7 28342663 25077
enTenTen 365.1 15.9 246095083 72695

Table 3: Comparison of frequency for core words,
fc, found in the monolithic community and spe-
cialist terms, fs, found in the satellite communities
(Wilcoxon rank-sum test). All differences were
significant at p < 0.001.

4 Discussion

The results of our method show that outlying
structure in the lexicon can be extracted directly
from large collections of unstructured text. The
lexicon’s topography, previously explored in dic-
tionary studies, contains modular groups of satel-
lite terms that are observable without appeal to ex-
ternal resources or document structure and with
minimal normalization. The contribution of this
method is two-fold: it confirms the structure of the
observed lexicon is similar to that apparent in the
organization of dictionaries (Picard et al., 2013).
Second, it offers a tractable, reliable means of ex-
tracting and summarizing structure in the fringes
of the lexicon.

The output of the model developed here is sim-
ilar to topic models, but with some important
differences. Topic models produce a probability
distribution over words to define a topic, which
can be summarized by the top 10 to 20 most
likely words. Instead of probabilities, the within-

1431



community hub-scores were used to rank words in
each cluster. This means that the actual structure
of the community (to which topics have no ana-
logue) is responsible for producing the scores that
rate words’ internal relevance. Another crucial
difference is that topic size from a single sampling
iteration tends to correlate with coherence (Mimno
et al., 2011), but in the current method, there is
no correlation between cluster size and coherence
(p = 0.98). The other important difference is that
whereas topic models produce a topic-document
mixture that can be used for posterior inference, to
perform such inference with our method, the out-
put would have to be used indirectly.

One understated strength of the community
detection method is the minimal required pre-
processing. Whereas many solutions in NLP
(including topic models) require document seg-
mentation, lexical normalization and statistical
normalizations on the co-occurrence matrix it-
self, the only variable in our method is the co-
occurrence window size. However, lemmatiza-
tion (or stemming) could help collapse morpho-
syntactic variation among terms in the results,
but stop-word removal, sentence segmentation and
TF-IDF weighting appear unnecessary. What
might be most surprising given the examples in Ta-
ble 2 is that word-document occurrence informa-
tion is not used at all. This makes the the method
particularly useful for large collections with little
to no structure.

One question overlooked in our analysis con-
cerns the effect the core has on the satellites. It
could be that the proportional size of a collection’s
core is indicative of the degree of specialist ter-
minology contained in the collection. Also, the
raw number of satellite communities might indi-
cate the level of diversity in a corpus. Addressing
these questions could yield measures of previously
vague and latent variables like specialty or topi-
cal diversity, without employing a direct semantic
analysis. By measuring a collection’s core size,
relative to its satellites, one could also use mea-
sure changes in specialization. The Infomap algo-
rithm could accommodate such an experiment: by
varying the threshold of density that constitutes a
community, the core could be made smaller, yield-
ing more satellites, the coherence of which could
be compared to those reported here. One could ex-
amine the position of individual words in the satel-
lite(s) to explore what features signal important,

emerging and dying terms or to track diachronic
movement of terms like computer or gene from the
specialized periphery to core of the lexicon.

At the level of inter-related term clusters, there
are likely important or central groups that influ-
ence other satellites. There is no agreed upon mea-
sure of “community centrality” in a network sense
(Eaton and Mansbach, 2012). One way to measure
the importance of a community would be to use
significance testing on the internal link mass com-
pared to the external (Csardi and Nepusz, 2006).
However, this approach discards some factors for
which one might want to account, such as cen-
trality in the network of communities and their
composition. Future work could seek to com-
bine graph-theoretic notions of centrality and in-
tuitions about the defining features of term clus-
ters. Another avenue for future research would
be to use mixed membership community detection
(Gopalan and Blei, 2013). Allowing terms to be
represented in more than one community would
accommodate words like nuclear, that might be
found relating to weaponry, energy production and
physics research at the same time. Using co-
occurrence networks to extract clusters of special-
ist terms, though an important task, is perhaps only
a starting point for exploring the observed lexicon.
Network-based analysis of language offers a gen-
eral and powerful potential to address a range of
questions about the lexicon, other NLP tasks and
language more generally.

Acknowledgments

Thanks to E. Duede and three reviewers for com-
ments on earlier versions of this manuscript. This
work was supported by a grant from the Templeton
Foundation to the Metaknowledge Research Net-
work and grant #1158803 from the National Sci-
ence Foundation.

References
Andrea Baronchelli, Ramon Ferrer i Cancho, Ro-

mualdo Pastor-Satorras, Nick Chater, and Morten H.
Christiansen. 2013. Networks in cognitive science.
Trends in cognitive sciences, 17(7):348–360.

David M. Blei. 2012. Probabilistic topic models.
Communications of the ACM, 55(4):77–84.

Gerlof Bouma. 2009. Normalized (pointwise) mutual
information in collocation extraction. Proceedings
of the German Society for Computational Linguis-
tics & Language Technology, pages 31–40.

1432



Hiram Calvo, Alexander Gelbukh, and Adam Kilgar-
riff. 2005. Distributional thesaurus versus word-
net: A comparison of backoff techniques for unsu-
pervised pp attachment. In Computational Linguis-
tics and Intelligent Text Processing, pages 177–188.
Springer.

Jonathan Chang, Jordan Boyd-Graber, Sean Gerrish,
Chong Wang, and David M. Blei. 2009. Reading
tea leaves: How humans interpret topic models. In
Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 22,
pages 288–296.

Kenneth Ward Church and Patrick Hanks. 1990. Word
association norms, mutual information, and lexicog-
raphy. Computational linguistics, 16(1):22–29.

Gabor Csardi and Tamas Nepusz. 2006. The igraph
software package for complex network research. In-
terJournal, Complex Systems:1695.

Ido Dagan, Lillian Lee, and Fernando C.N. Pereira.
1999. Similarity-based models of word cooccur-
rence probabilities. Machine Learning, 34(1-3):43–
69.

Eric Eaton and Rachael Mansbach. 2012. A spin-glass
model for semi-supervised community detection. In
Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intel-
ligence.

Ramon Ferror i Cancho and Richard V. Solé. 2001.
The small world of human language. Proceedings
of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological
Sciences, 268(1482):2261–2265.

Dipl-Math Bettina Friedl, Julia Heidemann, et al.
2010. A critical review of centrality measures in
social networks. Business & Information Systems
Engineering, 2(6):371–385.

Prem K. Gopalan and David M. Blei. 2013. Efficient
discovery of overlapping communities in massive
networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 110(36):14534–14539.

Donald Hindle. 1990. Noun classification from
predicate-argument structures. In Proceedings of the
28th annual meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 268–275.

Yuening Hu, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Brianna Sati-
noff. 2011. Interactive topic modeling. In Pro-
ceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies-Volume 1, pages 248–257.

Junko Itô and Armin Mester. 1995. The core-periphery
structure of the lexicon and constraints on rerank-
ing. University of Massachusetts occasional papers
in linguistics, 18:181–209.

Thomas K. Landauer and Susan T. Dumais. 1997.
A solution to plato’s problem: The latent semantic
analysis theory of acquisition, induction, and rep-
resentation of knowledge. Psychological review,
104(2):211.

A. Blondin Massé, Guillaume Chicoisne, Yassine Gar-
gouri, Stevan Harnad, Olivier Picard, and Odile
Marcotte. 2008. How is meaning grounded in
dictionary definitions? In Proceedings of the 3rd
Textgraphs Workshop on Graph-Based Algorithms
for Natural Language Processing, pages 17–24.

Rada Mihalcea and Dragomir Radev. 2011. Graph-
based natural language processing and information
retrieval. Cambridge University Press.

George A. Miller. 1995. Wordnet: a lexical
database for english. Communications of the ACM,
38(11):39–41.

David Mimno, Hanna M. Wallach, Edmund Talley,
Miriam Leenders, and Andrew McCallum. 2011.
Optimizing semantic coherence in topic models. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 262–
272.

David Newman, Jey Han Lau, Karl Grieser, and Tim-
othy Baldwin. 2010. Automatic evaluation of
topic coherence. In Human Language Technologies:
The 2010 Annual Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 100–108.

Ted Pedersen, Siddharth Patwardhan, and Jason Miche-
lizzi. 2004. Wordnet::similarity: measuring the re-
latedness of concepts. In Demonstration Papers at
HLT-NAACL 2004, pages 38–41.

Olivier Picard, Mélanie Lord, Alexandre Blondin-
Massé, Odile Marcotte, Marcos Lopes, and Stevan
Harnad. 2013. Hidden structure and function in the
lexicon. NLPCS 2013: 10th International Workshop
on Natural Language Processing and Cognitive Sci-
ence, Marseille, France.

Philip Resnik. 1997. Selectional preference and sense
disambiguation. In Proceedings of the ACL SIGLEX
Workshop on Tagging Text with Lexical Semantics:
Why, What, and How, pages 52–57.

Martin Rosvall and Carl T. Bergstrom. 2008. Maps of
random walks on complex networks reveal commu-
nity structure. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 105(4):1118–1123.

Martin Rosvall and Carl T. Bergstrom. 2011. Mul-
tilevel compression of random walks on networks
reveals hierarchical organization in large integrated
systems. PloS one, 6(4):e18209.

Ekaterina Shutova, Simone Teufel, and Anna Korho-
nen. 2013. Statistical metaphor processing. Com-
putational Linguistics, 39(2):301–353.

John Sinclair. 1996. The empty lexicon. International
Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 1(1):99–119.

Mark Steyvers and Tom Griffiths. 2007. Probabilistic
topic models. Handbook of latent semantic analysis,
427(7):424–440.

1433



Lin Sun and Anna Korhonen. 2009. Improving verb
clustering with automatically acquired selectional
preferences. In Proceedings of the 2009 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing: Volume 2-Volume 2, pages 638–647.

Peter D. Turney and Patrick Pantel. 2010. From
frequency to meaning: Vector space models of se-
mantics. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
37(1):141–188.

Xing Wei and Bruce Croft. 2006. Lda-based docu-
ment models for ad-hoc retrieval. In Proceedings
of the 29th annual international ACM SIGIR confer-
ence on Research and development in information
retrieval, pages 178–185.

Yorick Wilks. 1975. A preferential, pattern-seeking,
semantics for natural language inference. Artificial
Intelligence, 6(1):53–74.

1434


