



















































Abstractive Summarization of Product Reviews Using Discourse Structure


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1602–1613,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Abstractive Summarization of Product Reviews Using Discourse Structure

Shima Gerani‡† ∗ Yashar Mehdad‡ ∗ Giuseppe Carenini‡ Raymond T. Ng‡ Bita Nejat‡
†University of Lugano ‡University of British Columbia

Switzerland Vancouver, BC, Canada
{gerani,mehdad,carenini,rng,nejatb}@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract

We propose a novel abstractive summa-
rization system for product reviews by tak-
ing advantage of their discourse structure.
First, we apply a discourse parser to each
review and obtain a discourse tree repre-
sentation for every review. We then mod-
ify the discourse trees such that every leaf
node only contains the aspect words. Sec-
ond, we aggregate the aspect discourse
trees and generate a graph. We then select
a subgraph representing the most impor-
tant aspects and the rhetorical relations be-
tween them using a PageRank algorithm,
and transform the selected subgraph into
an aspect tree. Finally, we generate a
natural language summary by applying a
template-based NLG framework. Quan-
titative and qualitative analysis of the re-
sults, based on two user studies, show that
our approach significantly outperforms ex-
tractive and abstractive baselines.

1 Introduction

Most existing works on sentiment summarization
focus on predicting the overall rating on an en-
tity (Pang et al., 2002; Pang and Lee, 2004) or
estimating ratings for product features (Lu et al.,
2009; Lerman et al., 2009; Snyder and Barzilay,
2007; Titov and McDonald, 2008)). However, the
opinion summaries in such systems are extractive,
meaning that they generate a summary by concate-
nating extracts that are representative of opinion
on the entity or its aspects.

Comparing extractive and abstractive sum-
maries for evaluative texts has shown that an ab-
stractive approach is more appropriate for sum-
marizing evaluative text (Carenini et al., 2013;

∗The contribution of the first two authors to this paper

was equal.

Di Fabbrizio et al., 2014). This finding is also
supported by a previous study in the context of
summarizing news articles (Barzilay et al., 1999).
To the best of our knowledge, there are only three
previous works on abstractive opinion summariza-
tion (Ganesan et al., 2010; Carenini et al., 2013;
Di Fabbrizio et al., 2014). The first work (Gane-
san et al., 2010) proposes a graph-based method
for generating ultra concise opinion summaries
that are more suitable for viewing on devices with
small screens. This method does not provide a
well-formed grammatical abstract and the gener-
ated summary only contains words that occur in
the original texts. Therefore, this approach is more
extractive than abstractive. Another limitation is
that the generated summaries do not contain any
information about the distribution of opinions.

In the second work, (Carenini et al., 2013) ad-
dresses some of the aforementioned problems and
generates well-formed grammatical abstracts that
describe the distribution of opinion over the en-
tity and its features. However, for each product,
this approach requires a feature taxonomy hand-
crafted by humans as an input, which is not scal-
able. To partially address this problem (Mukherjee
and Joshi, 2013) has proposed a method for the au-
tomatic generation of a product attribute hierarchy
that leverages ConceptNet (Liu and Singh, 2004).
However, the resulting ontology tree has been used
only for sentiment classification and not for clas-
sification.

In the third and most recent study, (Di Fabbrizio
et al., 2014) proposed Starlet-H as a hybrid ab-
stractive/extractive sentiment summarizer. Starlet-
H uses extractive summarization techniques to se-
lect salient quotes from the input reviews and em-
beds them into the abstractive summary to exem-
plify, justify or provide evidence for the aggregate
positive or negative opinions. However, Starlet-H
assumes a limited number of aspects as input and
needs a large amount of training data to learn the

1602



ordering of aspects for summary generation.

Highlighting the reasons behind opinions in re-
views was also previously proposed in (Kim et al.,
2013). However, their approach is extractive and
similar to (Ganesan et al., 2010) does not cover the
distribution of opinions. Furthermore, it aims to
explain the opinion on only one aspect, rather than
explaining the overall opinion on the product, its
aspects and how they affect each other.

To address some of the above mentioned limita-
tions , in this paper we propose a novel abstrac-
tive summarization framework that generates an
aspect-based abstract from multiple reviews of a
product. In our framework, anything that is eval-
uated in the review is considered an aspect, in-
cluding the product itself. We propose a natural
language generation (NLG) framework that takes
aspects and their structured relation as input and
generates an abstractive summary. However, un-
like (Carenini et al., 2013), our method assumes no
domain knowledge about the entity in terms of a
user-defined feature taxonomy. On the other hand,
in contrast with Starlet-H, we do not limit the in-
put reviews to a small number of aspects and our
aspect ordering method takes advantage of rhetor-
ical information and does not require any training
data. Our method relies on the discourse struc-
ture and discourse relations of reviews to infer the
importance of aspects as well as the association
between them (e.g., which aspects relate to each
other).

Researchers have recently started using the dis-
course structure of text in sentiment analysis and
have shown its advantage in improving sentiment
classification accuracy (e.g., (Lazaridou et al.,
2013; Trivedi and Eisenstein, 2013; Somasun-
daran et al., 2009; Asher et al., 2008)). However,
to the best of our knowledge, none of the existing
works have looked into exploiting discourse struc-
ture in abstractive review summarization.

In our work, importance of aspects, derived
from the reviews’ discourse structure and rela-
tions, is used to rank and select aspects to be in-
cluded in the summary. More specifically, we start
with the most important (highest ranked) aspects
to generate a summary and add more aspects to
the system until a summary of desired length is
obtained. Aspect association is considered to bet-
ter explain how the opinions on aspects affect each
other (e.g., opinion over specific aspects affect the
opinion over the more general ones). Consider

the following sentence as an example summary
generated by our system for the entity Camera
Canon G3: “All reviewers who commented on the
camera, thought that it was really good mainly be-
cause of the photo quality.” This summary encap-
sulates all the following key pieces of information:
1) camera and photo quality are the most impor-
tant aspects, 2) People have positive opinion on
camera in general and on photo quality as one of
its features, and finally 3) photo quality is the main
reason behind users satisfaction on camera. Such
summary helps users understand the reason behind
a rating of a product or its aspects without going
through all reviews or reading scattered opinions
on different aspects in multiple sentences of an ex-
tractive summary.

This paper makes the following contributions:
1. We propose a novel content selection and struc-
turing strategy for review summarization, that as-
sumes no prior domain knowledge, by taking ad-
vantage of the discourse structure of reviews.
2. We propose a novel product-independent
template-based NLG framework to generate an ab-
stract based on the selected content, without re-
lying on deep syntactic knowledge or sophisti-
cated NLG methods. Our framework, similarly to
(Carenini et al., 2013), can effectively convey the
distribution of opinions.
3. We present the first study that investigates the
use of discourse structure information in both con-
tent selection and abstract generation for multi-
document summarization.

Quantitative and qualitative analysis over eval-
uation results of two user studies on a set of user
reviews on twelve different products show that our
system is an effective abstractive system for re-
view summarization.

2 Summarization Framework

At a high-level, our summarization framework in-
volves generating a summary from multiple in-
put reviews based on an Aspect Hierarchy Tree
(AHT) that reflects the importance of aspects as
well as the relationships between them. In our
framework, an AHT is generated automatically
from the set of input reviews, where each sen-
tence of every review is marked by the aspects pre-
sented in that sentence and the polarity of opin-
ions over them. There are various methods for
extracting the aspects and predicting the polar-
ity of opinion (Hu and Liu, 2004b; Hu and Liu,

1603



2006; Kim et al., 2011). In this paper we do not
focus on aspect extraction and sentiment predic-
tion but rather consider the aspect and their po-
larity/strength (P/S) information given as input to
the system. P/S scores are integer values in the
range [-3, +3], where +3 is the most positive and
-3 is the most negative polarity value. We also
do not attempt to automatically resolve corefer-
ences between aspects. For example, the aspect
“g3”, “canon g3” and “canon” were manually
collapsed as into “camera”. This preprocessing
step helps to reduce the noise generated by inac-
curate aspect labeling in our reviews. Figure 1
shows two sample input reviews where the aspects
and their P/S scores are identified. For example, in
R1, aspects camera, photo quality and auto mode
are mentioned. The P/S values for the three as-
pects are [+2], [+3] and [+2] respectively which
indicate positive opinion on all aspects.

The first component of our system applies a dis-
course parser to each review and obtains a dis-
course tree representation for every review (e.g.
Figure 1 (a) and (b)). The discourse trees are then
modified such that every leaf node only contains
the aspect words. The output of the first compo-
nent is an aspect-based discourse tree (ADT) for
every review (e.g. Figure 1 (c) and (d)). In the
second component, we aggregate the ADTs and
generate a graph called Aggregated Rhetorical Re-
lation Graph (ARRG) (e.g. Figure 1 (f)). The
third component of our framework, is responsi-
ble for content selection and structuring. It takes
ARRG as input, runs Weighted PageRank, and se-
lects a subgraph (e.g. Figure 1 (g)) representing
the most important aspects. Finally it transforms
the selected subgraph into a tree and provides an
AHT as output (e.g. Figure 1 (h)). The gener-
ated AHT is the input of the last component which
generates a natural language summary by apply-
ing micro planning and sentence realization. We
now describe each component of our framework
in more detail.

3 Discourse Parsing

Any coherent text is structured so that we can
derive and interpret the information. This struc-
ture shows how discourse units (text spans such
as sentences or clauses) are connected and relate
to each other. Discourse analysis aims to reveal
this structure. Several theories have been pro-
posed in the past to describe the discourse struc-

ture, among which the Rhetorical Structure The-
ory (RST) (Mann and Thompson, 1988) is one of
the most popular. RST divides a text into min-
imal atomic units, called Elementary Discourse
Units (EDUs). It then forms a tree representa-
tion of a discourse called a Discourse Tree (DT)
using rhetorical relations (e.g., Elaboration, Ex-
planation, etc) as edges, and EDUs as leaves.
EDUs linked by a rhetorical relation are also dis-
tinguished based on their relative importance in
conveying the author’s message: nucleus is the
central part, whereas satellite is the peripheral
part.

We use a publicly available state-of-the-art dis-
course parser (Joty et al., 2013)1 to generate a
DT for each product review. Figure 1 (a) and (b)
show DTs for two sample reviews where dotted
edges identify the satellite spans. DT1 in Figure 1
(a) shows that review R1 consists of three EDUs
with two relations Elaboration and Background
between them. It also shows that the first EDU
(i.e. I love camera) is the nucleus (shown by solid
line) of the relation Elaboration and so the rest of
the document (EDUs 2 and 3) is less important and
aims at elaborating on what the author meant in
the first EDU. Similarly, the structure shows that
the third EDU is mentioned as background infor-
mation for EDU2 and so is less important for real-
izing the core meaning of the document.

After obtaining the DTs, we remove all words
from the text spans of each EDU, except the aspect
words. Thus, for each review, we have a DT where
a leaf node represents the aspects occurring in the
corresponding EDU. Note that there may be EDUs
containing no aspects in a review. In such cases,
we keep the corresponding node and mark it with
no aspect. We call the resulting tree an Aspect-
based Discourse Tree (ADT) which will be used
in the next components. Figure 1 (c) and (d) show
ADTs generated from DTs.

4 Aspect Rhetorical Relation Graph
(ARRG)

In the second component, we aim at generat-
ing an ARRG for a product, based on the ADTs
which are the output from the previous compo-
nent. There are two motivations behind aggregat-
ing the ADTs and building the ARRG: i) while
each ADT can be rather noisy because of the infor-
mal language of the reviews and inaccuracies from

1http://alt.qcri.org/discourse/Discourse Parser Dist.tar.gz

1604



Background

Elaboration

I love this 
camera

I  am amazed at 
the quality of 

photos

that I have took 
simply by using the 

auto mode

great camera !

It gives tons of 
control for 
photo buffs

but still has an 
auto mode

for the novice 
to use

INPUT:
R1: camera[+2], photo quality[+3], auto mode[+2]##I love this camera, I am amazed at the quality of photos that I have took simply using the auto mode
R2: camera[+2], control[+2], auto mode [+1]#great camera! It gives tons of control for photo buffs but still has an auto mode for the novice to use

camera

 photo 
quality

auto mode

Background

Elaboration

camera

control

auto mode

camera

-

(camera, Elaboration, photo quality, 0.5)
(camera, Elaboration, auto mode, 0.33)

(photo quality, Background, auto mode, 0.75)

(camera, Elaboration, auto mode, 0.375)
(camera, Elaboration, control, 0.5)
(control, Contrast, auto mode, 0.66)

Elaboration

Contrast

Elaboration

Elaboration

Contrast

Elaboration

camera

 photo quality auto mode

control

El
ab
or
at
io
n,
0.
5

Background,0.75

Elaboration,0.705

Elaboration,0.5

C
on
tr
as
t,0
.6
6

8 4

9 5

camera

 photo quality

control

El
ab
or
at
io
n,
0.
5

Elaboration,0.5

camera

 photo quality control

El
ab
or
at
io
n Elaboration

(d) ADT2

(c) ADT1(a) DT1

(b) DT2 (f) ARRG (h) AHT

(g) ARRG-subgraph(e) aspect relation tuples extracted from ADTs

OUTPUT:
All reviewers who commented on the camera, thought that it was really good mainly because of the photo quality. Accordingly, about half of the reviewers commented 
about the control and they thought it was fine.

(i)
 M

ic
ro

pl
an

ni
ng

Se
nt

en
ce

 re
al

iz
at

io
n

Wednesday, May 28, 14

Figure 1: A simple example illustrating different components of our summarization framework.

automatic discourse parsing, aggregating all the
ADTs can reveal more reliable information; and
ii) the aggregated information highlights the most
important aspects overall as well as the strongest
connection between the aspects. This information
can effectively drive the content selection and ab-
stract generation phases.
ARRG is a directed graph in which we allow

multiple edges between two vertices. In ARRG,
vertices represent aspects. We associate to each
aspect/node an importance measure that aggre-
gates all the P/S values that the aspect receives
in all the reviews. By following (Carenini et al.,
2013), let PS(a) be the set of P/S values that an
aspect a receives. The direct measure of impor-
tance of the aspect is defined as:

dir-moi(a) =
∑

ps∈PS(a)
ps2 (1)

In ARRG, edges indicate existence of a
rhetorical relation between text spans of a re-
view in which the aspects occurred. Edges are
labeled with the type of the relation as well
as a weight indicating our confidence in the
presence of the relation between the two aspects.
In ARRG, an edge with label r, w from node
u to node v, u

r, w−−−→ v, indicates the existance
of a relation r with confidence w between two
aspects u and v. Also, the direction of the arrow
indicates that u and v occurred in the satellite

and nucleus spans respectively. For example,

photo quality
elaboration, 0.8−−−−−−−−−−−→ camera indicates

that there is a high confidence (0.8) that aspect
photo quality was used in a text span to elaborate
aspect camera. Moreover, camera is a more
important aspect compared to photo quality.

To build ARRG, we use all the ADTs that are
output of the previous component (one for each
review). From each ADTj , we extract all tuples
of the form (u, r, v, w) in which u is an aspect oc-
curring in a satellite span, v is an aspect occurring
in a nucleus span, r is a relation type and w is the
weight of the tuple computed as follows:

w = 1−0.5 |EDUs between u and v||total EDUs in ADTj | −0.5
dr
d

(2)

where, |.| indicates cardinality of a set. d indi-
cates the depth of the ADTj and dr indicates the
depth of the sub-tree of ADTj rooted at relation
r. Equation 2 weighs a tuple based on two factors:
(i) the relative distance of the EDUs in which the
two aspects u and v participating in relation r oc-
cur. The intuition is that aspects occurring in close
proximity to each other are more related; and (ii)
the depth of the sub-tree at the point of the rela-
tion relative to the depth of the whole ADTj . This
is because as we move from leaves to the root of
a DT, the accuracy of the rhetorical structure has
been shown to decrease. Also, at higher levels
of an ADT (intra-sentential relations), it is more

1605



likely that aspects are related through non adjacent
EDUs and so are less strongly related. Figure 1 (e)
shows tuples extracted from sample ADTs.

Notice that every two aspects u and v may be
related by the same relation more than once in an
ADT for a review. Thus, we might have i tuples
with the same u,r, and v but confidence weights
which are not necessarily the same. From every
ADTj , we extract all (u, r, v, wij) and select the
one with maximum confidence. We then aggre-
gate the selected tuples extracted from different
reviews. Putting these two steps together, for ev-
ery two aspects u and v related by relation r, we
obtain a single tuple (u, r, v, ŵ) where

ŵ =
∑

j

max
i
wij (3)

Figure 1 (f) shows an example ARRG built for the
sample reviews.

5 Content Selection and Structuring

The content of the summary is selected by extract-
ing from ARRG a subgraph containing the most
important aspects. Such content is then structured
by transforming the subgraph into an aspect hier-
archy.

5.1 Subgraph Extraction
In ARRG aspects/nodes are weighted by how fre-
quently and strongly they are evaluated in the re-
views (i.e, dir-moi) and edges are weighted by
how frequently and strongly the corresponding as-
pects are rhetorically related in the discourse trees
(Equation 3). In content selection, we want to
extract aspects that not only have high weight,
but that are also linked with heavy edges to other
heavy aspects. This problem can be effectively
addressed by Weighted Page Rank (WPR) (Xing
and Ghorbani, 2004). WPR takes the importance
of both the in-links and out-links of the aspects
into account and distributes rank scores based on
the weights of relations between aspects. In this
way, the heavier aspect nodes, that are either in
the nuclei of many relations or in the satellites of
relations with other heavy aspects, are promoted.
We then update the weight of nodes (aspects) with
the new score from WPR. Finally, we rank nodes
based on their updated score moi and select the
top N aspects.

moi(a) = αdir-moi(a) + (1−α)WPR(a) (4)

Here α is a coefficient that can be tuned on a de-
velopment set or can be set to 0.5 without tuning.
Figure 1 (g) shows an example subgraph selected
from the sample ARRG.

5.2 Aspects Subgraph to Aspects Hierarchy
Transformation

In this step, we generate a hierarchical tree struc-
ture for aspects. Such a tree structure helps to
navigate over aspects and can be easily traversed
to find certain aspects and their relation to their
parent or children. The hierarchy of aspects also
matches the intuition that the root node is the most
frequent and general aspect (often the product) and
as the depth increases, nodes represent more spe-
cific aspects of the product with less frequency and
weight.

To obtain a hierarchical tree structure from the
extracted subgraph, we first build an undirected
graph as follows: we merge the edges connecting
two nodes and consider the sum of their weights
as the weight of the merged graph. We also ignore
the relation direction for the purpose of generat-
ing the tree. We then find the Maximum Span-
ning Tree of the undirected subgraph and set the
highest weighted aspect as the root of the tree.
This process results in a useful knowledge struc-
ture of aspects with their associated weight and
sentiment polarity connected with the rhetorical
relations called Aspect Hierarchical Tree (AHT).
Figure 1 (h) shows the generated AHT from the
sub-graph.

6 Abstract Generation

The automatic generation of a natural language
summary in our system involves the following
tasks (Reiter and Dale, 2000): (i) microplanning,
which covers lexical selection; and (ii) sentence
realization, which produces english text from the
output of the microplanner.

6.1 Microplanning
Once the content is selected and structured, it is
passed to the microplanning module which per-
forms lexical choice. Lexical choice is an impor-
tant component of microplanning. Lexical choice
is formulated in our system based on a “formal”
style, language “variability” and “fluent” connec-
tivity among other lexical units. Table 1 demon-
strates our lexical choice strategy.

1606



Quantifiers:
if (relative-number == 1) : [“All users (x people) who commented about the aspect”, “All costumers (x people) that reviewed the aspect”, ...]
if (relative-number >= 0.8) : [“Almost all users commented about the aspect and they”, “Almost all costumers mentioned the aspect and they”, ...]
if (relative-number >= 0.6) : [“Most users commented about the aspect and they mainly”, “Most shoppers mentioned aspect and they”, ...]
if (relative-number >= 0.45) : [“Almost half of the users commented about the aspect and they”, ’Almost 50% of the shoppers mentioned the aspect and they”, ...]
if (relative-number >= 0.2) : [“About y% of the reviewers commented about the aspect and they”, “Around y% of the shoppers mentioned the aspect and they”, ...]
if (relative-number >= 0.0) : [“z reviewers commented about the aspect and in overall they”, “z shoppers mentioned about the aspect and they”, ...]

Polarity verbs:
if (controversial(aspect)) : [“had controversial opinions about it”, “expressed controversial opinions about this feature”, ...]
else: if (average <= −2) : [“hated it”, “felt that it was very poor’, ’thought that it was very poor”, ...]

if (average <= −1) : [“disliked it”, “felt that it was poor”, “thought that it was poor”, ...]
if (average < 0) : [“did not like it”, “felt that it was weak”, “thought that it was weak”, ...]
if (average == 0) : [“did not express any strong positive or negative opinion about it”, ...]
if (average <= +1) : [“liked it”, “felt that it was fine”, “thought that it was satisfactory”, ...]
if (average <= +2) : [“absolutely liked it”, “really liked this feature”, “felt that it was a really good feature”, “thought that it was really good”, ...]
if (average <= +3) : [“loved it”, “felt that it was great”, “thought that it was great”, ...]

Connectives
[“Also, related to the aspect”, “Accordingly, ”, “Moreover, regarding the aspect, ” ,“In relation to the aspect, ”, “Talking about the aspect, ”, ...]

Table 1: Microplanning strategy for lexical choice. The selected lexical items will fill the template in the
realization step.

Sentence realization templates:
First sentence templates:
if (polarity-agreement(root,highest-weighted-child) & connecting-relation == [elaboration, explain, cause, summary, same-unit, background, evidence, justify]):
“quantifier + polarity-verb + ‘mainly because of the’ + highest-weighted-child”
else: “quantifier + polarity-verb”
First level children (aspects) sentences templates:
“connective + ‘, ’ + quantifier + ’ ’ + polarity-verb”
Supporting sentences templates:
if (#children(aspect)==1): “connective + quantifier + verb ”
elseif (#children(aspect)>1 & polarity-agreement(children)): “connective + quantifier + verb + [and, similarly, while, ...] + quantifier + verb”
elseif (#children(aspect)>1 & !polarity-agreement(children)): “connective + quantifier + verb + [but, in contrast, on contrary, ...] + quantifier + verb”

Table 2: Sentence realization templates.

Quantifiers: for each aspect, a quantifier is se-
lected based on both the absolute and relative
number of users whose opinions contributed to the
evaluation of the aspect.

Polarity verbs: for each aspect, a polarity verb is
selected based on the average sentiment polarity
strength for that aspect. Although the average, in
most cases, can be a good metric to evaluate the
polarity of an aspect, it fails when the distribution
of evaluations is centered on zero, for instance, if
there are equal numbers of positive and negative
evaluations (i.e., controversial). To partially solve
this problem, we first check whether the aspect
evaluation is controversial by applying the formula
proposed by (Carenini and Cheung, 2008). In the
case of controversiality, our microplanner selects
a lexical item to express the controversiality of the
aspect. In other cases, we use the average and se-
lect the polarity verb based on that.

Connectives: in order to form more fluent and
readable sentences and to increase the language
variability, we randomly select our connectives
from the list shown in Table 1. Moreover, when
a parent aspect (excluding the root in AHT) has
two children, they are connected by one of the co-
ordinating conjunction “[and, similarly]” if they

agree on polarity, and they will be connected by
a choice of “[on the contrary, in contrast]” other-
wise (see Supporting sentences templates in Table
2). As an alternative we could have selected con-
nectives based on the discourse relations specified
in the aspects tree. However, this is left as future
work.

6.2 Sentence Realization
The realization of our abstract generation is per-
formed by applying a rather simple and compre-
hensive template-based strategy. Depending on
the specific lexical choice in microplanning step,
an appropriate template and corresponding fillers
are selected as shown in Table 2. We develop three
different templates: i) generates the first abstract
sentence; ii) generates the abstract sentence for the
aspects with no children; and iii) generates sup-
porting sentences for aspects with children.

For illustration, assuming that we apply this
strategy to a 5-node variation of the AHT in Figure
1 (h), where the aspect “control” has two children
“auto mode” and “setting”, we obtain “All review-
ers (45 people) who commented on the camera,
thought that it was really good mainly because of
the photo quality. Accordingly, about 24% of the
reviewers commented about the control and they

1607



thought it was fine. Also, related to the control, 7
users expressed their opinion about the auto mode
and they liked it, similarly, 6 shoppers commented
about the setting and they thought that it was sat-
isfactory.”

7 Experimental Setup

7.1 Dataset and Baselines

We conduct our experiments using the customer
reviews of twelve products obtained from (Hu and
Liu, 2004a): 4 digital cameras, 1 DVD player, 1
MP3 player, 2 routers, 2 phones, 1 diaper and 1
antivirus. The reviews were collected from Ama-
zon.com and Cnet.com. We use manually anno-
tated aspects and their associated sentiment from
the same dataset.

We compare the summaries generated by our
system with two state-of-the-art extractive base-
lines and a simpler version of our abstractive sys-
tem, as follows:

1) MEAD-LexRank (LR): we use the LexRank
(Erkan and Radev, 2004) implementation inside
the MEAD summarization framework (Radev et
al., 2004), which outperforms other algorithms
implemented in the MEAD framework.

2) MEADStar (MEAD*): a state-of-the-art ex-
tractive opinion summarization system (Carenini
et al., 2013), which is adapted from the
open source summarization framework MEAD.
MEAD* orders aspects by the number of sen-
tences evaluating that aspect, and selects a sen-
tence from each aspect until it reaches the word
limit. The sentence that is selected for each aspect
is the one with the highest sum of polarity/strength
evaluations for any aspect.

3) Simple Abstractive (SA): we sort the aspects
of each product based on dir-moi (Equation 1).
Then, for each aspect, we generate a sentence
based on a simple template “quantifier + polarity-
verb” until the summary reaches the word limit.

We limit the length of our summaries to 150
words. In our experiment we use the default pa-
rameter in Equation 4 without tuning (i.e. α =
0.5). Our system starts the content selection pro-
cess with 10 aspects and generates a summary
based on a AHT with 10 aspects. We add one as-
pect, reproduce the AHT and regenerate the sum-
mary. We repeat this process until the word limit
is reached.

7.2 Evaluation Framework

On one hand, the lack of product reviews datasets
with human written summaries, and on the other
hand, the difficulty of generating human-written
summaries for reviews, makes review summary
evaluation a very challenging task.

We evaluate the summaries generated by our
system by performing two user studies based on
pairwise preferences using a popular crowdsourc-
ing service.2 The user preference evaluation is an
effective method for opinion summarization (e.g.,
(Lerman et al., 2009)). The main motivations be-
hind pairwise preferences evaluation is two-fold:
i) raters can make a preference decision more ef-
ficiently than a scoring judgment; and ii) rater
agreement is higher in preference decisions than
in scoring judgments (Ariely et al., 2003).

In both user studies, for each product, we run
six pairwise comparisons for four summaries. In
each rating assignment, two summaries of the
same product were placed in random order. Raters
were shown the name of each product along with
the relevant summaries and were asked to express
their preference for one summary over the other
using a simple set of criteria. For two summaries
S1 and S2 raters should choose one of the follow-
ing three options: 1) Prefer S1, 2) Prefer S2, 3) No
preference.

Raters were specifically instructed that their rat-
ing should express “overall satisfaction with the
information provided by the summary”. Raters
were also asked to provide a brief comment jus-
tifying their choice. Over 48 raters participated in
each study, and each comparison was evaluated by
at least five raters generating more than 360 judg-
ments for each user study. We pre-select the high
skilled raters to ensure a higher quality results.

The main difference between the two user stud-
ies is that in “user study 1”, we show two sum-
maries to the raters and ask them to choose the one
they prefer without showing them the original re-
views. In contrast, in “user study 2”, we show two
summaries with links to the full text of the reviews
for the raters to explore. In order to make sure that
the raters read the reviews, we ask them to write
a short summary of the reviews before rating the
automatic summaries. We ran two different user
studies because: i) for each product there might be
many reviews to be included; ii) there is no guar-
anty that raters, in various evaluation settings, read

2www.crowdflower.com

1608



System I vs System II Agreement No preference Preferred Sys I Preferred Sys II
User Studies 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2
LR vs MEAD* 0.33 0.75 7% 6% 35% 20% 58% 74%
LR vs SA 0.42 0.83 0% 0% 38% 21% 62% 79%
LR vs Our System 0.50 1.00 0% 3% 26% 13% 74% 84%
MEAD* vs SA 0.58 0.83 0% 0% 38% 20% 62% 80%
MEAD* vs Our System 0.67 0.50 0% 3% 25% 30% 75% 67%
SA vs Our System 0.42 0.50 12% 11% 23% 32% 65% 57%

Table 3: Results of pairwise preference user studies. Statistically significant improvements (p < 0.01)
over the baselines are demonstrated by bold fonts. Italic fonts indicate statistical significance (p < 0.01)
of abstractive methods (SA and Our System) over extractive approaches (LR and MEAD*).

Systems LR MEAD* SA Our System
User Studies 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2
Preference 33% 18% 41% 41% 49% 63% 71% 69%

Table 4: System preference results. Statistically significant improvements (p < 0.01) over the baselines
are demonstrated by bold fonts.

the reviews (partially or completely); and iii) there
is no evidence regarding the depth that each rater
would look into the reviews. Therefore, choosing
between user study 1 and 2 is not a straightforward
decision. In other words, designing the two user
studies in this way helps us to answer the ques-
tion: “Does the fact that raters can read all the
reviews affect their ratings?”.

8 Results

This section provides a quantitative and qualitative
analysis of the evaluation results3.

8.1 Quantitative Analysis
Quantitative results for both user studies are
shown in Table 3. The second column indicates
the percentage of judgments for which the raters
were in agreement. Agreement here is a weak
agreement, where four (out of five) raters are de-
fined to be in agreement if they all gave the same
rating. The next three columns indicate the per-
centage of judgments for each preference cate-
gory, grouped into two user studies. In addi-
tion, we measure the preference for each system
in both user studies (Table 4). For each system,
the preference is the number of times raters prefer
the system, divided by the total number of judg-
ments for that system (e.g., if A is preferred over

3The evaluation results and summaries obtained
from CrowdFlower are publicly available and can
be downloaded from: https://www.cs.ubc.
ca/cs-research/lci/research-groups/
natural-language-processing/reviews/
user_study_results.zip

B 10 out of 30 times, and A is preferred over C
15 out of 20 times, the overall preference of A is
(10+15)/(30+20)=50%)
Abstractive vs. Extractive: the results of our sys-
tem and SA in Table 3 show statistically signifi-
cant improvements in pairwise preference over ex-
tractive baselines (LR and MEAD*) in both user
studies.4 Moreover, the results of overall prefer-
ence in Table 4 demonstrates that two abstractive
systems are preferred over the extractive ones in
both studies. This further supports the findings in
the previous studies (e.g., (Carenini et al., 2013))
that users prefer abstractive summarization. We
can observe that, in both user studies, raters prefer
our system over other abstractive and extractive
baselines. Also, the highest pairwise preference
percentages occur comparing an extractive and an
abstractive system (e.g., LR vs Our System).
Abstractive Systems: the raters prefer our system
over SA in both user studies (65% and 57%), and
our system ranks first in our pairwise preference
user studies. Knowing that both systems are ab-
stractive and the differences between them comes
from using the rhetorical structure in the content
selection and abstract generation phases, proves
the effectiveness of using rhetorical structure and
relations in abstractive summarization of reviews.
Extractive Systems: the result in Table 3 and 4
demonstrate that raters prefer MEAD* over LR.
Although both systems are extractive, the MEAD*
system has been proposed for extractive opinion

4The statistical significance tests was calculated by ap-
proximate randomization, as described in (Yeh, 2000).

1609



Preference Sys 1 to Sys 2 Reasons Examples of preference justification taken from the raters comments
Our System to LR and MEAD* Readability, coverage of aspects,

aggregation of opinions
better wording, more objective, more depth, I like the stats, more detail about
people opinion, less personal experience, detail comparison from different
reviews, a summary in a summary, mentions more features, ...

LR and MEAD* to Our System Descriptiveness, personal point of
views, product capabilities

explain how the product is positive, good characteristics about the product,
has lot more to tell, more descriptive about features, personal perspective,
not only characteristics but also ability, more true to the product itself, ...

Our System to SA The relations between the aspects,
more language variability

provides a bit more information, is very complete, not repetitive, more ele-
gant, coherent, .....

SA to Our System Simpler structure, more aspects written better, has touched variety of features, ...

Table 5: System preference results. The reasons are classified based on raters justifications preferring
the underlined systems.

summarization. In contrast, LR is a generic ex-
tractive summarization system which is not opti-
mized for opinion summarization. This also fur-
ther demonstrates the need for opinion and reviews
summarization systems.
User Study 1 vs. User Study 2: the first in-
teresting observation is that, although the over-
all ranking of systems in both user studies does
not change, there are some changes in the re-
sults. This indicates that reading the reviews ef-
fects preference decisions. We can observe that
in all cases except one (MEAD* vs Our System)
the agreement between the raters increases sig-
nificantly when they are given the reviews. This
can be interpreted as reading the reviews helps
the rater to choose a better summary easier and
more effectively. Moreover, we calculate the over-
all agreement for both user studies.5 Case study 2
reports a higher overall agreement (70%) in com-
parison with the user study 1 (65%). This further
proves our finding that showing the reviews can
help the raters with their preference judgment.

In Table 3, the preference of sys 2 (last col-
umn) significantly rises for all cases when com-
pared with the LR system. This proves that raters
strongly prefer the summaries that cover opinion-
ated sentences, specifically when they are exposed
to the reviews. The same result is reflected in Ta-
ble 4, where the overall preference of LR drops
when the raters are given the reviews. We also ob-
serve a significant rise in preference of sys 2 when
MEAD* is compared with SA (Table 3) and in the
overall preference of SA (Table 4) in user study
2. This proves that raters become more confident
in preferring an abstractive summary over an ex-
tractive one when the reviews are given to them.
In contrast, we notice that the preference of sys
2 drops comparing “MEAD* vs Our System” and
“SA vs Our System”. Knowing that the drop is

5The agreement is calculated based on 100 randomly sam-
pled units selected from our crowdsourcing job.

not significant and the the overall ranking of sys-
tems remains unchanged, this case is less straight
forward to interpret.

8.2 Qualitative Analysis

We collect and group the rater justifications in the
results we obtain by crowdsourcing our evaluation
framework, when preferring a summary over an-
other, in Table 5. To make the comparison more
clear, Example 1 shows the summaries generated
by MEAD* and our system.

Comparing our system with the extractive base-
lines, raters’ justifications are classified in three
main categories. Although the language of the ex-
tractive summaries is less formal, raters often pre-
fer our system in terms of presentation and lan-
guage. They justify their selections by expressing
phrases such as “better grammar” or “fewer er-
rors”. They also comment about the coverage of
aspects in the summaries generated by our system
and they realize that our system was capable of
aggregating the opinions for each aspect. In con-
trast, when they prefer the extractive summaries,
they like the descriptive language of the summary
and the technical details of the products that were
missing in our system summaries.

We also notice that raters realize the usage of
structure (AHT) in our system (both of content se-
lection and summary generation) and they appre-
ciate it by expressing phrases such as “very com-
plete”, “more elegant” or “related features”. In
contrast, they sometimes appreciate a simpler lan-
guage in summaries generated by SA. Moreover,
few raters prefer the higher coverage in SA sum-
maries. This is mainly because not using connec-
tives and structure in SA leaves more space to in-
clude more aspects.

1610



Product: Nikon Coolpix 4300
MEAD*: it is very compact but the controls are so well designed that
they ’re still easy to use . It ’s easy for beginners to use , but has features
that more serious photographers will love , so it ’s an excellent camera
to grow into . But overall this is a good camera with a ’ really good ’
picture clarity ; an exceptional close-up shooting capability .The battery
life is very good , i got about 90 minutes with the lcd turned on all
the time , the first time around , and i have been using it with the lcd
off every now and then , and have yet needed to recharge it . Yes ,
the picture quality and features which are too numerous to mention are
unmatched for any camera in this price range.
Our System: All reviewers (34 people), who commented on the cam-
era, felt that it was really good mainly because of the picture. Around
26% of the reviewers expressed their opinion about the picture quality
and they really liked it. Around 24% of the reviewers noted the use
and they thought that it was satisfactory. Talking about the use, around
24% of the reviewers expressed their opinion about the size and they
felt that it was fine. Only 6 reviewers commented about the scene mode
and in overall they thought that it was satisfactory. Moreover, regarding
the scene mode, 4 shoppers mentioned about the manual mode and they
thought that it was satisfactory, and similarly only 4 reviewers com-
mented about the auto mode and in overall they did not express any
strong positive or negative opinion about it. Only 4 costumers men-
tioned the software and they felt that it was really good.

Example 1. Summaries generated by our system
and MEAD* baseline for the Nikon Coolpix 4300
camera. For brevity we exclude other baselines.

9 Conclusions

We have presented a framework for abstractive
summarization of product reviews based on dis-
course structure. For content selection, we pro-
pose a graph model based on the importance
and association relations between aspects, that as-
sumes no prior domain knowledge, by taking ad-
vantage of the discourse structure of reviews. For
abstract generation, we propose a product inde-
pendent template-based natural language genera-
tion (NLG) framework that takes aspects and their
structured relation as input and generates an ab-
stractive summary. Quantitative evaluation results,
based on two pairwise preference user studies,
show substantial improvement over extractive and
abstractive baselines, including MEAD*, which
is considered a state-of-the-art opinion extractive
summarization system, and a simpler version of
our abstractive system. In future work, we plan
to extend the microplanning phase by taking ad-
vantage of the highly weighted rhetorical relations
between the aspects and select connective phrases
based on the discourse relations specified in the
aspects tree. In addition, we plan to develop and
evaluate an end-to-end system, in which the aspect
extraction and polarity estimation of aspects are
automated. In this way, we can achieve an end-to-
end automatic summarizaion system for product
reviews.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by Swiss Na-
tional Science Foundation (PBTIP2-145659) and
NSERC Business Intelligence Network. We
would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for
their valuable comments. We also acknowledge
Shafiq Rayhan Joty for his help regarding rhetori-
cal parser.

References
Dan Ariely, George Loewenstein, and Drazen Prelec.

2003. “Coherent Arbitrariness”: Stable Demand
Curves Without Stable Preferences. Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics, 118:73–105.

Nicholas Asher, Farah Benamara, and Yvette Yannick
Mathieu. 2008. Distilling opinion in discourse: A
preliminary study. In Coling 2008: Companion vol-
ume: Posters and Demonstrations, pages 5–8.

Regina Barzilay, Kathleen R. McKeown, and Michael
Elhadad. 1999. Information fusion in the context
of multi-document summarization. In Proceedings
of the 37th annual meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics on Computational Lin-
guistics, ACL ’99, pages 550–557, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Giuseppe Carenini and Jackie Chi Kit Cheung. 2008.
Extractive vs. nlg-based abstractive summarization
of evaluative text: the effect of corpus controversial-
ity. In INLG ’08: Proceedings of the Fifth Inter-
national Natural Language Generation Conference,
pages 33–41, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Giuseppe Carenini, Jackie Chi Kit Cheung, and Adam
Pauls. 2013. Multi-document summarization
of evaluative text. Computational Intelligence,
29(4):545–576.

Giuseppe Di Fabbrizio, Amanda Stent, and Robert
Gaizauskas. 2014. A hybrid approach to multi-
document summarization of opinions in reviews. In
Proceedings of the 8th International Natural Lan-
guage Generation conference, INLG 2014.

Günes Erkan and Dragomir R. Radev. 2004. Lexrank:
graph-based lexical centrality as salience in text
summarization. J. Artif. Int. Res., 22(1):457–479,
December.

Kavita Ganesan, ChengXiang Zhai, and Jiawei Han.
2010. Opinosis: a graph-based approach to abstrac-
tive summarization of highly redundant opinions. In
Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference
on Computational Linguistics, COLING ’10, pages
340–348, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

1611



Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. 2004a. Mining and sum-
marizing customer reviews. In Proceedings of ACM
SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining 2004 (KDD 2004), pages 168–177,
Seattle, Washington.

Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. 2004b. Mining opinion
features in customer reviews. In Proceedings of the
Nineteenth National Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence (AAAI-2004).

Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. 2006. Opinion feature
extraction using class sequential rules. In Pro-
ceedings of AAAI 2006 Spring Sympoia on Compu-
tational Approaches to Analyzing Weblogs (AAAI-
CAAW 2006).

Shafiq Joty, Giuseppe Carenini, Raymond Ng, and
Yashar Mehdad. 2013. Combining intra- and multi-
sentential rhetorical parsing for document-level dis-
course analysis. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 486–496,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Hyun Duk Kim, Kavita Ganesan, Parikshit Sondhi, and
ChengXiang Zhai. 2011. Comprehensive review of
opinion summarization.

Hyun Duk Kim, Malu Castellanos, Meichun Hsu,
ChengXiang Zhai, Umeshwar Dayal, and Riddhi-
man Ghosh. 2013. Compact explanatory opinion
summarization. In Proceedings of the 22Nd ACM
International Conference on Conference on Infor-
mation &#38; Knowledge Management, CIKM ’13,
pages 1697–1702, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Angeliki Lazaridou, Ivan Titov, and Caroline
Sporleder. 2013. A bayesian model for joint
unsupervised induction of sentiment, aspect and
discourse representations. In Proceedings of the
51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
1630–1639, Sofia, Bulgaria, August. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Kevin Lerman, Sasha Blair-Goldensohn, and Ryan Mc-
Donald. 2009. Sentiment summarization: Evaluat-
ing and learning user preferences. In Proceedings of
the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, EACL
’09, pages 514–522, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Hugo Liu and Push Singh. 2004. Conceptnet: A prac-
tical commonsense reasoning toolkit. BT Technol-
ogy Journal, 22(4):211–226.

Yue Lu, ChengXiang Zhai, and Neel Sundaresan.
2009. Rated aspect summarization of short com-
ments. In Proceedings of the 18th International
Conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’09, pages
131–140, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. 1988.
Rhetorical structure theory: Toward a functional the-
ory of text organization. Text, 8(3):243–281.

Subhabrata Mukherjee and Sachindra Joshi. 2013.
Sentiment aggregation using conceptnet ontology.
In Proceedings of the 6th International Joint Con-
ference on Natural Language Processing, IJCNLP
2013.

Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2004. A sentimental educa-
tion: Sentiment analysis using subjectivity summa-
rization based on minimum cuts. In Proceedings of
the 42Nd Annual Meeting on Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, ACL ’04, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up?: Sentiment classification using
machine learning techniques. In Proceedings of the
ACL-02 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing - Volume 10, EMNLP ’02,
pages 79–86, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Dragomir Radev, Timothy Allison, Sasha Blair-
Goldensohn, John Blitzer, Arda Çelebi, Stanko
Dimitrov, Elliott Drabek, Ali Hakim, Wai Lam,
Danyu Liu, Jahna Otterbacher, Hong Qi, Horacio
Saggion, Simone Teufel, Michael Topper, Adam
Winkel, and Zhu Zhang. 2004. MEAD — A plat-
form for multidocument multilingual text summa-
rization. In Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC), Lisbon, Portugal.

Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. 2000. Building Natural
Language Generation Systems. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, New York, NY, USA.

Benjamin Snyder and Regina Barzilay. 2007. Multiple
aspect ranking using the good grief algorithm. In
HLT-NAACL, pages 300–307.

Swapna Somasundaran, Galileo Namata, Janyce
Wiebe, and Lise Getoor. 2009. Supervised and
unsupervised methods in employing discourse rela-
tions for improving opinion polarity classification.
In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing: Volume
1 - Volume 1, EMNLP ’09, pages 170–179, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Ivan Titov and Ryan T. McDonald. 2008. A joint
model of text and aspect ratings for sentiment sum-
marization. In Proceedings of the 46th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, June 15-20, 2008, Columbus, Ohio, USA,
ACL 2008, pages 308–316. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Rakshit S. Trivedi and Jacob Eisenstein. 2013. Dis-
course connectors for latent subjectivity in sentiment
analysis. In HLT-NAACL, pages 808–813. The As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

1612



Wenpu Xing and Ali Ghorbani. 2004. Weighted pager-
ank algorithm. In Proceedings of the Second Annual
Conference on Communication Networks and Ser-
vices Research, CNSR ’04, pages 305–314. IEEE
Computer Society.

Alexander Yeh. 2000. More accurate tests for the sta-
tistical significance of result differences. In Pro-
ceedings of the 18th conference on Computational
linguistics - Volume 2, COLING ’00, pages 947–
953, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

1613


