



















































Invited Talk: IBM Cognitive Computing - An NLP Renaissance!


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), page 1,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

IBM Cognitive Computing - An NLP Renaissance!

Salim Roukos
Senior Manager of Multi-Lingual NLP and CTO for Translation Technologies

IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
roukos@us.ibm.com

Abstract

Electronically available multi-modal data
(primarily text and meta-data) is unprece-
dented in terms of its volume, variety, ve-
locity, (and veracity). The increased in-
terest and investment in cognitive comput-
ing for building systems and solutions that
enable and support richer human-machine
interactions presents a unique opportunity
for novel statistical models for natural lan-
guage processing.

In this talk, I will describe a journey at
IBM during the past three decades in de-
veloping novel statistical models for NLP
covering statistical parsing, machine trans-
lation, and question-answering systems.
Along with a discussion of some of the re-
cent successes, I will discuss some diffi-
cult challenges that need to be addressed to
achieve more effective cognitive systems
and applications.

About the Speaker

Salim Roukos is Senior Manager of Multi-Lingual
NLP and CTO for Translation Technologies at
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center. Dr. Roukos
received his B.E. from the American University
of Beirut, in 1976, his M.Sc. and Ph.D. from
the University of Florida, in 1978 and 1980, re-
spectively. He joined Bolt Beranek and Newman
from 1980 through 1989, where he was a Senior
Scientist in charge of projects in speech compres-
sion, time scale modification, speaker identifica-
tion, word spotting, and spoken language under-
standing. He was an Adjunct Professor at Boston
University in 1988 before joining IBM in 1989.
Dr. Roukos has served as Chair of the IEEE Digi-
tal Signal Processing Committee in 1988.

Salim Roukos currently leads a group at IBM
T.J. Watson research Center that focuses on vari-

ous problems using machine learning techniques
for natural language processing. The group pi-
oneered many of the statistical methods for NLP
from statistical parsing, to natural language under-
standing, to statistical machine translation and ma-
chine translation evaluation metrics (BLEU met-
ric). Roukos has over a 150 publications in the
speech and language areas and over two dozen
patents. Roukos was the lead of the group which
introduced the first commercial statistical lan-
guage understanding system for conversational
telephony systems (IBM ViaVoice Telephony) in
2000 and the first statistical machine translation
product for Arabic-English translation in 2003.
He has recently lead the effort to create IBM’s
offering of IBM Real-Time Translation Services
(RTTS) a platform for enabling real-time transla-
tion applications such as multilingual chat and on-
demand document translation.

1


