



















































Question Answering with Subgraph Embeddings


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 615–620,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Question Answering with Subgraph Embeddings

Antoine Bordes
Facebook AI Research

112 avenue de Wagram,
Paris, France

abordes@fb.com

Sumit Chopra
Facebook AI Research

770 Broadway,
New York, USA

spchopra@fb.com

Jason Weston
Facebook AI Research

770 Broadway,
New York, USA
jase@fb.com

Abstract

This paper presents a system which learns
to answer questions on a broad range of
topics from a knowledge base using few
hand-crafted features. Our model learns
low-dimensional embeddings of words
and knowledge base constituents; these
representations are used to score natural
language questions against candidate an-
swers. Training our system using pairs of
questions and structured representations of
their answers, and pairs of question para-
phrases, yields competitive results on a re-
cent benchmark of the literature.

1 Introduction
Teaching machines how to automatically answer
questions asked in natural language on any topic
or in any domain has always been a long stand-
ing goal in Artificial Intelligence. With the rise
of large scale structured knowledge bases (KBs),
this problem, known as open-domain question an-
swering (or open QA), boils down to being able
to query efficiently such databases with natural
language. These KBs, such as FREEBASE (Bol-
lacker et al., 2008) encompass huge ever growing
amounts of information and ease open QA by or-
ganizing a great variety of answers in a structured
format. However, the scale and the difficulty for
machines to interpret natural language still makes
this task a challenging problem.

The state-of-the-art techniques in open QA can
be classified into two main classes, namely, infor-
mation retrieval based and semantic parsing based.
Information retrieval systems first retrieve a broad
set of candidate answers by querying the search
API of KBs with a transformation of the ques-
tion into a valid query and then use fine-grained
detection heuristics to identify the exact answer
(Kolomiyets and Moens, 2011; Unger et al., 2012;

Yao and Van Durme, 2014). On the other hand,
semantic parsing methods focus on the correct in-
terpretation of the meaning of a question by a se-
mantic parsing system. A correct interpretation
converts a question into the exact database query
that returns the correct answer. Interestingly, re-
cent works (Berant et al., 2013; Kwiatkowski et
al., 2013; Berant and Liang, 2014; Fader et al.,
2014) have shown that such systems can be ef-
ficiently trained under indirect and imperfect su-
pervision and hence scale to large-scale regimes,
while bypassing most of the annotation costs.

Yet, even if both kinds of system have shown the
ability to handle large-scale KBs, they still require
experts to hand-craft lexicons, grammars, and KB
schema to be effective. This non-negligible hu-
man intervention might not be generic enough to
conveniently scale up to new databases with other
schema, broader vocabularies or languages other
than English. In contrast, (Fader et al., 2013) pro-
posed a framework for open QA requiring almost
no human annotation. Despite being an interesting
approach, this method is outperformed by other
competing methods. (Bordes et al., 2014b) in-
troduced an embedding model, which learns low-
dimensional vector representations of words and
symbols (such as KBs constituents) and can be
trained with even less supervision than the system
of (Fader et al., 2013) while being able to achieve
better prediction performance. However, this ap-
proach is only compared with (Fader et al., 2013)
which operates in a simplified setting and has not
been applied in more realistic conditions nor eval-
uated against the best performing methods.

In this paper, we improve the model of (Bor-
des et al., 2014b) by providing the ability to an-
swer more complicated questions. The main con-
tributions of the paper are: (1) a more sophisti-
cated inference procedure that is both efficient and
can consider longer paths ((Bordes et al., 2014b)
considered only answers directly connected to the

615



question in the graph); and (2) a richer represen-
tation of the answers which encodes the question-
answer path and surrounding subgraph of the KB.
Our approach is competitive with the current state-
of-the-art on the recent benchmark WEBQUES-
TIONS (Berant et al., 2013) without using any lex-
icon, rules or additional system for part-of-speech
tagging, syntactic or dependency parsing during
training as most other systems do.

2 Task Definition
Our main motivation is to provide a system for
open QA able to be trained as long as it has ac-
cess to: (1) a training set of questions paired with
answers and (2) a KB providing a structure among
answers. We suppose that all potential answers are
entities in the KB and that questions are sequences
of words that include one identified KB entity.
When this entity is not given, plain string match-
ing is used to perform entity resolution. Smarter
methods could be used but this is not our focus.

We use WEBQUESTIONS (Berant et al., 2013)
as our evaluation bemchmark. Since it contains
few training samples, it is impossible to learn on
it alone, and this section describes the various data
sources that were used for training. These are sim-
ilar to those used in (Berant and Liang, 2014).

WebQuestions This dataset is built using FREE-
BASE as the KB and contains 5,810 question-
answer pairs. It was created by crawling questions
through the Google Suggest API, and then obtain-
ing answers using Amazon Mechanical Turk. We
used the original split (3,778 examples for train-
ing and 2,032 for testing), and isolated 1k ques-
tions from the training set for validation. WE-
BQUESTIONS is built on FREEBASE since all an-
swers are defined as FREEBASE entities. In each
question, we identified one FREEBASE entity us-
ing string matching between words of the ques-
tion and entity names in FREEBASE. When the
same string matches multiple entities, only the en-
tity appearing in most triples, i.e. the most popular
in FREEBASE, was kept. Example questions (an-
swers) in the dataset include “Where did Edgar
Allan Poe died?” (baltimore) or “What degrees
did Barack Obama get?” (bachelor of arts,
juris doctor).

Freebase FREEBASE (Bollacker et al., 2008)
is a huge and freely available database of
general facts; data is organized as triplets
(subject, type1.type2.predicate, object),

where two entities subject and object (identi-
fied by mids) are connected by the relation type
type1.type2.predicate. We used a subset, cre-
ated by only keeping triples where one of the
entities was appearing in either the WEBQUES-
TIONS training/validation set or in CLUEWEB ex-
tractions. We also removed all entities appearing
less than 5 times and finally obtained a FREEBASE
set containing 14M triples made of 2.2M entities
and 7k relation types.1 Since the format of triples
does not correspond to any structure one could
find in language, we decided to transform them
into automatically generated questions. Hence, all
triples were converted into questions “What is the
predicate of the type2 subject?” (using the
mid of the subject) with the answer being object.
An example is “What is the nationality of the
person barack obama?” (united states). More
examples and details are given in a longer version
of this paper (Bordes et al., 2014a).

ClueWeb Extractions FREEBASE data allows
to train our model on 14M questions but these have
a fixed lexicon and vocabulary, which is not real-
istic. Following (Berant et al., 2013), we also cre-
ated questions using CLUEWEB extractions pro-
vided by (Lin et al., 2012). Using string match-
ing, we ended up with 2M extractions structured
as (subject, “text string”, object) with both
subject and object linked to FREEBASE. We
also converted these triples into questions by using
simple patterns and FREEBASE types. An exam-
ple of generated question is “Where barack obama
was allegedly bear in?” (hawaii).

Paraphrases The automatically generated ques-
tions that are useful to connect FREEBASE triples
and natural language, do not provide a satisfac-
tory modeling of natural language because of their
semi-automatic wording and rigid syntax. To
overcome this issue, we follow (Fader et al., 2013)
and supplement our training data with an indirect
supervision signal made of pairs of question para-
phrases collected from the WIKIANSWERS web-
site. On WIKIANSWERS, users can tag pairs of
questions as rephrasings of each other: (Fader et
al., 2013) harvested a set of 2M distinct questions
from WIKIANSWERS, which were grouped into
350k paraphrase clusters.

1WEBQUESTIONS contains ∼2k entities, hence restrict-
ing FREEBASE to 2.2M entities does not ease the task for us.

616



3 Embedding Questions and Answers
Inspired by (Bordes et al., 2014b), our model
works by learning low-dimensional vector embed-
dings of words appearing in questions and of enti-
ties and relation types of FREEBASE, so that repre-
sentations of questions and of their corresponding
answers are close to each other in the joint embed-
ding space. Let q denote a question and a a can-
didate answer. Learning embeddings is achieved
by learning a scoring function S(q, a), so that S
generates a high score if a is the correct answer to
the question q, and a low score otherwise. Note
that both q and a are represented as a combina-
tion of the embeddings of their individual words
and/or symbols; hence, learning S essentially in-
volves learning these embeddings. In our model,
the form of the scoring function is:

S(q, a) = f(q)>g(a). (1)

Let W be a matrix of Rk×N , where k is the di-
mension of the embedding space which is fixed a-
priori, andN is the dictionary of embeddings to be
learned. LetNW denote the total number of words
and NS the total number of entities and relation
types. WithN = NW +NS , the i-th column of W
is the embedding of the i-th element (word, entity
or relation type) in the dictionary. The function
f(.), which maps the questions into the embed-
ding space Rk is defined as f(q) = Wφ(q), where
φ(q) ∈ NN , is a sparse vector indicating the num-
ber of times each word appears in the question q
(usually 0 or 1). Likewise the function g(.) which
maps the answer into the same embedding space
Rk as the questions, is given by g(a) = Wψ(a).
Here ψ(a) ∈ NN is a sparse vector representation
of the answer a, which we now detail.

3.1 Representing Candidate Answers
We now describe possible feature representations
for a single candidate answer. (When there are
multiple correct answers, we average these rep-
resentations, see Section 3.4.) We consider three
different types of representation, corresponding to
different subgraphs of FREEBASE around it.

(i) Single Entity. The answer is represented as
a single entity from FREEBASE: ψ(a) is a 1-
of-NS coded vector with 1 corresponding to
the entity of the answer, and 0 elsewhere.

(ii) Path Representation. The answer is
represented as a path from the entity

mentioned in the question to the answer
entity. In our experiments, we consid-
ered 1- or 2-hops paths (i.e. with either
1 or 2 edges to traverse): (barack obama,
people.person.place of birth, honolulu)
is a 1-hop path and (barack obama,
people.person.place of birth, location.
location.containedby, hawaii) a 2-hops
path. This results in a ψ(a) which is a
3-of-NS or 4-of-NS coded vector, expressing
the start and end entities of the path and the
relation types (but not entities) in-between.

(iii) Subgraph Representation. We encode both
the path representation from (ii), and the en-
tire subgraph of entities connected to the can-
didate answer entity. That is, for each entity
connected to the answer we include both the
relation type and the entity itself in the repre-
sentation ψ(a). In order to represent the an-
swer path differently to the surrounding sub-
graph (so the model can differentiate them),
we double the dictionary size for entities, and
use one embedding representation if they are
in the path and another if they are in the sub-
graph. Thus we now learn a parameter matrix
Rk×N where N = NW + 2NS (NS is the to-
tal number of entities and relation types). If
there areC connected entities withD relation
types to the candidate answer, its representa-
tion is a 3+C+D or 4+C+D-of-NS coded
vector, depending on the path length.

Our hypothesis is that including more informa-
tion about the answer in its representation will lead
to improved results. While it is possible that all
required information could be encoded in the k di-
mensional embedding of the single entity (i), it is
unclear what dimension k should be to make this
possible. For example the embedding of a country
entity encoding all of its citizens seems unrealis-
tic. Similarly, only having access to the path ig-
nores all the other information we have about the
answer entity, unless it is encoded in the embed-
dings of either the entity of the question, the an-
swer or the relations linking them, which might be
quite complicated as well. We thus adopt the sub-
graph approach. Figure 1 illustrates our model.

3.2 Training and Loss Function
As in (Weston et al., 2010), we train our model
using a margin-based ranking loss function. Let
D = {(qi, ai) : i = 1, . . . , |D|} be the training set

617



“Who did Clooney marry in 1987?” 

Embedding	  matrix	  W	  

G. Clooney 
K. Preston 

1987 

J. Travolta 

Model 

Honolulu 

Detec0on	  of	  Freebase	  
en0ty	  in	  the	  ques0on	  

Embedding model 

Freebase subgraph 

Binary	  encoding	  of	  
the	  subgraph	  ψ(a)	  

Embedding	  of	  the	  
subgraph	  g(a)	  

Binary	  encoding	  of	  
the	  ques0on	  Φ(q)	  

Embedding	  of	  the	  
ques0on	  f(q)	  

Ques0on	  q	  

Subgraph	  of	  a	  candidate	  
answer	  a	  (here	  K.	  Preston)	  

Score S(q,a) 
How	  the	  candidate	  answer	  

fits	  the	  ques0on	  

Dot	  product	  
Embedding	  matrix	  W	  

Figure 1: Illustration of the subgraph embedding model scoring a candidate answer: (i) locate entity in
the question; (ii) compute path from entity to answer; (iii) represent answer as path plus all connected
entities to the answer (the subgraph); (iv) embed both the question and the answer subgraph separately
using the learnt embedding vectors, and score the match via their dot product.

of questions qi paired with their correct answer ai.
The loss function we minimize is

|D|∑
i=1

∑
ā∈Ā(ai)

max{0,m−S(qi, ai)+S(qi, ā)}, (2)

where m is the margin (fixed to 0.1). Minimizing
Eq. (2) learns the embedding matrix W so that
the score of a question paired with a correct an-
swer is greater than with any incorrect answer ā
by at least m. ā is sampled from a set of incor-
rect candidates Ā. This is achieved by sampling
50% of the time from the set of entities connected
to the entity of the question (i.e. other candidate
paths), and by replacing the answer entity by a ran-
dom one otherwise. Optimization is accomplished
using stochastic gradient descent, multi-threaded
with Hogwild! (Recht et al., 2011), with the con-
straint that the columns wi of W remain within
the unit-ball, i.e., ∀i, ||wi||2 ≤ 1.
3.3 Multitask Training of Embeddings
Since a large number of questions in our training
datasets are synthetically generated, they do not
adequately cover the range of syntax used in natu-
ral language. Hence, we also multi-task the train-
ing of our model with the task of paraphrase pre-
diction. We do so by alternating the training of
S with that of a scoring function Sprp(q1, q2) =
f(q1)>f(q2), which uses the same embedding ma-
trix W and makes the embeddings of a pair of
questions (q1, q2) similar to each other if they are
paraphrases (i.e. if they belong to the same para-
phrase cluster), and make them different other-

wise. Training Sprp is similar to that of S except
that negative samples are obtained by sampling a
question from another paraphrase cluster.

We also multitask the training of the embed-
dings with the mapping of the mids of FREEBASE
entities to the actual words of their names, so that
the model learns that the embedding of the mid of
an entity should be similar to the embedding of the
word(s) that compose its name(s).

3.4 Inference
Once W is trained, at test time, for a given ques-
tion q the model predicts the answer with:

â = argmaxa′∈A(q)S(q, a
′) (3)

where A(q) is the candidate answer set. This can-
didate set could be the whole KB but this has both
speed and potentially precision issues. Instead, we
create a candidate set A(q) for each question.

We recall that each question contains one identi-
fied FREEBASE entity. A(q) is first populated with
all triples from FREEBASE involving this entity.
This allows to answer simple factual questions
whose answers are directly connected to them (i.e.
1-hop paths). This strategy is denoted C1.

Since a system able to answer only such ques-
tions would be limited, we supplement A(q) with
examples situated in the KB graph at 2-hops from
the entity of the question. We do not add all such
quadruplets since this would lead to very large
candidate sets. Instead, we consider the follow-
ing general approach: given that we are predicting
a path, we can predict its elements in turn using

618



Method P@1 F1 F1
(%) (Berant) (Yao)

Baselines
(Berant et al., 2013) – 31.4 –
(Bordes et al., 2014b) 31.3 29.7 31.8
(Yao and Van Durme, 2014) – 33.0 42.0
(Berant and Liang, 2014) – 39.9 43.0
Our approach
Subgraph & A(q) = C2 40.4 39.2 43.2
Ensemble with (Berant & Liang, 14) – 41.8 45.7
Variants
Without multiple predictions 40.4 31.3 34.2
Subgraph & A(q) = All 2-hops 38.0 37.1 41.4
Subgraph & A(q) = C1 34.0 32.6 35.1
Path & A(q) = C2 36.2 35.3 38.5
Single Entity & A(q) = C1 25.8 16.0 17.8

Table 1: Results on the WEBQUESTIONS test set.

a beam search, and hence avoid scoring all can-
didates. Specifically, our model first ranks rela-
tion types using Eq. (1), i.e. selects which rela-
tion types are the most likely to be expressed in
q. We keep the top 10 types (10 was selected on
the validation set) and only add 2-hops candidates
to A(q) when these relations appear in their path.
Scores of 1-hop triples are weighted by 1.5 since
they have one less element than 2-hops quadru-
plets. This strategy, denotedC2, is used by default.

A prediction a′ can commonly actually be
a set of candidate answers, not just one an-
swer, for example for questions like “Who are
David Beckham’s children?”. This is achieved
by considering a prediction to be all the en-
tities that lie on the same 1-hop or 2-hops
path from the entity found in the question.
Hence, all answers to the above question are
connected to david beckham via the same path
(david beckham, people.person.children, *).
The feature representation of the prediction is then
the average over each candidate entity’s features
(see Section 3.1), i.e. ψall(a′) = 1|a′|

∑
a′j :a′

ψ(a′j)
where a′j are the individual entities in the over-
all prediction a′. In the results, we compare to a
baseline method that can only predict single can-
didates, which understandly performs poorly.

4 Experiments

We compare our system in terms of F1 score as
computed by the official evaluation script2 (F1
(Berant)) but also with a slightly different F1 def-
inition, termed F1 (Yao) which was used in (Yao
and Van Durme, 2014) (the difference being the
way that questions with no answers are dealt with),

2Available from www-nlp.stanford.edu/software/sempre/

and precision @ 1 (p@1) of the first candidate en-
tity (even when there are a set of correct answers),
comparing to recently published systems.3 The
upper part of Table 1 indicates that our approach
outperforms (Yao and Van Durme, 2014), (Berant
et al., 2013) and (Bordes et al., 2014b), and per-
forms similarly as (Berant and Liang, 2014).

The lower part of Table 1 compares various ver-
sions of our model. Our default approach uses
the Subgraph representation for answers and C2
as the candidate answers set. Replacing C2 by
C1 induces a large drop in performance because
many questions do not have answers thatare di-
rectly connected to their inluded entity (not in
C1). However, using all 2-hops connections as
a candidate set is also detrimental, because the
larger number of candidates confuses (and slows
a lot) our ranking based inference. Our results
also verify our hypothesis of Section 3.1, that a
richer representation for answers (using the local
subgraph) can store more pertinent information.
Finally, we demonstrate that we greatly improve
upon the model of (Bordes et al., 2014b), which
actually corresponds to a setting with the Path rep-
resentation and C1 as candidate set.

We also considered an ensemble of our ap-
proach and that of (Berant and Liang, 2014). As
we only had access to their test predictions we
used the following combination method. Our ap-
proach gives a score S(q, a) for the answer it pre-
dicts. We chose a threshold such that our approach
predicts 50% of the time (when S(q, a) is above
its value), and the other 50% of the time we use
the prediction of (Berant and Liang, 2014) instead.
We aimed for a 50/50 ratio because both meth-
ods perform similarly. The ensemble improves the
state-of-the-art, and indicates that our models are
significantly different in their design.

5 Conclusion

This paper presented an embedding model that
learns to perform open QA using training data
made of questions paired with their answers and
of a KB to provide a structure among answers, and
can achieve promising performance on the com-
petitive benchmark WEBQUESTIONS.

3Results of baselines except (Bordes et al., 2014b) have
been extracted from the original papers. For our experiments,
all hyperparameters have been selected on the WEBQUES-
TIONS validation set: k was chosen among {64, 128, 256},
the learning rate on a log. scale between 10−4 and 10−1 and
we used at most 100 paths in the subgraph representation.

619



References
Jonathan Berant and Percy Liang. 2014. Semantic

parsing via paraphrasing. In Proceedings of the
52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (ACL’14), Baltimore, USA.

Jonathan Berant, Andrew Chou, Roy Frostig, and Percy
Liang. 2013. Semantic parsing on Freebase from
question-answer pairs. In Proceedings of the 2013
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP’13), Seattle, USA.

Kurt Bollacker, Colin Evans, Praveen Paritosh, Tim
Sturge, and Jamie Taylor. 2008. Freebase: a col-
laboratively created graph database for structuring
human knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM
SIGMOD international conference on Management
of data, Vancouver, Canada. ACM.

Antoine Bordes, Sumit Chopra, and Jason Weston.
2014a. Question answering with subgraph embed-
dings. CoRR, abs/1406.3676.

Antoine Bordes, Jason Weston, and Nicolas Usunier.
2014b. Open question answering with weakly su-
pervised embedding models. In Proceedings of the
7th European Conference on Machine Learning and
Principles and Practice of Knowledge Discovery
in Databases (ECML-PKDD’14), Nancy, France.
Springer.

Anthony Fader, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Oren Etzioni.
2013. Paraphrase-driven learning for open question
answering. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL’13), Sofia, Bulgaria.

Anthony Fader, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Oren Etzioni.
2014. Open question answering over curated and
extracted knowledge bases. In Proceedings of 20th
SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining (KDD’14), New York City, USA.
ACM.

Oleksandr Kolomiyets and Marie-Francine Moens.
2011. A survey on question answering technology
from an information retrieval perspective. Informa-
tion Sciences, 181(24):5412–5434.

Tom Kwiatkowski, Eunsol Choi, Yoav Artzi, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2013. Scaling semantic parsers with
on-the-fly ontology matching. In Proceedings of the
2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP’13), Seattle, USA,
October.

Thomas Lin, Mausam, and Oren Etzioni. 2012. En-
tity linking at web scale. In Proceedings of the Joint
Workshop on Automatic Knowledge Base Construc-
tion and Web-scale Knowledge Extraction (AKBC-
WEKEX’12), Montreal, Canada.

Benjamin Recht, Christopher Ré, Stephen J Wright,
and Feng Niu. 2011. Hogwild!: A lock-free ap-
proach to parallelizing stochastic gradient descent.

In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems (NIPS 24)., Vancouver, Canada.

Christina Unger, Lorenz Bühmann, Jens Lehmann,
Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo, Daniel Gerber, and
Philipp Cimiano. 2012. Template-based question
answering over RDF data. In Proceedings of the
21st international conference on World Wide Web
(WWW’12), Lyon, France. ACM.

Jason Weston, Samy Bengio, and Nicolas Usunier.
2010. Large scale image annotation: learning to
rank with joint word-image embeddings. Machine
learning, 81(1).

Xuchen Yao and Benjamin Van Durme. 2014. Infor-
mation extraction over structured data: Question an-
swering with freebase. In Proceedings of the 52nd
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL’14), Baltimore, USA.

620


