



















































Staying on Topic: An Indicator of Power in Political Debates


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1481–1486,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Staying on Topic:
An Indicator of Power in Political Debates

Vinodkumar Prabhakaran
Dept. of Computer Science

Columbia University
New York, NY, USA

vinod@cs.columbia.edu

Ashima Arora
Dept. of Computer Science

Columbia University
New York, NY, USA
aa3470@columbia.edu

Owen Rambow
CCLS

Columbia University
New York, NY, USA

rambow@ccls.columbia.edu

Abstract

We study the topic dynamics of interac-
tions in political debates using the 2012
Republican presidential primary debates
as data. We show that the tendency of
candidates to shift topics changes over the
course of the election campaign, and that it
is correlated with their relative power. We
also show that our topic shift features help
predict candidates’ relative rankings.

1 Introduction

The field of computational social sciences has cre-
ated many interesting applications for natural lan-
guage processing in recent years. One of the areas
where NLP techniques have shown great promise
is in the analysis of political speech. For example,
researchers have applied NLP techniques to polit-
ical texts for a variety of tasks such as predicting
voting patterns (Thomas et al., 2006), identifying
markers of persuasion (Guerini et al., 2008), cap-
turing cues that signal charisma (Rosenberg and
Hirschberg, 2009), and detecting ideological po-
sitions (Sim et al., 2013). Our work also analyzes
political speech, more specifically, presidential de-
bates. The contribution of this paper is to show
that the topic shifting tendency of a presidential
candidate changes over the course of the election
campaign, and that it is correlated with his or her
relative power. We also show that this insight can
help computational systems that predict the candi-
dates’ relative rankings based on their interactions
in the debates.

2 Motivation

The motivation for this paper stems from prior
work done by the first author in collaboration
with other researchers (Prabhakaran et al., 2013a;
Prabhakaran et al., 2013b). Prabhakaran et al.

(2013a) introduced the notion of power in the do-
main of presidential debates, and Prabhakaran et
al. (2013b) followed it up with an automatic power
ranker system based on interactions within the de-
bates. The power that a candidate had at a cer-
tain point in the election campaign was modeled
based on his or her recent poll standings: in elec-
tions, popularity is power. Those studies analyzed
the 2012 Republican presidential primary debates
and found that a candidate’s power at the time of
a debate correlates with the structure of interac-
tions within the debate (e.g., turn frequency and
interruption patterns). Another finding was that
the candidates’ power correlates with the distribu-
tion of topics they speak about in the debates: can-
didates with more power spoke significantly more
about certain topics (e.g., economy) and less about
certain other topics (e.g., energy). However, these
findings relate to the specific election cycle that
was analyzed and will not carry over to political
debates in general.

A further dimension with relevance beyond a
specific election campaign is how topics evolve
during the course of an interaction (e.g., who at-
tempts to shift topics). In (Prabhakaran et al.,
2014), we explored this dimension and found that
candidates with higher power introduce signifi-
cantly more topics in the debates, but attempt to
shift topics significantly less often while respond-
ing to a moderator. We used the basic LDA topic
modeling method (with a filter for substantivity of
turns) to assign topics to turns, which were then
used to detect shifts in topics. However, segment-
ing interactions into coherent topic segments is an
active area of research and a variety of topic mod-
eling approaches have been proposed for that pur-
pose. In this paper, we explore the utility of one
such topic modeling approach to tackle this prob-
lem.

While most of the early approaches for topic
segmenting in interactions have focused on the

1481



content of the contribution, Nguyen et al. (2012)
introduced a system called Speaker Identity for
Topic Segmentation (SITS) which also takes into
account the topic shifting tendencies of the partic-
ipants of the conversation. In later work, Nguyen
et al. (2013) demonstrated the SITS system’s util-
ity in detecting influencers in Crossfire debates
and Wikipedia discussions. They also applied the
SITS system to the domain of political debates.
However they were able to perform only a qual-
itative analysis of its utility in the debates domain
since the debates data did not have influence an-
notations. In this paper, we use the SITS system
to assign topics to turns and perform a quantita-
tive analysis of how the topic shift features calcu-
lated using the SITS system relate to the notion of
power as captured by (Prabhakaran et al., 2013a).

The SITS system associates each debate partic-
ipant with a constant scalar value that captures his
or her tendency to shift topics. However, since
we want to investigate how each candidate’s topic
shifting tendency relates to his or her changing
power over the course of the campaign, we intro-
duce a variation of the SITS analysis in which we
represent a different “persona” for each candidate
in each debate. Once equipped with this notion
of “persona”, we find that the topic shifting ten-
dency of a candidate does indeed show a great deal
of fluctuation during the election campaign period.
We also find that this fluctuation in topic shifting
tendencies is significantly correlated with the can-
didates’ power.

As an additional contribution of this paper, we
demonstrate the utility of our topic shift features
extracted using both types of SITS-based anal-
yses in improving the performance of the auto-
matic power ranker system presented in (Prab-
hakaran et al., 2013b). We also investigated the
utility of topic shifting features described in (Prab-
hakaran et al., 2014) extracted using LDA based
topic modeling. However, they did not improve
the performance of the ranker, and hence we do
not discuss them in detail in this paper.

3 Data

We use the presidential debates corpus released by
Prabhakaran et al. (2013a), which contains manual
transcripts of 20 debates held between May 2011
and February 2012 as part of the 2012 Republican
presidential primaries. The corpus also captures
each candidate’s power at the time of each debate,

computed based on their relative standing in re-
cent public polls. The poll numbers capture how
successful candidates are in convincing the elec-
torate of their candidature, which in turn affects
their confidence within the debates. These debates
serve as a rich domain to explore manifestations
of power since they are a medium through which
candidates pursue and maintain power over other
candidates. Prabhakaran et al. (2013b) offers a de-
tailed description of how the relative standings in
national and state-level polls from various sources
are aggregated to obtain candidates’ power.

The transcripts are originally obtained from The
American Presidency Project, where each turn of
the conversation is manually demarcated and their
speakers identified. The turns in the corpus are
preprocessed using the Stanford CoreNLP pack-
age to perform basic NLP steps such as tokeniza-
tion, sentence segmentation, parts-of-speech tag-
ging and lemmatization.

4 Modeling Topic Shifts

Topic segmentation, the task of segmenting inter-
actions into coherent topic segments, is an impor-
tant step in analyzing interactions. In addition
to its primary purpose, topic segmentation also
identifies the speaker turn where the conversation
changed from one topic to another, i.e., where the
topic shifted, which may shed light on the char-
acteristics of the speaker who changed the topic.
We use the SITS approach proposed by (Nguyen
et al., 2012) to detect topic shifts. We also propose
a different way of using SITS to obtain an analysis
of our corpus, which we call SITSvar. We discuss
both in turn, and then provide a discussion.

4.1 Segmentation using SITS

Most computational approaches towards auto-
matic topic segmentation have focused mainly on
the content of the contribution without taking into
account the social aspects or speaker character-
istics. Different discourse participants may have
different tendencies to introduce or shift topics in
interactions. In order to address this shortcom-
ing, Nguyen et al. (2012) proposed a new topic
segmentation model called Speaker Identity for
Topic Segmentation (SITS), in which they explic-
itly model the individual’s tendency to introduce
new topics.

Like traditional topic modeling approaches, the
SITS system also considers each turn to be a

1482



0	  

0.1	  

0.2	  

0.3	  

0.4	  

0.5	  

0.6	  

6/1
3/1
1	  

8/1
1/1
1	  

9/5
/11
	  

9/7
/11
	  

9/1
2/1
1	  

9/2
2/1
1	  

10
/11
/11
	  

10
/18
/11
	  

11
/9/
11
	  

11
/12
/11
	  

11
/22
/11
	  

12
/10
/11
	  

12
/15
/11
	  

1/7
/12
	  

1/8
/12
	  

1/1
6/1
2	  

1/1
9/1
2	  

1/2
3/1
2	  

1/2
6/1
2	  

2/2
2/1
2	  

To
pi
c	  
Sh
i)
	  T
en

de
nc
y,
	  P
I(x

_d
)	  

Date	  of	  Debate	  

BACHMANN	  

CAIN	  

GINGRICH	  

HUNTSMAN	  

PAUL	  

PERRY	  

ROMNEY	  

SANTORUM	  

Figure 1: SITSvar Topic shift tendency values across debates

bag of words generated from a mixture of top-
ics. These topics themselves are multinomial dis-
tributions over terms. In order to account for the
topic shifts that happen during the course of an in-
teraction, they introduce a binary latent variable
ld;t called the topic shift to indicate whether the
speaker changed the topic or not in conversation
d at turn t. To capture the individual speaker’s
topic shifting tendency, they introduced another
latent variable called topic shift tendency (πx) of
speaker x. The πx value represents the propensity
of speaker x to perform a topic shift.

4.2 Segmentation using SITSvar

Within the SITS formulation, the topic shifting
tendency of an individual (πx) is considered a con-
stant across conversations. While an individual
may have an inherent propensity to shift topics or
not, we argue that the topic shifting tendency he
or she displays can vary based on the social set-
tings in which he or she interacts and his or her
status within those settings. In other words, the
same discourse participant may behave differently
in different social situations and at different points
in time. This is especially relevant in the context
of our dataset, where the debates happen over a
period of 10 months, and the power and status
of each candidate in the election campaign vary
greatly within that time period.

We propose a variant of SITS which takes this
issue into account. We consider each candi-
date to have a different “persona” in each debate.
To accomplish this, we create new identities for
each candidate x for each debate d, denoted by
x d. For example, ‘ROMNEY 08-11-2011’ de-

notes the persona of the candidate ROMNEY in
the debate held on 08-11-2011. Running the SITS
system using this formulation, we obtain different
πx d values for candidate x for different debates,
capturing different topic shift tendencies of x.

4.3 Execution

We perform both the SITS and SITSvar analyses
on the 20 debates in our corpus. We used the non-
parametric version of SITS for both runs, since it
systemically estimates the number of topics in the
data. We set the maximum number of iterations
at 5000, sample lag at 100 and initial number of
topics at 25. We refer the reader to (Nguyen et al.,
2013) for details on these parameters.

For each candidate, we calculate the mean and
standard deviation of the topic shift tendency
(πx d) of his or her personas across all debates
he or she participated in. We then average these
means and standard deviations, and obtain an av-
erage mean of 0.14 and an average standard devia-
tion of 0.09. This shows that the topic shift tenden-
cies of candidates vary by a considerable amount
across debates. Figure 1 shows the πx d value fluc-
tuating across different debates.

5 Analysis of Topic Shift Features

Nguyen et al. (2013) used the SITS analysis as a
means to model influence in multi party conver-
sations. They propose two features to detect in-
fluencers: Total Topic Shifts (TTS) and Weighted
Topic Shifts (WTS). TTS(x, d) captures the ex-
pected number of topic shifts the individual x
makes in conversation d. This expectation is cal-
culated through the empirical average of samples

1483



Feature Set Feature Correlation

TopSh
Total Topic Shifts (TTS) 0.12

Weighted Topic Shifts (WTS) 0.16

TopShvar
Total Topic Shifts (TTSvar) 0.12

Weighted Topic Shifts (WTSvar) 0.15

Topic Shift Tendency (PIvar) -0.27

Table 1: Pearson Correlations for Topical Features
boldface denotes statistical significance (p < 0.05)

from the Gibbs sampler, after a burn-in period. We
refer the reader to (Nguyen et al., 2013) for more
details on how this value is computed. WTS(x, d)
is the value of TTS(x, d) weighted by 1− πx. The
intuition here is that a topic shift by a speaker with
low topic shift tendency must be weighted higher
than that by a speaker with a high topic shift ten-
dency. We use these two features as well, and de-
note the set of these two features as TopSh.

We also extract the TTS and WTS features us-
ing our SITSvar variation of topic segmentation
analysis and denote them as TTSvar and WTSvar

respectively. In addition, we also use a feature
PIvar(x, d) which is the πx d value obtained by the
SITSvar for candidate x in debate d. It captures the
topic shifting tendency of candidate x in debate d.
(We do not include the SITS πx value in our corre-
lation analysis since it is constant across debates.)
We denote the set of these three features obtained
from the SITSvar run as TopShvar.

Table 1 shows the Pearson’s product correla-
tion between each topical feature and candidate’s
power. We obtain a highly significant (p = 0.002)
negative correlation between topic shift tendency
of a candidate (PI) and his/her power. In other
words, the variation in the topic shifting tenden-
cies is significantly correlated with the candidates’
recent poll standings. Candidates who are higher
up in the polls tend to stay on topic while the
candidates with less power attempt to shift top-
ics more often. This is in line with our previous
findings from (Prabhakaran et al., 2014) that can-
didates with higher power attempt to shift topics
less often than others when responding to moder-
ators. It is also in line with the findings by Prab-
hakaran et al. (2013a) that candidates with higher
power tend not to interrupt others. On the other
hand, we did not obtain any significant correlation
for the features proposed by Nguyen et al. (2013).

6 Topic Shift Features in Power Ranker

In this section, we investigate the utility of the
SITS and SITSvar based topic shift features de-
scribed above in the problem of automatically
ranking the participants of debates based on their
power. Prabhakaran et al. (2013b) define the prob-
lem as follows: given a debate d with a set of par-
ticipants Cd = {x1, x2, ...xn} and corresponding
power indices P (xi) for 1 < i < n, find a ranking
function r : Cd → {1...n} such that for all 1 <
i, j < n, r(xi) > r(xj) ⇐⇒ P (xi) > P (xj).
For our experiments, we use the SVMrank based
supervised learned power ranker presented in that
work to estimate this ranking function.

As we do in (Prabhakaran et al., 2013b), we
here report Kendall’s Tau and Normalized Dis-
counted Cumulative Gain values (NDCG and
NDCG@3) on 5-fold cross validation (at the de-
bate level). All three metrics are based on the
number of rank inversions between original and
predicted ranking. While Tau treats all rank in-
versions equal, NDCG and NDCG@3 penalize
the inversions happening in the top of the ranked
list more than those happening in the bottom.
NDCG@3 focuses only on the top 3 positions in
the ranked list.

We use the best performing feature set of (Prab-
hakaran et al., 2013b) as the baseline (BL), which
contains three features: Words Deviation (WD),
Question Deviation (QD) and Mention Percent-
age (MP). WD and QD capture the deviation of
percentage of words spoken by the candidate and
questions addressed to the candidate from the ex-
pected fair share of those measures in the particu-
lar debate. The fair share for debate d is 1/|Cd|—
the percentage each candidate would have gotten
for each feature if it was equally distributed. This
deviation measure is used instead of the raw per-

1484



Kendall’s Tau NDCG NDCG@3

BL 0.55 0.962 0.932
TopSh 0.36 0.907 0.830
TopShvar 0.39 0.919 0.847
BL + TopSh 0.59 0.967 0.929
BL + TopShvar 0.60 0.970 0.937
BL + TopSh + TopShvar 0.59 0.968 0.934

Table 2: Power Ranker results using topic shift features on 5-fold cross validation
BL: Baseline system (Prabhakaran et al., 2013b)

NDCG: Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain

centage in order to handle the fact that the percent-
age values are dependent on the number of partic-
ipants in a debate, which varied from 9 to 4. MP
captures the percentage of mentions of the candi-
date within a debate.

Table 2 shows the results obtained using the
baseline features (BL) as well as combinations of
TopSh and TopShvar features. The baseline sys-
tem obtained a Kendall Tau of 0.55, NDCG of
0.962 and NDCG@3 of 0.932. The topic shift
features by themselves performed much worse,
with TopShvar posting marginally better results
than TopSh. Combining the topic shift and base-
line features increases performance considerably.
TopShvar obtained better performance than TopSh
across the board. BL + TopShvar posted the over-
all best system obtaining a Tau of 0.60, NDCG
of 0.970, and NDCG@3 of 0.937. These results
demonstrates the utility of topic shift features in
the power ranking problem, especially using the
SITSvar formulation. We also experimented with
all subsets of TopSh and TopShvar; the best results
were obtained using all features in each set.

7 Related Work

Studies in sociolinguistics (e.g., (Ng et al., 1993;
Ng et al., 1995; Reid and Ng, 2000)) have long
established that dialog structure in interactions re-
lates to power and influence. Researchers in the
NLP community have studied power and influence
in various genres of interactions, such as organiza-
tional email threads (Bramsen et al., 2011; Gilbert,
2012; Prabhakaran and Rambow, 2013; Prab-
hakaran and Rambow, 2014), online discussion fo-
rums (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al., 2012; Bi-
ran et al., 2012) and online chat dialogs (Strza-
lkowski et al., 2012). The correlates analyzed in
these studies range from word and phrase patterns,

to derivatives of such patterns such as linguistic
coordination, to deeper dialogic features such as
argumentation and dialog acts. Our work differs
from these studies in that we study the correlates
of power in topic dynamics. Furthermore, we an-
alyze spoken interactions.

8 Conclusion

In this paper, we studied how topic shift patterns
in the 2012 Republican presidential debates corre-
late with the power of candidates. We proposed an
alternate formulation of the SITS topic segmenta-
tion system that captures fluctuations in each can-
didate’s topic shifting tendencies, which we found
to be correlated with their power. We also showed
that features based on topic shift improve the pre-
diction of the relative rankings of candidates. In
future work, we will explore a model that cap-
tures individuals’ inherent topic shift propensities,
while also capturing their fluctuations due to so-
cial factors.

Acknowledgments

This paper is based upon work supported by the
DARPA DEFT Program. The views expressed are
those of the authors and do not reflect the official
policy or position of the Department of Defense or
the U.S. Government. We also thank the anony-
mous reviewers for their constructive feedback.

1485



References
Or Biran, Sara Rosenthal, Jacob Andreas, Kathleen

McKeown, and Owen Rambow. 2012. Detecting
influencers in written online conversations. In Pro-
ceedings of the Second Workshop on Language in
Social Media, pages 37–45, Montréal, Canada, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Philip Bramsen, Martha Escobar-Molano, Ami Patel,
and Rafael Alonso. 2011. Extracting social power
relationships from natural language. In Proceedings
of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, pages 773–782, Portland, Oregon, USA,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Lillian Lee,
Bo Pang, and Jon Kleinberg. 2012. Echoes of
power: language effects and power differences in
social interaction. In Proceedings of the 21st in-
ternational conference on World Wide Web, WWW
’12, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Eric Gilbert. 2012. Phrases that signal workplace hier-
archy. In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, CSCW
’12, pages 1037–1046, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Marco Guerini, Carlo Strapparava, and Oliviero Stock.
2008. Corps: A corpus of tagged political speeches
for persuasive communication processing. Journal
of Information Technology & Politics, 5(1):19–32.

Sik Hung Ng, Dean Bell, and Mark Brooke. 1993.
Gaining turns and achieving high in influence rank-
ing in small conversational groups. British Journal
of Social Psychology, pages 32, 265–275.

Sik Hung Ng, Mark Brooke, and Michael Dunne.
1995. Interruption and in influence in discussion
groups. Journal of Language and Social Psychol-
ogy, pages 14(4),369–381.

Viet-An Nguyen, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Philip
Resnik. 2012. Sits: A hierarchical nonparametric
model using speaker identity for topic segmentation
in multiparty conversations. In Proceedings of the
50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 78–87, Jeju Island, Korea, July. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Viet-An Nguyen, Jordan Boyd-Graber, Philip Resnik,
Deborah A. Cai, Jennifer E. Midberry, and Yuanxin
Wang. 2013. Modeling topic control to detect in-
fluence in conversations using nonparametric topic
models. Machine Learning, pages 1–41.

Vinodkumar Prabhakaran and Owen Rambow. 2013.
Written dialog and social power: Manifestations of
different types of power in dialog behavior. In Pro-
ceedings of the IJCNLP, pages 216–224, Nagoya,
Japan, October. Asian Federation of Natural Lan-
guage Processing.

Vinodkumar Prabhakaran and Owen Rambow. 2014.
Predicting power relations between participants in
written dialog from a single thread. In Proceed-
ings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Pa-
pers), pages 339–344, Baltimore, Maryland, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Ajita John, and Dorée D.
Seligmann. 2013a. Power dynamics in spoken in-
teractions: a case study on 2012 republican primary
debates. In Proceedings of the 22nd international
conference on World Wide Web companion, pages
99–100. International World Wide Web Conferences
Steering Committee.

Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Ajita John, and Dorée D.
Seligmann. 2013b. Who had the upper hand? rank-
ing participants of interactions based on their rela-
tive power. In Proceedings of the IJCNLP, pages
365–373, Nagoya, Japan, October. Asian Federation
of Natural Language Processing.

Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Ashima Arora, and Owen
Rambow. 2014. Power of confidence: How poll
scores impact topic dynamics in political debates.
In Proceedings of the ACL 2014 Workshop on Lan-
guage Technologies and Computational Social Sci-
ence, page 49, Baltimore, MD, USA, June. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Scott A. Reid and Sik Hung Ng. 2000. Conversation as
a resource for in influence: evidence for prototypical
arguments and social identification processes. Euro-
pean Journal of Social Psych., pages 30, 83–100.

Andrew Rosenberg and Julia Hirschberg. 2009.
Charisma perception from text and speech. Speech
Communication, 51(7):640–655.

Yanchuan Sim, Brice D. L. Acree, Justin H. Gross, and
Noah A. Smith. 2013. Measuring ideological pro-
portions in political speeches. In Proceedings of the
2013 Conference on EMNLP, pages 91–101, Seattle,
Washington, USA, October. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Tomek Strzalkowski, Samira Shaikh, Ting Liu,
George Aaron Broadwell, Jenny Stromer-Galley,
Sarah Taylor, Umit Boz, Veena Ravishankar, and
Xiaoai Ren. 2012. Modeling leadership and influ-
ence in multi-party online discourse. In Proceedings
of COLING, pages 2535–2552, Mumbai, India, De-
cember. The COLING 2012 Organizing Committee.

Matt Thomas, Bo Pang, and Lillian Lee. 2006. Get out
the vote: Determining support or opposition from
congressional floor-debate transcripts. In Proceed-
ings of the 2006 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 327–335,
Sydney, Australia, July. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

1486


