



















































Verbal and Nonverbal Clues for Real-life Deception Detection


Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2336–2346,
Lisbon, Portugal, 17-21 September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.

Verbal and Nonverbal Clues for Real-life Deception Detection

Verónica Pérez-Rosas, Mohamed Abouelenien, Rada Mihalcea,
Yao Xiao, CJ Linton, Mihai Burzo

University of Michigan
(vrncapr,zmohamed,mihalcea,xyaoinum,cjlint,mburzo)@umich.edu

Abstract

Deception detection has been receiving
an increasing amount of attention from
the computational linguistics, speech, and
multimodal processing communities. One
of the major challenges encountered in this
task is the availability of data, and most of
the research work to date has been con-
ducted on acted or artificially collected
data. The generated deception models
are thus lacking real-world evidence. In
this paper, we explore the use of multi-
modal real-life data for the task of decep-
tion detection. We develop a new decep-
tion dataset consisting of videos from real-
life scenarios, and build deception tools
relying on verbal and nonverbal features.
We achieve classification accuracies in the
range of 77-82% when using a model that
extracts and fuses features from the lin-
guistic and visual modalities. We show
that these results outperform the human
capability of identifying deceit.

1 Introduction

As deceptive behavior occurs on a daily basis in
different areas of life (Meyer, 2010; Smith et al.,
2014), the need arises for automated methodolo-
gies to detect deception in an efficient, yet reliable
manner. There are many applications that can ben-
efit from automatic deception identification, such
as airport security screening, crime investigation
and interrogation, interviews, advertisement, and
others. In many of these settings, the polygraph
test has been used as the main method to identify
deceptive behavior. However, this method requires
the use of skin-contact devices and human exper-
tise, making it infeasible for large-scale applica-
tions. Moreover, polygraph tests were shown to be
misleading in multiple cases (Vrij, 2001; Gannon
et al., 2009), as human judgment is often biased.

Given the difficulties associated with the use
of polygraph-like methods, learning-based ap-
proaches have been proposed to address the de-
ception detection task using a number of modali-
ties, including text (Feng et al., 2012) and speech
(Hirschberg et al., 2005; Newman et al., 2003).
Unlike the polygraph methods, learning-based
methods for deception detection rely mainly on
data collected from deceivers and truth-tellers.
The data is usually elicited from human contrib-
utors, in a lab setting or via crowdsourcing. An
important problem identified in this data-driven re-
search is the lack of real data. Because of the arti-
ficial setting, the subjects may not be emotionally
aroused, as they may not take the experiments seri-
ously given the lack of motivation and/or penalty.

In this paper, we describe what we believe is a
first attempt at building a multimodal system that
detects deception in real-life settings. We collect
a dataset consisting of 118 deceptive and truthful
video clips, from real trials and live street inter-
views aired in television shows. We use the tran-
scription of these videos to extract several linguis-
tic features, and we manually annotate the videos
for the presence of several gestures that are used to
extract nonverbal features. We then build a system
that jointly uses the verbal and nonverbal modali-
ties to automatically detect the presence of decep-
tion. Our experiments show that the multimodal
system can identify deception with an accuracy in
the range of 77-82%, significantly improving over
the baseline. In addition, we present a study on
the human ability to detect deception in single or
multimodal data streams, and show that our sys-
tem outperforms humans on this task.

2 Dataset

Our goal is to build a multimodal collection of oc-
currences of real deception, which will allow us
to analyze both verbal and nonverbal behaviors in
relation to deception.

2336



Figure 1: Sample screenshots showing facial displays and hand gestures from real-life deception and
truthful clips. Starting at the top left-hand corner: deceptive interview with up gaze (Up), deceptive
interview with side gaze (Side), deceptive trial with both hands (Both-H), truthful trial with forward
head (Forward), truthful interview with side turn (Side-Turn), and truthful interview with single hand
(Single-H).

Truthful Deceptive
I was sentenced to forty to sixty years in prison
for this crime that I didn’t commit. At the trial
the judge had exceeded the sentence guidelines
because he said I failed to show remorse. And I
told him, you know, I felt terrible for what happen
to this woman, shouldn’t happen to anyone, but I
can’t show remorse for something I didn’t do.

We had some drinks at the bar, maybe one ... two.
um I got onto the dance floor myself as I ex-
plained, um I have been a trained dancer for some
time, going to be able to dance freely is like a ...
release. I’m very much in my own space when I
do that and so I got up, and I was dancing alone
on the dance floor.

It’s difficult to pick just one but um I think Ten-
der Mercies uh is ... really captured my imagi-
nation um when I was in junior high. Had a lot
to do with Robert Duval’s performance certainly
and that got me excited about the possibility of
um .... pulling off an acting career for myself.

Yeah, yeah he was convincing as a wolf. Ahhh
actually you know ahhh this is like crazy I’m ter-
rified from wolves, it’s my worst fear even though
they don’t exist but thats my worst fear, sharks
and stuff like that. Yeah its my worst fear, I am
being honest with you.

Table 1: Sample transcripts for deceptive and truthful clips. The first row presents transcripts from the
Trials domain while the second shows transcripts corresponding to the Interviews domain.

2.1 Data Collection

To collect real deception data, we start by identi-
fying online multimedia sources where deceptive
behavior can be observed and verified. We specif-
ically target videos of people, on which we en-
force some of the constraints imposed by current
data processing technologies: the person in the
video should be in front of the camera; her face
should be clearly visible; visual quality should
be clear enough to identify the facial expressions;
and finally, audio quality should be clear enough
to hear the voices and understand what the per-
son is saying. We collect video clips from pub-
lic real trials and interviews aired during television
shows, where the truth or falsehood of the partic-

ipant’s statements ends up being known. Video
clips from trials consist of statements from wit-
nesses and defendants in the same trial. In or-
der to have a clear distinction between deceptive
and truthful trial videos portraying defendants, the
process of labeling the trial relies on the verdict.
Thus, clips with a guilty verdict are considered
deceptive whereas clips with a non-guilty verdict
or exoneration are labeled as truthful. Clips con-
taining witness testimonies are labeled as truth-
ful if their statements are verified by police in-
vestigations. Examples of trials included in our
dataset are Jodi Arias, Andrea Sneiderman, and
Amanda Hayes. Exoneree’s statements were taken
from “The Innocence Project” (http://www.
innocenceproject.org).

2337



Deceptive and truthful responses are also col-
lected from TV shows and interviews. Examples
of such shows are “Lie Witness,” “Golden Balls,”
and the “American Film Institute” and “RevYOU”
You-Tube channels. Deceptive videos portray sce-
narios where interviewees’ responses were known
to be a lie. For example, the interviewer asks a ran-
dom individual on his opinion on a non-existing
film where the interviewee fabricates a story. On
the other hand, truthful videos are collected from
individuals asked on their opinions on real movies.

Given our goals and constraints, data collec-
tion ended up being a lengthy and laborious pro-
cess consisting of several iterations of Web min-
ing, data processing and analysis, and content val-
idation.

The final dataset includes 118 videos, includ-
ing 59 that are labeled as deceptive and 59 la-
beled as truthful. Among them, 62 belong to the
TV street interviews and shows category (Inter-
views) with 28 deceptive and 34 truthful video
clips, and 56 belong to the trials category (Trials)
with 31 deceptive and 25 truthful clips. The aver-
age length of the videos in the dataset is 27.28 sec-
onds, with an average length of 33.02 seconds for
the truthful clips and 21.54 seconds for the decep-
tive clips. Collected trial samples cover famous
murder cases, while street interviews cover sev-
eral topics such as movies, music, politics, and re-
ligion. The dataset contains 23 unique female and
39 unique male speakers, with their ages ranging
approximately between 16 and 60 years.

2.2 Transcriptions and Nonverbal Behavior
Annotations

Our goal is to analyze both verbal and nonverbal
behavior to understand their relation to deception.

First, all the video clips were manually tran-
scribed. The transcription was performed by two
transcribers using the Elan software (Wittenburg
et al., 2006). We asked transcribers to include
word repetitions and fillers such as um, ah, and
uh, as well as long pauses that were marked using
three consecutive dots. The final set of transcrip-
tions contain 7835 words, with an average of 66
words per transcript. Table 1 shows transcriptions
of sample deceptive and truthful statements from
both trials and reality shows.

Second, we annotate the gestures1 observed
during the interactions in the video clips. We

1As done in the Human-Computer Interaction commu-
nity, we use the term “gesture” to broadly refer to body move-
ments, including facial expressions and hand gestures.

Gesture Category Agreement Kappa
Facial Expressions 72.88% 0.576
Eyebrows 80.51% 0.656
Eyes 68.64% 0.517
Gaze 61.40% 0.432
Mouth Openness 77.97% 0.361
Mouth Lips 82.20% 0.684
Head Movements 55.08% 0.420
Hand Movements 91.53% 0.858
Hand Trajectory 84.75% 0.753
Average 75.00% 0.584

Table 2: Gesture annotation agreement

specifically focus on the annotation of facial dis-
plays and hand movements, as they have been pre-
viously found to correlate with deceptive behav-
ior (Depaulo et al., 2003). The gesture annotation
is performed using the MUMIN coding scheme
(Allwood et al., 2007).

In the MUMIN scheme, facial displays consist
of several different facial expressions associated
with eyebrows, eyes, gaze, and mouth. Smile,
laughter, and scowl are also included, as well as
general head and hand movements.

The multimodal annotation was performed by
two annotators using the Elan software (Witten-
burg et al., 2006). We decided to perform the ges-
ture annotations at video level, rather than at utter-
ance level, because the overall judgment of truth-
fulness and deceitfulness is based on the whole
video content. During the annotation process, an-
notators were allowed to watch each video clip as
many times as they needed. They were asked to
identify the facial displays and hand gestures that
were most frequently observed or dominating dur-
ing the entire clip duration. For each video clip,
the annotators had to choose one label for each of
the nine gestures listed in Table 3.

Table 3 shows the frequency counts associated
with the nine gestures considered during the an-
notation. Note that the counts under each gesture
add up to 118, reflecting the fact that for every ges-
ture, the annotators had to choose one label for ev-
ery video clip. When none of the labels applied,
the “Other” category was selected. In the case
of gestures associated with hand movements, the
“Other” label also accounted for those cases where
the speaker’s hands were not moving or were not
visible.

After all the video clips were annotated for
gestures, the inter-annotator agreement was mea-

2338



Label Count
Eyebrows

Frown (Frowning) 17
Raise (Raising) 71
Other 30

Eyes
X-open (Exaggerated opening) 17
Close-BE (Closing both) 7
Closing-E (Closing one) 1
Close-R (Closing repeated) 20
Other 73

Gaze
Interlocutor 69
Up 7
Down 14
Side 24
Other 4

Label Count
General Facial Expressions

Smile 41
Scowl 13
Laugh (Laughter) 1
Other 63

Mouth Openness
Close-M (Closed mouth) 26
Open-M (Open mouth) 92

Mouth Lips
Up-C (Corners up) 61
Down-C (Corners down) 51
Protruded 1
Retracted 5

Hand Movements
Both hands (Both-H) 31
Single hands (Single-H) 26
Other 61

Label Count
Hand Trajectory

Up (Upwards) 13
Down (Downwards) 5
Sideways 5
Complex 33
Other 62

Head Movements
Down (Single nod) 3
Down-R (Repeated nods) 48
Forward (Move forward) 3
Back (Move backward) 3
Side-tilt (Single tilt) 8
Side-Tilt-R (Repeated tilts) 9
Side-Turn 9
Side-Turn-R (Shake repeated) 26
Waggle 3
Other 6

Table 3: Frequency counts for nine facial displays and hand gestures

sured. Table 2 shows the observed annotation
agreement between the two annotators, along with
the Kappa statistic. The agreement measure rep-
resents the percentage of times the two annotators
agreed on the same label for each gesture category.
For instance, 72.88% of the time the annotators
agreed on the label assigned to the General Face
category. On average, the observed agreement was
measured at 75%, with a Kappa of 0.58 (macro-
averaged over the nine categories), which reflects
substantial agreement. Observed agreement for
Head Movements and Gaze is noticeably lower
than other categories, which can be attributed to
a higher number of available gesture choices, as
seen in Table 3.

3 Features of Verbal and Nonverbal
Behaviors

Given the multimodal nature of our dataset, we de-
cided to focus on the linguistic and gesture compo-
nents. In this section, we describe the sets of fea-
tures extracted for each modality, which will then
be used to build classifiers of deception.

3.1 Verbal Features
We implement three types of features, consisting
of unigrams, psycholinguistic features, and syn-
tactic complexity features.

Unigrams. We extract unigrams derived from
the bag-of-words representation of the video
transcripts. The unigram features are en-
coded as word frequencies and include all the
words present in the transcripts.

Psycholinguistic Features. The Linguistic Word
Count (LIWC) is a psycholinguistics lexicon
that has been frequently used to incorporate
semantic and psychological information into
linguistic analysis (Pennebaker and Francis,
1999). It has been successfully used in pre-
vious work on deception detection (Newman
et al., 2003; Mihalcea and Strapparava, 2009;
Ott et al., 2011). We obtain features for each
of the 80 psycholinguistic classes present in
the lexicon by calculating the percentage of
words in the transcription belonging to each
class.

Syntactic Complexity. We also extract features
to measure the syntactic complexity of the
speech produced by the speakers in truth-
ful and deceptive clips. This set of features
is motivated by previous research that has
suggested that deceivers’ speech has lower
complexity (Depaulo et al., 2003). We use
the tool described in (Lu, 2010), which gen-
erates indexes of syntactic complexity, in-
cluding general complexity metrics, length of
production, and amount of coordination. The
set of features consists of fourteen indexes
including statistics related to T-units, which
are linguistic units that include a main clause
in addition to attached subordinate clauses.
T-unit analysis is extensively used to ana-
lyze syntactic complexity in speech and writ-
ten content. The set of features includes the
mean length of sentence, mean length of T-

2339



0	  

0.2	  

0.4	  

0.6	  

0.8	  

1	  

Smile	   Close-­‐R	   Side-­‐Turn-­‐R	   Raise	   Interlocutor	   Side	   Open-­‐M	   Down-­‐R	   Single-­‐H	  

DecepCve	  	   Truthful	  

Figure 2: Distribution of nonverbal features for deceptive and truthful groups

unit, mean length of clause, clauses per sen-
tence, verb phrases per T-unit, clauses per T-
unit, dependent clauses per clause, dependent
clauses per T-unit, T-units per sentence, com-
plex T-unit ratio, coordinate phrases per T-
unit, coordinate phrases per clause, complex
nominals per T-unit, and complex nominals
per clause.

3.2 Nonverbal Features
The nonverbal features are derived from the an-
notations performed using the MUMIN coding
scheme as described in section 2.2. We create a
binary feature for each of the 40 available gesture
labels. Each feature indicates the presence of a
gesture only if it is observed during the majority
of the interaction duration. The generated features
represent nine different gesture categories cover-
ing facial displays and hand movements.

Facial Displays. These are facial expressions or
head movements displayed by the speaker
during the deceptive or truthful interaction.
They include all the behaviors listed in Table
3 under the General Facial Expressions, Eye-
brows, Eyes, Mouth Openness, Mouth Lips,
and Head Movements.

Hand Gestures. The second broad category cov-
ers gestures made with the hands, and it in-
cludes the Hand Movements and Hand Tra-
jectories listed in Table 3.

4 Experiments

We start our experiments with an analysis of the
nonverbal behaviors occurring in deceptive and
truthful videos. We compare the percentage of
each behavior as observed in each class. For in-
stance, there is a total of 41 videos in the dataset

Feature Set SVM DT RF
Unigrams 69.49% 76.27% 67.79%
Psycholinguistic 53.38% 50.00% 66.10%
Syntactic Complexity 52.54% 62.71% 53.38%
Facial Displays 78.81% 74.57% 67.79%
Hand Gestures 59.32% 57.62% 57.62%
Unigr.+Facial Disp. 71.18% 70.33% 68.64%
All Verbal 65.25% 63.55 % 57.62 %
All Nonverbal 75.42% 68.64% 72.03%
All Features 77.11% 69.49% 73.72%

Table 4: Deception classifiers using individual and
combined sets of verbal and nonverbal features.

that include the Smile feature (as shown in Ta-
ble 3), out of which 12 are part of the deceptive
set of 59 videos, and 29 are part of the truthful
set (again, of 59 videos). Hence, the percentages
for this feature are 20.33% in the deceptive class,
and 49.13% in the truthful class. Figure 2 shows
the percentages of all the nonverbal features for
which we observe noticeable differences for the
deceptive and truthful groups. As the figure sug-
gests, facial displays seem to help differentiate be-
tween the deceptive and truthful conditions. For
instance, we can observe that truth-tellers smile
(Smile) and blink more (Close-R). Interestingly
deceivers seem to make more eye contact (Inter-
locutor gaze) and nod (Side-Turn-R) more fre-
quently than truth-tellers. This agrees with the
findings in (Depaulo et al., 2003) that liars who are
more motivated to get away with their lies (i.e., tri-
als) are likely to increase their eye-contact behav-
ior.

Motivated by these results, we proceed to con-
duct further experiments to evaluate the perfor-
mance of the extracted features using a machine
learning approach.

2340



Feature Set SVM
All 77.11%
– Hand gestures 74.57%
– Facial displays 64.40%
– Syntactic 76.27%
– Semantic 72.03%
– Unigrams 73.72%

Table 5: Feature ablation study.

We run our learning experiments on the real-
deception dataset introduced earlier. Given the
even distribution between deceptive and truthful
clips, the baseline on this dataset is 50%. For
each video clip, we create feature vectors formed
by combinations of the verbal and nonverbal fea-
tures described in the previous section. We build
deception classifiers using three classification al-
gorithms: Support Vector Machines (SVM), De-
cision Trees (DT), and Random Forest (RF).2 We
run several comparative experiments using leave-
one-out cross-validation. Table 4 shows the accu-
racy figures obtained by the three classifiers on the
major feature groups described in Section 3. As
shown in this table, the facial displays classifier
achieves the highest accuracy among the individ-
ual classifiers, followed by the unigrams classifier.

We also evaluate classifiers that rely on com-
bined sets of features. The nonverbal features
clearly outperform the verbal features, and the
classifier that includes all the features improves
over the classifiers that rely on all the verbal fea-
tures or all the nonverbal features. Importantly,
several of the classifiers improve significantly over
the baseline.

4.1 Analysis of Feature Contribution

To better understand the contribution of the dif-
ferent feature sets to the overall classifier perfor-
mance, we conduct an ablation study where we re-
move one group of features at a time. Given that
SVM had the best performance in our initial set of
experiments, we run all our analysis experiments
only using this classifier. Table 5 shows the accu-
racies obtained when one feature group is removed
and the deception classifier is built using the re-
maining features. From this table, we can again
observe that Facial Displays contribute the most
to the classifier performance, while Syntactic Fea-
tures show the lowest contribution.

2We use the implementation available in the Weka toolkit
with the default parameters.

0	   0.2	   0.4	   0.6	   0.8	   1	  

Side	  turn	  

Up	  gaze	  

Blinking	  

Smile	  

Lips	  down	  

Open	  mouth	  

Single	  hand	  

Closing	  both	  eyes	  

Raising	  eyebrows	  

Side	  Tilt	  

Feature	  Weights	  

Figure 3: Weights of top nonverbal features

For a closer look at the contribution of indi-
vidual features included in the group of Facial
Displays, we analyzed the absolute values of the
weights assigned by the learning algorithm to the
features in this group. Figure 3 shows the fea-
tures normalized with respect to the largest fea-
ture weight. The five most predictive features are
the presence of side turns, up gazes, blinking, and
smiling, which we previously identified as possi-
ble indicators of deception. This further confirms
our initial hypothesis that gestures associated with
human interaction are an important component of
human deception.

We also analyze the contribution of the lin-
guistic features. Using the linguistic ethnogra-
phy method (Mihalcea and Pulman, 2009), we ob-
tain the most dominant LIWC word classes asso-
ciated with deceptive and truthful transcripts ex-
tracted from trials and interviews clips. Results
are shown in Table 6. Interestingly, the most dom-
inant classes in truthful clips, regardless of being
from interviews or trials, correspond to words re-
lated to Family, Home, and Humans. This sug-
gests that truth-tellers show similar word usage
when interviewed on a real scenario. On the other
hand, dominant classes associated to deceivers are
less consistent as they discuss aspects related to
the topic being discussed. For instance, while be-
ing interviewed about a non-existing movie, de-
ceivers talk about their Past, Assent, and use Mo-
tion words in order to support their lies. In con-
trast, while being on trial stating their (false) inno-
cence, they use Anxiety, Anger, and negative emo-

2341



Truthful
Interviews Trials

Class Score Class Score
Metaphor 2.98 You 3.99
Money 2.74 Family 3.07
Inhibition 2.74 Home 2.45
Home 2.13 Humans 1.87
Humans 2.02 Posemo 1.81
Family 1.96 Insight 1.64

Deceptive
Interviews Trials

Class Score Class Score
Assent 4.81 Anger 2.61
Past 2.59 Anxiety 2.61
Sexual 2.00 Certain 2.28
Other 1.87 Death 1.96
Motion 1.68 Physical 1.77
Negemo 1.44 Negemo 1.52

Table 6: LIWC word classes most strongly associ-
ated with deception and truth.

tion words (class Negemo). In line with earlier ob-
servations (Mihalcea and Strapparava, 2009), de-
ceptive texts include more words that reflect cer-
tainty (class Certain, with words such as com-
pletely, truly, always) and more references to oth-
ers (class Other, with words such as she, day, him).

4.2 Domain Experiments

We perform three sets of experiments to determine
the role played by the domain. The first set of ex-
periments uses only the Interviews video clips (62
in total), and the results are shown in the left col-
umn of Table 7. The second set uses only the Tri-
als instances (56 in total), with results shown in the
right column of Table 7. Finally, we also perform
cross-domain experiments, with the training data
drawn from one domain and the test data from the
other. The results of these experiments are shown
in Table 8. Given the uneven distribution of the
truthful and deceptive video clips in two domains,
the baselines are 54.83% for the Interviews do-
main (34 truthful, 28 deceptive), and 55.35% for
the Trials domain (25 truthful, 31 deceptive).

What we learn from these experiments is that
the domain does matter. Despite the smaller
dataset, the experiments run on one domain at a
time lead to results that are higher than the ones
obtained with more data but with a mix of do-
mains. The cross-domain experiments also sup-
port this argument, as the performance drops sig-

Feature Set Interviews Trials
Baseline 54.83% 55.35%
Unigrams 75.80 % 82.14%
Psycholinguistics 59.67% 50.00%
Syntactic Complexity 54.83% 60.71%
Facial Displays 70.96% 80.35%
Hand Gestures 56.45% 48.21%
Unigr.+Facial Disp. 70.96% 76.78%
All Verbal 70.96% 64.28%
All Nonverbal 67.14% 83.92%
All features 79.03% 82.14%

Table 7: Deception classifiers for the Interviews
and Trials domains, using a SVM classifier trained
on individual and combined sets of verbal and
nonverbal features.

Training Test SVM
Trials Interviews 58.06%
Interviews Trials 58.92%

Table 8: Cross-domain classification results using
a SVM classifier trained on all the features

nificantly when there is no overlap in domain be-
tween the training and the test instances. Over-
all, in all our machine learning experiments, the
combined classifier that makes use of all the verbal
and nonverbal features achieves the best trade-off
between performance and robustness, as it always
leads to the best or second best performance across
all the experiments using individual or combined
feature sets. While a classifier based on an individ-
ual feature set can sometime lead to a better per-
formance (e.g., the Facial Displays classifier has
better performance when all the video clips are
used), that same classifier may not perform well in
another setting (e.g., the Facial Displays classifier
is significantly below the All Features classifier in
the domain experiments).

5 Human Performance

An important remaining question is concerned
with the human performance on the task of de-
ception detection. An answer to this question can
shed light on the difficulty of the task, and can also
place our results in perspective.

We conduct a study where we evaluate the hu-
man ability to identify deceit when exposed to four
different modalities: Text, consisting of the lan-
guage transcript; Audio, consisting of the audio
track of the clip; Silent video, consisting of only
the video with muted audio; and Full video, where

2342



Modality Agreement Kappa
Text 58.80% 0.047
Audio 66.70% 0.288
Silent video 52.00% 0.065
Full Video 61.60% 0.191

Table 9: Agreement among three human annota-
tors on text, audio, silent video, and full video
modalities.

Text Audio Silent video Full video
A1 54.24% 58.47% 50.85% 63.00%
A2 55.93% 67.80% 45.76% 68.00%
A3 65.25% 70.34% 55.93% 71.00%
Sys. 65.75% NA 75.42% 77.11%

Table 10: Performance of three annotators and
the developed automatic system (Sys) on the real-
deception dataset over four modalities.

audio and video are played simultaneously. We
create an annotation interface that shows an anno-
tator instances for each modality in random order,
and ask him or her to select a label of either “De-
ception” or “Truth” according to his or her percep-
tion of truthfulness or falsehood.

To avoid annotation bias, we show the modal-
ities in the following order: first we show either
Text or Silent video, then we show Audio, followed
by Full video. Note that apart from this constraint
which is enforced over the four modalities belong-
ing to each video clip, the order in which instances
are presented to an annotator is random. Further-
more, the annotators did not have access to any
information that would reveal the true label of an
instance. The only exception to this could have
been the annotators’ previous knowledge of some
of the public trials in our dataset. A discussion
with the annotators after the annotation took place
indicated however that this was not the case.

Three annotators labeled all the 118 video clips
in the dataset. Since four modalities were ex-
tracted from each video, each annotator annotated
a total of 412 instances. Annotators were not of-
fered a monetary reward and we considered their
judgments to be honest as they participated volun-
tarily in this experiment. Table 9 shows the ob-
served agreement and Kappa statistics among the
three annotators for each modality.3 The agree-
ment for most modalities is rather low and the
Kappa scores range between slight to fair agree-
ment. As noted before (Ott et al., 2011), this low

3Inter-rater agreement with multiple raters and variables.
https://mlnl.net/jg/software/ira/

agreement can be interpreted as an indication that
people are poor judges of deception.

We also determine each annotator’s perfor-
mance for each modality. The results, shown in
Table 10, additionally support the argument that
human judges have difficulty performing the de-
ception detection task. An interesting, yet perhaps
unsurprising observation is that the human perfor-
mance increases with the availability of modali-
ties. The poorest accuracy is obtained in Silent
video, followed by Text, Audio, and Full Video
where the judges have the highest performance.

Overall, our study indicates that detecting de-
ception is indeed a difficult task for humans and
further verifies previous findings where human
ability to spot liars was found to be slightly better
than chance (Aamodt and Custer, 2006). More-
over, the performance of the human annotators ap-
pears to be significantly below that of our system.

6 Related Work

Verbal Deception Detection. To date, several re-
search publications on verbal-based deception de-
tection have explored the identification of decep-
tive content in a variety of domains, including on-
line dating websites (Toma and Hancock, 2010;
Guadagno et al., 2012), forums (Warkentin et al.,
2010; Joinson and Dietz-Uhler, 2002), social net-
works (Ho and Hollister, 2013), and consumer re-
port websites (Ott et al., 2011; Li et al., 2014).
Research findings have shown the effectiveness
of features derived from text analysis, which fre-
quently includes basic linguistic representations
such as n-grams and sentence count statistics (Mi-
halcea and Strapparava, 2009), and also more
complex linguistic features derived from syntac-
tic CFG trees and part of speech tags (Feng et al.,
2012; Xu and Zhao, 2012). Research work has
also relied on the LIWC lexicon to build deception
models using machine learning approaches (Mi-
halcea and Strapparava, 2009; Ángela Almela et
al., 2012) and showed that the use of psycholin-
guistic information is helpful for the automatic
identification of deceit. Following the hypothe-
sis that deceivers might create less complex sen-
tences in an effort to conceal the truth and being
able to recall their lies more easily, several re-
searchers have also studied the relation between
text syntactic complexity and deception (Yancheva
and Rudzicz, 2013).

Nonverbal Deception Detection. Earlier ap-
proaches to nonverbal deception detection relied

2343



on polygraph tests to detect deceptive behavior.
These tests are mainly based on such physiolog-
ical features such as heart rate, respiration rate,
skin temperature. Several studies (Vrij, 2001;
Gannon et al., 2009; Derksen, 2012) indicated
that relying solely on physiological measurements
can be biased and misleading. Chittaranjan et
al. (Chittaranjan and Hung, 2010) created an au-
dio visual recording of the “Are you a Werewolf?”
game in order to detect deceptive behaviour us-
ing non-verbal audio cues and to predict the sub-
jects’ decisions in the game. For hand gestures,
blob analysis was used to detect deceit by track-
ing the hand movements of the subjects (Lu et al.,
2005; Tsechpenakis et al., 2005), or using geo-
metric features related to the hand and head mo-
tion (Meservy et al., 2005). Caso et al. (Caso
et al., 2006) identified particular hand gestures
that can be related to the act of deception using
data from simulated interviews. Cohen et al.
(2010) found that fewer iconic hand gestures were
a sign of a deceptive narration, and Hillman et al.
(2012) determined that increased speech prompt-
ing gestures were associated with deception while
increased rhythmic pulsing gestures were associ-
ated with truthful behavior. Also related is the
taxonomy of hand gestures developed by (Mar-
icchiolo et al., ) for deception and social behav-
ior. Facial expressions also played a critical role
in the identification of deception. (Ekman, 2001)
defined micro-expressions as relatively short in-
voluntary expressions, which can be indicative of
deceptive behavior. Moreover, these expressions
were analyzed using smoothness and asymmetry
measurements to further relate them to an act of
deceit (Ekman, 2003). Tian et al. (Tian et al.,
2005) considered features such as face orienta-
tion and facial expression intensity. Owayjan et
al. (Owayjan et al., 2012) extracted geometric-
based features from facial expressions, and Pfis-
ter and Pietikainen (Pfister and Pietikäinen, 2012)
developed a micro-expression dataset to identify
expressions that are clues for deception. Recently,
features from different modalities were integrated
in order to find a combination of multimodal fea-
tures with superior performance (Burgoon et al.,
2009; Jensen et al., 2010). A multimodal decep-
tion dataset consisting of linguistic, thermal, and
physiological features was introduced in (Pérez-
Rosas et al., 2014), which was then used to de-
velop a multimodal deception detection system
(Abouelenien et al., 2014). An extensive review

of approaches for evaluating human credibility us-
ing physiological, visual, acoustic, and linguistic
features is available in (Nunamaker et al., 2012).

7 Conclusions

In this paper we presented a study of multimodal
deception detection using real-life occurrences of
deceit. We introduced a novel dataset covering
recordings from public real trials and street inter-
views, and used this dataset to perform both qual-
itative and quantitative experiments. Our analy-
sis of nonverbal behaviors occurring in deceptive
and truthful videos brought insight into the ges-
tures that play a role in deception. We also built
classifiers relying on individual or combined sets
of verbal and nonverbal features, and showed that
we can achieve accuracies in the range of 77-82%.

Additional analyses showed the role played by
the various feature sets used in the experiments,
and the importance of the domain. To place our re-
sults in perspective and better understand the dif-
ficulty of the task, we performed a study of hu-
man ability to detect deception, which revealed
high disagreement among the annotators. Our au-
tomatic system outperforms the human detection
of deceit by 6-15%.

To our knowledge this is the first work to auto-
matically detect instances of deceit using both ver-
bal and nonverbal features extracted from real de-
ception data. In order to develop a fully automated
deception deception system, our future work will
address the use of automatic gesture and facial ex-
pression identification and automated speech tran-
scription. Our goal is to move forward towards a
real-time deception detection system.

The dataset introduced in this paper is publicly
available from http://lit.eecs.umich.edu.

Acknowledgments

This material is based in part upon work sup-
ported by National Science Foundation awards
#1344257 and #1355633, by grant #48503 from
the John Templeton Foundation, and by DARPA-
BAA-12-47 DEFT grant #12475008. Any opin-
ions, findings, and conclusions or recommenda-
tions expressed in this material are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Science Foundation, the John Tem-
pleton Foundation, or the Defense Advanced Re-
search Projects Agency.

2344



References
Michael G. Aamodt and Heather Custer. 2006. Who

can best catch a liar? a meta-analysis of individual
differences in detecting deception. Forensic Exam-
iner, 15(1):6–11.

Mohamed Abouelenien, Veronica Pérez-Rosas, Rada
Mihalcea, and Mihai Burzo. 2014. Deception de-
tection using a multimodal approach. In Proceed-
ings of the 16th International Conference on Mul-
timodal Interaction, pages 58–65, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

Jens Allwood, Loredana Cerrato, Kristiina Jokinen,
Costanza Navarretta, and Patrizia Paggio. 2007.
The mumin coding scheme for the annotation of
feedback, turn management and sequencing phe-
nomena. Language Resources and Evaluation,
41(3-4):273–287.

Ángela Almela, Rafael Valencia-Garcı́a, and Pascual
Cantos. 2012. Seeing through deception: A com-
putational approach to deceit detection in written
communication. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Computational Approaches to Deception Detection,
pages 15–22, Avignon, France, April.

Judee K. Burgoon, Douglas P. Twitchell, Matthew L.
Jensen, Thomas O. Meservy, Mark Adkins, John
Kruse, Amit V. Deokar, Gabriel Tsechpenakis, Shan
Lu, Dimitris N. Metaxas, et al. 2009. Detecting
concealment of intent in transportation screening: A
proof of concept. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, 10(1):103–112, March.

Letizia Caso, Fridanna Maricchiolo, Marino Bonaiuto,
Aldert Vrij, and Samantha Mann. 2006. The impact
of deception and suspicion on different hand move-
ments. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 30(1):1–19.

Gokul Chittaranjan and Hayley Hung. 2010. Are you
awerewolf? detecting deceptive roles and outcomes
in a conversational role-playing game. In 2010
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics Speech
and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 5334–5337,
March.

Doron Cohen, Geoffrey Beattie, and Heather Shovel-
ton. 2010. Nonverbal indicators of deception: How
iconic gestures reveal thoughts that cannot be sup-
pressed. Semiotica, 2010(182):133–174.

Bella Depaulo, Brian Malone, James Lindsay, Laura
Muhlenbruck, Kelly Charlton, and Harris Cooper.
2003. Cues to deception. Psychological Bulletin,
pages 74–118.

Maarten Derksen. 2012. Control and resistance in
the psychology of lying. Theory and Psychology,
22(2):196–212.

Paul Ekman, 2001. Telling Lies: Clues to Deceit in the
Marketplace, Politics and Marriage. Norton, W.W.
and Company.

Paul Ekman. 2003. Darwin, deception, and facial ex-
pression. Annals of the New York Academy of Sci-
ences, 1000(EMOTIONS INSIDE OUT: 130 Years
after Darwin’s The Expression of the Emotions in
Man and Animals):205–221.

Song Feng, Ritwik Banerjee, and Yejin Choi. 2012.
Syntactic stylometry for deception detection. In
Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2:
Short Papers), pages 171–175, Jeju Island, Korea,
July. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Theresa Gannon, Anthony Beech, and Tony Ward,
2009. Risk Assessment and the Polygraph, pages
129–154. John Wiley and Sons Ltd.

Rosanna E. Guadagno, Bradley M. Okdie, and Sara A.
Kruse. 2012. Dating deception: Gender, online
dating, and exaggerated self-presentation. Comput.
Hum. Behav., 28(2):642–647, March.

Jackie Hillman, Aldert Vrij, and Samantha Mann.
2012. Um they were wearing : The effect of de-
ception on specific hand gestures. Legal and Crimi-
nological Psychology, 17(2):336–345.

Julia Hirschberg, Stefan Benus, Jason M. Brenier,
Frank Enos, Sarah Friedman, Sarah Gilman, Cynthia
Girand, Martin Graciarena, Andreas Kathol, Laura
Michaelis, et al. 2005. Distinguishing deceptive
from non-deceptive speech. In In Proceedings of In-
terspeech 2005 - Eurospeech, pages 1833–1836.

Shuyuan Mary Ho and Jonathan M Hollister. 2013.
Guess who? an empirical study of gender decep-
tion and detection in computer-mediated communi-
cation. Proceedings of the American Society for In-
formation Science and Technology, 50(1):1–4.

Matthew Jensen, Thomas Meservy, Judee Burgoon,
and Jay Nunamaker. 2010. Automatic, multimodal
evaluation of human interaction. Group Decision
and Negotiation, 19(4):367–389.

Adam N. Joinson and Beth Dietz-Uhler. 2002. Ex-
planations for the perpetration of and reactions to
deception in a virtual community. Social Science
Computer Review, 20(3):275–289.

Jiwei Li, Myle Ott, Claire Cardie, and Eduard Hovy.
2014. Towards a general rule for identifying decep-
tive opinion spam. In Proceedings of the 52nd An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, Baltimore, Maryland, June.

Shan Lu, Gabriel Tsechpenakis, Dimitris Metaxas,
Matthew Jensen, and John Kruse. 2005. Blob anal-
ysis of the head and hands: A method for decep-
tion detection. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual
Hawaii International Conference on System Sci-
ences (HICSS’05), HICSS ’05, pages 20–29, Wash-
ington, DC, USA.

2345



Xiaofei Lu. 2010. Automatic analysis of syntac-
tic complexity in second language writing. Inter-
national Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 15(4):474–
496.

Fridanna Maricchiolo, Augusto Gnisci, and Marino
Bonaiuto. In Anna Esposito, AntoniettaM. Esposito,
Alessandro Vinciarelli, Rdiger Hoffmann, and Vin-
centC. Mller, editors, Cognitive Behavioural Sys-
tems, pages 405–416. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

Thomas Meservy, Matthew Jensen, John Kruse, Dou-
glas Twitchell, Gabriel Tsechpenakis, Judee Bur-
goon, Dimitris Metaxas, and Jay Nunamaker. 2005.
Deception detection through automatic, unobtrusive
analysis of nonverbal behavior. IEEE Intelligent
Systems, 20(5):36–43, September.

Pamela Meyer. 2010. Liespotting: Proven Techniques
to Detect Deception. New York: St. Martin’s.

Rada Mihalcea and Stephen Pulman. 2009. Linguistic
ethnography: Identifying dominant word classes in
text. In Computational Linguistics and Intelligent
Text Processing, pages 594–602. Springer.

Rada Mihalcea and Carlo Strapparava. 2009. The lie
detector: Explorations in the automatic recognition
of deceptive language. In Proceedings of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2009),
Singapore. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Matthew L. Newman, James W. Pennebaker, Diane S.
Berry, and Jane M. Richards. 2003. Lying words:
Predicting deception from linguistic styles. Person-
ality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29.

Jay F. Nunamaker, Judee K. Burgoon, Nathan W.
Twyman, Jeffrey Gainer Proudfoot, Ryan M.
Schuetzler, and Justin Scott Giboney. 2012. Estab-
lishing a foundation for automated human credibility
screening. In 2012 IEEE International Conference
on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), pages
202–211, June.

Myle Ott, Yejin Choi, Claire Cardie, and Jeffrey Han-
cock. 2011. Finding deceptive opinion spam by
any stretch of the imagination. In Proceedings of
the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies - Volume 1, HLT ’11, pages 309–319, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Michel Owayjan, Ahmad Kashour, Nancy Al Haddad,
Maurice Fadel, and Ghinwa Al Souki. 2012. The
design and development of a lie detection system
using facial micro-expressions. In 2012 2nd Inter-
national Conference on Advances in Computational
Tools for Engineering Applications (ACTEA), pages
33–38, Dec.

James W. Pennebaker and Martha E. Francis. 1999.
Linguistic inquiry and word count: LIWC. Erlbaum
Publishers.

Verónica Pérez-Rosas, Rada Mihalcea, Alexis Narvaez,
and Mihai Burzo. 2014. A multimodal dataset for
deception detection. In Proceedings of the Ninth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC-2014), Reykjavik, Iceland, May
26-31, 2014., pages 3118–3122.

Tomas Pfister and Matti Pietikäinen. 2012. Electronic
imaging & signal processing automatic identifica-
tion of facial clues to lies. SPIE Newsroom, January.

Madeline Smith, Jeffrey Hancock, Lindsay Reynolds,
and Jeremy Birnholtz. 2014. Everyday deception
or a few prolific liars? the prevalence of lies in
text messaging. Computers in Human Behavior,
41(0):220–227.

Ying-Li Tian, Takeo Kanade, and Jeffrey F. Cohn.
2005. Facial expression analysis. In Handbook
of Face Recognition, pages 247–275. Springer New
York.

Catalina L. Toma and Jeffrey T. Hancock. 2010. Read-
ing between the lines: linguistic cues to deception in
online dating profiles. In Proceedings of the 2010
ACM conference on Computer supported coopera-
tive work, CSCW ’10, pages 5–8.

Gabriel Tsechpenakis, Dimitris Metaxas, Mark Ad-
kins, John Kruse, Judee K. Burgoon, Matthew L.
Jensen, Thomas Meservy, Douglas P. Twitchell,
Amit Deokar, and Jay F. Nunamaker. 2005. Hmm-
based deception recognition from visual cues. In
IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and
Expo, 2005. ICME 2005, pages 824–827, July.

Aldert Vrij. 2001. Detecting Lies and Deceit: The
Psychology of Lying and the Implications for Pro-
fessional Practice. Wiley series in the psychology
of crime, policing and law. Wiley.

Darcy Warkentin, Michael Woodworth, Jeffrey T Han-
cock, and Nicole Cormier. 2010. Warrants and
deception in computer mediated communication.
In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM conference on
Computer supported cooperative work, pages 9–12.
ACM.

Peter Wittenburg, Hennie Brugman, Albert Russel,
Alex Klassmann, and Han Sloetjes. 2006. Elan: a
professional framework for multimodality research.
In Language Resources and Evaluation, volume
2006.

Qiongkai Xu and Hai Zhao. 2012. Using deep lin-
guistic features for finding deceptive opinion spam.
In Proceedings of COLING 2012: Posters, Mumbai,
India, December.

Maria Yancheva and Frank Rudzicz. 2013. Automatic
detection of deception in child-produced speech us-
ing syntactic complexity features. In Proceedings of
the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 944–953, Sofia, Bulgaria, August. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

2346


