



















































Syntax-Aware Multi-Sense Word Embeddings for Deep Compositional Models of Meaning


Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1531–1542,
Lisbon, Portugal, 17-21 September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.

Syntax-Aware Multi-Sense Word Embeddings
for Deep Compositional Models of Meaning

Jianpeng Cheng
University of Oxford

Department of
Computer Science

jianpeng.cheng@stcatz.oxon.org

Dimitri Kartsaklis
Queen Mary University of London
School of Electronic Engineering

and Computer Science
d.kartsaklis@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract

Deep compositional models of meaning
acting on distributional representations of
words in order to produce vectors of larger
text constituents are evolving to a pop-
ular area of NLP research. We detail
a compositional distributional framework
based on a rich form of word embeddings
that aims at facilitating the interactions
between words in the context of a sen-
tence. Embeddings and composition lay-
ers are jointly learned against a generic
objective that enhances the vectors with
syntactic information from the surround-
ing context. Furthermore, each word is
associated with a number of senses, the
most plausible of which is selected dy-
namically during the composition process.
We evaluate the produced vectors qualita-
tively and quantitatively with positive re-
sults. At the sentence level, the effective-
ness of the framework is demonstrated on
the MSRPar task, for which we report re-
sults within the state-of-the-art range.

1 Introduction

Representing the meaning of words by using their
distributional behaviour in a large text corpus is
a well-established technique in NLP research that
has been proved useful in numerous tasks. In
a distributional model of meaning, the semantic
representation of a word is given as a vector in
some high dimensional vector space, obtained ei-
ther by explicitly collecting co-occurrence statis-
tics of the target word with words belonging to a
representative subset of the vocabulary, or by di-
rectly optimizing the word vectors against an ob-
jective function in some neural-network based ar-
chitecture (Collobert and Weston, 2008; Mikolov
et al., 2013).

Regardless their method of construction, distri-
butional models of meaning do not scale up to

larger text constituents such as phrases or sen-
tences, since the uniqueness of multi-word expres-
sions would inevitably lead to data sparsity prob-
lems, thus to unreliable vectorial representations.
The problem is usually addressed by the provision
of a compositional function, the purpose of which
is to prepare a vectorial representation for a phrase
or sentence by combining the vectors of the words
therein. While the nature and complexity of these
compositional models may vary, approaches based
on deep-learning architectures have been shown to
be especially successful in modelling the meaning
of sentences for a variety of tasks (Socher et al.,
2012; Kalchbrenner et al., 2014).

The mutual interaction of distributional word
vectors by a means of a compositional model pro-
vides many opportunities for interesting research,
the majority of which still remains to be explored.
One such direction is to investigate in what way
lexical ambiguity affects the compositional pro-
cess. In fact, recent work has shown that shal-
low multi-linear compositional models that explic-
itly handle extreme cases of lexical ambiguity in a
step prior to composition present consistently bet-
ter performance than their “ambiguous” counter-
parts (Kartsaklis and Sadrzadeh, 2013; Kartsaklis
et al., 2014). A first attempt to test these obser-
vations in a deep compositional setting has been
presented by Cheng et al. (2014) with promising
results.

Furthermore, a second important question re-
lates to the very nature of the word embeddings
used in the context of a compositional model. In a
setting of this form, word vectors are not any more
just a means for discriminating words based on
their underlying semantic relationships; the main
goal of a word vector is to contribute to a bigger
whole—a task in which syntax, along with seman-
tics, also plays a very important role. It is a central
point of this paper, therefore, that in a composi-
tional distributional model of meaning word vec-
tors should be injected with information that re-
flects their syntactical roles in the training corpus.

1531



The purpose of this work is to improve the
current practice in deep compositional models of
meaning in relation to both the compositional pro-
cess itself and the quality of the word embed-
dings used therein. We propose an architecture
for jointly training a compositional model and a
set of word embeddings, in a way that imposes
dynamic word sense induction for each word dur-
ing the learning process. Note that this is in con-
trast with recent work in multi-sense neural word
embeddings (Neelakantan et al., 2014), in which
the word senses are learned without any composi-
tional considerations in mind.

Furthermore, we make the word embeddings
syntax-aware by introducing a variation of the
hinge loss objective function of Collobert and We-
ston (2008), in which the goal is not only to predict
the occurrence of a target word in a context, but to
also predict the position of the word within that
context. A qualitative analysis shows that our vec-
tors reflect both semantic and syntactic features in
a concise way.

In all current deep compositional distributional
settings, the word embeddings are internal param-
eters of the model with no use for any other pur-
pose than the task for which they were specifically
trained. In this work, one of our main consid-
erations is that the joint training step should be
generic enough to not be tied in any particular
task. In this way the word embeddings and the de-
rived compositional model can be learned on data
much more diverse than any task-specific dataset,
reflecting a wider range of linguistic features. In-
deed, experimental evaluation shows that the pro-
duced word embeddings can serve as a high qual-
ity general-purpose semantic word space, present-
ing performance on the Stanford Contextual Word
Similarity (SCWS) dataset of Huang et al. (2012)
competitive to and even better of the performance
of well-established neural word embeddings sets.

Finally, we propose a dynamic disambiguation
framework for a number of existing deep compo-
sitional models of meaning, in which the multi-
sense word embeddings and the compositional
model of the original training step are further re-
fined according to the purposes of a specific task
at hand. In the context of paraphrase detection, we
achieve a result very close to the current state-of-
the-art on the Microsoft Research Paraphrase Cor-
pus (Dolan and Brockett, 2005). An interesting
aspect at the sideline of the paraphrase detection
experiment is that, in contrast to mainstream ap-
proaches that mainly rely on simple forms of clas-

sifiers, we approach the problem by following a
siamese architecture (Bromley et al., 1993).

2 Background and related work

2.1 Distributional models of meaning
Distributional models of meaning follow the dis-
tributional hypothesis (Harris, 1954), which states
that two words that occur in similar contexts have
similar meanings. Traditional approaches for con-
structing a word space rely on simple counting: a
word is represented by a vector of numbers (usu-
ally smoothed by the application of some func-
tion such as point-wise mutual information) which
show how frequently this word co-occurs with
other possible context words in a corpus of text.

In contrast to these methods, a recent class of
distributional models treat word representations as
parameters directly optimized on a word predic-
tion task (Bengio et al., 2003; Collobert and We-
ston, 2008; Mikolov et al., 2013; Pennington et
al., 2014). Instead of relying on observed co-
occurrence counts, these models aim to maximize
the objective function of a neural net-based ar-
chitecture; Mikolov et al. (2013), for example,
compute the conditional probability of observ-
ing words in a context around a target word (an
approach known as the skip-gram model). Re-
cent studies have shown that, compared to their
co-occurrence counterparts, neural word vectors
reflect better the semantic relationships between
words (Baroni et al., 2014) and are more effective
in compositional settings (Milajevs et al., 2014).

2.2 Syntactic awareness
Since the main purpose of distributional models
until now was to measure the semantic relatedness
of words, relatively little effort has been put into
making word vectors aware of information regard-
ing the syntactic role under which a word occurs
in a sentence. In some cases the vectors are POS-
tag specific, so that ‘book’ as noun and ‘book’
as verb are represented by different vectors (Kart-
saklis and Sadrzadeh, 2013). Furthermore, word
spaces in which the context of a target word is de-
termined by means of grammatical dependencies
(Padó and Lapata, 2007) are more effective in cap-
turing syntactic relations than approaches based
on simple word proximity.

For word embeddings trained in neural settings,
syntactic information is not usually taken explic-
itly into account, with some notable exceptions.
At the lexical level, Levy and Goldberg (2014)
propose an extension of the skip-gram model

1532



based on grammatical dependencies. Following a
different approach, Mnih and Kavukcuoglu (2013)
weight the vector of each context word depending
on its distance from the target word. With regard
to compositional settings (discussed in the next
section), Hashimoto et al. (2014) use dependency-
based word embeddings by employing a hinge loss
objective, while Hermann and Blunsom (2013)
condition their objectives on the CCG types of the
involved words.

As we will see in Section 3, the current paper
offers an appealing alternative to those approaches
that does not depend on grammatical relations or
types of any form.

2.3 Compositionality in distributional models
The methods that aim to equip distributional mod-
els of meaning with compositional abilities come
in many different levels of sophistication, from
simple element-wise vector operators such as ad-
dition and multiplication (Mitchell and Lapata,
2008) to category theory (Coecke et al., 2010).
In this latter work relational words (such as verbs
or adjectives) are represented as multi-linear maps
acting on vectors representing their arguments
(nouns and noun phrases). In general, the above
models are shallow in the sense that they do not
have functional parameters and the output is pro-
duced by the direct interaction of the inputs; yet
they have been shown to capture the compositional
meaning of sentences to an adequate degree.

The idea of using neural networks for compo-
sitionality in language appeared 25 years ago in
a seminal paper by Pollack (1990), and has been
recently re-popularized by Socher and colleagues
(Socher et al., 2011a; Socher et al., 2012). The
compositional architecture used in these works
is that of a recursive neural network (RecNN)
(Socher et al., 2011b), where the words get com-
posed by following a parse tree. A particular
variant of the RecNN is the recurrent neural net-
work (RNN), in which a sentence is assumed to
be generated by aggregating words in sequence
(Mikolov et al., 2010). Furthermore, some re-
cent work (Kalchbrenner et al., 2014) models the
meaning of sentences by utilizing the concept of a
convolutional neural network (LeCun et al., 1998),
the main characteristic of which is that it acts on
small overlapping parts of the input vectors. In all
the above models, the word embeddings and the
weights of the compositional layers are optimized
against a task-specific objective function.

In Section 3 we will show how to remove
the restriction of a supervised setting, introduc-

ing a generic objective that can be trained on any
general-purpose text corpus. While we focus on
recursive and recurrent neural network architec-
tures, the general ideas we will discuss are in prin-
ciple model-independent.

2.4 Disambiguation in composition

Regardless of the way they address composition,
all the models of Section 2.3 rely on ambiguous
word spaces, in which every meaning of a poly-
semous word is merged into a single vector. Es-
pecially for cases of homonymy (such as ‘bank’,
‘organ’ and so on), where the same word is used
to describe two or more completely unrelated con-
cepts, this approach is problematic: the semantic
representation of the word becomes the average of
all senses, inadequate to express any of them in a
reliable way.

To address this problem, a prior disambiguation
step on the word vectors is often introduced, the
purpose of which is to find the word representa-
tions that best fit to the given context, before com-
position takes place (Reddy et al., 2011; Kartsak-
lis et al., 2013; Kartsaklis and Sadrzadeh, 2013;
Kartsaklis et al., 2014). This idea has been tested
on algebraic and tensor-based compositional func-
tions with very positive results. Furthermore, it
has been also found to provide minimal benefits
for a RecNN compositional architecture in a num-
ber of phrase and sentence similarity tasks (Cheng
et al., 2014). This latter work clearly suggests that
explicitly dealing with lexical ambiguity in a deep
compositional setting is an idea that is worth to be
further explored. While treating disambiguation
as only a preprocessing step is a strategy less than
optimal for a neural setting, one would expect that
the benefits should be greater for an architecture
in which the disambiguation takes place in a dy-
namic fashion during training.

We are now ready to start detailing a compo-
sitional model that takes into account the above
considerations. The issue of lexical ambiguity is
covered in Section 4; Section 3 below deals with
generic training and syntactic awareness.

3 Syntax-based generic training

We propose a novel architecture for learning word
embeddings and a compositional model to use
them in a single step. The learning takes places
in the context of a RecNN (or an RNN), and both
word embeddings and parameters of the composi-
tional layer are optimized against a generic objec-
tive function that uses a hinge loss function.

1533



input

output

input

output

(a) RecNN

(b) RNN

Figure 1: Recursive (a) and recurrent (b) neural
networks.

Figure 1 shows the general form of recursive
and recurrent neural networks. In architectures of
this form, a compositional layer is applied on each
pair of inputs x1 and x2 in the following way:

p = g(Wx[1:2] + b) (1)

where x[1:2] denotes the concatenation of the two
vectors, g is a non-linear function, and W,b are
the parameters of the model. In the RecNN case,
the compositional process continues recursively
by following a parse tree until a vector for the
whole sentence or phrase is produced; on the other
hand, an RNN assumes that a sentence is gener-
ated in a left-to-right fashion, taking into consider-
ation no dependencies other than word adjacency.

We amend the above setting by introducing a
novel layer on the top of the compositional one,
which scores the linguistic plausibility of the com-
posed sentence or phrase vector with regard to
both syntax and semantics. Following Collobert
and Weston (2008), we convert the unsupervised
learning problem to a supervised one by corrupt-
ing training sentences. Specifically, for each sen-
tence s we create two sets of negative examples.
In the first set, S′, the target word within a given
context is replaced by a random word; as in the
original C&W paper, this set is used to enforce
semantic coherence in the word vectors. Syntac-
tic coherence is enforced by a second set of nega-
tive examples, S′′, in which the words of the con-
text have been randomly shuffled. The objective
function is defined in terms of the following hinge
losses:∑

s∈S

∑
s′∈S′

max(0,m− f(s) + f(s′)) (2)

∑
s∈S

∑
s′′∈S′′

max(0,m− f(s) + f(s′′)) (3)

where S is the set of sentences, f the composi-
tional layer, and m a margin we wish to retain
between the scores of the positive training ex-
amples and the negative ones. During training,
all parameters in the scoring layer, the composi-
tional layers and word representations are jointly
updated by error back-propagation. As output,
we get both general-purpose syntax-aware word
representations and weights for the corresponding
compositional model.

4 From words to senses

We now extend our model to address lexical ambi-
guity. We achieve that by applying a gated archi-
tecture, similar to the one used in the multi-sense
model of Neelakantan et al. (2014), but advancing
the main idea to the compositional setting detailed
in Section 3.

We assume a fixed number of n senses per
word.1 Each word is associated with a main vector
(obtained for example by using an existing vector
set, or by simply applying the process of Section
3 in a separate step), as well as with n vectors de-
noting cluster centroids and an equal number of
sense vectors. Both cluster centroids and sense
vectors are randomly initialized in the beginning
of the process. For each word wt in a training sen-
tence, we prepare a context vector by averaging
the main vectors of all other words in the same
context. This context vector is compared with the
cluster centroids of wt by cosine similarity, and
the sense corresponding to the closest cluster is se-
lected as the most representative of wt in the cur-
rent context. The selected cluster centroid is up-
dated by the addition of the context vector, and the
associated sense vector is passed as input to the
compositional layer. The selected sense vectors
for each word in the sentence are updated by back-
propagation, based on the objectives of Equations
2 and 3. The overall architecture of our model, as
described in this and the previous section, is illus-
trated in Figure 2.

5 Task-specific dynamic disambiguation

The model of Figure 2 decouples the training of
word vectors and compositional parameters from

1Note that in principle the fixed number of senses assump-
tion is not necessary; Neelakantan et al. (2014), for exam-
ple, present a version of their model in which new senses are
added dynamically when appropriate.

1534



main 
(ambiguous)

vectors

sense vectors

gate

compositional
layer

phrase vector
plausibility layer

compositional layer
sentence vector
plausibility layer

Figure 2: Training of syntax-aware multi-sense
embeddings in the context of a RecNN.

a specific task, and as a consequence from any
task-specific training dataset. However, note that
by replacing the plausibility layer with a classi-
fier trained for some task at hand, you get a task-
specific network that transparently trains multi-
sense word embeddings and applies dynamic dis-
ambiguation on the fly. While this idea of a single-
step direct training seems appealing, one consid-
eration is that the task-specific dataset used for the
training will not probably reflect the linguistic va-
riety that is required to exploit the expressiveness
of the setting in its full. Additionally, in many
cases the size of datasets tied to specific tasks is
prohibiting for training a deep architecture.

It is a merit of this proposal that, in cases like
these, it is possible for one to train the generic
model of Figure 2 on any large corpus of text, and
then use the produced word vectors and compo-
sitional weights to initialize the parameters of a
more specific version of the architecture. As a
result, the trained parameters will be further re-
fined according to the task-specific objective. Fig-
ure 3 illustrates the generic case of a composi-
tional framework applying dynamic disambigua-
tion. Note that here sense selection takes place by
a soft-max layer, which can be directly optimized
on the task objective.

6 A siamese network for paraphrase
detection

We will test the dynamic disambiguation frame-
work of Section 5 in a paraphrase detection task.
A paraphrase is a restatement of the meaning of a

sentence using different words and/or syntax. The
goal of a paraphrase detection model, thus, is to
examine two sentences and decide if they express
the same meaning.

While the usual way to approach this problem is
to utilize a classifier that acts (for example) on the
concatenation of the two sentence vectors, in this
work we follow a novel perspective: specifically,
we apply a siamese architecture (Bromley et al.,
1993), a concept that has been extensively used
in computer vision (Hadsell et al., 2006; Sun et
al., 2014). While siamese networks have been also
used in the past for NLP purposes (for example,
by Yih et al. (2011)), to the best of our knowledge
this is the first time that such a setting is applied
for paraphrase detection.

In our model, two networks sharing the same
parameters are used to compute the vectorial rep-
resentations of two sentences, the paraphrase rela-
tion of which we wish to detect; this is achieved by
employing a cost function that compares the two
vectors. There are two commonly used cost func-
tions: the first is based on the L2 norm (Hadsell
et al., 2006; Sun et al., 2014), while the second on
the cosine similarity (Nair and Hinton, 2010; Sun
et al., 2014). The L2 norm variation is capable of
handling differences in the magnitude of the vec-
tors. Formally, the cost function is defined as:

Ef =

{
1
2
‖f(s1)− f(s2)‖22 , if y = 1

1
2

max(0, m− ‖f(s1)− f(s2)‖2)2, o.w.

where s1, s2 are the input sentences, f the com-
positional layer (so f(s1) and f(s2) refer to sen-
tence vectors), and y = 1 denotes a paraphrase re-
lationship between the sentences; m stands for the
margin, a hyper-parameter chosen in advance. On

classifier

main (ambiguous)
vectors

sense vectors

soft-max layer

selected sense 
vectors

compositional layer(s)

sentence vector

Figure 3: Dynamic disambiguation in a generic
compositional deep net.

1535



deep
compositional

layer(s)

deep
compositional

layer(s)

Figure 4: A siamese network for paraphrase detec-
tion.

the other hand, the cost function based on cosine
similarity handles only directional differences, as
follows:

Ef =
1
2
(y − σ(wd+ b))2 (4)

where d = f(s1)·f(s2)‖f(s1)‖2‖f(s2)‖2 is the cosine similar-
ity of the two sentence vectors, w and b are the
scaling and shifting parameters to be optimized, σ
is the sigmoid function and y is the label. In the
experiments that will follow in Section 7.4, both
of these cost functions are evaluated. The overall
architecture is shown in Figure 4.

In Section 7.4 we will use the pre-trained vec-
tors and compositional weights for deriving sen-
tence representations that will be subsequently fed
to the siamese network. When the dynamic disam-
biguation framework is used, the sense vectors of
the words are updated during training so that the
sense selection process is gradually refined.

7 Experiments

We evaluate the quality of the compositional
word vectors and the proposed deep compositional
framework in the tasks of word similarity and
paraphrase detection, respectively.

7.1 Model pre-training

In all experiments the word representations and
compositional models are pre-trained on the
British National Corpus (BNC), a general-purpose
text corpus that contains 6 million sentences of
written and spoken English. For comparison we
train two sets of word vectors and compositional
models, one ambiguous and one multi-sense (fix-

ing 3 senses per word). The dimension of the em-
beddings is set to 300.

As our compositional architectures we use a
RecNN and an RNN. In the RecNN case, the
words are composed by following the result of an
external parser, while for the RNN the composi-
tion takes place in sequence from left to right. To
avoid the exploding or vanishing gradient problem
(Bengio et al., 1994) for long sentences, we em-
ploy a long short-term memory (LSTM) network
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997). During the
training of each model, we minimize the hinge loss
in Equations 2 and 3. The plausibility layer is im-
plemented as a 2-layer network, with 150 units at
the hidden layer, and is applied at each individ-
ual node (as opposed to a single application at the
sentence level). All parameters are updated with
mini-batches by AdaDelta (Zeiler, 2012) gradient
descent method (λ = 0.03, initial α = 0.05).

7.2 Qualitative evaluation of the word vectors

As a first step, we qualitatively evaluate the trained
word embeddings by examining the nearest neigh-
bours lists of a few selected words. We com-
pare the results with those produced by the skip-
gram model (SG) of Mikolov et al. (2013) and
the language model (CW) of Collobert and Weston
(2008). We refer to our model as SAMS (Syntax-
Aware Multi-Sense). The results in Table 1 show
clearly that our model tends to group words that
are both semantically and syntactically related; for
example, and in contrast with the compared mod-
els which group words only at the semantic level,
our model is able to retain tenses, numbers (singu-
lars and plurals), and gerunds.

The observed behaviour is comparable to that of
embedding models with objective functions con-
ditioned on grammatical relations between words;
Levy and Goldberg (2014), for example, present a
similar table for their dependency-based extension
of the skip-gram model. The advantage of our ap-
proach against such models is twofold: firstly, the
word embeddings are accompanied by a generic
compositional model that can be used for creat-
ing sentence representations independently of any
specific task; and secondly, the training is quite
forgiving to data sparsity problems that in gen-
eral a dependency-based approach would intensify
(since context words are paired with the grammati-
cal relations they occur with the target word). As a
result, a small corpus such as the BNC is sufficient
for producing high quality syntax-aware word em-
beddings.

1536



SG CW SAMS
begged beg, begging, cried begging, pretended, beg persuaded, asked, cried
refused refusing, refuses, refusal refusing , declined, refuse declined, rejected, denied

interrupted interrupting, punctuated,interrupt interrupts, interrupt, interrupting punctuated, preceded, disrupted

themes thematic, theme, notions theme, concepts, subtext meanings, concepts, ideas
patiently impatiently, waited, waits impatiently, queue, expectantly impatiently, siliently, anxiously
player players, football, league game, club, team athlete, sportsman, team
prompting prompted, prompt, sparking prompt, amid, triggered sparking, triggering, forcing
reproduce reproducing, replicate, humans reproducing, thrive, survive replicate, produce, repopulate

predictions prediction, predict, forecasts predicting, assumption,predicted
expectations, projections,
forecasts

Table 1: Nearest neighbours for a number of words with various embedding models.

7.3 Word similarity
We now proceed to a quantitative evaluation of
our embeddings on the Stanford Contextual Word
Similarity (SCWS) dataset of Huang et al. (2012).
The dataset contains 2,003 pairs of words and the
contexts they occur in. We can therefore make
use of the contextual information in order to select
the most appropriate sense for each ambiguous
word. Similarly to Neelakantan et al. (2014), we
use three different metrics: globalSim measures
the similarity between two ambiguous word vec-
tors; localSim selects a single sense for each word
based on the context and computes the similarity
between the two sense vectors; avgSim represents
each word as a weighted average of all senses in
the given context and computes the similarity be-
tween the two weighted sense vectors.

We compute and report the Spearman’s corre-
lation between the embedding similarities and hu-
man judgments (Table 2). In addition to the skip-
gram and Collobert and Weston models, we also
compare against the CBOW model (Mikolov et
al., 2013) and the multi-sense skip-gram (MSSG)
model of Neelakantan et al. (2014).

Model globalSim localSim avgSim
CBOW 59.5 – –
SG 61.8 – –
CW 55.3 – –
MSSG 61.3 56.7 62.1
SAMS 59.9 58.5 62.5

Table 2: Results for the word similarity task
(Spearman’s ρ × 100).

Among all methods, only the MSSG model and
ours are capable of learning multi-prototype word
representations. Our embeddings show top per-
formance for localSim and avgSim measures, and
performance competitive to that of MSSG and SG
for globalSim, both of which use a hierarchical

soft-max as their objective function. Compared to
the original C&W model, our version presents an
improvement of 4.6%—a clear indication for the
effectiveness of the proposed learning method and
the enhanced objective.

7.4 Paraphrase detection

In the last set of experiments, the proposed com-
positional distributional framework is evaluated
on the Microsoft Research Paraphrase Corpus
(MSRPC) (Dolan and Brockett, 2005), which con-
tains 5,800 pairs of sentences. This is a binary
classification task, with labels provided by human
annotators. We apply the siamese network detailed
in Section 6.

While MSRPC is one of the most used datasets
for evaluating paraphrase detection models, its
size is prohibitory for any attempt of training a
deep architecture. Therefore, for our training
we rely on a much larger external dataset, the
Paraphrase Database (PPDB) (Ganitkevitch et al.,
2013). The PPDB contains more than 220 million
paraphrase pairs, of which 73 million are phrasal
paraphrases and 140 million are paraphrase pat-
terns that capture syntactic transformations of sen-
tences. We use these phrase- and sentence-level
paraphrase pairs as additional training contexts
to fine-tune the generic compositional model pa-
rameters and word embeddings and to train the
baseline models. The original training set of the
MSRPC is used as validation set for deciding hy-
perparameters, such as the margin of the error
function and the number of training epochs.

The evaluations were conducted on various as-
pects, and the models are gradually refined to
demonstrate performance within the state-of-the-
art range.

Comparison of the two error functions In the
first evaluation, we compare the two error func-
tions of the siamese network using only ambigu-

1537



ous vectors. As we can see in Table 3, the co-
sine error function consistently outperforms the
L2 norm-based one for both compositional mod-
els, providing a yet another confirmation of the
already well-established fact that similarity in se-
mantic vector spaces is better reflected by length-
invariant measures.

Model L2 Cosine
RecNN 73.8 74.9
RNN 73.0 74.3

Table 3: Results with different error functions for
the paraphrase detection task (accuracy × 100).

Effectiveness of disambiguation We now pro-
ceed to compare the effectiveness of the two com-
positional models when using ambiguous vectors
and multi-sense vectors, respectively. Our error
function is set to cosine similarity, following the
results of the previous evaluation. When dynamic
disambiguation is applied, we test two methods of
selecting sense vectors: in the hard case the vector
of the most plausible sense is selected, while in the
soft case a new vector is prepared as the weighted
average of all sense vectors according to proba-
bilities returned by the soft-max layer (see Figure
3). As a baseline we use a simple compositional
model based on vector addition.

The dynamic disambiguation models and the
additive baseline are compared with variations that
use a simple prior disambiguation step applied on
the word vectors. This is achieved by first se-
lecting for each word the sense vector that is the
closest to the average of all other word vectors
in the same sentence, and then composing the se-
lected sense vectors without further considerations
regarding ambiguity. The baseline model and the
prior disambiguation variants are trained as sepa-
rate logistic regression classifiers. The results are
shown in Table 4.

Model Ambig. Prior Hard DD Soft DD
Addition 69.9 71.3 – –
RecNN 74.9 75.3 75.7 76.0
RNN 74.3 74.6 75.1 75.2

Table 4: Different disambiguation choices for the
paraphrase detection task (accuracy × 100).

Overall, disambiguated vectors work better than
the ambiguous ones, with the improvement to be
more significant for the additive model; there, a
simple prior disambiguation step produces 1.4%
gains. For the deep compositional models, simple

prior disambiguation is still helpful with small im-
provements, a result which is consistent with the
findings of Cheng et al. (2014). The small gains
of the prior disambiguation models over the am-
biguous models clearly show that deep architec-
tures are quite capable of performing this elemen-
tary form of sense selection intrinsically, as part
of the learning process itself. However, the situ-
ation changes when the dynamic disambiguation
framework is used, where the gains over the am-
biguous version become more significant. Com-
paring the two ways of dynamic disambiguation
(hard method and soft method), the numbers that
the soft method gives are slightly higher, produc-
ing a total gain of 1.1% over the ambiguous ver-
sion for the RecNN case.2

Note that, at this stage, the advantage of us-
ing the dynamic disambiguation framework over
simple prior disambiguation is still small (0.7%
for the case of RecNN). We seek the reason be-
hind this in the recursive nature of our architecture,
which tends to progressively “hide” local features
of word vectors, thus diminishing the effect of the
fine-tuned sense vectors produced by the dynamic
disambiguation mechanism. The next section dis-
cusses the problem and provides a solution.

The role of pooling One of the problems of the
recursive and recurrent compositional architec-
tures, especially in grammars with strict branching
structure such as in English, is that any given com-
position is usually the product of a terminal and a
non-terminal; i.e. a single word can contribute to
the meaning of a sentence to the same extent as the
rest of a sentence on its whole, as below:

[[kids]NP [play ball games in the park]VP]S

In the above case, the contribution of the words
within the verb phrase to the final sentence rep-
resentation will be faded out due to the recursive
composition mechanism. Inspired by related work
in computer vision (Sun et al., 2014), we attempt
to alleviate this problem by introducing an aver-
age pooling layer at the sense vector level and
adding the resulting vector to the sentence repre-
sentation. By doing this we expect that the new
sentence vector will reflect local features from all
words in the sentence that can help in the clas-
sification in a more direct way. The results for
the new deep architectures are shown in Table 5,
where we see substantial improvements for both
deep nets. More importantly, the effect of dynamic

2For all subsequent experiments, the reported results are
based on the soft selection method.

1538



disambiguation now becomes more significant, as
expected by our analysis.

Table 5 also includes results for two models
trained in a single step, with word and sense vec-
tors randomly initialized at the beginning of the
process. We see that, despite the large size of the
training set, the results are much lower than the
ones obtained when using the pre-training step.
This demonstrates the importance of the initial
training on a general-purpose corpus: the result-
ing vectors reflect linguistic information that, al-
though not obtainable from the task-specific train-
ing, can make great difference in the result of the
classification.

Model Ambig. Prior Dynamic
RecNN+pooling 75.5 76.3 77.6
RNN+pooling 74.8 75.9 76.6
1-step RecNN+pooling 74.4 – 72.9
1-step RNN+pooling 73.6 – 73.1

Table 5: Results with average pooling for the para-
phrase detection task (accuracy × 100).

Cross-model comparison In this section we
propose a method to further improve the perfor-
mance of our models, and we present an evaluation
against some of the previously reported results.

We notice that using distributional properties
alone cannot capture efficiently subtle aspects of a
sentence, for example numbers or human names.
However, even small differences on those aspects
between two sentences can lead to a different clas-
sification result. Therefore, we train (using the
MSPRC training data) an additional logistic re-
gression classifier which is based not only on the
embeddings similarity, but also on a few hand-
engineered features. We then ensemble the new
classifier (C1) with the original one. In terms of
feature selection, we follow Socher et al. (2011a)
and Blacoe and Lapata (2012) and add the fol-
lowing features: the difference in sentence length,
the unigram overlap among the two sentences, fea-
tures related to numbers (including the presence or
absence of numbers from a sentence and whether
or not the numbers in the two sentences are the
same). In Table 6 we report results of the original
model and the ensembled model, and we compare
with the performance of other existing models.

In all of the implemented models (including the
additive baseline), disambiguation is performed to
guarantee the best performance. We see that by
ensembling the original classifier with C1, we im-
prove the result of the previous section by another
1%. This is the second best result reported so far

Model Acc. F1

B
L All positive 66.5 79.9

Addition (disamb.) 71.3 81.1

D
yn

am
ic

D
is

. RecNN 76.0 84.0
RecNN+Pooling 77.6 84.7
RecNN+Pooling+C1 78.6 85.3
RNN 75.2 83.6
RNN+Pooling 76.6 84.3
RNN+Pooling+C1 77.5 84.6

Pu
bl

is
he

d
re

su
lts

Mihalcea et al. (2006) 70.3 81.3
Rus et al. (2008) 70.6 80.5
Qiu et al. (2006) 72.0 81.6
Islam and Inkpen (2009) 72.6 81.3
Fernando and Stevenson (2008) 74.1 82.4
Wan et al. (2006) 75.6 83.0
Das and Smith (2009) 76.1 82.7
Socher et al. (2011a) 76.8 83.6
Madnani et al. (2012) 77.4 84.1
Ji and Eisenstein (2013) 80.4 85.9

Table 6: Cross-model comparison in the para-
phrase detection task.

for the specific task, with a 0.6 difference in F-
score from the first (Ji and Eisenstein, 2013).3

8 Conclusion and future work

The main contribution of this paper is a deep com-
positional distributional model acting on linguis-
tically motivated word embeddings.4 The effec-
tiveness of the syntax-aware, multi-sense word
vectors and the dynamic compositional disam-
biguation framework in which they are used was
demonstrated by appropriate tasks at the lexical
and sentence level, respectively, with very posi-
tive results. As an aside, we also demonstrated the
benefits of a siamese architecture in the context of
a paraphrase detection task. While the architec-
tures tested in this work were limited to a RecNN
and an RNN, the ideas we presented are in prin-
ciple directly applicable to any kind of deep net-
work. As a future step, we aim to test the proposed
models on a convolutional compositional architec-
ture, similar to that of Kalchbrenner et al. (2014).

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank the three anony-
mous reviewers for their useful comments, as well
as Nal Kalchbrenner and Ed Grefenstette for early
discussions and suggestions on the paper, and Si-
mon Šuster for comments on the final draft. Dim-
itri Kartsaklis gratefully acknowledges financial
support by AFOSR.

3Source: ACL Wiki (http://www.aclweb.org/acl-
wiki), August 2015.

4Code in Python/Theano and the word embeddings can be
found at https://github.com/cheng6076.

1539



References
Marco Baroni, Georgiana Dinu, and Germán

Kruszewski. 2014. Don’t count, predict! a
systematic comparison of context-counting vs.
context-predicting semantic vectors. In Proceedings
of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, volume 1.

Yoshua Bengio, Patrice Simard, and Paolo Frasconi.
1994. Learning long-term dependencies with gra-
dient descent is difficult. Neural Networks, IEEE
Transactions on, 5(2):157–166.

Yoshua Bengio, Réjean Ducharme, Pascal Vincent, and
Christian Janvin. 2003. A neural probabilistic lan-
guage model. The Journal of Machine Learning Re-
search, 3:1137–1155.

William Blacoe and Mirella Lapata. 2012. A com-
parison of vector-based representations for semantic
composition. In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and Computational Natural Language
Learning, pages 546–556. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Jane Bromley, James W Bentz, Léon Bottou, Is-
abelle Guyon, Yann LeCun, Cliff Moore, Eduard
Säckinger, and Roopak Shah. 1993. Signature
verification using a siamese time delay neural net-
work. International Journal of Pattern Recognition
and Artificial Intelligence, 7(04):669–688.

Jianpeng Cheng, Dimitri Kartsaklis, and Edward
Grefenstette. 2014. Investigating the role of
prior disambiguation in deep-learning composi-
tional models of meaning. In 2nd Workshop of
Learning Semantics, NIPS 2014, Montreal, Canada,
December.

B Coecke, M Sadrzadeh, and S Clark. 2010. Math-
ematical foundations for a distributional composi-
tional model of meaning. lambek festschrift. Lin-
guistic Analysis, 36:345–384.

Ronan Collobert and Jason Weston. 2008. A unified
architecture for natural language processing: Deep
neural networks with multitask learning. In Pro-
ceedings of the 25th international conference on
Machine learning, pages 160–167. ACM.

Dipanjan Das and Noah A Smith. 2009. Paraphrase
identification as probabilistic quasi-synchronous
recognition. In Proceedings of the Joint Confer-
ence of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the
4th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing of the AFNLP: Volume 1-Volume
1, pages 468–476. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

W.B. Dolan and C. Brockett. 2005. Automati-
cally constructing a corpus of sentential paraphrases.
In Third International Workshop on Paraphrasing
(IWP2005).

Samuel Fernando and Mark Stevenson. 2008. A se-
mantic similarity approach to paraphrase detection.
In Proceedings of the 11th Annual Research Collo-
quium of the UK Special Interest Group for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 45–52. Citeseer.

Juri Ganitkevitch, Benjamin Van Durme, and Chris
Callison-Burch. 2013. Ppdb: The paraphrase
database. In HLT-NAACL, pages 758–764.

Raia Hadsell, Sumit Chopra, and Yann LeCun. 2006.
Dimensionality reduction by learning an invariant
mapping. In Computer vision and pattern recog-
nition, 2006 IEEE computer society conference on,
volume 2, pages 1735–1742. IEEE.

Zellig S Harris. 1954. Distributional structure. Word.

Kazuma Hashimoto, Pontus Stenetorp, Makoto Miwa,
and Yoshimasa Tsuruoka. 2014. Jointly learn-
ing word representations and composition functions
using predicate-argument structures. In Proceed-
ings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages
1544–1555, Doha, Qatar, October. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Karl Moritz Hermann and Phil Blunsom. 2013. The
role of syntax in vector space models of composi-
tional semantics. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 894–904,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997.
Long short-term memory. Neural computation,
9(8):1735–1780.

Eric H Huang, Richard Socher, Christopher D Man-
ning, and Andrew Y Ng. 2012. Improving word
representations via global context and multiple word
prototypes. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: Long Papers-Volume 1, pages 873–882. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Aminul Islam and Diana Inkpen. 2009. Semantic sim-
ilarity of short texts. Recent Advances in Natural
Language Processing V, 309:227–236.

Yangfeng Ji and Jacob Eisenstein. 2013. Discrimi-
native improvements to distributional sentence sim-
ilarity. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 891–896, Seattle, Washington, USA, Oc-
tober. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Nal Kalchbrenner, Edward Grefenstette, and Phil Blun-
som. 2014. A convolutional neural network for
modelling sentences. Proceedings of the 52nd An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, June.

1540



Dimitri Kartsaklis and Mehrnoosh Sadrzadeh. 2013.
Prior disambiguation of word tensors for construct-
ing sentence vectors. In Proceedings of the 2013
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 1590–1601, Seattle, Wash-
ington, USA, October. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Dimitri Kartsaklis, Mehrnoosh Sadrzadeh, and Stephen
Pulman. 2013. Separating disambiguation from
composition in distributional semantics. In Pro-
ceedings of 17th Conference on Natural Language
Learning (CoNLL), pages 114–123, Sofia, Bulgaria,
August.

Dimitri Kartsaklis, Nal Kalchbrenner, and Mehrnoosh
Sadrzadeh. 2014. Resolving lexical ambiguity in
tensor regression models of meaning. In Proceed-
ings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Vol. 2: Short Pa-
pers), pages 212–217, Baltimore, USA, June. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick
Haffner. 1998. Gradient-based learning applied to
document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE,
86(11):2278–2324.

Omer Levy and Yoav Goldberg. 2014. Dependency-
based word embeddings. In Proceedings of the 52nd
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pages
302–308, Baltimore, Maryland, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Nitin Madnani, Joel Tetreault, and Martin Chodorow.
2012. Re-examining machine translation metrics
for paraphrase identification. In Proceedings of the
2012 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies, pages 182–190. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Rada Mihalcea, Courtney Corley, and Carlo Strappa-
rava. 2006. Corpus-based and knowledge-based
measures of text semantic similarity. In AAAI, vol-
ume 6, pages 775–780.

Tomas Mikolov, Martin Karafiát, Lukas Burget, Jan
Cernockỳ, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. 2010. Recur-
rent neural network based language model. In IN-
TERSPEECH 2010, 11th Annual Conference of the
International Speech Communication Association,
Makuhari, Chiba, Japan, September 26-30, 2010,
pages 1045–1048.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, pages 3111–3119.

Dmitrijs Milajevs, Dimitri Kartsaklis, Mehrnoosh
Sadrzadeh, and Matthew Purver. 2014. Evaluating

neural word representations in tensor-based compo-
sitional settings. In Proceedings of the 2014 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 708–719, Doha, Qatar,
October. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jeff Mitchell and Mirella Lapata. 2008. Vector-based
models of semantic composition. In Proceedings
of ACL-08: HLT, pages 236–244, Columbus, Ohio,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Andriy Mnih and Koray Kavukcuoglu. 2013. Learning
word embeddings efficiently with noise-contrastive
estimation. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, pages 2265–2273.

Vinod Nair and Geoffrey E Hinton. 2010. Rectified
linear units improve restricted boltzmann machines.
In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML-10), pages 807–814.

Arvind Neelakantan, Jeevan Shankar, Alexandre Pas-
sos, and Andrew McCallum. 2014. Efficient non-
parametric estimation of multiple embeddings per
word in vector space. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

S. Padó and M. Lapata. 2007. Dependency-based
Construction of Semantic Space Models. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 33(2):161–199.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D
Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for
word representation. Proceedings of the Empiricial
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP
2014), 12.

Jordan B Pollack. 1990. Recursive distributed repre-
sentations. Artificial Intelligence, 46(1):77–105.

Long Qiu, Min-Yen Kan, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2006.
Paraphrase recognition via dissimilarity significance
classification. In Proceedings of the 2006 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 18–26. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Siva Reddy, Ioannis P Klapaftis, Diana McCarthy, and
Suresh Manandhar. 2011. Dynamic and static pro-
totype vectors for semantic composition. In IJC-
NLP, pages 705–713.

Vasile Rus, Philip M McCarthy, Mihai C Lintean,
Danielle S McNamara, and Arthur C Graesser.
2008. Paraphrase identification with lexico-
syntactic graph subsumption. In FLAIRS confer-
ence, pages 201–206.

Richard Socher, Eric H Huang, Jeffrey Pennin, Christo-
pher D Manning, and Andrew Y Ng. 2011a. Dy-
namic pooling and unfolding recursive autoencoders
for paraphrase detection. In Advances in Neural In-
formation Processing Systems, pages 801–809.

Richard Socher, Cliff C Lin, Chris Manning, and An-
drew Y Ng. 2011b. Parsing natural scenes and natu-
ral language with recursive neural networks. In Pro-
ceedings of the 28th international conference on ma-
chine learning (ICML-11), pages 129–136.

1541



R. Socher, B. Huval, C. Manning, and Ng. A.
2012. Semantic compositionality through recursive
matrix-vector spaces. In Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing 2012.

Yi Sun, Yuheng Chen, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou
Tang. 2014. Deep learning face representation by
joint identification-verification. In Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems, pages 1988–
1996.

Stephen Wan, Mark Dras, Robert Dale, and Cécile
Paris. 2006. Using dependency-based features
to take the para-farce out of paraphrase. In Pro-
ceedings of the Australasian Language Technology
Workshop, volume 2006.

Wen-tau Yih, Kristina Toutanova, John C. Platt, and
Christopher Meek. 2011. Learning discriminative
projections for text similarity measures. In Proceed-
ings of the Fifteenth Conference on Computational
Natural Language Learning, pages 247–256, Port-
land, Oregon, USA, June. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Matthew D Zeiler. 2012. Adadelta: an adaptive learn-
ing rate method. arXiv preprint arXiv:1212.5701.

1542


