



















































Identifying Political Sentiment between Nation States with Social Media


Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 65–75,
Lisbon, Portugal, 17-21 September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.

Identifying Political Sentiment between Nation States with Social Media

Nathanael Chambers, Victor Bowen, Ethan Genco, Xisen Tian,
Eric Young, Ganesh Harihara, Eugene Yang

Department of Computer Science
United States Naval Academy
nchamber@usna.edu

Abstract

This paper describes an approach to large-
scale modeling of sentiment analysis for
the social sciences. The goal is to model
relations between nation states through so-
cial media. Many cross-disciplinary appli-
cations of NLP involve making predictions
(such as predicting political elections), but
this paper instead focuses on a model that
is applicable to broader analysis. Do cit-
izens express opinions in line with their
home country’s formal relations? When
opinions diverge over time, what is the
cause and can social media serve to de-
tect these changes? We describe several
learning algorithms to study how the pop-
ulace of a country discusses foreign na-
tions on Twitter, ranging from state-of-the-
art contextual sentiment analysis to some
required practical learners that filter irrel-
evant tweets. We evaluate on standard
sentiment evaluations, but we also show
strong correlations with two public opin-
ion polls and current international alliance
relationships. We conclude with some po-
litical science use cases.

1 Introduction

The volume of text available on social media pro-
vides a new opportunity for public policy and po-
litical science. Specifically in the area of interna-
tional relations, advances in natural language un-
derstanding and sentiment analysis may offer new
insights into the sentiment of one nation toward
another. This paper processes 17 months of Twit-
ter data to identify discussions about sovereign
states, and it aggregates opinions toward these

states from foreign nations. We present a novel
application of contextual sentiment with this task,
and identify several semi-supervised learning al-
gorithms that are needed to address the reference
resolution challenge inherent to country names.
We present intrinsic evaluations of our learners on
labeled datasets as well as four extrinsic politi-
cal science evaluations that show strong alignment
with our large-scale sentiment extraction.

An open question for international policy mak-
ers is the extent to which public opinion drives de-
cision making. How do military conflicts affect a
neutral nation’s relationship? Does public opin-
ion shift toward a country after a formal alliance is
created, or must popular opinion shift first? These
questions are difficult to address due to the lack of
measurable data. While polling data can be col-
lected, collection beyond a handful of countries
is cost prohibitive. This paper hypothesizes that
sentiment analysis can be used as a proxy to track
international relations between nation states. We
describe the largest attempt (over 2 billion tweets)
to measure nation state sentiment across hundreds
of country pairs.

The core challenge to measuring public opin-
ion between countries is an accurate algorithm to
judge the sentiment of a text toward another na-
tion. Unlike traditional sentiment analysis, the
general sentiment of the text is not adequate. Let
the following serve as an example.

I miss Pakistan. I am in full sad mode right about
now. @RachOrange (California)

This tweet is a positive example from the USA to-
ward Pakistan. However, a typical sentiment clas-
sifier misclassifies this as negative because miss
and sad express sadness. A contextual sentiment
classification is needed to identify that the predi-
cate miss is positive toward its argument. Several

65



recent competitions included contextual classifi-
cation tasks, and this paper builds on the best of
those algorithms for a unique nation-nation sen-
timent classifier. We describe a multi-classifier
model that aggregates tweets into counts of pos-
itive and negative sentiment from one country to-
ward another. Several unique filters are required to
resolve textual references toward country names.

We first present standard NLP sentiment exper-
iments that show the classifiers achieve good per-
formance on individual tweets. To evaluate the
complete nation-nation system, we present four
novel evaluations, including two public opinion
polls. Correlation with the polls is high at ρ = .8,
and our nation-nation sentiment is 84% accurate
with NATO and EU relations. We then discuss the
implications for both NLP as a technical science
and political science as a social science.

2 Previous Work

Sentiment analysis is a large field applicable to
many genres. This paper focuses on social me-
dia and contextual polarity, so we only address the
closest work in those areas. For a broader perspec-
tive, several survey papers are available (Pang and
Lee, 2008; Tang et al., 2009; Liu and Zhang, 2012;
Tsytsarau and Palpanas, 2012).

Several sources for microblogs have been used
to measure a large population’s mood and opin-
ion. O’Connor et al. (2010) used Twitter data to
compute a ratio of positive and negative words to
measure consumer confidence and presidential ap-
proval. Kramer (2010) counted lexicon words on
Facebook for a general ’happiness’ measure, and
Thelwall (2011) built a general sentiment model
on MySpace user comments. These are early gen-
eral sentiment algorithms for social media.

Other microblog research focused on finding
noisy training data with distant supervision. Many
of these algorithms use emoticons as semantic in-
dicators of polarity. For instance, a tweet that con-
tains a sad face likely contains a negative polar-
ity (Read, 2005; Go et al., 2009; Bifet and Frank,
2010; Pak and Paroubek, 2010; Davidov et al.,
2010; Kouloumpis et al., 2011). In a similar vein,
hashtags can serve as noisy labels (Davidov et al.,
2010; Kouloumpis et al., 2011). Our bootstrap
learner is similar in its selection of seed tokens.

Supervised learning for contextual polarity has
received more attention recently. Jiang et al.
(2011) is an early approach. Work on product

reviews sought the sentiment toward particular
product features. These systems used rule based
models based on parts of speech and surface fea-
tures (Nasukawa and Yi, 2003; Hu and Liu, 2004;
Ding and Liu, 2007). Most notably, recent Se-
meval competitions addressed contextual polarity
(Nakov et al., 2013; Rosenthal et al., 2014). The
top performing systems learned their own lexicons
custom to the domain (Mohammad et al., 2013;
Zhu et al., 2014). Our proposed system includes
many of their features, but several fail to help on
nation-nation sentiment.

Early approaches to topic detection on social
media were straightforward, selecting a keyword
(e.g., “Obama”) to represent the topic (e.g., “US
President”) and retrieving tweets containing the
word (O’Connor et al., 2010; Tumasjan et al.,
2010; Tan et al., 2011). These systems classify the
polarity of the entire tweet, but ignore the ques-
tion of polarity toward the particular topic. This
paper focuses on identifying tweets with nation
mentions, and identifying the sentiment toward the
mention, not the overall sentiment of the text.

Event detection on Twitter is also relevant
(Sakaki et al., 2010; Becker et al., 2011). In fact,
O’Connor et al. (2013) modeled events to detect
international relations, but our goal is to model
long term relation trends, not isolated events.

Large-scale computational studies of social me-
dia are relatively new to the international relations
community. Barbera and Rivero (2014) is a no-
table example for election analysis. Some studied
online discussion about Palestine (Lynch, 2014)
and the role of Twitter in the Arab Spring (Howard
et al., 2011; Howard, 2013). However, they sim-
ply counted the volume of tweets containing key-
words. This paper applies a deeper NLP analysis
and we show that frequency alone fails at detecting
nation-nation relations.

Most relevant to this paper is a study of Ara-
bic tweets into anti-American sentiment. Jamal et
al. (2015) used a supervised sentiment classifier
on Arabic tweets to measure sentiment toward the
USA. Our paper differs by taking a broader view.
We investigate with state-of-the-art sentiment al-
gorithms, and we we study practical problems that
arise within when measuring nation-nation senti-
ment across all country pairs. To our knowledge,
this paper is the largest computational approach
(17 months with 2 billion tweets) to measuring in-
ternational relations on social media.

66



3 Microblog Datasets

The main dataset for this study is 17 months of
tweets obtained through the keyword Twitter API
that mention one of 187 unique countries. The
dataset spans from Sep. 3, 2013 to Jan 10, 2015
with 3-5 million tweets per day. Each tweet in-
cludes the profile location and geolocation data (if
available) of the user who posted the tweet. Col-
lection was not limited to a specific location in or-
der to retrieve samples from across the world. This
dataset is used in all political science experiments
(Sections 6.2 and 6.3).

A smaller labeled dataset is used for supervised
classification. We randomly sampled the data to
create a dataset of 4250 tweets. The authors ini-
tially labeled each tweet with one of four senti-
ment labels: positive, negative, objective, or ir-
relevant. Text was only labeled as positive if it
is positive toward the nation’s mention. Text that
contains a nation’s mention, but does not contain
sentiment toward the mention is labeled objective.
Text with a mention that is not referent to a phys-
ical country is labeled irrelevant despite presence
of sentiment. This irrelevant distinction is a depar-
ture from sentiment competitions. A second label-
ing added a fifth label to the irrelevant tweets to
split off dining topics.

Usernames (e.g., @user) and URLs are replaced
with placeholder tokens. Multiple whitespace
characters are condensed and the text is split on
it. Punctuation attached to tokens is removed
(but saved) and used in later punctuation features.
Punctuation is not treated as separate tokens in
the n-gram features. We prepend occurrences of
“not” to their subsequent tokens, merging the two
into a new token (e.g., “not happy” becomes “not-
happy”). Once the raw text of the tweet is tok-
enized as above, non-English tweets are filtered
out. English filtering is performed by LingPipe1.
We manually evaluated this filter and found it
86.2% accurate over 400 tweets. Accuracy is lost
due to slang and the short nature of the text.

4 Classifying Nation-Nation Sentiment

Given a tweet containing a country’s name, our
goal is to identify the sentiment of the text toward
that nation. Unlike most work on contextual polar-
ity, this requires reference resolution of the target
phrase (e.g., the country name). Previous Semeval

1alias-i.com/lingpipe/#lingpipe

competitions evaluate the sentiment of a text to-
ward a phrase, but the semantics of the phrase is
largely ignored. For instance, the following exam-
ple would make an excellent Semeval test item, but
its classification is irrelevant to the goal of measur-
ing nation sentiment:

My daughter and I have been to Angelo’s several
times when in Little Italy. Love love it!

The author is obviously positively inclined to-
ward Little Italy, however, Little Italy does not
refer to the country of Italy. We found that
most tweets referring to dining or visiting foreign-
themed restaurants are not relevant to determining
nation to nation sentiment. It became necessary to
research new classifiers that perform basic refer-
ence resolution.

4.1 Reference Resolution: Irrelevant
Detection

This paper defines reference resolution in the tra-
ditional linguistic sense: determine the real-world
referent of a text mention. Most NLP tasks use
coreference resolution: determine the text an-
tecedent of a text mention. This paper requires ref-
erence resolution because the target phrase often
does not refer to an actual geolocated country. Af-
ter collecting months of tweets that include coun-
try name mentions, data analysis revealed several
types of these non-references. We treat reference
resolution as a classification problem. Below are
a variety of supervised and semi-supervised learn-
ers that identify different types of errant country
references, and ultimately serve to filter out these
irrelevant tweets.

4.1.1 Dining Classifier
One of our early observations was that mentions
of nations are often in the context of eating and
dining, as evidenced here:

This is the first turkey sandwich I’ve had in
awhile... It’s great turkey.

Taste of China For chinese food lover’s. For
more info Please visit

This class of tweet is problematic to our study
of international politics. While microblogs about
dining can contain heavy emotion, a link to the
writer’s opinion about the foreign nation itself
is ambiguous. We thus filter out dining text
through supervised classification. Using the la-
beled dataset in Section 3, we annotated a dine la-
bel for all dining tweets. Tweets without a dine

67



Dine Rel
All unigrams in text X X
1-3grams that include the country X X
Bigram and Trigram country pattern X X
Four Square app pattern X
Named Entity 2-3grams w/ country X
Emoticon happy or sad X
Ending text punctuation X
Binary: contains exclamation point X

Table 1: Dining and Relevant features.

label are considered not-dine. We ran a logistic
regression for two labels, dine and not-dine. Text
features are shown in Table 1.

4.1.2 Irrelevancy Classifier
Beyond dining, a broader class of irrelevant tweets
refer to non-nation entities. These microblogs
contain country names, but the mentions do not
reference the physical country. The following ex-
amples illustrate this class of irrelevant tweets (na-
tion tokens in bold):

Yesterday was chilly out and now today’s going
to be 80. New England weather is so bipolar I
hate it so much

Bank Of America Upgrades ConocoPhillips On
More Favorable Outlook

Several types of irrelevancy can be found, but
the most common is a non-nation geolocation like
New England. Proper nouns like Bank of Amer-
ica are frequent as well. A named entity recog-
nizer (NER) identified some of these, but we ulti-
mately turned to supervised classification for bet-
ter accuracy (space constraints prevent discussion
of NER performance). We trained a logistic re-
gression classifier on the relevant tweets in the
Section 3 dataset, and mapped all other labels to
irrelevant. Features used are shown in Table 1.

4.1.3 Bootstrap Learner
After filtering non-referent tweets, we observed
that many positive and negative tweets reference
countries in the context of sporting events and mu-
sic/concerts. These are correctly labeled relevant
by the above binary classifiers (and possibly anno-
tated as positive or negative), but the topic (sports
or music) does not contain a strong semantic con-
nection to the author’s actual opinion about the
country. A couple of sport examples are given
here:

@SpecialKBrook Wow - the Brittish judge scored
the fight a draw - lucky England’s fighters are
better than their judges.

Congo LFC now someone give me that goalie’s
jersey :p

The sport topic has a less diverse vocabulary
than other topics. We hypothesized that a boot-
strap learning framework (Riloff and Jones, 1999)
could quickly learn its unique language without
the need for supervised learning. Beginning with
a short list of sport keywords (football, basket-
ball, baseball, cricket, soccer, golf, hockey, rugby,
game, vs), we ran two iterations of a bootstrapped
learner. The first step retrieves tweets containing
one of the keywords. The second counts token oc-
currences in this set and computes pointwise mu-
tual information (PMI) scores for each unigram by
comparing with the unigram counts over the entire
corpus. The learner processed ˜190 million tweets
(a couple months of data). The PMI scores from
this process then form the basis of a simple topic
classifier.

A tweet is classified as a topic (e.g., sports) if its
average token PMI score is above a learned thresh-
old for that topic:

scoreT (text) =
1
N

∑
w∈text

pmiT (w) (1)

where N is the number of tokens in the text and
T ∈ {sports, concerts}. The text is classified
as in topic if scoreT (text) > λt. The threshold
λT was determined by visual inspection of a held
out 1000 tweets to maximize accuracy. The initial
seed words and λT thresholds for each topic are
given here:

Seed Words λ
football, basketball, baseball, cricket, soccer,
golf, hockey, rugby, game, vs

0.08

concert, music, album, song, playlist, stage,
drum

0.15

4.2 Contextual Sentiment Analysis
The above classifiers identify relevant tweets with
references to geolocated nations. Approximately
21% are filtered out, leaving 79% for the remain-
ing component of this paper: contextual sentiment
analysis. Contextual sentiment analysis focuses on
the disposition of text toward a word or phrase (in
this case, a country’s name). Most data-driven ap-
proaches rely on labeled corpora to drive the learn-
ing process, and this paper is no different.

Assigning polarity to a word/phrase requires
features that capture the surrounding context. The
following tweets are examples of context with
strong polarity toward the country in bold.

68



RT @ChrissyCostanza: Happiest girl ever. I
LOVE YOU SINGAPORE

there’s no Singapore Got Talent cus the only tal-
ent we have is stomping complaining & staring

Singapore is the target country here. The first
tweet is overtly positive toward it, but the second
requires a more subtle interpretation. The nega-
tive context is toward us, referencing the people of
the Singapore anaphor. It seems reasonable to in-
fer that they are negative toward the country as a
whole, but a deeper reasoning is required to make
the connection. These difficult decisions require a
wide-range of lexical features. We build on the top
performing features from contextual polarity sys-
tems in Semeval 2013 and 2014 (Mohammad et
al., 2013; Zhu et al., 2014). We used the following
set of features to capture these different contexts:

Token Features: All unigrams and bigrams.

Target Patterns: This feature creates patterns
from n-grams that include the target word. The
target is replaced with a variable to capture gen-
eralized patterns. For instance, “to France last”
becomes “to X last”. Bigram and trigram patterns
are created.

Punctuation: End of sentence punctuation and
punctuation attached to target words. Prefix and
postfix punctuation are separate features.

Emoticons: Two binary features for the pres-
ence/absence of smiley and sad face emoticons.

Hand-Built Dictionary: Two binary features,
postivemood and negativemood, indicate if a token
appears in a sentiment lexicon’s positive or nega-
tive list. We use Bing Liu’s Opinion Lexicon2.

Nation-Nation Learned Dictionary: Following
the success of Zhu et al. (2014), we learn a
mood dictionary from our domain-specific nation
dataset. We count unigrams (bigrams did not
improve performance) in one year of unfiltered
tweets with nation mentions that contain an emoti-
con. Using these counts, each unigram computes
its PMI scores toward happy and sad contexts. We
construct features based on these PMI scores: (1)
the highest happy PMI score of all unigrams in a
tweet, (2) the highest sad PMI score, (3) the num-
ber of positive tokens, (4) the number of negative
tokens, and (5) the sum of the token PMI differ-
ences between happy-sad.

2http://www.cs.uic.edu/˜liub/FBS/sentiment-analysis.html

General Learned Dictionary: We computed the
same features as in the above learned dictionary,
but instead counted tokens in all tweets of the gen-
eral emoticon corpus of Go et al. (2009).

The contextual sentiment learner is trained on
the labeled dataset (Section 3). Only tweets with
positive, negative, or objective labels are included
(irrelevant and dining are ignored). Stanford’s
CoreNLP (nlp.stanford.edu/software) is used to
train a MaxEnt classifier with its default settings.

5 Nation to Nation Pipeline

The complete system to determine the nation-
nation sentiment of a tweet consists of 3 steps:
(1) identify the country origin of the tweet, (2) fil-
ter out tweets without references to geolocated na-
tions and filter out irrelevant topics, and (3) iden-
tify the sentiment toward the country. We pro-
cessed 17 months of tweets (Section 3).

The first step identifies the origin of the tweet
with either its GPS coordinates or the profile lo-
cation of the Twitter user. Profile locations are
mapped to countries with an exhaustive list of
country names, major cities, and patterns that
match US city/states (e.g., Pensacola,FL maps to
USA). Non-english tweets are removed with ling-
pipe. The second step filters non-referent, irrel-
evant, dining, and concert tweets with the clas-
sifiers from Section 4.1 (about 21% of tweets at
this stage). The final step is the contextual sen-
timent classifier (Section 4.2). Tweets that make
it through receive 1 of 3 possible labels: positive,
negative, objective.

The aggregate counts of the three labels are col-
lected for each day. This was around 1.2 million
nation labels per day over 17 months. The counts
are used for evaluation in the experiments.

6 Experiments

Our goal is to first prove the accuracy of our senti-
ment classifiers, then show the broader pipeline’s
correlation with known nation-nation politics.We
thus conducted three types of experiments. The
first is an intrinsic evaluation of the classifiers with
common frameworks from the NLP community.
The second is an extrinsic evaluation from multi-
ple political science datasets. The third is a set of
use case proposals for application of this analysis.

69



Dining Classifier
Label P R F1
dining .76 .48 .59
not-dining .96 .99 .98
Baseline Accuracy 93.1%
Accuracy 95.3%

Irrelevant Classifier
Label Prec Recall F1
irrelevant .84 .90 .87
relevant .84 .75 .80
Baseline Accuracy 58.7%
Accuracy 84.0%

Sentiment Classifier
Label Prec Recall F1
positive .64 .47 .54
negative .60 .33 .43
objective .71 .87 .78
Baseline Accuracy 59.0%
Accuracy 68.7%

Table 2: Classifier performance. Precision/Recall is calculated for each label separately. Accuracy is
over all labels: # correct/total.

6.1 Classifier Experiments

The dining, irrelevant, and sentiment classifiers
are supervised systems trained on a labeled dataset
of 4,250 tweets. We split the dataset into training,
dev, and test sets. The dev set contains 200 tweets,
the test set has 750 tweets, and the training set size
varied based on the available labels. The features
in this paper were developed solely on the training
and dev datasets. Reported results are on the un-
seen test set of 750 tweets. The bootstrapped clas-
sifiers for sports and concerts were learned with-
out labeled data, so we ran the sports and concerts
classifiers on an unseen portion of our data, and
manually evaluated the first 200 tweets that were
labeled by each classifier.

Precision and recall are calculated individually
for each class label: P = #correct/#guessed
and R = #correct/#gold. Where #guessed is
how many times the classifier predicted the target
label, and #gold is how many times the target la-
bel appears in the dataset. Accuracy is also shown,
calculated as a single score over all labels together:
Accuracy = #correct/N . The first table in Ta-
ble 2 shows the dining classifier’s performance.
The majority class baseline is high at 93% because
only 7% of the data is about dining. The clas-
sifier achieves a 29% decrease in accuracy error
(2% absolute increase). The second table shows
the more general irrelevant classifier. The majority
class baseline is much lower than dining at 58.7%.
Many tweets that contain a country name are not
relevant nor references to the geolocated country
itself. Our trained classifier does well on this task
achieving 84% accuracy, a 26% absolute increase
over baseline. It is 84% precise with 90% recall on
detecting irrelevant tweets. The third table in Ta-
ble 2 shows sentiment classifier results. Accuracy
is almost 10% absolute above the majority class.

Finally, the bootstrapped classifiers perform at
98% accuracy for sports and 90% for concerts.

Positive/Negative Ratios
Target Ratio Target Ratio
US to Canada 11.9 US to Ireland 3.2
US to Italy 10.8 US to Spain 3.0
US to Japan 7.7 US to France 2.7
US to Australia 3.5 US to Jordan 2.1
US to UK 3.5 US to Mexico 1.9

Table 3: Positive/Negative ratios for the US to-
ward its top 10 frequently mentioned nations.

6.2 Nation-Nation Sentiment Experiments
Nation opinions are represented as directed edges:
each edge (X,Y) represents the opinion of nation
X toward nation Y. The weight of an edge is the
ratio of positive to negative counts:

R(X,Y ) = C(X,Y, positive)/C(X,Y, negative)

where C(X,Y,L) is the number of tweets by nation
X users about nation Y with sentiment L. Only
tweets that make it through the Nation to Nation
Pipeline of Section 5 receive sentiment labels. If
a nation pair (X,Y) was observed less than 1000
times, it is not included in the evaluations. We
provide experiments later to evaluate this cutoff’s
affect.

The dataset (Section 3) spans 17 months from
2013-2015. All tweets are classified or filtered
out, and R(X,Y) is computed for all pairs. Table
3 shows the top 10 nation pair ratios (with over
500k tweets between them) for the U.S.

We present four formal evaluations to answer
the central question of this paper: can sentiment
from social media be used to help approximate in-
ternational opinions? The first two experiments
use public opinion polls of national sentiment to-
ward other nations. The third uses military con-
flicts as a proxy for negative relations, and the
fourth uses current formal alliances as a proxy for
positive relations. None of these can provide a
complete picture of the connection between pop-
ular sentiment and international relations, but the
four together provide a strong case that sentiment
contains a useful signal.

70



Correlation: Public Opinion Polls
Human Poll Sentiment Freq. Baseline

Germany Canada China
Canada Japan Israel

UK EU USA
Japan France Russia
France UK India

EU Brazil Japan
Brazil USA Canada
USA India UK
China South Africa Pakistan

South Korea South Korea France
South Africa Germany Iran

India Russia Brazil
Russia China Germany
Israel Israel North Korea

North Korea North Korea South Korea
Pakistan Iran South Africa

Iran Pakistan EU
Correlation 0.80 -0.06

Table 4: Polling Data: ranking of a nation’s “posi-
tive contribution” to the world, compared to auto-
matically identified nation-nation sentiment.

Each year, GlobeScan/PIPA releases polling
data of 16 nations in a ranked ordering based on
how 26,000 people view their “positive contribu-
tion” to the world3. This poll helps to determine
whether or not this paper’s sentiment pipeline
matches human polling. We created our own rank-
ing by assigning a world score to each nation
n: the average sentiment ratio of all other na-
tions toward n. Since the polling data also ranks
the EU, we average the EU member nation world
scores for an EU world score. Table 4 shows the
PIPA poll (Human Poll) and our world ranking
(Sentiment). Using Spearman’s rank correlation
coefficient to measure agreement, our ranking is
strongly correlated at ρ = 0.8 (perfect is 1.0). The
main mistake in our ranking is Germany. We also
compare against a Frequency Baseline to elim-
inate the possibility that it’s simply a matter of
topic popularity. Poll rankings could simply be
correlated with who people choose to discuss, or
vice versa. The frequency baseline is the aver-
age number of twitter mentions per nation (i.e., the
most discussed). This baseline shows no correla-
tion at ρ = −.06.

We then evaluated against a US-centric polling
agency, Gallup. They asked Americans to rate
other nations as ’favorable’ or ’unfavorable’ in a
2014 poll4. The result is a ranking of favora-
bility. In contrast to the PIPA poll which evalu-

3http://www.worldpublicopinion.org/pipa/2013CountryRatingPoll.pdf
4http://www.gallup.com/poll/1624/perceptions-foreign-countries.aspx

ates many nations looking in, Gallup evaluates a
single nation looking out. Space constraints pre-
vent us from visually showing the US ranking,
but again the sentiment ratios have a strong cor-
relation at ρ = .81. The frequency baseline is
ρ = .23. The nation-nation sentiment extraction
strongly correlates with both world views (PIPA)
and US-specific views (Gallup).

The third evaluation uses a political science
dataset from the Correlates of War Project, the
Militarized Interstate Disputes v4.01 (MID)
(Ghosn et al., 2004). This dataset is used in
the field of international relations, listing conflicts
since 1816. We limit the evaluation to conflicts
after 1990 to keep relations current. The dataset
ends at 2001, so while not a completely current
evaluation, it stands as a proxy for negative rela-
tions. Each conflict in MID is labeled with a con-
flict severity. We convert severity labels between
nations to a pair score MID(X,Y):

MID(X,Y ) =
∑

d∈Disputes(X,Y )
score(d) (2)

where Disputes(X,Y) is the set of conflicts be-
tween the two nations X and Y, and score(d) is a
severity score for the type of dispute d. War is -5,
use of force is -4, displays of force is -3, threaten-
ing use of force is -2, and no militarized action is
-1. We take the sum of severity scores and save all
nation pairs (X,Y) such that MID(X,Y ) < −10.
This score indicates multiple conflicts and are thus
considered as nations with true negative relations.

We then compare our sentiment ratios R(X,Y)
against these gold negative pairs. Each continuous
R(X,Y) is discretized into sentiment categories for
ease of comparison. Since the mean across all
R(X,Y) is 1.25, we consider an interval around
1.25 as neutral and create positive and negative la-
bels above and below that neutral center:

ratiolabel(Z) =



positive, if Z ≥ 2.4
slightpos, if 2.4 > Z ≥ 1.4
neutral, if 1.4 > Z ≥ 1.1
slightneg, if 1.1 > Z ≥ 0.8
negative, if 0.8 > Z

The bottom table in Table 5 shows the number of
nation pairs that align with the negative labels of
the MID dataset. Only pairs that have at least 1000
tweets are evaluated. Of the resulting 90 pairs,
61 are correctly identified by our system as neg-
ative or slight negative for an accuracy of 68%.
19 positive pairs are incorrectly aligned with MID-
negative. Error analysis shows that many incorrect

71



Positive: Formal Alliances
Pos SlPos N SlNeg Neg

# Nation Pairs 341 65 22 26 28

Negative: Military Disputes
Pos SlPos N SlNeg Neg

MID-Negative 12 7 10 15 46

Table 5: Top: The number of NATO/EU nation
pairs with automatic sentiment labels. Bottom:
The number of pairs with military disputes (MID
dataset) and automatic sentiment labels.

labels are between nations with a smaller Twit-
ter presence, so performance likely suffers due to
lack of data. For robustness testing, we shifted
the thresholds that discretize the nation ratios and
MID scores into postive and negative categories.
The accuracy result shows little change. We also
reran the experiment with a higher cutoff of 10,000
instead of 1,000. The negative disputes accuracy
increases from 68% to 81%, but the recall obvi-
ously drops as less countries are included. This
suggests the sentiment ratios might be used on
a sliding confidence scale based on frequency of
mention.

To evaluate positive relations, we use current
alliances as a fourth evaluation. NATO and the
EU are the main global alliances with elements
of mutual defense. We do not include trade-only
alliances as trade is not always an indication of
allegiance and approval (Russia and Ukraine is a
current example of this disparity). This evaluation
considers pairs of nations within NATO and within
the EU as gold positive relations. We compare our
sentiment ratios to these pairs in the top of Table 5.
This evaluation is broader than the conflict evalu-
ation because NATO and EU nations have more of
a Twitter presence. Of the 482 country pairs, our
positive/slightpos accuracy is 84.2%.

6.3 Application Experiments

We now briefly discuss how these positive results
for nation-nation sentiment relates to political sci-
ence analysis.

One core area of study is how national sen-
timent shifts over time, and why. Computing
R(X,Y) on a bi-weekly basis, Figure 1 graphs the
sentiment ratio from the USA toward India and Is-
rael. The timeline shows significant favorability
toward India during their extended election sea-

Sep16 Nov11 Jan06 Mar03 May03 Jun28 Aug23 Oct18 Dec13 Feb09

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

2−week Intervals from Sep16−2013 to Jun28−2014

P
o
s
it
iv

e
/N

e
g
a
ti
v
e
 R

a
ti
o

 

 
India

Israel
India general election
in 9 phases from Apr 7
to May 12

Israel−Gaza
military conflict

Israel sentiment
returns to
pre−conflict levels.

Figure 1: USA opinion of India/Israel over 2-week
intervals from Sep-2013 to Feb-2015.

son, but afterward the opinion is similar to before
the election. In contrast, the 2014 Israel-Gaza con-
flict shows a very different effect. US opinion of
Israel is initially steady (slightly positive) until the
conflict causes a large dip. Unlike India’s spike,
US opinion stays depressed even after the conflict
concludes. It appears to have only risen to ‘nor-
mal’ levels months later. We do note that the wa-
ter is slightly muddied because our algorithm may
not distinguish well between sentiment toward the
war, Israel itself, or even sympathy toward casu-
alties. However, it’s clear that nation-nation sen-
timent is captured, and future work is needed to
identify finer grained sentiment as needed.

Another application is inter-alliance relations.
For instance, Table 6 shows how NATO member
nations view other alliances. The table shows the
average of all R(X,Y) edges for each nation within
an alliance to a nation in the other. According to
our ratios, NATO countries have stark differences
between how they view themselves versus how
they view African Union/Arab League nations.
Further, our pipeline enables analysis of outside
nations looking in. For instance, the nations with
the most positive view of the EU are Uruguay,
Lithuania (EU member), Belarus, Moldova, and
Slovakia (EU member). Almost all (not Uruguay)
are eastern european nations. Moldova is currently
seeking EU membership and Belarus had closer
ties until recently. Our results might point to po-
tential future alliances. Future work is needed to
explore this implied connection.

Finally, the R(X,Y) ratios can also represent a
nation’s opinion profile. Represent each nation X
by a vector of its R(X,Y) ratios. This represents
its entire international view based on social me-

72



Inter-Alliance Opinion Ratios
Source Target Average R(X,Y)
NATO African Union 0.45
NATO Arab League 0.48
NATO European Union 1.51
NATO NATO 1.55

Table 6: Average pos/neg ratio of NATO nations
toward the nations in other formal alliances.

MID Accuracy with Filters
Filters Correct Incorrect Acc.
Dining+Sports 61 29 68%
Sports only 61 37 62%
None 56 51 52%

Table 7: Filtering effects on the MID results.

dia sentiment. Space prohibits more detail, but
we clustered opinion profiles with k-means (k=12)
and cosine similarity. Typical alliances, such as
European and African clusters, are learned.

6.4 Ablation Tests
The sentiment pipeline includes two practical fil-
ters to remove tweets about dining and sports.
We added these during training and developement
solely based on our interpretation and analysis of
the data. We did not evaluate on the test datasets
until the very end. Table 7 shows results from the
MID evaluation with the dining and sports filters
removed in sequence.

The number of correctly identified negative na-
tion pairs is mostly unchanged, but the number of
incorrect decisions increases dramatically. This
occurs because a greater number of tweets make
it through the pipeline. Further, this shows that the
filters effectively remove tweets that cause mis-
classification errors.

7 Discussion

This work is an important first step toward auto-
matic means to broadly detect international rela-
tions from social media. We use sentiment analy-
sis as a proxy for extracting at least one aspect of
the large set of factors involved in such relations.
This paper is the largest application of sentiment
analysis across a diverse set of nation-nation pairs
(hundreds of country pairs over 17 months), and
we showed that this sentiment is strongly corre-
lated (ρ = 0.8) with two independent public opin-
ion polls. These correlations more importantly
suggest that we are not simply identifying a bi-

nary positive or negative relation, but that the rela-
tive sentiment scores are useful. The failure of fre-
quency baselines on this ranking further suggests
that this is not a side effect of topic frequency.

One argument against using public opinion
polls for an evaluation is that the same people
who are polled by PIPA might be the same peo-
ple who tend to voice opinions on Twitter. The
Twitter dataset is not independent from the polls,
so the strong correlation we found could simply be
a matter of sampling the same population. This is
not possible to know, but whether or not it is the
case, this paper’s pipeline could be quite valuable
in automating expensive and time consuming hu-
man polls.

The results that focused on positive sentiment
(polls and alliances) are quite high. Negative sen-
timent revealed a lower 68% accuracy on the MID
dataset, but it is due to the fact that nation-nation
conflicts often occur between smaller nations that
are not represented well on Twitter. Requiring a
higher observed count improves accuracy to 81%.

While we are cautious not to make broad claims
about discovering international relations on Twit-
ter, we are encouraged by the experimental align-
ment with current alliances and historical conflict
data. The sentiment timeline for Israel and India
(Figure 1) is also intriguing. Tracking nation rela-
tions over a longer time period presents an oppor-
tunity for future study. This continual tracking of
sentiment is one of the most obvious benefits of an
automated approach.

Finally, an interactive world map is
available to browse this paper’s data at
www.usna.edu/Users/cs/nchamber/nations.
Each nation can be selected to visually color the
map with its positive/negative lens, and timelines
showing sentiment shifts between nations are vis-
ible. All code, data, and results are also available
on this page. We hope this work encourages even
further connections between NLP and political
science.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by the DoD HPC
Modernization Program. It also would not have
been possible without the infrastructure support
and help from the accommodating staff at the
Maui HPCC. Special thanks to the reviewers and
area chair for their parts in an exciting and fulfill-
ing review process.

73



References
Pablo Barberá and Gonzalo Rivero. 2014. Understand-

ing the political representativeness of twitter users.
Social Science Computer Review, December.

Hila Becker, Mor Naaman, and Luis Gravano. 2011.
Beyond trending topics: Real-world event identifi-
cation on twitter. ICWSM, 11:438–441.

Albert Bifet and Eibe Frank. 2010. Sentiment knowl-
edge discovery in twitter streaming data. In Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, volume 6332, pages 1–
15.

Dmitry Davidov, Oren Tsur, and Ari Rappoport. 2010.
Enhanced sentiment learning using twitter hashtags
and smileys. In Proceedings of the 23rd Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING 2010).

Xiaowen Ding and Bing Liu. 2007. The utility of lin-
guistic rules in opinion mining. In Proceedings of
SIGIR-2007, pages 23–27.

Ghosn, Faten, Glenn Palmer, and Stuart Bremer. 2004.
The mid3 data set, 1993-2001: Procedures, coding
rules, and description. In Conflict Management and
Peace Science 21, pages 133–154.

Alec Go, Richa Bhayani, and Lei Huang. 2009. Twit-
ter sentiment classification using distant supervision.
Technical report.

Philip N. Howard, Aiden Duffy, Deen Freelon, Muza-
mmil Hussain, Will Mari, and Marwa Mazaid.
2011. Opening closed regimes: What was the role
of social media during the arab spring? Technical
Report working paper 2011.1, University of Wash-
ington, September.

Philip N. Howard. 2013. Democracy’s Fourth Wave?
Digital Media and the Arab Spring. Oxford Univer-
sity Press.

Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. 2004. Mining and sum-
marizing customer reviews. In Proceedings of the
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining.

Amaney A. Jamal, Robert O. Keohane, David Rom-
ney, and Dustin Tingley. 2015. Anti-americanism
and anti-interventionism in arabic twitter discourses.
Perspectives on Politics, pages 55–73, March.

Long Jiang, Mo Yu, Ming Zhou, Xiaohua Liu, and
Tiejun Zhao. 2011. Target-dependent twitter sen-
timent classification. In Proceedings of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL-2011).

Efthymios Kouloumpis, Theresa Wilson, and Johanna
Moore. 2011. Twitter sentiment analysis: The good
the bad and the omg! In Proceedings of the Fifth In-
ternational AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social
Media.

Adam D. I. Kramer. 2010. An unobtrusive behavioral
model of ‘gross national happiness’. In Proceedings
of the 28th International Conference on Human Fac-
tors in Computing Systems (CHI 2010).

Bing Liu and Lei Zhang. 2012. A survey of opinion
mining and sentiment analysis. Mining Text Data,
pages 415–463.

Marc Lynch. 2014. Arabs do care about
gaza. www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/monkey-
cage/wp/2014/07/14/arabs-do-care-about-gaza.

Saif M. Mohammad, Svetlana Kiritchenko, and Xiao-
dan Zhu. 2013. Nrc-canada: Building the state-
of-the-art in sentiment analysis of tweets. In Pro-
ceedings of the seventh international workshop on
Semantic Evaluation Exercises (SemEval-2013).

Preslav Nakov, Zornitsa Kozareva, Alan Ritter, Sara
Rosenthal, Veselin Stoyanov, and Theresa Wilson.
2013. Semeval-2013 task 2: Sentiment analysis
in twitter. In Proceedings of the 7th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Tetsuya Nasukawa and Jeonghee Yi. 2003. Senti-
ment analysis: capturing favorability using natural
language processing. In Proceedings of K-CAP.

Brendan O’Connor, Ramnath Balasubramanyan,
Bryan R. Routledge, and Noah A. Smith. 2010.
From tweets to polls: Linking text sentiment to
public opinion time series. In Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media.

Brendan O’Connor, Brandon M Stewart, and Noah A
Smith. 2013. Learning to extract international re-
lations from political context. In ACL (1), pages
1094–1104.

Alexander Pak and Patrick Paroubek. 2010. Twit-
ter as a corpus for sentiment analysis and opinion
mining. In Proceedings of the Seventh International
Conference On Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC).

B. Pang and L. Lee. 2008. Opinion mining and senti-
ment analysis. Foundations and Trends in Informa-
tion Retrieval.

Jonathon Read. 2005. Using emoticons to reduce de-
pendency in machine learning techniques for senti-
ment classification. In Proceedings of the ACL Stu-
dent Research Workshop (ACL-2005).

Ellen Riloff and Rosie Jones. 1999. Learning dic-
tionaries for information extraction by multi-level
bootstrapping. In Proceedings of the 16th Na-
tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-
99), pages 474–479.

Sara Rosenthal, Preslav Nakov, Alan Ritter, and
Veselin Stoyanov. 2014. Semeval-2014 task 9: Sen-
timent analysis in twitter. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

74



Takeshi Sakaki, Makoto Okazaki, and Yutaka Matsuo.
2010. Earthquake shakes twitter users: real-time
event detection by social sensors. In Proceedings
of the 19th international conference on World wide
web, pages 851–860. ACM.

Chenhao Tan, Lillian Lee, Jie Tang, Long Jiang, Ming
Zhou, and Ping Li. 2011. User-level sentiment anal-
ysis incorporating social networks. In Proceedings
of the 17th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining.

H. Tang, S. Tan, and X. Cheng. 2009. A survey on
sentiment detection of reviews. Expert Systems with
Applications.

Mike Thelwall, Kevan Buckley, and Georgios Pal-
toglou. 2011. Sentiment in twitter events. Journal
of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 62(2):406–418.

M. Tsytsarau and T. Palpanas. 2012. Survey on min-
ing subjective data on the web. Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery Journal, 24(3):478–514.

Andranik Tumasjan, Timm O. Sprenger, Philipp G.
Sandner, and Isabell M. Welpe. 2010. Election fore-
casts with twitter: How 140 characters reflect the po-
litical landscape. Social Science Computer Review.

Xiaodan Zhu, Svetlana Kiritchenko, and Saif M. Mo-
hammad. 2014. Nrc-canada-2014: Recent improve-
ments in the sentiment analysis of tweets. In Pro-
ceedings of the seventh international workshop on
Semantic Evaluation Exercises (SemEval-2013).

75


