



















































Variable-Length Word Encodings for Neural Translation Models


Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2088–2093,
Lisbon, Portugal, 17-21 September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.

Variable-Length Word Encodings for Neural Translation Models

Rohan Chitnis and John DeNero
Computer Science Division

University of California, Berkeley
{ronuchit,denero}@berkeley.edu

Abstract

Recent work in neural machine translation
has shown promising performance, but the
most effective architectures do not scale
naturally to large vocabulary sizes. We
propose and compare three variable-length
encoding schemes that represent a large
vocabulary corpus using a much smaller
vocabulary with no loss in information.
Common words are unaffected by our en-
coding, but rare words are encoded us-
ing a sequence of two pseudo-words. Our
method is simple and effective: it requires
no complete dictionaries, learning proce-
dures, increased training time, changes to
the model, or new parameters. Com-
pared to a baseline that replaces all rare
words with an unknown word symbol, our
best variable-length encoding strategy im-
proves WMT English-French translation
performance by up to 1.7 BLEU.

1 Introduction
Bahdanau et al. (2014) propose a neural transla-
tionmodel that learns vector representations for in-
dividual words as well as word sequences. Their
approach jointly predicts a translation and a la-
tent word-level alignment for a sequence of source
words. However, the architecture of the network
does not scale naturally to large vocabularies (Jean
et al., 2014).
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to

circumvent the large-vocabulary challenge by pre-
processing the source and target word sequences,
encoding them as a longer token sequence drawn
from a small vocabulary that does not discard
any information. Common words are unaffected,
but rare words are encoded as a sequence of two
pseudo-words. The exact same learning and infer-

ence machinery applied to these transformed data
yields improved translations.
We evaluate a family of 3 different encoding

schemes based on Huffman codes. All of them
eliminate the need to replace rare words with the
unknown word symbol. Our approach is simpler
than other methods recently proposed to address
the same issue. It does not introduce new param-
eters into the model, change the model structure,
affect inference, require access to a complete dic-
tionary, or require any additional learning proce-
dures. Nonetheless, compared to a baseline system
that replaces all rare words with an unknown word
symbol, our encoding approach improves English-
French news translation by up to 1.7 BLEU.

2 Background
2.1 Neural Machine Translation
Neural machine translation describes approaches
to machine translation that learn from corpora in
a single integrated model that embeds words and
sentences into a vector space (Kalchbrenner and
Blunsom, 2013; Cho et al., 2014; Sutskever et al.,
2014). We focus on one recent approach to neu-
ral machine translation, proposed by Bahdanau et
al. (2014), that predicts both a translation and its
alignment to the source sentence, though our tech-
nique is relevant to related approaches as well.
The architecture consists of an encoder and a de-

coder. The encoder receives a source sentence x
and encodes each prefix using a recurrent neural
network that recursively combines embeddings xj
for each word position j:

−→
h j = f(xj ,

−→
h j−1) (1)

where f is a non-linear function. Reverse encod-
ings
←−
h j are computed similarly to represent suf-

fixes of the sentence. These vector representa-
tions are stacked to form hj , a representation of the

2088



whole sentence focused on position j.
The decoder predicts each target word yi se-

quentially according to the distribution

P (yi|yi−1, ..., y1,x) = g(yi−1, si, ci) (2)

where si is a hidden decoder state summarizing
the prefix of the translation generated so far, ci is
a summary of the entire input sequence, and g is
another non-linear function. Encoder and decoder
parameters are jointly optimized to maximize the
log-likelihood of a training corpus.
Depending on the approach to neural transla-

tion, c can take multiple forms. Bahdanau et al.
(2014) propose integrating an attentionmechanism
in the decoder, which is trained to determine on
which portions of the source sentence to focus.
The decoder computes ci, the summarizing con-
text vector, as a convex combination of the hj .
The coefficients of this combination are propor-
tional (softmax) to an alignment model prediction
exp a(hj , si), where a is a non-linear function.
The speed of prediction scales with the output

vocabulary size, due to the denominator of Equa-
tion 2 (Jean et al., 2014). The input vocabulary size
is also a challenge for storage and learning. As a re-
sult, neural machine translation systems only con-
sider the top 30K to 100K most frequent words in
a training corpus, replacing the other words with
an unknown word symbol.

2.2 Related Work
There has been much recent work in improving
translation quality by addressing these vocabulary
size challenges. Luong et al. (2014) describe an
approach that, similar to ours, treats the translation
system as a black box. They eliminate unknown
symbols by training the system to recognize from
where in the source text each unknown word in the
target text came, so that in a postprocessing phase,
the unknown word can be replaced by a dictionary
lookup of the corresponding source word. In con-
trast, our method does not rely on access to a com-
plete dictionary, and instead transforms the data to
allow the system itself to learn translations for even
the rare words.

Some approaches have altered the model to cir-
cumvent the expensive normalization computa-
tion, rather than applying preprocessing and post-
processing on the text. Jean et al. (2014) de-
velop an importance sampling strategy for ap-
proximating the softmax computation. Mnih and

Kavukcuoglu (2013) present a technique for ap-
proximation of the target word probability using
noise-contrastive estimation.
Sequential or hierarchical encodings of large vo-

cabularies have played an important role in recur-
rent neural network language models, primarily to
address the inference time issue of large vocabu-
laries. Mikolov et al. (2011b) describe an architec-
ture in which output word types are grouped into
classes by frequency: the network first predicts a
class, then a word in that class. Mikolov et al.
(2013) describe an encoding of the output vocabu-
lary as a binary tree. To our knowledge, hierarchi-
cal encodings have not been applied to the input
vocabulary of a machine translation system.
Othermethods have also been developed towork

around large-vocabulary issues in languagemodel-
ing. Morin and Bengio (2005), Mnih and Hinton
(2009), and Mikolov et al. (2011a) develop hierar-
chical versions of the softmax computation; Huang
et al. (2012) and Collobert and Weston (2008) re-
move the need for normalization, thus avoiding
computation of the summation term over the entire
vocabulary.

2.3 Huffman Codes

An encoding can be used to represent a sequence
of tokens from a large vocabulary V using a small
vocabularyW . In the case of translation, let V be
the original corpus vocabulary, which can number
in the millions of word types in a typical corpus.
Let W be the vocabulary size of a neural transla-
tion model, typically set to a much smaller number
such as 30,000.
A deterministically invertible, variable-length

encodingmaps each v ∈ V to a sequencew ∈ W+
such that no other v′ ∈ V is mapped to a prefix of
w. Encoding simply replaces each element of V
according to the map, and decoding is unambigu-
ous because of this prefix restriction. An encoding
can be represented as a tree in which each leaf cor-
responds to an element of V , each node contains a
symbol fromW , and the encoding of any leaf is its
path from the root.
A Huffman code is an optimal encoding that

uses as few symbols fromW as possible to encode
an original sequence of symbols from V . Although
binary codes are typical,W can have any size. An
optimal encoding can be found using a greedy al-
gorithm (Huffman, 1952).

2089



to be or not to be

take it or leave it

to be or not it

(take) (leave)

s0

be s0

to be or not to be

s0 be it or s0 s0 it

Original Corpus

Repeat-All Encoding

to be s0 s1

(not) (it)

or

s0 s1

Repeat-Symbol Encoding

to be or s0 s0 to be

s1 s0 s0 s1 or s1 s1 s0 s1

(take) (leave)
s0 s1

s0 s1 s2

(not)(it)(to)
t0 t1

No-Repeats Encoding

s0 t0 s0 t1 or s1 t0 s0 t0 s0 t1

s2 t0 s1 t1 or s2 t1 s1 t1

(take)(leave)
t0 t1

(be)

or

t0 t1

13 encoded tokens

16 encoded tokens

20 encoded tokens

Figure 1: Our three encoding schemes are applied
to a two-sentence toy corpus for which each word
type appears one or two times, and the total vocab-
ulary size V is 7. An optimal encoding tree under
each scheme is shown for an encoded vocabulary
sizeW of 6. As stricter constraints are imposed on
the encoding, the encoded corpus length increases
and the number of elements of V that can be rep-
resented using a single symbol decreases. Two-
symbol encodings of rare words are underlined.

3 Variable-Length Encoding Methods

We consider three different encoding schemes that
are based on Huffman codes. The encoding for a
toy corpus under each scheme is depicted in Fig-
ure 1. While a Huffman code achieves the shortest
possible encoded length using a fixed vocabulary
size W , symbols are often shared between both
common words and rare words. The variants we
consider are designed to prevent specific forms of
symbol sharing across encodings.

3.1 Encoding Schemes
Repeat-All. The first scheme is a standard Huff-
man code. In our experiments with V ≈ 2 · 106,
W = 3 · 104, and frequencies drawn from the

WMT corpus, all words in V are encoded as either
a single symbol or two symbols ofW . We denote
the single-symbol words (which have the high-
est frequency) as common, and we call the other
words rare. The Repeat-All encoding scheme has
the highest number of common words. In Fig-
ure 1, common words are represented as them-
selves. Rare words are represented by two words,
and the first is always a pseudo-word symbol intro-
duced intoW of the form sX for an integer X.
Repeat-Symbol. The Repeat-Symbol encoding
scheme does not allow common-word symbols to
appear in the encoding of rare words. Instead, each
rare word is encoded as a two-symbol sequence
of the form “sX sY,” where X and Y are integers
that may be the same or different. This scheme
decreases the number of common words in order
to encode all rare words using a restricted set of
symbols. In this scheme, a common word in the
encoded vocabulary always corresponds to a com-
mon word in the original vocabulary, reducing am-
biguity of commonword symbols at the expense of
increasing ambiguity of pseudo-word symbols.
No-Repeats. Our final encoding scheme, No-
Repeats, uses a different vocabulary for the first
and second symbols in each rare word. That is, rare
words are represented as “sX tY,” where X and Y
are integers that may be the same or different. In
this scheme, common words and rare words do not
share symbols, and each symbol can immediately
be identified as common, the first of a rare encod-
ing pair, or the second of a rare encoding pair.

3.2 Symbol Counts
To maximize performance, it is critical to set the
number of common words (which transform to
themselves) as high as possible while satisfying
the desired total vocabulary size, counting all the
newly introduced symbols. In this section, we al-
gebraically derive this optimal number of common
words for each encoding scheme. We define the
following:

V : Size of the original vocabulary.

W : Size of the encoded vocabulary.

C: Number of common words.

S: Number of pseudo-words of the form sX.

T : Number of pseudo-words of the form tX.

2090



We are interested in maximizing C so that total
encoding length is minimized.
Repeat-All. We would like to encode the V − C
rare words, using onlyW −C new symbols. To do
so, for each new symbol (non-terminal node in our
encoding tree), we have all W symbols under it in
that branch. Therefore, we maximize C satisfying
the constraint that

V − C ≤ (W − C) ·W

Repeat-Symbol. Out of the V −C rare words, we
would like to pack them into a complete tree so that
they may be encoded using our remaining W −C
symbols. Therefore, we maximizeC satisfying the
constraint that

V − C ≤ (W − C)2

No-Repeats. Again, we desire to pack V − C
rare words into a complete tree where we may use
W − C symbols. To maximize C, we let S = T .
Because S +T +C = W , we have that 2S +C =
W . Therefore, we maximize C satisfying the con-
straint that

V − C ≤
(

W − C
2

)2

4 Experimental Results

We trained a public implementation1 of the sys-
tem described in Bahdanau et al. (2014) on the
English-French parallel corpus from ACL WMT
2014, which contains 348M tokens. We evaluated
on news-test-2014, also from WMT 2014, which
contains 3003 sentences. All experiments used the
same learning parameters and vocabulary size of
30,000.
We constructed each encoding by the following

method. First, we used the formulas derived in the
previous section to calculate the optimal number
of common words C for each encoding scheme,
using V to be the true vocabulary size of the train-
ing corpus and W = 30, 000. We then found the
C most common words in the text and encoded
them as themselves. For the remaining rare words,
we encoded them using a distinct symbol whose
formmatched the one prescribed for each encoding
scheme. The encoding was then applied separately

1github.com/lisa-groundhog/GroundHog

Encoding BLEU # Common Words
None 25.77 30,000
Repeat-All 27.45 29,940
Repeat-Symbol 26.52 28,860
No-Repeats 25.79 27,320

Table 1: BLEU scores (%) on detokenized test set
for each encoding scheme after training for 5 days.

to both the source text and the target text. Our en-
coding schemes all increased the total number of
tokens in the training corpus by approximately 4%.
To construct the mapping from rare words to

their 2-word encodings, we binned rare words by
frequency into branches. Thus, rare words of sim-
ilar frequency in the training corpus tended to
have encodings with the same first symbol. Simi-
larly, the standard Huffman construction algorithm
groups together rare words with similar frequen-
cies within subtrees. More intelligent heuristics for
constructing trees, such as using translation statis-
tics instead of training corpus frequency, would be
an interesting area of future work.

4.1 Results
Weused the RNNsearch-50 architecture fromBah-
danau et al. (2014) as our machine translation sys-
tem. We report results for this system alone, as well
as for each of our three encoding schemes, using
the BLEU metric (Papineni et al., 2002). Table 1
summarizes our results after training each vari-
ant for 5 days, corresponding to roughly 2 passes
through the 180K-sentence training corpus.
Alternative techniques that leverage bilingual

resources have been shown to provide larger im-
provements. Jean et al. (2014) demonstrate an im-
provement of 3.1 BLEU by using bilingual word
co-occurrence statistics in an aligned corpus to re-
place unknown word tokens. Luong et al. (2014)
demonstrate an improvement of up to 2.8 BLEU
over a series of stronger baselines using an un-
known word model that also makes predictions us-
ing a bilingual dictionary.

4.2 Analysis
Our results indicate that the encoding scheme
that keeps the highest number of common words,
Repeat-All, performs best. Table 2 shows the un-
igram precision of each output. The common
word translation accuracy is higher for all encoding
schemes than for the baseline, although all preci-

2091



Encoding Common Rare 1st Symbol
None 62.0 0.0 -
Repeat-All 65.8 28.0 64.8
Repeat-Symbol 65.5 16.5 24.8
No-Repeats 63.6 15.8 25.7

Table 2: Test set precision (%) on common words
and rare words for each encoding strategy. 1st Sym-
bol denotes the precision of the first pseudo-word
symbol in an encoded rare word.

sions are similar. Larger differences appear in the
precision of rare words. The scheme that encodes
rare words using both pseudo-words and common
words gives substantially higher rare word accu-
racy than any other approach.
The final column of Table 2 shows the unigram

precision of the first pseudo-word in an encoded
rare word. The Repeat-All scheme uses only 60
different first symbols to encode all rare words.
The other schemes require over 1,000. The fact
that Repeat-All has a constrained set of rare word
first symbols may account for its higher rare word
precision.

It is possible for the model to predict an in-
valid encoded sequence that does not correspond
to any word in the original vocabulary. However,
in our experiments, we did not observe any such
sequences in the decoding of the test set. A rea-
sonable way to deal with invalid sequences would
be to drop them from the output during decoding.

5 Conclusion and Future Work
We described a novel approach for encoding the
source and target text based on Huffman cod-
ing schemes, eliminating the use of the unknown
word symbol. An important continuation of our
work would be to develop heuristics for effectively
grouping “similar” words in the source and target
text, so that they tend to have encodings that share
a symbol. Even with our naive grouping by corpus
frequency, our approach offers a simple way to pre-
dict both common and rare words in a neural trans-
lation model. As a result, performance improves
by up to 1.7 BLEU. We expect that the simplic-
ity of our technique will allow for straightforward
combination with other enhancements and neural
models.

References
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua

Bengio. 2014. Neural machine translation by
jointly learning to align and translate. CoRR,
abs/1409.0473.

Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merrienboer, Çaglar
Gülçehre, Fethi Bougares, Holger Schwenk, and
Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Learning phrase represen-
tations using RNN encoder-decoder for statistical
machine translation. CoRR, abs/1406.1078.

Ronan Collobert and Jason Weston. 2008. A unified
architecture for natural language processing: Deep
neural networks with multitask learning. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Machine
Learning.

Eric H. Huang, Richard Socher, Christopher D. Man-
ning, and Andrew Y. Ng. 2012. Improving word
representations via global context and multiple word
prototypes. In Proceedings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics.

David A. Huffman. 1952. A method for the construc-
tion of minimum-redundancy codes. Proceedings of
the IRE.

Sébastien Jean, Kyunghyun Cho, Roland Memisevic,
and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. On using very large
target vocabulary for neural machine translation.
CoRR, abs/1412.2007.

Nal Kalchbrenner and Phil Blunsom. 2013. Recurrent
continuous translation models.

Thang Luong, Ilya Sutskever, Quoc V. Le, Oriol
Vinyals, and Wojciech Zaremba. 2014. Addressing
the rare word problem in neural machine translation.
CoRR, abs/1410.8206.

Tomáš Mikolov, Anoop Deoras, Daniel Povey, Lukáš
Burget, and Jan Černocký. 2011a. Strategies for
training large scale neural network language models.
In Proceedings of ASRU.

Tomáš Mikolov, S. Kombrink, L. Burget, J.H. Cer-
nocky, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. 2011b. Exten-
sions of recurrent neural network language model.
In Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing.

Tomáš Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey
Dean. 2013. Efficient estimation of word represen-
tations in vector space. CoRR, abs/1301.3781.

Andriy Mnih and Geoffrey E. Hinton. 2009. A scal-
able hierarchical distributed language model. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems.

Andriy Mnih and Koray Kavukcuoglu. 2013. Learning
word embeddings efficiently with noise-contrastive
estimation. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems.

2092



Frederic Morin and Yoshua Bengio. 2005. Hierarchi-
cal probabilistic neural network language model. In
AI Stats.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: A method for automatic eval-

uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V. Le. 2014.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks.

CoRR, abs/1409.3215.

2093


