



















































Learning to Recognize Affective Polarity in Similes


Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 190–200,
Lisbon, Portugal, 17-21 September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.

Learning to Recognize Affective Polarity in Similes

Ashequl Qadir and Ellen Riloff
School of Computing

University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA

{asheq,riloff}@cs.utah.edu

Marilyn A. Walker
Natural Language & Dialogue Systems Lab

University of California Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA
mawalker@ucsc.edu

Abstract

A simile is a comparison between two
essentially unlike things, such as “Jane
swims like a dolphin”. Similes often ex-
press a positive or negative sentiment to-
ward something, but recognizing the po-
larity of a simile can depend heavily on
world knowledge. For example, “memory
like an elephant” is positive, but “mem-
ory like a sieve” is negative. Our research
explores methods to recognize the polarity
of similes on Twitter. We train classifiers
using lexical, semantic, and sentiment fea-
tures, and experiment with both manu-
ally and automatically generated training
data. Our approach yields good perfor-
mance at identifying positive and negative
similes, and substantially outperforms ex-
isting sentiment resources.

1 Introduction

A simile is a form of figurative language that com-
pares two essentially unlike things (Paul, 1970),
such as “Jane swims like a dolphin”. Similes of-
ten express a positive or negative view toward an
entity, object, or experience (Li et al., 2012; Fish-
elov, 2007). Sometimes, the sentiment of a simile
is expressed explicitly, such as “Jane swims beau-
tifully like a dolphin!”. But in many cases the sen-
timent is implicit, evoked entirely from the com-
parison itself. “Jane swims like a dolphin” is eas-
ily understood to be a compliment toward Jane’s
swimming ability because dolphins are known to
be excellent swimmers.

A simile consists of four key components: the
topic or tenor (subject of the comparison), the ve-
hicle (object of the comparison), the event (act
or state), and a comparator (usually “as”, “like”,
or “than”) (Niculae and Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil,
2014). A property (shared attribute) can be op-
tionally included as well (e.g., “He is as red as

a tomato”). Our research aims to identify the af-
fective polarity of a simile as positive, negative, or
neutral, based on its component phrases.

Table 1 shows examples of similes and their po-
larity. A simile can have neutral polarity if it offers
an objective observation. Example (a) is a neutral
simile because, although bananas have a distinc-
tive smell, it is not generally considered to be a
particularly good or bad scent. Example (b) illus-
trates that using the subjective verb “stink” instead
of “smell” indicates a negative polarity toward the
scent of bananas. Example (c) shows that includ-
ing a subjective adjective such as “rotten” suggests
a negative sentiment. Example (d) has negative
polarity because the vehicle term, “garbage”, car-
ries a strong negative connotation.

Simile Polarity
(a) smells like bananas neutral
(b) stinks like bananas negative
(c) smells like rotten bananas negative
(d) smells like garbage negative
(e) memory like an elephant positive
(f) memory like a sieve negative
(g) looks like a celebrity positive
(h) acts like a celebrity negative

Table 1: Simile Examples with Affective Polarity.

However, the affective polarity of a simile of-
ten emerges from multiple component terms. For
instance, all of the words in Examples (e) and (f)
have neutral polarity. But Example (e) is positive
because elephants are widely known to have ex-
cellent memories, while Example (f) is negative
because a sieve has holes, which is metaphorical
with memory lapses. Examples (g) and (h) illus-
trate that a prior connotation can even be overrid-
den depending upon the property being compared.
In general, the word “celebrity” tends to have a
positive connotation and looking like a celebrity is
generally a compliment. But acting like a celebrity
is a negative simile because it alludes to negative
attributes such as narcissism or entitlement.

190



Our research explores the challenge of identi-
fying the affective polarity of similes. First, we
introduce a new data set of similes extracted from
Twitter. We describe a manual annotation study to
label them with affective polarity. We also present
several approaches for identifying some instances
of positive and negative similes using existing sen-
timent resources, to automatically create labeled
data to train a classifier. Second, we describe a
machine learning classifier to recognize the affec-
tive polarity of similes by considering lexical, se-
mantic, and sentiment properties of their compo-
nents. Third, we present experimental results for
the simile polarity classifier, using both manually
annotated training data and automatically labeled
training data. Our evaluation shows that the clas-
sifier trained with manually labeled data achieves
good performance at identifying positive and neg-
ative similes. Training with automatically labeled
data produces classifiers that are not quite as good
as those trained with manually labeled data, but
they still substantially outperform existing senti-
ment resources and offer a way to easily train sim-
ile classifiers for different domains.

2 Related Work

Although similes are a popular form of com-
parison, there has been relatively little prior re-
search on understanding affective polarity in sim-
iles. Veale and Hao (2007) created a large sim-
ile case-base using the pattern “as ADJ as a/an
NOUN”. They collected similes by querying the
web after instantiating part of the pattern with ad-
jectives, and then had a human annotate 30,991
of the extracted similes for validity. Their fo-
cus was on extracting salient properties associated
with simile vehicles, and the affective perception
on vehicles that the salient properties bring about.

Veale (2012) took a step further and automati-
cally recognized the affect toward vehicles when
properties reinforce each other (e.g., hot and hu-
mid). They built a support graph of properties
and determined how they connect to unambiguous
positive and negative words. Li et al. (2012) used
similar patterns to retrieve similes and determine
basic sentiment toward simile vehicles across dif-
ferent languages using the compared properties.
One major difference with their work and ours
is that they determine sentiment or affective per-
ception toward entities or concepts extracted from
simile vehicles. In contrast, our work is focused

on determining affective polarity of a simile as a
whole, where the affective polarity typically re-
lates to an act or state of the tenor. In many cases,
a simile vehicle does not have positive or negative
polarity by itself. For example, “sauna” is not a
positive or negative concept, but “room feels like
a sauna” is a negative simile because it suggests
that the room is humid and unpleasant.

Niculae and Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil (2014)
created a simile data set from Amazon product re-
views, and determined when comparisons are figu-
rative. They did not identify affective polarity, but
showed that sentiment and figurative comparisons
are correlated. Fishelov (2007) conducted a study
of 16 similes where the connection between tenor
and vehicle is obvious or not obvious, and when
a conventional or unconventional explicit property
is present or absent. Fishelov analyzed responses
from participants to understand the positive and
negative impression a simile conveys toward its
tenor. Hanks (2005) presented an analysis of se-
mantic categories of simile vehicles (animal, roles
in society, artifact, etc.) that people most com-
monly use in similes.

Previous research has also explored sentiment
expressed through metaphor. Rumbell et al.
(2008) presented an analysis of animals that are
metaphorically used to describe a person. Ren-
toumi et al. (2009) determined use of figurative
language by disambiguating word senses, and then
determined sentiment polarity at the sense level
using ngram graph similarity. Wallington et al.
(2011) identified affect in metaphor and similes
when a comparison is made with an animal (e.g.,
dog, fox) or mythical creature (e.g., dragon, angel)
by analyzing WordNet sense glosses of the com-
pared terms. More recently, the SemEval-2015
Shared Task 11 (Ghosh et al., 2015) has addressed
the sentiment analysis of figurative language such
as irony, metaphor and sarcasm in Twitter.

Our work is also related to sentiment analy-
sis in general. The most common approach ap-
plies supervised classification with features such
as ngrams, parts-of-speech, punctuation, lexicon
features, etc. (e.g., (Kouloumpis et al., 2011;
Davidov et al., 2010; Mohammad et al., 2013)).
To overcome the challenge of acquiring manu-
ally labeled data, some work automatically col-
lects noisy training data using emoticons and hash-
tags (e.g., (Go et al., 2009; Purver and Battersby,
2012)). In addition to determining overall sen-

191



timent, research has also focused on understand-
ing people’s sentiment during specific events such
as stock market fluctuations, presidential elec-
tions, Oscars, tsunamis, or toward entities such
as movies, companies, or aspects of a product
(Bollen et al., 2011; Thelwall et al., 2011; Jiang
et al., 2011; Hu and Liu, 2004; Jo and Oh, 2011).

To our knowledge, we are the first to explore
recognition of affective polarity in similes as a
whole, where the polarity relates to an act or state
of the tenor. Unlike previous work, we do not rely
on the presence of explicit properties. We also
present a data set annotated with affective polarity
in similes, and experiment with both manually an-
notated and automatically acquired training data.

3 Simile Data Set Creation

One of the major challenges of supervised clas-
sification is acquiring sufficient labeled data for
training, since manual annotation is time consum-
ing. However, similes sometimes contain words
with explicit polarity (e.g., “bed feels like heaven”
or “he cries like a baby”). Many of these cases
can be identified with existing sentiment resources
and then used to provide a classifier with training
instances. But because sentiment resources have
limitations (e.g., sentiment classifiers are not per-
fect, sentiment lexicons do not possess knowledge
of context), these instances will have some noise.
Therefore, we experiment with both manually la-
beled data sets that are smaller in size but high
quality, and automatically labeled data sets that are
comparatively larger but noisier.

Twitter is a popular microblogging platform and
is widely used for sentiment analysis. Thus it is an
excellent source for collecting similes that people
use in everyday conversation. For this research,
we extracted similes from 140 million tweets we
harvested using the Twitter streaming API from
March 2013 to April 2014. We started by select-
ing tweets containing three common compara-
tor keywords: “like”, “as”, and “than”. We re-
moved tweets with exact duplicate content, and
tweets containing a retweet token. An additional
challenge of tweets is that many are “near dupli-
cates” (e.g., shared tweets with an added sym-
bol or comment). So we performed an additional
de-duplication step using Jaccard similarity of tri-
grams to measure overlap in the text content be-
tween pairs of tweets. When Jaccard similarity
between two tweets was > 0.5, we kept only the

longer tweet, and repeated the process.
We used the UIUC Chunker (Punyakanok and

Roth, 2001) to identify phrase sequences with the
syntax of similes (e.g., NP1 + VP + PP-like + NP2,
or NP1 + VP + ADJP + PP-like + NP2, where
NP1 is the tenor, NP2 is the vehicle, VP is the
event, and ADJP is any explicitly mentioned prop-
erty). We generalized over the extracted similes
by removing the comparator, and the optional ex-
plicit property component. Our simile represen-
tation is thus a triple of the tenor, event and ve-
hicle. We also lemmatized all words using Stan-
ford CoreNLP (Manning et al., 2014). For a tenor
phrase, we kept only the head noun, which is usu-
ally sufficient to understand the affective polarity
target. We kept the entire noun phrase for the ve-
hicle, since vehicles like “ice box” and “gift box”
may represent two different concepts with differ-
ent polarities in similes. We replaced personal pro-
nouns (e.g., he, she) with a general PERSON token
and other pronouns (e.g., it, this, that) with a gen-
eral IT token. Table 2 presents examples of posi-
tive and negative similes in the annotated data set.

Positive Negative
PERSON, smile, sun PERSON, look, zombie
PERSON, feel, kid PERSON, treat, stranger
PERSON, be, older brother PERSON, feel, poo
IT, sound, heaven PERSON, look, clown
PERSON, look, superman word, cut, knife
IT, be, old time PERSON, act, child
IT, feel, home PERSON, look, voldemort
IT, fit, glove PERSON, look, wet dog
IT, would be, dream PERSON, treat, baby
IT, smell, spring PERSON, look, drug addict

Table 2: Sample Similes from Annotated Data.

Sometimes, vehicle phrases contain adjective
modifiers indicating explicit sentiment (e.g., “she
looks like a beautiful model”). Since a sim-
ile is trivial to classify with such a modifier,
we removed the instances that already had posi-
tive or negative adjective modifiers. To identify
these cases, we used the AFINN sentiment lexi-
con (Nielsen, 2011). Similes that contain profan-
ity (e.g., “You look like crap”) are nearly always
negative, and trivial to classify, so we filtered out
these cases using a freely available profanity list1.
We also removed any simile where the vehicle is
a pronoun (e.g., “it looks like that”), and discard
similes appearing fewer than 5 times. Our final
data set contains 7,594 similes.

1http://www.bannedwordlist.com/lists/swearWords.txt

192



3.1 Manually Annotated Simile Data Set

To obtain manual annotation, we randomly se-
lected 1500 similes occurring at least 10 times,
from the 7,594 similes. Our expectation was that
more frequent similes will be easier for the anno-
tators to understand. We used Amazon’s Mechani-
cal Turk to obtain gold standard annotations for af-
fective polarity. We asked the annotators to deter-
mine if a simile expresses affective polarity toward
the subject (i.e., the tenor component), and to as-
sign one of four labels: positive, negative, neutral,
or invalid. The first two labels are for similes that
clearly express positive polarity (e.g., “Jane swims
like a dolphin”) or negative polarity (e.g., “Fred’s
hair looks like a bird’s nest”). The neutral label
is for similes that do not have positive or negative
polarity (e.g., “the cloud looks like a turtle” isn’t
a positive or negative comment about the cloud) or
similes that are ambiguous without the benefit of
context (e.g., “he is like my dog” could be good or
bad depending on the context).

The data also contained many misidentified
similes, typically due to parsing errors. For exam-
ple, sometimes there is an entire clause in place
of the vehicle (e.g., “I feel like im gonna puke”).
Other times, the informal text of Twitter makes the
tweet hard to parse (e.g., “he is like whatttt”) or a
verb occurs after “like” (e.g., “he is like hyperven-
tilating”). The invalid label covers these types of
erroneously extracted similes.

The annotation task was first conducted on a
small sample of 50 similes, to select workers that
had high annotation agreement with each other
and gold standard labels we prepared. The best
three workers then all annotated the official set
of 1500 similes. The average Cohen’s Kappa (κ)
(Carletta, 1996) between each pair of annotators
was 0.69. We then assigned the final label through
majority vote. However, none of the annotators
agreed on the same label for 78 of the 1500 simi-
les, and 303 instances were labeled as invalid sim-
iles by the annotators. So we removed these 381
instances from the annotated data set. Finally, we
randomly divided the remaining similes into an
evaluation (Eval) set of 741 similes, and a devel-
opment (Dev) set of 378 similes. Table 3 shows
the label distribution of these sets.

3.2 Automatically Labeled Similes

For any new domain (e.g., Amazon product re-
views), manual annotations for supervised training

Label # of Similes # of Similes
(Dev Data) (Eval Data)

Positive 164 312
Negative 181 343
Neutral 33 86
Total 378 741

Table 3: Manually Annotated Data.

may not be readily available, and being able to au-
tomatically obtain training instances can be valu-
able. We therefore create and experiment with six
types of automatically labeled training data.
Using AFINN Sentiment Lexicon Words: Our
first training data set is created using the AFINN
sentiment lexicon (Nielsen, 2011) containing
2,477 manually labeled words with integer values
ranging from -5 (negativity) to 5 (positivity). For
each simile, we sum the sentiment scores for all
lexicon words in the simile components, assigning
positive/negative polarity depending on whether
the sum is positive/negative. This method yields
460 positive and 423 negative similes.
Using MPQA Sentiment Lexicon Words: Our
second training data set is created using the
2,718 positive words and 4,910 negative words
from the MPQA lexicon (Wilson et al., 2005).
We applied the CMU part-of-speech tagger for
tweets (Owoputi et al., 2013) to match the MPQA
parts-of-speech for each word. We assign posi-
tive/negative polarity to similes with more posi-
tive/negative lexicon words. This method yields
629 positive and 522 negative similes.
Using Sentiment Classifiers: We create our third
training data set using a state-of-the-art sentiment
classifier designed for tweets. For this, we re-
implemented the NRC Canada sentiment classifier
(Zhu et al., 2014) using the same set of features
described by the authors. We use a Java imple-
mentation2 of SVM from LIBLINEAR (Fan et al.,
2008), with the original parameter values used by
the NRC Canada system. We trained the sentiment
classifier with all of the tweet training data from
SemEval 2013 subtask B (Nakov et al., 2013). We
label a simile as positive or negative if the senti-
ment classifier labels it as positive or negative, re-
spectively. This method yields 1185 positive and
402 negative similes.
Using Sentiment in Surrounding Words: The
previous approaches for labeling training in-
stances will primarily identify similes that con-
tain one or more strongly affective words. This

2http://liblinear.bwaldvogel.de/

193



can potentially bias the training data and limit the
classifier’s ability to learn to recognize affective
similes that do not contain words with a positive
or negative connotation. Therefore, we explore
an additional approach where instead of judging
the sentiment of the words in the simile, we ana-
lyze the words in the tweet surrounding the sim-
ile. We hypothesize that there are often redundant
sentiment indicators in the tweet. For example, “I
hate it when my room is as cold as Antarctica”.
For each simile, we identify all tweets that contain
the simile and collect all of the words surround-
ing the simile in these tweets as a collective “con-
text” for the tweet. We then count the number of
distinct positive and negative sentiment words and
compute the probability of positive or negative po-
larity given all the sentiment words surrounding a
simile, and retain positive or negative similes with
probability higher than a threshold (here, 0.7 to en-
sure high quality). As our sentiment lexicon, we
combined the MPQA and the AFINN lexicon.

One issue is that when people feel amused (e.g.,
“he looks like a complete zombie, haha”) or sar-
castic (e.g., “my room feels like an igloo. great!
LOL.”), seemingly positive words in the context
can be misleading because the sentiment is actu-
ally negative. As a simple measure to mitigate this
issue, we manually removed a small set of laugh-
ter indicators from the lexicons (e.g., lol, haha).

This method yielded 492 positive and 181 neg-
ative similes.

Combination of Training Instances: As our last
two training sets, we combined sets of instances
labeled using the different methods above. As the
fifth set, we combined training instances collected
using the MPQA and AFINN lexicons and the
NRC Canada sentiment classifier, which yielded
a total of 2274 positive similes and 1347 negative
similes. As our sixth set, we added the instances
recognized from the surrounding words of a sim-
ile, producing the largest data set of 2766 positive
and 1528 negative similes.

We also select neutral instances that are not
identified as positive or negative by the above ap-
proaches and that also do not contain a sentiment
lexicon (AFINN + MPQA) word in their collective
context. For each approach, we then randomly se-
lect our final training instances for positive, neg-
ative and neutral classes maintaining the distribu-
tion of the development data. The final training
data sizes are reported in Table 5.

4 Classifying Simile Polarity

Our goal is to create a classifier that can deter-
mine whether a simile expresses positive or neg-
ative affective polarity toward its subject. We
present a classifier designed to label similes as
Positive, Negative, or Neutral polarity. In this sec-
tion, we describe the feature set and the classifica-
tion framework of the supervised classifiers.

4.1 Feature Set

We extract three types of features from a simile,
representing the lexical, semantic, and sentiment
properties of the simile components.

4.1.1 Lexical Features
Unigrams: A binary feature indicates the pres-
ence of a unigram in a simile. This feature is not
component specific, so the unigram can be from
any simile component (tenor, event or vehicle).
Simile Components: We define a binary feature
for each tenor, event and vehicle phrase in the
data set. This feature is component specific, (e.g.,
“dog” as a tenor is a different feature from “dog”
as a vehicle).
Paired Components: We use a binary feature for
each pair of simile components. Our intuition
is that a pair of components may indicate affec-
tive polarity when used together. For example,
“event:feel, vehicle:ice box” is negative for many
different tenors (e.g., house, room, hotel). Simi-
larly, “tenor:person, vehicle:snail” is negative for
many different events (e.g., move, run, drive).
Explicit Properties Associated with Vehicle:
Sometimes a simile explicitly mentions a property
that is common to the tenor and the vehicle (e.g.,
“my pillow is soft like a cloud”). Although the
properties are not part of our triples because they
are optional components, we can still use them as
valuable features, whenever present in the original
corpus. For each simile vehicle, we therefore ex-
tract all explicit properties mentioned with that ve-
hicle in our corpus, and create a binary feature for
each (e.g., “Jane swims like a dolphin” and “Jim
runs like a cheetah” can both share the feature fast,
if fast appears with both “dolphin” and “cheetah”
in the corpus as an explicit property).
Vehicle Pre-modifiers: We use a binary feature
for each noun or adjective pre-modifier that ap-
pears with the vehicle (the vehicle head noun itself
is excluded). Our intuition is that the same pre-
modifiers appearing with different vehicles indi-

194



cate the same affective polarity (e.g., “smells like
wet dog” and “smells like wet clothes”).

4.1.2 Semantic Features

Hypernym Class: We obtain up to two levels of
hypernym classes for each simile component head,
using WordNet (Miller, 1995). For words with
multiple senses, we only use the first synset of
a word from WordNet, for simplicity. Once the
hypernym classes are obtained for a word, we no
longer keep the level information, and use a binary
feature to represent each hypernym class. Our in-
tuition is that groups of similar words can be used
in different similes with the same affective polarity
(e.g., room, bedroom).
Perception Verb: We create a binary feature to in-
dicate if the event component is a perception verb.
Perception verbs are fairly common in similes
(e.g., “looks like a model”, “smells like garbage”).
We use a set of the 5 most common perception
verbs in similes (look, feel, sound, smell, taste).

4.1.3 Sentiment Features

We add sentiment features that can be recognized
in the simile using existing sentiment resources.
For this purpose, we combined the MPQA (Wil-
son et al., 2005), and the AFINN lexicon (Nielsen,
2011) to use as our sentiment lexicon.
Component Sentiment: We use 3 binary features
(one for each component) to indicate the presence
of a positive sentiment word, and 3 binary features
to indicate the presence of a negative sentiment
word in each simile component.
Explicit Property Sentiment: We use 2 numeric
features that count the number of positive and neg-
ative properties that appear with the vehicle in our
corpus. We look for the property words in the
combined AFINN and MPQA sentiment lexicons.
Sentiment Classifier Label: We use 2 binary fea-
tures (one for positive and one for negative) to rep-
resent the label that the NRC-Canada Sentiment
Classifier assigns to a simile.
Simile Connotation Polarity: We use 2 binary
features (one for positive and one for negative) to
indicate the overall connotation of a simile. We
count whether the number of positive (or nega-
tive) connotation words is greater in a simile using
a Connotation Lexicon (Feng et al., 2013), which
contains 30,881 words with positive connotation
and 33,724 words with negative connotation.

4.2 Classification Framework
As our supervised classification algorithm, we use
a linear SVM classifier from LIBLINEAR (Fan et
al., 2008), with its default parameter settings. Our
goal is to assign one of three labels to a simile:
Positive, Negative, or Neutral. We train two bi-
nary classifiers, one for positive and one for nega-
tive polarity. For positive polarity, we use similes
labeled positive as positive training instances, and
similes labeled negative or neutral as the negative
training instances. For the negative polarity classi-
fier, we use similes labeled negative as the positive
training instances, and similes labeled positive or
neutral as the negative instances.

To classify a simile, we apply both classifiers.
If the simile is labeled as positive or negative, then
it is assigned that label. If the simile is labeled as
both positive and negative, or not labeled as either,
then it is assigned a neutral label. We did not cre-
ate a classifier to solely identify neutral similes be-
cause neutral similes are much less common than
positive/negative similes, making up only 8.7% of
the extracted similes in our development set (Ta-
ble 3). Consequently, obtaining a large set of neu-
tral similes via manual annotation would have re-
quired substantially more manual annotation ef-
fort. Secondly, we did not have a good way to
reliably identify neutral similes automatically.

5 Evaluation

5.1 Classification Performance with
Manually Annotated Data

Table 4 presents the results for supervised clas-
sification with our manually annotated data set
using 10-fold cross-validation. As baselines, we
used existing sentiment resources as described in
Section 3.2, but now applied to evaluation data.
We also used the connotation lexicon (Feng et
al., 2013) the same way as the MPQA sentiment
lexicon (Wilson et al., 2005) to compare as an
additional baseline. The top section of Table 4
shows how effective these four existing sentiment
resources are at assigning polarity to similes. Al-
though precision was sometimes very high, recall
was low across the board.

The lower section of Table 4 shows results for
our classifiers. We first trained a classifier using
only the sentiment features in order to shed light
on the effectiveness of traditional sentiment indi-
cators. Row (a) in Table 4 shows that this classifier
produces reasonable precision (65-72%) but recall

195



Positive Negative Neutral
P R F P R F P R F

Sentiment Resource Baselines
AFINN Lexicon 88 17 28 95 18 31 13 95 23
MPQA Lexicon 83 21 34 90 15 26 13 95 24
Connotation Lexicon 61 38 47 63 40 49 17 63 26
NRC Canada Sentiment Classifier 72 34 47 94 16 27 13 83 23

Affective Polarity Simile Classifiers
(a) Sentiment Features 65 54 59 72 48 58 19 37 25
(b) Unigrams 73 52 61 74 70 72 21 47 29
(c) Unigrams + Other Lexical 73 56 63 75 76 75 26 45 33
(d) Unigrams + Other Lexical + Semantic 68 59 63 76 72 74 24 40 30
(e) Unigrams + Other Lexical + Semantic + Sentiment 75 60 67 77 79 78 25 40 31

Table 4: Results with Manually Annotated Training Data (P = Precision, R = Recall, F = F1-score).

Classifier # of Training Instances Positive Negative Neutral
Pos Neg Neu P R F P R F P R F

(a) SVM with labeled data using AFINN 384 423 78 78 32 45 85 31 45 14 80 24
(b) SVM with labeled data using MPQA 475 522 94 65 44 53 81 27 41 12 59 20
(c) SVM with labeled data using NRC Canada 365 402 74 72 34 47 94 16 27 13 83 23
(d) SVM with labeled data from (a), (b), + (c) 1085 1193 216 69 50 58 88 30 45 13 62 22
(e) SVM with labeled data using 164 181 34 60 57 59 62 57 60 13 20 16

sentiment in surrounding words
(f) SVM with labeled data from (a), (b), (c), + (e) 1221 1342 242 64 61 62 75 48 59 11 30 16

Table 5: Results with Automatically Labeled Training Data (P = Precision, R = Recall, F = F1-score).

levels only around 50% for both positive and neg-
ative polarity. The Neutral class has extremely low
precision, which indicates that many unrecognized
positive and negative similes are being classified
as Neutral.

Row (b) shows the results for a baseline classi-
fier trained only with unigram features. Unigrams
perform substantially better than the sentiment
features for negative polarity, but only slightly bet-
ter for positive polarity. Row (c) shows that the ad-
ditional lexical features described in Section 4.1.1
further improve performance.

Row (d) shows that adding the semantic fea-
tures did not improve performance. One reason
could be that some WordNet hypernym classes are
very specific and may not generalize well. Also,
similes can have different polarities with vehicle
words from the same general semantic class (e.g.,
“he runs like a cheetah” vs “he runs like a turtle”).

Finally, Row (e) shows that adding the sen-
timent features along with all the other features
yields a precision gain for positive polarity and a
recall gain for negative polarity. Overall, the full
feature set improves the F score from 61% to 67%
for positive polarity, and from 72% to 78% for
negative polarity, over the unigram baseline.

5.2 Classification Performance with
Automatically Acquired Training Data

Table 5 shows the performance of the classifiers
(using our full feature set) when they are trained
with automatically acquired training instances.
The upper section of Table 5 shows results using
training instances labeled by three different sen-
timent resources. Row (d) shows that combining
the training instances labeled by all three resources
produces the best results.

Row (e) of Table 5 shows the performance of
the classifiers when they are trained with instances
selected by analyzing sentiment in the surrounding
words of the similes. We observe a substantial re-
call gain, which validates our hypothesis that simi-
les obtained by recognizing sentiment in their sur-
rounding words provide the classifier with a more
diverse set of training examples. Finally, Row (f)
shows that using both types of training instances
further improves performance for positive polar-
ity, and increases precision for negative polarity
but with some loss of recall.

Comparing these results with Table 4, we see
that there is still a gap between the performance
of classifiers trained with manually annotated data
versus automatically acquired data. However, the
classifiers trained with automatically acquired data
produce substantially higher F scores than all of

196



the baseline systems in Table 4. Using automati-
cally acquired training data is a practical approach
for creating simile classifiers for specific domains,
such as Amazon product reviews (e.g., “head-
phone sounds like garbage”, or “each song is like a
snow-flake”) which were studied in previous work
on figurative comparisons in similes (Niculae and
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, 2014).

5.3 Impact of Training Data Size

Figure 1: Learning Curve for Positive Similes.

Figure 2: Learning Curve for Negative Similes.

We also generated learning curves to determine
how much the size of the training set matters.
Figures 1 and 2 show the performance of classi-
fiers trained using varying amounts of manually
annotated data. We show results for the classi-
fiers trained only with unigram features and clas-
sifiers trained with our full feature set, for pos-
itive similes in Figure 1 and negative similes in
Figure 2. The results were produced from 2-fold,
3-fold, 5-fold and 10-fold cross-validation experi-
ments, with the size of the corresponding training
sets shown on the X-axis. These figures show that

the classifiers with unigram features hit a plateau
at about 600 training instances. However the clas-
sifiers with the full feature set continually bene-
fited from more training data. Table 6 presents a
sample of similes where the vehicle appears only
once in our data set. The unigram-based classifier
could not classify these instances, but the classifier
with the full feature set could.

Positive Negative
PERSON, feel, superhero PERSON, feel, old woman
PERSON, be, friend PERSON, be, hurricane
beast, look, beauty IT, feel, eternity
PERSON, feel, hero PERSON, feel, peasant
PERSON, feel, champion PERSON, eat, savage
PERSON, seem, sweetheart PERSON, be, witch
IT, be, sleepover PERSON, feel, prisoner
IT, be, reunion IT, be, north pole
PERSON, feel, president IT, feel, winter
ronaldo, be, messi PERSON, be, wolf

Table 6: Similes with unique vehicles that were
correctly classified using the full feature set.

6 Analysis and Discussion

We also conducted a qualitative analysis of our
new corpus of similes and the behavior of the clas-
sifiers. We hypothesized that there are at least
two reasons why similes might be difficult to clas-
sify. First, the interpretation of a simile can be
highly context-dependent and subjective, depend-
ing on the speaker or the perceiver. To illustrate,
Table 7 presents examples of similes that can have
different polarity depending on the speaker or per-
ceiver’s personal experience or location, and other
subjective aspects of the context. For example, it
looks like snow may be a good thing to someone
who lives in Utah where people look forward to
skiing, but a bad thing to someone living in Boston
during the winter of 2015. Similarly she smells
like a baby is typically positive to new mothers,
but was viewed as negative by the Mechanical
Turk annotators.

Polarity Simile Context
positive PERSON, smell, baby young mother
negative PERSON, smell, baby MTurkers
negative IT, look, snow lives in Boston
positive IT, look, snow lives in Utah
negative IT, look, rain lives in England
positive IT, look, rain lives in California

Table 7: Similes with Context-dependent Polarity.

Second, we hypothesized that the polarity of
a simile might interact with the distinction made
in previous work between figurative and literal

197



uses of similes (Bredin, 1998; Addison, 1993), for
example Niculae and Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil
(2014) showed that sentiment and figurative com-
parisons are strongly correlated. Thus our expec-
tation was that most literal comparisons would be
neutral while most figurative comparisons would
carry polarity. To explore this issue, we conducted
an informal analysis of the 378 similes in our de-
velopment data set to examine the literal vs. figu-
rative distinction. For this analysis, we looked at
the simile component triples as well as the context
of ten tweets in which the simile appeared.

Our analysis suggests that the picture is more
complex than we initially hypothesized. We found
that, 1) the distinction between positive and nega-
tive similes in our data is orthogonal to the figura-
tive vs. literal distinction, 2) some similes are used
both figuratively and literally, and cannot be dif-
ferentiated without context, 3) even in cases when
all sample uses were literal, it is easy to invent
contexts where the simile might be used figura-
tively, and vice versa, and 4) for a particular in-
stance (simile + context), it is usually possible to
tell whether a figurative or literal use is intended
by examining the simile context, but some cases
remain ambiguous. Table 8 shows examples of
some similes that we identified as being figurative,
literal, or both depending on context.

Use Polarity Simile
fig positive house, smell, heaven
fig positive PERSON, look, queen
fig negative PERSON, look, tomato
lit negative hair, smell, smoke
lit neutral PERSON, look, each other

both neutral house, smell, pizza
both negative IT, smell, skunk
both negative PERSON, look, frankenstein

Table 8: Similes with figurative (fig) or literal
(lit) interpretation, or ambiguous depending on the
context.

These observations reinforce the difficulty with
making the figurative/literal distinction noted
by Niculae and Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil (2014),
whose annotation task required Turkers to label
comparisons on a scale of 1 to 4 ranging from
very literal to very figurative. Even with Master
Turkers, a qualification task, filtering annotators
by gold standard items, and collapsing scalar 1,2
values to literal and 3,4 values to figurative, the
inter-annotator agreement with Fleiss’ κ was 0.54.
They note that out of 2400 automatically extracted
comparison candidates, only 12% end up being se-

lected confidently as figurative comparisons.
Selected cases that the classifiers fail on are fur-

ther illustrated in Table 9. Examples S1 to S9
could be related to the difficulties noted above
with subjectivity of interpretation. Many people
for example like the smell of coffee and pizza, but
perhaps not when a person smells that way. Sim-
ilarly, a baby is often positive as a vehicle, but
smelling and sounding like a baby may not be pos-
itive depending on the circumstances, while the
positive or negative interpretation of sounding like
a pirate and looking like a pirate might also be
context dependent.

ID Simile Gold Man Auto
S1 PERSON, smell, coffee neg pos pos
S2 PERSON, smell, pizza pos neg neut
S3 IT, smell, pizza neut pos neut
S4 PERSON, sleep, baby pos pos neut
S5 PERSON, smell, baby neg neg neut
S6 PERSON, feel, baby pos neg pos
S7 PERSON, sound, baby neg pos neut
S8 PERSON, sound, pirate pos neg neg
S9 PERSON, look, pirate neg neg neut

Table 9: Error Analysis of Classifier Output (Man
= Classifier trained with manually annotated in-
stances, Auto = Classifier trained with automati-
cally annotated instances).

7 Conclusions

Similes are one example of a tractable case of
sentiment-bearing expressions that are not recog-
nized well by current sentiment analysis tools or
lexicons. Making progress on sentiment analysis
may require tackling many different types of lin-
guistic phenomena such as this one. To this end,
we have presented a simile data set labeled with
affective polarity and have presented a supervised
classification framework for recognizing affective
polarity in similes. We have also presented our
experiments with both manually labeled and au-
tomatically acquired training instances. We have
shown that with manually labeled data, our feature
set can substantially improve performance over a
unigram only baseline. We have also shown that
good performance can be achieved with automat-
ically acquired training instances, when manually
labeled data may not be available.

Acknowledgments

This material is based upon work supported in part
by the National Science Foundation under grants
IIS-1450527 and IIS-1302668.

198



References
Catherine Addison. 1993. From literal to figurative:

An introduction to the study of simile. College En-
glish, pages 402–419.

Johan Bollen, Huina Mao, and Alberto Pepe. 2011.
Modeling public mood and emotion: Twitter senti-
ment and socio-economic phenomena.

Hugh Bredin. 1998. Comparisons and similes. Lin-
gua, 105(1):67–78.

Jean Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on classifi-
cation tasks: The kappa statistic. Comput. Linguist.,
22(2):249–254, June.

Dmitry Davidov, Oren Tsur, and Ari Rappoport. 2010.
Enhanced sentiment learning using twitter hashtags
and smileys. In Proceedings of the 23rd Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics:
Posters, pages 241–249. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Rong-En Fan, Kai-Wei Chang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Xiang-
Rui Wang, and Chih-Jen Lin. 2008. Liblinear: A li-
brary for large linear classification. J. Mach. Learn.
Res., 9:1871–1874, June.

Song Feng, Jun Seok Kang, Polina Kuznetsova, and
Yejin Choi. 2013. Connotation lexicon: A dash
of sentiment beneath the surface meaning. In Pro-
ceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pages 1774–1784, Sofia, Bulgaria, August.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

David Fishelov. 2007. Shall i compare thee? simile
understanding and semantic categories. Journal of
literary semantics, 36(1):71–87.

Aniruddha Ghosh, Guofu Li, Tony Veale, Paolo Rosso,
Ekaterina Shutova, John Barnden, and Antonio
Reyes. 2015. Semeval-2015 task 11: Sentiment
analysis of figurative language in twitter. In Pro-
ceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Se-
mantic Evaluation (SemEval 2015), pages 470–478,
Denver, Colorado, June. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Alec Go, Richa Bhayani, and Lei Huang. 2009. Twit-
ter sentiment classification using distant supervision.
CS224N Project Report, Stanford, pages 1–12.

Patrick Hanks. 2005. Similes and sets: The en-
glish preposition like. Languages and Linguis-
tics: Festschrift for Fr. Cermak. Charles University,
Prague.

Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. 2004. Mining and summa-
rizing customer reviews. In Proceedings of the tenth
ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowl-
edge discovery and data mining, pages 168–177.
ACM.

Long Jiang, Mo Yu, Ming Zhou, Xiaohua Liu, and
Tiejun Zhao. 2011. Target-dependent twitter sen-
timent classification. In Proceedings of the 49th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies-Volume
1, pages 151–160. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Yohan Jo and Alice H Oh. 2011. Aspect and senti-
ment unification model for online review analysis.
In Proceedings of the fourth ACM international con-
ference on Web search and data mining, pages 815–
824. ACM.

Efthymios Kouloumpis, Theresa Wilson, and Johanna
Moore. 2011. Twitter sentiment analysis: The good
the bad and the omg! ICWSM, 11:538–541.

Bin Li, Haibo Kuang, Yingjie Zhang, Jiajun Chen, and
Xuri Tang. 2012. Using similes to extract basic sen-
timents across languages. In Web Information Sys-
tems and Mining, pages 536–542. Springer.

Christopher D. Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Finkel, Steven J. Bethard, and David Mc-
Closky. 2014. The Stanford CoreNLP natural lan-
guage processing toolkit. In Proceedings of 52nd
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: System Demonstrations, pages
55–60.

George A. Miller. 1995. Wordnet: A lexical database
for english. Commun. ACM, 38(11):39–41, Novem-
ber.

Saif M. Mohammad, Svetlana Kiritchenko, and Xiao-
dan Zhu. 2013. Nrc-canada: Building the state-
of-the-art in sentiment analysis of tweets. In Pro-
ceedings of the seventh international workshop on
Semantic Evaluation Exercises (SemEval-2013), At-
lanta, Georgia, USA, June.

Preslav Nakov, Sara Rosenthal, Zornitsa Kozareva,
Veselin Stoyanov, Alan Ritter, and Theresa Wilson.
2013. Semeval-2013 task 2: Sentiment analysis in
twitter. In Second Joint Conference on Lexical and
Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2: Pro-
ceedings of the Seventh International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2013), pages 312–
320, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Vlad Niculae and Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil.
2014. Brighter than gold: Figurative language in
user generated comparisons. In Proceedings of the
2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 2008–2018.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Finn Årup Nielsen. 2011. ”A new ANEW: Evaluation
of a word list for sentiment analysis in microblogs”,.
In ESWC2011 Workshop on Making Sense of Micro-
posts: Big things come in small packages.

199



Olutobi Owoputi, Chris Dyer, Kevin Gimpel, Nathan
Schneider, and Noah A. Smith. 2013. Improved
part-of-speech tagging for online conversational text
with word clusters. In In Proceedings of NAACL.

Anthony M Paul. 1970. Figurative language. Philoso-
phy & Rhetoric, pages 225–248.

V. Punyakanok and D. Roth. 2001. The use of clas-
sifiers in sequential inference. In NIPS, pages 995–
1001. MIT Press.

Matthew Purver and Stuart Battersby. 2012. Experi-
menting with distant supervision for emotion classi-
fication. In Proceedings of the 13th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 482–491. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Vassiliki Rentoumi, George Giannakopoulos, Vangelis
Karkaletsis, and A. George Vouros. 2009. Senti-
ment analysis of figurative language using a word
sense disambiguation approach. In Proceedings of
the International Conference RANLP-2009, pages
370–375. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Tim Rumbell, John Barnden, Mark Lee, and Alan
Wallington. 2008. Affect in metaphor: Develop-
ments with wordnet. In Proceedings of the AISB
Convention on Communication, Interaction and So-
cial Intelligence, volume 1, page 21.

Mike Thelwall, Kevan Buckley, and Georgios Pal-
toglou. 2011. Sentiment in twitter events. Journal
of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 62(2):406–418.

Tony Veale and Yanfen Hao. 2007. Learning to under-
stand figurative language: from similes to metaphors
to irony. In Proceedings of CogSci.

Tony Veale. 2012. A context-sensitive, multi-faceted
model of lexico-conceptual affect. In Proceedings
of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Short Papers-Volume 2,
pages 75–79. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Alan Wallington, Rodrigo Agerri, John Barnden, Mark
Lee, and Tim Rumbell. 2011. Affect transfer by
metaphor for an intelligent conversational agent. In
Affective Computing and Sentiment Analysis, pages
53–66. Springer.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-
level sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Human Language Technology and Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
HLT ’05, pages 347–354, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Xiaodan Zhu, Svetlana Kiritchenko, and Saif Moham-
mad. 2014. Nrc-canada-2014: Recent improve-
ments in the sentiment analysis of tweets. In Pro-
ceedings of the 8th International Workshop on Se-
mantic Evaluation (SemEval 2014), pages 443–447,
Dublin, Ireland, August. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics and Dublin City University.

200


