



















































On the Role of Discourse Markers for Discriminating Claims and Premises in Argumentative Discourse


Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2236–2242,
Lisbon, Portugal, 17-21 September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.

On the Role of Discourse Markers for Discriminating Claims and
Premises in Argumentative Discourse

Judith Eckle-Kohler1 Roland Kluge3 Iryna Gurevych1,2
1 UKP Lab, Technische Universität Darmstadt

2 UKP Lab, German Institute for Educational Research
3 Real-Time Systems Lab, Technische Universität Darmstadt

http://www.ukp.tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract

This paper presents a study on the role
of discourse markers in argumentative dis-
course. We annotated a German cor-
pus with arguments according to the com-
mon claim-premise model of argumen-
tation and performed various statistical
analyses regarding the discriminative na-
ture of discourse markers for claims and
premises. Our experiments show that
particular semantic groups of discourse
markers are indicative of either claims or
premises and constitute highly predictive
features for discriminating between them.

1 Introduction

The growing field of argumentation mining in
NLP develops methods to automatically analyze
argumentative discourse for enhanced Information
Extraction.
Terminology: We understand argumentation as a
rhetorical arrangement of arguments with the in-
tent to convince or persuade the reader of a par-
ticular state of affairs. Following previous work
in argumentation mining (e.g., (Palau and Moens,
2009; Florou et al., 2013; Peldszus and Stede,
2013a; Stab and Gurevych, 2014)), we define an
argument as the pairing of a single claim (an ar-
guable text unit) and a (possibly empty) set of
premises, which each either support or attack the
claim (Besnard and Hunter, 2008). We subsume
claims and premises under the term argument unit
(AU).
Discourse markers in argumentative discourse:
Since an argumentation line can only be captured
in the context of a coherent text, argumentation
mining is closely related to automated discourse
analysis (Cabrio et al., 2013), which aims at iden-
tifying discourse functions of text segments, and
discourse relations (DRs) between adjacent text

segments (Webber et al., 2012). Often, so-called
discourse markers (DMs) are used to signal DRs.
The following example shows that DMs act as lex-
ical markers in argumentative discourse as well:
the DM however (marking the DR contrast) po-
sitions the claim in (1) in the overall argumenta-
tion line, while in (2), the DMs as (marking rea-
son) and also (marking elaboration) connect the
premises with each other and with the claim.

(1) However, staying down is pointless
from a pedagogic point of view.

(2) As the students get frustrated, their
performance generally does not im-
prove. Also, the point of repeating all
courses because of only one or two bad
grades is arguable.

DMs belong to the word classes of conjunctions
and adverbs (also called discourse particles) and
are semantically characterized in traditional gram-
mar books. The correspondence between DM se-
mantics and DR semantics has received consid-
erable attention in previous research in linguis-
tics, most of which is based on corpora annotated
with DRs (Carlson et al., 2003; Wolf and Gibson,
2005; Prasad et al., 2008). In contrast, the role
of DMs as potential lexical signals in argumenta-
tive discourse is not well-understood, yet. While
Stab and Gurevych (2014) used DMs as features
for classifying AUs into different types, they did
not analyze the semantics of DMs with respect to
AU classification or considered different DM re-
sources.

As far as we are aware, there is no prior work
performing a detailed investigation on the role of
DMs as lexical signals for discriminating between
the two fundamental argumentative roles of AUs,
i.e., between claims and premises.
Our contribution: In this paper, we address this
gap by analyzing the role of DMs for the auto-
matic discrimination of claims and premises in a

2236



new dataset of argumentative texts annotated with
arguments. More specifically, we (i) present the
results of an annotation study that we performed
to annotate a German dataset of news documents
with arguments, and (ii) performed a detailed in-
vestigation of the role of DMs in our annotated
dataset which highlights correspondences between
DM semantics and semantic properties of claims
and premises, and shows that DMs are highly pre-
dictive features for automatically discriminating
premises and claims.

2 Related Work

Related to our work are prior investigations (i) on
the relationship of DMs and DRs, and (ii) on the
role of DMs in classification tasks.

2.1 Relation of DMs and DRs

Previous work on the relation between DMs and
DRs is mostly based on corpora annotated with
DRs (Wolf et al., 2004; Taboada, 2006; Prasad et
al., 2008), most notably the Penn Discourse Tree-
bank (PDTB) for English (Prasad et al., 2008).
The PDTB is annotated with DRs, such as con-
trast or result, and the corresponding DMs, even
if they were not realized in the text. For instance,
the contrast relation can be expressed by the DMs
however and but. DRs that are lexically signaled
by DMs in the text are called explicit DRs. Some
DMs are highly polysemous, e.g., while appears in
12 DRs in the PDTB.

Asr and Demberg (2013) analyzed the DMs and
their corresponding DRs annotated in the PDTB
and addressed the question, which information is
conveyed by discourse connectives in the context
of human sentence processing, i.e., how they con-
tribute in the process of inferring a particular DR.

Taboada (2006) performed a corpus-based anal-
ysis of DRs annotated in the Rhetorical Structure
Theory (RST) Discourse Treebank (Carlson et al.,
2003). The most frequent relation in the RST Dis-
course Treebank is concession, and this relation
also received particular attention in the corpus lin-
guistics literature: Taboada and Gómez-González
(2012) present a corpus-based comparative study
of DMs that express concession across English
and Spanish in different genres. A classification
of DMs signaling concession across English and
German is presented by Grote et al. (1997). They
also point out the importance of concession in ar-
gumentative discourse: DMs expressing conces-

sion are often used to introduce counter-arguments
in an argumentation line.

2.2 DMs in Classification

There is previous work in sentiment classification
and argumentation mining using DMs as features,
as well as work in predicting DMs for natural lan-
guage generation tasks, such as abstractive sum-
marization. Taboada et al. (2011) successfully em-
ployed discourse particles as features for the cal-
culation of polarity scores in automated sentiment
analysis. They focused on particles acting as in-
tensifiers, which modify the semantic intensity of
the lexical item they refer to.1 Mukherjee and
Bhattacharyya (2012) demonstrated that using dis-
course connectives as features in a system for sen-
timent classification of Twitter posts significantly
improves classification accuracy over state-of-the
art systems not considering DMs as features.

In argumentation mining, Stab and Gurevych
(2014) experimented with different types of fea-
tures, including DMs from the PDTB annota-
tion guidelines, to classify text units into the
classes non-argumentative, major claim, claim,
and premise. While the PDTB DMs appeared to
be not helpful for discriminating between argu-
mentative and non-argumentative text units, they
were useful to distinguish between the classes
premise and claim.

Patterson and Kehler (2013) describe a classi-
fication model, trained and evaluated on PDTB
data, for predicting whether or not a DR is sig-
naled by an explicit DM. The most predictive
features in their model are discourse level fea-
tures that encode dependencies between neighbor-
ing DRs given by the overall discourse structure.
Other highly predictive features turned out to be
the DMs themselves, because DMs vary as to their
rates of being realized explicitly.2

3 Annotation Study

For our study, we used a dataset of 88 documents
in German – mainly news (ca. 83% of the docu-
ments) – from seven current topics related to the
German educational system (e.g., mainstreaming,
staying down at school). The documents were
manually selected from a focused crawl and the
top 100 search engine hits per topic (Vovk, 2013).

1Amplifiers such as very increase the semantic intensity,
while downtoners such as slightly decrease it.

2In the PDTB, DMs are also given for implicit DRs.

2237



Figure 1: Claim-Premise scheme.

3.1 Annotation Scheme

Since argumentation theory offers a wide range of
models, we performed a pre-study on a held-out
development set to develop the annotation scheme.
We found that most arguments consisted of adja-
cent claims and premises, related by a support or
attack relation; premises and claims were rarely
nested. Therefore, we decided to use a simplified
claim-premises scheme (see Figure 1), using the
terminology set up in Section 1.

Our scheme models an argument as a linked
set of AUs and encodes the argumentative support
and attack relations by assigning an argumentative
role to non-nested (e.g., adjacent) AUs. The non-
nested structure in combination with the pre- and
post- prefixes of premises (indicating if a premise
precedes or follows the claim) makes sure that all
premises are correctly attached to their respective
claims.

For claims, we also annotated whether the
claim is a restatement. In total, we distinguish
six argumentative roles as shown in Figure 1:
claim, restatement, pre-claim support, post-claim
support, pre-claim attack and post-claim attack.
Annotators could freely select annotation bound-
aries, but we encouraged them to annotate clauses
or sentences.

In the main study, three annotators annotated
the remaining 80 documents (3 863 sentences) be-
longing to six topics. On average, each annotator
marked 1 708 AUs (53 % premises, 47 % claims)
and 783 arguments (2.2 AUs per argument). An
average claim spans 1.1 sentences, whereas an av-
erage premise spans 2.2 sentences. On average,
74 % of the tokens are covered by an AU, indicat-
ing that the documents are highly argumentative.

Ao,t κt Ao,s κs αu

all 61.0 44.2 60.9 45.2 40.2

prem. /
claims 62.7 45.1 62.6 46.3 41.7

AU /
non-AU 79.0 50.0 77.0 50.0 56.6

Table 1: Inter-annotator agreement scores (per-
centages): Ao – observed agreement, κt– token-
based kappa; κs– sentence-based kappa; αu– uni-
tized alpha.

3.2 Inter-annotator Agreement

Like in other discourse annotation tasks, there is
no straightforward way to compute inter-annotator
agreement (IAA) due to free annotation bound-
aries, see for instance (Miltsakaki et al., 2004;
Wilson and Wiebe, 2003). We selected sentence-
based kappa κs, token-based kappa κt and Krip-
pendorff’s unitized alpha αu as IAA metrics.3 The
token-based kappa κt metric treats each token as
annotation item and, thereon, calculates Fleiss’
kappa (Fleiss, 1971). The tokens are labeled with
the IOB scheme, i.e., every token is annotated as
inside an AU (I), beginning of an AU (B) or out-
side an AU (O). In contrast, Krippendorff’s uni-
tized alpha αu operates on whole annotation spans
instead of isolated tokens. For comparison, we
also calculated the observed agreementAo (token-
based and sentence-based).

Table 1 summarizes the IAA scores for three
scenarios: (i) considering all six labels and non-
AUs, (ii) only premise, claim and non-AUs, and
(iii) AUs versus non-AUs. The IAA scores are
in line with previous results: Peldszus and Stede
(2013b) report κ=38.4 % and α=42.5 % for their
sentence-level annotation study, which used artifi-
cially created documents.

4 Experiments

This section describes the experiments we per-
formed to understand the role of DMs for the
automatic discrimination of claims and premises.
Since the IAA was not substantial, we performed
all experiments on three separate datasets, one per
annotator.

3We calculated the metrics using DKPro Statistics (Meyer
et al., 2014).

2238



4.1 Semantically Categorized DMs
Our first set of experiments aimed at understand-
ing the correspondence of DM semantics and se-
mantic aspects of claims and premises. For this,
we used semantically characterized lists of DMs
compiled from three different sources: (i) 28 se-
mantically categorized particles from a German
grammar (Helbig and Buscha, 1996, pp. 481–
484), (ii) 51 discourse connectives based on a
manual translation of the DMs in Appendix B of
the PDTB annotation guidelines, and (iii) a large
German lexicon of about 170 DMs called DiM-
Lex4 (Stede, 2002).

First, we applied a two-sample statistical test to
find out if the two classes claim and premise are
significantly different regarding the number of oc-
currences of individual DMs and semantic groups
of DMs (based on the semantic information given
in our lists). We chose Fisher’s exact test (Fisher,
1932), a non-parametric randomization test that
makes no assumptions about the underlying prob-
ability distribution of the DMs.5 Lacking DR an-
notations, we counted surface word forms of sin-
gle word and continuous multi-word DMs in the
AUs annotated in our dataset.6 For each semanti-
cally categorized DM, we computed a contingency
table containing the number of observed occur-
rences in the two samples of claims and premises.
For each semantic group of DMs given in DiM-
Lex and PDTB, we calculated the per-group con-
tingency table by adding up the contingency tables
for each DM in that particular group.

The results of the significance tests revealed
both single DMs and semantic groups of DMs
that occur with significantly different frequency
in claims or premises. The following individual
DMs and semantic groups of DMs appeared to be
indicative for claims and premises (note that the
sentence-initial variants are counted separately):

Claims: four DMs expressing result, compari-
son, contrast:

• also (therefore), Doch (However), je-
doch (though), sondern (but), as well as the
amplifier ganz (quite);

• semantic groups of DMs from PDTB: com-
parison (expressing concession and contrast)

4
https://github.com/discourse-lab/dimlex

5We used the implementation given in http:
//stat.ethz.ch/R-manual/R-patched/library/stats/
html/fisher.test.html and a p-value of 0.05.

6Sentence initial DMs were counted separately to capture
DRs being signaled by a sentence initial position.

and result.

Premises: three DMs expressing cause, reason,
elaboration, alternative:

• Denn (As), oder (or), und (and), as well as
the downtoner etwa (roughly);

• semantic groups of DMs from PDTB: al-
ternative (e.g., or), reason (e.g., because),
and from DiMLex, the group sequence (e.g.,
then).

In the group of high-frequent but non-
indicative DMs are DMs expressing elabora-
tion (Auch (Also), Und (And), So (There-
fore)), sequence (dann (then)), and contrast
(aber/Aber (but/But)), as well as some highly am-
biguous particles (e.g., immer (always), schon (al-
ready)).

Second, we ranked the DMs according to their
Information Gain (IG) using Weka (Hall et al.,
2009). For this, we mapped each DM to a boolean
feature indicating if it is present in an AU or not.
We considered all the DMs from the three re-
sources as features and ranked them by IG sepa-
rately for each annotator. The resulting ranking
revealed additional DMs indicative for premises,
e.g. further DMs expressing elaboration and the
downtoner nur (only).

Our findings are in accordance to the ability of
a claim to act as conclusion or result of an ar-
gument, and to the role of premises as providing
support for a claim by giving reasons and elabo-
rating on them. Moreover, we found that particu-
lar intensifying discourse particles play an impor-
tant role in discriminating claims and premises:
Downtoners seem to be significant for premises,
amplifiers for claims. Finally, semantic groups of
DMs expressing concession appeared to be sig-
nificant for claims, since claims often introduce
a counter-argument in the overall argumentation
structure (Grote et al., 1997).

4.2 Classification
The significance test and the IG ranking evalu-
ated the DMs in isolation. In order to exam-
ine the predictiveness of all DMs in combination
for claims vs. premises, we used a classification
model. Given an AU, the model predicts its ar-
gumentative role, i.e., claim vs. premise. In this
experiment, we used a list of single word DMs,
extracted from the three DM resources described
above, as boolean features (DMres).

2239



For comparison, we used two sets of data-driven
DMs extracted from the Tiger corpus (Brants et
al., 2004), a German newspaper corpus: one set
containing the 350 most frequent conjunctions
and adverbs (DMtiger), and another set contain-
ing the 300 most frequent non-open-class words
(NOCtiger, excluding the word classes of nouns,
main verbs and adjectives).7 In addition, we con-
sidered the top 1 800 unigrams (with minimum
frequency 5) as baseline features.

We trained three Machine Learning algorithms
(Naive Bayes (NB), Random Forests (RF) and
Support Vector Machine (SVM)) on the three
datasets annotated by the annotators A1, A2 and
A3, using 10-fold cross-validation and the DKPro
TC framework (Daxenberger et al., 2014). For the
classification experiments, we used all 88 docu-
ments in the annotated corpus (including the doc-
uments from the pre-study).

Table 2 summarizes the results. All classifiers
show significant improvement compared to the
majority class baseline (MC), indicating that DMs
might be useful as predictive features for discrim-
inating claims and premises. The DMs extracted
from Tiger did not improve the performance con-
sistently for all three datasets, showing that the
coverage of the manually compiled DMs is good.
Using the NOCtiger set, however, improved the
performance by up to 4 pp., compared to DMres;
the improvement of NOCtiger over DMres is sta-
tistically significant for NB across all datasets A1
- A3 (using Fisher’s exact test and a p-value of
0.05). These results suggest that not only DMs,
but also other function words, as well as auxil-
iaries and modals, play an important role in dis-
criminating claims and premises.

While the unigram baseline also outperforms
DMres, it is on par with NOCtiger (no significant
improvement for any of NB, RF, SVM across the
three datasets), but at the cost of a much larger
feature space and a model less able to generalize
to other datasets from the news domain.

5 Summary

Our goal was to understand some of the lexical-
semantic characteristics of claims and premises
with a focus on DMs acting as lexical signals for
the argumentative role of AUs. Such insights into
the way claims and premises are signaled by lexi-

7We used DKPro Core (Eckart de Castilho and Gurevych,
2014) to pre-process Tiger.

A1 A2 A3

MC 53.04 52.05 51.71

DMres-NB 64.74 65.21 64.53
DMres-RF 64.89 63.61 63.50
DMres-SVM 68.50 66.31 67.06

DMtiger-NB 67.81 65.65 66.65
DMtiger-RF 64.65 61.12 63.44
DMtiger-SVM 70.37 65.59 67.57

NOCtiger-NB 70.86 68.80 68.87
NOCtiger-RF 67.06 64.71 65.51
NOCtiger-SVM 71.80 68.25 68.41

unigram-NB 72.79 69.69 69.60
unigram-RF 70.32 68.75 68.15
unigram-SVM 71.21 69.97 71.14

Table 2: Accuracy (percent) using different feature
sets.

cal markers can be exploited not only for the auto-
matic analysis of argumentative discourse, but also
for language generation tasks such as creating ab-
stractive summaries of argumentative documents.

We investigated the role of a large set of DMs
in argumentative discourse based on a German
dataset annotated with arguments and identified
semantic groups of DMs that are indicative of ei-
ther claims or premises. These semantic groups
also shed light on semantic aspects of claims and
premises. Our classification model shows that
DMs are important features for the discrimination
of claims and premises. In order to foster fur-
ther research on DMs in argumentative discourse,
we publicly released the annotation guidelines, as
well as the semantically categorized DM lists used
in our experiments.8

Acknowledgments

This work has been supported by the Volkswagen
Foundation as part of the Lichtenberg-Professor-
ship Program under grant No. I/82806, by the Ger-
man Institute for Educational Research (DIPF),
and by the German Research Foundation under
grant No. GU 798/17-1. We thank the anonymous
reviewers for their valuable comments. We also
thank Georg Weber for his contributions to the an-
notation study.

8
https://www.ukp.tu-darmstadt.

de/data/argumentation-mining/
argument-annotated-news-articles/

2240



References
Fatemeh Torabi Asr and Vera Demberg. 2013. On

the Information Conveyed by Discourse Markers.
In Proceedings of the Fourth Annual Workshop on
Cognitive Modeling and Computational Linguistics
(CMCL), pages 84–93, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Philippe Besnard and Anthony Hunter. 2008. El-
ements of argumentation, volume 47. MIT press
Cambridge.

Sabine Brants, Stefanie Dipper, Peter Eisenberg, Sil-
via Hansen, Esther König, Wolfgang Lezius, Chris-
tian Rohrer, George Smith, and Hans Uszkoreit.
2004. TIGER: linguistic interpretation of a German
corpus. Research on Language and Computation,
2(4):597–620.

Elena Cabrio, Sara Tonelli, and Serena Villata. 2013.
From discourse analysis to argumentation schemes
and back: Relations and differences. In João Leite,
TranCao Son, Paolo Torroni, Leon Torre, and Ste-
fan Woltran, editors, Computational Logic in Multi-
Agent Systems, volume 8143 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 1–17. Springer Berlin Hei-
delberg.

Lynn Carlson, Daniel Marcu, and Mary Ellen
Okurowski, 2003. Building a discourse-tagged cor-
pus in the framework of rhetorical structure theory,
chapter 5, pages 85–112. Springer Berlin Heidel-
berg.

Johannes Daxenberger, Oliver Ferschke, Iryna
Gurevych, and Torsten Zesch. 2014. DKPro TC:
A Java-based Framework for Supervised Learning
Experiments on Textual Data. In Proceedings of
52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL): System Demonstrations,
pages 61–66, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Richard Eckart de Castilho and Iryna Gurevych. 2014.
A broad-coverage collection of portable NLP com-
ponents for building shareable analysis pipelines.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Open In-
frastructures and Analysis Frameworks for HLT
(OIAF4HLT) at COLING 2014, pages 1–11, Dublin,
Ireland.

Ronald Aylmer Fisher. 1932. Statistical Methods for
Research Workers. Oliver and Boyd, London.

Joseph L. Fleiss. 1971. Measuring nominal scale
agreement among many raters. Psychological Bul-
letin, 76(5):378–382.

Eirini Florou, Stasinos Konstantopoulos, Antonis
Koukourikos, and Pythagoras Karampiperis. 2013.
Argument extraction for supporting public policy
formulation. In Proceedings of the 7th Workshop
on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, So-
cial Sciences, and Humanities, pages 49–54, Sofia,
Bulgaria.

Brigitte Grote, Nils Lenke, and Manfred Stede. 1997.
Ma(r)king concessions in English and German. Dis-
course Processes, 24(1):87–118.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H Witten.
2009. The WEKA data mining software: an update.
ACM SIGKDD explorations newsletter, 11(1):10–
18.

Gerhard Helbig and Joachim Buscha. 1996.
Deutsche Grammatik. Ein Handbuch für den
Ausländerunterricht. Langenscheidt.

Christian M. Meyer, Margot Mieskes, Christian Stab,
and Iryna Gurevych. 2014. DKPro Agreement:
An Open-Source Java Library for Measuring Inter-
Rater Agreement. In Proceedings of the 25th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (COLING): System Demonstrations, pages 105–
109, Dublin, Ireland.

Eleni Miltsakaki, Rashmi Prasad, Aravind Joshi, and
Bonnie Webber. 2004. Annotating discourse con-
nectives and their arguments. In Proceedings of the
HLT/NAACL Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus An-
notation, pages 9–16, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Subhabrata Mukherjee and Pushpak Bhattacharyya.
2012. Sentiment analysis in twitter with lightweight
discourse analysis. In Proceedings of the 24th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING), pages 1847–1864, Mumbai, India.

Raquel Mochales Palau and Marie-Francine Moens.
2009. Argumentation mining: The detection, clas-
sification and structure of arguments in text. In
Proceedings of the 12th international conference on
artificial intelligence and law, pages 98–107, New
York, NY, USA.

Gary Patterson and Andrew Kehler. 2013. Predicting
the Presence of Discourse Connectives. In Proceed-
ings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages
914–923, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Andreas Peldszus and Manfred Stede. 2013a. From
Argument Diagrams to Argumentation Mining in
Texts: A Survey. International Journal of Cogni-
tive Informatics and Natural Intelligence (IJCINI),
7(1):1–31.

Andreas Peldszus and Manfred Stede. 2013b. Ranking
the annotators: An agreement study on argumenta-
tion structure. In Proceedings of the 7th Linguistic
Annotation Workshop and Interoperability with Dis-
course, pages 196–204, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Milt-
sakaki, Livio Robaldo, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie
Webber. 2008. The Penn Discourse TreeBank 2.0.
In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC),
pages 28–30, Marrakech, Morocco.

2241



Christian Stab and Iryna Gurevych. 2014. Identify-
ing Argumentative Discourse Structures in Persua-
sive Essays. In Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 46–
56, Doha, Qatar.

Manfred Stede. 2002. DiMLex: A Lexical Approach
to Discourse Markers. In Alessandro Lenci and
Vittorio Di Tomaso, editors, Exploring the Lexi-
con. Theory and Computation. Edizioni Dell’Orso,
Alessandria.

Maite Taboada and Marı́a de los Angeles Gómez-
González. 2012. Discourse markers and coherence
relations: Comparison across markers, languages
and modalities. Linguistics and the Human Sci-
ences, 6(1-3):17–41.

Maite Taboada, Julian Brooke, Milan Tofiloski, Kim-
berly Voll, and Manfred Stede. 2011. Lexicon-
based methods for sentiment analysis. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 37(2):267–307.

Maite Taboada. 2006. Discourse Markers as Sig-
nals (or Not) of Rhetorical Relationsteu. Journal of
Pragmatics, 38(4):567–592.

Artem Vovk. 2013. Discovery and Analysis of Public
Opinions on Controversial Topics in the Educational
Domain. Master’s thesis, Ubiquitious Knowledge
Processing Lab, TU Darmstadt.

Bonnie Webber, Mark Egg, and Valia Kordoni. 2012.
Discourse structure and language technology. Natu-
ral Language Engineering, 18:437–490, 10.

Theresa Wilson and Janyce Wiebe. 2003. Annotating
opinions in the world press. In Proceedings of the
4th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue,
pages 13–22, Hannover, Germany.

Florian Wolf and Edward Gibson. 2005. Represent-
ing Discourse Coherence: A Corpus-Based Study.
Computational Linguistics, 31(2):249–288.

Florian Wolf, Edward Gibson, Amy Fisher, and Mered-
ith Knight. 2004. Discourse Graphbank. Linguistic
Data Consortium.

2242


