



















































Indicative Tweet Generation: An Extractive Summarization Problem?


Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 138–147,
Lisbon, Portugal, 17-21 September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.

Indicative Tweet Generation: An Extractive Summarization Problem?

Priya Sidhaye
School of Computer Science

McGill University
Montreal, QC, Canada, H3A 0E9

priya.sidhaye@mail.mcgill.ca

Jackie Chi Kit Cheung
School of Computer Science

McGill University
Montreal, QC, Canada, H3A 0E9
jcheung@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract

Social media such as Twitter have become
an important method of communication,
with potential opportunities for NLG to fa-
cilitate the generation of social media con-
tent. We focus on the generation of in-
dicative tweets that contain a link to an ex-
ternal web page. While it is natural and
tempting to view the linked web page as
the source text from which the tweet is
generated in an extractive summarization
setting, it is unclear to what extent ac-
tual indicative tweets behave like extrac-
tive summaries. We collect a corpus of
indicative tweets with their associated ar-
ticles and investigate to what extent they
can be derived from the articles using ex-
tractive methods. We also consider the im-
pact of the formality and genre of the ar-
ticle. Our results demonstrate the limits
of viewing indicative tweet generation as
extractive summarization, and point to the
need for the development of a methodol-
ogy for tweet generation that is sensitive
to genre-specific issues.

1 Introduction

With the rise in popularity of social media, mes-
sage broadcasting sites such as Twitter and other
microblogging services have become an important
means of communication, with an estimated 500
million tweets being written every day1. In addi-
tion to individual users, various organizations and
public figures such as newspapers, government
officials and entertainers have established them-
selves on social media in order to disseminate in-
formation or promote their products.

While there has been recent progress in the
development of Twitter-specific POS taggers,

1https://about.twitter.com/company

parsers, and other tweet understanding tools
(Owoputi et al., 2013; Kong et al., 2014), there has
been little work on methods for generating tweets,
despite the utility this would have for users and
organizations.

In this paper, we study the generation of the par-
ticular class of tweets that contain a link to an ex-
ternal web page that is composed primarily of text.
Given the short length of a tweet, the presence of
a URL in the tweet is a strong signal that the tweet
is functioning to help Twitter users decide whether
to read the full article. This class of tweets, which
we call indicative tweets, represents a large sub-
set of tweets overall, constituting more than half
of the tweets in our data set. Indicative tweets
would appear to be the easiest to handle using cur-
rent methods in text summarization, because there
is a clear source of input from which a tweet could
be generated. In effect, the tweet would be acting
as an indicative summary of the article it is being
linked to, and it would seem that existing meth-
ods in summarization can be applied. It should be
noted that a tweet being indicative does not pre-
clude it from also providing a critical evaluation
of the linked article.

There has in fact been some work along these
lines, within the framework of extractive summa-
rization. Lofi and Krestel (2012) describe a system
to generate tweets from local government records
through keyphrase extraction. Lloret and Palo-
mar (2013) compares various extractive summa-
rization algorithms applied on Twitter data to gen-
erate tweets from documents.

Lofi and Krestel do not provide a formal evalua-
tion of their model, while Lloret and Palomar com-
pared overlap between system-generated and user-
generated tweets using ROUGE (Lin, 2004). Un-
fortunately, they also show that there is little corre-
lation between ROUGE scores and the perceived
quality of the tweets when rated by human users
for indicativeness and interest. More scrutiny is

138



required to determine whether the wholesale adop-
tion of methods and evaluation schemes from ex-
tractive summarization is justified.

Beyond issues of evaluation measures, it is also
unclear whether extraction is the strategy em-
ployed by human tweeters. One of the origi-
nal motivations behind extractive summarization
was the observation that human summary writers
tended to extract snippets of key phrases from the
source text (Mani, 2001). And while it may be true
that an automatic tweet generation system need
not necessarily follow the same approach to writ-
ing as human tweeters, it is still necessary to know
what proportion of tweets could be accounted for
in an extractive summarization paradigm.

With indicative tweets, an additional issue
arises in that the genre of the source text is not
constrained; for example it may be a news article
or an informal blog post. This may be vastly dif-
ferent from the desired formality of tweet itself,
and thus, a genre-appropriate extract may not be
available.

We begin to address the above issues through
a study that examines to what extent tweet gener-
ation can be viewed as an extractive summariza-
tion problem. We extracted a dataset of indica-
tive tweets containing a link to an external article,
including the documents linked to by the tweets.
We used this data and applied unigram, bigram
and LCS (longest common subsequence) match-
ing techniques inspired by ROUGE to determine
what proportion of tweets can be found in the
linked article. Even with the permissive unigram
match measure, we find that well under half of the
tweet can be found in the linked article. We also
use stylistic analysis on the articles to examine the
role that genre differences between the source text
and the target tweet play, and find that it is easier to
extract tweets from more formal articles than less
formal ones.

Our results point to the need for the devel-
opment of a methodology for indicative tweet
generation, rather than to expropriate the extrac-
tive summarization paradigm that was developed
mostly on news text. Such a methodology will ide-
ally be sensitive to stylistic factors as well as the
underlying intent of the tweet.

2 Background and Related Work

There have been studies on a number of different
issues related to Twitter data, including classifying

tweets and sentiment analysis of tweets. Ghosh et
al. (2011) classified the retweeting activity of users
based on time intervals between retweets of a sin-
gle user and frequency of retweets from unique
users. ‘Retweet’ here means the occurrence of
the same URL in a different tweet. The study
was able to classify the retweeting as automatic or
robotic retweeting, campaigns, news, blogs and so
on, based on the time-interval and user-frequency
distributions. In another study, Chen et al. (2012)
were able to extract sentiment expressions from a
corpus of tweets including both formal words and
informal slang that bear sentiment.

Other studies using Twitter data include
O’Connor et al. (2010), who use topic summa-
rization for a given search for better browsing.
Chakrabarti and Punera (2011) generate an event
summary by learning about the event using a
Hidden Markov Model over the tweets describ-
ing it. Wang et al. (2014) generate a coherent
event summary by treating summarization as an
optimization problem for topic cohesion. Inouye
and Kalita (2011) compare multiple summariza-
tion techniques to generate a summary of multi-
post blogs on Twitter. Wei and Gao (2014) use
tweets to help in generating better summaries of
news articles.

As described in Section 1, we analyze tweet
generation using measures inspired by extrac-
tive summarization evaluation. There has been
one study comparing different text summariza-
tion techniques for tweet generation by Lloret and
Palomar (2013). Summarization systems were
used to generate sentences lesser than 140 charac-
ters in length by summarizing documents, which
could then be taken to be tweets. The system-
generated tweets were evaluated using ROUGE
measures (Lin, 2004). The ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2
and ROUGE-L measures were used, and a human-
written reference tweet was taken to be the gold
standard.

The limits of extractive summarization have
been studied by He et al. (2000). They compare
user preferences for various types of summaries
of an audio-visual presentation. They demonstrate
that the most preferred method of summarization
is highlights and notes provided by the author,
rather than transcripts or slides from the presen-
tation. Conroy et al. (2006) computed an oracle
ROUGE score to investigate the same issue of the
limits of extraction for news text.

139



These studies show that extractive summariza-
tion algorithms may not generate good quality
summaries despite giving high ROUGE evalua-
tion scores. Cheung and Penn (2013) show that
for the news genre, extractive summarization sys-
tems that are optimized for centrality—that is, get-
ting the core parts of the text into the summary—
cannot perform well when compared to model
summaries, since the model summaries are ab-
stracted from the document to a large extent.

3 Data Extraction and Preprocessing

3.1 Using Twitter for Data Extraction

As mentioned earlier, there have been numerous
studies that used data from the public Twitter
feeds. However, none of the datasets in those stud-
ies focused on tweets and related articles linked
to these tweets. The dataset of Lloret and Palo-
mar (2013) is an exception, as it contains tweets
and the news articles they link to, but it only con-
tains 200 English tweet-article pairs. Wei and
Gao (2014) also constructed a dataset that contains
both tweets and articles linked through them, but
this data only deals with news text, and does not
contain the variety of topics we wanted in the data.
We therefore chose to build our own dataset. This
section describes extraction, cleaning and other
preprocessing of the data.

3.2 Extracting Data

Data was extracted from Twitter using the Twit-
ter REST API using 51 search terms, or hashtags.
These hashtags were chosen from a range of topics
including pop culture, international summit meet-
ings discussing political issues, lawsuits and tri-
als, social issues and health care issues. All these
hashtags were trending (being tweeted about at a
high rate) at the time of extraction of the data. To
get a broader sample, the data was extracted over
the course of 15 days in November, 2014, which
gave us multiple news stories to choose from for
the search terms. The search terms were chosen so
that there would be broad representation in terms
of various stylistic properties of text like formal-
ity, subjectivity, etc. For example, searches related
to politics would be more formal, while those re-
lated to films would be informal, and would also
have a lot more opinion pieces about them. A few
examples of the search terms and their distribution
in genre are shown in Table 1.

We extracted about 30,000 tweets, of which

more than half, or around 16,000, contained URLs
to an external news article, photo on photo sharing
sites, or video.

Politics Science & Technology
#apec2014
#G20
#oscarpistorius

#rosetta
#lollipop
#mangalayan

Events Films and Pop culture
#haiyan
#memorialday
#ottawashootings

#TaylorSwift
#theforceawakens
#johnoliver

International Sports
#berlinwall
#ebola
#erdogan

#ausvssa
#playingitmyway
#nycmarathon

Table 1: Examples of the hashtags used for extrac-
tion, grouped into various categories.

The data from the tweets was cleaned by remov-
ing the tweets that were not in English as well as
the retweets; i.e., re-publications of a tweet by a
different user.

We deduplicated the 16,000 extracted URLs
into 6,003 unique addressed, then extracted and
preprocessed their contents. The newspaper
package2 was used to extract article text and the
title from the web page. Since we are interested
in text articles that can serve as the source text
for summarization algorithms, we needed to re-
move photos and video links such as those from
Instagram and YouTube. To do so, we removed
those links that contained fewer than a threshold of
150 words. After this preprocessing, the number
of useful articles was reduced from 6003 to 3066.
There were some further tweet-article pairs where
the text of the tweets was identical, these were re-
moved by further preprocessing and the number of
unique tweet-article pairs came down to 2471.

The final version of the data consists of tweets
along with other information about the tweet, such
as links to articles, hashtags, time of publication,
etc. We also retain the linked article text and pre-
processed it using the CoreNLP toolkit (Manning
et al., 2014). This includes the URL itself and the
text extracted from the article, as well as some ex-
tracted information such as sentence boundaries,
POS tags for tokens, parse trees and dependency
trees. These annotations are used later during our

2https://pypi.python.org/pypi/newspaper

140



analysis in Section 4. Table 2 shows an example
of an entry in the dataset.

Tweet ‘#RiggsReport: #CA as the #Election-
Night exception. Voters rewarded #GOP
nationally, but not in the #GoldenState.
http://t.co/K542wvSNVz’

Title ‘The Riggs Report: California as the
Election Night exception’

Text ‘When the dust settled on Election Night
last week...’

Table 2: Example of a tweet, title of the article and
the text.

4 Analysis

We now describe the analyses we performed on
the data. Our goal is to investigate what propor-
tion of the indicative tweets that we extracted can
be found in the articles that they link to, in order to
determine whether indicative tweet generation can
be viewed as an extractive summarization prob-
lem. Table 3 gives an example of data where the
tweet that was shared about the article does not
come directly from the article text, while Table 4
shows a tweet that was almost entirely extracted
from the text of the article, but changed a little for
the purpose of readability.

Tweet Are #Airlines doing enough with
#Ebola? http://t.co/XExWwxmjnk
#travel

Title Could shortsighted airline refund poli-
cies lead to an outbreak?

Text The deadly Ebola virus has arrived in
the United States just in time for the hol-
iday travel season, carrying fear and un-
certainty with it...

Table 3: Example of a tweet, title of the article and
the text when tweet cannot be extracted from text.

We first compute the proportion of tweets that
can be recovered directly from the article in its en-
tirety (Section 4.1). Then, we calculate the degree
of overlap in terms of unigrams and bigrams be-
tween the tweet and the text of the document (Sec-
tions 4.2, 4.3).

In addition, we consider locality within the arti-
cle when computing the overlap. For the unigram
analysis, we performed a variant of the analysis,

Tweet Officer Wilson will be returned
to active duty if no indictment,
says #Ferguson Police Chief
http://t.co/zrRIBxMUYJ

Title Jackson clarifies comments on Wilson’s
future status

Text ...Chief Jackson said if the grand jury
does not indict Wilson, he will imme-
diately return to active duty....

Table 4: Example of a tweet, title of the article
and the text when tweet can be extracted from text.
The matched portions of the tweet and article are
in bold.

in which we computed the overlap within three-
sentence windows in the source article (Section
4.4). We also compute the least common subse-
quences between the tweet and the document (Sec-
tion 4.5). This was done to investigate whether
sentence compression techniques could be applied
to local context windows to generate the tweet.

These calculations are analogous to the
ROUGE-1, -2 and -L style calculations. These
results give an indication of the degree to which
the tweet is extracted from the document text.

For all these analyses, the stop words have been
eliminated from the tweet as well as the doc-
ument, so that only the informative words are
taken into consideration. The comparisons were
made without lemmatization or stemming, to ad-
here closely to existing work in extractive sum-
marization, where the only modifications to the
source text are removing discourse cue words or
removing words by sentence compression tech-
niques. The hashtags, references (@) and URLs
from the tweets were all removed for analysis.

4.1 Exact Match Calculations

We first checked for a complete substring match
of the tweet in the text. Out of the 2471 unique
instances of tweet and article pairs, a complete
match was found only 23 times. In 9 cases out of
these, the tweet text matched the title of the arti-
cle, which our preprocessing tool did not correctly
separate from the body of the article. In the other
cases, the text of the tweet appears in its entirety
inside the body of the article. This suggests that
the user chose the sentence that either seemed to
be the most conclusive contribution of the article,
or expressed the opinion of the user to be tweeted.

141



Figure 1: Distribution of unigram match percent-
age over unique tweets and articles. The mean is
29.53%, indicated by the red horizontal line, with
a standard deviation of 20.2%

An example for this is detailed in Table 5.

Apart from the 9 times where the tweet was
matched with title in the article, we also checked
to see if the tweet text matched with the arti-
cle titles that were separately extracted by the
newspaper package in order to determine if
tweets could be generated using the headline gen-
eration methods. We found that it did not match
with the titles. However, even though there are no
exact matches, there might still be matches where
the tweet is a slight modification of the headline
of the article, and can be measured using a partial
match measure.

Tweet @PNHP: 6. Renounce punitive
and counterproductive measures
such as sealing the borders,
http://t.co/LRLS2MhPRE #Ebola

Title Physicians for a National Health Pro-
gram

Text As health professionals and trainees, we
call on President Obama to take the fol-
lowing immediate steps to address the
Ebola crisis... 6. Renounce punitive
and counterproductive measures such
as sealing the borders, and take steps to
address the...

Table 5: Example where tweet is extracted as is
from the text, matched portion in bold.

Figure 2: Histogram of number of unique tweet-
article pairs vs number of unigrams matched. The
mean number of unigrams matched per tweet-
article pair is 3.9.

4.2 Percentage Match for Unigrams
Next, we did a percentage match with the text of
the article. This was a bag-of-words check using
unigram overlap between the tweet and the doc-
ument. Let unigrams(x) be the set of unigrams
for some text x, then u, the percentage of match-
ing unigrams found between a given tweet, t and a
given article, a, can be defined as

u =
|unigrams(t) ∩ unigrams(a)|

|unigrams(t)| ∗ 100 (1)

Figure 1 shows the percentage of matches in the
tweet and the article text as compared to the num-
ber of unigrams in the tweet. The mean match
percentage is 29.53% and standard deviation is
20.2%. The mean of this distribution shows that
the number of matched unigrams from a tweet in
the article are fairly low. Figure 2 shows the num-
ber of articles with a certain number of matching
unigrams. The graph shows that the most common
number of unigrams matched was 2. The num-
ber of articles with higher unigrams matched goes
on decreasing. The slight rise at the end - more
than 10 matched unigrams - is accounted for by
the completely matched tweets described above.

4.3 Percentage Match for Bigrams
Similar to the unigram matching techniques, the
bigram percentage matching was also calculated.
The text of the tweet was converted into bigrams
and we then looked for those bigrams in the ar-
ticle text. The percentage was calculated similar

142



Figure 3: Distribution of bigram match percent-
age over the tweet-article pair. The mean here is
10.73% shown by the red horizontal line, with a
standard deviation of 18.5%

Figure 4: Histogram of number of unique tweet-
article pairs vs number of bigrams matched. The
mean number of bigrams matched per article is
1.9.

to the unigram matching done earlier. For the set
of bigrams for a text x, bigrams(x), percentage of
matching bigrams b for the tweet t and article a is:

b =
|bigrams(t) ∩ bigrams(a)|

|bigrams(t)| ∗ 100 (2)

Figure 3 shows the percentages of matched bi-
grams found. The mean is 10.73 with a standard
deviation of 18.5. As seen in the figure, most of
the tweet-article pairs have no matched bigrams.
The percentage then increases to reflect the com-
plete matches found above.

Figure 4 shows frequency of the number of
tweet-article pairs for the number of bigrams

matched. There are no matched bigrams for most
of the pairs. A smaller number of articles had one
matched bigram, and the number decreased until
the end, where it increases a little at more than 10
matched bigrams because of exact tweet matches.

4.4 Percentage Match Inside a Window in
the Article Text

The next analysis checks for a significant word
matching inside a three-sentence window inside
the article text. We used a three sentence long win-
dow using the sentence boundary information ob-
tained during preprocessing. A window of three
sentences was chosen to give a smaller context for
the tweet to be extracted from than the entire arti-
cle. The number was chosen as a moderate context
window size as not too small to reduce it to a sen-
tence level, and not too big for the context to be
diluted. This was done to investigate whether a
pseudo-extractive multi-sentence compression ap-
proach could convert a small number of sentences
into a tweet.

After the text of the window was extracted, we
performed a similar analysis as the last one, ex-
cept on a smaller set of sentences. The match-
ing percentages from all three-sentence windows
in the articles were computed and the maximum
out of these was taken for the final results. Let
a sentence window wi be the set of three consec-
utive sentences starting from the sentence number
i. For this window, the unigram match in the tweet
t, and the window is the unigram match u calcu-
lated above. Then, the maximum match from all
the windows, uw is

uw = maxwi∈Su(t, wi) (3)

The result from this experiment is shown in Fig-
ure 5. Here, the mean of the values is 26.6% and
deviation 17%. Again this shows that only a small
proportion of tweets can be generated even with
an approach that combines unigrams from multi-
ple sentences in the article.

4.5 Longest Common Subsequence Match
Inside a Window for the Text

The percentage match analyses were a bag-of-
words approach that disregarded the order of the
words inside the texts and tweets. To respect the
order of the words in the sentence of the tweet,
we also used the least common subsequence al-
gorithm between the tweet text and the document

143



Figure 5: Percentages of common words in tweet
and a three sentence window in the article. The
maximum match from all percentages is chosen
for an article. The red horizontal line is the mean
is 26.6%, and standard deviation 17%.

text. This subsequence matching was done inside
a sentence window of 5 sentences. Again, the fi-
nal result for the article was the window in which
the maximum percentage was recorded among all
windows. The percentage match was calculated
using the number of words in the tweet as the de-
nominator.

If lcs(t, a) is the longest common subsequence
between the tweet t and article a, unigrams(x) is
the set of unigrams for a text x, then the percentage
of match for the lcs as compared to the tweet, l is

l =
|lcs(t, a)|
|unigrams(t)| ∗ 100 (4)

These numbers are shown in Figure 6. The
mean here is 44.6% and the standard deviation is
22.7%.

5 Interaction with Formality

As seen in the results of the analyses performed in
Section 4, the tweets have little in common with
the articles they are linked to. This shows that
extractive summarization algorithms can only re-
cover a small proportion of the indicative tweets.

To tie in the results of the findings above with
some intuitive notions about the text and see how
formality interacts with the results, we also cal-
culated the formality of the articles. This formal-
ity score was correlated with the longest common
subsequence measure that we defined above.

We assume that the formality of an article can
be estimated by the formality of the words and

Figure 6: Percentages of words matching in tweet
and document text using an LCS algorithm. Mean
is 44.6%, which is shown by the red horizontal
line, and standard deviation is 22.7%.

phrases in the article. We used the formality lex-
icon of Brooke and Hirst (2013). They calculate
formality scores for words and sentences by train-
ing a model on a large corpus based on the ap-
pearance of words in specific documents. Their
model represents words as vectors and the formal
and informal seeds appear in opposite halves of the
graphs, suggesting that we can use these seeds to
determine if an article is formal or informal. The
lexicon consists of words and phrases and their de-
gree of formality. Thus, more formal words are
marked on a positive scale and informal words like
those occurring in colloquial language are marked
on a negative scale.

Let the set of formality expressions from the
lexicon be L, and the formality score for an ex-
pression e be score(e). Let the set of all substrings
from the article substrings(a) be S. Then, the for-
mality score f for an article a is the number of
formal expressions per 10 words in article is

f =

∑
e∈L&e∈S

score(e)

|unigrams(a)| ∗ 10 (5)

The formality lexicon gave positive weights for
formal expressions and negative for informal ex-
pressions. When we computed f using both for-
mal and informal expressions, we found that the
informal words predominated and “swamped” the
signal of the formal words, leading to incompre-
hensible results. Thus, we discarded the informal
words and used only the weights from the formal
words in our final calculations. To check that these

144



formality scores made sense intuitively, we calcu-
lated the average formality score for the articles
belonging to each hashtag and ordered them, as
shown in Table 7.

Lowest Highest
#theforceawakens #KevinVickers
#TaylorSwift #erdogan
#winteriscoming #apec

Table 6: Table of hashtags (broadly, topics) with
highest and lowest formality according to the lex-
icon.

This formality score for each article was cor-
related with the percentage of match obtained us-
ing the longest common subsequence algorithm.
The Pearson correlation value was 0.41, with a p-
value of 7.08e-66, indicating that the interaction
between formality and overlap was highly signifi-
cant. Hence, we can say that the more formal the
subject or the article, the better the tweet can be
extracted from the article. Table 7 gives an exam-
ple of the formality of the article, which is a low
4.2 formality words per 10 words, where the tweet
is not extracted from the article, but rephrased
from the article instead.

Tweet @globetoronto: Why Buffalo
got clobbered with snow and
Toronto did not. #weather #snow-
storm http://t.co/gcwwoDPZmX...
http://t.co/BXY7EH6F3u”

Title What caused Buffalos massive snow and
why Toronto got lucky

Text Torontonians have long been the butt of
jokes about calling in the army every
time a few snow flurries whip by...

Table 7: Example of a tweet, title of the article
where the formality of the article is over the mean,
and the tweet is extracted from the article.

We speculate that tweets associated with less
formal articles may contain more abbreviations
and non-standard words or spellings, which de-
creases the amount of overlap. We plan to experi-
ment with tweet normalization systems to account
for this factor.

6 Discussions

Having presented the above statistics showing that
only a small portion of indicative tweets can be

recovered from the article they link to if viewed as
an extractive summarization problem, the question
then becomes, how should we view the process of
tweet generation?

We think that one promising direction is to
model more explicitly the intent, or the purpose
of the tweets. There have been several studies on
classifying intents in tweets, but in many cases the
intents are general, high-level intents of the tweets,
more akin to classifying the topic or genre of the
tweet than the intent. Wang et al. (2015) clas-
sify intents as food and drink, travel, career and
so on, ones that can directly be used as intents for
purchasing and can be utilized for advertisements.
They also focus on finding tweets with intent and
then classifying those. Banerjee et al. (2012) an-
alyze real time data to detect presence of intents
in tweets. Gómez-Adorno et al. (2014) use fea-
tures from text and stylistics to determine user in-
tentions, which are classified as news report, opin-
ion, publicity and so on. Mohammad et al. (2013)
study the classification of user intents specifically
for tweets related to elections. They study one
election and classify tweets as ones that agree or
disagree with the candidate, ones that are meant
for humour, support and so on.

These definitions of intent, while a promising
start, will not be sufficient for tweet generation.
For this purpose, intent would be the reason the
user chose to share the article with that particu-
lar text. This would include reasons like support
some cause, promote a product or an article, agree
or disagree with an event, or express an opinion
about it. Identifying these intents will help pro-
vide parameters for generating tweets.

7 Conclusion

We have described a study that investigates
whether indicative tweet generation can be viewed
as an extractive summarization problem. By ana-
lyzing a collection of indicative tweets that we col-
lected according to measures inspired by extrac-
tive summarization evaluation measures, we find
that most tweets cannot be recovered from the ar-
ticle that they link to, demonstrating a limit to the
effectiveness of extractive methods.

We further performed an analysis to deter-
mine the role of formality differences between the
source article and the Twitter genre. We find evi-
dence that formality is an important factor, as the
less formal the source article is, the less extrac-

145



tive the tweets seem to be. Future methods that
can change the level of formality of a piece of text
without changing the contents will be needed, as
will those that explicitly consider the intended use
of the tweet.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the anonymous review-
ers for their comments and suggestions, and Julian
Brooke for the formality lexicon used in a part of
this study.

References
Nilanjan Banerjee, Dipanjan Chakraborty, Anupam

Joshi, Sumit Mittal, Angshu Rai, and Balaraman
Ravindran. 2012. Towards analyzing micro-blogs
for detection and classification of real-time inten-
tions. In ICWSM, pages 391–394.

Julian Brooke and Graeme Hirst. 2013. A multi-
dimensional bayesian approach to lexical style. In
HLT-NAACL, pages 673–679.

Deepayan Chakrabarti and Kunal Punera. 2011. Event
summarization using tweets. ICWSM, 11:66–73.

Lu Chen, Wenbo Wang, Meenakshi Nagarajan, Shao-
jun Wang, and Amit P Sheth. 2012. Extracting
diverse sentiment expressions with target-dependent
polarity from twitter. In ICWSM, pages 50–57.

Jackie Chi Kit Cheung and Gerald Penn. 2013. To-
wards robust abstractive multi-document summa-
rization: A caseframe analysis of centrality and do-
main. In ACL (1), pages 1233–1242.

John M Conroy, Judith D Schlesinger, and Dianne P
O’Leary. 2006. Topic-focused multi-document
summarization using an approximate oracle score.
In Proceedings of the COLING/ACL on Main con-
ference poster sessions, pages 152–159. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Rumi Ghosh, Tawan Surachawala, and Kristina
Lerman. 2011. Entropy-based classification
of’retweeting’activity on twitter. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1106.0346.

Helena Gómez-Adorno, David Pinto, Manuel Montes,
Grigori Sidorov, and Rodrigo Alfaro. 2014. Con-
tent and style features for automatic detection of
users intentions in tweets. In Advances in Artifi-
cial Intelligence–IBERAMIA 2014, pages 120–128.
Springer.

Liwei He, Elizabeth Sanocki, Anoop Gupta, and
Jonathan Grudin. 2000. Comparing presentation
summaries: slides vs. reading vs. listening. In Pro-
ceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Fac-
tors in Computing Systems, pages 177–184. ACM.

David Inouye and Jugal K Kalita. 2011. Com-
paring twitter summarization algorithms for mul-
tiple post summaries. In Privacy, Security, Risk
and Trust (PASSAT) and 2011 IEEE Third Iner-
national Conference on Social Computing (Social-
Com), 2011 IEEE Third International Conference
on, pages 298–306. IEEE.

Lingpeng Kong, Nathan Schneider, Swabha
Swayamdipta, Archna Bhatia, Chris Dyer, and
Noah A. Smith. 2014. A dependency parser for
tweets. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), pages 1001–1012, Doha, Qatar, October.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. Rouge: A package for automatic
evaluation of summaries. In Text Summarization
Branches Out: Proceedings of the ACL-04 Work-
shop, pages 74–81.

Elena Lloret and Manuel Palomar. 2013. Towards
automatic tweet generation: A comparative study
from the text summarization perspective in the jour-
nalism genre. Expert Systems with Applications,
40(16):6624–6630.

Christoph Lofi and Ralf Krestel. 2012. iparticipate:
Automatic tweet generation from local government
data. In Database Systems for Advanced Applica-
tions, pages 295–298. Springer.

Inderjeet Mani. 2001. Automatic summarization, vol-
ume 3. John Benjamins Publishing.

Christopher D Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Finkel, Steven J Bethard, and David Mc-
Closky. 2014. The stanford corenlp natural lan-
guage processing toolkit. In Proceedings of 52nd
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: System Demonstrations, pages
55–60.

Saif M Mohammad, Svetlana Kiritchenko, and Joel
Martin. 2013. Identifying purpose behind elec-
toral tweets. In Proceedings of the Second Interna-
tional Workshop on Issues of Sentiment Discovery
and Opinion Mining, pages 1–9. ACM.

Brendan O’Connor, Michel Krieger, and David Ahn.
2010. Tweetmotif: Exploratory search and topic
summarization for Twitter. In ICWSM, pages 384–
385.

Olutobi Owoputi, Brendan O’Connor, Chris Dyer,
Kevin Gimpel, Nathan Schneider, and Noah A.
Smith. 2013. Improved part-of-speech tagging for
online conversational text with word clusters. In
Proceedings of the 2013 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 380–390, Atlanta, Georgia, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

146



Lu Wang, Claire Cardie, and Galen Marchetti. 2014.
Socially-informed timeline generation for complex
events. In Proceedings of Human Language Tech-
nologies: The 2015 Annual Conference of the North
American Chapter of the ACL, pages 1055–1065.

Jinpeng Wang, Gao Cong, Xin Wayne Zhao, and Xi-
aoming Li. 2015. Mining user intents in twitter:
A semi-supervised approach to inferring intent cate-
gories for tweets. In Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, pages 339–345.

Zhongyu Wei and Wei Gao. 2014. Utilizing mi-
croblogs for automatic news highlights extraction.
In Proceedings of COLING 2014, the 25th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics:
Technical Papers, pages 872–883.

147


