



















































Automatic recognition of habituals: a three-way classification of clausal aspect


Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2471–2481,
Lisbon, Portugal, 17-21 September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.

Automatic recognition of habituals:
a three-way classification of clausal aspect

Annemarie Friedrich Manfred Pinkal
Department of Computational Linguistics

Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany
{afried,pinkal}@coli.uni-saarland.de

Abstract

This paper provides the first fully au-
tomatic approach for classifying clauses
with respect to their aspectual properties
as habitual, episodic or static. We bring
together two strands of previous work,
which address only the related tasks of
the episodic-habitual and stative-dynamic
distinctions, respectively. Our method
combines different sources of information
found to be useful for these tasks. We are
the first to exhaustively classify all clauses
of a text, achieving up to 80% accuracy
(baseline 58%) for the three-way classifi-
cation task, and up to 85% accuracy for
related subtasks (baselines 50% and 60%),
outperforming previous work. In addi-
tion, we provide a new large corpus of
Wikipedia texts labeled according to our
linguistically motivated guidelines.

1 Introduction

In order to understand the function of a clause
within a discourse, we need to know the clause’s
aspectual properties. The distinction between dy-
namic and stative lexical aspect, as in exam-
ples (1a) and (1b) respectively, is fundamental
(Vendler, 1957). Its automatic prediction has
been addressed previously (Siegel and McKeown,
2000; Zarcone and Lenci, 2008; Friedrich and
Palmer, 2014).

(1) (a) Bill drank a coffee after lunch. (dynamic)
(b) Bill likes coffee. (stative)

In this work, we focus on habituality as another
fundamental aspectual property. While example
(1a) is an episodic sentence, i.e., a sentence ex-
pressing information about a particular event, the
same dynamic verb can be used to characterize the
default behavior of an individual or of a kind in a
certain type of situation (2).

(2) (a) Bill usually drinks coffee after lunch.
(habitual)

(b) Italians drink coffee after lunch.
(habitual)

The entailment properties of episodic and ha-
bitual (or characterizing) sentences differ substan-
tially. Also, they have different functions in dis-
course. The episodic event expressed by (1a) is
typically embedded in the temporal structure of a
narration. The habitual sentence (2a) can be used,
e.g., as an explanation (why Bill is still sitting at
the table), or in a contrastive context (today, he or-
dered a grappa instead). Generic sentences with
kind-referring subjects (2b) can also be habitual,
generalizing at the same time over typical mem-
bers of this kind and over situations in which they
typically carry out some action.

Habitual sentences do not move narrative time,
similar to stative clauses such as (1b). Carlson
(2005) considers habituals to be aspectually sta-
tive. Since there are clear differences between or-
dinary statives such as (1b) and habituals, we ap-
ply a three-way distinction for clausal aspect in
this work. We classify clauses as one of the three
categories habitual, episodic and static.1

Through its impact on entailment properties and
temporal discourse structure, the determination of
clausal aspect is relevant to various natural lan-
guage processing applications requiring text un-
derstanding, such as novelty detection (Soboroff
and Harman, 2005), knowledge extraction from
text (Van Durme, 2010) or question answering
(Llorens et al., 2015). Using aspectual informa-
tion has been shown to improve temporal relation
identification (Costa and Branco, 2012).

Some languages (e.g., Czech or Swahili) have
systematic morphological markers of habituality

1For clarity, we use the label static for the clausal aspect
of non-episodic and non-habitual sentences. We reserve sta-
tive, which is more common in the literature, for the lexical
aspectual class.

2471



(Dahl, 1985). In other languages, there are cues
for habituality, such as the simple present in En-
glish, and the use of certain adverbials (Dahl,
1995). The automatic recognition of habitual sen-
tences for the latter languages is non-trivial. The
work in this paper targets the English language;
we leave recognition of habituality in other lan-
guages to future work.

The only previous work on categorizing sen-
tences as episodic or habitual we know of is by
Mathew and Katz (2009). They do not attempt to
categorize arbitrary sentences in ‘free text’, how-
ever, but work with a corpus of selected sentences
and use gold standard parse information for their
experiments. In particular, they consider clauses
containing lexically dynamic verbs only.

In this work, we address the task of an exhaus-
tive classification of all clauses of a text into the
three aspectual classes habitual, episodic, and
static. Static sentences include lexically stative
clauses as well as negated or modalized clauses
containing a dynamic main verb. A computa-
tional model for identifying episodic and habitual
clauses clearly needs to address this third class
as well if it is to be applied in a realistic set-
ting. Linguistically, the determination of clausal
aspect depends on the recognition of the verb’s
lexical aspectual class (stative or dynamic), and
on the recognition of any aspectual markers or
transformations, such as use of the perfect tense,
negations or modals. Our work builds on re-
sults for the related subtasks (Mathew and Katz,
2009; Siegel and McKeown, 2000; Friedrich and
Palmer, 2014), using both context-based and verb-
type based information.

Our major contributions are: (i) We create a cor-
pus of 102 Wikipedia texts whose about 10,000
clauses are annotated as episodic, static or habitual
with substantial agreement. This corpus allows for
studying the range of linguistic phenomena related
to the clause types as defined above (compared to
previous work which uses only a small set of verbs
and sentences), and provides a basis for future re-
search. (ii) We provide the first fully automatic ap-
proach for this classification task, combining two
classification tasks (lexical aspectual class and ha-
bituality) that have been treated separately in pre-
vious work. For an exhaustive classification of
clauses of free text, these two classification tasks
need to be addressed jointly. We show two dif-
ferent feature sets (verb-type based features and

context-based features) to have different impact on
the two subtasks, and to be complementary for our
full three-way task.

We reach accuracies of nearly 85% for the two
subtasks of identifying static clauses and distin-
guishing episodic and habitual clauses (majority
class baselines are 60% and 50% respectively). A
joint model for the three-way classification task
reaches an accuracy of 80% (baseline 60%). In ad-
dition, we show that the verb-type based linguis-
tic indicator features generalize well across verb
types on our tasks: for verbs unseen in the training
data, accuracies drop only by 2-5%.

2 Theoretical background and
annotation guidelines

In this section, we give an overview of the seman-
tic theory related to habituals, at the same time
introducing our annotation guidelines for marking
clauses as habitual, episodic or static.

2.1 Habituality
Habitual sentences express regularities in terms of
generalizations over events and activities. In se-
mantic theory, habituals are formally represented
using a quantifier-like operator GEN (Krifka et al.,
1995):

(3) GEN[s](s is an after-dinner situation & Bill
is involved in s; Bill drinks a coffee in s)

In the semi-formal representation (3) of sen-
tence (2a) above, GEN binds a variable s ranging
over situations, the first argument restricts the sit-
uation type, and the second argument provides the
activity that is typically carried out by the protago-
nist in the respective situations. The GEN operator
is similar to the universal quantifier of predicate
logic. However, habitual sentences tolerate excep-
tions: (2a) is true even if Bill does not drink a cof-
fee after every lunch. Also note that habituals are
not restricted to what one would consider a matter
of habit; they can also have inanimate subjects, as
illustrated by (4).

(4) Glass breaks easily. (habitual)

2.2 Clausal and lexical aspectual class
Clausal aspect is dependent on the lexical aspec-
tual class (stative or dynamic), but the two lev-
els are essentially different. Dynamic verbs ex-
press events or activities (e.g., kill, fix, walk, for-
get), while stative verbs express states (e.g., be,

2472



like, know, own). The fundamental aspectual class
(Siegel and McKeown, 2000) of a verb in context
describes whether it is used in a stative or dynamic
sense before any aspectual markers or transforma-
tions (such as use of the past/present perfect or
modals) have been applied. It is a function of the
main verb and a select group of complements (it
may differ per verb which ones are important). For
example, the fundamental lexical aspectual class
of the verb make with the subject Mary and the
object cake in (5) is dynamic. English clauses in
past or present perfect such as (5) are static, as they
focus on the post-state of an event rather than the
event itself (Katz, 2003).

(5) Mary has made a cake. (static)

Habituals with verbs of dynamic aspectual class
are by far more frequent in our corpus,2 but there
are also instances of stative verbs used in a habit-
ual way, as for example (6).

(6) Sloths sometimes sit on top of branches.
(habitual, stative lexical aspectual class)

2.3 Modality and negation

Modalized (7) and negated sentences (8) tend to
be static: they do not express information about
a particular event, but refer to actual or possible
states of the world.

(7) Mary can swim. (static)

(8) Mary didn’t go swimming yesterday. (static)

The above definitions of habituality and stativ-
ity are generally agreed upon in literature. How-
ever, the interaction of these phenomena is by no
means trivial (Hacquard, 2009), and required mak-
ing some decisions during the design of our an-
notation guidelines. Here, we explain these deci-
sions, which are all motivated by a clause’s entail-
ment properties.

One difficult issue is how to interpret and mark
negated sentences such as (9a) whose positive ver-
sion (9b) is habitual.

(9) (a) John does not smoke. (habitual)
(b) John smokes. (habitual)

2The distribution of lexical aspectual class of verbs is
generally skewed towards dynamic (Friedrich and Palmer,
2014).

Sentence (9a) can be considered either static
because of the negation (It is not the case that
John smokes), or as habitual because it charac-
terizes John’s behavior (In any relevant situation,
John does not smoke). Both decisions are possible
(Garrett, 1998), we decide for the latter possibility.
This decision is supported by the observation that
(9a) is similar in its entailment properties to (10),
which due to the frequency adverbial never clearly
generalizes over relevant situations (though note
that this is not a linguistic test).

(10) John never smokes. (habitual)

Likewise, we mark modalized sentences as ha-
bitual if they have a strong implicature that an
event has actually happened regularly (Hacquard,
2009), as in (11). In contrast, (7) is static as it does
not imply that Mary actually swims regularly.

(11) I had to eat an apple every day. (habitual)

The above example shows that modality and ha-
bituality are interweaved and sometimes hard to
identify. Nevertheless, we reach substantial agree-
ment in the annotation of our corpus (see Sec-
tion 4.2).

Finally, some habituals have a dispositional
reading, indicating ability/capability (Menéndez-
Benito, 2012). Example (12) can be paraphrased
by (13), as it does not indicate that the car is ac-
tually driven this fast regularly, it only states its
maximum speed.

(12) This car goes 200 kph.

(13) This car can go 200 kph.

3 Related work

The task of predicting fundamental aspectual
class aims to determine whether the verb is used
in a stative or dynamic sense. This task predicts
the aspectual class of a verb in context before any
aspectual markers or transformations (such as use
of the perfect or modals) have been applied. Siegel
and McKeown (2000) propose the use of linguis-
tic indicators (explained in Section 5.2); Friedrich
and Palmer (2014) show the importance of us-
ing context-based features in addition. Zarcone
and Lenci (2008) classify occurrences of 28 Italian
verbs according to Vendlers classes state, process,
accomplishment and achievement.

Mathew and Katz (2009) address the problem
of ‘supervised categorization for habitual versus

2473



episodic sentences’ . The authors randomly select
1052 sentences for 57 verbs from the Penn Tree-
Bank (Marcus et al., 1993) and manually mark
them with regard to whether they are habitual or
episodic. They focus on verbs that are lexically
dynamic and discuss a variety of syntactic fea-
tures, which they extract from gold standard parse
trees. Their aim is to study the ability of syntactic
features alone to identify habitual sentences.

Xue and Zhang (2014) annotate verbs with the
four event types habitual event, state, on-going
event and episodic event with the aim of improv-
ing tense prediction for Chinese. Recent related
work (Williams, 2012; Williams and Katz, 2012)
extracts typical durations (in term of actual time
measures) for verb lemmas from Twitter. They
distinguish episodic and habitual uses of the verbs,
using the method of Mathew and Katz (2009).

4 Data

In this section, we describe the data sets used in
our experiments.3

4.1 Penn TreeBank (M&K) data set
Mathew and Katz (2009) randomly select sen-
tences for several verbs from the WSJ and Brown
corpus sections of the Penn Treebank. They re-
quire the verb to be lexically dynamic. Sentences
are marked as habitual or episodic, further de-
tails on the annotation guidelines are not specified.
Their data set contains 2743 annotated sentences
for 239 distinct verb types. Mathew and Katz re-
move verb types with highly skewed distributions
of labels, but their filtered data set is not available.
We follow their filtering approach, but we could
not replicate their filtering step. Our final data set
contains 1230 sentences for 54 distinct verb types.
Mathew and Katz (2009) state that their data set
comprises 1052 examples for 57 verb stems. We
aimed at producing a similar distribution of la-
bels: our data set contains 73.3% episodic cases,
M&K’s version has 73.1%.

4.2 Wikipedia corpus
We select 102 texts from a variety of domains from
Wikipedia, as we expect an encyclopedia to con-
tain many habitual sentences. We use the dis-
course parser SPADE (Soricut and Marcu, 2003)

3All data sets are freely available from
www.coli.uni-saarland.de/projects/sitent.
We thank Thomas A. Mathew and Graham Katz for allowing
us to publish their data set.

Label # %
static 6184 59.7
episodic 2114 20.4
habitual 2057 19.9
total 10355 -

Table 1: Wikipedia data, distribution of labels for
clausal aspect.

to automatically segment the first 70 sentences of
each article into clauses. A clause is approxi-
mately defined as a finite verb phrase. Each clause
is then labeled as static, episodic or habitual. De-
tails on our annotation scheme have been given in
Section 2. Annotators are allowed to skip non-
finite clauses (e.g., headlines only containing a
noun phrase). This happened in about 14% of all
pre-segmented clauses. The final Wikipedia data
consists of 10355 labeled clauses. Table 1 gives
statistics for the distribution of labels.

The data set was labeled by three paid annota-
tors, all students of computational linguistics. An-
notators were given a written manual and a short
training on documents not included in the corpus.
Agreement on the Wikipedia data is 0.61 in terms
of Fleiss’ κ, which indicates substantial agreement
(Landis and Koch, 1977). The gold standard that
we use in our experiments is constructed via ma-
jority voting. The gold standard contains the cases
where at least two annotators agreed on the label.
We found only 86 cases where all annotators dis-
agree, and manual inspection shows that most of
these cases are related to disagreements on the lex-
ical aspectual class that coincide with an attention
slip by one of the annotators.

5 Method

In this section, we describe our computational
models for determining clausal aspect.

5.1 CONTEXT-BASED features

Table 2 shows the syntactic-semantic features,
which we call CONTEXT-BASED as they are ex-
tracted from the context of each verb occurrence
that we classify. This feature set comprises the
features proposed by Mathew and Katz (2009)
and the ones proposed by Friedrich and Palmer
(2014). In addition, we use the features modal
and negated. We extract these features from syn-
tactic dependency parses created using the Stan-
ford parser (Klein and Manning, 2002). Tense
and voice are extracted following the rules pro-

2474



Feature Values
verb tense*† past, present, infinitive

pos† VB, VBG, VBN, ...
voice† active, passive

aspect progressive*† true, false
perfect*† true, false

subject bare plural* true, false
definite* true, false
indefinite* true, false

object absent* true, false
bare plural* true, false
definite* true, false
indefinite* true, false

grammatical dependents† WordNet lexname/POS
sentence modal would, can,...

negated true, false
conditionals* presence of clause

starting with if/when/
whenever

temporal specific, quantificational,
modifiers* including used to and would

(where no if)
prepositions* at / in / on (3 features,

true/false)

Table 2: CONTEXT-BASED features. Used by:
*Mathew and Katz (2009), †Friedrich and Palmer
(2014).

vided by Loaiciga et al. (2014). The values of the
grammatical dependents’ features are the Word-
Net (Miller, 1995) lexical filename of the depen-
dent’s lemma, or, if not available, the dependent’s
part-of-speech tag. Quantificational adverbs are
temporal modifiers such as always, occasionally
or weekly.4 Specific temporal adverbs are, ac-
cording to a heuristic proposed by Mathew (2009),
phrase children marked with the part-of-speech
tag TMP and whose child is a prepositional phrase.
Noun phrases with one of the determiners the, this,
that, these, those, each, every, all, as well as pos-
sessives, pronouns, proper names and quantified
phrases are definite. NPs with determiners a, an,
many, most, some, and cases of modifying adjec-
tives without determiners (e.g., few) or cardinal
numbers (part-of-speech tag CD) are indefinite.
Mathew (2009) describes their features in detail.

5.2 TYPE-BASED features
This feature set consists of the verb-type based
linguistic indicator features of Siegel and McKe-
own (2000). The computation of these features
is based on a large parsed, but otherwise un-
annotated background corpus. For each verb type
(i.e., lemma), these features count how often the

4The complete list of quantificational adverbs used is
given by Mathew (2009), page 36.

Feature Example Feature Example
frequency - continuous continually
present says adverb endlessly
past said evaluation better
future will say adverb horribly
perfect had won manner furiously
progressive is winning adverb patiently
negated not/never temporal again
particle up/in/... adverb finally
no subject - in-PP in an hour

for-PP for an hour

Table 3: TYPE-BASED feature set (linguistic indi-
cators) and examples for lexical items associated
with each indicator, following Siegel and McKe-
own (2000).

verb occurs with each of the linguistic indicators
as listed in Table 3. Except for the frequency fea-
ture, these values are normalized by the number
of occurrences of the verb type. For example, if
the verb type win occurs 1000 times in the parsed
background corpus, of which 100 times with per-
fect aspect, the value of the linguistic indicator
feature perfect is 0.1 for the verb type win.
For any instance whose verb’s lemma is win, 0.1
will be the value of the feature perfect, in other
words, all instances of the same verb type receive
the same TYPE-BASED feature values. Linguis-
tic indicator features have recently been applied
successfully on the related task of classifying the
lexical aspectual class of verbs by Friedrich and
Palmer (2014), who extract the linguistic indica-
tors from an automatically parsed version of the
AFE and XIE parts of Gigaword. We use their
database of linguistic indicator values.5

5.3 Algorithm
In order to investigate in which circumstances
the task of predicting a clause’s label (habitual,
episodic or static) can be addressed jointly, or
whether a pipelined approach is better, we ap-
ply the following methods. Our JOINT model
learns the decision boundaries for the three classes
jointly, i.e., as a three-way classification task. In
addition, we present a CASCADED model, which
uses two models learned for the two different sub-
tasks: (a) identifying static clauses and (b) distin-
guishing episodic and habitual clauses.

First, we train a model to distinguish the static
class from the other two. In this learning step, we
simply map all the clauses labeled as episodic and

5www.coli.uni-saarland.de/projects/
sitent

2475



habitual to the class non-static and learn the deci-
sion boundary between the two classes static and
non-static. Second, we train a model to distin-
guish the episodic from the habitual class. This
model is trained on the subset of examples labeled
with either of these two classes.

In the CASCADED model, first, the static vs.
non-static model is applied. The CASCADED
model labels all instances automatically labeled as
static in this first step, and then applies the second
model (episodic vs. habitual) on all remaining
instances.

We train Random Forest classifiers (Breiman,
2001) using Weka (Hall et al., 2009) for each step
and also for the JOINT model. Besides provid-
ing a robust performance, Random Forest classi-
fiers can easily deal with both categorical and nu-
meric features. This is relevant as our CONTEXT-
BASED features are categorical while the TYPE-
BASED features are numeric. In our experiments,
we will compare the impact of the different feature
sets on each subtask and on the JOINT model.

5.4 Baseline: Mathew and Katz (2009)

As a baseline, we also report results for the subset
of our CONTEXT-BASED features used by Mathew
and Katz (2009) and call this subset MK. Mathew
and Katz (2009) find a J48 decision tree and a
Naive Bayes classifier to work best. We replicate
their results for the decision tree in Section 6.2.

6 Experiments and discussion

This section describes our experiments. First,
we reproduce the experiments of Mathew and
Katz (2009), who use manually created syntactic
parses, in a purely automatic setting.

The data set and experiments of Mathew and
Katz (2009) focus on the episodic-habitual distinc-
tion using a set of sentences selected for a small set
of verbs, and their feature design focuses on syn-
tactic properties of the clauses found in this an-
notated data set. In the further experiments, we
turn to the Wikipedia data, which contains annota-
tions for full texts. We expect the Wikipedia data
to cover the range of habitual and episodic expres-
sions more fully, and in addition, allows for study-
ing the task of separating static sentences from the
other two classes. As we will show, this latter
task profits from including features relevant to the
stative-dynamic distinction on the lexical level.

We first present experimental results for the two

subtasks (described in Section 5.3). Our CAS-
CADED model first identifies static clauses, and
then classifies the remaining clauses as episodic or
habitual. For reasons of readability, we first report
on our experiments for the episodic-habitual dis-
tinction using both the M&K and Wikipedia data
sets. Using the Wikipedia data, we then report on
the results for the static vs. non-static distinction.
Finally, we turn to the full task of the three-ways
distinction.

6.1 Experimental setting
We report results for 10-fold cross validation (CV)
with two different settings: In the RANDOM CV
setting, we randomly distribute the instances over
the folds, putting all instances of one document
into the same fold. In the UNSEEN VERBS CV
setting, we simulate the case of not having labeled
training data for a particular verb type by putting
all instances of one verb type into the same fold.

We compute the information retrieval statistics
of precision (P), recall (R) and F1-measure per
class, where F1 is the harmonic mean of P and
R, F1 = 2∗P∗RP+R . Macro-average P is computed
as the (unweighted) average of the P scores of the
classes, and macro-average R is computed like-
wise. Macro-average F1 is the harmonic mean
of macro-average P and macro-average R. We use
McNemar’s test with p < 0.01 to compute statis-
tical signficance of differences in accuracies. In
our tables, we indicate that two results differ sig-
nificantly by marking them with the same symbols
(we only show this when scores are close).

6.2 M&K data: episodic vs. habitual
We use Weka’s 10-fold stratified cross validation
and a J48 decision tree in the experiments reported
in this section in order to replicate their experi-
mental setting. Results are shown in Table 4. For
the sake of completeness, we also show the results
as presented in the original paper. F1-scores are
computed from P and R as reported in the orig-
inal paper. Note that their experiments are per-
formed on a different subset of the data and so
these numbers are not directly comparable to ours,
but our subset has a very similar class distribution
(see Section 4.1). Our accuracies based on auto-
matic parses rather than gold standard parses are
about 3% lower when using the original feature
set (MK). We conclude that our results are in the
expected range. Also, we do not find any signifi-
cant improvements on this data set when using any

2476



other feature sets or combinations thereof (the ta-
ble shows the results for our CONTEXT-based fea-
ture set); the M&K feature set designed for this
corpus captures its variation well.

We have used a J48 decision tree in this section
for comparability with previous work. In all fol-
lowing sections, we present results using Random
Forest classifiers as described in Section 5.3.

F1-score Acc.System epis. habit. macro
majority class* 84.5 0.0 42.2 73.1
MK* 91.1 70.5 80.8 86.1
MK 89.6 63.5 76.5 83.8
CONTEXT 90.0 64.7 77.3 84.4

Table 4: Results for episodic vs. habitual, J48
decision tree, data from Mathew and Katz (2009).
*Numbers from original paper.

6.3 Wikipedia: episodic vs. habitual
We study the classification task of distinguishing
episodic and habitual sentences using the subset
of the Wikipedia data having one of these two la-
bels (4171 instances). This task parallels the ex-
periment of Mathew and Katz (2009) described
above. We conduct two experiments, once using
the RANDOM CV setting and once using the UN-
SEEN VERBS setting. Table 5 shows the results.
The distribution of instances is nearly 50:50 in the
gold standard (see Section 4, Table 1), and the ma-
jority classes in the respective training folds differ
(this is the reason for the different baseline scores).
For reasons of space we do not show the other
scores here; macro-average F1-scores have (al-
most) the same values as accuracy, the F1-scores
for episodic and habitual are similar to each other
in each case.

Our findings are as follows: TYPE-BASED
features outperform the majority class baseline,

Features RANDOM CV UNSEEN VERBS
majority class 42.1 46.3
lemma 65.4 46.3
TYPE 68.1 53.9
MK 82.3 ‡81.4
CONTEXT *†82.8 ‡83.8
+ lemma *84.3
CONTEXT + TYPE †85.1 83.1
+ lemma 84.0

Table 5: Wikipedia: Accuracy of episodic vs ha-
bitual, 4171 instances, 10-fold cross validation,
*†‡differences statistically significant.

RANDOM CV UNSEEN VERBS
Features F1 Acc. F1 Acc.
majority class 37.4 59.7 37.4 59.7‡
MK 67.5 *69.5 59.2 62.7‡
CONTEXT 70.3 *71.7 62.8 64.9‡
+ lemma 81.9 †82.8
TYPE 78.8 79.3 72.2 73.2‡
CONTEXT + TYPE 83.6 †84.1 78.4 79.2‡
+ lemma 83.8 84.4

Table 6: Wikipedia: static vs non-static. All
10355 instances, 10-fold cross validation.*†‡ dif-
ferences statistically significant.

which means that some verbs have a preference
for being used as either episodic or habitual. The
CONTEXT-BASED features work remarkably well.
If training data of the same verb type is available,
adding the TYPE-BASED features or the lemma to
the CONTEXT-BASED features results in improve-
ments; this is not the case in the UNSEEN VERBS
setting. The latter setting shows that the additional
contextual features (compared to the MK subset)
are important: our corpus indeed covers a broader
range of phenomena than the M&K data set.

6.4 Wikipedia: static vs. non-static

We evaluate the task of classifying static ver-
sus non-static clauses using all 10355 instances
of the Wikipedia data set. Any instance la-
beled episodic or habitual receives the label non-
static both in training and testing. Results of
this task are shown in Table 6. For this subtask,
the CONTEXT-BASED features are less informa-
tive than the TYPE-BASED features. Again, us-
ing lemma information approximates the use of
type-based information, but this is not an option
in the UNSEEN VERBS setting. A combination of
the CONTEXT-BASED and TYPE-BASED features
achieves the best results. Friedrich and Palmer
(2014) find that TYPE-BASED features generalize
well across verb types when predicting the aspec-
tual class of verbs in context, the same is true
here. They achieve small improvements by adding
context-based features. Predicting the lexical as-
pectual class of the clause’s main verb is only part
of our classification task, the static class includes
not only lexically stative clauses but also clauses
with lexically dynamic verbs that are stativized,
e.g., modals, negation or perfect tense. Hence,
as expected, in our task, adding the CONTEXT-
BASED features results in a considerable perfor-
mance improvement (5-7% absolute in accuracy).

2477



RANDOM CROSS VALIDATION UNSEEN VERB TYPES EXPERIMENT
F1-score Acc. F1-score Acc.Features stat. epis. habit. macro stat. epis. habit. macro

majority class baseline 74.8 0 0 24.9 59.7 74.8 0.0 0.0 24.9 ‡59.7
JOINT: MK 76.6 65.4 26.1 57.5 *67.0 76.3 41.7 0.8 49.0 ‡63.8
JOINT: CONTEXT 77.5 65.8 36.4 60.5 *68.4 74.7 57.1 12.0 51.7 ?63.9
+ lemma 85.5 75.0 51.6 71.8 †78.0
JOINT: TYPE 81.9 52.7 49.7 61.5 69.9 74.9 4.2 2.8 40.7 ?60.0
JOINT: CONTEXT + TYPE 86.1 75.8 58.8 73.8 †79.0 81.2 69.5 31.3 63.6 **72.1
+ lemma 86.8 75.0 59.9 74.2 79.6

CASCADED 86.9 76.1 62.2 75.1 79.9 82.6 72.0 50.2 68.4 **74.3

Table 7: Wikipedia: static vs. episodic vs. habitual. 10355 instances, 10-fold cross validation. The
CASCADED model uses the best models from Table 6 and Table 5. *† ‡ ?** differences statistically
significant.

It is worth noting that even for verbs not seen in
the training data, high accuracies and F1-scores of
almost 80% can be reached.

6.5 Wikipedia: combined task

In this section, we describe our experiments for
the three-way classification task of static, episodic
and habitual clauses, as in a realistic classification
setting, a clause may belong to either of these three
classes. We investigate whether a pipelined CAS-
CADED approach is better, or whether the JOINT
model profits from learning the decision bound-
aries between all three classes jointly. The results
for this task are presented in Table 7. Both the
CONTEXT-BASED and the TYPE-BASED features
when used alone improve over the majority class
baseline by about 10% in accuracy in the RAN-
DOM CV setting, and only by about 4% in the UN-
SEEN VERBS setting. In the latter setting, all fea-
ture sets when used alone are ineffective for identi-
fying habituals. This indicates that the CONTEXT-
BASED features only ‘pick up’ on some type-based
information in the RANDOM CV case. The best
models for this JOINT classification task use both
the CONTEXT-BASED and the TYPE-BASED fea-
ture sets: F1-scores and accuracy increase remark-
ably. Again, in the RANDOM CV setting, using
the lemma results in a large performance gain,
though using the TYPE-BASED features is benefi-
cial, and, in the UNSEEN VERBS setting, essential.

We apply the CASCADED model as described in
Section 5.3, training and testing the models for the
subtasks in each fold. In the RANDOM CV set-
ting, the accuracy of the CASCADED approach is
not significantly better than the one of the JOINT
approach, though F1-scores for the less frequent
episodic and habitual classes both increase. In

the UNSEEN VERBS setting, however, the differ-
ence is remarkable: macro-average F1-score in-
creases by almost 5% (absolute) and accuracy in-
creases by 2.2%. Most notably, the F1-score for
the habitual class increases from 0.31 to 0.50 (due
to an increase in recall). To conclude, the CAS-
CADED approach is favorable as it works more ro-
bustly both for verb types seen or unseen in the
training data.

6.6 Feature ablation

In the above sections, we have compared the two
major feature groups of CONTEXT-BASED and
TYPE-BASED features. In addition, we ablate each
single feature from the best results for each exper-
iment. For all classification tasks, we found fea-
tures reflecting tense and grammatical aspect to
be most important, both for the CONTEXT-BASED
and TYPE-BASED features. In general, we observe
that no single feature has a big impact on the re-
sults, accuracy drops only by at most 1-2%. This
shows that our feature set is quite robust and some
of the features (e.g., part-of-speech tag of the verb
and tense) reflect partially redundant information.
However, using only the best features results in a
significant performance drop by several percent-
age points in the various settings, which means
that though single features may not have a large
impact, overall, the models for this classification
task profit from including many diverse features.

For the episodic-habitual distinction in the
UNSEEN VERBS setting, the definiteness of the
object was an important CONTEXT-BASED fea-
ture. In the static vs. non-static task, the subject
also plays an important role, as well as the TYPE-
BASED feature for continuous adverbs. In the UN-
SEEN VERBS setting, many TYPE-BASED features

2478



are important, including those indicating how of-
ten the verb type occurs with adverbs of manner,
negation and in-PPs in the background corpus.
For the combined three-way task, we found the
main verb’s lemma and the direct object to have
most impact. Of the TYPE-BASED features, the
for-PP, present and temporal adverbial were most
important. In the UNSEEN VERBS setting, many
linguistic indicator features (among others past,
progressive, negation) play a greater role, as well
as information about the object, subject and tense.

7 Conclusion

In this paper, we have presented an approach for
classifying the aspect of a clause as habitual,
episodic or static. Clearly, when exhaustively
classifying all clauses of a text, the static class
cannot be ignored; we have shown that we can sep-
arate these instances from episodic and habitual
instances, most of which are lexically dynamic,
with high accuracy. Our model for distinguishing
episodic and habitual sentences integrates a wide
range of contextual information and outperforms
previous work. Previous work has only addressed
the classification of lexical aspectual class and the
automatic distinction of episodic and habitual sen-
tences. Our work is the first bringing together two
strands of work relevant to classifying clausal as-
pect, and we have shown that sources of informa-
tion relevant to these two underlying aspectual dis-
tinctions are relevant for our three-way classifica-
tion task.

We have shown that for distinguishing static
sentences from the other two, TYPE-BASED
and CONTEXT-BASED information is needed;
for distinguishing episodic and habitual clauses,
CONTEXT-BASED features are most important.
Our experimental results show that the three-way
classification task is most effectively approached
by combining both contextual and verb-type based
information. Especially for verbs unseen in the
training data, we found the CASCADED approach
to work better. It is hard for the JOINT approach to
identify habitual clauses; while in the CASCADED
approach, performance for both steps is high and
adds up.

We found the overall performance of this task to
be about 80% accuracy, and 75% macro-average
F1-score. These scores suggest that this method
may be usable as a preprocessing step for further
temporal processing.

8 Future work

Our models do not yet take discourse information
into account. Consider example (14) by Mathew
and Katz (2009): The second sentence is habitual,
but the only indicator for this is sentence-external.

(14) John rarely ate fruit. He just ate oranges.
(habitual)

In some preliminary experiments, we tried to
leverage the discourse context of a clause for its
classification by means of incorporating the gold
standard label of the previous clause as a feature.
This did not result in significant performance im-
provements. However, further experiments trying
to incorporate discourse information are due, and,
due to our new corpus of fully annotated texts,
now possible.

Another related research direction is the clas-
sification of the different types of static clauses,
e.g., the different senses of modality (Ruppenhofer
and Rehbein, 2012). As mentioned before, a finer
classification of the temporal structure of clauses
is needed, among others identifying the lexical as-
pectual class as well as viewpoint aspect as perfec-
tive vs. imperfective (Smith, 1997).

Finally, the next steps in this line of research are
to integrate the aspectual information attributed to
clauses by our model into models of temporal dis-
course structure, which in turn are useful for infor-
mation extraction and text understanding tasks in
general. Costa and Branco (2012) are the first to
show that aspectual information is relevant here;
we hope to show in the future that temporal pro-
cessing profits from integrating more fine-grained
aspectual information.

Acknowledgments

We thank the anonymous reviewers, Alexis
Palmer, Alessandra Zarcone and Andrea Horbach
for their helpful comments related to this work,
Graham Katz for providing us with their data
set, and our annotators Christine Bocionek, Kleio-
Isidora Mavridou and Melissa Peate Sørensen.
This research was supported in part by the Clus-
ter of Excellence “Multimodal Computing and
Interaction” of the German Excellence Initiative
(DFG), and the first author is supported by an IBM
PhD Fellowship.

2479



References
Leo Breiman. 2001. Random forests. Machine learn-

ing, 45(1):5–32.

Greg Carlson, 2005. The Encyclopedia of Language
and Linguistics, chapter Generics, Habituals and It-
eratives. Elsevier.

Francisco Costa and António Branco. 2012. Aspec-
tual type and temporal relation classification. In
Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 266–275. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Östen Dahl. 1985. Tense and aspect systems. Oxford,
Blackwell.

Östen Dahl. 1995. The marking of the
generic/episodic distinction in tense-aspect systems.
The generic book, pages 412–425.

Annemarie Friedrich and Alexis Palmer. 2014. Auto-
matic prediction of aspectual class of verbs in con-
text. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL). Baltimore, USA.

Andrew Garrett. 1998. On the origin of auxiliary do.
English Language and Linguistics, 2(02):283–330.

Valentine Hacquard. 2009. On the interaction of aspect
and modal auxiliaries. Linguistics and Philosophy,
32(3):279–315.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H. Witten.
2009. The WEKA data mining software: an update.
ACM SIGKDD explorations newsletter, 11(1):10–
18.

Graham Katz. 2003. On the stativity of the English
perfect. Perfect explorations, pages 205–234.

Dan Klein and Christopher D Manning. 2002. Fast ex-
act inference with a factored model for natural lan-
guage parsing. In Advances in neural information
processing systems, pages 3–10.

Manfred Krifka, Carlson Gregory N Pelletier, Fran-
cis Jeffry, Alice ter Meulen, Gennaro Chierchia, and
Godehard Link. 1995. Genericity: An introduction.
The generic book, pages 1–124.

J Richard Landis and Gary G Koch. 1977. The mea-
surement of observer agreement for categorical data.
biometrics, pages 159–174.

Hector Llorens, Nathanael Chambers, Naushad Uz-
Zaman, Nasrin Mostafazadeh, James Allen, and
James Pustejovsky. 2015. SemEval-2015 Task 5:
QA TEMPEVAL - Evaluating Temporal Informa-
tion Understanding with Question Answering. In
9th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation
(SemEval 2015), pages 46–54, Denver, Colorado.

Sharid Loaiciga, Thomas Meyer, and Andrei Popescu-
Belis. 2014. English-French Verb Phrase Align-
ment in Europarl. In Proceedings of LREC 2014.

Mitchell P Marcus, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz, and
Beatrice Santorini. 1993. Building a large anno-
tated corpus of english: The penn treebank. Compu-
tational linguistics, 19(2):313–330.

Thomas A. Mathew and Graham E. Katz. 2009. Su-
pervised categorization for habitual versus episodic
sentences. In Sixth Midwest Computational Lin-
gustics Colloquium, Bloomington, Indiana. Indiana
University.

Thomas A. Mathew. 2009. Supervised categorization
for habitual versus episodic sentences. Master’s the-
sis, Faculty of the Graduate School of Arts and Sci-
ences of Georgetown University.

Paula Menéndez-Benito. 2012. On dispositional sen-
tences. Genericity, 43:276.

George A Miller. 1995. Wordnet: a lexical
database for english. Communications of the ACM,
38(11):39–41.

Josef Ruppenhofer and Ines Rehbein. 2012. Yes we
can!? annotating the senses of english modal verbs.
In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC),
pages 24–26.

Eric V Siegel and Kathleen R McKeown. 2000.
Learning methods to combine linguistic indica-
tors: Improving aspectual classification and reveal-
ing linguistic insights. Computational Linguistics,
26(4):595–628.

Carlota S. Smith. 1997. The Parameter of Aspect,
volume 43 of Studies in Linguistics and Philosophy.
Springer.

Ian Soboroff and Donna Harman. 2005. Nov-
elty detection: The trec experience. In Proceed-
ings of Human Language Technology Conference
and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 105–112, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada, October. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Radu Soricut and Daniel Marcu. 2003. Sentence level
discourse parsing using syntactic and lexical infor-
mation. In Proceedings of the 2003 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics on Human Language
Technology-Volume 1, pages 149–156. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Benjamin D Van Durme. 2010. Extracting implicit
knowledge from text. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Rochester.

Zeno Vendler, 1957. Linguistics in Philosophy, chapter
Verbs and Times, pages 97–121. Cornell University
Press, Ithaca, New York.

2480



Jennifer Williams and Graham Katz. 2012. Extracting
and modeling durations for habits and events from
twitter. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: Short Papers - Volume 2, ACL ’12, pages 223–
227, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Jennifer Williams. 2012. Extracting fine-grained dura-
tions for verbs from twitter. In Proceedings of ACL
2012 Student Research Workshop, pages 49–54. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Nianwen Xue and Yuchen Zhang. 2014. Buy one get
one free: Distant annotation of chinese tense, event
type, and modality. Proceedings of LREC-2014,
Reykjavik, Iceland.

Alessandra Zarcone and Alessandro Lenci. 2008.
Computational models for event type classification
in context. In LREC.

2481


