



















































What Your Username Says About You


Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2032–2037,
Lisbon, Portugal, 17-21 September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.

What Your Username Says About You

Aaron Jaech and Mari Ostendorf
Dept. of Electrical Engineering

University of Washington
{ajaech,ostendor}@uw.edu

Abstract

Usernames are ubiquitous on the Internet,
and they are often suggestive of user de-
mographics. This work looks at the de-
gree to which gender and language can
be inferred from a username alone by
making use of unsupervised morphology
induction to decompose usernames into
sub-units. Experimental results on the
two tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed morphological features com-
pared to a character n-gram baseline.

1 Introduction

There is much interest in automatic recognition
of demographic information of Internet users to
improve the quality of online interactions. Re-
searchers have looked into identifying a variety
of factors about users, including age, gender, lan-
guage, religious beliefs and political views. Most
work leverages multiple sources of information,
such as search query history, Twitter feeds, Face-
book likes, social network links, and user profiles.
However, in many situations, little of this infor-
mation is available. Conversely, usernames are al-
most always available.

In this work, we look specifically at classify-
ing gender and language based only on the user-
name. Prior work by sociologists has established
a link between usernames and gender (Cornetto
and Nowak, 2006), and studies have linked user-
names to other attributes, such as individual be-
liefs (Crabill, 2007; Hassa, 2012) and shown how
usernames shape perceptions of gender and eth-
nicity in the absence of common nonverbal cues
(Pelletier, 2014). The connections to ethnicity mo-
tivate the exploration of language identification.

Gender identification based on given names is
very effective for English (Liu and Ruths, 2013),
since many names are strongly associated with a

particular gender, like “Emily” or “Mark”. Unfor-
tunately, the requirement that each username be
unique precludes use of given names alone. In-
stead, usernames are typically a combination of
component words, names and numbers. For ex-
ample, the Twitter name @taylorswift13 might
decompose into “taylor”, “swift” and “13”. The
sub-units carry meaning and, importantly, they are
shared with many other individuals. Thus, our ap-
proach is to leverage automatic decomposition of
usernames into sub-units for use in classification.

We use the Morfessor algorithm (Creutz and
Lagus, 2006; Virpioja et al., 2013) for unsuper-
vised morphology induction to learn the decom-
position of the usernames into sub-units. Morfes-
sor has been used successfully in a variety of lan-
guage modeling frameworks applied to a number
of languages, particularly for learning concatena-
tive morphological structure. The usernames that
we analyze are a good match to the Morfessor
framework, which allows us to push the boundary
of how much can be done with only a username.

The classifier design is described in the next
section, followed by a description of experiments
on gender and language recognition that demon-
strate the utility of morph-based features com-
pared to character n-gram features. The paper
closes with a discussion of related work and a
summary of key findings.

2 General Classification Approach

2.1 Unsupervised Morphology Learning

In linguistics, a morpheme is the “minimal lin-
guistic unit with lexical or grammatical meaning”
(Booij, 2012). Morphemes are combined in vari-
ous ways to create longer words. Similarly, user-
names are frequently made up of a concatenated
sequence of smaller units. These sub-units will be
referred to as u-morphs to highlight the fact that
they play an analogous role to morphemes but for

2032



purposes of encoding usernames rather than stan-
dard words in a language. The u-morphs are sub-
units that are small enough to be shared across dif-
ferent usernames but retain some meaning.

Unsupervised morphology induction using
Morfessor (Creutz and Lagus, 2006) is based on
a minimum description length (MDL) objective,
which balances two competing goals: maximizing
both the likelihood of the data and of the model.
The likelihood of the data is maximized by longer
tokens and a bigger lexicon whereas the likeli-
hood of the model is maximized by a smaller lexi-
con with shorter tokens. A parameter controls the
trade-off between the two parts of the objective
function, which alters the average u-morph length.
We tune this parameter on held-out data to opti-
mize the classification performance of the demo-
graphic tasks.

Maximizing the Morfessor objective exactly is
computationally intractable. The Morfessor algo-
rithm searches for the optimal lexicon using an
iterative approach. First, the highest probability
decomposition for each training token is found
given the current model. Then, the model is up-
dated with the counts of the u-morphs. A u-
morph is added to the lexicon when it increases
the weighted likelihood of the data by more than
the cost of increasing the size of the lexicon.

Usernames can be mixed-case, e.g. “JohnDoe”.
The case change gives information about a likely
u-morph boundary, but at the cost of doubling the
size of the character set. To more effectively lever-
age this cue, all characters are made lowercase but
each change from lower to uppercase is marked
with a special token, e.g. “john$doe”. Using this
encoding reduces the u-morph inventory size, and
we found it to give slightly better results in lan-
guage identification.

Character 3-grams and 4-grams are used as
baseline features. Before extracting the n-grams
a “#” token is placed at the start and end of each
username. The n-grams are overlapping to give
them the best chance of finding a semantically
meaningful sub-unit.

2.2 Classifier Design

Given a decomposition of the username into a se-
quence of u-morphs (or character n-grams), we
represent the relationship between the observed
features and each class with a unigram language
model. If a username u has decomposition

m1, . . . ,mn then it is assigned to the class ci for
which the unigram model gives it the highest pos-
terior probability, or equivalently:

argmaxi pC(ci)
n∏

k=1

p(mk|ci),

where pC(ci) is the class prior and p(mk|ci) is the
class-dependent unigram.1

For some demographics, the class prior can be
very skewed, as in the case of language detec-
tion where English is the dominant language. The
choice of smoothing algorithm can be important in
such cases, since minority classes have much less
training data for estimating the language model
and benefit from having more probability mass as-
signed to unseen words. Here, we follow the ap-
proach proposed in (Frank and Bouckaert, 2006)
that normalizes the token count vectors for each
class to have the same L1 norm, specifically:

p(mk|ci) = 1
Z

(
1 +

β · n(mk, ci)
n(ci)

)
,

where n(·) indicates counts and β controls the
strength of the smoothing. Setting β equal to
the number of training examples approximately
matches the strength of the smoothing to the add-
one-smoothing algorithm. Z = β + |M | is a con-
stant to make the probabilities sum to one.

Only a small portion of usernames on the In-
ternet come with gender labels. In these situa-
tions, semi-supervised learning algorithms can use
the unlabeled data to improve the performance of
the classifier. We use a self-training expectation-
maximization (EM) algorithm similar to that de-
scribed in (Nigam et al., 2000). The algorithm
first learns a classifier on the labeled data. In the
E-step, the classifier assigns probabilistic labels to
the unlabeled data. In the M-step, the labeled data
and the probabilistic labels are combined to learn
a new classifier. These steps are iterated until con-
vergence, which usually requires three iterations
for our tasks.

1Note that the unigram model used here, which consid-
ers only the observed u-morphs or n-grams, is not the same
as using a Naive Bayes (NB) classifier based on a vector
of u-morph counts. In the former, unobserved u-morphs do
not impact the class-dependent probability, whereas the zero
counts do impact the probability for the NB classifier. Since
the vast majority of possible u-morphs are unobserved in a
username, it is better to base the decision only on the ob-
served u-morphs. The n-gram model is actually a unigram
with an n-gram “vocabulary” rather than an n-gram language
model.

2033



Nigam et al. (2000) call their method EM-λ be-
cause it uses a parameter λ to reduce the weight
of the unlabeled examples relative to the labeled
data. This is important because the independence
assumptions of the unigram model lead to over-
confident predictions. We used another method
that directly corrects the estimated posterior prob-
abilities. Using a small validation set, we binned
the probability estimates and calculated the true
class probability for each bin. The EM algorithm
used the corrected probabilities for each bin for
the unlabeled data during the maximization step.
Samples with a prediction confidence of less than
60% are not used for training.

3 Experiments

3.1 Gender Identification

Data was collected from the OkCupid dating site
by downloading up to 1,000 profiles from 27 cities
in the United States, first for men seeking women
and again for women seeking men to obtain a bal-
anced set of 44,000 usernames. The data is parti-
tioned into three sets with 80% assigned to train-
ing and 10% each to validation and test. We also
use 3.5M usernames from the photo messaging
app Snapchat (McCormick, 2014): 1.5M are used
for u-morph learning and 2M are for self-training.
All names in this task used only lower case, due to
the nature of the available data.

Male Female

u-morph
guy, mike,
matt, josh

girl, marie,
lady, miss

trigram
guy, uy#,
kev, joe

irl, gir,
grl, emm

Table 1: Top Gender Identification Features

The top features ranked by likelihood ratios
are given in Table 1. The u-morphs clearly carry
semantic meaning, and the trigram features ap-
pear to be substrings of the top u-morph fea-
tures. The trigram features have an advantage
when the u-morphs are under-segmented such as
if the u-morph “niceguy” or “thatguy” is included
in the lexicon. Conversely, the n-grams can suf-
fer from over-segmentation. For example, the tri-
gram “guy” is inside the surname “Nguyen” even
though it is better to ignore that substring in this
context. Many other tokens suffer from this prob-
lem, e.g. “miss” is in “mission”.

The variable-length u-morphs are longer on av-
erage than the character n-grams (4.9 characters).
The u-morph inventory size is similar to that for
3-grams but 5-10 times smaller than the 4-gram
inventory, depending on the amount of data used
since the inventory is expanded in semi-supervised
training. By using the MDL criterion in unsuper-
vised morphology learning, the u-morphs provide
a more efficient representation of usernames than
n-grams and make it easier to control the trade-
off between vocabulary size and average segment
length. The smaller inventory is less sensitive to
sparse data in language model training.

Error Rate
Features Supervised Self-Training
3-gram 28.7% 32.0%
4-gram 28.7% 29.4%

u-morph 27.8% 25.8%

Table 2: Gender Classification Results

The experiment results are presented in Table 2.
For the supervised learning method, the character
3-gram and 4-gram features give equivalent per-
formance, and the u-morph features give the low-
est error rate by a small amount (3% relative).
More significantly, the character n-gram systems
do not benefit from semi-supervised learning, but
the u-morph features do. The semi-supervised
u-morph features obtain an error rate of 25.8%,
which represents a 10% relative reduction over the
baseline character n-gram results.

3.2 Language Identification on Twitter

This experiment takes usernames from the Twitter
streaming API. Each username is associated with
a tweet, for which the Twitter API identifies a lan-
guage. The language labels are noisy, so we re-
move approximately 35% of the tweets where the
Twitter API does not agree with the langid.py clas-
sifier (Lui and Baldwin, 2012). Both training and
test sets are restricted to the nine languages that
comprise at least 1% of the training set. These
languages cover 96% of the observed tweets (see
Table 4). About 110,000 usernames were reserved
for testing and 430,000 were used for training
both u-morphs and the classifier. Semi-supervised
methods are not used because of the abundant la-
beled data. For each language, we train a one-vs.-
all classifier. The mixed case encoding technique
(see sec. 2.1) gives a small increase (0.5%) in the

2034



Model Prec. Recall F1
4-gram .67 .75 .70

u-morph .77 .67 .71
Combination .73 .73 .73

Table 3: Precision, recall and F1 score for lan-
guage identification using the 4-gram, u-morph
representations and a combination system, averag-
ing over all users.

accuracy of the model and reduces the u-morph
model size by 5%.

The results in Tables 3 and 4 contrast sys-
tems using 4-grams, u-morphs, and a combina-
tion model, showing precision-recall trade-offs for
all users together and F1 scores broken down by
specific languages, respectively. The combina-
tion system simply uses the average of the pos-
terior log-probabilities for each class giving equal
weight to each model. While the overall F1 scores
are similar for the 4-gram and u-morph systems,
their precision and recall trade-offs are quite dif-
ferent, making them effective in combination. The
4-gram system has higher recall, and the u-morph
system has higher precision. With the combina-
tion, we obtain a substantial gain in precision over
the 4-gram system with a modest loss in recall, re-
sulting in a 3% absolute improvement in average
F1 score.

Looking at performance on the different lan-
guages, we find that the F1 score for the combi-
nation model is higher than the 4-gram for every
language, with precision always improving. For
the dominant languages, the difference in recall
is negligible. The infrequent languages have a 4-
8% drop in recall, but the gains in precision are
substantial for these languages, ranging from 50-
100% relative. The greatest contrast between the
4-gram and the combination system can be seen
for the least frequent languages, i.e. the languages
with the least amount of training data. In partic-
ular, for French, the precision of the combination
system (0.36) is double that of the 4-gram model
(0.18) with only a 34% loss in recall (0.24 to 0.16).

Looking at the most important features from
the classifier highlights the ability of the mor-
phemes to capture relevant meaning. The pres-
ence of the morpheme “juan”, “jose” or “flor” in-
crease the probability of a Spanish language tweet
by five times. The same is true for Portuguese
and the morpheme “bieber”. The morpheme “q8”

Language Freq 4-gr u-m Comb
English 43.5 .78 .78 .79

Japanese 21.6 .75 .76 .77
Spanish 15.1 .66 .65 .68
Arabic 7.9 .66 .65 .68

Portuguese 6.2 .50 .55 .58
Russian 1.8 .40 .58 .45
Turkish 1.8 .59 .36 .65
French 1.1 .18 .13 .22

Indonesian 1.1 .34 .30 .43

Table 4: Language identification performance (F1
Scores) and relative frequency in the corpus for
4-gram (4-gr) and u-morph (u-m) representations
and the combination system (Comb).

increases the odds of an Arabic language tweet
by thirteen times due to its phonetic similarity to
the name of the Arabic speaking country Kuwait.
Other features may simply reflect cultural norms.
For example, having an underscore in the user-
name makes it five percent less likely to observe an
English tweet. These highly discriminative mor-
phemes are both long and short. It is hard for the
fixed-length n-grams to capture this information as
well as the morphemes do.

4 Related Work

Of the many studies on automatic classification
of online user demographics, few have leveraged
names or usernames at all, and the few that do
mainly explore their use in combination with other
features. The work presented here differs in its use
of usernames alone, but more importantly in the
introduction of morphological analysis to handle a
large number of usernames.

Two studies on gender recognition are particu-
larly relevant. Burger et al. (2011) use the Twitter
username (or screen name) in combination with
other profile and text features to predict gender,
but they also look at the use of username features
alone. The results are not directly comparable to
ours, because of differences in the data set used
(150k Twitter users) and the classifier framework
(Winnow), but the character n-gram performance
is similar to ours (21-22% different from the ma-
jority baseline). The study uses over 400k char-
acter n-grams (n=1-5) for screen names alone; our
study indicatess that the u-morphs can reduce this
number by a factor of 10. Burger et al. (2011)
used the same strategy with the self-identified full

2035



name of the user as entered into their profile,
obtaining 89% gender recognition (vs. 77% for
screen names). Later, Liu and Ruths (2013) use
the full first name from a user’s profile for gender
detection, finding that for the names that are highly
predictive of gender, performance improves by re-
lying on this feature alone. However, more than
half of the users have a name that has an unknown
gender association. Manual inspection of these
cases indicated that the majority includes strings
formed like usernames, nicknames or other types
of word concatenations. These examples are pre-
cisely what the u-morph approach tries to address.

Language identification is an active area of re-
search (Bergsma et al., 2012; Zubiaga et al.,
2014), but the username has not been used as a
feature. Again, results are difficult to compare
due to the lack of a common test set, but it is no-
table that the average F1 score for the combination
model approaches the scores obtained on a similar
Twitter language identification task where the al-
gorithm has access to the full text of the tweet (Lui
and Baldwin, 2014): 73% vs. 77% .

A study that is potentially relevant to our work
is automatic classification of ethnicity of Twit-
ter users, specifically whether a user is African-
American (Pennacchiotti and Popescu, 2011).
Again, a variety of content, profile and behav-
ioral features are used. Orthographic features of
the username are used (e.g. length, number of nu-
meric/alpha characters), and names of users that
a person retweets or replies to. The profile name
features do not appear to be useful, but examples
of related usernames point to the utility of our ap-
proach for analysis of names in other fields.

5 Conclusions

In summary, this paper has introduced the use
of unsupervised morphological analysis of user-
names to extract features (u-morphs) for identi-
fying user demographics, particularly gender and
language. The experimental results demonstrate
that usernames contain useful personal informa-
tion, and that the u-morphs provide a more effi-
cient and complementary representation than char-
acter n-grams.2 The result for language identifi-
cation is particularly remarkable because it comes
close to matching the performance achieved by us-

2In order to allow the replicability of the experiments,
software and data for building and evaluating our classifiers
using pre-trained Morfessor models is available at http:
//github.com/ajaech/username_analytics.

ing the full text of a tweet. The work is com-
plementary to other demographic studies in that
the username prediction can be used together with
other features, both for the user and members of
his/her social network.

The methods proposed here could be extended
in different directions. The unsupervised morphol-
ogy learning algorithm could incorporate priors
related to capitalization and non-alphabetic char-
acters to better model these phenomena than our
simple text normalization approach. More so-
phisticated classifiers could also be used, such as
variable-length n-grams or neural-network-based
n-gram language models, as opposed to the uni-
gram model used here. Of course the sophistica-
tion of the classifier will be limited by the amount
of training data available.

A large amount of data is not necessary to build
a high precision username classifier. For example,
less than 7,000 training examples were available
for Turkish in the language identification exper-
iment and the classifier had a precision of 76%.
Since little data is required, there may be many
more applications of this type of model.

Prior work on unsupervised morphological in-
duction focused on applying the algorithm to natu-
ral language input. By using those techniques with
a new type of input, this paper shows that there are
other applications of morphology learning.

References
Shane Bergsma, Paul McNamee, Mossaab Bagdouri,

Clayton Fink, and Theresa Wilson. 2012. Language
identification for creating language-specific twitter
collections. In Proc. second workshop on language
in social media, pages 65–74.

G. Booij. 2012. The Grammar of Words: An Introduc-
tion to Linguistic Morphology. Oxford Textbooks in
Linguistics. OUP Oxford.

John D Burger, John Henderson, George Kim, and
Guido Zarrella. 2011. Discriminating gender on
Twitter. In Proc. Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 1301–1309.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Karen M. Cornetto and Kristine L. Nowak. 2006. Uti-
lizing usernames for sex categorization in computer-
mediated communication: Examining perceptions
and accuracy. CyberPsychology & Behavior 9.4,
pages 377–387.

Scott L Crabill. 2007. Comparative content analysis of
social identity cues within a white supremacist dis-

2036



cussion board and a social activist discussion board.
Ph.D. thesis, Wayne State University.

Mathias Creutz and Krista Lagus. 2006. Morfessor in
the morpho challenge. In Proc. PASCAL Challenge
Workshop on Unsupervised Segmentation of Words
into Morphemes.

Eibe Frank and Remco R Bouckaert. 2006.
Naive Bayes for text classification with unbalanced
classes. In Proc. KDD, pages 503–510.

Samira Hassa. 2012. Projecting, exposing, revealing
self in the digital world: Usernames as a social prac-
tice in a Moroccan chatroom. Names, 60(4):201–
209.

Wendy Liu and Derek Ruths. 2013. What’s in a name?
using first names as features for gender inference in
Twitter. In Proc. AAAI Spring Symposium, pages
10–16.

Marco Lui and Timothy Baldwin. 2012. langid. py:
An off-the-shelf language identification tool. In
Proc. ACL 2012 System Demonstrations, pages 25–
30.

Marco Lui and Timothy Baldwin. 2014. Accurate lan-
guage identification of Twitter messages. Proc. 5th
Workshop on Language Analysis for Social Media
(LASM)@ EACL, pages 17–25.

Rich McCormick. 2014. 4.6 million snapchat phone
numbers and usernames leaked, January.

Kamal Nigam, Andrew Kachites McCallum, Sebastian
Thrun, and Tom Mitchell. 2000. Text classification
from labeled and unlabeled documents using EM.
Machine learning, 39(2-3):103–134.

Laura Pelletier. 2014. You’ve got mail: Identity per-
ceptions based on email usernames. Journal of Un-
dergraduate Research at Minnesota State Univer-
sity, Mankato, 9.1(13).

Marco Pennacchiotti and Ana-Maria Popescu. 2011.
A machine learning approach to Twitter user classi-
fication. In Proc. AAAI Conference on Weblogs and
Social Media, pages 281–288.

Sami Virpioja, Peter Smit, Stig-Arne Grönroos, Mikko
Kurimo, et al. 2013. Morfessor 2.0: Python imple-
mentation and extensions for morfessor baseline.

Arkaitz Zubiaga, Inaki San Vicente, Pablo Gamallo,
José Ramom Pichel, Inaki Alegria, Nora Aranberri,
Aitzol Ezeiza, and Vıctor Fresno. 2014. Overview
of TweetLID: Tweet language identification at SE-
PLN 2014. Proceedings of the Tweet Language
Identification Workshop.

2037


