



















































Improved Arabic Dialect Classification with Social Media Data


Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2118–2126,
Lisbon, Portugal, 17-21 September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.

Improved Arabic Dialect Classification with Social Media Data

Fei Huang
Facebook Inc.

Menlo Park, CA
feihuang@fb.com

Abstract

Arabic dialect classification has been an
important and challenging problem for
Arabic language processing, especially for
social media text analysis and machine
translation. In this paper we propose
an approach to improving Arabic dialect
classification with semi-supervised learn-
ing: multiple classifiers are trained with
weakly supervised, strongly supervised,
and unsupervised data. Their combination
yields significant and consistent improve-
ment on two different test sets. The dialect
classification accuracy is improved by 5%
over the strongly supervised classifier and
20% over the weakly supervised classifier.
Furthermore, when applying the improved
dialect classifier to build a Modern Stan-
dard Arabic (MSA) language model (LM),
the new model size is reduced by 70%
while the English-Arabic translation qual-
ity is improved by 0.6 BLEU point.

1 Introduction

As more and more users share increasing amount
of information on various social media platforms
(Facebook, Twitter, etc.), text analysis for so-
cial media language is getting more important
and challenging. When people share their sto-
ries, opinions, post comments or tweets on so-
cial media platforms, they frequently use collo-
quial languages, which are more similar to spo-
ken languages. In addition to typical natural lan-
guage processing problems, the informal nature of
social media languages presents additional chal-
lenges, such as frequent spelling errors, improper
casing, internet slang, spontaneity, dis-fluency and

ungrammatical utterances (Eisenstein, 2014). Di-
alect classification and dialect-specific processing
are extra challenges for languages such as Arabic
and Chinese.

Considering Arabic as an example: there are
big differences between MSA and various dialec-
tal Arabic: MSA is the standardized and literary
variety of Arabic used in writing and in most for-
mal speech.1 It is widely used in government pro-
ceedings, newspapers and product manuals. Many
research and linguistic resources for Arabic nat-
ural language processing are based on MSA. For
example, most existing Arabic-English bilingual
data are MSA-English parallel sentences. The di-
alect Arabic has more varieties: 5 major dialects
are spoken in different regions of the Arab world:
Egyptian, Gulf, Iraqi, Levantine and Maghrebi
(Zaidan and Callison-Burch, 2011). These dialects
differ in morphologies, grammatical cases, vocab-
ularies and verb conjugations. These differences
call for dialect-specific processing and modeling
when building Arabic automatic speech recogni-
tion (ASR) systems or machine translation (MT)
systems. Therefore, identification and classifica-
tion of Arabic text is fundamental for building so-
cial media Arabic speech and language processing
systems.

In order to build better MT systems between
Arabic and English, we first analyze the distri-
bution of different Arabic dialects appearing on a
very large scale social media platform, as well as
their effect on Arabic-English machine translation.
We propose several methods to improve the dialect
classification accuracy by training models with
distant supervision: a weakly supervised model
is trained with data whose labels are automati-

1http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modern_
Standard_Arabic

2118



cally assigned based on authors’ geographical in-
formation. A strongly supervised model is trained
with manually annotated data. More importantly,
semi-supervised learning on large amount of unla-
beled data effectively increases the classification
accuracy. We also combine different classifiers
to achieve even bigger improvement. When eval-
uated on two test sets, the widely adopted Ara-
bic Online Commentary (AOC) corpus and a test
set created from the social media domain (Face-
book), our methods demonstrate an absolute 20%
improvement over the weakly supervised classi-
fier, and 5% over the strongly supervised classi-
fier. Furthermore, the improved classifier is ap-
plied on large amount of Arabic social media text
to filter out non-MSA data. An LM trained with
the cleaned data is used for English-Arabic (MSA)
translation. Compared with the baseline model
trained with the unfiltered data, the MSA LM re-
duces the training data by 85%, model size by
70%, and it brings 0.6 BLEU point (Papineni et
al., 2002) gain in MT.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows:
in section 2 we review previous research on this
topic. In section 3 we analyze the dialect distri-
bution and its impact on social media data transla-
tion. We present the problem formulation in sec-
tion 4. In section 5 we introduce two supervised
classifiers trained with weakly and strongly la-
beled data. We describe different semi-supervised
learning methods in section 6, followed by the
combination of multiple classifiers in section 7. In
section 8 we show the experimental results on di-
alect classification as well as machine translation.
The paper finishes with discussions and conclu-
sion in section 9.

2 Related Work

Previous research on Arabic dialect identification
focused on two problems: spoken dialect classi-
fication for speech recognition ((Novotney et al.,
2011) and (Lei and Hansen, 2011)), and writ-
ten text dialect classification mostly for machine
translation. (Habash and Rambow, 2006), (Habash
et al., 2008), (Diab et al., 2010) and (Elfardy and
Diab, 2012) developed annotation guidelines and
morphology analyzer for Arabic dialect.

(Zaidan and Callison-Burch, 2011) created the
AOC data set by extracting reader commentary
from online Arabic newspaper forums. The se-
lected Arabic sentences are manually labeled with

one of 4 dialect labels with the help of crowd
sourcing: Egyptian, Gulf, Iraqi and Levantine. A
dialect classifier using unigram features is trained
from the labeled data. In the BOLT (Broad Oper-
ational Language Translation) project, translation
from dialectal Arabic (especially Egyptian Arabic)
to English is a main problem. (Elfardy and Diab,
2013) uses the same labeled AOC data to generate
token-based features and perplexity-based features
for sentence level dialect identification between
MSA and Egyptian Arabic. (Tillmann et al., 2014)
trained feature-rich linear classifier based on lin-
ear SVM then evaluated the classification between
MSA and Egyptian Arabic, reporting 1.4% im-
provement. All these experiments are based on the
AOC corpus. The characteristics and distribution
of the Arabic dialects could be different for online
social media data. (Darwish et al., 2014) selected
Twitter data and developed models taking consid-
eration of lexical, morphological, and phonologi-
cal information from different dialects, then classi-
fied Egyptian and MSA Arabic tweets. (Cotterell
and Callison-Burch, 2014) collected dialect data
covering Iraqi and Maghrebi Arabic from Twitter
as well.

When translating Arabic dialect into English,
(Sawaf, 2010) and (Salloum and Habash, 2011)
normalized dialect words into MSA equivalents
considering character- and morpheme-level fea-
tures, then translated the normalized input with
MSA Arabic-English MT system. (Zbib et al.,
2012) used crowd sourcing to build Levantine-
English and Egyptian-English parallel data. Even
with small amount of parallel corpora for each di-
alect, they obtained significant gains (6-7 BLEU
pts) over a baseline MSA-English MT system.

3 Social Media Arabic Dialect
Distribution and Translation

The population speaking a dialect does not nec-
essarily reflect its popularity on internet and so-
cial media. Many factors, such as a country’s
social-economic development status, internet ac-
cess and government policy, play important roles.
To understand the distribution of Arabic dialects
on social media, we select data from the largest so-
cial media platform, Facebook. There are around
one billion users sharing content in 60+ languages
every day. The Arabic content comes from dif-
ferent regions of the Arabic world, representative
enough for our analysis. We randomly select 2700

2119



Figure 1: Distribution of various Arabic dialect on
the social media platform

sentences from public posts, then ask human an-
notators to label their dialect types2. The result
is shown in Figure 1. Not surprisingly, MSA is
the most widely used, accounting for 58% of sen-
tences. Besides that, Egyptian Arabic is the most
frequent dialect (34%), followed by Levantine and
Gulf. Maghrebi is the least frequent. There are
other sentences which are not labeled as Arabic
dialect, such as classical Arabic, verses from the
Quran, foreign words and their transliterations,
etc.

We also investigate the effect of different di-
alects on Arabic-English translation. We ask hu-
mans to translate the Arabic sentences into En-
glish to create reference translations. We build a
phrase-based Arabic-English MT system with 1M
sentence pairs selected from MSA Arabic-English
parallel corpora (UN corpus, Arabic news corpus,
etc.).3 The training and decoding procedures are
similar to those described in (Koehn et al., 2007).
More details about the MT system are given in
section 8. We group the source Arabic sentences
into different subsets based on their dialect labels,
then translate them with the MT system. We mea-
sure the BLEU score for each subset, as shown in
Figure 2. As expected the MSA subset has the
highest BLEU scores (18), followed by the Gulf
dialect, which is somewhat similar to MSA. The
translation of the Egyptian and Levantine dialects
is more challenging, with BLEU scores around 10-
12, even though they are 40% of the total Arabic
data. To improve Arabic-English MT quality, in-
creasing the bilingual data coverage for these two
dialects should be most effective, as seen in (Zbib

2The data was annotated by a translation service provider
under confidentiality agreement.

3Because existing Arabic-English bilingual corpora do
not include parallel data from social media domain, increas-
ing training data size does not increase the translation quality.

Figure 2: BLEU scores of different Arabic dialects
in Arabic-English translation. The MT model is
trained with mostly MSA-English parallel data.

et al., 2012). Because the Maghrebi dialect sam-
ple size is too small, we do not report its BLEU
score. From these experiments, we further appre-
ciate the importance of accurately identifying Ara-
bic dialect and building dialect-specific translation
models.

4 Problem Formulation

In this section we present the general framework
of dialect classification. Given a sentence S =
{w1, w2, .., wl} generated by user u, its dialect
class label d∗ is determined based on the following
functions:

d∗ = arg max
i
P (di|S, u),

where the probability function is defined accord-
ing to the following exponential model:

P (di|S, u) = exp
∑

k λkfk(di, ·)∑
j exp

∑
k λkfk(dj , ·)

d∗ = arg max
i

∑
k

λkfk(di, ·).

Here fk(di, ·) is the k-th feature function. For ex-
ample. f(di, u) models the likelihood of writing
dialect di by user u given the user’s profile infor-
mation. f(di, S) models the likelihood of generat-
ing sentence S with di’s n-gram language model:

f(di, S) = log p(S|di)

=
l∑

k=1

log pdi(wk|wk−1, ..., wk−n+1).

This framework allows the incorporation of rich
feature functions such as geographical, lexical,

2120



Figure 3: Arabic dialect map, from (Zaidan and
Callison-Burch, 2011).

morphological and n-gram information, as seen in
previous work ((Zaidan and Callison-Burch, 2011)
, (Darwish et al., 2014), (Tillmann et al., 2014) and
(Elfardy and Diab, 2013)). However, in this paper
we focus on training classifiers with weakly and
strongly labeled data, as well as semi-supervised
learning methods. So we only choose the geo-
graphical and text-based features. Exploration of
other features will be reported in another paper.

Previous research (Zaidan and Callison-Burch,
2014) indicated that the unigram model obtains
the best accuracy in dialect classification. How-
ever, (Tillmann et al., 2014) and (Darwish et al.,
2014) exploited more sophisticated text features
that lead to better accuracy on selected test set. In
our experiments, we find that the unigram model
does outperform bigram and trigram models, so
we stick to the unigram features.

5 Supervised Learning

5.1 Learning with Weakly Labeled Data

In the chosen social media platform, each user is
associated with a unique profile, which includes
user-specific information such as the age and gen-
der of the user, the country where s/he is from, etc..
As different Arabic dialects are spoken in differ-
ent countries, one approach is to classify a post’s
dialect type based on the author’s country, assum-
ing that there is at least a major dialect spoken in
each country. This approach is not highly accu-
rate, because the user’s country information may
be missing or inaccurate; one dialect may be spo-
ken in multiple countries (for example, Egyptian
is very popular in different regions of the Arabic
world) and multiple dialects may be spoken in the
same country; the user can post in MSA instead

of dialect Arabic or a mixture of both. However,
using data from certain countries as the “approxi-
mate” dialect training data, we can train a baseline
classifier. As the training data labels are inferred
from user profiles instead of manually annotated,
such data is called weakly labeled data.

According to the dialect map shown in Fig.3,
we group the social media posts into the following
5 dialects according to the author’s country:

1. Egyptian: Egypt
2. Gulf : Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirate,

Qatar, Bahrain, Oman, Yemen
3. Levantine: Syrian, Jordan, Palestinian,

Lebanese
4. Iraqi: Iraq
5. Maghrebi: Algeria, Libya, Tunisia, Morocco

Table 1 shows the number of words for each di-
alect group. Considering the dialect distribution
in the social media platform (shown in Figure 1),
we focus on the classification of MSA (msa) and
3 Arabic dialects: Egyptian (egy), Gulf (gul) and
Levantine (lev).

We train an n-gram model for each dialect from
the collected data. To train the MSA model, we
select sentences from Arabic UN corpus and news
collections. All the dialect and MSA models share
the same vocabulary, thus perplexity can be com-
pared properly. At classification time, given an in-
put sentence, the classifier computes the perplex-
ity for each dialect type and choose the one with
minimum perplexity as the label.

Dialect Weakly Labeled Strongly Labeled
egy 22M 0.45M
gul 6M 0.34M
lev 8M 0.45M
msa 27M 1.34M
iraqi 3M 0.01M

Table 1: Corpus size (word count) of weakly
and strongly labeled data for supervised learning.
The weakly labeled dialect data is from Facebook
based on users’ country information. The strongly
labeled data is manually annotated from the AOC
corpus.

5.2 Learning with Strongly Labeled Data

In the AOC corpus, every sentence’s dialect type
is labeled by human annotators. As these labels

2121



are gold labels, the AOC corpus is strongly labeled
data. Because of the high cost of manual annota-
tion, the strongly labeled data is much less than the
weakly labeled data, but the higher quality makes
it possible to train a better classifier. Table 1 shows
the corpus size. Although over 50% data is MSA.
Egyptian, Gulf and Levantine dialects still have
significant presence while the Iraqi dialect has the
least labeled data. Such distribution is consistent
with what we observed from the social media data.
Using these strongly labeled data, we can train a
classifier that significant outperforms the weakly
supervised classifier.

6 Semi-supervised Learning

6.1 Self-training

Given the small amount of gold labeled data from
the AOC corpus and large amount of unlabeled
data from the social media platform, a natural
combination is semi-supervised learning. In other
words, by applying the strongly supervised clas-
sifier on the unlabeled data, we can obtain “auto-
matically labeled” dialect data that could further
improve the classification accuracy. From the so-
cial media platform we select additional Arabic
posts with a total of 646M words. The sizes of
the newly created dialect corpora are shown in Ta-
ble 2. Notice that the MSA data accounts for more
than 75% of all the labeled data. We train a new
classifier with these additional data. As the new
labels are only from the original strong classifier,
this is self-training.

6.2 Co-Training

Another approach for automatic labeling is co-
training (Blum and Mitchell, 1998). With two
classifier C1 and C2 classifying the same input
sentence S with labels l1 and l2, S is labeled as
l only if l1 = l2 = l. In other words, a sentence
is labeled and used to train a model only when the
two classifiers agree. In our experiment we use
both the weakly and strongly supervised classifiers
to classify the same unlabeled data. Table 2 lists
the sizes of the dialect corpora from co-training.
Compared with the self-training approach, the co-
training method filters out 25% data.

6.3 Data Filtering

Because of domain mismatch, even the strongly
supervised classifier does not achieve very high
accuracy on the social media test set, thus there is

Dialect Self-training Co-training Filter
egy 73M 54M 21M
gul 46M 5.1M 2.7M
lev 34M 11.7M 2.5M
msa 493M 406M 139M
All 646M 476M 165M

Table 2: The size of dialect corpora from semi-
supervised learning.

lots of noise in the automatically labeled data. To
filter this noise, we only keep the sentences whose
minimum perplexity score (corresponding to the
winning dialect label) is smaller than any other
perplexity score by a margin. Lower perplexity
means higher probability of generating the sen-
tence from the dialect model. In other words, sen-
tence S is assigned with label l and used in model
re-training if and only if perpl(S) < perpk(S) ×
threshold, for k 6= l. The threshold is selected
to optimize the classification accuracy on a tuning
set. Table 2 also shows the corpora size after fil-
tering. We can see that the filtered dialect is only
a quarter of the self-training data. We will com-
pare the three semi-supervised learning methods
and evaluate the gains to dialect classification.

7 Classifier Combination

Now we have 3 types of classifiers:

1. The weakly supervised classifier trained with
data whose labels are automatically assigned
according to author’s country;

2. The strongly supervised classifier trained
with human labeled data;

3. The semi-supervised classifier trained with
automatically classified data, with different
data selection methods.

How should we combine them to further improve
the classification accuracy?

One approach is data combination: simply
adding all the training data together to train a uni-
fied n-gram model for each dialect. This exper-
iment is straightforward but the performance is
suboptimal because the classifier will be domi-
nated by the model with the most training data,
even though its accuracy may not be the best.

The second approach is model combination:
we compute the model scores of the weakly su-
pervised (w), strongly supervised (s) and semi-
supervised (e) classifiers, then combines them

2122



with linear interpolation:

p(S|di) =
∑

m={w,m,e}
wmpm(S|di)

As the dialect n-gram perplexity is computed sep-
arately, the model weights wm can be tuned. In
our experiments we optimize them with a tuning
set from all the dialects.

8 Experiment Results

8.1 Dialect Classification
We already described the training data for super-
vised and semi-supervised classifiers in previous
sections. In this section we will compare their di-
alect classification accuracies. We select two test
sets: 9.5K sentences from the AOC corpus as the
AOC test set and 2.3K sentences from the Face-
book data set as the FB test set4. Both test sets
have the dialect of each sentence labeled by hu-
man. The accuracy is computed as the percentage
of sentences whose classified label is the same as
the human label. 90% of the AOC labeled data
are used for training the strongly supervised clas-
sifier, and the remaining 10% data containing 9.5K
sentences is for evaluation. We also keep 200 sen-
tences from the AOC corpus as the development
set to tune the model combination parameters.

Model AOC FB
weakly supervised 68.4% 48.5%
strongly supervised 83.4% 63.1%

semi-supervised 86.2% 67.7%
combination 87.8% 68.2%

Table 3: Arabic dialect classification accuracies
with the weakly and strongly supervised classi-
fiers, as well as the semi-supervised model.

In Table 3 we show the overall classification ac-
curacies of different models on both test sets. No-
tice that the weakly supervised classifier trained
with 68M words obtains 68% accuracy on the
AOC test set and 48% on the FB test set (row 1),
which is not much higher. However, considering
this classifier is trained without any human labeled
dialect data, the performance is expected and can
be improved with better training data and models.
The strongly supervised classifier (row 2), which

4The FB test set is available for download at
https://www.facebook.com/groups/2419174607/
10153205046974608/.

is trained with much less human labeled data (only
2.6M words), outperforms the weak classifier by
15%. Such a difference is consistently observed in
both test tests. This confirms the significant bene-
fits from the gold labeled data.

We apply the strong classifier to large amount of
unlabeled data, and train several semi-supervised
classifiers with these automatically labeled data.
The best result is obtained with the co-training
strategy, which brings significant improvement
over the strongly supervised model: 2.8-4.6%
(row 3), as the label noise is effectively reduced
among the agreed labels from two supervised clas-
sifiers. Finally, combining all three classifiers (row
1, 2 and 3) with model combination achieves the
best result: about 5% improvement of the strong
baseline and 20% over the weak baseline. These
results demonstrate the effectiveness of combin-
ing labeled and unlabeled data obtained from so-
cial media platform.

Model AOC FB
strongly supervised baseline 83.4% 63.1%

self-training 84.4% 65.5%
co-training 86.2% 67.7%

data filtering 85.2% 64.8%
model interpolation 87.8% 68.2%
data concatenation 82.1% 67.4%

Table 4: Comparison of semi-supervised learning
and combination methods.

With semi-supervised learning, we evaluate
three data selection methods: self-training, co-
training and data filtering. The results are shown
in Table 4. Compared with the strong classifier
baseline, the self-training method improves by 1%
- 2.4%, the co-training method improves by 2.8-
4.6%, and the data filtering method improves by
1.7-1.8%. The co-training method is the most ef-
fective for both test sets because the information
are from two independent classifiers. Data filter-
ing is more effective for the AOC test set (which
has the same domain as the baseline model) but
less so for the FB test set because valuable in-
domain data are filtered out.

In the same table we also compare the results
from model and data combination: one from the
semi-supervised co-training and the other from the
strongly supervised learning. On the AOC test
set, the data concatenation method is significantly

2123



(a) Result on the AOC test set. (b) Result on the Facebook test set.

Figure 4: Classification precisions by dialect. The number in parenthesis is the number of sentences from
each dialect.

worse than the model interpolation method. Its ac-
curacy is even lower than that of the supervised
classifier (82.1% vs. 83.4%). However the gap is
much smaller on the FB test set. The automati-
cally labeled data is much more than the human
labeled data, thus it dominates the combined train-
ing data set, which is not a good match for the
AOC test data, but is more relevant to the FB test
data. In both cases, the model combination obtains
better classification accuracies, where the super-
vised model is assigned higher weights (0.9) and
the semi-supervised model is used for smoothing,
therefore the combined model is able to improve
over the strong classifier.

We further analyze the classification precision
for each type of dialect on both test sets in Figure
4. Figure 4a shows the result on the AOC test set.
The number after the dialect type (in the parenthe-
sis) is the number of sentences from that dialect.
Precisions increase from the weakly supervised
to the strongly supervised to the semi-supervised
classifier, and the combined classifier generally
outperforms all three classifiers, except for the
Gulf dialect. However, considering the smaller
percentage of the Gulf dialect, we still observe
significant improvement overall. Figure 4b shows
the result on the FB test set, where the MSA and
Egyptian dialects are much more frequent than the
Levantine and Gulf dialects. Improving classifica-
tion on the MSA and Egyptian dialect (especially
MSA) will be very helpful. We notice that the su-
pervised classifier improves over the unsupervised
classifier by a large margin on the MSA and Gulf
dialects, but performs worse on the Egyptian and
Levantine dialects. This is different from the result

in the AOC test set, where the supervised classifier
consistently improves over the unsupervised clas-
sifier. One reason is that in the AOC test set, the
training and test data are from the same corpus,
thus the supervised training from in-domain data
is very effective. For the FB test set, the strongly
labeled data and the test data mismatch in genre
and topics. The automatically labeled data is less
similar to the dialect test set, thus it is less effective
for the Egyptian and Levantine dialects. This fur-
ther confirms the necessity of combining informa-
tion from multiple sources. The combined classi-
fier performs significantly better for the MSA and
Gulf dialect, but slightly worse for the Egyptian
and Levantine dialects. The overall result is still
positive.

We also compare our approach with other di-
alect classification methods on the AOC corpus,
which is commonly used so the results are com-
parable. Most previous work focus on the clas-
sification of MSA vs. EGY dialect, and report
the accuracies from 85.3% (Elfardy and Diab,
2013), 87.9% (Zaidan and Callison-Burch, 2014)
to 89.1% (Tillmann et al., 2014), adding morpho-
logical features, using word-based unigram-model
and linear SVM models. Our MSA vs. EGY
dialect classification accuracy is 92.0%, the best
known result on this test set. We do not use
more sophisticated features; the improvement is
just from the mined unlabeled data and the com-
bination of different classifiers. On the FB test
set, our strongly supervised classifier is the same
as (Zaidan and Callison-Burch, 2014), both using
word-based unigram model. We see 5% gain with
the combined classifiers.

2124



8.2 Machine Translation

The motivation of this research is to handle chal-
lenges from Arabic dialects to improve machine
translation quality. For example, using the dialect
classifier output one can build dialect-specific
Arabic-English MT systems. Given an Arabic sen-
tence, the system first identifies its dialect type,
then translates with the corresponding MT system.
When building English-to-Arabic (MSA) transla-
tion systems for social media translation, the target
LM trained from in-domain data is very helpful to
improve the translation quality. Considering that
the Arabic in-domain data contains lots of dialects,
an effective dialect classifier helps filter out dialect
Arabic and only keep the MSA to train a cleaner
LM.

Because of the limited bilingual resources of di-
alect Arabic-English, we will focus on English-
Arabic MT system first. In this experiment, the
training data for the English-Arabic MT system
is 1M parallel sentences selected from publicly
available Arabic-English bilingual data (LDC,
OPUS). Because none of the parallel corpora is
for social media translation, we select a subset
closer to the social media domain by maximizing
the n-gram coverage on the test domain. The de-
velopment and test sets contain 700 and 892 En-
glish sentences, respectively. These sentences are
translated into MSA by human translators. We ap-
ply the standard SMT system building procedures:
pre-processing, automatic word alignment, phrase
extraction, parameter tuning with MERT, and de-
coding with a typical phrase-based decoder simi-
lar to (Koehn et al., 2007). The LM is trained with
the target side of the parallel data, plus 200M in-
domain Arabic sentences.

Using the above combined dialect classifier, we
label the dialect type of each sentence in the in-
domain data, filter out any non-MSA sentences
and re-train the target LM. Again to keep the in-
domain data clean, we also apply the threshold-
based data filtering. As shown in Table 5, the
dialect filtering reduces the LM training data by
85%, which corresponds to 70% less memory
footprint. Thanks to the cleaner LM, the transla-
tion quality is also improved by 0.6 BLEU point.5

5Due to the challenging nature of social media data, and
the lack of in-domain training data, the BLEU score is much
lower than the one in news translation.

All
Arabic Data

Filtered
MSA data

number of
sentences

200M 30M

memory
footprint

23G 6.6G

BLEU score
(1-reference)

12.52 13.14

Table 5: Cleaned MSA LM after dialect filtering
for English-Arabic(MSA) translation.

9 Discussion and Conclusion

Existing Arabic dialect classification methods
solely rely on textural features, be they n-gram
language model or morphology/POS-based fea-
tures. This paper utilizes authors’ geographical
information to train a weakly supervised dialect
classifier. Using the weakly and strongly super-
vised classifiers to classify and filter unlabeled
data leads to several improved semi-supervised
classifiers. The combination of all three signif-
icantly improves the Arabic dialect classification
accuracy on both in-domain and out-of-domain
test sets: 20% absolute improvement over the
weak baseline and 5% absolute over the strong
baseline. After applying the proposed classifier
to filter out Arabic dialect data, and building a
cleaned MSA LM, we observe 70% model size
reduction with 0.6 BLEU point gain in English-
Arabic translation quality.

In future work, we would like to explore more
user-specific information for dialect classification,
apply the classifier for Arabic-to-English MT sys-
tems, and extend the approach to a larger family
of languages and dialects.

References
Avrim Blum and Tom Mitchell. 1998. Combining la-

beled and unlabeled data with co-training. In Pro-
ceedings of the eleventh annual conference on Com-
putational learning theory, pages 92–100. ACM.

Ryan Cotterell and Chris Callison-Burch. 2014. A
multi-dialect, multi-genre corpus of informal writ-
ten arabic. In Proceedings of the Ninth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’14), Reykjavik, Iceland, may.

Kareem Darwish, Hassan Sajjad, and Hamdy Mubarak.
2014. Verifiably effective arabic dialect identifica-
tion. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on

2125



Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), pages 1465–1468. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Mona Diab, Nizar Habash, Owen Rambow, Mohamed
Altantawy, and Yassine Benajiba. 2010. Colaba:
Arabic dialect annotation and processing. In LREC
Workshop on Semitic Language Processing, pages
66–74.

Jacob Eisenstein. 2014. Identifying regional dialects
in online social media.

Heba Elfardy and Mona T Diab. 2012. Simplified
guidelines for the creation of large scale dialectal
arabic annotations. In LREC, pages 371–378.

Heba Elfardy and Mona T Diab. 2013. Sentence level
dialect identification in arabic. In ACL (2), pages
456–461.

Nizar Habash and Owen Rambow. 2006. Magead: a
morphological analyzer and generator for the arabic
dialects. In Proceedings of the 21st International
Conference on Computational Linguistics and the
44th annual meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 681–688. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Nizar Habash, Owen Rambow, Mona Diab, and Reem
Kanjawi-Faraj. 2008. Guidelines for annotation
of arabic dialectness. In Proceedings of the LREC
Workshop on HLT & NLP within the Arabic world,
pages 49–53.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondřej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open
source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL
on Interactive Poster and Demonstration Sessions,
ACL ’07, pages 177–180, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Yun Lei and John HL Hansen. 2011. Dialect classifica-
tion via text-independent training and testing for ara-
bic, spanish, and chinese. Audio, Speech, and Lan-
guage Processing, IEEE Transactions on, 19(1):85–
96.

Scott Novotney, Richard M Schwartz, and Sanjeev
Khudanpur. 2011. Unsupervised arabic dialect
adaptation with self-training. In INTERSPEECH,
pages 541–544. Citeseer.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 40th annual meeting on association for compu-
tational linguistics, pages 311–318. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Wael Salloum and Nizar Habash. 2011. Dialectal
to standard arabic paraphrasing to improve arabic-
english statistical machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the First Workshop on Algorithms and Re-
sources for Modelling of Dialects and Language Va-
rieties, pages 10–21. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Hassan Sawaf. 2010. Arabic dialect handling in hybrid
machine translation. In Proceedings of the 9th Con-
ference of the Association for Machine Translation
in the Americas.

Christoph Tillmann, Saab Mansour, and Yaser Al-
Onaizan, 2014. Proceedings of the First Workshop
on Applying NLP Tools to Similar Languages, Va-
rieties and Dialects, chapter Improved Sentence-
Level Arabic Dialect Classification, pages 110–
119. Association for Computational Linguistics and
Dublin City University.

Omar F. Zaidan and Chris Callison-Burch. 2011. The
arabic online commentary dataset: an annotated
dataset of informal arabic with high dialectal con-
tent. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies, pages 37–41, Portland,
Oregon, USA, June. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Omar F Zaidan and Chris Callison-Burch. 2014. Ara-
bic dialect identification. Computational Linguis-
tics, 40(1):171–202.

Rabih Zbib, Erika Malchiodi, Jacob Devlin, David
Stallard, Spyros Matsoukas, Richard Schwartz, John
Makhoul, Omar F Zaidan, and Chris Callison-
Burch. 2012. Machine translation of arabic dialects.
In Proceedings of the 2012 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 49–59. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

2126


