



















































Unsupervised Negation Focus Identification with Word-Topic Graph Model


Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1632–1636,
Lisbon, Portugal, 17-21 September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.

Unsupervised Negation Focus Identification with Word-Topic Graph 
Model 

 
 

Bowei Zou        Qiaoming Zhu       Guodong Zhou* 
Natural Language Processing Lab, School of Computer Science and Technology 

Soochow University, Suzhou, 215006, China 
zoubowei@gmail.com, {qmzhu, gdzhou}@suda.edu.cn 

 
  

 

Abstract 

Due to the commonality in natural language, 
negation focus plays a critical role in deep 
understanding of context. However, existing 
studies for negation focus identification ma-
jor on supervised learning which is time-
consuming and expensive due to manual 
preparation of annotated corpus. To address 
this problem, we propose an unsupervised 
word-topic graph model to represent and 
measure the focus candidates from both lexi-
cal and topic perspectives. Moreover, we 
propose a document-sensitive biased Pag-
eRank algorithm to optimize the ranking 
scores of focus candidates. Evaluation on the 
*SEM 2012 shared task corpus shows that 
our proposed method outperforms the state of 
the art on negation focus identification. * 

1 Introduction 
Negation is used to reverse the polarity of part of 
statements that are otherwise affirmative by de-
fault (Blanco and Moldovan, 2011), which is 
common in natural language. Negation focus is 
defined as the special part in sentence, which is 
most prominently or explicitly negated by a neg-
ative expression. For example, sentence (1) could 
be interpreted as He stopped, but not until he got 
to Jackson Hole with a positive part he stopped 
and a negative part until he got to Jackson Hole. 
(1) He didn't stop until he got to Jackson Hole. 

Our previous work (Zou et al., 2014) showed 
that contextual information plays a critical role 
on negation focus identification. For better illus-
tration of this conclusion, they manually analyze 
the evidences for 100 negation focuses. It is sur-

                                                 
* Corresponding author 

prising that 77 focuses can be identified with 
help of contextual information. This indicates 
that negation focus is often related with what 
authors repeatedly states in context. In this paper, 
we thus focus on graph-based ranking methods 
(Mihalcea and Tarau, 2004) which first build a 
word graph according to word co-occurrences 
within document, and then use random walk al-
gorithms (e.g., PageRank) to measure word im-
portance. 

However, for negation focus identification, the 
graph-based methods may suffer from the fol-
lowing two problems: (a) the words in graph-
based methods are strongly connected by co-
occurrence rather than semantic content, which 
do not necessarily guarantee that they are rele-
vant to the negation focus in context; and (b) 
identifying a negation focus may be affected by 
not only the relatedness of surrounding words 
but also its importance in current document 
which is not considered in standard random walk 
algorithms. 

To address the above problems, we propose a 
word-topic graph model by adding a topical layer 
on the original word layer to capture the seman-
tic clues from both lexical and topic perspectives. 
Besides, a document-sensitive PageRank algo-
rithm is also proposed to optimize the graph 
model by considering the document’s major top-
ics. Experimental results indicate that our word-
topic graph model outperforms other baseline 
methods. Moreover, our model is unsupervised 
and requires only un-annotated text for training. 

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 overviews the related work. Section 3 
introduces our word-topic graph model with con-
textual discourse information. Section 4 reports 
the experimental results and analysis. Finally, we 
conclude our work in Section 5. 

1632



2 Related Work 
So far there is little work on negation focus iden-
tification, which was pioneered by Blanco and 
Moldovan (2011) who investigated the negation 
phenomenon in semantic relations and proposed 
a supervised learning approach to identify the 
focus of a negation expression. However, alt-
hough Morante and Blanco (2012) proposed ne-
gation focus identification as one of the 
*SEM’2012 shared tasks, only one team (Rosen-
berg and Bergler, 2012) participated in. They 
identified negation focus by three heuristic rules. 

Our previous work (Zou et al., 2014) demon-
strates the effectiveness of contextual infor-
mation for negation focus identification. On this 
basis, we further optimize the graph model in 
both the topical layer and the PageRank algo-
rithm in this paper. 

In recent years, many algorithms are widely 
used to incorporate word graph models and topi-
cal information within random walk. Our work is 
originally inspired by Liu et al. (2010). Their 
method runs decomposed Topical PageRank 
(TPR) for each topic separately, and then calcu-
lates the word scores with respect to different 
topics. When setting the edge weights, only word 
co-occurrence is considered. Different from their 
work, our word-topic graph model runs on a two-
layers (word layer and topical layer) graph model 
and sets the edge weights by measuring both 
word similarity and topic distribution. 

3 Methods 
The word-topic graph model consists of word 
layer and topical layer, as shown in Figure 1. 
While the word layer is constructed according to 
word co-occurrence within a sliding window, 
which expresses the cohesion relationship be-
tween words in the context, the topical layer is to 
refine the graph model over the discourse con-
textual information. 

 
Figure 1. Word-topic graph model. 

3.1 Constructing Word Layer 
The word layer is constructed according to word 
co-occurrence within a sliding window, which 
expresses the cohesion relationship between 
words in the context. It can be denoted as Lword 
(W, Ew), where vertex set W={wi} represents the 
set of words in one document and link set Ew 
={eij|wi, wj∈W} represents the set of directed 
edges between these words. Note that only con-
tent words are considered. Namely, we consider 
nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs. 

The link directions are added from the first 
word pointing to other words within a sliding s-
width sentence window. Directed edge ewij is 
weighted to represent the relatedness between 
word wi and word wj in a document with transi-
tion probability Pw(j|i) from i to j, which is nor-
malized as follows: 

:

( , )
( | ) ,

( , )
i k

i j
w

i k
k w w

sim w w
P j i

sim w w



                (1) 

where the denominator represents the out-degree 
of vertex wi , and sim(wi,wj) denotes the similari-
ty between word wi and wj. In this paper, both 
corpus-based and knowledge-based methods are 
evaluated to calculate the similarity between 
words. 
 Word co-occurrence. If word wi and word wj 

occur in a s-width sliding sentence window, 
sim(wi,wj) increases 1. 

 WordNet similarity (Miller, 1995). In this 
paper, we adopt the path similarity function 
to measure relatedness of nouns and verbs, 
and adopt the similar to function to measure 
relatedness of adjectives and adverbs by us-
ing the NLTK toolkit1 (Bird et al., 2009). 

Note that sim(wi,wi) = 0 to avoid self-transition, 
and sim(wi,wj) and sim(wj,wi) may not be equal. 

3.2 Preliminaries for Topical Layer 
To infer the latent topic distributions of words, 
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei et al., 
2003), a typical of topic model, is directly ap-
plied. By the set of topics which derive from a 
corpus, we can obtain: 
 P(t|w), the probability of topic t given word 

w, which indicates how much that word w 
focuses on topic t, and 

 P(t|d), the probability of topic t given doc-
ument d, which indicates how much that 
document d focuses on topic t. 

                                                 
1 http://www.nltk.org/ 

1633



Then, the similarity between two words or be-
tween word wi and document d can be measured 
by the similarity between their corresponding 
topic distributions. Formally, we denote a topic 
distribution as θ, and measure the similarity by 
using: 
 Dot-product. We consider the topic distribu-

tions as vectors and apply the dot-product, a 
geometrically motivated function, to calcu-
late the similarity: 
( , ) ( | ) ( | ),

i j i j k
w w w w k i k jt T

Inner P t w P t w   


      (2) 
( , ) ( | ) ( | ).

i i k
w d w d k i kt T

Inner P t w P t d   


          (3) 
 Kullback Leibler (KL) divergence (Lin, 

1991). Considering the asymmetry (Eq.(4)), 
we obtain a symmetrized measure by Eq.(5). 

2
( )( , ) ( ) log .
( )k

i k
i j i kt T

j k

P tD P t
P t

 


             (4) 
( , ) ( , ) ( , ).KL i j i j j iD D D                    (5) 

Note that DKL(θi, θj) is undefined if Pi(tk)=0 
or Pj(tk)=0 for any tk ∈T. For this reason, 
only the topics which make both Pi(tk)≠0 
and Pj(tk)≠0 are adopted to calculate the KL 
divergence between two topic distributions. 

3.3 Word-Topic Graph Model 
The word layer can well capture the relatedness 
between words, but just partially model the nega-
tion focus since it is more directly related with 
topic than content. Therefore, we add one more 
layer to refine the graph model over the topical 
information, as shown in Figure 1. Formally, the 
word-topic graph is defined as Gtopic(W, T, Ew, Et), 
where vertex set T={ti} represents the set of top-
ics in all of documents in corpus and link set Et 
={etij|wi∈W, tj ∈T} represents the set of undi-
rected edges between words and topics. 

Considering that the topical layer can provide 
more contextual semantic information, we refine 
the relatedness between words by using a topical 
transition probability Pt(j|i) which is calculated 
by two kinds of measurements: 

:

( , )
( | ) .

( , )
i j

i k
i k

w w
t

w w
k w w

sim
P j i

sim
 

 



              (6) 

Here, the similarity is measured by the dot-
product or the KL divergence (using reciprocals). 
On this basis, the word transition probability 
Pw(j|i) is updated as following: 

' ( | ) ( | ) (1 ) ( | ).w w tP j i P j i P j i            (7) 

where µ∈[0,1] is the coefficient controlling the 
relative contributions from the lexical infor-
mation and the topical information. 

Moreover, the weights of word vertices are 
calculated by a PageRank algorithm. In standard 
PageRank (Page et al., 1998), words are set to be 
the same value, which indicates there is equal 
importance to all of words in a document. How-
ever, intuitively, we should allocate higher 
weights to those words with high relevance to the 
document. Therefore, we assign a document-
sensitive value to word wi: 

( , )
( )

( , )
i

kk

w d
d i

w dw W

sim
R w

sim
 

 



                    (8) 

and calculate the weights of word vertices itera-
tively by using a biased PageRank algorithm: 

( 1) ( ) '( ) ( ) ( | )

(1 ) ( ).

n n
i j wj i

d i

Score w Score w P j i

R w










 


    (9)

 

All of the PageRank algorithms are terminated 
when the number of iterations reaches 100 or the 
difference of each vertex between consecutive 
iterations is less than 0.001. 

Finally, according to the annotation guidelines 
(Blanco and Moldovan, 2011), the focus is al-
ways a full text of a semantic role. Thus, we se-
lect all of semantic roles in sentence as candidate 
focuses for ranking. The ranking score of a can-
didate focus f is computed by averaging the 
scores of all words inside the candidate: 

( )
( ) ,

( , )
i

iw f
avg

score w
score f

Count f





         (10) 

where count(f,•) denotes the number of content 
words within the candidate. Then the top ranked 
candidate is chosen as the negation focus. 

4 Experimental Results 
To evaluate the performance of our word-topic 
graph model for negation focus identification, we 
carry out experiments on the *SEM'2012 shared 
task corpus2. As a freely downloadable resource, 
the corpus is annotated on top of PropBank, 
which uses the WSJ section of the Penn Tree-
Bank. In particular, negation focus annotation on 
this corpus is restricted to verbal negations 
(Blanco and Moldovan, 2011). In total, this cor-
pus provides 3,544 instances of negation focus 
annotations. Although for each instance, the cor-
pus only provides the current sentence, the pre-
vious and next sentences as its context, we sort to 

                                                 
2 http://www.clips.ua.ac.be/sem2012-st-neg/ 

1634



the Penn TreeBank3 to obtain the corresponding 
document as its discourse context. For fair com-
parison, we adopt the same partition as 
*SEM’2012 shared task in our experiments. 

We evaluate our results in terms of accuracy. 
To see whether an improvement is statistically 
significant, we conduct significance testing using 
the paired t-test. 

For estimating the topical transition probabil-
ity Pt(j|i) and the document-sensitive value Rd(wi), 
we employ GibbsLDA++4, an LDA model using 
Gibbs Sampling technique for parameter estima-
tion and inference (Griffiths, 2002). We set the 
parameters α = 50/T and β = 0.1 as Griffiths and 
Steyvers (2004) suggested. 

4.1 Influences of Parameters 
There are two major parameters in our models 
that may influence the performance, including: (a) 
the damping factor µ of the word transition prob-
ability P’w(j|i) (Eq.(7)) and (b) the damping fac-
tor λ of the word-topic graph model (Eq.(9)). 

Figure 2 shows the accuracy when varying µ 
from 0.1 to 0.9 with an interval of 0.1 and when 
varying λ from 0.05 to 1 with an interval of 0.05. 
We notice that the best performance is achieved 
when µ=0.6. It indicates that the direct lexical 
information contributes slightly more than the 
topical information. The results also show the 
complementarity between these two kinds of in-
formation on negation focus identification.  

For λ, it has very little, if any, effect on per-
formance, when λ is set from 0.5 to 0.85. It indi-
cates that the contextual information (the first 
term in Eq.(9)) contributes more than the docu-
ment information (the second term in Eq.(9)) on 
negation focus identification. 

 
Figure 2. Influence of the damping factors µ and λ. 

Moreover, the results also show that these two 
parameters have little impact in a certain range 
on performance (µ:0.4~0.6; λ:0.5~0.85), which 
suggests that the approach is robust to a certain 

                                                 
3 http://www.cis.upenn.edu/~treebank/ 
4 http://gibbslda.sourceforge.net/ 

extent. Therefore, we set µ=0.6 and λ=0.7 in the 
following experiments. 

Besides, we also evaluate the other minor pa-
rameters in our model. Due to space limit, we do 
not report all of results here and set parameters to 
the following values: setting window size s=1 
(the previous and next sentences) and the number 
of topic T=40, adopting the word co-occurrence 
similarity to calculate the similarity between 
words, and using dot-product to measure both 
Pt(j|i) and Rd(wi). 

4.2 Comparison with Other Methods 
In the word-topic graph models, two primary 
improvements are proposed: (a) updating the 
word transition probability Pw(j|i) by adding a 
topical layer (“TL”), and (b) assigning a docu-
ment-sensitive value to word node (“DS”).  

model Acc. 
WLM 52.61 
WTGM (TL) 65.74 
WTGM(TL+DS) 69.39 

Table 1. Performance of the word-topic graph 
model. 

Table 1 shows that the word-topic graph mod-
el (WTGM) is significantly better (+16.78%, 
p<0.01) than the graph model with only word 
layer (WLM), which justifies the effectiveness of 
the topical layer. In addition, the results also in-
dicate that the word-topic graph model not only 
takes the topical information into account (“TL”), 
but also considers the semantic relationship in 
current document (“DS”). 

We select two supervised baseline methods to 
compare with our word-topic graph model. One 
is a decision tree-based system described in 
Blanco and Moldovan (2011), and the other one 
is a SVM-based system which takes advantage of 
both syntactic features and contextual features 
(Zou et al., 2014). 

system Acc. 
B&M(2011) 63.20 
Zou et al.(2014) 67.14 
Ours 69.39 

Table 2. Comparison Results. 
Table 2 shows that our word-topic graph 

model performs significantly better than the two 
others by 6.19% (p<0.01) and 2.25% (p<0.01), 
respectively. The results support our viewpoint 
that the topical information in context can help 
to find the negation focus, and the word-topic 
graph model we proposed is effective. Moreo-
ver, it is also worth noting that our method is 

1635



unsupervised, which does not need the prior 
knowledge for training, while the other two su-
pervised baselines employ the golden features, 
such as the POS tag, constituent tree, and de-
pendency tree. 

5 Conclusion 
In this paper, we propose an unsupervised word-
topic graph model, which represents and 
measures the word importance by using contex-
tual information from both lexical and topical 
perspectives. And then, we propose a document-
sensitive biased PageRank algorithm to calculate 
the ranking scores of negation focus candidates. 
Experimental results show that our method 
achieves better performance than other baselines 
without any annotated data. 

The main shortcoming of our method is that 
not all of negation focus can be identified by the 
context. As our statistics, at least 17% of samples 
are hard to be determined by human beings when 
ignoring the information in current sentence. 
Therefore, in future work, we will focus on in-
vestigating an effective method to integrate the 
local lexical/syntactic information and the global 
contextual discourse information. 

Acknowledgments 
This research is supported by the National Natu-
ral Science Foundation of China, No.61272260, 
No.61331011, No.61273320, and the Major Pro-
ject of College Natural Science Foundation of 
Jiangsu Province, No.11KJA520003. The au-
thors would like to thank the anonymous review-
ers for their insightful comments and suggestions. 

Reference 
Steven Bird, Edward Loper, and Ewan Klein. 2009. 

Natural Language Processing with Python. 
O’Reilly Media Inc. 

Eduardo Blanco and Dan Moldovan. 2011. Semantic 
Representation of Negation Using Focus Detection. 
In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 
581-589, Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. 

David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan. 
2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research, 3:993-1022, January. 

Tom Griffiths. 2002. Gibbs sampling in the generative 
model of Latent Dirichlet Allocation. Tech. rep., 
Stanford University. 

Thomas L. Griffiths and Mark Steyvers. 2004. Find-
ing scientific topics. In Proceedings of the National 

Academy of Sciences of the United States of Ameri-
ca, 101(Suppl. 1), 5228-5235. 

Jianhua Lin. 1991. Divergence measures based on 
Shannon entropy. IEEE Transactions on Infor-
mation Theory, 37(14), 145-151. 

Zhiyuan Liu, Wenyi Huang, Yabin Zheng, and 
Maosong Sun. 2010. Automatic Keyphrase Extrac-
tion via Topic Decomposition. In Proceedings of 
the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in 
Natural Language Processing, pages 366-376, 
MIT, Massachusetts, USA, 9-11 October 2010. 

Rada Mihalcea and Paul Tarau. 2004. Textrank: 
Bringing order into texts. In Proceedings of the 
2004 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing, pages 404-411. 

George A. Miller. 1995. Wordnet: a lexical database 
for english. Commun. ACM, 38(11):39-41. 

Roser Morante and Eduardo Blanco. 2012. *SEM 
2012 Shared Task: Resolving the Scope and Focus 
of Negation. In Proceedings of the First Joint Con-
ference on Lexical and Computational Semantics, 
pages 265-274, Montreal, Canada, June 7-8, 2012. 

Lawrence Page, Sergey Brin, Rajeev Motwani, et al. 
1998. The pagerank citation ranking: Bringing or-
der to the web. Technical report, Stanford Univer-
sity. 

Sabine Rosenberg and Sabine Bergler. 2012. UCon-
cordia: CLaC Negation Focus Detection at *Sem 
2012. In Proceedings of the First Joint Conference 
on Lexical and Computational Semantics, pages 
294-300, Montreal, Canada, June 7-8, 2012. 

Bowei Zou, Qiaoming Zhu, and Guodong Zhou. 2014. 
Negation Focus Identification with Contextual 
Discourse Information. In Proceedings of the 52nd 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 522-530, Baltimore, Mar-
yland, USA, June 23-25 2014. 

1636


