



















































Inducing Domain-Specific Sentiment Lexicons from Unlabeled Corpora


Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 595–605,
Austin, Texas, November 1-5, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Inducing Domain-Specific Sentiment Lexicons from Unlabeled Corpora

William L. Hamilton, Kevin Clark, Jure Leskovec, Dan Jurafsky
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford CA, 94305

wleif,kevclark,jure,jurafsky@stanford.edu

Abstract

A word’s sentiment depends on the domain in
which it is used. Computational social science
research thus requires sentiment lexicons that
are specific to the domains being studied. We
combine domain-specific word embeddings
with a label propagation framework to in-
duce accurate domain-specific sentiment lex-
icons using small sets of seed words, achiev-
ing state-of-the-art performance competitive
with approaches that rely on hand-curated re-
sources. Using our framework we perform
two large-scale empirical studies to quantify
the extent to which sentiment varies across
time and between communities. We induce
and release historical sentiment lexicons for
150 years of English and community-specific
sentiment lexicons for 250 online communi-
ties from the social media forum Reddit. The
historical lexicons show that more than 5%
of sentiment-bearing (non-neutral) English
words completely switched polarity during the
last 150 years, and the community-specific
lexicons highlight how sentiment varies dras-
tically between different communities.

1 Introduction

Inducing domain-specific sentiment lexicons is cru-
cial to computational social science (CSS) research.
Sentiment lexicons allow us to analyze key subjec-
tive properties of texts like opinions and attitudes
(Taboada et al., 2011). But lexical sentiment is
hugely influenced by context. The word soft has a
very different sentiment in an online sports commu-
nity than it does in one dedicated to toy animals (Fig-
ure 1). Terrific once had a highly negative conno-

r/spor
ts

r/mylit
tlepon

y

−6
−4
−2

0
2
4
6

S
en

tim
en

to
fs

of
t

Figure 1: The sentiment of soft in different online commu-
nities. Sentiment values computed using SENTPROP (Section
3) on comments from Reddit communities illustrate how sen-
timent depends on social context. Bootstrap-sampled standard
deviations provide a measure of confidence with the scores.

tation; now it is essentially synonymous with good
(Figure 2). Without domain-specific lexicons, social
scientific analyses can be misled by sentiment as-
signments biased towards domain-general contexts,
neglecting factors like genre, community-specific
vernacular, or demographic variation (Deng et al.,
2014; Hovy, 2015; Yang and Eisenstein, 2015).

Using experts or crowdsourcing to construct
domain-specific sentiment lexicons is expensive
and often time-consuming (Mohammad and Turney,
2010; Fast et al., 2016), and is especially prob-
lematic when non-standard language (as in histori-
cal documents or obscure social media forums) pre-
vents annotators from understanding the sociolin-
guistic context of the data.

Web-scale sentiment lexicons can be automat-
ically induced for large socially-diffuse domains,
such as the internet-at-large (Velikovich et al., 2010)
or all of Twitter (Tang et al., 2014). However, to
study sentiment in domain-specific cases—financial
documents, historical texts, or tight-knit social me-

595



dia forums—such generic lexicons may be inaccu-
rate, and even introduce harmful biases (Loughran
and McDonald, 2011).1 Researchers need a princi-
pled and accurate framework for inducing lexicons
that are specific to their domain of study.

To meet these needs, we introduce SENTPROP, a
framework to learn accurate sentiment lexicons from
small sets of seed words and domain-specific cor-
pora. SENTPROP combines the well-known method
of label propagation with advances in word em-
beddings, and unlike previous approaches, is de-
signed to be accurate even when using modestly-
sized domain-specific corpora (∼107 tokens). Our
framework also provides confidence scores along
with the learned lexicons, which allows researchers
to quantify uncertainty in a principled manner.

The key contributions of this work are:

1. A simple state-of-the-art sentiment induction al-
gorithm, combining high-quality word vector
embeddings with a label propagation approach.

2. A novel bootstrap-sampling framework for infer-
ring confidence scores with the sentiment values.

3. Two large-scale studies that reveal how sentiment
depends on both social and historical context.
(a) We induce community-specific sentiment
lexicons for the largest 250 “subreddit” commu-
nities on the social-media forum Reddit, reveal-
ing substantial variation in word sentiment be-
tween communities.
(b) We induce historical sentiment lexicons for
150 years of English, revealing that >5% of
words switched polarity during this time.

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work
to systematically analyze the domain-dependency of
sentiment at a large-scale, across hundreds of years
and hundreds of user-defined online communities.

All of the inferred lexicons along with code for
SENTPROP and all methods evaluated are made
available in the SOCIALSENT package released with
this paper.2 The SOCIALSENT package provides a
benchmark toolkit for inducing sentiment lexicons,
including implementations of previously published
algorithms (Velikovich et al., 2010; Rothe et al.,
2016), which are not otherwise publicly available.

1
http://brandsavant.com/brandsavant/

the-hidden-bias-of-social-media-sentiment-analysis
2http://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/socialsent

Figure 2: The sentiment of terrific changed from negative to
positive over the last 150 years. Sentiment values and boot-
strapped confidences were computed using SENTPROP on his-
torical data (see Section 6).

2 Related work

Our work builds upon a wealth of previous research
on inducing sentiment lexicons, along two threads:

Corpus-based approaches use seed words and
patterns in unlabeled corpora to induce domain-
specific lexicons. These patterns may rely on syn-
tactic structures (Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown,
1997; Jijkoun et al., 2010; Rooth et al., 1999; The-
len and Riloff, 2002; Widdows and Dorow, 2002),
which can be domain-specific and brittle (e.g., in
social media lacking usual grammatical structures).
Other models rely on general co-occurrence (Igo
and Riloff, 2009; Riloff and Shepherd, 1997; Tur-
ney and Littman, 2003). Often corpus-based meth-
ods exploit distant-supervision signals (e.g., review
scores, emoticons) specific to certain domains (As-
ghar et al., 2015; Blair-Goldensohn et al., 2008;
Bravo-Marquez et al., 2015; Choi and Cardie, 2009;
Severyn and Moschitti, 2015; Speriosu et al., 2011;
Tang et al., 2014). An effective corpus-based ap-
proach that does not require distant-supervision—
which we adapt here—is to construct lexical graphs
using word co-occurrences and then to perform
some form of label propagation over these graphs
(Huang et al., 2014; Velikovich et al., 2010). Re-
cent work has also learned transformations of word-
vector representations in order to induce sentiment
lexicons (Rothe et al., 2016). Fast et al. (2016) com-
bine word vectors with crowdsourcing to produce
domain-independent topic lexicons.

Dictionary-based approaches use hand-curated
lexical resources—usually WordNet (Fellbaum,
1998)—in order to propagate sentiment from seed

596



Domain Positive seed words Negative seed words

Standard
English

good, lovely, excellent, fortunate, pleasant,
delightful, perfect, loved, love, happy

bad, horrible, poor, unfortunate, unpleasant,
disgusting, evil, hated, hate, unhappy

Finance successful, excellent, profit, beneficial, im-
proving, improved, success, gains, positive

negligent, loss, volatile, wrong, losses, dam-
ages, bad, litigation, failure, down, negative

Twitter love, loved, loves, awesome, nice, amazing,
best, fantastic, correct, happy

hate, hated, hates, terrible, nasty, awful,
worst, horrible, wrong, sad

Table 1: Seed words. The seed words were manually selected to be context insensitive (without knowledge of the test lexicons).

labels (Esuli and Sebastiani, 2006; Hu and Liu,
2004; Kamps et al., 2004; Rao and Ravichandran,
2009; San Vicente et al., 2014; Takamura et al.,
2005; Tai and Kao, 2013). There is an implicit con-
sensus that dictionary-based approaches will gener-
ate higher-quality lexicons, due to their use of these
clean, hand-curated resources; however, they are not
applicable in domains lacking such a resource (e.g.,
most historical texts).

Most previous work seeks to enrich or enlarge ex-
isting lexicons (Qiu et al., 2009; San Vicente et al.,
2014; Velikovich et al., 2010), emphasizing recall
over precision. This recall-oriented approach is mo-
tivated by the need for massive polarity lexicons in
tasks like web-advertising (Velikovich et al., 2010).
In contrast to these previous efforts, the goal of this
work is to induce high-quality lexicons that are ac-
curate to a specific social context.

Algorithmically, our approach is inspired by Ve-
likovich et al. (2010). We extend Velikovich
et al. (2010) by incorporating high-quality word
vector embeddings, a new graph construction ap-
proach, an alternative label propagation algorithm,
and a bootstrapping method to obtain confidence
values. Together these improvements, especially
the high-quality word vectors, allow our corpus-
based method to even outperform the state-of-the-art
dictionary-based approach.

3 Framework

Our framework, SENTPROP, is designed to meet
four key desiderata:
1. Resource-light: Accurate performance without

massive corpora or hand-curated resources.
2. Interpretable: Uses small seed sets of

“paradigm” words to maintain interpretabil-
ity and avoid ambiguity in sentiment values.

3. Robust: Bootstrap-sampled standard deviations
provide a measure of confidence.

4. Out-of-the-box: Does not rely on signals that are
specific to only certain domains.
SENTPROP involves two steps: constructing a

lexical graph from unlabeled corpora and propagat-
ing sentiment labels over this graph.

3.1 Constructing a lexical graph

Lexical graphs are constructed from distributional
word embeddings learned on unlabeled corpora.

Distributional word embeddings
The first step in our approach is to build high-

quality semantic representations for words using a
vector space model (VSM). We embed each word
wi ∈ V as a vector wi that captures information
about its co-occurrence statistics with other words
(Landauer and Dumais, 1997; Turney and Pantel,
2010). This VSM approach has a long history in
NLP and has been highly successful in recent appli-
cations (see Levy et al., 2015 for a survey).

When recreating known lexicons, we used a num-
ber of publicly available embeddings (Section 4).

In the cases where we learned embeddings our-
selves, we employed an SVD-based method to con-
struct the word-vectors. First, we construct a matrix
MPPMI ∈ R|V|×|V| with entries given by

MPPMIi,j = max

{
log

(
p̂(wi, wj)

p̂(w)p̂(wj)

)
, 0

}
, (1)

where p̂ denotes smoothed empirical probabilities of
word (co-)occurrences within fixed-size sliding win-
dows of text.3 MPPMIi,j is equal to a smoothed vari-
ant of the positive pointwise mutual information be-
tween words wi and wj (Levy et al., 2015). Next,
we compute MPPMI = UΣV>, the truncated sin-
gular value decomposition of MPPMI . The vector

3We use contexts of size four on each side and context-
distribution smoothing with c = 0.75 (Levy et al., 2015).

597



a. Run random walks from seed words. b. Assign polarity scores based on frequency of random walk visits.

love

hate

despise

adore

loath

dislike

like

find

appreciate

acknowledge

see

+++

idolize

relish

abhor

notice

---

execrate

disapprove

uncover

love

hate

despise

adore

loath

dislike

like

find

appreciate

acknowledge

see

+++

idolize

relish

abhor

notice

---

execrate

disapprove

uncover

--

----
-

--
-

++

++

++ +

++

Figure 3: Visual summary of the SENTPROP algorithm.

embedding for word wi is then given by

wSVDi = (U)i . (2)

Excluding the singular value weights, Σ, has been
shown known to dramatically improve embedding
quality (Turney and Pantel, 2010; Bullinaria and
Levy, 2012). Following standard practices, we learn
embeddings of dimension 300.

We found that this SVD-based method signif-
icantly outperformed word2vec (Mikolov et al.,
2013) and GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014) on pre-
liminary experiments with the domain-specific data
we used (see Section 4).

Defining the graph edges
Given a set of word embeddings, a weighted lex-

ical graph is constructed by connecting each word
with its nearest k neighbors within the semantic
space (according to cosine-similarity). The weights
of the edges are set as

Ei,j = arccos

(
− wi

>wj
‖wi‖‖wj‖

)
. (3)

3.2 Propagating polarities from a seed set
Once a weighted lexical graph is constructed, we
propagate sentiment labels over this graph using a
random walk method (Zhou et al., 2004). A word’s
polarity score for a seed set is proportional to the
probability of a random walk from the seed set hit-
ting that word (Figure 3).

Let p ∈ R|V| be a vector of word-sentiment
scores constructed using seed set S (e.g., ten nega-
tive words); p is initialized to have 1|V| in all entries.
And let E be the matrix of edge weights given by
equation (3). First, we construct a symmetric tran-
sition matrix from E by computing T = D

1
2 ED

1
2 ,

where D is a matrix with the column sums of E on
the diagonal. Next, using T we iteratively update p
until numerical convergence:

p(t+1) = βTp(t) + (1− β)s, (4)

where s is a vector with values set to 1|S| in the en-
tries corresponding to the seed set S and zeros else-
where. The β term controls the extent to which the
algorithm favors local consistency (similar labels for
neighbors) vs. global consistency (correct labels on
seed words), with lower βs emphasizing the latter.

To obtain a final polarity score for a word wi,
we run the walk using both positive and negative
seed sets, obtaining positive (pP (wi)) and nega-
tive (pN (wi)) label scores. We then combine these
values into a positive-polarity score as p̄P (wi) =

pP (wi)
pP (wi)+pN (wi)

and standardize the final scores to
have zero mean and unit variance (within a corpus).

3.3 SENTPROP variants
Many variants of the random walk approach and re-
lated label propagation techniques exist in the lit-
erature (San Vicente et al., 2014; Velikovich et al.,
2010; Zhou et al., 2004; Zhu and Ghahramani, 2002;
Zhu et al., 2003). For example, there are differ-
ences in how to normalize the transition matrix in
the random walks (Zhou et al., 2004) and variants
of label propagation, e.g. where the labeled seeds
are clamped to the correct values (Zhu and Ghahra-
mani, 2002) or where only shortest-paths through
the graph are used for propagation (Velikovich et al.,
2010).

We experimented with a number of these ap-
proaches and found little difference in their perfor-
mance. We opted to use the random walk method
because it had a slight edge in terms of performance

598



in preliminary experiments4 and because it pro-
duces well-behaved distributions over label scores,
whereas Zhu and Ghahramani (2002)’s method and
its variants produce extremely peaked distributions.
We do note report in detail on all the label propa-
gation variants here, but the SOCIALSENT package
contains a full suite of these methods.

3.4 Bootstrap-sampling for robustness

Propagated sentiment scores are inevitably influ-
enced by the seed set, and it is important for re-
searchers to know the extent to which polarity values
are simply the result of corpus artifacts that are cor-
related with these seeds words. We address this issue
by using a bootstrap-sampling approach to obtain
confidence regions over our sentiment scores. We
bootstrap by running our propagation over B ran-
dom equally-sized subsets of the positive and neg-
ative seed sets. Computing the standard deviation
of the bootstrap-sampled polarity scores provides a
measure of confidence and allows the researcher to
evaluate the robustness of the assigned polarities.
We set B = 50 and used 7 words per random subset
(full seed sets are size 10; see Table 1).

4 Recreating known lexicons

We validate our approach by recreating known sen-
timent lexicons in the three domains: Standard En-
glish, Twitter, and Finance. Table 1 lists the seed
words used in each domain.

Standard English: To facilitate comparison with
previous work, we focus on the well-known General
Inquirer lexicon (Stone et al., 1966). We also use the
continuous valence (i.e., polarity) scores collected
by Warriner et al. (2013) in order to evaluate the
fine-grained performance of our framework. We test
our framework’s performance using two different
embeddings: off-the-shelf Google news embeddings
constructed from 1011 tokens5 and embeddings we
constructed from the 2000s decade of the Corpus of
Historical American English (COHA), which con-
tains ∼2 × 107 words in each decade, from 1850
to 2000 (Davies, 2010). The COHA corpus allows
us to test how the algorithms deal with this smaller

4>2% improvement across metrics on the standard and his-
torical English datasets described in Section 4.

5https://code.google.com/p/word2vec/

historical corpus, which is important since we will
use the COHA corpus to infer historical sentiment
lexicons (Section 6).

Finance: Previous work found that general pur-
pose sentiment lexicons performed very poorly on
financial text (Loughran and McDonald, 2011), so
a finance-specific sentiment lexicon (containing bi-
nary labels) was hand-constructed for this domain
(ibid.). To test against this lexicon, we constructed
embeddings using a dataset of∼2×107 tokens from
financial 8K documents (Lee et al., 2014).

Twitter: Numerous works attempt to induce
Twitter-specific sentiment lexicons using supervised
approaches and features unique to that domain (e.g.,
follower graphs; Speriosu et al., 2011). Here, we
emphasize that we can induce an accurate lexicon
using a simple domain-independent and resource-
light approach, with the implication that lexicons
can easily be induced for related social media
domains without resorting to complex supervised
frameworks. We evaluate our approach using the
test set from the 2015 SemEval task 10E competition
(Rosenthal et al., 2015), and we use the embeddings
constructed by Rothe et al. (2016).6

4.1 Baselines and state-of-the-art comparisons

We compare SENTPROP against standard baselines
and state-of-the-art approaches. The PMI base-
line of Turney and Littman (2003) computes the
pointwise mutual information between the seeds and
the targets without using propagation. The base-
line method of Velikovich et al. (2010) is simi-
lar to our method but uses an alternative propa-
gation approach and raw co-occurrence vectors in-
stead of learned embeddings. Both these methods
require raw corpora, so they function as baselines
in cases where we do not use off-the-shelf embed-
dings. We also compare against DENSIFIER, a state-
of-the-art method that learns orthogonal transforma-
tions of word vectors instead of propagating labels
(Rothe et al., 2016). Lastly, on standard English we
compare against a state-of-the-art WordNet-based
method, which performs label propagation over a
WordNet-derived graph (San Vicente et al., 2014).
Several variant baselines, all of which SENTPROP

6The official SemEval task 10E involved fully-supervised
learning, so we do not use their evaluation setup.

599



Method AUC Ternary F1 τ

SENTPROP 90.6 58.6 0.44
DENSIFIER 93.3 62.1 0.50
WordNet 89.5 58.7 0.34
Majority – 24.8 –

(a) Corpus methods outperform WordNet on standard
English. Using word-vector embeddings learned on a mas-
sive corpus (1011 tokens), we see that both corpus-based
methods outperform the WordNet-based approach overall.

Method AUC Ternary F1 τ

SENTPROP 86.0 60.1 0.50
DENSIFIER 90.1 59.4 0.57
Sentiment140 86.2 57.7 0.51
Majority – 24.9 –

(b) Corpus approaches are competitive with a distantly
supervised method on Twitter. Using Twitter embeddings
learned from ∼109 tokens, we see that the semi-supervised
corpus approaches using small seed sets perform very well.

Method AUC Ternary F1

SENTPROP 91.6 63.1
DENSIFIER 80.2 50.3
PMI 86.1 49.8
Velikovich et al. (2010) 81.6 51.1
Majority – 23.6

(c) SENTPROP performs best with domain-specific finance
embeddings. Using embeddings learned from financial cor-
pus (∼2×107 tokens) , SENTPROP significantly outperforms
the other methods.

Method AUC Ternary F1 τ

SENTPROP 83.8 53.0 0.28
DENSIFIER 77.4 46.6 0.19
PMI 70.6 41.9 0.16
Velikovich et al. (2010) 52.7 32.9 0.01
Majority – 24.3 –

(d) SENTPROP performs well on standard English even
with 1000x reduction in corpus size. SENTPROP maintains
strong performance even when using embeddings learned
from the 2000s decade of COHA (only 2×∼107 tokens).

Table 2: Results on recreating known lexicons.

outperforms, are omitted for brevity (e.g., using
word-vector cosines in place of PMI in Turney and
Littman (2003)’s framework). Code for all these
variants is available in the SOCIALSENT package.

4.2 Evaluation setup
We evaluate the approaches according to (i) their
binary classification accuracy (ignoring the neutral
class, as is common in previous work), (ii) ternary
classification performance (positive vs. neutral vs.
negative)7, and (iii) Kendall τ rank-correlation with
continuous human-annotated polarity scores.

For all methods in the ternary-classification con-
dition, we use the class-mass normalization method
(Zhu et al., 2003) to label words as positive, neutral,
or negative. This method assumes knowledge of the
label distribution—i.e., how many positive/negative
vs. neutral words there are—and simply assigns la-
bels to best match this distribution.

4.3 Evaluation results
Tables 2a-2d summarize the performance of our
framework along with baselines and other state-of-

7Only GI contains words explicitly marked neutral, so for
ternary evaluations in Twitter and Finance we sample neutral
words from GI to match its neutral-vs-not distribution.

the-art approaches. Our framework significantly
outperforms the baselines on all tasks, outperforms a
state-of-the-art approach that uses WordNet on stan-
dard English (Table 2a), and is competitive with
Sentiment140 on Twitter (Table 2b), a distantly-
supervised approach that uses signals from emoti-
cons (Mohammad and Turney, 2010). DENSIFIER
also performs extremely well, outperforming SENT-
PROP when off-the-shelf embeddings are used (Ta-
bles 2a and 2b). However, SENTPROP significantly
outperforms all other approaches when using the
domain-specific embeddings (Tables 2c and 2d).

Overall our results show that SENTPROP— a rel-
atively simple method, which combines high-quality
word vectors embeddings with standard label prop-
agation — can perform at a state-of-the-art level,
even performing competitively with methods rely-
ing on hand-curated lexical graphs. Unlike previous
published approaches, SENTPROP is able to main-
tain high accuracy even when modest-sized domain-
specific corpora are used. In cases where very large
corpora are available and where there is an abun-
dance of training data, DENSIFIER performs ex-
tremely well, since it was designed for this sort of
setting (Rothe et al., 2016).

600



We found that the baseline method of Velikovich
et al. (2010), which our method is closely related
to, performed relatively poorly with these domain-
specific corpora. This indicates that using high-
quality word-vector embeddings can have a drastic
impact on performance. However, it is worth noting
that Velikovich et al. (2010)’s method was designed
for high recall with massive corpora, so its poor per-
formance in our regime is not surprising.

Lastly, we found that the choice of embedding
method could have a drastic impact. Prelimi-
nary experiments on the COHA data showed that
using word2vec SGNS vectors (with default set-
tings) instead of our SVD-based embeddings led to
a >40% performance drop for SENTPROP across
all measures and a >10% performance drop for
DENSIFIER. It is possible that certain settings of
word2vec could perform better, but previous work
has shown that SVD-based methods have superior
results on smaller datasets and rare-word similarity
tasks (Levy et al., 2015; Hamilton et al., 2016), so
this result is not surprising.

5 Inducing community-specific lexicons

As a first large-scale study, we investigate how sen-
timent depends on the social context in which a
word is used. It is well known that there is sub-
stantial sociolinguistic variation between different
communities, whether these communities are de-
fined geographically (Trudgill, 1974) or via under-
lying sociocultural differences (Labov, 2006). How-
ever, no previous work has systematically investi-
gated community-specific variation in word senti-
ment at a large scale. Yang and Eisenstein (2015)
exploit social network structure in Twitter to infer
a small number (1-10) of communities and analyzed
sentiment variation via a supervised framework. Our
analysis extends this line of work by analyzing the
sentiment across hundreds of user-defined commu-
nities using only unlabeled corpora and a small set
of “paradigm” seed words (the Twitter seed words
outlined in Table 1).

In our study, we induced sentiment lexicons for
the top-250 (by comment-count) subreddits from the
social media forum Reddit.8 We used all the 2014
comment data to induce the lexicons, with words

8Subreddits are user-created topic-specific forums.

lower cased and comments from bots and deleted
users removed.9 Sentiment was induced for the top-
5000 non-stop words in each subreddit (again, by
comment-frequency).

5.1 Examining the lexicons

Analysis of the learned lexicons reveals the ex-
tent to which sentiment can differ across com-
munities. Figure 4 highlights some words with
opposing sentiment in two communities: in
r/TwoXChromosomes (r/TwoX), a community
dedicated to female perspectives and gender issues,
the words crazy and insane have negative polarity,
which is not true in the r/sports community, and,
vice-versa, words like soft are positive in r/TwoX
but negative in r/sports.

To get a sense of how much sentiment differs
across communities in general, we selected a ran-
dom subset of 1000 community pairs and examined
the correlation in their sentiment values for highly
sentiment-bearing words (Figure 5). We see that the
distribution is noticeably skewed, with many com-
munity pairs having highly uncorrelated sentiment
values. The 1000 random pairs were selected such
that each member of the pair overlapped in at least
half of their top-5000 word vocabulary. We then
computed the correlation between the sentiments in
these community-pairs. Since sentiment is noisy and
relatively uninteresting for neutral words, we com-
pute τ25%, the Kendall-τ correlation over the top-
25% most sentiment bearing words shared between
the two communities.

Analysis of individual pairs reveals some inter-
esting insights about sentiment and inter-community
dynamics. For example, we found that the sentiment
correlation between r/TwoX and r/TheRedPill
(τ25% = 0.58), two communities that hold con-
flicting views and often attack each other10, was
actually higher than the sentiment correlation be-
tween r/TwoX and r/sports (τ25% = 0.41), two
communities that are entirely unrelated. This re-
sult suggests that conflicting communities may have

9
https://archive.org/details/2015_reddit_comments_corpus

10This conflict is well-known on Reddit; for example, both
communities mention each others’ names along with fuck-based
profanity in the same comment far more than one would expect
by chance (χ21 > 6.8, p < 0.01 for both). r/TheRedPill is
dedicated to male empowerment.

601



Figure 4: Word sentiment differs drastically between a community dedicated to sports (r/sports) and one dedicated to
female perspectives and gender issues (r/TwoX). Words like soft and animal have positive sentiment in r/TwoX but negative
sentiment in r/sports, while the opposite holds for words like crazy and insane.

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8

Community-community sentiment correlation (τ25%)

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

C
ou

nt

Figure 5: There is a long tail of communities with very dif-
ferent word sentiments. Some communities have very similar
sentiment (e.g., r/sports and r/hockey), while other com-
munity pairs differ drastically (e.g., r/sports and r/TwoX).

more similar sentiment in their language compared
to communities that are entirely unrelated.

6 Inducing diachronic sentiment lexicons

Sentiment also depends on the historical time-period
in which a word is used. To investigate this depen-
dency, we use our framework to analyze how word
polarities have shifted over the last 150 years. The
phenomena of amelioration (words becoming more
positive) and pejoration (words becoming more neg-
ative) are well-discussed in the linguistic literature
(Traugott and Dasher, 2001); however, no compre-
hensive polarity lexicons exist for historical data
(Cook and Stevenson, 2010). Such lexicons are cru-
cial to the growing body of work on NLP analyses of

historical text (Piotrowski, 2012) which are inform-
ing diachronic linguistics (Hamilton et al., 2016),
the digital humanities (Muralidharan and Hearst,
2012), and history (Hendrickx et al., 2011).

Our work is inspired by the only previous work
on automatically inducing historical sentiment lexi-
cons, Cook and Stevenson (2010); they use the PMI
method and a full modern sentiment lexicon as their
seed set, which relies on the assumption that all
these words have not changed in sentiment. In con-
trast, in addition to our different algorithm, we use a
small seed set of words that were manually selected
based on having strong and stable sentiment over the
last 150 years (Table 1; confirmed via historical en-
tries in the Oxford English Dictionary).

6.1 Examining the lexicons

We constructed lexicons from COHA, since it was
carefully constructed to be genre balanced (e.g.,
compared to the Google N-Grams; Pechenick et al.,
2015). We built lexicons for all adjectives with
counts above 100 in a given decade and also for the
top-5000 non-stop words within each year. In both
these cases we found that>5% of sentiment-bearing
(positive/negative) words completely switched po-
larity during this 150-year time-period and >25%
of all words changed their sentiment label (includ-
ing switches to/from neutral).11 The prevalence of

11We defined the thresholds for polar vs. neutral using the
class-mass normalization method and compared scores aver-

602



(a) Lean becomes more positive. Lean underwent amelioration,
becoming more similar to muscular and less similar to weak.

(b) Pathetic becomes more negative. Pathetic underwent pejo-
ration, becoming similar to weak and less similar to passionate.

Figure 6: Examples of amelioration and pejoration.

full polarity switches highlights the importance of
historical sentiment lexicons for work on diachronic
linguistics and cultural change.

Figure 6a shows an example amelioration de-
tected by this method: the word lean lost its neg-
ative connotations associated with “weakness” and
instead became positively associated with concepts
like “muscularity” and “fitness”. Figure 6b shows
an example pejoration, where pathetic, which used
to be more synonymous with passionate, gained
stronger negative associations with the concepts
of “weakness” and “inadequacy” (Simpson et al.,
1989). In both these cases, semantic similarities
computed using our learned historical word vectors
were used to contextualize the shifts.

Some other well-known examples of sentiment
changes captured by our framework include the se-
mantic bleaching of sorry, which shifted from nega-
tive and serious (“he was in a sorry state”) to uses
as a neutral discourse marker (“sorry about that”)
and worldly, which used to have negative conno-
tations related to materialism and religious impu-
rity (“sinful worldly pursuits”) but now is frequently
used to indicate sophistication (“a cultured, worldly
woman”) (Simpson et al., 1989). Our hope is that
the full lexicons released with this work will spur
further examinations of such historical shifts in sen-
timent, while also facilitating CSS applications that
require sentiment ratings for historical text.

7 Conclusion

SENTPROP allows researchers to easily induce ro-
bust and accurate sentiment lexicons that are rel-

aged over 1850-1880 to those averaged over 1970-2000.

evant to their particular domain of study. Such
lexicons are crucial to CSS research, as evidenced
by our two studies showing that sentiment depends
strongly on both social and historical context.

Our methodological comparisons show that sim-
ply combining label propagation with high-quality
word vector embeddings can achieve state-of-the-
art performance competitive with methods that rely
on hand-curated dictionaries, and the code pack-
age released with this work contains a full bench-
mark toolkit for this area, including implementations
of several variants of SENTPROP. We hope these
tools will facilitate future quantitative studies on the
domain-dependency of sentiment.

Of course, the sentiment lexicons induced by
SENTPROP are not perfect, which is reflected in the
uncertainty associated with our bootstrap-sampled
estimates. However, we believe that these user-
constructed, domain-specific lexicons, which quan-
tify uncertainty, provide a more principled founda-
tion for CSS research compared to domain-general
sentiment lexicons that contain unknown biases.
In the future our method could also be integrated
with supervised domain-adaption (e.g.,Yang and
Eisenstein, 2015) to further improve these domain-
specific results.

Acknowledgements

The authors thank P. Liang for his helpful com-
ments. This research has been supported in part
by NSF CNS-1010921, IIS-1149837, IIS-1514268
NIH BD2K, ARO MURI, DARPA XDATA, DARPA
SIMPLEX, Stanford Data Science Initiative, SAP
Stanford Graduate Fellowship, NSERC PGS-D,
Boeing, Lightspeed, and Volkswagen.

603



References
Muhammad Zubair Asghar, Aurangzeb Khan, Shakeel

Ahmad, Imran Ali Khan, and Fazal Masud Kundi.
2015. A Unified Framework for Creating Domain De-
pendent Polarity Lexicons from User Generated Re-
views. PLOS ONE, 10(10):e0140204, October.

Sasha Blair-Goldensohn, Kerry Hannan, Ryan McDon-
ald, Tyler Neylon, George A. Reis, and Jeff Reynar.
2008. Building a sentiment summarizer for local ser-
vice reviews. In WWW Workshop on NLP in the Infor-
mation Explosion Era.

Felipe Bravo-Marquez, Eibe Frank, and Bernhard
Pfahringer. 2015. From Unlabelled Tweets to Twitter-
specific Opinion Words. In SIGIR.

John A. Bullinaria and Joseph P. Levy. 2012. Extract-
ing semantic representations from word co-occurrence
statistics: stop-lists, stemming, and SVD. Behavior
Research Methods, 44(3):890–907, September.

Yejin Choi and Claire Cardie. 2009. Adapting a polarity
lexicon using integer linear programming for domain-
specific sentiment classification. In EMNLP.

Paul Cook and Suzanne Stevenson. 2010. Automati-
cally Identifying Changes in the Semantic Orientation
of Words. In LREC.

Mark Davies. 2010. The Corpus of Historical
American English: 400 million words, 1810-2009.
http://corpus.byu.edu/coha/.

Lingjia Deng, Janyce Wiebe, and Yoonjung Choi. 2014.
Joint inference and disambiguation of implicit senti-
ments via implicature constraints. In COLING.

Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2006. Sentiword-
net: A publicly available lexical resource for opinion
mining. In LREC.

Ethan Fast, Binbin Chen, and Michael S. Bernstein.
2016. Empath: Understanding Topic Signals in Large-
Scale Text. In CHI.

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet. Wiley Online Li-
brary.

William L. Hamilton, Jure Leskovec, and Dan Jurafsky.
2016. Diachronic Word Embeddings Reveal Statisti-
cal Laws of Semantic Change. In ACL.

Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou and Kathleen R. McKeown.
1997. Predicting the semantic orientation of adjec-
tives. In EACL.

Iris Hendrickx, Michel Gnreux, and Rita Marquilhas.
2011. Automatic pragmatic text segmentation of his-
torical letters. In Language Technology for Cultural
Heritage, pages 135–153. Springer.

Dirk Hovy. 2015. Demographic factors improve classifi-
cation performance. In ACL.

Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. 2004. Mining and summariz-
ing customer reviews. In KDD.

Sheng Huang, Zhendong Niu, and Chongyang Shi.
2014. Automatic construction of domain-specific sen-
timent lexicon based on constrained label propagation.
Knowledge-Based Systems, 56:191–200.

Sean P. Igo and Ellen Riloff. 2009. Corpus-based seman-
tic lexicon induction with web-based corroboration. In
ACL Workshop on Unsupervised and Minimally Super-
vised Learning of Lexical Semantics.

Valentin Jijkoun, Maarten de Rijke, and Wouter
Weerkamp. 2010. Generating focused topic-specific
sentiment lexicons. In ACL.

Jaap Kamps, M. J. Marx, Robert J. Mokken, and M. de
Rijke. 2004. Using wordnet to measure semantic ori-
entations of adjectives. In LREC.

William Labov. 2006. The social stratification of English
in New York City. Cambridge University Press.

Thomas K. Landauer and Susan T. Dumais. 1997. A so-
lution to Plato’s problem: The latent semantic analysis
theory of acquisition, induction, and representation of
knowledge. Psychol. Rev., 104(2):211.

Heeyoung Lee, Mihai Surdeanu, Bill MacCartney, and
Dan Jurafsky. 2014. On the Importance of Text Anal-
ysis for Stock Price Prediction. In LREC.

Omer Levy, Yoav Goldberg, and Ido Dagan. 2015. Im-
proving distributional similarity with lessons learned
from word embeddings. Trans. Assoc. Comput. Ling.,
3.

Tim Loughran and Bill McDonald. 2011. When is a
liability not a liability? Textual analysis, dictionaries,
and 10-Ks. The Journal of Finance, 66(1):35–65.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S. Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representations
of words and phrases and their compositionality. In
NIPS.

Saif M. Mohammad and Peter D. Turney. 2010. Emo-
tions evoked by common words and phrases: Using
Mechanical Turk to create an emotion lexicon. In
NAACL.

Aditi Muralidharan and Marti A Hearst. 2012. Support-
ing exploratory text analysis in literature study. Liter-
ary and Linguistic Computing.

Eitan Adam Pechenick, Christopher M. Danforth, and
Peter Sheridan Dodds. 2015. Characterizing the
Google Books corpus: Strong limits to inferences of
socio-cultural and linguistic evolution. PLoS ONE,
10(10).

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D.
Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word rep-
resentation. In EMNLP.

Michael Piotrowski. 2012. Natural language processing
for historical texts. Synthesis Lectures on Human Lan-
guage Technologies, 5(2):1–157.

604



Guang Qiu, Bing Liu, Jiajun Bu, and Chun Chen. 2009.
Expanding Domain Sentiment Lexicon through Dou-
ble Propagation. In IJCAI.

Delip Rao and Deepak Ravichandran. 2009. Semi-
supervised polarity lexicon induction. In EACL.

Ellen Riloff and Jessica Shepherd. 1997. A corpus-
based approach for building semantic lexicons. arXiv
preprint cmp-lg/9706013.

Mats Rooth, Stefan Riezler, Detlef Prescher, Glenn Car-
roll, and Franz Beil. 1999. Inducing a semantically
annotated lexicon via EM-based clustering. In ACL.

Sara Rosenthal, Preslav Nakov, Svetlana Kiritchenko,
Saif M. Mohammad, Alan Ritter, and Veselin Stoy-
anov. 2015. SemEval-2015 task 10: Sentiment analy-
sis in Twitter. SemEval-2015.

Sascha Rothe, Sebastian Ebert, and Hinrich Schutze.
2016. Ultradense Word Embeddings by Orthogonal
Transformation. In NAACL-HLT.

Inaki San Vicente, Rodrigo Agerri, German Rigau, and
Donostia-San Sebastin. 2014. Simple, Robust and (al-
most) Unsupervised Generation of Polarity Lexicons
for Multiple Languages. In EACL.

Aliaksei Severyn and Alessandro Moschitti. 2015. On
the automatic learning of sentiment lexicons. In
NAACL-HLT.

John Andrew Simpson, Edmund SC Weiner, et al. 1989.
The Oxford English Dictionary, volume 2. Clarendon
Press Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Michael Speriosu, Nikita Sudan, Sid Upadhyay, and Ja-
son Baldridge. 2011. Twitter polarity classifica-
tion with label propagation over lexical links and the
follower graph. In ACL Workshop on Unsupervised
Learning in NLP.

Philip J Stone, Dexter C Dunphy, and Marshall S Smith.
1966. The General Inquirer: A Computer Approach to
Content Analysis.

Maite Taboada, Julian Brooke, Milan Tofiloski, Kimberly
Voll, and Manfred Stede. 2011. Lexicon-based meth-
ods for sentiment analysis. Comput. Ling., 37(2):267–
307.

Yen-Jen Tai and Hung-Yu Kao. 2013. Automatic
domain-specific sentiment lexicon generation with la-
bel propagation. In Proceedings of International Con-
ference on Information Integration and Web-based Ap-
plications & Services, page 53. ACM.

Hiroya Takamura, Takashi Inui, and Manabu Okumura.
2005. Extracting semantic orientations of words using
spin model. In ACL.

Duyu Tang, Furu Wei, Bing Qin, Ming Zhou, and Ting
Liu. 2014. Building Large-Scale Twitter-Specific
Sentiment Lexicon: A Representation Learning Ap-
proach. In COLING.

Michael Thelen and Ellen Riloff. 2002. A bootstrapping
method for learning semantic lexicons using extraction
pattern contexts. In EMNLP.

Elizabeth Closs Traugott and Richard B Dasher. 2001.
Regularity in Semantic Change. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, UK.

Peter Trudgill. 1974. Linguistic change and diffusion:
Description and explanation in sociolinguistic dialect
geography. Language in Society, 3(2):215–246.

Peter D. Turney and Michael L. Littman. 2003. Mea-
suring praise and criticism: Inference of semantic
orientation from association. ACM Trans. Inf. Sys.,
21(4):315–346.

Peter D. Turney and Patrick Pantel. 2010. From fre-
quency to meaning: Vector space models of semantics.
J. Artif. Intell. Res., 37(1):141–188.

Leonid Velikovich, Sasha Blair-Goldensohn, Kerry Han-
nan, and Ryan McDonald. 2010. The viability of web-
derived polarity lexicons. In NAACL-HLT.

Amy Beth Warriner, Victor Kuperman, and Marc Brys-
baert. 2013. Norms of valence, arousal, and domi-
nance for 13,915 English lemmas. Behavior research
methods, 45(4):1191–1207.

Dominic Widdows and Beate Dorow. 2002. A graph
model for unsupervised lexical acquisition. In COL-
ING.

Yi Yang and Jacob Eisenstein. 2015. Putting Things
in Context: Community-specific Embedding Pro-
jections for Sentiment Analysis. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.06052.

Dengyong Zhou, Olivier Bousquet, Thomas Navin Lal,
Jason Weston, and Bernhard Scholkopf. 2004. Learn-
ing with local and global consistency. In NIPS.

Xiaojin Zhu and Zoubin Ghahramani. 2002. Learning
from labeled and unlabeled data with label propaga-
tion. Technical report.

Xiaojin Zhu, Zoubin Ghahramani, John Lafferty, and oth-
ers. 2003. Semi-supervised learning using Gaussian
fields and harmonic functions. In ICML.

605


