



















































HUME: Human UCCA-Based Evaluation of Machine Translation


Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1264–1274,
Austin, Texas, November 1-5, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

HUME: Human UCCA-Based Evaluation of Machine Translation

Alexandra Birch1∗, Omri Abend2*, Ondřej Bojar3*, Barry Haddow1*
1School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh

2School of Computer Science and Engineering, Hebrew University of Jerusalem
3 Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics

a.birch@ed.ac.uk, oabend@cs.huji.ac.il
bojar@ufal.mff.cuni.cz, bhaddow@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract

Human evaluation of machine translation nor-
mally uses sentence-level measures such as
relative ranking or adequacy scales. However,
these provide no insight into possible errors,
and do not scale well with sentence length.
We argue for a semantics-based evaluation,
which captures what meaning components are
retained in the MT output, thus providing a
more fine-grained analysis of translation qual-
ity, and enabling the construction and tuning
of semantics-based MT. We present a novel
human semantic evaluation measure, Human
UCCA-based MT Evaluation (HUME), build-
ing on the UCCA semantic representation
scheme. HUME covers a wider range of se-
mantic phenomena than previous methods and
does not rely on semantic annotation of the
potentially garbled MT output. We experi-
ment with four language pairs, demonstrating
HUME’s broad applicability, and report good
inter-annotator agreement rates and correla-
tion with human adequacy scores.

1 Introduction

Human judgement should be the ultimate test of the
quality of an MT system. Nevertheless, common
measures for human MT evaluation, such as ade-
quacy and fluency judgements or the relative rank-
ing of possible translations, are problematic in two
ways. First, as the quality of translation is multi-
faceted, it is difficult to quantify the quality of the
entire sentence in a single number. This is indeed

∗∗ All authors contributed equally to this work.

reflected in the diminishing inter-annotator agree-
ment (IAA) rates of human ranking measures with
the sentence length (Bojar et al., 2011). Second, a
sentence-level quality score does not indicate what
parts of the sentence are badly translated, and so
cannot inform developers in repairing these errors.

These problems are partially addressed by mea-
sures that decompose over parts of the evaluated
translation, often words or n-grams (see §2 for a
brief survey of previous work). A promising line
of research decomposes metrics over semantically
defined units, quantifying the similarity of the out-
put and the reference in terms of their verb argu-
ment structure; the most notable of these measures
is HMEANT (Lo and Wu, 2011).

We propose the HUME metric, a human evalua-
tion measure that decomposes over UCCA semantic
units. UCCA (Abend and Rappoport, 2013) is an
appealing candidate for semantic analysis, due to its
cross-linguistic applicability, support for rapid anno-
tation, and coverage of many fundamental semantic
phenomena, such as verbal, nominal and adjectival
argument structures and their inter-relations.

HUME operates by aggregating human assess-
ments of the translation quality of individual seman-
tic units in the source sentence. We are thus avoiding
the semantic annotation of machine-generated text,
which is often garbled or semantically unclear. This
also allows the re-use of the source semantic anno-
tation for measuring the quality of different transla-
tions of the same source sentence and avoids relying
on reference translations, which have been shown to
bias annotators (Fomicheva and Specia, 2016).

After a brief review (§2), we describe HUME in

1264



detail (§3). Our experiments with four language
pairs: English to Czech, German, Polish and Roma-
nian (§4) document HUME’s inter-annotator agree-
ment and efficiency (time of annotation). We further
empirically compare HUME with direct assessment
of human adequacy ratings (§5), and conclude by
discussing the differences with HMEANT (§6).

2 Background

MT Evaluation. Human evaluation is generally
done by ranking the outputs of multiple systems
e.g., in the WMT tasks (Bojar et al., 2015), or by
assigning adequacy/fluency scores to each transla-
tion, a procedure recently improved by Graham et
al. (2015b) under the title Direct Assessment. We
use this latter method to compare and contrast with
HUME later in the paper. HTER (Snover et al.,
2006) is another widely used human evaluation met-
ric which uses edit distance metrics to compare a
translation and its human post-edition. HTER suf-
fers from the problem that small edits in the transla-
tion could in fact be serious flaws in accuracy, e.g.,
deleting a negation. Some manual measures ask an-
notators to explicitly mark errors, but this has been
found to have even lower agreement than ranking
(Lommel et al., 2014).

However, while providing the gold standard for
MT evaluation, human evaluation is not a scalable
solution. Scalability is addressed by employing au-
tomatic and semi-automatic approximations of hu-
man judgements. Commonly, such scores decom-
pose over the sub-parts of the translation, and quan-
tify how many of these sub-parts appear in a manu-
ally created reference translation. This decomposi-
tion allows system developers to localize the errors.
The most commonly used measures decompose over
n-grams or individual words, e.g., BLEU (Papineni
et al., 2002), NIST (Doddington, 2002) and ME-
TEOR (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005). Another com-
mon approach is to determine the similarity between
the reference and translation in terms of string edits
(Snover et al., 2006). While these measures stimu-
lated much progress in MT research by allowing the
evaluation of massive-scale experiments, the focus
on words and n-grams does not provide a good esti-
mate of semantic correctness, and may favour shal-
low string-based MT models.

L Linker A Participant
H Parallel Scene R Relater
P Process C Centre

Figure 1: Sample UCCA annotation. Leaves correspond
to words and nodes to units. The dashed edge indicates
that “Tom” is also a participant in the “moved to Amer-
ica” Scene. Edge labels mark UCCA categories.

In order to address this shortcoming, more recent
work quantified the similarity of the reference and
translation in terms of their structure. Liu and Gildea
(2005) took a syntactic approach, using dependency
grammar, and Owczarzak et al. (2007) took a sim-
ilar approach using Lexical Functional Grammar
structures. Giménez and Màrquez (2007) proposed
to combine multiple types of information, captur-
ing the overlap between the translation and refer-
ence in terms of their semantic (predicate-argument
structures), lexical and morphosyntactic features.
Macháček and Bojar (2015) divided the source sen-
tences into shorter segments, defined using a phrase
structure parse, and applied human ranking to the
resulting segments.

Perhaps the most notable attempt at semantic
MT evaluation is MEANT and its human variant
HMEANT (Lo and Wu, 2011), which quantifies the
similarity between the reference and translation in
terms of the overlap in their verbal argument struc-
tures and associated semantic roles. We discuss the
differences between HMEANT and HUME in §6.

Semantic Representation. UCCA (Universal
Conceptual Cognitive Annotation) (Abend and
Rappoport, 2013) is a cross-linguistically applicable
scheme for semantic annotation. Formally, an
UCCA structure is a directed acyclic graph (DAG),
whose leaves correspond to the words of the text.
The graph’s nodes, called units, are either terminals
or several elements jointly viewed as a single entity
according to some semantic or cognitive considera-
tion. Edges bear a category, indicating the role of
the sub-unit in the structure the unit represents.

UCCA’s basic inventory of distinctions (its foun-
dational layer) focuses on argument structures (ad-

1265



jectival, nominal, verbal and others) and relations
between them. The most basic notion is the Scene,
which describes a movement, an action or a state
which persists in time. Each Scene contains one
main relation and zero or more participants. For ex-
ample, the sentence “After graduation, Tom moved
to America” contains two Scenes, whose main rela-
tions are “graduation” and “moved”. The participant
“Tom” is a part of both Scenes, while “America”
only of the latter (Figure 1). Further categories ac-
count for inter-scene relations and the sub-structures
of participants and relations.

The use of UCCA for semantic MT evaluation
has several motivations. First, UCCA’s foundational
layer can be annotated by non-experts after a short
training (Abend and Rappoport, 2013; Marinotti,
2014). Second, UCCA is cross-linguistically appli-
cable, seeking to represent what is shared between
languages by building on linguistic typological the-
ory (Dixon, 2010b; Dixon, 2010a; Dixon, 2012). Its
cross-linguistic applicability has so far been tested in
annotations of English, French, German and Czech.
Third, the scheme has been shown to be stable across
translations: UCCA annotations of translated text
usually contain the same set of relations (Sulem et
al., 2015), indicating that UCCA reflects a layer of
representation that in a correct translation is mostly
shared between the translation and the source.

The Abstract Meaning Representation (AMR)
(Banarescu et al., 2013) shares UCCA’s motivation
for defining a more complete semantic annotation.
However, using AMR is not optimal for defining a
decomposition of a sentence into semantic units as
it does not anchor its semantic symbols in the text,
and thus does not provide clear decomposition of the
sentence into sub-spans. Also, AMR is more fine-
grained than UCCA and consequently harder to an-
notate. Other approaches represent semantic struc-
tures as bi-lexical dependencies (Sgall et al., 1986;
Hajič et al., 2012; Oepen and Lønning, 2006), which
are indeed anchored in the text, but are less suitable
for MT evaluation as they require linguistic exper-
tise for their annotation.

3 The HUME Measure

3.1 Annotation Procedure
This section summarises the manual annotation

procedure used to compute the HUME measure. We
denote the source sentence as s and the translation
as t. The procedure involves two manual steps: (1)
UCCA-annotating s, (2) HUME-annotation: human
judgements as to the translation quality of each se-
mantic unit of s relative to t, where units are defined
according to the UCCA annotation. UCCA annota-
tion is performed once for every source sentence, ir-
respective of the number of its translations we wish
to evaluate, and requires proficiency in the source
language only. HUME annotation requires the em-
ployment of bilingual annotators.1

UCCA Annotation. We begin by creating UCCA
annotations for the source sentence, following the
UCCA guidelines.2 A UCCA annotation for a sen-
tence s is a labeled DAG G, whose leaves are the
words of s. For every node in G, we define its yield
to be its leaf descendants. The semantic units for s
according to G are the yields of nodes in G.

Translation Evaluation. HUME annotation is
done by traversing the semantic units of the source
sentence, which correspond to the arguments and re-
lations expressed in the text, and marking the ex-
tent to which they have been correctly translated.
HUME aggregates the judgements of the users into
a composite score, which reflects the overall extent
to which the semantic content of s is preserved in t.

Annotation of the semantic units requires first de-
ciding whether a unit is structural, i.e., has meaning-
bearing sub-units in the target language, or atomic.
In most cases, atomic units correspond to individual
words, but they may also correspond to multi-word
expressions that translate as one unit. For instance,
the expression “took a shower” is translated into the
German “duschte”, while its individual words do not
correspond to any sub-part of the German transla-
tion, motivating the labeling the entire expression as
an atomic node. When a multi-word unit is labeled

1Where bilingual annotators are not available, the evaluation
could be based on the UCCA structure for the reference trans-
lation. See discussion in §6.

2All UCCA-related resources can be found here: http:
//www.cs.huji.ac.il/~oabend/ucca.html

1266



Figure 2: HUME annotation of an UCCA tree with a
word-aligned example translation shown below. Atomic
units are labelled using traffic lights (Red, Orange,
Green) and structural units are marked A or B.

as atomic, its sub-units’ annotations are ignored in
the evaluation.

Atomic units can be labelled as “Green” (G, cor-
rect), “Orange” (O, partially correct) and “Red” (R,
incorrect). Green means that the meaning of the
word or phrase has been largely preserved. Orange
means that the essential meaning of the unit has been
preserved, but some part of the translation is wrong.
This is often be due to the translated word having the
wrong inflection, in a way that impacts little on the
understandability of the sentence. Red means that
the essential meaning of the unit has not been cap-
tured.

Structural units have sub-units (children in the
UCCA graph), which are themselves atomic or
structural. Structural units are labeled as “Adequate”
(A) or “Bad” (B), meaning that the relation between
the sub-units went wrong3. We will use the exam-
ple “man bites dog” to illustrate typical examples of
why a structural node should be labelled as “Bad”:
incorrect ordering (“dog bites man”), deletion (“man
bites”) and insertion (“man bites biscuit dog”).

HUME labels reflect adequacy, rather than flu-
ency judgements. Specifically, annotators are in-
structed to label a unit as Adequate if its translation
is understandable and preserves the meaning of the
source unit, even if its fluency is impaired.

Figure 2 presents an example of a HUME annota-
tion, where the translation is in English for ease of
comprehension. When evaluating “to America” the
annotator looks at the translation and sees the word
“stateside”. This word captures the whole phrase

3Three labels are used with atomic units, as opposed to two
labels with structural units, as atomic units are more susceptible
to slight errors.

and so we mark this non-leaf node with an atomic la-
bel. Here we choose Orange since it approximately
captures the meaning in this context. The ability to
mark non-leaves with atomic labels allows the an-
notator to account for translations which only cor-
respond at the phrase level. Another feature high-
lighted in this example is that by separating struc-
tural and atomic units, we are able to define where
an error occurs, and localise the error to its point of
origin. The linker “After” is translated incorrectly as
“by” which changes the meaning of the entire sen-
tence. This error is captured at the atomic level, and
it is labelled Red. The sentence still contains two
Scenes and a Linker and therefore we mark the root
node as structurally correct, Adequate.
3.2 Composite Score

We proceed to detailing how judgements on the
semantic units of the source are aggregated into a
composite score. We start by taking a very sim-
ple approach and compute an accuracy score. Let
Green(s, t), Adequate(s, t) and Orange(s, t) be the
number of Green, Adequate and Orange units, re-
spectively. Let Units(s) be the number of units
marked with any of the labels. Then HUME’s com-
posite score is:

HUME(s, t) =
Green(s, t) + Adequate(s, t) + 0.5 · Orange(s, t)

Units(s)

3.3 Annotation Interface
Figure 3 shows the HUME annotation interface4.

One source sentence and one translation are pre-
sented at a time. The user is asked to select a label
for each source semantic unit, by clicking the “A”,
“B”, Green, Orange, or Red buttons to the right of
the unit’s box. Units with multiple parents (as with
“Tom” in Figure 2) are displayed twice, once under
each of their parents, but are only annotatable in one
of their instances, to avoid double counting.

The interface presents, for each unit, the transla-
tion segment aligned with it. This allows the user,
especially in long sentences, to focus her attention
on the parts that are most likely to be relevant for her
judgement. As the alignments are automatically de-
rived, and therefore noisy, the annotator is instructed
to treat the aligned text is a cue, but to ignore the
alignment if it is misleading, and instead make a

4A demo of HUME can be found in www.cs.huji.ac.
il/~oabend/hume_demo.html

1267



Figure 3: The HUME annotation tool. The top orange box contains the translation. The source sentence is directly
below it, followed by the tree of the source semantic units. Alignments between the source and translation are in italics
and unaligned intervening words are in red (see text).

judgement according to the full translation. Con-
cretely, let s be a source sentence, t a translation, and
A ⊂ 2s×2t a many-to-many word alignment. If u is
a semantic unit in s, whose yield is yld(u), we define
the aligned text in t to be

⋃
(xs,xt)∈A∧xs∩yld(u)6=∅ xt.

Where the aligned text is discontinuous in t,
words between the left and right boundaries which
are not contained in it (intervening words) are pre-
sented in a smaller red font. Intervening words are
likely to change the meaning of the translation of
u, and thus should be attended to when considering
whether the translation is correct or not.

For example, in Figure 3, “ongoing pregnancy”
is translated to “Schwangerschaft ... laufenden” (lit.
“pregnancy ... ongoing”). This alone seems accept-
able but the interleaving words in red notify the an-
notator to check the whole translation, in which the
meaning of the expression is not preserved5. The
annotator should thus mark this structural node as
Bad.

4 Experiments

In order to validate the HUME metric, we ran an an-
notation experiment with one source language (En-
glish), and four target languages (Czech, German,
Polish and Romanian), using text from the public
health domain. Semantically accurate translation is
paramount in this domain, which makes it particu-
larly suitable for semantic MT evaluation. HUME is
evaluated in terms of its consistency (inter-annotator

5The interleaving words are “... und beide berichtet
berichteten ...” (lit. “... and both report reported ...”), which
doesn’t form any coherent relation with the rest of the sentence.

agreement), efficiency (time of annotation) and va-
lidity (by comparing it with crowd-sourced ade-
quacy judgements).
4.1 Datasets and Translation Systems

For each of the four language pairs under con-
sideration we built phrase-based MT systems using
Moses (Koehn et al., 2007). These were trained
on large parallel data sets extracted from OPUS
(Tiedemann, 2009), and the data sets released for
the WMT14 medical translation task (Bojar et al.,
2014), giving between 45 and 85 million sentences
of training data, depending on the language pair.
These translation systems were used to translate
texts derived from both NHS 246 and Cochrane7 into
the four languages. NHS 24 is a public body provid-
ing healthcare and health-service related informa-
tion in Scotland; Cochrane is an international NGO
which provides independent systematic reviews on
health-related research. NHS 24 texts come from the
“Health A-Z” section in the NHS Inform website,
and Cochrane texts come from their plain language
summaries and abstracts.
4.2 HUME Annotation Statistics

The source sentences are all in English, and their
UCCA annotation was performed by four computa-
tional linguists and one linguist. For the annotation
of the MT output, we recruited two annotators for
each of German, Romanian and Polish and one main
annotator for Czech. For computing Czech IAA,
several further annotators worked on a small number
of sentences each. We treat these further annotators

6http://www.nhs24.com/
7http://www.cochrane.org/

1268



cs de pl ro
#Sentences Annot. 1 324 339 351 230

Annot. 2 205 104 340 337
#Units Annot. 1 8794 9253 9557 6152

Annot. 2 5553 2906 9303 9228
Table 1: HUME-annotated #sentences and #units.

cs de pl ro
Annot. 1 255 140 138 96
Annot. 2 ∗ 162 229 207

Table 2: Median annotation times per sentence, in sec-
onds. ∗: no timing information is available, as this was a
collection of annotators, working in parallel.

as one annotator, resulting in two annotators for each
language pair. The annotators were all native speak-
ers of the respective target languages and fluent in
English. They completed a three hour on-line train-
ing session which included a description of UCCA
and the HUME task, followed by walking through a
few examples.

Table 1 shows the total number of sentences and
units annotated by each annotator. Not all units in all
sentences were annotated, often due to the annotator
accidentally missing a node.

Efficiency. We estimate the annotation time us-
ing the timestamps provided by the annotation tool,
which are recorded whenever an annotated sentence
is submitted. Annotators are not able to re-open a
sentence once submitted. To estimate the annota-
tion time, we compute the time difference between
successive sentences, and discard outlying times,
assuming annotation was not continuous in these
cases. From inspection of histograms of annotation
times, we set the upper threshold at 500 seconds.
Median annotation times are presented in Table 2,
indicating that the annotation of a sentence takes
around 2–4 minutes, with some variation between
annotators.

Inter-Annotator Agreement. In order to assess
the consistency of the annotation, we measure the
Inter-Annotator Agreement (IAA) using Cohen’s
Kappa on the multiply-annotated units. Table 3 re-
ports the number of units which have two annota-
tions from different annotators and the correspond-
ing Kappas. We report the overall Kappa, as well as
separate Kappas on atomic units (annotated as Red,
Orange or Green) and structural units (annotated as

cs de pl ro
Sentences 181 102 334 217
All units 4686 2793 8384 5604
Kappa 0.64 0.61 0.58 0.69
Atomic units 2982 1724 5386 3570
Kappa 0.54 0.29 0.54 0.50
Structural units 1602 1040 2655 1989
Kappa 0.31 0.44 0.33 0.58

Table 3: IAA for the multiply-annotated units, measured
by Cohen’s Kappa.

(a) English-Czech (b) English-German

(c) English-Polish (d) English-Romanian

Figure 4: Confusion matrices for each language pair.

Adequate or Bad). As expected and confirmed by
confusion matrices in Figure 4, there is generally lit-
tle confusion between the two types of units. This
results in the Kappa for all units being considerably
higher than the Kappa over the atomic units or struc-
tural units, where there is more internal confusion.

To assess HUME reliability for long sentences,
we binned the sentences according to length and
measured Kappa on each bin (Figure 5). We see no
discernible reduction of IAA with sentence length.
Table 3 also shows that the overall IAA is similar
for all languages, presenting good agreement (0.6–
0.7). However, there are differences observed when
we break down by node type. Specifically, we see a
contrast between Czech and Polish, where the IAA
is higher for atomic than for structural units, and
German and Romanian, where the reverse is true.
We also observe low IAA (around 0.3) in the cases
of German atomic units, and Polish and Czech struc-
tural units.

Looking more closely at the areas of disagree-

1269



(a) English-Czech (b) English-German

(c) English-Polish (d) English-Romanian

Figure 5: Kappa versus sentence length for structural and
atomic units. (Node counts in bins on top of each bar.)

ment, we see that for the Polish structural units, the
proportion of As was quite different between the two
annotators (53% vs. 71%), whereas for other lan-
guages the annotators agree in the proportions. We
believe that this was because one of the Polish an-
notators did not fully understand the guidelines for
structural units, and percolated errors up the tree,
creating more Bs. For German atomic and Czech
structural units, where Kappa is also around 0.3, the
proportion of such units being marked as “correct” is
relatively high, meaning that the class distribution is
more skewed, so the expected agreement used in the
Kappa calculation is high, lowering Kappa. Finally
we note some evidence of domain-specific disagree-
ments, for instance the German MT system normally
translated “review” (as in “systematic review” – a
frequent term in the Cochrane texts) as “Überprü-
fung”, which one annotator marked correct, and the
other (a Cochrane employee) as incorrect.

5 Comparison with Direct Assessment

Recent research (Graham et al., 2015b; Graham et
al., 2015a; Graham, 2015) has proposed a new ap-
proach for collecting accuracy ratings, direct assess-
ment (DA). Statistical interpretation of a large num-
ber of crowd-sourced adequacy judgements for each
candidate translation on a fine-grained scale of 0 to
100 results in reliable aggregate scores, that corre-
late very strongly with one another.

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
HUME scores

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

D
A

 s
co

re
s

(a) English-German

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
HUME scores

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

D
A

 s
co

re
s

(b) English-Romanian

Figure 6: HUME vs DA scores. DA score have been stan-
dardised for each crowdsourcing annotator and averaged
across exactly 10 annotators. HUME scores are averaged
where there were two annotations.

We attempted to follow Graham et al. (2015b) but
struggled to get enough crowd-sourced judgements
for our target languages. We ended up with 10 ade-
quacy judgements on most of the HUME annotated
translations for German and Romanian but insuffi-
cient data for Czech and Polish. We see this as a
severe practical limitation of DA.

Figure 6 plots the HUME score for each sentence
against its DA score. HUME and Direct Assessment
scores correlate reasonably well. The Pearson corre-
lation for en-ro (en-de) is 0.70 (0.58), or 0.78 (0.74)
if only doubly HUME-annotated points are consid-
ered. This confirms that HUME is consistent with
an accepted human evaluation method, despite their
conceptual differences. While DA is a valuable tool,
HUME has two advantages: it returns fine-grained

1270



a
ll 

a
to

m
ic

 

st
ru

ct
 

P
 a

n
d
 S

 

H
 

A
 

C
 

E
 

L 0.1

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

C
o
rr

e
la

ti
o
n

German

Romanian

Figure 7: Pearson correlation of HUME vs. DA scores
for en-ro and en-de. Each bar represents a correlation
between DA and an aggregate HUME score based on
a sub-set of the units (#nodes for the en-de/en-ro set-
ting in brackets): all units (“all”, 8624/10885), atomic
(“atomic”, 5417/6888) and structural units (“struct”,
3207/3997), and units by UCCA categories: Scene
main relations (i.e, Process and State units; “P and S”,
954/1178), Parallel Scenes (“H”, 656/784), Participants
(“A”, 1348/1746), Centres (“C”, 1904/2474), elaborators
(“E”, 1608/2031) and linkers (“L”, 261/315).

semantic information about the quality of transla-
tions and it only requires very few annotators. Di-
rect assessment returns a single opaque score, and
(as also noted by Graham et al.) requires a large
crowd which may not be available or reliable.

Figure 7 presents an analysis of HUME’s corre-
lations with DA by HUME unit type, an analysis
enabled by HUME’s semantic decomposition. For
both target languages, correlation is highest in the
’all’ case, supporting our claim for the value of ag-
gregating over a wide range of semantic phenom-
ena. Some types of nodes predict the DA scores bet-
ter than others. HUME scores on As correlate more
strongly with DA than scores on Scene Main Rela-
tions (P+S). Center nodes (C) are also more corre-
lated than elaborator nodes (E), which is expected
given that Centers are defined to be more semanti-
cally dominant. Future work will construct an aggre-
gate HUME score which weights the different node
types according to their semantic prominence.

HUME and DA are conceputally very different
metrics: while DA standardises and averages scores
across annotators to denoise the crowd-sourced raw
data, thus obtaining a single aggregate score, HUME
decomposes over a combinatorial structure, thus al-

lowing to localize the translation errors. We now
turn to comparing HUME to a more conceptually-
related measure, namely HMEANT.

6 Comparison with HMEANT

HMEANT is a human MT evaluation metric that
measures the overlap between the translation a ref-
erence in terms of their SRL annotations. In this
section we present a qualitative comparison between
HUME and HMEANT, using examples from our ex-
perimental data.

Verbal Structures Only? HMEANT focuses on
verbal argument structures, ignoring other pervasive
phenomena such as non-verbal predicates and inter-
clausal relations. Consider the following example:

Source a coronary angioplasty may not be
technically possible

Transl. eine koronare Angioplastie kann nicht
technisch möglich

Gloss a coronary angioplasty can not techni-
cally possible

The German translation is largely correct, except
that the main verb “sein” (“be”) is omitted. While
this may be interpreted as a minor error, HMEANT
will assign the sentence a very low score, as it failed
to translate the main verb.

It is also relatively common that verbal construc-
tions are translated as non-verbal ones or vice versa.
Consider the following example:

Source ... tend to be higher in saturated fats
Transl. ... in der Regel höher in gesättigte

Fette
Gloss ... as a rule higher in saturated fats

The German translation is largely correct, despite
the grammatical divergence, namely that the English
verb “tend” is translated into the German preposi-
tional phrase “in der Regel” (“as a rule”). HMEANT
will consider the translation to be of poor quality as
there is no German verb to align with the English
one.

We conducted an analysis of the English UCCA
Wikipedia corpus (5324 sentences) in order to assess
the pervasiveness of three phenomena that are not
well supported by HMEANT.8 First, copula clauses

8Argument structures and linkers are explicitly marked in
UCCA. Non-auxiliary instances of “be” and nouns are identi-

1271



are treated in HMEANT simply as instances of the
main verb “be”, which generally does not convey the
meaning of these clauses. They appear in 21.7% of
the sentences, according to conservative estimates
that only consider non-auxiliary instances of “be”.
Second, nominal argument structures, ignored by
HMEANT, are in fact highly pervasive, appearing
in 48.7% of the sentences. Third, linkers that ex-
press inter-relations between clauses (mainly dis-
course markers and conjunctions) appear in 56% of
the sentences, but are again ignored by HMEANT.
For instance, linkers are sometimes omitted in trans-
lation, but these omissions are not penalized by
HMEANT. The following is such an example from
our experimental dataset:

Source However, this review was restricted to
...

Transl. Diese Überprüfung bescränkte sich
auf ...

Gloss This review was restricted to ...
We note that some of these issues were already

observed in previous applications of HMEANT to
languages other than English. See Birch et al. (2013)
for German, Bojar and Wu (2012) for Czech and
Chuchunkov et al. (2014) for Russian.

One Structure or Two. HUME only annotates
the source, while HMEANT relies on two indepen-
dently constructed structural annotations, one for the
reference and one for the translation. Not annotat-
ing the translation is appealing as it is often impos-
sible to assign a semantic structure to a low quality
translation. On the other hand, HUME may be ar-
tificially boosting the perceived understandability of
the translation by allowing access to the source.

Alignment. In HMEANT, the alignment between
the reference and translation structures is a key part
of the manual annotation. If the alignment cannot
be created, the translation is heavily penalized. Bo-
jar and Wu (2012) and Chuchunkov et al. (2014)
argue that the structures of the reference and of an
accurate translation may still diverge, for instance
due to a different interpretation of a PP-attachment,
or the verb having an additional modifier in one of
the structures. It would be desirable to allow mod-
ifications to the SRL annotations at the alignment
fied using the NLTK standard tagger. Nominal argument struc-
tures are here Scenes whose Main Relation is headed by a noun.

stage, to avoid unduly penalizing such spurious di-
vergences.

The same issue is noted by Lo and Wu (2014): the
IAA on SRL dropped from 90% to 61% when the
two aligned structures were from two different an-
notators. HUME uses automatic (word-level) align-
ment, which only serves as a cue for directing the
attention of the annotators. The user is expected to
mentally correct the alignment as needed, thus cir-
cumventing this difficulty.

Monolingual vs. Bilingual Evaluation. HUME
diverges from HMEANT and from shallower mea-
sures like BLEU, in not requiring a reference. In-
stead, it directly compares the source and the trans-
lation. This requires the employment of bilingual
annotators, but has the benefit of avoiding using a
reference, which is never uniquely defined, and may
thus lead to unjustly low scores where the transla-
tion is a paraphrase of the reference. If only mono-
lingual annotators are available, the HUME evalua-
tion could be performed with a reference sentence
instead of with the source. This, however, would
risk inaccurate judgements due to the naturally oc-
curring differences between the source and its refer-
ence translations.

7 Conclusion

We have introduced HUME, a human semantic MT
evaluation measure which addresses a wide range
of semantic phenomena. We have shown that it
can be reliably and efficiently annotated in multi-
ple languages, and that annotation quality is robust
to sentence length. Comparison to direct assess-
ments further support HUME’s validity. We be-
lieve that HUME, and a future automated version of
HUME, allows for a finer-grained analysis of trans-
lation quality, and will be useful in informing the de-
velopment of a more semantically aware approach to
MT.

All annotation data gathered in this project, to-
gether with analysis scripts, is available online9.

Acknowledgments

This project has received funding from the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation pro-
gramme under grant agreement 644402 (HimL).

9https://github.com/bhaddow/hume-emnlp16

1272



References

Omri Abend and Ari Rappoport. 2013. Universal con-
ceptual cognitive annotation (ucca). In Proceedings
of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 228–238, Sofia, Bulgaria, August. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Laura Banarescu, Claire Bonial, Shu Cai, Madalina
Georgescu, Kira Griffitt, Ulf Hermjakob, Kevin
Knight, Philipp Koehn, Martha Palmer, and Nathan
Schneider. 2013. Abstract Meaning Representation
for sembanking. In Proceedings of Linguistic Anno-
tation Workshop and Interoperability with Discourse,
pages 178–186.

Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. METEOR:
An automatic metric for MT evaluation with improved
correlation with human judgments. In Proceedings of
the ACL Workshop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evalu-
ation Measures for Machine Translation and/or Sum-
marization, pages 65–72, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Alexandra Birch, Barry Haddow, Ulrich Germann, Maria
Nadejde, Christian Buck, and Philipp Koehn. 2013.
The feasibility of HMEANT as a human MT evalua-
tion metric. In Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation, pages 52–61, Sofia,
Bulgaria, August. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Ondřej Bojar and Dekai Wu. 2012. Towards a Predicate-
Argument Evaluation for MT. In Proceedings of the
Sixth Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in
Statistical Translation, pages 30–38, Jeju, Republic of
Korea, July. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Ondřej Bojar, Miloš Ercegovčević, Martin Popel, and
Omar F. Zaidan. 2011. A grain of salt for the WMT
manual evaluation. In Proceedings of the Sixth Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 1–11,
Edinburgh, Scotland.

Ondrej Bojar, Christian Buck, Christian Federmann,
Barry Haddow, Philipp Koehn, Johannes Leveling,
Christof Monz, Pavel Pecina, Matt Post, Herve Saint-
Amand, Radu Soricut, Lucia Specia, and Aleš Tam-
chyna. 2014. Findings of the 2014 workshop on statis-
tical machine translation. In Proceedings of the Ninth
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages
12–58, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Ondřej Bojar, Rajen Chatterjee, Christian Federmann,
Barry Haddow, Matthias Huck, Chris Hokamp, Philipp
Koehn, Varvara Logacheva, Christof Monz, Matteo
Negri, Matt Post, Carolina Scarton, Lucia Specia, and
Marco Turchi. 2015. Findings of the 2015 workshop

on statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
the Tenth Workshop on Statistical Machine Transla-
tion, pages 1–46, Lisbon, Portugal, September. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Alexander Chuchunkov, Alexander Tarelkin, and Irina
Galinskaya. 2014. Applying HMEANT to English-
Russian Translations. In Proceedings of SSST-8,
Eighth Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure
in Statistical Translation, pages 43–50, Doha, Qatar,
October. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Robert M.W. Dixon. 2010a. Basic Linguistic Theory:
Grammatical Topics, volume 2. Oxford University
Press.

Robert M.W. Dixon. 2010b. Basic Linguistic Theory:
Methodology, volume 1. Oxford University Press.

Robert M.W. Dixon. 2012. Basic Linguistic Theory:
Further Grammatical Topics, volume 3. Oxford Uni-
versity Press.

George Doddington. 2002. Automatic evaluation of ma-
chine translation quality using n-gram co-occurrence
statistics. In Proceedings of the second interna-
tional conference on Human Language Technology
Research, pages 138–145, San Diego, CA, USA. Mor-
gan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.

Marina Fomicheva and Lucia Specia. 2016. Reference
bias in monolingual machine translation evaluation. In
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, ACL, Berlin, Germany.

Jesús Giménez and Lluís Màrquez. 2007. Linguistic
features for automatic evaluation of heterogenous mt
systems. In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation, pages 256–264.

Yvette Graham, Timothy Baldwin, Alistair Moffat, and
Justin Zobel. 2015a. Can machine translation systems
be evaluated by the crowd alone? Natural Language
Engineering, pages 1–28.

Yvette Graham, Nitika Mathur, and Timothy Baldwin.
2015b. Accurate evaluation of segment-level machine
translation metrics. In Proc. of NAACL-HLT, pages
1183–1191.

Yvette Graham. 2015. Improving evaluation of machine
translation quality estimation. In Proceedings of the
53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics and the 7th International Joint Con-
ference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 1804–1813, Beijing, China, July.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jan Hajič, Eva Hajičová, Jarmila Panevová, Petr Sgall,
Ondřej Bojar, Silvie Cinková, Eva Fučíková, Marie
Mikulová, Petr Pajas, Jan Popelka, Jiří Semecký, Jana
Šindlerová, Jan Štěpánek, Josef Toman, Zdeňka Ure-
šová, and Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2012. Announcing
Prague Czech-English Dependency Treebank 2.0. In

1273



Proceedings of the Eighth International Language Re-
sources and Evaluation Conference (LREC’12), pages
3153–3160, Istanbul, Turkey, May. ELRA, European
Language Resources Association.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
et al. 2007. Moses: Open source toolkit for statis-
tical machine translation. In Proceedings of the 45th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, Companion Volume Proceedings of the
Demo and Poster Sessions, pages 177–180, Prague,
Czech Republic. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Ding Liu and Daniel Gildea. 2005. Syntactic features for
evaluation of machine translation. In ACL 2005 Work-
shop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures
for Machine Translation and/or Summarization, pages
25–32.

Chi-kiu Lo and Dekai Wu. 2011. Structured vs. flat
semantic role representations for machine translation
evaluation. In Proceedings of the Fifth Workshop on
Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Statistical Transla-
tion, pages 10–20. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Chi-Kiu Lo and Dekai Wu. 2014. On the Reliabil-
ity and Inter-Annotator Agreement of Human Seman-
tic MT Evaluation via HMEANT. In Nicoletta Cal-
zolari (Conference Chair), Khalid Choukri, Thierry
Declerck, Hrafn Loftsson, Bente Maegaard, Joseph
Mariani, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios
Piperidis, editors, Proceedings of the Ninth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Evalu-
ation (LREC’14), Reykjavik, Iceland. European Lan-
guage Resources Association (ELRA).

Arle Richard Lommel, Maja Popovic, and Aljoscha Bur-
chardt. 2014. Assessing Inter-Annotator Agreement
for Translation Error Annotation. In MTE: Workshop
on Automatic and Manual Metrics for Operational
Translation Evaluation. LREC.

Matouš Macháček and Ondřej Bojar. 2015. Evaluating
Machine Translation Quality Using Short Segments
Annotations. The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical
Linguistics, 103:85–110, April.

Pedro Marinotti. 2014. Measuring semantic preservation
in machine translation with HCOMET: human cogni-
tive metric for evaluating translation. Master’s thesis,
University of Edinburgh.

Stephan Oepen and Jan Tore Lønning. 2006.
Discriminant-based MRS banking. In Proceedings of
LREC, pages 1250–1255.

Karolina Owczarzak, Josef van Genabith, and Andy Way.
2007. Evaluating machine translation with LFG de-
pendencies. Machine Translation, 21(2):95–119.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 311–318, Philadelphia, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Petr Sgall, Eva Hajičová, and Jarmila Panevová. 1986.
The Meaning of the Sentence and Its Semantic and
Pragmatic Aspects. Academia/Reidel Publishing
Company, Prague, Czech Republic/Dordrecht, Nether-
lands.

Matthew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, Richard Schwartz, Lin-
nea Micciulla, and John Makhoul. 2006. A study of
translation edit rate with targeted human annotation.
In Proceedings of association for machine translation
in the Americas, pages 223–231.

Elior Sulem, Omri Abend, and Ari Rappoport. 2015.
Conceptual annotations preserve structure across
translations: A French-English case study. In ACL
2015 Workshop on Semantics-Driven Statistical Ma-
chine Translation (S2MT), pages 11–22.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2009. News from OPUS – a collection
of multilingual parallel corpora with tools and inter-
faces. In Recent Advances in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, volume 5, pages 237–248, Borovets, Bulgaria.
John Benjamins.

1274


