



















































Modeling Human Reading with Neural Attention


Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 85–95,
Austin, Texas, November 1-5, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Modeling Human Reading with Neural Attention

Michael Hahn Frank Keller
Institute for Language, Cognition and Computation

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
10 Crichton Street, Edinburgh EH8 9AB, UK

s1582047@inf.ed.ac.uk keller@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract
When humans read text, they fixate some
words and skip others. However, there have
been few attempts to explain skipping behav-
ior with computational models, as most ex-
isting work has focused on predicting read-
ing times (e.g., using surprisal). In this pa-
per, we propose a novel approach that models
both skipping and reading, using an unsuper-
vised architecture that combines a neural at-
tention with autoencoding, trained on raw text
using reinforcement learning. Our model ex-
plains human reading behavior as a tradeoff
between precision of language understanding
(encoding the input accurately) and economy
of attention (fixating as few words as possi-
ble). We evaluate the model on the Dundee
eye-tracking corpus, showing that it accurately
predicts skipping behavior and reading times,
is competitive with surprisal, and captures
known qualitative features of human reading.

1 Introduction

Humans read text by making a sequence of fixations
and saccades. During a fixation, the eyes land on a
word and remain fairly static for 200–250 ms. Sac-
cades are the rapid jumps that occur between fixa-
tions, typically lasting 20–40 ms and spanning 7–
9 characters (Rayner, 1998). Readers, however, do
not simply fixate one word after another; some sac-
cades go in reverse direction, and some words are
fixated more than once or skipped altogether.

A range of computational models have been de-
veloped to account for human eye-movements in
reading (Rayner and Reichle, 2010), including mod-
els of saccade generation in cognitive psychology,

such as EZ-Reader (Reichle et al., 1998, 2003,
2009), SWIFT (Engbert et al., 2002, 2005), or
the Bayesian Model of Bicknell and Levy (2010).
More recent approaches use machine learning mod-
els trained on eye-tracking data to predict human
reading patterns (Nilsson and Nivre, 2009, 2010;
Hara et al., 2012; Matthies and Søgaard, 2013).
Both types of models involve theoretical assump-
tions about human eye-movements, or at least re-
quire the selection of relevant eye-movement fea-
tures. Model parameters have to be estimated in a
supervised way from eye-tracking corpora.

Unsupervised approaches, that do not involve
training the model on eye-tracking data, have also
been proposed. A key example is surprisal, which
measures the predictability of a word in context, de-
fined as the negative logarithm of the conditional
probability of the current word given the preced-
ing words (Hale, 2001; Levy, 2008). Surprisal is
computed by a language model, which can take the
form of a probabilistic grammar, an n-gram model,
or a recurrent neural network. While surprisal has
been shown to correlate with word-by-word reading
times (McDonald and Shillcock, 2003a,b; Demberg
and Keller, 2008; Frank and Bod, 2011; Smith and
Levy, 2013), it cannot explain other aspects of hu-
man reading, such as reverse saccades, re-fixations,
or skipping. Skipping is a particularly intriguing
phenomenon: about 40% of all words are skipped
(in the Dundee corpus, see below), without apparent
detriment to text understanding.

In this paper, we propose a novel model architec-
ture that is able to explain which words are skipped
and which ones are fixated, while also predicting

85



reading times for fixated words. Our approach is
completely unsupervised and requires only unla-
beled text for training.

Compared to language as a whole, reading is a
recent innovation in evolutionary terms, and peo-
ple learning to read do not have access to compe-
tent readers’ eye-movement patterns as training data.
This suggests that human eye-movement patterns
emerge from general principles of language pro-
cessing that are independent of reading. Our start-
ing point is the Tradeoff Hypothesis: Human read-
ing optimizes a tradeoff between precision of lan-
guage understanding (encoding the input accurately)
and economy of attention (fixating as few words as
possible). Based on the Tradeoff Hypothesis, we ex-
pect that humans only fixate words to the extent nec-
essary for language understanding, while skipping
words whose contribution to the overall meaning can
be inferred from context.

In order to test these assumptions, this paper in-
vestigates the following questions:

1. Can the Tradeoff Hypothesis be implemented
in an unsupervised model that predicts skipping
and reading times in quantitative terms? In par-
ticular, can we compute surprisal based only on
the words that are actually fixated?

2. Can the Tradeoff Hypothesis explain known
qualitative features of human fixation patterns?
These include dependence on word frequency,
word length, predictability in context, a con-
trast between content and function words, and
the statistical dependence of the current fixa-
tion on previous fixations.

To investigate these questions, we develop a generic
architecture that combines neural language model-
ing with recent ideas on integrating recurrent neural
networks with mechanisms of attention, which have
shown promise both in NLP and in computer vision.
We train our model end-to-end on a large text cor-
pus to optimize a tradeoff between minimizing input
reconstruction error and minimizing the number of
words fixated. We evaluate the model’s reading be-
havior against a corpus of human eye-tracking data.
Apart from the unlabeled training corpus and the
generic architecture, no further assumptions about
language structure are made – in particular, no lex-

icon or grammar or otherwise labeled data is re-
quired.

Our unsupervised model is able to predict human
skips and fixations with an accuracy of 63.7%. This
compares to a baseline of 52.6% and a supervised
accuracy of 69.9%. For fixated words, the model
significantly predicts human reading times in a lin-
ear mixed effects analysis. The performance of our
model is comparable to surprisal, even though it only
fixates 60.4% of all input words. Furthermore, we
show that known qualitative features of human fix-
ation sequences emerge in our model without addi-
tional assumptions.

2 Related Work

A range of attention-based neural network architec-
tures have recently been proposed in the literature,
showing promise in both NLP and computer vision
(e.g., Mnih et al., 2014; Bahdanau et al., 2015). Such
architectures incorporate a mechanism that allows
the network to dynamically focus on a restricted part
of the input. Attention is also a central concept in
cognitive science, where it denotes the focus of cog-
nitive processing. In both language processing and
visual processing, attention is known to be limited to
a restricted area of the visual field, and shifts rapidly
through eye-movements (Henderson, 2003).

Attention-based neural architectures either em-
ploy soft attention or hard attention. Soft attention
distributes real-valued attention values over the in-
put, making end-to-end training with gradient de-
scent possible. Hard attention mechanisms make
discrete choices about which parts of the input to
focus on, and can be trained with reinforcement
learning (Mnih et al., 2014). In NLP, soft atten-
tion can mitigate the difficulty of compressing long
sequences into fixed-dimensional vectors, with ap-
plications in machine translation (Bahdanau et al.,
2015) and question answering (Hermann et al.,
2015). In computer vision, both types of attention
can be used for selecting regions in an image (Ba
et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2015).

3 The NEAT Reading Model

The point of departure for our model is the Trade-
off Hypothesis (see Section 1): Reading optimizes a
tradeoff between precision of language understand-

86



ing and economy of attention. We make this idea ex-
plicit by proposing NEAT (NEural Attention Trade-
off), a model that reads text and attempts to re-
construct it afterwards. While reading, the network
chooses which words to process and which words
to skip. The Tradeoff Hypothesis is formalized us-
ing a training objective that combines accuracy of
reconstruction with economy of attention, encourag-
ing the network to only look at words to the extent
that is necessary for reconstructing the sentence.

3.1 Architecture

We use a neural sequence-to-sequence architecture
(Sutskever et al., 2014) with a hard attention mech-
anism. We illustrate the model in Figure 1, oper-
ating on a three-word sequence www. The most basic
components are the reader, labeled R, and the de-
coder. Both of them are recurrent neural networks
with Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM, Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber, 1997) units. The recurrent reader
network is expanded into time steps R0, . . . ,R3 in
the figure. It goes over the input sequence, reading
one word wi at a time, and converts the word se-
quence into a sequence of vectors h0, . . . ,h3. Each
vector hi acts as a fixed-dimensionality encoding
of the word sequence w1, . . . ,wi that has been read
so far. The last vector h3 (more generally hN for
sequence length N), which encodes the entire in-
put sequence, is then fed into the input layer of
the decoder network, which attempts to reconstruct
the input sequence www. It is also realized as a recur-
rent neural network, collapsed into a single box in
the figure. It models a probability distribution over
word sequences, outputting a probability distribu-
tion PDecoder(wi|www1,...,i−1,hN) over the vocabulary in
the i-th step, as is common in neural language mod-
eling (Mikolov et al., 2010). As the decoder has
access to the vector representation created by the
reader network, it ideally is able to assign the high-
est probability to the word sequence www that was ac-
tually read. Up to this point, the model is a stan-
dard sequence-to-sequence architecture reconstruct-
ing the input sequence, that is, performing autoen-
coding.

As a basic model of human processing, NEAT
contains two further components. First, experimen-
tal evidence shows that during reading, humans con-
stantly make predictions about the upcoming input

(e.g., Van Gompel and Pickering, 2007). As a model
of this behavior, the reader network at each time step
outputs a probability distribution PR over the lex-
icon. This distribution describes which words are
likely to come next (i.e., the reader network per-
forms language modeling). Unlike the modeling per-
formed by the decoder, PR, via its recurrent connec-
tions, has access to the previous context only.

Second, we model skipping by stipulating that
only some of the input words wi are fed into the
reader network R, while R receives a special vec-
tor representation, containing no information about
the input word, in other cases. These are the words
that are skipped. In NEAT, at each time step dur-
ing reading, the attention module A decides whether
the next word is shown to the reader network or not.
When humans skip a word, they are able to identify
it using parafoveal preview (Rayner, 2009). Thus,
we can assume that the choice of which words to
skip takes into account not only the prior context
but also a preview of the word itself. We therefore
allow the attention module to take the input word
into account when making its decision. In addition,
the attention module has access to the previous state
hi−1 of the reader network, which summarizes what
has been read so far. To allow for interaction be-
tween skipping and prediction, we also give the at-
tention module access to the probability of the in-
put word according to the prediction PR made at the
last time step. If we write the decision made by A
as ωi ∈ {0,1}, where ωi = 1 means that word wi is
shown to the reader and 0 means that it is not, we
can write the probability of showing word wi as:

P(ωi = 1|ωωω1...i−1,www)
= PA(wi,hi−1,PR(wi|www1...i−1,ωωω1...i−1))

(1)

We implement A as a feed-forward network, fol-
lowed by taking a binary sample ωi.

We obtain the surprisal of an input word by taking
the negative logarithm of the conditional probability
of this word given the context words that precede it:

Surp(wi|www1...i−1) =− logPR(wi|www1...i−1,ωωω1...i−1)
(2)

As a consequence of skipping, not all input words
are accessible to the reader network. Therefore, the

87



probability and surprisal estimates it computes cru-
cially only take into account the words that have ac-
tually been fixated. We will refer to this quantity as
the restricted surprisal, as opposed to full surprisal,
which is computed based on all prior context words.

The key quantities for predicting human reading
are the fixation probabilities in equation (1), which
model fixations and skips, and restricted surprisal in
equation (2), which models the reading times of the
words that are fixated.

3.2 Model Objective
Given network parameters θ and a sequence www
of words, the network stochastically chooses a
sequence ωωω according to (1) and incurs a loss
L(ωωω|www,θ) for language modeling and reconstruc-
tion:

L(ωωω|www,θ) =−∑
i

logPR(wi|www1,...,i−1,ωωω1,...,i−1;θ)

−∑
i

logPDecoder(wi|www1,...,i−1;hN ;θ)

(3)

where PR(wi, . . .) denotes the output of the reader af-
ter reading wi−1, and PDecoder(wi| . . . ;hN) is the out-
put of the decoder at time i− 1, with hN being the
vector representation created by the reader network
for the entire input sequence.

To implement the Tradeoff Hypothesis, we train
NEAT to solve language modeling and reconstruc-
tion with minimal attention, i.e., the network mini-
mizes the expected loss:

Q(θ) := Ewww,ωωω [L(ωωω|www,θ)+α · ‖ωωω‖`1 ] (4)
where word sequences www are drawn from a corpus,
and ωωω is distributed according to P(ωωω|www,θ) as de-
fined in (1). In (4), ‖ωωω‖`1 is the number of words
shown to the reader, and α > 0 is a hyperparameter.
The term α · ‖ωωω‖`1 encourages NEAT to attend to as
few words as possible.

Note that we make no assumption about linguis-
tic structure – the only ingredients of NEAT are the
neural architecture, the objective (4), and the corpus
from which the sequences www are drawn.

3.3 Training
We follow previous approaches to hard attention in
using a combination of gradient descent and rein-
forcement learning, and separate the training of the

recurrent networks from the training of A. To train
the reader R and the decoder, we temporarily re-
move the attention network A, set ωωω ∼ Binom(n, p)
(n sequence length, p a hyperparameter), and mini-
mize E[L(www|θ,ωωω)] using stochastic gradient descent,
sampling a sequence ωωω for each input sequence. In
effect, NEAT is trained to perform reconstruction
and language modeling when there is noise in the
input. After R and the decoder have been trained,
we fix their parameters and train A using the RE-
INFORCE rule (Williams, 1992), which performs
stochastic gradient descent using the estimate

1
|B| ∑www∈B;ωωω

(L(ωωω|www,θ)+α · ‖ωωω‖`1)∂θA (logP(ωωω|www,θ))

(5)
for the gradient ∂θAQ. Here, B is a minibatch, ωωω is
sampled from P(ωωω|www,θ), and θA ⊂ θ is the set of
parameters of A. For reducing the variance of this
estimator, we subtract in the i-th step an estimate of
the expected loss:

U(www,ωωω1...i−1) := Eωωωi...N [L(ωωω1...i−1ωωωi...N |www,θ)
+ α · ‖ωωω‖`1 ]

(6)

We compute the expected loss using an LSTM
that we train simultaneously with A to predict L+
α‖ωωω‖`1 based on www and ωωω1...i−1. To make learning
more stable, we add an entropy term encouraging the
distribution to be smooth, following Xu et al. (2015).
The parameter updates to A are thus:

∑
www,ωωω

∑
i
(L(ωωω|www,θ)+α‖ωωω‖`1−U(www,ωωω1...i−1))

· ∂θA (log P(ωi|ωωω1...i−1,www,θ))

−γ ∂θA

(
∑
www,ωωω

∑
i

H[P(ωi|ωωω1,...,i−1,www,θ)]
) (7)

where γ is a hyperparameter, and H the entropy.

4 Methods

Our aim is to evaluate how well NEAT predicts hu-
man fixation behavior and reading times. Further-
more, we want show that known qualitative prop-
erties emerge from the Tradeoff Hypothesis, even
though no prior knowledge about useful features is
hard-wired in NEAT.

88



w1 w2 w3A A A

R0 R1 R2 R3 Decoder

h0 h1 h2

PR1 PR2 PR3

Figure 1: The architecture of the proposed model, reading a three-word input sequence w1,w2,w3. R is the reader network and PR
the probability distribution it computes in each time step. A is the attention network. At each time step, the input, its probability

according to PR, and the previous state hi−1 of R are fed into A, which then decides whether the word is read or skipped.

4.1 Training Setup

For both the reader and the decoder networks, we
choose a one-layer LSTM network with 1,000 mem-
ory cells. The attention network is a one-layer feed-
forward network. For the loss estimator U , we use
a bidirectional LSTM with 20 memory cells. Input
data is split into sequences of 50 tokens, which are
used as the input sequences for NEAT, disregarding
sentence boundaries. Word embeddings have 100 di-
mensions, are shared between the reader and the
attention network, and are only trained during the
training of the reader. The vocabulary consists of
the 10,000 most frequent words from the training
corpus. We trained NEAT on the training set of the
Daily Mail section of the corpus described by Her-
mann et al. (2015), which consists of 195,462 arti-
cles from the Daily Mail newspaper, containing ap-
proximately 200 million tokens. The recurrent net-
works and the attention network were each trained
for one epoch. For initialization, weights are drawn
from the uniform distribution. We set α = 5.0, γ =
5.0, and used a constant learning rate of 0.01 for A.

4.2 Corpus

For evaluation, we use the English section of the
Dundee corpus (Kennedy and Pynte, 2005), which
consists of 20 texts from The Independent, anno-
tated with eye-movement data from ten English na-
tive speakers. Each native speakers read all 20 texts
and answered a comprehension question after each
text. We split the Dundee corpus into a development
and a test set, with texts 1–3 constituting the devel-
opment set. The development set consists of 78,300
tokens, and the test set of 281,911 tokens. For evalu-
ation, we removed the datapoints removed by Dem-
berg and Keller (2008), mainly consisting of words
at the beginning or end of lines, outliers, and cases

of track loss. Furthermore, we removed datapoints
where the word was outside of the vocabulary of the
model, and those datapoints mapped to positions 1–
3 or 48–50 of a sequence when splitting the data.
After preprocessing, 62.9% of the development to-
kens and 64.7% of the test tokens remained. To ob-
tain the number of fixations on a token and reading
times, we used the eye-tracking measures computed
by Demberg and Keller (2008). The overall fixation
rate was 62.1% on the development set, and 61.3%
on the test set.

The development set was used to run preliminary
versions of the human evaluation studies, and to de-
termine the human skipping rate (see Section 5). All
the results reported in this paper were computed on
the test set, which remained unseen until the model
was final.

5 Results and Discussion

Throughout this section, we consider the following
baselines for the attention network: random atten-
tion is defined by ωωω ∼ Binom(n, p), with p = 0.62,
the human fixation rate in the development set. For
full attention, we take ωωω = 1, i.e., all words are
fixated. We also derive fixation predictions from
full surprisal, word frequency, and word length by
choosing a threshold such that the resulting fixation
rate matches the human fixation rate on the develop-
ment set.

5.1 Quantitative Properties

By averaging over all possible fixation sequences,
NEAT defines for each word in a sequence a prob-
ability that it will be fixated. This probability is
not efficiently computable, so we approximate it by
sampling a sequence ωωω and taking the probabilities
P(ωi = 1|ω1...i−1,www) for i = 1, . . . ,50. These sim-

89



ulated fixation probabilities can be interpreted as
defining a distribution of attention over the input
sequence. Figure 2 shows heatmaps of the simu-
lated and human fixation probabilities, respectively,
for the beginning of a text from the Dundee cor-
pus. While some differences between simulated and
human fixation probabilities can be noticed, there
are similarities in the general qualitative features of
the two heatmaps. In particular, function words and
short words are less likely to be fixated than content
words and longer words in both the simulated and
the human data.

Reconstruction and Language Modeling We
first evaluate NEAT intrinsically by measuring how
successful the network is at predicting the next
word and reconstructing the input while minimiz-
ing the number of fixations. We compare perplex-
ity on reconstruction and language modeling for
ωωω ∼ P(ωωω|www,θ). In addition to the baselines, we run
NEAT on the fixations generated by the human read-
ers of the Dundee corpus, i.e., we use the human fix-
ation sequence as ωωω instead of the fixation sequence
generated by A to compute perplexity. This will tell
us to what extent the human behavior minimizes the
NEAT objective (4).

The results are given in Table 1. In all settings, the
fixation rates are similar (60.4% to 62.1%) which
makes the perplexity figures directly comparable.
While NEAT has a higher perplexity on both tasks
compared to full attention, it considerably outper-
forms random attention. It also outperforms the
word length, word frequency, and full surprisal base-
lines. The perplexity on human fixation sequences is
similar to that achieved using word frequency. Based
on these results, we conclude that REINFORCE suc-
cessfully optimizes the objective (4).

Likelihood of Fixation Data Human reading be-
havior is stochastic in the sense that different runs of
eye-tracking experiments such as the ones recorded
in the Dundee corpus yield different eye-movement
sequences. NEAT is also stochastic, in the sense that,
given a word sequence w, it defines a probability dis-
tribution over fixation sequences ωωω. Ideally, this dis-
tribution should be close to the actual distribution of
fixation sequences produced by humans reading the
sequence, as measured by perplexity.

We find that the perplexity of the fixation se-

Acc F1fix F1skip
NEAT 63.7 70.4 53.0

Supervised Models
Nilsson and Nivre (2009) 69.5 75.2 62.6
Matthies and Søgaard (2013) 69.9 72.3 66.1

Human Performance and Baselines
Random Baseline 52.6 62.1 37.9
Full Surprisal 64.1 70.7 53.6
Word Frequency 67.9 74.0 58.3
Word Length 68.4 77.1 49.0
Human 69.5 76.6 53.6

Table 2: Evaluation of fixation sequence predictions against hu-
man data. For the human baseline, we predicted the n-th reader’s

fixations by taking the fixations of the n + 1-th reader (with

missing values replaced by reader average), averaging the re-

sulting scores over the ten readers.

quences produced by the ten readers in the Dundee
corpus under NEAT is 1.84. A perplexity of 2.0
corresponds to the random baseline Binom(n,0.5),
and a perplexity of 1.96 to random attention
Binom(n,0.62). As a lower bound on what can
achieved with models disregarding the context, us-
ing the human fixation rates for each word as proba-
bilities, we obtain a perplexity of 1.68.

Accuracy of Fixation Sequences Previous work
on supervised models for modeling fixations (Nils-
son and Nivre, 2009; Matthies and Søgaard, 2013)
has been evaluated by measuring the overlap of the
fixation sequences produced by the models with
those in the Dundee corpus. For NEAT, this method
of evaluation is problematic as differences between
model predictions and human data may be due to
differences in the rate of skipping, and due to the in-
herently stochastic nature of fixations. We therefore
derive model predictions by rescaling the simulated
fixation probabilities so that their average equals the
fixation rate in the development set, and then greed-
ily take the maximum-likelihood sequence. That is,
we predict a fixation if the rescaled probability is
greater than 0.5, and a skip otherwise. As in previ-
ous work, we report the accuracy of fixations and
skips, and also separate F1 scores for fixations and
skips. As lower and upper bounds, we use the ran-
dom baseline ωωω ∼ Binom(n,0.62) and the agree-
ment of the ten human readers, respectively. The re-

90



The decision of the Human Fertility and Embryology Authority (HFEA) to allow a couple to select genetically their next baby was bound

to raise concerns that advances in biotechnology are racing ahead of our ability to control the consequences. The couple at the centre of

this case have a son who suffers from a potentially fatal disorder and whose best hope is a marrow transplant from a sibling, so the

stakes of this decision are particularly high. The HFEA’s critics believe that it sanctions ’designer babies’ and does not show respect for the

sanctity of individual life. Certainly, the authority’s backing for Shahana and Raj Hashmi’s plea for genetic screening raises fundamental questions

The decision of the Human Fertility and Embryology Authority (HFEA) to allow a couple to select genetically their next baby was bound

to raise concerns that advances in biotechnology are racing ahead of our ability to control the consequences. The couple at the centre of

this case have a son who suffers from a potentially fatal disorder and whose best hope is a marrow transplant from a sibling, so the

stakes of this decision are particularly high. The HFEA’s critics believe that it sanctions ’designer babies’ and does not show respect for the

sanctity of individual life. Certainly, the authority’s backing for Shahana and Raj Hashmi’s plea for genetic screening raises fundamental questions

Figure 2: Top: Heatmap showing human fixation probabilities, as estimated from the ten readers in the Dundee corpus. In cases of
track loss, we replaced the missing value with the corresponding reader’s overall fixation rate. Bottom: Heatmap showing fixation

probabilities simulated by NEAT. Color gradient ranges from blue (low probability) to red (high probability); words without color

are at the beginning or end of a sequence, or out of vocabulary.

NEAT Rand. Att. Word Len. Word Freq. Full Surp. Human Full Att.
Language Modeling 180 333 230 219 211 218/170 107
Reconstruction 4.5 56 40 39 34 39/31 1.6
Fixation Rate 60.4% 62.1% 62.1% 62.1% 62.1% 61.3%/72.0% 100%

Table 1: Performance on language modeling and reconstruction as measured by perplexity. Random attention is an upper bound
on perplexity, while full attention is a lower bound. For the human baseline, we give two figures, which differ in the treatment of

missing data. The first figure is obtained when replacing missing values with a random variable ω ∼ Binom(n,0.61); the second
results from replacing missing values with 1.

sults are shown in Table 2. NEAT clearly outper-
forms the random baseline and shows results close
to full surprisal (where we apply the same rescal-
ing and thresholding as for NEAT). This is remark-
able given that NEAT has access to only 60.4% of
the words in the corpus in order to predict skipping,
while full surprisal has access to all the words.

Word frequency and word length perform well, al-
most reaching the performance of supervised mod-
els. This shows that the bulk of skipping behavior
is already explained by word frequency and word
length effects. Note, however, that NEAT is com-
pletely unsupervised, and does not know that it has
to pay attention to word frequency; this is something
the model is able to infer.

Restricted Surprisal and Reading Times To
evaluate the predictions NEAT makes for reading
times, we use linear mixed-effects models contain-
ing restricted surprisal derived from NEAT for the
Dundee test set. The mixed models also include a
set of standard baseline predictors, viz., word length,
log word frequency, log frequency of the previous

word, launch distance, landing position, and the po-
sition of the word in the sentence. We treat partici-
pants and items as random factors. As the dependent
variable, we take first pass duration, which is the
sum of the durations of all fixations from first enter-
ing the word to first leaving it. We compare against
full surprisal as an upper bound and against ran-
dom surprisal as a lower bound. Random surprisal
is surprisal computed by a model with random at-
tention; this allows us to assess how much surprisal
degrades when only 60.4% of all words are fixated,
but no information is available as to which words
should be fixated. The results in Table 3 show that
restricted surprisal as computed by NEAT, full sur-
prisal, and random surprisal are all significant pre-
dictors of reading time.

In order to compare the three surprisal estimates,
we therefore need a measure of effect size. For this,
we compare the model fit of the three mixed ef-
fects models using deviance, which is defined as
the difference between the log likelihood of the
model under consideration minus the log likelihood
of the baseline model, multiplied by −2. Higher de-

91



β SE t
(Intercept) 247.43 7.14 34.68*
Word Length 12.92 0.21 60.62*
Previous Word Freq. −5.28 0.28 −18.34*
Prev. Word Fixated −24.67 0.81 −30.55*
Launch Distance -0.01 0.01 −0.37
Obj. Landing Pos. −8.07 0.20 −41.25*
Word Pos. in Sent. −0.10 0.03 −2.98*
Log Word Freq. −1.59 0.21 −7.73*
Resid. Random Surprisal 2.69 0.10 29.27*
Resid. Restr. Surprisal 2.75 0.12 23.66*
Resid. Full Surprisal 2.99 0.12 25.23*

Table 3: Linear mixed effects models for first pass duration.
The first part of the table shows the coefficients, standard er-

rors, and t values for the predictors in the baseline model. The

second part of the table gives the corresponding values for ran-

dom surprisal, restricted surprisal computed by NEAT, and full

surprisal, residualized against the baseline predictors, in three

models obtained by adding these predictors.

viance indicates greater improvement in model fit
over the baseline model. We find that the mixed
model that includes restricted surprisal achieves a
deviance of 867, compared to the model contain-
ing only the baseline features. With full surprisal,
we obtain a deviance of 980. On the other hand, the
model including random surprisal achieves a lower
deviance of 832.

This shows that restricted surprisal as computed
by NEAT not only significantly predicts reading
times, it also provides an improvement in model fit
compared to the baseline predictors. Such an im-
provement is also observed with random surprisal,
but restricted surprisal achieves a greater improve-
ment in model fit. Full surprisal achieves an even
greater improvement, but this is not unexpected, as
full surprisal has access to all words, unlike NEAT or
random surprisal, which only have access to 60.4%
of the words.

5.2 Qualitative Properties

We now examine the second key question we de-
fined in Section 1, investigating the qualitative fea-
tures of the simulated fixation sequences. We will
focus on comparing the predictions of NEAT with
that of word frequency, which performs comparably
at the task of predicting fixation sequences (see Sec-

Human NEAT Word Freq.
ADJ 78.9 (2) 72.8 (1) 98.4 (3)
ADP 46.1 (8) 53.8 (8) 21.6 (9)
ADV 70.4 (3) 67.2 (4) 96.4 (4)
CONJ 36.7 (11) 50.7 (9) 14.6 (10)
DET 45.2 (9) 44.8 (11) 22.9 (8)
NOUN 80.3 (1) 69.8 (2) 98.7 (2)
NUM 63.3 (6) 71.5 (3) 99.5 (1)
PRON 49.2 (7) 57.0 (7) 42.6 (7)
PRT 37.4 (10) 46.7 (10) 13.9 (11)
VERB 66.7 (5) 64.7 (5) 74.4 (5)
X 68.6 (4) 67.8 (3) 69.0 (6)
Spearman’s ρ 0.85 0.84
Pearson’s r 0.92 0.94
MSE 57 450

Table 4: Actual and simulated fixation probabilities (in %) by
PoS tag, with the ranks given in brackets, and correlations and

mean squared error relative to human data.

tion 5.1). We show NEAT nevertheless makes rele-
vant predictions that go beyond frequency.

Fixations of Successive Words While predictors
derived from word frequency treat the decision
whether to fixate or skip words as independent, hu-
mans are more likely to fixate a word when the pre-
vious word was skipped (Rayner, 1998). This effect
is also seen in NEAT. More precisely, both in the
human data and in the simulated fixation data, the
conditional fixation probability P(ωi = 1|ωi−1 = 1)
is lower than the marginal probability P(ωi = 1).
The ratio of these probabilities is 0.85 in the human
data, and 0.81 in NEAT. The threshold predictor de-
rived from word frequency also shows this effect (as
the frequencies of successive words are not indepen-
dent), but it is weaker (ratio 0.91).

To further test the context dependence of NEAT’s
fixation behavior, we ran a mixed model predict-
ing the fixation probabilities simulated by NEAT,
with items as random factor and the log frequency
of word i as predictor. Adding ωi−1 as a predic-
tor results in a significant improvement in model
fit (deviance = 4,798, t = 71.3). This shows that
NEAT captures the context dependence of fixation
sequences to an extend that goes beyond word fre-
quency alone.

92



Parts of Speech Part of speech categories are
known to be a predictor of fixation probabilities,
with content words being more likely to be fixated
than function words (Carpenter and Just, 1983). In
Table 4, we give the simulated fixation probabilities
and the human fixation probabilities estimated from
the Dundee corpus for the tags of the Universal PoS
tagset (Petrov et al., 2012), using the PoS annotation
of Barrett et al. (2015). We again compare with the
probabilities of a threshold predictor derived from
word frequency.1 NEAT captures the differences be-
tween PoS categories well, as evidenced by the high
correlation coefficients. The content word categories
ADJ, ADV, NOUN, VERB and X consistently show
higher probabilities than the function word cate-
gories. While the correlation coefficients for word
frequency are very similar, the numerical values of
the simulated probabilities are closer to the human
ones than those derived from word frequency, which
tend towards more extreme values. This difference
can be seen clearly if we compare the mean squared
error, rather than the correlation, with the human fix-
ation probabilities (last row of Table 4).

Correlations with Known Predictors In the lit-
erature, it has been observed that skipping correlates
with predictability (surprisal), word frequency, and
word length (Rayner, 1998, p. 387). These correla-
tions are also observed in the human skipping data
derived from Dundee, as shown in Table 5. (Hu-
man fixation probabilities were obtained by averag-
ing over the ten readers in Dundee.)

Comparing the known predictors of skipping with
NEAT’s simulated fixation probabilities, similar cor-
relations as in the human data are observed. We ob-
serve that the correlations with surprisal are stronger
in NEAT, considering both restricted surprisal and
full surprisal as measures of predictability.

6 Conclusions

We investigated the hypothesis that human read-
ing strategies optimize a tradeoff between precision
of language understanding and economy of atten-
tion. We made this idea explicit in NEAT, a neural
reading architecture with hard attention that can be

1We omit the tag “.” for punctuation, as punctuation charac-
ters are not treated as separate tokens in Dundee.

Human NEAT
Restricted Surprisal 0.465 0.762
Full Surprisal 0.512 0.720
Log Word Freq. −0.608 −0.760
Word Length 0.663 0.521

Table 5: Correlations between human and NEAT fixation prob-
abilities and known predictors

trained end-to-end to optimize this tradeoff. Exper-
iments on the Dundee corpus show that NEAT pro-
vides accurate predictions for human skipping be-
havior. It also predicts reading times, even though it
only has access to 60.4% of the words in the cor-
pus in order to estimate surprisal. Finally, we found
that known qualitative properties of skipping emerge
in our model, even though they were not explicitly
included in the architecture, such as context depen-
dence of fixations, differential skipping rates across
parts of speech, and correlations with other known
predictors of human reading behavior.

References

Ba, Jimmy, Ruslan R. Salakhutdinov, Roger B.
Grosse, and Brendan J. Frey. 2015. Learning
wake-sleep recurrent attention models. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems. pages 2575–2583.

Bahdanau, Dzmitry, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua
Bengio. 2015. Neural machine translation by
jointly learning to align and translate. In Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Learning
Representations.

Barrett, Maria, Željko Agić, and Anders Søgaard.
2015. The Dundee treebank. In Proceedings
of the 14th International Workshop on Treebanks
and Linguistic Theories. pages 242–248.

Bicknell, Klinton and Roger Levy. 2010. A ratio-
nal model of eye movement control in reading.
In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics. pages
1168–1178.

Carpenter, P. A. and M. A. Just. 1983. What your
eyes do while your mind is reading. In K. Rayner,
editor, Eye Movements in Reading, Academic
Press, New York, pages 275–307.

93



Demberg, Vera and Frank Keller. 2008. Data
from eye-tracking corpora as evidence for theo-
ries of syntactic processing complexity. Cognition
109(2):193–210.

Engbert, Ralf, André Longtin, and Reinhold Kliegl.
2002. A dynamical model of saccade generation
in reading based on spatially distributed lexical
processing. Vision Research 42(5):621–636.

Engbert, Ralf, Antje Nuthmann, Eike M. Richter,
and Reinhold Kliegl. 2005. SWIFT: A dynami-
cal model of saccade generation during reading.
Psychological Review 112(4):777–813.

Frank, S.L. and R. Bod. 2011. Insensitivity of the
human sentence-processing system to hierarchi-
cal structure. Psychological Science 22:829–834.

Hale, John. 2001. A probabilistic Earley parser as a
psycholinguistic model. In Proceedings of Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics. vol-
ume 2, pages 159–166.

Hara, Tadayoshi, Daichi Mochihashi Yoshinobu
Kano, and Akiko Aizawa. 2012. Predicting word
fixations in text with a CRF model for capturing
general reading strategies among readers. In Pro-
ceedings of the 1st Workshop on Eye-tracking and
Natural Language Processing. pages 55–70.

Henderson, John. 2003. Human gaze control in real-
world scene perception. Trends in Cognitive Sci-
ences 7:498–504.

Hermann, Karl Moritz, Tomáš Kočiskỳ, Ed-
ward Grefenstette, Lasse Espeholt, Will Kay,
Mustafa Suleyman, and Phil Blunsom. 2015.
Teaching machines to read and comprehend.
ArXiv:1506.03340.

Hochreiter, Sepp and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997.
Long short-term memory. Neural Computation
9(8):1735–1780.

Kennedy, Alan and Joël Pynte. 2005. Parafoveal-on-
foveal effects in normal reading. Vision Research
45(2):153–168.

Levy, Roger. 2008. Expectation-based syntactic
comprehension. Cognition 106(3):1126–1177.

Matthies, Franz and Anders Søgaard. 2013. With
blinkers on: Robust prediction of eye movements
across readers. In Proceedings of the Conference

on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing. pages 803–807.

McDonald, Scott A. and Richard C. Shillcock.
2003a. Eye movements reveal the on-line compu-
tation of lexical probabilities during reading. Psy-
chological Science 14(6):648–652.

McDonald, Scott A. and Richard C. Shillcock.
2003b. Low-level predictive inference in reading:
the influence of transitional probabilities on eye
movements. Vision Research 43(16):1735–1751.

Mikolov, Tomáš, Martin Karafiát, Lukáš Burget, Jan
Černocký, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. 2010. Recur-
rent neural network based language model. In
Proceedings of Interspeech. pages 1045–1048.

Mnih, Volodymyr, Nicolas Heess, Alex Graves, and
others. 2014. Recurrent models of visual atten-
tion. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems. pages 2204–2212.

Nilsson, Mattias and Joakim Nivre. 2009. Learn-
ing where to look: Modeling eye movements in
reading. In Proceedings of the 13th Conference
on Computational Natural Language Learning.
pages 93–101.

Nilsson, Mattias and Joakim Nivre. 2010. Towards
a data-driven model of eye movement control in
reading. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Cog-
nitive Modeling and Computational Linguistics.
pages 63–71.

Petrov, Slav, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan T. McDon-
ald. 2012. A universal part-of-speech tagset. In
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation. pages
2089–2096.

Rayner, K. 1998. Eye movements in reading and in-
formation processing: 20 years of research. Psy-
chological Bulletin 124(3):372–422.

Rayner, Keith. 2009. Eye movements in reading:
Models and data. Journal of Eye Movement Re-
search 2(5):1–10.

Rayner, Keith and Erik D. Reichle. 2010. Models of
the reading process. Wiley Interdisciplinary Re-
views: Cognitive Science 1(6):787–799.

Reichle, E. D., A. Pollatsek, D. L. Fisher, and
K. Rayner. 1998. Toward a model of eye move-

94



ment control in reading. Psychological Review
105(1):125–157.

Reichle, E. D., T. Warren, and K. McConnell. 2009.
Using EZ Reader to model the effects of higher
level language processing on eye movements dur-
ing reading. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review
16(1):1–21.

Reichle, Erik D., Keith Rayner, and Alexander Pol-
latsek. 2003. The EZ Reader model of eye-
movement control in reading: Comparisons to
other models. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
26(04):445–476.

Smith, Nathaniel J. and Roger Levy. 2013. The ef-
fect of word predictability on reading time is log-
arithmic. Cognition 128(3):302–319.

Sutskever, Ilya, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc VV Le.
2014. Sequence to sequence learning with neu-
ral networks. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems. pages 3104–3112.

Van Gompel, Roger PG and Martin J. Pickering.
2007. Syntactic parsing. In The Oxford Handbook
of Psycholinguistics, Oxford University Press,
pages 289–307.

Williams, Ronald J. 1992. Simple statistical
gradient-following algorithms for connectionist
reinforcement learning. Machine Learning 8(3-
4):229–256.

Xu, Kelvin, Jimmy Ba, Ryan Kiros, Aaron
Courville, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Richard Zemel,
and Yoshua Bengio. 2015. Show, attend and tell:
Neural image caption generation with visual at-
tention. ArXiv:1502.03044.

95


