



















































Question Relevance in VQA: Identifying Non-Visual And False-Premise Questions


Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 919–924,
Austin, Texas, November 1-5, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Question Relevance in VQA:
Identifying Non-Visual And False-Premise Questions

Arijit Ray1, Gordon Christie1, Mohit Bansal2, Dhruv Batra3,1, Devi Parikh3,1
1Virginia Tech 2UNC Chapel Hill 3Georgia Institute of Technology

{ray93,gordonac,dbatra,parikh}@vt.edu
mbansal@cs.unc.edu

Abstract

Visual Question Answering (VQA) is the
task of answering natural-language questions
about images. We introduce the novel prob-
lem of determining the relevance of questions
to images in VQA. Current VQA models do
not reason about whether a question is even
related to the given image (e.g., What is the
capital of Argentina?) or if it requires infor-
mation from external resources to answer cor-
rectly. This can break the continuity of a dia-
logue in human-machine interaction. Our ap-
proaches for determining relevance are com-
posed of two stages. Given an image and a
question, (1) we first determine whether the
question is visual or not, (2) if visual, we de-
termine whether the question is relevant to the
given image or not. Our approaches, based on
LSTM-RNNs, VQA model uncertainty, and
caption-question similarity, are able to outper-
form strong baselines on both relevance tasks.
We also present human studies showing that
VQA models augmented with such question
relevance reasoning are perceived as more in-
telligent, reasonable, and human-like.

1 Introduction

Visual Question Answering (VQA) is the task of
predicting a suitable answer given an image and a
question about it. VQA models (e.g., (Antol et al.,
2015; Ren et al., 2015)) are typically discriminative
models that take in image and question representa-
tions and output one of a set of possible answers.

Our work is motivated by the following key ob-
servation – all current VQA systems always output
an answer regardless of whether the input question
makes any sense for the given image or not. Fig. 1

Non-Visual Visual True-Premise 

Who is the president 
of the USA? 

What is the girl 
wearing? 

 

What is the cat 
wearing? 

 

Visual False-Premise 

Figure 1: Example irrelevant (non-visual, false-premise)
and relevant (visual true-premise) questions in VQA.

shows examples of relevant and irrelevant questions.
When VQA systems are fed irrelevant questions as
input, they understandably produce nonsensical an-
swers (Q: “What is the capital of Argentina?” A:
“fire hydrant”). Humans, on the other hand, are
unlikely to provide such nonsensical answers and
will instead answer that this is irrelevant or use an-
other knowledge source to answer correctly, when
possible. We argue that this implicit assumption by
all VQA systems – that an input question is always
relevant for the input image – is simply untenable
as VQA systems move beyond standard academic
datasets to interacting with real users, who may be
unfamiliar, or malicious. The goal of this work is to
make VQA systems more human-like by providing
them the capability to identify relevant questions.

While existing work has reasoned about cross-
modal similarity, being able to identify whether a
question is relevant to a given image is a novel prob-
lem with real-world applications. In human-robot
interaction, being able to identify questions that are
dissociated from the perception data available is im-
portant. The robot must decide whether to process
the scene it perceives or query external world knowl-
edge resources to provide a response.

919



As shown in Fig. 1, we study three types of
question-image pairs: Non-Visual. These questions
are not questions about images at all – they do not
require information from any image to be answered
(e.g., “What is the capital of Argentina?”). Visual
False-Premise. While visual, these questions do not
apply to the given image. For instance, the ques-
tion “What is the girl wearing?” makes sense only
for images that contain a girl in them. Visual True-
Premise. These questions are relevant to (i.e., have
a premise which is true) the image at hand.

We introduce datasets and train models to rec-
ognize both non-visual and false-premise question-
image (QI) pairs in the context of VQA. First, we
identify whether a question is visual or non-visual;
if visual, we identify whether the question has a true-
premise for the given image. For visual vs. non-
visual question detection, we use a Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) recurrent neural network (RNN)
trained on part of speech (POS) tags to capture
visual-specific linguistic structure. For true vs. false-
premise question detection, we present one set of ap-
proaches that use the uncertainty of a VQA model,
and another set that use pre-trained captioning mod-
els to generate relevant captions (or questions) for
the given image and then compare them to the given
question to determine relevance.

Our proposed models achieve accuracies of 92%
for detecting non-visual, and 74% for detecting
false-premise questions, which significantly outper-
form strong baselines. We also show through human
studies that a VQA system that reasons about ques-
tion relevance is picked significantly more often as
being more intelligent, human-like and reasonable
than a baseline VQA system which does not. Our
code and datasets are publicly available on the au-
thors’ webpages.

2 Related Work

There is a large body of existing work that reasons
about cross-modal similarity: how well an image
matches a query tag (Liu et al., 2009) in text-based
image retrieval, how well an image matches a cap-
tion (Feng and Lapata, 2013; Xu et al., 2015; Or-
donez et al., 2011; Karpathy and Fei-Fei, 2015; Fang
et al., 2015), and how well a video matches a de-
scription (Donahue et al., 2015; Lin et al., 2014a).

In our work, if a question is deemed irrelevant,
the VQA model says so, as opposed to answering
the question anyway. This is related to perception
systems that do not respond to an input where the
system is likely to fail. Such failure prediction sys-
tems have been explored in vision (Zhang et al.,
2014; Devarakota et al., 2007) and speech (Zhao
et al., 2012; Sarma and Palmer, 2004; Choularton,
2009; Voll et al., 2008). Others attempt to provide
the most meaningful answer instead of suppressing
the output of a model that is expected to fail for a
given input. One idea is to avoid a highly specific
prediction if there is a chance of being wrong, and
instead make a more generic prediction that is more
likely to be right (Deng et al., 2012). Malinowski
and Fritz (2014) use semantic segmentations in their
approach to question answering, where they reason
that objects not present in the segmentations should
not be part of the answer.

To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first
to study the relevance of questions in VQA. Chen et
al. (2012) classify users’ intention of questions for
community question answering services. Most re-
lated to our work is Dodge et al. (2012). They extract
visual text from within Flickr photo captions to be
used as supervisory signals for training image cap-
tioning systems. Our motivation is to endow VQA
systems the ability to detect non-visual questions to
respond in a human-like fashion. Moreover, we also
detect a more fine-grained notion of question rele-
vance via true- and false-premise.

3 Datasets

For the task of detecting visual vs. non-visual
questions, we assume all questions in the VQA
dataset (Antol et al., 2015) are visual, since the
Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) workers were
specifically instructed to ask questions about a dis-
played image while creating it. We also col-
lected non-visual philosophical and general knowl-
edge questions from the internet (see supplementary
material). Combining the two, we have 121,512 vi-
sual questions from the validation set of VQA and
9,9521 generic non-visual questions collected from
the internet. We call this dataset Visual vs. Non-

1High accuracies on this task in our experiments indicate
that this suffices to learn the corresponding linguistic structure.

920



Visual Questions (VNQ).
We also collect a dataset of true- vs. false-premise

questions by showing AMT workers images paired
with random questions from the VQA dataset and
asking them to annotate whether they are applicable
or not. We had three workers annotate each QI pair.
We take the majority vote as the final ground truth
label.2 We have 10,793 QI pairs on 1,500 unique
images out of which 79% are non-applicable (false-
premise). We refer to this visual true- vs. false-
premise questions dataset as VTFQ.

Since there is a class imbalance in both of these
datasets, we report the average per-class (i.e., nor-
malized) accuracy for all approaches. All datasets
are publicly available.

4 Approach

Here we present our approaches for detecting (1) vi-
sual vs. non-visual QI pairs, and (2) true- vs. false-
premise QI pairs.

4.1 Visual vs. Non-Visual Detection

Recall that the task here is to detect visual questions
from non-visual ones. Non-visual questions, such
as “Do dogs fly?” or “Who is the president of the
USA?”, often tend to have a difference in the lin-
guistic structure from that of visual questions, such
as “Does this bird fly?” or “What is this man do-
ing?”. We compare our approach (LSTM) with a
baseline (RULE-BASED):
1. RULE-BASED. A rule-based approach to detect
non-visual questions based on the part of speech
(POS)3 tags and dependencies of the words in the
question. E.g., if a question has a plural noun with
no determiner before it and is followed by a singular
verb (“Do dogs fly?”), it is a non-visual question.4

2. LSTM. We train an LSTM with 100-dim hid-
den vectors to embed the question into a vector and
predict visual vs. not. Instead of feeding question
words ([‘what’, ‘is’, ‘the’, ‘man’, ‘doing’, ‘?’]), the
input to our LSTM is embeddings of POS tags of
the words ([‘pronoun’, ‘verb’, ‘determiner’, ‘noun’,
‘verb’]). Embeddings of the POS tags are learnt
end-to-end. This captures the structure of image-

278% of the time all three votes agree.
3We use spaCy POS tagger (Honnibal and Johnson, 2015).
4See supplement for examples of such hand-crafted rules.

grounded questions, rather than visual vs. non-
visual topics. The latter are less likely to generalize
across domains.

4.2 True- vs. False-Premise Detection
Our second task is to detect whether a question Q en-
tails a false-premise for an image I. We present two
families of approaches to measure this QI ‘compat-
ibility’: (i) using uncertainty in VQA models, and
(ii) using pre-trained captioning models.

Using VQA Uncertainty. Here we work with the
hypothesis that if a VQA model is uncertain about
the answer to a QI pair, the question may be irrele-
vant for the given image since the uncertainty may
mean it has not seen similar QI pairs in the training
data. We test two approaches:
1. ENTROPY. We compute the entropy of the soft-
max output from a state-of-the art VQA model (An-
tol et al., 2015; Lu et al., 2015) for a given QI pair
and train a three-layer multilayer perceptron (MLP)
on top with 3 nodes in the hidden layer.
2. VQA-MLP. We feed in the softmax output to a
three-layer MLP with 100 nodes in the hidden layer,
and train it as a binary classifier to predict whether
a question has a true- or false-premise for the given
image.

Using Pre-trained Captioning Models. Here we
utilize (a) an image captioning model, and (b) an
image question-generation model – to measure QI
compatibility. Note that both these models generate
natural language capturing the semantics of an im-
age – one in the form of statement, the other in the
form of a question. Our hypothesis is that a given
question is relevant to the given image if it is similar
to the language generated by these models for that
image. Specifically:
1. Question-Caption Similarity (Q-C SIM). We
use NeuralTalk2 (Karpathy and Fei-Fei, 2015) pre-
trained on the MSCOCO dataset (Lin et al., 2014b)
(images and associated captions) to generate a cap-
tion C for the given image, and then compute a
learned similarity between Q and C (details below).
2. Question-Question Similarity (Q-Q’ SIM). We
use NeuralTalk2 re-trained (from scratch) on the
questions in the VQA dataset to generate a question
Q’ for the image. Then, we compute a learned simi-
larity between Q and Q’.

921



Visual vs. Non-Visual True- vs. False-Premise

RULE-BASED LSTM ENTROPY VQA-MLP Q-GEN SCORE Q-C SIM Q-Q’ SIM

75.68 92.27 59.66 64.19 57.41 74.48 74.58

Table 1: Normalized accuracy results (averaged over 40 random train/test splits) for visual vs. non-visual detection and
true- vs. false-premise detection. RULE-BASED and Q-GEN SCORE were not averaged because they are deterministic.

We now describe our learned Q-C similarity func-
tion (the Q-Q’ similarity is analogous). Our Q-C
similarity model is a 2-channel LSTM+MLP (one
channel for Q, another for C). Each channel se-
quentially reads word2vec embeddings of the cor-
responding language via an LSTM. The last hid-
den state vectors (40-dim) from the 2 LSTMs are
concatenated and fed as inputs to the MLP, which
outputs a 2-class (relevant vs. not) softmax. The
entire model is learned end-to-end on the VTFQ
dataset. We also experimented with other represen-
tations (e.g., bag of words) for Q, Q’, C, which are
included in the supplement for completeness.

Finally, we also compare our proposed models
above to a simpler baseline (Q-GEN SCORE), where
we compute the probability of the input question Q
under the learned question-generation model. The
intuition here is that since the question generation
model has been trained only on relevant questions
(from the VQA dataset), it will assign a high proba-
bility to Q if it is relevant.

5 Experiments and Results

The results for both experiments are presented in Ta-
ble 1. We present results averaged over 40 random
train/test splits. RULE-BASED and Q-GEN SCORE
were not averaged because they are deterministic.

Visual vs. Non-Visual Detection. We use a ran-
dom set of 100,000 questions from the VNQ dataset
for training, and the remaining 31,464 for testing.
We see that LSTM performs 16.59% (21.92% rela-
tive) better than RULE-BASED.

True- vs. False-Premise Detection. We use a ran-
dom set of 7,195 (67%) QI pairs from the VTFQ
dataset to train and the remaining 3,597 (33%) to
test. While the VQA model uncertainty based ap-
proaches (ENTROPY, VQA-MLP) perform reason-
ably well (with the MLP helping over raw entropy),
the learned similarity approaches perform much bet-

ter (10.39% gain in normalized accuracy). High un-
certainty of the model may suggest that a similar QI
pair was not seen during training; however, that does
not seem to translate to detecting irrelevance. The
language generation models (Q-C SIM, Q-Q’ SIM)
seem to work significantly better at modeling the
semantic interaction between the question and the
image. The generative approach (Q-GEN SCORE)
is outperformed by the discriminative approaches
(VQA-MLP, Q-C SIM, Q-Q’ SIM) that are trained
explicitly for the task at hand. We show qualitative
examples of Q-Q’ SIM for true- vs. false-premise
detection in Fig. 2.

6 Human Qualitative Evaluation

We also perform human studies where we compare
two agents: (1) AGENT-BASELINE– always answers
every question. (2) AGENT-OURS– reasons about
question relevance before responding. If question is
classified as visual true-premise, AGENT-OURS an-
swers the question using the same VQA model as
AGENT-BASELINE (using (Lu et al., 2015)). Other-
wise, it responds with a prompt indicating that the
question does not seem meaningful for the image.

A total of 120 questions (18.33% relevant,
81.67% irrelevant, mimicking the distribution of the
VTFQ dataset) were used. Of the relevant ques-
tions, 54% were answered correctly by the VQA
model. Human subjects on AMT were shown the
response of both agents and asked to pick the agent
that sounded more intelligent, more reasonable, and
more human-like after every observed QI pair. Each
QI pair was assessed by 5 different subjects. Not all
pairs were rated by the same 5 subjects. In total, 28
unique AMT workers participated in the study.

AGENT-OURS was picked 65.8% of the time as
the winner, AGENT-BASELINE was picked only
1.6% of the time, and both considered equally
(un)reasonable in the remaining cases. We also mea-
sure the percentage of times each robot gets picked

922



Q":"Is"the"event"indoor"or"outdoor?
Q'#:#What"is"the"elephant"doing?

US GT

(a)

Q":"What"type"of"melon"is"that?
Q' :"What"color"is"the"horse?

US GT

(b)

Q:"Is"this"man"married?
Q':"What"is"the"man"holding?

US GT

(c)

Q:"Is"that"graffiti"on"the"wall?"
Q':"What"is"the"woman"holding?

US GT

(d)
Figure 2: Qualitative examples for Q-Q’ SIM. (a) and (b) show success cases, and (c) and (d) show failure cases.
Our model predicts true-premise in (a) and (c), and false-premise in (b) and (d). In all examples we show the original
question Q and the generated question Q’.

by the workers for true-premise, false-premise, and
non-visual questions. These percentages are shown
in Table 2.

True-
Premise

False-
Premise

Non-
Visual

AGENT-OURS 22.7 78.2 65.0
AGENT-BASELINE 04.7 01.4 00.0

Both 27.2 03.8 10.0
None 45.4 16.6 25.0

Table 2: Percentage of times each robot gets picked by
AMT workers as being more intelligent, more reasonable,
and more human-like for true-premise, false-premise, and
non-visual questions.

Interestingly, humans often prefer AGENT-OURS
over AGENT-BASELINE even when both models are
wrong – AGENT-BASELINE answers the question
incorrectly and AGENT-OURS incorrectly predicts
that the question is irrelevant and refuses to answer
a legitimate question. Users seem more tolerant to
mistakes in relevance prediction than VQA.

7 Conclusion

We introduced the novel problem of identifying ir-
relevant (i.e., non-visual or visual false-premise)
questions for VQA. Our proposed models signifi-
cantly outperform strong baselines on both tasks. A
VQA agent that utilizes our detector and refuses to
answer certain questions significantly outperforms a

baseline (that answers all questions) in human stud-
ies. Such an agent is perceived as more intelligent,
reasonable, and human-like.

There are several directions for future work. One
possibility includes identifying the premise entailed
in a question, as opposed to just stating true- or
false-premise. Another is determining what exter-
nal knowledge is needed to answer non-visual ques-
tions.

Our system can be further augmented to com-
municate to users what the assumed premise of the
question is that is not satisfied by the image, e.g.,
respond to “What is the woman wearing?” for an
image of a cat by saying “There is no woman.”

Acknowledgements

We thank Lucy Vanderwende for helpful sugges-
tions and discussions. We also thank the anony-
mous reviewers for their helpful comments. This
work was supported in part by the following: Na-
tional Science Foundation CAREER awards to DB
and DP, Alfred P. Sloan Fellowship, Army Research
Office YIP awards to DB and DP, ICTAS Junior Fac-
ulty awards to DB and DP, Army Research Lab grant
W911NF-15-2-0080 to DP and DB, Office of Naval
Research grant N00014-14-1- 0679 to DB, Paul G.
Allen Family Foundation Allen Distinguished Inves-
tigator award to DP, Google Faculty Research award
to DP and DB, AWS in Education Research grant to
DB, and NVIDIA GPU donation to DB.

923



References
Stanislaw Antol, Aishwarya Agrawal, Jiasen Lu, Mar-

garet Mitchell, Dhruv Batra, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and
Devi Parikh. 2015. VQA: Visual Question Answer-
ing. In ICCV.

Long Chen, Dell Zhang, and Levene Mark. 2012. Un-
derstanding User Intent in Community Question An-
swering. In WWW.

Stephen Choularton. 2009. Early Stage Detection of
Speech Recognition Errors. Ph.D. thesis, Macquarie
University.

Jia Deng, Jonathan Krause, Alexander C Berg, and
Li Fei-Fei. 2012. Hedging Your Bets: Optimizing
Accuracy-Specificity Trade-offs in Large Scale Visual
Recognition. In CVPR.

Pandu R Devarakota, Bruno Mirbach, and Björn Otter-
sten. 2007. Confidence estimation in classification
decision: A method for detecting unseen patterns. In
ICAPR.

Jesse Dodge, Amit Goyal, Xufeng Han, Alyssa Men-
sch, Margaret Mitchell, Karl Stratos, Kota Yamaguchi,
Yejin Choi, Hal Daumé, III, Alexander C. Berg, and
Tamara L. Berg. 2012. Detecting Visual Text. In
NAACL HLT.

Jeffrey Donahue, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Sergio Guadar-
rama, Marcus Rohrbach, Subhashini Venugopalan,
Kate Saenko, and Trevor Darrell. 2015. Long-term
Recurrent Convolutional Networks for Visual Recog-
nition and Description. In CVPR.

Hao Fang, Saurabh Gupta, Forrest Iandola, Rupesh K.
Srivastava, Li Deng, Piotr Dollar, Jianfeng Gao,
Xiaodong He, Margaret Mitchell, John C. Platt,
C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Geoffrey Zweig. 2015.
From Captions to Visual Concepts and Back. In
CVPR.

Yansong Feng and Mirella Lapata. 2013. Automatic
Caption Generation for News Images. PAMI, 35(4).

Matthew Honnibal and Mark Johnson. 2015. An Im-
proved Non-monotonic Transition System for Depen-
dency Parsing. In EMNLP.

Andrej Karpathy and Li Fei-Fei. 2015. Deep Visual-
Semantic Alignments for Generating Image Descrip-
tions. In CVPR.

Dahua Lin, Sanja Fidler, Chen Kong, and Raquel Ur-
tasun. 2014a. Visual Semantic Search: Retrieving
Videos via Complex Textual Queries. In CVPR.

Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James
Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár, and
C Lawrence Zitnick. 2014b. Microsoft COCO: Com-
mon objects in context. In ECCV.

Dong Liu, Xian-Sheng Hua, Meng Wang, and HongJiang
Zhang. 2009. Boost Search Relevance for Tag-based
Social Image Retrieval. In ICME.

Jiasen Lu, Xiao Lin, Dhruv Batra, and Devi Parikh.
2015. Deeper LSTM and normalized CNN Visual
Question Answering model. https://github.
com/VT-vision-lab/VQA_LSTM_CNN.

Mateusz Malinowski and Mario Fritz. 2014. A Multi-
World Approach to Question Answering about Real-
World Scenes based on Uncertain Input. In NIPS.

Vicente Ordonez, Girish Kulkarni, and Tamara L. Berg.
2011. Im2Text: Describing Images Using 1 Million
Captioned Photographs. In NIPS.

Mengye Ren, Ryan Kiros, and Richard Zemel. 2015. Ex-
ploring models and data for image question answering.
In NIPS.

Arup Sarma and David D Palmer. 2004. Context-based
Speech Recognition Error Detection and Correction.
In NAACL HLT.

Kimberly Voll, Stella Atkins, and Bruce Forster. 2008.
Improving the Utility of Speech Recognition Through
Error Detection. Journal of Digital Imaging, 21(4).

Kelvin Xu, Jimmy Ba, Ryan Kiros, Aaron Courville,
Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Richard Zemel, and Yoshua
Bengio. 2015. Show, Attend and Tell: Neural Image
Caption Generation with Visual Attention. In ICML.

Peng Zhang, Jiuling Wang, Ali Farhadi, Martial Hebert,
and Devi Parikh. 2014. Predicting Failures of Vision
Systems. In CVPR.

Tongmu Zhao, Akemi Hoshino, Masayuki Suzuki,
Nobuaki Minematsu, and Keikichi Hirose. 2012. Au-
tomatic Chinese Pronunciation Error Detection Using
SVM Trained with Structural Features. In Spoken
Language Technology Workshop.

924


