



















































Cultural Shift or Linguistic Drift? Comparing Two Computational Measures of Semantic Change


Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2116–2121,
Austin, Texas, November 1-5, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Cultural Shift or Linguistic Drift? Comparing Two
Computational Measures of Semantic Change

William L. Hamilton, Jure Leskovec, Dan Jurafsky
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford CA, 94305

wleif,jure,jurafsky@stanford.edu

Abstract

Words shift in meaning for many reasons,
including cultural factors like new technolo-
gies and regular linguistic processes like sub-
jectification. Understanding the evolution of
language and culture requires disentangling
these underlying causes. Here we show how
two different distributional measures can be
used to detect two different types of seman-
tic change. The first measure, which has been
used in many previous works, analyzes global
shifts in a word’s distributional semantics; it
is sensitive to changes due to regular pro-
cesses of linguistic drift, such as the semantic
generalization of promise (“I promise.”→“It
promised to be exciting.”). The second mea-
sure, which we develop here, focuses on local
changes to a word’s nearest semantic neigh-
bors; it is more sensitive to cultural shifts, such
as the change in the meaning of cell (“prison
cell” → “cell phone”). Comparing measure-
ments made by these two methods allows re-
searchers to determine whether changes are
more cultural or linguistic in nature, a distinc-
tion that is essential for work in the digital hu-
manities and historical linguistics.

1 Introduction

Distributional methods of embedding words in vec-
tor spaces according to their co-occurrence statis-
tics are a promising new tool for diachronic seman-
tics (Gulordava and Baroni, 2011; Jatowt and Duh,
2014; Kulkarni et al., 2014; Xu and Kemp, 2015;
Hamilton et al., 2016). Previous work, however,
does not consider the underlying causes of seman-

tic change or how to distentangle different types of
change.

We show how two computational measures can
be used to distinguish between semantic changes
caused by cultural shifts (e.g., technological ad-
vancements) and those caused by more regular pro-
cesses of semantic change (e.g., grammaticalization
or subjectification). This distinction is essential for
research on linguistic and cultural evolution. Detect-
ing cultural shifts in language use is crucial to com-
putational studies of history and other digital hu-
manities projects. By contrast, for advancing histor-
ical linguistics, cultural shifts amount to noise and
only the more regular shifts matter.

Our work builds on two intuitions: that dis-
tributional models can highlight syntagmatic ver-
sus paradigmatic relations with neighboring words
(Schutze and Pedersen, 1993) and that nouns are
more likely to undergo changes due to irregular cul-
tural shifts while verbs more readily participate in
regular processes of semantic change (Gentner and
France, 1988; Traugott and Dasher, 2001). We use
this noun vs. verb mapping as a proxy to compare
our two measures’ sensitivities to cultural vs. lin-
guistic shifts. Sensitivity to nominal shifts indi-
cates a propensity to capture irregular cultural shifts
in language, such as those due to technological ad-
vancements (Traugott and Dasher, 2001). Sensitiv-
ity to shifts in verbs (and other predicates) indicates
a propensity to capture regular processes of linguis-
tic drift (Gentner and France, 1988; Kintsch, 2000;
Traugott and Dasher, 2001).

The first measure we analyze is based upon
changes to a word’s local semantic neighborhood;

2116



lesbian homosexual

heterosexual
queer

woman

gay 
(1990s)

hispanic

daft

witty

brilliant

merry

gay 
(1900s)

frolicsome

joyous

Global measure of change Local neighborhood measure of change

Figure 1: Two different measures of semantic change. With the global measure of change, we measure how far a word has
moved in semantic space between two time-periods. This measure is sensitive to subtle shifts in usage and also global effects due
to the entire semantic space shifting. For example, this captures how actually underwent subjectification during the 20th century,
shifting from uses in objective statements about the world (“actually did try”) to subjective statements of attitude (“I actually agree”;
see Traugott and Dasher, 2001 for details). In contrast, with the local neighborhood measure of change, we measure changes in a
word’s nearest neighbors, which captures drastic shifts in core meaning, such as gay’s shift in meaning over the 20th century.

we show that it is more sensitive to changes in the
nominal domain and captures changes due to unpre-
dictable cultural shifts. Our second measure relies
on a more traditional global notion of change; we
show that it better captures changes, like those in
verbs, that are the result of regular linguistic drift.

Our analysis relies on a large-scale statistical
study of six historical corpora in multiple lan-
guages, along with case-studies that illustrate the
fine-grained differences between the two measures.

2 Methods

We use the diachronic word2vec embeddings con-
structed in our previous work (Hamilton et al., 2016)
to measure how word meanings change between
consecutive decades.1 In these representations each
word wi has a vector representation w(t) (Turney
and Pantel, 2010) at each time point, which captures
its co-occurrence statistics for that time period. The
vectors are constructed using the skip-gram with
negative sampling (SGNS) algorithm (Mikolov et
al., 2013) and post-processed to align the semantic
spaces between years. Measuring the distance be-
tween word vectors for consecutive decades allows
us to compute the rate at which the different words

1http://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/histwords/.
This URL also links to detailed dataset descriptions and the code
needed to replicate the experiments in this paper.

change in meaning (Gulordava and Baroni, 2011).
We analyzed the decades from 1800 to 1990 using

vectors derived from the Google N-gram datasets
(Lin et al., 2012) that have large amounts of his-
torical text (English, French, German, and English
Fiction). We also used vectors derived from the Cor-
pus of Historical American English (COHA), which
is smaller than Google N-grams but was carefully
constructed to be genre balanced and contains word
lemmas as well as surface forms (Davies, 2010). We
examined all decades from 1850 through 2000 using
the COHA dataset and used the part-of-speech tags
provided with the corpora.

2.1 Measuring semantic change

We examine two different ways to measure semantic
change (Figure 1).

Global measure
The first measure analyzes global shifts in a

word’s vector semantics and is identical to the mea-
sure used in most previous works (Gulordava and
Baroni, 2011; Jatowt and Duh, 2014; Kim et al.,
2014; Hamilton et al., 2016). We simply take
a word’s vectors for two consecutive decades and
measure the cosine distance between them, i.e.

dG(w
(t)
i , w

(t+1)
i ) = cos-dist(w

(t)
i ,w

(t+1)
i ). (1)

2117



English (All) English (Fic.) German French COHA (word) COHA (lemma)

−0.4
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1

0.0

0.1

0.2

(V
er

b
-n

ou
n)

ch
an

ge

Global measure
Local measure

Figure 2: The global measure is more sensitive to semantic changes in verbs while the local neighborhood measure is more
sensitive to noun changes. Examining how much nouns change relative to verbs (using coefficients from mixed-model regressions)
reveals that the two measures are sensitive to different types of semantic change. Across all languages, the local neighborhood
measure always assigns relatively higher rates of change to nouns (i.e., the right/green bars are lower than the left/blue bars for all
pairs), though the results vary by language (e.g., French has high noun change-rates overall). 95% confidence intervals are shown.

Local neighborhood measure
The second measure is based on the intuition that

only a word’s nearest semantic neighbors are rele-
vant. For this measure, we first find word wi’s set of
k nearest-neighbors (according to cosine-similarity)
within each decade, which we denote by the ordered
set Nk(w(t)i ). Next, to measure the change between
decades t and t + 1, we compute a “second-order”
similarity vector for w(t)i from these neighbor sets
with entries defined as

s(t)(j) = cos-sim(w(t)i ,w
(t)
j )

∀wj ∈ Nk(w(t)i ) ∪Nk(w
(t+1)
i ), (2)

and we compute an analogous vector for w(t+1)i .
The second-order vector, s(t)i , contains the cosine
similarity of wi and the vectors of all wi’s near-
est semantic neighbors in the the time-periods t and
t + 1. Working with variants of these second-order
vectors has been a popular approach in many recent
works, though most of these works define these vec-
tors against the full vocabulary and not just a word’s
nearest neighbors (del Prado Martin and Brendel,
2016; Eger and Mehler, 2016; Rodda et al., 2016).

Finally, we compute the local neighborhood
change as

dL(w
(t)
i , w

(t+1)
i ) = cos-dist(s

(t)
i , s

(t+1)
i ). (3)

This measures the extent to which wi’s similarity
with its nearest neighbors has changed.

The local neighborhood measure defined in (3)
captures strong shifts in a word’s paradigmatic re-
lations but is less sensitive to global shifts in syntag-
matic contexts (Schutze and Pedersen, 1993). We

Dataset # Nouns # Verbs

Google English All 5299 2722
Google English Fic. 4941 3128
German 5443 1844
French 2310 4992
COHA (Word) 4077 1267
COHA (Lemma) 3389 783

Table 1: Number of nouns and verbs tested in each dataset.

used k = 25 in all experiments (though we found
the results to be consistent for k ∈ [10, 50]).

2.2 Statistical methodology

To test whether nouns or verbs change more accord-
ing to our two measures of change, we build on
our previous work and used a linear mixed model
approach (Hamilton et al., 2016). This approach
amounts to a linear regression where the model also
includes “random” effects to account for the fact that
the measurements for individual words will be cor-
related across time (McCulloch and Neuhaus, 2001).

We ran two regressions per datatset: one with the
global dG values as the dependent variables (DVs)
and one with the local neighborhood dL values. In
both cases we examined the change between all con-
secutive decades and normalized the DVs to zero-
mean and unit variance. We examined nouns/verbs
within the top-10000 words by frequency rank and
removed all words that occurred <500 times in
the smaller COHA dataset. The independent vari-
ables are word frequency, the decade of the change
(represented categorically), and variable indicating

2118



Word 1850s context 1990s context

actually “...dinners which you have actually eaten.” “With that, I actually agree.”
must “O, George, we must have faith.” “Which you must have heard ten years ago...”
promise “I promise to pay you...’ “...the day promised to be lovely.”

gay “Gay bridals and other merry-makings of men.” “...the result of gay rights demonstrations.”
virus “This young man is...infected with the virus.” “...a rapidly spreading computer virus.”
cell “The door of a gloomy cell...” “They really need their cell phones.”

Table 2: Example case-studies of semantic change. The first three words are examples of regular linguistic shifts, while the latter
three are examples of words that shifted due to exogenous cultural factors. Contexts are from the COHA data (Davies, 2010).

actually must promise gay virus cell

−0.3

−0.1

0.1

0.3

G
lo

ba
l-

lo
ca

lc
ha

ng
e

Regular linguistic shifts Irregular cultural shifts

Figure 3: The global measure captures classic examples of linguistic drift while the local measure captures example cultural
shifts. Examining the semantic distance between the 1850s and 1990s shows that the global measure is more sensitive to regular
shifts (and vice-versa for the local measure). The plot shows the difference between the measurements made by the two methods.

whether a word is a noun or a verb (proper nouns
are excluded, as in Hamilton et al., 2016).2

3 Results

Our results show that the two seemingly related
measures actually result in drastically different no-
tions of semantic change.

3.1 Nouns vs. verbs

The local neighborhood measure assigns far higher
rates of semantic change to nouns across all lan-
guages and datasets while the opposite is true for
the global distance measure, which tends to assign
higher rates of change to verbs (Figure 2).

We focused on verbs vs. nouns since they are
the two major parts-of-speech and previous research
has shown that verbs are more semantically mutable
than nouns and thus more likely to undergo linguis-
tic drift (Gentner and France, 1988), while nouns
are far more likely to change due to cultural shifts
like new technologies (Traugott and Dasher, 2001).
However, some well-known regular linguistic shifts
include rarer parts of speech like adverbs (included
in our case studies below). Thus we also confirmed

2Frequency was included since it is known to strongly influ-
ence the distributional measures (Hamilton et al., 2016).

that the differences shown in Figure 2 also hold
when adverbs and adjectives are included along with
the verbs. This modified analysis showed analogous
significant trends, which fits with previous research
arguing that adverbial and adjectival modifiers are
also often the target of regular linguistic changes
(Traugott and Dasher, 2001).

The results of this large-scale regression analy-
sis show that the local measure is more sensitive to
changes in the nominal domain, a domain in which
change is known to be driven by cultural factors.
In contrast, the global measure is more sensitive to
changes in verbs, along with adjectives and adverbs,
which are known to be the targets of many regular
processes of linguistic change (Traugott and Dasher,
2001; Hopper and Traugott, 2003)

3.2 Case studies

We examined six case-study words grouped into two
sets. These case studies show that three examples of
well-attested regular linguistic shifts (set A) changed
more according to the global measure, while three
well-known examples of cultural changes (set B)
change more according to the local neighborhood
measure. Table 2 lists these words with some rep-
resentative historical contexts (Davies, 2010).

2119



Set A contains three words that underwent at-
tested regular linguistic shifts detailed in Traugott
and Dasher (2001): actually, must, and promise.
These three words represent three different types of
regular linguistic shifts: actually is a case of subjec-
tification (detailed in Figure 1); must shifted from
a deontic/obligation usage (“you must do X”) to a
epistemic one (“X must be the case”), exemplifying
a regular pattern of change common to many modal
verbs; and promise represents the class of shift-
ing “performative speech acts” that undergo rich
changes due to their pragmatic uses and subjectifi-
cation (Traugott and Dasher, 2001). The contexts
listed in Table 2 exemplify these shifts.

Set B contains three words that were selected
because they underwent well-known cultural shifts
over the last 150 years: gay, virus, and cell.
These words gained new meanings due to uses in
community-specific vernacular (gay) or technolog-
ical advances (virus, cell). The cultural shifts un-
derlying these changes in usage — e.g., the devel-
opment of the mobile “cell phone” — were unpre-
dictable in the sense that they were not the result of
regularities in human linguistic systems.

Figure 3 shows how much the meaning of these
word changed from the 1850s to the 1990s according
to the two different measures on the English Google
data. We see that the words in set A changed more
when measurements were made using the global
measure, while the opposite holds for set B.

4 Discussion

Our results show that our novel local neighborhood
measure of semantic change is more sensitive to
changes in nouns, while the global measure is more
sensitive to changes in verbs. This mapping aligns
with the traditional distinction between irregular cul-
tural shifts in nominals and more regular cases of
linguistic drift (Traugott and Dasher, 2001) and is
further reinforced by our six case studies.

This finding emphasizes that researchers must de-
velop and use measures of semantic change that
are tuned to specific tasks. For example, a cul-
tural change-point detection framework would be
more successful using our local neighborhood mea-
sure, while an empirical study of grammaticalization
would be better off using the traditional global dis-

tance approach. Comparing measurements made by
these two approaches also allows researchers to as-
sess the extent to which semantic changes are lin-
guistic or cultural in nature.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank C. Manning, V. Prabhakaran,
S. Kumar, and our anonymous reviewers for their
helpful comments. This research has been sup-
ported in part by NSF CNS-1010921, IIS-1149837,
IIS-1514268 NIH BD2K, ARO MURI, DARPA
XDATA, DARPA SIMPLEX, Stanford Data Sci-
ence Initiative, SAP Stanford Graduate Fellowship,
NSERC PGS-D, Boeing, Lightspeed, and Volkswa-
gen.

References
Mark Davies. 2010. The Corpus of Historical

American English: 400 million words, 1810-2009.
http://corpus.byu.edu/coha/.

Fermin Moscoso del Prado Martin and Christian Brendel.
2016. Case and Cause in Icelandic: Reconstructing
Causal Networks of Cascaded Language Changes. In
Proc. ACL.

Steffen Eger and Alexander Mehler. 2016. On the
Linearity of Semantic Change: Investigating Meaning
Variation via Dynamic Graph Models. In Proc. ACL.

Dedre Gentner and Ilene M. France. 1988. The verb
mutability effect: Studies of the combinatorial seman-
tics of nouns and verbs. Lexical ambiguity resolution:
Perspectives from psycholinguistics, neuropsychology,
and artificial intelligence, pages 343–382.

Kristina Gulordava and Marco Baroni. 2011. A distribu-
tional similarity approach to the detection of semantic
change in the Google Books Ngram corpus. In Proc.
GEMS 2011 Workshop on Geometrical Models of Nat-
ural Language Semantics, pages 67–71. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

William L. Hamilton, Jure Leskovec, and Dan Jurafsky.
2016. Diachronic Word Embeddings Reveal Statisti-
cal Laws of Semantic Change. In Proc. ACL.

Paul J Hopper and Elizabeth Closs Traugott. 2003.
Grammaticalization. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.

Adam Jatowt and Kevin Duh. 2014. A framework for
analyzing semantic change of words across time. In
Proc. 14th ACM/IEEE-CS Conf. on Digital Libraries,
pages 229–238. IEEE Press.

Yoon Kim, Yi-I. Chiu, Kentaro Hanaki, Darshan Hegde,
and Slav Petrov. 2014. Temporal analysis of lan-
guage through neural language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1405.3515.

2120



Walter Kintsch. 2000. Metaphor comprehension: A
computational theory. Psychon. Bull. Rev., 7(2):257–
266.

Vivek Kulkarni, Rami Al-Rfou, Bryan Perozzi, and
Steven Skiena. 2014. Statistically significant detec-
tion of linguistic change. In Proc. 24th WWW Conf.,
pages 625–635.

Yuri Lin, Jean-Baptiste Michel, Erez Lieberman Aiden,
Jon Orwant, Will Brockman, and Slav Petrov. 2012.
Syntactic annotations for the google books ngram cor-
pus. In Proc. ACL System Demonstrations.

Charles E McCulloch and John M Neuhaus. 2001. Gen-
eralized linear mixed models. Wiley-Interscience,
Hoboken, NJ.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S. Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representations
of words and phrases and their compositionality. In
NIPS.

Martina Rodda, Marco Senaldi, and Alessandro Lenci.
2016. Panta rei: Tracking Semantic Change with Dis-
tributional Semantics in Ancient Greek. In Italian
Conference of Computational Linguistics.

Hinrich Schutze and Jan Pedersen. 1993. A vector model
for syntagmatic and paradigmatic relatedness. In Proc.
9th Annu. Conf. of the UW Centre for the New OED
and Text Research, pages 104–113. Citeseer.

Elizabeth Closs Traugott and Richard B Dasher. 2001.
Regularity in Semantic Change. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, UK.

Peter D. Turney and Patrick Pantel. 2010. From fre-
quency to meaning: Vector space models of semantics.
J. Artif. Intell. Res., 37(1):141–188.

Yang Xu and Charles Kemp. 2015. A computational
evaluation of two laws of semantic change. In Proc.
37th Annu. Conf. Cogn. Sci. Soc.

2121


