



















































Topic-Based Agreement and Disagreement in US Electoral Manifestos


Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2938–2944
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 7–11, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Topic-Based Agreement and Disagreement in US Electoral Manifestos

Stefano Menini1,3, Federico Nanni2, Simone Paolo Ponzetto2, Sara Tonelli1
1Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy

2University of Mannheim, Germany
3University of Trento, Italy

{menini, satonelli}@fbk.eu
{federico, simone}@informatik.uni-mannheim.de

Abstract

We present a topic-based analysis of
agreement and disagreement in political
manifestos, which relies on a new method
for topic detection based on key con-
cept clustering. Our approach outperforms
both standard techniques like LDA and a
state-of-the-art graph-based method, and
provides promising initial results for this
new task in computational social science.

1 Introduction

During the last decade, the adoption of natu-
ral language processing (NLP) techniques for the
study of political phenomena has gained consid-
erable momentum (Grimmer and Stewart, 2013),
arguably because of both the availability of parlia-
mentary proceedings (van Aggelen et al., 2017),
electoral manifestos (Volkens et al., 2011) and
campaign debates (Woolley and Peters, 2008), and
the interest of the computational social science
(CSS) community in the potential of text mining
methods for advancing political science research
(Lazer et al., 2009).

Previous work focused on the automatic de-
tection of sentiment expressions in political news
(Young and Soroka, 2012), the identification of
ideological proportions (Sim et al., 2013) and the
scaling on a left-right spectrum of politicians’
speeches (Slapin and Proksch, 2008). More re-
cently, researchers looked at topic-centered ap-
proaches to provide finer-grained analyses, includ-
ing segmentation methods for topic-labeled man-
ifestos (Glavaš et al., 2016), supporting manual
coders in identifying coarse-grained political top-
ics (Zirn et al., 2016), as well as topic-based and
cross-lingual political scaling (Nanni et al., 2016;
Glavaš et al., 2017).

Measuring Agreement. Automatically measur-
ing the level of agreement in political documents
(Gottipati et al., 2013; Menini and Tonelli, 2016)
has the potential of supporting political analyses
such as the comparisons between campaign strate-
gies (Burton et al., 2015), the study of promises
kept and broken after elections (Naurin, 2011),
the formation of coalitions (Debus, 2009) and the
interactions between government and opposition
(Hix and Noury, 2016). However, previous work
relies on the availability of pre-defined topics, in-
cluding supervised methods (Galley et al., 2004;
Hillard et al., 2003), approaches leveraging col-
laboratively generated resources (Gottipati et al.,
2013; Awadallah et al., 2012) or pairwise agree-
ment detection from political debates (Menini and
Tonelli, 2016).

Our Contributions. a) New task: Given a collec-
tion of political documents such as, e.g., electoral
manifestos, we look at ways to perform an auto-
matic, topic-based agreement-disagreement clas-
sification. b) New approach: We first segment the
texts into coarse-grained domains. Next, coarse
domains are used to extract a fine-grained list of
topic-based points of view which, in turn, are used
to perform classification. We achieve this by de-
veloping a novel approach for topic detection on
the basis of key concept clustering techniques: this
is shown to outperform not only LDA-based Topic
Modeling – the de facto standard approach for this
task in CSS (Grimmer and Stewart, 2013) – but
also established unsupervised (k-means) and state-
of-the-art graph-based clustering techniques. c)
Experimental study and resources: We use man-
ifestos from the Comparative Manifesto Project
(Volkens et al., 2011). As in previous works (Zirn
et al., 2016), we focus on a subset consisting of
six U.S. manifestos (Republican and Democrat)
from the 2004, 2008 and 2012 elections. We show

2938



that our method leads to promising results when
measuring the topic-based agreement between the
party manifestos, thus indicating the overall feasi-
bility of the task. Additionally, we release all code
and annotations related to this paper to foster fur-
ther work from the research community.

2 System Overview

We present a new system for measuring the topic-
based agreement of political manifestos. Our ap-
proach consists of four main steps: i) macro-
domain detection, e.g. foreign policy, economy,
welfare, ii) key concept extraction, iii) topic de-
tection as key concept clustering, e.g., energy con-
sumption, new energy solution, petroleum depen-
dence for the topic green economy, and iv) pair-
wise, topic-based agreement detection.

The central component of our pipeline is a new
approach for fine-grained topic detection in po-
litical contents based on key concept clustering.
This is because, among existing methods, super-
vised approaches cannot be applied here due to
the scarce availability of in-domain labeled data,
as well as the already remarked high complexity of
the annotation process (Benoit et al., 2016). More-
over, the application of unsupervised topic detec-
tion techniques like LDA has been shown during
prototyping to produce low-quality topics that are
rather coarse (cf. the results in Section 3).

Similar to LDA-based approaches, we view
each topic as a cluster of words or phrases. How-
ever, given that we are in a domain with topics
built around rather specific lexical cues, we do not
rely on the entire vocabulary of the documents.
Instead, we build clusters that are made up of se-
mantically similar key concepts extracted from the
documents themselves, including both single and
multiwords (i.e. keywords and keyphrases). In
the next paragraph we present an overview of each
component of our system.

1) Domain Detection. We are given as input sen-
tences from a political manifesto. The first step of
our work is to classify them into the seven macro-
domains defined by the Manifesto Project, namely
external relations, freedom and democracy, polit-
ical system, economy, welfare and quality of life,
fabric of society, social groups. To achieve this
goal, we use ClassyMan, a system developed in a
previous work (Zirn et al., 2016), which predicts
the domains and domain shifts between pairs of
adjacent sentences.

2) Key concept Extraction. Next, for each do-
main we process each sentence using Keyphrase
Digger (KD) (Moretti et al., 2015). KD is a rule-
based (hence domain-agnostic) system for key
concept extraction that combines statistical mea-
sures with linguistic information, and which has
shown competitive performance on the SemEval
2010 benchmark (Kim et al., 2010). We set the
tool to extract lemmatized key concepts up to three
tokens. For each key concept, we compute its tf-
idf, considering each domain as a different docu-
ment. The result is a list of key concepts for each
domain, with a score representing their relevance
to the domain.

3) Key concept Clustering. Starting from the flat
lists of key concepts extracted by KD, we adopt
a recursive procedure to merge them into mean-
ingful clusters. First, we build a distributional se-
mantic vector for each key concept by averaging
the embeddings of each word in the key concept
(we use the GloVe embeddings from Pennington
et al. (2014) with 50 dimensions, pre-trained on
Wikipedia). Next, we build a semantic graph rep-
resentation where a) each node consists of a key
concept, b) the weight of each edge is the cosine
distance between their respective embedding vec-
tors and c) edges are directed, pointing to the node
of the key concept with the higher tf-idf. For ties,
we create multiple edges. To direct the nodes we
adopt tf-idf, since we want to weigh the key con-
cepts according to the relevance for the macro-
domain we are processing. This allows us to ob-
tain well-defined groups within the domains.

To reduce the number of weak edges, we set a
cosine similarity threshold of 0.8,1 and we set an
edge between two multi-word keyphrases if they
have at least one word in common (e.g. ethnic mi-
nority, black minority).

Finally, we obtain clusters of semantically re-
lated key concepts from the graph as follows: a)
we extract all groups of key concepts with an edge
directed to the same node and create a first set of
clusters. Then, b) clusters sharing at least 50% of
the key concepts are merged. Next, c) the clusters
purity is improved by removing the less relevant
key concepts. These are identified as those key
concepts whose cosine distance is more than 1.5
times the standard deviation from the centroid of

1We evaluated the clustering output with different thresh-
olds ranging from 0.6 to 0.9. The value of 0.8 is the one
leading to the best accuracy. In Table 1 and 2 we report the
results using this threshold.

2939



the cluster. At the end of this process, we obtain
for each domain a set of clusters or topics, made
of semantically related key concepts. The number
of clusters is determined dynamically during the
process and does not need to be defined a priori.

4) Statement Extraction. We use the clusters of
key concepts to identify pairs of statements, re-
lated to the same topic, from the Republican (R)
and Democratic (D) manifestos. For each topic,
we first collect the statements from D and R man-
ifestos having among their key concepts one of the
key concepts defining the topic and then we pair
groups of three statements from D with groups of
three statements from R. We use groups of three
statements because it allows us i) to obtain a suffi-
cient number of pairs to perform automatic classi-
fication, and ii) to improve the quality of the man-
ual annotations. We noticed during an initial eval-
uation that annotators focus easier on groups of 3
sentences rather than larger groups and that, on the
other hand, using less than 3 sentences decreases
the chances to obtain at least two statements in
agreement/disagreement within a pair.

5) Agreement Classification. The last step is
the automatic classification of agreement and dis-
agreement between Republicans and Democrats.
To classify pairs of statements, we rely on a su-
pervised machine learning approach with the set
of features used in Menini and Tonelli (2016), in
which a similar task is addressed. The classifica-
tion relies on features related to surface informa-
tion such as lexical overlap and negation, to the
semantic content of the statements (e.g. sentiment)
and to their relation (e.g. entailment).

3 Evaluation

3.1 Topic Extraction

Having a set of manifestos annotated with coarse-
grained domains – using ClassyMan, which
achieved a micro F1-Score of 0.78 across the
seven macro-topics in a 10-fold cross validation
setting – the central step of our pipeline is to detect
clusters of key concepts representing fine-grained
topics in each macro domain. To do that, we adopt
the method described above, that we call here Key
Concept Clusters. We examine its performance in
comparison with two types of baselines.

LDA Baselines. We first employ vanilla LDA,
a common approach for topic detection in CSS
(Grimmer and Stewart, 2013), relying on the as-

sumption that tokens often co-occurring together
in a corpus belong to the same topic. For this task,
we use the Mallet topic model package.2 Given
the fact that our method for key concept cluster-
ing identifies on average 30 topics per domain, we
create a corpus for each domain with all its sen-
tences and we run LDA with 10,000 iterations to
obtain 30 topics. We test LDA by considering all
the tokens in the corpus (Vanilla LDA) and only
the extracted key concepts (Key concept LDA).

Clustering Baselines. The second type of base-
line adopts the same representation of key con-
cepts used in our approach, i.e., we represent can-
didate phrases by averaging the embeddings of
their constituent words. We test two different clus-
tering approaches to group them into topics: the
first uses K-means (with 30 clusters). The second
(Graph-based) builds a fully-connected semantic
relatedness graph by measuring the cosine similar-
ity between all pairs of key concepts: topic cluster-
ing is then obtained by finding all maximal cliques
in the graph using the Bron-Kerbosch algorithm.

Evaluation. In order to assess the overall quality
of the topics produced by each approach, we adopt
the word-intrusion post-hoc evaluation method
(Chang et al., 2009) using the platform presented
in Lauscher et al. (2016). For each approach, we
randomly pick 100 topics and for each topic we
keep two sets of key concepts, respectively the
four and eight top-relevant elements of the clus-
ter.3 Then, we add to these four/eight words a new
word from another topic (i.e. the intruder), and
we shuffle the obtained five/nine words. Finally,
we ask three political science experts to identify
the intruder. The more the topics are coherent, the
easier the intruder is detected. While this type of
post-hoc evaluation is extremely time-consuming
– no less than 45 minutes of work for annotator
for each produced ranking, thus hindering the ex-
perimental assessment of, for instance, the role of
different numbers of topics for each baseline – it is
necessary given the already remarked limits of ex-
isting gold standards manually-created for the task
(Mikhaylov et al., 2012; King et al., 2017).

Results. As shown in Table 1, our system out-
performs the other methods with an accuracy of
0.86 in the word-intrusion task with four key con-

2http://mallet.cs.umass.edu/
3For LDA, Mallet provides already ranked results. For the

other approaches, the most relevant key concepts are the key
concepts closest to the centroid of the cluster.

2940



Method Acc.@4 Acc.@8
Vanilla-LDA 0.22 0.35
Key concept-LDA 0.29 0.36
Graph-based Clusters 0.46 0.44
k-means Clusters 0.72 0.67
Key concept Clusters 0.86 0.67

Table 1: Topics evaluation: accuracy in word in-
trusion task. The table reports the accuracy values
on the first 4 and 8 key concepts in the clusters.

cepts in each cluster, while it decreases to 0.67 if
we extend the evaluation to include eight key con-
cepts. Besides, inter-annotator agreement (Fleiss’
kappa), reported in Table 2, varies a lot across
the different methods. In particular, the agree-
ment in the intrusion task with four key concepts
is higher for clusters generated with our method
(0.79), while it is very low using LDA (0.32). This
confirms the findings by Chang et al. (2009) that
LDA topics are often difficult to interpret.

If we extend the evaluation to the first eight ele-
ments of each cluster, we notice that the difference
between the agreement with our pipeline (0.62)
and LDA (0.46) decreases. This shows that, with
key concept clusters, increasing the number of key
concepts in a topic affects their interpretation, al-
though there is still an improvement with respect
to the other approaches.

Final Tuning. We next tune clustering to classify
fine-grained topics as in agreement or disagree-
ment. Tuning is performed as to maximize cluster-
ing accuracy while obtaining a sufficient number
of topics shared by both Democrats and Republi-
cans. Since a cosine similarity threshold of 0.8 in
the clustering process leads to clusters that are too
specific, often addressed only by one of the two
parties, we reduce the threshold to 0.7, so that the
topics are likely to be covered by both manifestos.
In addition, we want to compare the agreement fo-
cusing on small clusters, composed by a maximum
of 10 key concepts. To obtain them, we iterate the
clustering process over the key concepts of larger
clusters, progressively increasing the cosine sim-
ilarity threshold until there are no groups larger
than 10 key concepts. We reach this goal with a
threshold of 0.85. Using these settings, the accu-
racy (Acc. @4) of the clusters decreases to 0.74,
but we obtain clusters that allow us to extract a
total of 351 pairs covering 87 fine-grained topics.
Table 3 shows some of the clusters extracted.

Method Kappa@4 Kappa@8
Vanilla LDA 0.32 0.46
Key concept LDA 0.50 0.40
Graph-based Clusters 0.39 0.32
k-means Clusters 0.65 0.61
Key concept Clusters 0.79 0.62

Table 2: Inter-annotator agreement (IAA) eval-
uation (Fleiss’ kappa) in the word intrusion task.
The table reports the IIA on the first 4 and 8 key
concepts in the clusters.

3.2 Agreement Classification

Data Annotation. The statements in the pairs
have been annotated by three scholars of politi-
cal science in terms of agreement, disagreement
or none of the two. The annotation results in 158
pairs in disagreement, 135 in agreement and 58
neither in agreement nor in disagreement, with an
inter-annotator agreement (IAA) of 0.64 (Fleiss’
Kappa). Note that only in three cases the annota-
tors claimed that the meaning of a sentence pair
did not match with the topic detected with our ap-
proach. This additional finding highlights again
the quality of our method for topic detection based
on key concept clustering.

Agreement Classification. Agreement classifica-
tion is carried out using Support Vector Machine
(SVM) tested in two configurations. In the first
setting, we train and test the classifier with 10-
fold cross validation over the manually annotated
pairs from the political manifestos. In the second
configuration, we explore instead a cross-domain
approach: we train the SVM on the 1960 Elec-
tions dataset from Menini and Tonelli (2016) and
use all the pairs in our gold standard of political
manifestos as test set. This experiment is aimed
at assessing the impact of training on comparable
data are from the same domain (i.e., transcript of
political speeches vs. manifestos).

The results of both configurations are shown in
Table 4, where they are compared to a random
baseline. The results show that the set of features
used suits our task, classifying the data with an
accuracy comparable to the performance of hu-
man annotators, if we consider IAA as an upper
bound for the task. We achieve nevertheless re-
sults that are in a lower range than Menini and
Tonelli (2016), thus suggesting that agreement and
disagreement is harder to detect in political mani-

2941



Macro-domain: External Relations
japan, korea, missile, north korea, south korea, weapon north korea
extremism, renounce terrorism, nuclear terrorism, proliferation, security, terrorism
Macro-domain: Freedom and Democracy
culture, freedom, ideology, religion, society, tolerance, tradition
democracy, discrimination, first amendment rights, freedom, issue, law, rights of citizenship
Macro-domain: Political System
budget, budget act, cost, cut, deficit, shortfall, tax
congressional republican, election, republican, republican platform, romney, vote
Macro-domain: Economy
alternative fuel, electricity, fuel, gas, transportation fuel
bailout, credit, loan, mortgage, payment, savings
Macro-domain: Welfare and Quality of Life
ailment, chronic, disease, health, illness, obesity, treatment of disease
global energy forum, industry, new energy solution, new global energy, solar energy generation
Macro-domain: Fabric of Society
crime, criminal, high-profile criminal conviction, prosecution
religious freedom, religious, religious discrimination
Macro-domain: Social Groups
agricultural agricultural america, agricultural production, agriculture, farm, rural, rural america
hispanic, latino, latino population

Table 3: Examples of key concept clusters extracted for each macro-domain.

Classification Accuracy
Random Baseline 0.54
10-fold cross validation 0.66
1960 Elections training 0.61

Table 4: Results on agreement classification.

festos than in speeches. Finally the accuracy of the
classifier in the cross-domain setting is lower than
the one obtained with in-domain cross-validation,
but still comparable with that of human annotators.

4 Conclusion

In this paper, we presented a system for support-
ing automatic topic-bases analyses of agreement
and disagreement in political manifestos. This ap-
proach goes beyond established approaches for the
task, which are either too coarse-grained or rely
intensively on manual annotations.

Our method can provide insights into agree-
ment and disagreement between parties, covering
several topics of internal and foreign policy. By
examining the results, we find an overall cross-
party agreement of 46% regarding the discussed
issues. However, this agreement varies substan-
tially if we consider the different macro-domains.

For example, while we notice a strong disagree-
ment over the domain political system, especially
for what concerns the responsibilities of previous
administrations, other domains, such as external
relations, present a more balanced ratio of agree-
ment and disagreement between Republicans and
Democrats. The possibility of measuring agree-
ment at a finer level (topics) that is offered by our
approach, shows, for example, that between 2004
and 2012 two opposite positions have been defined
regarding the Middle East. On the contrary, there
has been a general agreement on the role of the
U.S. concerning the relations with Europe.

In the future, we hope that the pipeline pre-
sented in this paper will support political science
researchers in studying topics such as party po-
larization through the analysis and comparison of
electoral manifestos, parliamentary proceedings
and campaign speeches. On the computational
side, we will to extend our approach to cross-
lingual data, in order to enable computer-assisted
political analysis across different languages.

Downloads. The code for topic detection
as key concept clustering process is available
at https://dh.fbk.eu/technologies/
keyphrase-clustering.

2942



References
Astrid van Aggelen, Laura Hollink, Max Kemman,

Martijn Kleppe, and Henri Beunders. 2017. The de-
bates of the european parliament as linked open data.
Semantic Web, 8(2):271–281.

Rawia Awadallah, Maya Ramanath, and Gerhard
Weikum. 2012. Polaricq: Polarity classification
of political quotations. In Proceedings of the 21st
ACM International Conference on Information and
Knowledge Management, pages 1945–1949.

Kenneth Benoit, Drew Conway, Benjamin E Laud-
erdale, Michael Laver, and Slava Mikhaylov. 2016.
Crowd-sourced text analysis: reproducible and ag-
ile production of political data. American Political
Science Review, 110(02):278–295.

Michael John Burton, William J. Miller, and Daniel M.
Shea. 2015. Campaign Craft: The Strategies, Tac-
tics, and Art of Political Campaign Management:
The Strategies, Tactics, and Art of Political Cam-
paign Management. New York: Praeger.

Jonathan Chang, Sean Gerrish, Chong Wang, Jordan L
Boyd-Graber, and David M Blei. 2009. Reading
tea leaves: How humans interpret topic models. In
Advances in neural information processing systems,
pages 288–296.

Marc Debus. 2009. Pre-electoral commitments and
government formation. Public Choice, 138(1-2):45.

Michel Galley, Kathleen McKeown, Julia Hirschberg,
and Elizabeth Shriberg. 2004. Identifying agree-
ment and disagreement in conversational speech:
Use of bayesian networks to model pragmatic de-
pendencies. In Proceedings of the 42nd Annual
Meeting on Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 669–676.

Goran Glavaš, Federico Nanni, and Simone Paolo
Ponzetto. 2016. Unsupervised text segmentation us-
ing semantic relatedness graphs. In Proceedings of
the 5th Joint Conference on Lexical and Computa-
tional Semantics, pages 125–130.

Goran Glavaš, Federico Nanni, and Simone Paolo
Ponzetto. 2017. Unsupervised cross-lingual scaling
of political texts. In Proceedings of the 15th Confer-
ence of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Volume 2, Short Papers,
pages 688–693.

Swapna Gottipati, Minghui Qiu, Yanchuan Sim, Jing
Jiang, and Noah A. Smith. 2013. Learning topics
and positions from Debatepedia. In Proceedings of
the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing, pages 1858–1868.

Justin Grimmer and Brandon M Stewart. 2013. Text as
data: The promise and pitfalls of automatic content
analysis methods for political texts. Political Analy-
sis, 21(3):267–297.

Dustin Hillard, Mari Ostendorf, and Elizabeth
Shriberg. 2003. Detection of agreement vs. dis-
agreement in meetings: Training with unlabeled
data. In Proceedings of the 2003 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics on Human Language
Technology (Short Papers), pages 34–36.

Simon Hix and Abdul Noury. 2016. Government-
opposition or left-right? the institutional determi-
nants of voting in legislatures. Political Science Re-
search and Methods, 4(02):249–273.

Su Nam Kim, Olena Medelyan, Min-Yen Kan, and
Timothy Baldwin. 2010. Semeval-2010 task 5 : Au-
tomatic keyphrase extraction from scientific articles.
In Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation, pages 21–26.

Gary King, Patrick Lam, and Margaret Roberts. 2017.
Computer-assisted keyword and document set dis-
covery from unstructured text. American Journal of
Political Science.

Anne Lauscher, Federico Nanni, Pablo Ruiz Fabo, and
Simone Paolo Ponzetto. 2016. Entities as topic la-
bels: combining entity linking and labeled lda to
improve topic interpretability and evaluability. IJ-
Col: Italian journal of computational linguistics,
2(2):67–88.

David Lazer, Alex Sandy Pentland, Lada Adamic,
Sinan Aral, Albert Laszlo Barabasi, Devon Brewer,
Nicholas Christakis, Noshir Contractor, James
Fowler, Myron Gutmann, et al. 2009. Life in the
network: the coming age of computational social
science. Science (New York, NY), 323(5915):721.

Stefano Menini and Sara Tonelli. 2016. Agreement and
disagreement: Comparison of points of view in the
political domain. In Proceedings of the 26th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 2461–2470.

Slava Mikhaylov, Michael Laver, and Kenneth R
Benoit. 2012. Coder reliability and misclassification
in the human coding of party manifestos. Political
Analysis, 20(1):78–91.

Giovanni Moretti, Rachele Sprugnoli, and Sara Tonelli.
2015. Digging in the dirt: Extracting keyphrases
from texts with KD. In Proceedings of the 2nd Ital-
ian Conference on Computational Linguistics.

Federico Nanni, Cäcilia Zirn, Goran Glavaš, Jason Ei-
chorst, and Simone Paolo Ponzetto. 2016. TopFish:
Topic-based analysis of political position in US elec-
toral campaigns. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on the Advances in Computational Anal-
ysis of Political Text, pages 61–67.

Elin Naurin. 2011. Election Promises, Party Behaviour
and Voter Perceptions. Palgrave Macmillan.

2943



Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D
Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word
representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 1532–43.

Yanchuan Sim, Brice Acree, Justin H Gross, and
Noah A. Smith. 2013. Measuring ideological pro-
portions in political speeches. In Proceedings of the
2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 91–101.

Jonathan B Slapin and Sven-Oliver Proksch. 2008. A
scaling model for estimating time-series party posi-
tions from texts. American Journal of Political Sci-
ence, 52(3):705–722.

Andrea Volkens, Onawa Lacewell, Pola Lehmann,
Sven Regel, Henrike Schultze, and Annika Werner.
2011. The manifesto data collection. Mani-
festo Project (MRG/CMP/MARPOR), Berlin:
Wissenschaftszentrum Berlin für Sozialforschung
(WZB).

John T Woolley and Gerhard Peters. 2008. The Amer-
ican presidency project.

Lori Young and Stuart Soroka. 2012. Affective news:
The automated coding of sentiment in political texts.
Political Communication, 29(2):205–231.

Cäcilia Zirn, Goran Glavaš, Federico Nanni, Jason Ei-
chorts, and Heiner Stuckenschmidt. 2016. Classify-
ing topics and detecting topic shifts in political man-
ifestos. In Proceedings of the International Confer-
ence on the Advances in Computational Analysis of
Political Text, pages 88–93.

2944


