



















































Does syntax help discourse segmentation? Not so much


Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2432–2442
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 7–11, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Does syntax help discourse segmentation? Not so much

Chloé Braud and Ophélie Lacroix and Anders Søgaard
CoAStaL DIKU

University of Copenhagen
University Park 5, 2100 Copenhagen

chloe.braud@gmail.com lacroix@di.ku.dk soegaard@di.ku.dk

Abstract

Discourse segmentation is the first step in
building discourse parsers. Most work on
discourse segmentation does not scale to
real-world discourse parsing across lan-
guages, for two reasons: (i) models rely
on constituent trees, and (ii) experiments
have relied on gold standard identification
of sentence and token boundaries. We
therefore investigate to what extent con-
stituents can be replaced with universal de-
pendencies, or left out completely, as well
as how state-of-the-art segmenters fare in
the absence of sentence boundaries. Our
results show that dependency information
is less useful than expected, but we pro-
vide a fully scalable, robust model that
only relies on part-of-speech information,
and show that it performs well across lan-
guages in the absence of any gold-standard
annotation.

1 Introduction

Discourse segmentation is the task of identify-
ing, in a document, the minimal units of text –
called Elementary Discourse Units (EDU) (Carl-
son et al., 2001) – that will be then linked by
semantico-pragmatic relations – called discourse
relations. Discourse segmentation is the first step
when building a discourse parser, and has a large
impact on the building of the final structure –
predicted segmentation leads to a drop in perfor-
mance of about 12-14% (Joty et al., 2015).

In this work, we focus on the Rhetorical Struc-
ture Theory (RST) (Mann and Thompson, 1988)
in which discourse analysis is a tree covering an
entire document. Most of the recent discourse
parsers have been developed within this frame-
work, making crucial the development of robust

RST discourse segmenters. Many corpora have
been annotated within this framework for several
domains and languages – such as English with
the RST Discourse Treebank (RST-DT) (Carlson
et al., 2001), but also Spanish (da Cunha et al.,
2011), Brazilian Portuguese (Cardoso et al., 2011;
Collovini et al., 2007; Pardo and Seno, 2005;
Pardo and Nunes, 2004) or German (Stede and
Neumann, 2014).

State-of-the-art performance for discourse seg-
mentation on the RST-DT is about 94% in
F1 (Xuan Bach et al., 2012). Most work on dis-
course parsing has focused on English and on the
RST-DT (Ji and Eisenstein, 2014; Feng and Hirst,
2014; Li et al., 2014; Joty et al., 2013), and so
discourse segmentation (Xuan Bach et al., 2012;
Fisher and Roark, 2007; Subba and Di Eugenio,
2007). And while discourse parsing is a document
level task, discourse segmentation is done at the
sentence level, assuming that sentence boundaries
are known. This prevents from using discourse in-
formation for a wider range of downstream tasks.

Moreover, while discourse parsing is a seman-
tic task involving a large range of information,
the annotation guidelines reflect that segmentation
is merely based on syntax: in practice, an EDU
can not overlap sentence boundaries – while some
discourse trees can cross the sentence boundaries
(van der Vliet and Redeker, 2011) –, and de-
ciding whether a clause is an EDU in the RST-
DT strongly depends on its syntactic function –
e.g. “Clauses that are subjects or objects of a
main verb are not treated as EDUs” (Carlson and
Marcu, 2001). Consequently, existing discourse
segmenters heavily rely on information derived
from constituent trees usually following the Penn
Treebank (PTB) (Marcus et al., 1993) guidelines.
Nevertheless constituent trees are not easily avail-
able for any language. Finally, even for English,
using predicted trees leads to a large drop in per-

2432



formance for discourse segmentation.
Recently, Braud et al. (2017) proposed the first

cross-lingual and cross-domain experiments for
discourse segmentation, relying only on words
and Part-of-Speech (POS) tags (morpho-syntactic
level). However, they focus on document-level
discourse segmentation – preventing from a com-
parison with previous work –, and they did not in-
clude any syntactic information. In this paper, we
significantly extend their work by investigating the
use of syntactic information, reporting results with
various sets of features at the sentence level – vary-
ing the settings between gold and predicted, and
fine-grained vs coarse grained information –, and
studying the impact of tokenisation.

Our contributions

• We develop new discourse segmenters that
can be used for many languages and domains
since they rely on easily available resources;

• We investigate the usefulness of syntactic in-
formation when derived from Universal De-
pendencies (UD) (Nivre et al., 2016) parse
trees, compare it to simpler representations
and show that accurate POS tags are better
than low quality parse trees;

• We compare different settings considering
gold and predicted POS tags, tokenization
and sentence segmentation.

2 Related work

First discourse segmenters on the RST-DT were
based on hand-crafted rules, relying on punc-
tuation, POS tags, discourse cues (e.g. “but”,
“because”, “after”) and syntactic information (Le
Thanh et al., 2004; Tofiloski et al., 2009). Seg-
menters based on handwritten rules have also been
developed for Brazilian Portuguese (Pardo and
Nunes, 2008) (51.3% to 56.8%, depending on the
genre), for Spanish (da Cunha et al., 2010, 2012)
(80%) and for Dutch (van der Vliet, 2010) (73%
with automatic parse, 82% with gold parse).1

More recent discourse segmenters on the RST-
DT are based on binary classifiers at the word
level (Soricut and Marcu, 2003; Fisher and Roark,
2007; Joty et al., 2015), possibly using a neu-
ral network architecture (Subba and Di Eugenio,
2007). Joty et al. (2015) also report results for

1For German, Sidarenka et al. (2015) propose a segmenter
in clauses (that may be EDU or not).

the Instructional corpus (Subba and Di Eugenio,
2009) (F1 80.9% on 10-fold).

Interestingly, Fisher and Roark (2007) investi-
gate the utility of parse-derived features for the
task. More precisely, they compare different sets
of features derived from constituent trees, us-
ing n-grams or paths in a tree that could be a
full constituent tree or a shallow parse (chunks).
Their system thus requires chunker or constituent
parser. In contrast, we investigate the usefulness
of syntactic information derived from dependency
parses, and we extend their work in also compar-
ing our results to the use of only POS tags and
words.

For English RST-DT, the best discourse seg-
mentation results were presented in Xuan Bach
et al. (2012) (F1 91.0% with automatic parse, 93.7
with gold parse). They cast discourse segmenta-
tion as a sequence labeling problem, as also done
in (Sporleder and Lapata, 2005; Hernault et al.,
2010). More precisely, they develop a base sys-
tem using CRF on top of which they add a rerank-
ing model. Their base system relies on lexico-
syntactic features including words, POS tags –
from the Penn Treebank (PTB) annotation scheme
–, and paths in the constituent trees. The rerank-
ing systems then considers subtrees features, cor-
responding to the boundaries of a candidate EDU
and the common boundary of two consecutive can-
didates EDUs. This post-processing only leads
to small improvements: about 1.2% when using
gold syntactic information, and only 0.3% with
predicted trees.

All these systems rely on a quite large range
of lexical and syntactic features (e.g. token,
POS tags, chunks, lexicalized production rules,
discourse connectives). Sporleder and Lapata
(2005) present arguments for a knowledge-lean
system that can be used for low-resourced lan-
guages. Their system, however, still relies on
several tools and gold annotations (e.g. POS
tagger, chunker, list of connectives, gold sen-
tences). Moreover, previous work always rely
on gold sentence boundaries, and only consid-
ers intra-sentential segment boundaries while sen-
tence boundaries are not available for all lan-
guages.

Braud et al. (2017) recently proposed the first
systems for discourse segmentation of entire doc-
uments directly applicable to low-resource lan-
guages. Their systems only rely on Universal De-

2433



pendencies POS tagging, for which models are
available for many languages. As done in that
study, we do sequence prediction using a neural
network. However, we extend their work signifi-
cantly in reporting results for intra-sentential seg-
mentation, in comparing more settings concerning
the availability of information (tokenisation, POS
tags), and in including syntactic information into
our systems.

3 Discourse segmentation

3.1 Binary task

Since the EDUs cover the documents entirely, dis-
course segmentation is generally cast as a binary
task at the word level, where the goal is to find
which word indicates an EDU boundary: A word
is thus either beginning an EDU (label ’B’), or
within an EDU (label ’I’).

This design choice assumes that EDUs are ad-
jacent spans of text, that is an EDU begins just
after the end of the previous EDU. This is not en-
tirely true in RST corpora, where embedded EDUs
could break up another EDU, as in Example (1)
taken from the RST-DT annotation manual (Carl-
son and Marcu, 2001). The units 1 and 3 form
in fact one EDU, which is acknowledged by the
annotation of a pseudo-relation SAME-UNIT be-
tween these segments.

(1) [But maintaining the key components (. . .)]1
[– a stable exchange rate and high levels of imports –]2
[will consume enormous amounts (. . .).]3

We follow previous work on treating this as
three segments, but note that this may not be
the optimal solution. It introduces a bias: while
most of the EDUs are full clauses, EDU 1 and 3
are fragments. Other designs are possible, espe-
cially a multi-label setting as done in (Afantenos
et al., 2010) for a corpus annotated within the Seg-
mented Discourse Representation Theory (Asher
and Lascarides, 2003). While it seems relevant
to deal with this issue during segmentation rather
than using a pseudo-relation, it introduces new is-
sues (i.e. the final structures are not trees any-
more). We thus leave this question for future work.

3.2 Sentence vs document-level segmentation

Most of the existing work on discourse segmen-
tation always assume a gold segmentation of the
sentences: since an EDU boundary never crosses

a sentence boundary,2 these systems only perform
intra-sentential segmentation. This is motivated
by the quite high performance of sentence seg-
menters. In our experiments, we report intra-
sentential results, in order to compare our systems
to previous ones.

However, sentence boundaries are not always
available. In a situation where both inter and
intra-sentential segmentation is required, there are
two alternatives: processing the tasks sequentially
or simultaneously. In preliminary experiments
we considered using the multilingual system UD-
Pipe 3 (Straka et al., 2016) to segment document
into sentences in an effort to use tools available in
multiple languages. However, the segmentation is
far from perfect: 7.5% of the words marked as be-
ginning a sentence were not an EDU boundary in
the RST-DT, thus corresponding to an error.

We thus rather decided to rely on a model per-
forming both inter- and intra-sentential segmenta-
tion. We aim at building systems directly segment-
ing entire documents. Then in order to provide
performance of discourse segmenters in a realistic
setting, our final systems jointly predict sentence
and intra-sentential EDU boundaries.

Finally, for the English RST-DT, we present two
performance metrics:

• F1 for intra-sentential boundaries only (see
Section 7.1), in order to be comparable with
state-of-the-art systems;

• and F1 for all EDU boundaries, in order to
set up a document-level baseline (see Section
7.2).

For the other languages and domains, since we do
not have access to gold sentence boundaries, we
only present results at the document level.

4 Approach

4.1 Neural network for sequence prediction

We model the task as a sequence prediction task
using a neural network architecture. Our model
consists of a stacked k-layer bi-LSTM, a variant of
LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997) that

2With two exceptions in the RST DT, possibly due to
errors in the discourse or syntactic annotation (Documents
2343 and 0678). As probably done in previous works, we do
not consider these cases as separate sentences, following the
discourse annotation.

3http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/udpipe

2434



reads the input in both regular and reversed or-
der. This enables to take into account both left and
right context (Graves and Schmidhuber, 2005).
This is a crucial property for discourse segmenta-
tion, especially with the simplified representations
we consider, since the decision depends on the
context, e.g. coordinated NPs are not segmented
while coordinated VPs are, our model must thus
learn to distinguish a VP from a NP without using
constituent parses.

The model takes as input a concatenation of
randomly initialized and trainable embeddings of
words and their morpho-syntactic features (see
Section 4.3). The sequence goes through the k-
stacked layers, and we output the concatenation
of the backward and forward states. At the upper
level, we compute the prediction using a Multi-
Layer Perceptron. We used the Adam trainer.
All other hyper parameters were tuned on devel-
opment data; see Section 6.2 for a description
of hyper-parameter tuning, and our final param-
eters. 4

4.2 Tokenization and sentence splitting

In order to evaluate the impact of tokenization on
discourse segmentation we propose two settings
for English: one for which we evaluate on gold to-
kens – as done in all previous work –, and another
one where tokenization is pre-processed using the
UDPipe tokenizer. For the other languages, the
task is always evaluated on non-gold tokens.

In the same way, we investigate the impact
of gold sentence splitting by considering the tra-
ditional setting where discourse segmentation is
only intra-sentential (gold sentences) and the more
realistic one where we directly segment docu-
ments (sentence boundaries are unknown).

4.3 Features

To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to re-
port the scores one can expect when not using syn-
tactic trees and/or cue phrases, that is, only based
on words or POS tags. These are interesting re-
sults, because they correspond to representations
that can be built easily for any new language.

In addition, we investigate the impact of gold vs
predicted features for discourse segmentation for
English, and of automatic pre-processing of the
data before feature extraction (tokenization). Un-

4Our system has been implemented with the Dynamic
Neural Network Toolkit (Neubig et al., 2017).

til now, only the impact of using predicted con-
stituent trees had been investigated. But since
constituent treebanks are not readily available for
many languages, we limit ourselves to (predicted)
dependency trees.

Focusing on English allows us to set up a base-
line using predicted feature information (docu-
ment level) which could then be evaluated on other
languages for which no gold features are available.

We evaluate both the performance when using
single features and when combining the features
described above, each corresponding to a (ran-
domly intialized) real valued vector. The vectors
for each features are concatenated to build a rep-
resentation of a single word.

Lexical information Our first features are lexi-
cal. We use each token as a feature, being repre-
sented by a real-valued vector.

Morpho-syntactic features POS tags are also
valuable information for the task, for example con-
junctions and adverbs may often begin an EDU,
because they can correspond to a discourse con-
nective (e.g. “because”, “if”, “and”, “after”).

For English, we want to compare between gold
and predicted information: gold PTB POS vs pre-
dicted PTB POS. For this last setting, we use pre-
dicted POS tag features for both training and test-
ing our discourse segmenter in order to minimize
the difference between training data and test data.
We use our own POS-tagger,5 which achieves
96.6% accuracy on test data, to predict the POS-
tags. The test and development (discourse) data
are tagged using a model trained on the entire
training set, and the training data are tagged using
a 10-fold cross-validation.

We also compare between scarce and available
information (predicted setting): PTB POS (fine
grained - 45 tags) vs UD POS (coarse grained -
17 tags). For predicting UD POS tags we make
use of the UDPipe system (retrained on the v1.3
UD data).

Syntactic information We augment our repre-
sentation with syntactic information available for
many languages: supertags (STAGS) extracted
from dependency parsed trees (predicted using
UDpipe in the same setting as for POS-tags).

5Bi-LSTM tagger (keras-based implementation) using
non-supervised features about words (e.g. capitalization, suf-
fixes).

2435



to bolster its new material supply and develop new uses tokens
PART VERB PRON ADJ NOUN NOUN CONJ VERB ADJ NOUN POS
mark advcl nmod amod compound dobj cc conj amod dobj hlab
advcl root dobj dobj dobj advcl advcl advcl dobj conj hhlab

bolster goes supply supply supply bolster bolster bolster uses develop htok
goes faces bolster bolster bolster goes goes goes develop bolster hhtok

R Root R R R L L L R L hdir
VERB VERB NOUN NOUN NOUN VERB VERB VERB NOUN VERB hpos

B I I I I I B I I I

advcl

mark

nmod
amod

compound

dobj
cc

conj

amod

dobj

Figure 1: Features extracted from a (part of a) sentence and its predicted UD dependency tree.

Our selection of supertags is first inspired by the
work of Ouchi et al. (2016) on supertagging for
dependency parsing, and second on our own ex-
pertise of discourse segmentation and UD scheme.
Actually a large part of EDU boundaries which
need syntactic information to be disambiguated
are function words such as “to” or “and”. Since
the UD scheme favors the attachments via content
words rather than function words, the latter are of-
ten leaves in the dependency trees. It means that
the valuable information for these words comes
from their parents, their grand-parents or their sib-
lings. We thus extract the following features for
each token:

• hlab, the label of its incoming dependency
(47 UD labels);

• hhlab, the label of its incoming dependency
of the token’s head (37 UD labels + NONE :
26% nmod, 23% root);

• hdir, the direction of its incoming depen-
dency (3 tags : RIGHT, LEFT or ROOT);

• hpos, the UD POS-tag of its head (17 UD tags
+ ROOT : 41% NOUNs, 34% VERBs and 10%
PROPNs);

• htok, its head token (11.483 different tokens);

• hhtok, the head of its head token (8.266 dif-
ferent tokens);

• sleft, the POS and incoming label of its left
siblings (if it is a coordination or an object)
(265 tags);

• sright, the POS and incoming label of its right
siblings (if it is a coordination or an object)
(331 tags).

An example for which supertags help to identify
EDU boundaries is presented in Figure 1.

5 Corpora

Corpus #Doc #EDU #Sent #Word

En-SFU-DT 400 28, 260 16, 827 328, 362
En-DT 385 21, 789 9, 074 210, 584
Pt-DT 330 12, 594 4, 385 136, 346
Es-DT 266 3, 325 1, 816 57, 768
En-Instr-DT 176 5, 754 3, 090 56, 197
De-DT 174 2, 979 1, 805 33, 591

Table 1: Number of documents, EDUs, sentences
and words (according to UDPipe).

For English, we use three corpora, allowing us
to evaluate how robust is our model across do-
mains. First, we report results on the RST-DT
(from now on called En-DT), the most widely used
corpus for this task. This corpus is composed of
Wall Street Journal articles, it has been annotated
over the Penn Treebank. We also report perfor-
mance on the SFU review corpus6 (En-SFU-DT)

6https://www.sfu.ca/˜mtaboada

2436



containing product reviews, and on the instruc-
tional corpus (En-Instr-DT) (Subba and Di Euge-
nio, 2009) built on instruction manuals.7

We also evaluate our model across languages.
For Spanish, we report performance on the cor-
pus (Es-DT) presented in (da Cunha et al., 2011),8.
For German, we use the Postdam corpus (De-
DT) (Stede, 2004; Stede and Neumann, 2014).
For Brazilian Portuguese (Pt-DT), we merged four
corpora (Cardoso et al., 2011; Collovini et al.,
2007; Pardo and Seno, 2005; Pardo and Nunes,
2003, 2004) as done in (Maziero et al., 2015;
Braud et al., 2017).

Table 1 summarizes statistics about the data.

6 Experiments

6.1 Evaluation

For English, on the En-DT, evaluation for dis-
course segmentation has been done under different
conditions.

First, all previous systems were evaluated on the
same set of 38 documents that initially contains
991 sentences – and more precisely on each sen-
tence of this set for intra-sentential results. How-
ever, Soricut and Marcu (2003) do not consider
sentences that are not exactly spanned by a dis-
course subtree (keeping only 941 sentences in the
test set), and Sporleder and Lapata (2005) only
keep the sentences that contain intra-sentential
EDUs (608 sentences).

Since we want to give results at the document
level, – with the sentence boundaries being pre-
dicted as the other EDU boundaries –, there is no
reason to remove any sentences. We thus keep all
the 991 sentences in the test set as done in (Fisher
and Roark, 2007; Xuan Bach et al., 2012) at the
sentence level, and in (Braud et al., 2017) at the
document level.

For the other corpora (see Section 5), we either
use the official test set (Es-DT, 84 documents) or
build a test set containing 38 documents chosen
randomly.

Second, since Soricut and Marcu (2003), the
evaluation scores do not include the first boundary
of a sentence. Exceptions are (Sporleder and Lap-
ata, 2005), and some results in (Fisher and Roark,
2007) given to compare with the former.

7We only report fully supervised results, we thus do not
consider the GUM corpus and the corpus for Dutch, contrary
to (Braud et al., 2017).

8We only use the test set from the annotator A.

For intra-sentential results, we also ignore the
first boundary of each sentence when computing
the final score. At the document level, we ignore
the first boundary of each document (thus keep-
ing the first boundary of the sentences within the
document).

The reported score is the F1 over the boundaries
(the ’B’ labels), ignoring the non-boundary words
(’I’ labels).

6.2 Hyper-parameters

The model has several hyper-parameters, all tuned
on the development set over the F1.

Concerning the dimensions of the input layer d,
we tested several values when experimenting on
models using only one type of feature (for the
POS tags, we only tuned on PTB gold), with
d ∈ {50, 100, 200, 300} for the words, and d ∈
{4, 8, 16, 32, 64} for the others.9 We then keep the
best values (300 for words, 64 for the POS tags
and 32 for each supertag10) for each feature when
concatenating.

We also tuned the number of hidden layers
n ∈ {1, 2}, and the size of the hidden layers
h ∈ {50, 100, 200, 400} when experimenting on
single features, and used 1 hidden layer of size 200
in our final experiments. Our output layer is of size
32.

The number of iterations i with 1 ≤ i ≤ 20 is
tuned on the development set for each experiment.

Note that this may not be optimal, as better re-
sults could be obtained by tuning all the hyper-
parameters for each set of features. But we aim
at providing a fair comparison between the mod-
els, and thus always keep the same architecture.

7 Results

7.1 Intra-sentential segmentation

Our results for intra-sentential segmentation are
summarized in Table 2. Recall that these results
are only on the En-DT.

Single features Using only words lead to 81.3%
in F1, which is already high considering that words
are generally considered as a too sparse represen-
tation especially with a quite small dataset.

9Supertags that correspond to words – i.e. “htok” and “hh-
tok” – are considered as words and thus correspond to vectors
of the same dimension as other words.

10We report results using the supertags where the input is
the concatenation of several vectors with 32 dimensions rep-
resenting each supertag.

2437



It is clear that lexical information can help, for
example to identify EDUs corresponding to com-
plements of attribution verbs – the verb could be
the word at the end of the previous EDU as in ex-
ample (2a) or the word beggining the EDU as in
example (2b) –, these verbs being part of a limited
list (e.g. “declared”, “said”, “reported”).

(2) a. [Mercedes officials said] [they expect flat
sales next year]

b. [Kodak understands] [HDTV is where
everybody is going,”] [says RIT’s Mr.
Spaull.]

More precisely, we found out that only 1, 409
tokens are an EDU boundary in the En-DT training
set (over about 16, 577 tokens in the vocabulary).
Among them, 909 only appear once as a bound-
ary, and 104 are a boundary more than 10 times
making for 79.7% of all the boundaries. Lexical
information is thus not so sparse for this task.

Using POS tags alone allows to improve these
results, but only when using PTB gold POS
(+3.7%). Contrary to words, 99.7% of the POS
tags from the PTB appear as an EDU boundary
more than 10 times, but only a few are almost
always indicating the beginning of an EDU (i.e.
more than 70% of the occurrences), namely WDT,
-LRB-, WP, WRB and WP$. Our results demon-
strate that our model is able to take into account
the context in terms of the surrounding POS tags
to identify a boundary.

As expected, using predicted PTB POS tags
leads to lower results than gold ones (-3.4%), re-
flecting the impact of the noise introduced. More-
over, using fine grained PTB POS tags, even pre-
dicted ones, is better than using coarse grained
POS UD (-5.4%), indicating that the UD scheme
lacks fine distinctions needed for the task. For
example, WDT and WP$ are mapped to DET in
the UD scheme, and WP to PRON, two categories
that become very ambiguous between indicating
an EDU boundary or not (respectively, 28% and
10%), thus inducing more errors. Note that using
words only is better, or similar to using predicted
or coarse-grained POS tags, demonstrating once
again the usefulness of the lexical information.

Finally, using supertags (STAGS) leads to re-
sults similar to using words or predicted PTB
POS tags, but higher than the ones obtained with
the POS UD (+4.8%), reflecting that they in-
clude more information. Among the supertags, we

found that using “sleft” and “sright” does not make
real difference when the supertags are used alone
(80.9% with them, and 81% without). This could
come from the huge sparsity of this feature.11 We
decided to not include them in the rest of the ex-
periments.

System (Morpho-)syntax F1

Gold tokenization

(Subba and Di Eugenio, 2007) Gold 86.1
(Subba and Di Eugenio, 2007) Pred 84.4
(Xuan Bach et al., 2012) Gold 92.5
(Xuan Bach et al., 2012) Rerank Gold 93.7
(Xuan Bach et al., 2012) Pred 90.7
(Xuan Bach et al., 2012) Rerank Pred 91.0
(Fisher and Roark, 2007) Pred 90.5

Words - 81.3

POS PTB Gold 85.0
POS PTB Pred 81.6
POS UD Pred 76.2

STAGS Pred 81.0

Words+POS PTB Gold 91.0
Words+POS PTB Pred 87.6
Words+POS UD Pred 87.4

POS UD+STAGS Pred 79.6
Words+POS UD+STAGS Pred 86.1

Predicted tokenization

Words - 82.7

POS UD Pred 74.0

Words + POS UD Pred 86.3
Words + POS UD + STAGS Pred 86.8

Table 2: Intra-sentential results on the En-DT.
Xuan Bach et al. (2012) report the best results,
Subba and Di Eugenio (2007) is a segmenter based
on neural networks, Fisher and Roark (2007) pro-
posed a study on syntactic information.

Combining features Combining words and
gold PTB POS tags leads to our better results
(91%), with a large increase over using only words
(+9.7%) or PTB gold POS (+6%). Note that this
score is as high as the one reported by (Xuan Bach
et al., 2012; Fisher and Roark, 2007) when using
predicted constituent trees: this indicates that a
syntactic information that is noisy does not help
that much, since perfect POS tags are enough to
reach the same performance.

As previously, using predicted PTB POS tags
or coarse-grained UD POS tags leads to a drop
in performance compared to gold PTB POS tags,

1194% of the tokens have no “sleft” tag and 90% no
“sright” tag.

2438



but the scores are still largely higher than when
only one type of features is used, demonstrating
that lexical and morpho-syntactic features bring
complementary information. The gain in F1 is
even higher when using noisy/coarse grained POS
tags than when using gold ones, showing that lex-
ical information allows to replace part of the miss-
ing/incorrect information.

Finally, combining supertags leads to mixed
results: they allow to improve over using only
UD POS tags (+3.4%), showing that they con-
vey new relevant information, but the scores are
lowered compared to using only the supertags (-
1.4%). Moreover, when combined also with words
(Words+POS UD+STAGS), we observe a small
drop in performance compared to only combining
them with the UD POS tags (Words+POS UD, -
1.3%). More importantly, using syntactic infor-
mation does not lead to results as high as the ones
obtained with gold PTB POS tags.

Predicted tokenization In general, relying on
predicted tokens lowers the performance, probably
because it leads to more errors for POS tagging (-
2.2% when using only the UD POS tags compared
to gold tokenization). However, it does not really
affect performance with lexical information, and
the other scores are similar to the ones obtained
with gold tokens.

7.2 Document-level results

Multi-lingual and multi-domain results are pre-
sented in Table 3. Again, the use of syntactic infor-
mation leads to mixed results: in general, results
are similar with or without supertags, but it could
also lead to a large drop in performance as it can
be seen especially for the En-DT, the En-SFU-DT
and the En-Instr-DT. It could come from more im-
portant differences in the annotation schemes for
these very different domains.

Our results are in general better than the one re-
ported in (Braud et al., 2017), which could come
from the way features are incorporated (they en-
code each document as a sequence of words and
POS tags, rather than directly combining the vec-
tors). Our scores on the En-DT are a bit lower
than those reported in (Braud et al., 2017), but
note that these authors fine tuned their system at
the document level, while we optimized it at the
intra-sentential one.

SOA Words+UD Words+UD+S-tags

En-DT (news) 89.5 89.0 87.0

En-SFU-DT 85.5 87.6 86.0
En-Instr-DT 87.1 88.3 86.4

Pt-DT 82.2 82.9 83.0
Es-DT 79.3 78.7 78.3
De-DT 85.1 85.8 86.2

Table 3: Multi-domain and multi-lingual
document-level results. State-of-the-art (SOA)
results reported in (Braud et al., 2017).

8 Discussion

In order to investigate the drop in F1 between gold
and predicted POS tags we looked at the distribu-
tion of the POS tags in the train set, and, for each
POS, the percentage of instances being a discourse
boundary and their accuracy when predicted.

Globally, the accuracy of POS-tagging on EDU
boundaries is lower (95.6%) than on the non-EDU
boundaries. However, the most frequent POS as-
signed to EDU boundaries (i.e. ’IN’, ’CC’, ’PRP’,
’TO’ and ’VBG’) achieve accuracy between 97.4
and 100% and cover 50% of the EDU boundaries.

We also saw that some very frequent POS are
rarely an EDU boundary, such as ’NN, ’JJ’ or the
comma.12 But the low accuracy of some of these
frequent POS tags (94.8 for ’NN’ and 90.1 for
’JJ’) can still hurt discourse segmentation as they
often appear in the context of the EDU bound-
aries. On the contrary, some quite infrequent
POS are really frequent EDU boundaries, such
as ’WP’ (Wh-pronoun), ’WDT’ (Wh-determiner),
’WRB’ (Wh-adverb), -LRB-, ’WP$’ (Possessive
wh-pronoun) and ’LS’ (List item marker). Ex-
cept for ’WDT’ (90.8%) their POS-tagging scores
are high (100% for ’WP’, ’-LRB-’ and ’Wp$’ and
98.3% for ’WRB’). But because they are infre-
quent, they could be hard to identify as bound-
aries. They could be even more difficult to iden-
tify using the UD scheme since these POS tags are
mapped to frequent UD POS tags that cover very
different tokens (’DET’, ’PRON’, ’ADV’).

9 Conclusion

We proposed new discourse segmenters that make
use of resources available for many languages and
domains. We investigated the usefulness of syn-

12The only example with a comma corresponds probably
to a segmentation error, the comma being preceded by a point
corresponding to an acronym (Doc 1390).

2439



tactic information when derived from dependency
parse trees, and showed that this information is
not as useful as expected, and that gold POS tags
give as high results as using predicted constituent
trees. We also showed that scores are lowered
when considering a realistic setting, relying on
predicted tokenization and not assuming gold sen-
tences. We make our code available at https://
bitbucket.org/chloebt/discourse/.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers
for their comments. This research is funded by the
ERC Starting Grant LOWLANDS No. 313695.

References
Stergos Afantenos, Pascal Denis, Philippe Muller, and

Laurence Danlos. 2010. Learning recursive seg-
ments for discourse parsing. In Proceedings of
LREC.

Nicholas Asher and Alex Lascarides. 2003. Logics of
Conversation. Cambridge University Press.

Chloé Braud, Ophélie Lacroix, and Anders Søgaard.
2017. Cross-lingual and cross-domain discourse
segmentation of entire documents. In arXiv preprint
arXiv::1704.04100, To appear in Proceedings of
ACL 17.

Paula C.F. Cardoso, Erick G. Maziero, Mara Luca Cas-
tro Jorge, Eloize R.M. Seno, Ariani Di Felippo, Lu-
cia Helena Machado Rino, Maria das Gracas Volpe
Nunes, and Thiago A. S. Pardo. 2011. CSTNews
- a discourse-annotated corpus for single and multi-
document summarization of news texts in Brazilian
Portuguese. In Proceedings of the 3rd RST Brazilian
Meeting, pages 88–105.

Lynn Carlson and Daniel Marcu. 2001. Discourse tag-
ging reference manual. Technical report, University
of Southern California Information Sciences Insti-
tute.

Lynn Carlson, Daniel Marcu, and Mary Ellen
Okurowski. 2001. Building a discourse-tagged cor-
pus in the framework of Rhetorical Structure Theory.
In Proceedings of the Second SIGdial Workshop on
Discourse and Dialogue.

Sandra Collovini, Thiago I Carbonel, Juliana Thiesen
Fuchs, Jorge César Coelho, Lúcia Rino, and Renata
Vieira. 2007. Summ-it: Um corpus anotado com
informaçoes discursivas visandoa sumarizaçao au-
tomática. Proceedings of TIL.

Iria da Cunha, Eric SanJuan, Juan-Manuel Torres-
Moreno, Marina Lloberas, and Irene Castellón.
2010. DiSeg: Un segmentador discursivo au-
tomático para el español. Procesamiento del
lenguaje natural, 45:145–152.

Iria da Cunha, Eric SanJuan, Juan-Manuel Torres-
Moreno, Marina Lloberes, and Irene Castellón.
2012. DiSeg 1.0: The first system for Span-
ish discourse segmentation. Expert Syst. Appl.,
39(2):1671–1678.

Iria da Cunha, Juan-Manuel Torres-Moreno, and Ger-
ardo Sierra. 2011. On the development of the RST
Spanish Treebank. In Proceedings of the Fifth Lin-
guistic Annotation Workshop, LAW.

Vanessa Wei Feng and Graeme Hirst. 2014. A linear-
time bottom-up discourse parser with constraints
and post-editing. In Proceedings of ACL.

Seeger Fisher and Brian Roark. 2007. The utility of
parse-derived features for automatic discourse seg-
mentation. In Proceedings ACL.

Alex Graves and Jrgen Schmidhuber. 2005. Frame-
wise phoneme classification with bidirectional lstm
and other neural network architectures. Neural Net-
works, pages 5–6.

Hugo Hernault, Danushka Bollegala, and Mitsuru
Ishizuka. 2010. A sequential model for discourse
segmentation. In Proceedings of CICLing.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997.
Long short-term memory. Neural Computation,
9(8):1735–1780.

Yangfeng Ji and Jacob Eisenstein. 2014. Represen-
tation learning for text-level discourse parsing. In
Proceedings of ACL.

Shafiq Joty, Giuseppe Carenini, and Raymond T. Ng.
2015. Codra: A novel discriminative framework
for rhetorical analysis. Computational Linguistics,
41:3.

Shafiq R. Joty, Giuseppe Carenini, Raymond T. Ng,
and Yashar Mehdad. 2013. Combining intra- and
multi-sentential rhetorical parsing for document-
level discourse analysis. In Proceedings of ACL.

Huong Le Thanh, Geetha Abeysinghe, and Christian
Huyck. 2004. Generating discourse structures for
written text. In Proceedings of COLING.

Jiwei Li, Rumeng Li, and Eduard H. Hovy. 2014. Re-
cursive deep models for discourse parsing. In Pro-
ceedings of EMNLP.

William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. 1988.
Rhetorical Structure Theory: Toward a functional
theory of text organization. Text, 8:243–281.

Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated
corpus of english: The penn treebank. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 19(2):313–330.

Erick G. Maziero, Graeme Hirst, and Thiago A. S.
Pardo. 2015. Adaptation of discourse parsing mod-
els for Portuguese language. In Proceedings of
the Brazilian Conference on Intelligent Systems
(BRACIS).

2440



Graham Neubig, Chris Dyer, Yoav Goldberg, Austin
Matthews, Waleed Ammar, Antonios Anastasopou-
los, Miguel Ballesteros, David Chiang, Daniel
Clothiaux, Trevor Cohn, Kevin Duh, Manaal
Faruqui, Cynthia Gan, Dan Garrette, Yangfeng Ji,
Lingpeng Kong, Adhiguna Kuncoro, Gaurav Ku-
mar, Chaitanya Malaviya, Paul Michel, Yusuke
Oda, Matthew Richardson, Naomi Saphra, Swabha
Swayamdipta, and Pengcheng Yin. 2017. Dynet:
The dynamic neural network toolkit. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1701.03980.

Joakim Nivre, Željko Agić, Lars Ahrenberg, Maria Je-
sus Aranzabe, Masayuki Asahara, Aitziber Atutxa,
Miguel Ballesteros, John Bauer, Kepa Bengoetxea,
Yevgeni Berzak, Riyaz Ahmad Bhat, Cristina
Bosco, Gosse Bouma, Sam Bowman, Gülşen Ce-
birolu Eryiit, Giuseppe G. A. Celano, Çar Çöltekin,
Miriam Connor, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe,
Arantza Diaz de Ilarraza, Kaja Dobrovoljc, Timo-
thy Dozat, Kira Droganova, Tomaž Erjavec, Richárd
Farkas, Jennifer Foster, Daniel Galbraith, Sebas-
tian Garza, Filip Ginter, Iakes Goenaga, Koldo Go-
jenola, Memduh Gokirmak, Yoav Goldberg, Xavier
Gómez Guinovart, Berta Gonzáles Saavedra, Nor-
munds Grūzītis, Bruno Guillaume, Jan Hajič, Dag
Haug, Barbora Hladká, Radu Ion, Elena Irimia, An-
ders Johannsen, Hüner Kaşkara, Hiroshi Kanayama,
Jenna Kanerva, Boris Katz, Jessica Kenney, Si-
mon Krek, Veronika Laippala, Lucia Lam, Alessan-
dro Lenci, Nikola Ljubešić, Olga Lyashevskaya,
Teresa Lynn, Aibek Makazhanov, Christopher Man-
ning, Cătălina Mărănduc, David Mareček, Héctor
Martı́nez Alonso, Jan Mašek, Yuji Matsumoto,
Ryan McDonald, Anna Missilä, Verginica Mititelu,
Yusuke Miyao, Simonetta Montemagni, Keiko So-
phie Mori, Shunsuke Mori, Kadri Muischnek, Nina
Mustafina, Kaili Müürisep, Vitaly Nikolaev, Hanna
Nurmi, Petya Osenova, Lilja Øvrelid, Elena Pas-
cual, Marco Passarotti, Cenel-Augusto Perez, Slav
Petrov, Jussi Piitulainen, Barbara Plank, Martin
Popel, Lauma Pretkalnia, Prokopis Prokopidis, Ti-
ina Puolakainen, Sampo Pyysalo, Loganathan Ra-
masamy, Laura Rituma, Rudolf Rosa, Shadi Saleh,
Baiba Saulīte, Sebastian Schuster, Wolfgang Seeker,
Mojgan Seraji, Lena Shakurova, Mo Shen, Na-
talia Silveira, Maria Simi, Radu Simionescu, Katalin
Simkó, Kiril Simov, Aaron Smith, Carolyn Spadine,
Alane Suhr, Umut Sulubacak, Zsolt Szántó, Takaaki
Tanaka, Reut Tsarfaty, Francis Tyers, Sumire Ue-
matsu, Larraitz Uria, Gertjan van Noord, Vik-
tor Varga, Veronika Vincze, Jing Xian Wang,
Jonathan North Washington, Zdeněk Žabokrtský,
Daniel Zeman, and Hanzhi Zhu. 2016. Universal de-
pendencies 1.3. LINDAT/CLARIN digital library at
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics, Charles
University in Prague.

Hiroki Ouchi, Kevin Duh, Hiroyuki Shindo, and Yuji
Matsumoto. 2016. Transition-based dependency
parsing exploiting supertags. IEEE/ACM Transac-
tions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing,
24(11):2059–2068.

Thiago A. S. Pardo and Maria das Graças Volpe
Nunes. 2003. A construção de um corpus de textos
cientı́ficos em Português do Brasil e sua marcação
retórica. Technical report, Technical Report.

Thiago A. S. Pardo and Maria das Graças Volpe Nunes.
2004. Relações retóricas e seus marcadores superfi-
ciais: Análise de um corpus de textos cientı́ficos em
Português do Brasil. Relatório Técnico NILC.

Thiago A. S. Pardo and Maria das Graças Volpe Nunes.
2008. On the development and evaluation of a
Brazilian Portuguese discourse parser. Revista de
Informática Teórica e Aplicada, 15(2):43–64.

Thiago A. S. Pardo and Eloize R. M. Seno. 2005.
Rhetalho: Um corpus de referłncia anotado retori-
camente. In Proceedings of Encontro de Corpora.

Uladzimir Sidarenka, Andreas Peldszus, and Manfred
Stede. 2015. Discourse segmentation of german
texts. Journal of Language Technology and Com-
putational Linguistics, 30(1):71–98.

Radu Soricut and Daniel Marcu. 2003. Sentence level
discourse parsing using syntactic and lexical infor-
mation. In Proceedings of NAACL.

Caroline Sporleder and Mirella Lapata. 2005. Dis-
course chunking and its application to sentence com-
pression. In Proceedings of HLT/EMNLP.

Manfred Stede. 2004. The potsdam commentary cor-
pus. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Dis-
course Annotation.

Manfred Stede and Arne Neumann. 2014. Potsdam
commentary corpus 2.0: Annotation for discourse
research. In Proceedings of LREC.

Milan Straka, Jan Hajič, and Straková. 2016. UDPipe:
Trainable Pipeline for Processing CoNLL-U Files
Performing Tokenization, Morphological Analysis,
POS Tagging and Parsing. In Proceedings of the
Tenth International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC’16).

Rajen Subba and Barbara Di Eugenio. 2007. Au-
tomatic discourse segmentation using neural net-
works. In Workshop on the Semantics and Pragmat-
ics of Dialogue.

Rajen Subba and Barbara Di Eugenio. 2009. An effec-
tive discourse parser that uses rich linguistic infor-
mation. In Proceedings of ACL-HLT.

Milan Tofiloski, Julian Brooke, and Maite Taboada.
2009. A syntactic and lexical-based discourse seg-
menter. In Proceedings of ACL-IJCNLP.

Nynke van der Vliet. 2010. Syntax-based discourse
segmentation of Dutch text. In 15th Student Session,
ESSLLI.

Nynke van der Vliet and Gisela Redeker. 2011. Com-
plex sentences as leaky units in discourse parsing.
In Proceedings of Constraints in Discourse.

2441



Ngo Xuan Bach, Nguyen Le Minh, and Akira Shimazu.
2012. A reranking model for discourse segmenta-
tion using subtree features. In Proceedings of Sig-
dial.

2442


