



















































Scientific Information Extraction with Semi-supervised Neural Tagging


Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2641–2651
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 7–11, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Scientific Information Extraction with Semi-supervised Neural Tagging

Yi Luan Mari Ostendorf Hannaneh Hajishirzi
Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Washington

{luanyi, ostendor, hannaneh}@uw.edu

Abstract

This paper addresses the problem of ex-
tracting keyphrases from scientific articles
and categorizing them as corresponding to
a task, process, or material. We cast the
problem as sequence tagging and intro-
duce semi-supervised methods to a neu-
ral tagging model, which builds on re-
cent advances in named entity recognition.
Since annotated training data is scarce in
this domain, we introduce a graph-based
semi-supervised algorithm together with a
data selection scheme to leverage unanno-
tated articles. Both inductive and trans-
ductive semi-supervised learning strate-
gies outperform state-of-the-art informa-
tion extraction performance on the 2017
SemEval Task 10 ScienceIE task.

1 Introduction

As a research community grows, more and more
papers are published each year. As a result there
is increasing demand for improved methods for
finding relevant papers and automatically under-
standing the key ideas in those papers. However,
due to the large variety of domains and extremely
limited annotated resources, there has been rel-
atively little work on scientific information ex-
traction. Previous research has focused on unsu-
pervised approaches such as bootstrapping (Gupta
and Manning, 2011; Tsai et al., 2013), where
hand-designed templates are used to extract sci-
entific keyphrases, and more templates are added
through bootstrapping.

Very recently a new challenge on Scientific
Information Extraction (ScienceIE) (Augenstein
et al., 2017)1 provides a dataset consisting of 500

1SemEval (Task 10)https://scienceie.github.
io/index.html

Computer Science:
This paper addresses the task of [named en-
tity recognition]Task, using [conditional random
fields]Process. Our method is evlauated on the [ConLL
NER Corpus]Material.

Physics:
[Local field effects] Process on spontaneous emission
rates within [nanostructure photonics material]Material
for example are familiar, and have been well used.

Material Science:
The [Kelvin probe force microscopy technique]
Process allows [detection of local EWF]Task be-
tween an [atomic force micorscopy]Material and [metal
surface]Material.

Figure 1: Annotated ScienceIE examples.

scientific paragraphs with keyphrase annotations
for three categories: TASK, PROCESS, MATERIAL
across three scientific domains, Computer Science
(CS), Material Science (MS), and Physics (Phy),
as in Figure 1. This dataset enables the use of
more advanced approaches such as neural network
(NN) models. To that end, we cast the keyphrase
extraction task as a sequence tagging problem,
and build on recent progress in another informa-
tion extraction task: Named Entity Recognition
(NER) (Lample et al., 2016; Peng and Dredze,
2015). Like named entities, keyphrases can be
identified by their linguistic context, e.g. re-
searchers ”use” methods. In addition, keyphrases
can be associated with different categories in dif-
ferent contexts. For example, ‘semantic parsing’
can be labeled as a TASK in one article and as
a PROCESS in another. Scientific keyphrases dif-
fer in that they can include both noun phrases
and verb phrases and in that non-standard “words”
(equations, chemical compounds, references) can
provide important cues.

Since the scale of the data is still small for su-
pervised training of neural systems, we introduce
semi-supervised methods to the neural tagging

2641



model in order to take advantage of the large quan-
tity of unlabeled scientific articles. This is par-
ticularly important because of the differences in
keyphrases across domains. Our semi-supervised
learning algorithm uses a graph-based label prop-
agation scheme to estimate the posterior proba-
bilities of unlabeled data. It additionally extends
the training objective to leverage the confidence of
the estimated posteriors. The new training treats
low confidence tokens as missing labels and com-
putes the sentence-level score by marginalizing
over them.

Our experiments show that our neural tagging
model achieves state-of-the-art results in the Se-
mEval Science IE task. We further show that both
inductive and transductive semi-supervised strate-
gies significantly improve the performance. Fi-
nally, we provide in-depth analysis of domain dif-
ferences as well as analysis of failure cases.

The key contributions of our work include:
i) achieving state of the art in scientific infor-
mation extraction SEMEVAL Task 10 by ex-
tending recent advances in neural tagging mod-
els; ii) introducing a semi-supervised learning al-
gorithm that uses graph-based label propagation
and confidence-aware data selection, iii) explor-
ing different alternatives for taking advantage of
large, multi-domain unannotated data including
both unsupervised embedding initialization and
semi-supervised model training.

2 Related Work

There has been growing interest in research on au-
tomatic methods to help researchers search and
extract useful information from scientific litera-
ture. Past research has addressed citation sen-
timent (Athar and Teufel, 2012b,a), citation net-
works (Kas, 2011; Gabor et al., 2016; Sim et al.,
2012; Do et al., 2013; Jaidka et al., 2014), summa-
rization (Abu-Jbara and Radev, 2011) and some
analysis of research community (Vogel and Ju-
rafsky, 2012; Anderson et al., 2012; Luan et al.,
2012, 2014b; Levow et al., 2014). However, due
to scarce hand-annotated data resources, previ-
ous work on information extraction (IE) for sci-
entific literature is very limited. Gupta and Man-
ning (2011) first proposed a task that defines sci-
entific terms for 474 abstracts from the ACL an-
thologhy (Bird et al., 2008) into three aspects:
domain, technique and focus and apply template-
based bootstrapping to tackle the problem. Based

on this study, Tsai et al. (2013) improve the per-
formance by introducing hand-designed features
from NER (Collins and Singer, 1999) to the boot-
strapping framework. QasemiZadeh and Schu-
mann (2012) compile a dataset of scientific terms
into 7 fine-grained categories for 171 abstracts of
ACL anothology. Similar to our work, very re-
cently Augenstein and Søgaard (2017) also eval-
uated on ScienceIE dataset, but use multi-task
learning to improve the performance of a super-
vised neural approach. Instead, we introduce
a semi-supervised neural tagging approach that
leverages unlabeled data.

Neural tagging models have been recently in-
troduced to tagging problems such as NER. For
example, Collobert et al. (2011) use a CNN over
a sequence of word embeddings and apply a CRF
layer on top. Huang et al. (2015) use hand-crafted
features with LSTMs to improve performance.
There is currently great interest in using character-
based embeddings in neural models. (Chiu and
Nichols, 2016; Lample et al., 2016; Ballesteros
et al., 2015; Ma and Hovy, 2016). Our approach
also takes advantage of neural tagging models and
character-based embeddings for IE in scientific ar-
ticles.

Previous work on semi-supervised learning for
neural models has mainly focused on transfer
learning (Dai and Le, 2015; Luan et al., 2014a;
Harsham et al., 2015) or initializing the model
with pre-trained word embeddings (Mikolov et al.,
2013; Pennington et al., 2014; Levy and Gold-
berg, 2014; Luan et al., 2016b, 2015, 2016a). In
our work, we use pre-training but also use more
powerful methods including graph-based semi-
supervision (Subramanya and Bilmes, 2011; Liu
and Kirchhoff, 2013, 2015, 2016a,b) and a method
for leveraging partially labeled data (Kim et al.,
2015). We show that the combination of these
techniques gives better results than any one alone.

3 Problem Definition and Data

The purpose of this work is to extract phrases that
can answer questions that researchers usually face
when reading a paper: What TASK has the paper
addressed? What PROCESS or method has the pa-
per used or compared to? What MATERIALS has
the paper utilized in experiments? While these
fundamental concepts are important in a wide vari-
ety of scientific disciplines, the terms that are used
in specific disciplines can be substantially differ-

2642



ent. For example, MATERIALS in computer sci-
ence might be a text corpus, while they would be
physical materials in physics or materials science.

Data We use the SemEval 2017 Task 10 Sci-
enceIE dataset. Fig. 1 provides examples that il-
lustrate the variation in domains, but also show
that there are common cues such as “the task of”,
“using”, “technique,” etc. A challenge with this
dataset is that the size of the training data is very
small. It is built from ScienceDirect open access
publications and consists of 500 journal articles,
but only one paragraph of each article is manu-
ally labeled. Therefore, we use a large amount of
external data to leverage the continuous-space rep-
resentation of language in neural network model.
We explore the effect of pre-training word embed-
ding with two different external resources: i) a
data set of Wikipedia articles as a general English
resource, and ii) a data set of 50k Computer Sci-
ence papers from ACM.2

Tagging Problem Formulation The task re-
quires detecting the exact span of a keyphrase. In
order to be able to distinguish spans of two consec-
utive keyphrases of the same type, we assign labels
to every word in a sentence, indicating position in
the phrase and the type of phrase. We formulate
the problem as an IOBES (Inside, Outside, Begin-
ning, End and Singleton) tagging problem where
every token is labeled either as: B, if it is at the
beginning of a keyphrase; E, if it ends the phrase;
I, if it is inside a keyphrase but not the first or last
token; S, if it is a single-word keyphrase; or O, oth-
erwise. For example, “named entity recognition”
in first sentence of Fig. 1 is labeled as “B-Task I-
task E-task”.

4 Neural Architecture Model

We introduce an end-to-end model to categorize
scientific keyphrases, building on a neural named
entity recognition model (Lample et al., 2016) and
adding a feature-based embedding.

4.1 Model

We develop a 3-layer hierarchical neural model
to tag tokens of the documents (details of the to-
kenization is in Sec. 6). (1) The token repre-
sentation layer concatenates three components for

2Due to the difficulty of data collection, experiments with
external data from the other two domains is left to future
work.

each token: a bi-directional character-based em-
bedding, a word embedding, and an embedding as-
sociated with orthographic and part-of-speech fea-
tures. (2) The token LSTM layer uses a bidirec-
tional LSTM to incorporate contextual cues from
surrounding tokens to derive intermediate token
embeddings. (3) The CRF tagging layer models
token-level tagging decisions jointly using a CRF
objective function to incorporate dependencies be-
tween tags.
Character-Based Embedding. The embedding
for a token is derived from its characters as the
concatenation of forward and backward represen-
tations from a bidirectional LSTM. The charac-
ter lookup table is initialized at random. The ad-
vantage of building a character-based embedding
layer is that it can handle out-of-vocabulary words
and equations, which are frequent in this data, all
of which are mapped to “UNK” tokens in the Word
Embedding Layer.
Word Embedding. Words from a fixed vocab-
ulary (plus the unknown word token) are mapped
to a vector space, initialized using Word2vec pre-
training with different combinations of corpora.
Feature Embedding. We map features to a vec-
tor space: capitalization (all capital, first capital,
all lower, any capital but first letter) and Part-of-
Speech tags.3 We randomly initialize feature vec-
tors and train them together as other parameters.
Token LSTM Layer We apply a bidirectional
LSTM at the token level taking the concatenated
character-word-feature embedding as input. The
token representation obtained by stacking the for-
ward and backward LSTM hidden states is passed
as input to a linear layer that project the dimension
to the size of label type space and is used as input
to CRF layer.
CRF Layer Keyphrase categorization is a task
where there is strong dependencies across out-
put labels (e.g., I-TASK cannot follow B-Process).
Therefore, instead of making independent tag-
ging decisions for each output, we model them
jointly using conditional random field (Lafferty
et al., 2001). For an input sentence x =
(x1, x2, x3, . . . , xn), we consider P to be the ma-
trix of scores output by the bidirectional LSTM
network. P is of size n×m, where n is the num-
ber of tokens in a sentence, and m is the number
of distinct tags. Pt,i corresponds to the score of

3Dependency features were investigated but did not lead
to performance gains.

2643



Figure 2: Label propagation. Gray nodes indicates labeled
data while white nodes are unlabeled. Bold font word indi-
cates the current token. The assumption is if two instances
are similar according to the graph, the output labels should
be similar.

the i-th tag of the t-th word in a sentence. We use
a first-order Markov Model and define a transition
matrix T where Ti,j represents the score from tag
i to tag j. We also add y0 and yn as the start and
end tags of a sentence. Therefore T becomes a
square matrix of dimension m+ 2.
Given one possible output y, and neural network
parameters θ we define the score as

φ(y; x, θ) =
n∑
t=0

Tyt,yt+1 +
n∑
t=1

Pt,yt (1)

The probability of sequence y is obtained by ap-
plying a softmax over all possible tag sequences

pθ(y|x) = exp(φ(y; x, θ))∑
y′∈Y exp(φ(y′; x, θ))

(2)

where Y denotes all possible tag sequences. The
normalization term is efficiently computed using
the forward algorithm.

Supervised Training During training, we max-
imize the log-probability L(Y ; X, θ) of the cor-
rect tag sequence given the corpus {X,Y }. Back-
propagation is done based on a gradient computed
using sentence-level scores.

5 Semi-supervised Learning

We develop a semi-supervised algorithm that ex-
tends self-training by estimating the labels of un-
labeled data and then using those labels for re-
training. Specifically, we use a graph-based al-
gorithm to estimate the posterior probabilities of
unlabeled data and develop a new CRF training to
take the uncertainty of the estimated labels into ac-
count while optimizing the objective function.

5.1 Graph-based Posterior Estimates

Our semi-supervised algorithm uses the following
steps to estimate the posterior. It first constructs
a graph of tokens based on their semantic similar-
ity, then uses the CRF marginal as a regularization
term to do label propagation on the graph. The
smoothed posterior is then used to either interpo-
late with the CRF marginal or as an additional fea-
ture to the neural network.
Graph Construction Vertices in the graph cor-
respond to tokens, and edges are distance between
token features which capture semantic similarity.
The total size of the graph is equal to the num-
ber of tokens in both labeled data Vl and unlabeled
data Vu. The tokens are modelled with a concate-
nation of pre-trained word embeddings (with di-
mension d) of 5-gram centered by the current to-
ken, the word embedding of the closest verb, and
a set of discrete features including part-of-speech
tags and capitalization (43 and 4 dimension one-
hot features). The resulting feature vector with
dimension of 5d + d + 43 + 4 is then projected
down to 100 dimensions using PCA. We define
the weight wuv of the edge between nodes u and
v as follows: wuv = de(u, v) if v ∈ K(u) or u ∈
K(v), where K(u) is the set of k-nearest neigh-
bors of u and de(u, v) is the Euclidean distance
between any two nodes u and v in the graph. An
example of our graph is in Fig. 2.

For every node i in the graph, we compute
the marginal probabilities {qi} using the forward-
backward algorithm. Let θi represent the estimate
of the CRF parameters after the n-th iteration,
we compute the marginal probabilities p̃(j,t) =
p(yjt |x; θi) over IOBES tags for every token posi-
tion t in sentence j in labeled and unlabeled data.
Label Propagation We use prior-regularized
measure propagation (Liu and Kirchhoff, 2014;
Subramanya and Bilmes, 2011) to propagate la-
bels from the annotated data to their neighbors in
the graph. The algorithm aims for the label distri-
bution between neighboring nodes to be as similar
to each other as possible by optimizing an objec-
tive function that minimizes the Kullback-Leibler
distances between: i) the empirical distribution ru
of labeled data and the predicted label distribution
qu for all labeled nodes in the graph; ii) the distri-
butions qu and qv for all nodes u in the graph and
their neighbors v; iii) the distributions qu and the
CRF marginals p̃u for all nodes. The third term
regularizes the predicted distribution toward the

2644



Figure 3: Lattice representation of ULM. Dashed box is
the uncertain token which is going to be marginalized over.
Arrows and grey nodes are paths to be summed over during
training. When all tokens are confident, the score of only one
path is calculated.

CRF prediction if the node is not connected to a
labeled vertex, ensuring the algorithm performs at
least as well as standard self-training.

Posterior Estimates We develop two strategies
to estimate the new posteriors p̂(yt|x; θ), which
can then be used in the CRF training.

The first strategy (called GRAPHINTERP) is
the commonly used approach (Subramanya et al.,
2010; Aliannejadi et al., 2014) that interpolates the
smoothed posterior {q} with CRF marginals p:

p̂(yt|x; θ) = αp(yt|x; θ) + (1− α)q(y) (3)

where α is a mixing coefficient.
A second strategy introduced here (called

GRAPHFEAT) uses the smoothed posterior {q} as
features and learns it with other parameters in the
neural network. Given a sentence {x1, . . . , xn},
let Q = {q1, . . . , qn} be the predicted label distri-
bution from the graph. We then use Q as a feature
input to neural network as P̃ = P + MQ where
P is the n ×m matrix output by the bidirectional
LSTM network as in Eq. 1, and M is m×m ma-
trix and is learned together with other parameters
of neural network. We modify Eq. 1 by replacing
Pt,yt with P̃t,yt . Note that GRAPHFEAT can only
be done in a transductive way since it requires out-
put Q from the graph at test time.

5.2 CRF training with Uncertain Labels

A standard approach to self-training is to make
hard decisions for labeling tokens based on the
estimated posteriors and retrain the model. How-
ever, the estimated posteriors in our task are noisy
due to the difficulty and variety of the ScienceIE
task. Instead, we extend the CRF training to lever-
age the confidence of the estimated posteriors.
The new CRF training (called Uncertain Label

Marginalizing (ULM)) treats low confidence to-
kens as missing labels and computes the sentence-
level score by marginalizing over them. A similar
idea has been previously used in treating partially
labeled data (Kim et al., 2015).

Specifically, given a sentence x we define a con-
strained lattice Y(x), where at each position t the
allowed label types Y(xt) are:

Y(xt) =
{
{yt}, if p(yt|x; θ) > η
All label types, otherwise

(4)

where η is the confidence threshold, yt is the pre-
diction of posterior decoding and p(yt|x; θ) is its
CRF token marginal. The new neural network pa-
rameters θ are estimated by maximizing the log-
likelihood of pθ(Y(xk)|xk) for every input sen-
tence xk, where

pθ(Y(xk)|xk) =
∑

yk∈Y(xk) exp(φ(y
k; xk, θ))∑

y′∈Y exp(φ(y′; x, θ))

where yk is an instance sequence of lattice Y(x),
and k is the sentence index in the training set. Ex-
treme cases are when all tokens are uncertain then
the likelihood would be equal to 1, when all to-
kens of a sequence are confident, it would be equal
to Eq. 2 where only one possible sequence, as in
Fig. 3.
Inductive and Transductive Learning The
semi-supervised training process is summarized as
follow: It first computes marginals over the un-
labeled data given a set of CRF parameters. It
then uses the marginals as a regularization term
for label propagation. The smoothed posteriors
from the graph are then interpolated with the CRF
marginal in GRAPHINTERP or used as an addi-
tional feature in GRAPHFEAT. It then uses the
estimated labels for the unlabeled data combined
with the labeled data to retrain the CRF using ei-
ther the hard decision CRF training objective as
Eq. 2 or the ULM data selection objective.

In the inductive setting, we only use the unla-
beled data from the development set for the semi-
supervision. In the transductive setting we also use
the unlabeled data of the test set to construct the
graph. In both cases, the parameters are tuned only
on the dev set.

6 Experimental Setup
Data The SemEval ScienceIE (SE) corpus con-
sists of 500 journal articles; one paragraph of each

2645



Span Level Classification (dev) Classification (test) Identification

Gupta et.al.(unsupervised) - 9.8 6.4
Tsai et.al. (unsupervised) - 11.9 8.0
MULTITASK 45.5 - -
Best Non-Neural SemEval+ - 38 51
Best Neural SemEval+ - 44 56
NN-CRF(supervised) 48.1 40.2 52.1
NN-CRF(semi) 51.9 45.3 56.9
NN-CRF(semi)∗ 52.1 46.6 57.6

Table 1: Overall span-level F1 results for keyphrase identification (SemEval Subtask A) and classification (SemEval Subtask
B). ∗ indicates tranductive setting. + indicates not documented as either transductive or inductive. - indicates score not reported
or not applied.

Model P R F1

NN-CRF(supervised) 46.2 48.2 47.2

No features 44.2 46.1 45.1
No bi-LSTM 45.2 44.7 44.9
No CRF 36.7 38.2 37.4
No char 45.7 46.2 45.9

Table 2: Ablation study showing impact of neural network
configurations of our NN-CRF(supervised) model on the dev
set.

article is randomly selected and annotated. The
complete unlabeled articles and their metadata are
provided together with the labeled data. The train-
ing data consists of 350 documents; 50 are kept for
development and 100 for testing. The 500 articles
come from 82 different journals evenly distributed
in three domains. We manually labeled 82 journal
names in the dataset into the three domains and do
analysis based on the domain partitions. The 500
full articles contains 2M words and is 30 times the
size of the annotated data.

Additionally, we use two external resources for
pretraining word embeddings: i) WIKI, as for
Wikipedia articles, specifically a full Wikipedia
dump from 2012 containing 46M words, and
ii) ACM, a collection of CS papers, containing
108M words.

Comparisons We compare our system with two
template matching baselines and the state-of-the-
art on the SemEval Science IE task. The first
baseline (Gupta and Manning, 2011) is an un-
supervised method to extract keyphrases by ini-
tially using seed patterns in a dependency tree, and
then adding to seed patterns through bootstrap-
ping. The second baseline (Tsai et al., 2013) im-
proves the work of Gupta and Manning (2011) by
adding Named Entity Features and use different
set of seed patterns.

Implementation details All parameters are
tuned on the dev set performance, the best pa-
rameters are selected and fixed for model switch-
ing and semi-supervised systems. The word em-
bedding dimension is 250; the token-level hidden
dimension is 100; the character-level hidden di-
mension is 25; and the optimization algorithm is
SGD with a learning rate of 0.05. For building
the graph, the best pre-trained embeddings for the
supervised system (Sec. 7.2) are used in each do-
main. Two special tokens BOS and EOS are added
when pre-training, indicating the begin and end of
a sentence. The number of the graph vertices is
2M in tranductive setting and 1.4M in inductive
setting. The ULM parameter η in Eq. 4 is tuned
from 0.1 to 0.9, the best η is 0.4. The best pa-
rameters of label propagation are µ = 10−6 and
ν = 10−5. The interpolation parameter α in Eq. 3
is tuned from 0.1 to 0.9, the best α is 0.3. We do
iteration of semi-supervised learning until we ob-
tain the best result on the dev set, which is mostly
achieved in the second round.

We use Stanford CoreNLP (Manning et al.,
2014) tokenizer to tokenize words. The tokenizer
is augmented with a few hand-designed rules to
handle equations (e.g. “fs(B,t)=Spel(t)S” is a sin-
gle token) and other non-standard word phenom-
ena (Cu40Zn, 20MW/m2) in scientific literature.
We use Approximate Nearest Neighbor Searching
(ANN)4 to calculate the k-nearest neighbors. For
all experiments in this paper, k = 10.
Setup We evaluate our system in both inductive
and transductive settings. The systems with a ∗

superscript in the table are transductive. The in-
ductive setting uses 400 full articles in ScienceIE
training and dev sets, while the transductive set-
ting uses 500 full articles including the test set. In
both settings parameters are tuned over the dev set.

4https://www.cs.umd.edu/˜mount/ANN/

2646



7 Experimental Results

We evaluate our NN-CRF model in both super-
vised and semi-supervised settings. We also per-
form ablations and try different variants to best un-
derstand our model.

7.1 Best Case System Performance

Table 1 reports the results of our neural sequence
tagging model NN-CRF in both supervised and
semi-supervised learning (ULM and graph-based),
and compares them with the baselines and the
state-of-the-art (best SemEval System (Augen-
stein et al., 2017)).

Augenstein and Søgaard (2017) use a multi-task
learning strategy to improve the performance of
supervised keyphrase classification, but they only
report dev set performance on SemEval Task 10,
we also include their result here and refer it as
MULTITASK. We report results for both span
identification (SemEval SubTask A) and span clas-
sification into TASK, PROCESS and MATERIAL
(SemEval Subtask B).5

The results show that our neural sequence tag-
ging models significantly outperforms the state
of the art and both baselines. It confirms that
our neural tagging model outperforms other non-
neural and neural models for the SemEval Scien-
ceIE challenge6. It further shows that our system
achieves significant boost from semi-supervised
learning using unlabeled data. Table 5 shows the
detailed analysis of the system across different cat-
egories.

7.2 Supervised Learning

Impact of Neural Model Components Table 2
provides the results of an ablation study on the dev
set showing the impact of different components of
our NN-CRF on the Scientific IE task. For the ba-
sic model, the word embeddings are initialized by
word2vec trained on the 350 full journal articles
in the SE training set together with Wikipedia and
ScienceIE data. The feature layer, character layer,
and bi-LSTM word layers all improves the perfor-
mance. Moreover, we observe a large improve-
ment (20.6% relative) in the scientific IE task by
adding the CRF layer.
Initialization Table 3 reports our NN-CRF
performance when pretrained on different do-

5The evaluation script is provided by the challenge, with
a modification to report 3 decimal precision results.

6Best SemEval Numbers from https://scienceie.github.io/

Dev Test
Initialization MS Phy CS MS Phy CS

SE 49.4 39.4 45.0 42.9 33.0 30.5
+wiki 52.9 40.5 47.9 46.1 39.2 31.0
+ACM 50.3 39.8 49.5 42.2 37.8 34.2
+wiki+ACM 50.5 40.3 48.9 43.1 37.9 34.4

Table 3: F1 score on the dev and test sets for using different
sources of data for pretraining.

mains. We explore different word embedding pre-
training with ScienceIE training set alone (SE),
and adding other external resources including
Wikipedia (wiki) and Computer Science articles
(ACM). All alternatives use word2vec. Compared
with using SE alone, introduction of all external
data sources improve performance. Moreover, we
observe that with the introduction of the ACM
dataset, the performance on the CS domain is in-
creased significantly in both the dev and test sets.
Adding Wikipedia data benefits all three domains,
with more significant improvement on the MS and
Physics domains.

Based on these observations, we select the best
model on each domain according to the dev set and
use the combined result as our best suprevised sys-
tem (called NN-CRF(supervised)). The F1 score
improves from 39.4 to 40.2 when applying model
switching strategy. The best model on the dev set
is used for each domain: for MS and physics do-
main, we pretrain word embeddings with the SE
and Wiki, and for the CS domain, we pretrain with
the SE and ACM.

7.3 Semi-Supervision Learning

Table 4 reports the results of the semi-supervised
learning algorithms in different settings. In par-
ticular we ablate incorporating the graph-based
methods of computing the posterior and CRF
training (ULM vs. hard decision). The table shows
incorporating graph-based methods for computing
posterior and ULM for CRF training outperforms
their counterparts.

For computing the posterior, we explore two
different strategies of the graph-based meth-
ods: i) GRAPHINTERP that interpolates the
smoothed posterior from label propagation with
CRF marginals; For inductive setting, GRAPHIN-
TERP only uses un-annotated data from the dev set
and uses the best model for decoding at test time.
For transductive setting, GRAPHINTERP∗ uses un-
annoated data from test set to build the graph as

2647



Posterior Training Dev Test

- - 50.2 42.9
- ULM 51.3 44.4
GRAPHINTERP - 50.9 43.3
GRAPHINTERP ULM 51.9 45.3
GRAPHINTERP* - 50.7 44.0
GRAPHINTERP* ULM 51.8 45.7
GRAPHFEAT* - 51.4 44.9
GRAPHFEAT* ULM 52.1 46.6

Table 4: F1 scores of semi-supervised Learning ap-
proaches; * shows transductive models.

Span Level T P M K

Best SemEval 19 44 48 55
supervised 13.3 40.5 43.7 52.1
ULM+GRAPHINTERP 17.0 45.4 49.4 56.9
ULM+GRAPHFEAT* 17.2 46.5 50.7 57.6

Token Level T P M K

supervised 29.6 56.0 59.3 70.8
ULM+GRAPHINTERP 40.0 60.7 61.2 77.0
ULM+GRAPHFEAT* 40.1 62.8 63.4 78.1

Table 5: F1 score results on the test set for different cat-
egories: T indicates TASK, P indicates PROCESS, M is MA-
TERIAL and K is Keyword identification (SubTask A). * is
transductive model.

well, and tune the parameters on the dev set. ii)
GRAPHFEAT uses the smoothed posterior from la-
bel propagation as additional feature to neural net-
work and only has transductive setting.

As expected, the transductive approaches con-
sistently outperform inductive approaches on the
test set. With around the same performance on
dev set, GRAPHINTERP* seems to generalize bet-
ter on test set with 1.6% relative improvement over
GRAPHINTERP. We observe higher improvement
with GRAPHFEAT* compared to GRAPHINTERP.
This is mainly because automatically learning the
weight matrix M between neural network scores
and graph outputs adds more flexibility compared
to tuning an interpolation weight α. The perfor-
mance is further improved by applying data selec-
tion through modifying the objective to ULM. The
best inductive system is ULM+GRAPHINTERP
with 5.6% relative improvement over pure Self-
Training that makes hard decisions, and the best
transductive system is ULM+GRAPHFEAT* with
8.6% relative improvement.

7.4 Category and Span Analysis

Table 5 details the performance of our method on
the three categories at the span and token level.
We observe significant improvement by using

ULM+GRAPHINTERP and ULM+GRAPHFEAT
over best SemEval and our best supervised sys-
tem on all three categories at both token and span
levels. We further observe that systems’ per-
formance on TASK classification is much lower
than PROCESS and MATERIAL. This is in part
because TASK is much less frequent than the
other types. In addition, TASK keyphrases of-
ten include verb phrases while the other two do-
mains mainly consists of noun phrases. An anal-
ysis of confusion patterns show that the most
frequent type confusions are between PROCESS
and MATERIAL. However, we observe that
ULM+GRAPHFEAT* can greatly reduce the con-
fusion, with 3.5% relative improvement of PRO-
CESS and 3.6% relative improvement of PROCESS
over ULM+GRAPHINTERP on token level.

7.5 Error Analysis

We provide examples of typical errors that our sys-
tem makes in Table 6. As described in the previ-
ous subsection, TASK is the hardest type to iden-
tify with our system. Row 1 shows a failure to
detect the verb phrase following ‘to’ as part of the
TASK, but detect ‘enantiopure products’ as MA-
TERIAL. The system prefers to predict PROCESS
or MATERIAL since those classes have more sam-
ples than TASK. Row 2 illustrates the problem
of identifying general terms as keyphrases due to
similar context, such as ‘receptors’ and ‘drug ac-
tion’. A third common error involves incorrectly
labeling adjectives, such as ‘neighbouring’ in Row
3, which leads to span errors. Another common
cause of error is insufficient context: in the last
example, a larger context is needed to determine
whether ‘SWE’ is a PROCESS or MATERIAL.

8 Conclusion

This paper casts the scientific information extrac-
tion task as a sequence tagging problem and in-
troduces a hierarchical LSTM-CRF neural tag-
ging model for this task, building on recent results
in NER. We introduced a semi-supervised learn-
ing algorithm that incorporates graph-based label
propagation and confidence-aware data selection.
We show the introduction of semi-supervision sig-
nificantly outperforms the performance of the su-
pervised LSTM-CRF tagging model. We addi-
tionally show that external resources are useful
for initializing word embeddings. Both induc-
tive and transductive semi-supervised strategies

2648



Error types Annotation and System Output

Verb phrases A key requirement in aiming to [achieve [enantiopure products]Material ]Task is therefore a
means to [quantitate [the enantiometric excess]Process]Task.

General terms Since the [receptors]Material in human biology mostly consist of [chiral molecules]Material,
[drug action]Process mostly involves a specified enantiometric form.

Falsely predicted adjec-
tives

It has been shown that the most efficient forms of energy transfer between the two occurs when
there is a [neighbouring carotenoid species]Material.

Lack of context Other models use [SWEs ]MaterialProcess but focus on the use of multi resolution grids or irregular
mesh.

Table 6: Common errors, where blue means golden label our system misses, red means falsely predicted results, and green
means correctly predicted spans.

achieve state-of-the-art performance in SemEval
2017 ScienceIE task. We also conducted a detailed
analysis of the system and point out common error
cases.

In our experiments, we observe that including
in-domain data only for semi-supervised learning
has slightly better performance than using cross-
domain data. Reducing the amount of in-domain
data hurts performance. Therefore, adding more
in-domain unlabeled data may help when com-
bined with selection schemes such as the ULM al-
gorithms proposed here. It would be useful to as-
sess the impact of matched unlabeled data for the
physics and material science domain. Other future
work includes leveraging global context, informa-
tion of citation network.

9 Acknowledgments

This research was supported by the NSF (IIS
1616112), Allen Institute for AI (66-9175), Allen
Distinguished Investigator Award, and gifts from
Google, Samsung, and Bloomberg. We thank the
anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments.

References
Amjad Abu-Jbara and Dragomir Radev. 2011. Co-

herent citation-based summarization of scientific pa-
pers. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies-Volume 1. Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 500–509.

Mohammad Aliannejadi, Masoud Kiaeeha, Shahram
Khadivi, and Saeed Shiry Ghidary. 2014. Graph-
based semi-supervised conditional random fields
for spoken language understanding using unaligned
data. In Australasian Language Technology Associ-
ation Workshop. page 98.

Ashton Anderson, Dan McFarland, and Dan Jurafsky.
2012. Towards a computational history of the ACL:

1980-2008. In Proceedings of the ACL-2012 Special
Workshop on Rediscovering 50 Years of Discoveries.
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
13–21.

Awais Athar and Simone Teufel. 2012a. Context-
enhanced citation sentiment detection. In Proceed-
ings of the 2012 conference of the North American
chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human language technologies. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 597–601.

Awais Athar and Simone Teufel. 2012b. Detection of
implicit citations for sentiment detection. In Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Detecting Structure in
Scholarly Discourse. Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 18–26.

Isabelle Augenstein, Mrinal Das, Sebastian Riedel,
Lakshmi Vikraman, and Andrew McCallum. 2017.
Semeval 2017 task 10: ScienceIE - extracting
keyphrases and relations from scientific publica-
tions. Proceedings of SemEval .

Isabelle Augenstein and Anders Søgaard. 2017. Multi-
task learning of keyphrase boundary classification.
In arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.00514.

Miguel Ballesteros, Chris Dyer, and Noah A Smith.
2015. Improved transition-based parsing by mod-
eling characters instead of words with LSTMs. In
EMNLP.

Steven Bird, Robert Dale, Bonnie J Dorr, Bryan R Gib-
son, Mark Thomas Joseph, Min-Yen Kan, Dongwon
Lee, Brett Powley, Dragomir R Radev, Yee Fan Tan,
et al. 2008. The ACL anthology reference corpus: A
reference dataset for bibliographic research in com-
putational linguistics. In LREC.

Jason PC Chiu and Eric Nichols. 2016. Named entity
recognition with bidirectional lstm-cnns. In TACL.

Michael Collins and Yoram Singer. 1999. Unsuper-
vised models for named entity classification. In Pro-
ceedings of the joint SIGDAT conference on empiri-
cal methods in natural language processing and very
large corpora. Citeseer, pages 100–110.

2649



Ronan Collobert, Jason Weston, Léon Bottou, Michael
Karlen, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Pavel Kuksa.
2011. Natural language processing (almost) from
scratch. Journal of Machine Learning Research
12(Aug):2493–2537.

Andrew M Dai and Quoc V Le. 2015. Semi-supervised
sequence learning. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems. pages 3079–3087.

Huy Hoang Nhat Do, Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran,
Philip S Cho, and Min Yen Kan. 2013. Extracting
and matching authors and affiliations in scholarly
documents. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM/IEEE-
CS joint conference on Digital libraries. ACM,
pages 219–228.

Kata Gabor, Haifa Zargayouna, Davide Buscaldi, Is-
abelle Tellier, and Thierry Charnois. 2016. Seman-
tic annotation of the ACL anthology corpus for the
automatic analysis of scientific literature. In Pro-
ceedings of the Tenth International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016).
Paris, France.

Sonal Gupta and Christopher D Manning. 2011. An-
alyzing the dynamics of research by extracting key
aspects of scientific papers. In IJCNLP. pages 1–9.

Bret Harsham, Shinji Watanabe, Alan Esenther, John
Hershey, Jonathan Le Roux, Yi Luan, Daniel
Nikovski, and Vamsi Potluru. 2015. Driver predic-
tion to improve interaction with in-vehicle hmi. In
Proc. Workshop on Digital Signal Processing for In-
Vehicle Systems (DSP).

Zhiheng Huang, Wei Xu, and Kai Yu. 2015. Bidirec-
tional LSTM-CRF models for sequence tagging. In
arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.01991.

Kokil Jaidka, Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran, Beat-
riz Fisas Elizalde, Rahul Jha, Christopher Jones,
Min-Yen Kan, Ankur Khanna, Diego Molla-Aliod,
Dragomir R Radev, Francesco Ronzano, et al. 2014.
The computational linguistics summarization pilot
task. Proceedings of TAC .

Miray Kas. 2011. Structures and statistics of citation
networks. Technical report, DTIC Document.

Young-Bum Kim, Minwoo Jeong, Karl Stratos, and
Ruhi Sarikaya. 2015. Weakly supervised slot tag-
ging with partially labeled sequences from web
search click logs. In HLT-NAACL. pages 84–92.

John Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, Fernando Pereira,
et al. 2001. Conditional random fields: Probabilis-
tic models for segmenting and labeling sequence
data. In Proceedings of the eighteenth international
conference on machine learning, ICML. volume 1,
pages 282–289.

Guillaume Lample, Miguel Ballesteros, Sandeep Sub-
ramanian, Kazuya Kawakami, and Chris Dyer. 2016.
Neural architectures for named entity recognition.
In NAACL.

Gina-Anne Levow, Valerie Freeman, Alena Hrynke-
vich, Mari Ostendorf, Richard Wright, Julian Chan,
Yi Luan, and Trang Tran. 2014. Recognition of
stance strength and polarity in spontaneous speech.
In Spoken Language Technology Workshop (SLT),
2014 IEEE. IEEE, pages 236–241.

Omer Levy and Yoav Goldberg. 2014. Dependency-
based word embeddings. In ACL. pages 302–308.

Yuzong Liu and Katrin Kirchhoff. 2013. Graph-based
semi-supervised learning for phone and segment
classification. In Proceedings of Annual Conference
of the International Speech Communication Associ-
ation (Interspeech).

Yuzong Liu and Katrin Kirchhoff. 2014. Graph-based
semi-supervised acoustic modeling in DNN-based
speech recognition. In IEEE SLT .

Yuzong Liu and Katrin Kirchhoff. 2015. Acoustic
modeling with neural graph embeddings. In IEEE
Workshop on Automatic Speech Recognition and
Understanding (ASRU).

Yuzong Liu and Katrin Kirchhoff. 2016a. Graph-based
semisupervised learning for acoustic modeling in
automatic speech recognition. IEEE/ACM Transac-
tions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing
24(11):1946–1956.

Yuzong Liu and Katrin Kirchhoff. 2016b. Novel front-
end features based on neural graph embeddings for
DNN-HMM and LSTM-CTC acoustic modeling. In
Proceedings of Annual Conference of the Interna-
tional Speech Communication Association (Inter-
speech). ISCA.

Yi Luan, Yangfeng Ji, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and
Boyang Li. 2016a. Multiplicative representations
for unsupervised semantic role induction. In The
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. page 118.

Yi Luan, Yangfeng Ji, and Mari Ostendorf. 2016b.
Lstm based conversation models. In arXiv preprint
arXiv:1603.09457.

Yi Luan, Daisuke Saito, Yosuke Kashiwagi, Nobuaki
Minematsu, and Keikichi Hirose. 2014a. Semi-
supervised noise dictionary adaptation for exemplar-
based noise robust speech recognition. In Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2014 IEEE
International Conference on. IEEE, pages 1745–
1748.

Yi Luan, Masayuki Suzuki, Yutaka Yamauchi, Nobuaki
Minematsu, Shuhei Kato, and Keikichi Hirose.
2012. Performance improvement of automatic pro-
nunciation assessment in a noisy classroom. In Spo-
ken Language Technology Workshop (SLT), 2012
IEEE. IEEE, pages 428–431.

Yi Luan, Shinji Watanabe, and Bret Harsham. 2015.
Efficient learning for spoken language understand-
ing tasks with word embedding based pre-training.
In INTERSPEECH. Citeseer, pages 1398–1402.

2650



Yi Luan, Richard Wright, Mari Ostendorf, and Gina-
Anne Levow. 2014b. Relating automatic vowel
space estimates to talker intelligibility. In Fifteenth
Annual Conference of the International Speech
Communication Association.

Xuezhe Ma and Eduard Hovy. 2016. End-to-end
sequence labeling via bi-directional LSTM-CNNs-
CRF. In ACL.

Christopher D Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Rose Finkel, Steven Bethard, and David Mc-
Closky. 2014. The stanford CoreNLP natural lan-
guage processing toolkit. In ACL (System Demon-
strations). pages 55–60.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jef-
frey Dean. 2013. Efficient estimation of word rep-
resentations in vector space. In arXiv preprint
arXiv:1301.3781.

Nanyun Peng and Mark Dredze. 2015. Named en-
tity recognition for chinese social media with jointly
trained embeddings. In EMNLP. pages 548–554.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D
Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word
representation. In EMNLP. volume 14, pages 1532–
1543.

Behrang QasemiZadeh and Anne-Kathrin Schumann.
2012. The acl rd-tec 2.0: A language resource
for evaluating term extraction and entity recognition
methods. In LREC.

Yanchuan Sim, Noah A Smith, and David A Smith.
2012. Discovering factions in the computational lin-
guistics community. In Proceedings of the ACL-
2012 Special Workshop on Rediscovering 50 Years
of Discoveries. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 22–32.

Amarnag Subramanya and Jeff Bilmes. 2011.
Semi-supervised learning with measure propa-
gation. Journal of Machine Learning Research
12(Nov):3311–3370.

Amarnag Subramanya, Slav Petrov, and Fernando
Pereira. 2010. Efficient graph-based semi-
supervised learning of structured tagging models. In
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 167–176.

Chen-Tse Tsai, Gourab Kundu, and Dan Roth. 2013.
Concept-based analysis of scientific literature. In
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international confer-
ence on Conference on information & knowledge
management. ACM, pages 1733–1738.

Adam Vogel and Dan Jurafsky. 2012. He said, she said:
Gender in the ACL anthology. In Proceedings of
the ACL-2012 Special Workshop on Rediscovering
50 Years of Discoveries. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 33–41.

2651


