



















































Asking too much? The rhetorical role of questions in political discourse


Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1558–1572
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 7–11, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Asking too much? The rhetorical role of questions in political discourse

Justine Zhang,1 Arthur Spirling,2 Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil1
1Cornell University, 2New York University

jz727@cornell.edu, arthur.spirling@nyu.edu, cristian@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract

Questions play a prominent role in social
interactions, performing rhetorical func-
tions that go beyond that of simple infor-
mational exchange. The surface form of a
question can signal the intention and back-
ground of the person asking it, as well as
the nature of their relation with the inter-
locutor. While the informational nature of
questions has been extensively examined
in the context of question-answering appli-
cations, their rhetorical aspects have been
largely understudied.

In this work we introduce an unsupervised
methodology for extracting surface mo-
tifs that recur in questions, and for group-
ing them according to their latent rhetor-
ical role. By applying this framework to
the setting of question sessions in the UK
parliament, we show that the resulting ty-
pology encodes key aspects of the politi-
cal discourse—such as the bifurcation in
questioning behavior between government
and opposition parties—and reveals new
insights into the effects of a legislator’s
tenure and political career ambitions.

1 Introduction
“We’d now like to open the floor to shorter
speeches disguised as questions...”

– Steve Macone, New Yorker cartoon caption

Why do we ask questions? Perhaps we are seek-
ing factual information that others hold, or maybe
we are requesting a favor. Alternatively we could
be simply making a rhetorical point, perhaps at the
start of an academic paper.

Questions play a prominent role in social inter-
actions (Goffman, 1976), performing a multitude
of rhetorical functions that go beyond mere factual

information gathering (Kearsley, 1976). While the
informational component of questions has been
well-studied in the context of question-answering
applications, there is relatively little computational
work addressing the rhetorical and social role of
these basic dialogic units.

One domain where questions have a particularly
salient rhetorical role is politics. The ability to
question the actions and intentions of governments
is a crucial part of democracy (Pitkin, 1967), par-
ticularly in parliamentary systems. Consequently,
scholars have studied parliamentary questions in
detail, in terms of their origins (Chester and
Bowring, 1962), their institutionalization (Eggers
and Spirling, 2014) and their importance for over-
sight (Proksch and Slapin, 2011). In particular, the
United Kingdom’s House of Commons, renowned
for theatrical questions periods, has been stud-
ied in some depth. However, those accounts are
largely qualitative in nature (Bull and Wells, 2012;
Bates et al., 2014).
The present work: methodology. In order to
approach these problems computationally, we in-
troduce an unsupervised framework to structure
the space of questions according to their rhetori-
cal role. First, we identify common ways in which
questions are phrased. To this end, we automati-
cally extract these recurring surface forms, or mo-
tifs, based on the lexico-syntactic structure of the
questions posed (Section 4). To capture rhetorical
aspects we then group these motifs according to
their role, relying on the intuition that this role is
encoded in the type of answer a question receives.
To operationalize this intuition we construct a la-
tent question-answer space in which question mo-
tifs triggering similar answers are mapped to the
same region (Section 5).
The present work: application. We apply this
general framework to the political discourse that
occurs during parliamentary question sessions in

1558



the British House of Commons, a new dataset
which we make publicly available (Section 3).
Our framework extracts intuitive question types
ranging from narrow factual queries to pointed
criticisms disguised as questions (Section 5, Ta-
ble 1). We validate our framework by aligning
these types with prior understandings of parlia-
mentary proceedings from the political science lit-
erature (Section 6). In particular, previous work
(Bates et al., 2014) has categorized questions
asked in Parliament according to the intentions of
the asker (e.g., to help the answerer, or to adver-
sarially put them on the spot); we find a clear, pre-
dictive mapping between these expert-coded cate-
gories and the induced typology. We further show
that the types of questions specific legislators tend
to ask vary with whether they are part of the gov-
erning or opposition party, consistent with well-
established accounts of partisan differences (Cow-
ley, 2002; Spirling and McLean, 2007; Eggers and
Spirling, 2014). Concretely, government legisla-
tors exhibit a preference for overtly friendly ques-
tions, while the opposition slants towards more ag-
gressive question types.

We then apply our methodology to provide new
insights into how a legislator’s questioning be-
havior varies with their career trajectory. The
pressures faced by legislators at various stages in
their career are cross-cutting, and multiple possi-
ble hypotheses emerge. Younger, more enthusi-
astic legislators may be motivated to ask harder-
hitting questions, but risk being passed over for
future promotion if they are too combative (Cow-
ley, 2002). Older legislators, whose opportunities
for promotion are largely behind them and hence
have “less to lose”, may act more aggressively
(Benedetto and Hix, 2007); or simply seek a quiet
path to retirement. Viewing each group’s behav-
ior through the questions they ask brings evidence
for the latter hypothesis that more tenured legis-
lators are more aggressive, even when questioning
their own leaders. In this way, their presence in the
House of Commons, and their refusal to simply
‘keep their heads down’, facilitates a core compo-
nent of democracy.

2 Related Work

Question-answering. Computationally, questions
have received considerable attention in the con-
text of question-answering (QA) systems—for a
survey see Gupta and Gupta (2012)—with an em-

phasis on understanding their information need
(Harabagiu, 2008). Techniques have been devel-
oped to categorize questions based on the nature
of these information needs in the context of the
TREC QA challenge (Harabagiu et al., 2000), and
to identify questions asking for similar informa-
tion (Shtok et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2017; Jeon
et al., 2005); questions have also been classified
by topic (Cao et al., 2010) and quality (Treude
et al., 2011; Ravi et al., 2014). In contrast, our
work is not concerned with the information need
central to QA applications, and instead focuses on
the rhetorical aspect of questions.

Question types. To facilitate retrieval of fre-
quently asked questions, Lytinen and Tomuro
(2002) manually developed a typology of surface
question forms (e.g., ‘what’- and ‘why’-questions)
starting from Lehnerts’ conceptual question cat-
egories (Lehnert, 1978). Question types were
also hand annotated for dialog-act labeling, dis-
tinguishing between yes-no, wh-, open-ended and
rhetorical questions (Dhillon et al., 2004). To
complement this line of work, this paper intro-
duces a completely unsupervised methodology to
automatically build a domain-tailored question ty-
pology, bypassing the need for human annotation.

Pragmatic dimensions. One important prag-
matic dimension of questions that has been pre-
viously studied computationally is their level of
politeness (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al., 2013;
Aubakirova and Bansal, 2016); in the specific con-
text of making requests, politeness was shown
to correlate with the social status of the asker.
Sachdeva and Kumaraguru (2017) studied another
rhetorical aspect by examining linguistic attributes
distinguishing serviceable requests addressed to
police on social media from general conversa-
tion. Previous research has also been directed at
identifying rhetorical questions (Bhattasali et al.,
2015) and understanding the motivations of their
“askers” (Ranganath et al., 2016). Using the rela-
tionship between questions and answers, our work
examines the rhetorical and social aspect of ques-
tions without predefining a pragmatic dimension
and without relying on labeled data. We also com-
plement these efforts in analyzing a broader range
of situations in which questions may be posed
without an information-seeking intent.

Political discourse. Finally, our work contributes
to a rapidly growing area of NLP applications to
political domains (Monroe et al., 2008; Card et al.,

1559



2016; Gonzalez-Bailon et al., 2010; Niculae et al.,
2015; Grimmer and Stewart, 2013; Grimmer et al.,
2012; Iyyer et al., 2014b, inter alia). Particularly
relevant are applications to discourse in congres-
sional and parliamentary settings (Thomas et al.,
2006; Boydstun et al., 2014; Rheault et al., 2016).

3 Data: Parliamentary Question Periods

The bulk of our analysis focuses on the questions
asked, and responses given during parliamentary
question periods in the British House of Com-
mons. Below, we provide a brief overview of key
features of this political system in general, as well
as a description of the question period setting.
Parliamentary systems. Legislators in the House
of Commons (Members of Parliament, henceforth
MPs or members) belong to two main voting and
debating affiliations: a government party which
controls the executive and holds a majority of the
seats in the chamber, and a set of opposition par-
ties.1 The executive is headed by the Prime Min-
ister (PM) and run by a cabinet of ministers, high-
ranking government MPs responsible for various
departments such as finance and education.
Question periods. The House of Commons holds
weekly, moderated question periods, in which
MPs of all affiliations take turns to ask questions to
(and theoretically receive answers from) govern-
ment ministers for each department regarding their
specific domains. Such events are a primary way
in which legislators hold senior policy-makers re-
sponsible for their decisions. In practice, beyond
narrow requests for information about specific pol-
icy points, MPs use their questions to critique or
praise the government, or to self-promote; indeed,
certain sessions, such as Questions to the Prime
Minister, have gained renown for their partisan
clashes, often fueled by the (mis)handling of a cur-
rent crisis. The following question, asked to the
Prime Minister by an opposition MP about con-
tamination of the meat supply in 2013, encapsu-
lates this odd mix of purposes:

“The Prime Minister is rightly shocked by the
revelations that many food products contain 100%
horse. Does he share my concern that, if tested,
many of his answers may contain 100% bull?”2

1We use affiliation to refer broadly to the government and
opposition roles, independent of the identity of the current
government and opposition parties. In subsequent analysis
we only consider the largest, “official” opposition party as
the opposition.

2MPs almost always address each other in 3rd person.

The moderated, relatively rigid format of ques-
tions periods, along with the multifaceted array of
underlying incentives and interpersonal relation-
ships, yields a structurally controlled setting with
a rich variety of social interactions, taking place
in the realm of important policy discussions. This
complexity makes question periods a particularly
fruitful and consequential setting in which to study
questions as social signals, and expand our under-
standing of their role beyond factual queries.
Dataset description. Our dataset covers ques-
tion periods from May 1979 to December 2016,
encompassing six different Prime Ministers. For
each question period, we extract all question-
answer pairs, along with the identity of the asker
and answerer. Because our focus here is on how
questions are posed in a social setting, and not
on the subsequent dialogue, we ignore questions
which were tabled prior to the session, as well as
any followup back-and-forth dialogue between the
asker and answerer.

We augment this collection with metadata about
each asker and answerer, including their political
party, the time when they first took office, and
whether they were serving as a minister at a given
point in time. Such information is used to validate
our methodology and interpret our results in light
of the social context in which the questions were
asked, described further in Sections 6 and 7.

In total there are 216,894 question-answer pairs
in our data, occurring over 4,776 days and 6
prime-ministerships. The questions cover 1,975
different askers, 1,066 different answerers, and a
variety of government departments with respon-
sibilities ranging from defense to transport. We
make this dataset publicly available, along with
the code implementing our methodology, as part
of the Cornell Conversational Analysis Toolkit.3

4 Question Motifs

The first component of our framework identifies
lexico-syntactic phrasing patterns recurring in a
collection of questions, which we call motifs. Intu-
itively, motifs constitute wordings commonly used
to pose questions. To find motifs in a given col-
lection, we first extract relevant fragments from
each question. We then group sets of frequently
co-occurring fragments into motifs.

3
https://github.com/CornellNLP/

Cornell-Conversational-Analysis-Toolkit

1560



Question fragments. Our goal is to find motifs
which reflect functional characteristics of ques-
tions. Hence, we start by extracting the key
fragments within a question which encapsulate its
functional nature. Following the intuition that the
bulk of this functional information is contained in
the root of a question’s dependency parse along
with its outgoing arcs (Iyyer et al., 2014a), we
take the fragments of a question to be the root of
its parse tree, along with each (root, child) pair.
To capture cases when the operational word in
the question is not connected to its root (such as
“What...”), we also consider the initial unigram
and bigram of a question as fragments. The fol-
lowing question has 5 fragments: what, what is,
going→*, is←going and going→do.

(1) What is the minister going to do about ... ?

Because our goal is to capture topic-agnostic
patterns, we ignore all fragments which contain
a noun phrase (NP) or pronoun. NP subtrees are
identified based on their outgoing dependencies to
the root;4 in the event that an NP starts with a WH-
determiner (WDT), we consider (root, WDT) to be
a fragment and drop the remainder of the NP.5

Finally, we note that some questions consist of
multiple sub-questions (“What does the Minister
think [...], and why [...]?”). For such questions, we
recursively extract fragments from each child sub-
tree in the same manner, starting from their roots.
From fragments to motifs. We define motifs as
sets of question fragments that frequently co-occur
(in at least n questions). We find motifs by ap-
plying the apriori algorithm (Agrawal and Srikant,
1994) to find these common itemsets. This results
in a collection of motifs M which correspond to
different question phrasings.6 Examples of motifs
are shown in Table 1.

Motifs can identify phrasings to varying degrees
of specificity. For example, the singleton mo-
tif {what is} corresponds to all questions starting
with that bigram, while {what is, going→do} nar-

4We take as NPs subtrees connected to the root with the
following: nsubj, nsubjpass, dobj, iobj, pobj, attr.

5In the particular case of the Parliament dataset, removing
NPs also removes conventional, partisan address terms (e.g.
“my hon. Friend”).

6In some cases, a pair of motifs almost always co-occurs
in the same questions, making them redundant. We treat two
motifs m1 and m2 as equivalent if, for some probability p,
Pr(m1|m2) > p and Pr(m2|m1) > p; we keep the smaller
of the two as the representative motif, or pick one of them
arbitrarily if they are of equal sizes.

rows these down to questions also containing the
fragment going→do. To model the specificity re-
lation between motifs, we structure M as a di-
rected acyclic graph where an edge points from
a motif m1 to another motif m2 if the latter has
exactly one more fragment in addition to those in
m1, corresponding to a narrower set of phrasings.
Motif-representation of a question. Finally, a
question q contains a motif if it includes all of the
fragments comprising that motif. We can hence
capture the phrasing of a given question q using
the subset of motifs it contains, structured as the
subgraphMq ⊂ M induced by this subset. This
directed subgraph represents the question at mul-
tiple levels of specificity simultaneously; in par-
ticular, the set of sinks (i.e., nodes with outdegree
0; henceforth sink motifs) ofMq is the most fine-
grained way to specify the phrasing of q. For ex-
ample {what is, is←going, going→do} is the only
sink motif of the question in example (1); its entire
subgraph is shown in Figure 3 in the appendix.

5 Latent Question Types

The second component of our framework struc-
tures the space of questions according to their
functional roles, thus going beyond the lexico-
syntactic representation captured via motifs. The
main intuition is that the nature of the answer
that a question receives provides a good indication
of its intention. Therefore, if two questions are
phrased differently but answered in similar ways,
the parallels exhibited by their answers should re-
flect commonalities in the askers’ intentions.

To operationalize this intuition, we first con-
struct a latent space based on answers, and then
map question motifs (Section 4) to the same space.
Using the resultant latent representations, we can
then cluster questions with similar rhetorical func-
tions, even if their surface forms are different.
Constructing a space of answers. In line with
our focus on functional characterizations, we ex-
tract the fragments from each sentence of an an-
swer, defined in the same way as question frag-
ments. We then construct a term-document ma-
trix, where terms correspond to answer fragments,
and documents correspond to individual answers
in the corpus. We filter out infrequent fragments
occurring less than nA times, reweight the rows
of this matrix with tf-idf reweighting, and scale
to unit norm, producing a fragment-answer ma-
trix A. We perform singular value decomposi-

1561



tion on A and obtain a low-rank representation
A ≈ Â = UASV TA , for some rank d, where rows
of UA correspond to answer fragments and rows
of VA correspond to answers.7

Latent projection of question motifs. We can
draw a natural correspondence between a ques-
tion motif m and answer term t if m occurs in a
question whose answer contains t. This enables us
to compute representations of question motifs in
the same space as Â. Concretely, we construct a
motif-question matrix Q = (qij) where qij = 1
if motif i occurred in question j; we scale rows
of Q to unit norm. To represent Q in the latent
answer space, we solve for Q̂ in Q = Q̂SV TA as
Q̂ = QVAS−1, again scaling rows to unit norm.
Row i of Q̂ then gives a d-dimensional represen-
tation of motif i, denoted q̂i.

Grouping similar questions. Finally, we iden-
tify question types—broad groups of similar mo-
tifs. Intuitively, if two motifs mi and mj have vec-
tors qi and qj which are close together, they elicit
answers that are close in the latent space, so are
functionally similar in this sense. We use the K-
Means algorithm (Pedregosa et al., 2011) to clus-
ter motif vectors into k clusters; these clusters then
constitute the desired set of question types.

To determine the type of a particular question
q∗, we transform it to a binary vector (q∗i ) where
q∗i = 1 if motif i is a sink motif of q

∗; using only
sink motifs at this stage allows us to characterize a
question according to the most specific represen-
tation of its phrasing, thus avoiding spurious asso-
ciations resulting from more general motifs. We
scale q∗, project it to the latent space as before,
and assign the resultant projection q̂∗ to a cluster
t, hence determining its type.

Since question motifs and answer fragments
have both been mapped to the same latent space
(as rows of Q̂ and UA respectively), we can
also assign each answer fragment to a ques-
tion type. This further facilitates interpretabil-
ity through characterizing the answers commonly
triggered by a particular type of question.

7We experimented with grouping answer fragments into
motifs as well, but found that most of the motifs produced
were one fragment large. While future work could focus
more on understanding consistent phrasings of answers, we
note that at least in our chosen corpus, answers are longer and
encompass a much greater variation of possible phrasings.

6 Validation

We now apply our general framework to the par-
ticular setting of parliamentary question periods,
structuring the space of questions posed within
these sessions according to their rhetorical func-
tion. To validate the induced typology, we quanti-
tatively show that it recovers asker intentions in an
expert-coded dataset, and qualitatively aligns with
prior findings in the political science literature on
parliamentary dynamics.
Question types in Parliament. We apply our mo-
tif extraction and question type induction pipeline
to the questions in the parliamentary dataset.8

Over 90% of the questions in the dataset contain
at least one of the resulting 2,817 motifs; in sub-
sequent analyses we discard questions without a
matching motif. We apply our pipeline to the
questions in the parliamentary dataset, and induce
a typology of k = 8 question types to capture the
rich array of questions represented in this space
while preserving interpretability.

Table 1 displays extracted types, along with ex-
ample questions, answers, and motifs.9 The sec-
ond author, a political scientist with domain ex-
pertise in the UK parliamentary setting, manually
investigated each type and provided interpretable
labels. For example, in questions of type 4, the
asker is aware that his main premise is supported
by the minister, and thus will be met with a pos-
itive statement backing the thrust of the question;
we call this the agreement cluster. Types 6 and
7 are much more combative: in type 6 questions
the asker explicitly attempts to force the minister
to concede/accept a point that would undermine
some government stance, while type 7 contains
condemnatory questions that prompt the minis-
ter to justify a policy that is self-evidently bad in
the eyes of the asker. In contrast, type 2 consti-
tutes tamer narrow queries that require the min-
ister to simply report on non-partisan matters of
policy. (Extended interpretations in the appendix.)
Quantitative validation. We compare our out-
put to a dataset of 1,256 questions asked to vari-
ous Prime Ministers labeled by Bates et al. (2014)

8We consider questions to be sentences ending in question
marks. If an utterance consists of multiple questions, we ex-
tract fragments sets from each question separately, and take
the motifs of the utterance to be the union of motifs of each
component question. We set n = 100, p = 0.9, nA = 100
and d = 25. The choice of parameters was done via manual
inspection of the dataset.

9Each type contains a few hundred question motifs and
answer fragments.

1562



Type Question motifs Answer fragments Example question-answer pairs
0: Issue
update
(16,693)

{what,are←taking},
{will←update}

continue→work,
met→discuss

Q: What steps are the Department taking to create a system for
asylum-seekers?
A: We continue to work with the Department of Education to en-
sure an equitable [...]

1: Shared
concerns
(35,954)

{will←take},
{may←urge}

grateful←am,
shall←consider

Q: Will he take steps to support other MPs to employ apprentices?
A: I am grateful for that suggestion [...]

2: Narrow
factual
(16,467)

{what←made},
{what←happen,
will←happen}

is←considering,
have←discussed

Q: What representations has the Minister made on the future of
rural policing [in] Dyfed-Powys?
A:The Home Office is considering the matter [...]

3: Prompt
for
comment
(16,588)

{what←say,say→to},
{will←tell}

must←say,
said→was

Q: What has the Prime Minister to say to President Reagan for
sending troops to Honduras?
A: [...] I must say that we deplore the reported incursion by
Nicaraguan forces [...]

4: Agree-
ment
(32,835)

{does←agree,
agree→is},
{is→important}

agree→with,
agree→completely

Q: Does [he] agree that one of the best ways to improve the trade
balance is to continue the Government’s strong economic policies?
A: I agree with my hon. Friend [...]

5: Self
promotion
(26,351)

{is→aware},
{will←consider}

will←appreciate,
am→certain

Q: Is my Friend aware that members of my parish church are
pleased to have received a grant [...] ?
A: [My Friend] will appreciate the significant performance of
parishes up and down the country [...]

6: Concede,
accept
(31,653)

{will←accept},
{is→not, is→true}

not←accept,
not←believe

Q: Will [he] accept that [the UK exiting the EU] would undermine
our security [...]?
A: No, I do not accept that [...]

7: Con-
demnatory
(21,320)

{can←explain},
{how←justify,
can←justify}

knows→well,
is→wrong

Q: Can the Secretary explain why the Government are scrapping
child poverty targets?
A: The hon. Lady is wrong in what she says [...]

Table 1: Question types automatically extracted from the parliamentary question periods, along with
representative motifs and question-answer pairs. The number of questions in our dataset assigned to
each type is shown in parantheses. Interpretations and more examples in Tables 2 & 3 in the appendix.

(also included in our data distribution). Each ques-
tion in this data is hand-coded by a domain ex-
pert with one of three labels indicating the rhetor-
ical intention of the asker: compared to stan-
dard questions—denoting straightforward factual
queries, helpful questions serve as prompts for
the PM to talk favorably about their government,
while unanswerable questions are effectively ve-
hicles for delivering criticisms that the PM cannot
respond to. Questions which are unanswered by
the PM are also labeled. If our framework cap-
tures meaningful rhetorical dimensions, we expect
a given label to be over-represented in some of our
induced types, and under-represented in others.

Even though our clustering of questions is gen-
erated in an unsupervised fashion without any
guidance from the coded rhetorical roles, we see
that several of the types we discover closely align
with these annotations. In particular, helpful ques-
tions are highly associated with the agreement
type (constituting 28% of questions of that type
compared to 14% over the entire dataset; bino-
mial test p < 0.01), reinforcing our interpretation

that this type captures MPs cheerleading their own
government. Conversely, unanswerable questions
are frequently of the concede/accept type (20%
in-type vs. 11% overall), while condemnatory
questions are often unanswered (43% vs. 24%
overall), suggesting that questions of these types
have an increased tendency to be posed as aggres-
sive criticisms packaged as questions.

We also validate our framework in a prediction
setting using these labels, in three binary clas-
sification tasks: distinguishing helpful vs. stan-
dard, unanswerable vs. standard, and unanswered
vs. answered questions. (In each task, we bal-
ance the two classes.) To control for asker affil-
iation effects, we consider only questions asked
by government MPs for the helpful task, and op-
position questions in the unanswerable and unan-
swered tasks; we train on questions to Conserva-
tive PMs and evaluate on Labour PMs.10 For each
setting, we train logistic regression classifiers; as

10These choices are motivated by the number of questions
from each affiliation and party in the dataset (see appendix
for further details on this dataset).

1563



Figure 1: A: Log-odds ratios of questions of each type asked by government and opposition MPs, com-
pared to MPs not of the respective affiliation; 95% confidence intervals (sometimes imperceptible) are
depicted. B: Mean propensities for each question type, for MPs who switch from being in the opposition
to being in the government (top) and vice-versa (bottom) after an election. Stars indicate statistically
significant differences at the p < 0.05 (*), p < 0.01 (**) and p < 0.001 (***) levels (Wilcoxon test).

features we compare the latent representation of
each question to a unigram BOW baseline.11

In the unanswerable and unanswered tasks, we
find that the BOW features do not perform sig-
nificantly better than a random (50%) baseline.
However, the latent question features produced
by our framework bring additional predictive sig-
nal and outperform the baseline when combined
with BOW (binomial p < 0.05), achieving ac-
curacies of 66% and 62% respectively (compared
with 55% and 50% for BOW alone). This suggests
that our representation captures useful rhetorical
information that, given our train-test split, gen-
eralizes across parties. None of the models sig-
nificantly outperform the random baseline on the
helpful task, perhaps owing to the small data size.
Qualitative validation: question partisanship.
We additionally provide a qualitative validation
of our framework by comparing the question-
asking activity of government and opposition-
affiliated MPs—as viewed through the extracted
question types—to well-established characteriza-
tions of these affiliations in the political science lit-
erature. In particular, prior work has examined the
bifurcation in behavior between government and
opposition members, in their differing focus on
various issues (Louwerse, 2012), and in settings
such as roll call votes (Cowley, 2002; Spirling and
McLean, 2007; Eggers and Spirling, 2014). Since
government MPs are elected on the same party
ticket and manifesto, they primarily act to sup-

11We used tf-idf reweighting and excluded unigrams oc-
curring less than 5 times.

port the government’s various policies and bolster
the status of their cabinet, seldom airing disagree-
ments publicly. In contrast, opposition members
tend to offer trenchant partisan criticism of gov-
ernment policies, seeking to destabilize the gov-
ernment’s relationship with its MPs and create
negative press in the country at large. In character-
izing the question-asking activity of government
and opposition MPs, this friendly vs. adversarial
behavior should also be reflected in a rhetorical ty-
pology of questions.12

Concretely, to quantify the relationship between
a particular question type t and asker affiliation P ,
we compute the log-odds ratio of type t questions
asked by MPs in P , compared to MPs not in P .13

Figure 1A shows the resultant log-odds ratios of
each question type for government and opposition
members. Notably, we see that agreement-type
questions are significantly more likely to origi-
nate from government than from opposition MPs,
while the opposite holds for concede/accept and
condemnatory questions (binomial p < 10−4
for each, comparing within-type to overall propor-
tions of questions from an affiliation). No such

12While we induce the typology over our entire dataset,
we perform all subsequent analyses on a filtered subset of
50,152 questions. In particular, we omit utterances with mul-
tiple questions—i.e. multiple question marks—to ensure that
we don’t confound effects arising from different co-occurring
question types. Our filtering decisions are also determined by
the availability of information about the asker and answerers’
roles in Parliament. Further information about these filtering
choices can be found in the appendix.

13The log-odds values are not symmetric between govern-
ment and opposition, because they includes questions asked
by MPs not in the official opposition.

1564



Figure 2: A: Median asker tenures over each question type, for government and opposition askers. Over-
all median tenures are also shown for reference (solid blue line for government, dashed red line for
opposition). B: Mean propensities for newly elected MPs during the 1997 and 2010 elections, com-
pared to re-elected MPs in the subsequent parliamentary sitting. Stars indicate statistically significant
differences at the p < 0.05 (*), p < 0.01 (**) and p < 0.001 (***) levels (Mann Whitney U test).

slant is exhibited in the narrow factual type, fur-
ther reinforcing the role of such questions as infor-
mational queries about relatively non-partisan is-
sues. These results strongly cohere with the “text-
book” accounts of parliamentary activity in the lit-
erature, as well as our interpretation of these types
as bolstering or antagonistic.

Moreover, we find that the same MP shifts in
her propensity for different question types as her
affiliation changes. When a new political party
is elected into office, MPs who were previously
in the opposition now belong to the government
party, and vice versa. Such a switch occurs within
our data between the Major and Blair governments
(Conservative to Labour, 1997), and between
the Brown and Cameron governments (Labour to
Conservative, 2010). For both switches, we con-
sider all MPs who asked at least 5 questions both
before and after the switch, resulting in 88 mem-
bers who became government MPs and 102 who
became opposition MPs. For an MP M we com-
pute PM,t, their propensity for a question type
t, as the proportion of questions they ask which
are from t. Comparing PM,t before and after a
switch, we replicate the key differences observed
above—for instance, we find that former opposi-
tion MPs who become government MPs decrease
in their propensity for condemnatory questions,
while newly opposition MPs move in the other di-
rection (Wilcoxon p < 0.001, Figure 1B). This
suggests that the general trends we observed be-
fore are driven by the shift in affiliation, and hence
parliamentary role, of individual MPs.

7 Career Trajectory Effects

We now apply our framework to gain further in-
sights into the nature of political discourse in Par-
liament, focusing on how questioning behavior
varies with a member’s tenure in the institution.
As stated in the introduction, two alternative hy-
potheses arise: younger MPs may be more vig-
orously critical out of enthusiasm, but are poten-
tially tempered by their stake in future promo-
tion prospects compared to older members (Cow-
ley, 2002, 2012). Alternatively, older MPs who
have less at stake in terms of prospects of further
promotion may ask more antagonistic questions.
Throughout, young and old refer to tenure—i.e.,
how many years someone has served as an MP—
rather than biological age.

In order to understand the extent to which young
or old members contribute a specific type of ques-
tion, for each question type t we compute the
median tenure of askers of each question in t,
and compare the median tenures of different ques-
tion types, for each affiliation (Figure 2A).14 We
see that among both affiliations, more aggres-
sive questions tend to originate more from older
members, reflected in significantly higher median
tenures (for types 6 in both affiliations, and 7
in government MPs; Mann Whitney U test p <
0.001 comparing within-type median tenure with
outside-type median tenure); whereas standard is-
sue update questions tend to come from younger

14Median tenures for opposition members are generally
higher; winning an election tends to result in more newly-
elected and therefore younger MPs (Webb and Farrell, 1999).

1565



members (p < 0.001, both affiliations). Notably,
the disproportionate aggressiveness of older mem-
bers manifests even among government MPs who
direct these questions towards their own govern-
ment. This supports the “less to lose” intuition,
offering a rhetorical parallel to previous findings
about the increased tendency to vote contrary to
party lines from MPs with little chance of minis-
terial promotion (Benedetto and Hix, 2007).

Interestingly, we find that these differential
preferences across member tenure also manifest
at a finer granularity than simply less to more ag-
gressive. For instance, younger opposition mem-
bers tend to contribute more condemnatory ques-
tions compared to older members (Mann Whitney
U test p < 0.01), who disproportionately favor
concede/accept questions. While further work is
needed to fully explain these differences, we spec-
ulate that they are potentially reflective of strate-
gic attempts by younger MPs to signal traits that
could facilitate future promotion, such as partisan
loyalty (Kam, 2009).

To discount the possibility of these effects be-
ing solely driven by a few very prolific young or
old MPs, we also consider a setting where type
propensities are macroaveraged over MPs. For
each affiliation we compare the cohort of younger
MPs who are newly voted in at the 1997 and 2010
elections, with older MPs who have been in of-
fice prior to the election.15 We compute the type
propensities of these two cohorts over the ques-
tions they asked during the subsequent parliamen-
tary sitting, and replicate the tenure effects ob-
served previously (Figure 2B). This suggests that
these parliamentary career effects reflect behav-
ioral changes at the level of individual MPs, whose
incentives evolve over their tenure.

8 Conclusion and Future Work

In this work we introduced an unsupervised frame-
work for structuring the space of questions accord-
ing to their rhetorical role. We instantiated and
validated our approach in the domain of parlia-
mentary question periods, and revealed new inter-
actions between questioning behavior and career
trajectories.

We note that our methodology is not tied to a
particular domain. It would be interesting to ex-
plore its potential in a variety of less structured do-

15This totals 272 new and 184 old government MPs, and
84 new and 179 old opposition MPs.

mains where questions likewise play a crucial role.
For example, examining how interviewers in high-
profile media settings (e.g., Frost on Nixon) can
use their questions to elicit substantive responses
from influential people would aid us in the broader
normative goal of holding elites to account, by
gaining a better understanding of what and how
to ask, and what (not) to accept as an answer.

From a technical standpoint, future work could
also augment the representation of questions and
answers presently used in our framework, be-
yond our heuristic of using root arcs without noun
phrases. Richer linguistic representations, as well
as more judicious ways of weighting different
fragments and motifs, could enable us to capture
a wider range of possible surface and rhetorical
forms, especially in settings where phrasings are
potentially less structured by institutional conven-
tions. Additionally, as with most unsupervised
methods, our approach is limited by the need to
hand-select parameters such as the number of clus-
ters, and manually interpret the typology’s output.
Having annotations of these corpora could better
motivate the methodology and enable further eval-
uation and interpretation; we hope to encourage
such annotation efforts by releasing the dataset.

Inevitably, drawing causal lessons from obser-
vational data is difficult. Moving forward, experi-
mental tests of insights gathered through such ex-
plorations would enable us to establish causal ef-
fects of question-asking rhetoric, perhaps offering
prescriptive insights into questioning strategies for
objectives such as information-seeking (Dillman,
1978), request-making (Althoff et al., 2014; Mi-
tra and Gilbert, 2014) and persuasion (Tan et al.,
2016; Zhang et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2017).

Acknowledgements. The first author thanks John Bercow,
the Speaker of the House, for suggesting she “calm [her]self

down by taking up yoga” during the hectic deadline push

(https://youtu.be/AiAWdLAIj3c). The authors

thank the anonymous reviewers and Liye Fu for their com-

ments and for their helpful questions. We are grateful to the

organizers of the conference on New Directions in Text as

Data for fostering the inter-disciplinary collaboration that led

to this work, to Amber Boydstun and Philip Resnik for their

insights on questions in the political domain, and to Stephen

Bates, Peter Kerr and Christopher Byrne for sharing the la-

beled PMQ dataset. This research has been supported in part

by a Discovery and Innovation Research Seed Award from

the Office of the Vice Provost for Research at Cornell.

1566



References
Rakesh Agrawal and Ramakrishnan Srikant. 1994.

Fast algorithms for mining association rules. In Pro-
ceedings of VLDB.

Tim Althoff, Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, and
Dan Jurafsky. 2014. How to ask for a favor: A case
study on the success of altruistic requests. In Pro-
ceedings of ICWSM.

Malika Aubakirova and Mohit Bansal. 2016. Interpret-
ing neural networks to improve politeness compre-
hension. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Stephen R. Bates, Peter Kerr, Christopher Byrne, and
Liam Stanley. 2014. Questions to the Prime Minis-
ter: A comparative study of PMQs from Thatcher to
Cameron. Parliamentary Affairs.

Giacomo Benedetto and Simon Hix. 2007. The Re-
jected, the Ejected, and the Dejected: Explaining
government rebels in the 2001-2005 British House
of Commons. Comparative Political Studies.

Shohini Bhattasali, Jeremy Cytryn, Elana Feldman,
and Joonsuk Park. 2015. Automatic identification
of rhetorical questions. In ACL.

Amber E. Boydstun, Dallas Card, Justin H. Gross,
Philip Resnik, and Noah A. Smith. 2014. Tracking
the development of media frames within and across
policy issues. In Proceedings of the APSA.

Peter Bull and Pam Wells. 2012. Adversarial discourse
in Prime Ministers Questions. Journal of Language
and Social Psychology.

Xin Cao, Gao Cong, Bin Cui, and Christian S Jensen.
2010. A generalized framework of exploring cate-
gory information for question retrieval in commu-
nity question answer archives. In Proceedings of
WWW.

Dallas Card, Justin Gross, Amber Boydstun, and Noah
Smith. 2016. Analyzing framing through the casts
of characters in the news. In Proceedings of
EMNLP.

Daniel Chester and Nona Bowring. 1962. Questions in
Parliament. Clarendon Press, Oxford.

Philip Cowley. 2002. The Rebels: How Blair Mislaid
his Majority. Politico’s Publishing.

Philip Cowley. 2012. Arise, novice leader! The contin-
uing rise of the career politician in Britain. Politics.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Moritz Sudhof,
Dan Jurafsky, Jure Leskovec, and Christopher Potts.
2013. A computational approach to politeness with
application to social factors. In Proceedings of ACL.

Rajdip Dhillon, Bhagat Sonali, Carvey Hannah, and
Shriberg Elizabeth. 2004. Meeting Recorder
Project: Dialog Act Labeling Guide. Technical re-
port.

Don A Dillman. 1978. Mail and telephone surveys:
The total design method. Wiley New York.

Andrew Eggers and Arthur Spirling. 2014. Ministerial
responsiveness in westminster systems: Institutional
choices and House of Commons debate, 1832–1915.
American Journal of Political Science.

Erving Goffman. 1976. Replies and responses. Lan-
guage in society.

Sandra Gonzalez-Bailon, Andreas Kaltenbrunner, and
Rafael E Banchs. 2010. The structure of political
discussion networks: A model for the analysis of
online deliberation. Journal of Information Technol-
ogy.

Justin Grimmer, Solomon Messing, and Sean J West-
wood. 2012. How words and money cultivate a per-
sonal vote: The effect of legislator credit claiming
on constituent credit allocation. American Political
Science Review.

Justin Grimmer and Brandon Stewart. 2013. Text as
Data: The promise and pitfalls of automatic content
analysis methods for political texts. Political Analy-
sis.

Poonam Gupta and Vishal Gupta. 2012. A survey of
text question answering techniques. International
Journal of Computer Applications.

Sanda M. Harabagiu. 2008. Questions and intentions.
In Advances in Open Domain Question Answering.

Sanda M. Harabagiu, Dan I. Moldovan, Marius Paşca,
Rada Mihalcea, Mihai Surdeanu, Răzvan Bunescu,
Corina R Gı̂rju, Vasile Rus, and Paul Morărescu.
2000. FALCON: Boosting knowledge for answer
engines. In Proceedings of TREC.

Mohit Iyyer, Jordan Boyd-Graber, Leonardo
Max Batista Claudino, Richard Socher, and
Hal Daumé III. 2014a. A neural network for
factoid question answering over paragraphs. In
Proceedings of EMNLP.

Mohit Iyyer, Peter Enns, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and
Philip Resnik. 2014b. Political ideology detection
using recursive neural networks. In Proceedings of
ACL.

Jiwoon Jeon, W Bruce Croft, and Joon Ho Lee. 2005.
Finding Semantically Similar Questions Based on
Their Answers. In Proceedings of SIGIR.

Christopher Kam. 2009. Party Discipline and Par-
liamentary Politics. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

Greg P. Kearsley. 1976. Questions and question ask-
ing in verbal discourse: A cross-disciplinary review.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research.

Wendy G. Lehnert. 1978. The process of question
answering: A computer simulation of cognition.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

1567



Tom Louwerse. 2012. Mechanisms of issue congru-
ence: The democratic party mandate. West Euro-
pean Politics.

Steven Lytinen and Noriko Tomuro. 2002. The use of
question types to match questions in FAQFinder. In
AAAI Spring Symposium on Mining Answers from
Texts and Knowledge Bases.

Tanushree Mitra and Eric Gilbert. 2014. The Language
that Gets People to Give: Phrases that Predict Suc-
cess on Kickstarter. In Proceedings of CSCW.

Burt L. Monroe, Michael P. Colaresi, and Kevin M.
Quinn. 2008. Fightin’ Words: Lexical feature se-
lection and evaluation for identifying the content of
political conflict. Political Analysis.

Vlad Niculae, Caroline Suen, Justine Zhang, Cristian
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, and Jure Leskovec. 2015.
QUOTUS: The structure of political media coverage
as revealed by quoting patterns. In Proceedings of
WWW.

F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel,
B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-
hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Pas-
sos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
E. Duchesnay. 2011. scikit-learn: Machine learning
in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research.

Hanna F. Pitkin. 1967. The Concept of Representation.
University of California Press, Oakland.

Sven-Oliver Proksch and Jonathan Slapin. 2011. Par-
liamentary questions and oversight in the European
Union. European Journal of Political Research.

Suhas Ranganath, Xia Hu, Jiliang Tang, Suhang Wang,
and Huan Liu. 2016. Identifying rhetorical ques-
tions in social media. In ICWSM.

Sujith Ravi, Bo Pang, Vibhor Rastogi, and Ravi Kumar.
2014. Great question! Question quality in commu-
nity Q&A. In Proceedings of ICWSM.

Ludovic Rheault, Kaspar Beelen, Christopher
Cochrane, and Graeme Hirst. 2016. Measuring
emotion in parliamentary debates with automated
textual analysis. PloS One.

Niharika Sachdeva and Ponnurangam Kumaraguru.
2017. Call for service: Characterizing and modeling
police response to serviceable requests on Facebook.
In Proceedings of CSCW.

Anna Shtok, Gideon Dror, Yoelle Maarek, and Idan
Szpektor. 2012. Learning from the past: Answering
new questions with past answers. In Proceedings of
WWW.

Arthur Spirling and Iain McLean. 2007. UK OC
OK? Interpreting optimal classification scores for
the U.K. House of Commons. Political Analysis.

Chenhao Tan, Vlad Niculae, Cristian Danescu-
Niculescu-Mizil, and Lillian Lee. 2016. Winning
arguments: Interaction dynamics and persuasion
strategies in good-faith online discussions. In Pro-
ceedings of WWW.

Matt Thomas, Bo Pang, and Lillian Lee. 2006. Get Out
the Vote: Determining support or opposition from
congressional floor-debate transcripts. In Proceed-
ings of EMNLP.

Christoph Treude, Ohad Barzilay, and Margaret-Anne
Storey. 2011. How do programmers ask and answer
questions on the web? In Proceedings of ICSE.

Lu Wang, Nick Beauchamp, Sarah Shugars, and
Kechen Qin. 2017. Winning on the merits: The
joint effects of content and style on debate outcomes.
TACL.

Paul Webb and David M Farrell. 1999. Party members
and ideological change. Critical Elections: British
Parties and Voters in Long-Term Perspective.

Justine Zhang, Ravi Kumar, Sujith Ravi, and Cris-
tian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil. 2016. Conversa-
tional flow in Oxford-style debates. In Proceedings
of NAACL.

Wei Emma Zhang, Quan Z. Sheng, Jey Han Lau, and
Ermyas Abebe. 2017. Detecting duplicate posts in
programming QA communities via latent semantics
and association rules. In Proceedings of WWW.

1568



Appendix

A.1 Further examples of question types
Tables 2 and 3 provide further examples of rep-
resentative questios and motifs from each of the
eight question types we induce on our dataset of
parliamentary question periods. Additionally, we
include extended interpretations of each of these
types, provided by the second author, a political
scientist with domain expertise in the UK parlia-
mentary setting.

A.2 Details about data filtering decisions
Here we provide further details about how we se-
lected the subset of 50,152 questions which was
used in the analyses described in Sections 6 & 7.
First, we restrict our analysis to the questions
which consist of only one question, as opposed to
a series of questions (as delimited by multiple sen-
tences ending in question marks; constituting 52%
of the data). We omit these multi-question utter-
ances in order to ensure that we don’t confound ef-
fects arising from different co-occurring question
types. Next, we only include questions for which
information about the asker and answerers’ party
affiliations and ministership positions are available
(such data is provided consistently from the Blair
government onwards). Finally, we omit questions
asked by opposition members who are specifically
appointed by their party to shadow a government
minister, and are hence obliged by their appoint-
ment to ask more critical questions. Our choice
to omit such questions eliminates the possibility
that our observed differences in question prefer-
ence are driven by official appointment.

A.3 Details about the labeled PMQ dataset
Here we provide further details about the size
of the labeled Questions to the Prime Minister
(PMQ) dataset from Bates et al. (2014) used in
the quantitative validation of our typology (Sec-
tion 6). The dataset contains 931 standard, 186
helpful and 139 unanswerable questions. Addi-
tionally, 445 answers to questions are labeled as
answered, while 305 are labeled as not answered;
the rest are labeled as deferred answer, meaning
the Prime Minister did not have the knowledge or
capability to provide an answer.

We restrict all analysis done using the unan-
swered vs. answered labels to standard questions,
i.e., questions for which the PM has an opportu-
nity to provide a legitimate answer.

The helpful vs. standard classification task con-
tains 264 train and 108 test examples; the unan-
swerable vs. standard classification task contains
190 train and 86 test examples; the unanswered vs.
answered classification task contains 166 train and
84 test examples.

A.4 Example motif subgraph
Figure 3 illustrates a section of the motif DAGM
and highlights (in bold) the subgraph Mq corre-
sponding to the phrasing of the question in exam-
ple (1). Nodes that are higher in the graph serve
as general representations, and capture similarities
between broad sets of phrasings: e.g., {is←going
going→do, is←going, what is} groups together
example (1) with a question like “When is he go-
ing to get a grip on [the scandal]”. By projecting
such motifs into our latent question-answer space
(Section 5) we capture characteristics shared be-
tween these phrasings and allow for generalizabil-
ity. Nodes which are lower in the graph constitute
more specific representations, disambiguating be-
tween phrasings. In particular, sink motifs serve
as the most specific representation of a question,
delineating the region of the latent space (and thus
the question type) that best captures its phrasing.
For instance, this additional specificity allows us
to draw contrasts between “What is the minis-
ter going to do [about the policy]?” (sink motif:
{what is, is←going, going→do}) and the more
aggressive “When is he going to get a grip on [the
scandal]?” (sink motif: {when is, is←going}).

1569



Type Interpretation and examples

0:
Is

su
e

up
da

te

Requests for information or updates about a current event, issue, or policy. Typically the policy refers to a genuinely
‘national’ concern, rather than a partisan issue for which the major parties may have differing views.

Q: Will the Minister also update the House on whether any decisions have been made on the post-2014 UK
contribution to Afghanistan?

Q: What more can the Government do to ensure that each pupil has a single point of contact [for mental health
issues] throughout their education?

Q: What further steps can we take to resolve [the] terrible situation [in Syria]?

Question motifs: {what,are←taking}, {will←update}, {what←do, do→ensure}, {what←take, can←take}

1:
Sh

ar
ed

co
nc

er
ns

Straightforward factual question with no strong ideological underpinnings; answers are typically vague and in-
volve explaining that the government takes it seriously, will continue to do so and will consult with the relevant
stakeholders.

Q: May I urge the Minister to concentrate on tough penalties for people who get involved in alcohol-induced
antisocial behaviour?

Q: Will the Secretary of State look carefully at reports that houses built to house the soldiers will block off the
rising sun at the summer equinox [at] the Stonehenge?

Q: Will [my hon. Friend] raise [the matter of] product placement with people in the film industry [when he meets
them]?

Question motifs: {will, take→*}, {may←urge}, {will←look, look→at, look→carefully}, {raise→will,
raise→with}

2:
N

ar
ro

w
fa

ct
ua

l

Narrow queries about relatively minor policy issues which are either extremely local in nature (perhaps referring to
implications for a given constituency) or limited in scope (constituting a small issue within a much broader context
of policy). Questions are precise if not especially penetrating. Answers typically explain the ministry response in
narrow, non-ideological terms.

Q: What funding will be given to the new postgraduate institute at the Edinburgh College of Dentistry?
Q: Will the Minister make a statement on where we are with the website for the [National Health Service appraisals
toolkit for general practitioners]?

Q: What will happen to the French if they are found guilty of infringing the rules of the Commission?

Question motifs: {what←made}, {what←happen, will←happen}, {what←given, given→to}, {will←make,
make→on}

3:
Pr

om
pt

fo
r

co
m

m
en

t

Requests for comments, or information, especially on a meeting that has taken place between a minister and con-
stituents, colleagues, or opposite numbers, the contents of which would not normally be immediately accessible to
MPs. The asker seeks that the minister clarifies policy where none might presently exist.

Q: Will the Secretary of State tell us which Minister has been appointed to be responsible for green economic
growth?

Q: Can [the Secretary of State] confirm whether train platform capacity will be a part of the discussions between
the city council and Network Rail?

Q: What would the Prime Minister say to a borough council which is considering rejecting Government funding
and instead [taxing] my constituents more?

Question motifs: {what←say,say→to}, {will←tell}, {can←confirm, confirm→be}, {what←say, would←say}

Table 2: Interpretation for the first four types, with examples of representative questions and motifs.

1570



Type Interpretation and examples

4:
A

gr
ee

m
en

t

Airing a laudatory remark about a policy that the minister and MP clearly already agree on. Often these questions
effectively serve as attempts to curry favor with the minister and bolster their (mutual) party.

Q: Is it not important that the Department continues its excellent work [in] building flood defeneces?
Q: Does [the Secretary of State] agree with me that part of protecting Britain’s national interests is that Britain
should develop relationships with emerging economies?

Q: Does the Minister agree that UK taxpayers need to be considered at every single step of the way when it comes
to our aid spending?

Question motifs: {does←agree, agree→is}, {is→important}, {does←agree, agree→with}, {does←agree,
agree→need}

5:
Se

lf-
pr

om
ot

io
n

Here, “awareness” is entirely rhetorical: either the minister is aware and agrees or the minister is not aware and will
investigate. These questions allow the question asker to be seen to be bringing local concerns to broader attention,
but in a way that is more assertive than in type 2 (narrow factual).

Q: Has the right hon. Gentleman considered compulsory postal voting , and moving polling day from a Thursday
to the weekend?

Q: In considering the role of local tribunals , will my hon Friend take account of the recommendation in the Oglesby
report?

Q: Will the Minister reconsider his reply to my [colleague], [in light of] the situation [on] school leavers applying
for technical positions?

Question motifs: {is→aware}, {considered←has}, {will←take, take→in}, {will←reconsider}

6:
C

on
ce

de
,a

cc
ep

t

Aggressive demand for minister to concede to, or accept, a fault. The premise of such questions is that the minister
has been incompetent, or that the government has the wrong policy; these questions do not constitute a genuine
attempt to obtain information.

Q: Is it not now completely true that the Labour Government are out of touch with gut British instincts?
Q: Will [the Secretary] acknowledge the importance of not completely abandoning the research on sustainable
biofuels?

Q: Will [the Deputy Prime Minister] now concede to the House that the Royal Mail was sold off too cheaply?

Question motifs: {will←accept}, {is→not, is→true}, {will←acknowledge}, {will←concede}

7:
C

on
de

m
na

to
ry

Similar to type 6 (concede, accept) but more aggressive and hectoring in tone, asking the minister to explain
themselves and be contrite on the basis of very broad ideological premises that are difficult to answer without ‘self-
incrimination’. These questions often rely on rhetorical grandstanding and lacks any subtlety or policy detail on
which minister can comment precisely.

Q: When members of the armed forces are facing a pay freeze, how can the Secretary justify bonuses to senior
offices in the civil service?

Q: Why does the right hon Gentleman not have an industrial strategy to build that recovery?
Q: Will the Government now apologise for their complacent decision to scrap the future jobs fund, [given that]
long-term youth unemployment is rising?

Question motifs: {can←explain}, {how←justify, can←justify}, {why does}, {will←apologise}

Table 3: Interpretation for the last four types, with examples of representative questions and motifs.

1571



Figure 3: A section of the motif DAGM and the subgraphMq (in bold) representing the phrasing of
the question in example (1). For clarity, redundant and irrelevant nodes and edges are not shown.

1572


