



















































Framing and Agenda-setting in Russian News: a Computational Analysis of Intricate Political Strategies


Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 3570–3580
Brussels, Belgium, October 31 - November 4, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

3570

Framing and Agenda-setting in Russian News:
a Computational Analysis of Intricate Political Strategies

Anjalie Field♠ Doron Kliger♦ Shuly Wintner♦
Jennifer Pan♥ Dan Jurafsky♥ Yulia Tsvetkov♠

♠Carnegie Mellon University ♦University of Haifa ♥Stanford University
{anjalief, ytsvetko}@cs.cmu.edu,

{kliger@econ, shuly@cs}.haifa.ac.il, {jp1, jurafsky}@stanford.edu

Abstract

Amidst growing concern over media
manipulation, NLP attention has focused on
overt strategies like censorship and “fake
news”. Here, we draw on two concepts from the
political science literature to explore subtler
strategies for government media manipulation:
agenda-setting (selecting what topics to
cover) and framing (deciding how topics are
covered). We analyze 13 years (100K articles)
of the Russian newspaper Izvestia and identify
a strategy of distraction: articles mention the
U.S. more frequently in the month directly
following an economic downturn in Russia.
We introduce embedding-based methods for
cross-lingually projecting English frames
to Russian, and discover that these articles
emphasize U.S. moral failings and threats to
the U.S. Our work offers new ways to identify
subtle media manipulation strategies at the
intersection of agenda-setting and framing.

1 Introduction

Authoritarian countries such as Russia and China
have received a great deal of attention for trying
to control and distort the spread of information
through “fake news” and censorship. However,
authoritarian governments might also use subtle
tactics of media manipulation that are much harder
to detect, like flooding communication channels
with irrelevant information or highlighting
particular viewpoints of an event to distract public
attention (Rozenas and Stukal, Forthcoming;
Munger et al., 2018;King et al., 2017). “Fake news”
can be identified by fact checkers. Censorship
can be detected by checking what content is no
longer available. However, we have no systematic
way of identifying more subtle forms of media
manipulation. To date, research has been limited to
occasional leaks to reveal ground truth data (King
et al., 2017). This paper proposes techniques—

grounded in economics and political science—
to automatically identify subtle manipulation at
scale, and applies these techniques to studyRussian
media.
These subtle manipulation strategies can

be understood through agenda-setting—selecting
what topics to cover—and framing—how aspects
of those topics are highlighted to promote
particular interpretations (Entman, 2007; Ghanem
and McCombs, 2001). For example, abortion
can be framed in terms of the life of a child
or a woman’s freedom of choice (Tankard Jr,
2001). Agenda-setting and framing can have a
significant influence on public opinion by attending
to particular issues at the exclusion of others
(McCombs, 2002; Boydstun et al., 2013). Both
concepts have been well-studied in English-
speaking democratic countries, but understudied in
other settings. Here, we apply these concepts to the
study ofmediamanipulation in Russia, particularly
as strategies of an autocratic regime.
We focus on Russia, because of intense interest

in the way Russia is shaping the global information
environment (Van Herpen, 2015). Many Russian
media outlets are state-owned or heavily influenced
by the government. We focus on news coverage
from 2003–2016 in one of the most widely-read
newspapers in Russia: Izvestia. Despite a brief
period of autonomy, Izvestia has become strongly
influenced by the government (Jones, 2002).
Prior work has identified a relationship between

negative economic performance in Russia, such as
stock market declines, and “selection attribution”
in state-controlled media outlets, where negative
events are blamed on foreign officials while
positive events are credited to domestic officials
(Rozenas and Stukal, Forthcoming). We build
on these findings and investigate the relationship
between economic performance, including that of
the Russia Trading System Index (RTSI) and gross



3571

domestic product (GDP), and news coverage of
foreign events. We primarily investigate coverage
of the United States because Russia has seen the
U.S. as its main rival since the Cold War, and we
expect news coverage of foreign events to focus
disproportionally on the U.S.
We first establish a strong negative correlation

between Russia’s economic situation and the
proportion of news focused on the U.S.
(§2). We then show that the correlation is
directed: economic indicators precede (and thereby
Granger-cause) the increase in foreign news
coverage (§2.2). We consider this a clear case
of agenda-setting. We then investigate how these
news articles frame the U.S. We develop a distant
supervision method to project English framing
annotations onto ourRussian corpus (§3), and draw
on the projected frames to analyze manipulation
strategies in news about the U.S. (§5).
The contributions of this work are manifold: we

show how framing and agenda-setting (concepts
traditionally applied to policy debates) can be
used to understand media manipulation strategies;
we use economic metrics to automate the
identification of agenda-setting; we devise a novel
method for cross-lingual projection of framing
annotations; and we use these annotations to show
how agenda-setting is realized.

2 Agenda-Setting

All media outlets inevitably use a form of
agenda-setting: deciding what is “newsworthy”
by covering some topics at the exclusion of
others. Agenda-setting can powerfully sway the
focus of public opinion (McCombs, 2002). We
hypothesize that in countrieswithweak democratic
institutions and in particular, with state-controlled
media, the government may actively use agenda-
setting to shape public opinion. We observe this
phenomenon by comparing how much Russian
newspapers describe the U.S. and the state of the
Russian economy. We then use Granger-causality
to show that a decline the Russian stock market is
followed by an increase in U.S. news coverage.

Our results are based on a corpus of over 100,000
articles from the newspaper Izvestia published in
2003–2016 (see Appendix A for details).

2.1 Correlations

We compared the salience of news focused on
the U.S. with indicators that reflect the economic

state of Russia to test our hypothesis: that news
coverage of the U.S. is used to distract the public
from negative economic events.We first performed
an initial, simplistic study of this agenda-setting
strategy. We define U.S. coverage as the ratio of
Izvestia articles that mention the U.S. at least
twice to the total number of articles in any
given time slice (in our initial study, a year).
We show in Figure 1 the U.S. coverage plotted
against Russian GDP, in an annual resolution. We
find a strong negative Pearson’s correlation (r=-
0.83): mentions of the U.S. in Izvestia increase as
economic indicators deteriorate. The one exception
to this trend is 2008, during which there was
a high amount of U.S. news coverage and the
Russian GDP peaked. This year coincides with
both the U.S. financial crisis and the Obama-
McCain Presidential election, whichwould explain
a focus on U.S. events regardless of the Russian
economic situation.
U.S. coverage, measured by counting mentions

of the U.S. in Izvestia, is inversely related to the
level of the Russian GDP. This negative correlation
indicates the possibility of intentional agenda-
setting by the Russian government.

Figure 1: Proportion of articles that mention the U.S. at
least twice (blue) and Russian GDP (red), 2003–2016.

We now extend these preliminary results in
several ways. First, we refine the definition of U.S.
coverage by using two metrics: article level, the
number of articles that mention the U.S. at least
twice normalized by the total number of articles
in the time slice; and word level, the frequency
of the occurrences of the U.S., normalized by the
total number of words in the time slice. Second, we
compare these metrics to two economic indicators:
GDP (in USD) and the index of the Russian



3572

stock market (RTSI), in rubles.1 Third, we refine
the time-resolution and use yearly, quarterly, and
monthly time slices.
Table 1 reports the correlations between the two

metrics of U.S. coverage and (monthly, quarterly,
and yearly) RTSI and GDP values. At all levels,
there are strong negative correlations between
the proportion of news focused on the U.S. and
economic state.

Level: Article Word
RTSI (Monthly, rubles) -0.54 -0.52
GDP (Quarterly, USD) -0.69 -0.65
GDP (Yearly, USD) -0.83 -0.79

Table 1: Pearson’s correlation between news coverage
of the U.S. and economic indicators.

2.2 Granger Causality
Next, we hypothesize that these correlations are
in fact directed: a change in the economy is
followed by a change in U.S. news coverage. To
investigate this hypothesis we employ Granger
causality (Granger, 1988). The key concept behind
Granger causality is that cause precedes effect.
Thus, a time series X is said to Granger-cause a
times series Y if past values xt−i are significant
indicators in predicting yt. First, we computed
the article-level (at) and word-level (wt) metrics
at a monthly granularity from 2003 to 2016;
we also extracted the RTSI monthly close price
(in rubles) for the same time period (rt). We then
calculated the percentage change of these series
as:C(wt) = wtwt−1 −1, and equivalently calculated
C(at) and C(rt). By taking the percent change of
both series, we control for long term trends (e.g.,
stock markets tend to trend upwards over time),
and instead focus on short-term relations: does a
change in the economy directly precede a change
in news coverage?
We computed Granger causality betweenC(wt)

and C(rt) by fitting a linear regression model:

C(wt) =
m∑
i=1

αi(C(wt−i)) +
n∑

j=1

βj(C(rt−j))

wherem andn denote how far back in timewe look
(denoted as m-lag or n-lag). We can say that rt
Granger-causes wt if we find that β is significantly
different from zero.

1Stock market values were obtained from the Moscow
exchange website. GDP values were obtained from OECD.

Tables 2 and 3 report the results. A p-value
≤ 0.05 indicates significance; thus we find 1-lag
RTSI values Granger-cause coverage of U.S. news
by both the word-level and article-level metrics.
Importantly, the rt−1 coefficient is negative, which
indicates that a decline in the stock market is
followed by an increase in U.S. news coverage.
In the 2-lag analysis, the rt−2 values are not
significant, which suggests that the changes in news
coverage follow changes in the stock market within
one month.2 For completeness, we also computed
Granger causality in the reverse direction: i.e., does
a change in U.S. news coverage Granger-cause a
change in the stock market? As expected, we found
no significant results.

1-Lag 2-Lag
α; β p-Value α; β p-Value

wt−1 -0.233 0.003 -0.320 0.00005
wt−2 - - -0.301 0.0001
rt−1 -0.352 0.0334 -0.369 0.024
rt−2 - - -0.122 0.458

Table 2: Granger causality between % change in RTSI
and frequency of USA (word level).

1-Lag 2-Lag
α; β p-Value α; β p-Value

at−1 -0.222 0.005 -0.290 0.000289
at−2 - - -0.270 0.000634
rt−1 -0.311 0.035 -0.329 0.0267
rt−2 - - -0.091 0.543

Table 3: Granger causality between % change in RTSI
and frequency of USA (article level).

3 Framing Analysis
We hypothesize that framing can further our
understanding of why Russian media focuses
on the U.S. during economic downturns. By
identifying common frames in news coverage of
theU.S., we see how the concepts of agenda-setting
and framing work together to manipulate public
attention. In this section, we first define the concept
of framing and demonstrate why existing methods
are insufficient for analysis of the Izvestia corpus.
We then present a new method for analyzing
frames and evaluate it quantitatively through hand-
annotations and qualitatively through a series

2We computed Granger causality at a quarterly and yearly
level and found no significant causal relationship. This result
is unsurprising; the monthly analysis suggests trends in news
coverage are largely driven by the previous month, so we
would not expect causality at a quarterly or yearly level.

https://www.moex.com/
https://www.moex.com/
http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/


3573

of examples. Finally, we use this method to
contextualize strategies of media manipulation in
the Izvestia corpus.

3.1 Background on Framing Analyses

While agenda-setting broadly refers to what topics
a text covers, framing refers to which attributes
of those topics are highlighted. Several aspects
of framing make the concept difficult to analyze.
First, just defining framing has been “notoriously
slippery” (Boydstun et al., 2013). Frames can occur
as stock phrases, i.e. “death tax” vs. “estate tax”,
but they can also occur as broader associations or
sub-topics (Tsur et al., 2015; McCombs, 2002).
Frames also need to be distinguished from similar
concepts, like sentiment and stance. For example,
the same frame can be used to take different
stances on an issue: one politician might argue
that immigrants boost the economy by starting new
companies that create jobs, while another might
argue that immigrants hurt the economy by taking
jobs away from U.S. citizens (Baumer et al., 2015;
Gamson and Modigliani, 1989). Finally, unlike
classification tasks where each article is assigned
to a single category, most articles employ a variety
of frames (Ghanem and McCombs, 2001).
Recent work has attempted to address these

conceptual challenges by defining broad framing
categories. The Policy Frames Codebook defines
a set of 15 frames (one of which is “Other”)
commonly used in media for a broad range of
issues (Boydstun et al., 2013). In a follow-up
work, the authors use these frames to build The
Media Frames Corpus (MFC), which consists of
articles related to 3 issues: immigration, tobacco,
and same-sex marriage (Card et al., 2015). About
11,900 articles are hand-annotated with frames:
annotators highlight spans of text related to each
frame in the codebook and assign a single “primary
frame” to each document. However, the MFC, like
other prior framing analyses, relies heavily on
labor-intensive manual annotations.
The primary automated methods have relied

on probabilistic topic models (Tsur et al., 2015;
Boydstun et al., 2013; Nguyen et al., 2013; Roberts
et al., 2013). Although topic models can show
researchers what themes are salient in a corpus,
they have two main drawbacks: they tend to
be corpus-specific and hard to interpret. Topics
discovered in one corpus are likely not relevant to
a different corpus, and it is difficult to compare the

outputs of topic models run on different corpora.
Other automated framing analyses have used the
annotations of the Media Frame Corpus to predict
the primary frame of articles (Card et al., 2016;
Ji and Smith, 2017), or used classifiers to identify
language specifically related to framing (Baumer
et al., 2015). Importantly, all of these methods
focus exclusively on English data sets. While
unsupervised methods like topic models can be
applied to other languages, any supervised method
requires annotated data, which does not exist in
other languages.

3.2 Framing Analysis Methodology
Our goal is to develop a method that is easy
to interpret and applicable across-languages. In
order to ensure our analysis is interpretable, we
ground our method using the annotations of the
Media Frames Corpus. However, because theMFC
is entirely in English and our test corpora is in
Russian, we cannot use a fully supervised method.
Instead, we use the MFC annotations to derive
lexicons for each frame, which we then translate
into Russian. We use query-expansion to reduce
the noisiness of machine translation and make
the lexicons specific to the Izvestia corpus, rather
than specific to the MFC. We evaluate the derived
lexicons in English and in Russian. Finally, we
use these lexicons to analyze frames in Izvestia
and identify strategies of media manipulation. Our
method allows for in-depth analysis by identifying
primary and secondary frames in a document and
specific words that signify frames.

Generating framing lexicons Although our
primary test corpus is in Russian, we also use
English test corpora for evaluation; thus, we
describe our method as applicable to either
language. First, we use the MFC annotations to
derive a lexicon of English words related to each
frame in the Policy Frames Codebook. For a given
frameF wemeasure pointwisemutual information
(Church and Hanks, 1990) for each word in the
corpus as:

I(F,w) = log
P (F,w)

P (F )P (w)
= log

P (w | F )
P (w)

We estimate P (w|F ) by taking all text
segments annotated with frame F , and computing

Count(w)
Count(allwords) . We similarly compute P (w) from
the entire corpus. We then use the 250 words with
the highest I(w,F ) as the base framing lexicon for



3574

frame F , denoted Fbase. We discard all words that
occur in fewer than 0.5% of documents or in more
than 98% of documents.

Translation and extension of framing lexicons
Next, we use query-expansion to alter Fbase, with
the goal of generalizing the lexicon. Without
this step, our lexicons are biased towards words
common in English news articles, particularly
words specific to the 3 policy issues in the MFC.
When our test corpus is in a different language

(i.e. Russian), we use Google Translate to translate
Fbase into the new language. We restrict our
vocabulary to the 50,000 most frequent words in
the test corpus.
Then, to perform the query-expansion, we train

200-dimensional word embeddings on a large
background corpus in the test language, using
CBOW with a 5-word context window (Mikolov
et al., 2013). We compute the center of each
lexicon, c, by summing the embeddings for all
words in the lexicon. We then identify up to the
K nearest neighbors to this center, determined by
the cosine distance from c, as long as the cosine
distance is not greater than a manually-chosen
threshold (t).3 We again filtered the final set by
removing all words that occur in fewer than 0.5%
of documents or in more than 98% of documents.

The final lexicons contain between 100 and 300
words per frame. Table 4 depicts a few examples of
lexicon words extracted from the MFC, and words
in our final lexicons. We can observe that words in
Frus are closely related to words in Fbase, but also
specific to Russian culture and politics.
We consider a document to employ a frame F

if the document contains at least 3 instances of
a word from F ’s lexicon. We assign the primary
frame of a document to be its most common frame,
determined by the number of words from each
framing lexicon in the document .4

3When the test corpus is in English, we set t to 0.4 and
K to 500 and we add the identified neighbors to Fbase.
When our test corpus is in Russian, we choose to discard
our base lexicon, to prevent the final lexicons from being too
U.S.-specific. Instead, we set t to 0.3 and K to 1000, which
increases the number of neighbors identified, and we keep
only these neighbors in the final lexicon.

4We do not generate a lexicon for the “Other” frame, and
instead assign a document’s primary frame as “Other” only if
it does not contain at least 3 words from any framing lexicon.
Throughout this process,we use small subsets of the “tobacco”
articles for parameter tuning.

Fbase Frus
Political

republican-controlled bills
filibuster conservative
gubernatorial parlimentary

Economic
cents deductions
holdings tax
profitable fines

Public Sentiment
gallup activism
demonstrators facsim
rallied vote

Table 4: Example lexicons extracted from the MFC and
transfered to the Izvestia corpus.

4 Evaluation of Framing Lexicons

We can evaluate the English lexicons using
annotated data from the MFC. For the Russian
lexicons, since we do not have annotated Russian
data, we instead conduct an annotation task. These
evaluation metrics determine howwell our method
captures which frames are present in a text. Finally,
we also qualitatively compare our method to
existing methods for framing analysis, specifically
topic models.

English Evaluations We first evaluate our
lexicons on two tasks using the MFC annotations:
primary frame identification and identification of
all frames in a document.
Primary frame identification is a 15-class

classification problem. Two prior studies evaluate
models on this task: Card et al. (2016) and Ji and
Smith (2017). Following these studies, we evaluate
our model using 10-fold cross-validation on only
the “Immigration” subset of the MFC. We use 9
folds to generate framing lexicons and the 10th fold
to evaluate. To train word embeddings, we use the
entire MFC corpus combined with over 1 million
New York Times articles from 1986 - 2016 (Fast
and Horvitz, 2017). Table 5 shows the accuracy
of our model. Our results outperform Card et al.
(2016) and are comparable to Ji and Smith (2017).
Furthermore, unlike prior methods, our method is
able to transfer to different domains and languages
without needing further annotated data.

Ji and Smith (2017) 58.4
Card et al. (2016) 56.8
Our model 57.3

Table 5: Accuracy of primary frame classification.

However, our main interest is in measuring the
salience of frames in general, not merely focusing
on the primary frame. Thus, we also use our



3575

lexicons to identify the presence of any frames in
a document. As the MFC has multiple annotators,
we define a frame to be present in a document if
any annotator identified the frame, and use this as
gold standard test data. In evaluating our lexicons,
we consider a frame to be present in a document
if the document contains at least 3 tokens from the
frame’s lexicon.
To the best of our knowledge, identifying

all frames in a document is a new task that
was not attempted in prior work. Thus, we use
a logistic regression model with bag-of-word
features as a standard baseline. As above, we
evaluate using 10-fold cross validation on the
“Immigration” subset of the MFC. Table 6 shows
that our method outperforms the baseline, with the
exception of 2 frames, even though the baseline is
fully supervised, whereas our method is distantly
supervised. We note that the poorest performing
frames, “External Regulation and Reputation” and
“Morality” are the frames which are least common
in this subset of the data – each frame occurs in
fewer than 500 articles. When we run the same 10-
fold cross validation evaluation on the “Samesex”
subsection of the MFC, where the “Morality”
frame occurs in over 1000 articles, we achieve a
higher F1 score (0.65).

Ours Baseline
Capacity & Resources 0.53 0.48
Crime & Punishment 0.78 0.76
Cultural Identity 0.57 0.62
Economic 0.69 0.67
External Regulation 0.25 0.47
Fairness & Equality 0.50 0.44
Health & Safety 0.58 0.53
Legality & Constitutionality 0.80 0.76
Morality 0.31 0.25
Policy Prescription 0.72 0.69
Political 0.80 0.77
Public Sentiment 0.54 0.47
Quality of Life 0.65 0.63
Security & Defense 0.63 0.63

Table 6: F1 Scores for identification of all frames in a
document.

Russian Evaluations Next, we evaluate the
quality of our method on the Russian data
set. Unlike in English, we do not have frame-
annotated data in Russian. We instead performed
the intruder detection task, an established method
for evaluating topic models (Chang et al., 2009).

For each frame F we randomly sampled 5 words
from the framing lexiconFrus and 1 word from the
lexicon of a different frame, which has no overlap
with Frus. We then presented two (native Russian
speaking) annotators with the frame heading and
the set of 6 words, and asked them to choose which
word did not belong in the set. We evaluated 15
sets or 75 words per frame.
Framing can be subjective, and we do not

necessarily expect annotators to interpret frames in
the same way. We calculate two forms of accuracy:
“soft”, whether any annotator correctly identified
the intruder; and “hard”, whether both did.We also
report average precision as defined in (Chang et al.,
2009), i.e. the average number of annotators that
correctly identified the intruder, averaged across
all sets.
We briefly summarize results here and report

them fully in Appendix B. All accuracies are
significantly better than random guessing, and
no soft accuracy falls below 60%. Only two
frames have an average accuracy≤ 60%, “Fairness
and Equality” and “Morality”, both very abstract
concepts. In these frames, we also see a larger
difference between hard and soft accuracies,
which reflects the subjectivity of framing. The
MFC annotators sometimes disagreed on the
correct annotations, even after discussing their
disagreements (Boydstun et al., 2013). Thus, we
can attribute some of the differences between hard
and soft accuracies to this subjectivity.

Qualitative Comparison to Structured Topic
Models We also qualitatively compared the
information our framing lexicons provide with
information provided by a Structured Topic Model
(STM) (Roberts et al., 2013). We find that our
approach is better able to capture frames the way
a reader might conceptualize them, whereas topic
models are useful for finding fine-grained corpus-
specific topics.
Topic models are a common way to analyze

frames in a text (Nguyen et al., 2013); the STM
specifically allows correlation between topics and
covariates. We trained an STM with 10, 15, 20,
25, and 50 topics on U.S.-focused articles in the
Izvestia corpus, including publication date (month
and year) as a covariate. We selected the 20
topic model as having the most coherent topics.
Throughout this section, we refer to topics using
their most representative words as determined by
the “Lift” metric (Roberts et al., 2013).



3576

We randomly selected a sample document for
each primary frame to investigate. The framing
lexicons are able to connect corpus-specific
vocabulary to higher-level concepts. For example,
an article describing movies about the U.S. prison
facility at Guantanamo Bay has two main STM
topics: [laden, sentence, prison] and [author,
viewer, filming]. Similarly, the framing lexicons
identify ‘Cultural Identity” as the primary frame.
However, a secondary frame in the document
is “Morality”, captured by words: writer, form,
Christ, art. While both the STM and the framing
lexicons capture major details of the article, the
framing lexicons additionally tie the article to
morality, because words like “art” in this corpus
are often signs of a moral framework.
Nevertheless, when the STM identifies a topic

similar to a frame, we find correlations with the
related lexicon, i.e. there is a 0.75 correlation
between the frequency of words in the Legality,
Constitutionality, Jurisdiction lexicon and the
monthly average proportion of each document
assigned to the topic [yukos, bill, legislation].
Additionally, the framing lexicons tend to have

higher precision in identifying relevant articles
than the STM. Topics are commonly identified
by their most probably words, which may not
occur at all in documents associated with the
topic. For example, the STM assigns an article
about smoking policies in the U.S. to 3 main
topics: [laden, sentence, prison], [kosovo, falcons,
because], [author, viewer, filming], none of which
are closely related to the article. In contrast,
because assignments to the framing lexicons are
made directly from words in the lexicon, we can be
confident that articles assigned to each frame have
words from the actual lexicon, and are very likely
related to the frame. The framing lexicons assign
the primary frame as “Policy” for this article,
which is a good fit. Neither method captures that
the article is also related to health.
Finally, the STM is useful for finding

fine-grained topics, beyond the Policy Frames
Codebook. For example, we find a “sports” topic:
[match, nhl, team]. These topics tend to be corpus-
specific and more concrete than the framing
lexicons: no STM topic captures “Quality of Life”.

5 Identifying Media Manipulation

We first use the generated framing lexicons to
determine which frames are frequently associated

with the U.S. We then break the frames into finer-
categories and manually look at sample articles
to determine why associating these frames with
the U.S. constitutes a media manipulation strategy.
We find that as the stock market declines, not
only is news focused more on the U.S., but also
emphasizes threats to the U.S.

5.1 Salient frames
To estimate which frames are associated with the
U.S. we compute normalized pointwise-mutual
information (nPMI) between the U.S. and each
frameF 5 bymapping themutual information score
onto a [-1,1] scale.A value of 1 represents complete
co-occurrence; a value of 0 represents complete
independence. By using nPMI, we measure which
frames are overrepresented in U.S.-focused news,
as compared to other news.

Figure 2: nPMI between U.S. and each frame.

Figure 2 shows the nPMI score between the
U.S. and each frame for all articles in our
corpus. As any news article about the U.S. is by
definition externally focused, the frame with the
strongest association is unsurprisingly “External
Regulation and Reputation”. Other frames with
strong associations include “Morality”, “Political”,
“Public Sentiment”, and “Security and Defense”.
These frames demonstrate what type of news
events in the U.S are reported in Russia. As
an example, we look at an article that uses a
combination of these frames. The article describes
cooling relations between Russia and the U.S.
It explains that anti-Russian sentiment will be
prevalent in the U.S. during upcoming elections,
when politicians on both sideswill play the “Russia
card”. It ultimately attributes the cooling relations

5As above, we consider an article to be U.S.-focused if it
mentions the U.S. at least 2 times, and we consider an article
to employ frame F if it uses at least 3 words from F ’s lexicon.



3577

to a mismatch of values and ideology between the
two nations. The framing lexicons well-capture the
numerous themes in this article. Specifically, the
frames identified and the related framing lexicon
words are:
Political: electorate, election, former, pre-

election, political scientists, congress, president,
post, bush

Public Sentiment: elections, campaign, pre-
election, democrats, republicans
External Regulation and Reputation: west,

war, former, washington, politics, summit,
exacerbation, west, decision, bush, president
Morality: peace, sins, ideals, love, values
Fairness and Equality: politics, love, values
This article uses several strategies to promote

unity in Russia and actively separate Russia from
Western culture, including criticizing American
politics and emphasizing a difference of values.
Russian articles use a combination of frames
to describe the U.S., which demonstrates the
importance of looking at all frames in a document,
rather than just the primary frame. In the
following sections, we provide additional examples
demonstrating how combinations of frames can
generate anti-U.S. sentiment.

5.2 Salient words within frames
We expect different aspects of frames to be
foregrounded during economic upturns than in
downturns. To investigate these differences, we
define a set of monthsM+t , as the 10% of months
where RTSI showed the greatest growth, and a
corresponding set M−t where RTSI showed the
greatest decline. We then takeM+t+1 as the month
directly following every month in M+t , and we
similarly define M−t+1. From the analysis in §2.2,
we expect media manipulation strategies to decline
from M+t to M

+
t+1, and increase from M

−
t to

M−t+1. For each frame, we take the subset of
U.S.-focused articles that use the frame. Then,
we use log odds with a Dirichlet prior (Jurafsky
et al., 2014; Monroe et al., 2008) to identify words
that are overrepresented or underrepresented from
M+t to M

+
t+1 and from M

−
t to M

−
t+1.6 Thus,

for each frame, we identify words which become
more common after a stock market downturn and
become less common after a stock market upturn.
We refer to these words as AgendaLex.

6We take the 500wordswith the largest increase in salience
from M−t to M

−
t+1 intersected with the 500 words with the

largest decrease in salience fromM+t to M
+
t+1.

We found the Security and Defense AgendaLex
and the Crime and Punishment AgendaLex to
be surprisingly coherent, both containing words
related to terrorism and countries enemy to the
U.S., including bombs, missiles, Guantanamo,
North Korea, Iraq, etc. We found a correlation of
-0.49 between the frequency of words from the
Security and Defense AgendaLexin U.S.-focused
articles and the RSTI (-0.49). A 1-lag Granger
causality test (to what extent does a change in
RTSI Granger-cause a change in the prevalence
of the Security and Defense AgendaLex?) has a
p-value of 0.0051. As the stock market declines,
not only does the news focus more on the U.S., the
news focuses specifically on terrorists and other
enemies to the U.S. In the next section, we refine
this conclusion by looking at sample articles.

5.3 Examples of framing during downturns

By reading sample articles from months just after
stock market downturns that used words from the
Security and Defense lexicon and AgendaLex, we
identified three common strategies for distracting
Russian citizens from negative economic events:
villainizing the U.S., describing threats to the U.S.,
and promoting the Russian military over the U.S.
military.
First, some articles focus on immoral actions

of the U.S. military, describing U.S. troops as
“Nazi”, or U.S. campaigns in Iraq as “barbaric” or
causing “horror and outrage throughout theworld".
Others discuss Guantanamo Bay, employing
the “Morality” or “Legality, Constitutionality,
Jurisdiction” frames. By portraying the U.S.
government negatively, actions of the Russian
government appear positively by comparison.
Promoting unity by presenting an external enemy
is a well-studied political strategy.
Second, many articles, often in passing,

described threats to the U.S. An article about
terror attacks in Paris mentions U.S. involvement
with words from the Crime and Punishment and
Security and Defense lexicons: terrorist, terrorists,
special services. An article about the conflict
between Israel and Palestine describes increased
security in the U.S. An article about a U.S.
military operation refers more directly to threats
to the U.S. by claiming the killed terrorist will
simply be replaced “and everything will start
afresh - explosions, chases, roundups...unlucky
businessmen, successful terrorists”. The articles



3578

portray the U.S. as an unsafe place to live, making
Russia seem like a preferable home.
A third type of article also presents Russia as

safe by downplaying U.S. military threat: “the
missile defense system of the USA does not pose
a real threat to Russia’s strategic nuclear forces.”
or describing the growth of Russian technology
compared to ‘impotent’ American counterparts.

6 Related Work

Most studies on Russian media manipulation
focus on state-owned television networks, such
as Channel 1 and RT. Strategies identified in
these outlets include spreading confusion (Paul
and Matthews, 2016) and “selection attribution”,
in which negative economic events are attributed
to foreign entities and positive events are
attributed to Russian officials (Rozenas and
Stukal, Forthcoming). Similar strategies have
been identified in social media in China and in
Venezuela: these regimes flood communication
channels with irrelevant information or general
“cheerleading”, presumably to distract the public
from current events (King et al., 2017; Munger
et al., 2018). We expand on these analyses
as we study manipulation strategies in a more
automated way, through Granger-causality and
framing lexicons. We further draw parallels
between these strategies and theories of agenda-
setting and framing.
Furthermore, our method for analyzing frames

contributes to the growing body of work on
automated-framing analysis (Nguyen et al., 2013;
Boydstun et al., 2013; Card et al., 2016; Baumer
et al., 2015).While past work uses fully-supervised
methods, which are not applicable to languages
lacking training data, or unsupervised topic
models, which can be difficult to interpret, we
take a semi-supervised approach: using statistical
metrics and word embeddings to generate corpus-
specific lexicons based on common frameworks.
We additionally integrate our framing and

agenda-setting analysis with economic indicators
through the concept of Granger causality. While
the concept of Granger causality is not new
in economics, it is less common in NLP and
social sciences. Moreover, modeling relationships
between news and economic indicators is a
relatively recent area. Most research has focused
on using text to predict economic indicators using
a variety of features, from frequencies of keywords

to sentiment of social media posts (Nardo et al.,
2016). Kang et al. (2017) combine text and
Granger causality for a different task: automatically
explaining causes of time series events. Our study
differs from past work in that we reverse the
direction: rather than using news articles to model
changes in economic data, we use economic data
to show changes in news articles.

7 Conclusions

We show that natural language technology, in
addition to its ability to address overt manipulation
strategies like “fake news” and censorship, has the
potential to shed light on more subtle political
manipulation strategies, specifically distraction.
We offer a way to define these strategies by
drawing on social science theories of agenda-
setting and framing, combining them with a
novel methodology for cross-lingual projection
of framing annotations. We investigate how the
resulting frames are used in the Russian newspaper
Izvestia, and show that it reports on negative events
in the U.S. as a way of distracting from economic
downturns in the Russian economy.
Our approach and our findings serve as a starting

point for further research on automating the
identification and analysis of media manipulation
strategies. These include identification of more
nuanced framing strategies, such as mitigation,
projections of power among entities mentioned in
news, identification of over- and under-represented
events, and in general, detection of biases in
news articles as a means for understanding
trustworthiness in media reports.

Acknowledgments

We gratefully acknowledge our helpful reviewers
and annotators and Ethan Fast for providing
the NYT corpus. This research was supported
by Grant No. 2017699 from the United States-
Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF), by
Grant No. 1813153 from the United States
National Science Foundation (NSF), and by the
Stanford Cyber Initiative. Further, this material
is based upon work supported by the NSF
Graduate Research Fellowship Program under
Grant No. DGE1745016. Any opinions, findings,
and conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the NSF.



3579

References
Eric Baumer, Elisha Elovic, Ying Qin, Francesca

Polletta, and Geri Gay. 2015. Testing and
comparing computational approaches for identifying
the language of framing in political news. In
Proceedings of the 2015 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, pages 1472–1482.

Amber E Boydstun, Justin H Gross, Philip Resnik, and
Noah A Smith. 2013. Identifying media frames and
frame dynamics within and across policy issues. In
NewDirections in Analyzing Text as Data Workshop,
London.

Dallas Card, Amber E Boydstun, Justin H Gross,
Philip Resnik, and Noah A Smith. 2015. The
media frames corpus: Annotations of frames across
issues. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics and
the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (Volume 2: Short Papers),
volume 2, pages 438–444.

Dallas Card, Justin Gross, Amber Boydstun, and
Noah A Smith. 2016. Analyzing framing through
the casts of characters in the news. In Proceedings
of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 1410–1420.

Jonathan Chang, Sean Gerrish, Chong Wang, Jordan L
Boyd-Graber, and David M Blei. 2009. Reading
tea leaves: How humans interpret topic models. In
Advances in neural information processing systems,
pages 288–296.

Kenneth Ward Church and Patrick Hanks. 1990.
Word association norms, mutual information, and
lexicography. Computational linguistics, 16(1):22–
29.

Robert M Entman. 2007. Framing bias: Media in the
distribution of power. Journal of communication,
57(1):163–173.

Ethan Fast and Eric Horvitz. 2017. Long-term trends
in the public perception of artificial intelligence.
In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference of the
Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence, pages 963–969.

William A Gamson and Andre Modigliani. 1989.
Media discourse and public opinion on nuclear
power: A constructionist approach. American
journal of sociology, 95(1):1–37.

Salma I Ghanem and Maxwell McCombs. 2001. The
convergence of agenda setting and framing. In
Framing public life, pages 83–98. Routledge.

Clive WJ Granger. 1988. Some recent development
in a concept of causality. Journal of econometrics,
39(1-2):199–211.

Yangfeng Ji and Noah A Smith. 2017. Neural discourse
structure for text categorization. In Proceedings
of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
volume 1, pages 996–1005.

Adam Jones. 2002. The russian press in the post-soviet
era: a case study of izvestia. Journalism Studies,
3(3):359–375.

Dan Jurafsky, Victor Chahuneau, Bryan Routledge,
and Noah Smith. 2014. Narrative framing of
consumer sentiment in online restaurant reviews.
First Monday, 19(4).

Dongyeop Kang, Varun Gangal, Ang Lu, Zheng Chen,
and Eduard Hovy. 2017. Detecting and explaining
causes from text for a time series event. In
Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
2758–2767.

Gary King, Jennifer Pan, andMargaret E Roberts. 2017.
How the chinese government fabricates social media
posts for strategic distraction, not engaged argument.
American Political Science Review, 111(3):484–501.

Maxwell McCombs. 2002. The agenda-setting role of
the mass media in the shaping of public opinion. In
Proceedings of the 2002 Conference of Mass Media
Economics, London School of Economics.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and
Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Efficient estimation of word
representations in vector space. In In Proceedings
of the 2013 International Conference on Learning
Representations.

Burt L. Monroe, Michael P. Colaresi, and Kevin M.
Quinn. 2008. Fightin’ words: Lexical feature
selection and evaluation for identifying the content of
political conflict. Political Analysis, 16(4):372–403.

Kevin Munger, Richard Bonneau, Jonathan Nagler,
and Joshua A Tucker. 2018. Elites tweet to get
feet off the streets: Measuring regime social media
strategies during protest. Political Science Research
and Methods, pages 1–20.

Michela Nardo, Marco Petracco-Giudici, and Minás
Naltsidis. 2016. Walking down wall street with a
tablet: A survey of stock market predictions using
the web. Journal of Economic Surveys, 30(2):356–
369.

Viet-An Nguyen, Jordan L Boyd-Graber, and Philip
Resnik. 2013. Lexical and hierarchical topic
regression. In Advances in neural information
processing systems, pages 1106–1114.

Christopher Paul and Miriam Matthews. 2016. The
Russian “Firehose of Falsehood” propaganda model.
Perspective, RANDCorporation, SantaMonica, CA.



3580

Margaret E Roberts, Brandon M Stewart, Dustin
Tingley, and Edoardo M Airoldi. 2013. The
structural topic model and applied social science. In
Presented at the NIPS Workshop on Topic Models:
Computation, Application, and Evaluation, pages 1–
20.

Arturas Rozenas and Denis Stukal. Forthcoming. How
autocrats manipulate economic news: Evidence from
russia’s state-controlled television. Journal of
Politics.

James W Tankard Jr. 2001. The empirical approach to
the study of media framing. In Framing public life,
pages 111–121. Routledge.

Oren Tsur, Dan Calacci, and David Lazer. 2015.
A frame of mind: Using statistical models for
detection of framing and agenda setting campaigns.
In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics and
the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers),
volume 1, pages 1629–1638.

Marcel H Van Herpen. 2015. Putin’s propaganda
machine: Soft power and russian foreign policy.
Rowman & Littlefield.


