



















































Identifying Well-formed Natural Language Questions


Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 798–803
Brussels, Belgium, October 31 - November 4, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

798

Identifying Well-formed Natural Language Questions

Manaal Faruqui Dipanjan Das
Google AI Language

Abstract

Understanding search queries is a hard prob-
lem as it involves dealing with “word salad”
text ubiquitously issued by users. However,
if a query resembles a well-formed ques-
tion, a natural language processing pipeline
is able to perform more accurate interpreta-
tion, thus reducing downstream compounding
errors. Hence, identifying whether or not a
query is well formed can enhance query un-
derstanding. Here, we introduce a new task
of identifying a well-formed natural language
question. We construct and release a dataset
of 25,100 publicly available questions classi-
fied into well-formed and non-wellformed cat-
egories and report an accuracy of 70.7% on the
test set. We also show that our classifier can
be used to improve the performance of neu-
ral sequence-to-sequence models for generat-
ing questions for reading comprehension.

1 Introduction

User issued search queries often do not follow for-
mal grammatical structure, and require specialized
language processing (Bergsma and Wang, 2007;
Barr et al., 2008; Manshadi and Li, 2009; Mishra
et al., 2011). Traditional natural language pro-
cessing (NLP) tools trained on formal text (e.g.
treebanks) often have difficulty analyzing search
queries; the lack of regularity in the structure of
queries makes it difficult to train models that can
optimally process the query to extract information
that can help understand the user intent behind the
query (Baeza-Yates et al., 2006).

One clear direction to improve query process-
ing is to annotate a large number of queries with
the desired annotation scheme. However, such
an annotation can be prohibitively expensive and
models trained on such queries might suffer from
freshness issues, as the domain and nature of
queries evolve frequently (Markatos, 2001; Bawa

et al., 2003; Roy et al., 2012). Another direction
is to obtain a paraphrase of the given query that is
a grammatical natural language question, and then
analyze that paraphrase to extract the required in-
formation (Nogueira and Cho, 2017; Buck et al.,
2018). There are available tools and datasets,
such as Quora question paraphrases and the Par-
alex dataset (Fader et al., 2013) – for identifying
query paraphrases (Wang et al., 2017; Tomar et al.,
2017), but these datasets do not contain informa-
tion about whether a query is a natural language
question or not. Identifying well-formed natural
language questions can also facilitate a more nat-
ural interaction between a user and a machine in
personal assistants or chatbots (Yang et al., 2014;
Mostafazadeh et al., 2016) or while recommend-
ing related queries in search-engines.

Identifying a well-formed question should be
easy by parsing with a grammar, such as
the English resource grammar (Copestake and
Flickinger, 2000), but such grammars are highly
precise and fail to parse more than half of web
queries. Thus, in this paper we present a model
to predict whether a given query is a well-formed
natural language question. We construct and pub-
licly release a dataset of 25,100 queries annotated
with the probability of being a well-formed nat-
ural language question (§2.1). We then train a
feed-forward neural network classifier that uses
the lexical and syntactic features extracted from
the query on this data (§2.2). On a test set of
3,850 queries, we report an accuracy of 70.1%
on the binary classification task. We also demon-
strate that such a query well-formedness clas-
sifier can be used to improve the quality of a
sequence-to-sequence question generation model
(Du et al., 2017) by showing an improvement of
0.2 BLEU score in its performance (§3). Our
dataset ise available for download at http://goo.
gl/language/query-wellformedness.

http://goo.gl/language/query-wellformedness
http://goo.gl/language/query-wellformedness


799

Query Well-formed? Reasoning
what is the breed of scooby doo? 1 Grammatical and an explicit question
tell me whats the breed of scooby doo? 0 A command but not a question
headache evenings? 0 Ungrammatical and not a question
what causes headaches during evenings 1 Grammatical and an explicit question
what 12.5 as a fraction? 0 An explicit question but ungrammatical

Table 1: Examples of well-formed and non-wellformed queries according to the annotation guideline.

2 Well-formed Natural Language
Question Classifier

In this section we describe the data annotation,
and the models used for question well-formedness
classification.

2.1 Dataset Construction
We use the Paralex corpus (Fader et al., 2013)
that contains pairs of noisy paraphrase questions.
These questions were issued by users in WikiAn-
swers (a Question-Answer forum) and consist of
both web-search query like constructs (“5 parts of
chloroplast?”) and well-formed questions (“What
is the punishment for grand theft?”), and thus
is a good resource for constructing the question
well-formedness dataset. We select 25,100 queries
from the unique list of queries extracted from the
corpus such that no two queries in the selected
set are paraphrases. The queries are then anno-
tated into well-formed or non-wellformed ques-
tions. We define a query to be a well-formed nat-
ural language question if it satisfies the following:

1. Query is grammatical.
2. Query is an explicit question.
3. Query does not contain spelling errors.

Table 1 shows some examples that were shown
to the annotators to illustrate each of the above
conditions. Every query was labeled by five dif-
ferent crowdworkers with a binary label indicating
whether a query is well-formed or not. We average
the ratings of the five annotators to get the prob-
ability of a query being well-formed. Table 2.1
shows some queries with obtained human anno-
tation. Humans are pretty good at identifying an
implicit query (“Population of owls...”) or a sim-
ple well-formed question (“What is released...”),
but may miss out on subtle spelling mistakes like
“disscovered” or disagree on whether the deter-
miner “the” is needed before the word “genocide”
(“What countries have genocide happened in?”).
Similar to other NLP tasks like entailment (Dagan

Query (q) pwf (q)
population of owls just in north
america?

0.0

who disscoverd rihanna? 0.2
what countries have genocide hap-
pened in?

0.6

what is released when an ion is
formed?

1.0

Table 2: Examples of human annotations on query
well-formedness.

Figure 1: The distribution of the annotated questions
according to well-formedness probability.

et al., 2006; Bowman et al., 2015), paraphrasing
(Wieting et al., 2015) etc. we rely on the wisdom
of the crowd to get such annotations in order to
make the data collection scalable and language-
independent.

Figure 1 is the histogram of query well-
formedness probability across the dataset. Inter-
estingly, the number of queries where at least 4
or more annotators agree1 on well-formedness is
large: |{q | 0.8 ≤ pwf (q) ≤ 0.2}| = 19206
queries. These constitute 76.5% of all queries in
the dataset. The Fleiss’ kappa (Fleiss, 1971) for
measuring agreement among multiple annotators
is computed to be κ = 0.52 which shows mod-
erate agreement (Landis and Koch, 1977). We

1At least 4 annotators label the query with 0 or 1.



800

then randomly divided the dataset in approx. 70%,
15%, 15% ratio into training, development and test
sets containing 17500, 3750, and 3850 queries re-
spectively. While testing, we consider every query
well-formed where at least 4 out of 5 annotators
(pwf ≥ 0.8) marked it as well-formed.2

2.2 Model

We use a feed-forward neural network with 2 hid-
den layers with ReLU activations (Glorot et al.,
2011) on each layer and a softmax at the output
layer predicting 0 or 1. We extract a variety of
features from the query which can be helpful in
the classification. We extract character-3, 4-grams
and word-1, 2-grams as they can be helpful in cap-
turing spelling errors. In addition to lexical fea-
tures, we also extract syntactic features that can
inform the model on any anomaly in the structure
of the query. Specifically, we annotate the query
with POS-tags using SyntaxNet POS tagger (Al-
berti et al., 2015) and extract POS-1, 2, 3-grams.3

Every feature in the network is represented as a
real-valued embedding. All the n-grams embed-
dings of every feature type are summed together
and concatenated to form the input layer as shown
in Figure 2. The model is trained using cross-
entropy loss against the gold labels for each query.
The hyperparameters are tuned to maximize accu-
racy on the dev set and results are reported on the
test set.

Hyperparameters. We fix the size of the first
and second hidden layers to be 128 and 64 respec-
tively. The character n-gram embeddings were of
length 16 and all other feature embeddings were
of length 25. We use stochastic gradient descent
with momentum for optimization with learning
rate tuned over [0.001 − 0.3], a batch size of 32
and 50000 training steps.

2.3 Experiments

Baselines. The majority class baseline is 61.5%
which corresponds to all queries being classified
non-wellformed. The question word baseline that
classifies any query starting with a question word

2We randomly selected 100 queries and manually deter-
mined if each of those queries were well-formed. We found
pwf (q) = 0.8 to be the value above which all queries were
well-formed.

3The use of dependency labels as features and use of pre-
trained Glove embeddings did not show improvement and
hence omitted here for space constraints.

word n-grams char n-grams POS n-grams

pwf(q)

Figure 2: A feed-forward neural network for query
well-formedness classification.

Model Accuracy (%)
majority class baseline 61.5
word bi-LSTM baseline 65.8
question word baseline 54.9
word-1 65.4
word-1, 2 65.5
word-1, 2 char-3, 4 66.9
word-1, 2 POS-1, 2, 3 70.7
word-1, 2 char-3, 4 POS-1, 2, 3 70.2
Approx. human upper bound 88.4

Table 3: Performance of well-formedness query classi-
fier on the test set.

as a well-formed question gets 54.9%.4 Also, we
used a single-layer word-level biLSTM encoder
with hidden layer of length 50 to encode the ques-
tion and then use this representation in the softmax
layer to predict the label (Lee and Dernoncourt,
2016). This classifier achieved 65.8%.

Results. The best performance obtained is
70.7% while using word-1, 2-grams and POS-
1, 2, 3-grams as features. Using POS n-grams
gave a strong boost of 5.2 points over word un-
igrams and bigrams. Although character-3, 4-
grams gave improvement over word unigrams and
bigrams, the performance did not sustain when
combined with POS tags.5 A random sample of
1000 queries from the test set were annotated by
one of the authors of the paper with proficiency in
English, which matched the gold label with 88.4%
accuracy providing an approximate upper-bound
for model performance.

A major source of error is our model’s inabil-
ity to understand deep semantics and syntax. For
example, “What is the history of dirk bikes?” is
labeled as a non-wellformed question with pwf =

4List of question words: https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Interrogative_word

5We assumed character n-grams to help identify spelling
mistakes, but our dataset has relatively few misspelled
words–only 6 in 100 random queries.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interrogative_word
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interrogative_word


801

0 by annotators because of the misspelled word
“dirk” (the correct word is “dirt”). However, the
POS tagger identifies “dirk” as a noun and as “NN
NNS” is a frequent POS-bigram, our model tags it
as a well-formed question with pwf = 0.8, unable
to identify that the word does not fit in the con-
text of the question. Another source of error is the
inability to capture long term grammatical depen-
dencies. For example, in “What sort of work did
Edvard Munch made ?” the verb “made” is in-
correctly in the past tense instead of present tense.
Our model is unable to capture the relationship be-
tween “did” and “made” and thus marks this as a
well-formed question.

3 Improving Question Generation

Automatic question generation is the task of gen-
erating questions that ask about the information or
facts present in either a given sentence or para-
graph (Vanderwende, 2008; Heilman and Smith,
2010). Du et al. (2017) present a state-of-the-
art neural sequence-to-sequence model to generate
questions from a given sentence/paragraph. The
model used is an attention-based encoder-decoder
network (Bahdanau et al., 2015), where the en-
coder reads in a given text and the decoder is an
LSTM RNN that produces the question by predict-
ing one word at a time.

Du et al. (2017) use the SQuAD question-
answering dataset (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) to de-
velop a question generation dataset by pairing sen-
tences from the text with the corresponding ques-
tions. The question generation dataset contains ap-
prox 70k, 10k, and 12k training, development and
test examples. Their current best model selects
the top ranked question from the n-best list pro-
duced by the decoder as the output. We augment
their system by training a discriminative reranker
(Collins and Koo, 2005) with the model score
of the question generation model and the well-
formedness probability of our classifier as features
to optimize BLEU score (Papineni et al., 2002) be-
tween the selected question from the 10-best list
and the reference question on the development set.
We then use this reranker to select the best ques-
tion from the 10-best list of the test set.

We use the evaluation package released by Chen
et al. (2015) to compute BLEU-1 and BLEU-4
scores.6 Table 4 shows that the reranked question
selected using our query well-formedness clas-

6BLEU-x uses precision computed over [1, x]-grams.

Model BLEU-1 BLEU-4
Baseline 41.3 12.0
Reranked 41.6 12.2

Table 4: Reranking the n-best output of a neu-
ral seq2seq question generation model using well-
formedness probability.

Sentence: montana is home to the rocky
mountain elk foundation and has a historic big
game hunting tradition.
Gold question: what is the name of the big
game hunting foundation in montana?
seq2seq: what is a historic big game hunting
tradition? (pwf = 0.7)
Reranked: what is the name of the historic
big game tradition? (pwf = 0.8)

Figure 3: Example showing question selection from the
n-best list using our reranking model.

sifier improves the BLEU-4 score of a seq-to-
seq question generation model from 12.0 to 12.2.
The oracle improvement, by selecting the sentence
from the list that maximizes the BLEU-4 score is
15.2. However, its worth noting that an increase
in well-formedness doesn’t guarantee an improved
BLEU score, as the oracle sentence maximizing
the BLEU score might be fairly non-wellformed
(Callison-Burch et al., 2006). For example, “who
was elected the president of notre dame in?” has a
higher BLEU score to the reference “who was the
president of notre dame in 1934?” than our well-
formed question “who was elected the president of
notre dame?”. Figure 3 shows a question genera-
tion example with the output of Du et al. (2017) as
the baseline result and the reranked question using
the wellformed probability.

4 Related Work

We have referenced much of the related work
throughout the paper. We now review another or-
thogonally related field of work. Grammatical er-
ror correction (GEC) is the task of correcting the
grammatical errors (if any) in a piece of text (Ng
et al., 2014). As GEC includes not just identifica-
tion of ungrammatical text but also correcting the
text to produce grammatical text, its a more com-
plex task. However, grammatical error prediction
(Schmaltz et al., 2016; Daudaravicius et al., 2016)
is the task of classifying whether or not a sentence
is grammatical, which is more closely related to



802

our task as classifying a question as well-formed
requires making judgement on both the style and
grammar of the text.

5 Conclusion

We proposed a new task of well-formed nat-
ural language question identification and estab-
lished a strong baseline on a new dataset that can
be downloaded at: http://goo.gl/language/
query-wellformedness. We also showed that
question well-formedness information can be a
helpful signal in improving state-of-the-art ques-
tion generation systems.

References
Chris Alberti, David Weiss, Greg Coppola, and Slav

Petrov. 2015. Improved transition-based parsing and
tagging with neural networks. In Proc. of EMNLP.

Ricardo Baeza-Yates, Liliana Calderón-Benavides, and
Cristina González-Caro. 2006. The intention behind
web queries. In Proc. of SPIRE.

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. In Proc. of ICLR.

Cory Barr, Rosie Jones, and Moira Regelson. 2008.
The linguistic structure of English web-search
queries. In Proc. of EMNLP.

Mayank Bawa, Roberto J. Bayardo, Jr., Sridhar Ra-
jagopalan, and Eugene J. Shekita. 2003. Make it
fresh, make it quick: Searching a network of per-
sonal webservers. In Proc. of WWW.

Shane Bergsma and Qin Iris Wang. 2007. Learn-
ing noun phrase query segmentation. In Proc. of
EMNLP-CoNLL.

Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts,
and Christopher D. Manning. 2015. A large anno-
tated corpus for learning natural language inference.
In Proc. of EMNLP.

Christian Buck, Jannis Bulian, Massimiliano Cia-
ramita, Andrea Gesmundo, Neil Houlsby, Wojciech
Gajewski, and Wei Wang. 2018. Ask the right ques-
tions: Active question reformulation with reinforce-
ment learning. In Proc. of ICLR.

Chris Callison-Burch, Miles Osborne, and Philipp
Koehn. 2006. Re-evaluating the role of bleu in ma-
chine translation research. In Proc. of EACL.

Xinlei Chen, Hao Fang, Tsung-Yi Lin, Ramakr-
ishna Vedantam, Saurabh Gupta, Piotr Dollár, and
C. Lawrence Zitnick. 2015. Microsoft coco cap-
tions: Data collection and evaluation server. CoRR,
abs/1504.00325.

Michael Collins and Terry Koo. 2005. Discrimina-
tive reranking for natural language parsing. Comput.
Linguist., 31(1):25–70.

Ann A Copestake and Dan Flickinger. 2000. An
open source grammar development environment and
broad-coverage english grammar using HPSG. In
Proc. of LREC.

Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2006. The pascal recognising textual entailment
challenge. In Machine learning challenges., pages
177–190. Springer.

Vidas Daudaravicius, Rafael E. Banchs, Elena Volo-
dina, and Courtney Napoles. 2016. A report on
the automatic evaluation of scientific writing shared
task. In Proc. of the 11th Workshop on Innovative
Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications.

Xinya Du, Junru Shao, and Claire Cardie. 2017. Learn-
ing to ask: Neural question generation for reading
comprehension. In Proc. of ACL.

Anthony Fader, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Oren Etzioni.
2013. Paraphrase-driven learning for open question
answering. In Proc. of ACL.

Joseph L Fleiss. 1971. Measuring nominal scale agree-
ment among many raters. Psychological bulletin,
76(5):378.

Xavier Glorot, Antoine Bordes, and Yoshua Bengio.
2011. Deep sparse rectifier neural networks. In
Proc. of AISTATS.

Michael Heilman and Noah A. Smith. 2010. Good
question! statistical ranking for question generation.
In Proc. of NAACL.

J Richard Landis and Gary G Koch. 1977. The mea-
surement of observer agreement for categorical data.
biometrics, pages 159–174.

Ji Young Lee and Franck Dernoncourt. 2016. Sequen-
tial short-text classification with recurrent and con-
volutional neural networks. In Proc. of NAACL.

Mehdi Manshadi and Xiao Li. 2009. Semantic tagging
of web search queries. In Proc. of ACL-IJCNLP.

Evangelos P. Markatos. 2001. On caching search
engine query results. Computer Communications,
24(2):137–143.

Nikita Mishra, Rishiraj Saha Roy, Niloy Ganguly, Sri-
vatsan Laxman, and Monojit Choudhury. 2011. Un-
supervised query segmentation using only query
logs. In Proc. of WWW.

Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Ishan Misra, Jacob Devlin, Mar-
garet Mitchell, Xiaodong He, and Lucy Vander-
wende. 2016. Generating natural questions about an
image. In Proc. of ACL.

http://goo.gl/language/query-wellformedness
http://goo.gl/language/query-wellformedness


803

Hwee Tou Ng, Siew Mei Wu, Ted Briscoe, Christian
Hadiwinoto, Raymond Hendy Susanto, and Christo-
pher Bryant. 2014. The conll-2014 shared task on
grammatical error correction. In CoNLL Shared
Task.

Rodrigo Nogueira and Kyunghyun Cho. 2017. Task-
oriented query reformulation with reinforcement
learning. In Proc. of EMNLP.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: A method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proc. of ACL.

Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and
Percy Liang. 2016. Squad: 100,000+ questions
for machine comprehension of text. In Proc. of
EMNLP.

Rishiraj Saha Roy, Monojit Choudhury, and Kalika
Bali. 2012. Are web search queries an evolving pro-
tolanguage. In In Proc. of Evolang.

Allen Schmaltz, Yoon Kim, Alexander M. Rush, and
Stuart Shieber. 2016. Sentence-level grammatical
error identification as sequence-to-sequence correc-
tion. In Proc. of the 11th Workshop on Innovative
Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications.

Gaurav Singh Tomar, Thyago Duque, Oscar
Täckström, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Dipanjan Das.
2017. Neural paraphrase identification of questions
with noisy pretraining. In Proc. of First Workshop
on Subword and Character Level Models in NLP.

Lucy Vanderwende. 2008. The importance of being
important: Question generation. In Proc. of the
Workshop on the Question Generation Shared Task
and Evaluation Challenge.

Zhiguo Wang, Wael Hamza, and Radu Florian. 2017.
Bilateral multi-perspective matching for natural lan-
guage sentences. In Proc. of IJCAI.

John Wieting, Mohit Bansal, Kevin Gimpel, and Karen
Livescu. 2015. From paraphrase database to compo-
sitional paraphrase model and back. TACL, 3:345–
358.

Jie Yang, Claudia Hauff, Alessandro Bozzon, and
Geert-Jan Houben. 2014. Asking the right question
in collaborative QA systems. In Proc. of Conference
on Hypertext and Social Media.


