



















































Has Machine Translation Achieved Human Parity? A Case for Document-level Evaluation


Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 4791–4796
Brussels, Belgium, October 31 - November 4, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

4791

Has Machine Translation Achieved Human Parity?
A Case for Document-level Evaluation

Samuel Läubli1 Rico Sennrich1,2 Martin Volk1

1Institute of Computational Linguistics, University of Zurich
{laeubli,volk}@cl.uzh.ch

2School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
rico.sennrich@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Recent research suggests that neural machine
translation achieves parity with professional
human translation on the WMT Chinese–
English news translation task. We empiri-
cally test this claim with alternative evalua-
tion protocols, contrasting the evaluation of
single sentences and entire documents. In a
pairwise ranking experiment, human raters as-
sessing adequacy and fluency show a stronger
preference for human over machine transla-
tion when evaluating documents as compared
to isolated sentences. Our findings emphasise
the need to shift towards document-level eval-
uation as machine translation improves to the
degree that errors which are hard or impossible
to spot at the sentence-level become decisive
in discriminating quality of different transla-
tion outputs.

1 Introduction

Neural machine translation (Kalchbrenner and
Blunsom, 2013; Sutskever et al., 2014; Bahdanau
et al., 2015) has become the de-facto standard in
machine translation, outperforming earlier phrase-
based approaches in many data settings and shared
translation tasks (Luong and Manning, 2015; Sen-
nrich et al., 2016; Cromieres et al., 2016). Some
recent results suggest that neural machine transla-
tion “approaches the accuracy achieved by average
bilingual human translators [on some test sets]”
(Wu et al., 2016), or even that its “translation qual-
ity is at human parity when compared to profes-
sional human translators” (Hassan et al., 2018).
Claims of human parity in machine translation are
certainly extraordinary, and require extraordinary
evidence.1 Laudably, Hassan et al. (2018) have

1The term “parity” may raise the expectation that there is
evidence for equivalence, but the term is used in the definition
of “there [being] no statistical significance between [two out-
puts] for a test set of candidate translations” by Hassan et al.
(2018). Still, we consider this finding noteworthy given the
strong evaluation setup.

released their data publicly to allow external val-
idation of their claims. Their claims are further
strengthened by the fact that they follow best prac-
tices in human machine translation evaluation, us-
ing evaluation protocols and tools that are also
used at the yearly Conference on Machine Trans-
lation (WMT) (Bojar et al., 2017), and take great
care in guarding against some confounds such as
test set selection and rater inconsistency.

However, the implications of a statistical tie be-
tween two machine translation systems in a shared
translation task are less severe than that of a statis-
tical tie between a machine translation system and
a professional human translator, so we consider
the results worthy of further scrutiny. We per-
form an independent evaluation of the professional
translation and best machine translation system
that were found to be of equal quality by Hassan
et al. (2018). Our main interest lies in the eval-
uation protocol, and we empirically investigate if
the lack of document-level context could explain
the inability of human raters to find a quality dif-
ference between human and machine translations.
We test the following hypothesis:

A professional translator who is asked to
rank the quality of two candidate trans-
lations on the document level will prefer
a professional human translation over a
machine translation.

Note that our hypothesis is slightly different from
that tested by Hassan et al. (2018), which could be
phrased as follows:

A bilingual crowd worker who is asked
to directly assess the quality of candi-
date translations on the sentence level
will prefer a professional human trans-
lation over a machine translation.



4792

As such, our evaluation is not a direct replication
of that by Hassan et al. (2018), and a failure to re-
produce their findings does not imply an error on
either our or their part. Rather, we hope to indi-
rectly assess the accuracy of different evaluation
protocols. Our underlying assumption is that pro-
fessional human translation is still superior to neu-
ral machine translation, but that the sensitivity of
human raters to these quality differences depends
on the evaluation protocol.

2 Human Evaluation of Machine
Translation

Machine translation is typically evaluated by com-
paring system outputs to source texts, reference
translations, other system outputs, or a combi-
nation thereof (for examples, see Bojar et al.,
2016a). The scientific community concentrates
on two aspects: adequacy, typically assessed by
bilinguals; and target language fluency, typically
assessed by monolinguals. Evaluation protocols
have been subject to controversy for decades (e. g.,
Van Slype, 1979), and we identify three aspects
with particular relevance to assessing human par-
ity: granularity of measurement (ordinal vs. inter-
val scales), raters (experts vs. crowd workers), and
experimental unit (sentence vs. document).

2.1 Related Work

Granularity of Measurement Callison-Burch
et al. (2007) show that ranking (Which of these
translations is better?) leads to better inter-rater
agreement than absolute judgement on 5-point
Likert scales (How good is this translation?) but
gives no insight about how much a candidate trans-
lation differs from a (presumably perfect) refer-
ence. To this end, Graham et al. (2013) suggest
the use of continuous scales for direct assessment
of translation quality. Implemented as a slider
between 0 (Not at all) and 100 (Perfectly), their
method yields scores on a 100-point interval scale
in practice (Bojar et al., 2016b, 2017), with each
raters’ rating being standardised to increase ho-
mogeneity. Hassan et al. (2018) use source-based
direct assessment to avoid bias towards reference
translations. In the shared task evaluation by Cet-
tolo et al. (2017), raters are shown the source and
a candidate text, and asked: How accurately does
the above candidate text convey the semantics of
the source text? In doing so, they have translations
produced by humans and machines rated indepen-

dently, and parity is assumed if the mean score of
the former does not significantly differ from the
mean score of the latter.

Raters To optimise cost, machine translation
quality is typically assessed by means of crowd-
sourcing. Combined ratings of bilingual crowd
workers have been shown to be more reliable than
automatic metrics and “very similar” to ratings
produced by “experts”2 (Callison-Burch, 2009).
Graham et al. (2017) compare crowdsourced to
“expert” ratings on machine translations from
WMT 2012, concluding that, with proper quality
control, “machine translation systems can indeed
be evaluated by the crowd alone.” However, it is
unclear whether this finding carries over to trans-
lations produced by NMT systems where, due to
increased fluency, errors are more difficult to iden-
tify (Castilho et al., 2017a), and concurrent work
by Toral et al. (2018) highlights the importance of
expert translators for MT evaluation.

Experimental Unit Machine translation evalu-
ation is predominantly performed on single sen-
tences, presented to raters in random order (e. g.,
Bojar et al., 2017; Cettolo et al., 2017). There
are two main reasons for this. The first is cost:
if raters assess entire documents, obtaining the
same number of data points in an evaluation cam-
paign multiplies the cost by the average number
of sentences per document. The second is exper-
imental validity. When comparing systems that
produce sentences without considering document-
level context, the perceived suprasentential cohe-
sion of a system output is likely due to random-
ness and thus a confounding factor. While in-
corporating document-level context into machine
translation systems is an active field of research
(Webber et al., 2017), state-of-the-art systems still
operate at the level of single sentences (Sennrich
et al., 2017; Vaswani et al., 2017; Hassan et al.,
2018). In contrast, human translators can and do
take document-level context into account (Krings,
1986). The same holds for raters in evaluation
campaigns. In the discussion of their results,
Wu et al. (2016) note that their raters “[did] not
necessarily fully understand each randomly sam-
pled sentence sufficiently” because it was pro-
vided with no context. In such setups, raters can-
not reward textual cohesion and coherence.

2“Experts” here are computational linguists who develop
MT systems, who may not be expert translators.



4793

2.2 Our Evaluation Protocol

We conduct a quality evaluation experiment with
a 2× 2 mixed factorial design, testing the effect
of source text availability (adequacy, fluency) and
experimental unit (sentence, document) on ratings
by professional translators.

Granularity of Measurement We elicit judge-
ments by means of pairwise ranking. Raters
choose the better (with ties allowed) of two trans-
lations for each item: one produced by a profes-
sional translator (HUMAN), the other by machine
translation (MT). Since our evaluation includes
that of human translation, it is reference-free. We
evaluate in two conditions: adequacy, where raters
see source texts and translations (Which transla-
tion expresses the meaning of the source text more
adequately?); and fluency, where raters only see
translations (Which text is better English?).

Raters We recruit professional translators, only
considering individuals with at least three years
of professional experience and positive client re-
views.

Experimental Unit To test the effect of context
on perceived translation quality, raters evaluate en-
tire documents as well as single sentences in ran-
dom order (i. e., context is a within-subjects fac-
tor). They are shown both translations (HUMAN
and MT) for each unit; the source text is only
shown in the adequacy condition.

Quality Control To hedge against random rat-
ings, we convert 5 documents and 16 sentences per
set into spam items (Kittur et al., 2008): we render
one of the two options nonsensical by shuffling its
words randomly, except for 10 % at the beginning
and end.

Statistical Analysis We test for statistically sig-
nificant preference of HUMAN over MT or vice
versa by means of two-sided Sign Tests. Let a be
the number of ratings in favour of MT, b the num-
ber of ratings in favour of HUMAN, and t the num-
ber of ties. We report the number of successes x
and the number of trials n for each test, such that
x = b and n = a+ b.3

3Emerson and Simon (1979) suggest the inclusion of ties
such that x = b+0.5t and n = a+ b+ t. This modification
has no effect on the significance levels reported in this paper.

2.3 Data Collection

We use the experimental protocol described in the
previous section for a quality assessment of Chi-
nese to English translations of news articles. To
this end, we randomly sampled 55 documents and
2×120 sentences from the WMT 2017 test set.
We only considered the 123 articles (documents)
which are native Chinese,4 containing 8.13 sen-
tences on average. Human and machine transla-
tions (REFERENCE-HT as HUMAN, and COMBO-
6 as MT) were obtained from data released by
Hassan et al. (2018).5

The sampled documents and sentences were
rated by professional translators we recruited from
ProZ:6 4 native in Chinese (2), English (1), or both
(1) to rate adequacy, and 4 native in English to rate
fluency. On average, translators had 13.7 years of
experience and 8.8 positive client reviews on ProZ,
and received US$ 188.75 for rating 55 documents
and 120 sentences.

The averages reported above include an ad-
ditional translator we recruited when one rater
showed poor performance on document-level
spam items in the fluency condition, whose judge-
ments we exclude from analysis. We also ex-
clude sentence-level results from 4 raters because
there was overlap with the documents they anno-
tated, which means that we cannot rule out that the
sentence-level decisions were informed by access
to the full document. To allow for external val-
idation and further experimentation, we make all
experimental data publicly available.7

3 Results

In the adequacy condition, MT and HUMAN are
not statistically significantly different on the sen-
tence level (x=86, n=189, p= .244). This is
consistent with the results Hassan et al. (2018)
obtained with an alternative evaluation protocol
(crowdsourcing and direct assessment; see Sec-
tion 2.1). However, when evaluating entire doc-

4While it is common practice in machine translation to
use the same test set in both translation directions, we con-
sider a direct comparison between human “translation” and
machine translation hard to interpret if one is in fact the orig-
inal English text, and the other an automatic translation into
English of a human translation into Chinese. In concurrent
work, Toral et al. (2018) expand on the confounding effect of
evaluating text where the target side is actually the original
document.

5
http://aka.ms/Translator-HumanParityData

6
https://www.proz.com

7
https://github.com/laeubli/parity

http://aka.ms/Translator-HumanParityData
https://www.proz.com
https://github.com/laeubli/parity


4794

(a) Adequacy

MT Tie HUMAN
0

20

40

60
50

9

41
37

11

52

P
re

fe
re

nc
e

(%
)

Sentence (N=208) Document (N=200)

(b) Fluency

MT Tie HUMAN
0

20

40

60

32

17

51

22
29

50

P
re

fe
re

nc
e

(%
)

Sentence (N=208) Document (N=200)

Figure 1: Raters prefer human translation more strongly in entire documents. When evaluating isolated
sentences in terms of adequacy, there is no statistically significant difference between HUMAN and MT;
in all other settings, raters show a statistically significant preference for HUMAN.

uments, raters show a statistically significant pref-
erence for HUMAN (x=104, n=178, p<.05).
While the number of ties is similar in sentence-
and document-level evaluation, preference for MT
drops from 50 to 37 % in the latter (Figure 1a).

In the fluency condition, raters prefer HU-
MAN on both the sentence (x= 106, n=172,
p<.01) and document level (x=99, n=143, p<
.001). In contrast to adequacy, fluency ratings in
favour of HUMAN are similar in sentence- and
document-level evaluation, but raters find more
ties with document-level context as preference for
MT drops from 32 to 22 % (Figure 1b).

We note that these large effect sizes lead
to statistical significance despite modest sam-
ple size. Inter-annotator agreement (Cohen’s κ)
ranges from 0.13 to 0.32 (see Appendix for full
results and discussion).

4 Discussion

Our results emphasise the need for suprasentential
context in human evaluation of machine transla-
tion. Starting with Hassan et al.’s (2018) finding
of no statistically significant difference in trans-
lation quality between HUMAN and MT for their
Chinese–English test set, we set out to test this re-
sult with an alternative evaluation protocol which
we expected to strengthen the ability of raters to
judge translation quality. We employed profes-
sional translators instead of crowd workers, and
pairwise ranking instead of direct assessment, but
in a sentence-level evaluation of adequacy, raters
still found it hard to discriminate between HUMAN
and MT: they did not show a statistically signifi-
cant preference for either of them.

Conversely, we observe a tendency to rate HU-
MAN more favourably on the document level than
on the sentence level, even within single raters.
Adequacy raters show a statistically significant
preference for HUMAN when evaluating entire
documents. We hypothesise that document-level
evaluation unveils errors such as mistranslation of
an ambiguous word, or errors related to textual co-
hesion and coherence, which remain hard or im-
possible to spot in a sentence-level evaluation. For
a subset of articles, we elicited both sentence-level
and document-level judgements, and inspected ar-
ticles for which sentence-level judgements were
mixed, but where HUMAN was strongly preferred
in document-level evaluation. In these articles,
we do indeed observe the hypothesised phenom-
ena. We find an example of lexical coherence
in a 6-sentence article about a new app “微信挪
车”, which HUMAN consistently translates into
“WeChat Move the Car”. In MT, we find three
different translations in the same article: “Twit-
ter Move Car”, “WeChat mobile”, and “WeChat
Move”. Other observations include the use of
more appropriate discourse connectives in HU-
MAN, a more detailed investigation of which we
leave to future work.

To our surprise, fluency raters show a stronger
preference for HUMAN than adequacy raters (Fig-
ure 1). The main strength of neural machine trans-
lation in comparison to previous statistical ap-
proaches was found to be increased fluency, while
adequacy improvements were less clear (Bojar
et al., 2016b; Castilho et al., 2017b), and we ex-
pected a similar pattern in our evaluation. Does
this indicate that adequacy is in fact a strength of



4795

MT, not fluency? We are wary to jump to this
conclusion. An alternative interpretation is that
MT, which tends to be more literal than HUMAN,
is judged more favourably by raters in the bilin-
gual condition, where the majority of raters are
native speakers of the source language, because of
L1 interference. We note that the availability of
document-level context still has a strong impact in
the fluency condition (Section 3).

5 Conclusions

In response to recent claims of parity between hu-
man and machine translation, we have empirically
tested the impact of sentence and document level
context on human assessment of machine transla-
tion. Raters showed a markedly stronger prefer-
ence for human translations when evaluating at the
level of documents, as compared to an evaluation
of single, isolated sentences.

We believe that our findings have several impli-
cations for machine translation research. Most im-
portantly, if we accept our interpretation that hu-
man translation is indeed of higher quality in the
dataset we tested, this points to a failure of cur-
rent best practices in machine translation evalu-
ation. As machine translation quality improves,
translations will become harder to discriminate
in terms of quality, and it may be time to shift
towards document-level evaluation, which gives
raters more context to understand the original text
and its translation, and also exposes translation er-
rors related to discourse phenomena which remain
invisible in a sentence-level evaluation.

Our evaluation protocol was designed with the
aim of providing maximal validity, which is why
we chose to use professional translators and pair-
wise ranking. For future work, it would be of
high practical relevance to test whether we can
also elicit accurate quality judgements on the
document-level via crowdsourcing and direct as-
sessment, or via alternative evaluation protocols.
The data released by Hassan et al. (2018) could
serve as a test bed to this end.

One reason why document-level evaluation
widens the quality gap between machine trans-
lation and human translation is that the machine
translation system we tested still operates on the
sentence level, ignoring wider context. It will
be interesting to explore to what extent exist-
ing and future techniques for document-level ma-
chine translation can narrow this gap. We ex-

pect that this will require further efforts in cre-
ating document-level training data, designing ap-
propriate models, and supporting research with
discourse-aware automatic metrics.

Acknowledgements

We thank Xin Sennrich for her help with the
analysis of translation errors. We also thank An-
tonio Toral and the anonymous reviewers for their
helpful comments.

References
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-

gio. 2015. Neural Machine Translation by Jointly
Learning to Align and Translate. In Proceedings of
ICLR, San Diego, CA.

Ondrej Bojar, Christian Federmann, Barry Haddow,
Philipp Koehn, Matt Post, and Lucia Specia. 2016a.
Ten years of WMT evaluation campaigns: Lessons
learnt. In Proceedings of the LREC 2016 Workshop
“Translation Evaluation – From Fragmented Tools
and Data Sets to an Integrated Ecosystem”, pages
27–34, Portorož, Slovenia.

Ondřej Bojar, Rajen Chatterjee, Christian Federmann,
Yvette Graham, Barry Haddow, Shujian Huang,
Matthias Huck, Philipp Koehn, Qun Liu, Varvara
Logacheva, Christof Monz, Matteo Negri, Matt
Post, Raphael Rubino, Lucia Specia, and Marco
Turchi. 2017. Findings of the 2017 Conference on
Machine Translation (WMT17). In Proceedings of
WMT, pages 169–214, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Ondřej Bojar, Rajen Chatterjee, Christian Federmann,
Yvette Graham, Barry Haddow, Matthias Huck,
Antonio Jimeno Yepes, Philipp Koehn, Varvara
Logacheva, Christof Monz, Matteo Negri, Aure-
lie Neveol, Mariana Neves, Martin Popel, Matt
Post, Raphael Rubino, Carolina Scarton, Lucia Spe-
cia, Marco Turchi, Karin Verspoor, and Marcos
Zampieri. 2016b. Findings of the 2016 Conference
on Machine Translation (WMT16). In Proceedings
of WMT, pages 131–198, Berlin, Germany.

Chris Callison-Burch. 2009. Fast, cheap, and creative:
Evaluating translation quality using amazon’s me-
chanical turk. In Proceedings of EMNLP, pages
286–295, Singapore.

Chris Callison-Burch, Cameron Fordyce, Philipp
Koehn, Christof Monz, and Josh Schroeder. 2007.
(Meta-) evaluation of machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of WMT, pages 136–158, Prague, Czech
Republic.

Sheila Castilho, Joss Moorkens, Federico Gaspari,
Iacer Calixto, John Tinsley, and Andy Way. 2017a.
Is Neural Machine Translation the New State of the
Art? The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguis-
tics, 108:109–120.



4796

Sheila Castilho, Joss Moorkens, Federico Gaspari,
Rico Sennrich, Vilelmini Sosoni, Yota Geor-
gakopoulou, Pintu Lohar, Andy Way, Antonio Va-
lerio Miceli Barone, and Maria Gialama. 2017b.
A Comparative Quality Evaluation of PBSMT and
NMT using Professional Translators. In Proceed-
ings of MT Summit, Nagoya, Japan.

Mauro Cettolo, Marcello Federico, Luisa Bentivogli,
Jan Niehues, Sebastian Stüker, Katsuitho Sudoh,
Koichiro Yoshino, and Christian Federmann. 2017.
Overview of the IWSLT 2017 Evaluation Campaign.
In Proceedings of IWSLT, pages 2–14, Tokyo, Japan.

Fabien Cromieres, Chenhui Chu, Toshiaki Nakazawa,
and Sadao Kurohashi. 2016. Kyoto University par-
ticipation to WAT 2016. In Proceedings of WAT,
pages 166–174, Osaka, Japan.

John D. Emerson and Gary A. Simon. 1979. Another
Look at the Sign Test When Ties Are Present: The
Problem of Confidence Intervals. The American
Statistician, 33(3):140–142.

Yvette Graham, Timothy Baldwin, Alistair Moffat,
and Justin Zobel. 2013. Continuous Measurement
Scales in Human Evaluation of Machine Transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the 7th Linguistic Anno-
tation Workshop & Interoperability with Discourse,
pages 33–41, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Yvette Graham, Timothy Baldwin, Alistair Moffat, and
Justin Zobel. 2017. Can machine translation sys-
tems be evaluated by the crowd alone? Natural Lan-
guage Engineering, 23(1):3–30.

Hany Hassan, Anthony Aue, Chang Chen, Vishal
Chowdhary, Jonathan Clark, Christian Feder-
mann, Xuedong Huang, Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt,
William Lewis, Mu Li, Shujie Liu, Tie-Yan Liu,
Renqian Luo, Arul Menezes, Tao Qin, Frank Seide,
Xu Tan, Fei Tian, Lijun Wu, Shuangzhi Wu, Yingce
Xia, Dongdong Zhang, Zhirui Zhang, and Ming
Zhou. 2018. Achieving Human Parity on Automatic
Chinese to English News Translation. Computing
Research Repository, arXiv:1803.05567.

Nal Kalchbrenner and Phil Blunsom. 2013. Recurrent
Continuous Translation Models. In Proceedings of
EMNLP, pages 1700–1709, Seattle, WA.

Aniket Kittur, Ed H. Chi, and Bongwon Suh. 2008.
Crowdsourcing User Studies with Mechanical Turk.
In Proceedings of CHI, pages 453–456, Florence,
Italy.

Hans P. Krings. 1986. Was in den Köpfen von
Übersetzern vorgeht. Gunter Narr, Tübingen, Ger-
many.

Minh-Thang Luong and Christopher D. Manning.
2015. Stanford Neural Machine Translation Sys-
tems for Spoken Language Domains. In Proceed-
ings of IWSLT, Da Nang, Vietnam.

Rico Sennrich, Alexandra Birch, Anna Currey, Ulrich
Germann, Barry Haddow, Kenneth Heafield, An-
tonio Valerio Miceli Barone, and Philip Williams.
2017. The University of Edinburgh’s Neural MT
Systems for WMT17. In Proceedings of WMT,
pages 389–399, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2016. Edinburgh Neural Machine Translation Sys-
tems for WMT 16. In Proceedings of WMT, pages
368–373, Berlin, Germany.

Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V. Le. 2014.
Sequence to Sequence Learning with Neural Net-
works. In Proceedings of NIPS, pages 3104–3112,
Montreal, Canada.

Antonio Toral, Sheila Castilho, Ke Hu, and Andy Way.
2018. Attaining the Unattainable? Reassessing
Claims of Human Parity in Neural Machine Trans-
lation. In Proceedings of WMT, Brussels, Belgium.

Georges Van Slype. 1979. Critical study of methods for
evaluating the quality of machine translation. Re-
search report BR 19142 prepared for the Commis-
sion of the European Communities, Bureau Marcel
van Dijk, Brussels, Belgium.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is All
you Need. In Proceedings of NIPS, pages 5998–
6008, Long Beach, CA.

Bonnie Webber, Andrei Popescu-Belis, and Jörg Tiede-
mann, editors. 2017. Proceedings of the Third Work-
shop on Discourse in Machine Translation. Copen-
hagen, Denmark.

Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V.
Le, Mohammad Norouzi, Wolfgang Macherey,
Maxim Krikun, Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus
Macherey, Jeff Klingner, Apurva Shah, Melvin
Johnson, Xiaobing Liu, Lukasz Kaiser, Stephan
Gouws, Yoshikiyo Kato, Taku Kudo, Hideto
Kazawa, Keith Stevens, George Kurian, Nishant
Patil, Wei Wang, Cliff Young, Jason Smith, Jason
Riesa, Alex Rudnick, Oriol Vinyals, Greg Corrado,
Macduff Hughes, and Jeffrey Dean. 2016. Google’s
Neural Machine Translation System: Bridging the
Gap between Human and Machine Translation.
Computing Research Repository, arXiv:1609.08144.


