



















































emrQA: A Large Corpus for Question Answering on Electronic Medical Records


Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2357–2368
Brussels, Belgium, October 31 - November 4, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

2357

emrQA: A Large Corpus for Question Answering on
Electronic Medical Records

Anusri Pampari∗ Preethi Raghavan†¨ Jennifer Liang† and Jian Peng∗‡
¨MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, Cambridge, MA

†IBM TJ Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY
∗Dept. of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana Champaign, IL

‡Carle Illinois College of Medicine, University of Illinois Urbana Champaign, IL
∗{pampari2,jianpeng}@illinois.edu †{praghav,jjliang}@us.ibm.com

Abstract

We propose a novel methodology to gener-
ate domain-specific large-scale question an-
swering (QA) datasets by re-purposing ex-
isting annotations for other NLP tasks. We
demonstrate an instance of this methodology
in generating a large-scale QA dataset for elec-
tronic medical records by leveraging existing
expert annotations on clinical notes for various
NLP tasks from the community shared i2b2
datasets§. The resulting corpus (emrQA) has
1 million questions-logical form and 400,000+
question-answer evidence pairs. We character-
ize the dataset and explore its learning poten-
tial by training baseline models for question to
logical form and question to answer mapping.

1 Introduction

Automatic question answering (QA) has made
big strides with several open-domain and machine
comprehension systems built using large-scale an-
notated datasets (Voorhees et al., 1999; Ferrucci
et al., 2010; Rajpurkar et al., 2016; Joshi et al.,
2017). However, in the clinical domain this prob-
lem remains relatively unexplored. Physicians fre-
quently seek answers to questions from unstruc-
tured electronic medical records (EMRs) to sup-
port clinical decision-making (Demner-Fushman
et al., 2009). But in a significant majority of cases,
they are unable to unearth the information they
want from EMRs (Tang et al., 1994). Moreover
to date, there is no general system for answering
natural language questions asked by physicians on
a patient’s EMR (Figure 1) due to lack of large-
scale datasets (Raghavan and Patwardhan, 2016).

EMRs are a longitudinal record of a patient’s
health information in the form of unstructured
clinical notes (progress notes, discharge sum-
maries etc.) and structured vocabularies. Physi-

∗This work was conducted during an internship at IBM
§https://www.i2b2.org/NLP/DataSets/

Record Date: 08/09/98
08/31/96 ascending aortic root replacement with homograft
with omentopexy. The patient continued to be hemodynam-
ically stable making good progress. Physical examination:
BMI: 33.4 Obese, high risk. Pulse: 60. resp. rate: 18

Question: Has the patient ever had an abnormal BMI?
Answer: BMI: 33.4 Obese, high risk
Question: When did the patient last receive a homograft
replacement ?
Answer: 08/31/96 ascending aortic root replacement with
homograft with omentopexy.

Figure 1: Question-Answer pairs from emrQA clinical note.

cians wish to answer questions about medical en-
tities and relations from the EMR, requiring a
deeper understanding of clinical notes. While
this may be likened to machine comprehension,
the longitudinal nature of clinical discourse, lit-
tle to no redundancy in facts, abundant use of
domain-specific terminology, temporal narratives
with multiple related diseases, symptoms, medi-
cations that go back and forth in time, and mis-
spellings, make it complex and difficult to ap-
ply existing NLP tools (Demner-Fushman et al.,
2009; Raghavan and Patwardhan, 2016). More-
over, answers may be implicit or explicit and may
require domain-knowledge and reasoning across
clinical notes. Thus, building a credible QA sys-
tem for patient-specific EMR QA requires large-
scale question and answer annotations that suffi-
ciently capture the challenging nature of clinical
narratives in the EMR. However, serious privacy
concerns about sharing personal health informa-
tion (Devereaux, 2013; Krumholz et al., 2016),
and the tedious nature of assimilating answer an-
notations from across longitudinal clinical notes,
makes this task impractical and possibly erroneous
to do manually (Lee et al., 2017).

In this work, we address the lack of any pub-
licly available EMR QA corpus by creating a
large-scale dataset, emrQA, using a novel gener-

https://www.i2b2.org/NLP/DataSets/


2358

Question
Collection

Question
Template

Question
Template

Question
Template

Question
Template

Question
Template

Question
Template

Question
Template

Normalization
I2b2 dataset

Ontology/Schema 
Representation of 

Data

Question
Template

Question
Template

Question
Template

Question
Template

Question
Template

Question
Template

Logical Form
Template

Question
Template

Question
Template

Question
Template

Question
Template

Question
Template

Coreference
Template

Medication
i2b2Logical Form

Annotation

Entity Placeholder 
Entity type: medication

----------------------------
-----…….

Clinical Notes

What is the dosage of |medication| ?
MedicationEvent (|medication|) [dosage=x] <Medication = Nitroglycerin 

dosage = 40mg > 

What is the dosage of Nitroglycerin ? Answer = 40mg, Evidence = Nitroglycerin 40 mg daily, evening

……………………………….. 
nitroglycerin 40 mg daily , 
evening. The patient 
………………………………………
………………………………………
..

Electronic Medical Record 

Patient 1             Year 2013

Patient 1             Year 2014

Patient 1             Year 2015

Patient 2            Year 2012

Answer Entity 
Entity type = dosage

Question Entity Placeholder

MedicationEvent (Nitroglycerin) [dosage=x]

Figure 2: Our QA dataset generation framework using existing i2b2 annotations on a given patient’s record to generate a
question, its logical form and answer evidence. The highlights in the figure show the annotations being used for this example.

ation framework that allows for minimal expert
involvement and re-purposes existing annotations
available for other clinical NLP tasks (i2b2 chal-
lenge datasets (Guo et al., 2006)). The annota-
tions serve as a proxy-expert in generating ques-
tions, answers, and logical forms. Logical forms
provide a human-comprehensible symbolic repre-
sentation, linking questions to answers, and help
build interpretable models, critical to the medical
domain (Davis et al., 1977; Vellido et al., 2012).
We analyze the emrQA dataset in terms of ques-
tion complexity, relations, and the reasoning re-
quired to answer questions, and provide neural and
heuristic baselines for learning to predict question-
logical forms and question-answers.

The main contributions of this work are as fol-
lows:

• A novel framework for systematic generation
of domain-specific large-scale QA datasets
that can be used in any domain where manual
annotations are challenging to obtain but lim-
ited annotations may be available for other
NLP tasks.

• The first accessible patient-specific EMR
QA dataset, emrQA∗, consisting of 400,000
question-answer pairs and 1 million question-
logical form pairs. The logical forms will
allow users to train and benchmark inter-
pretable models that justify answers with cor-
responding logical forms.

• Two new reasoning challenges, namely arith-
metic and temporal reasoning, that are absent
in open-domain datasets like SQuAD (Ra-
jpurkar et al., 2016).
∗https://github.com/panushri25/emrQA, scripts to gener-

ate emrQA from i2b2 data. i2b2 data is accessible by every-
one subject to a license agreement.

2 Related Work
Question Answering (QA) datasets are classified
into two main categories: (1) machine comprehen-
sion (MC) using unstructured documents, and (2)
QA using Knowledge Bases (KBs).

MC systems aim to answer any question that
could be posed against a reference text. Recent
advances in crowd-sourcing and search engines
have resulted in an explosion of large-scale (100K)
MC datasets for factoid QA, having ample re-
dundant evidence in text (Rajpurkar et al., 2016;
Trischler et al., 2016; Joshi et al., 2017; Dhingra
et al., 2017). On the other hand, complex domain-
specific MC datasets such as MCTest (Richardson
et al., 2013), biological process modeling (Berant
et al., 2014), BioASQ (Tsatsaronis et al., 2015),
InsuranceQA (Feng et al., 2015), etc have been
limited in scale (500-10K) because of the com-
plexity of the task or the need for expert anno-
tations that cannot be crowd-sourced or gathered
from the web. In contrast to the open-domain,
EMR data cannot be released publicly due to pri-
vacy concerns (Šuster et al., 2017). Also, anno-
tating unstructured EMRs requires a medical ex-
pert who can understand and interpret clinical text.
Thus, very few datasets like i2b2, MIMIC (John-
son et al., 2016) (developed over several years in
collaboration with large medical groups and hos-
pitals), share small-scale annotated clinical notes.
In this work, we take advantage of the limited ex-
pertly annotated resources to generate emrQA.

KB-based QA datasets, used for semantic pars-
ing, are traditionally limited by the requirement of
annotated question and logical form (LF) pairs for
supervision where the LF are used to retrieve an-
swers from a schema (Cai and Yates, 2013; Lopez
et al., 2013; Bordes et al., 2015). Roberts and
Demner-Fushman (2016) generated a corpus by

https://github.com/panushri25/emrQA


2359

Datasets #QA #QL #notes Property Stats.
Relations 141,243 1,061,710 425 Question len. 8.6
Medications 255,908 198,739 261 Evidence len. 18.7
Heart disease 30,731 36,746 119 LF len. 33
Obesity 23,437 280 1,118 Note len. 3825
Smoking 4,518 6 502 # of evidence 1.5
emrQA 455,837 1,295,814 2,425 # Ques. in note 187

Table 1: (left) i2b2 dataset distribution in emrQA, and
(right) emrQA properties with length in tokens, averaged

manually annotating LFs on 468 EMR questions
(not released publicly), thus limiting its ability to
create large scale datasets. In contrast, we only
collect LFs for question templates from a domain-
expert - the rest of our corpus is automatically gen-
erated.

Recent advances in QA combine logic-based
and neural MC approaches to build hybrid mod-
els (Usbeck et al., 2015; Feng et al., 2016; Palangi
et al., 2018). These models are driven to combine
the accuracy of neural approaches (Hermann et al.,
2015) and the interpretability of the symbolic rep-
resentations in logic-based methods (Gao et al.;
Chabierski et al., 2017). Building interpretable
yet accurate models is extremely important in the
medical domain (Shickel et al., 2017). We gen-
erate large-scale ground truth annotations (ques-
tions, logical forms, and answers) that can provide
supervision to learn such hybrid models. Our ap-
proach to generating emrQA is in the same spirit
as Su et al. (2016), who generate graph queries
(logical forms) from a structured KB and use them
to collect answers. In contrast, our framework can
be applied to generate QA dataset in any domain
with minimal expert input using annotations from
other NLP tasks.

3 QA Dataset Generation Framework
Our general framework for generating a large-
scale QA corpus given certain resources consists
of three steps: (1) collecting questions to capture
domain-specific user needs, followed by normal-
izing the collected questions to templates by re-
placing entities (that may be related via binary or
composite relations) in the question with place-
holders. The entity types replaced in the question
are grounded in an ontology like WordNet (Miller,
1995), UMLS (Bodenreider, 2004), or a user-
generated schema that defines and relates different
entity types. (2) We associate question templates
with expert-annotated logical form templates; log-
ical forms are symbolic representations using re-
lations from the ontology/schema to express the
relations in the question, and associate the ques-

How was the |problem| managed ?
How was the patient’s |problem| treated ?
What was done to correct the patient’s |problem| ?
Has the patient ever been treated for a |problem| ?
What treatment has the patient had for his |problem| ?
Has the patient ever received treatment for |problem| ?
What treatments for |problem| has this patient tried ?

Table 2: Paraphrase templates of a question type in emrQA.

tion entity type with an answer entity type. (3) We
then proceed to the important step of re-purposing
existing NLP annotations to populate question-
logical form templates and generate answers. QA
is a complex task that requires addressing several
fundamental NLP problems before accurately an-
swering a question. Hence, obtaining expert man-
ual annotations in complex domains is infeasible
as it is tedious to expert-annotate answers that may
be found across long document collections (e.g.,
longitudinal EMR) (Lee et al., 2017). Thus, we
reverse engineer the process where we reuse ex-
pert annotations available in NLP tasks such as
entity recognition, coreference, and relation learn-
ing, based on the information captured in the log-
ical forms to populate entity placeholders in tem-
plates and generate answers. Reverse engineering
serves as a proxy expert ensuring that the gener-
ated QA annotations are credible. The only man-
ual effort is in annotating logical forms, thus sig-
nificantly reducing expert labor. Moreover, in do-
main specific instances such as EMRs, manually
annotated logical forms allow the experts to ex-
press information essential for natural language
understanding such as domain knowledge, tempo-
ral relations, and negation (Gao et al.; Chabierski
et al., 2017). This knowledge, once captured, can
be used to generate QA pairs on new documents,
making the framework scalable.

4 Generating the emrQA Dataset
We apply the proposed framework to generate the
emrQA corpus consisting of questions posed by
physicians against longitudinal EMRs of a patient,
using annotations provided by i2b2 (Figure 2).

4.1 Question Collection and Normalization

We collect questions for EMR QA by, 1) polling
physicians at the Veterans Administration for what
they frequently want to know from the EMR (976
questions), 2) using an existing source of 5,696
questions generated by a team of medical experts
from 71 patient records (Raghavan et al., 2017)
and 3) using 15 prototypical questions from an ob-



2360

MedicationEvent

• Medication/treatment
• Dosage
• Startdate
• Enddate
• Route
• Adherence
• Frequency

• Treatment/test
• Date
• Result
• Status
• AbnormalResultFlag

VitalEvent

ConditionEvent

SymptomEvent

• IsTobaccoUser
• PacksPerUse
• YearsOfUSe

• Treatment/test
• Date
• Result
• Status
• AbnormalResultFlag

ProcedureEvent

• Test 
• Date
• Result
• Status
• AbnormalResultFlag

LabEvent

SmokingUseEvent

SmokingQuitEvent

• problem
• Diagnosisdate
• Status

• QuitDate

• problem

FamilyHistoryEvent

Relations

Attributes

I2b2 entity types 
as arguments

Figure 3: Events, attributes & relations in emrQA’s logical
forms. Events & attributes accept i2b2 entities as arguments.

servational study done by physicians (Tang et al.,
1994). To obtain templates, the questions were au-
tomatically normalized by identifying medical en-
tities (using MetaMap (Aronson, 2001)) in ques-
tions and replacing them with generic placehold-
ers. The resulting ∼2K noisy templates were ex-
pert reviewed and corrected (to account for any
entity recognition errors by MetaMap). We align
our entity types to those defined in the i2b2 con-
cept extraction tasks (Uzuner et al., 2010a, 2011)
- problem, test, treatment, mode and medication.
E.g., The question What is the dosage of insulin?
from the collection gets converted to the template
What is the dosage of |medication|? as shown in
Fig.2. This process resulted in 680 question tem-
plates. We do not correct for the usage/spelling
errors in these templates, such as usage of "pt"
for "patient", or make the templates gender neutral
in order to provide a true representation of physi-
cians’ questions. Further, analyzing these tem-
plates shows that physicians most frequently ask
about test results (11%), medications for problem
(9%), and problem existence (8%). The long tail
following this includes questions about medica-
tion dosage, response to treatment, medication du-
ration, prescription date, etiology, etc. Temporal
constraints were frequently imposed on questions
related to tests, problem diagnosis and medication
start/stop.

4.2 Associating Templates w/ Logical Forms

The 680 question templates were annotated by a
physician with their corresponding logical form
(LF) templates, which resulted in 94 unique LF
templates. More than one question template that
map to the same LF are considered paraphrases of
each other and correspond to a particular question
type (Table 2). Logical forms are defined based

on an ontology schema designed by medical ex-
perts (Figure 3). This schema captures entities in
unstructured clinical notes through medical events
and their attributes, interconnected through rela-
tions. We align the entity and relation types of
i2b2 to this schema.

A formal representation of the LF gram-
mar using this schema (Figure 3) is as fol-
lows. Medical events are denoted as MEi (e.g
LabEvent, ConditionEvent) and relations are de-
noted as REi (e.g conducted/reveals). Now,
ME[a1, .., aj , .., oper(an)] is a medical event
where aj represents the attribute of the event (such
as result in LabEvent). An event may optionally
include constraints on attributes captured by an
operator (oper() ∈ sort, range, check for null val-
ues, compare). These operators sometimes require
values from external medical KB (indicated by ref,
e.g. lab.ref low/lab.ref high to indicate range of ref-
erence standards considered healthy in lab results)
indicating the need for medical knowledge to an-
swer the question. Using these constructs, a LF
can be defined using the following rules,
LF →MEi |M1 relation M2
M1 →MEi, M2 →MEj
M1 →M1 relation M2, M2 →M1 relation M2
relation→ OR | AND | REi

Advantages of our LF representation include
the ability to represent composite relations, de-
fine attributes for medical events and constrain
the attributes to precisely capture the informa-
tion need in the question. While these can be
achieved using different methods that combine
lambda calculus and first order logic (Roberts
and Demner-Fushman, 2016), our representation
is more human comprehensible. This allows a
physician to consider an ontology like Figure 3
and easily define a logical form. Some exam-
ple question templates with their LF annotations
are described in Table 3 using the above notation.
The LF representation of the question in Figure
2 is MedicationEvent(|medication|) [dosage=x].
The entities seen in LF are the entities posed in
the question and entity marked x indicates the an-
swer entity type.

4.3 Template Filling and Answer Extraction

The next step in the process is to populate the
question and logical form (QL) templates with
existing annotations in the i2b2 clinical datasets
and extract answer evidence for the questions.



2361

Property Example Annotation Stats.
Fine grained answer type
(attribute entity is answer)

Q: What is the dosage of |medication| ?
LF: MedicationEvent (|medication|) [dosage=x]

62.7%

Course grained answer type
(event entity is answer)

Q: What does the patient take |medication| for?
LF: MedicationEvent(|medication|)given{ConditionEvent(x) OR SymptomEvent(x)}

52.1%

Questions with operators on
entities

Q: What are the last set of labs with elevated numbers out of range?
LF: LabEvent (x) [date=x, (result=x)>lab.refhigh]

25.5%

Questions which require
medical KB

Q: What are the last set of labs with elevated numbers out of range?
LF: LabEvent (x) [date=x, (result=x)>lab.refhigh]

11.7%

At least one event relation What lab results does he have that are pertinent to |problem| diagnosis
LF: LabEvent (x) [date=x, result=x] conducted/reveals ConditionEvent (|problem|)

46.8%

Table 3: Properties of question templates inferred from the corresponding logical form templates. The boldface words hint at
the presence of the corresponding property in both question and the logical form template.

The i2b2 datasets are expert annotated with
fine-grained annotations (Guo et al., 2006) that
were developed for various shared NLP challenge
tasks, including (1) smoking status classification
(Uzuner et al., 2008), (2) diagnosis of obesity and
its co-morbidities (Uzuner, 2009), extraction of
(3) medication concepts (Uzuner et al., 2010a),
(4) relations, concepts, assertions (Uzuner et al.,
2010b, 2011) (5) co-reference resolution (Uzuner
et al., 2012) and (6) heart disease risk factor
identification (Stubbs and Uzuner, 2015). In
Figure 2, this would correspond to leveraging
annotations from medications challenge between
medications and their dosages, such as medica-
tion=Nitroglycerin, dosage=40mg, to populate
|medication| and generate several instances of the
question “What is the dosage of |medication|?"
and its corresponding logical form
MedicationEvent(|medication|)[dosage=x].
The answer would be derived from the value of
the dosage entity in the dataset.

Preprocessing: The i2b2 entities are prepro-
cessed before using them with our templates to
ensure syntactic correctness of the generated ques-
tions. The pre-processing steps are designed based
on the i2b2 annotations syntax guidelines (Guo
et al., 2006). To estimate grammatical correct-
ness, we randomly sampled 500 generated ques-
tions and found that <5% had errors. These errors
include, among others, incorrect usage of article
with the entity and incorrect entity phrasing.

Answer Extraction: The final step in the pro-
cess is generating answer evidence corresponding
to each question. The answers in emrQA are de-
fined differently; instead of a single word or phrase
we provide the entire i2b2 annotation line from
the clinical note as the answer. This is because
the context in which the answer entity or phrase
is mentioned is extremely important in clinical
decision making (Demner-Fushman et al., 2009).

Hence, we call them answer evidence instead of
just answers. For example, consider the ques-
tion Is the patient’s hypertension controlled?.
The answer to this question is not a simple yes/no
since the status of the patient’s hypertension can
change through the course of treatment. The an-
swer evidence to this question in emrQA are mul-
tiple lines across the longitudinal notes that reflect
this potentially changing status of the patients con-
dition, e.g. Hypertension-borderline today. Addi-
tionally, for questions seeking specific answers we
also provide the corresponding answer entities.

The overall process for answer evidence gener-
ation was vetted by a physician. Here is a brief
overview of how the different i2b2 datasets were
used in generating answers. The relations chal-
lenge datasets have various event-relation anno-
tations across single/multiple lines in a clinical
note. We used a combination of one or more of
these, to generate answers for a question; in do-
ing so we used the annotations provided by the
i2b2 co-reference datasets. Similarly, the medica-
tions challenge dataset has various event-attribute
annotations but since this dataset is not provided
with co-reference annotations, it is currently not
possible to combine all valid answers. The heart
disease challenge dataset has longitudinal notes
(∼5 per patient) with record dates. The events
in this dataset are also provided with time anno-
tations and are rich in quantitative entities. This
dataset was primarily used to answer questions
that require temporal and arithmetic reasoning
on events. The patient records in the smoking
and obesity challenge datasets are categorized into
classes with no entity annotations. Thus, for ques-
tions generated on these datasets, the entire docu-
ment acts as evidence and the annotated class in-
formation (7 classes) needs to be predicted as the
answer.

The total questions, LFs and answers gener-



2362

ated using this framework are summarized in Ta-
ble 1. Consider the question How much does the
patient smoke? for which we do not have i2b2-
annotations to provide an answer. In cases where
the answer entity is empty, we only generate the
question and LF, resulting in more question types
being used for QL than QA pairs: only 53% of
question types have answers.

5 emrQA Dataset Analysis
We analyze the complexity of emrQA by consider-
ing the LFs for question characteristics, variations
in paraphrases, and the type of reasoning required
for answering questions (Table 2, 3, 4).

5.1 Question/Logical Form Characteristics

A quantitative and qualitative analysis of emrQA
question templates is shown in Table 3, where log-
ical forms help formalize their characteristics (Su
et al., 2016). Questions may request specific fine-
grained information (attribute values like dosage)
or may express a more coarse-grained need (event
entities like medications etc), or a combination
of both. 25% of questions require complex op-
erators (e.g compare(>)) and 12% of questions
express the need for external medical knowledge
(e.g. lab.refhigh). The questions in emrQA are
highly compositional, where 47% of question tem-
plates have at least one event relation.

5.2 Paraphrase Complexity Analysis

Questions templates that map to the same LF are
considered paraphrases (e.g, Table 2) and corre-
spond to the same question type. In emrQA, an
average of 7 paraphrase templates exist per ques-
tion type. This is representative of FAQ types that
are perhaps more important to the physician. Good
paraphrases are lexically dissimilar to each other
(Chen and Dolan, 2011). In order to understand
the lexical variation within our paraphrases, we
randomly select a question from the list of para-
phrases as a reference and evaluate the others with
respect to the reference, and report the average
BLEU (0.74 ± 0.06) and Jaccard Score (0.72 ±
0.19). The low BLEU and Jaccard score with large
standard deviation indicates the lexical diversity
captured by emrQA’s paraphrases (Papineni et al.,
2002; Niwattanakul et al., 2013).

5.3 Answer Evidence Analysis

33% of the questions in emrQA have more than
one answer evidence, with the number ranging

from 2 to 61. E.g., the question Medications
Record? has all medications in the patient’s lon-
gitudinal record as answer evidence. In order to
analyze the reasoning required to answer emrQA
questions, we sampled 35 clinical notes from the
corpus and analyzed 3 random questions per note
by manually labeling them with the categories de-
scribed in Table 4. Categories are not mutually
exclusive: a single example can fall into multiple
categories. We compare and contrast this analy-
sis with SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016), a popu-
lar MC dataset generated through crowdsourcing,
to show that the framework is capable of generat-
ing a corpus as representative and even more com-
plex. Compared to SQuAD, emrQA offers two
new reasoning categories, temporal and arithmetic
which make up 31% of the dataset. Addition-
ally, over two times as many questions in emrQA
require reasoning over multiple sentences. Long
and noisy documents make the question answer-
ing task more difficult (Joshi et al., 2017). EMRs
are inherently noisy and hence 29% have incom-
plete context and the document length is 27 times
more than SQuAD which offers new challenges to
existing QA models. Owing to the domain specific
nature of the task, 39% of the examples required
some form of medical/world knowledge.

As discussed in Section 4.3, 12% of the ques-
tions in emrQA corpus require a class category
from i2b2 smoking and obesity datasets to be pre-
dicted. We also found 6% of the questions had
other possible answers that were not included by
emrQA, this is because of the lack of co-reference
annotations for the medications challenge.

6 Baseline Methods
We implement baseline models using neural and
heuristic methods for question to logical form (Q-
L) and question to answer (Q-A) mapping.

6.1 Q-L Mapping
Heuristic Models: We use a template-matching
approach where we first split the data into
train/test sets, and then normalize questions in
the test set into templates by replacing entities
with placeholders. The templates are then scored
against the ground truth templates of the questions
in the train set, to find the best match. The place-
holders in the LF template corresponding to the
best matched question template is then filled with
the normalized entities to obtain the predicted LF.
To normalize the test questions we use CLiNER



2363

Reasoning Description Example Annotation emrQA SQuAD
Lexical Variation
(Synonym)

Major correspondence between the
question and answer sentence are
synonyms.

Q: Has this patient ever been treated with insulin?
E: Patient sugars were managed o/n with sliding
scale insulin and diabetic

15.2% 33.3%

Lexical Variation
(world/medical
knowledge)

Major correspondence between the
question and answer sentence re-
quires world/medical knowledge to
resolve

Q: Has the patient complained of any CAD symp-
toms?
E: 70-year-old female who comes in with
substernal chest pressure

39.0% 9.1%

Syntactic Variation After the question is paraphrased
into declarative form, its syntac-
tic dependency structure does not
match that of the answer sentence

Q: Has this patient ever been treated with ffp?
E: attempt to reverse anticoagulation , one unit of
FFP was begun

60.0% 64.1%

Multiple Sentence Co-reference and higher level fu-
sion of multiple sentences

Q: What happened when the patient was given as-
cending aortic root replacement?
E: The patient tolerated the procedure fairly well
and was transferred to the ICU with his chest open

23.8% 13.6%

Arithmetic Knowing comparison and subtrac-
tion operators.

Q: Show me any LDL > 100 mg/dl in the last 6
years?
E: gluc 192, LDL 115, TG 71, HDL 36

13.3% N.A.

Temporal Reasoning based on time frame Q: What were the results of the abnormal A1C on
2115-12-14?
E: HBA1C 12/14/2115 11.80

18.1% N.A.

Incomplete
Context

Unstructured clinical text is noisy
and may have missing context

Q: What is her current dose of iron?
E: Iron 325 mg p.o. t.i.d.

28.6% N.A.

Class Prediction Questions for which a specific pre-
defined class needs to be predicted

Q: Is the patient currently Obese?
E: Yes

12.4% N.A.

Table 4: We manually labeled 105 examples into one or more of the above categories. Words relevant to the corresponding
reasoning type are in bold and the answer entity (if any) in the evidence is in italics. We compare this analysis with SQuAD.

Dataset Train/Test HM-1 HM-2 Neural
GeoQuery 600/280 32.8% 52.1% 74.6%†

ATIS 4,473/448 20.8% 52.2% 69.9%†

emrQL-1 1M/253K 0.3% 26.3% 22.4%
emrQL-2 1.1M/296K 31.6% 32.0% 42.7%

Table 5: Heuristic (HM) and neural (seq2seq) models per-
formance on question to logical form learning in emrQA.

(Boag et al., 2015) for emrQA and Jia and Liang
(2016)’s work for ATIS and GeoQuery. Scoring
and matching is done using two heuristics: (1)
HM-1, which computes an identical match, and
(2) HM-2, which generates a GloVe vector (Arora
et al., 2016) representation of the templates using
sentence2vec and then computes pairwise cosine
similarity.

Neural Model: We train a sequence-to-
sequence (seq2seq) (Sutskever et al., 2014) with
attention paradigm (Bahdanau et al., 2014; Luong
et al., 2017) as our neural baseline (2 layers, each
with 64 hidden units). The same setting when used
with Geoquery and ATIS gives poor results be-
cause the parameters are not appropriate for the
nature of that dataset. Hence, for comparison with
GeoQuery and ATIS, we use the results of seq2seq
model with a single 200 hidden units layer (Jia and
Liang, 2016). At test time we automatically bal-
ance missing right parentheses.

†results from Jia and Liang (2016)

6.1.1 Experimental Setup
We randomly partition the QL pairs in the dataset
in train(80%) and test(20%) sets in two ways. (1)
In emrQL-1, we first split the paraphrase templates
corresponding to a single LF template into train
and test, and then generate the instances of QL
pairs. (2) In emrQL-2, we first generate the in-
stances of QL pairs from the templates and then
distribute them into train and test sets. As a result,
emrQL-1 has more lexical variation between train
and test distribution compared to emrQL-2, result-
ing in increased paraphrase complexity. We use
accuracy i.e, the total number of logical forms pre-
dicted correctly as a metric to evaluate our model.

6.1.2 Results
The performance of the proposed models is sum-
marized in Table 5. emrQL results are not directly
comparable with GeoQuery and ATIS because of
the differences in the lexicon and tools available
for the domains. However, it helps us establish
that QL learning in emrQA is non-trivial and sup-
ports significant future work.

Error analysis of heuristic models on emrQL-1
and emrQL-2 showed that 70% of the errors oc-
curred because of incorrect question normaliza-
tion. In fact, 30% of these questions had not been
normalized at all. This shows that the entities



2364

added to the templates are complex and diverse
and make the inverse process of template gener-
ation non trivial. This makes a challenging QL
corpus that cannot trivially be solved by template
matching based approaches.

Errors made by the neural model on both
emrQL-1 and emrQL-2 are due to long LFs (20%)
and incorrectly identified entities (10%), which
are harder for the attention-based model (Jia and
Liang, 2016). The increased paraphrase complex-
ity in emrQL-1 compared to emrQL-2 resulted in
20% more structural errors in emrQL-1, where the
predicted event/grammar structure deviates signif-
icantly from the ground truth. This shows that the
model is not adequately capturing the semantics
in the questions to generalize to new paraphrases.
Therefore, emrQL-1 can be used to benchmark QL
models robust to paraphrasing.

6.2 Q-A Mapping
Question-answering on emrQA consists of two
different tasks, (1) extraction of answer line from
the clinical note (machine comprehension (MC))
and (2) prediction of answer class based on the en-
tire clinical note. We provide baseline models to
illustrate the complexity in doing both these tasks.

Machine Comprehension: To do extractive
QA on EMRs, we use DrQA’s (Chen et al., 2017)
document reader which is a multi-layer RNN
based MC model. We use their best performing
settings trained for SQuAD data using Glove vec-
tors (300 dim-840B).

Class Prediction: We build a multi-class logis-
tic regression model for predicting a class as an
answer based on the patient’s clinical note. Fea-
tures input to the classifier are TF-IDF vectors of
the question and the clinical notes taken from i2b2
smoking and obesity datasets.

6.2.1 Experimental setup
We consider a 80-20 split of the data for train-test.
In order to evaluate worst-case performance, we
train on question-evidence pairs in a clinical note
obtained by using only one random paraphrase for
a question instead of all the paraphrases. We use a
slightly modified‡ version of the two popularly re-
ported metrics in MC for evaluation since our ev-
idence span is longer: Exact Match (EM) and F1.
Wherever the answer entity in an evidence is ex-
plicitly known, EM checks if the answer entity is

‡using the original definitions, the evaluated values were
far less than those obtained in Table 7

Model Train/Test Exact Match F1
DrQA (MC) 47,605/9,966 59.2% 60.6

Class Prediction 1276/320 36.6% n.a

Table 7: Performance of baseline models on the two QA sub
tasks, machine comprehension (MC) and class prediction.

present within the evidence, otherwise it checks if
the predicted evidence span lies within ±20 char-
acters of the ground truth evidence. For F1 we
construct a bag of tokens for each evidence string
and measure the F1 score of the overlap between
the two bags of tokens. Since there may be mul-
tiple evidence for a given question, we consider
only the top 10 predictions and report an average
of EM and F1 over ground truth number of an-
swers. In the class prediction setting, we report
the subset accuracy.

6.2.2 Results
The performance of the proposed models is sum-
marized in Table 7. DrQA is one of the best per-
forming models on SQuAD with an F1 of 78.8 and
EM of 69.5. The relatively low performance of the
models on emrQA (60.6 F1 and 59.2 EM) shows
that QA on EMRs is a complex task and offers new
challenges to existing QA models.

To understand model performance, we macro-
average the EM across all the questions corre-
sponding to a LF template. We observe that LFs
representing temporal and arithmetic§ needs had
< 16% EM. LFs expressing the need for medi-
cal KB§ performed poorly since we used general
Glove embeddings. An analysis of LFs which had
approximately equal number of QA pair represen-
tation in the test set revealed an interesting relation
between the model performance and LF complex-
ity, as summarized in Table 6. The trend shows
that performance is worse on multiple relation
questions as compared to single relation and at-
tribute questions, showing that the LFs sufficiently
capture the complexity of the questions and give
us an ability to do a qualitative model analysis.

Error analysis on a random sample of 50 ques-
tions containing at least one answer entity in an
evidence showed that: (1) 38% of the examples re-
quired multiple sentence reasoning of which 16%
were due to a missing evidence in a multiple ev-
idence question, (2) 14% were due to syntactic
variation, (3) 10% required medical reasoning and
(4) in 14%, DrQA predicted an incomplete evi-
dence span missing the answer entity in it.

§maximum representation of these templates comes from
the i2b2 heart disease risk dataset



2365

Logical Form template Property Exact Match
MedicationEvent (|medication|) [enddate=x] single attribute 55.3%
{LabEvent (|test|) OR ProcedureEvent (|test|)} conducted
{ConditionEvent(x) OR SymptomEvent (x)}

single relation 32.2%

{MedicationEvent(|treatment|)ORProcedureEvent(|treatment|)}
improves/worsens/causes {ConditionEvent (x) OR SymptomEvent (x)}

multiple relation 12.6%

Table 6: Neural models (DrQA) performance on question-evidence corpus of emrQA stratified according to the logical
form templates. Instance showing increasing complexity in the logical forms with decreasing model performance.

7 Discussion
In this section, we describe how our generation
framework may also be applied to generate open-
domain QA datasets given the availability of other
NLP resources. We also discuss possible exten-
sions of the framework to increase the complexity
of the generated datasets.

Open domain QA dataset generation: Con-
sider the popularly used SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al.,
2016) reading comprehension dataset generated
by crowdworkers, where the answer to every ques-
tion is a segment of text from the corresponding
passage in the Wikipedia article. This dataset can
easily be generated or extended using our pro-
posed framework with existing NLP annotations
on Wikipedia (Auer et al., 2007; Nothman et al.,
2008; Ghaddar and Langlais, 2017).

For instance, consider DBPedia (Auer et al.,
2007), an existing dataset of entities and their re-
lations extracted from Wikipedia. It also has its
own ontology which can serve as the semantic
frames schema to define logical forms. Using
these resources, our reverse engineering technique
for QA dataset generation can be applied as fol-
lows. (1) Question templates can be defined for
each entity type and relation in DBPedia. For
example¶, consider the relation [place, country]
field in DBpedia. For this we can define a ques-
tion template In what country is |place| located?.
(2) Every such question template can be annotated
with a logical form template using existing DB-
Pedia ontology. (3) By considering the entity val-
ues of DBPedia fields such as [place=Normandy,
dbo:country=France], we can automatically gen-
erate the question In what country is Normandy
located? and its corresponding logical form from
the templates. The text span of country=France
from the Wikipedia passage is then used as the
answer (Daiber et al., 2013). Currently, this QA
pair instance is a part of the SQuAD dev set. Us-
ing our framework we can generate many more in-
stances like this example from different Wikipedia
passages - without crowdsourcing efforts.
¶example reference: http://dbpedia.org/page/Normandy

Extensions to the framework: The complexity
of the generated dataset can be further extended as
follows. (1) We can use a coreferred or a lexical
variant of the original entity in the question-logical
form generation. This can allow for increased lexi-
cal variation between the question and answer line
entities in the passage. (2) It is possible to combine
two or more question templates to make composi-
tional questions with the answers to these ques-
tions similarly combined. This can also result in
more multiple sentence reasoning questions. (3)
We can generate questions with entities not related
to the context in the passage. This can increase
empty answer questions in the dataset, resulting in
increased negative training examples.

8 Conclusions and Future Work
We propose a novel framework that can generate
a large-scale QA dataset using existing resources
and minimal expert input. This has the potential
to make a huge impact in domains like medicine,
where obtaining manual QA annotations is tedious
and infeasible. We apply this framework to gener-
ate a large scale EMR QA corpus (emrQA), con-
sisting of 400,000 question-answers pairs and 1
million question-logical forms, and analyze the
complexity of the dataset to show its non-trivial
nature. We show that the logical forms provide a
symbolic representation that is very useful for cor-
pus generation and for model analysis. The logi-
cal forms also provide an opportunity to build in-
terpretable systems by perhaps jointly (or latently)
learning the logical form and answer for a ques-
tion. In future, this framework may be applied to
also re-purpose and integrate other NLP datasets
such as MIMIC and generate a more diverse and
representative EMR QA corpus (Johnson et al.,
2016).

Acknowledgments
This project is partially funded by Sloan Research
Fellowship, PhRMA Foundation Award in Infor-
matics, and NSF Career Award (1652815). The
authors would like to thank Siddharth Patwardhan
for his valuable feedback in formatting the paper.

http://dbpedia.org/page/Normandy


2366

References
Alan R Aronson. 2001. Effective mapping of biomed-

ical text to the umls metathesaurus: the metamap
program. In Proceedings of the AMIA Symposium,
page 17. American Medical Informatics Associa-
tion.

Sanjeev Arora, Yingyu Liang, and Tengyu Ma. 2016.
A simple but tough-to-beat baseline for sentence em-
beddings.

Sören Auer, Christian Bizer, Georgi Kobilarov, Jens
Lehmann, Richard Cyganiak, and Zachary Ives.
2007. Dbpedia: A nucleus for a web of open data.
In The semantic web, pages 722–735. Springer.

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2014. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.0473.

Jonathan Berant, Vivek Srikumar, Pei-Chun Chen,
Abby Vander Linden, Brittany Harding, Brad
Huang, Peter Clark, and Christopher D Manning.
2014. Modeling biological processes for reading
comprehension. In EMNLP.

William Boag, Kevin Wacome, Tristan Naumann, and
Anna Rumshisky. 2015. Cliner: A lightweight tool
for clinical named entity recognition. AMIA Joint
Summits on Clinical Research Informatics (poster).

Olivier Bodenreider. 2004. The unified medical lan-
guage system (umls): integrating biomedical termi-
nology. Nucleic acids research, 32(suppl_1):D267–
D270.

Antoine Bordes, Nicolas Usunier, Sumit Chopra, and
Jason Weston. 2015. Large-scale simple question
answering with memory networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1506.02075.

Qingqing Cai and Alexander Yates. 2013. Large-scale
semantic parsing via schema matching and lexicon
extension. In ACL (1), pages 423–433.

Piotr Chabierski, Alessandra Russo, and Mark Law.
2017. Logic-based approach to machine compre-
hension of text.

Danqi Chen, Adam Fisch, Jason Weston, and An-
toine Bordes. 2017. Reading wikipedia to an-
swer open-domain questions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.00051.

David L Chen and William B Dolan. 2011. Collect-
ing highly parallel data for paraphrase evaluation.
In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies-Volume 1, pages 190–200.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Joachim Daiber, Max Jakob, Chris Hokamp, and
Pablo N. Mendes. 2013. Improving efficiency
and accuracy in multilingual entity extraction. In
Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on
Semantic Systems (I-Semantics).

Randall Davis, Bruce Buchanan, and Edward Short-
liffe. 1977. Production rules as a representation for
a knowledge-based consultation program. Artificial
intelligence, 8(1):15–45.

Dina Demner-Fushman, Wendy Webber Chapman, and
Clement J. McDonald. 2009. What can natural lan-
guage processing do for clinical decision support?
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 42(5):760–772.

Mary Devereaux. 2013. The use of patient records
(ehr) for research.

Bhuwan Dhingra, Kathryn Mazaitis, and William W
Cohen. 2017. Quasar: Datasets for question an-
swering by search and reading. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.03904.

Minwei Feng, Bing Xiang, Michael R Glass, Li-
dan Wang, and Bowen Zhou. 2015. Applying
deep learning to answer selection: A study and an
open task. In Automatic Speech Recognition and
Understanding (ASRU), 2015 IEEE Workshop on,
pages 813–820. IEEE.

Yansong Feng, Songfang Huang, Dongyan Zhao, et al.
2016. Hybrid question answering over knowledge
base and free text. In Proceedings of COLING 2016,
the 26th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics: Technical Papers, pages 2397–2407.

David Ferrucci, Eric Brown, Jennifer Chu-Carroll,
James Fan, David Gondek, Aditya A Kalyanpur,
Adam Lally, J William Murdock, Eric Nyberg, John
Prager, et al. 2010. Building watson: An overview
of the deepqa project. AI magazine, 31(3):59–79.

Jianfeng Gao, Rangan Majumder, and Bill Dolan. Ma-
chine reading for question answering: from sym-
bolic to neural computation.

Abbas Ghaddar and Phillippe Langlais. 2017. Winer:
A wikipedia annotated corpus for named en-
tity recognition. In Proceedings of the Eighth
International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), volume 1,
pages 413–422.

Y. Guo, R. Gaizauskas, I. Roberts, G. Demetriou,
and M. Hepple. 2006. Identifying personal health
information using support vector machines. In
i2b2 Workshop on Challenges in Natural Language
Processing for Clinical Data, pages 10–11.

Karl Moritz Hermann, Tomas Kocisky, Edward
Grefenstette, Lasse Espeholt, Will Kay, Mustafa
Suleyman, and Phil Blunsom. 2015. Teaching
machines to read and comprehend. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages
1693–1701.

Robin Jia and Percy Liang. 2016. Data recombina-
tion for neural semantic parsing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.03622.



2367

Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Lu Shen,
H Lehman Li-wei, Mengling Feng, Moham-
mad Ghassemi, Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits,
Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger G Mark. 2016.
Mimic-iii, a freely accessible critical care database.
Scientific data, 3:160035.

Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel S Weld, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2017. Triviaqa: A large scale distantly
supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehen-
sion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.03551.

Harlan M Krumholz, Sharon F Terry, and Joanne Wald-
streicher. 2016. Data acquisition, curation, and use
for a continuously learning health system. Jama,
316(16):1669–1670.

Chonho Lee, Zhaojing Luo, Kee Yuan Ngiam, Mei-
hui Zhang, Kaiping Zheng, Gang Chen, Beng Chin
Ooi, and Wei Luen James Yip. 2017. Big health-
care data analytics: Challenges and applications. In
Handbook of Large-Scale Distributed Computing in
Smart Healthcare, pages 11–41. Springer.

Vanessa Lopez, Christina Unger, Philipp Cimiano, and
Enrico Motta. 2013. Evaluating question answering
over linked data. Web Semantics: Science, Services
and Agents on the World Wide Web, 21:3–13.

Minh-Thang Luong, Eugene Brevdo, and Rui Zhao.
2017. Neural machine translation (seq2seq) tutorial.
https://github.com/tensorflow/nmt.

George A Miller. 1995. Wordnet: a lexical database for
english. Communications of the ACM, 38(11):39–
41.

Suphakit Niwattanakul, Jatsada Singthongchai,
Ekkachai Naenudorn, and Supachanun Wanapu.
2013. Using of jaccard coefficient for keywords
similarity. In Proceedings of the International
MultiConference of Engineers and Computer
Scientists, volume 1.

Joel Nothman, James R Curran, and Tara Murphy.
2008. Transforming wikipedia into named entity
training data. In Proceedings of the Australasian
Language Technology Association Workshop 2008,
pages 124–132.

Hamid Palangi, Paul Smolensky, Xiaodong He,
and Li Deng. 2018. Question-answering with
grammatically-interpretable representations. In
Proceedings of the 32nd AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, New Orleans, LA.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings
of the 40th annual meeting on association for
computational linguistics, pages 311–318. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Preethi Raghavan and Siddharth Patwardhan. 2016.
Question answering on electronic medical records.
In Proceedings of the 2016 Summit on Clinical

Research Informatics, San Francisco, CA, March
2016.

Preethi Raghavan, Siddharth Patwardhan, Jennifer J.
Liang, and Murthy V. Devarakonda. 2017. Annotat-
ing electronic medical records for question answer-
ing. arXiv:1805.06816.

Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and
Percy Liang. 2016. Squad: 100,000+ questions
for machine comprehension of text. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.05250.

Matthew Richardson, Christopher JC Burges, and Erin
Renshaw. 2013. Mctest: A challenge dataset for
the open-domain machine comprehension of text. In
EMNLP, volume 3, page 4.

Kirk Roberts and Dina Demner-Fushman. 2016. An-
notating logical forms for ehr questions. In LREC...
International Conference on Language Resources &
Evaluation:[proceedings]. International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation, volume
2016, page 3772. NIH Public Access.

Benjamin Shickel, Patrick James Tighe, Azra Bihorac,
and Parisa Rashidi. 2017. Deep ehr: A survey of re-
cent advances in deep learning techniques for elec-
tronic health record (ehr) analysis. IEEE Journal of
Biomedical and Health Informatics.

Amber Stubbs and Özlem Uzuner. 2015. Annotating
longitudinal clinical narratives for de-identification:
The 2014 i2b2/uthealth corpus. Journal of
biomedical informatics, 58:S20–S29.

Yu Su, Huan Sun, Brian Sadler, Mudhakar Srivatsa,
Izzeddin Gur, Zenghui Yan, and Xifeng Yan. 2016.
On generating characteristic-rich question sets for qa
evaluation. In EMNLP, pages 562–572.

Simon Šuster, Stéphan Tulkens, and Walter Daelemans.
2017. A short review of ethical challenges in clin-
ical natural language processing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.10090.

Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le.
2014. Sequence to sequence learning with neu-
ral networks. In Advances in neural information
processing systems, pages 3104–3112.

Paul C Tang, Danielle Fafchamps, and Edward H
Shortliffe. 1994. Traditional medical records as a
source of clinical data in the outpatient setting. In
Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer
Application in Medical Care, page 575. American
Medical Informatics Association.

Adam Trischler, Tong Wang, Xingdi Yuan, Justin Har-
ris, Alessandro Sordoni, Philip Bachman, and Ka-
heer Suleman. 2016. Newsqa: A machine compre-
hension dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.09830.

George Tsatsaronis, Georgios Balikas, Prodromos
Malakasiotis, Ioannis Partalas, Matthias Zschunke,
Michael R Alvers, Dirk Weissenborn, Anastasia



2368

Krithara, Sergios Petridis, Dimitris Polychronopou-
los, et al. 2015. An overview of the bioasq
large-scale biomedical semantic indexing and ques-
tion answering competition. BMC bioinformatics,
16(1):138.

Ricardo Usbeck, Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo, Lorenz
Bühmann, and Christina Unger. 2015. Hawk–
hybrid question answering using linked data. In
European Semantic Web Conference, pages 353–
368. Springer.

Özlem Uzuner. 2009. Recognizing obesity and co-
morbidities in sparse data. Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association, 16(4):561–570.

Ozlem Uzuner, Andreea Bodnari, Shuying Shen, Tyler
Forbush, John Pestian, and Brett R South. 2012.
Evaluating the state of the art in coreference res-
olution for electronic medical records. Journal
of the American Medical Informatics Association,
19(5):786–791.

Özlem Uzuner, Ira Goldstein, Yuan Luo, and Isaac Ko-
hane. 2008. Identifying patient smoking status from
medical discharge records. Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association, 15(1):14–24.

Özlem Uzuner, Imre Solti, and Eithon Cadag. 2010a.
Extracting medication information from clinical
text. Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association, 17(5):514–518.

Özlem Uzuner, Imre Solti, Fei Xia, and Eithon
Cadag. 2010b. Community annotation experiment
for ground truth generation for the i2b2 medica-
tion challenge. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 17(5):519–523.

Özlem Uzuner, Brett R South, Shuying Shen, and
Scott L DuVall. 2011. 2010 i2b2/va challenge
on concepts, assertions, and relations in clinical
text. Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association, 18(5):552–556.

Alfredo Vellido, José David Martín-Guerrero, and
Paulo JG Lisboa. 2012. Making machine learning
models interpretable. In ESANN, volume 12, pages
163–172. Citeseer.

Ellen M Voorhees et al. 1999. The trec-8 question an-
swering track report. In Trec, volume 99, pages 77–
82.


