



















































Getting Gender Right in Neural Machine Translation


Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 3003–3008
Brussels, Belgium, October 31 - November 4, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

3003

Getting Gender Right in Neural Machine Translation

Eva Vanmassenhoveα Christian Hardmeierβ

α ADAPT, School of Computing, Dublin City University, Dublin, Ireland
firstname.lastname@adaptcentre.ie

β Department of Linguistics and Philology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
christian.hardmeier@lingfil.uu.se

Andy Wayα

Abstract

Speakers of different languages must attend
to and encode strikingly different aspects of
the world in order to use their language cor-
rectly (Sapir, 1921; Slobin, 1996). One such
difference is related to the way gender is ex-
pressed in a language. Saying “I am happy”
in English, does not encode any additional
knowledge of the speaker that uttered the sen-
tence. However, many other languages do
have grammatical gender systems and so such
knowledge would be encoded. In order to
correctly translate such a sentence into, say,
French, the inherent gender information needs
to be retained/recovered. The same sentence
would become either “Je suis heureux”, for a
male speaker or “Je suis heureuse” for a fe-
male one. Apart from morphological agree-
ment, demographic factors (gender, age, etc.)
also influence our use of language in terms of
word choices or even on the level of syntac-
tic constructions (Tannen, 1991; Pennebaker
et al., 2003). We integrate gender information
into NMT systems. Our contribution is two-
fold: (1) the compilation of large datasets with
speaker information for 20 language pairs, and
(2) a simple set of experiments that incorpo-
rate gender information into NMT for multi-
ple language pairs. Our experiments show that
adding a gender feature to an NMT system sig-
nificantly improves the translation quality for
some language pairs.

1 Introduction

In the field of linguistics, the differences between
male and female traits within spoken and written
language have been studied both empirically and
theoretically, revealing that the language used by
males and females differs in terms of style and
syntax (Coates, 2015). The increasing amount of
work on automatic author classification (or ‘au-
thor profiling’) reaching relatively high accuracies

on domain-specific data corroborates these find-
ings (Rangel et al., 2013; Santosh et al., 2013).
However, determining the gender of an author
based solely on text is not a solved issue. Like-
wise, the selection of the most informative fea-
tures for gender classification remains a difficult
task (Litvinova et al., 2016).

When translating from one language into an-
other, original author traits are partially lost, both
in human and machine translations (Mirkin et al.,
2015; Rabinovich et al., 2017). However, in the
field of Machine Translation (MT) one of the most
observable consequences of this missing informa-
tion are morphologically incorrect variants due to
a lack of agreement in number and gender with
the subject. Such errors harm the overall fluency
and adequacy of the translated sentence. Further-
more, gender-related errors are not just harming
the quality of the translation as getting the gender
right is also a matter of basic politeness. Current
systems have a tendency to perpetuate a male bias
which amounts to negative discrimination against
half the population and this has been picked up by
the media.1

Human translators rely on contextual informa-
tion to infer the gender of the speaker in order to
make the correct morphological agreement. How-
ever, most current MT systems do not; they simply
exploit statistical dependencies on the sentence
level that have been learned from large amounts
of parallel data. Furthermore, sentences are trans-
lated in isolation. As a consequence, pieces of
information necessary to determine the gender of
the speakers, might get lost. The MT system will,
in such cases, opt for the statistically most likely
variant, which depending on the training data, will

1https://www.theguardian.
com/technology/2017/apr/
13/ai-programs-exhibit
-racist-and-sexist-biases-research

https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/apr/13/ai-programs-exhibit
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/apr/13/ai-programs-exhibit
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/apr/13/ai-programs-exhibit
-racist-and-sexist-biases-research


3004

be either the male or the female form. Addition-
ally, in the field of MT, training data often con-
sists of both original and translated parallel texts:
large parts of the texts have already been trans-
lated, which, as studied by Mirkin et al. (2015),
does not preserve the original demographic and
psychometric traits of the author, making it very
hard for a Neural MT (NMT) system to determine
the gender of the author.

With this in mind, a first step towards the preser-
vation of author traits would be their integration
into an NMT system. As ‘gender’ manifests itself
not only in the agreement with other words in a
sentence, but also in the choice of context-based
words or on the level of syntactic constructions,
the sets of experiments conducted in this paper
focus on the integration of a gender feature into
NMT for multiple language pairs.

The structure of the paper is the following: re-
lated work is described in Section 2; Section 3 de-
scribes and analyses the datasets that were com-
piled; the experimental setup is discussed in Sec-
tion 4; the results are presented in Section 5; fi-
nally, we conclude and provide some ideas for fu-
ture work in Section 6.

2 Related Work

Differences in the language between male and
female speakers have been studied within vari-
ous fields related to linguistics, including Natural
Language Processing (NLP) for author profiling,
conversational agents, recommendation systems
etc. Mirkin et al. (2015) motivated the need for
more personalized MT. Their experiments show
that MT is detrimental to the automatic recogni-
tion of linguistic signals of traits of the original au-
thor/speaker. Their work suggests using domain-
adaptation techniques to make MT more personal-
ized but does not include any actual experiments
on the inclusion of author traits in MT.

Rabinovich et al. (2017) conducted a series of
experiments on preserving original author traits,
focusing particularly on gender. As suggested
by Mirkin et al. (2015), they treat the person-
alization of Statistical MT (SMT) systems as a
domain-adaptation task treating the female and
male gender as two different domains. They
applied two common simple domain-adaptation
techniques in order to create personalized SMT:
(1) using gender-specific phrase-tables and lan-
guage models, and (2) using a gender-specific tun-

ing set. Although their models did not improve
over the baseline, their work provides a detailed
analysis of gender traits in human and machine
translation.

Our work is, to the best of our knowledge, the
first to attempt building a speaker-informed NMT
system. Our approach is similar to the work of
Sennrich et al. (2016) on controlling politeness,
where some sentence of the training data are fol-
lowed with an ‘informal’ or ‘polite’ tag indicating
the level of politeness expressed.

3 Compilation of Datasets

One of the main obstacles for more personalized
MT systems is finding large enough annotated
parallel datasets with speaker information. Rabi-
novich et al. (2017) published an annotated paral-
lel dataset for EN–FR and EN–DE. However, for
many other language pairs no sufficiently large an-
notated datasets are available.

To address the aforementioned problem, we
published online a collection of parallel corpora
licensed under the Creative Commons Attribu-
tion 4.0 International License for 20 language
pairs (Vanmassenhove and Hardmeier, 2018).2

We followed the approach described by Rabi-
novich et al. (2017) and tagged parallel sentences
from Europarl (Koehn, 2005) with speaker infor-
mation (name, gender, age, date of birth, euroID
and date of the session) by retrieving speaker in-
formation provided by tags in the Europarl source
files. The Europarl source files contain informa-
tion about the speaker on the paragraph level and
the filenames contain the data of the session. By
retrieving the names of the speakers together with
meta-information on the members of the Euro-
pean Parliament (MEPs) released by Rabinovich
et al. (2017) (which includes among others name,
country, date of birth and gender predictions per
MEP), we were able to retrieve demographic an-
notations (gender, age, etc.). An overview of the
language pairs as well as the amount of annotated
parallel sentences per language pair is given in Ta-
ble 1.

3.1 Analysis of the EN–FR Annotated
Dataset

We first analysed the distribution of male and fe-
male sentence in our data. In the 10 different

2https://github.com/evavnmssnhv/
Europarl-Speaker-Information

https://github.com/evavnmssnhv/Europarl-Speaker-Information
https://github.com/evavnmssnhv/Europarl-Speaker-Information


3005

Languages # sents Languages # sents
EN–BG 306,380 EN–IT 1,297,635
EN–CS 491,848 EN–LT 481,570
EN–DA 1,421,197 EN–LV 487,287
EN–DE 1,296,843 EN–NL 1,419,359
EN–EL 921,540 EN–PL 478,008
EN–ES 1,419,507 EN–PT 1,426,043
EN–ET 494,645 EN–RO 303,396
EN–FI 1,393,572 EN–SK 488,351
EN–FR 1,440,620 EN–SL 479,313
EN–HU 251,833 EN–SV 1,349,472

Table 1: Overview of annotated parallel sentences per lan-
guage pair

datasets we experimented with, the percentage of
sentences uttered by female speakers is very sim-
ilar, ranging between 32% and 33%. This simi-
larity can be explained by the fact that Europarl
is largely a multilingual corpus with a big overlap
between the different language pairs.

We conducted a more focused analysis on one
of the subcorpora (EN–FR) with respect to the
percentage of sentences uttered by males/females
for various age groups to obtain a better grasp of
what kind of data we are using for training. As
can be seen from Figure 1, with the exception of
the youngest age group (20–30), which represents
only a very small percentage of the total amount
of sentences (0.71%), more male data is available
in all age groups. Furthermore, when looking at
the entire dataset, 67.39% of the sentences are pro-
duced by male speakers. Moreover, almost half of
the total number of sentences are uttered by the
50–60 age group (43.76%).

20-30 30-40 40-50 50-60 60-70 70-80 80-90
0%

10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%

100%

Male

Female

Age groups

Figure 1: Percentage of female and male speakers per age
group

The analysis shows that indeed, there is a gen-
der unbalance in the Europarl dataset, which will
be reflected in the translations that MT systems
trained on this data produce.

4 Experimental Setup

4.1 Datasets
We carried out a set of experiments on 10 lan-
guage pairs (the ones for which we compiled more
than 500k annotated Europarl parallel sentences):
EN–DE, EN–FR, EN–ES, EN–EL, EN–PT, EN–
FI, EN–IT, EN–SV, EN–NL and EN–DA. We aug-
mented every sentence with a tag on the English
source side, identifying the gender of the speaker,
as illustrated in (1). This approach for encoding
sentence-specific information for NMT has been
successfully exploited to tackle other types of is-
sues, multilingual NMT systems (e.g., Zero Shot
Translation (Johnson et al., 2017)), domain adap-
tation (Sennrich et al., 2016), etc.

(1) “FEMALE Madam President, as a...”

For each of these language pairs we trained two
NMT systems: a baseline and a tagged one. We
evaluated the performance of all our systems on a
randomly selected 2K general test set. Moreover,
we further evaluated the EN–FR systems on 2K
male-only and female-only test sets to have a look
at the system performance with respect to gender-
related issues. We also looked at two additional
male and female test sets in which the first person
singular pronoun appeared.

4.2 Description of the NMT Systems
We used the OpenNMT-py toolkit (Klein et al.,
2017) to train the NMT models. The models
are sequence-to-sequence encoder-decoders with
LSTMs as the recurrent unit (Bahdanau et al.,
2014; Cho et al., 2014; Sutskever et al., 2014)
trained with the default parameters. In order to by-
pass the OOV problem and reduce the number of
dictionary entries, we use word-segmentation with
BPE (Sennrich, 2015). We ran the BPE algorithm
with 89,500 operations (Sennrich, 2015). All sys-
tems are trained for 13 epochs and the best model
is selected for evaluation.

5 Results

In this section we discuss some of the results ob-
tained. We hypothesized that the male/female
tags would be particularly helpful for French, Por-
tuguese, Italian, Spanish and Greek, where adjec-
tives and even verb forms can be marked by the
gender of the speaker. Since, according to the
literature, women and men also make use of dif-
ferent syntactic constructions and make different



3006

word choices, we also tested the approach on other
languages that do not have morphological agree-
ment with the gender of the speaker such as Dan-
ish (DA), Dutch (NL), Finnish (FI), German (DE)
and Swedish (SV).

First, we wanted to see how our tagged systems
performed on the general test set compared to the
baseline. In Table 2, the BLEU scores for 10 base-
line and 10 gender-enhanced NMT systems are
presented.

Systems EN EN-TAG
FR 37.82 39.26*
ES 42.47 42.28
EL 31.38 31.54
IT 31.46 31.75*
PT 36.11 36.33
DA 36.69 37.00*
DE 28.28 28.05
FI 21.82 21.35*
SV 35.42 35.19
NL 28.35 28.22

Table 2: BLEU scores for the 10 baseline (denoted with
EN) and the 10 gender-enhanced NMT (denoted with EN-
TAG) systems. Entries labeled with * present statistically
significant differences (p < 0.05). Statistical significance was
computed with the MultEval tool (Clark et al., 2011).

While most of the BLEU-scores (Papineni et al.,
2002) in Table 2 are consistent with our hy-
pothesis, showing (significant) improvements for
the NMT systems enriched with a gender tag
(EN-TAG) over the baseline systems (EN) for
French, Italian, Portuguese and Greek, the Span-
ish enriched system surprisingly does not (–0.19
BLEU). As hypothesized, the Dutch, German,
Finnish and Swedish systems do not improve.
However, the Danish (EN–DA) enriched NMT
system does achieve a significant +0.31 BLEU im-
provement.

We expected to see the strongest improvements
in sentences uttered by female speakers as, accord-
ing to our initial analysis, the male data was over-
represented in the training. To test this hypothe-
sis, we evaluated all systems on a male-only and
female-only test set. Furthermore, we also experi-
mented on test sets containing the pronoun of the
first person singular as this form is used when a
speaker refers to himself/herself. The results on
the specific test set for the EN–FR dataset are pre-
sented in Table 3. As hypothesized, the biggest
BLEU score improvement is observed on the fe-
male test set, particularly, the test sets containing
first person singular pronouns (F1).

We had a closer look at some of the transla-

Test Sets EN EN-TAG
FR (M) 37.58 38.71*
FR (F) 37.75 38.97*
FR (M1) 39.00 39.66*
FR (F1) 37.32 38.57*

Table 3: BLEU-scores on EN–FR comparing the baseline
(EN) and the tagged systems (EN–TAG) on 4 different test
sets: a test set containing only male data (M), only female
data (F), 1st person male data (M1) and first person female
data (F1). All the improvements of the EN-TAG system are
statistically significant (p < 0.5), as indicated by *.

tions.3 There are cases where the gender-informed
(TAG) system improves over the baseline (BASE)
due to better agreement. Interestingly, in (2)
the French female form of vice-president (vice-
présidente) appears in the translation produced by
the BASE system while the male form is the cor-
rect one. The gender-informed system does make
the correct agreement by using the female variant.
In (3) the speaker is female but the baseline sys-
tem outputs a male form of the adjective ‘happy’
(‘heureux’).

(2)
(Ref) En tant que vice-président...
(BASE) En tant que vice-présidente...
(TAG) En tant que vice-président...

(3)
(Ref) ... je suis heureuse que...
(BASE) ... je suis heureux que...
(TAG) ... je suis heureuse que...

However, we also encountered cases where the
gender-informed system fails to produce the cor-
rect agreement, as in (4), where both the BASE
and the TAG system produce a male form (‘em-
barassé’) instead of the correct female one (‘em-
barassée’ or ‘gênée’).

(4)
(Ref) je suis gênée que...
(BASE) je suis embarassé que...
(TAG) je suis embarassé que...

For some language pairs the gender-informed
system leads to a significant improvement even
on a general test set. This implies that the im-
provement is not merely because of better mor-
phological agreement, as these kinds of improve-
ments are very hard to measure with BLEU, espe-
cially given the fact that Europarl consists of for-
mal spoken language and does not contain many
sentences using the first person singular pronoun.
From our analysis, we observe that in many cases
the gender-informed systems have a higher BLEU

3We used the tool provided by Tilde https://www.
letsmt.eu/Bleu.aspx to see where the BLEU score
between the baseline and our tagged systems varied the most.

https://www.letsmt.eu/Bleu.aspx
https://www.letsmt.eu/Bleu.aspx


3007

score than the baseline system due to differences
in word choices as in (5) and (6), where both trans-
lations are correct, but the gender-informed sys-
tem picks the preferred variant.

The observations with respect to differences in
word preferences between male and female speak-
ers are in accordance with corpus linguistic stud-
ies, which have shown that gender does not only
have an effect on morphological agreement, but
also manifests itself in other ways as males and
females have different preferences when it comes
to different types of constructions, word choices
etc. (Newman et al., 2008; Coates, 2015). This
also implies that, even for languages that do not
mark gender overtly (i.e. grammatically), it can
still be beneficial to take the gender of the au-
thor/speaker into account.

(5)
(Ref) Je pense que ...
(BASE) Je crois que...
(TAG) Je pense que...

Although more research is required in order
to draw general conclusions on this matter, from
other linguistic studies, it appears that it is indeed
the case that there is a relation between the use
of the word “pense” (“think”) / “crois” (“believe”)
and the gender of the speaker. To see whether
there is a difference in word choice and whether
this is reflected in our data, we compiled a list
of the most frequent French words for the male
data and the female data. Our analysis reveals that
“crois” is, in general, used more by males (hav-
ing position 303 in the most frequent words for
males, but only position 373 for females), while
“pense” is found at a similar position in both lists
(position 151 and 153). These findings are in ac-
cordance with other linguistic corpus studies on
language and gender stating that women use less
assertive speech (Newman et al., 2008). “Croire”
and “penser” are both verbs of cognition but there
is a difference in the degree of confidence in the
truth value predicated: the verb “croire” denotes
more confidence in the truth of the complement
clause than the verb “penser” does. In the future,
we would like to perform a more detailed analy-
sis of other specific differences in lexical choices
between males and females on multiple language
pairs.

(6)
(Ref) J’ ai plusieurs remarques...
(BASE) J’ ai un nombre de commentaires...
(TAG) J’ ai plusieurs remarques...

6 Conclusions and Future Work

In this work, we experimented with the incorpora-
tion of speaker-gender tags during the training of
NMT systems in order to improve morphological
agreement. We focused particularly on language
pairs that express grammatical gender but included
other language pairs as well, as linguistic studies
have shown that the style and syntax of language
used by males and females differs (Coates, 2015).

From the experiments, we see that informing
the NMT system by providing tags indicating the
gender of the speaker can indeed lead to signif-
icant improvements over state-of-the-art baseline
systems, especially for those languages expressing
grammatical gender agreement. However, while
analyzing the EN–FR translations, we observed
that the improvements are not always consistent
and that, apart from morphological agreement, the
gender-aware NMT system differs from the base-
line in terms of word choices.

In the future, we would like to conduct fur-
ther manual evaluation on the translations to fur-
ther analyze the differences with the baseline sys-
tem. Furthermore, we aim to experiment with
other ways of integrating speaker information. We
envisage working on gender classification tech-
niques in order to work on other types (more in-
formal) of corpora that are more likely to express
speaker characteristics.

Acknowledgements

This work has been supported by COST action
IS1312, the Dublin City University Faculty of En-
gineering & Computing under the Daniel O’Hare
Research Scholarship scheme and by the ADAPT
Centre for Digital Content Technology, which
is funded under the SFI Research Centres Pro-
gramme (Grant 13/RC/2106). Christian Hard-
meier was supported by the Swedish Research
Council under grant 2017-930.

We would also like to thank the anonymous re-
viewers for their insightful comments and feed-
back.

References
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-

gio. 2014. Neural Machine Translation by Jointly
Learning to Align and Translate. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, Banff,
Canada.



3008

Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merriënboer, Çalar
Gülçehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Hol-
ger Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Learn-
ing Phrase Representations using RNN Encoder–
Decoder for Statistical Machine Translation. In Pro-
ceedings of EMNLP 2014, pages 1724–1734, Doha,
Qatar.

Jonathan H Clark, Chris Dyer, Alon Lavie, and Noah A
Smith. 2011. Better Hypothesis Testing for Statisti-
cal Machine Translation: Controlling for Optimizer
Instability. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: Human Language Technologies: short papers-
Volume 2, pages 176–181. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Jennifer Coates. 2015. Women, Men and Language:
A Sociolinguistic Account of Gender Differences in
Language. Routledge, London.

Melvin Johnson, Mike Schuster, Quoc V Le, Maxim
Krikun, Yonghui Wu, Zhifeng Chen, Nikhil Thorat,
Fernanda Viégas, Martin Wattenberg, Greg Corrado,
et al. 2017. Google’s Multilingual Neural Machine
Translation System: Enabling Zero-Shot Transla-
tion. Transactions of the Association of Computa-
tional Linguistics, 5(1):339–351.

Guillaume Klein, Yoon Kim, Yuntian Deng, Jean
Senellart, and Alexander M. Rush. 2017. Open-
NMT: Open-Source Toolkit for Neural Machine
Translation. In Proceeding of ACL, Vancouver,
Canada.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A Parallel Corpus for
Statistical Machine Translation. In MT Summit, vol-
ume 5, pages 79–86, Phuket, Thailand.

Tatiana Litvinova, Pavel Seredin, Olga Litvinova,
Olga Zagorovskaya, Aleksandr Sboev, Dmitry Gu-
dovskih, Ivan Moloshnikov, and Roman Rybka.
2016. Gender Prediction for Authors of Russian
Texts Using Regression And Classification Tech-
niques. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on
Concept Discovery in Unstructured Data co-located
with the 13th International Conference on Concept
Lattices and Their Applications (CDUD@ CLA),
pages 44–53, Moscow, Russia.

Shachar Mirkin, Scott Nowson, Caroline Brun, and
Julien Perez. 2015. Motivating Personality-Aware
Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the 2015
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 1102–1108, Lisbon, Portu-
gal.

Matthew L Newman, Carla J Groom, Lori D Handel-
man, and James W Pennebaker. 2008. Gender Dif-
ferences in Language Use: An Analysis of 14,000
Text Samples. Discourse Processes, 45(3):211–236.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: A Method for Automatic
Evaluation of Machine Translation. In Proceedings

of the 40th annual meeting on association for com-
putational linguistics, pages 311–318.

James W. Pennebaker, Matthias R. Mehl, and Kate G.
Niederhoffer. 2003. Psychological Aspects of Natu-
ral Language Use: Our words, Our Selves. Annual
review of psychology, 54(1):547–577.

Ella Rabinovich, Raj Nath Patel, Shachar Mirkin, Lu-
cia Specia, and Shuly Wintner. 2017. Personalized
Machine Translation: Preserving Original Author
Traits. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Volume 1, Long Papers, pages
1074–1084, Valencia, Spain.

Francisco Rangel, Paolo Rosso, Moshe Koppel, Ef-
stathios Stamatatos, and Giacomo Inches. 2013.
Overview of The Author Profiling Task at PAN
2013. In CLEF Conference on Multilingual and
Multimodal Information Access Evaluation, pages
352–365.

K Santosh, Romil Bansal, Mihir Shekhar, and Va-
sudeva Varma. 2013. Author profiling: Predicting
age and gender from blogs. Notebook for PAN at
CLEF, pages 119–124.

Edward Sapir. 1921. Language: An Introduction to
the Study of Speech. NewYork: Harcourt Brace &
Company.

Rico Sennrich. 2015. Modelling and Optimizing on
Syntactic N-grams for Statistical Machine Transla-
tion. Transactions of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 3:169–182.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2016. Controlling Politeness in Neural Machine
Translation via Side Constraints. In Proceedings of
the 2016 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: Human Language Technologies, pages 35–40,
Berlin, Germany.

Dan I. Slobin. 1996. From Thought and Language to
Thinking for Speaking. In J. Gumperz and S. Levin-
son, editors, Rethinking Linguistic Relativity, pages
70–96. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V. Le. 2014.
Sequence to Sequence Learning with Neural Net-
works. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 27: Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems, pages 3104–3112,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Deborah Tannen. 1991. You Just Don’t Understand.
Ballantine Books, New York, USA.

Eva Vanmassenhove and Christian Hardmeier. 2018.
Europarl Datasets with Demographic Speaker Infor-
mation. In EAMT, Alicante, Spain.


