



















































Hierarchical Neural Networks for Sequential Sentence Classification in Medical Scientific Abstracts


Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 3100–3109
Brussels, Belgium, October 31 - November 4, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

3100

Hierarchical Neural Networks for Sequential Sentence Classification in
Medical Scientific Abstracts

Di Jin
MIT

jindi15@mit.edu

Peter Szolovits
MIT

psz@mit.edu

Abstract

Prevalent models based on artificial neural net-
work (ANN) for sentence classification often
classify sentences in isolation without con-
sidering the context in which sentences ap-
pear. This hampers the traditional sentence
classification approaches to the problem of se-
quential sentence classification, where struc-
tured prediction is needed for better overall
classification performance. In this work, we
present a hierarchical sequential labeling net-
work to make use of the contextual informa-
tion within surrounding sentences to help clas-
sify the current sentence. Our model outper-
forms the state-of-the-art results by 2%-3% on
two benchmarking datasets for sequential sen-
tence classification in medical scientific ab-
stracts.

1 Introduction

Since 1665, over 50 million scholarly research
articles have been published (Jinha, 2010), with
approximately 2.5 million new scientific papers
coming out each year (Ware and Mabe, 2015).
While this enormous corpus provides us with the
ability to conclusively accept or reject hypotheses
and yields insight into promising research direc-
tions, it is getting harder and harder to extract use-
ful information from the literature in an efficient
and timely manner due to its sheer amount. There-
fore, an automatic and intelligent tool to help users
locate the information of interest quickly and com-
prehensively is highly desired.

When searching for relevant literature for a cer-
tain field, investigators first check the abstracts of
scientific papers to see whether they match the
criterion of interest. This process can be expe-
dited if the abstracts are structured; that is, if
the rhetorical structural elements of scientific ab-
stracts such as purpose, methods, results, and con-
clusions (American National Standards Institute,

1979) are explicitly stated. However, even to-
day, a significant portion of scientific abstracts is
still unstructured, which causes great difficulty in
information retrieval. In this paper, we develop
a machine-learning based approach to automati-
cally categorize sentences in scientific abstracts
into rhetorical sections so that the desired infor-
mation can be efficiently retrieved.

In a scientific abstract, each sentence can be as-
signed to a rhetorical structural element sequen-
tially. This rhetorical structure profiling process
can be formulated as a sequential sentence clas-
sification task, as the element assignment of any
single sentence is greatly associated with the as-
signments of the surrounding sentences. This is
in contrast to the general sentence classification
problem, where each sentence is classified individ-
ually and no contextual information can be used.
Previous state-of-the-art methods relied on Condi-
tional Random Fields (CRFs) to take into account
the inter-dependence between subsequent labels,
which improved joint sentence classification per-
formance by considering the label sequence infor-
mation. In this work, we add a bi-directional long
short-term memory (bi-LSTM) layer over the rep-
resentations of individual sentences so that it can
encode the contextual content and semantics from
preceding and succeeding sentences for better cat-
egorical inference of the current one.

In this work, we present a hierarchical neural
network model for the sequential sentence classi-
fication task, which we call a hierarchical sequen-
tial labeling network (HSLN). Our model first uses
a RNN or CNN layer to individually encode the
sentence representation from the sequence of word
embeddings, then uses another bi-LSTM layer to
take as input the individual sentence representa-
tion and output the contextualized sentence repre-
sentation, subsequently uses a single-hidden-layer
feed-forward network to transform the sentence



3101

representation to the probability vector, and finally
optimizes the predicted label sequence jointly via
a CRF layer. We evaluate our model on two
benchmarking datasets, PubMed RCT (Dernon-
court and Lee, 2017) and NICTA-PIBOSO (Kim
et al., 2011), which were both generated from
the PubMed database1. Our key contributions are
summarized as follows:

1. Based on the previous best performing archi-
tecture for sequential sentence classification
(Dernoncourt et al., 2016), we add one more
layer to extract contextual information from
surrounding sentences for more accurate pre-
diction of the current one. Together with the
CRF algorithm, this allows us to make use
of not only the preceding labels’ information
but also the content and semantics of adjacent
sentences to infer the label of the target sen-
tence.

2. We remove the need for a character-based
word embedding component without sacrific-
ing performance. For individual sentence en-
coding, we propose the use of a CNN module
as an alternative to RNN for small datasets,
suffering less from over-fitting as evidenced
by our experiments. Moreover, we incorpo-
rate attention-based pooling in both RNN and
CNN models to further improve the perfor-
mance.

3. We adopt dropout with expectation-linear
regularization instead of the standard one to
reduce the performance gap between training
and test phases.

4. We obtain state-of-the-art results on two
datasets for sequential sentence classification
in medical abstracts, outperforming the pre-
vious best models by at least 2% in terms of
F1 scores.

2 Related Work

Previous systems for sequential sentence classifi-
cation concentrate on the rhetorical structure anal-
ysis of biomedical abstracts. They are mainly
based on naive Bayes (Ruch et al., 2007), sup-
port vector machine (SVM) (McKnight and Srini-
vasan, 2003; Yamamoto and Takagi, 2005; Liu
et al., 2013), Hidden Markov Model (HMM) (Lin

1https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/

et al., 2006), and CRF (Kim et al., 2011; Hassan-
zadeh et al., 2014; Hirohata et al., 2008; Chung,
2009). All these methods heavily rely on nu-
merous carefully hand-engineered features such as
lexical (bag-of-words (BOW)), semantic (hyper-
nyms, synonyms), structural (part of speech (POS)
tags, lemmas, orthographic shapes, headings), sta-
tistical (statistical distributions of token types) and
sequential (sentence position, surrounding fea-
tures, predicted labels) features.

In contrast, current emerging artificial neural
network (ANN) based models have removed the
need for manually selected features; instead, fea-
tures are self-learned from the token and/or char-
acter embeddings. These deep learning mod-
els have revolutionized the natural language pro-
cessing (NLP) field with state-of-the-art results
achieved in various tasks, including the most rel-
evant text classification task (Kim, 2014; Zhang
et al., 2016; Conneau et al., 2017; Lai et al., 2015;
Joulin et al., 2016; Ma et al., 2015). Most of these
models are built upon deep CNNs or RNNs as
well as combinations of them, where CNN is good
at extracting local n-gram features while RNN is
suitable for sequence modeling.

The above-mentioned works for short-text clas-
sification do not consider any context of sentence
semantics in the models, making them under-
perform in the sequential sentence classification
scenario, where surrounding sentences can play
a big role in inferring the label of the current
sentence. Recent works that apply deep neural
networks to the sequential sentence classification
problem include the system proposed by Lee et al.
(Lee and Dernoncourt, 2016), where the preceding
utterances were used to help classify the current
utterance in a dialog into the corresponding dia-
logue act. Most recent work from Dernoncourt et
al. (Dernoncourt et al., 2016) used a CRF layer
to optimize the predicted label sequence, where
the preceding labels have influence on determin-
ing the current label. This model outperformed
the state-of-the-art results on two datasets PubMed
RCT and NICTA-PIBOSO for sentence classifica-
tion in medical abstracts.

3 Proposed Model

Notation We denote scalars in italic lowercase
(e.g., k), vectors in bold italic lowercase (e.g., s)
and matrices in italic uppercase (e.g., W ). Colon
notations xi:j and si:j are used to denote the se-



3102

quence of scalars (xi, xi+1, ..., xj) and vectors
(si, si+1, ..., sj).

Our model is composed of four components:
the word embedding layer, the sentence encoding
layer, the context enriching layer, and the label se-
quence optimization layer. In the following sec-
tions they will be discussed in detail.

3.1 Word Embedding Layer

Given a sentence w =
[
w1 w2 · · · wN

]
com-

prising N words, this layer maps each word to a
real-valued vector as its lexical-semantic represen-
tation. Word representations are encoded by the
column vector in the embedding matrix Wword ∈
Rdw×|V |, where dw is the dimension of the word
vector and V is the vocabulary of the dataset. Each
column Wwordi ∈ Rd

w
is the word embedding

vector for the ith word in the vocabulary. The
word embeddings Wword can be pre-trained on
large unlabeled datasets using unsupervised algo-
rithms such as word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013),
GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014) and fastText (Bo-
janowski et al., 2016).

3.2 Sentence Encoding Layer

This layer takes as input the embedding vector of
each token in a sentence from the word embed-
ding layer and produces a vector s to encode this
sentence. The sequence of embedding vectors is
first processed by a bi-directional RNN (bi-RNN)
or CNN layer, similar to the ones used in the text
classification before (Kim, 2014; Lee and Dernon-
court, 2016; Liu et al., 2016). This layer outputs a
sequence of hidden states h1:N (h ∈ Rd

hs
) for a

sentence of N words with each hidden state cor-
responding to a word. To form the final repre-
sentation vector s of this sentence, attention-based
pooling is used, which can be described using the
following equations:

A = softmax(Us tanh(WsH + bs)), (1)

S = AHT , (2)

where H =
[
h1 h2 · · · hN

]
∈ Rdhs×N ,

Ws ∈ Rd
a×dhs is the transformation matrix for

soft alignment, bs ∈ Rd
a

is the bias vector, Us ∈
Rr×da is the token level context matrix used to
measure the relevance or importance of each to-
ken with respect to the whole sentence, softmax is

performed along the second dimension of its input
matrix, and A ∈ Rr×N is the attention matrix.

Here each row of Us is a context vector us ∈
Rda and it is expected to reflect an aspect or com-
ponent of the semantics of a sentence. To repre-
sent the overall semantics of the sentence, we use
multiple context vectors to focus on different parts
of this sentence.

Finally, the sentence encoding vector s ∈ Rrdhs

is obtained by reshaping the matrix S into a vector.

Figure 1: Model architecture. w: original word; e:
word embedding vector; h: sentence-level hidden state
output by the bi-RNN or CNN layer; s: sentence repre-
sentation vector; h′: abstract-level hidden state output
by the bi-LSTM layer; r: sentence label probability
vector; y: predicted sentence label.

3.3 Context Enriching Layer

This layer takes as input the sequence of individ-
ual sentence encoding vectors in a given abstract
of n sentences obtained from the last sentence en-
coding layer, with each vector corresponding to a
sentence. It outputs a new sequence of contextu-
alized sentence encoding vectors, which are en-
riched with the contextual information from sur-
rounding sentences. Specifically, the sequence of
individual sentence encoding vectors is input into



3103

a bi-LSTM layer, which produces a sequence of
hidden state vectors h′1:n (h′ ∈ Rd

hd
) with each

corresponding to a sentence. Each of these vec-
tors is subsequently input to a feed-forward neural
network with only one hidden layer to get the cor-
responding probability vector r ∈ Rl, which rep-
resents the probability that this sentence belongs
to each label, where l is the number of labels.

3.4 Label Sequence Optimization Layer

Within the abstract, the sequence of sentence cat-
egories implicitly follows some patterns. For ex-
ample, the category Results is always followed by
Conclusion, and the category Methods is certainly
after the Background. Making use of such patterns
can boost the classification performance via the
CRF algorithm (Lample et al., 2016). Given the
sequence of probability vectors r1:n from the last
context enriching layer for an abstract of n sen-
tences, this layer outputs a sequence of labels y1:n,
where yi represents the predicted label assigned to
the ith sentence.

In the CRF algorithm, in order to model depen-
dencies between subsequent labels, we incorpo-
rate a matrix T that contains the transition prob-
abilities between two subsequent labels; we define
T [i, j] as the probability that a token with label i is
followed by a token with the label j. The score of
a label sequence y1:n is defined as the sum of the
probabilities of individual labels and the transition
probabilities:

s(y1:n) =

n∑
i=1

ri(yi) +

n∑
i=2

T [yi−1, yi]. (3)

The score in the above equation can be trans-
formed into the probability of a certain label se-
quence by taking a softmax operation over all pos-
sible label sequences:

p(y1:n) =
es(y1:n)∑

ŷ1:n∈Y e
s(ŷ1:n)

, (4)

where Y denotes the set of all possible label se-
quences. During the training phase, the objective
is to maximize the probability of the gold label se-
quence. In the testing phase, given an input se-
quence, the corresponding sequence of predicted
labels is chosen as the one that maximizes the
score, computed via the Viterbi algorithm (Forney,
1973).

4 Experiments

4.1 Datasets
We evaluate our model on two sources of bench-
marking datasets on medical scientific abstracts,
where each sentence of the abstract is annotated
with one label that is associated with the rhetori-
cal structure. Table 1 summarizes the statistics of
the two datasets.

NICTA-PIBOSO This dataset2 was shared
from the ALTA 2012 Shared Task (Amini et al.,
2012), the goal of which is to build automatic sen-
tence classifiers that can map the sentences from
biomedical abstracts into a set of pre-defined cate-
gories for Evidence-Based Medicine (EBM).

PubMed RCT This new dataset was curated by
(Dernoncourt and Lee, 2017)3 and is currently
the largest dataset for sequential sentence classi-
fication. It is based on the PubMed database of
biomedical literature and each sentence of each
abstract is labeled with its role in the abstract
using one of the following classes: background,
objective, method, result, and conclusion. Table
2 presents an example abstract comprising struc-
tured sentences with their annotated labels.

4.2 Training Settings
For both datasets, test performance is assessed
on the training epoch with best validation perfor-
mance and F1 scores (weighted average by sup-
port (the number of true instances for each label))
are reported as the results.

The token embeddings were pre-trained on a
large corpus combining Wikipedia, PubMed, and
PMC texts (Moen and Ananiadou, 2013) us-
ing the word2vec tool4 (denoted as “Word2vec-
wiki+P.M.”). They are fixed during the train-
ing phase to avoid over-fitting. We also
tried other types of word embeddings, such
as the word2vec embeddings pre-trained on the
Google News dataset5 (denoted as “Word2vec-
News”), word2vec embeddings pre-trained on
the Wikipedia corpus6 (denoted as “Word2vec-
wiki”), GloVe embeddings pre-trained on the cor-

2This dataset can be found online at
https://www.kaggle.com/c/alta-nicta-challenge2

3This dataset can be downloaded from
https://github.com/Franck-Dernoncourt/pubmed-rct

4The word vectors can be downloaded at
http://bio.nlplab.org/

5https://code.google.com/archive/p/word2vec/
6https://github.com/jind11/word2vec-on-wikipedia



3104

Dataset |C| |V | Train Validation Test
NICTA-PIBOSO 6 17k 720 (7.7k) 80 (0.9k) 200 (2.2k)
PubMed 20k 5 68k 15k (180k) 2.5k (30k) 2.5k (30k)
PubMed 200k 5 331k 190k (2.2M) 2.5k (29k) 2.5k (29k)

Table 1: Datasets statistics. |C| denotes the number of labels, |V | represents the vocabulary size. For the train,
validation, and test sets, we indicate the number of abstracts followed by the number of sentences in parentheses.

Category Sentences

BACKGROUND
Emotional eating is associated with overeating and the development of obesity.
[...]

OBJECTIVES
The aim of this study was to test if attention bias for food moderates the effect
of self-reported emotional eating during sad mood (vs neutral mood) on actual
food intake. [...]

METHODS
Participants (N = 85) were randomly assigned to one of the two experimental
mood induction conditions (sad/neutral). [...]

RESULTS
[...] Yet, attention maintenance on food cues was significantly related to
increased intake specifically in the neutral condition, but not in the sad mood
condition.

CONCLUSIONS
The current findings show that self-reported emotional eating (based on the
DEBQ) might not validly predict who overeats when sad, at least not in a
laboratory setting with healthy women. [...]

Table 2: A typical abstract example with structured sentences and their corresponding annotated labels. The PMID
of this abstract is 24854809.

pus of Wikipedia 2014 + Gigaword 57 (denoted
as “Glove-wiki”), fastText embeddings pre-trained
on Wikipedia8 (denoted as “FastText-wiki”), and
fastText embeddings initialized with the standard
GloVe Common Crawl embeddings and then fine-
tuned on PubMed abstracts plus MIMIC-III notes
(denoted as “FastText-P.M.+MIMIC”). The com-
parison results are summarized in the next section.

The model is trained using the Adam optimiza-
tion method (Kingma and Ba, 2014). The learning
rate is initially set as 0.003 and decayed by 0.9
after each epoch. For regularization, dropout (Sri-
vastava et al., 2014) is applied to each layer. For
the version of dropout used in practice (e.g., the
dropout function implemented in the TensorFlow
and Pytorch libraries), the model ensemble gen-
erated by dropout in the training phase is approxi-
mated by a single model with scaled weights in the
inference phase, resulting in a gap between train-
ing and inference. To reduce this gap, we adopted
the dropout with expectation-linear regularization
introduced by Ma et al. (2016) to explicitly control
the inference gap and thus improve the generaliza-

7http://nlp.stanford.edu/data/glove.6B.zip
8https://github.com/facebookresearch/fastText/blob/master/

pretrained-vectors.md

tion performance.
Hyperparameters were optimized via grid

search based on the validation set and the best con-
figuration is shown in Table 3. The window sizes
of the CNN encoder in the sentence encoding layer
are 2, 3, 4 and 5. The RNN encoder in the sentence
encoding layer is set as LSTM for the PubMed
datasets and gated recurrent unit (GRU) for the
NICTA-PIBOSO dataset. Code for this work is
available online9.

5 Results and Discussion

Table 4 compares our model against the best
performing models in the literature (Dernoncourt
et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2013). There are two vari-
ants of our model in terms of different implemen-
tations of the sentence encoding layer: the model
that uses bi-RNN to encode the sentence is called
HSLN-RNN; while the model that uses the CNN
module is named HSLN-CNN. We have evaluated
both model variants on all datasets. And as evi-
denced by Table 4, our best model can improve the
F1 scores by 2%-3% in absolute number compared
with the previous best published results for all

9https://github.com/jind11/HSLN-Joint-Sentence-
Classification



3105

Parameter
PubMed NICTA

RNN CNN RNN CNN
dhs 200 - 200 -
dhd 200 200 200 300
da 200 100 250 75
dc - 200 - 150
r 15 1 5 4
β 0.01 0.001 0.01 0.01
dr 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6

Table 3: Hyperparameter settings. dhs: hidden size of
the sentence-level RNN layer (single direction); dhd:
hidden size of the abstract-level bi-LSTM layer (single
direction); da: dimension of the context vector us; r:
number of context vectors; β: coefficient of the dropout
regularization added to the total loss; dr: dropout.

datasets. For the PubMed 20k and 200k datasets,
our HSLN-RNN model achieves better results;
however, for the NICTA dataset, the HSLN-CNN
model performs better. This makes sense because
the CNN sentence encoder has fewer parameters
to be optimized, thus the HSLN-CNN model is
less likely to over-fit in a smaller dataset such
as NICTA. With sufficient data, however, the in-
creased capacity of the HSLN-RNN model offers
performance benefits. To be noted, this perfor-
mance gap between RNN and CNN sentence en-
coder gets larger as the dataset size increases from
20k to 200k for the PubMed dataset.

Model
PubMed

NICTA
20k 200k

Best Published
Marco Lui
(Lui, 2012)

- - 82.0
bi-ANN
(Dernoncourt et al., 2016)

90.0 91.6 82.7

Our Models
HSLN-CNN 92.2 92.8 84.7
HSLN-RNN 92.6 93.9 84.3

Table 4: Comparison of F1 scores (weighted average
by support (the number of true instances for each la-
bel)) between our model and the best published meth-
ods. The presented results of our model are evaluated
on the test set of the run with the highest F1 score on
the validation set.

Table 5 presents the ablation analysis of our
model (on the PubMed 20k dataset), where we re-
move one component at a time and quantify the
performance drop (reported on F1 scores). As can
be seen from Table 5, our HSLN-CNN model uni-

formly suffers a little more from the component re-
moval than the HSLN-RNN model, indicating that
the HSLN-RNN model is more robust. When the
context enriching layer is removed, both models
experience the most significant performance drop
and can only be on par with the previous state-
of-the-art results, strongly demonstrating that this
proposed component is the key to the performance
improvement of our model. Furthermore, even
without the label sequence optimization layer, our
model still significantly outperforms the best pub-
lished methods that are empowered by this layer,
indicating that the context enriching layer we pro-
pose can help optimize the label sequence by
considering the context information from the sur-
rounding sentences. Last but not the least, the
dropout regularization and attention-based pool-
ing components we add to our system can help
further improve the model in a limited extent.

Model HSLN-RNN HSLN-CNN
Full Model 92.6 92.2
− context 90.0 89.0
− seq. opt. 92.3 91.8
− dropout reg. 92.4 91.9
− attention 92.4 91.7

Table 5: Ablation analysis. F1 scores are reported.
“− context” is our model without the context enrich-
ing layer. “− seq. opt.” is our model without the la-
bel sequence optimization layer. “− dropout reg.’ is
our model using the standard dropout strategy without
the expectation-linearization regularization. “− atten-
tion” refers to the model without attention-based pool-
ing, i.e., in the sentence encoding layer, the final hid-
den state is used for the HSLN-RNN model while max-
pooling is used for the HSLN-CNN model.

Table 6 and 7 detail the results of classifica-
tion for each label in terms of performance scores
(precision, recall and F1) and confusion matrix,
respectively (for our HSLN-RNN model trained
on the PubMed 20k dataset). These show that
the classifier is very good at predicting the la-
bels Methods, Results and Conclusions, whereas
the greatest difficulty the classifier has is in dis-
tinguishing Background sections from Objectives
sections. One fifth of Background sentences are
incorrectly classified as Objectives, while around
one forth of Objectives sentences are wrongly as-
signed to the label of Background. We conjec-
ture this difficulty mainly comes from the fact
that the difference between Background and Ob-



3106

jectives sentences in terms of writing style is less
obvious compared with the other sections of the
abstract. Moreover, our model has some difficulty
in telling Methods sentences apart from Results
sentences.

Label P R F1 Support
Background 78.5 80.0 79.2 3077
Objectives 74.2 69.9 72.0 2333
Methods 95.0 97.7 96.3 9884
Results 96.8 95.3 96.0 9713
Conclusions 97.6 96.5 97.1 4571
Total 92.6 92.7 92.6 29578

Table 6: Results (presented in percentage) in terms of
precision (P), recall (R) and F-measure (F1) on the test
set for each label obtained by our HSLN-RNN model
on the PubMed 20k dataset.

B C M O R
B 2460 4 69 537 7
C 4 4413 11 1 142
M 37 11 9657 27 152
O 632 0 68 1630 3
R 2 95 362 1 9253

Table 7: Confusion matrix obtained by our model on
the PubMed 20k dataset. Rows correspond to predicted
labels, and columns correspond to true labels. B rep-
resents background, O represents objectives, M repre-
sents methods, R represents results, and C represents
conclusions.

Table 8 presents a few examples of prediction
errors that are produced by our HSLN-RNN model
trained on the PubMed 20k dataset. This error
analysis suggests that one of the biggest model er-
ror sources could be from the debatable gold stan-
dard labels of the dataset. For example, the sen-
tence “Depressive disorders are one of the leading
components of the global burden of disease with
a prevalence of up to 14% in the general popula-
tion.” is indeed introducing the background of the
problem (depressive disorders) on which this arti-
cle is going to focus; however, the gold label clas-
sifies it into the Objective category. For another
instance, the sentence “A post hoc analysis was
conducted with the use of data from the evaluation
study of congestive heart failure and pulmonary
artery catheterization effectiveness (escape).” be-
longs to the Result label according to the gold stan-
dard, but it makes more sense that it should be
classified as a Method label.

Figure 2 presents an example of the transi-
tion matrix after the HSLN-RNN model has been
trained on the PubMed 20k dataset, which encodes
the transition probability between two subsequent
labels. It effectively reflects what label is the most
likely one that follows the current one. For ex-
ample, by comparing the transition scores in the
Result row in Figure 2, we can conclude that a
sentence pertaining to the Result is typically fol-
lowed by a sentence pertaining to the Conclusion
and is unlikely to be followed by a sentence in
the Background category (transition scores of 2.48
vs -5.46), which makes sense. From this transi-
tion matrix, we can figure out the most probable
label sequence: Background → Objective →
Method → Result → Conclusion, which is
also consistent with our expectations.

Figure 2: Transition matrix of label sequence after the
HSLN-RNN model has been trained on the PubMed
20k dataset. The rows represent the label of the previ-
ous sentence, while the columns represent the label of
the current sentence.

In order to test the importance of pretrained
word embeddings, we performed experiments
with different sets of publicly published word em-
beddings, as well as our locally curated word em-
beddings, to initialize our model. Table 9 gives
the performance of six different word embeddings
for our HSLN-RNN model trained on the PubMed
20k dataset. According to Table 9, the training
methods that create the word embeddings do not
have a strong influence on model performance, but
the corpus they are trained on does. The combi-
nation of Wikipedia and PubMed abstracts as the
corpus for unsupervised word embedding training
yields the best result, and the individual use of ei-
ther the Wikipedia corpus or the PubMed abstracts
performs much worse. Although the dataset we



3107

Sentence Predicted Gold
Depressive disorders are one of the leading components of the global
burden of disease with a prevalence of up to 14% in the general
population. [25829103]

Background Objective

This study assessed whether diets with different fat quality and
supplementation with coenzyme Q10 (CoQ) affect the metabolomic
profile in urine. [24986061]

Objective Background

A post hoc analysis was conducted with the use of data from the
evaluation study of congestive heart failure. [24845963]

Method Result

Hence, 47 secondary schools from all 12 districts of the city [...] are
participating in the study. [25150368]

Result Method

This study investigated whether oxytocin can affect attentional bias in
social anxiety. [25552432]

Objective Method

We hypothesize that BMC+Phone and BMC+Home will produce greater
reductions in BMI percentiles than BMC alone. [24456698]

Conclusion Method

Table 8: Examples of prediction errors of our HSLN-RNN model trained on the PubMed 20k dataset. Each
sentence is followed by the PMID of the abstract that this sentence belongs to, which is enclosed in middle brackets.
The “Predicted” column indicates the label predicted by our model for a given sentence. The “Gold” column
indicates the gold label of the sentence.

are using for evaluation is also from PubMed ab-
stracts, using only the PubMed abstracts together
with MIMIC notes without the Wikipedia corpus
does not guarantee better result (see the “FastText-
P.M.+MIMIC” embeddings in Table 9), which
may be because the corpus size of PubMed ab-
stracts plus MIMIC notes (about 12.8 million ab-
stracts and 1 million notes) is not large enough for
good embedding training compared with the cor-
pus consisting of at least billion tokens such as the
Wikipedia.

Embedding Dimension P.M. 20k
Glove-wiki 200 92.0
FastText-wiki 300 92.2
FastText-P.M.+MIMIC 300 92.0
Word2vec-News 300 92.2
Word2vec-wiki 200 92.1
Word2vec-wiki+P.M. 200 92.6

Table 9: Comparison of performance with differ-
ent choices of word embeddings for our HSLN-RNN
model trained on the PubMed 20k dataset (reported on
F1-scores on the test set). “P.M.” means PubMed.

6 Conclusion

In this work, we have presented an ANN based
hierarchical sequential labeling network to clas-
sify sentences that appear sequentially in text.
We demonstrate that incorporating the contextual
information from surrounding sentences to help

classify the current one by using an LSTM layer
to sequentially process the encoded sentence rep-
resentations can improve the overall quality of pre-
dictions. Our model outperforms the state-of-the-
art results by 2%-3% on two datasets for sequen-
tial sentence classification in medical abstracts.
We expect that our proposed model can be gener-
alized to any problem that is related to sequential
sentence classification, such as the paragraph-level
sequential sentence categorization in full-text arti-
cles for better text mining and document retrieval
(Westergaard et al., 2018).

7 Future Work

Although the whole PubMed database contains
over 2 million abstracts with part of them accom-
panied by full-text articles, only a small fraction of
them are structured and contain the label informa-
tion utilized in this work. We plan to make use
of the rest unannotated abstracts or full texts to
pre-train our model and then fine tune it to the tar-
get annotated datasets inspired by the work from
(Howard and Ruder, 2018) so that the performance
can be further boosted.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by funding grant U54-
HG007963 from National Human Genome Re-
search Institute (NHGRI).



3108

References
American National Standards Institute. 1979. Ameri-

can national standard for writing abstracts (ansi z39.
14-1979).

Iman Amini, David Martinez, Diego Molla, et al. 2012.
Overview of the alta 2012 shared task.

Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin,
and Tomas Mikolov. 2016. Enriching word vec-
tors with subword information. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1607.04606.

Grace Y Chung. 2009. Sentence retrieval for abstracts
of randomized controlled trials. BMC medical infor-
matics and decision making, 9(1):10.

Alexis Conneau, Holger Schwenk, Loı̈c Barrault, and
Yann Lecun. 2017. Very deep convolutional net-
works for text classification. In Proceedings of the
15th Conference of the European Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: Volume 1,
Long Papers, volume 1, pages 1107–1116.

Franck Dernoncourt and Ji Young Lee. 2017. Pubmed
200k rct: a dataset for sequential sentence clas-
sification in medical abstracts. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.06071.

Franck Dernoncourt, Ji Young Lee, and Peter
Szolovits. 2016. Neural networks for joint sen-
tence classification in medical paper abstracts. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1612.05251.

G David Forney. 1973. The Viterbi algorithm. Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE, 61(3):268–278.

Hamed Hassanzadeh, Tudor Groza, and Jane Hunter.
2014. Identifying scientific artefacts in biomedical
literature: The evidence based medicine use case.
Journal of biomedical informatics, 49:159–170.

Kenji Hirohata, Naoaki Okazaki, Sophia Ananiadou,
and Mitsuru Ishizuka. 2008. Identifying sections in
scientific abstracts using conditional random fields.
In Proceedings of the Third International Joint Con-
ference on Natural Language Processing: Volume-I.

Jeremy Howard and Sebastian Ruder. 2018. Universal
language model fine-tuning for text classification. In
Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), volume 1, pages 328–339.

Arif E Jinha. 2010. Article 50 million: an estimate
of the number of scholarly articles in existence.
Learned Publishing, 23(3):258–263.

Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, Piotr Bojanowski, and
Tomas Mikolov. 2016. Bag of tricks for efficient text
classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.01759.

Su Nam Kim, David Martinez, Lawrence Cavedon, and
Lars Yencken. 2011. Automatic classification of
sentences to support evidence based medicine. In
BMC bioinformatics, volume 12, page S5. BioMed
Central.

Yoon Kim. 2014. Convolutional neural net-
works for sentence classification. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1408.5882.

Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam: A
method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980.

Siwei Lai, Liheng Xu, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao. 2015.
Recurrent convolutional neural networks for text
classification. In AAAI, volume 333, pages 2267–
2273.

Guillaume Lample, Miguel Ballesteros, Sandeep Sub-
ramanian, Kazuya Kawakami, and Chris Dyer. 2016.
Neural architectures for named entity recognition.
In HLT-NAACL.

Ji Young Lee and Franck Dernoncourt. 2016. Se-
quential short-text classification with recurrent and
convolutional neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1603.03827.

Jimmy Lin, Damianos Karakos, Dina Demner-
Fushman, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. 2006. Genera-
tive content models for structural analysis of medical
abstracts. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Link-
ing Natural Language Processing and Biology: To-
wards Deeper Biological Literature Analysis, pages
65–72. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Pengfei Liu, Xipeng Qiu, and Xuanjing Huang.
2016. Recurrent neural network for text classi-
fication with multi-task learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1605.05101.

Yuanchao Liu, Feng Wu, Ming Liu, and Bingquan Liu.
2013. Abstract sentence classification for scientific
papers based on transductive svm. Computer and
Information Science, 6(4):125.

Marco Lui. 2012. Feature stacking for sentence classi-
fication in evidence-based medicine. In Proceedings
of the Australasian Language Technology Associa-
tion Workshop 2012, pages 134–138.

Mingbo Ma, Liang Huang, Bing Xiang, and Bowen
Zhou. 2015. Dependency-based convolutional neu-
ral networks for sentence embedding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1507.01839.

Xuezhe Ma, Yingkai Gao, Zhiting Hu, Yaoliang Yu,
Yuntian Deng, and Eduard Hovy. 2016. Dropout
with expectation-linear regularization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1609.08017.

Larry McKnight and Padmini Srinivasan. 2003. Cat-
egorization of sentence types in medical abstracts.
In AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings, volume
2003, page 440. American Medical Informatics As-
sociation.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In Advances in neural information processing
systems, pages 3111–3119.



3109

SPFGH Moen and Tapio Salakoski2 Sophia Anani-
adou. 2013. Distributional semantics resources for
biomedical text processing. In Proceedings of the
5th International Symposium on Languages in Biol-
ogy and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, pages 39–43.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher
Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word
representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 confer-
ence on empirical methods in natural language pro-
cessing (EMNLP), pages 1532–1543.

Patrick Ruch, Celia Boyer, Christine Chichester,
Imad Tbahriti, Antoine Geissbühler, Paul Fabry,
Julien Gobeill, Violaine Pillet, Dietrich Rebholz-
Schuhmann, Christian Lovis, et al. 2007. Using ar-
gumentation to extract key sentences from biomedi-
cal abstracts. International journal of medical infor-
matics, 76(2-3):195–200.

Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky,
Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. 2014.
Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks
from overfitting. The Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 15(1):1929–1958.

Mark Ware and Michael Mabe. 2015. The STM report:
An overview of scientific and scholarly journal pub-
lishing.

David Westergaard, Hans-Henrik Stærfeldt, Christian
Tønsberg, Lars Juhl Jensen, and Søren Brunak.
2018. A comprehensive and quantitative compar-
ison of text-mining in 15 million full-text articles
versus their corresponding abstracts. PLoS compu-
tational biology, 14(2):e1005962.

Yasunori Yamamoto and Toshihisa Takagi. 2005. A
sentence classification system for multi biomedi-
cal literature summarization. In Data Engineering
Workshops, 2005. 21st International Conference on,
pages 1163–1163. IEEE.

Rui Zhang, Honglak Lee, and Dragomir Radev. 2016.
Dependency sensitive convolutional neural networks
for modeling sentences and documents. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1611.02361.


