



















































SafeCity: Understanding Diverse Forms of Sexual Harassment Personal Stories


Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2805–2811
Brussels, Belgium, October 31 - November 4, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

2805

SafeCity: Understanding Diverse Forms of Sexual Harassment
Personal Stories

Sweta Karlekar Mohit Bansal
UNC Chapel Hill

{swetakar, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract

With the recent rise of #MeToo, an increasing
number of personal stories about sexual ha-
rassment and sexual abuse have been shared
online. In order to push forward the fight
against such harassment and abuse, we present
the task of automatically categorizing and an-
alyzing various forms of sexual harassment,
based on stories shared on the online forum
SafeCity. For the labels of groping, ogling,
and commenting, our single-label CNN-RNN
model achieves an accuracy of 86.5%, and
our multi-label model achieves a Hamming
score of 82.5%. Furthermore, we present
analysis using LIME, first-derivative saliency
heatmaps, activation clustering, and embed-
ding visualization to interpret neural model
predictions and demonstrate how this helps
extract features that can help automatically
fill out incident reports, identify unsafe areas,
avoid unsafe practices, and ‘pin the creeps’.

1 Introduction

The hashtag #MeToo1 has been prevalent on vari-
ous social media platforms as a campaign centered
around sharing stories of sexual harassment in an
act of solidarity with other victims and spread-
ing awareness of a widespread and endemic issue.
With vast amounts of personal stories on the in-
ternet, it is important that we make scientific use
of this data to push these movements forward and
enable real-world change. Manually sorting and
comprehending the information shared in these
stories is an arduous task, and the power of natural
language processing (NLP) can serve as the miss-
ing link between online activism and real change.

We present several neural NLP models that al-
low us to automatically classify, aggregate, and
analyze vast amounts of harassment data found
on social media, becoming an effective tool for

1https://metoomvmt.org

Type of behavior experienced 
(please check all that apply): 

Catcalls

Stalking

Public Indecency

Commenting

Online Sexual Violence and Sexual 
Harassment Incident Report Form

Narrative Description: 

“Was walking on the street, a guy 
stands leaning on the gate of his 
home and whistles and calls out 
to me the whole time I cross his 
home. I take that road daily, 
except Sunday, to go to music 
classes. This went on for a month 
and I finally quit music classes. I 
was 13 then.”

Figure 1: Task of sexual harassment story classifica-
tion to help fill online incident reports.

spreading awareness, increasing understanding,
and allowing faster action. This large-scale au-
tomatic categorization, summarization, and anal-
ysis of personal abuse stories can help activist
groups enlighten the public and advocate for so-
cial change in a timely manner.

We present single-label and multi-label clas-
sification of diverse forms of sexual harassment
present in abuse stories shared online through the
forum SafeCity, a crowd-sourcing platform for
personal stories of sexual harassment and abuse.
Each story includes one or more tagged forms of
sexual harassment, along with a description of the
occurrence. For example, the description “My col-
lege was nearby. This happened all the time. Guys
passing comments, staring, trying to touch. Frus-
trating” is positive for three classes: commenting,
ogling/staring, and touching/groping.

We use CNN-RNN architectures (with
character-level CNN embeddings and bidirec-
tional RNNs) to classify the three forms of sexual
harassment mentioned above using both single-
and multi-label setups. Our models achieve strong
performances of 80-86% on these setups. This
automatic classification of different forms of sex-
ual harassment can help victims and authorities
to partially automate and speed up the process of
filling online sexual violence reporting forms (see
Figure 1), which usually requires the victim to
detail each form of sexual harassment that took
place. The act of partially filling out the report

https://metoomvmt.org


2806

(by our classifier) in itself makes it more likely
for the victim to file a report. A study by the
Bureau of Justice found that victims who report
sexual assault are more likely to seek medical
treatment for injuries, which also allows for more
immediate prosecution and a better chance of
finding DNA evidence to convict the offender
(Rennison, 2002). Further, it can also be used to
fulfill the need to automatically categorize and
summarize large numbers of online testimonials
describing or reporting sexual harassment.

Next, in order to further utilize these stories
as an important tool for harassment understand-
ing and to help prevent similar situations from
happening to others, we present interpretability
analysis of our neural classification results in the
forms of LIME analysis, first-derivative saliency
heatmaps, activation clustering, and t-SNE em-
bedding visualization. We show how these anal-
ysis techniques hold promise as avenues for future
work and can potentially provide insightful clues
towards building (1) a tool to analyze the most
common circumstances around each distinct form
of harassment to provide more detailed and accu-
rate safety advice, (2) a map of unsafe areas to help
others avoid dangerous spaces, and 3) an unoffi-
cial sex offender registry that marks frequently-
mentioned offenders to warn potential victims.
This paper seeks to provide an avenue to utilize
the millions of stories shared on social media de-
scribing instances of sexual harassment, including
#MeToo, #WhyILeft, and #YesAllWomen. With
this task and analysis, we hope that these stories
can be used to prevent future sexual harassment.

2 Related Work
Analyzing personal sexual harassment stories
from online social forums is fairly unexplored,
to the best of our knowledge. However, recent
works in a similar vein include detecting the pres-
ence of domestic abuse stories on social media
sites (Schrading et al., 2015a; Schrading, 2015;
Schrading et al., 2015b). In more distantly related
work, NLP has been used for various socially-
driven tasks, such as detecting the presence of
cyberbullying or incivility (Ziegele et al., 2018;
Founta et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2012; Zhao et al.,
2016; Agrawal and Awekar, 2018; Van Hee et al.,
2018), and detecting and providing aid for signs
of depression or suicidal thoughts (Pestian et al.,
2010; Yazdavar et al., 2017; Stepanov et al., 2017;
Fitzpatrick et al., 2017).

	

I 
was 

groped 
by 
an 

unknown 
man 

… 
 

 
m 
a 
n 
 
 

Convolution + Max Pooling  

Word Embeddings 

Bidirectional RNN 

Output Thresholding 

P 
(C

om
m

en
tin

g)
 

P 
(G

ro
pi

ng
)  

P 
(S

ta
rin

g)
 

Character Embeddings 

Figure 2: Multi-label CNN-RNN model with CNN-
based character embeddings and bidirectional RNNs.

3 Classification Models
For our single-label binary classification task, the
two output classes can be [commenting, non-
commenting], [ogling, non-ogling], or [groping,
non-groping]. For our multi-label scenario, there
are a total of 8 combinations (true or false for three
types of sexual harassment), including a label for
none of the three classes present in the description.
CNN: For each input description, an embedding
and convolutional layer are applied. This is fol-
lowed by a max-pooling layer (Collobert et al.,
2011). Filters of varying window sizes are ap-
plied to each window of word vectors, the result
of which is then passed through a softmax layer to
produce probabilities over the output classes.
LSTM-RNN: As CNNs are not designed to cap-
ture sequential relationships (Pascanu et al., 2014),
we adopted an RNN model that consisted of word
vectors fed into LSTM layer, the final state of
which was fed into a fully-connected layer. The
result is passed through a softmax layer to output
the probability over all output classes.
CNN-RNN: As both models have strengths and
weaknesses, we experimented with a hybrid ar-
chitecture in which our LSTM-RNN model after
the embedding layer is laid on top of our CNN
model before the max-pooling (related to Zhou
et al. (2015)). For single-label models, the final
fully-connected layer is fed into a softmax to give
final output probabilities.
Multi-Label Classification We also present
multi-label classification (Boutell et al., 2004;
Tsoumakas and Katakis, 2006; Katakis et al.,
2008), which allows for models to predict multi-
ple categories simultaneously for the same input.
We further utilized CNN-based character embed-
dings in addition to word embeddings, and also
employed bidirectional RNNs (see Figure 2). The



2807

outputs of the final fully-connected layer (F) are
fed into a sigmoid function. The classification for
each category (C) are seen as positive (1) if the
output is above threshold t and negative (0) if the
output is below threshold t, a hyperparameter, giv-
ing the equation: C = 1(σ(F ) ≥ t).

4 Experimental Setup
4.1 Dataset

SafeCity2 is, to the best of our knowledge, the
largest publicly-available online forum for report-
ing sexual harassment. Its motto is “pin the
creeps”. Victims of sexual harassment share
personal stories, with the objective of spread-
ing awareness of ongoing sexual harassment and
showcasing location-based trends. The language
styles of SafeCity forums are very diverse, and
therefore can potentially be used for a variety of
test cases, such as emails or tweets.

Each of the 9,892 stories includes a descrip-
tion of the incident, the location, and tagged
forms of harassment, with all identifying infor-
mation removed. SafeCity has explicitly given
us permission to use this data. The dataset3

contains descriptions of text submitted by forum
users, along with tags of 13 forms of sexual ha-
rassment. We chose the top three most dense
categories—groping/touching, staring/ogling, and
commenting—to use as our dataset, as the others
were more sparse. Each description may fall into
none, some, or all of the categories.

4.2 Evaluation

The single-label models were evaluated using ac-
curacy. The multi-label models were evaluated us-
ing exact match ratio and Hamming score (calcu-
lated as the complement of Hamming loss). Ham-
ming loss was used as detailed by Tsoumakas and
Katakis (2006). Hamming loss (y) is equal to 1
over |D| (number of multi-label samples), mul-
tiplied by the sum of the symmetric differences
between the predictions (Z) and the true labels
(Y), divided by the number of labels (L), giving

y = 1|D|

|D|∑
i=1

|Yi∆Zi|
|L| .

2http://safecity.in
3We release our dataset splits at https://github.

com/swkarlekar/safecity. Please follow SafeCity
guidelines for usage.

Model Commenting Ogling Groping
Linear SVM 42.2 35.0 55.8

Gaussian NB 46.8 74.7 66.0
Logistic Reg. 61.4 78.0 69.1

SVM 65.5 79.0 70.3
CNN 80.9 82.2 86.0
RNN 81.0 82.2 86.2

CNN-RNN 81.6 84.1 86.5
Table 1: Single-label classification (accuracy) results.

Model Exact Match Hamming
Random Forest 35.0 70.2

CNN 53.7 80.2
RNN 57.1 81.5

CNN-RNN 59.2 82.3
CNN-RNN (bidirec + char) 62.0 82.5

Table 2: Multi-label classification results.

4.3 Training Details
All models have vocabulary size of 10, 000, and
use AdamOptimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2015) with
a learning rate of 1e−4. All gradient norms are
clipped to 2.0 (Pascanu et al., 2013; Graves, 2013).
For each model, the hyperparameters are tuned us-
ing the development set.
CNN We use a 2-D CNN. Filter sizes of [3, 4,
5] are used with 128 filters per filter size. Batch
size is set to 128, and a dropout (Srivastava et al.,
2014) of 0.80 is applied.
LSTM Our LSTM has 2 layers with 60 hidden
units. Batch size is 64 with a dropout of 0.75.
CNN-LSTM Our CNN-LSTM model consists
of an LSTM on top of a CNN. The CNN has 100
filters per filter size of [3, 4, 5]. Embedding di-
mensions of 300 are used. An LSTM with 300
hidden units is used. For the character level em-
beddings, we use an additional CNN with 100 fil-
ters per filter size of [3, 4, 5]. Bidirectional RNNs
of 300 units are used.

5 Results
See Table 1 for single-label results on the selected
harassment categories, where CNN-RNN was the
best performing model compared to several non-
neural and neural baselines. See Table 2 for
multi-label classification results, where the Ham-
ming score for the multi-label CNN-RNN model
is 82.5%, showing potential for real-world use as
well as substantial future research scope.

6 Analysis
We provide various visualization techniques to an-
alyze our models. Each of these techniques em-
ploys a different approach and offers new infor-
mation or supports previous findings.

http://safecity.in
https://github.com/swkarlekar/safecity
https://github.com/swkarlekar/safecity


2808

A man standing too close to me in a 
semicrowded metro continued to touch me 
indecently till pushed away. 

True label: Groping
Predicted: Groping

The guy at first was staring at me and later 
started passing cheap comments. 

True label: Commenting
Predicted: Commenting

touching/groping, commenting, ogling, sexual
invites

True label: Ogling
Predicted: Ogling

Figure 3: LIME analysis. Left : Correctly-classified example of groping. Middle: Correctly-classified example
of commenting. Right: Correctly-classified example of ogling/staring.

0 50 100 150 200 250

due

poor

lighting

one

boy

starting

commenting

how

look

all

−0.15

−0.1

−0.05

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

True label: Commenting, Predicted: Commenting

0 50 100 150 200 250

commenting

by

group

middle

age

man

−0.1

−0.05

0

0.05

0.1

True label: Commenting, Predicted: Commenting

0 50 100 150 200 250

neighbor

using

vague

language

shouting

creating

nuisance

foul

and

bad

body

language'

−0.1

−0.05

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

True label: Non-Commenting, Predicted: Commenting

Figure 4: First derivative saliency heatmaps. Left: Correctly-classified example of commenting. Middle:
Correctly-classified example of commenting. Right: Incorrectly-classified example of commenting.

Harassment Type Observed t-SNE Cluster
Groping abusively, encounter, talk, under-

age, surrounded, embarrassed
Ogling boobs, leering, disturbing, ges-

tures, voyeur, visually, gestures
Commenting shameful, vulgar, inappropriately,

indecent, invites, stalked, strong

Table 3: Relevant word clusters found via t-SNE word
embedding clustering.

6.1 Word Embedding Visualization
We selected seed words that corresponded to class
labels and found the nearest neighbors of each
seed word’s vector by reducing the dimension-
ality of the word embeddings using t-SNE (see
Table 3) (Maaten and Hinton, 2008). This form
of visualization not only ensures that our model
has learned appropriate word embeddings, but also
demonstrates that each form of sexual harassment
has a unique and distinct context. Furthermore,
this shows that our model learns related words and
concepts for each type of harassment.

6.2 LIME Analysis
LIME analysis (Ribeiro et al., 2016), or Local
Interpretable Model-Agnostic Explanation, inter-
prets the local reasoning of a model around an in-
stance. Results of LIME (ξ) are found by taking
the minimum of L, which is the measure of how
unfaithful the interpretable model (g) is to approx-
imating the probability that an input (x) belongs
to a certain class (f ) in the locally defined area
(πx) summed with complexity measures Ω, giving
ξ(x) = argmin L(f, g, πx) + Ω(g). In Figure 3
(left), the words “touch”, “man”, and the collective
words “indecently till pushed away” are the most
important to the local classification of “groping”.
Furthermore, the word “metro” has importance in
the classification, suggesting that this may be a fre-

quent location in which groping takes place. In
Figure 3 (middle), the words with the most im-
portance are “comments” and “staring”, indicating
that ogling may coincide with commenting very
frequently. In Figure 3 (right), the words “ogling”,
“sexual”, and “commenting” had the most im-
portance, which further supports the notion that
ogling and commenting often occur together. As
verified by the data, ogling and commenting to-
gether is more common than ogling alone.

6.3 First Derivative Saliency
Saliency heatmaps (Simonyan et al., 2014; Li
et al., 2016) illustrate which words of an input
have the biggest impact on the final classifica-
tion by taking the gradient of the final scores out-
putted by the neural network (S) with respect to
the embedding (E), given the true label (L), giving
∂SL(E)

∂E . While LIME analysis and first derivative
saliency are both used to find word-level contribu-
tions, first derivative saliency is model-dependent
and gives reasoning behind classification based on
the whole model, in contrast to the locally-faithful,
model-agnostic LIME analysis technique.

In Figure 4 (left), the word “commenting” and
the words “one boy” have the most influence
on the classification. The influence of the word
“lighting” indicates poor lighting is often present
in situations where sexual harassment takes place.
In Figure 4 (middle), the classification of “com-
menting” was most influenced by the word “com-
menting”, followed by the word “age”. This sug-
gests the possibility of using descriptors of of-
fenders as a classification tool. Figure 4 (right)
is an incorrectly classified example. We see that
the word “body”, followed by “language”, had the
most influence on the classification of this exam-



2809

ple as “commenting”. Our model identifies syn-
onyms and hyponyms like the word “language” in
relation to the category of commenting. However,
the true label was “non-commenting”, as the word
was not used in a context of sexual language, but
rather as “vague language” and “body language”.

6.4 Activation Clustering
Activation clustering (Girshick et al., 2014;
Aubakirova and Bansal, 2016) accesses the ac-
tivation values of all n neurons and treats the
activation values per input as coordinates in n-
dimensional space. K-means clustering was per-
formed to group activation clusters and find com-
mon themes in these reports. Activation cluster-
ing is distinct from both LIME analysis and first
derivative saliency in that it finds patterns and
clusterings at a description-level.
Circumstances of Harassment: One of the clus-
ters was classified as “ogling”: {‘a group of boys
was standing near us and were making weird ex-
pressions and as we moved away they started fol-
lowing’; ‘a group of guys lurking around the the-
ater...’}. Another cluster was classified as “com-
menting”: {’a group of men were standing who
commented on every girl who passed by the’,
’a group of boys were standing there... as we
started moving one of them commented on us’}
Both of these clusters contained examples describ-
ing circumstances of the harassment, following
the pattern of “a group of boys/men were stand-
ing/lurking and...” It can be inferred that certain
forms of sexual harassment are more likely to hap-
pen with large groups of men. Activation cluster-
ing can identify the circumstances of harassment,
helping potential victims to be better prepared.
Location and Time of Harassment: Some clus-
ters contain examples that point to specific loca-
tions of harassment, e.g., a groping cluster: {‘i
was in the bus and there was this man who pur-
posely fell on me and touched me inappropri-
ately’; ‘while traveling in a crowded bus most of
the time men try to grind their intimate part over
my body’; ‘i was in the bus when a man standing
tried to put his d**k on my hand’}. Specific lo-
cations can also be found: {‘the gurgaon sohna
road is very unsafe at night especially if you are
alone with no street lights’; ‘kurla station really
gets scary at night once i was trying to get a train
from kurla station around 10’; ‘mathura highway
, not enough lights on the way during nights so
is not safe for a individual to journey’}. Notice

that the second cluster examples also contain the
word “night”. With data that contains more spe-
cific locations or times of day, activation clusters
can serve as an automatic way to map out unsafe
areas based on location and time of day.
Identifying Offenders: Examples from another
groping cluster include: {‘...her step father abused
her physically for a year’; ‘one of the girl of about
6 years got raped by her own father’; ‘it happened
at my house my brother harassed me and also mis-
behaved with me one night its been six months’}.
This shows that clusters can point to common rela-
tionships or titles for offenders. This phenomenon
can be presumed to happen with names of offend-
ers as well. If many reports have been filed around
this offender, clusters will form around his/her
name. Instead of a case of “he said, she said”, ac-
tivation clustering provides an avenue towards “he
said, they said”, as clusters form when multiple
reports have been filed around the same name.

The main purpose of our visualization tech-
niques is to explain what the black-box deep learn-
ing models are learning, such as locations, offend-
ers, or times of day. With more detailed data in the
future, we may be able to uncover more nuanced
circumstances behind harassment.

7 Conclusion
We presented the novel task of identifying vari-
ous forms of sexual harassment in personal stories.
Our accurate multi-label classification models il-
lustrate the plausibility of automatically filling out
incident reports. Using visualization techniques,
we found circumstances surrounding forms of ha-
rassment and the possibility of automatically iden-
tifying safe areas and repeat offenders. In future
work, we hope to experiment with the transfer-
ability of our model to other datasets to encompass
the diverse mediums through which these personal
stories are shared. Honoring the courage that these
victims demonstrated in sharing their stories on-
line, we use these descriptions not only to help
summarize online testimonials and provide more
detailed safety advice, but also to help others re-
port similar occurrences to hopefully prevent fu-
ture sexual harassment from occurring.

Acknowledgments
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their help-
ful comments. This work was supported by a
Google Faculty Research Award, a Bloomberg
Data Science Research Grant, an IBM Faculty
Award, and NVidia GPU awards.



2810

References
Sweta Agrawal and Amit Awekar. 2018. Deep learn-

ing for detecting cyberbullying across multiple so-
cial media platforms. European Conference on In-
formation Retrieval.

Malika Aubakirova and Mohit Bansal. 2016. Interpret-
ing neural networks to improve politeness compre-
hension. Proceedings of EMNLP.

Matthew R Boutell, Jiebo Luo, Xipeng Shen, and
Christopher M Brown. 2004. Learning multi-
label scene classification. Pattern Recognition,
37(9):1757–1771.

Ying Chen, Yilu Zhou, Sencun Zhu, and Heng Xu.
2012. Detecting offensive language in social me-
dia to protect adolescent online safety. In Privacy,
Security, Risk and Trust (PASSAT), 2012 Interna-
tional Conference on and 2012 International Con-
ference on Social Computing (SocialCom), pages
71–80. IEEE.

Ronan Collobert, Jason Weston, Léon Bottou, Michael
Karlen, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Pavel Kuksa.
2011. Natural language processing (almost) from
scratch. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
12(Aug):2493–2537.

Kathleen Kara Fitzpatrick, Alison Darcy, and Molly
Vierhile. 2017. Delivering cognitive behavior ther-
apy to young adults with symptoms of depression
and anxiety using a fully automated conversational
agent (woebot): a randomized controlled trial. JMIR
Mental Health, 4(2).

Antigoni-Maria Founta, Despoina Chatzakou, Nicolas
Kourtellis, Jeremy Blackburn, Athena Vakali, and Il-
ias Leontiadis. 2018. A unified deep learning archi-
tecture for abuse detection. CoRR.

Ross Girshick, Jeff Donahue, Trevor Darrell, and Jiten-
dra Malik. 2014. Rich feature hierarchies for accu-
rate object detection and semantic segmentation. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 580–587.

Alex Graves. 2013. Generating sequences with
recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1308.0850.

Ioannis Katakis, Grigorios Tsoumakas, and Ioannis
Vlahavas. 2008. Multilabel text classification for
automated tag suggestion. In Proceedings of the
ECML/PKDD, volume 18.

Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam: A
method for stochastic optimization. 3rd Interna-
tional Conference for Learning Representations.

Jiwei Li, Xinlei Chen, Eduard Hovy, and Dan Jurafsky.
2016. Visualizing and understanding neural models
in nlp. Proceedings of NAACL.

Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. 2008.
Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 9(Nov):2579–2605.

Razvan Pascanu, Caglar Gulcehre, Kyunghyun Cho,
and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. How to construct deep
recurrent neural networks. Proceedings of ICLR.

Razvan Pascanu, Tomas Mikolov, and Yoshua Bengio.
2013. On the difficulty of training recurrent neural
networks. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 1310–1318.

John Pestian, Henry Nasrallah, Pawel Matykiewicz,
Aurora Bennett, and Antoon Leenaars. 2010. Sui-
cide note classification using natural language pro-
cessing: A content analysis. Biomedical Informatics
Insights, 3:BII–S4706.

Callie Marie Rennison. 2002. Rape and sexual assault:
Reporting to police and medical attention, 1992-
2000. US Department of Justice, Office of Justice
Programs Washington, DC.

Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos
Guestrin. 2016. Why should i trust you?: Explain-
ing the predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings
of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages
1135–1144. ACM.

J Nicolas Schrading. 2015. Analyzing domestic abuse
using natural language processing on social media
data. Rochester Institute of Technology.

Nicolas Schrading, Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm, Ray
Ptucha, and Christopher Homan. 2015a. An analysis
of domestic abuse discourse on reddit. In Proceed-
ings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 2577–2583.

Nicolas Schrading, Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm, Raymond
Ptucha, and Christopher Homan. 2015b. # whyis-
tayed,# whyileft: Microblogging to make sense of
domestic abuse. In Proceedings of the 2015 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, pages 1281–1286.

Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisser-
man. 2014. Deep inside convolutional networks: Vi-
sualising image classification models and saliency
maps. ICLR Workshop.

Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey E Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky,
Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. 2014.
Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks
from overfitting. Journal of Machine Learning Re-
search, 15(1):1929–1958.

Evgeny Stepanov, Stephane Lathuiliere, Shammur Ab-
sar Chowdhury, Arindam Ghosh, Radu-Laurentiu
Vieriu, Nicu Sebe, and Giuseppe Riccardi. 2017.
Depression severity estimation from multiple
modalities. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.06095.



2811

Grigorios Tsoumakas and Ioannis Katakis. 2006.
Multi-label classification: An overview. Interna-
tional Journal of Data Warehousing and Mining,
3(3).

Cynthia Van Hee, Gilles Jacobs, Chris Emmery, Bart
Desmet, Els Lefever, Ben Verhoeven, Guy De Pauw,
Walter Daelemans, and Véronique Hoste. 2018. Au-
tomatic detection of cyberbullying in social media
text. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.05617.

Amir Hossein Yazdavar, Hussein S Al-Olimat,
Monireh Ebrahimi, Goonmeet Bajaj, Tanvi Baner-
jee, Krishnaprasad Thirunarayan, Jyotishman
Pathak, and Amit Sheth. 2017. Semi-supervised
approach to monitoring clinical depressive symp-
toms in social media. In Proceedings of the 2017
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances
in Social Networks Analysis and Mining 2017,
pages 1191–1198. ACM.

Rui Zhao, Anna Zhou, and Kezhi Mao. 2016. Auto-
matic detection of cyberbullying on social networks
based on bullying features. In Proceedings of the
17th International Conference on Distributed Com-
puting and Networking, page 43. ACM.

Chunting Zhou, Chonglin Sun, Zhiyuan Liu, and Fran-
cis Lau. 2015. A c-lstm neural network for text clas-
sification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.08630.

Marc Ziegele, Johannes Daxenberger, Oliver Quiring,
and Iryna Gurevych. 2018. Developing automated
measures to predict incivility in public online dis-
cussions on the facebook sites of established news
media. In Proceedings of the 68th Annual Confer-
ence of the International Communication Associa-
tion (ICA).


