



















































Multi-Head Attention with Disagreement Regularization


Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2897–2903
Brussels, Belgium, October 31 - November 4, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

2897

Multi-Head Attention with Disagreement Regularization

Jian Li1,2 Zhaopeng Tu3∗ Baosong Yang4 Michael R. Lyu1,2 Tong Zhang3
1Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong

2Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
1,2{jianli,lyu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

3Tencent AI Lab 4University of Macau
3{zptu,bradymzhang}@tencent.com 4nlp2ct.baosong@gmail.com

Abstract

Multi-head attention is appealing for the abil-
ity to jointly attend to information from dif-
ferent representation subspaces at different po-
sitions. In this work, we introduce a dis-
agreement regularization to explicitly encour-
age the diversity among multiple attention
heads. Specifically, we propose three types
of disagreement regularization, which respec-
tively encourage the subspace, the attended
positions, and the output representation asso-
ciated with each attention head to be differ-
ent from other heads. Experimental results on
widely-used WMT14 English⇒German and
WMT17 Chinese⇒English translation tasks
demonstrate the effectiveness and universality
of the proposed approach.

1 Introduction

Attention model is now a standard component
of the deep learning networks, contributing to
impressive results in neural machine transla-
tion (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Luong et al., 2015),
image captioning (Xu et al., 2015), speech recog-
nition (Chorowski et al., 2015), among many other
applications. Recently, Vaswani et al. (2017) in-
troduced a multi-head attention mechanism to cap-
ture different context with multiple individual at-
tention functions.

One strong point of multi-head attention is the
ability to jointly attend to information from dif-
ferent representation subspaces at different posi-
tions. However, there is no mechanism to guar-
antee that different attention heads indeed capture
distinct features. In response to this problem, we
introduce a disagreement regularization term to
explicitly encourage the diversity among multiple
attention heads. The disagreement regularization

∗ Zhaopeng Tu is the corresponding author of the paper.
This work was mainly conducted when Jian Li and Baosong
Yang were interning at Tencent AI Lab.

serves as an auxiliary objective to guide the train-
ing of the related attention component.

Specifically, we propose three types of disagree-
ment regularization, which are applied to the three
key components that refer to the calculation of fea-
ture vector using multi-head attention. Two regu-
larization terms are respectively to maximize co-
sine distances of the input subspaces and output
representations, while the last one is to disperse
the positions attended by multiple heads with
element-wise multiplication of the corresponding
attention matrices. The three regularization terms
can be either used individually or in combination.

We validate our approach on top of advanced
TRANSFORMER model (Vaswani et al., 2017)
for both English⇒German and Chinese⇒English
translation tasks. Experimental results show that
our approach consistently improves translation
performance across language pairs. One encour-
aging finding is that TRANSFORMER-BASE with
disagreement regularization achieves comparable
performance with TRANSFORMER-BIG, while the
training speed is nearly twice faster.

2 Background: Multi-Head Attention
Bush held a talk with Sharon

head1

head2

Bush held a talk with Sharon

head1
head2

Figure 1: Illustration of the multi-head attention,
which jointly attends to different representation
subspaces (colored boxes) at different positions
(darker color denotes higher attention probability).

Attention mechanism aims at modeling the
strength of relevance between representation pairs,



2898

such that a representation is allowed to build a di-
rect relation with another representation. Instead
of performing a single attention function, Vaswani
et al. (2017) found it is beneficial to capture dif-
ferent context with multiple individual attention
functions. Figure 1 shows an example of a two-
head attention model. For the query word “Bush”,
green and red head pay attention to different posi-
tions of “talk” and “Sharon” respectively.

Attention function softly maps a sequence of
query Q = {Q1, . . . , QN} and a set of key-value
pairs {K,V } = {(K1, V1), . . . , (KM , VM )} to
outputs. More specifically, multi-head attention
model first transforms Q, K, and V into H sub-
spaces, with different, learnable linear projections,
namely:

Qh,Kh, V h = QWQh ,KW
K
h , V W

V
h ,

where {Qh,Kh, V h} are respective the query,
key, and value representations of the h-th head.
{WQh ,W

K
h ,W

V
h } ∈ Rd×dk denote parameter ma-

trices, d and dk represent the dimensionality of the
model and its subspace. Furthermore, H atten-
tion functions are applied in parallel to produce
the output states {O1, . . . , OH}, among them:

Oh = AhV h with Ah = softmax(
QhKh

T

√
dk

).

Here Ah is the attention distribution produced by
the h-th attention head. Finally, the output states
are concatenated to produce the final state.

3 Approach

Multi-head attention allows the model to jointly
attend to information from different representation
subspaces at different positions. To further guaran-
tee the diversity, we enlarge the distances among
multiple attention heads with disagreement regu-
larization (Section 3.1). Specifically, we propose
three types of disagreement regularization to en-
courage each head vector Oi to be different from
other heads (Section 3.2).

3.1 Framework
In this work, we take the machine translation tasks
as application. Given a source sentence x and its
translation y, a neural machine translation model
is trained to maximize the conditional translation
probability over a parallel training corpus.

We introduce an auxiliary regularization term in
order to encourage the diversity among multiple

attention heads. Formally, the training objective is
revised as:

J(θ) = argmax
θ

{
L(y|x; θ)︸ ︷︷ ︸
likelihood

+λ∗D(a|x,y; θ)︸ ︷︷ ︸
disagreement

}
,

where a is the referred attention matrices, λ is
a hyper-parameter and is empirically set to 1.0
in this paper. The auxiliary regularization term
D(·) guides the related attention component to
capture different features from the corresponding
projected subspaces.

Note that the introduced regularization term
works like L1 and L2 terms, which do not intro-
duce any new parameters and only influence the
training of the standard model parameters.

3.2 Disagreement Regularization
Three types of regularization term, which are ap-
plied to three parts of the original multi-head at-
tention, are introduced in this section.

Disagreement on Subspaces (Sub.) This dis-
agreement is designed to maximize the cosine dis-
tance between the projected values. Specifically,
we first calculate the cosine similarity cos(·) be-
tween the vector pair V i and V j in different value
subspaces, through the dot product of the normal-
ized vectors1, which measures the cosine of the an-
gle between V i and V j . Thus, the cosine distance
is defined as negative similarity, i.e, − cos(·). Our
training objective is to enlarge the average cosine
distance among all head pairs. The regularization
term is formally expressed as:

Dsubpace = −
1

H2

H∑
i=1

H∑
j=1

V i · V j

‖V i‖‖V j‖
. (1)

Disagreement on Attended Positions (Pos.)
Another strategy is to disperse the attended po-
sitions predicted by multiple heads. Inspired by
the agreement regularization (Liang et al., 2006;
Cheng et al., 2016) which encourages multiple
alignments to be similar, in this work, we deploy
a variant of the original term by introducing an
alignment disagreement regularization. Formally,
we employ the sum of element-wise multiplica-
tion of corresponding matrix cells2, to measure the

1We did not employ the Euler Distance between vectors
since we do not care the absolute value in each vector.

2We also used the squared element-wise subtraction of
two matrices in our preliminary experiments, and found it
underperforms its multiplication counterpart, which is con-
sistent with the results in (Cheng et al., 2016).



2899

similarity between two matrices Ai and Aj of two
heads:

Dposition = −
1

H2

H∑
i=1

H∑
j=1

|Ai �Aj |. (2)

Disagreement on Outputs (Out.) This dis-
agreement directly applies regularization on the
outputs of each attention head, by maximizing the
difference among them. Similar to the subspace
strategy, we employ negative cosine similarity to
measure the distance:

Doutput = −
1

H2

H∑
i=1

H∑
j=1

Oi ·Oj

‖Oi‖‖Oj‖
. (3)

4 Related Work

The regularization on attended positions is in-
spired by agreement learning in prior works,
which encourages alignments or hidden variables
of multiple models to be similar. Liang et al.
(2006) first assigned agreement terms for jointly
training word alignment in phrase-based statistic
machine translation (Koehn et al., 2003). The
idea was further extended into other natural lan-
guage processing tasks such as grammar induc-
tion (Liang et al., 2008). Levinboim et al.
(2015) extended the agreement for general bidi-
rectional sequence alignment models with model
inevitability regularization. Cheng et al. (2016)
further explored the agreement on modeling the
source-target and target-source alignments in neu-
ral machine translation model. In contrast to
the mentioned approaches which assigned agree-
ment terms into loss function, we deploy an align-
ment disagreement regularization by maximizing
the distance among multiple attention heads.

As standard multi-head attention model lacks
effective control on the influence of different
attention heads, Ahmed et al. (2017) used a
weighted mechanism to combine them rather
than simple concatenation. As an alternative
approach to multi-head attention, Shen et al.
(2018a) and Shen et al. (2018b) extended the sin-
gle relevance score to multi-dimensional attention
weights, demonstrating the effectiveness of mod-
eling multiple features for attention networks. Our
approach is complementary to theirs: our model
encourages the diversity among multiple heads,
while theirs enhance the power of each head.

#
Regularization Speed BLEU

Sub. Pos. Out.
1 × × × 1.21 24.13
2 X × × 1.15 24.64
3 × X × 1.14 24.42
4 × × X 1.15 24.78
5 X × X 1.12 24.73
6 X X × 1.11 24.38
7 X X X 1.05 24.60

Table 1: Effect of regularization terms, which are
applied to the encoder self-attention only. “Speed”
denotes the training speed (steps/second).

5 Experiments

5.1 Setup

To compare with the results reported by previous
work (Gehring et al., 2017; Vaswani et al., 2017;
Hassan et al., 2018), we conduct experiments on
both WMT2017 Chinese⇒English (Zh⇒En) and
WMT2014 English⇒German (En⇒De) transla-
tion tasks. The Zh⇒En corpus consists of 20M
sentence pairs, and the En⇒De corpus consists of
4M sentence pairs. We follow previous work to
select the validation and test sets. Byte-pair en-
coding (BPE) is employed to alleviate the Out-of-
Vocabulary problem (Sennrich et al., 2016) with
32K merge operations for both language pairs.
We use the case-sensitive 4-gram NIST BLEU
score (Papineni et al., 2002) as evaluation metric,
and sign-test (Collins et al., 2005) for statistical
significance test.

We evaluate the proposed approaches on the
advanced TRANSFORMER model (Vaswani et al.,
2017), and implement on top of an open-source
toolkit – THUMT (Zhang et al., 2017). We fol-
low Vaswani et al. (2017) to set the configurations
and have reproduced their reported results on the
En⇒De task. All the evaluations are conducted
on the test sets. We have tested both Base and
Big models, which differ at hidden size (512 vs.
1024) and number of attention heads (8 vs. 16).
We study model variations with Base model on
the Zh⇒En task (Section 5.2 and 5.3), and eval-
uate overall performance with Big model on both
Zh⇒En and En⇒De tasks (Section 5.4).

5.2 Effect of Regularization Terms

In this section, we evaluate the impact of differ-
ent regularization terms on the Zh⇒En task us-



2900

System Architecture Zh⇒En En⇒De
Speed BLEU Speed BLEU

Existing NMT systems
(Wu et al., 2016) GNMT n/a n/a n/a 26.30
(Gehring et al., 2017) CONVS2S n/a n/a n/a 26.36

(Vaswani et al., 2017)
TRANSFORMER-BASE n/a n/a n/a 27.3
TRANSFORMER-BIG n/a n/a n/a 28.4

(Hassan et al., 2018) TRANSFORMER-BIG n/a 24.2 n/a n/a
Our NMT systems

this work

TRANSFORMER-BASE 1.21 24.13 1.28 27.64
+ Disagreement 1.06 24.85⇑ 1.10 28.51⇑

TRANSFORMER-BIG 0.58 24.56 0.61 28.58
+ Disagreement 0.47 25.08⇑ 0.51 29.28⇑

Table 3: Comparing with existing NMT systems on WMT17 Chinese⇒English and WMT14
English⇒German translation tasks. “⇑” indicates that the model is significantly better than its base-
line counterpart (p < 0.01).

Applying to Speed BLEU
Enc E-D Dec
× × × 1.21 24.13
X × × 1.15 24.78
X X × 1.10 24.67
X × X 1.11 24.69
X X X 1.06 24.85

Table 2: Effect of regularization on different atten-
tion networks, i.e., encoder self-attention (“Enc”),
encoder-decoder attention (“E-D”), and decoder
self-attention (“Dec”).

ing TRANSFORMER-BASE. For simplicity and
efficiency, here we only apply regularizations on
the encoder side. As shown in Table 1, all the
models with the proposed disagreement regular-
izations (Rows 2-4) consistently outperform the
vanilla TRANSFORMER (Row 1). Among them,
the Output term performs best which is +0.65
BLEU score better than the baseline model, the
Position term is less effective than the other two.
In terms of training speed, we do not observe ob-
vious decrease, which in turn demonstrates the ad-
vantage of our disagreement regularizations.

However, the combinations of different dis-
agreement regularizations fail to further improve
translation performance (Rows 5-7). One pos-
sible reason is that different regularization terms
have overlapped guidance, and thus combining
them does not introduce too much new informa-
tion while makes training more difficult.

5.3 Effect on Different Attention Networks

The TRANSFORMER consists of three attention
networks, including encoder self-attention, de-
coder self-attention, and encoder-decoder atten-
tion. In this experiment, we investigate how each
attention network benefits from the disagreement
regularization. As seen from Table 2, all mod-
els consistently improve upon the baseline model.
When applying disagreement regularization to all
three attention networks, we achieve the best per-
formance, which is +0.72 BLEU score better than
the baseline model. The training speed decreases
by 12%, which is acceptable considering the per-
formance improvement.

5.4 Main Results

Finally, we validate the proposed disagree-
ment regularization on both WMT17 Chinese-to-
English and WMT14 English-to-German transla-
tion tasks. Specifically, we adopt the Output dis-
agreement regularization, which is applied to all
three attention networks. The results are con-
cluded in Table 3. We can see that our im-
plementation of TRANSFORMER outperforms all
existing NMT systems, and matches the results
of TRANSFORMER reported in previous works.
Incorporating disagreement regularization consis-
tently improves translation performance for both
base and big TRANSFORMER models across lan-
guage pairs, demonstrating the effectiveness of the
proposed approach. It is encouraging to see that
TRANSFORMER-BASE with disagreement regu-



2901

Regularization on Disagreement on
Sub. Pos. Out.

n/a 0.882 0.007 0.881
Subspace 0.999 0.006 0.935
Position 0.882 0.219 0.882
Output 0.989 0.006 0.997

Table 4: Effect of different regularization terms on
the three disagreement measurements. “n/a” de-
notes the baseline model without any regulariza-
tion term. Larger value denotes more disagree-
ment (at most 1.0).

Reg. Layer
1 2 3 4 5 6

n/a 0.040 0.009 0.002 0.003 0.008 0.006
Sub. 0.039 0.009 0.001 0.003 0.006 0.005
Pos. 0.217 0.167 0.219 0.242 0.233 0.249
Out. 0.048 0.009 0.002 0.003 0.008 0.006

Table 5: Disagreement on attended positions with
respect to the levels of the encoder layers.

larization achieves comparable performance with
TRANSFORMER-BIG, while the training speed is
nearly twice faster.

5.5 Quantitative Analysis of Regularization

In this section, we empirically investigate how the
regularization terms affect the multi-head atten-
tion. To this end, we compare the disagreement
scores on subspaces (“Sub.”), attended positions
(“Pos.”), and outputs (“Out.”). Since the scores
are negative values, we list exp(D) for readabil-
ity, which has a maximum value of 1.0. Table 4
lists the results of encoder-side multi-head atten-
tion on the Zh⇒En validation set. As seen, the
disagreement score on the individual component
indeed increases with the corresponding regular-
ization term. For example, the disagreement of
outputs increases to almost 1.0 by using the Output
regularization, which means that the output vec-
tors are almost perpendicular to each other as we
measure the cosine distance as the disagreement.

One interesting finding is that attending to dif-
ferent positions may not be the essential strength
of multi-head attention on the translation task. As
seen, the disagreement score on the attended posi-
tions for the standard multi-head attention is only
0.007, which indicates that almost all the heads at-
tend to the same positions. Table 5 shows the dis-
agreement scores on attended positions across en-

coder layers. Except for the 1st layer that attends
to the input word embeddings, the disagreement
scores on other layers (i.e. ranging from the 2nd to
6th layer) are very low, which confirms out above
hypothesis.

Concerning the regularization terms, except that
on position, the other two regularization terms (i.e.
“Sub.” and “Out.”) do not increase the disagree-
ment score on the attended positions. This can
explain why positional regularization term does
not work well with the other two terms, as shown
in Table 1. This is also consistent with the find-
ing in (Tu et al., 2016), which indicates that neu-
ral networks can model linguistic information in
their own way. In contrast to attended positions, it
seems that the multi-head attention prefer to en-
coding the differences among multiple heads in
the learned representations.

6 Conclusion

In this work, we propose several disagreement reg-
ularizations to augment the multi-head attention
model, which encourage the diversity among at-
tention heads so that different head can learn dis-
tinct features. Experimental results across lan-
guage pairs validate the effectiveness of the pro-
posed approaches.

The models also suggest a wide range of poten-
tial advantages and extensions, from being able to
improve the performance of multi-head attention
in other tasks such as reading comprehension and
language inference, to being able to combine with
other techniques (Shaw et al., 2018; Shen et al.,
2018a; Dou et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2018) to fur-
ther improve performance.

Acknowledgments

The work was supported by the National Nat-
ural Science Foundation of China (Project No.
61332010 and No. 61472338), the Research
Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Admin-
istrative Region, China (No. CUHK 14234416 of
the General Research Fund), and Microsoft Re-
search Asia (2018 Microsoft Research Asia Col-
laborative Research Award). We thank the anony-
mous reviewers for their insightful comments.

References
Karim Ahmed, Nitish Shirish Keskar, and Richard

Socher. 2017. Weighted transformer net-



2902

work for machine translation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.02132.

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. In International Con-
ference on Learning Representations (ICLR).

Yong Cheng, Shiqi Shen, Zhongjun He, Wei He,
Hua Wu, Maosong Sun, and Yang Liu. 2016.
Agreement-based joint training for bidirectional
attention-based neural machine translation. In Inter-
national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(IJCAI).

Jan K Chorowski, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Dmitriy
Serdyuk, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio.
2015. Attention-based Models for Speech Recogni-
tion. In Advances in neural information processing
systems (NIPS).

M. Collins, P. Koehn, and I. Kučerová. 2005. Clause
restructuring for statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL).

Ziyi Dou, Zhaopeng Tu, Xing Wang, Shuming Shi, and
Tong Zhang. 2018. Exploiting Deep Representa-
tions for Neural Machine Translation. In Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP).

Jonas Gehring, Michael Auli, David Grangier, Denis
Yarats, and Yann N. Dauphin. 2017. Convolutional
sequence to sequence learning. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML).

Hany Hassan, Anthony Aue, Chang Chen, Vishal
Chowdhary, Jonathan Clark, Christian Feder-
mann, Xuedong Huang, Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt,
William Lewis, Mu Li, et al. 2018. Achieving hu-
man parity on automatic chinese to english news
translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05567.

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies
(NAACL-HLT).

Tomer Levinboim, Ashish Vaswani, and David Chiang.
2015. Model invertibility regularization: Sequence
alignment with or without parallel data. In North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies
(NAACL-HLT).

Percy Liang, Dan Klein, and Michael I Jordan. 2008.
Agreement-based Learning. In Advances in neural
information processing systems (NIPS).

Percy Liang, Ben Taskar, and Dan Klein. 2006. Align-
ment by agreement. In North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT).

Minh-Thang Luong, Hieu Pham, and Christopher D
Manning. 2015. Effective Approaches to Attention-
based Neural Machine Translation. In Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP).

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of
the Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL).

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2016. Neural machine translation of rare words with
subword units. In Proceedings of the Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL).

Peter Shaw, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Ashish Vaswani.
2018. Self-Attention with Relative Position Repre-
sentations. In North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies (NAACL-HLT).

Tao Shen, Tianyi Zhou, Guodong Long, Jing Jiang,
Shirui Pan, and Chengqi Zhang. 2018a. DiSAN:
Directional Self-Attention Network for RNN/CNN-
free Language Understanding. In Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI).

Tao Shen, Tianyi Zhou, Guodong Long, Jing Jiang, and
Chengqi Zhang. 2018b. Bi-directional Block Self-
Attention for Fast and Memory-Efficient Sequence
Modeling. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR).

Zhaopeng Tu, Zhengdong Lu, Yang Liu, Xiaohua Liu,
and Hang Li. 2016. Modeling coverage for neural
machine translation. In Proceedings of the Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (ACL).

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems (NIPS).

Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V
Le, Mohammad Norouzi, Wolfgang Macherey,
Maxim Krikun, Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus
Macherey, et al. 2016. Google’s neural ma-
chine translation system: Bridging the gap between
human and machine translation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.08144.

Kelvin Xu, Jimmy Ba, Ryan Kiros, Kyunghyun Cho,
Aaron C Courville, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Richard S
Zemel, and Yoshua Bengio. 2015. Show, Attend and
Tell: Neural Image Caption Generation with Visual
Attention. In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Machine Learning (ICML).

Baosong Yang, Zhaopeng Tu, Derek F. Wong, Fandong
Meng, Lidia S. Chao, and Tong Zhang. 2018. Mod-
eling Localness for Self-Attention Networks. In



2903

Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP).

Jiacheng Zhang, Yanzhuo Ding, Shiqi Shen, Yong
Cheng, Maosong Sun, Huanbo Luan, and Yang
Liu. 2017. THUMT: An Open Source Toolkit
for Neural Machine Translation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.06415.


