



















































Extending Neural Generative Conversational Model using External Knowledge Sources


Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 690–695
Brussels, Belgium, October 31 - November 4, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

690

Extending Neural Generative Conversational Model using External
Knowledge Sources

Prasanna Parthasarathi
McGill University, Canada

pparth2@cs.mcgill.ca

Joelle Pineau
McGill University, Canada

Facebook AI Research, Canada
jpineau@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract

The use of connectionist approaches in conver-
sational agents has been progressing rapidly
due to the availability of large corpora. How-
ever current generative dialogue models often
lack coherence and are content poor. This
work proposes an architecture to incorporate
unstructured knowledge sources to enhance
the next utterance prediction in chit-chat type
of generative dialogue models. We focus
on Sequence-to-Sequence (Seq2Seq) conver-
sational agents trained with the Reddit News
dataset, and consider incorporating external
knowledge from Wikipedia summaries as well
as from the NELL knowledge base. Our exper-
iments show faster training time and improved
perplexity when leveraging external knowl-
edge.

1 Introduction

Much of the research in dialogue systems from
the last few years has focused on replacing all (or
some) of its components with Deep Neural Net-
work (DNN) architectures (Levin and Pieraccini,
1997; Dahl et al., 2012; Li et al., 2017; Serban
et al., 2016a,b; Vinyals and Le, 2015). These
DNN models are trained end-to-end with large
corpora of human-to-human dialogues, and essen-
tially learn to mimic human conversations.

Although these models can represent the input
context, the need for a dedicated external memory
to remember information in context was pointed
out and mechanisms were introduced in models
like Memory Networks (Sukhbaatar et al., 2015;
Bordes et al., 2016; Gulcehre et al., 2018), and the
Neural Turing Machine (Graves et al., 2014). Al-
though these models, in theory, are better at main-
taining the state using their memory component,
they require longer training time and excessive
search for hyperparameters.

In this paper we explore the possibility of in-
corporating external information in dialogue sys-
tems as a mechanism to supplement the standard
context encoding and facilitate the generation to
be more specific with faster learning time. Fur-
thermore, especially in the case of chit-chat sys-
tems, knowledge can be leveraged from differ-
ent topics ( education, sports, news, travel, etc.).
Current memory-based architectures cannot effi-
ciently handle access to large unstructured exter-
nal knowledge sources.

In this work, we build on the popular Encoder-
Decoder model, and incorporate external knowl-
edge as an additional continuous vector. The pro-
posed Extended Encoder-Decoder (Ext-ED) archi-
tecture learns to predict the embedding of the rel-
evant external context during training and, during
testing, uses an augmented state of external con-
text and encoder final state to generate the next ut-
terance. We evaluate our model with experiments
on Reddit News dataset, and consider using either
the Wikipedia summary (Scheepers, 2017) or the
NELL KB (Carlson et al., 2010) as a source of ex-
ternal context.

2 Related Work

Incorporating supplemental knowledge in neural
conversational agents has been addressed in a few
recent works on dialogue systems. Previous re-
search however was mostly in the context of goal-
driven dialogue systems, where the knowledge-
base is highly structured, and queried to obtain
very specific information (e.g. bus schedules,
restaurant information, more broad tourist infor-
mation).

Few goal-oriented dialogues research use ex-
ternal information directly from the web or rele-
vant data sources. An exception is (Long et al.,
2017), which searches the web for relevant infor-



691

mation that pertains to the input context and pro-
vides them as suggestions (like advising on places
to visit while the user intends to visit a city). Sim-
ilarly, instead of dynamically querying the web,
(Ghazvininejad et al., 2017) pre-trains the model
from facts in Foursquare (Yang et al., 2013) to se-
lect relevant facts as suggestions.

Moving closer to unstructured domains, but still
within task-driven conversations, (Lowe et al.,
2015) proposes a way of retrieving relevant re-
sponses based on external knowledge sources. The
model selects relevant knowledge from Ubuntu
man pages and uses it to retrieve a relevant
context-response pair that is inline with the knowl-
edge extracted. Similarly, (Young et al., 2017) ex-
tracts relations within the context and parses over
it to score the message response pairs. The rela-
tional knowledge provides a way of incorporating
useful knowledge or common sense as termed by
the authors.

Though (Guu et al., 2017) did not directly make
use of an external knowledge source, they used an
edit vector that aids in editing a sampled prototype
sentence. This is relevant to our proposed model
as the generated response is conditioned on a sup-
plementary vector similar to the external context
vector discussed later in this paper.

3 Technical Background

3.1 Recurrent Neural Networks
The Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) is a vari-
ant of neural network used for learning represen-
tations of inputs, x1:T , that have an inherent se-
quential structure (speech, video, dialogue etc.).
In natural language processing, RNNs are used to
learn language models that generalize over n-gram
models (Katz, 1987). The RNN maintains a hid-
den state, ht, that is an abstraction of inputs ob-
served until time-step t of the input sequence, and
uses xt to operate on them. RNN uses two pro-
jection functions, U and W , for computing oper-
ations on input and hidden states respectively. A
third function, V , to map ht to the output, yt, the
output of the RNN at every time step t. yt, is a
distribution over the next token given the previous
tokens, and is computed as a function of ht. The
functions of the RNN can be explained as shown
in Equations 1 and 2,

ht = g (U · xt + W · ht−1 + b) , (1)
yt = V · ht + d, (2)

where yt is the output, xt is the vector represen-
tation of input token, ht is the internal state of
the RNN at time t and g is a non-linear function
(like tanh or sigmoid). RNNs are trained with
Back Propagation Through Time (BPTT) (Rumel-
hart et al., 1988) to compute weight updates using
the derivative of a loss function with respect to the
parameters over all previous time-steps.

3.2 Seq2Seq Dialogue Architecture

Generative dialogue models (Sutskever et al.,
2014; Serban et al., 2015) extends the language
model learned by RNNs to generate natural lan-
guage that are conditioned not only on the previ-
ous words generated in the response but also on a
representation of the input context. The ability of
such a learning module to understand an input se-
quence of words (that we call context (ci1:T )) and
generate a response ri1:T tantamount to solving
the dialogue task.

(Vinyals and Le, 2015) first proposed a vanilla
LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997) dia-
logue model that encodes a given context with an
LSTM (Encoder) and feeds it to another LSTM
(Decoder) that generates a response token-by-
token. Here the choice of encoder and decoder
modules can be any recurrent architectures like
GRU (Cho et al., 2014), RNN, Bi-directional
LSTM (Schuster and Paliwal, 1997), etc. The
model is then trained to learn a conditional distri-
bution over the vocabulary for generating the next
token in response to the ith context as shown in
Equation 3:

P
(
ri1:T | ci1:T

)
= ΠTk=1P

(
rik | ri1:k−1, ci1:T

)
.

(3)
With neural language models, this form can aid

in maintaining long term dependencies and the
next word distribution can be made to condition-
ally depend on an arbitrarily long context. Sophis-
ticated models have made significant architectural
improvements to aid better modelling of the con-
texts (Serban et al., 2016b).

4 Extended Encoder Decoder
Architecture

The primary objective of the proposed architecture
is to supplement response generation with exter-
nal knowledge relevant to the context. Most of
the knowledge sources that are available are free-
form and lack suitable structure for easy querying



692

of relevant information. In this work, we attempt
to incorporate such unstructured knowledge cor-
pora for dialogue generation in Seq2Seq models.

Figure 1: Architecture Diagram of Extended Encoder
Decoder Model.

4.1 The Model

The Extended Encoder Decoder (Ext-ED) model,
shown in Figure 1, uses an encoder LSTM (param-
eterized as ΘEnc) to encode the ith context, ci1:T ,
and a fully connected layer (f ) to predict an ex-
ternal context vector (eci) conditioned on the en-
coded context. The predicted external context vec-
tor, eci, is provided to the decoder LSTM (ΘDec)
at every step, augmented with the encoder final
state and previous predicted token, to generate the
next token in the response:

P
(
eci | ci1:T

)
= f

(
ΘEnc

(
ci1:T

))
(4)

P
(
ri1:T | ci1:T

)
= ΠTk=1P

(
rik | ri1:k−1, ci1:T , eci

)
.

(5)
The decoder is provided with an encoding of

the context along with the external knowledge en-
coding, as eci acts as information supplement to
the knowledge available in the context as shown in
Equations 4 and 5.

During training, the gradients for Ext-ED pa-
rameters (f,ΘEnc,ΘDec) are computed by back-
propagating the gradients for parameters with re-
spect to losses in Equations 6, 7 and 8:

L1 =
T∑

k=1

Q
(
ri | êci, ci

)
logP

(
ri | ci

)
, (6)

L2 = ‖êci − eci‖2, (7)

L3 = −
T∑

k=1

Q
(
ri | ci,0

)
logP

(
ri | ci

)
. (8)

Here L1 is the log-likelihood that is used to
make the model distribution mimic the data dis-
tribution. L2 trains f to correctly predict eci, and
L3 trains ΘDec to make use of the external con-
text by forcing it the model distribution to diverge
when not provided with the external context (eci is
set to 0 vector). In the loss equations, P and Q rep-
resent the data and the model learned distributions
respectively, and eci and êci represent true and
model(f ) predicted external knowledge encoding.

4.2 External Context Vector
We use Wikipedia summary (Scheepers, 2017)
and NELL knowledge base (KB) (Carlson et al.,
2010) to compute the external knowledge encod-
ing for every context in the context-response pairs.
Algorithm 1 oultines the pseudocode for comput-
ing the external context vector (eci). For ith input
context, the methods Return All Values for Entity
or Wiki Summary Query is used to extract the ex-
ternal knowledge vector, eci, from NELL KB or
Wikipedia summary sources.

Algorithm 1: Get External Context Vector
(ci1:T )

1 eci ← zero vector
2 # Ext Tokens← 0
3 for t in range (1,T) do
4 if cit is not a stop word then
5 External TokensList ←

Wiki Summary Query(cit)
6 % Return All Values for Entity(cit)
7 for token in External TokensList do
8 eci ← eci +

GloVe Embedding(token)
9 # Ext Tokens← # Ext Tokens + 1

10 return ec
i

# Ext Tokens

The external context encoding, eci, is a fixed
length continuous embedding of the knowledge
from external sources, as having all the words
sampled (represented as a Bag of Words ) proved
to be a severe computational overhead because of
sparsity.

The continuous embedding of external context
provides an additional conditioning with relevant
external knowledge that is used to generate the
next utterance. Although this is the intended hy-
pothesis, there are certain expected characteristics
that are desirable of external knowledge sources
for them to be useful:

• The knowledge vectors being away from the



693

Figure 2: Convergence of Sequence loss (cross-entropy
loss in sequential outputs) over different models dur-
ing training.(-L3 in legend denote exclusion of L3 loss
from gradient computation.)

mean of their distribution.

• The knowledge vectors having high variance.

We analyzed the knowledge vectors constructed
using the two knowledge sources and the distri-
bution of distances of eci from their mean. The
variance of this distribution in NELL KB was 1.44
and from that of Wikipedia summary was 0.73.
Mean distance was very low (0.77) in the case
of Wikipedia compared to that of NELL (2.16).
We observed that the vectors not being spread out
made them less useful than the encoded context
itself in the initial experiments.

5 Experiments and Discussion

We evaluated Ext-ED by training with Reddit
News dataset, and incorporated Wikipedia Sum-
mary and NELL KB as sources of external knowl-
edge. The objective of the experiments are three-
fold: (1) to evaluate the ability of the model to
make use of the external context to condition the
response; (2) to analyze the training time with the
additional knowledge provided; and (3) to observe
any tangible differences in training with the two
knowledge sources.

For the first analysis, we trained Ext-ED with
external context (R100) and validated it without
providing it (see Ext-ED - L3 Ablation in Table 1).
Without the inclusion of L3, Ext-ED did not find
the external context useful and the performance
was not very different from a Vanilla Seq2Seq di-
alogue model (Figure 2). The encoder context had

enough variance to be a viable information source
and hence the external context was ignored. This
can be observed from similar learning curves of
Vanilla Seq2Seq, Ext-ED - L3 (Wiki) models in
Figure 2.

With propagating back gradients with respect
to L3, we observed that the model learns to use
the external context, but, as discussed in Section
4.2, the variance in the external context vectors
constructed using the two knowledge sources was
too low. To fix this, we scaled the external con-
text vectors withN (4, 1). This improved the vari-
ance in the knowledge that subsequently improved
the usefulness of these vectors which was also ob-
served in Figure 2.

Model PPL BLEU-4
Vanilla Seq2Seq 38.09 0.437
Ext-ED - L3 (Wiki) 38.37 0.435
Ext-ED - L3 Ablation 37.06 0.425
Ext-ED (Wiki) 30.26 0.53
Ext-ED (NELL KB) 29.07 0.525
Ext-ED Ablation 601.8 0.274

Table 1: Comparison of BLEU (sentence bleu) and
Perplexity scores on validation set across different
models.

The provision of external knowledge improved
the Perplexity and BLEU-4 scores as shown in Ta-
ble 1. Though the improvements are reasonable,
the metrics used are not strong indicators for eval-
uating the influence of external contexts in dia-
logue. But, they do indicate that the prediction ac-
curacy is improved with the inclusion of external
knowledge sources. The poor perplexity for Ext-
ED Ablation is because the model is conditioned
to predict the next utterance using eci and when
not provided the context alone is not sufficiently
informative. Another way to interpret this would
be to see that the external context and and the dia-
logue context provide complementary information
for better predicting the next utterance. Further,
the experiments illustrated that the model, when
provided with an informative source of knowl-
edge (the one that has higher variance), will let
the model converge faster. One possible hypothe-
sis is that eci, which has high variance and is pro-
vided as input in every step of decoding, is learned
before the RNN parameters converge. The infor-
mation in eci is relevant to the context and subse-
quently helps in training the decoder faster.



694

6 Conclusion

The proposed model, Extended Encoder Decoder,
offers a framework to incorporate unstructured
external knowledge to generate dialogue utter-
ances. The experiments helped in understanding
the need for external knowledge sources for im-
proving learning time, and helped characterize the
value of external knowledge sources. The exper-
iments showed that external knowledge improved
the learning time of the models. In future work, we
aim to add more experiments with dialogue tasks
that require understanding a supplementary source
of knowledge to solve the task. Also, we plan to
look at specialized tasks that naturally evaluate the
influence of external knowledge, to help the model
to generate diverse responses.

Acknowledgements

The authors gratefully acknowledge financial sup-
port for portions of this work by the Samsung
Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT) and the
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Coun-
cil of Canada (NSERC).

References
Antoine Bordes, Y-Lan Boureau, and Jason Weston.

2016. Learning end-to-end goal-oriented dialog. In
arXiv preprint.

Andrew Carlson, Justin Betteridge, Bryan Kisiel, and
Burr Settles. 2010. Toward an architecture for
never-ending language learning. In AAAI.

Kyunghyun Cho, Bart Van Merriënboer, Dzmitry Bah-
danau, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. On the properties
of neural machine translation: Encoder-decoder ap-
proaches. In arXiv preprint.

George E Dahl, Dong Yu, Li Deng, and Alex Acero.
2012. Context-dependent pre-trained deep neural
networks for large-vocabulary speech recognition.
In IEEE Transactions on audio, speech, and lan-
guage processing.

Marjan Ghazvininejad, Chris Brockett, Ming-Wei
Chang, Bill Dolan, Jianfeng Gao, Wen-tau Yih, and
Michel Galley. 2017. A knowledge-grounded neural
conversation model. In arXiv preprint.

Alex Graves, Greg Wayne, and Ivo Danihelka. 2014.
Neural turing machines. In arXiv preprint.

Caglar Gulcehre, Sarath Chandar, Kyunghyun Cho,
and Yoshua Bengio. 2018. Dynamic neural tur-
ing machine with continuous and discrete address-
ing schemes. In Neural computation. MIT Press.

Kelvin Guu, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, Yonatan Oren,
and Percy Liang. 2017. Generating sentences by
editing prototypes. In arXiv preprint.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997. Long
short-term memory. In Neural computation.

Slava Katz. 1987. Estimation of probabilities from
sparse data for the language model component of a
speech recognizer. In IEEE transactions on acous-
tics, speech, and signal processing.

Esther Levin and Roberto Pieraccini. 1997. A stochas-
tic model of computer-human interaction for learn-
ing dialogue strategies. In Fifth European Confer-
ence on Speech Communication and Technology.

Jiwei Li, Will Monroe, Tianlin Shi, Alan Ritter, and
Dan Jurafsky. 2017. Adversarial learning for neural
dialogue generation. In arXiv preprint.

Yinong Long, Jianan Wang, Zhen Xu, Zongsheng
Wang, Baoxun Wang, and Zhuoran Wang. 2017. A
knowledge enhanced generative conversational ser-
vice agent. In the 6th Dialog System Technology
Challenges (DSTC6) Workshop.

Ryan Lowe, Nissan Pow, Iulian Serban, Laurent Char-
lin, and Joelle Pineau. 2015. Incorporating unstruc-
tured textual knowledge sources into neural dialogue
systems. In Neural Information Processing Systems
Workshop on Machine Learning for Spoken Lan-
guage Understanding.

David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, Ronald J
Williams, et al. 1988. Learning representations by
back-propagating errors. In Cognitive modeling.

Thijs Scheepers. 2017. Improving the compositionality
of word embeddings. Master’s thesis, Universiteit
van Amsterdam.

Mike Schuster and Kuldip K Paliwal. 1997. Bidirec-
tional recurrent neural networks. In IEEE Transac-
tions on Signal Processing.

Iulian Vlad Serban, Ryan Lowe, Laurent Charlin, and
Joelle Pineau. 2015. A survey of available corpora
for building data-driven dialogue systems. In arXiv
preprint.

Iulian Vlad Serban, Alessandro Sordoni, Yoshua Ben-
gio, Aaron C Courville, and Joelle Pineau. 2016a.
Building end-to-end dialogue systems using genera-
tive hierarchical neural network models. In AAAI.

Iulian Vlad Serban, Alessandro Sordoni, Ryan Lowe,
Laurent Charlin, Joelle Pineau, Aaron Courville,
and Yoshua Bengio. 2016b. A hierarchical latent
variable encoder-decoder model for generating di-
alogues. In arXiv preprint.

Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jason Weston, Rob Fergus, et al.
2015. End-to-end memory networks. In Advances
in neural information processing systems.



695

Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V. Le. 2014.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural net-
works.

Oriol Vinyals and Quoc V. Le. 2015. A neural conver-
sational model.

Dingqi Yang, Daqing Zhang, Zhiyong Yu, and Zhiwen
Yu. 2013. Fine-grained preference-aware location
search leveraging crowdsourced digital footprints
from lbsns. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM in-
ternational joint conference on Pervasive and ubiq-
uitous computing.

Tom Young, Erik Cambria, Iti Chaturvedi, Minlie
Huang, Hao Zhou, and Subham Biswas. 2017. Aug-
menting end-to-end dialog systems with common-
sense knowledge. In arXiv preprint.


