



















































A Computational Exploration of Exaggeration


Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 3296–3304
Brussels, Belgium, October 31 - November 4, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

3296

A Computational Exploration of Exaggeration

Enrica Troiano and Carlo Strapparava and Gözde Özbal and Serra Sinem Tekiroğlu
FBK-Irst, Trento, Italy

enrica.troiano@gmail.com, strappa@fbk.eu, gozbalde@gmail.com, tekiroglu@fbk.eu

Abstract

Several NLP studies address the problem of
figurative language, but among non-literal
phenomena, they have neglected exaggeration.
This paper presents a first computational ap-
proach to this figure of speech. We explore the
possibility to automatically detect exaggerated
sentences. First, we introduce HYPO, a cor-
pus containing overstatements (or hyperboles)
collected on the web and validated via crowd-
sourcing. Then, we evaluate a number of mod-
els trained on HYPO, and bring evidence that
the task of hyperbole identification can be suc-
cessfully performed based on a small set of se-
mantic features.

1 Introduction

Very often, when humans recount their experi-
ences, describe objects or verbalize ideas, they
exaggerate in some respects. “All you need is
love”, sang The Beatles in one of their most iconic
recordings; many centuries before, Shakespeare
had Romeo say that there was “more danger in
Juliet’s eyes than in twenty swords”; and Maximus
Meridius, a Roman commander in the movie The
Gladiator, incited his legion to battle by the words
“At my signal, unleash hell”. Exaggerating, like in
these quotes, is a linguistic tendency that unfolds
in a variety of situations. From TV advertisements
to debates in politics, our verbal productions are
infused with statements, or more precisely over-
statements, that puff up facts.

The study of exaggeration dates back to ancient
Greece, and its centrality in the spectrum of figures
of speech has long been established. Empirical ev-
idence has shown that it is the most used rhetori-
cal device, second only to metaphor (Kreuz et al.,
1996), but in comparison to its kin tropes, this phe-
nomenon represents an under-researched field in
NLP. In effect, the problem of automatic detection
of exaggerations (or hyperboles) has been quite

dismissed. On the one hand, determining that a
sentence speaks an excess is often a complex and
context dependent act, on the other, no resource
has ever been made available to specifically ad-
dress the figure. To overcome this issue, we build
HYPO, the first dataset focused on exaggeration,
and introduce the task of automatic hyperbole de-
tection. Specifically, the goal of this work is to
find an automatic solution to establish if the topic
of a sentence is aggrandized or, on the contrary, is
presented as it is in reality.

Effective identification of overstatements would
benefit theoretical and applied approaches to natu-
ral language. It can represent both a deterministic
strategy to test hypotheses about exaggerations, as
well as a boost for dialogue systems, information
extraction, and all such AI endeavors to under-
stand how humans talk. In fact, automating the in-
tuition that a text says more than is true can meet a
number of useful applications. Endowed with this
ability, automatic tools might support our recog-
nition of some kind of fake news, which blow in-
formation out of proportion; they might ascertain
whether the promises of testimonials and politi-
cians constitute a form of puffery; they might even
be exploited for health-related objectives, as auxil-
iary tools for the diagnosis of psychological condi-
tions (e.g., depression, narcissistic disorder) which
use exaggerations to depict extremely unnuanced
views of the world.

To tackle the problem, the paper starts with a
synthesis of past theoretical work, which provides
a guideline for building HYPO. Data was collected
by a manual crawl on the web and its quality was
tested via crowdsourcing. We then use the over-
statements of HYPO for learning to classify a sen-
tence as hyperbolic or literal. Experimental results
show that a number of models can solve the prob-
lem with above chance accuracy, thus confirming
that the task is feasible and that HYPO can be ex-



3297

ploited for similar purposes in future work.

2 Related Work

A long lasting challenge in NLP is to reason about
figurative language, and in fact, scientists have
achieved groundbreaking results in the study of
a range of figures. Nevertheless, they have given
scarce attention to hyperbole – if any at all. Only
relatively recently has this trope become an object
of interest of corpus linguistics, and some insights
on its nature have been delivered by statistics ex-
tracted from written and spoken sources.

The bulk of research points out that a hyperbole
is not perceived nor produced as a lie. It makes
things sound bigger than they actually are, but
with the goal of emphasizing them, of clarifying
ideas, of adding interest and humor to the conver-
sation (Roberts and Kreuz, 1994). In other words,
speakers exaggerate to accentuate the one element,
account or aspect of reality that is important to
them, in order to make others see truth from their
perspective (Ritter, 2012). Hearers, on their part,
suspend disbelief towards the literal content of the
hyperbolic expression, which is mendacious, and
recover its intended meaning, which is instead in
accord with reality. Basically, to find this non-
literal content, they reformulate a hyperbole as a
paraphrase devoid of figures of speech, which is
softer than the hyperbole itself and still conveys a
strong concept (Fogelin, 1988).

Another point on which the literature agrees is
that hyperboles are pragmatic acts. They may en-
tirely rely on the concrete context of their produc-
tion, like in the statement “It took ages to build
the castle”, which carries both an exaggerated and
a literal sense, depending on whether it refers to
a playful sand castle or to a strong walled con-
struction. McCarthy and Carter (2004) endorse
this view based on the need of contextual, extra-
linguistic information, and claim that understand-
ing an overstatement is to perceive a ‘contrast’ be-
tween the expression itself and its referent, i.e. a
discrepancy between reality as it is and as is de-
scribed.

Focusing on this contrast, Cano Mora (2010)
provides a handcrafted framework of the seman-
tic fields in which it tends to arise. Her taxon-
omy develops along a quantitative and a qualita-
tive dimensions, suggesting that any exaggeration
inflates either a measurable or a subjective prop-
erty of the topic of discourse. However, given

that any type of speaking non-literal is a depar-
ture from actual facts, the notion of ‘contrast’ can
be referred to figures of speech in general. With
this regard, an important point is made about the
peculiarities of hyperbole (Colston and O’Brien,
2000; Carston and Wearing, 2011). Exaggerat-
ing presents facts with a greater degree, e.g. being
bigger, more desirable, so it prompts a contrast of
magnitude. Other tropes engender a contrast of
kind for they portray an object via some types of
qualities that it does not actually have. Metaphors,
for instance, borrow those qualities from the vehi-
cle term.

Therefore, the major contribution yielded by
past corpus research is to have made explicit a few
typically hyperbolic characteristics, which will
come handy for the construction of our corpus.

3 HYPO

Hyperboles over-blow the truth, by augmenting or
down-toning the qualities of the referent of dis-
course, e.g., an event, an object, a person, etc. If
a referent has a feature X, a hyperbole presents it
as having more of that X than warranted by reality
(Claridge, 2011): what is big becomes bigger (e.g.
[1]) and what is small becomes smaller (e.g. [2]).
This causes a discrepancy between the linguistic
expression and the actual state of affairs, and pro-
vides the former with a non-literal meaning.

[1] Her morning jog turned into a marathon.

[2] I’m ready in no time.

Drawing on example from (McCarthy and
Carter, 2004), we use this ‘contrast’ or ‘counter-
factuality’ as the central condition that makes a
statement hyperbolic. It can be noticed that the ex-
tent of the contrast corresponds to different types
of overstatements, which can go from slight distor-
tions of real situations (e.g. [1]), to representations
of absurd worlds (e.g. [2]). In the second instance,
the contrast is grasped with no need for pragmatic
information, but other types of overstatements can
be perceived as such only if one knows the con-
textual setting in which they were produced. In
those cases, readers evaluate the credibility of the
sentence, that is, they confront how the sentence
presents property X of the topic to how they ex-
pect it to be, given their previous experience and
their common knowledge about the world (Ferré,
2014). For instance, although one cannot verify if
proposition [1] is in contrast with the truth, hardly



3298

would one believe that a routine jog has equaled a
marathon.

[3] I won’t wait for you: it took you centuries to
get dressed.

[4] That bag is to die for!

The above examples picture some peculiar traits
of hyperboles. First, they require the possibility
to present concepts with different intensities, by
shifting ideally towards the extremes of a continu-
ous semantic scale. Second, there are two scales
on which this shift occurs (Cano Mora, 2010).
One is quantitative, and it allows to inflate objec-
tive, measurable features (e.g. time [3]), while the
other is qualitative and serves to augment subjec-
tive characteristics (e.g. appreciation [4]).

Another defining element of hyperboles is their
emotional bent. When we exaggerate, we ac-
centuate some pieces of evidence that supports
our thoughts and perspectives, while downplay-
ing competing alternatives. We present an extrav-
agant view of reality with the goal of manifest-
ing our positive or negative involvement towards
it. This might appear obvious for qualitative hy-
perboles such as [4], for the property they enlarge
is subjective, but quantitative overstatements have
an evaluative trait as well. As an example, the
overstatement [3] frames an antipathetic position
by increasing an impartial, unemotional measure.

To sum up, there are three criteria that were
deemed to characterize a hyperbole. They are the
non-literal meaning, the upsurge on a semantic
scale and a connotative trait. Hyperbolic candi-
dates entered the corpus only if they were consid-
ered to have a figurative content rather than a de-
ceptive one, if the figurative component emerged
as a contrast of magnitude with reality, and if the
contrast seemed to color reality with an evaluative
tone.

3.1 Dataset Description

HYPO is a collection of 709 objects that comply
with the three definitional requirements, and that
can be deemed exaggerated without knowing the
context in which they were originally produced1.

1As an example, rather than “It took ages to build the cas-
tle”, which can be read as hyperbolic or literal depending on
contextual information, our dataset would be appended with
“It took ages to build the castle. After a few minutes, my
little brother had already destroyed it!”, which is non-literal
regardless of the context of its production.

Sentences can be semantically grouped into ba-
sic and composite items, which respectively pre-
serve and modify the semantic domain of their ref-
erent (Claridge, 2011). For instance, [5] is basic,
because the intended and literal meanings have the
same domain (i.e. size) though they differ in mag-
nitude. Instead, the exclamation in [6] is com-
posite, as the intended meaning concerns human
emotions but is expressed with a quality inherent
to stones. This results both in a metaphor, since it
describes a psychological state by means of a do-
main transfer, and in a hyperbole, because among
all the things that have limited movement capabil-
ities, it pinpoints the stones, which are completely
motionless.

[5] The house is the size of a postage stamp.

[6] First I was afraid, I was petrified!

[7] I avoid crowded places like the plague.

[8] She agreed with every word of my argument.

Other hyperboles arise from the combination
with figures different than metaphors, such as
comparatives [7] and synecdoches [8].

From a syntactic point of view, exaggerations
in the data either spread over phrases, or pop up
as single words that belong to any sorts of gram-
matical classes. One peculiar instance is that of
Extreme Case Formulations (ECFs), which are ad-
jectives (“absolute, whole”), quantifiers and nouns
(“all, no, everybody”), adverbs (“always, never”),
phrases (“as good as it gets”) and superlative con-
structions (“ever, the most”) that engender ex-
treme utterances by evoking the highest degree
on a semantic scale (Pomerantz, 1986). Although
ECFs might not be “heard as absurd or counter-
factual and often display a degree of convention-
ality” (McCarthy and Carter, 2004), they share
the three fundamental characteristics of the trope:
they build expressions around semantic acmes,
which lessens their credibility and prompts hear-
ers to grasp their non-literal content, namely, one
that expresses an evaluation. Some ECFs are at
work in the following propositions.

[9] This is the best pizza in history.

[10] Everybody loves chocolate.

Within the above groups lie qualitative [9] and
quantitative [5] hyperboles, creative [7] and con-
ventional [10] ways of exaggerating. Notably,



3299

such categories can criss-cross (Peña and Ruiz de
Mendoza, 2017) like in “I’d bake cakes again and
again and again”, an instance of a quantitative hy-
perbole that encompasses multiple tokens, as it is
merged with a polysyndeton.

4 Resource Construction

The collection of data for HYPO proceeded along
two lines. One involved our own effort to invent
overstatements. The other consisted of a manual
crawl of the Internet and targeted the scripts of ani-
mated cartoons, advertisements, love letters, click-
bait headlines, as well as other material that al-
legedly fulfilled the communicative objectives of
exaggerations (see Roberts and Kreuz, 1994), and
therefore was likely to include instances of this fig-
ure of speech. A total of 804 overstatements was
obtained which comply with the definition pre-
sented in Section 3.

These candidate items underwent a validation
stage on the Crowdflower/Figure Eight platform2,
where their hyperbolicity was judged by external
annotators, and the final corpus was determined.
Ideally, our microtask was feasible by any English
speaker. It asked workers to read 10 sentences, one
of which was a test item, and to answer 6 questions
aimed at determining if and how the texts overstate
their topic. Gold units consisted of 42 hyperboles,
together with 50 non-hyperbolic statements to en-
sure that raters would not learn to mark all items
as exaggerated. Each of the 854 sentences was ex-
pected to be judged by 5 annotators provided with
minimal instructions on the subject at hand.

In particular, the annotators decided if a sen-
tence contained a hyperbole (Question 1), and if
so, they highlighted the words that caused its hy-
perbolic bent (Question 2), paraphrased it with-
out exaggerating (Question 3), classified the hy-
perbole as quantitative or qualitative (Question 4),
rated the degree of the exaggeration (Question 5)
and established whether it was creative or conven-
tional (Question 6).

With the first question, candidate items for
HYPO were validated. In the second, annotators
selected the smallest number of words (or minimal
units) that convey the exaggeration, like “million”
in “I’ve told you a million times”. This assign-
ment enabled us to collect the units perceived as
hyperbolic, and to use them for creating another
corpus, that is, a dataset of sentences which in-

2https://www.figure-eight.com

clude the hyperbolic tokens of HYPO, but without
their hyperbolic twist (see 4.2). Similarly, the ra-
tionale beyond the third question was the construc-
tion of a corpus devoid of exaggerations. People
had to paraphrase the sentences without exaggerat-
ing. They were encouraged to reword or delete the
portion of text highlighted in Question 2, such that
the resulting sentences would have differed from
the original ones only for the absence of hyper-
bolic tokens. Basically, we explored the idea that
understanding a hyperbole requires a sort of re-
adjustment, where concepts are toned down, but
still to a high degree. For instance, an overstate-
ment such as “I’ve told you a million times” could
have been modified as in “I’ve told you a lot of
times”.

In Question 4, the annotators decided if a hy-
perbole belonged to a quantitative or a qualitative
class, according to whether it exaggerated some-
thing which is objective and quantifiable with a
number (e.g. “He never says no”) or which is
subjective and unmeasurable (e.g. “He seems to
come from another world!”). This was meant to
label sentences with one of the two semantic di-
mensions along which a concept is aggrandized, as
proposed in the literature (Cano Mora, 2010). As
for Question 5, an exaggeration was rated as either
‘Possible’, if it denoted an extreme but conceiv-
able situation (e.g. “I avoid crowded places like
the plague”), or ‘Impossible’, when it described
an absurd or paradoxical situation (e.g. “My father
always works”). We collected these scores to test
the hypothesis that sentences with a higher hyper-
bolic degree are classified more accurately in the
experiment because their excess is easier to detect.
In the sixth question, exaggerations were judged
either as conventional (“He died of envy”) or cre-
ative ways to express an idea (“It got so cold that
all spoken words froze solid”). The answers were
expected to show if there is a correlation between
conventional and ‘Possible’ hyperboles of Ques-
tion 5 (i.e. if conventional items are perceived as
softer exaggerations)3.

4.1 Evaluation Measures

Only 750 sentence received 5 reliable judgments.
Therefore, to evaluate the quality of the results, the

3For the quality check, we only required the raters to cor-
rectly judge questions 1 and 2. Question 3 was not included
as no unique answer exists. Questions 4, 5 and 6 were also not
included because, due to their difficulty, we expected some
amount of disagreement among the raters.



3300

inter-annotator agreement was observed on those.
We calculated two measures of agreement for the
task of recognizing hyperboles (Question 1). First,
we measured the raw agreement (RA) that is the
proportion of items with unanimous judgments
(i.e. the sentences marked as either hyperbolic or
non-hyperbolic by all the workers) out of the to-
tal number of items with 5 judgments. The final
score showed that annotators agreed in 58.5% of
the cases, which we considered an acceptable met-
ric for the reliability of the annotation process.

That people had the same understanding of hy-
perboles in more than half the items seemed rea-
sonable, because it can be challenging to estab-
lish if a statement is extreme, especially for non-
expert workers. In fact, contextual knowledge,
which in everyday situations enables interlocutors
to grasp the inflation of a sentence, is neglected
in an experiment that revolves around isolated tex-
tual passages. Moreover, the RA measure is ex-
tremely sensitive to the inconsistency of results,
as the presence of one incongruous annotation out
of 5 is enough to lower the outcome.

Therefore, we used a second measure to take
into consideration the difficulty of having 5 people
agree. Since items were labeled by more than two
annotators, we computed a pairwise agreement, as
suggested by (Artstein and Poesio, 2008). We ex-
ploited the Observed Agreement (AO) as defined
in Fleiss’s κ, which consists of the proportion of
items on which pairs of annotators agree out of the
total number of judgment pairs. Also in this case
we observed a substantial agreement (AO=80.2%)
corroborating the quality of our results.

4.2 Final Datasets

The logic behind the validation of our resource
was to obtain adequate information to train a clas-
sifier of hyperboles. Given the consistency of
annotations, we selected the sentences to be in-
serted into the corpus of hyperboles and built two
control datasets. The outcome is a set of hyper-
boles (HYPO) with two types of non-figurative
counterparts, that is, their paraphrases, and literal
sentences that include the words that are hyper-
bolic in HYPO, but with a literal connotation. By
means of illustration, while HYPO would incor-
porate a sentence like “Her morning jog turned
into a marathon”, the Paraphrases corpus and the
Minimal Units Corpus would respectively include
“Her morning jog turned into a very long run” and

“There is a marathon in the city today”.

HYPO The sentences in HYPO are the items
that at least 3 annotators out of 5 perceived as ex-
aggerations. From the total of 854 judged sen-
tences, we discarded the non-hyperbolic units,
those that received less than 5 judgments and those
which were not classified as hyperbolic by the ma-
jority of annotators. The final result is a corpus of
709 hyperboles4.

Paraphrases Corpus The corpus of para-
phrases was created by choosing one paraphrase
for each hyperbolic sentence, i.e. the one that in-
troduced the smallest change in the syntax and the
semantics of the corresponding hyperbole. The re-
sult is a collection of 709 sentences which say the
same things as their hyperbolic counterparts but
are devoid of exaggerations.

Minimal Units Corpus To build this dataset,
we used the minimal units selected by the annota-
tors in Question 2. We wanted to end up with sen-
tences which are not hyperbolic and which contain
the same hyperbolic words of HYPO.

For each exaggeration we considered the tokens
that were selected by the majority of annotators.
They either consisted of a single term, or a phrase,
or long-distance words. Then, we extracted sen-
tences containing these tokens from sources such
as the WaCKy corpus, a dump of the English
Wikipedia, whose editorial criteria force the en-
tries to be neutral and verifiable, and thus, un-
likely to incorporate excessive statements. When-
ever this approach did not produce results, we ran
a Google search. The final corpus contains 698
non-hyperbolic sentences.

5 Experiment

The task of hyperbole detection is formulated as
a supervised learning problem, and specifically, as
a sentence-based classification with two classes,
that is, hyperbolic and literal.

5.1 Features Set
To describe sentences, we define two sets of
features that incorporate the qualitative and
quantitative criteria proposed in the literature5.

4The dataset will be made publicly available under a Cre-
ative Commons License for free cultural works.

5These terms do not refer to the semantic scale on which
the shift of meaning occurs, which vary depending on the
topic of hyperboles, but to the counterfactuality and the con-
notative traits that characterize them all.



3301

All of the features take on values in the interval
[-1,1], and some are encoded in multiple ways
to ensure richer information. As for the quantity
group, the notion that hyperboles say more of
X when X is the case is decomposed into two
features, i.e. imageability and unexpectedness,
while the qualitative marker of hyperboles, or the
view that they shape a speaker’s perspective about
X, is rendered by the polarity, the subjectivity and
the emotional strength of sentences.

Imageability is the degree to which a word
can evoke a mental image. Speakers hyperbolize
to convey meanings with strength, and we as-
sumed that such a goal might be backed by a
highly picturable vocabulary. This feature is
extracted from the resource of Tsvetkov et al.
(2014), who propagated the imageability ratings
of the MRC psycholinguistic database to 150.114
terms. For each sentence, we averaged the
imageability values of all its words.

Unexpectedness refers to the fact that hy-
perboles are less predictable expressions than
literals. Basically, minimal hyperbolic units
modify the real characteristics of X, and in this
sense, they are incoherent with the rest of dis-
course about X: they are out of context, and come
unexpected to the hearers of overstatements.

We conjecture that word vectors may capture
if an expression is being used “unexpectedly” be-
cause they encode the contexts in which terms fre-
quently occur, as well as contrasts and similari-
ties among their meanings. In fact, according to
the Distributional Hypothesis (Harris, 1954), lex-
ical items appearing in similar contexts tend to
have similar meanings. Our expectation is that the
words of a figurative sentence carry less similar
meanings compared to those of a literal instance,
and hence, that their vectorial representations turn
out to be more distant.

For every sentence in the dataset, we map
its words onto both the pre-trained vectors of
Mikolov et al. (2013), obtained from the Skip-
gram model, and the GloVe vectors by Pennington
et al. (2014). Then, we consider the cosine
distance between all possible word pairs to score
their semantic similarity. The unexpectedness
feature of a sentence is found in two ways: as the
average similarity among all of its word pairs, and
as the lowest of those pair similarities. Both mea-

sures are separately computed with Skip-Gram
and GloVe vectors, resulting in 4 scores.

Polarity corresponds to the sentiment of a
statement. It is extracted through both TextBlob
(Loria, 2014), a system that directly scores
sentences, and SentiWords (Gatti et al., 2016),
which lists polarity values for 155k POS-tagged
lemmas. With this lexicon, we find the sentiment
of a sentence by averaging the sentiment of all of
its word lemmas.

Subjectivity, found with TextBlob, which
specifies if a statement conveys an objective
information or a personal opinion. Ideally, the
higher the absolute value of polarity in the range
[0,1], the more subjective a sentence.

Emotional intensity stands for the strength
of sentiment. It captures if the utterer of a
sentence is sympathetic towards the thing being
said, while quantifying the emphasis with which
such position is communicated. The scores are
obtained from VADER (Hutto and Gilbert, 2014).

5.2 Experimental Setup and Results

A simple pre-processing is applied to HYPO,
the Paraphrases and the Minimal Units corpora
prior to the experiment. We remove the stop-
words, for which the quality scores are not avail-
able. The resulting sentences are represented by
9-dimensional vectors, in which 5 entries stand for
the quantity features and 4 belong to the quality
group.

For classification, we experiment with vari-
ous algorithms, such as Logistic Regression (LR),
Naive Baies (NB), k-Nearest Neighbors (KNN),
Decision Trees (DT), Support Vector Machine
(SVM) and Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA).
The models are evaluated by comparing their aver-
age accuracy on a 10-fold cross-validation against
three baselines: a classifier that randomly asso-
ciates inputs to the hyperbolic and literal labels,
one that classifies sentences using the 300 features
of the pre-trained Skip-gram representations, and
a third that relies on the 300-dimensional GloVe
vectors trained by their authors. Sentences fed
to the baseline classifiers were represented as the
sum of their word vectors6.

6Other types of compositional methods yield results anal-
ogous to those in Table 1 and Table 2.



3302

Baseline1 QQ Skip-gram GloVe Skip-gram+QQ GloVe+QQ
LR .50 .64 .68 .66 .72 .69
KNN .50 .63 .47 .43 .52 .48
NB .50 .66 .69 .66 .69 .68
DT .50 .60 .54 .53 .55 .54
SVM .50 .64 .15 .62 .63 .64
LDA .50 .61 .67 .65 .68 .67

Table 1: Mean accuracy of 10-fold cross validation in the Hype-Par setting. Column QQ shows results for our
handcrafted quality and quantity features; the last two columns are concatenations of QQ with the Skip-gram and
GloVe baseline features.

Baseline1 QQ Skip-gram GloVe Skip-gram+QQ GloVe+QQ
LR .50 .44 .60 .58 .61 .59
KNN .50 .47 .49 .48 .50 .51
NB .50 .50 .64 .64 .62 .68
DT .50 .51 .51 .52 .56 .54
SVM .50 .02 .09 .59 .13 .60
LDA .50 .52 .54 .34 .57 .56

Table 2: Mean accuracy of 10-fold cross validation in the Hype-Min setting.

Cross-validation is conducted in two settings.
In one (Hype-Par), the non-hyperbolic sentences
are paraphrases, in the other (Hype-Min), literal
data come from the Minimal Units Corpus. The
results are shown in Table 1 and Table 2.

While in the Hype-Min setting the performance
is not satisfying, estimators achieve above chance
accuracy using paraphrases as literal inputs. In
fact, in Table 1, the accuracy scores based on
quantity-quality vectors (QQ column) suggest that
our handcrafted features are actually useful for de-
tecting hyperboles. Therefore, to gain further in-
sight on their informativeness, we conduct a re-
current feature ablation and observed how differ-
ent subsets affect predictions. Figure 1 illustrates
that 5 features can maximize the accuracy of LR.
SVM and LDA behave the same with a set of the
same size, and they all assign high weights to im-
ageability, unexpectedness and subjectivity. The
three models become comparable to, and yet do
not outperform, the second and third baselines.

In the attempt to improve the models’ descrip-
tion of the data, we repeat the experiment with yet
another set of features. We merge the QQ with
the Skip-Gram and GloVe features, by separately
concatenating the two types of vectors to our data
representations (Skip-Gram+QQ and GloVe+QQ
columns).

An interesting trend appears both for Hype-Par
and Hype-Min: with Skip-Gram+QQ, algorithms

perform better than relying on Skip-Gram or QQ
alone, and the same happens for Glove+QQ. The
new sets of features produce a consistent improve-
ment over the baselines and over our own fea-
tures. LR outstands other classifiers in the Skip-
Gram+QQ combination, reaching .72 mean accu-
racy and .76 average F1-score (see Table 3).

Figure 1: Recurrent Feature Elimination with LR in the
Hype-Par setting.

5.3 Analysis

The concatenation of vectors enhance perfor-
mances and it provides evidence that our quan-
tity and quality vectors enrich both Skip-Gram and
GloVe with some useful information about hyper-
bole. This observation, together with the outcome
of LR, suggests that the task introduced in the



3303

Hype-Par Hype-Min
(LR, Skip-Gram+QQ) (NB, GloVe+QQ)

Precision .76 .54
Recall .76 .53
F1-score .76 .52

Table 3: Average precision, recall and F-1 values ob-
tained in cross validation for the best performing mod-
els in Hype-Par and Hype-Min.

Conventional Measurable Possible
YES 50 18 20
NO 43 75 73

Table 4: Annotators’ judgments about 93 misclassified
hyperboles.

present work delineates a promising field of in-
quiry, and that it can benefit from our QQ features.

To deepen our understanding of the results, we
analyze the errors made in the Hype-Par classifica-
tion. This conclusive stage of the study serves to
probe if the overstatements that tend to be misclas-
sified share some characteristics that are missing
from our group of features.

From a test set of 468 data points, we collect
those that are incorrectly labeled by all of the mod-
els, which comprise 185 sentences, 93 of which
are hyperbolic. Examples are: “He’s more aged
than the hills” (Hype), “They will die of envy”
(Hype), “You get into that university, you won’t
get out alive” (Hype), “He hiccuped for a long
time” (Par).

We investigate the characteristics for which we
collected judgments in the Crowdflower experi-
ment (Questions 4, 5 and 6 in the Section above),
that is, the measurable trait of exaggerations, and
their degree of hyperbolicity and conventionality.
Table 4 details the judgments about misclassified
hyperboles, as rated by the the majority of their an-
notators. More than half hyperboles were declared
conventional, impossible and non-measurable.

It appears that conventional hyperboles are
more difficult to recognize (the test set comprises
an equal number of conventional and creative
items). This is not surprising if we consider that
the classifiers have especially relied on the unex-
pectedness feature. Vectors encode information
relative to the context where words occur, so they
might capture that the words of a conventional hy-
perbole are likely to be used together, since they

are highly common in language (e.g. [2]).
As for the second characteristic, the majority of

hyperboles amplifies, according to the annotators,
an unmeasurable trait of the topic of discourse.
This sheds light on the topic of the errors: un-
derstanding that a sentence overshoots reality with
respect to a subjective impression (e.g. heaviness
of commitment [3]) is harder than with an objec-
tive quality (e.g. age [1]). In future work, we may
investigate how to better formalize the counterfac-
tuality condition, by specifying different strategies
to use in the two cases.

Lastly, errors regarding the degree of hyperbol-
icity run up against our expectations. We hypoth-
esized that a more exaggerated hyperbole (i.e. im-
possible) is easier to identify, but statistics suggest
the opposite. Impossible hyperboles may be ob-
vious for humans, who use pragmatic knowledge,
but not for an agent which entirely relies on lin-
guistic information. Prospective research may test
if this problem can be overcome with the help of
multimodal strategies.

6 Conclusions

Hyperbole, the figure of exaggeration and one of
the hallmarks of human communication, is tack-
led in this paper from a computational perspec-
tive. Our research aimed at answering the question
whether it is possible to endow a system with the
ability to identify exaggerated sentences. Exper-
imental results showed promising directions for
their automatic detection and suggest that the ex-
ecution of this task can be based on semantic fea-
tures. As a novel approach to hyperboles, the
project started with no related studies to compare
to, nor useful resources to investigate. Hence, its
main contribution to the field of NLP is the pro-
posal of a new task together with the construction
of a corpus of hyperboles, and its main achieve-
ment is the devising of a procedure to learn such
figurative mechanism. Specifically, the described
experiment tested the hypothesis that quantity and
quality, which emerge from the body of literature
as two core features of exaggerations, are also use-
ful for the automatic processing of the figure.

As a future work, we plan to investigate if our
QQ-based models are enhanced by extra-linguistic
knowledge, and to incorporate contextual, multi-
modal features along semantic ones.



3304

References
Ron Artstein and Massimo Poesio. 2008. Inter-coder

agreement for computational linguistics. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 34(4):555–596.

Laura Cano Mora. 2010. All or nothing: A seman-
tic analysis of hyperbole. Revista de Lingüı́stica y
Lenguas Aplicadas, 4(1):25–35.

Robyn Carston and Catherine Wearing. 2011.
Metaphor, hyperbole and simile: A pragmatic
approach. Language and Cognition, 3(2):283–312.

Claudia Claridge. 2011. Hyperbole in English: A
Corpus-Based Study of Exaggeration. Cambridge
University Press.

Herbert L. Colston and Jennifer O’Brien. 2000. Con-
trast of kind versus contrast of magnitude: The
pragmatic accomplishments of irony and hyperbole.
Discourse processes, 30(2):179–199.

Gaëlle Ferré. 2014. Multimodal hyperbole. Multi-
modal Communication, 3(1):25–50.

Robert J. Fogelin. 1988. Figuratively Speaking: Re-
vised Edition. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Lorenzo Gatti, Marco Guerini, and Marco Turchi.
2016. Sentiwords: Deriving a high precision and
high coverage lexicon for sentiment analysis. IEEE
Transactions on Affective Computing, 7(4):409–421.

Zellig S. Harris. 1954. Distributional structure. Word,
10(2-3):146–162.

Clayton J. Hutto and Eric Gilbert. 2014. Vader: A par-
simonious rule-based model for sentiment analysis
of social media text. In Eighth International Con-
ference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM-14).

Roger J. Kreuz, Richard M. Roberts, Brenda K. John-
son, and Eugenie L. Bertus. 1996. Figurative lan-
guage occurrence and co-occurrence in contempo-
rary literature. In Roger J. Kreuz & Mary Sue Mac-
Nealy, editor, Empirical Approaches to Literature
and Aesthetics, pages 83–97. Norwood, NJ: Ablex
Publishing Corporation.

Steven Loria. 2014. Textblob: simplified text pro-
cessing. Retrieved 04 March 2017 from http:
//textblob.readthedocs.io/en/dev/.

Michael McCarthy and Ronald Carter. 2004. “There’s
millions of them”: hyperbole in everyday conversa-
tion. Journal of pragmatics, 36(2):149–184.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey
Dean. 2013. Efficient estimation of word represen-
tations in vector space. ICLR Workshop.

Ma Sandra Peña and Francisco J. Ruiz de Mendoza.
2017. Construing and constructing hyperbole. Stud-
ies in Figurative Thought and Language, 56:41.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher
Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word
representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 confer-
ence on empirical methods in natural language pro-
cessing (EMNLP), pages 1532–1543.

Anita Pomerantz. 1986. Extreme case formulations:
A way of legitimizing claims. Human studies,
9(2):219–229.

Joshua R. Ritter. 2012. Recovering hyperbole: Re-
thinking the limits of rhetoric for an age of excess.
Philosophy & Rhetoric, 45(4):406–428.

Richard M. Roberts and Roger J. Kreuz. 1994. Why
do people use figurative language? Psychological
science, 5(3):159–163.

Yulia Tsvetkov, Leonid Boytsov, Anatole Gershman,
Eric Nyberg, and Chris Dyer. 2014. Metaphor detec-
tion with cross-lingual model transfer. In Proceed-
ings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-
pers), pages 248–258.

http://textblob.readthedocs.io/en/dev/
http://textblob.readthedocs.io/en/dev/

