



















































WikiConv: A Corpus of the Complete Conversational History of a Large Online Collaborative Community


Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2818–2823
Brussels, Belgium, October 31 - November 4, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

2818

WikiConv: A Corpus of the Complete Conversational History of a Large
Online Collaborative Community

Yiqing Hua
Cornell Tech

yiqing@cs.cornell.edu

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil
Cornell University

cristian@cs.cornell.edu

Dario Taraborelli
Wikimedia Foundation

dtaraborelli@wikimedia.org

Nithum Thain and Jeffery Sorensen and Lucas Dixon
Jigsaw, Google

nthain, sorenj, ldixon@google.com

Abstract

We present a corpus that encompasses the
complete history of conversations between
contributors to Wikipedia, one of the largest
online collaborative communities. By record-
ing the intermediate states of conversations—
including not only comments and replies,
but also their modifications, deletions and
restorations—this data offers an unprece-
dented view of online conversation. This
level of detail supports new research ques-
tions pertaining to the process (and challenges)
of large-scale online collaboration. We illus-
trate the corpus’ potential with two case stud-
ies that highlight new perspectives on earlier
work. First, we explore how a person’s conver-
sational behavior depends on how they relate
to the discussion’s venue. Second, we show
that community moderation of toxic behavior
happens at a higher rate than previously esti-
mated. Finally the reconstruction framework
is designed to be language agnostic, and we
show that it can extract high quality conversa-
tional data in both Chinese and English.

1 Introduction

Compared to large-scale collections of conver-
sations from social media (Felbo et al., 2017;
Luo et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2017; Tan et al.,
2016) or news comments (Napoles et al., 2017),
Wikipedia talk pages offer a unique perspective
into goal-oriented discussions between thousands
of volunteer contributors coordinating to write
the largest online encyclopedia. Talk page data

already underpins research on social phenom-
ena such as conversational behavior (Danescu-
Niculescu-Mizil et al., 2012, 2013), disputes
(Wang and Cardie, 2014b), antisocial behavior
(Wulczyn et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2018) and
collaboration (Kittur et al., 2007; Halfaker et al.,
2009). However, the scope of such studies has so
far been limited by a view of the conversation that
is incomplete in two crucial ways: first, it only
captures a subset of all discussions; and second, it
only accounts for the final form of each conversa-
tion, which frequently differs from the interlocu-
tors experience as the conversation develops.

In this paper, we undertake the challenge of
reconstructing a complete and structured history
of the conversational process in Wikipedia talk
pages, containing detailed information about all
the interlocutors’ actions, such as adding and re-
plying to comments, modifying or deleting them.
To this end, we devise a methodology for identi-
fying and structuring these actions, while also ad-
dressing the challenges spurring from the incon-
sistent formatting and the raw scale of existing
records. This results in the largest public dataset
of goal-oriented conversations, WikiConv, span-
ning five languages. The largest component of
this dataset is based on the English Wikipedia, and
contains roughly 91 million conversations consist-
ing of 212 million conversational actions taking
place in 24 million talk pages.

By including details about how each conver-
sation evolved, this corpus provides an unprece-
dented view into the conversational process, as ex-



2819

perienced by the interlocutors. In fact, we find that
about 40% of discussion activity would be missed
by approaches that do not consider comment mod-
ifications and deletions, and even more is missed
when only considering the (final) static snapshots
of conversations. Furthermore, a manual review
of the English Wikipedia portion of the dataset re-
veals that 98% of the reply structure is recovered
correctly and 98% of the interlocutor’s actions are
categorized correctly.

Since the reconstruction pipeline does not rely
on any language specific heuristics, we also ap-
ply it to Chinese, German, Greek and Russian
Wikipedia Talk page archives, in addition to
those from English Wikipadia. A manual review
of the conversations obtained from the Chinese
Wikipedia Talk pages shows a similarly high re-
construction accuracy with that obtained from the
English Wikipedia, suggesting that it is reasonable
to apply the reconstruction pipeline to different
languages. To encourage further validation, refine-
ments and updates, we have open sourced the code
and published the datasets.1

Finally, we present two case studies illustrat-
ing how the corpus can bring new insights into
previously observed phenomena. We first analyze
the conversational behavior of a subset of English
Wikipedia contributors across the entire range of
talk pages, and show that their levels of linguistic
coordination vary according to where the conver-
sation takes place. Second, we investigate the tox-
icity of deleted comments, and show that commu-
nity moderation of undesired behavior takes place
at a much higher rate than previously estimated.

2 Further Related Work

Past efforts aimed at characterizing conversa-
tions on Wikipedia talk pages have either focused
on snapshots of discussion threads (Danescu-
Niculescu-Mizil et al., 2012; Prabhakaran and
Rambow, 2016; Wang and Cardie, 2014b,a), or
have considered text segments in talk page history
as incremental comments, ignoring conversational
turns and reply structures within these conversa-
tions (Wulczyn et al., 2017). The limitations of
these approaches can be seen in Figure 2, where,
if we limit our analysis to only a snapshot of the
final state of the conversation, we miss the abusive
comment introduced in revision 3 and removed in
revision 4, and thus miss an important part of the

1github.com/conversationai/wikidetox

experience of the participants. In fact, this “hid-
den” activity accounts for one third of all actions
taken on talk pages in English Wikipedia.

The closest dataset to our work is Bender et al.
(2011) which introduces the Authority and Align-
ment in Wikipedia discussions corpus (AAWD),
containing 365 talk page discussions. While ac-
knowledging the complexity of conversational be-
haviors on Wikipedia talk pages, the AAWD work
falls short of providing data on the deletions and
follow-up changes to existing comments. Beyond
addressing this shortcoming, the dataset we intro-
duce in this paper is many orders of magnitude
larger, containing 91 million conversations in En-
glish Wikipedia alone.

Figure 1: An example Wiki markdown and its ren-
dered form from Wikipedia Talk Page Help2.

3 Conversation Reconstruction

Technically, comments are added to Wikipedia
talk pages the same way content is added to ar-
ticle pages: contributors simply edit the mark-
down of any part of the talk page without rely-
ing on any functionality specialized for structur-
ing the conversations. Figure 1 gives an example
of the discussion interface and the resulting ren-
dered conversation. Each edit results in a revision
of the whole page that is permanently stored in a
public historical record.3 Because conversations
on Wikipedia have no ‘official’ underlying struc-
ture, and instead are organized using indentation
markup and other ad hoc visual cues, computa-
tional heuristics are necessary to interpret conver-
sational structure.
Actions. We model the conversational structure of

2mediawiki.org/wiki/Help:Talk_pages
3In some rare cases revisions are deleted, for example, if

personal information is accidentally written into a page.

github.com/conversationai/wikidetox
mediawiki.org/wiki/Help:Talk_pages


2820

Figure 2: Example conversation reconstruction. The action id in the ReplyTo column defines the con-
versation’s structure; The Parent column indicates history, showing how actions change earlier actions.
Note that each revision (color-coded) can introduce multiple actions.

English Wikipedia Reconstruction Accuracy by Action Type
Number of Action Type Breakdown Boundary Type ReplyTo Parent
Distinct users 4.4M Creation 21% 100% 100% 100% 100%
Talk Pages 24M Addition 39% 96% 100% 95% 100%
Revisions 120M Modification 13% 97% 95% 97% 95%
Conversations 91M Deletion 24% 94% 96% 100% 100%
Actions 212M Restoration 3% 84% 98% 100% 99%

All actions: 96% 98% 98% 99%
Chinese Wikipedia Reconstruction Accuracy by Action Type

Number of Action Type Breakdown Boundary Type ReplyTo Parent
Distinct users 87K Creation 22% 100% 100% 100% 100%
Talk Pages 2.2M Addition 50% 96% 100% 100% 100%
Revisions 4.6M Modification 9% 84% 94% 99% 97%
Conversations 4.4M Deletion 16% 99% 90% 100% 98%
Actions 6.4M Restoration 3% 97% 98% 100% 98%

All actions: 96% 98% 99% 99%
Table 1: Summary statistics and reconstruction accuracy for the English and Chinese Wikipedia
talk page corpora. These statistics exclude actions that result in empty content after markup cleaning
(e.g., purely formatting edits).

interactions as a graph of actions, as illustrated in
Figure 2. Actions are categorized into five types:
• Creation: the start of a conversation thread based
on a markup section heading being added (e.g. Ac-
tion 1 in Figure 2).
• Addition: the addition of a new comment to a
thread (e.g. Actions 2 and 3).
• Modification: modification of an existing com-
ment (e.g. Action 5); with the original specified as
the Parent-id.
• Deletion: the removal of a comment or heading
(e.g. Action 4) where the Parent-id specifies the
comment or heading’s most recent action.
• Restoration: a revert specifies the deleted action

being undone as the Parent-id.

All action types except thread creations, thread
deletions and thread restorations also include a
ReplyTo-id indicating the target of the reply.
From Page Revisions to Actions. Our recon-
struction pipeline is a Python program written for
Google Cloud Dataflow (also known as Apache
Beam)4 that operates on pages in parallel and on
the revisions of each page sequentially in temporal
order.

Due to the large scale of Wikipedia data, we use
external sorting for pages that contains too many
revisions to fit in a Dataflow worker’s memory.

4cloud.google.com/dataflow/

cloud.google.com/dataflow/


2821

When the number of revisions is too large for a
Dataflow worker’s local disk, the computation is
performed in stages, a few years at a time.

Given the sorted set of a page-revisions, token-
level diffs between sequential revisions are com-
puted using a longest common sequence (LCS)
algorithm.5 Each sequential diff is then decom-
posed into the set of atomic conversation actions
attributed to the user who submitted the page revi-
sion. During the sequential processing of a page’s
revisions, two data structures are maintained: each
comment’s current character offset, and a list of
deleted comments. The comment offsets are used
to interpret the difference between modification
actions (edits within the bounds of an existing ac-
tion) and additions; the deleted comments are used
to identify restoration of comments.

We store the most recent 100 deleted com-
ments between 10 to 1000 characters long, for
each page. This is used to compute when a com-
ment is restored by looking up deleted comments
in a trie. The token length lower bound param-
eter avoids short commonly added comments—
like “Thanks!”—from being interpreted as restora-
tions. The upper bound ensures that occasional
very long deleted comments are skipped, to bound
Dataflow workers’ memory usage.

Finally, reconstructed actions are processed us-
ing mwparserfromhell 6 to clean the MediaWiki
formating. Note that, since arbitrary page changes
are allowed, some actions cannot be processed by
the parser (about 1 in 200,000); in such cases, an
action’s raw MediaWiki markup is stored.

Table 1 shows summary statistics of the final
dataset on English and Chinese Wikipedia. The
version of the raw data dumps processed were re-
trieved on July 1st 2018.

4 Evaluation of Reconstruction Quality

We evaluate the quality of the automatic recon-
struction by manually verifying a randomly drawn
subset of (at least) 100 examples from each action
category. For each action we verify the accuracy
of (1) the assigned action type, (2) the token-level
boundary of the comment, (3) the ReplyTo rela-
tion and (4) the action’s Parent relation.

We conduct the evaluation for both English and
Chinese data (Table 1). With over 98% of actions
classified correctly in both languages, the dataset

5github.com/google/diff-match-patch
6github.com/earwig/mwparserfromhell

exhibits a high annotation quality given its scale
and detail. From the error cases in the English
data, 10% result from limitations in the current
technologies for HTML parsing and LCS match-
ing. User behavior that we could interpret but is
not yet captured by our algorithm, such as mov-
ing ongoing conversations to another talk pages
accounts for another 24%. The remaining errors
were from edits that we were unable to interpret.
By open sourcing the reconstruction code, we en-
courage further refinements.

5 Case Studies

We now briefly present two studies on English
Wikipedia that highlight the importance of (1) col-
lecting the full history of Wikipedia across all
pages and (2) capturing the various types of in-
teractions.
Linguistic Coordination. Danescu-Niculescu-
Mizil et al. (2012) studied language coordinations
(i.e., in a conversation between a and b, to what
degree is b systematically adopting a’s language
patterns when replying to a) on a conversational
corpus derived from 5, 657 User Talk pages: those
associated with, and managed by, a specific user.
The study showed that social status mediates the
amount of linguistic coordination, with contrib-
utors imitating more the linguistic style of those
with higher status in the community.

We now show that the coordination pattern of
the page owners in the previous dataset differs sig-
nificantly based on where the conversation takes
place. We compare each contributor’s coordina-
tion patterns on their own user talk page to pat-
terns exhibited on talk pages of other contribu-
tors, as well as to those on article talk pages—
talk pages associated with a Wikipedia article. To
avoid confounding different populations (and fall
into the trap of Simpson’s paradox), we only in-
clude in the comparison users that had a sufficient
amount of contributions across all three venues.
Figure 3 shows the three aggregated coordination
values computed by applying the methodology of
the original paper on 4 million addition actions
that occurred before 2012.

Our results show with significant difference
(p < 0.001 calculated by one-way ANOVA) that
contributors coordinate the least when replying on
other users’ talk pages, and most on their own talk
page. This leads us to speculate a new hypothesis:
contributors have a different perception of status

github.com/google/diff-match-patch
github.com/earwig/mwparserfromhell


2822

Aggregated 1
 on 2,425 editors

Aggregated 2
 on 3,130 editors

Aggregated 3
on 3,130 editors

0

1

2

3

Co
or

di
na

tio
n 

Va
lu

e
(×

 1
00

)

User's own talk page
Article talk page

Other users' talk pages

0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%

Normal

Toxic

Severe
Toxic

In a day
In a week

In a month
In a year

After one year

Figure 3: (Left) Linguistic coordination depends on the discussion’s venue. Error bars are estimated
by bootstrap resampling. (Right) Deletion rate of content over varying time periods.

or respect on their own page than on others. Such
questions, which require more thorough investiga-
tion that depends on observing how contributors
interact across different discussion venues, can be
studied using the WikiConv corpus.
Moderation of toxic behavior. Wulczyn et al.
(2017) measured prevalence of personal attacks
in a Wikipedia talk page corpus, and evaluated
the fraction of attacks that moderators follow up
on with a block or warning (17.9%). However,
because there was no structured history of com-
ment deletion, the authors were unable to mea-
sure the rate at which toxic comments are mod-
erated through deletion. Using the more complete
datasets provided by WikiConv we show that the
fraction of problematic comments moderated by
Wikipedians is significantly higher than their ini-
tial estimate suggests.

We used the Perspective API7 to score the tox-
icity of all addition and creation actions (which
we refer to as “comments” here).8 Each com-
ment is further classified as toxic or non-toxic ac-
cording to the equal error rate threshold, follow-
ing the methodology of (Wulczyn et al., 2017),
where false positives are offset by false negatives.
The threshold is calculated by on the human la-
bels in the Kaggle Toxicity dataset of Wikipedia
comments 9. Classification at this threshold yields
86% precision and 84% recall.

We used the same method to labeled comments
with the severe toxic model. Figure 3 shows the
fraction of comments deleted by Wikipedians who
are not the author of the comment for different
lengths of time; distinguishing between comments
labeled as toxic, severely toxic, and the back-
ground distribution. The key results here are that

7www.perspectiveapi.com
8We release the scores with the dataset.
9The Jigsaw Toxicity Kaggle Competition: goo.gl/

N6UGPK

nearly 33% of toxic comments are removed within
a day; And over 82% of severely toxic comments
are deleted within a day. This complements re-
sults previously reported by Wulczyn et al. (2017),
accounting for an additional type of community
moderation that is revealed using the detailed in-
formation about the history of the conversation
provided by our corpus.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

We introduced a pipeline that extracts the com-
plete conversational history of Wikipedia talk
pages at a level of detail that was not previously
available. We applied this pipeline to Wikipedia
in multiple languages and evaluated its quality on
the English and Chinese Talk page corpora, ob-
taining a high reconstruction accuracy for both
the Chinese and English datasets (9̃8%). This
level of detail and completeness opens avenues for
new research, as well as revisiting and extending
existing work on online conversational and col-
laboration behavior. For example, while in our
use cases we have focused on contributors delet-
ing toxic comments, one could seek to understand
why and when an editor is deleting or rewording
their own comments. Beyond refining the heuris-
tics and parsing methods used in our reconstruc-
tion pipeline, and reducing the time needed to up-
date the corpus, a significant remaining challenge
is to capture conversations that happen across page
boundaries.

7 Acknowledgement

We thank Thomas Ristenpart, Andreas Veit for
proof reading; Ben Vitale for many helpful discus-
sions on building the pipeline; and all those who
helped us find bugs and discussed the challenges
throughout. This project is supported in part by
NSF grant CNS-1558500.

www.perspectiveapi.com
goo.gl/N6UGPK
goo.gl/N6UGPK


2823

References
Emily M Bender, Jonathan T Morgan, Meghan Oxley,

Mark Zachry, Brian Hutchinson, Alex Marin, Bin
Zhang, and Mari Ostendorf. 2011. Annotating so-
cial acts: Authority claims and alignment moves in
Wikipedia talk pages. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Languages in Social Media.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Lillian Lee,
Bo Pang, and Jon Kleinberg. 2012. Echoes of
power: Language effects and power differences in
social interaction. In Proceedings of WWW.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Moritz Sudhof,
Dan Jurafsky, Jure Leskovec, and Christopher Potts.
2013. A computational approach to politeness with
application to social factors. In Proceedings of ACL.

Bjarke Felbo, Alan Mislove, Anders Søgaard, Iyad
Rahwan, and Sune Lehmann. 2017. Using millions
of emoji occurrences to learn any-domain represen-
tations for detecting sentiment, emotion and sar-
casm. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Aaron Halfaker, Aniket Kittur, Robert Kraut, and John
Riedl. 2009. A jury of your peers: quality, experi-
ence and ownership in Wikipedia. In Proceedings of
the 5th International Symposium on Wikis and Open
Collaboration.

Aniket Kittur, Bongwon Suh, Bryan A Pendleton, and
Ed H Chi. 2007. He says, she says: Conflict and
coordination in Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing
systems.

Zhunchen Luo, Miles Osborne, and Ting Wang. 2012.
Opinion retrieval in Twitter. In Proceedings of
ICWSM.

Courtney Napoles, Joel Tetreault, Aasish Pappu, En-
rica Rosato, and Brian Provenzale. 2017. Finding
good conversations online: The Yahoo news anno-
tated comments corpus. In Proceedings of the 11th
Linguistic Annotation Workshop.

Vinodkumar Prabhakaran and Owen Rambow. 2016.
A corpus of wikipedia discussions: Over the years,
with topic, power and gender labels. In Proceedings
of LREC.

Chenhao Tan, Vlad Niculae, Cristian Danescu-
Niculescu-Mizil, and Lillian Lee. 2016. Winning
arguments: Interaction dynamics and persuasion
strategies in good-faith online discussions. In Pro-
ceedings of WWW.

Lu Wang and Claire Cardie. 2014a. Improving agree-
ment and disagreement identification in online dis-
cussions with a socially-tuned sentiment lexicon. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational Ap-
proaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social Me-
dia Analysis.

Lu Wang and Claire Cardie. 2014b. A piece of my
mind: A sentiment analysis approach for online dis-
pute detection. In Proceedings of ACL.

Ellery Wulczyn, Nithum Thain, and Lucas Dixon.
2017. Ex machina: Personal attacks seen at scale.
In Proceedings of WWW.

Amy X Zhang, Bryan Culbertson, and Praveen Par-
itosh. 2017. Characterizing online discussion us-
ing coarse discourse sequences. In Proceedings of
ICWSM.

Justine Zhang, Jonathan P Chang, Cristian Danescu-
Niculescu-Mizil, Lucas Dixon, Yiqing Hua, Nithum
Thain, and Dario Taraborelli. 2018. Conversations
gone awry: Detecting early signs of conversational
failure. In Proceedings of ACL.


