



















































DeClarE: Debunking Fake News and False Claims using Evidence-Aware Deep Learning


Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 22–32
Brussels, Belgium, October 31 - November 4, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

22

DeClarE: Debunking Fake News and False Claims
using Evidence-Aware Deep Learning

Kashyap Popat1, Subhabrata Mukherjee2, Andrew Yates1, Gerhard Weikum1
1Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany

2Amazon Inc., Seattle, USA
{kpopat,ayates,weikum}@mpi-inf.mpg.de, subhomj@amazon.com

Abstract

Misinformation such as fake news is one of
the big challenges of our society. Research on
automated fact-checking has proposed meth-
ods based on supervised learning, but these
approaches do not consider external evidence
apart from labeled training instances. Recent
approaches counter this deficit by considering
external sources related to a claim. However,
these methods require substantial feature mod-
eling and rich lexicons. This paper overcomes
these limitations of prior work with an end-to-
end model for evidence-aware credibility as-
sessment of arbitrary textual claims, without
any human intervention. It presents a neural
network model that judiciously aggregates sig-
nals from external evidence articles, the lan-
guage of these articles and the trustworthiness
of their sources. It also derives informative
features for generating user-comprehensible
explanations that makes the neural network
predictions transparent to the end-user. Exper-
iments with four datasets and ablation studies
show the strength of our method.

1 Introduction

Motivation: Modern media (e.g., news feeds, mi-
croblogs, etc.) exhibit an increasing fraction of
misleading and manipulative content, from ques-
tionable claims and “alternative facts” to com-
pletely faked news. The media landscape is be-
coming a twilight zone and battleground. This so-
cietal challenge has led to the rise of fact-checking
and debunking websites, such as Snopes.com
and PolitiFact.com, where people research claims,
manually assess their credibility, and present their
verdict along with evidence (e.g., background ar-
ticles, quotations, etc.). However, this manual ver-
ification is time-consuming. To keep up with the
scale and speed at which misinformation spreads,
we need tools to automate this debunking process.

State of the Art and Limitations: Prior work on
“truth discovery” (see Li et al. (2016) for survey)1

largely focused on structured facts, typically in
the form of subject-predicate-object triples, or on
social media platforms like Twitter, Sina Weibo,
etc. Recently, methods have been proposed to as-
sess the credibility of claims in natural language
form (Popat et al., 2017; Rashkin et al., 2017;
Wang, 2017), such as news headlines, quotes from
speeches, blog posts, etc.

The methods geared for general text input ad-
dress the problem in different ways. On the one
hand, methods like Rashkin et al. (2017); Wang
(2017) train neural networks on labeled claims
from sites like PolitiFact.com, providing credibil-
ity assessments without any explicit feature mod-
eling. However, they use only the text of ques-
tionable claims and no external evidence or inter-
actions that provide limited context for credibil-
ity analysis. These approaches also do not offer
any explanation of their verdicts. On the other
hand, Popat et al. (2017) considers external evi-
dence in the form of other articles (retrieved from
the Web) that confirm or refute a claim, and jointly
assesses the language style (using subjectivity lex-
icons), the trustworthiness of the sources, and the
credibility of the claim. This is achieved via a
pipeline of supervised classifiers. On the upside,
this method generates user-interpretable explana-
tions by pointing to informative snippets of evi-
dence articles. On the downside, it requires sub-
stantial feature modeling and rich lexicons to de-
tect bias and subjectivity in the language style.
Approach and Contribution: To overcome the
limitations of the prior works, we present De-
ClarE2, an end-to-end neural network model for
assessing and explaining the credibility of arbi-

1As fully objective and unarguable truth is often elusive
or ill-defined, we use the term credibility rather than “truth”.

2Debunking Claims with Interpretable Evidence



23

trary claims in natural-language text form. Our
approach combines the best of both families of
prior methods. Similar to Popat et al. (2017), De-
ClarE incorporates external evidence or counter-
evidence from the Web as well as signals from the
language style and the trustworthiness of the un-
derlying sources. However, our method does not
require any feature engineering, lexicons, or other
manual intervention. Rashkin et al. (2017); Wang
(2017) also develop an end-to-end model, but De-
ClarE goes far beyond in terms of considering ex-
ternal evidence and joint interactions between sev-
eral factors, and also in its ability to generate user-
interpretable explanations in addition to highly
accurate assessments. For example, given the
natural-language input claim “the gun epidemic
is the leading cause of death of young African-
American men, more than the next nine causes put
together” by Hillary Clinton, DeClarE draws on
evidence from the Web to arrive at its verdict cred-
ible, and returns annotated snippets like the one
in Table 6 as explanation. These snippets, which
contain evidence in the form of statistics and as-
sertions, are automatically extracted from web ar-
ticles from sources of varying credibility.

Given an input claim, DeClarE searches for web
articles related to the claim. It considers the con-
text of the claim via word embeddings and the
(language of) web articles captured via a bidirec-
tional LSTM (biLSTM), while using an attention
mechanism to focus on parts of the articles accord-
ing to their relevance to the claim. DeClarE then
aggregates all the information about claim source,
web article contexts, attention weights, and trust-
worthiness of the underlying sources to assess the
claim. It also derives informative features for in-
terpretability, like source embeddings that capture
trustworthiness and salient words captured via at-
tention. Key contributions of this paper are:

• Model: An end-to-end neural network model
which automatically assesses the credibility
of natural-language claims, without any hand-
crafted features or lexicons.

• Interpretability: An attention mechanism in
our model that generates user-comprehensible
explanations, making credibility verdicts
transparent and interpretable.

• Experiments: Extensive experiments on four
datasets and ablation studies, demonstrating
effectiveness of our method over state-of-the-
art baselines.

2 End-to-end Framework for Credibility
Analysis

Consider a set of N claims 〈Cn〉 from the respec-
tive origins/sources 〈CSn〉, where n ∈ [1, N ].
Each claim Cn is reported by a set of M arti-
cles 〈Am,n〉 along with their respective sources
〈ASm,n〉, where m ∈ [1,M ]. Each corresponding
tuple of claim and its origin, reporting articles and
article sources – 〈Cn, CSn, Am,n, ASm,n〉 forms
a training instance in our setting, along with the
credibility label of the claim used as ground-truth
during network training. Figure 1 gives a pictorial
overview of our model. In the following sections,
we provide a detailed description of our approach.

2.1 Input Representations

The input claim Cn of length l is represented as
[c1, c2, ..., cl] where cl ∈ <d is the d-dimensional
word embedding of the l-th word in the input
claim. The source/origin of the claim CSn is rep-
resented by a ds-dimensional embedding vector
csn ∈ <ds .

A reporting article Am,n consisting of k to-
kens is represented by [am,n,1, am,n,2, ..., am,n,k],
where am,n,k ∈ <d is the d-dimensional word
embedding vector for the k-th word in the report-
ing article Am,n. The claim and article word em-
beddings have shared parameters. The source of
the reporting article ASm,n is represented as a ds-
dimensional vector, asm,n ∈ <ds . For the sake
of brevity, we drop the notation subscripts n and
m in the following sections by considering only a
single training instance – the input claim Cn from
source CSn, the corresponding article Am,n and
its sources ASm,n given by: 〈C,CS,A,AS〉.

2.2 Article Representation

To create a representation of an article, which may
capture task-specific features such as whether it
contains objective language, we use a bidirectional
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network as
proposed by Graves et al. (2005). A basic LSTM
cell consists of various gates to control the flow of
information through timesteps in a sequence, mak-
ing LSTMs suitable for capturing long and short
range dependencies in text that may be difficult
to capture with standard recurrent neural networks
(RNNs). Given an input word embedding of to-
kens 〈ak〉, an LSTM cell performs various non-
linear transformations to generate a hidden vector
state hk for each token at each timestep k.



24

Claim Word 
Embeddings 

Claim Source 
Embedding 

Article Word 
Embeddings 

Article Source 
Embedding 

avg

X

X

X

avg

Concatenate Dense 
Layer 

Softmax

Dense 
Layer 

Dense 
Layer 

Softmax/ 
Linear

Attention 
Weights 

Credibility 
Score 

Concatenate 
Features 

Inner 
Product 

Bidirectional 
LSTM 

Figure 1: Framework for credibility assessment. Upper part of the pipeline combines the article and
claim embeddings to get the claim specific attention weights. Lower part of the pipeline captures the
article representation through biLSTM. Attention focused article representation along with the source
embeddings are passed through dense layers to predict the credibility score of the claim.

We use bidirectional LSTMs in place of stan-
dard LSTMs. Bidirectional LSTMs capture both
the previous timesteps (past features) and the fu-
ture timesteps (future features) via forward and
backward states respectively. Correspondingly,
there are two hidden states that capture past and
future information that are concatenated to form
the final output as: hk = [

−→
hk,
←−
hk].

2.3 Claim Specific Attention

As we previously discussed, it is important to con-
sider the relevance of an article with respect to the
claim; specifically, focusing or attending to parts
of the article that discuss the claim. This is in con-
trast to prior works (Popat et al., 2017; Rashkin
et al., 2017; Wang, 2017) that ignore either the ar-
ticle or the claim, and therefore miss out on this
important interaction.

We propose an attention mechanism to help our
model focus on salient words in the article with
respect to the claim. To this end, we compute
the importance of each term in an article with
respect to an overall representation of the corre-
sponding claim. Additionally, incorporating atten-
tion helps in making our model transparent and in-
terpretable, because it provides a way to generate
the most salient words in an article as evidence of
our model’s verdict.

Following Wieting et al. (2015), the overall rep-
resentation of an input claim is generated by tak-
ing an average of the word embeddings of all the

words therein:

c̄ =
1

l

∑
l

cl

We combine this overall representation of the
claim with each article term:

âk = ak ⊕ c̄

where, âk ∈ <d+d and ⊕ denotes the concatenate
operation. We then perform a transformation to
obtain claim-specific representations of each arti-
cle term:

a′k = f(Waâk + ba)

where Wa and ba are the corresponding weight
matrix and bias terms, and f is an activation func-
tion3, such as ReLU , tanh, or the identity func-
tion. Following this, we use a softmax activation
to calculate an attention score αk for each word
in the article capturing its relevance to the claim
context:

αk =
exp(a′k)∑
k exp(a

′
k)

(1)

2.4 Per-Article Credibility Score of Claim
Now that we have article term representations
given by 〈hk〉 and their relevance to the claim
given by 〈αk〉, we need to combine them to pre-
dict the claim’s credibility. In order to create an

3In our model, the tanh activation function gives best re-
sults.



25

attention-focused representation of the article con-
sidering both the claim and the article’s language,
we calculate a weighted average of the hidden
state representations for all article tokens based on
their corresponding attention scores:

g =
1

k

∑
k

αk · hk (2)

We then combine all the different feature repre-
sentations: the claim source embedding (cs), the
attention-focused article representation (g), and
the article source embedding (as). In order to
merge the different representations and capture
their joint interactions, we process them with two
fully connected layers with non-linear activations.

d1 = relu(Wc(g ⊕ cs⊕ as) + bc)
d2 = relu(Wdd1 + bd)

where, W and b are the corresponding weight ma-
trix and bias terms.

Finally, to generate the overall credibility label
of the article for classification tasks, or credibil-
ity score for regression tasks, we process the final
representation with a final fully connected layer:

Classification: s = sigmoid(d2) (3)

Regression: s = linear(d2) (4)

2.5 Credibility Aggregation

The credibility score in the above step is obtained
considering a single reporting article. As previ-
ously discussed, we have M reporting articles per
claim. Therefore, once we have the per-article
credibility scores from our model, we take an av-
erage of these scores to generate the overall credi-
bility score for the claim:

cred(C) =
1

M

∑
m

sm (5)

This aggregation is done after the model is
trained.

3 Datasets

We evaluate our approach and demonstrate its gen-
erality by performing experiments on four differ-
ent datasets: a general fact-checking website, a po-
litical fact-checking website, a news review com-
munity, and a SemEval Twitter rumour dataset.

3.1 Snopes

Snopes (www.snopes.com) is a general fact-
checking website where editors manually investi-
gate various kinds of rumors reported on the In-
ternet. We used the Snopes dataset provided by
Popat et al. (2017). This dataset consists of ru-
mors analyzed on the Snopes website along with
their credibility labels (true or false), sets of re-
porting articles, and their respective web sources.

3.2 PolitiFact

PolitiFact is a political fact-checking website
(www.politifact.com) in which editors rate
the credibility of claims made by various politi-
cal figures in US politics. We extract all articles
from PolitiFact published before December 2017.
Each article includes a claim, the speaker (polit-
ical figure) who made the claim, and the claim’s
credibility rating provided by the editors.

PolitiFact assigns each claim to one of six pos-
sible ratings: true, mostly true, half true, mostly
false, false and pants-on-fire. Following Rashkin
et al. (2017), we combine true, mostly true and
half true ratings into the class label true and the
rest as false – hence considering only binary cred-
ibility labels. To retrieve the reporting articles for
each claim (similar to Popat et al. (2017)), we is-
sue each claim as a query to a search engine4 and
retrieve the top 30 search results with their respec-
tive web sources.

3.3 NewsTrust

NewsTrust is a news review community in which
members review the credibility of news articles.
We use the NewsTrust dataset made available by
Mukherjee and Weikum (2015). This dataset con-
tains NewsTrust stories from May 2006 to May
2014. Each story consists of a news article along
with its source, and a set of reviews and ratings by
community members. NewsTrust aggregates these
ratings and assigns an overall credibility score (on
a scale of 1 to 5) to the posted article. We map the
attributes in this data to the inputs expected by De-
ClarE as follows: the title and the web source of
the posted (news) article are mapped to the input
claim and claim source, respectively. Reviews and
their corresponding user identities are mapped to
reporting articles and article sources, respectively.
We use this dataset for the regression task of pre-
dicting the credibility score of the posted article.

4We use the Bing search API.

www.snopes.com
www.politifact.com


26

Dataset SN PF NT SE

Total claims 4341 3568 5344 272
True claims 1164 1867 - 127
False claims 3177 1701 - 50
Unverified claims - - - 95

Claim sources - 95 161 10

Articles 29242 29556 25128 3717
Article sources 336 336 251 89

Table 1: Data statistics (SN: Snopes, PF: Politi-
Fact, NT: NewsTrust, SE: SemEval).

3.4 SemEval-2017 Task 8
As the fourth dataset, we consider the benchmark
dataset released by SemEval-2017 for the task of
determining credibility and stance of social media
content (Twitter) (Derczynski et al., 2017). The
objective of this task is to predict the credibility
of a questionable tweet (true, false or unverified)
along with a confidence score from the model. It
has two sub-tasks: (i) a closed variant in which
models only consider the questionable tweet, and
(ii) an open variant in which models consider both
the questionable tweet and additional context con-
sisting of snapshots of relevant sources retrieved
immediately before the rumor was reported, a
snapshot of an associated Wikipedia article, news
articles from digital news outlets, and preceding
tweets about the same event. Testing and devel-
opment datasets provided by organizers have 28
tweets (1021 reply tweets) and 25 tweets (256 re-
ply tweets), respectively.

3.5 Data Processing
In order to have a minimum support for training,
claim sources with less than 5 claims in the dataset
are grouped into a single dummy claim source,
and article sources with less than 10 articles are
grouped similarly (5 articles for SemEval as it is a
smaller dataset).

For Snopes and PolitiFact, we need to extract
relevant snippets from the reporting articles for
a claim. Therefore, we extract snippets of 100
words from each reporting article having the maxi-
mum relevance score: sim = simbow×simsemantic
where simbow is the fraction of claim words that
are present in the snippet, and simsemantic repre-
sents the cosine similarity between the average
of claim word embeddings and snippet word em-
beddings. We also enforce a constraint that the
sim score is at least δ. We varied δ from 0.2
to 0.8 and found 0.5 to give the optimal perfor-

Parameter SN PF NT SE

Word embedding length 100 100 300 100
Claim source embedding length - 4 8 4
Article source embedding length 8 4 8 4
LSTM size (for each pass) 64 64 64 16
Size of fully connected layers 32 32 64 8
Dropout 0.5 0.5 0.3 0.3

Table 2: Model parameters used for each dataset
(SN: Snopes, PF: PolitiFact, NT: NewsTrust, SE:
SemEval).

mance on a withheld dataset. We discard all arti-
cles related to Snopes and PolitiFact websites from
our datasets to have an unbiased model. Statis-
tics of the datasets after pre-processing is pro-
vided in Table 1. All the datasets are made pub-
licly available at https://www.mpi-inf.
mpg.de/dl-cred-analysis/.

4 Experiments

We evaluate our approach by conducting experi-
ments on four datasets, as described in the previ-
ous section. We describe our experimental setup
and report our results in the following sections.

4.1 Experimental Setup

When using the Snopes, PolitiFact and NewsTrust
datasets, we reserve 10% of the data as valida-
tion data for parameter tuning. We report 10-fold
cross validation results on the remaining 90% of
the data; the model is trained on 9-folds and the
remaining fold is used as test data. When us-
ing the SemEval dataset, we use the data splits
provided by the task’s organizers. The objective
for Snopes, PolitiFact and SemEval experiments is
binary (credibility) classification, while for New-
sTrust the objective is to predict the credibility
score of the input claim on a scale of 1 to 5 (i.e.,
credibility regression). We represent terms us-
ing pre-trained GloVe Wikipedia 6B word embed-
dings (Pennington et al., 2014). Since our train-
ing datasets are not very large, we do not tune the
word embeddings during training. The remaining
model parameters are tuned on the validation data;
the parameters chosen are reported in Table 2. We
use Keras with a Tensorflow backend to imple-
ment our system. All the models are trained using
Adam optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2014) (learn-
ing rate: 0.002) with categorical cross-entropy loss
for classification and mean squared error loss for
regression task. We use L2-regularizers with the

https://www.mpi-inf.mpg.de/dl-cred-analysis/
https://www.mpi-inf.mpg.de/dl-cred-analysis/


27

Dataset Configuration True ClaimsAccuracy (%)
False Claims

Accuracy (%)
Macro

F1-Score AUC

Snopes

LSTM-text 64.65 64.21 0.66 0.70
CNN-text 67.15 63.14 0.66 0.72
Distant Supervision 83.21 80.78 0.82 0.88

DeClarE (Plain) 74.37 78.57 0.78 0.83
DeClarE (Plain+Attn) 78.34 78.91 0.79 0.85
DeClarE (Plain+SrEmb) 77.43 79.80 0.79 0.85
DeClarE (Full) 78.96 78.32 0.79 0.86

PolitiFact

LSTM-text 63.19 61.96 0.63 0.66
CNN-text 63.67 63.31 0.64 0.67
Distant Supervision 62.53 62.08 0.62 0.68

DeClarE (Plain) 62.67 69.05 0.66 0.70
DeClarE (Plain+Attn) 65.53 68.49 0.66 0.72
DeClarE (Plain+SrEmb) 66.71 69.28 0.67 0.74
DeClarE (Full) 67.32 69.62 0.68 0.75

Table 3: Comparison of various approaches for credibility classification on Snopes and PolitiFact datasets.

fully connected layers as well as dropout. For all
the datasets, the model is trained using each claim-
article pair as a separate training instance.

To evaluate and compare the performance of
DeClarE with other state-of-the-art methods, we
report the following measures:

• Credibility Classification (Snopes, PolitiFact
and SemEval): accuracy of the models in clas-
sifying true and false claims separately, macro
F1-score and Area-Under-Curve (AUC) for
the ROC (Receiver Operating Characteristic)
curve.

• Credibility Regression (NewsTrust): Mean
Square Error (MSE) between the predicted and
true credibility scores.

4.2 Results: Snopes and Politifact

We compare our approach with the following
state-of-the-art models: (i) LSTM-text, a recent
approach proposed by Rashkin et al. (2017). (ii)
CNN-text: a CNN based approach proposed by
Wang (2017). (iii) Distant Supervision: state-
of-the-art distant supervision based approach pro-
posed by Popat et al. (2017). (iv) DeClare
(Plain): our approach with only biLSTM (no at-
tention and source embeddings). (v) DeClarE
(Plain+Attn): our approach with only biLSTM
and attention (no source embeddings). (vi) De-
ClarE (Plain+SrEmb): our approach with only
biLSTM and source embeddings (no attention).
(vii) DeClarE (Full): end-to-end system with biL-
STM, attention and source embeddings.

The results when performing credibility classi-
fication on the Snopes and PolitiFact datasets are

shown in Table 3. DeClarE outperforms LSTM-
text and CNN-text models by a large margin on
both datasets. On the other hand, for the Snopes
dataset, performance of DeClarE (Full) is slightly
lower than the Distant Supervision configuration
(p-value of 0.04 with a pairwise t-test). How-
ever, the advantage of DeClarE over Distant Su-
pervision approach is that it does not rely on hand
crafted features and lexicons, and can generalize
well to arbitrary domains without requiring any
seed vocabulary. It is also to be noted that both of
these approaches use external evidence in the form
of reporting articles discussing the claim, which
are not available to the LSTM-text and CNN-text
baselines. This demonstrates the value of external
evidence for credibility assessment.

On the PolitiFact dataset, DeClarE outperforms
all the baseline models by a margin of 7-9%
AUC (p-value of 9.12e−05 with a pairwise t-test)
with similar improvements in terms of Macro F1.
A performance comparison of DeClarE’s various
configurations indicates the contribution of each
component of our model, i.e, biLSTM capturing
article representations, attention mechanism and
source embeddings. The additions of both the
attention mechanism and source embeddings im-
prove performance over the plain configuration in
all cases when measured by Macro F1 or AUC.

4.3 Results: NewsTrust

When performing credibility regression on the
NewsTrust dataset, we evaluate the models in
terms of mean squared error (MSE; lower is bet-
ter) for credibility rating prediction. We use the



28

Configuration MSE

CNN-text 0.53
CCRF+SVR 0.36
LSTM-text 0.35
DistantSup 0.35
DeClarE (Plain) 0.34
DeClarE (Full) 0.29

Table 4: Comparison of various approaches for
credibility regression on NewsTrust dataset.

first three models described in Section 4.2 as base-
lines. For CNN-text and LSTM-text, we add a lin-
ear fully connected layer as the final layer of the
model to support regression. Additionally, we also
consider the state-of-the-art CCRF+SVR model
based on Continuous Conditional Random Field
(CCRF) and Support Vector Regression (SVR)
proposed by Mukherjee and Weikum (2015). The
results are shown in Table 4. We observe that De-
ClarE (Full) outperforms all four baselines, with
a 17% decrease in MSE compared to the best-
performing baselines (i.e., LSTM-text and Dis-
tant Supervision). The DeClarE (Plain) model
performs substantially worse than the full model,
illustrating the value of including attention and
source embeddings. CNN-text performs substan-
tially worse than the other baselines.

4.4 Results: SemEval

On the SemEval dataset, the objective is to per-
form credibility classification of a tweet while also
producing a classification confidence score. We
compare the following approaches and consider
both variants of the SemEval task: (i) NileTMRG
(Enayet and El-Beltagy, 2017): the best perform-
ing approach for the close variant of the task, (ii)
IITP (Singh et al., 2017): the best performing ap-
proach for the open variant of the task, (iii) De-
Clare (Plain): our approach with only biLSTM
(no attention and source embeddings), and (iv)
DeClarE (Full): our end-to-end system with biL-
STM, attention and source embeddings.

We use the evaluation measure proposed by the
task’s organizers: macro F1-score for overall clas-
sification and Root-Mean-Square Error (RMSE)
over confidence scores. Results are shown in Ta-
ble 5. We observe that DeClarE (Full) outperforms
all the other approaches — thereby, re-affirming
its power in harnessing external evidence.

Configuration MacroAccuracy RMSE

IITP (Open) 0.39 0.746
NileTMRG (Close) 0.54 0.673
DeClarE (Plain) 0.46 0.687
DeClarE (Full) 0.57 0.604

Table 5: Comparison of various approaches for
credibility classification on SemEval dataset.

5 Discussion

5.1 Analyzing Article Representations
In order to assess how our model separates articles
reporting false claims from those reporting true
ones, we employ dimensionality reduction using
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to project
the article representations (g in Equation 2) from
a high dimensional space to a 2d plane. The pro-
jections are shown in Figure 2a. We observe that
DeClarE obtains clear separability between credi-
ble versus non-credible articles in Snopes dataset.

5.2 Analyzing Source Embeddings
Similar to the treatment of article representations,
we perform an analysis with the claim and arti-
cle source embeddings by employing PCA and
plotting the projections. We sample a few popu-
lar news sources from Snopes and claim sources
from PolitiFact. These news sources and claim
sources are displayed in Figure 2b and Figure 2c,
respectively. From Figure 2b we observe that
DeClarE clearly separates fake news sources like
nationalreport, empirenews, huzlers, etc. from
mainstream news sources like nytimes, cnn, wsj,
foxnews, washingtonpost, etc. Similarly, from Fig-
ure 2c we observe that DeClarE locates politicians
with similar ideologies and opinions close to each
other in the embedding space.

5.3 Analyzing Attention Weights
Attention weights help understand what DeClarE
focuses on during learning and how it affects its
decisions – thereby, making our model transparent
to the end-users. Table 6 illustrates some interest-
ing claims and salient words (highlighted) that De-
ClarE focused on during learning. Darker shades
indicate higher weights given to the corresponding
words. As illustrated in the table, DeClarE gives
more attention to important words in the report-
ing article that are relevant to the claim and also



29

(a) Projections of article representations
using PCA; DeClarE obtains clear sep-
aration between representations of non-
credible articles (red) vs. true ones
(green).

cnn

washingtonpost
nytimes

nationalreport
empirenews

dailycurrant

foxnews
bbc

usatoday

wsj

huzlers

worldnewsdailyreport

(b) Projections of article source repre-
sentations using PCA; DeClarE clearly
separates fake news sources from au-
thentic ones.

barack obama

donald trump

hillary clinton

mitch mcconnell

paul ryan

ted cruz

bernie sanders

mike pence

rudy giuliani

(c) Projections of claim source repre-
sentations using PCA; DeClarE clusters
politicians of similar ideologies close to
each other in the embedding space.

Figure 2: Dissecting the article, article source and claim source representations learned by DeClarE.

Table 6: Interpretation via attention (weights) ([True]/[False] indicates the verdict from DeClarE).

play a major role in deciding the corresponding
claim’s credibility. In the first example on Table 6,
highlighted words such as “..barely true...” and
“..sketchy evidence...” help our system to identify
the claim as not credible. On the other hand, high-
lighted words in the last example, like, “..reveal...”
and “..documenting reports...” help our system to
assess the claim as credible.

6 Related Work

Our work is closely related to the following areas:
Credibility analysis of Web claims: Our work
builds upon approaches for performing credibility
analysis of natural language claims in an open-
domain Web setting. The approach proposed in
Popat et al. (2016, 2017) employs stylistic lan-

guage features and the stance of articles to as-
sess the credibility of the natural language claims.
However, their model heavily relies on hand-
crafted language features. Rashkin et al. (2017);
Wang (2017) propose neural network based ap-
proaches for determining the credibility of a tex-
tual claim, but it does not consider external
sources like web evidence and claim sources.
These can be important evidence sources for cred-
ibility analysis. The method proposed by Samadi
et al. (2016) uses the Probabilistic Soft Logic
(PSL) framework to estimate source reliability and
claim correctness. Vydiswaran et al. (2011) pro-
poses an iterative algorithm which jointly learns
the veracity of textual claims and trustworthiness
of the sources. These approaches do not consider



30

the deeper semantic aspects of language, however.
Wiebe and Riloff (2005); Lin et al. (2011); Re-
casens et al. (2013) study the problem of detecting
bias in language, but do not consider credibility.
Truth discovery: Prior approaches for truth dis-
covery (Yin et al., 2008; Dong et al., 2009, 2015;
Li et al., 2011, 2014, 2015; Pasternack and Roth,
2011, 2013; Ma et al., 2015; Zhi et al., 2015;
Gao et al., 2015; Lyu et al., 2017) have focused
on structured data with the goal of addressing
the problem of conflict resolution amongst multi-
source data. Nakashole and Mitchell (2014) pro-
posed a method to extract conflicting values from
the Web in the form of Subject-Predicate-Object
(SPO) triplets and uses language objectivity analy-
sis to determine the true value. Like the other truth
discovery approaches, however, this approach is
mainly suitable for use with structured data.
Credibility analysis in social media: Mukher-
jee et al. (2014); Mukherjee and Weikum (2015)
propose PGM based approaches to jointly in-
fer a statement’s credibility and the reliability of
sources using language specific features. Ap-
proaches like (Castillo et al., 2011; Qazvinian
et al., 2011; Yang et al., 2012; Xu and Zhao, 2012;
Gupta et al., 2013; Zhao et al., 2015; Volkova
et al., 2017) propose supervised methods for de-
tecting deceptive content in social media plat-
forms like Twitter, Sina Weibo, etc. Similarly, ap-
proaches like Ma et al. (2016); Ruchansky et al.
(2017) use neural network methods to identify
fake news and rumors on social media. Ku-
mar et al. (2016) studies the problem of detect-
ing hoax articles on Wikipedia. All these rely on
domain-specific and community-specific features
like retweets, likes, upvotes, etc.

7 Conclusion

In this work, we propose a completely automated
end-to-end neural network model, DeClarE, for
evidence-aware credibility assessment of natural
language claims without requiring hand-crafted
features or lexicons. DeClarE captures signals
from external evidence articles and models joint
interactions between various factors like the con-
text of a claim, the language of reporting articles,
and trustworthiness of their sources. Extensive ex-
periments on real world datasets demonstrate our
effectiveness over state-of-the-art baselines.

References
Carlos Castillo, Marcelo Mendoza, and Barbara

Poblete. 2011. Information credibility on twitter. In
Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on
World Wide Web, WWW ’11, pages 675–684, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

Leon Derczynski, Kalina Bontcheva, Maria Liakata,
Rob Procter, Geraldine Wong Sak Hoi, and Arkaitz
Zubiaga. 2017. Semeval-2017 task 8: Rumoureval:
Determining rumour veracity and support for ru-
mours. In Proceedings of the 11th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, SemEval@ACL
2017, Vancouver, Canada, August 3-4, 2017, pages
69–76.

Xin Luna Dong, Laure Berti-Equille, and Divesh Sri-
vastava. 2009. Integrating conflicting data: The
role of source dependence. Proc. VLDB Endow.,
2(1):550–561.

Xin Luna Dong, Evgeniy Gabrilovich, Kevin Murphy,
Van Dang, Wilko Horn, Camillo Lugaresi, Shao-
hua Sun, and Wei Zhang. 2015. Knowledge-based
trust: Estimating the trustworthiness of web sources.
Proc. VLDB Endow., 8(9):938–949.

Omar Enayet and Samhaa R. El-Beltagy. 2017.
Niletmrg at semeval-2017 task 8: Determining ru-
mour and veracity support for rumours on twitter.
In Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop
on Semantic Evaluation, SemEval@ACL 2017, Van-
couver, Canada, August 3-4, 2017, pages 470–474.

Jing Gao, Qi Li, Bo Zhao, Wei Fan, and Jiawei Han.
2015. Truth discovery and crowdsourcing aggrega-
tion: A unified perspective. PVLDB, 8(12):2048–
2049.

Alex Graves, Santiago Fernández, and Jürgen Schmid-
huber. 2005. Bidirectional lstm networks for
improved phoneme classification and recognition.
In Proceedings of the 15th International Con-
ference on Artificial Neural Networks: Formal
Models and Their Applications - Volume Part II,
ICANN’05, pages 799–804, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Springer-Verlag.

Aditi Gupta, Hemank Lamba, Ponnurangam Ku-
maraguru, and Anupam Joshi. 2013. Faking sandy:
Characterizing and identifying fake images on twit-
ter during hurricane sandy. In Proceedings of the
22Nd International Conference on World Wide Web,
WWW ’13 Companion, pages 729–736, New York,
NY, USA. ACM.

Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam:
A method for stochastic optimization. CoRR,
abs/1412.6980.

Srijan Kumar, Robert West, and Jure Leskovec. 2016.
Disinformation on the web: Impact, characteristics,
and detection of wikipedia hoaxes. In Proceed-
ings of the 25th International Conference on World
Wide Web, WWW ’16, pages 591–602, Republic and



31

Canton of Geneva, Switzerland. International World
Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee.

Qi Li, Yaliang Li, Jing Gao, Lu Su, Bo Zhao, Mu-
rat Demirbas, Wei Fan, and Jiawei Han. 2014. A
confidence-aware approach for truth discovery on
long-tail data. Proc. VLDB Endow., 8(4):425–436.

Xian Li, Weiyi Meng, and Clement Yu. 2011. T-
verifier: Verifying truthfulness of fact statements.
In Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE 27th International
Conference on Data Engineering, ICDE ’11, pages
63–74, Washington, DC, USA. IEEE Computer So-
ciety.

Yaliang Li, Jing Gao, Chuishi Meng, Qi Li, Lu Su,
Bo Zhao, Wei Fan, and Jiawei Han. 2016. A sur-
vey on truth discovery. SIGKDD Explor. Newsl.,
17(2):1–16.

Yaliang Li, Qi Li, Jing Gao, Lu Su, Bo Zhao, Wei Fan,
and Jiawei Han. 2015. On the discovery of evolv-
ing truth. In Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining, KDD ’15, pages 675–684, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

Chenghua Lin, Yulan He, and Richard Everson.
2011. Sentence subjectivity detection with weakly-
supervised learning. In Proceedings of 5th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 1153–1161. Asian Federation of Nat-
ural Language Processing.

Shanshan Lyu, Wentao Ouyang, Huawei Shen, and
Xueqi Cheng. 2017. Truth discovery by claim and
source embedding. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM
on Conference on Information and Knowledge Man-
agement, CIKM ’17, pages 2183–2186, New York,
NY, USA. ACM.

Fenglong Ma, Yaliang Li, Qi Li, Minghui Qiu, Jing
Gao, Shi Zhi, Lu Su, Bo Zhao, Heng Ji, and Jiawei
Han. 2015. Faitcrowd: Fine grained truth discovery
for crowdsourced data aggregation. In Proceedings
of the 21th ACM SIGKDD International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD
’15, pages 745–754, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Jing Ma, Wei Gao, Prasenjit Mitra, Sejeong Kwon,
Bernard J. Jansen, Kam-Fai Wong, and Meeyoung
Cha. 2016. Detecting rumors from microblogs with
recurrent neural networks. In Proceedings of the
Twenty-Fifth International Joint Conference on Ar-
tificial Intelligence, IJCAI’16, pages 3818–3824.
AAAI Press.

Subhabrata Mukherjee and Gerhard Weikum. 2015.
Leveraging joint interactions for credibility analysis
in news communities. In Proceedings of the 24th
ACM International on Conference on Information
and Knowledge Management, CIKM ’15.

Subhabrata Mukherjee, Gerhard Weikum, and Cristian
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil. 2014. People on drugs:

Credibility of user statements in health communi-
ties. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining, KDD ’14, pages 65–74, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

Ndapandula Nakashole and Tom M. Mitchell. 2014.
Language-aware truth assessment of fact candidates.
In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL
2014, June 22-27, 2014, Baltimore, MD, USA, Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers, pages 1009–1019.

Jeff Pasternack and Dan Roth. 2011. Making bet-
ter informed trust decisions with generalized fact-
finding. In IJCAI 2011, Proceedings of the 22nd
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intel-
ligence, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, July 16-22,
2011, pages 2324–2329.

Jeff Pasternack and Dan Roth. 2013. Latent credibility
analysis. In Proceedings of the 22Nd International
Conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’13, pages
1009–1020, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christo-
pher D. Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for
word representation. In Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, EMNLP ’14.

Kashyap Popat, Subhabrata Mukherjee, Jannik
Strötgen, and Gerhard Weikum. 2016. Credibil-
ity assessment of textual claims on the web. In
Proceedings of the 25th ACM International on
Conference on Information and Knowledge Man-
agement, CIKM ’16, pages 2173–2178, New York,
NY, USA. ACM.

Kashyap Popat, Subhabrata Mukherjee, Jannik
Strötgen, and Gerhard Weikum. 2017. Where the
truth lies: Explaining the credibility of emerging
claims on the web and social media. In Proceedings
of the 26th International Conference on World Wide
Web Companion, WWW ’17 Companion.

Vahed Qazvinian, Emily Rosengren, Dragomir R.
Radev, and Qiaozhu Mei. 2011. Rumor has it: Iden-
tifying misinformation in microblogs. In Proceed-
ings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, EMNLP ’11, pages
1589–1599, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Hannah Rashkin, Eunsol Choi, Jin Yea Jang, Svitlana
Volkova, and Yejin Choi. 2017. Truth of varying
shades: Analyzing language in fake news and polit-
ical fact-checking. In Proceedings of the 2017 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, EMNLP ’17.

Marta Recasens, Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil,
and Dan Jurafsky. 2013. Linguistic models for an-
alyzing and detecting biased language. In Proceed-
ings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association



32

for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-
pers), pages 1650–1659. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Natali Ruchansky, Sungyong Seo, and Yan Liu. 2017.
Csi: A hybrid deep model for fake news detection.
In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Conference on
Information and Knowledge Management, CIKM
’17, pages 797–806, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Mehdi Samadi, Partha Talukdar, Manuela Veloso, and
Manuel Blum. 2016. Claimeval: Integrated and
flexible framework for claim evaluation using cred-
ibility of sources. In Proceedings of the Thir-
tieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
AAAI’16, pages 222–228. AAAI Press.

Vikram Singh, Sunny Narayan, Md. Shad Akhtar, Asif
Ekbal, and Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2017. IITP at
semeval-2017 task 8 : A supervised approach for
rumour evaluation. In Proceedings of the 11th In-
ternational Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, Se-
mEval@ACL 2017, Vancouver, Canada, August 3-4,
2017, pages 497–501.

Svitlana Volkova, Kyle Shaffer, Jin Yea Jang, and
Nathan Hodas. 2017. Separating facts from fiction:
Linguistic models to classify suspicious and trusted
news posts on twitter. In Proceedings of the 55th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 647–
653. Association for Computational Linguistics.

V.G. Vinod Vydiswaran, ChengXiang Zhai, and Dan
Roth. 2011. Content-driven trust propagation frame-
work. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining, KDD ’11, pages 974–982, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

William Yang Wang. 2017. ”liar, liar pants on fire”: A
new benchmark dataset for fake news detection. In
Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2017,
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, Volume 2:
Short Papers, pages 422–426.

Janyce Wiebe and Ellen Riloff. 2005. Creating subjec-
tive and objective sentence classifiers from unanno-
tated texts. In Proceedings of the 6th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics and Intel-
ligent Text Processing, CICLing’05, pages 486–497,
Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer-Verlag.

John Wieting, Mohit Bansal, Kevin Gimpel, and Karen
Livescu. 2015. Towards universal paraphrastic sen-
tence embeddings. In Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR).

Qiongkai Xu and Hai Zhao. 2012. Using deep lin-
guistic features for finding deceptive opinion spam.
In Proceedings of COLING 2012: Posters, pages
1341–1350. The COLING 2012 Organizing Com-
mittee.

Fan Yang, Yang Liu, Xiaohui Yu, and Min Yang. 2012.
Automatic detection of rumor on sina weibo. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Mining
Data Semantics, MDS ’12, pages 13:1–13:7, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

Xiaoxin Yin, Jiawei Han, and Philip S. Yu. 2008.
Truth discovery with multiple conflicting informa-
tion providers on the web. IEEE Trans. on Knowl.
and Data Eng., 20(6):796–808.

Zhe Zhao, Paul Resnick, and Qiaozhu Mei. 2015. En-
quiring minds: Early detection of rumors in social
media from enquiry posts. In Proceedings of the
24th International Conference on World Wide Web,
WWW ’15, pages 1395–1405, Republic and Canton
of Geneva, Switzerland. International World Wide
Web Conferences Steering Committee.

Shi Zhi, Bo Zhao, Wenzhu Tong, Jing Gao, Dian Yu,
Heng Ji, and Jiawei Han. 2015. Modeling truth ex-
istence in truth discovery. In Proceedings of the 21th
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’15, pages
1543–1552, New York, NY, USA. ACM.


