



















































Getting to "Hearer-old": Charting Referring Expressions Across Time


Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 4350–4359
Brussels, Belgium, October 31 - November 4, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

4350

Getting to “Hearer-old”: Charting Referring Expressions Across Time

Ieva Staliūnaitė‡ Hannah Rohde‡‡ Bonnie Webber† Annie Louis†,¶
‡Utrecht Institute of Linguistics, Utrecht University, Netherlands
‡‡Linguistics and English Language, University of Edinburgh, UK

†School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, UK
¶The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK

i.r.staliunaite@students.uu.nl
{hannah.rohde, bonnie.webber, annie.louis}@ed.ac.uk

Abstract

When a reader is first introduced to an en-
tity, its referring expression must describe the
entity. For entities that are widely known,
a single word or phrase often suffices. This
paper presents the first study of how expres-
sions that refer to the same entity develop over
time. We track thousands of person and or-
ganization entities over 20 years of New York
Times (NYT). As entities move from hearer-
new (first introduction to the NYT audience)
to hearer-old (common knowledge) status, we
show empirically that the referring expressions
along this trajectory depend on the type of the
entity, and exhibit linguistic properties related
to becoming common knowledge (e.g., shorter
length, less use of appositives, more definite-
ness). These properties can also be used to
build a model to predict how long it will take
for an entity to reach hearer-old status. Our
results reach 10-30% absolute improvement
over a majority-class baseline.

1 Introduction

While today the company Google is so well known
that its name can even be used as a verb, in 2002,
it was referred to in The New York Times1 as
“Google, the company behind the popular Web
search engine”. The appositive told the readers
what the company does, whereas now such elab-
oration is needed rarely, if at all. This paper
presents a first computational study that relates the
form of an entity’s referring expressions (RE) in
articles written at different times to the entity’s
changing information status.2

Previous work has focused on predicting how
REs for an entity vary within a single text. This
type of information status can improve coref-
erence resolution (Recasens et al., 2013) and

1article 1386221 from Sandhaus (2008)
2Corpus available at http://groups.inf.ed.ac.

uk/cup/ref/

help generate references in automatic summaries
(Nenkova and McKeown, 2003). But there has
been little exploration of the change in REs to an
entity over time and across articles, as the entity
is accepted into common knowledge. The current
work is driven by linguistic interest in character-
izing REs over time. In addition, knowing the
current acceptance of an entity can help in gen-
erating time-appropriate expressions. From a so-
cial science perspective, there is also great inter-
est in capturing the birth, acceptance into common
parlance, but also possible death, and subsequent
reintroductions of entities.

In this paper, we disambiguate and track thou-
sands of person (PER) and organization (ORG)
entities in the New York Times Annotated Corpus
(Sandhaus, 2008) across 20 years of news. We ex-
tract and analyze hundreds of thousands of REs for
these entities, and provide the first empirical evi-
dence that the expressions used to refer to an entity
grow shorter over time, and that properties such as
definiteness increase. The properties of RE form
are also not uniform over entities, and we identify
systematic differences between PER and ORG.

We also present a model that predicts the fu-
ture information status of an entity. The model
takes the REs in a small snapshot (a month’s span)
from anywhere in an entity’s timeline, and predicts
how long it will take the entity to reach hearer-old
(common knowledge) status. Features related to
mention frequency, and content, syntax, and topic
of the REs are highly predictive, giving accuracies
in the 60-80% range. We also make our corpus
available for future work on REs over time.

2 Background

The choice of an RE depends on the availability
and novelty of an entity (Prince, 1992). A mention
may be first or later within a text (discourse-new

http://groups.inf.ed.ac.uk/cup/ref/
http://groups.inf.ed.ac.uk/cup/ref/


4351

and discourse-old respectively), or either newly in-
troduce the entity to an audience (hearer-new) or
be part of common knowledge (hearer-old). Ac-
cording to Prince (1992), hearer-old entities are
more often mentioned with definite expressions,
since the hearer can pick out the unique referent
based on background knowledge. Corpus studies
(Nenkova and McKeown, 2003; Yoshida, 2011)
have corroborated similar trends that subsequent
mentions to established entities within a discourse
tend to be reduced or definite noun phrases.

In computational work, many studies (Nissim,
2006; Rahman and Ng, 2011; Markert et al., 2012)
classify entities in a text as discourse-new/old.
Here, hearer-old entities are a separate mediated
class (not introduced in the text but which read-
ers infer based on common knowledge), and pre-
dicted using features such as definiteness and the
entity name itself. In the context of text summa-
rization, the system of Siddharthan et al. (2011)
classifies entities in source documents as hearer-
old or not, based on frequency, syntax, and coref-
erence (within the documents). The predicted sta-
tus is then used in a rule-based algorithm to gen-
erate references in summaries of the source. Ear-
lier work (Radev, 1998) modeled the choice of the
best expression (from a lexicon) to fit the specific
semantic context during text generation. Supple-
menting these efforts, we model the progression
of entities’ status from hearer-new to hearer-old as
it changes across, rather than within, documents.

In the social sciences, Graus et al. (2017) ana-
lyzed distributions of entity mentions, and inter-
vals between mentions, to identify patterns of en-
tities becoming common knowledge, but without
looking at the content of the REs. The coinage
and subsequent acceptance/extinction of lexical
innovations is another domain that models expres-
sions over time, often by mapping properties of the
speakers who use them within a community (see
Tredici and Fernandez, 2018 and work reviewed
therein). Our focus here is on REs specifically.

In what follows, we explain our RE extrac-
tion (Section 3) and linguistic features (Section 4).
Analysis of the REs and the model for information
status prediction are in Sections 5 and 6.

3 Extracting REs over time

We use the New York Times Annotated Corpus
(NYTAC) (Sandhaus, 2008), containing the 1.8M
articles published in the New York Times over the

period 1987–2007 (20 years).
Given the complexity in identifying potentially

interesting entities and disambiguating references
to them over time, we limited our scope to person
(PER) and organization (ORG) entities, which we
could disambiguate with high accuracy. We also
set aside years 2003–2007 for future validation,
and used 1990–2002 for all our training, valida-
tion, and testing. Across these 13 years3, we col-
lected 52,338 unique entities (74% PER and 26%
ORG) that were mentioned 284,064 times (65%
PER mentions and 35% ORG).

3.1 RE span detection
We used the Stanford CoreNLP toolkit (Manning
et al., 2014) (version 2018-01-31) to obtain con-
stituency parse trees, and perform coreference res-
olution on the articles.4

We then extract all noun phrases (NP), includ-
ing NPs that are nested in other NPs. For each NP,
we identify if it is a proper name RE by match-
ing the structure of its children to a set of six pat-
terns (Table 1) of syntactic structures that can be
used in describing an entity: pre-modifier, rela-
tive clause, appositive, participle clause, adjec-
tive/adverb clause and prepositional phrase.

Pattern 1 (pre-modifier) is used to identify NPs
which are headed (rightmost leaf, except for pos-
sessives) by a proper noun (NNP). If an NP
matches pattern 1, we have found a proper noun
RE. Otherwise, if the NP matches one of the other
patterns, we recursively match the patterns for the
head NP phrase (bolded in Table 1) until one of
them matches pattern 1. For appositives, there is
no consensus about which NP should be the head
of the phrase, as the entity name can be syntacti-
cally realized as the first or the second NP. Here
we process both NPs. If there is no match for pat-
tern 1 in this process, we discard the RE because
the entity name is not a proper noun phrase. If we
find multiple overlapping RE spans headed by the
same noun, we only keep the largest NP.

After identifying a proper noun NP, the se-
quence of NNP children in the component NP
span that matched pattern 1 is treated as the
base expression (the entity name). The rest of
the RE is the descriptor (description of the en-
tity). For example, the phrase ‘the pilot, First
Lieut. Kelly Flinn’ matches the appositive pattern.

3Our corpus contains trajectories for 20 years.
4The shift-reduce parser (Zhu et al., 2013) has an F1 score

of 90% on the Wall Street Journal corpus (results from 2014).



4352

Type Pattern for the children of
an NP

Example NP Base expression

1. Pre-modifier DT? (JJ JJR JJS VBG CD
QP NP NN NNS NNP

NNPS PRP , CC HYPH
SYM)* POS? NNP+ POS?

The tedious, complicated ABC ABC

2. Relative clause NP ,? SBAR ,? The International Business Machines
Corporation, which is the second-
biggest advertiser on the Internet

International Business
Machines

3. Appositive NP (, :)? NP (, :)? International Business Machines Cor-
poration, the worlds largest computer
company

International Business
Machines Corporation

4. Participle clause NP ,? VP ,? International Business Machines Cor-
poration, based in Armonk, N.Y.

International Business
Machines Corporation

5. Adjective or ad-
verb clause

NP ,? (ADJP ADVP) ,? Western Resources Inc., worth $1.7 bil-
lion

Western Resources Inc.

6. Prepositional
phrase

NP ,? PP ,? The National Basketball Association in
New York

National Basketball As-
sociation

Table 1: Regular expressions (regex) for finding RE spans within an NP. The regex use Penn Treebank
(Marcus et al., 1993) tags.

The full phrase is the RE, the string of NNPs ‘First
Lieut. Kelly Flinn’ that comprise the embedded
NP is the base expression, and the remaining NP
‘the pilot’ is the descriptor.

Certain adjustments had to be made. For exam-
ple, NPs of the form ‘NNP of NNP’ (e.g. “Univer-
sity of Virginia”) are treated as base expressions.
In addition, some connectives and symbols were
included in the base to accommodate names such
as “Food and Drug Administration”. These ad-
justments lead to their own errors. For instance,
for “Dan Zegart of Titusville”, our exception rule
will mark the full expression as the base, while we
would prefer just the name. As expected, our RE
spans are also subject to parsing errors.

But we found that the REs mined are largely ro-
bust. We manually annotated 100 randomly se-
lected REs for correctness of the full RE span
and base expression. 92 were correctly identified.
Most errors involve prepositional phrase (PP) at-
tachment, so PP modifiers are ignored in further
analysis (except PPs within base expressions).

3.2 Finding cross-document entity chains

We next identify ORG and PER entities, and link
the REs for the same entities over the entire span
of the NYTAC. While cross-document coreference
is usually a hard problem, we took advantage of
NYTAC metadata to identify and link mentions to
the same ORG and PER entity with high precision.

STEP 1: Our analysis focuses on salient and re-
peatedly appearing entities in the news. Therefore
using position in the lead paragraph as a proxy

for salience, we only include entities mentioned at
least once in the first three sentences of each arti-
cle. We also filter out entities that appear in fewer
than two documents in our corpus.

Then within an article, we extract coreference
chains to identify unique entities and their REs.
For each entity, we then identify a single RE
in the article which is indicative of its hearer-
old/new status. One would expect the first men-
tion to be performing this task as later mentions
are discourse-old, which itself affects the form of
the REs. But we found that entities are not nec-
essarily introduced in the first mention, hence for
each entity we take the longest descriptor among
the first three mentions in an article.

STEP 2: Next we link mentions across articles.
Each NYTAC article has metadata tags which in-
ter alia name salient people and organizations ap-
pearing in the article. These tags uniquely identify
an entity every time it appears in the corpus.

We match these tags to the article REs. The
tags contain normalized entity names which may
not match the article’s REs (from STEP 1) exactly.
So we perform matches at the level of coreference
chains. A chain is matched to a tagged name if
the words from the base expressions in that chain
overlap highly with the tag. In the case of people,
the last name of the tagged person had to match
the last proper noun in one of the base expressions.
For ORG, at most one word in the base expression
could be missing in the tag, unless an acronym
of the tagged name was used as the base expres-
sion. We manually annotated the correctness of



4353

tag matches for a random sample of 25 each of
PER and ORG entities. 88% of PER and 96% of
ORG matches were accurate indicating high pre-
cision. All the PER match mistakes involved two
people with the same last name mentioned in same
article, e.g. Bill Clinton and Hillary Clinton.5 As
an estimate of recall, we find that 61.1% of all
PER metadata tags, and 59.5% of ORG tags were
matched to an entity, which is reasonable. Note
also that we only match when an entity is men-
tioned within the first three sentences of an article.

Once tags are matched to article REs, the link-
ing of REs across the corpus is also complete since
the tags are already linked. The extracted REs for
each entity are ordered by the publication date of
the article, creating a chain of time-ordered REs
for that entity across the entire corpus.

For an example of the result of our complete
timeline extraction method, consider the entity
Boris Yeltsin. Mr. Yeltsin became leader of
the Russian parliament in May 1990, and subse-
quently the President in June 1991. Both events
are within the timeframe of our corpus. Below we
list some expressions taken from different time-
points in Mr. Yeltsin’s path to presidency and later.

Spring 1990 Mr. Yeltsin, the popular chairman of the

Russian Parliament who has emerged as

the champion of radical reform and de-

centralization and as the prime political

rival to the Soviet President, Mikhail S.

Gorbachev

Fall 1990 Boris Yeltsin, champion of the slender

insurgent minority at the Communist

Party congress

Spring 1991 Boris Yeltsin, the president of the Rus-

sian federated republic and chief oppo-

sition critic of Mr. Gorbachev

Fall 1991 Boris Yeltsin, the president of the Rus-

sian republic

Spring 1992 President Boris Yeltsin

Spring 1993 Mr. Yeltsin

Spring 2000 Former Russian President Boris Yeltsin

Figure 1 shows the average length of descriptors
for Mr. Yeltsin: 5 or 6 words up until Spring 1991,
after which the average length is 1 word or below,
indicating a significant shift in information status.

3.3 Defining hearer-old status
Next we designate an entity’s mentions as hearer-
new, mentions which are hearer-old, and those

5Coreference chains are also noisy in these cases.

Figure 1: Descriptor lengths for Mr. Boris Yeltsin
starting Spring 1990

whose information status lies in between.
Hearer-new mention. The NYTAC spans the

years 1987–2007. To identify entities which are
new, we treat the years 1987 to 1989 as a prior
background corpus. When an entity is mentioned
in the news from 1990 onwards but which never
appeared in the prior corpus, the entity is consid-
ered as ‘hearer-new’ at the first mention.6

Mr. Yeltsin (our previous example) in fact re-
signed from the Politburo in 1987 before emerg-
ing again as leader of Parliament in 1990. Inter-
estingly, our method (possibly) correctly identifies
Mr. Yeltsin as hearer-new in 1990 based on com-
parison with the prior corpus of 1987-89.

Entity mention trajectories. From the previ-
ous section, we have the trajectories of REs for
any identified hearer-new entity up to the end of
our data (2002). We exclude entities that have a
gap of more than 6 months between consecutive
mentions, because such long gaps require the au-
thor to reintroduce an entity in case readers had
forgotten it. Figure 2 shows how the length of de-
scriptors tends to increase with greater time gaps.

Also, different entities are introduced at differ-
ent times in the span from 1990 to 2002. To nor-
malize their introduction time, we define the idea
of age for an entity at a certain time point, so

6We noticed that sometimes multiple unique metadata
tags exist for the same entity, mostly reflecting major changes
in what the entity is known for, for example an entity before
and after becoming a President. This pattern is not consistent
in the editorial conventions however, so we leave improve-
ments to cross-document coreference for future work.



4354

Figure 2: Mean descriptor length vs. time since
previous mention

Figure 3: Mean descriptor length vs ‘age’ of entity

that all entities start out at time zero. For every
later mention of the entity, we record the age as
the number of days since first mention. Figure
3 shows a clear decrease in length of descriptors
with increasing age of the entity.

Hearer-old mentions. We hypothesize that
hearer-old entities are referred to by bare names
only, and only occasionally by longer REs. Thus,
we define acceptance of a hearer-old entity as
the time after which its descriptors (the additional
words besides the base expression) do not exceed
a length of n words on average. Also rather than
define this time point based on a single mention
(which would be fragile), we bin the age values
into month spans. The information status of an
entity will undergo little change within a month.

First, we calculate the average length of all de-

scriptors (entire timeline) for a given entity. If it
is less than n words, then we designate the entity
as hearer-old within the first month. Otherwise,
we find the first month in the timeline after which
the average length of descriptors of all remaining
mentions is below n, and use it as time of accep-
tance. If the entity never reaches the threshold, we
conclude that it is not accepted in the time span of
the corpus. We tested values for n of 0.5 words, 1
word, and 2 words, and chose the 1-word thresh-
old which performed best (in our linear model and
classification experiments which follow).

Table 2 shows the distribution of the acceptance
age for entities in our corpus. While PERs are
accepted faster, more of the PER entities are also
never accepted within the corpus timespan.

Below we list some examples, and qualitative
observations of PER entities from each bin. The
frequency of mentions is indicated within [].
1 month bin involves prominent public figures:

Bill Clinton [6005]; Michael Jordan [8]; Michael

Bloomberg [546]; Nelson Mandela [3]

within 1 year are authors, journalists, local politi-
cians (senators, mayors):

Judith Kaye (a centrist on the New York State Court of

Appeals) [6]; (Senator-elect) Hillary Rodham Clinton [86];

Jurate Kazickas (a freelance writer) [2]

1-13 years involve politicians and their families,
people linked to famous criminal cases:

Lisa Olson (a reporter for the Boston Herald) [14]; Laura

Bush (the wife of president-elect George W. Bush) [47];

Boris Yeltsin (President of the powerful Russian Republic,

whom Mr. Gorbachev portrayed as a destructive opportunist)

[1229]; Joseph Gambino (a convicted heroin trafficker) [9];

Abner Louima (the Haitian immigrant who the prosecutors

say was tortured by New York City police officers in a Brook-

lyn station house) [276]

longer than timespan involves those mentioned
along a longer period but not famous (lawyers,
economists, doctors), or people mentioned a lot
within a short period (wedding announcements,
serial killers, accident victims) and people reintro-
duced from the past:

Mildred Natwick (a versatile actress who created an en-

gaging gallery of eccentric, whimsical and spunky charac-

ters in plays, films and television for more than 60 years) [2],

Irene Neal (a 53 year old sculptor and painter) [2]

4 Features to characterize REs

We group the mentions of an entity within each
month, and treat the group as one example. In this



4355

Accepted after less than 1 month 1 to 12 months 1 to 13 years longer than timespan of corpus
People (entity level) 48.39% 6.42% 0.24% 44.95%

Organizations (entity level) 57.61% 8.66% 0.86% 32.89%
People (RE level) 46.92% 7.59% 2.47% 43.02%

Organizations (RE level) 49.71% 10.77% 6.67% 32.85%

Table 2: Distribution of acceptance ages. The ‘entity level’ rows record one age for each entity since its
first mention. ‘RE level’ is the distribution when the remaining age is calculated from each RE mention.
The timelines are truncated at year 2002. The later years are kept as a test set.

ORGANIZATION PERSON
Positive Positive
indefinite article, length 0, length 0-3, length 3-10,
length 10-20, average length, gap between mentions,
topic:transport

definite article, pre-modifier, age, length 0-3, length 3-
10, length 10-20, average length, section:cars and lifestyle,
topic:sports, topic: entertainment

Negative Negative
relative clause, definite article, named entity,
topic:international relations, topic:military and politics

relative clause, appositive, possessive, named entity, length
0, topic:transport, topic:religion, topic:awards

Table 3: Significant main effects in linear model

way, the example contains RE choices for the en-
tity at a certain snapshot in time. A set of 61 fea-
tures are computed for each example to character-
ize the REs (descriptor part only) it contains. None
of the features involve the identity of the entity.

Descriptor contents: include the number of
PER and ORG named entities if any in the descrip-
tor text, type/token ratio, the counts of date and
money, adjectives, superlative adjectives, verbs,
and honorifics (based on a list with words such as
Judge, President, Dr. etc). All counts are normal-
ized by the number of REs in the example.

Syntactic form: They include average num-
ber per RE of definite articles, indefinite articles
and possessive constructions, appositives, partici-
ple clauses, relative clauses, adjective or adverb
clauses, and pre-modification. We also record the
length of the descriptors using 5 bins (0 words, 1-
3, 3-10, 10-20 and >20 words). The feature value
is the proportion of REs in a bin. A binary fea-
ture also indicates whether the average length of
descriptors is below 0.5 words.

Frequency of mentions: We include the num-
ber of mentions within the one month bin, and the
average time gap between consecutive mentions
(multiplied by the log of number of mentions to
compensate for frequency). We also include the
entity’s current age (time since introduction).

Context: We employ the topic metadata from
NYTAC to capture a notion of world context of
an entity’s mentions. Every article has topic tags
(sports, finance, technology, politics, etc.) and
also a section label (travel, economics, culture,

etc.). We clustered the thousands of topic tags into
20 broad topics by using the Glove word embed-
dings (Pennington et al., 2014), and K-means clus-
tering. A small set of 17 clusters were also created
for the newspaper sections. The count of mentions
belonging to articles in each cluster is a feature.

5 Features versus acceptance time

We built a linear model (LM) to test which features
are significantly predictive of time to acceptance.

An example is the set of REs for an entity from a
one month bin. The dependent variable is the time
left until acceptance, i.e. the value (in months)
from the current age of the entity (month were the
mentions were taken from) until the acceptance
age. For our corpus, the possible values are 0
to 156. Entities that do not become well known
within the span of our dataset are given a label of
160 months. Entities which fall out of use (never
mentioned in the corpus after a certain time point
but also have not reached acceptance threshold at
their found last mentions) have a label of 161.7

We also performed a variance analysis over the
LM with ANOVA to account for possible correla-
tion between variables. We scale the feature val-
ues into z-scores which show how many standard
deviations each example is away from the mean.

We used lm and Anova (Fox and Weisberg,
2011) functions within R (R Core Team, 2013).
The adjusted R2 value is 43% for PER and 37%

7One could also perform survival analysis for this prob-
lem, we have not explored it yet.



4356

(a) Definite articles in ORG descriptors (b) Definite articles in PER descriptors

(c) Appositives in PER descriptors (d) Proportion of PER mentions with appositive descriptors, at
different ‘ages’ of an entity (within the first 5 years)

Figure 4: Main effects for definite articles and appositives

for ORG entities. The significant features (p <
0.05) from the ANOVA are in Table 3. The fea-
tures are divided into positive and negative ones,
reflecting whether a higher value of the feature
was predictive of a higher (positive) or lower (neg-
ative) value of the time until acceptance. More
features are significant for PER (18) compared
to ORG (13) expressions. Also for persons, the
significant features are more varied compared to
ORG, indicating that people may have more varied
roles and characterizations presented in the media.
Note also that we have more data for PER entities.

Below we describe some of the most interesting
findings from the model.

5.1 Main effects

Definite articles are a significant feature for both
PER and ORG entities. In Figures 4a and 4b, we
plot the variation in time until acceptance versus
number of definite articles, holding other variables
at their means. The bands show the 0.95 level con-
fidence interval. We used the effects package (Fox,
2003) in R, and the graphs show scaled values.

Assuming that the use of definite articles indi-
cates definite expressions roughly, for ORG enti-
ties, the results confirm the hypothesis that REs

become more definite the longer the entity is in
use. REs such as “Ebay, an online auction site”
become “Ebay, the largest of the auction sites” and
“Ebay, the auction site” before settling to “Ebay”.

The pattern for people is opposite, with more
definite articles used with early mentions. Upon
closer observation, we found that in fact, the ex-
pressions are more often definite when they are
closer to acceptance, but with definiteness not ex-
pressed by the article. The definite article is ex-
cluded, and the possessive is used to produce a
concise phrase e.g. “Russia’s acting president” in-
stead of “the acting president of Russia”. The pos-
sessive phrase is short and also has fewer func-
tion words, which is consistent with psycholin-
guistic findings that people tend to reduce highly
predictable phrases by dropping function words
(Jaeger and Levy, 2007). Moreover, we observed
that for ORG, an article may still describe the en-
tity after acceptance e.g. “The FDA”, and under-
standably this pattern does not exist for persons.

Appositives are not significant predictors for
ORG; for PER, more appositives is associated
with closeness to acceptance (Figure 4c). Yet early
mentions involve more appositives than later ones
(Figure 4d). One interpretation of these contrast-



4357

Figure 5: Interaction between the effect of sports
topic and honorifics (both scaled). Sub-figures
represent proportions of mentions in sports topics.

ing tendencies could be that there are two types of
entities. The first are those important enough to
be introduced with lots of appositives at the begin-
ning of their ‘lifespan’. These entities could be ac-
cepted quickly, and this behavior may manifest as
having more appositives close to acceptance. The
other set is that of non-salient entities which are
probably not introduced with appositives anyway,
and show slow acceptance. This analysis is sup-
ported by our observations that entities which are
not as important as the context they appear in, such
as a lesser known football player who scores a goal
or an architect of a famous building, are often in-
troduced without an appositive.

5.2 Interactions

We also found significant interactions in the model
highlighting differences between various types of
entities. For example, there is no main effect for
honorifics but there is a significant positive effect
when sports entities are involved (Figure 5). It is
possible that REs such as “the number one player”
indicate closeness to acceptance more than “the
president of the National Hockey League”, as hon-
orifics (e.g. ‘president’) are not used with most
known people in the sports domain.

The presence of verbs (in the descriptor) also
does not have a main effect, but becomes mean-
ingful when the type/token ratio of descriptors of

Figure 6: Interaction between the effect of
type/token ratio and verb use (both scaled). Sub-
figures represent values of the type/token ratio.

a person is low (see Figure 6). We consider the
type/token ratio as reflecting the different guises
that a person is mentioned with, and verbs in
the descriptor as associating the person with an
event rather than their role in society. When the
type/token ratio is low, it suggests the person is
known for one or a few aspects. Here acceptance
time and verbs are positively related, implying that
when the few aspects are events (more verbs), the
entities have a slower path to hearer-old. Whereas,
if the aspects were titles such as CEO (less verbs),
the entity is closer to acceptance.

6 Predicting future information-status

Given the significant correlations between our fea-
tures and the time to acceptance, we now build a
predictive model to identify acceptance time given
a snapshot of REs for an entity. Every example
contains a certain entity’s mentions over a month’s
span, similar to the linear model. The target class
indicates whether or not the entity was accepted
within a period, x years from the sample time.

The classification models were built separately
for PER and ORG expressions. We divide
the data into 70% training, 10% validation and
20% test. For number of data points for train-
ing/validation/test, ORG has 8,768/1,252/2,506
data points; PER has 26,190/3,742/7,483. Note
that examples are month-sized bins of each en-



4358

ENTITY Baseline (%) SVM MLP(majority-class) C Gamma Accuracy (%) Layers Units Alpha Accuracy (%)
4-CLASS

Org 35.17 10 0.01 62.69 2 400 100 68.36
People 42.01 100 0.01 70.77 3 300 100 74.18

BINARY
Org 69.80 10 0.01 78.41 3 100 100 79.41
People 59.16 10 0.01 79.14 3 300 100 80.66

Table 4: Results of the SVM and MLP classifiers. C and Alpha are regularization parameters, Gamma
parameterizes the RBF kernel. Hidden layers and hidden units in the MLP are also shown.

tity’s REs, rather than unique entities. We explore
both an SVM classifier with an RBF kernel, and
a Multi Layer Perceptron (MLP) classifier. The
MLP uses a BFGS solver with ReLU activation
function. We used implementations from scikit-
learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011), and the parameters
of both classifiers were tuned on the development
set using grid search.

We build two types of classifiers (results in Ta-
ble 4). The baseline is majority-class assignment.

4-CLASS is a four-label classifier for predicting
when an entity will become hearer-old. The four
classes reflect the distribution of acceptance ages
(see Table 2—RE level): already accepted (at the
sample month), will be accepted within the year,
between 1 and 13 years from the sample, and will
not be accepted within the time frame we have.

BINARY is a classifier performing a simpler bi-
nary division of whether an entity is hearer-old or
hearer-new after 2 years from the sampling time.
About half of both entities in our data are accepted
within 2 years after introduction.

The 4-CLASS MLP model is better than SVM
reaching 68% accuracy for ORG and 74% for peo-
ple. The improvement is over 30% absolute value,
indicating the significant effect of the model and
features. Still there is scope for improvement,
given that the performance is less than 75%.

Both SVM and MLP perform similarly for the
binary tasks. The overall binary classification ac-
curacy is 80% for both PER and ORG entities, a
10% increase for ORG and 20% for PER.

We also performed an ablation study to iden-
tity the most useful individual classes of features.
Syntax features (Section 4) had the biggest im-
pact when removed, lowering performing by 5-8%
for all models. But since both our classifiers are
non-linear, they can capture useful interactions be-
tween all our feature classes.8

8The context class uses corpus-specific metadata, but un-
supervised topic modeling could likely approximate it.

7 Conclusion

In this work, we have shown empirically that
the path to hearer-old status displays detectable
and interesting linguistic features, and that enti-
ties of a certain type exhibit distinctive properties.
These significant differences have allowed for a
first model which predicts how long it will take for
an entity to be accepted as common knowledge.

There are a number of directions which we plan
to explore. While we have focused on predict-
ing whether an entity will be accepted after a cer-
tain period of time has passed, we have not mod-
eled the RE tokens themselves, or their generation.
During our analysis, it was clear that the REs of a
(named) entity may also change semantically over
time, reflecting current interest in it, rather than
the same RE content just growing shorter over
time. We have also not explored the RE time-
lines of common noun entities such as organic
food or cryptocurrency. It is possible that they
follow a different trend than named entities, and
require a different set of feature indicators. We
also plan to improve upon our current models and
assumptions. Currently, we have ignored entities
with long time gaps and requiring reintroduction
to an audience. Learning to predict when an entity
will go out of use, and indicators for reintroduc-
tion will add strength to our analyses. The defi-
nition of acceptance and fine-grained models for
prediction will also be developed. We are also re-
leasing a corpus of chained REs from the NYTAC
(represented as byte-span sets) to enable other re-
searchers to study these aspects of REs.

Acknowledgments

Staliūnaitė was funded under EU COST Action
IS1312 (TextLink). Rohde was supported by a
Leverhulme Trust Prize in Languages & Litera-
tures. We also thank Jan Odijk, Mark Steedman,
and our anonymous reviewers for their comments.



4359

References

John Fox. 2003. Effect displays in R for gener-
alised linear models. Journal of Statistical Software,
8(15):1–27.

John Fox and Sanford Weisberg. 2011. An R Com-
panion to Applied Regression, second edition. Sage,
Thousand Oaks CA.

David Graus, Daan Odijk, and Maarten de Rijke.
2017. The birth of collective memories: Analyz-
ing emerging entities in text streams. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1701.04039.

Florian T. Jaeger and Roger P. Levy. 2007. Speakers
optimize information density through syntactic re-
duction. In Proceedings of Advances in Neural In-
formation Processing Systems, pages 849–856.

Christopher Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Finkel, Steven Bethard, and David McClosky.
2014. The Stanford CoreNLP Natural Language
Processing toolkit. In Proceedings of 52nd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: System Demonstrations, pages 55–60.

Mitchell P. Marcus, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz, and
Beatrice Santorini. 1993. Building a large annotated
corpus of english: The penn treebank. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 19(2):313–330.

Katja Markert, Yufang Hou, and Michael Strube. 2012.
Collective classification for fine-grained information
status. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: Long Papers - Volume 1, pages 795–804.

Ani Nenkova and Kathleen McKeown. 2003. Refer-
ences to named entities: A corpus study. In Pro-
ceedings of the Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics on Human Language Technology: Short Pa-
pers - Volume 2, pages 70–72.

Malvina Nissim. 2006. Learning information status
of discourse entities. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 94–102.

F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel,
B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-
hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Pas-
sos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
E. Duchesnay. 2011. Scikit-learn: Machine learning
in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
12:2825–2830.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christo-
pher D. Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for
word representation. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 1532–1543.

Ellen F Prince. 1992. The ZPG letter: Subjects, defi-
niteness, and information-status. In Sandra Thomp-
son and William Mann, editors, Discourse descrip-
tion: diverse analyses of a fund raising text, pages
295–325.

R Core Team. 2013. R: A Language and Environment
for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statis-
tical Computing, Vienna, Austria.

Dragomir R Radev. 1998. Learning correlations be-
tween linguistic indicators and semantic constraints:
Reuse of context-dependent descriptions of entities.
In Proceedings of the 17th International Confer-
ence on Computational linguistics-Volume 2, pages
1072–1078.

Altaf Rahman and Vincent Ng. 2011. Learning the
information status of noun phrases in spoken dia-
logues. In Proceedings of the Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 1069–1080.

Marta Recasens, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, and
Christopher Potts. 2013. The life and death of dis-
course entities: Identifying singleton mentions. In
Proceedings of the Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages
627–633.

Evan Sandhaus. 2008. The New York Times An-
notated Corpus. Linguistic Data Consortium,
Philadelphia, 6(12):e26752.

Advaith Siddharthan, Ani Nenkova, and Kathleen
McKeown. 2011. Information status distinctions
and referring expressions: An empirical study of
references to people in news summaries. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 37(4):811–842.

Marco Del Tredici and Raquel Fernandez. 2018. The
road to success: Assessing the fate of linguistic in-
novations in online communities. In Proceedings of
the 27th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics.

Etsuko Yoshida. 2011. Referring expressions in En-
glish and Japanese: Patterns of use in dialogue pro-
cessing, volume 208. John Benjamins Publishing.

Muhua Zhu, Yue Zhang, Wenliang Chen, Min Zhang,
and Jingbo Zhu. 2013. Fast and accurate shift-
reduce constituent parsing. In Proceedings of the
51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 434–443.


