











































Lost in Evaluation: Misleading Benchmarks for Bilingual Dictionary Induction


Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 3336–3341,
Hong Kong, China, November 3–7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

3336

Lost in Evaluation:
Misleading Benchmarks for Bilingual Dictionary Induction

Yova Kementchedjhieva
University of Copenhagen

yova@di.ku.dk

Mareike Hartmann
University of Copenhagen
hartmann@di.ku.dk

Anders Søgaard
University of Copenhagen
soegaard@di.ku.dk

Abstract

The task of bilingual dictionary induction
(BDI) is commonly used for intrinsic evalua-
tion of cross-lingual word embeddings. The
largest dataset for BDI was generated auto-
matically, so its quality is dubious. We study
the composition and quality of the test sets for
five diverse languages from this dataset, with
concerning findings: (1) a quarter of the data
consists of proper nouns, which can be hardly
indicative of BDI performance, and (2) there
are pervasive gaps in the gold-standard targets.
These issues appear to affect the ranking be-
tween cross-lingual embedding systems on in-
dividual languages, and the overall degree to
which the systems differ in performance. With
proper nouns removed from the data, the mar-
gin between the top two systems included in
the study grows from 3.4% to 17.2%. Man-
ual verification of the predictions, on the other
hand, reveals that gaps in the gold standard tar-
gets artificially inflate the margin between the
two systems on English to Bulgarian BDI from
0.1% to 6.7%. We thus suggest that future re-
search either avoids drawing conclusions from
quantitative results on this BDI dataset, or ac-
companies such evaluation with rigorous error
analysis.

1 Introduction

Bilingual dictionary induction (BDI) refers to re-
trieving translations of individual words. The
task has been widely used for intrinsic evalua-
tion of cross-lingual embedding algorithms, which
aim to map two languages into the same embed-
ding space, for transfer learning purposes (Kle-
mentiev et al., 2012). Recently, Glavas et al.
(2019) reported limited evidence in support of
this practice—they found that cross-lingual em-
beddings optimized for a BDI evaluation metric
were not necessarily better on downstream tasks.
Here, we study BDI evaluation in itself, as has

been done for other evaluation methods in the past
(cf. Faruqui et al., 2016’s work on word similar-
ity), with concerning findings about its reliability.

A massive dataset of 110 bilingual dictionar-
ies, known as the MUSE dataset, was introduced
in early 2018 along with a strong baseline (Con-
neau et al., 2018). Subsets of the MUSE dictio-
naries have been used for model comparison in
the evaluation of numerous cross-lingual embed-
ding systems developed since (cf. Grave et al.,
2018; Jawanpuria et al., 2018; Hoshen and Wolf,
2018a,b; Wada and Iwata, 2018; Joulin et al.,
2018). Even though the field has been very ac-
tive, progress has been incremental for most lan-
guage pairs. Moreover, there have been very few
attempts at a linguistically-informed error analy-
sis of BDI performance as measured on MUSE (cf.
Kementchedjhieva et al., 2018). This is problem-
atic for two reasons: on one hand, most systems
greatly vary in their approach and architecture, so
it is difficult to identify the source of the reported
performance gains; on the other hand, the MUSE
dataset was compiled automatically, with no man-
ual post-processing to clean up noise, so the real
impact of the performance gains is unclear.

In this work, we study the composition and
quality of the MUSE data for five diverse lan-
guages: German, Danish, Bulgarian, Arabic and
Hindi. A manual part-of-speech annotation of the
test sets for these languages reveals a strikingly
high number of proper nouns. We refer to linguis-
tic literature to argue that proper nouns, having no
lexical meaning but rather just a referential func-
tion, cannot reliably be used in the evaluation of
word-level translation systems. We find that ex-
cluding proper noun pairs from the test dictionar-
ies for the aforementioned languages affects the
ranking and degree of performance gaps between
five of the most influential recent systems for BDI.

With a new, more reliable ranking at hand, we



3337

perform qualitative analysis on the performance
gap between the best and second best systems for
Bulgarian. This reveals another major issue with
the data: limited coverage of morphological vari-
ants for the target words. Through manual verifi-
cation of the models’ predictions, we find that the
gap in performance between the two systems is far
smaller than previously perceived.

The uncovered issues of high noise levels
(proper nouns) and limited coverage (missing gold
standard targets) clearly have a crucial impact
on BDI results obtained on the MUSE dataset,
and need to be addressed. Filtering out proper
nouns could be achieved automatically, by check-
ing against gazetteers of named entities. We find
that an automatic procedure for the filling of miss-
ing targets, however, yields only minor improve-
ments. Until an alternative solution to the latter
problem is found, we urge researchers to be cau-
tious when reporting quantitative results on MUSE,
and to account for the problems presented here
through manual verification and analysis of the re-
sults. We share our part-of-speech annotations,
such that future work can use this resource for
analysis purposes. 1

2 Bilingual Dictionary Induction

Improvements on BDI mostly stem from develop-
ments in the space of cross-lingual embeddings,
which use BDI for intrinsic evaluation.

Systems Five influential recent systems for
cross-lingual embeddings are MUSE (Conneau
et al., 2018), which can be supervised (MUSE-S)
or unsupervised (MUSE-U); VecMap, which also
can be supervised (VM-S) (Artetxe et al., 2018a)
or unsupervised (VM-U) (Artetxe et al., 2018b);
and RCSLS (Joulin et al., 2018), a supervised sys-
tem (RCSLS), which scores best on BDI out of
the five. We refer the reader to the respective pub-
lications for a general description of the systems.

Metrics Performance on BDI in these works is
evaluated by verifying the system-retrieved trans-
lations for a source word against a set of gold-
standard targets. The metric used is Precision at
k (P@k), which measures how often the set of k
top predictions contains one of the gold-standard
targets, i.e. what is the ratio of True Positives to
the sum of True Positives and False Positives.

1Available at https://github.com/coastalcph/MUSE_dicos

Data All systems listed above report results on
one or both of two test sets: the MUSE test sets
Conneau et al. (2018) and/or the Dinu test sets
(Dinu et al., 2015; Artetxe et al., 2017). Similarly
to MUSE, the Dinu dataset was compiled auto-
matically (from Europarl word-alignments), but it
only covers four languages. Due to the bigger size
of MUSE (110 language pairs), we deem its impact
larger and focus our study entirely on it.

3 Annotation-based observations

In order to gain insights into the linguistic compo-
sition of the MUSE dictionaries, we employ anno-
tators fluent in German, Danish, Bulgarian, Arabic
and Hindi (hereafter, DE, DA, BG, AR, HI) to anno-
tate the entire dictionaries from English to one of
these languages (hereafter, from-EN) and the en-
tire dictionaries from these languages to English
(hereafter, to-EN) with part-of-speech (POS) tags.
Details on the annotation procedure can be found
in Appendix A. Below, we discuss our findings on
the POS composition of the data, and we evaluate
the performance of RCSLS per POS tag.2

3.1 Analysis of POS composition

The average percentage of common nouns, proper
nouns, verbs, and adjectives/adverbs in the dictio-
naries to-EN was respectively 49.6, 24.9, 12.5, and
12.9.3 Nouns constitute half of the dictionaries’
volume, while verbs and adjectives/adverbs col-
lectively make up only about a fourth of the aver-
age dictionary. A skewed ratio between these three
categories is not surprising: in the EWT depen-
dency treebank, for example, which contain gold-
standard POS tags, the proportion of noun, verb
and adjective/adverb types is 34, 17 and 14 per-
cent, respectively. Notice, however, that in the
case of the MUSE data, the ratio is even more
skewed in favour of nouns over the other two cat-
egories.

The large number of proper nouns in the dic-
tionaries seems even more problematic. Proper
nouns are considered to have no lexical mean-
ing, but rather just a referential function (Pierini,
2008). Personal names usually refer to a spe-
cific referent in a given context, but they can, in
general, be attributed to different referents across
different contexts, and they are almost univer-

2For all experiments, we use the pretrained embeddings
of Bojanowski et al. (2017), trained on Wikipedia.

3The numbers were similar across from-EN dictionaries.



3338

de da bg h
i

ar

0

20

40

60

80
Pr

ec
is

io
n 

at
 1

NOUN
VERB
AD
PNOUN
Overall

Figure 1: Precision of RCSLS by POS tag on to-EN
data.

sally interchangeable in any given context. Some
personal names and most place and organization
names may have a unique referent, e.g. Barack
Obama, Wisconsin, Skype, but these names still do
not carry a sense, their referent is resolved through
access to encyclopedic knowledge (Pierini, 2008).
Considering that the pretrained embeddings which
we use were trained on Wikipedia, we can expect
that such encyclopedic information would indeed
appear in the context of certain unique names, but
importantly, the alignability of the embeddings for
such entities would depend on the level of paral-
lelism between the contents of Wikipedia articles
in the different languages.

With these considerations in mind, one should
wonder how stable the representation of names
can be in an embedding space. This question has
previously been raised by Artetxe et al. (2017). We
address it empirically below.

3.2 Evaluation by POS

Figure 1 shows the precision of the RCSLS em-
bedding alignment method on different POS seg-
ments of the test data in mapping to-EN (results
from-EN were similar and are shown in Appendix
B). Verbs pose a greater challenge to BDI systems
than nouns and adjectives do. Generally, we can
attribute this observation to the higher abstraction
of concepts described by verbs. This is a known
problem for word embedding methods in general
(Gerz et al., 2016), which BDI systems naturally
inherit.

With respect to proper nouns, we observe that
they indeed introduce a level of instability in the
evaluation of BDI systems. Notice that while
the other parts of speech follow a similar pattern
across languages, with higher precision obtained
for nouns and adjectives/adverbs than for verbs,

Corpora NOUN VERB AD PNOUN

Wikipedia 69.0 57.9 66.4 83.0
Mixed* 64.0 55.5 59.4 37.6

Table 1: Comparison in performance by POS cate-
gory with two different embedding sets. * The out-of-
vocabulary rate for items in the dictionaries is negligi-
ble: 2, 0, and 1 for NOUN, VERB , and AD , respectively.

relative precision on proper nouns is highly vari-
able. For DE, proper nouns are easier to translate
than other parts of speech by a margin of 15%, for
HI and AR they are easier than nouns and adjec-
tives/adverbs, but harder than verbs, and for DA
and BG they are hardest out of all four categories.
We looked into the individual word pairs marked
as proper nouns in the DE and DA data, as these
languages are related and RCSLS performs com-
parably on them otherwise, and did not find any
patterns that could explain the large differences.
In fact, between the 384 proper noun pairs in the
EN-DE dictionary and the 330 proper noun pairs in
the EN-DA dictionary, there was an overlap of 279
pairs, retrieved with precision of 89.21% in the
EN-DE setting and 51.30% in the EN-DA setting.
We conjecture that this result relates to the level of
parallel content between the Wikipedia dumps for
the different language pairs, which is likely higher
for EN-DE , since the dumps for these languages
are also closer in size: 5.8M articles in EN, 2.3M
in DE (and only 0.2M in DA).4

We evaluate this hypothesis through an exper-
iment where we train an RCSLS alignment for
DE-EN using the DE embeddings of Artetxe et al.
(2017), trained on SdeWaC (Baroni et al., 2009)
and the EN embeddings of Dinu et al. (2015),
trained on ukWaC (Baroni et al., 2009), Wikipedia
and the BNC 5 corpora. The level of parallel con-
tent between the data used to train the two sets
of embeddings is thus far more limited in this
case, and the DE embeddings are not explicitly
trained on Wikipedia data. Table 1 summarizes
the results: while with the new embeddings per-
formance is somewhat reduced for nouns, verbs
and adjectives/adverbs, precision at 1 for proper
nouns, in particular, drops by over 50%, indicat-
ing that this category of test word pairs is indeed
highly sensitive to the nature of the training data.

4https://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/List_of_Wikipedias
5Available at http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk



3339

es de da bg h
i

ar

5

0

5

10
Pr

ec
is

io
n 

at
 1

old MUSE-U
new MUSE-U

old VM-S
new VM-S

old VM-U
new VM-U

old RCSLS
new RCSLS

es de da bg h
i

ar

5.0

2.5

0.0

2.5

5.0

7.5

10.0

Figure 2: Absolute difference in performance on from-
EN BDI, relative to MUSE-S. Pattern-filled bars show
results as estimated on the original data (old), while
colored bars show results as estimated on the cleaned
data (new).

3.3 Re-ranking on clean data
Based on the analysis presented above, we re-
moved all pairs that were annotated as proper
nouns and all pairs that were marked as invalid
during the annotation process.6 This clean-up re-
sulted in a drop in the size of the test dictionaries
of about 25% on average. A detailed size com-
parison between the old test dictionaries and their
new cleaned versions is presented in the top rows
of Table 4 in Appendix B. Figure 2 visualizes a
re-evaluation of the five systems for BDI listed
in Section 2, on the original test data and on the
new clean versions of the test dictionaries from-
EN.7 The results are reported in terms of change
in performance relative to MUSE-S (chosen as a
baseline) as estimated on the original MUSE data
(pattern-filled bars) and on the cleaned version of
the data (colored bars). The absolute system per-
formances before and after the clean-up can be
found in Table 4 in Appendix B.

We see that the ranking between the models
changes most notably for AR, where RCSLS ap-
pears inferior to VM-S on the original test data,
but on the clean data it emerges as best. For BG,
the evaluation on the clean test data reveals that
RCSLS outperforms the next best system, VM-S,
by a larger factor than it appeared on the original
test data. Lastly, for DA, evaluation on the orig-
inal test data makes RCSLS seem far inferior to
VM-S and VM-U, but on the clean test data we
see that it outperforms VM-S and matches the per-
formance of VM-U. These observations show that
the noise coming from proper nouns has a large

6The latter constitute less than 1% of the removed data.
7The to-EN results were similar, see Appendix B.

impact on the perceived ranking and difference in
performance between systems.

4 False False Positives

With a more reliable estimate of the models’ per-
formance at hand, we next manually study the
remaining performance gap between RCSLS, the
best-performing model overall, and VM-S, the
second best model overall, for EN–BG.8 We
present some examples in Table 2 and more can
be found in Table 5, Appendix C.

We find that there are 125 source words that
RCSLS translated correctly and VM-S did not.
Upon closer inspection, we find that for 54% of
these words, both RCSLS and VM-S predicted
a valid translation, but RCSLS predicted a more
canonical translation, which was listed among the
gold-standard targets, while VM-S predicted an-
other word form that was missing from the list
of gold-standard targets. By more canonical we
mean, for example, indefinite instead of definite
forms of nouns and adjectives (see Ex. A, Table 2,
masculine instead of feminine or neuter forms of
adjectives (see Ex. B), singular instead of plural
forms. To the extent that a more canonical trans-
lation should be considered better, RCSLS is def-
initely showing superiority over VM-S. It is not
clear, however, if that should be the case, since
for some words, the test dictionary exhibits higher
coverage than for others, i.e. the less canonical
translations are not omitted by design, but appear
to be accidental gaps.

Another 19% of the instances where RCSLS
outperformed VM-S, we find to be clear cases of a
missing translation in the test dictionary, i.e. not a
missing form of a listed target, but a missing syn-
onym or a missing sense altogether (see Ex. C and
D).

The two types of errors in precision at 1 dis-
cussed above can be considered cases of false
False Positives, because they really should have
been True Positives. The remaining 27% of the
gap between the two models’ performance indeed
illustrate that RCSLS provides better translations
in some cases (see Ex. E).

Notice, however, that it is not the case that RC-
SLS outperformed VM-S in all cases–for 50 test
words, VM-S predicted a correct translation and
RCSLS did not. Among these, there are cases of
missing translations from the dictionary as well

8We also analyzed EN–DE, with very similar results.



3340

Ex. SRC TGT RCSLS VM-S Description

A joke шега шега [INDEF] шегата [DEF] definite form missing from targets
лаф
виц

B remembered запомнен запомнен[MASC] запомнена[FEM] feminine form missing from targets
C hide скриване скриване [NOUN] скриват[VERB] hide as a verb vs. hide as a noun
D bench пейка пейка скамейка synonym missing from targets

пейката
E depot депо депо гара VM-S predicted ‘train station’
F crowned коронован коронована[FEM] коронован[MASC] feminine form missing from targets
G pond езерце къщичка езерце RCSLS predicted ‘cottage’
H grants субсидии стипендии стипендии synonym missing from targets
I armies армии армиите армиите definite form missing from targets

Table 2: Example translations from EN to BG. Underlined forms are more canonical. Grey forms are incorrect.

(see Ex. F), but they can explain less of the lack
in performance of RCSLS, i.e. 50% of the transla-
tions of RCSLS are indeed erroneous (see Ex. G).

To summarize, originally the performance gap
between the two models appeared to be (125 −
50)/1125 ∗ 100 = 6.67%, while after the manual
verification, it is (27% ∗ 125− 50% ∗ 50)/1125 ∗
100 = 0.1%.9 Such a substantial narrowing in the
gap between the two models clearly indicates that
conclusions drawn on the original result, i.e. that
RCSLS is far superior that VM-S for this language
pair, is hardly supported by the updated result.

A surface analysis of the subset of words for
which neither RCSLS nor VM-S retrieved correct
translations revealed similar patterns of extensive
false False Positives, due to gaps in the coverage
of the dictionary (see Ex. H and I). Our takeaway
from these observations is two-fold. Firstly, when
RCSLS retrieves a correct target form, it also usu-
ally retrieves its most canonical form. More im-
portantly, the evaluation of BDI systems on even
the cleaned test dictionaries still does not repre-
sent accurately the differences in quality between
them, due to major gaps in the coverage of the test
dictionaries.

5 Concluding remarks

Our study of the MUSE dataset revealed two strik-
ing problems: a high level of noise coming from
proper nouns, and an issue of false False Positives,
due to gaps in the gold-standard targets. The for-
mer problem, we conjecture, can be solved by fil-
tering names out with gazetteers. The quality of
this solution would depend on the coverage of the
gazetteers. The more challenging problem, how-

91125 is the total dictionary size.

ever, is filling in the gaps, especially in terms of
inflectional forms. We carried out preliminary ex-
periments aiming to enrich the EN–BG and EN-
DE dictionaries. We extracted additional word
forms of verbal and nominal targets from the Uni-
Morph inflectional tables (Kirov et al., 2018), ac-
cording to a manually designed morphosyntactic
correspondence map.10 Unfortunately, due to lim-
ited coverage of the UniMorph data, and, in the
case of BG, limited vocabulary of the pretrained
embeddings, the impact of this procedure was al-
most negligible. Alternative approaches for en-
richment exists, of course, but we wonder how
worthwhile further efforts would be. That is, es-
pecially in light of Glavas et al. 2019’s findings
that BDI performance is not necessarily indica-
tive of cross-lingual embedding quality. We there-
fore hope that our work adds weight to the call
of Glavas et al. (2019) for more reliable evalua-
tion methods in cross-lingual embedding research.
When BDI performance is used for evaluation pur-
poses, it should be accompanied by manual verifi-
cation, of the type presented here.

6 Acknowledgements

We thank Marcel Bollmann, Matthew Lamm,
Maria Barrett, Meriem Beloucif, Mostafa Abdou,
Rahul Aralikatte and Victor Petrén Hansen for
help with annotations. We would also like to thank
Adam Lopez, Andreas Grivas and Sameer Bansal
for useful feedback on drafts of the paper, and to
the anonymous reviewers for their comments and
suggestions. Anders Søgaard was supported by a
Google Focused Research Award; Mareike Hart-
mann by the Carlsberg Foundation.

10Details can be found in Appendix D.



3341

References
Mikel Artetxe, Gorka Labaka, and Eneko Agirre. 2017.

Learning bilingual word embeddings with (almost)
no bilingual data. In Proceedings of the 55th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 451–462.

Mikel Artetxe, Gorka Labaka, and Eneko Agirre.
2018a. Generalizing and Improving Bilingual Word
Embedding Mappings with a Multi-Step Framework
of Linear Transformations. In Proceedings of AAAI
2018.

Mikel Artetxe, Gorka Labaka, and Eneko Agirre.
2018b. A robust self-learning method for fully un-
supervised cross-lingual mappings of word embed-
dings. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers), pages 789–798.

Marco Baroni, Silvia Bernardini, Adriano Ferraresi,
and Eros Zanchetta. 2009. The wacky wide web:
a collection of very large linguistically processed
web-crawled corpora. Language resources and
evaluation, 43(3):209–226.

Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and
Tomas Mikolov. 2017. Enriching word vectors with
subword information. Transactions of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, 5:135–146.

Alexis Conneau, Guillaume Lample, Marc’Aurelio
Ranzato, Ludovic Denoyer, and Hervé Jégou. 2018.
Word Translation Without Parallel Data. In Pro-
ceedings of ICLR 2018.

Georgiana Dinu, Angeliki Lazaridou, and Marco Ba-
roni. 2015. Improving Zero-Shot Learning by Miti-
gating the Hubness Problem. ICLR 2015 Workshop
track, pages 1–10.

Manaal Faruqui, Yulia Tsvetkov, Pushpendre Rastogi,
and Chris Dyer. 2016. Problems with evaluation of
word embeddings using word similarity tasks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1605.02276.

Daniela Gerz, Ivan Vulić, Felix Hill, Roi Reichart, and
Anna Korhonen. 2016. SimVerb-3500: A Large-
Scale Evaluation Set of Verb Similarity. In Proceed-
ings of EMNLP.

Goran Glavas, Robert Litschko, Sebastian Ruder, and
Ivan Vulic. 2019. How to (Properly) Evaluate Cross-
Lingual Word Embeddings: On Strong Baselines,
Comparative Analyses, and Some Misconceptions.
In ACL.

Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and Quentin Berthet.
2018. Unsupervised alignment of embeddings
with wasserstein procrustes. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1805.11222.

Yedid Hoshen and Lior Wolf. 2018a. An iterative clos-
est point method for unsupervised word translation.
CoRR, abs/1801.06126.

Yedid Hoshen and Lior Wolf. 2018b. Non-adversarial
unsupervised word translation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1801.06126.

Pratik Jawanpuria, Arjun Balgovind, Anoop
Kunchukuttan, and Bamdev Mishra. 2018. Learn-
ing multilingual word embeddings in latent metric
space: a geometric approach. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1808.08773.

Armand Joulin, Piotr Bojanowski, Tomas Mikolov,
Hervé Jégou, and Edouard Grave. 2018. Loss in
translation: Learning bilingual word mapping with a
retrieval criterion. In Proceedings of the 2018 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing.

Yova Kementchedjhieva, Sebastian Ruder, Ryan Cot-
terell, and Anders Søgaard. 2018. Generalizing pro-
crustes analysis for better bilingual dictionary induc-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.00064.

Christo Kirov, Ryan Cotterell, John Sylak-Glassman,
Géraldine Walther, Ekaterina Vylomova, Patrick
Xia, Manaal Faruqui, Sebastian Mielke, Arya D
McCarthy, Sandra Kübler, et al. 2018. Uni-
morph 2.0: Universal morphology. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.11101.

Alexandre Klementiev, Ivan Titov, and Binod Bhat-
tarai. 2012. Inducing crosslingual distributed rep-
resentations of words. In Proceedings of COLING
2012, pages 1459–1474. The COLING 2012 Orga-
nizing Committee.

Patrizia Pierini. 2008. Opening a pandora’s box:
Proper names in english phraseology. Linguistik
Online, 36.

Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, Christopher D. Man-
ning, and Yoram Singer. 2003. Feature-rich part-of-
speech tagging with a cyclic dependency network.
In Proceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics on Human Language Technology
- Volume 1, NAACL ’03, pages 173–180, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Takashi Wada and Tomoharu Iwata. 2018. Unsuper-
vised cross-lingual word embedding by multilingual
neural language models. CoRR, abs/1809.02306.

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1042
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1042
http://arxiv.org/abs/1710.04087
http://arxiv.org/abs/arXiv:1412.6568v2
http://arxiv.org/abs/arXiv:1412.6568v2
http://aclweb.org/anthology/C12-1089
http://aclweb.org/anthology/C12-1089
https://doi.org/10.3115/1073445.1073478
https://doi.org/10.3115/1073445.1073478
http://arxiv.org/abs/1809.02306
http://arxiv.org/abs/1809.02306
http://arxiv.org/abs/1809.02306

