



















































Integrating Text and Image: Determining Multimodal Document Intent in Instagram Posts


Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 4622–4632,
Hong Kong, China, November 3–7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

4622

Integrating Text and Image: Determining Multimodal Document Intent in
Instagram Posts

Julia Kruk1∗, Jonah Lubin2∗, Karan Sikka1, Xiao Lin1,
Dan Jurafsky3, Ajay Divakaran1†,

∗equal contribution
1SRI International, Princeton, NJ 2The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois

3Stanford University, Stanford, CA

Abstract

Computing author intent from multimodal
data like Instagram posts requires modeling a
complex relationship between text and image.
For example, a caption might evoke an ironic
contrast with the image, so neither caption nor
image is a mere transcript of the other. In-
stead they combine—via what has been called
meaning multiplication Bateman (2014)—to
create a new meaning that has a more complex
relation to the literal meanings of text and im-
age. Here we introduce a multimodal dataset
of 1299 Instagram posts labeled for three or-
thogonal taxonomies: the authorial intent be-
hind the image-caption pair, the contextual re-
lationship between the literal meanings of the
image and caption, and the semiotic relation-
ship between the signified meanings of the im-
age and caption. We build a baseline deep
multimodal classifier to validate the taxonomy,
showing that employing both text and image
improves intent detection by 9.6% compared
to using only the image modality, demonstrat-
ing the commonality of non-intersective mean-
ing multiplication. The gain with multimodal-
ity is greatest when the image and caption di-
verge semiotically. Our dataset offers a new
resource for the study of the rich meanings that
result from pairing text and image.

1 Introduction

Multimodal social platforms such as Instagram
let content creators combine visual and textual
modalities. The resulting widespread use of
text+image makes interpreting author intent in
multimodal messages an important task for NLP
for document understanding.

There are many recent language processing
studies of images accompanied by basic text labels

∗ Work done while Julia (from Cornell University) and
Jonah were interns at SRI International.

† Corresponding author, ajay.divakaran@sri.com.

Figure 1: Image-Caption meaning multiplication: A
change in the caption completely changes the overall
meaning of the image-caption pair.

or captions (Chen et al., 2015; Faghri et al., 2018,
inter alia). But prior work on image–text pairs has
generally been asymmetric, regarding either im-
age or text as the primary content, and the other
as mere complement. Scholars from semiotics as
well as computer science have pointed out that this
is insufficient; often text and image are not com-
bined by a simple addition or intersection of the
component meanings (Bateman, 2014; Marsh and
Domas White, 2003; Zhang et al., 2018).

Rather, determining author intent with
text+image content requires a richer kind of
meaning composition that has been called mean-
ing multiplication (Bateman, 2014): the creation
of new meaning through integrating image and
text. Meaning multiplication includes simple
meaning intersection or concatenation (a picture
of a dog with the label “dog”, or the label “Ru-
fus”). But it also includes more sophisticated
kinds of composition, such as irony or indirection,
where the text+image integration requires infer-
ence that creates a new meaning. For example in
Figure 1, a picture of a young woman smoking
is given two different hypothetical captions that
result in different composed meanings. In Pairing
I, the image and text are parallel, with the picture



4623

used to highlight relaxation through smoking.
Pairing II uses the tension between her image and
the implications of her actions to highlight the
dangers of smoking.

Computational models that detect complex re-
lationships between text and image and how they
cue author intent could be significant for many ar-
eas, including the computational study of adver-
tising, the detection and study of propaganda, and
our deeper understanding of many other kinds of
persuasive text, as well as allowing NLP applica-
tions to news media to move beyond pure text.

To better understand author intent given such
meaning multiplication, we create three novel tax-
onomies related to the relationship between text
and image and their combination/multiplication
in Instagram posts, designed by modifying exist-
ing taxonomies (Bateman, 2014; Marsh and Do-
mas White, 2003) from semiotics, rhetoric, and
media studies. Our taxonomies measure the au-
thorial intent behind the image-caption pair and
two kinds of text-image relations: the contextual
relationship between the literal meanings of the
image and caption, and the semiotic relationship
between the signified meanings of the image and
caption. We then introduce a new dataset, MDID
(Multimodal Document Intent Dataset), with 1299
Instagram posts covering a variety of topics, anno-
tated with labels from our three taxonomies.

Finally, we build a deep neural network model
for annotating Instagram posts with the labels
from each taxonomy, and show that combining
text and image leads to better classification, es-
pecially when the caption and the image diverge.
While our goal here is to establish a computational
framework for investigating multimodal meaning
multiplication, in other pilot work we have be-
gun to consider some applications, such as us-
ing intent for social media event detection and for
user engagement prediction. Both these directions
highlight the importance of the intent and semiotic
structure of a social media posting in determining
its influence on the social network as a whole.

2 Prior Work

A wide variety of work in multiple fields has ex-
plored the relationship between text and image
and extracting meaning, although often assigning
a subordinate role to either text or images, rather
than the symmetric relationship in media such as
Instagram posts. The earliest work in the Barthe-

sian tradition focuses on advertisements, in which
the text serves as merely another connotative as-
pect to be incorporated into a larger connotative
meaning (Heath et al., 1977). Marsh and Do-
mas White (2003) offer a taxonomy of the re-
lationship between image and text by consider-
ing image/illustration pairs found in textbooks or
manuals. We draw on their taxonomy, although as
we will see, the connotational aspects of Instagram
posts require some additions.

For our model of speaker intent, we draw on
the classic concept of illocutionary acts (Austin,
1962) to develop a new taxonomy of illocutionary
acts focused on the kinds of intentions that tend
to occur on social media. For example, we rarely
see commissive posts on Instagram and Facebook
because of the focus on information sharing and
constructions of self-image.

Computational approaches to multi-modal doc-
ument understanding have focused on key prob-
lems such as image captioning (Chen et al., 2015;
Faghri et al., 2018), visual question answering
(Goyal et al., 2017; Zellers et al., 2018; Hudson
and Manning, 2019), or extracting the literal or
connotative meaning of a post (Soleymani et al.,
2017). More recent work has explored the role
of image as context for interaction and pragmat-
ics, either in dialog (Mostafazadeh et al., 2016,
2017), or as a prompt for users to generate de-
scriptions (Bisk et al., 2019). Another important
direction has looked at an image’s perlocutionary
force (how it is perceived by its audience), includ-
ing aspects such as memorability (Khosla et al.,
2015), saliency (Bylinskii et al., 2018), popular-
ity (Khosla et al., 2014) and virality (Deza and
Parikh, 2015; Alameda-Pineda et al., 2017).

Some prior work has focused on intention. Joo
et al. (2014) and Huang and Kovashka (2016)
study prediction of intent behind politician por-
traits in the news. Hussain et al. (2017) study the
understanding of image and video advertisements,
predicting topic, sentiment, and intent. Alikhani
et al. (2019) introduce a corpus of the coher-
ence relationships between recipe text and im-
ages. Our work builds on Siddiquie et al. (2015),
who focused on a single type of intent (detect-
ing politically persuasive video on the internet)
and even more closely on Zhang et al. (2018),
who study visual rhetoric as interaction between
the image and the text slogan in advertisements.
They categorize image-text relationships into par-



4624

allel equivalent (image-text deliver same point at
equal strength), parallel non-equivalent (image-
text deliver the same point at different levels) and
non-parallel (text or image alone is insufficient in
point delivery). They also identify the novel issue
of understanding the complex, non-literal ways in
which text and image interacts. Weiland et al.
(2018) study the non-literal meaning conveyed by
image-caption pairs and draw on a knowledge-
base to generate the gist of the image-caption pair.

3 Taxonomies

As Berger (1972) points out in discussing the rela-
tionship between one image and its caption:

It is hard to define exactly how the
words have changed the image but un-
doubtedly they have. (p. 28).

We propose three taxonomies in an attempt to an-
swer Berger’s implicit question, two (contextual
and semiotic) to capture different aspects of the re-
lationship between the image and the caption, and
one to capture speaker intent.

3.1 Intent Taxonomy

The proposed intent taxonomy is a generalization
and elaboration of existing rhetorical categories
pertaining to illocution, that targets multimodal
social networks like Instagram. We developed a
set of eight illocutionary intents from our exam-
ination and clustering of a large body of repre-
sentative Instagram content, informed by previ-
ous studies of intent in Instagram posts. There
is some overlap between categories; to bound the
burden on the annotators, however, we asked them
to identify intent for the image-caption pairing as
a whole and not for the individual components

For example drawing on Goffman’s idea of the
presentation of self (Goffman, 1978), Mahoney
et al. (2016) in their study of Scottish political In-
stagram posts define acts like Presentation of Self,
which, following Hogan (2010) we refer to as ex-
hibition, or Personal Political Expression, which
we generalize to advocative. Following are our fi-
nal eight labels; Figure 2 shows some examples.

1. advocative: advocate for a figure, idea,
movement, etc.

2. promotive: promote events, products, orga-
nizations etc.

Figure 2: Examples of multimodal document intent:
advocative, provocative, expressive and promotive con-
tent

3. exhibitionist: create a self-image reflecting
the person, state etc. for the user using selfies,
pictures of belongings (e.g. pets, clothes) etc.

4. expressive: express emotion, attachment, or
admiration at an external entity or group.

5. informative: relay information regarding a
subject or event using factual language.

6. entertainment: entertain using art, humor,
memes, etc.

7. provocative/discrimination: directly attack
an individual or group.

8. provocative/controversial: be shocking.

3.2 The Contextual Taxonomy
The contextual relationship taxonomy captures the
relationship between the literal meanings of the
image and text. We draw on the three top-level cat-
egories of the Marsh and Domas White (2003) tax-
onomy, which distinguished images that are min-
imally related to the text, highly related to the
text, and related but going beyond it. These three
classes— reflecting Marsh et al.’s primary interest
in illustration—frame the image only as subordi-
nate to the text. We slightly generalize the three



4625

Intent
Category # Samples

Provocative 84
Informative 119
Advocative 97

Entertainment 310
Expositive 237
Expressive 95
Promotive 162

Semiotic
Category # Samples
Divergent 115
Additive 277
Parallel 712

Contextual Relationship
Category # Samples
Minimal 372

Close 585
Transcendent 147

Table 1: Counts of different labels in the Multimodal Document Intent Dataset (MDID).

top-level categories taxonomy of Marsh and Do-
mas White (2003) to make them symmetric for the
Instagram domain:

Minimal Relationship: The literal meanings of
the caption and image overlap very little. For
example, a selfie of a person at a waterfall
with the caption “selfie”. While such a terse
caption does nevertheless convey a lot of in-
formation, it still leaves out details such as
the location, description of the scene, etc.
that are found in typical loquacious Insta-
gram captions.

Close Relationship: The literal meanings of the
caption and the image overlap considerably.
For example, a selfie of a person at a crowded
waterfall, with the caption “Selfie at Hemlock
falls on a crowded sunny day”.

Transcendent Relationship: The literal meaning
of one modality picks up and expands on the
literal meaning of the other. For example,
a selfie of a person at a crowded waterfall
with the caption “Selfie at Hemlock Falls on
a sunny and crowded day. Hemlock falls is
a popular picnic spot. There are hiking and
biking trails, and a great restaurant 3 miles
down the road ...”.

Note that while the labels “minimal” and ”close”
could be thought of as lying on a continuous scale
indicating semantic overlap, the label “transcen-
dent” indicates an expansion of the meaning that
cannot be captured by such a continuous scale.

3.3 The Semiotic Taxonomy
The contextual taxonomy described above does
not deal with the more complex forms of “mean-
ing multiplication” illustrated in Figure 1. For ex-
ample, an image of three frolicking puppies with
the caption “My happy family,” sends a message

of pride in one’s pets that is not directly reflected
in either modality taken by itself. First, it forces
the reader to step back and consider what is being
signified by the image and the caption, in effect of-
fering a meta-comment on the text-image relation.
Second, there is a tension between what is signi-
fied (a family and a litter of young animals respec-
tively) that results in a richer idiomatic meaning.

Our third taxonomy therefore captures the re-
lationship between what is signified by the re-
spective modalities, their semiotics. We draw on
the earlier 3-way distinction of Kloepfer (1977)
as modeled by Bateman (2014) and the two-way
(parallel vs. non-parallel) distinction of Zhang
et al. (2018) to classify the semiotic relationship
of image/text pairs as divergent, parallel and addi-
tive. A divergent relationship occurs when the im-
age and text semiotics pull in opposite directions,
creating a gap between the meanings suggested by
the image and text. A parallel relationship occurs
when the image and text independently contribute
to the same meaning. An additive relationship oc-
curs when the image and text semiotics amplify or
modify each other.

The semiotic classification is not always homol-
ogous to the contextual. For example, an image
of a mother feeding her baby with a caption “My
new small business needs a lot of tender loving
care”, would have a minimal contextual relation-
ship. Yet because both signify loving care and
the image intensifies the caption’s sentiment, the
semiotic relationship is additive. Or a lavish for-
mal farewell scene at an airport with the caption
“Parting is such sweet sorrow”, has a close con-
textual relationship because of the high overlap in
literal meaning, but the semiotics would be addi-
tive, not parallel, since the image shows only the
leave-taking, while the caption suggests love (or
ironic lack thereof) for the person leaving.



4626

Figure 3: The top three images exemplify the semiotic
categories. Images I-VI show instances of divergent
semiotic relationships.

Figure 3 further illustrates the proposed semi-
otic classification. The first three image-caption
pairs (ICP’s) exemplify the three semiotic relation-
ships. To give further insights into the rich com-
plexity of the divergent category, the six ICP’s be-
low showcase the kinds of divergent relationships
we observed most frequently on Instagram.

ICP I exploits the tension between the refer-
ence to retirement expressed in the caption and
the youth projected by the two young women in
the image to convey irony and thus humor in what
is perhaps a birthday greeting or announcement.
Many ironic and humorous posts exhibit divergent
semiotic relationships. ICP II has the structure of a
classic Instagram meme, where the focus is on the
image, and the caption is completely unrelated to
the image. This is also exhibited in the divergent
“Good Morning” caption in the top row. ICP III
is an example of a divergent semiotic relationship
within an exhibitionist post. A popular commu-
nicative practice on Instagram is to combine self-
ies with a caption that is some sort of inside joke.
The inside joke in ICP III is a lyric from a song
a group of friends found funny and discussed the

night this photo was taken. ICP IV is an aesthetic
photo of a young woman, paired with a caption
that has no semantic elements in common with the
photo. The caption may be a prose excerpt, the
author’s reflection on what the image made them
think or feel, or perhaps just a pairing of pleas-
ant visual stimulus with pleasant literary material.
This divergent relationship is often found in pho-
tography, artistic and other entertainment posts.
ICP V uses one of the most common divergent re-
lationships, in which exhibitionist visual material
is paired with reflections or motivational captions.
ICP V is thus similar to ICP III, but without the
inside jokes/hidden meanings common to ICP III.
ICP VI is an exhibitionist post that seems to be
common recently among public figures on Insta-
gram. The image appears to be a classic selfie or
often a professionally taken image of the individ-
ual, but the caption refers to that person’s opinions
or agenda(s). This relationship is divergent—there
are no common semantic elements in the image
and caption—but the pair paints a picture of the
individual’s current state or future plans.

4 The MDID Dataset

Our dataset, MDID (the Multimodal Document In-
tent Dataset) consists of 1299 public Instagram
posts that we collected with the goal of develop-
ing a rich and diverse set of posts for each of the
eight illocutionary types in our intent taxonomy.
For each intent we collected at least 16 hashtags
or users likely to yield a high proportion of posts
that could be labeled by that heading.

For the advocative intent, we selected mostly
hashtags advocating and spanning political or so-
cial ideology such as #pride and #maga. For the
promotive intent we relied on the #ad tag that In-
stagram has recently begun requiring for spon-
sored posts. For exhibitionist intent we used tags
that focused on the self as the most important as-
pect of the post such as #selfie and #ootd (outfit
of the day). The expressive posts were retrieved
via tags that actively expressed a stance or an af-
fective intent, such as #lovehim or #merrychrist-
mas. Informative posts were taken from infor-
mative accounts such as news websites. Enter-
tainment posts drew on an eclectic group of tags
such as #meme, #earthporn, #fatalframes. Finally,
provocative posts were extracted via tags that ei-
ther expressed a controversial or provocative mes-
sage or that would draw people into being influ-



4627

enced or provoked by the post (#redpill, #antifa,
#eattherich, #snowflake).

Data Labeling: Data was pre-processed (for ex-
ample to convert all albums to single image-
caption pairs). We developed a simple annotation
toolkit that displayed an image–caption pair and
asked the annotator to confirm whether the pair
was relevant (contains both an image and text in
English) and if so to identify the post’s intent (ad-
vocative, promotive, exhibitionist, expressive, in-
formative, entertainment, provocative), contextual
relationship (minimal, close, transcendent), and
semiotic relationship (divergent, parallel, addi-
tive). Two of the authors collaborated on the label-
ers manual and then labeled the data by consensus,
and any label on which the authors disagreed af-
ter discussion was removed. Dataset statistics are
shown in Table 1; see https://www.ksikka.
com/document_intent.html for the data.

5 Computational Model

We train and test a deep convolutional neural net-
work (DCNN) model on the dataset, both to of-
fer a baseline model for users of the dataset, and
to further explore our hypothesis about meaning
multiplication.

Our model can take as input either image (Img),
text (Txt) or both (Img + Txt), and consists of
modality specific encoders, a fusion layer, and a
class prediction layer. We use the ResNet-18 net-
work pre-trained on ImageNet as the image en-
coder (He et al., 2016). For encoding captions,
we use a standard pipeline that employs a RNN
model on word embeddings. We experiment with
both word2vec type (word token-based) embed-
dings trained from scratch (Mikolov et al., 2013)
and pre-trained character-based contextual embed-
dings (ELMo) (Peters et al., 2018). For our pur-
pose ELMo character embeddings are more useful
since they increase robustness to noisy and often
misspelled Instagram captions. For the combined
model, we implement a simple fusion strategy that
first linearly projects encoded vectors from both
the modalities in the same embedding space and
then adds the two vectors. Although naive, this
strategy has been shown to be effective at a vari-
ety of tasks such as Visual Question Answering
(Nguyen and Okatani, 2018) and image-caption
matching (Ahuja et al., 2018). We then use the
fused vector to predict class-wise scores using a
fully connected layer.

6 Experiments

We evaluate our models on predicting intent, semi-
otic relationships, and image-text relationships
from Instagram posts, using image only, text only,
and both modalities.

6.1 Dataset, Evaluation and Implementation

We use the 1299-sample MDID dataset (sec-
tion 4). We only use corresponding image and
text information for each post and do not use other
meta-data to preserve the focus on image-caption
joint meaning. We perform basic pre-processing
on the captions such as removing stopwords and
non-alphanumeric characters. We do not perform
any pre-processing for images.

Due to the small dataset, we perform 5-fold
cross-validation for our experiments reporting av-
erage performance across all splits. We report
classification accuracy (ACC) and also area un-
der the ROC curve (AUC) (since AUC is more
robust to class-skew), using macro-average across
all classes (Jeni et al., 2013; Stager et al., 2006).

We use a pre-trained ResNet-18 model as the
image encoder. For word token based embed-
dings we use 300 dimensional vectors trained from
scratch. For ELMo we use a publicly available
API 1 and use a pre-trained model with two layers
resulting in a 2048 dimensional input. We use a bi-
directional GRU as the RNN model with 256 di-
mensional hidden layers. We set the dimensional-
ity of the common embedding space in the fusion
layer to 128. In case there is a single modality,
the fusion layer only projects features from that
modality. We train with the Adam optimizer with
a learning rate of 0.00005, which is decayed by
0.1 after every 15 epochs. We report results with
the best model selected based on performance on
a mini validation set.

6.2 Quantitative Results

We show results in Table 2. For the intent taxon-
omy images are more informative than (word2vec)
text (76% for Img vs 72.7% for Txt-emb) but with
ELMo text outperforms just using images (82.6%
for Txt-ELMo, 76.0% for Img). ELMo similarly
improves performance on the contextual taxon-
omy but not the semiotic taxonomy.

For the semiotic taxonomy, ELMo and
word2vec embeddings perform similarly, (67.8%

1https://github.com/allenai/allennlp/
blob/master/tutorials/how_to/elmo.md

https://www.ksikka.com/document_intent.html
https://www.ksikka.com/document_intent.html
https://github.com/allenai/allennlp/blob/master/tutorials/how_to/elmo.md
https://github.com/allenai/allennlp/blob/master/tutorials/how_to/elmo.md


4628

Method Intent Semiotic Contextual
ACC AUC ACC AUC ACC AUC

Chance 28.1 50.0 64.5 50.0 53.0 50.0
Img 42.9 (±0.0) 76.0 (±0.5) 61.5 (±0.0) 59.8 (±3.0) 52.5 (±0.0) 62.5 (±1.3)

Txt-emb 42.9 (±0.0) 72.7 (±1.5) 58.9 (±0.0) 67.8 (±1.7) 60.7 (±0.5) 74.9 (±3.0)
Txt-ELMo 52.7 (±0.0) 82.6 (±1.2) 61.7 (±0.0) 66.5 (±1.9) 65.4 (±0.0) 78.5 (±2.1)

Img + Txt-emb 48.1 (±0.0) 80.8 (±1.2) 60.4 (±0.0) 69.7 (±1.8) 60.8 (±0.0) 76.0 (±2.5)
Img + Txt-ELMo 56.7 (±0.0) 85.6 (±1.3) 61.8 (±0.0) 67.8 (±1.8) 63.6 (±0.5) 79.0 (±1.4)

Table 2: Table showing results with various DCNN models– image-only (Img), text-only (Txt-emb and Txt-
ELMo), and combined model (Img + Txt-emb and Img + Txt-ELMo). Here emb is the model using standard word
(token) based embeddings, while ELMo is the pre-trained ELMo based word embeddings (Peters et al., 2018). The
numbers in Table2 are standard deviations across 5 folds.

for Txt-emb vs. 66.5% for Txt-ELMo), suggest-
ing that individual words are sufficient for the
semiotic labeling task, and the presence of the
sentence context (as in ELMo) is not needed.

Combining visual and textual modalities helps
across the board. For example, for intent taxon-
omy the joint model Img + Txt-ELMo achieves
85.6% compared to 82.6% for Txt-ELMo. Images
seem to help even more when using a word embed-
ding based text model (80.8% for Img + Txt-emb
vs. 72.7% for Txt-emb). Joint models also im-
prove over single-modality on labeling the image-
text relationship and the semiotic taxonomy. We
show class-wise performances with the single- and
multi-modality models in Table 3. It is particularly
interesting that in the semiotic taxonomy, multi-
modality helps the most with divergent semiotics
(gain of 4.4% compared to the image-only model).

Figure 4: Confusion between intent classes for the in-
tent classification task. The confusion matrix was ob-
tained using the Img + Txt-ELMo model and the results
are averaged over the 5 splits.

6.3 Discussion

In general, using both text and image is helpful,
a fact that is unsurprising since combinations of
text and image are known to increase performance
on tasks such as predicting post popularity or user
personality (Hessel et al., 2017; Wendlandt et al.,
2017). Most telling, however, were the differences
in this helpfulness across items. In the semiotic
category the greatest gain came when the text-
image semiotics were “divergent”. By contrast,
multimodal models help less when the image and
text are additive, and help the least when the image
and text are parallel and provide less novel infor-
mation. Similarly, with contextual relationships,
multimodal analysis helps the most with the “min-
imal” category (1.6%). This further supports the
idea that on social media such as Instagram, the
relation between image and text can be richly di-
vergent and thereby form new meanings.

The category confusion matrix in Figure 4 pro-
vides further insights. The least confused category
is informative. Informative posts are least similar
to the rest of Instagram, since they consist of de-
tached, objective posts, with little use of first per-
son pronouns like “I” or “me.” Promotive posts are
also relatively easy to detect, since they are for-
mally informative, telling the viewer the advan-
tages and logistics of an item or event, with the ad-
dition of a persuasive intent reflecting the poster’s
personal opinions (“I love this watch”.). We found
that the entertainment label is often misapplied;
perhaps to some extent all posts have a goal of en-
tertaining, and any analysis must account for this
filter of entertainment. The Exhibitionist intent
tends to be predicted well, likely due to its visual
and textual signifiers of individuality (e.g. selfies
are almost always exhibitionist, as are captions



4629

Intent
Class Img Txt-ELMo Img+

Txt-ELMo
Provocative 85.5 84.1 90.0
Informative 77.0 93.9 92.8
Advocative 84.8 82.4 87.4

Entertainment 69.0 78.6 80.5
Exhibitionist 81.7 78.7 84.9
Expressive 57.9 72.0 73.2
Promotive 76.3 88.5 90.1

Mean 76.0 82.6 85.6

Semiotic
Class Img Txt-emb Img+

Txt-ELMo
Divergent 69.8 72.7 77.1
Additive 55.0 66.7 68.2
Parallel 54.5 64.3 64.0
Mean 59.8 67.8 69.7

Contextual
Class Img Txt-ELMo Img+

Txt-ELMo
Minimal 60.9 79.7 81.3

Close 60.5 73.8 74.6
Transcendent 66.1 82.0 81.2

Mean 62.5 78.5 79.0

Table 3: Class-wise results (AUC) for the three taxonomies with different DCNN models on the MDID dataset.
Except for the semiotic taxonomy we used ELMo text representations (based on the performance in Table 2).

like “I love my new hair”). There is a great deal
of confusion, however, between the expressive and
exhibitionist categories, since the only distinction
lies in whether the post is about a general topic or
about the poster, and between the provocative and
advocative categories, perhaps because both often
seek to prove points in a similar way.

With the contextual and semiotic taxonomies,
some good results are obtained with text alone. In
the “transcendent” contextual case, it is not neces-
sarily surprising that using text alone enables 82%
AUC because whenever a caption is really long or
has many adverbs, adjectives or abstract concepts,
it is highly likely to be transcendent. In the “diver-
gent” semiotics case, we were surprised that text
alone would predict divergence with 72.7% AUC.
Examining these cases showed that many of them
had lexical cues suggesting irony or sarcasm, al-
lowing the system to infer that the image will di-
verge in keeping with the irony. There is, how-
ever, a consistent improvement when both modal-
ities are used for both taxonomies.

6.4 Sample Outputs

We show some sample successful outputs of the
(multimodal) model in Figure 5, in which the high-
est probability class in each of the three dimen-
sion corresponds to our gold labels. The top-left
Image-caption pair (Image I) is classified as ex-
hibitionist, closely followed by expressive; it is a
picture of someone’s home with a caption describ-
ing a domestic experience. The semiotic relation-
ship is classified as additive; the image and caption

together signify the concept of spending winter at
home with pets before the fireplace. The contex-
tual relationship is classified as transcendental; the
caption indeed goes well beyond the image.

The top-right image-caption pair (Image II) is
classified as entertainment; the image caption pair
works as an ironic reference to dancing (“yeet”)
grandparents, who are actually reading, in lan-
guage used usually by young people that a typ-
ical grandparent would never use. The semiotic
relationship is classified as divergent and the con-
textual relationship is classified as minimal; there
is semantic and semiotic divergence of the image-
caption pair caused by the juxtaposition of youth-
ful references with older people.

To further understand the role of meaning mul-
tiplication, we consider the change in intent and
semiotic relationships when the same image of the
British Royal Family is matched with two differ-
ent captions in the bottom row of Figure 5 (Image
IV). In both cases the semiotic relationship is par-
allel, perhaps due to the match between the multi-
figure portrait setting and the word family. But
the other two dimensions show differences. When
the caption is “the royal family” our system clas-
sifies the intent as entertainment; presumably such
pictures and caption pairs often appear on Insta-
gram intending to entertain. But when the caption
is “my happy family” the intent is classified as ex-
pressive, perhaps due to the family pride expressed
in the caption.



4630

Figure 5: Sample successful output predictions for the three taxonomies, showing ranked classes and predicted
probabilities. In images IV the same image when paired with a different caption gives rise to a different intent.

7 Conclusion

We have proposed a model to capture the complex
meaning multiplication relationship between im-
age and text in multimodal Instagram posts. Our
three new taxonomies, adapted from the media and
semiotic literature, allow the literal, semiotic, and
illocutionary relationship between text and image
to be coded. Of course our new dataset and the
baseline classifier models are just a preliminary ef-
fort, and future work will need to examine larger
datasets, consider additional data such as hashtags,
richer classification schemes, and more sophisti-
cated classifiers. Some of these may be domain-
specific. For example, Alikhani et al. (2019) show
how to develop rich coherence relations that model
the contextual relationship between recipe text and
accompanying images (specific versions of Elabo-
ration or Exemplification such as “Shows a tool
used in the step but not mentioned in the text”).
Expanding our taxonomies with richer sets like
these is an important goal. Nonetheless, the fact
that we found multimodal classification to be most

helpful in cases where the image and text diverged
semiotically points out the importance of these
complex relations, and our taxonomies, dataset,
and tools should provide impetus for the commu-
nity to further develop more complex models of
this important relationship.

8 Acknowledgment

This project is sponsored by the Office of
Naval Research (ONR) under the contract number
N00014-17C-1008 and by DARPA Communicat-
ing with Computers (CwC) program under ARO
prime contract number W911NF- 15-1-0462. Dis-
claimer: The views, opinions, and/or findings ex-
pressed are those of the author(s) and should not
be interpreted as representing the official views or
policies of the Department of Defense or the U.S.
Government. We would like to thank the reviewers
for their incisive critique. We would like to thank
Prof. Joyce Chai. Ajay Divakaran would like to
dedicate this paper to his mother Mrs. Bharathi
Divakaran.



4631

References
Karuna Ahuja, Karan Sikka, Anirban Roy, and Ajay

Divakaran. 2018. Understanding visual ads by
aligning symbols and objects using co-attention.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.01448.

Xavier Alameda-Pineda, Andrea Pilzer, Dan Xu, Nicu
Sebe, and Elisa Ricci. 2017. Viraliency: Pooling
local virality. In CVPR.

Malihe Alikhani, Sreyasi Nag Chowdhury, Gerard
de Melo, and Matthew Stone. 2019. CITE: A cor-
pus of image–text discourse relations. In NAACL.

John Langshaw Austin. 1962. How to Do Things with
Words. Clarendon Press.

John Bateman. 2014. Text and image: A critical intro-
duction to the visual/verbal divide. Routledge.

John Berger. 1972. Ways of Seeing. Penguin.

Yonatan Bisk, Jan Buys, Karl Pichotta, and Yejin Choi.
2019. Benchmarking hierarchical script knowledge.
In Proceedings of NAACL 2019, pages 4077–4085.

Zoya Bylinskii, Tilke Judd, Aude Oliva, Antonio Tor-
ralba, and Frédo Durand. 2018. What do differ-
ent evaluation metrics tell us about saliency models?
PAMI.

Xinlei Chen, Hao Fang, Tsung-Yi Lin, Ramakr-
ishna Vedantam, Saurabh Gupta, Piotr Dollár, and
C Lawrence Zitnick. 2015. Microsoft coco captions:
Data collection and evaluation server. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1504.00325.

Arturo Deza and Devi Parikh. 2015. Understanding
image virality. In CVPR, pages 1818–1826.

Fartash Faghri, David J Fleet, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and
Sanja Fidler. 2018. Vse++: Improving visual-
semantic embeddings with hard negatives. In
BMVC.

Erving Goffman. 1978. The presentation of self in ev-
eryday life. Anchor Books, New York, NY.

Yash Goyal, Tejas Khot, Douglas Summers-Stay,
Dhruv Batra, and Devi Parikh. 2017. Making the
v in vqa matter: Elevating the role of image under-
standing in visual question answering. In CVPR, 2,
page 3.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian
Sun. 2016. Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition. In CVPR, pages 770–778.

Stephen Heath et al. 1977. Image-music-text. Fontana,
London.

Jack Hessel, Lillian Lee, and David Mimno. 2017.
Cats and captions vs. creators and the clock: Com-
paring multimodal content to context in predicting
relative popularity. In WWW, pages 927–936.

Bernie Hogan. 2010. The presentation of self in the age
of social media: Distinguishing performances and
exhibitions online. Bulletin of Science, Technology
& Society, 30(6):377–386.

Xinyue Huang and Adriana Kovashka. 2016. Inferring
visual persuasion via body language, setting, and
deep features. In CVPRW, pages 73–79.

Drew A. Hudson and Christopher D. Manning. 2019.
Gqa: A new dataset for real-world visual reasoning
and compositional question answering. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 6700–6709.

Zaeem Hussain, Mingda Zhang, Xiaozhong Zhang,
Keren Ye, Christopher Thomas, Zuha Agha, Nathan
Ong, and Adriana Kovashka. 2017. Automatic un-
derstanding of image and video advertisements. In
CVPR, pages 1100–1110. IEEE.

László A Jeni, Jeffrey F Cohn, and Fernando
De La Torre. 2013. Facing imbalanced data–
recommendations for the use of performance met-
rics. In ACII, pages 245–251. IEEE.

Jungseock Joo, Weixin Li, Francis F Steen, and Song-
Chun Zhu. 2014. Visual persuasion: Inferring com-
municative intents of images. In CVPR, pages 216–
223.

Aditya Khosla, Atish Das Sarma, and Raffay Hamid.
2014. What makes an image popular? In WWW,
pages 867–876. ACM.

Aditya Khosla, Akhil S Raju, Antonio Torralba, and
Aude Oliva. 2015. Understanding and predicting
image memorability at a large scale. In ICCV, pages
2390–2398.

R Kloepfer. 1977. Komplementaritat von Sprache
und Bild, Am Beispiel von Comic, Karikatur, und
Reklame. In R. Posner and H.-P. Reinecke, edi-
tors, Zeichenprozesse, Semiotische Forschung in den
Einzelwissenschaften, pages 129–145. Athenaum.

Jamie Mahoney, Tom Feltwell, Obinna Ajuruchi, and
Shaun Lawson. 2016. Constructing the visual on-
line political self: an analysis of Instagram use by
the Scottish Electorate. In CHI, pages 3339–3351.
ACM.

Emily E Marsh and Marilyn Domas White. 2003. A
taxonomy of relationships between images and text.
Journal of Documentation, 59(6):647–672.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In NIPS, pages 3111–3119.

Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Chris Brockett, Bill Dolan,
Michel Galley, Jianfeng Gao, Georgios Sp-
ithourakis, and Lucy Vanderwende. 2017. Image-
grounded conversations: Multimodal context for



4632

natural question and response generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the Eighth International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing, pages 462–
472.

Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Ishan Misra, Jacob Devlin, Mar-
garet Mitchell, Xiaodong He, and Lucy Vander-
wende. 2016. Generating natural questions about
an image. In Proceedings of the ACL 2016, pages
1802–1813.

Duy-Kien Nguyen and Takayuki Okatani. 2018. Im-
proved fusion of visual and language representations
by dense symmetric co-attention for visual question
answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.00775.

Matthew E Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt
Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2018. Deep contextualized word rep-
resentations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05365.

Behjat Siddiquie, David Chisholm, and Ajay Di-
vakaran. 2015. Exploiting multimodal affect and
semantics to identify politically persuasive web
videos. In ICMI, pages 203–210.

Mohammad Soleymani, David Garcia, Brendan Jou,
Björn Schuller, Shih-Fu Chang, and Maja Pantic.
2017. A survey of multimodal sentiment analysis.
IVC, 65:3–14.

Mathias Stager, Paul Lukowicz, and Gerhard Troster.
2006. Dealing with class skew in context recogni-
tion. In ICDCSW, pages 58–58. IEEE.

Lydia Weiland, Ioana Hulpus, Simone Paolo Ponzetto,
Wolfang Effelsberg, and Laura Dietz. 2018.
Knowledge-rich image gist understanding beyond
literal meaning. arXiv preprint 1904.08709.

Laura Wendlandt, Rada Mihalcea, Ryan L. Boyd, and
James W. Pennebaker. 2017. Multimodal analysis
and prediction of latent user dimensions. In Interna-
tional Conference on Social Informatics, pages 323–
340.

Rowan Zellers, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin
Choi. 2018. From recognition to cognition: Vi-
sual commonsense reasoning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1811.10830.

Mingda Zhang, Rebecca Hwa, and Adriana Kovashka.
2018. Equal but not the same: Understanding the
implicit relationship between persuasive images and
text. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.08205.


