






































Linking artificial and human neural representations of language


Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 529–539,
Hong Kong, China, November 3–7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

529

Linking artificial and human neural representations of language

Jon Gauthier and Roger P. Levy
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
jon@gauthiers.net, rplevy@mit.edu

Abstract

What information from an act of sentence un-
derstanding is robustly represented in the hu-
man brain? We investigate this question by
comparing sentence encoding models on a
brain decoding task, where the sentence that an
experimental participant has seen must be pre-
dicted from the fMRI signal evoked by the sen-
tence. We take a pre-trained BERT architec-
ture as a baseline sentence encoding model and
fine-tune it on a variety of natural language un-
derstanding (NLU) tasks, asking which lead to
improvements in brain-decoding performance.

We find that none of the sentence encoding
tasks tested yield significant increases in brain
decoding performance. Through further task
ablations and representational analyses, we
find that tasks which produce syntax-light rep-
resentations yield significant improvements in
brain decoding performance. Our results con-
strain the space of NLU models that could best
account for human neural representations of
language, but also suggest limits on the possi-
bility of decoding fine-grained syntactic infor-
mation from fMRI human neuroimaging.

What are the neural representations which sup-
port human language understanding? Language
neuroscience has converged on a set of reliable
physiological markers related to language process-
ing (Kutas and Federmeier, 2011), and a picture of
where in the brain different aspects of language pro-
cessing take place (Fedorenko et al., 2010). But we
still largely lack a coherent picture of the structure
and format of the neural representations driving
language understanding.

Part of this struggle is due to a scarcity of can-
didate representational structures in the first place.
While there are certainly enough representational

Source code for all analyses reported in this paper is
available at http://bit.ly/nn-decoding.

theories of language understanding, many are spec-
ified at too high a level of analysis to plausibly
map onto neural structures without serious further
revision (Poeppel, 2012).

Studies which draw on these high-level repre-
sentations must therefore also assume some link
between such representations and measures of neu-
ral activity — for example, that the magnitude of
neural activations should match up with the proba-
bility values derived from a computational model
(Brennan et al., 2016), or measures derived from
syntactic representations of the input (Pallier et al.,
2011). While the success of these mapping studies
demonstrates that specific summary statistics of lin-
guistic representations have correlates in the mind,
these summary statistics are not themselves candi-
date representations for the fundamental operations
underlying language understanding.

In the meantime, research in natural language
processing has produced neural network models
that capture many different sorts of intelligent lan-
guage understanding behavior (Collobert et al.,
2011; Goldberg, 2016). These models accomplish
this behavior in an implementation better matched
with that of the brain, with information about their
inputs distributed across a high-dimensional con-
tinuous space. Could these models be taken se-
riously as candidate hypotheses of how language
processing could be implemented in neural hard-
ware? Under the assumption that both human brain
and neural network representations are optimally
suited to solve some task (Anderson et al., 1990),
linking these two computational systems should
reveal parallel task-optimal structure shared within
their representations.

This paradigm linking brain and machine has
already seen substantial success in vision science.
Yamins et al. (2013) first demonstrated that the ac-
tivations of a convolutional neural network trained
on ImageNet in response to natural images could

http://bit.ly/nn-decoding


530

predict activations in a macaque monkey’s visual
cortex in response to the same images. This result
and others have led to an increasingly detailed un-
derstanding of the contents of brain representations
(Schrimpf et al., 2018) and novel artificial neural
network architectures (Kubilius et al., 2018) in the
domain of vision.

In language understanding, several authors have
exploited neural network representations as prox-
ies for sentence meaning, and demonstrated that
human brain activations in response to sentences
can match with these meaning representations at
well above chance performance (see e.g. Mitchell
et al., 2008; Wehbe et al., 2014; Huth et al., 2016;
Pereira et al., 2018). Our aim in this paper is to fur-
ther understand why these mappings are successful,
uncovering the parallel representational contents
shared between human brains and neural networks.

We evaluate the link between human brain activ-
ity and neural network models as the models are
optimized for different tasks. We find that neural
network models quickly diverge in their capacity
to match human brain activations as they are opti-
mized for different NLU objectives. We further lo-
cate correlates of these changes in representational
content, finding that the granularity of a model’s
syntactic representations is at least partially respon-
sible for their differences in brain decoding perfor-
mance. Overall, this approach allows us to generate
and validate hypotheses about the representational
contents of both human brain and neural network
activity.

1 Related work

Several papers have begun to explore the brain–
machine link in language understanding, asking
whether human brain activations can be matched
with the activations of computational language
models. Mitchell et al. (2008) first demonstrated
that distributional word representations could be
used to predict human brain activations, when sub-
jects were presented with individual words in iso-
lation. Huth et al. (2016) replicated and extended
these results using distributed word representations,
and Pereira et al. (2018) extended these results to
sentence stimuli. Wehbe et al. (2014), Qian et al.
(2016), Jain and Huth (2018), and Abnar et al.
(2019) next introduced more complex word and
sentence meaning representations, demonstrating
that neural network language models could better
account for brain activation by incorporating repre-

Figure 1: Brain decoding methodology. We use human
brain activations in response to sentences to predict
how neural networks represent those same sentences.

sentations of longer-term linguistic context. Gau-
thier and Ivanova (2018) and Sun et al. (2019) fur-
ther demonstrated that optimizing model represen-
tations for different objectives yielded substantial
differences in brain decoding performance. This
paper extends the neural network brain decoding
paradigm both in breadth, studying a wide class
of different task-optimal models, and in depth, ex-
ploring the particular representational contents of
each model responsible for its brain decoding per-
formance.

2 Methods

Figure 1 describes the high-level design of our
experiments, which attempt to match human neu-
roimaging data with different candidate model rep-
resentations of sentence inputs. Using a dataset
of human brain activations recorded in response
to complete sentences, we learn linear regression
models which map from human brain activity to
representations of the same sentences produced by
different natural language understanding models.

To the extent that this linear decoding is success-
ful, it can reveal parallel structure between brain
and model representations. Consider a softmax
neural network classifier model optimized for some
task T , mapping input sentences x to class outputs
y. We can factor this neural network classifier into
the composition of two operations, a representa-
tional function r(x), and an affine operator A:

p(y | x) ∝ exp(A(r(x))) (1)

Under this factorization, r(x) must compute repre-
sentations which are linearly separable with respect



531

A man is a male human adult.
Fingers are used for grasping, writing, grooming and other activities.
Piranhas have very sharp teeth and are opportunistic carnivores.
Pressing a piano key causes a felt-tipped hammer to hit a vibrating steel string.
A range of mountains forms due to tectonic plate collision.

Table 1: Randomly sampled sentence stimuli from the
human neuroimaging dataset of Pereira et al. (2018).

to the classes of the task T .
Research in cognitive neuroscience has shown

that surprisingly many features of perceptual and
cognitive states are likewise linearly separable from
images of human brain activity, even at the coarse
spatial and temporal resolution afforded by func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI; see e.g.
Haxby et al., 2001; Kriegeskorte et al., 2006). How-
ever, the full power of linear decoding with fMRI
remains unknown within language neuroscience
and elsewhere. One possibility (1) is that the rep-
resentational distinctions intrinsically required to
describe language understanding behavior are lin-
early decodable from fMRI data. If this were the
case, we could use performance in brain decoding
to gauge the similarity between the mental represen-
tations underlying human language understanding
and those deployed within artificial neural network
models. Conversely (2), if the representations sup-
porting language understanding in the brain are
not linearly decodable from fMRI, we should be
able to demonstrate this fact by showing specific
ablations of sentence representation models do not
degrade in brain decoding performance. Thus, the
brain decoding framework offers possibilities both
for (1) discriminating among NLU tasks as faithful
characterizations of human language understand-
ing, and for (2) understanding potential limitations
of fMRI imaging and linear decoding methods. We
explore both of these possibilities in this paper.

Section 2.1 describes the human neuroimaging
data used as the source of this learned mapping.
Section 2.2 next describes how we derive the target
representations of sentence inputs from different
natural language understanding models. Finally,
Section 2.3 describes our method for deriving and
evaluating mappings between the two representa-
tional spaces.

2.1 Human neuroimaging data

We use the human brain images collected by
Pereira et al. (2018, experiment 2).1 Pereira et al.

1This dataset is publicly available at https://osf.
io/crwz7/.

Task Dataset Domain # train Avg sent len. # types

Paraphrase
classifica-
tion

Quora Ques-
tion Pairs

social
QA

364k 22.1 103k

Question
answer-
ing

SQuAD 2.0
(Rajpurkar
et al., 2018)

wiki 130k 11.2 43.9k

Natural
language
inference

MNLI
(Williams
et al., 2017)

mixed 393k 16.8 83.3k

Sentiment
analysis

SST-2
(Socher
et al., 2013)

movie
reviews

67.3k 9.41 14.8k

Table 2: Details of the tasks used for fine-tuning.

visually presented 384 natural-language sentences
to 8 adult subjects. The sentences (examples in Ta-
ble 1) consisted of simple encyclopedic statements
about natural kinds, written by the authors. The
subjects were instructed to carefully read each sen-
tence, presented one at a time, and think about its
meaning. As they read the sentences, the subjects’
brain activity was recorded with functional mag-
netic resonance imaging (fMRI). For each subject
and each sentence, the fMRI images consist of a
∼ 200, 000-dimensional vector describing the ap-
proximate neural activity within small 3D patches
of the brain, known as voxels.2 We collect these
vectors in a single matrix and compress them to
dB = 256 dimensions using PCA, yielding a ma-
trix Bi ∈ R384×dB for each subject i.3

2.2 Sentence representation models

We will match the human brain activation data de-
scribed above with a suite of different sentence rep-
resentations. Our primary concern in this evalua-
tion is to compare alternative tasks and the represen-
tational contents they demand, rather than compar-
ing neural network architectures. For this reason,
we draw sentence representations from a unified
neural network architecture — the bidirectional
Transformer model BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) —
as we optimize it to perform different tasks.

The BERT model uses a series of multi-head
attention operations to compute context-sensitive
representations for each token in an input sentence.
The model is pre-trained on two tasks: (1) a cloze
language modeling task, where the model is given
a complete sentence containing several masked
words and asked to predict the identity of a particu-

2For more information on data collection and fMRI analy-
sis, please see Pereira et al. (2018).

3The PCA projections retain more than 95% of the variance
among sentence responses within each subject.

https://osf.io/crwz7/
https://osf.io/crwz7/


532

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0
Tr

ai
ni

ng
 lo

ss
(ro

llin
g 

wi
nd

ow
)

0 100 200
Training step

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

Va
lid

at
io

n 
se

t a
cc

ur
ac

y
(ro

llin
g 

wi
nd

ow
)

(a) QQP

2

3

4

5

6

0 50 100 150 200 250
Training step

0.50

0.51

0.52

0.53

0.54

(b) SQuAD

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

1.4

0 50 100 150 200 250
Training step

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

(c) MNLI

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0 50 100 150 200 250
Training step

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

(d) SST

Figure 2: Learning curves (training set loss and evaluation set accuracy) for NLU model fine-tuning.

lar masked word; and (2) a next-sentence prediction
task, where the model is given two sentences and
asked to predict whether the sentences are imme-
diately adjacent in the original language modeling
data.4 For our purposes, this pre-training process
produces a set of BERT parameters ΘLM jointly op-
timized for these two objectives, consisting of word
embeddings and attention mechanism parameters.

For an input token sequencew1, . . . , wT , the out-
put of the BERT model is a corresponding sequence
of contextualized representations of each token. We
derive a single sentence representation vector by
prepending a constant token w0 = [CLS], and
extracting its corresponding output vector at the
final layer, following Devlin et al. (2018).5

We first extract sentence representations from
the pre-trained model parameterized by ΘLM. We
let CLM ∈ R384×dH refer to the matrix of sentence
representations drawn from this pre-trained BERT
model, where dH is the dimensionality of the BERT
hidden layer representation.

2.2.1 Fine-tuned models
We use the code and pre-trained weights released
by Devlin et al. (2018) to fine-tune the BERT
model on a suite of natural language processing
classification tasks, shown in Table 2.6 This fine-
tuning process jointly optimizes the pre-trained

4See Devlin et al. (2018); Vaswani et al. (2017) for further
details on model architecture and training.

5We also repeated the experiments of this paper using
sentence representations computed by uniformly averaging
BERT’s contextualized token representations of each input
sentence, and found similar qualitative results as will be pre-
sented below.

6Details on the fine-tuning procedure are available in De-
vlin et al. (2018).

word embeddings and attention weights drawn
from ΘLM, along with a task-specific classification
model which accepts the sentence representations
produced by the BERT model (the vector corre-
sponding to the prepended [CLS] token) as input.

We fine-tune the pretrained BERT model on a
set of popular shared NLU tasks, shown in Table 2,
with fixed hyperparameters across tasks (available
in Appendix B). Each fine-tuning operation is run
for 250 iterations, before which all models show
substantial improvements on the fine-tuning task.
Figure 2 shows the learning curves for each of the
models fine-tuned by this procedure.

We execute 8 different runs for each fine-tuning
task. Each run ` of each fine-tuning task j produces
a set of final parameters Θj`. We can derive a set of
sentence representations Cj` from each fine-tuned
model by the same logic as above, feeding in each
sentence with a prepended [CLS] token and ex-
tracting the contextualized [CLS] representation.

For our purposes, the product of each fine-tuning
run is a set of sentence representations Cj` ∈
R384×dH .

Custom tasks In order to better understand why
models might fail or succeed at brain decoding,
we also produced several custom fine-tuning tasks.
Each task was a modified form of the standard
BERT cloze language modeling task, manipulated
to strongly select for or against some particular
aspect of linguistic representation.7

7The training and test data for these tasks were generated
from the Toronto Books Corpus (Zhu et al., 2015), a subset
of the data used to train the original BERT model. Further
details and examples for these tasks are given in Appendix C.



533

Scrambled language modeling We first de-
sign two language modeling tasks to select against
fine-grained syntactic representation of inputs. We
randomly shuffle words from the corpus samples
used for language modeling, to remove all first-
order cues to syntactic structure. Our first custom
task, LM-scrambled, deals with sentence inputs
where words are shuffled within sentences; our
second task, LM-scrambled-para, uses inputs
where words are shuffled within their containing
paragraphs in the corpus. 8

By shuffling inputs in this way, we effectively
turn the cloze task into a bag-of-words language
modeling task: given a set of words from a sentence
or a random draw of words from a paragraph, the
model must predict a missing word. After optimiz-
ing models on these scrambled tasks, we design
a probe to validate the effects of the task on the
model’s syntactic representations. This probe is
detailed in Section 3.2.2.

Part-of-speech language modeling We next
design a task, LM-pos, to select against fine-
grained semantic representation of inputs. We do
this by requiring a model to predict only the part
of speech of a masked word, rather than the word
itself. This manipulation removes pressure for the
model to distinguish predictions between target
words in the same syntactic class.

We repeat fine-tuning runs on each of these
custom tasks 4 times per task, and see substan-
tial improvements in held-out task performance for
each of these custom tasks after just 250 steps of
training. After fine-tuning, we extract sentence rep-
resentation matrices Cj` from each run ` of each
these models.

Language modeling control As a control, we
also continue training on the original BERT lan-
guage modeling objectives using text drawn from
the Books Corpus (Zhu et al., 2015). We run 4 fine-
tuning runs of this task, yielding representations
CLM,`.

2.2.2 Word vector baseline
As a baseline comparison, we also include sen-
tence representations computed from GloVe word

8This shuffling method removes first-order cues to con-
stituency: for example, the fact that the table appears directly
to the right of on suggests that they are members of a sin-
gle constituent. It is still possible that the model can exploit
second-order cues to structure. For example, if two nouns
ranch and rancher appear in the same sentence as dressing,
we can still guess that ranch is more likely to modify dressing.

vectors (Pennington et al., 2014). Unlike BERT’s
word representations, these word vectors are in-
sensitive to their surrounding sentential context.
These word vectors have nevertheless successfully
served as sentence meaning representations in prior
studies (Pereira et al., 2018; Gauthier and Ivanova,
2018). We let CGloVe(w1, . . . , wT ) = 1T e(wt),
where e(wi) retrieves the GloVe embedding for
word wi.9

2.3 Brain decoding

We next learn a suite of decoders: regression mod-
els mapping from descriptions of human brain acti-
vation to model activations in response to sentences.
Let Bi ∈ R384×dB represent the brain activations
of subject i in response to the 384 sentences in
our evaluation set. For each subject and each sen-
tence representation available (including both lan-
guage model representations CLM and fine-tuned
model representations Cj`), we learn a linear map
Gi→j` : RdH×dB between the two spaces which
minimizes the regularized regression loss

Jij` = ||Gi→j`Bi − Cj`||22 + β ||Gi→j`||22 (2)

where β is a regularization hyperparameter. For
each subject’s collection of brain images and each
target model representation, we train and evalu-
ate the above regression model with nested 8-fold
cross-validation (Cawley and Talbot, 2010). The
regression models are evaluated under two metrics:
mean squared error (MSE) in prediction of model
activations, and average rank (AR):

AR(i, j, `) =
1

384

∑
k

rank((Gi→j`Bi)[k], Cj`[k])

(3)
where rank((Gi→j`Bi)[k], Cj`[k]) gives the rank
of a ground-truth sentence representation Cj`[k] in
the list of nearest neighbors of a predicted sentence
representation (Gi→j`Bi)[k], ordered by increas-
ing cosine distance.

These two metrics serve complementary roles:
the MSE metric strictly evaluates the ability of
human brain activations to exactly match the rep-
resentational geometry of model activations, while
the AR metric simply requires that the brain ac-
tivations be able to support the relevant meaning
contrasts between the 384 sentences tested.

9We use publicly available GloVe vectors computed
on Common Crawl, available in the spaCy toolkit as
en vectors web lg.



534

3 Results

We first present the performance of all of the BERT
models tested and the GloVe baseline in Figure 3.
This figure makes apparent a number of surprising
findings, which we validate by paired t-tests.10

1. On average, fine-tuning on the standard NLU
tasks yields increased error in brain decod-
ing under both metrics relative to the BERT
baseline (MSE, t ≈ 14.8, p < 3 × 10−36;
AR, t ≈ 17, p < 3 × 10−42). This trend is
significant for each model individually, ex-
cept QQP (MSE, t ≈ −2.2, p > 0.03; AR,
t ≈ 0.79, p > 0.4).

2. Fine-tuning on the LM-scrambled-para cus-
tom task yields decreased error in brain de-
coding under both metrics relative to the
BERT baseline (MSE, t ≈ −33.6, p < 3 ×
10−45; AR, t ≈ −26.9, p < 5 × 10−39)
and GloVe vectors (MSE, t ≈ −23.4, p <
4× 10−35; AR, t ≈ −12.1, p < 6× 10−19).

3. Fine-tuning on both the control language-
modeling task and the LM-pos custom task
yields ambiguous results: decreased MSE
and no significant change in AR relative to
the BERT baseline (LM-pos: MSE, t ≈
−2.90, p < 0.007; AR, t ≈ 2.10, p > 0.04;
LM: MSE, t ≈ −5.68, p < 4 × 10−7; AR,
t ≈ −2.36, p > 0.02).

3.1 Learning dynamics

When during training do these models diverge in
brain decoding performance? We repeat our brain
decoding evaluation on model snapshots taken ev-
ery 5 steps during fine-tuning, and chart brain de-
coding performance over time for each model in
Figure 4. We find that models rapidly diverge in
brain decoding performance, but remain mostly sta-
ble after about 100 fine-tuning steps. This phase
of rapid change in brain decoding performance is
generally matched with a phase of rapid change in
task performance (compare each line in Figure 4
with the learning curves in Figure 2).

10Each sample in our statistical tests compares the brain
decoding performance matching a subject’s brain image with
model representations before and after fine-tuning on a par-
ticular task. See Figures 8 and 9 of Appendix A for further
visualizations. Results are reported throughout with a signifi-
cance level α = 0.01.

3.2 Representational analysis

We next investigate the structure of the model rep-
resentations, and find that differing fidelity of syn-
tactic representation can explain some major quali-
tative differences between the models in brain de-
coding performance.

3.2.1 Representational similarity
We first investigate coarse-grained model sim-
ilarity with representational similarity analysis
(Kriegeskorte et al., 2008), which measures mod-
els’ pairwise distance judgments as a proxy for how
well the underlying representations are aligned in
their contents. For each fine-tuning run ` on each
task j, we compute pairwise cosine similarities be-
tween each pair of sentence representation rows in
Cj`, yielding a vector Dj` ∈ R(384 choose 2).

We measure the similarity between the represen-
tations derived from a run (j, `) and some other
run (j′, `′) by computing the Spearman correlation
coefficient ρ(Dj`, Dj′`′). These correlation values
are graphed as a heatmap in Figure 5, where each
cell averages over different runs of the two cor-
responding models. This heatmap yields several
clear findings:

1. The language modeling fine-tuning runs (es-
pecially the two LM-scrambled tasks) are the
only models which have reliable high correla-
tions between one another.

2. Language modeling tasks yield representa-
tions which make similar sentence-sentence
distance predictions between different runs
on the same task, while the rest of the mod-
els are less coherent across runs (see matrix
diagonal).

The scrambled LM tasks produce sentence repre-
sentations which are reliably coherent across runs
(Figure 5), and produce reliable improvements in
brain decoding performance (Figure 3). What is it
about this task which yields such reliable results?
We attempt to answer this question in the following
section.

3.2.2 Syntactic probe
Because the scrambled LM tasks were designed to
remove all first-order cues to syntactic constituency
from the input, we hypothesized that the models
trained on this task were succeeding due to their re-
sulting coarse syntactic representations. We tested



535

LM
_sc

ram
ble

d_p
ara

LM
_sc

ram
ble

d
glo

ve QQ
P LM

LM
_po

s

SQ
uA

D SS
T

MN
LI

Model

0.0034

0.0035

0.0036

0.0037

0.0038

M
ea

n 
sq

ua
re

d 
er

ro
r

(a) Mean squared error metric

LM
_sc

ram
ble

d_p
ara

LM
_sc

ram
ble

d
glo

ve LM
LM

_po
s

QQ
P

SQ
uA

D SS
T

MN
LI

Model

20

40

60

80

M
ea

n 
av

er
ag

e 
ra

nk

(b) Average rank metric

Figure 3: Brain decoding performance for fine-tuned BERT models and the GloVe baseline. Error bars are boot-
strapped 95% confidence intervals, pooling across decoders matching different subjects (8 total) and different
BERT fine-tuning runs (up to 8 runs per model). Dashed gray line shows the average brain decoding performance
of the pretrained BERT language model.

0 50 100 150 200 250
Fine-tuning step

0.00020
0.00015
0.00010
0.00005
0.00000
0.00005
0.00010
0.00015
0.00020

(M
SE

)

model
LM
LM_pos
LM_scrambled
LM_scrambled_para
MNLI
QQP
SQuAD
SST

(a) Mean squared-error metric

0 50 100 150 200 250
Fine-tuning step

20

0

20

40

60
(M

AR
)

model
LM
LM_pos
LM_scrambled
LM_scrambled_para
MNLI
QQP
SQuAD
SST

(b) Average rank metric

Figure 4: Brain decoding performance trajectories over fine-tuning time, graphed relative to the brain decoding
performance of the pre-trained BERT language model. Performance rapidly diverges and then stabilizes within
tens of fine-tuning steps. Shaded regions represent 95% confidence intervals, pooling across 8 subjects and up to 8
fine-tuning runs per model.

this idea using the structural probe method of He-
witt and Manning (2019). This method measures
the degree to which word representations can re-
produce syntactic analyses of sentences. We used
dependency-parsed sentences from the Universal
Dependencies (UD) English Web Treebank corpus
(Silveira et al., 2014) to evaluate the performance
of each fine-tuned BERT model with a structural
probe.

For each fine-tuned BERT model (task j, fine-
tuning run `) and each sentence w1, . . . , wT , let w̃i
denote the context-sensitive representation of word
wi under the model parameters Θj`. The struc-
tural probe method attempts to derive a distance
measure between context-sensitive word represen-
tations, parameterized by a transformation matrix
B, which approximates the number of grammatical
dependencies separating the two words (Hewitt and

Manning, 2019). Concretely, for any two words
wi, wj in a parsed sentence, we learn a parameter
matrix B such that(

(B(w̃i − w̃j))T (B(w̃i − w̃j))
)2 ≈ |wi ↔ wj |

(4)
where |wi ↔ wj | denotes the number of edges
separating wi and wj in a dependency parse of the
sentence.

We learn this parameter matrix B for a set of
training sentences randomly sampled from the UD
corpus, and then apply the distance measure above
to model representations for a set of held-out test
sentences. For any sentence w1, . . . , wT , the mea-
sure induces a T × T pairwise distance matrix,
where each entry (i, j) predicts the distance (in
grammatical dependencies) between words i and j.
By applying a minimum spanning tree algorithm to
this matrix, we derive an (undirected) parse tree for



536

MNL
I

SQu
AD SSTQQPLM_

pos LM

LM_
scra

mbl
ed

LM_
scra

mbl
ed_

para

MNLI

SQuAD

SST

QQP

LM_pos

LM

LM_scrambled

LM_scrambled_para

0.41 0.21 0.31 0.27 0.21 0.25 0.21 0.18

0.21 0.52 0.18 0.34 0.25 0.3 0.24 0.23

0.31 0.18 0.77 0.32 0.25 0.26 0.27 0.27

0.27 0.34 0.32 0.57 0.47 0.46 0.44 0.4

0.21 0.25 0.25 0.47 0.86 0.7 0.63 0.59

0.25 0.3 0.26 0.46 0.7 0.92 0.71 0.66

0.21 0.24 0.27 0.44 0.63 0.71 0.9 0.8

0.18 0.23 0.27 0.4 0.59 0.66 0.8 0.88
0.30

0.45

0.60

0.75

0.90

Figure 5: Representational similarity of the sentence
encodings produced by each model (between -1 and 1;
higher is more similar). See Section 3.2.1 for details.

0 100 200
Training step

0.275
0.300
0.325
0.350
0.375
0.400
0.425
0.450

UU
AS

model
LM
LM_pos
LM_scrambled
LM_scrambled_para
MNLI
QQP
SQuAD
SST
GloVe

Figure 6: Syntactic probe evaluation across fine-tuning
time (section 3.2.2).

the sentence which best matches the predictions of
the distance measure. We measure the accuracy of
the reconstructed tree by calculating its unlabeled
attachment score (UAS) relative to ground-truth
parses from the UD corpus.

We apply the probe described above to every fine-
tuning run of each model, and to baseline GloVe
representations. We expected the GloVe represen-
tations to perform worst, since they cannot encode
any context-sensitive features of input words. The
probe results are graphed over fine-tuning time
in Figure 6, relative to a probe induced from the
GloVe representations (dashed blue line). This
analysis shows that the models optimized for LM-
scrambled and LM-scrambled-para — the models
which improve in brain decoding performance —
progressively worsen under this syntactic probe
measure during fine-tuning. Their probe perfor-
mance remains well above the performance of the
GloVe baseline, however.

Figure 7 shows a representative sample sentence
with parses induced from the syntactic probes of

I won a golf lesson certificate with Adz through a charity auction .

.

.

.

. .
.

. .. ..

.

.
.

.

..
. .

Figure 7: Example sentence with undirected syntactic
probe parses induced from LM-scrambled representa-
tions (blue, above) and GloVe representations (red, be-
low). Solid arcs represent correct dependency predic-
tions; dashed lines represent errors.

LM-scrambled (after 250 fine-tuning steps) and the
GloVe baseline. While both parses make many
mistaken attachments (dashed arcs), the parse in-
duced from LM-scrambled (blue arcs) makes better
guesses about local attachment decisions than the
parse from GloVe (red arcs), which seems to simply
link identical and thematically related words. This
is the case even though LM-scrambled is never able
to exploit information about the relative positions
of words during its training. Overall, this suggests
that much (but not all) of the syntactic information
initially represented in the baseline BERT model
is discarded during training on the scrambled lan-
guage modeling tasks. Surprisingly, this loss of
syntactic information seems to yield improved per-
formance in brain decoding.

4 Discussion

The brain decoding paradigm presented in this pa-
per has led us to a set of scrambled language model-
ing tasks which best match the structure of brain ac-
tivations among the models tested. Optimizing for
these scrambled LM tasks produces a rapid but sta-
ble divergence in representational contents, yield-
ing improvements in brain decoding performance
(Figures 3 and 4) and reliably coherent predictions
in pairwise sentence similarity (Figure 5). These
changes are matched with a clear loss of syntactic
information (Figure 6), though some minimal in-
formation about local grammatical dependencies is
decodable from the model’s context-sensitive word
representations (Figure 7).

We do not take these results to indicate that hu-
man neural representations of language do not en-
code syntactic information. Rather, we see several
possible explanations for these results:

Limitations of fMRI. Functional magnetic reso-
nance imaging — the brain imaging method used to
collect the dataset studied in this paper — may be
too temporally coarse to detect traces of the syntac-



537

tic computations powering language understanding
in the human brain.

This idea may conflict with several findings in
the neuroscience of language. For example, Bren-
nan et al. (2016) compared how language models
with different granularities of syntactic represen-
tation map onto human brain activations during
passive listening of English fiction. They derived
word-level surprisal estimates from n-gram models
(which have no explicit syntactic representation)
and PCFG models (which explicitly represent syn-
tactic constituency). In a stepwise regression anal-
ysis, they demonstrated that the surprisal estimates
drawn from the PCFG model explain variance in
fMRI measures of brain activation not already ex-
plained by estimates drawn from the n-gram model.

Pallier et al. (2011) examined a different hypoth-
esis linking mental and neural representations of
language. They presented subjects with strings of
words which contain valid syntactic constituents of
different lengths. They assumed that, since subjects
will attempt to construct syntactic analyses of the
word strings, the length of the possible syntactic
constituents in any stimulus should have some cor-
relate in subjects’ neural activations. They found a
reliable relationship between the size of the avail-
able constituents in the input and region-specific
brain activations as measured by fMRI.

Our results are compatible with the idea that spe-
cific syntactic features like those discussed above
are still represented in the brain at the time scale of
fMRI. Figures 6 and 7 demonstrate, in fact, that the
LM-scrambled models still retain some syntac-
tic information (or correlates thereof), in that they
clearly outperform a baseline model in predicting
the syntactic parses of sentences.

While these brain mapping studies have detected
particular summary features of syntactic computa-
tion in the brain, these summary features do not
constitute complete proposals of syntactic process-
ing. In contrast, each of the models trained in
this paper constitutes an independent candidate al-
gorithmic description of sentence representation.
These candidate descriptions can be probed (as in
Section 3.2.2) to reveal exactly why brain decoding
fails or succeeds in any case.

Our paradigm thus enables us to next ask: what
specific syntactic features are responsible for the
improved performance of the LM-scrambled
models? By further probing the models and de-
signing ablated datasets, we plan to narrow down

the particular phenomena responsible for the find-
ings presented here. These results should act as
a source of finer-grained hypotheses about what
sort of syntactic information is preserved at coarse
temporal resolutions, and allow us to resolve the
conflict between our results those of Pallier et al.
(2011) and Brennan et al. (2016), among others.

Limitations of the linking hypothesis. Our lin-
ear linking hypothesis (presented in Section 2.3)
that representations of syntactic structure are en-
coded entirely in the linear geometry of both neu-
ral networks and human brains. It is likely that
some syntactic information — among other fea-
tures of the input — are conserved in the fMRI
signal, but not readable by a linear decoder. Future
work should investigate how more complex trans-
forms linking brain and machine can reveal parallel
structure between the two systems.

Limitations of the data. The fMRI data used in
this study (presented in Section 2.1) was collected
as subjects read sentences and were asked to sim-
ply think about their meaning. This vague task
specification may have led subjects to engage only
superficially with the sentences. If this were the
case, these shallow mental representations might
present us with correspondingly shallow neural
representations — just the sort of representations
which might be optimal for the simple tasks such as
LM-scrambled and LM-scrambled-para.
Future work should integrate brain images derived
from different behavioral tasks, and study which
model–brain relationships are conserved across
these behaviors. Such studies could illuminate the
degree to which there are genuinely task-general
language representations in the mind.

Our broader framework of analysis promises to
reveal further insights about the parallel contents
between artificial and human neural representations
of language. In this spirit, we have released our
complete analysis framework as open source code
for the research community, available at http:
//bit.ly/nn-decoding.

Acknowledgments

JG gratefully acknowledges support from the Open
Philanthropy Project, and RPL gratefully acknowl-
edges support from a Newton Brain Science Re-
search Seed Award and from the MIT–SenseTime
Alliance on Artificial Intelligence.

http://bit.ly/nn-decoding
http://bit.ly/nn-decoding


538

References

Samira Abnar, Lisa Beinborn, Rochelle Choenni, and
Willem Zuidema. 2019. Blackbox meets blackbox:
Representational similarity and stability analysis of
neural language models and brains. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.01539.

John Robert Anderson et al. 1990. The Adaptive Char-
acter of Thought. Psychology Press.

Jonathan R Brennan, Edward P Stabler, Sarah E
Van Wagenen, Wen-Ming Luh, and John T Hale.
2016. Abstract linguistic structure correlates with
temporal activity during naturalistic comprehension.
Brain and language, 157:81–94.

Gavin C Cawley and Nicola LC Talbot. 2010. On over-
fitting in model selection and subsequent selection
bias in performance evaluation. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 11(Jul):2079–2107.

Ronan Collobert, Jason Weston, Léon Bottou, Michael
Karlen, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Pavel Kuksa.
2011. Natural language processing (almost) from
scratch. Journal of machine learning research,
12(Aug):2493–2537.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understand-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805.

Evelina Fedorenko, Po-Jang Hsieh, Alfonso Nieto-
Castañón, Susan Whitfield-Gabrieli, and Nancy
Kanwisher. 2010. New method for fmri investi-
gations of language: defining rois functionally in
individual subjects. Journal of neurophysiology,
104(2):1177–1194.

Jon Gauthier and Anna Ivanova. 2018. Does the brain
represent words? an evaluation of brain decoding
studies of language understanding. In Proceedings
of the 2nd Conference on Cognitive Computational
Neuroscience, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Yoav Goldberg. 2016. A primer on neural network
models for natural language processing. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research, 57:345–420.

James V Haxby, M Ida Gobbini, Maura L Furey, Alu-
mit Ishai, Jennifer L Schouten, and Pietro Pietrini.
2001. Distributed and overlapping representations
of faces and objects in ventral temporal cortex. Sci-
ence, 293(5539):2425–2430.

John Hewitt and Christopher D Manning. 2019. A
structural probe for finding syntax in word repre-
sentations. In Proceedings of the 2019 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT, Minneapolis,
Minnesota, USA, volume 2.

Matthew Honnibal and Ines Montani. 2017. spacy 2:
Natural language understanding with bloom embed-
dings, convolutional neural networks and incremen-
tal parsing. To appear.

Alexander G Huth, Wendy A de Heer, Thomas L Grif-
fiths, Frédéric E Theunissen, and Jack L Gallant.
2016. Natural speech reveals the semantic maps that
tile human cerebral cortex. Nature, 532(7600):453.

Shailee Jain and Alexander Huth. 2018. Incorporat-
ing context into language encoding models for fMRI.
bioRxiv, page 327601.

Ryan Kiros, Yukun Zhu, Ruslan R Salakhutdinov,
Richard Zemel, Raquel Urtasun, Antonio Torralba,
and Sanja Fidler. 2015. Skip-thought vectors. In
Advances in neural information processing systems,
pages 3294–3302.

Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Rainer Goebel, and Peter Ban-
dettini. 2006. Information-based functional brain
mapping. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 103(10):3863–3868.

Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Marieke Mur, and Peter A Ban-
dettini. 2008. Representational similarity analysis-
connecting the branches of systems neuroscience.
Frontiers in systems neuroscience, 2:4.

Jonas Kubilius, Martin Schrimpf, Aran Nayebi, Daniel
Bear, Daniel LK Yamins, and James J DiCarlo. 2018.
Cornet: Modeling the neural mechanisms of core ob-
ject recognition. BioRxiv, page 408385.

Marta Kutas and Kara D Federmeier. 2011. Thirty
years and counting: finding meaning in the n400
component of the event-related brain potential (erp).
Annual review of psychology, 62:621–647.

Tom M Mitchell, Svetlana V Shinkareva, Andrew Carl-
son, Kai-Min Chang, Vicente L Malave, Robert A
Mason, and Marcel Adam Just. 2008. Predicting hu-
man brain activity associated with the meanings of
nouns. Science, 320(5880):1191–1195.

Christophe Pallier, Anne-Dominique Devauchelle, and
Stanislas Dehaene. 2011. Cortical representation of
the constituent structure of sentences. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(6):2522–
2527.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher
Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word rep-
resentation. In EMNLP.

Francisco Pereira, Bin Lou, Brianna Pritchett, Samuel
Ritter, Samuel J Gershman, Nancy Kanwisher,
Matthew Botvinick, and Evelina Fedorenko. 2018.
Toward a universal decoder of linguistic meaning
from brain activation. Nature communications,
9(1):963.

David Poeppel. 2012. The maps problem and the map-
ping problem: two challenges for a cognitive neuro-
science of speech and language. Cognitive neuropsy-
chology, 29(1-2):34–55.

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0600244103
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0600244103


539

Peng Qian, Xipeng Qiu, and Xuanjing Huang. 2016.
Bridging lstm architecture and the neural dynamics
during reading. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence, pages 1953–1959. AAAI Press.

Pranav Rajpurkar, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. 2018.
Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable ques-
tions for squad. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.03822.

Martin Schrimpf, Jonas Kubilius, Ha Hong, Najib J
Majaj, Rishi Rajalingham, Elias B Issa, Kohitij
Kar, Pouya Bashivan, Jonathan Prescott-Roy, Kai-
lyn Schmidt, et al. 2018. Brain-score: which arti-
ficial neural network for object recognition is most
brain-like? BioRxiv, page 407007.

Natalia Silveira, Timothy Dozat, Marie-Catherine
de Marneffe, Samuel Bowman, Miriam Connor,
John Bauer, and Christopher D. Manning. 2014. A
gold standard dependency corpus for English. In
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-
2014).

Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason
Chuang, Christopher D Manning, Andrew Ng, and
Christopher Potts. 2013. Recursive deep models
for semantic compositionality over a sentiment tree-
bank. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on
empirical methods in natural language processing,
pages 1631–1642.

Jingyuan Sun, Shaonan Wang, Jiajun Zhang,
Chengqing Zong, et al. 2019. Towards sentence-
level brain decoding with distributed representations.
In Proceedings of the 33rd AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-2019).

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, pages 5998–6008.

Leila Wehbe, Ashish Vaswani, Kevin Knight, and Tom
Mitchell. 2014. Aligning context-based statistical
models of language with brain activity during read-
ing. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), pages 233–243.

Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel R Bow-
man. 2017. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for
sentence understanding through inference. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1704.05426.

Daniel L Yamins, Ha Hong, Charles Cadieu, and
James J DiCarlo. 2013. Hierarchical modular opti-
mization of convolutional networks achieves repre-
sentations similar to macaque it and human ventral
stream. In C. J. C. Burges, L. Bottou, M. Welling,
Z. Ghahramani, and K. Q. Weinberger, editors, Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems
26, pages 3093–3101. Curran Associates, Inc.

Yukun Zhu, Ryan Kiros, Rich Zemel, Ruslan Salakhut-
dinov, Raquel Urtasun, Antonio Torralba, and Sanja
Fidler. 2015. Aligning books and movies: Towards
story-like visual explanations by watching movies
and reading books. In The IEEE International Con-
ference on Computer Vision (ICCV).

http://papers.nips.cc/paper/4991-hierarchical-modular-optimization-of-convolutional-networks-achieves-representations-similar-to-macaque-it-and-human-ventral-stream.pdf
http://papers.nips.cc/paper/4991-hierarchical-modular-optimization-of-convolutional-networks-achieves-representations-similar-to-macaque-it-and-human-ventral-stream.pdf
http://papers.nips.cc/paper/4991-hierarchical-modular-optimization-of-convolutional-networks-achieves-representations-similar-to-macaque-it-and-human-ventral-stream.pdf
http://papers.nips.cc/paper/4991-hierarchical-modular-optimization-of-convolutional-networks-achieves-representations-similar-to-macaque-it-and-human-ventral-stream.pdf

