



















































A Benchmark Dataset for Learning to Intervene in Online Hate Speech


Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 4755–4764,
Hong Kong, China, November 3–7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

4755

A Benchmark Dataset for Learning to Intervene in Online Hate Speech

Jing Qian†, Anna Bethke∗, Yinyin Liu∗, Elizabeth Belding†, William Yang Wang†
† University of California, Santa Barbara

∗ Intel AI
{jing qian,ebelding,william}@cs.ucsb.edu
{anna.bethke,yinyin.liu}@intel.com

Abstract

Countering online hate speech is a critical yet
challenging task, but one which can be aided by
the use of Natural Language Processing (NLP)
techniques. Previous research has primarily fo-
cused on the development of NLP methods to
automatically and effectively detect online hate
speech while disregarding further action needed to
calm and discourage individuals from using hate
speech in the future. In addition, most existing
hate speech datasets treat each post as an isolated
instance, ignoring the conversational context. In
this paper, we propose a novel task of generative
hate speech intervention, where the goal is to au-
tomatically generate responses to intervene during
online conversations that contain hate speech. As
a part of this work, we introduce two fully-labeled
large-scale hate speech intervention datasets1 col-
lected from Gab2 and Reddit3. These datasets pro-
vide conversation segments, hate speech labels, as
well as intervention responses written by Mechan-
ical Turk4 Workers. In this paper, we also ana-
lyze the datasets to understand the common inter-
vention strategies and explore the performance of
common automatic response generation methods
on these new datasets to provide a benchmark for
future research.

1 Introduction

The growing popularity of online interactions
through social media has been shown to have both
positive and negative impacts. While social media
improves information sharing, it also facilitates

1https://github.com/jing-qian/A-Benchmark-Dataset-for-
Learning-to-Intervene-in-Online-Hate-Speech

2https://gab.ai
3https://www.reddit.com
4https://www.mturk.com

Figure 1: An illustration of hate speech conversation
between User 1 and User 2 and the interventions col-
lected for our datasets. The check and the cross icons
on the right indicate a normal post and a hateful post.
The utterance following the human icon is a human-
written intervention, while the utterance following the
computer icon is machine-generated.

the propagation of online harassment, including
hate speech. These negative experiences can have
a measurable negative impact on users. Recently,
the Pew Research Center (Center, 2017) reported
that “roughly four-in-ten Americans have person-
ally experienced online harassment, and 63% con-
sider it a major problem.”

To address the growing problem of online hate,
an extensive body of work has focused on devel-
oping automatic hate speech detection models and
datasets (Warner and Hirschberg, 2012; Waseem
and Hovy, 2016; Davidson et al., 2017; Schmidt
and Wiegand, 2017; ElSherief et al., 2018a,b; Qian
et al., 2018a,b). However, simply detecting and
blocking hate speech or suspicious users often has
limited ability to prevent these users from simply
turning to other social media platforms to continue
to engage in hate speech as can be seen in the
large move of individuals blocked from Twitter5

to Gab (Ohlheiser, 2016). What’s more, such a

5https://www.twitter.com



4756

strategy is often at odds with the concept of free
speech. As reported by the Pew Research Cen-
ter (Center, 2017), “Despite this broad concern
over online harassment, 45% of Americans say it
is more important to let people speak their minds
freely online; a slightly larger share (53%) feels
that it is more important for people to feel wel-
come and safe online.” The special rapporteurs
representing the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) have
recommended that “The strategic response to hate
speech is more speech.” (Bielefeldt et al., 2011)
They encourage to change what people think in-
stead of merely changing what they do, so they
advocate more speech that educates about cultural
differences, diversity, and minorities as a better
strategy to counter hate speech.

Therefore, in order to encourage strategies of
countering online hate speech, we propose a novel
task of generative hate speech intervention and in-
troduce two new datasets for this task. Figure 1
illustrates the task. Our datasets consist of 5K con-
versations retrieved from Reddit and 12k conver-
sations retrieved from Gab. Distinct from existing
hate speech datasets, our datasets retain their con-
versational context and introduce human-written
intervention responses. The conversational con-
text and intervention responses are critical in order
to build generative models to automatically miti-
gate the spread of these types of conversations.

To summarize, our contributions are three-fold:

• We introduce the generative hate speech in-
tervention task and provide two fully-labeled
hate speech datasets with human-written in-
tervention responses.

• Our data is collected in the form of conversa-
tions, providing better context.

• The two data sources, Gab and Reddit, are
not well studied for hate speech. Our datasets
fill this gap.

Due to our data collecting strategy, all the posts
in our datasets are manually labeled as hate or non-
hate speech by Mechanical Turk workers, so they
can also be used for the hate speech detection task.
The performance of commonly-used classifiers on
our datasets is shown in Section 6.

2 Related Work

In recent years, a few datasets for hate speech
detection have been built and released by re-

searchers. Most are collected from Twitter and
are labeled using a combination of expert and non-
expert hand labeling, or through machine learning
assistance using a list of common negative words.
It is widely accepted that labels can vary in their
accuracy overall, though this can be mitigated by
relying on a consensus rule to rectify disagree-
ments in labels. A synopsis of these datasets can
be found in Table 1.

Waseem and Hovy (2016) collect 17k tweets
based on hate-related slurs and users. The tweets
are manually annotated with three categories: sex-
ist (20.0%), racist (11.7%), and normal (68.3%).
Because the authors identified a number of pro-
lific users during the initial manual search, the re-
sulting dataset has a small number of users (1,236
users) involved, causing a potential selection bias.
This problem is most prevalent on the 1,972 racist
tweets, which are sent by only 9 Twitter users. To
avoid this problem, we did not identify suspicious
user accounts or utilize user information when col-
lecting our data.

Davidson et al. (2017) use a similar strategy,
which combines the utilization of hate keywords
and suspicious user accounts to build a dataset
from Twitter. But different from Waseem and
Hovy (2016), this dataset consists of 25k tweets
randomly sampled from the 85.4 million posts of a
large number of users (33,458 users). This dataset
is proposed mainly to distinguish hateful and of-
fensive language, which tend to be conflated by
many studies.

Golbeck et al. (2017) focus on online harass-
ment on Twitter and propose a fine-grained labeled
dataset with 6 categories. Founta et al. (2018) in-
troduce a large Twitter dataset with 100k tweets.
Despite the large size of this dataset, the ratio of
the hateful tweets are relatively low (5%). Thus
the size of the hateful tweets is around 5k in this
dataset, which is not significantly larger than that
of the previous datasets.

The dataset introduced by Chatzakou et al.
(2017) is different from the other datasets as it
investigates the behavior of hate-related users on
Twitter, instead of evaluating hate-related tweets.
The large majority of the 1.5k users are labeled
as spammers (31.8%) or normal (60.3%). Only a
small fraction of the users are labeled as bullies
(4.5%) or aggressors (3.4%).

While most datasets are from single sources,
Kennedy III et al. (2017) introduce a dataset with



4757

Source #Posts Conv. Categories Interv.
Waseem and Hovy (2016) Twitter 17k No racist, sexist, normal No
Davidson et al. (2017) Twitter 25k No hateful, offensive, neither No
Golbeck et al. (2017) Twitter 35k No the worst, threats, hate speech, di-

rect harassment, potentially offensive,
non-harassment

No

Chatzakou et al. (2017) Twitter 9k No aggressive, bullying, spam, normal No
Kennedy III et al. (2017) Twitter, Reddit,

The Gaurdian
20k No harassment, non-harassment No

Founta et al. (2018) Twitter 100k No abusive, hateful, normal, spam No
Warner and Hirschberg (2012) Yahoo! 9k No anti-semitic, anti-black, anti-asian,

anti-woman, anti-muslim, anti-
immigrant, other-hate

No

Nobata et al. (2016) Yahoo! 2k No clean, hate, derogatory, profanity No
Van Hee et al. (2015) Ask.fm 85k No threat/blackmail, insult, defamation,

sexual talk, curse/exclusion, defense,
encouragement to the harasser

No

Ours Reddit 22k Yes hate, non-hate Yes
Ours Gab 34k Yes hate, non-hate Yes

Table 1: Comparison of our datasets with previous hate speech datasets. Conv.: Conversation. Interv.: Intervention.

a combination of Twitter (58.9%), Reddit, and
The Guardian. In total 20,432 unique comments
were obtained with 4,136 labeled as harassment
(20.2%) and 16,296 as non-harassment (79.8%).

Since most of the publicly available hate speech
datasets are collected from Twitter, previous re-
search of hate speech mainly focus on Twitter
posts or users (Waseem and Hovy, 2016; Gao
et al., 2017; Burnap and Williams, 2016; Badjatiya
et al., 2017; Davidson et al., 2017). While there
are several studies on the other sources, such as
Instagram (Zhong et al., 2016), Yahoo! (Warner
and Hirschberg, 2012; Nobata et al., 2016), and
Ask.fm (Van Hee et al., 2015), the hate speech
on Reddit and Gab is not widely studied. What’s
more, all the previous hate speech datasets are
built for the classification or detection of hate
speech from a single post or user on social me-
dia, ignoring the context of the post and interven-
tion methods needed to effectively calm down the
users and diffuse negative online conversations.

3 Dataset Collection

3.1 Ethics

Our study got approval from our Internal Review
Board. Workers were warned about the offensive
content before they read the data and they were
informed by our instructions to feel free to quit the
task at any time if they are uncomfortable with the
content. Additionally, all personally identifiable
information such as user names is masked in the
datasets.

3.2 Data Filtering
Reddit: To retrieve high-quality conversational
data that would likely include hate speech, we
referenced the list of the whiniest most low-key
toxic subreddits6. Skipping the three subreddits
that have been removed, we collect data from ten
subreddits: r/DankMemes, r/Imgoingtohellforthis,
r/KotakuInAction, r/MensRights, r/MetaCanada,
r/MGTOW, r/PussyPass, r/PussyPassDenied,
r/The Donald, and r/TumblrInAction. For each of
these subreddits, we retrieve the top 200 hottest
submissions using Reddit’s API. To further focus
on conversations with hate speech in each sub-
mission, we use hate keywords (ElSherief et al.,
2018b) to identify potentially hateful comments
and then reconstructed the conversational context
of each comment. This context consists of all
comments preceding and following a potentially
hateful comment. Thus for each potentially
hateful comment, we rebuild the conversation
where the comment appears. Figure 2 shows an
example of the collected conversation, where the
second comment contains a hate keyword and is
considered as potentially hateful. Because a con-
versation may contain more than one comments
with hate keywords, we removed any duplicated
conversations.
Gab: We collect data from all the Gab posts in
October 2018. Similar to Reddit, we use hate key-
words (ElSherief et al., 2018b) to identify poten-
tially hateful posts, rebuild the conversation con-
text and clean duplicate conversations.

6https://www.vice.com/en us/article/8xxymb/here-are-
reddits-whiniest-most-low-key-toxic-subreddits



4758

Figure 2: An example of the aggregated data. The first column is the conversation text. Indexes are added to
each post. Indentations before each post indicate the structure of replies. The second column is the indexes of the
human-labeled hateful post. Each bullet point in the third column is a human-written response.

3.3 Crowd-Sourcing
After we collected the conversations from both
Reddit and Gab, we presented this data to Me-
chanical Turk workers to label and create inter-
vention suggestions. In order not to over-burden
the workers, we filtered out conversations consist-
ing of more than 20 comments. Each assignment
consists of 5 conversations. For Reddit, we also
present the title and content of the corresponding
submission in order to give workers more informa-
tion about the topic and context. For each conver-
sation, a worker is asked to answer two questions:

• Q1: Which posts or comments in this conver-
sation are hate speech?

• Q2: If there exists hate speech in the conver-
sation, how would you respond to intervene?
Write down a response that can probably hold
it back (word limit: 140 characters).

If the worker thinks no hate speech exists in the
conversation, then the answers to both questions
are “n/a”. To provide context, the definition of
hate speech from Facebook7: “We define hate
speech as a direct attack on people based on what
we call protected characteristics race, ethnicity,
national origin, religious affiliation, sexual orien-
tation, caste, sex, gender, gender identity, and se-
rious disease or disability.” is presented to the
workers. Also, to prevent workers from using hate
speech in the response or writing responses that
are too general, such as “Please do not say that”,
we provide additional instructions and rejected ex-
amples.

3.4 Data Quality
Each conversation is assigned to three different
workers. To ensure data quality, we restrict the

7https://m.facebook.com/communitystandards/hate speech/

Figure 3: The distributions of the top 10 keywords in
the hate speech collected from Reddit and Gab. Hate
keywords are masked.

workers to be in an English speaking country in-
cluding Australia, Canada, Ireland, New Zealand,
the United Kingdom, and the United States, with
a HIT approval rate higher than 95%. Excluding
the rejected answers, the collected data involves
926 different workers. The final hate speech labels
(answers to Q1) are aggregated according to the
majority of the workers’ answers. A comment is
considered hate speech only when at least two out
of the three workers label it as hate speech. The
responses (answers to Q2) are aggregated accord-
ing to the aggregated result of Q1. If the worker’s
label to Q1 agrees with the aggregated result, then
their answer to Q2 is included as a candidate re-
sponse to the corresponding conversation but is
otherwise disregarded. See Figure 2 for an exam-
ple of the aggregated data.

4 Dataset Analysis

4.1 Statistics

From Reddit, we collected 5,020 conversations,
including 22,324 comments. On average, each
conversation consists of 4.45 comments and the



4759

length of each comment is 58.0 tokens. 5,257
of the comments are labeled as hate speech and
17,067 are labeled as non-hate speech. A majority
of the conversations, 3,847 (76.6%), contain hate
speech. Each conversation with hate speech has
2.66 responses on average, for a total of 10,243
intervention responses. The average length of the
intervention responses is 17.96 tokens.

From Gab, we collected 11,825 conversations,
consisting of 33,776 posts. On average, each con-
versation consists of 2.86 posts and the average
length of each post is 35.6 tokens. 14,614 of the
posts are labeled as hate speech and 19,162 are
labeled as non-hate speech. Nearly all the con-
versations, 11,169 (94.5%), contain hate speech.
31,487 intervention responses were originally col-
lected for conversations with hate speech, or 2.82
responses per conversation on average. The aver-
age length of the intervention responses is 17.27
tokens.

Compared with the Gab dataset, there are fewer
conversations and comments in the Reddit dataset,
comments and conversations are longer, and the
distribution of hate and non-hate speech labels is
more imbalanced. Figure 3 illustrates the distribu-
tions of the top 10 keywords in the hate speech col-
lected from Reddit and Gab separately. The Gab
dataset and the Reddit dataset have similar popular
hate keywords, but the distributions are very dif-
ferent. All the statistics shown above indicate that
the characteristics of the data collected from these
two sources are very different, thus the challenges
of doing detection or generative intervention tasks
on the dataset from these sources will also be dif-
ferent.

4.2 Intervention Strategies

Removing duplicates, there are 21,747 unique in-
tervention responses in the aggregated Gab dataset
and 7,641 in the aggregated Reddit dataset. De-
spite the large diversity of the collected responses
for intervention, we find workers tend to have cer-
tain strategies for intervention.

Identify Hate Keywords: One of the most com-
mon strategies is to identify the inappropriate
terms in the post and then urge the user to stop us-
ing that work. For example, “The C word and lan-
guage attacking gender is unacceptable. Please
refrain from future use.” This strategy is often
used when the hatred in the post is mainly con-
veyed by specific hate keywords.

Categorize Hate Speech: This is another com-
mon strategy used by the workers. The workers
classify hate speech into different categories, such
as racist, sexist, homophobic, etc. This strategy
is often combined with identifying hate keywords
or targets of hatred. For example, “The term
””fa**ot”” comprises homophobic hate, and as
such is not permitted here.”

Positive Tone Followed by Transitions: This is a
strategy where the response consists of two parts
combined with a transitional word, such as “but”
and “even though”. The first part starts with affir-
mative terms, such as “I understand”, “You have
the right to”, and “You are free to express”, show-
ing kindness and understanding, while the second
part is to alert the users that their post is inappro-
priate. For example, “I understand your frustra-
tion, but the term you have used is offensive to-
wards the disabled community. Please be more
aware of your words.”. Intuitively, compared with
the response that directly warns, this strategy is
likely more acceptable for the users and be more
likely to clam down a quarrel full of hate speech.
Suggest Proper Actions: Besides warning and
discouraging the users from continuing hate
speech, workers also suggest the actions that the
user should take. This strategy can either be com-
bined with other strategies mentioned above or be
used alone. In the latter case, a negative tone can
be greatly alleviated. For example, “I think that
you should do more research on how resources are
allocated in this country.”

5 Generative Intervention

Our datasets can be used for various hate speech
tasks. In this paper, we focus on generative hate
speech intervention.

The goal of this task is to generate a response
to hate speech that can mitigate its use during a
conversation. The objective can be formulated as
the following equation:

Obj = max
∑

(c,r)∈D

log p(r|c) (1)

where c is the conversation, r is the corresponding
intervention response, and D is the dataset. This
task is closely related to the response generation
and dialog generation, though several differences
exist including dialog length, language cadence,
and word imbalances. As a baseline, we chose
the most common methods of these two tasks,



4760

such as Seq2Seq and VAE, to determine the initial
feasibility of automatically generate intervention
responses. More recent Reinforcement Learning
method for dialog generation (Li et al., 2016) can
also be applied to this task with slight modifica-
tion. Future work will explore more complex, and
unique models.

Similar to (Li et al., 2016), a generative model
is considered as an agent. However, different from
dialog generation, generative intervention does not
have multiple turns of utterance, so the action of
the agent is to select a token in the response. The
state of the agent is given by the input posts and the
previously generated tokens. Another result due
to this difference is that the rewards with regard to
ease of answering or information flow do not apply
to this case, but the reward for semantic coherence
does. Therefore, the reward of the agent is:

rw(c, r) = λ1 log p(r|c) + λ2 log pback(c|r) (2)

where rw(c, r) is the reward with regard to the
conversation c and its reference response r in the
dataset. p(r|c) denotes the probability of gen-
erating response r given the conversation c, and
pback(c|r) denotes the backward probability of
generating the conversation based on the response,
which is parameterized by another generation net-
work. The reward is a weighted combination of
these two parts, which are observed after the agent
finishing generating the response. We refer the
readers to Li et al. (2016) for details.

6 Experiments

We evaluate the commonly-used detection and
generation methods with our dataset. Due to the
different characteristics of the data collected from
the two sources (Section 4), we treat them as two
independent datasets.

6.1 Experimental Settings
For binary hate speech detection, we experi-
mented the following four different methods.
Logistic Regression (LR): We evaluate the Logis-
tic Regression model with L2 regularization. The
penalty parameter C is set to 1. The input fea-
tures are the Term Frequency Inverse Document
Frequency (TF-IDF) values of up to 2-grams.
Support Vector Machine (SVM): We evaluate
the SVM model with linear kernels. We use L2
regularization and the coefficient is 1. The fea-
tures are the same as in LR.

Convolutional Neural Network (CNN): We use
the CNN model for sentence classification pro-
posed by Kim (2014) with default hyperparam-
eters. The word embeddings are randomly ini-
tialized (CNN in Table 2) or initialized with pre-
trained Word2Vec (Mikolov et al., 2013) embed-
dings on Google News (CNN∗ in Table 2).

Recurrent Neural Network (RNN): The model
we evaluated consists of 2-layer bidirectional
Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) (Cho et al., 2014)
followed by a linear layer. Same as for CNN, we
report the performance of RNN with two different
settings of the word embeddings.

The methods are evaluated on testing data ran-
domly selected from the dataset with the ratio of
20%. The input data is not manipulated to manu-
ally balance the classes for any of the above meth-
ods. Therefore, the training and testing data re-
tain the same distribution as the collected results
(Section 4). The methods are evaluated using F-1
score, Precision-Recall (PR) AUC, and Receiver-
Operating-Characteristic (ROC) AUC.

For generative hate speech intervention, we
evaluated the following three methods.

Seq2Seq (Sutskever et al., 2014; Cho et al., 2014):
The encoder consists of 2 bidirectional GRU lay-
ers. The decoder consists of 2 GRU layers fol-
lowed by a 3-layer MLP (Multi-Layer Percep-
tron).

Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) (Kingma and
Welling, 2013): The structure of the VAE model is
similar to that of the Seq2Seq model, except that it
has two independent linear layers followed by the
encoder to calculate the mean and variance of the
distribution of the latent variable separately. We
assume the latent variable follows a multivariate
Gaussian Distribution. KL annealing (Bowman
et al., 2016) is applied during training.

Reinforcement Learning (RL): We also imple-
ment the Reinforcement Learning method de-
scribed in Section 5. The backbone of this model
is the Seq2Seq model, which follows the same
Seq2Seq network structure described above. This
network is used to parameterize the probability
of a response given the conversation. Besides
this backbone Seq2Seq model, another Seq2Seq
model is used to generate the backward probabil-
ity. This network is trained in a similar way as
the backbone Seq2Seq model, but with a response
as input and the corresponding conversation as the
target. In our implementation, the function of the



4761

Figure 4: Examples of the generated intervention responses. The hateful terms in the conversation are masked.

first part of the reward (log p(r|c)) is conveyed by
the MLE loss. A curriculum learning strategy is
adopted for the reward of log pback(c|r) as in Ran-
zato et al. (2016). Same as in Li et al. (2016)
and Ranzato et al. (2016), a baseline strategy is
employed to estimate the average reward. We pa-
rameterize it as a 3-layer MLP.

The Seq2Seq model and VAE model are evalu-
ated under two different settings. In one setting,
the input for the generative model is the complete
conversation, while in the other setting, the input
is the filtered conversation, which only includes
the posts labeled as hate speech. The filtered con-
versation was necessary to test the Reinforcement
Learning model, as it is too challenging for the
backward model to reconstruct the complete con-
versation based only on the intervention response.

In our experiments on the generative hate
speech intervention task, we do not consider
conversations without hate speech. The testing
dataset is then randomly selected from the result-
ing dataset with the ratio of 20%. Since each con-
versation can have multiple reference responses,
we dis-aggregate the responses and construct a
pair (conversation, reference response) for each
of the corresponding references during training.
Teacher forcing is used for each of the three meth-
ods. The automatic evaluation metrics include
BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002), ROUGE-L (Lin,
2004), and METEOR (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005).

In order to validate and compare the quality of
the generated results from each model, we also
conducted human evaluations as previous research
has shown that automatic evaluation metrics often
do not correlate with human preference (Paulus
et al., 2018). We randomly sampled 450 conver-
sations from the testing dataset. We then gen-

Dataset Gab Reddit
Metric F1 PR ROC F1 PR ROC
LR 88.2 94.5 95.4 64.7 80.4 91.4
SVM 88.6 94.7 95.6 75.7 81.1 92.0
CNN 87.5 92.8 92.6 74.8 76.8 87.5
RNN 87.6 93.9 94.2 71.7 76.1 88.6
CNN∗ 89.6 95.2 95.8 76.9 80.1 90.9
RNN∗ 89.3 94.8 95.5 77.5 79.4 90.6

Table 2: Experimental results for the detection task. PR
is Precision-Recall AUC and ROC is ROC AUC. The
models marked with ∗ use pretrained Word2Vec em-
beddings. The best results are in bold.

erated responses using each of the above mod-
els trained with the filtered conversation setting.
In each assignment, a Mechanical Turk worker
is presented 10 conversations, along with corre-
sponding responses generated by the three models.
For each conversation, the worker is asked to eval-
uate the effectiveness of the generated interven-
tion by selecting a response that can best mitigate
hate speech. 9 of the 10 questions are filled with
the sampled testing data and the generated results,
while the other is artificially constructed to mon-
itor response quality. After selecting the 10 best
mitigation measures, the worker is asked to select
which of the three methods has the best diversity
of responses over all the 10 conversations. Ties are
permitted for answers. Assignments failed on the
quality check are rejected.

6.2 Experimental Results and Discussion

The experimental results of the detection task and
the generative intervention task are shown in Ta-
ble 2 and Table 3 separately. The results of the
human evaluation are shown in Table 4. Figure 4
shows examples of the generated responses.

As shown in Table 2 and 3, all the classification



4762

Dataset Gab Reddit
Inp. Set. Complete Filtered Complete Filtered
Metric B R M B R M B R M B R M
Seq2Seq 13.2 33.8 23.0 15.0 34.2 23.6 5.5 29.5 19.5 5.9 28.2 20.0
VAE 12.2 32.5 23.4 12.4 32.8 21.8 6.8 29.0 20.2 7.0 29.1 20.1
RL - - - 14.5 33.1 23.9 - - - 4.4 29.1 18.7

Table 3: Experimental results for generative intervention task. Inp. Set.: Input Setting (Section 6.1). B: BLEU. R:
ROUGE-L. M: METEOR. Best results are in bold.

Dataset Gab Reddit
Metric Eff. Div. Eff. Div.
Seq2Seq Wins 22.4 28.0 31.1 34.0
VAE Wins 20.0 6.0 26.0 4.0
RL Wins 41.6 40.0 30.0 30.0
Tie 16.0 26.0 12.9 32.0

Table 4: Human evaluation results. Table values are the
percentage of the answers. Eff.: Effectiveness, evalu-
ates how well the generated responses can mitigate hate
speech. Div: Diversity, evaluates how many different
responses are generated. Best results are in bold.

and generative models perform better on the Gab
dataset than on the Reddit dataset. We think this
stems from the datasets’ characteristics. First, the
Gab dataset is larger and has a more balanced cat-
egory distribution than the Reddit dataset. There-
fore, it is inherently more challenging to train a
classifier on the Reddit dataset. Further, the av-
erage lengths of the Reddit posts and conversa-
tions are much larger than those of Gab, poten-
tially making the Reddit input nosier than the Gab
input for both tasks. On both the Gab and Red-
dit datasets, the SVM classifier and the LR clas-
sifier achieved better performance than the CNN
and RNN model with randomly initialized word
embeddings. A possible reason is that without
pretrained word embeddings, the neural network
models tend to overfit on the dataset.

For the generative intervention task, three mod-
els perform similarly on all three automatic eval-
uation metrics. As expected, the Seq2Seq model
achieves higher scores with filtered conversation
as input. However, this is not the case for the VAE
model. This indicates that the two models may
have different capabilities to capture important in-
formation in conversations.

As shown in Table 3, applying Reinforcement
Learning does not lead to higher scores on the
three automatic metrics. However, human evalu-
ation (Table 4) shows that the RL model creates
responses that are potentially better at mitigating
hate speech and are more diverse, which is con-
sistent with Li et al. (2016). There is a larger per-

formance difference with the Gab dataset, while
the effectiveness and the diversity of the responses
generated by the Seq2Seq model and the RL
model are quite similar on the Reddit dataset. One
possible reason is that the size of the training data
from Reddit (around 8k) is only 30% the size of
the training data from Gab. The inconsistency be-
tween the human evaluation results and the auto-
matic ones indicates the automatic evaluation met-
rics listed in Table 3 can hardly reflect the quality
of the generated responses. As mentioned in Sec-
tion 4, annotators tend to have strategies for inter-
vention. Therefore, generating the common parts
of the most popular strategies for all the testing in-
put can lead to high scores of these automatic eval-
uation metrics. For example, generating “Please
do not use derogatory language.” for all the test-
ing Gab data can achieve 4.2 on BLEU, 20.4 on
ROUGE, and 18.2 on METEOR. However, this re-
sponse is not considered as high-quality because
it is almost a universal response to all the hate
speech, regardless of the context and topic.

Surprisingly, the responses generated by the
VAE model have much worse diversity than the
other two methods according to human evaluation.
As indicated in Figure 4, the responses generated
by VAE tend to repeat the responses related to
some popular hate keyword. For example, “Use
of the r-word is unacceptable in our discourse as
it demeans and insults people with mental disabili-
ties.” and “Please do not use derogatory language
for intellectual disabilities.” are the generated re-
sponses for a large part of the Gab testing data.
According to Figure 3, insults towards disabilities
are the largest portion in the dataset, so we suspect
that the performance of the VAE model is affected
by the imbalanced keyword distribution.

The sampled results in Figure 4 show that the
Seq2Seq and the RL model can generate reason-
able responses for intervention. However, as is to
be expected with machine-generated text, in the
other human evaluation we conducted, where Me-
chanical Turk workers were also presented with



4763

sampled human-written responses alongside the
machine generated responses, the human-written
responses were chosen as the most effective and
diverse option a majority of the time (70% or
more) for both datasets. This indicates that there
is significant room for improvement while gener-
ating automated intervention responses.

In our experiments, we only utilized the text of
the posts, but more information is available and
can be utilized, such as the user information and
the title of a Reddit submission.

7 Conclusion

Towards the end goal of mitigating the problem of
online hate speech, we propose the task of gener-
ative hate speech intervention and introduce two
fully-labeled datasets collected from Reddit and
Gab, with crowd-sourced intervention responses.
The performance of the three generative models:
Seq2Seq, VAE, and RL, suggests ample oppor-
tunity for improvement. We intend to make our
dataset freely available to facilitate further explo-
ration of hate speech intervention and better mod-
els for generative intervention.

Acknowledgments

This research was supported by the Intel AI Fac-
ulty Research Grant. The authors are solely re-
sponsible for the contents of the paper and the
opinions expressed in this publication do not re-
flect those of the funding agencies.

References
Pinkesh Badjatiya, Shashank Gupta, Manish Gupta,

and Vasudeva Varma. 2017. Deep learning for hate
speech detection in tweets. In Proceedings of the
26th International Conference on World Wide Web
Companion, pages 759–760. International World
Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee.

Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. Meteor: An
automatic metric for mt evaluation with improved
correlation with human judgments. In Proceedings
of the acl workshop on intrinsic and extrinsic evalu-
ation measures for machine translation and/or sum-
marization, pages 65–72.

Heiner Bielefeldt, Frank La Rue, and Githu Muigai.
2011. Ohchr expert workshops on the prohibition
of incitement to national, racial or religious hatred.
Expert workshop on the Americas.

Samuel R. Bowman, Luke Vilnis, Oriol Vinyals, An-
drew M. Dai, Rafal Józefowicz, and Samy Ben-
gio. 2016. Generating sentences from a continuous

space. In Proceedings of the 20th SIGNLL Confer-
ence on Computational Natural Language Learning,
CoNLL 2016, Berlin, Germany, August 11-12, 2016,
pages 10–21.

Pete Burnap and Matthew L Williams. 2016. Us and
Them: Identifying Cyber Hate on Twitter across
Multiple Protected Characteristics. EPJ Data Sci-
ence, 5(1):11.

Pew Research Center. 2017. Online harassment 2017.

Despoina Chatzakou, Nicolas Kourtellis, Jeremy
Blackburn, Emiliano De Cristofaro, Gianluca
Stringhini, and Athena Vakali. 2017. Mean birds:
Detecting aggression and bullying on twitter. In
Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on web science con-
ference, pages 13–22. ACM.

Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merrienboer, Çaglar
Gülçehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Hol-
ger Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Learning
phrase representations using RNN encoder-decoder
for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing, EMNLP 2014, October
25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar, A meeting of SIGDAT,
a Special Interest Group of the ACL, pages 1724–
1734.

Thomas Davidson, Dana Warmsley, Michael Macy,
and Ingmar Weber. 2017. Automated hate speech
detection and the problem of offensive language.
In Eleventh International AAAI Conference on Web
and Social Media.

Mai ElSherief, Vivek Kulkarni, Dana Nguyen,
William Yang Wang, and Elizabeth Belding. 2018a.
Hate lingo: A target-based linguistic analysis of hate
speech in social media. In Twelfth International
AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media.

Mai ElSherief, Shirin Nilizadeh, Dana Nguyen, Gio-
vanni Vigna, and Elizabeth Belding. 2018b. Peer to
peer hate: Hate speech instigators and their targets.
In Twelfth International AAAI Conference on Web
and Social Media.

Antigoni Maria Founta, Constantinos Djouvas, De-
spoina Chatzakou, Ilias Leontiadis, Jeremy Black-
burn, Gianluca Stringhini, Athena Vakali, Michael
Sirivianos, and Nicolas Kourtellis. 2018. Large
scale crowdsourcing and characterization of twit-
ter abusive behavior. In Twelfth International AAAI
Conference on Web and Social Media.

Lei Gao, Alexis Kuppersmith, and Ruihong Huang.
2017. Recognizing explicit and implicit hate speech
using a weakly supervised two-path bootstrapping
approach. In Proceedings of the Eighth Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (Volume 1: Long Papers), volume 1, pages
774–782.



4764

Jennifer Golbeck, Zahra Ashktorab, Rashad O Banjo,
Alexandra Berlinger, Siddharth Bhagwan, Cody
Buntain, Paul Cheakalos, Alicia A Geller, Quint
Gergory, Rajesh Kumar Gnanasekaran, et al. 2017.
A large labeled corpus for online harassment re-
search. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Web
Science Conference, pages 229–233. ACM.

George W. Kennedy III, Andrew W. McCollough, Ed-
ward Dixon, Alexie Bastidas, John Ryan, Chris Loo,
and Saurav Sahay. 2017. Technology solutions to
combat online harassment. In Proceedings of the
first workshop on abusive language online, pages
73–77.

Yoon Kim. 2014. Convolutional neural networks for
sentence classification. In Proceedings of the 2014
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, EMNLP 2014, October 25-29,
2014, Doha, Qatar, A meeting of SIGDAT, a Special
Interest Group of the ACL, pages 1746–1751.

Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. 2013. Auto-
encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.6114.

Jiwei Li, Will Monroe, Alan Ritter, Dan Jurafsky,
Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. 2016. Deep rein-
forcement learning for dialogue generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2016,
Austin, Texas, USA, November 1-4, 2016, pages
1192–1202.

Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. Rouge: A package for auto-
matic evaluation of summaries. Text Summarization
Branches Out.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In Advances in neural information processing
systems, pages 3111–3119.

Chikashi Nobata, Joel Tetreault, Achint Thomas,
Yashar Mehdad, and Yi Chang. 2016. Abusive lan-
guage detection in online user content. In Proceed-
ings of the 25th international conference on world
wide web, pages 145–153. International World Wide
Web Conferences Steering Committee.

Abby Ohlheiser. 2016. Banned from twitter? this site
promises you can say whatever you want. The Wash-
ington Post.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 40th annual meeting on association for compu-
tational linguistics, pages 311–318. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Romain Paulus, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher.
2018. A deep reinforced model for abstractive sum-
marization. In 6th International Conference on
Learning Representations, ICLR 2018.

Jing Qian, Mai ElSherief, Elizabeth Belding, and
William Yang Wang. 2018a. Hierarchical cvae for
fine-grained hate speech classification. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 3550–3559.

Jing Qian, Mai ElSherief, Elizabeth Belding, and
William Yang Wang. 2018b. Leveraging intra-user
and inter-user representation learning for automated
hate speech detection. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers),
volume 2, pages 118–123.

Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Sumit Chopra, Michael Auli,
and Wojciech Zaremba. 2016. Sequence level train-
ing with recurrent neural networks. In 4th Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2016.

Anna Schmidt and Michael Wiegand. 2017. A survey
on hate speech detection using natural language pro-
cessing. In Proceedings of the Fifth International
Workshop on Natural Language Processing for So-
cial Media, pages 1–10.

Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. 2014.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural net-
works. In Advances in neural information process-
ing systems.

Cynthia Van Hee, Els Lefever, Ben Verhoeven, Julie
Mennes, Bart Desmet, Guy De Pauw, Walter Daele-
mans, and Véronique Hoste. 2015. Detection
and Fine-grained Classification of Cyberbullying
Events. In RANLP’15: International Conference
Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing,
pages 672–680.

William Warner and Julia Hirschberg. 2012. Detecting
Hate Speech on the World Wide Web. In ACL’12:
Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Language in
Social Media, pages 19–26. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Zeerak Waseem and Dirk Hovy. 2016. Hateful sym-
bols or hateful people? predictive features for hate
speech detection on twitter. In Proceedings of the
NAACL student research workshop, pages 88–93.

Haoti Zhong, Hao Li, Anna Cinzia Squiccia-
rini, Sarah Michele Rajtmajer, Christopher Grif-
fin, David J Miller, and Cornelia Caragea. 2016.
Content-Driven Detection of Cyberbullying on the
Instagram Social Network. In IJCAI’16: Proceed-
ings of the 25th International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, pages 3952–3958.


