

















































Investigating BERT’s Knowledge of Language: Five Analysis Methods with NPIs


Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 2877–2887,
Hong Kong, China, November 3–7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

2877

Investigating BERT’s Knowledge of Language:

Five Analysis Methods with NPIs

Alex Warstadt,
†,1,2

Yu Cao,
†,3

Ioana Grosu,
†,2

Wei Peng,
†,3

Hagen Blix,
†,1

Yining Nie,
†,1,2

Anna Alsop,
†,2

Shikha Bordia,
†,3

Haokun Liu,
†,3

Alicia Parrish,
†,2,3

Sheng-Fu Wang,
†,3

Jason Phang,
†,1,3

Anhad Mohananey,
†,1,3

Phu Mon Htut,
†,3

Paloma Jeretič,
†,1,2

and Samuel R. Bowman

New York University

†Equal contribution with roles given below; order assigned randomly. Correspondence: bowman@nyu.edu
1Framing and organizing the paper 2Creating diagnostic data 3Constructing and running experiments

Abstract

Though state-of-the-art sentence representa-
tion models can perform tasks requiring sig-
nificant knowledge of grammar, it is an open
question how best to evaluate their grammat-
ical knowledge. We explore five experimen-
tal methods inspired by prior work evaluat-
ing pretrained sentence representation models.
We use a single linguistic phenomenon, nega-
tive polarity item (NPI) licensing in English,
as a case study for our experiments. NPIs
like any are grammatical only if they appear
in a licensing environment like negation (Sue
doesn’t have any cats vs. *Sue has any cats).
This phenomenon is challenging because of
the variety of NPI licensing environments that
exist. We introduce an artificially generated
dataset that manipulates key features of NPI
licensing for the experiments. We find that
BERT has significant knowledge of these fea-
tures, but its success varies widely across dif-
ferent experimental methods. We conclude
that a variety of methods is necessary to reveal
all relevant aspects of a model’s grammatical
knowledge in a given domain.

1 Introduction

Recent sentence representation models have at-
tained state-of-the-art results on language under-
standing tasks, but standard methodology for eval-
uating their knowledge of grammar has been
slower to emerge. Recent work evaluating gram-
matical knowledge of sentence encoders like
BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) has employed a vari-
ety of methods. For example, Shi et al. (2016),
Ettinger et al. (2016), and Tenney et al. (2019)
use probing tasks to target a model’s knowledge
of particular grammatical features. Marvin and
Linzen (2018) and Wilcox et al. (2019) compare
language models’ probabilities for pairs of mini-
mally different sentences differing in grammatical

acceptability. Linzen et al. (2016), Warstadt et al.
(2018), and Kann et al. (2019) use Boolean accept-
ability judgments inspired by methodologies in
generative linguistics. However, we have not yet
seen any substantial direct comparison between
these methods, and it is not yet clear whether
they tend to yield similar conclusions about what
a given model knows.

We aim to better understand the trade-offs in
task choice by comparing different methods in-
spired by previous work to evaluate sentence un-
derstanding models in a single empirical domain.
We choose as our case study negative polarity
item (NPI) licensing in English, an empirically
rich phenomenon widely discussed in the theoret-
ical linguistics literature (Kadmon and Landman,
1993; Giannakidou, 1998; Chierchia, 2013, a.o.).
NPIs are words or expressions that can only appear
in environments that are, in some sense, negative
(Fauconnier, 1975; Ladusaw, 1979; Linebarger,
1980). For example, any is an NPI because it is
acceptable in negative sentences (1) but not posi-
tive sentences (2); negation thus serves as an NPI
licensor. NPIs furthermore cannot be outside the
syntactic scope of a licensor (3). Intuitively, a li-
censor’s scope is the syntactic domain in which an
NPI is licensed, and it varies from licensor to li-
censor. A sentence with an NPI present is only
acceptable in cases where (i) there is a licensor—
as in (1) but not (2)—and (ii) the NPI is within the
scope of that licensor—as in (1) but not (3).

(1) Mary hasn’t eaten any cookies.
(2) *Mary has eaten any cookies.
(3) *Any cookies haven’t been eaten.

We compare five experimental methods to test
BERT’s knowledge of NPI licensing. We con-
sider: (i) a Boolean acceptability classification
task to test BERT’s knowledge of sentences in



2878

isolation, (ii) an absolute minimal pair task eval-
uating whether the absolute Boolean outputs of
acceptability classifiers distinguish between pairs
of minimally different sentences that differ in ac-
ceptability and each isolate a single key property
of NPI licensing, (iii) a gradient minimal pair
task evaluating whether the gradient outputs of ac-
ceptability classifiers distinguish between minimal
pairs, (iv) a cloze test evaluating the grammatical
preferences of BERT’s masked language model-
ing head, and (v) a probing task directly evaluating
BERT’s representations for knowledge of specific
grammatical features relevant to NPI licensing.

We find that BERT does have knowledge of
all the key features necessary to predict the ac-
ceptability of NPI sentences in our experiments.
However, our five methods give meaningfully dif-
ferent results. While the gradient minimal pair
experiment and, to a lesser extent, the accept-
ability classification and cloze tests indicate that
BERT has systematic knowledge of all NPI licens-
ing environments and relevant grammatical fea-
tures, the absolute minimal pair and probing ex-
periments show that BERT’s knowledge is in fact
not equal across these domains. We conclude that
each method depicts different relevant aspects of a
model’s grammatical knowledge; comparing both
gradient and absolute measures of performance of
models gives a more complete picture. We recom-
mend that future studies use multiple complemen-
tary methods to evaluate model performance.

2 Related Work

Evaluating Sentence Encoders The success of
sentence encoders and broader neural network
methods in NLP has prompted significant interest
in understanding the linguistic knowledge encap-
sulated in these models.

A portion of related work focuses on Boolean
classification tasks of English sentences to evalu-
ate the grammatical knowledge encoded in these
models. The objective of this task is to predict
whether a single input sentence is acceptable or
not, abstracting away from gradience in accept-
ability judgments. Linzen et al. (2016) train classi-
fiers on this task using data with manipulated ver-
bal inflection to investigate whether LSTMs can
identify subject-verb agreement violations, and
therefore a (potentially long distance) syntactic
dependency. Warstadt et al. (2018) train models
on this task using the CoLA corpus of acceptabil-

ity judgments as a method for evaluating domain
general grammatical knowledge, and Warstadt and
Bowman (2019) analyze how these domain gen-
eral classifiers perform on specific linguistic phe-
nomena. Kann et al. (2019) use this task to evalu-
ate whether sentence encoders represent informa-
tion about verbal argument structure classes.

A related method employs minimal pairs, con-
sisting of two sentences that differ minimally in
their content and differ in linguistic acceptability,
to judge whether a model is sensitive to a single
grammatical feature. Marvin and Linzen (2018)
and Wilcox et al. (2019) apply this method to phe-
nomena such as subject-verb agreement, NPI li-
censing, and reflexive licensing.

Another branch of work uses probing tasks in
which the objective is to predict the value of a
particular linguistic feature given an input sen-
tence. Probing tasks have been used to investi-
gate whether sentence embeddings encode syntac-
tic and surface features such as tense and voice
(Shi et al., 2016), sentence length and word con-
tent (Adi et al., 2016), or syntactic depth and mor-
phological number (Conneau et al., 2018). Giu-
lianelli et al. (2018) use diagnostic classifiers to
track the propagation of information in RNN-
based language models. Ettinger et al. (2018) and
Dasgupta et al. (2018) use automatic data genera-
tion to evaluate compositional reasoning. Tenney
et al. (2019) introduce sub-sentence level probing
tasks derived from common NLP tasks.

Negative Polarity Items In the theoretical liter-
ature on NPIs, proposals have been made to unify
the properties of the diverse NPI licensing envi-
ronments. For example, a popular view states
that NPIs are licensed if and only if they occur in
downward entailing (DE) environments (Faucon-
nier, 1975; Ladusaw, 1979), i.e. an environment
that licences inferences from sets to subsets.1

For instance, (4) shows that the environment
under the scope of negation is DE. The property
been to Paris is a subset of been to France, be-
cause those who have been to Paris are a subset of
those who have been to France. While the infer-
ence from set to subset is normally invalid (4-b), it
is valid if the property is embedded under negation
(4-a). According to the DE theory of NPI licens-

1Other prominent theories of NPI licensing are based
on notions of non-veridicality (Giannakidou, 1994, 1998;
Zwarts, 1998), domain widening and emphasis (Kadmon and
Landman, 1993; Krifka, 1995; Chierchia, 2013), a.o.



2879

ing, this explains the contrast between (1) and (2).
(4) a. I haven’t been to France.

! I haven’t been to Paris. (DE)
b. I have been to France.

6! I have been to Paris. (not DE)
This view does not capture licensing in some

environments, for example questions. No theory is
yet accepted as identifying the unifying properties
of all NPI licensing environments.

Within computational linguistics, NPIs are used
as a testing ground for neural network mod-
els’ grammatical knowledge. Marvin and Linzen
(2018) find that LSTM LMs do not systematically
prefer sentences with licensed NPIs (1) over sen-
tencew with unlicensed NPIs (2). Jumelet and
Hupkes (2018) shows LSTM LMs find a rela-
tion between the licensing context and the nega-
tive polarity item, and appears to be aware of the
scope of this context. Wilcox et al. (2019) use
NPIs and filler-gap dependencies, as instances of
non-local grammatical dependencies, to probe the
effect of supervision with hierarchical structure.
They find that structurally-supervised models out-
perform state-of-the-art sequential LSTM models,
showing the importance of structure in learning
non-local dependencies like NPI licensing.

CoLA We use the Corpus of Linguistic Accept-
ability (CoLA; Warstadt et al., 2018) in our exper-
iments to train supervised acceptability classifiers.
CoLA is a dataset of over 10k syntactically diverse
example sentences from the linguistics literature
with Boolean acceptability labels. As is conven-
tional in theoretical linguistics, sentences are taken
to be acceptable if native speakers judge them to
be possible sentences in their language. Such sen-
tences are widely used in linguistics publications
to illustrate phenomena of interest. The examples
in CoLA are gathered from diverse sources and
represent a wide array of syntactic, semantic, and
morphological phenomena. As measured by the
GLUE benchmark (Wang et al., 2018), acceptabil-
ity classifiers trained on top of BERT and related
models reach near-human performance on CoLA.

3 Methods

We experiment with five approaches to the evalua-
tion of grammatical knowledge of sentence repre-
sentation models like BERT using our generated
NPI acceptability judgment dataset (§4). Each
data sample in the dataset contains a sentence, a

Boolean label which indicates whether the sen-
tence is grammatically acceptable or not, and three
Boolean meta-data variables (licensor, NPI, and
scope; Table 2). We evaluate four model types:
BERT-large, BERT with fine-tuning on one of two
tasks, and a simple bag-of-words baseline using
GloVe word embeddings (Pennington et al., 2014).

Boolean Acceptability We test the model’s abil-
ity to judge the grammatical acceptability of the
sentences in the NPI dataset. Following standards
in linguistics, sentences for this task are assumed
to be either totally acceptable or totally unaccept-
able. We fine-tune the sentence representation
models to perform these Boolean judgments. For
BERT-based sentence representation models, we
add a classifier on top of the [CLS] embedding
of the last layer. For BoW, we use a max pool-
ing layer followed by an MLP classifier. The per-
formance of the models is measured as Matthews
Correlation Coefficient (MCC; Matthews, 1975)2

between the predicted label and the gold label.

Absolute Minimal Pair We conduct a minimal
pair experiment to analyze Boolean acceptability
classifiers on minimally different sentences. Two
sentences within paradigm form a minimal pair if
they differ in one feature (licensor, NPI, or scope),
but have different acceptability. For example, the
sentences in (1) and (2) differ in whether an NPI
licensor (negation) is present. We evaluate the
models trained on acceptability judgments with
the minimal pairs. In absolute minimal pair eval-
uation, the models needs to correctly classify both
sentences in the pair to be counted as correct.

Gradient Minimal Pair The gradient minimal
pair evaluation is a more lenient version of ab-
solute minimal pair evaluation: Here, we count a
pair as correctly classified as long as the Boolean
classifier’s output for the acceptable class is higher
for the acceptable sentence than for the unaccept-
able sentence. In other words, the classifier need
only predict the acceptable sentence has the higher
likelihood of being acceptable, but need not cor-
rectly predict that it is acceptable.

Cloze Test In the cloze test, a standard sentence-
completion task, we use the masked language
modeling (MLM) component in BERT (Devlin
et al., 2018) and evaluate whether it assigns a

2MCC gives the correlation of two Boolean distributions
between -1 and 1. A score of 0 is given to any two unrelated
distributions, without requiring balanced class sizes.



2880

higher probability to the acceptable sentence in a
minimal pair, following Linzen et al. (2016). An
MLM predicts the probability of a single masked
token based on the rest of the sentence. The min-
imal pairs tested are a subset of those in the abso-
lute and gradient minimal pair experiments, where
both sentences must be equal in length and differ
in only one token. This differing token is replaced
with [MASK], and the minimal pair is taken to be
classified correctly if the MLM assigns a higher
probability to the token from the acceptable sen-
tence. In contrast with the other minimal pair
experiments, this experiment is entirely unsuper-
vised, using BERT’s native MLM functionality.

Feature Probing We use probing classifiers as
a more fine-grained approach to the identification
of grammatical variables. We freeze the sentence
encoders both with and without fine-tuning from
the acceptability judgment experiments and train
lightweight classifiers on top of them to predict
meta-data labels corresponding to the key proper-
ties a model must learn in order to judge the ac-
ceptability of NPI sentences. These properties are
whether a licensor is present, whether an NPI is
present, and whether the NPI (or a similar item) is
in the syntactic scope of the licensor (or a similar
item). Crucially, each individual meta-data label
by itself does not decide acceptability (i.e., these
probing experiments test a different but related set
of knowledge from acceptability experiments).

4 Data

In order to probe BERT’s performance on sen-
tences involving NPIs, we generate a set of sen-
tences and acceptability labels for the experiments
in this paper. We use generated data so that we
can assess minimal pairs, and so that there are suf-
ficient unacceptable sentences. We release all our
data3 and our generation code and vocabulary.4

Licensing Features We create a controlled set
of 136,000 English sentences using an automated
sentence generation procedure, inspired in large
part by previous work by Ettinger et al. (2016,
2018), Marvin and Linzen (2018), Dasgupta et al.
(2018), and Kann et al. (2019). The set contains
nine NPI licensing environments (Table 1), and

3https://alexwarstadt.files.wordpress.
com/2019/08/npi_lincensing_data.zip (Click-
ing on the link will cause a file to download.)

4https://github.com/alexwarstadt/data_
generation

two NPIs (any, ever). All but one licensor-NPI
pair follows a 2⇥2⇥2 paradigm, which manipu-
lates three boolean NPI licensing features: licen-
sor presence, NPI presence, and the occurrence of
an NPI within a licensor’s scope. Each 2⇥2⇥2
paradigm forms 5 minimal pairs. Table 2 shows
an example paradigm.

The Licensor feature indicates whether an NPI
licensor is present in the sentence. For many en-
vironments, there are multiple lexical items that
serve as a licensor (e.g., the adverbs environ-
ment contains rarely, hardly, seldom, barely, and
scarcely as NPI licensors). When the licensor is
not present, we substitute it with a licensor re-
placement that has a similar syntactic distribution
but does not license NPIs, again using multiple ap-
propriate lexical items as replacements. For exam-
ple, licensor replacements for quantifier licensors
like every include quantifiers like some, many, and
more than three that do not license NPIs.

The NPI feature indicates whether an NPI is in
the sentence or if it is substituted by an NPI re-
placement with similar structural distribution. For
example, NPI replacements for ever include other
adverbs such as often, sometimes, and certainly.

The Scope feature indicates whether the
NPI/NPI replacement is within the scope of the
licensor/licensor replacement. As illustrated ear-
lier in (3), a sentence containing an NPI is only
acceptable when the NPI falls within the scope of
the licensor. What constitutes the scope of a licen-
sor is highly dependent on the type of licensor.

The exception to the 2⇥2⇥2 paradigm is the
Simple Questions licensing condition, with a re-
duced 2⇥2 paradigm. It lacks a scope manipu-
lation because the question takes scope over the
entire clause, and in Simple Questions the clause
is the whole sentence. The paradigm for Simple
Questions is given in Table 3 in the Appendix; it
forms only 2 minimal pairs.

Data Generation To generate sentences, we
create sentence templates for each condition.
Templates follow the general structure illustrated
in example (5), in which the part-of-speech (auxil-
iary verb, determiner, noun, verb), as well as the
instance number is specified. For example, N2
is the second instance of a noun in the template.
We use these labels here for illustrative purposes;
in reality, the templates include more fine-grained
properties, such as verb tense and noun number.



2881

Environment Abbrev. Example

Adverbs ADV The guests who rarely love any actors had left libraries.
Conditionals COND If the pedestrian passes any schools, the senator will talk to the adults.
Determiner negation D-NEG Just as the waitress said, no customers thought that any dancers bought the dish.
Sentential negation S-NEG These drivers have not thought that any customers have lied.
Only ONLY From what the cashier heard, only the children have known any dancers.
Quantifiers QNT Every actress who was talking about any high schools criticizes the children.
Questions QUES The boys wonder whether the doctors went to any art galleries.
Simple questions SMP-Q Has the guy worked with any teenagers?
Superlatives SUP The teenagers approach the nicest actress that any customers had criticized.

Table 1: Examples of each of the NPI licensing environments generated. The licensor is in bold, and the NPI (here
any) is in italics. All examples show cases where the NPI is present (NPI=1), the licensor is present (Licensor=1),
and the NPI is in the scope of the licensor (Scope=1); all are acceptable to native speakers of English.

Licensor NPI Scope Sentence

1 1 1 Those boys wonder whether [the doctors ever went to an art gallery.]
1 1 0 *Those boys ever wonder whether [the doctors went to an art gallery.]
1 0 1 Those boys wonder whether [the doctors often went to an art gallery.]
1 0 0 Those boys often wonder whether [the doctors went to an art gallery.]
0 1 1 *Those boys say that [the doctors ever went to an art gallery.]
0 1 0 *Those boys ever say that [the doctors went to an art gallery.]
0 0 1 Those boys say that [the doctors often went to an art gallery.]
0 0 0 Those boys often say that [the doctors went to an art gallery.]

Table 2: Example 2⇥2⇥2 paradigm using the Questions environment. The licensor (whether) or licensor replace-
ment (that) is in bold. The NPI (ever) or NPI replacement (often) is in italics. When licensor=1, the licensor
is present rather than its replacement word. When NPI=1, the NPI is present rather than its replacement. The
scope of the licensor/licensor replacement is shown in square brackets (brackets, italicization, and boldface are not
present in the actual data). When scope=1, the NPI/NPI replacement is within the scope of the licensor/licensor
replacement. Unacceptable sentences are marked with *. The five minimal pairs are connected by arrows that
point from the unacceptable to the acceptable sentence.

Figure 1: Results from the acceptability judgment experiment in MCC. The columns indicate evaluation tests, and
the rows fine-tuning settings.

(5) Aux1
Has

D1
the

N1
guy

V1
seen

any
any

N2
waitresses

?
?

Given the specifications encoded in the sentence
templates, words were sampled from a vocabulary
of over 1000 lexical items annotated with 30 syn-
tactic, morphological, and semantic features. The
annotated features allow us to encode selectional
requirements of lexical items, e.g., what types of
nouns a verb can combine with. This avoids bla-
tantly implausible sentences.

For each environment, the training set contains

10K sentences, and the dev and test sets con-
tain 1K sentences each. Sentences from the same
paradigm are always in the same set.

In addition to our data set, we also test BERT on
a set of 104 handcrafted sentences from the NPI
sub-experiment in Wilcox et al. (2019), who use
a paradigm that partially overlaps with ours, but
has an additional condition where the NPI linearly
follows its licensor while not being in the scope of
the licensor. This is included as an additional test
set for evaluating acceptability classifiers in (6).



2882

Data validation We use Amazon Mechanical
Turk (MTurk) to validate a subset of our data to
assure that the generated sentences contrast in ac-
ceptability as intended. We randomly sample 500
sentences in approximately equal amounts from
each environment, NPI and paradigm. Each sen-
tence is rated on a Likert scale of 1-6, with 1 be-
ing “the sentence is not possible in English” and 6
being “the sentence is possible in English” by 20
unique participants in the US who self-identified
as native English speakers. Participants are com-
pensated $0.25 per HIT and are often able to com-
plete a HIT of 5 sentences in just under 1 minute.

Table 4 in the Appendix shows the participants’
scores transformed into a Boolean judgment of 0
(unacceptable, score  3) or 1 (acceptable, score
� 4) and presented as the percentage of ‘accept-
able’ ratings assigned to the sentences in each of
the NPI-licensing environments. Across all NPI-
licensing environments, 81.3% of the sentences la-
belled acceptable are assigned an acceptable rating
by the MTurk raters, and 85.2% of sentences la-
beled unacceptable are assigned an unacceptable
rating. This gives an overall agreement rating of
82.8%5. A Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Wilcoxon,
1945) shows that within each environment and
for each NPI, the acceptable sentences are more
often rated as acceptable by our MTurk valida-
tors than the unacceptable sentences (all p-values
< 0.001). This contrast holds considering both
the raw Likert-scale responses and the responses
transformed to a Boolean judgment.

5 Experimental Settings

We conduct our experiments with the jiant 0.9 6

(Wang et al., 2019) multitask learning and transfer
learning toolkit, the AllenNLP platform (Gardner
et al., 2018), and the BERT implementation from
HuggingFace.7

Models We study the following sentence under-
standing models: (i) GloVe BoW: a bag-of-words
baseline obtained by max-pooling of 840B tokens
300-dimensional GloVe word embeddings (Pen-

5We observe that sentences with ‘any’ get over-accepted.
Overall agreement for sentences with ‘ever’ is 87.3%, while
agreement for those with ‘any’ is 78.3%. We believe this is
due to a free-choice interpretation of ‘any’ occurring more
easily than is often reported in the semantics literature.

6https://github.com/nyu-mll/jiant/
tree/blimp-and-npi/scripts/bert_npi

7https://github.com/huggingface/
pytorch-pretrained-BERT

nington et al., 2014) and (ii) BERT (Devlin et al.,
2018): we use the cased version of BERT-large
model, which works the best for our tasks in pi-
lot experiments. In addition, since recent work
(Liu et al., 2019; Stickland and Murray, 2019) has
shown that intermediate training on related tasks
can meaningfully impact BERT’s performance on
downstream tasks, we also explore two additional
BERT-based models—(iii) BERT!MNLI: BERT
fine-tuned on the Multi-Genre Natural Language
Inference corpus (Williams et al., 2018), mo-
tivated both by prior work on pretraining sen-
tence encoders on MNLI (Conneau et al., 2017)
as well as work showing significant improve-
ments to BERT on downstream semantic tasks
(Phang et al., 2018; Bowman et al., 2018) (iv)
BERT!CCG: BERT fine-tuned on Combinatory
Categorial Grammar Bank corpus (Hockenmaier
and Steedman, 2007), motivated by Wilcox et al.’s
(2019) finding that structural supervision may im-
prove a LSTM-based sentence encoders knowl-
edge on non-local syntactic dependencies.

Training-Evaluation Configurations We are
interested in whether sentence representation
models learn NPI licensing as a unified property.
Can the models generalize from trained environ-
ments to previously unseen environments? To an-
swer these questions, for each NPI environment,
we extensively test the performance of the models
in the following configurations: (i) CoLA: train-
ing on CoLA, evaluating on the environment. (ii)
1 NPI: training and evaluating on the same NPI
environment. (iii) Avg Other NPI: training inde-
pendently on every NPI environment except one,
averaged over the evaluation results on that envi-
ronment. (iv) All-but-1 NPI: training on all envi-
ronments except for one environment, evaluating
on that environment. (v) All NPI: training on all
environments, evaluating on the environment.

6 Results

Acceptability Judgments The results in Fig. 1
show that BERT outperforms the BoW baseline on
all test data with all fine-tuning settings. Within
each BERT variant, MCC reaches 1.0 on all test
data in the 1 NPI setting. In the All-but-1 NPI
training-evaluation configuration, the performance
on all NPI environments for BERT drops. While
the MCC value on environments like condition-
als and sentential negation remains above 0.9, on
the simple question environment it drops to 0.58.



2883

Figure 2: Results from the minimal pair test. The top section shows the average accuracy for detecting the
presence of the NPI, the middle section shows average accuracy for detecting the presence of the licensor, and the
bottom shows average accuracy of minimal pair contrasts that differ in whether the NPI is in scope of the licensor.
Within each section, we show performance of GloVe BoW and BERT models under both absolute preference
and gradient preference evaluation methods. The rows represent the training-evaluation configuration, while the
columns represent different licensing environments.

Compared with NPI data fine-tuning, CoLA fine-
tuning results in BERT’s lower performance on
most of the NPI environments but better perfor-
mance on data from Wilcox et al. (2019).

In comparing the three BERT variants (see full
results in Figure 5 in the Appendix), the Avg
Other NPI shows that on 7 out of 9 NPI environ-
ments, plain BERT outperforms BERT!MNLI
and BERT!CCG. Even in the remaining two en-
vironments, plain BERT yields about as good per-
formance as BERT!MNLI and BERT!CCG, in-
dicating that MNLI and CCG fine-tuning brings no

obvious gain to acceptability judgments.

Absolute and Gradient Minimal Pairs The
results (Fig. 2) show that models’ performance
hinges on how minimal pairs differ. When tested
on minimal pairs differing by the presence of an
NPI, BoW and plain BERT obtain (nearly) per-
fect accuracy on both absolute and gradient mea-
sures across all settings. For minimal pairs differ-
ing by licensor and scope, BERT again achieves
near perfect performance on the gradient measure,
while BoW does not. On the absolute measure,
both BERT and BoW perform worse. Overall, it



2884

shows that absolute judgment is more challenging
when targeting licensor, which involves a larger
pool of lexical items and syntactic configurations
than NPIs; and scope, which requires nontrivial
syntactic knowledge about NPI licensing.

As in the acceptability experiment, we find that
intermediate fine-tuning on MNLI and CCG does
not improve performance (see full results in Fig-
ures 6-8 in Appendix).

Figure 3: Results of BERT MLM performance in the
cloze test. The top section shows the average accuracy
for detecting the presence of the NPI; the bottom sec-
tion show the accuracy for detecting the presence of
the licensor. The columns represent different licensing
environments

Cloze Test The results (Fig. 3) show that even
without supervision on NPI data, the BERT MLM
can distinguish between acceptable and unaccept-
able sentences in the NPI domain. Performance
is highly dependent on the NPI-licensing envi-
ronment and type of minimal pair. Accuracy for
detecting NPI presence falls between 0.76 and
0.93 for all environments. Accuracy for detect-
ing licensor presence is much more variable, with
the BERT MLM achieving especially high perfor-
mance in conditional, sentential negation, and only
environments; and low performance in quantifier
and superlative environments.

Feature Probing Results (Fig. 4) show that
plain BERT outperforms the BoW baseline in de-
tecting whether NPI is in the scope of the licensor
(henceforth ‘scope detection’). As expected, BoW
is nearly perfect in detecting presence of NPI and
licensor, as these tasks do not require knowledge
of syntax or word order. Consistent with results
from previous experiments, detecting the presence
of a licensor is slightly more challenging for mod-
els fine-tuned with CoLA or NPI data. However,
the overall lower performances in scope detection
compared with detecting the presence of the licen-
sor is not found in the minimal-pair experiments.

CoLA fine-tuning improves the performance
for BERT, especially for detecting NPI presence.
Fine-tuning on NPI data improves scope detection.
Inspection of environment-specific results shows
that models struggle when the superlative, quan-
tifiers, and adverb environments are the held-out
test sets in the All-but-1 NPI fine-tuning setting.

Different from other experiments, BERT
and BERT!MNLI have comparable perfor-
mance across many settings and tasks, beating
BERT!CCG especially in scope detection (see
full results in Figure 9 in the Appendix).

7 Discussion

We find that BERT systematically represents all
features relevant to NPI licensing across most in-
dividual licensing environments, according to cer-
tain evaluation methods. However, these results
vary widely across the different methods we com-
pare. In particular, BERT performs nearly per-
fectly on the gradient minimal pairs task across
all of minimal pair configurations and nearly all
licensing environments. Based on this method
alone, we might conclude that BERT’s knowledge
of this domain is near perfect. However, the other
methods show a more nuanced picture.

BERT’s knowledge of which expressions are
NPIs and NPI licensors is generally stronger than
its knowledge of the licensors’ scope. This is es-
pecially apparent from the probing results (Fig. 4).
BERT without acceptability fine-tuning performs
close to ceiling on detecting the presence of a
licensor, but is inconsistent at scope detection.
Tellingly, the BoW baseline is also able to perform
at ceiling on telling whether a licensor is present.
For BoW to succeed at this task, the GloVe em-
beddings for NPI-licensors must share some com-
mon property, most likely the fact that licensors
co-occur with NPIs. It is possible that BERT is
able to succeed using a similar strategy. By con-
trast, identifying whether an NPI is in the scope
of a licensor requires at the very least word order
information and not just co-occurrences.

The contrast in BERT’s performance on the gra-
dient and absolute tasks tells us that these evalu-
ations reveal different aspects of BERT’s knowl-
edge. The gradient task is strictly easier than the
absolute task. On the one hand, BERT’s high per-
formance on the gradient task reveals the presence
of systematic knowledge in the NPI domain. On
the other hand, due to ceiling effects, the gradi-



2885

Figure 4: Results of probing classification on NPI presence, licensor presence, and whether the NPI is in the scope
of the licensor (scope detection), shown in MCC. Letters on top of bars refer to NPI environments: A=ADV,
B=COND, C=D-NEG, D=S-NEG, E=ONLY, F=QNT, G=QUES, H=SMP-Q, I=SUP.

ent task fails to reveal actual differences between
NPI-licensing environments that we clearly ob-
serve based on absolute, cloze, and probing tasks.

While BERT has systematic knowledge of ac-
ceptability contrasts, this knowledge varies across
different licensing environments and is not cat-
egorical. Generative models of syntax (Chom-
sky, 1965, 1981, 1995) model human knowledge
of natural language as categorical: In that sense
BERT fails at attaining human performance. How-
ever, some have argued that acceptability is in-
herently gradient (Lau et al., 2017), and results
from the human validation study on our generated
dataset show evidence of gradience in the accept-
ability of sentences in our dataset.

Supplementing BERT with additional pretrain-
ing on CCG and MNLI does not improve per-
formance, and even lowers performance in some
cases. While results from Phang et al. (2018)
lead us to hypothesize that intermediate pretrain-
ing might help, this is not what we observe on our
data. This result is in direct contrast with the re-
sults from Wilcox et al. (2019), who find that syn-
tactic pretraining does improve performance in the
NPI domain. This difference in findings is likely
due to differences in models and training proce-
dure, as their model is an RNN jointly trained
on language modeling and parsing over the much
smaller Penn Treebank (Marcus et al., 1993).

Future studies would benefit from employing
a variety of different methodologies for assessing
model performance withing a specified domain. In
particular, a result showing generally good perfor-
mance for a model should be regarded as possi-
bly hiding actual differences in performance that
a different task would reveal. Similarly, generally

poor performance for a model does not necessar-
ily mean that the model does not have systematic
knowledge in a given domain; it may be that an
easier task would reveal systematicity.

8 Conclusion

We have shown that within a well-defined domain
of English grammar, evaluation of sentence en-
coders using different tasks will reveal different
aspects of the encoder’s knowledge in that do-
main. By considering results from several eval-
uation methods, we demonstrate that BERT has
systematic knowledge of NPI licensing. However,
this knowledge is unequal across the different fea-
tures relevant to this phenomenon, and does not
reflect the Boolean effect that these features have
on acceptability.

Acknowledgments

This project was a joint effort by the participants in
the Spring 2019 NYU Linguistics seminar course
Linguistic Knowledge in Reusable Sentence En-
coders. We are grateful to the department for mak-
ing this seminar possible.

This material is based upon work supported by
the National Science Foundation under Grant No.
1850208. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions
or recommendations expressed in this material are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily re-
flect the views of the National Science Founda-
tion. This project has also benefited from finan-
cial support to SB by Samsung Research under
the project Improving Deep Learning using Latent
Structure and from the donation of a Titan V GPU
by NVIDIA Corporation.



2886

References

Yossi Adi, Einat Kermany, Yonatan Belinkov, Ofer
Lavi, and Yoav Goldberg. 2016. Fine-grained anal-
ysis of sentence embeddings using auxiliary predic-
tion tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.04207.

Samuel R. Bowman, Ellie Pavlick, Edouard Grave,
Benjamin Van Durme, Alex Wang, Jan Hula, Patrick
Xia, Raghavendra Pappagari, R. Thomas McCoy,
Roma Patel, Najoung Kim, Ian Tenney, Yinghui
Huang, Katherin Yu, Shuning Jin, and Berlin Chen.
2018. Looking for elmo’s friends: Sentence-level
pretraining beyond language modeling. CoRR,
abs/1812.10860.

Gennaro Chierchia. 2013. Logic in grammar: Polar-
ity, free choice, and intervention. Oxford University
Press.

Noam Chomsky. 1965. Aspects of the Theory of Syn-
tax. MIT Press.

Noam Chomsky. 1981. Lectures on Government and
Binding. Number 9 in Studies in Generative Gram-
mar. Foris Publications, Dordrecht, Holland ; Cin-
naminson, [N.J.].

Noam Chomsky. 1995. The Minimalist Program.
Number 28 in Current Studies in Linguistics. The
MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Alexis Conneau, Douwe Kiela, Holger Schwenk,
Loı̈c Barrault, and Antoine Bordes. 2017. Su-
pervised learning of universal sentence representa-
tions from natural language inference data. CoRR,
abs/1705.02364.

Alexis Conneau, German Kruszewski, Guillaume
Lample, Loı̈c Barrault, and Marco Baroni. 2018.
What you can cram into a single vector: Probing
sentence embeddings for linguistic properties. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1805.01070.

Ishita Dasgupta, Demi Guo, Andreas Stuhlmüller,
Samuel J Gershman, and Noah D Goodman. 2018.
Evaluating compositionality in sentence embed-
dings. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.04302.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. arXiv preprint 1810.04805.

Allison Ettinger, Ahmed Elgohary, and Philip Resnik.
2016. Probing for semantic evidence of composi-
tion by means of simple classification tasks. In Pro-
ceedings of the First Workshop on Evaluating Vector
Space Representations for NLP, pages 134–139. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Allyson Ettinger, Ahmed Elgohary, Colin Phillips, and
Philip Resnik. 2018. Assessing composition in sen-
tence vector representations. In Proceedings of
the 27th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, pages 1790–1801. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Gilles Fauconnier. 1975. Polarity and the scale princi-
ple. Proceedings of the Chicago Linguistics Society,
11:188–199.

Matt Gardner, Joel Grus, Mark Neumann, Oyvind
Tafjord, Pradeep Dasigi, Nelson F Liu, Matthew Pe-
ters, Michael Schmitz, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2018.
Allennlp: A deep semantic natural language pro-
cessing platform. In Proceedings of Workshop for
NLP Open Source Software (NLP-OSS), pages 1–6.

Anastasia Giannakidou. 1994. The semantic licensing
of NPIs and the Modern Greek subjunctive. Lan-
guage and Cognition, 4:55–68.

Anastasia Giannakidou. 1998. Polarity sensitivity as
(non) veridical dependency, volume 23. John Ben-
jamins Publishing.

Mario Giulianelli, Jack Harding, Florian Mohnert,
Dieuwke Hupkes, and Willem H. Zuidema. 2018.
Under the hood: Using diagnostic classifiers to in-
vestigate and improve how language models track
agreement information. CoRR, abs/1808.08079.

Julia Hockenmaier and Mark Steedman. 2007. CCG-
bank: A corpus of CCG derivations and dependency
structures extracted from the Penn Treebank. Com-
putational Linguistics, 33(3):355–396.

Jaap Jumelet and Dieuwke Hupkes. 2018. Do language
models understand anything? on the ability of lstms
to understand negative polarity items. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1808.10627.

Nirit Kadmon and Fred Landman. 1993. Any. Linguis-
tics and Philosophy, 16(4):353–422.

Katharina Kann, Alex Warstadt, and Adina Williams.
2019. Verb argument structure alternations in word
and sentence embeddings. In Proceedings of the So-
ciety for Computation in Linguistics (SCiL), pages
287–297.

Manfred Krifka. 1995. The semantics and pragmatics
of polarity items. Linguistic Analysis, 25(3-4):209–
257.

William Ladusaw. 1979. Negative polarity items as in-
herent scope relations. Unpublished Ph.D. Disser-
tation, University of Texas at Austin.

Jey Han Lau, Alexander Clark, and Shalom Lappin.
2017. Grammaticality, acceptability, and probabil-
ity: A probabilistic view of linguistic knowledge.
Cognitive Science, 41(5):1202–1241.

Marcia Christine Linebarger. 1980. The grammar of
negative polarity. Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology.

Tal Linzen, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Yoav Goldberg.
2016. Assessing the ability of lstms to learn syntax-
sensitive dependencies. Transactions of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, 4:521–535.



2887

Xiaodong Liu, Pengcheng He, Weizhu Chen, and
Jianfeng Gao. 2019. Multi-task deep neural net-
works for natural language understanding. CoRR,
abs/1901.11504.

Mitchell Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated
corpus of english: The penn treebank.

Rebecca Marvin and Tal Linzen. 2018. Targeted syn-
tactic evaluation of language models. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 1192–1202.

Brian W Matthews. 1975. Comparison of the pre-
dicted and observed secondary structure of t4 phage
lysozyme. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-
Protein Structure, 405(2):442–451.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christo-
pher D. Manning. 2014. GloVe: Global vectors for
word representation. In Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1532–
1543.

Jason Phang, Thibault Févry, and Samuel R. Bowman.
2018. Sentence encoders on STILTs: Supplemen-
tary training on intermediate labeled-data tasks. In
arXiv preprint.

Xing Shi, Inkit Padhi, and Kevin Knight. 2016. Does
string-based neural mt learn source syntax? In Pro-
ceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1526–
1534.

Asa Cooper Stickland and Iain Murray. 2019. BERT
and PALs: Projected attention layers for effi-
cient adaptation in multi-task learning. CoRR,
abs/1902.02671.

Ian Tenney, Patrick Xia, Berlin Chen, Alex Wang,
Adam Poliak, R Thomas McCoy, Najoung Kim,
Benjamin Van Durme, Sam Bowman, Dipanjan Das,
and Ellie Pavlick. 2019. What do you learn from
context? Probing for sentence structure in contextu-
alized word representations. In International Con-
ference on Learning Representations.

Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Fe-
lix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel Bowman. 2018.
GLUE: A multi-task benchmark and analysis plat-
form for natural language understanding. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop Black-
boxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Net-
works for NLP, pages 353–355.

Alex Wang, Ian F. Tenney, Yada Pruksachatkun,
Katherin Yu, Jan Hula, Patrick Xia, Raghu Pappa-
gari, Shuning Jin, R. Thomas McCoy, Roma Pa-
tel, Yinghui Huang, Jason Phang, Edouard Grave,
Najoung Kim, Phu Mon Htut, Thibault F’evry,
Berlin Chen, Nikita Nangia, Haokun Liu, An-
had Mohananey, Shikha Bordia, Ellie Pavlick, and
Samuel R. Bowman. 2019. jiant 0.9: A software
toolkit for research on general-purpose text under-
standing models. http://jiant.info/.

Alex Warstadt and Samuel R Bowman. 2019. Gram-
matical analysis of pretrained sentence encoders
with acceptability judgments. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1901.03438.

Alex Warstadt, Amanpreet Singh, and Samuel R. Bow-
man. 2018. Neural network acceptability judg-
ments. arXiv preprint 1805.12471.

Ethan Wilcox, Peng Qian, Richard Futrell, Miguel
Ballesteros, and Roger Levy. 2019. Structural su-
pervision improves learning of non-local grammat-
ical dependencies. In Proceedings of the 2019 An-
nual Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics.

Frank Wilcoxon. 1945. Individual comparisons by
ranking methods. Biometrics Bulletin, 1(6):80–83.

Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman.
2018. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sen-
tence understanding through inference. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
(Long Papers), pages 1112–1122.

Frans Zwarts. 1998. Three types of polarity. In Plural-
ity and Quantification, pages 177–238. Springer.


