



















































Investigating Sports Commentator Bias within a Large Corpus of American Football Broadcasts


Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 6355–6361,
Hong Kong, China, November 3–7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

6355

Investigating Sports Commentator Bias within a Large Corpus of
American Football Broadcasts

Jack MerulloF♠ Luke YehF♠ Abram Handler♠
Alvin Grissom II♣ Brendan O’Connor♠ Mohit Iyyer♠

University of Massachusetts Amherst♠ Ursinus College♣

{jmerullo,lyeh,ahandler,miyyer,brenocon}@umass.edu
agrissom@ursinus.edu

Abstract

Sports broadcasters inject drama into play-
by-play commentary by building team and
player narratives through subjective analyses
and anecdotes. Prior studies based on small
datasets and manual coding show that such
theatrics evince commentator bias in sports
broadcasts. To examine this phenomenon, we
assemble FOOTBALL, which contains 1,455
broadcast transcripts from American football
games across six decades that are automat-
ically annotated with 250K player mentions
and linked with racial metadata. We identify
major confounding factors for researchers ex-
amining racial bias in FOOTBALL, and perform
a computational analysis that supports conclu-
sions from prior social science studies.

1 Introduction

Sports broadcasts are major events in contempo-
rary popular culture: televised American football
(henceforth “football”) games regularly draw tens
of millions of viewers (Palotta, 2019). Such broad-
casts feature live sports commentators who weave
the game’s mechanical details into a broader, more
subjective narrative. Previous work suggests that
this form of storytelling exhibits racial bias: non-
white players are less frequently praised for good
plays (Rainville and McCormick, 1977), while
white players are more often credited with “in-
telligence” (Bruce, 2004; Billings, 2004). How-
ever, such prior scholarship forms conclusions
from small datasets1 and subjective manual cod-
ing of race-specific language.

We revisit this prior work using large-scale
computational analysis. From YouTube, we col-
lect broadcast football transcripts and identify
mentions of players, which we link to metadata

FAuthors contributed equally.
1 Rainville and McCormick (1977), for example, study

only 16 games.

Player Race Mention text

Baker
Mayfield

white “Mayfield the ultimate com-
petitor he’s tough he’s scrappy”

Jesse
James

white “this is a guy . . . does nothing
but work brings his lunch pail”

Manny
Lawson

nonwhite “good specs for that defensive
end freakish athletic ability”

B.J.
Daniels

nonwhite “that otherworldly athleticism
he has saw it with Michael
Vick”

Table 1: Example mentions from FOOTBALL that high-
light racial bias in commentator sentiment patterns.

about each player’s race and position. Our re-
sulting FOOTBALL dataset contains over 1,400
games spanning six decades, automatically an-
notated with ∼250K player mentions (Table 1).
Analysis of FOOTBALL identifies two confounding
factors for research on racial bias: (1) the racial
composition of many positions is very skewed
(e.g., only ∼5% of running backs are white), and
(2) many mentions of players describe only their
actions on the field (not player attributes). We
experiment with an additive log-linear model for
teasing apart these confounds. We also confirm
prior social science studies on racial bias in nam-
ing patterns and sentiment. Finally, we publicly
release FOOTBALL,2 the first large-scale sports
commentary corpus annotated with player race, to
spur further research into characterizing racial bias
in mass media.

2 Collecting the FOOTBALL dataset

We collect transcripts of 1,455 full game broad-
casts from the U.S. NFL and National Collegiate
Athletic Association (NCAA) recorded between
1960 and 2019. Next, we identify and link men-
tions of players within these transcripts to infor-

2 http://github.com/jmerullo/football

http://github.com/jmerullo/football


6356

mation about their race (white or nonwhite) and
position (e.g., quarterback). In total, FOOTBALL
contains 267,778 mentions of 4,668 unique play-
ers, 65.7% of whom are nonwhite.3 We now de-
scribe each stage of our data collection process.

2.1 Processing broadcast transcripts

We collect broadcast transcripts by downloading
YouTube videos posted by nonprofessional, indi-
vidual users identified by querying YouTube for
football archival channels.4 YouTube automati-
cally captions many videos, allowing us to scrape
caption transcripts from 601 NFL games and 854
NCAA games. We next identify the teams play-
ing and game’s year by searching for exact string
matches in the video title and manually labeling
any videos with underspecified titles.

After downloading videos, we tokenize tran-
scripts using spaCy.5 As part-of-speech tags pre-
dicted by spaCy are unreliable on our transcript
text, we tag FOOTBALL using the ARK TweetNLP
POS tagger (Owoputi et al., 2013), which is more
robust to noisy and fragmented text, including TV
subtitles (Jørgensen et al., 2016). Additionally, we
use phrasemachine (Handler et al., 2016) to
identify all corpus noun phrases. Finally, we iden-
tify player mentions in the transcript text using ex-
act string matches of first, last, and full names to
roster information from online archives; these ros-
ters also contain the player’s position.6 Although
we initially had concerns about the reliability of
transcriptions of player names, we noticed mini-
mal errors on more common names. Qualitatively,
we noticed that even uncommon names were often
correctly transcribed and capitalized. We leave a
more systematic study for future work.

2.2 Identifying player race

Racial identity in the United States is a creation
of complex, fluid social and historical processes
(Omi and Winant, 2014), rather than a reflec-
tion of innate differences between fixed groups.
Nevertheless, popular perceptions of race in the
United States and the prior scholarship on racial

3See Appendix for more detailed statistics.
4We specifically query for full

NFL|NCAA|college football games
1960s|1970s|1980s|1990s|2000, and the full list
of channels is listed in in the Appendix.

5https://spacy.io/ (2.1.3), Honnibal and Montani (2017)
6Roster sources listed in Appendix. We tag first and last

name mentions only if they can be disambiguated to a single
player in the rosters from opposing teams.

bias in sports broadcasts which informs our work
(Rainville and McCormick, 1977; Rada, 1996;
Billings, 2004; Rada and Wulfemeyer, 2005) typ-
ically assume hard distinctions between racial
groups, which measurably affect commentary. In
this work, we do not reify these racial categories;
we use them as commonly understood within the
context of the society in which they arise.

To conduct a large-scale re-examination of this
prior work, we must identify whether each player
in FOOTBALL is perceived as white or nonwhite.7

Unfortunately, publicly available rosters or player
pages do not contain this information, so we re-
sort to crowdsourcing. We present crowd workers
on the Figure Eight platform with 2,720 images
of professional player headshots from the Asso-
ciated Press paired with player names. We ask
them to “read the player’s name and examine their
photo” to judge whether the player is white or
nonwhite. We collect five judgements per player
from crowd workers in the US, whose high inter-
annotator agreement (all five workers agree on the
race for 93% of players) suggests that their percep-
tions are very consistent. Because headshots were
only available for a subset of players, the authors
labeled the race of an additional 1,948 players by
performing a Google Image search for the player’s
name8 and manually examining the resulting im-
ages. Players whose race could not be determined
from the search results were excluded from the
dataset.

3 Analyzing FOOTBALL

We now demonstrate confounds in the data and
revisit several established results from racial bias
studies in sports broadcasting. For all experi-
ments, we seek to analyze the statistics of con-
textual terms that describe or have an important
association with a mentioned player. Thus, we
preprocess the transcripts by collecting contex-
tual terms in windows of five tokens around each
player mention, following the approach of Ananya
et al. (2019) for gendered mention analysis.9

We emphasize that different term extraction
strategies are possible, corresponding to different

7While we use the general term “nonwhite” in this paper,
the majority of nonwhite football players are black: in 2013,
67.3% of the NFL was black and most of the remaining play-
ers (31%) were white (Lapchick, 2014).

8We appended “NFL” to every query to improve precision
of results.

9If multiple player mentions fall within the same window,
we exclude each term to avoid ambiguity.



6357

Figure 1: Almost all of the eight most frequently-
mentioned positions in FOOTBALL are heavily skewed
in favor of one race.

1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
Decade

0

5000

10000

15000

20000

C
ou

nt

Racial split in quarterback mentions by decade

nonwhite
white

Figure 2: The percentage of nonwhite quarterbacks
mentions has drastically increased over time, exem-
plifying the changing racial landscape in FOOTBALL
across time.

precision–recall tradeoffs. For instance, instead
of collecting all terms in a window (high recall)
we might instead only collect terms in copular
constructions with the entity mention (high pre-
cision), such as ‘devoted’ in “Tebow is devoted”.
Because mention detection strategies affect con-
clusions about bias in FOOTBALL, systematically
defining, analyzing or even learning different pos-
sible strategies offers an exciting avenue for future
work.

3.1 Statistical and linguistic confounds

Identifying racial bias in football broadcasts
presents both statistical and linguistic modeling
challenges. Many descriptions of players in
broadcasts describe temporary player states (e.g.,
“Smith deep in the backfield”) or discrete player
actions (“Ogden with a huge block”), rather than
possibly-biased descriptions of players themselves
(“Cooper is one scrappy receiver”). Moreover,

many players’ actions (“passes the ball down-
field”) depend on the position they play, which
is often skewed by race (Figure 1). Furthermore,
the racial composition of mentions across different
decades can differ dramatically—Figure 2 shows
these changes for quarterback mentions—which
makes the problem even more complex. Modeling
biased descriptions of players thus requires dis-
entangling attributes describing shifting, position-
dependent player actions on field (e.g., “Paulsen
the tight end with a fast catch”) from attributes
referring to intrinsic characteristics of individual
players (“Paulsen is just so, so fast”).

To demonstrate this challenge, we distinguish
between per-position effects and racial effects us-
ing an additive, log-linear model which represents
the log probability that a word or noun phrase
w will describe a player entity e as the sum of
two learned coefficients, corresponding to two ob-
served covariates. One observed covariate records
a player’s race and the other a player’s position,
which allows us to use learned coefficients to rep-
resent how much a player’s race or position con-
tributes to the chance of observing an (w, e) pair.

Formally, we model such effects using a sparse
MAP estimation variant of SAGE (Eisenstein
et al., 2011). We define the binary vector ye ∈
{0, 1}J to represent the observed player covari-
ates of race (white or nonwhite) and position.
For example, component ye,k will be set to 1 if
player e is a quarterback and the component k in-
dexes the quarterback covariate; ye is a concate-
nation of two one-hot vectors. We then model
p(w | e) ∝ exp (βw + (γye)w), with βw ∈ R|V| as
a background distribution over the vocabulary V ,
set to empirical corpus-wide word and phrase log-
probabilities, and γ ∈ RJ×|V| as a matrix of fea-
ture effects on those log probabilities. γj,w denotes
the difference in log-probability of w for the jth

player feature being on versus off. For example, if
j indexes the quarterback covariate and w indexes
the word “tough”, then γj,w represents how much
more likely the word “tough” is to be applied to
quarterbacks over the base distribution. We im-
pose a uniform Laplace prior on all elements of
γ to induce sparsity, and learn a MAP estimate
with the LibLBFGS implementation of OWL-QN,
an L1-capable quasi-Newtonian convex optimizer
(Andrew and Gao, 2007; Okazaki, 2010).

Table 2 shows several highest-valued γj,w for a
subset of the J covariates. The adjective “quick”



6358

White long way, long time, valuable
DB strong safety, free safety, state university
RB second effort,single setback,ground game
QB freshman quarterback, arm strength, easier

WR quick slant, end zone touchdown, punt returner

Table 2: Top terms for the white, defensive back (DB),
running back (RB), quarterback (QB), and wide re-
ceiver (WR) covariates for the log linear model.

is predictive of wide receivers, but refers to an ac-
tion the players take on the field (“quick slant”),
not an attribute of the receivers themselves. We
also find that since “strong safety” is a kind of de-
fensive back, the adjective “strong” is often asso-
ciated with defensive backs, who are often non-
white. In this case, “strong” does not reflect racial
bias. Preliminary experiments with per-position
mention-level race classifiers, as per Ananya et al.
(2019), were also unable to disentangle race and
position.

These results suggest that a more sophisticated
approach may be necessary to isolate race effects
from the confounds; it also raises sharp conceptual
questions about the meaning of race-conditional
statistical effects in social scientific inquiry, since
race is a multifaceted construct (a “bundle of
sticks,” as Sen and Wasow (2016) argue). For fu-
ture work, it may be useful to think of comparisons
between otherwise similar players: how do broad-
casters differ in their discussions of two players
who are both quarterbacks, and who have similar
in-game performance, but differ by race?

We now describe two experiments that sidestep
some of these confounds, each motivated by prior
work in social science: the first examines player
naming patterns, which are less tied to action on
field than player attributes. The other uses words
with known sentiment polarity to identify positive
and negative attributes, regardless of player posi-
tion or game mechanics.

3.2 Exploring naming patterns

Naming patterns in sports broadcasting—how
commentators refer to players by name (e.g., first
or last name)—are influenced by player attributes,
as shown by prior small-scale studies. For exam-
ple, Koivula (1999) find that women are more fre-
quently referred to by their first names than men
in a variety of sports. Bruce (2004) discover a
similar trend for race in basketball games: white
players are more frequently referred to by their
last names than nonwhite players, often because

Position Race First Last Full

QB white 8.3% 20.0% 71.7%
QB nonwhite 18.1% 7.5% 74.5%

WR white 6.9% 36.5% 56.5%
WR nonwhite 11.3% 24.1% 64.6%

RB white 10.5% 41.2% 48.4%
RB nonwhite 8.5% 35.4% 56.1%

TE white 16.6% 18.7% 64.7%
TE nonwhite 13.8% 16.6% 69.7%

Table 3: White players at the four major offensive posi-
tions are referred to by last name more often than non-
white players at the same positions, a discrepancy that
may reflect unconscious racial boundary-marking.

commentators believe their first names sound too
“normal”. Bruce (2004) further points out that the
“practice of having fun or playing with the names
of people from non-dominant racial groups” con-
tributes to racial “othering”. A per-position analy-
sis of player mentions in FOOTBALL corroborates
these findings for all offensive positions (Table 3).

3.3 Sentiment patterns

Prior studies examine the relationship between
commentator sentiment and player race: Rainville
and McCormick (1977) conclude that white play-
ers receive more positive coverage than black
players, and Rada (1996) shows that nonwhite
players are praised more for physical attributes
and less for cognitive attributes than white ones.

To examine sentiment patterns within FOOT-
BALL, we assign a binary sentiment label to
contextualized terms (i.e., a window of words
around a player mention) by searching for words
that match those in domain-specific sentiment
lexicons from Hamilton et al. (2016).10 This
method identifies 49,787 windows containing
sentiment-laden words, only 12.8% of which are
of negative polarity, similar to the 8.3% figure
reported by Rada (1996).11 We compute a list
of the most positive words for each race ranked
by ratio of relative frequencies (Monroe et al.,
2008).12 A qualitative inspection of these lists

10We use a filtered intersection of lexicons from the NFL,
CFB, and sports subreddits, yielding 121 positive and 125
negative words.

11Preliminary experiments with a state-of-the-art senti-
ment model trained on the Stanford Sentiment Treebank (Pe-
ters et al., 2018) produced qualitatively unreliable predictions
due to the noise in FOOTBALL.

12We follow Monroe et al. (2008) in removing infrequent
words before ranking; specifically, a word must occur at least
ten times for each race to be considered.



6359

Race Most positive words

white (all) enjoying, favorite, calm, appreciate,
loving, miracle, spectacular, perfect,
cool, smart

nonwhite (all) speed, gift, versatile, gifted, play-
maker, natural, monster, wow, beast,
athletic

white (QBs) cool, smart, favorite, safe, spectacu-
lar, excellent, class, fantastic, good,
interesting

nonwhite (QBs) ability, athletic, brilliant, aware-
ness, quiet, highest, speed, wow, ex-
cited, wonderful

Table 4: Positive comments for nonwhite players (top
two rows: all player mentions; bottom two rows: only
quarterback mentions) focus on their athleticism, while
white players are praised for personality and intelli-
gence.

(Table 4) confirms that nonwhite players are much
more frequently praised for physical ability than
white players, who are praised for personality and
intelligence (see Table 1 for more examples).

Limitations: The small lexicon results in
the detection of relatively few sentiment-laden
windows; furthermore, some of those are false
positives (e.g., “beast mode” is the nickname of
former NFL running back Marshawn Lynch). The
former issue precludes a per-position analysis
for all non-QB positions, as we are unable to
detect enough sentiment terms to draw meaning-
ful conclusions. The top two rows of Table 4,
which were derived from all mentions regardless
of position, are thus tainted by the positional
confound discussed in Section 3.1. The bottom
two rows of Table 4 are derived from the same
analysis applied to just quarterback windows;
qualitatively, the results appear similar to those
in the top two rows. That said, we hope that
future work on contextualized term extraction and
sentiment detection in noisy domains can shed
more light on the relationship between race and
commentator sentiment patterns.

4 Related Work

Our work revisits specific findings from social
science (§3) on racial bias in sports broadcasts.
Such non-computational studies typically exam-
ine a small number of games drawn from a single
season and rely on manual coding to identify dif-
ferences in announcer speech (Rainville and Mc-
Cormick, 1977; Billings, 2004; Rada and Wulfe-

meyer, 2005). For example, Rada (1996) per-
form a fine-grained analysis of five games from
the 1992 season, coding for aspects such as play-
ers’ cognitive or physical attributes. Our compu-
tational approach allows us to revisit this type of
work (§3) using FOOTBALL, without relying on
subjective human coding.

Within NLP, researchers have studied gender
bias in word embeddings (Bolukbasi et al., 2016;
Caliskan et al., 2017), racial bias in police stops
(Voigt et al., 2017) and on Twitter (Hasanuzzaman
et al., 2017), and biases in NLP tools like senti-
ment analysis systems (Kiritchenko and Moham-
mad, 2018). Especially related to our work is that
of Ananya et al. (2019), who analyze mention-
level gender bias, and Fu et al. (2019), who ex-
amine gender bias in tennis broadcasts. Other
datasets in the sports domain include the event-
annotated baseball commentaries of Keshet et al.
(2011) and the WNBA and NBA basketball com-
mentaries of Aull and Brown (2013), but we em-
phasize that FOOTBALL is the first large-scale
sports commentary corpus annotated for race.

5 Conclusion

We collect and release FOOTBALL to support
large-scale, longitudinal analysis of racial bias in
sports commentary, a major category of mass me-
dia. Our analysis confirms the results of prior
smaller-scale social science studies on commen-
tator sentiment and naming patterns. However,
we find that baseline NLP methods for quantifying
mention-level genderedness (Ananya et al., 2019)
and modeling covariate effects (Eisenstein et al.,
2011) cannot overcome the statistical and linguis-
tic confounds in this dataset. We hope that pre-
senting such a technically-challenging resource,
along with an analysis showing the limitations of
current bias-detection techniques, will contribute
to the emerging literature on bias in language.
Important future directions include examining the
temporal aspect of bias as well as developing more
precise mention identification techniques.

Acknowledgments

We thank the anonymous reviewers for their in-
sightful comments, and Emma Strubell, Patrick
Verga, David Fisher, Katie Keith, Su Lin Blodgett,
and other members of the UMass NLP group for
help with earlier drafts of the paper. This work
was partially supported by NSF IIS-1814955.



6360

References
Ananya Ananya, Nitya Parthasarthi, and Sameer Singh.

2019. Genderquant: Quantifying mention-level
genderedness. In Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics.

G. Andrew and J. Gao. 2007. Scalable training of L1-
regularized log-linear models. In Proceedings of the
International Conference of Machine Learning.

Laura L Aull and David West Brown. 2013. Fighting
words: a corpus analysis of gender representations
in sports reportage. Corpora, 8(1).

Andrew C Billings. 2004. Depicting the quarterback
in black and white: A content analysis of col-
lege and professional football broadcast commen-
tary. Howard Journal of Communications, 15(4).

Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y. Zou,
Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam Tauman Kalai.
2016. Man is to computer programmer as woman
is to homemaker? Debiasing word embeddings. In
Proceedings of Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems.

Toni Bruce. 2004. Marking the boundaries of the ‘nor-
mal’in televised sports: The play-by-play of race.
Media, Culture & Society, 26(6).

Aylin Caliskan, Joanna J. Bryson, and Arvind
Narayanan. 2017. Semantics derived automatically
from language corpora contain human-like biases.
Science, 356(6334).

Jacob Eisenstein, Amr Ahmed, and Eric P. Xing. 2011.
Sparse additive generative models of text. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference of Machine
Learning.

Liye Fu, Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, and Lil-
lian Lee. 2019. Tie-breaker: Using language mod-
els to quantify gender bias in sports journalism. In
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence.

William L Hamilton, Kevin Clark, Jure Leskovec, and
Dan Jurafsky. 2016. Inducing domain-specific sen-
timent lexicons from unlabeled corpora. In Pro-
ceedings of Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing.

Abram Handler, Matthew Denny, Hanna M. Wallach,
and Brendan T. O’Connor. 2016. Bag of what?
simple noun phrase extraction for text analysis. In
NLP+CSS@EMNLP.

Mohammed Hasanuzzaman, Gaël Dias, and Andy
Way. 2017. Demographic word embeddings for
racism detection on twitter. In International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing.

Matthew Honnibal and Ines Montani. 2017. spacy 2:
Natural language understanding with bloom embed-
dings, convolutional neural networks and incremen-
tal parsing.

Anna Jørgensen, Dirk Hovy, and Anders Søgaard.
2016. Learning a POS tagger for AAVE-like lan-
guage. In Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics.

Ezra Keshet, Terrence Szymanski, and Stephen Tyn-
dall. 2011. BALLGAME: A corpus for computa-
tional semantics. In Proceedings of the Ninth In-
ternational Conference on Computational Seman-
tics (IWCS 2011).

Svetlana Kiritchenko and Saif Mohammad. 2018. Ex-
amining gender and race bias in two hundred senti-
ment analysis systems. In Proceedings of the Joint
Conference on Lexical and Computational Seman-
tics.

Nathalie Koivula. 1999. Gender stereotyping in tele-
vised media sport coverage. Sex roles, 41(7-8).

Richard Lapchick. 2014. The 2014 racial and gender
report card: National football league.

Burt L Monroe, Michael P Colaresi, and Kevin M
Quinn. 2008. Fightin’words: Lexical feature selec-
tion and evaluation for identifying the content of po-
litical conflict. Political Analysis, 16(4).

Naoaki Okazaki. LibLBFGS: a Library of Limited-
memory Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno
(L-BFGS) [online]. 2010.

Michael Omi and Howard Winant. 2014. Racial for-
mation in the United States. Routledge.

Olutobi Owoputi, Brendan T. O’Connor, Chris Dyer,
Kevin Gimpel, Nathan Schneider, and Noah A.
Smith. 2013. Improved part-of-speech tagging for
online conversational text with word clusters. In
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Frank Palotta. 2019. NFL ratings rebound after two
seasons of declining viewership. CNN Business.

Matthew Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt
Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2018. Deep contextualized word rep-
resentations. In Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

James A Rada. 1996. Color blind-sided: Racial bias in
network television’s coverage of professional foot-
ball games. Howard Journal of Communications,
7(3).

James A Rada and K Tim Wulfemeyer. 2005. Color
coded: Racial descriptors in television coverage of
intercollegiate sports. Journal of Broadcasting &
Electronic Media, 49(1).

Raymond E Rainville and Edward McCormick. 1977.
Extent of covert racial prejudice in pro football an-
nouncers’ speech. Journalism Quarterly, 54(1).

https://www.cnn.com/2019/01/03/media/nfl-ratings-2018-season/index.html
https://www.cnn.com/2019/01/03/media/nfl-ratings-2018-season/index.html


6361

Maya Sen and Omar Wasow. 2016. Race as a ’bundle
of sticks’: Designs that estimate effects of seemingly
immutable characteristics. Annual Review of Politi-
cal Science, 19:499–522.

Rob Voigt, Nicholas P. Camp, Vinodkumar Prab-
hakaran, William L. Hamilton, Rebecca C. Hetey,
Camilla M. Griffiths, David Jurgens, Dan Jurafsky,
and Jennifer L. Eberhardt. 2017. Language from
police body camera footage shows racial dispari-
ties in officer respect. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 114(25).

http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev-polisci-032015-010015
http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev-polisci-032015-010015
http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev-polisci-032015-010015

