



















































VizSeq: a visual analysis toolkit for text generation tasks


Proceedings of the 2019 EMNLP and the 9th IJCNLP (System Demonstrations), pages 253–258
Hong Kong, China, November 3 – 7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

253

VizSeq: A Visual Analysis Toolkit for Text Generation Tasks

Changhan Wang†, Anirudh Jain*‡, Danlu Chen† and Jiatao Gu†
† Facebook AI Research, ‡ Stanford University

{changhan, danluchen, jgu}@fb.com, anirudhj@stanford.edu

Abstract

Automatic evaluation of text generation tasks
(e.g. machine translation, text summariza-
tion, image captioning and video description)
usually relies heavily on task-specific metrics,
such as BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) and
ROUGE (Lin, 2004). They, however, are ab-
stract numbers and are not perfectly aligned
with human assessment. This suggests in-
specting detailed examples as a complement
to identify system error patterns. In this paper,
we present VizSeq, a visual analysis toolkit for
instance-level and corpus-level system eval-
uation on a wide variety of text generation
tasks. It supports multimodal sources and mul-
tiple text references, providing visualization in
Jupyter notebook or a web app interface. It can
be used locally or deployed onto public servers
for centralized data hosting and benchmark-
ing. It covers most common n-gram based
metrics accelerated with multiprocessing, and
also provides latest embedding-based metrics
such as BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2019).

1 Introduction

Many natural language processing (NLP) tasks
can be viewed as conditional text generation prob-
lems, where natural language texts are generated
given inputs in the form of text (e.g. machine
translation), image (e.g. image captioning), au-
dio (e.g. automatic speech recognition) or video
(e.g. video description). Their automatic evalu-
ation usually relies heavily on task-specific met-
rics. Due to the complexity of natural language
expressions, those metrics are not always perfectly
aligned with human assessment. Moreover, met-
rics only produce abstract numbers and are limited
in illustrating system error patterns. This suggests
the necessity of inspecting detailed evaluation ex-
amples to get a full picture of system behaviors as

* Work carried out during an internship at Facebook.

Sources
Text

Image
Audio

References
Text 1
Text 2

Text N

…

Predictions
Model 1 Text
Model 2 Text

Model K Text

…

VizSeq

Web App

Jupyter Notebook

Video

evaluate.py

multi-process
scorers

Figure 1: An overview of VizSeq. VizSeq takes multi-
modal sources, text references as well as model predic-
tions as inputs, and analyzes them visually in Jupyter
notebook or in a web app interface. It can also be used
without visualization as a normal Python package.

well as seek improvement directions.
A bunch of softwares have emerged to facili-

tate calculation of various metrics or demonstrat-
ing examples with sentence-level scores in an in-
tegrated user interface: ibleu (Madnani, 2011),
MTEval 1, MT-ComparEval (Klejch et al., 2015),
nlg-eval (Sharma et al., 2017), Vis-Eval Met-
ric Viewer (Steele and Specia, 2018), compare-
mt (Neubig et al., 2019), etc. Quite a few of them
are collections of command-line scripts for met-
ric calculation, which lack visualization to bet-
ter present and interpret the scores. Some of
them are able to generate static HTML reports to
present charts and examples, but they do not al-
low updating visualization options interactively.
MT-ComparEval is the only software we found
that has an interactive user interface. It is, how-
ever, written in PHP, which unlike Python lacks a
complete NLP eco-system. The number of met-
rics it supports is also limited and the software
is no longer being actively developed. Support
of multiple references is not a prevalent stan-
dard across all the softwares we investigated, and

1https://github.com/odashi/mteval



254

Source Type Example Tasks

Text machine translation, text summarization,
dialog generation, grammatical error cor-
rection, open-domain question answering

Image image captioning, visual question answer-
ing, optical character recognition

Audio speech recognition, speech translation
Video video description
Multimodal multimodal machine translation

Table 1: Example text generation tasks supported by
VizSeq. The sources can be from various modalities.

Metrics VizSeq compare-
mt

nlg-
eval

MT-
Compar-
Eval

BLEU
chrF
METEOR
TER
RIBES
GLEU
NIST
ROUGE
CIDEr
WER

LASER
BERTScore

Table 2: Comparison of VizSeq and its counterparts on
n-gram-based and embedding-based metric coverage.

none of them supports multiple sources or sources
in non-text modalities such as image, audio and
video. Almost all the metric implementations are
single-processed, which cannot leverage the mul-
tiple cores in modern CPUs for speedup and better
scalability.

With the above limitations identified, we want
to provide a unified and scalable solution that
gets rid of all those constraints and is enhanced
with a user-friendly interface as well as the lat-
est NLP technologies. In this paper, we present
VizSeq, a visual analysis toolkit for a wide va-
riety of text generation tasks, which can be used
for: 1) instance-level and corpus-level system er-
ror analysis; 2) exploratory dataset analysis; 3)
public data hosting and system benchmarking. It
provides visualization in Jupyter notebook or a
web app interface. A system overview can be
found in Figure 1. We open source the software
at https://github.com/facebookresearch/vizseq.

BLEU METEOR chrF CIDEr
0
5

10
15
20
25
30
35

Ti
m

e
(s

ec
on

ds
) 1 process

2 processes
4 processes

Figure 2: VizSeq implements metrics with multipro-
cessing speedup. Speed test is based on a 36k evalua-
tion set for BLEU, METEOR and chrF, and a 41k one
for CIDEr. CPU: Intel Core i7-7920HQ @ 3.10GHz

2 Main Features of VizSeq

2.1 Multimodal Data and Task Coverage

VizSeq has built-in support for multiple sources
and references. The number of references is al-
lowed to vary across different examples, and the
sources are allowed to come from different modal-
ities, including text, image, audio and video. This
flexibility enables VizSeq to cover a wide range of
text generation tasks and datasets, far beyond the
scope of machine translation, which previous soft-
wares mainly focus on. Table 1 provides a list of
example tasks supported by Vizseq.

2.2 Metric Coverage and Scalability

Table 2 shows the comparison of VizSeq and its
counterparts on metric coverage.

N-gram-based metrics To the extent of our
knowledge, VizSeq has the best coverage of com-
mon n-gram-based metrics, including BLEU (Pap-
ineni et al., 2002), NIST (Doddington, 2002), ME-
TEOR (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005), TER (Snover
et al., 2006), RIBES (Isozaki et al., 2010),
chrF (Popović, 2015) and GLEU (Wu et al.,
2016) for machine translation; ROUGE (Lin,
2004) for summarization and video description;
CIDEr (Vedantam et al., 2015) for image caption-
ing; and word error rate for speech recognition.

Embedding-based metrics N-gram-based met-
rics have difficulties in capturing semantic sim-
ilarities since they are usually based on ex-
act word matches. As a complement, VizSeq
also integrates latest embedding-based metrics
such as BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2019) and
LASER (Artetxe and Schwenk, 2018). This is
rarely seen in the counterparts.

Scalability We re-implemented all the n-gram-
based metrics with multiprocessing, allowing

https://github.com/facebookresearch/vizseq


255

1 from vizseq.scorers import
register_scorer

2

3 @register_scorer(’metric name’)
4 def calculate_score(
5 hypothesis: List[str],
6 references: List[List[str]],
7 n_processes: int = 2,
8 verbose: bool = False
9 ) -> Tuple[float, List[float]]:

10 return corpus_score, sentence_scores

Figure 3: VizSeq metric API. Users can define and reg-
ister their new metric by implementing this function.

users to fully utilize the power of modern multi-
core CPUs. We tested our multi-process versions
on large evaluation sets and observed significant
speedup against original single-process ones (see
Figure 2). VizSeq’s embedding-based metrics are
implemented using PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2017)
framework and their computation is automatically
parallelized on CPU or GPU by the framework.

Versatility VizSeq’s rich metric collection is not
only available in Jupyter notebook or in the web
app, it can also be used in any Python scripts.
A typical use case is periodic metric calculation
during model training. VizSeq’s implementations
save time, especially when evaluation sets are
large or evaluation is frequent. To allow user-
defined metrics, we designed an open metric API,
whose definition can be found in Figure 3.

2.3 User-Friendly Interface

Given the drawbacks of simple command-line in-
terface and static HTML interface, we aim at visu-
alized and interactive interfaces for better user ex-
perience and productivity. VizSeq provides visu-
alization in two types of interfaces: Jupyter note-
book and web app. They share the same visual
analysis module (Figure 4). The web app interface
additionally has a data uploading module (Fig-
ure 9) and a task/dataset browsing module (Fig-
ure 10), while the Jupyter notebook interface gets
data directly from Python variables. The analysis
module includes the following parts.

Example grouping VizSeq uses sentence tags
to manage example groups (data subsets of differ-
ent interest, can be overlapping). It contains both
user-defined and machine-generated tags (e.g. la-
bels for identified languages, long sentences, sen-
tences with rare words or code-switching). Met-
rics will be calculated and visualized by different

1       

2       

3       

4       

5       

Figure 4: VizSeq example viewing. (1) keyword search
box, tag and model filters, sorting and page size op-
tions; (2) left: example index, right: user-defined tags
(blue) and machine-generated tags (grey); (3) multi-
modal sources and Google Translate integration; (4)
model predictions with highlighted matched (blue) and
unmatched (red) n-grams; (5) sentence-level scores
(highest ones among models in boldface, lowest ones
in italics with underscore).

example groups as a complement to scores over
the entire dataset.

Example viewing VizSeq presents examples
with various sentence-level scores and visualized
alignments of matched/unmatched reference n-
grams in model predictions. It also has Google
Translate integration to assist understanding of
text sources in unfamiliar languages as well as
providing a baseline translation model. Exam-
ples are listed in multiple pages (bookmarkable in
web app) and can be sorted by various orders, for
example, by a certain metric or source sentence
lengths. Tags or n-gram keywords can be used to
filter out examples of interest.

Dataset statistics VizSeq provides various
corpus-level statistics, including: 1) counts of
sentences, tokens and characters; 2) source and
reference length distributions; 3) token frequency
distribution; 4) list of most frequent n-grams (with
links to associated examples); 5) distributions
of sentence-level scores by models (Figure 5, 6
and 7). Statistics are visualized in zoomable
charts with hover text hints.

Data export Statistics in VizSeq are one-click
exportable: charts into PNG or SVG images (with



256

1

2 3

Figure 5: VizSeq dataset statistics. (1) sentence, to-
ken and character counts for source and reference sen-
tences; (2) length distributions of source and reference
sentences; (3) token frequency distribution. Plots are
zoomable and exportable to SVG or PNG images.

Figure 6: VizSeq dataset statistics: most frequent n-
grams (n=1,2,3,4). Each listed n-gram is clickable to
show associated examples in the dataset.

users’ zooming applied) and tables into CSV or
LATEX (copied to clipboard).

2.4 Data Management and Public Hosting

VizSeq web app interface gets new data from the
data uploading module (Figure 9) or a REST-
ful API. Besides local deployment, the web app
back-end can also be deployed onto public servers
and provide a general solution for hosting public
benchmarks on a wide variety of text generation
tasks and datasets.

In VizSeq, data is organized by special folder
structures as follows, which is easy to maintain:

<task>/<eval set>/source_*.{txt,zip}
<task>/<eval set>/reference_*.txt
<task>/<eval set>/tag_*.txt
<task>/<eval set>/<model>/prediction.txt
<task>/<eval set>/__cfg__.json

When new data comes in, scores, n-grams and
machine-generated tags will be pre-computed and
cached onto disk automatically. A file monitoring
and versioning system (based on file hashes, sizes
or modification timestamps) is employed to detect

1

2 3

Figure 7: VizSeq corpus-level metric viewing. (1) dis-
tributions of sentence-level scores by models; (2) one-
click export of tabular data to CSV and LATEX (copied
to clipboard); (3) corpus-level and group-level (by sen-
tence tags) scores (highest ones among models in bold-
face, lowest ones in italics with underscore).

Figure 8: VizSeq sentence tag distribution view. In this
example, tags are source-target language directions in
a multilingual machine translation dataset.

file changes and trigger necessary updates on pre-
computed results. This is important for support-
ing evaluation during model training where model
predictions change over training epochs.

3 Example Use Cases of VizSeq

We validate the usability of VizSeq with multiple
tasks and datasets, which are included as examples
in our Github repository:

• WMT14 English-German2: a classic medium-
size dataset for bilingual machine translation.

• Gigaword3: a text summarization dataset.

• COCO captioning 2015 (Lin et al., 2014): a
classic image captioning dataset where VizSeq
can present source images with text targets.

2http://www.statmt.org/wmt14/translation-task.html
3https://github.com/harvardnlp/sent-summary

http://www.statmt.org/wmt14/translation-task.html
https://github.com/harvardnlp/sent-summary


257

Figure 9: VizSeq data uploading. Users need to orga-
nize the files by given folder structures and pack them
into a zip file for upload. VizSeq will unpack the files
to the data root folder and perform integrity checks.

Figure 10: VizSeq task/dataset browsing. Users need
to select a dataset and models of interest to proceed to
the analysis module.

• WMT16 multimodal machine translation task
14: English-German translation with an image
the sentences describe. VizSeq can present both
text and image sources, and calculate the official
BLEU, METEOR and TER metrics.

• Multilingual machine translation on TED talks
dataset (Ye et al., 2018): translation from 58
languages into English. VizSeq can use lan-
guage directions as sentence tags to generate
score breakdown by languages. The test set has
as many as 165k examples, where VizSeq multi-
process scorers run significantly faster than
single-process ones. The integrated Google
Translate can help with understanding source
sentences in unfamiliar languages.

• IWSLT17 English-German speech translation5:
VizSeq can present English audios with English
transcripts and German text translations.

• YouCook (Das et al., 2013) video description:
VizSeq enables inspecting generated text de-
4https://www.statmt.org/wmt16/multimodal-task.html
5https://sites.google.com/site/iwsltevaluation2017

scriptions with presence of video contents.

4 Related Work

With the thrive of deep learning, task-agnostic
visualization toolkits such as Tensorboard6, vis-
dom7 and TensorWatch8, have emerged in need of
monitoring model statistics and debugging model
training. Model interpretability is another moti-
vation for visualization. In NLP, softwares have
been developed to interpret model parameters (e.g.
attention weights) and inspect prediction genera-
tion process: LM (Rong and Adar, 2016), Open-
NMT visualization tool (Klein et al., 2018) and
Seq2Seq (Strobelt et al., 2019). For machine trans-
lation, toolkits are made to perform metric calcu-
lation and error analysis: ibleu (Madnani, 2011),
MTEval 9, MT-ComparEval (Klejch et al., 2015),
nlg-eval (Sharma et al., 2017), Vis-Eval Metric
Viewer (Steele and Specia, 2018) and compare-
mt (Neubig et al., 2019).

5 Conclusion

In this paper, we present VizSeq, a visual anal-
ysis toolkit for {text, image, audio, video}-to-
text generation system evaluation, dataset analysis
and benchmark hosting. It is accessible as a web
app or a Python package in Jupyter notebook or
Python scripts. VizSeq is currently under active
development and our future work includes: 1) en-
abling image-to-text and video-to-text alignments;
2) adding human assessment modules; 3) integra-
tion with popular text generation frameworks such
as fairseq10, opennmt11 and tensor2tensor12.

Acknowledgments

We thank the anonymous reviewers for their com-
ments. We also thank Ann Lee and Pratik Ring-
shia for helpful discussions on this project.

References
Mikel Artetxe and Holger Schwenk. 2018. Mas-

sively multilingual sentence embeddings for zero-
shot cross-lingual transfer and beyond. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1812.10464.

6https://github.com/tensorflow/tensorboard
7https://github.com/facebookresearch/visdom
8https://github.com/microsoft/tensorwatch
9https://github.com/odashi/mteval

10https://github.com/pytorch/fairseq
11https://github.com/OpenNMT/OpenNMT-py
12https://github.com/tensorflow/tensor2tensor

https://www.statmt.org/wmt16/multimodal-task.html
https://sites.google.com/site/iwsltevaluation2017
https://github.com/tensorflow/tensorboard
https://github.com/facebookresearch/visdom
https://github.com/microsoft/tensorwatch
https://github.com/odashi/mteval
https://github.com/pytorch/fairseq
https://github.com/OpenNMT/OpenNMT-py
https://github.com/tensorflow/tensor2tensor


258

Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. Meteor: An
automatic metric for mt evaluation with improved
correlation with human judgments. In Proceedings
of the acl workshop on intrinsic and extrinsic evalu-
ation measures for machine translation and/or sum-
marization, pages 65–72.

Pradipto Das, Chenliang Xu, Richard F Doell, and Ja-
son J Corso. 2013. A thousand frames in just a few
words: Lingual description of videos through latent
topics and sparse object stitching. In Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 2634–2641.

George Doddington. 2002. Automatic evaluation
of machine translation quality using n-gram co-
occurrence statistics. In Proceedings of the second
international conference on Human Language Tech-
nology Research, pages 138–145. Morgan Kauf-
mann Publishers Inc.

Hideki Isozaki, Tsutomu Hirao, Kevin Duh, Katsuhito
Sudoh, and Hajime Tsukada. 2010. Automatic eval-
uation of translation quality for distant language
pairs. In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 944–952. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Guillaume Klein, Yoon Kim, Yuntian Deng, Vincent
Nguyen, Jean Senellart, and Alexander M. Rush.
2018. Opennmt: Neural machine translation toolkit.

Ondřej Klejch, Eleftherios Avramidis, Aljoscha Bur-
chardt, and Martin Popel. 2015. Mt-compareval:
Graphical evaluation interface for machine transla-
tion development. The Prague Bulletin of Mathe-
matical Linguistics, 104(1):63–74.

Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. Rouge: A package for auto-
matic evaluation of summaries. Text Summarization
Branches Out.

Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James
Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár,
and C Lawrence Zitnick. 2014. Microsoft coco:
Common objects in context. In European confer-
ence on computer vision, pages 740–755. Springer.

Nitin Madnani. 2011. ibleu: Interactively debugging
and scoring statistical machine translation systems.
In 2011 IEEE Fifth International Conference on Se-
mantic Computing, pages 213–214. IEEE.

Graham Neubig, Zi-Yi Dou, Junjie Hu, Paul Michel,
Danish Pruthi, and Xinyi Wang. 2019. compare-mt:
A tool for holistic comparison of language genera-
tion systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.07926.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 40th annual meeting on association for compu-
tational linguistics, pages 311–318. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Soumith Chintala, Gre-
gory Chanan, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Zem-
ing Lin, Alban Desmaison, Luca Antiga, and Adam
Lerer. 2017. Automatic differentiation in PyTorch.
In NIPS Autodiff Workshop.

Maja Popović. 2015. chrf: character n-gram f-score
for automatic mt evaluation. In Proceedings of the
Tenth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
pages 392–395.

Xin Rong and Eytan Adar. 2016. Visual tools for de-
bugging neural language models. In Proceedings of
ICML Workshop on Visualization for Deep Learn-
ing.

Shikhar Sharma, Layla El Asri, Hannes Schulz, and
Jeremie Zumer. 2017. Relevance of unsupervised
metrics in task-oriented dialogue for evaluating nat-
ural language generation. CoRR, abs/1706.09799.

Matthew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, Richard Schwartz, Lin-
nea Micciulla, and John Makhoul. 2006. A study of
translation edit rate with targeted human annotation.
In Proceedings of association for machine transla-
tion in the Americas, volume 200.

David Steele and Lucia Specia. 2018. Vis-eval metric
viewer: A visualisation tool for inspecting and eval-
uating metric scores of machine translation output.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Demonstrations, pages 71–75.

Hendrik Strobelt, Sebastian Gehrmann, Michael
Behrisch, Adam Perer, Hanspeter Pfister, and
Alexander M Rush. 2019. Seq2seq-vis: A visual
debugging tool for sequence-to-sequence models.
IEEE transactions on visualization and computer
graphics, 25(1):353–363.

Ramakrishna Vedantam, C Lawrence Zitnick, and Devi
Parikh. 2015. Cider: Consensus-based image de-
scription evaluation. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recog-
nition, pages 4566–4575.

Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V
Le, Mohammad Norouzi, Wolfgang Macherey,
Maxim Krikun, Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus
Macherey, et al. 2016. Google’s neural ma-
chine translation system: Bridging the gap between
human and machine translation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.08144.

Qi Ye, Sachan Devendra, Felix Matthieu, Padmanab-
han Sarguna, and Neubig Graham. 2018. When
and why are pre-trained word embeddings useful for
neural machine translation. In HLT-NAACL.

Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q
Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2019. Bertscore: Eval-
uating text generation with bert. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.09675.

http://arxiv.org/abs/1805.11462
http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.09799
http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.09799
http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.09799

