



















































A Dataset of General-Purpose Rebuttal


Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 5591–5601,
Hong Kong, China, November 3–7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

5591

A Dataset of General-Purpose Rebuttal

Matan Orbach1, Yonatan Bilu1, Ariel Gera1, Yoav Kantor1,
Lena Dankin1, Tamar Lavee1, Lili Kotlerman∗ 2, Shachar Mirkin∗3,

Michal Jacovi1, Ranit Aharonov1 and Noam Slonim1
1IBM Research, 2Intuition Robotics, 3Digimind

{matano,yonatanb,arielge,yoavka,lenad,tamarl, michal.jacovi, ranita,noams}@il.ibm.com,
lili@intuitionrobotics.com, shachar.mirkin@digimind.com

Abstract

In Natural Language Understanding, the task
of response generation is usually focused on
responses to short texts, such as tweets or a
turn in a dialog. Here we present a novel task
of producing a critical response to a long argu-
mentative text, and suggest a method based on
general rebuttal arguments to address it. We
do this in the context of the recently-suggested
task of listening comprehension over argu-
mentative content: given a speech on some
specified topic, and a list of relevant argu-
ments, the goal is to determine which of the
arguments appear in the speech. The gen-
eral rebuttals we describe here (written in En-
glish) overcome the need for topic-specific ar-
guments to be provided, by proving to be ap-
plicable for a large set of topics. This allows
creating responses beyond the scope of topics
for which specific arguments are available. All
data collected during this work is freely avail-
able for research1.

1 Introduction

A key element in argumentation is rebuttal: the
ability to contest an argument by presenting a
counter-argument. It is an important skill, not
easily learned, and valued in many fields such as
politics and science. It is useful for advancing
your own views and beliefs over opposing ones,
but perhaps more importantly, it facilitates a criti-
cal examination of the views and beliefs that you
hold. An automatic rebuttal system could there-
fore be useful whenever critical analysis of written
or spoken content is required – be it an elementary
school student writing an essay or a seasoned jour-
nalist composing an op-ed.

In the context of Natural Language Understand-
ing, the study of rebuttal and counter-arguments

∗This work was done at IBM Research.
1https://www.research.ibm.com/haifa/

dept/vst/debating_data.shtml

has focused on elucidating such relations between
given arguments. Indeed, such “attack” relations
are the foundation of Argumentation Frameworks
(Dung, 1995); such frameworks have been one of
the main objects of study in computational argu-
mentation.

A related task, that of generating a response
which need not be a rebuttal or even argumenta-
tive, has been the subject of much research, espe-
cially in the context of dialog systems, chat bots,
and question answering. In this line of work the
response typically follows a short input text, often
only a sentence or two.

Here we suggest the task of producing a rebuttal
in response to a long argumentative text. Specif-
ically, we consider spoken speeches around four
minutes long. In addition to being longer, and per-
haps because they are so, these kinds of texts tend
to include very general claims, often implicit in the
text. As such, these claims may appear in varied
contexts, and it may be feasible to compile a list of
such claims independently of the speeches’ topics.

For example, a concern that often comes up in
debates about policy is that implementing the pol-
icy (or failing to do so) disproportionately harms
minorities. This claim can be made to oppose
school vouchers, to oppose voter registration laws
or to support criminal justice reform. Moreover,
for some such general claims, it is feasible to
phrase a single rebuttal response which can fit
many of the contexts in which the claim might be
made. In the above example, such a response may
talk about separating between the policy at hand,
which should be adopted based on its merits, and
the need to right historical wrongs, which should
be pursued independently.

We envision an automatic rebuttal system based
on this observation, which includes a manually cu-
rated General-Purpose Rebuttal Knowledge Base
(GPR-KB) comprised of claims and matching re-

https://www.research.ibm.com/haifa/dept/vst/debating_data.shtml
https://www.research.ibm.com/haifa/dept/vst/debating_data.shtml


5592

buttal responses. Given an argumentative text,
the system would identify which claims from the
GPR-KB are made in the text (explicitly or im-
plicitly), and produce a rebuttal using the available
counter-arguments. Clearly, many of the claims
made in the text would not appear in the GPR-KB.
The objective is therefore not to identify and re-
but all arguments, but rather to identify and rebut
some arguments, and construct a GPR-KB that fa-
cilitates that.

Such a system (based on the more elaborate
CoPA modeling of Bilu et al., 2019) was indeed
implemented as a key element in IBM’s Project
Debater rebuttal mechanism, and demonstrated
during the live debate held between it and debating
champion Harish Natarajan2. However, a rebuttal
system of this nature may be of interest beyond
the realm of debating technologies. For example,
such a system may be instrumental in making me-
dia consumption a more critical process, by auto-
matically challenging the consumer with counter-
arguments. Similarly, it can be applicable in the
education domain, stimulating critical thinking by
prompting students with counter-arguments in re-
sponse to (or during) essay-composition tasks.

The formation of a GPR-KB that is applicable
to the real world poses several challenges. First,
phrased claims must be both relevant to a vari-
ety of topics, and commonly used. Second, pre-
written rebuttals should be effective and persua-
sive, even though they are created without prior
knowledge of the context in which they are to be
of use. We address these issues by turning to a do-
main in which a similar problem is solved by hu-
mans: the world of competitive debates. In these
contests, successful debaters need to combine spe-
cific knowledge about the topic at hand, with gen-
eral arguments that arise from the underlying prin-
ciples of the debate. Their ability to use such gen-
eral arguments for different topics lays the basis
for using a GPR-KB as the one described above.

Accordingly, we asked an expert debater to cre-
ate the initial GPR-KB by suggesting common
claims and preparing matching rebuttals. The full
process is detailed in §3.2.

To assess the usefulness of the suggested claims
and rebuttals in the real world, we performed sev-
eral steps of labeling on the dataset we constructed
in Mirkin et al. (2018), containing spoken argu-

2Video of the debate at https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=m3u-1yttrVw

mentative content discussing controversial topics.
Details of this process, along with an analysis
showing the high coverage obtained by our knowl-
edge base, are described in §4.

Another major challenge is the development
of automatic methods for identifying whether
knowledge-base claims are mentioned by speak-
ers. We break this problem into a three-stage fun-
nel – identifying whether: (i) a claim is relevant to
the topic; (ii) the claim’s stance aligns with that
of the speaker; (iii) the claim was made by the
speaker. We provide simple baseline results for
this third step (§5). Interestingly, we observe that
simply selecting the claim with the highest accep-
tance rate in the training data (without looking at
the text) provides a challenging baseline.

The main contributions of this work are (i) the
introduction of a novel task in NLU: producing
rebuttal in response to a long argumentative text
(ii) a manually constructed GPR-KB shared across
multiple topics (iii) an additional layer of labeling
to our dataset from Mirkin et al. (2018) for such
claims (iv) a baseline for detecting whether such a
claim was mentioned in a speech.

2 Related Work

In Mirkin et al. (2018) we introduced the task
of Listening Comprehension over argumentative
content. That work analyzes recorded speeches,
and tries to identify whether arguments from iDe-
bate3 are mentioned in the speech. Similarly, in
Lavee et al. (2019) we addressed this task by first
mining arguments from a large news corpus, and
then identifying the arguments which are men-
tioned in speeches.

This work complements our previous works in
two ways. First, the GPR-KB constructed here
is of general claims, with wide cross-topic rel-
evance. It facilitates Listening Comprehension
for topics not mentioned in iDebate, or topics for
which automatic argument mining does not yield
satisfactory results. Second, while Mirkin et al.
(2018) mention that the iDebate counter points
can in principle be used for rebuttal, and Lavee
et al. (2019) suggest mining opposing arguments
from their corpus to counter arguments mentioned
in speeches, pursuing both ideas is left for future
work. We pick up the baton (in the context of the
GPR-KB suggested here), and annotate the valid-
ity of the counter arguments as rebuttal to the ideas

3https://idebate.org/debatabase

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m3u-1yttrVw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m3u-1yttrVw


5593

expressed in a matching speech.
Response generation has been the subject of

much research, using a wide variety of methods
(e.g. Ritter et al., 2011; Sugiyama et al., 2013;
Shin et al., 2015; Yan et al., 2016; Xing et al.,
2017). In the context of dialog systems (see re-
cent survey in Chen et al., 2017), there is usually
a distinction between task-oriented systems (Wen
et al., 2016) and open-domain ones (Mazaré et al.,
2018; Weizenbaum, 1966). The task here can be
seen as lying in between the two: on the one hand
it allows for a response to speeches on a variety of
topics; on the other, the response is restricted to be
a rebuttal of a claim made in the speech. A major
difference from dialog systems is that in this task
the analysis is of a complete speech - rather than
taking turns, and the goal is to respond to some of
the claims - but not necessarily all.

In the context of computational argumentation
much attention has been given to mapping re-
buttal or disagreement among arguments. Such
works include datasets exemplifying these rela-
tions (Walker et al., 2012; Peldszus and Stede,
2015a; Musi et al., 2017), modeling them (Sridhar
et al., 2015) and explicitly detecting them (Rosen-
thal and McKeown, 2015; Peldszus and Stede,
2015b; Wachsmuth et al., 2018). The GPR-KB in
this work is reminiscent of argument datasets that
depict rebuttal relations, but the arguments are of a
different type, being manually authored as general
and applicable to a wide range of topics.

Most similar to our work is the task of gener-
ating an argument from an opposing stance for a
given statement (Hua and Wang, 2018; Hua et al.,
2019). These works present a neural-based gener-
ative approach, and experiment with user-written
posts. Our task differs in that the input is longer
text, potentially containing multiple arguments.

3 Data

3.1 Motions and Speeches

The speeches analyzed in this work are the 200
speeches provided by Mirkin et al. (2018). Each
speech debates one of 50 motions originating from
iDebate. In this data, the phrasing of the motions is
often simplified to include an explicit topic and ac-
tion. For example, the iDebate motion This House
would introduce goal line technology in football is
simplified to We should introduce goal line tech-
nology, where the topic is goal line technology and
the action is introduce.

Speeches are evenly distributed between mo-
tions, each having two speeches supporting it (i.e.
the speaker is arguing in favor of the motion) and
two contesting it. They were recorded by 14 dif-
ferent speakers. A speech is given in several for-
mats. We use the recorded audios and manually-
created transcriptions. Recordings are about 4
minutes long, and the transcript texts contain on
average 28.7 sentences and 833.1 tokens.

Lastly, the dataset contains claims taken from
iDebate along with annotations identifying spe-
cific claims mentioned in particular speeches.
Herein we refer to this data as iDebate18.

3.2 Knowledge base construction

An experienced competitive debater was solicited
to author claims that tend to come up in debates
across varied topics, and to write a rebuttal argu-
ment for each such claim (see the Appendix for
the guidelines). She was not given access to any
of the iDebate18 motions, which are analyzed later
on. In total, 39 pairs were constructed in this way.

Texts were allowed to incorporate the special to-
kens [ACTION] and [TOPIC], which are replaced
by the debate topic and suggested action when ap-
plied to a specific motion or speech. For exam-
ple, in the context of the motion We should intro-
duce goal line technology, the claim [ACTION]
[TOPIC] will encourage better choices is trans-
lated to introducing goal line technology will en-
courage better choices.

In a second phase, the claim-rebuttal pairs were
edited by the authors, as follows:

(i) Some rebuttal texts were written with the
context of a full speech in mind, and included seg-
ments that refer to what a debater would include in
such a speech. For example, one included the seg-
ment ”I have proven that this method is effective”.
Such segments were edited out.

(ii) For some claims, it seemed that an oppo-
site claim could also be made. In these cases
the negation of the claim was also added to the
knowledge base, along with an appropriate rebut-
tal. For example, in addition to the claim ”[AC-
TION] [TOPIC] is the most practical way to solve
the problem.”, we also added the claim ”[AC-
TION] [TOPIC] is not the most practical way to
solve the problem.”.

After these modifications, the final knowledge
base includes 55 claim-rebuttal pairs. Claims are
always one short single sentence, with an average



5594

Claim Rebuttal
We must limit personal
choice in this case

The greater good means nothing if the rights of individuals are being vio-
lated. It doesn’t make sense to violate rights in order to protect them.

[ACTION] [TOPIC] is
good for the economy

While we need to take the economy into account when making decisions,
it cannot be the sole consideration or even the top priority in many cases.
In this case, the harms outweigh any benefits there may be to the economy.

We need to protect the
weakest members of
society

A truly fair society is one where different people are afforded similar rights
and are also trusted to look after themselves. While weaker segments of
society can be more vulnerable, this does not justify paternalistic policies
that are not beneficial for society as a whole.

Table 1: Examples of GP-claims and matching rebuttals, created through the process described in §3.2.

length of 8.5 tokens. Rebuttals are longer, on av-
erage 1.8 sentences long, and containing on aver-
age 32.9 tokens. Three examples from the GPR-
KB are given in Table 1; henceforth we refer to
the generated claims as GP-claims, or simply as
claims when the context is clear.

4 Annotation Experiments

Four annotation experiments are described next,
aimed at assessing the applicability of the gener-
ated GPR-KB to the real world. Each of the fol-
lowing subsections describes one experiment and
its results. An overview of the whole process is
depicted in Figure 1. The full annotation guide-
lines for each experiment appear in the Appendix.

4.1 Cross-Topic Relevancy

The GP-claims were written based on the experi-
ence of a professional debater, but without context
of specific topics. The first annotation experiment
aims to establish whether these claims indeed at-
tain the desired goal of being applicable to a varied
set of topics. For each motion in iDebate18, and
for each GP-claim, we asked annotators to decide
whether the claim supports the motion, opposes
it or is not relevant4. Annotation was done by 7
experienced annotators, and 5 answers were col-
lected for each question.

A GP-claim was considered relevant to a mo-
tion when marked as supporting or opposing it by
most annotators. The stance of relevant claims
towards the motion was determined by majority.
When a relevant claim has an equal number of sup-
porting and opposing answers, its stance is consid-
ered undetermined.

4The stance is required for the experiment in §4.2.

Figure 1: Annotation overview: All motion-claim pairs
were annotated for whether the claim is relevant to the
motion (see §4.1). For each claim, speeches discussing
the relevant motions were annotated for whether the
claim was mentioned in the speech (see §4.2), explicitly
or implicitly. For explicitly mentioned claims, selected
speech sentences were annotated for whether the claim
was mentioned in the sentence (see §4.3). In addition,
for claims mentioned in the speech, the correspond-
ing Rebuttal Argument was annotated for whether it is
a plausible rebuttal in the context of the speech (see
§4.4). Blue rectangles indicate textual resources, violet
ones indicate annotated resources, yellow ones refer to
the relevant subsection.

Results Annotation included 2,750 claim-
motion pairs5, of which 46% are claims annotated
as relevant to the motion. 20% are annotated as
supporting the motion, 26% as opposing it, and a
negligible number have an undetermined stance.

On average, 25.4 claims are annotated as rele-
vant per motion. Inter-annotator agreement (av-
erage Cohen’s Kappa (Cohen, 1960) over pairs of
annotators), is 0.52 for the three-labels task, and
0.45 for the binary label of relevant/irrelevant.

Figure 2 shows the distribution of claims vs. the
5All pairs of 50 motions and 55 claims.



5595

31%

13%

20%

15%
16%

5%

0%

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

30%

35%

[0,10) [10,20) [20,30) [30,40) [40,50) 50

%
 o

f 
cl

ai
m

s

# of relevant motions

Figure 2: The distribution of GP-claims vs. the number
of motions annotated as relevant.

number of motions annotated as relevant. Of note,
many claims are relevant to various motions: 56%
(sum of the four right-most bars) are relevant to at
least 20 (out of 50) motions. However, only 5%
are phrased in a manner so general that they may
be relevant to all 50 motions. An example of such
a general claim is [ACTION] [TOPIC] will harm
others. At the other extreme, the claim Animals
have rights is labeled as relevant to only 3 motions
discussing various animal-related issues: adopting
vegetarianism, banning bullfighting and legalizing
ivory trade.

The majority of the claims are therefore general
enough to be relevant to a substantial portion of
the motions, but not so general as to make them
trivially relevant to all motions.

4.2 Usage in Spoken Content

Having established that GP-claims are potentially
relevant to many motions, the question still re-
mains of whether or not they are actually com-
monly made by people debating these motions.
This is a crucial point for using them as a basis
for generating a rebuttal-response.

To assess this, annotators were shown speeches
from iDebate18, alongside a matching list of GP-
claims determined to be relevant in the previous
stage. Specifically, claims annotated as support-
ing a motion were shown for speeches in which
the speaker is arguing in favor of that motion,
and vice versa. To allow for a greater number
of potential claims, those which at least 2 anno-
tators considered relevant (rather than 3) were in-
cluded. Claims with an undetermined stance were
excluded.

Speeches were presented in both audio and text
formats, and annotators were allowed to choose
between listening, reading or both. They then had
to determine whether each claim is mentioned in

the speech explicitly, implicitly or not at all. The
number of claims presented for each speech was
limited to 20; in case a larger number was deter-
mined to be relevant, the question was split into
chunks of 20 claims.

In total, 3,246 claim-speech pairs required an-
notation, almost four times more than the corre-
sponding annotation included in iDebate18. An-
notation was done using the Figure-Eight6 crowd-
sourcing platform, with 10 annotators per ques-
tion. Clearly, this is a challenging task for the
crowd, and hence a selected group of 22 annota-
tors was used. Selection was based on their past
performance on other tasks done by our team.

To further validate the annotation, the list of
claims presented for each speech included claims
for which the correct label was known a-priori.
These include claims annotated in the previous ex-
periment as irrelevant for the motion, for which
it is assumed that the correct label is “not men-
tioned”. In addition, annotation was done in
batches. Claim-speech pairs for which unanimous
answers were obtained in earlier batches were in-
cluded in newer ones, with the correct label as-
sumed to be this unanimous answer.

A claim is considered mentioned in a speech if a
majority labeled it as mentioned (i.e. summing up
implicit and explicit answer counts). Otherwise
it is considered as not mentioned. A mentioned
claim is explicit in the speech if its explicit an-
swers count strictly exceeds its implicit answers
count. Otherwise, it is considered implicit.

Results 41% of claim-speech pairs were labeled
as mentioned (7% explicit and 34% implicit). On
average, each claim is explicit in 4.3 speeches, and
implicit in 17.6 speeches.

Pairwise inter-annotator agreement is 0.37
when considering two labels: mentioned or not.
The average error rate of all annotators, on ques-
tions with a prior known answer, is 7%, suggesting
a relatively high-quality annotation.

The prior of a claim is defined as the number of
speeches in which it was found to be mentioned,
divided by the number of speeches in which it
was labeled. Figure 3 depicts the percentage of
claims vs. their prior, separately for explicit and
implicit mentions. Some claims are never men-
tioned in any speech: 20% are never mentioned
explicitly and ∼10% are not mentioned at all, not
even implicitly. Note that for the most part, claims

6www.figure-eight.com (formerly CrowdFlower).

www.figure-eight.com


5596

are mentioned in less than half of the speeches for
which they may be relevant.

In conclusion, the results suggest that GP-
claims are often used in spoken content discussing
various topics, and that this is not due to a small
subset of trivial claims. Rather, most claims ap-
pear at least once, but usually in no more than half
of the speeches for relevant motions.

These properties make automatic detection of
these claims in speeches an interesting and chal-
lenging task.

Comparison to iDebate18 Table 2 compares
the results of this annotation to that of iDebate18,
which contains topic-specific claims annotated for
the same set of speeches7.

Surprisingly, topic-specific claims are no more
likely to occur in speeches discussing that partic-
ular topic. Moreover, the larger number of poten-
tial GP-claims leads to a higher absolute number
of mentions, to the extent that – in contrast with
iDebate18 – all speeches include at least one men-
tion. Hence, the GPR-KB augments the iDebate18
dataset, both by increasing the number of claims
that are to be sought in a speech, and by suggest-
ing claims to speeches for which iDebate18 does
not contain any.

Speech stat. GP-claims iDebate18
Coverage 100% 86.5%
Avg. Mentions 6.7 1.8
Avg. Potential 16.2 4.4

Table 2: A comparison of GP-claims and topic-specific
iDebate claims annotation. Coverage is the percentage
of speeches with at least one claim annotated as men-
tioned. Avg. Potential is the average number of possi-
bly relevant claims per speech, and Avg. Mentions is
the average number of claims annotated as mentioned.

4.3 Where was it said?

A straightforward approach to determining
whether a claim was mentioned in a speech is
to go over its sentences, one by one, and decide
whether the claim is equivalent to a sentence
or implied by it, as indeed is done in Mirkin
et al. (2018). This is a challenging task since, as
described above, most mentions are implicit. In
many cases one can not point to a single sentence

7Available answers in iDebate18 are mentioned or not
mentioned.

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

%
 o

f 
lc

la
im

s

Speech prior

Explicit Implicit

Figure 3: The distribution of GP-claims vs. speech
prior (the percentage of labeled speeches in which a
claim is mentioned), for explicit or implicit mentions.

mentioning the claim, as the claim is implied by
the general stance of the speaker.

Even when a sentence does imply a claim, auto-
matically inferring that may be hard. For example,
for the motion We should end cheerleading, a rele-
vant opposing claim is Ending cheerleading limits
personal choice. We identified a sentence imply-
ing it, The only clear moral system we can derive
is one in which we value individual preference, yet
it seems hard to deduce this automatically without
considering the surrounding context which clari-
fies that the argument is about personal choice.

An annotation task for identifying where a
claim was mentioned is considerably more diffi-
cult than the aforementioned annotations. Deter-
mining ground truth is far from trivial, as anno-
tators may point to different sentences within the
same argument as being the location of the claim.

Nonetheless, such information seems a valuable
part of a GPR-KB. To provide at least a partial so-
lution, we annotated claim-sentence pairs directly,
asking whether the claim is mentioned within the
sentence. Algorithms developed on such data can
then predict a claim as mentioned in a speech
when it is mentioned in one of its sentences. This
form of annotation is simple and facilitates easier
collection of a large number of labels. To enable
research in this direction, such annotations were
performed both for GP-claims and, since none are
provided in iDebate18, for claims from iDebate.

A careful selection of pairs to annotate is re-
quired since there are too many pairs for a compre-
hensive labeling, and sampling at random would
rarely yield a pair such that the claim is men-
tioned in the sentence. Thus, we limited annota-
tion to claims which were labeled as mentioned
explicitly (and assumed all iDebate claims to be



5597

so), and paired them only with sentences which
are somewhat similar to them (based on word2vec,
Mikolov et al., 2013). Annotation was again done
by 10 crowd annotators.

Results Annotation included 4,271 GP-claim
and sentence pairs and 2,164 iDebate-claim and
sentence pairs, with a similarity of at least 0.5 and
0.7 (resp.) between claim and sentence. The us-
age of general crowd required some quality con-
trol. Annotators not meeting one or more of the
following criteria were removed, along with their
answers: Answer at least 10 questions; have at
least 5 common answers with 3 different peers;
have average agreement with peers ≥ 0.2.

The resulting inter-annotator agreement was
0.55 for GP-claims and 0.46 for iDebate claims.
Considering only pairs with at least 5 remaining
answers, after filtering out annotators as described
above, 20% of the GP-claims-sentence pairs were
annotated as a match (and 17% of iDebate pairs).

4.4 Validity of Rebuttal Arguments

Recall that rebuttal arguments in the GPR-KB
were written without any specific contexts in
which they are to be used. Hence, even if the claim
they respond to is indeed mentioned in a speech, it
is not clear whether the pre-written rebuttal would
consist a plausible rebuttal response to the speech.

We assessed the effectiveness of the rebuttal ar-
guments using a two-step procedure. First, as in
§4.2, annotators were shown a speech and a claim,
and determined whether the claim is mentioned in
the speech. Then, if they marked that claim as
mentioned, its pre-written rebuttal was shown, and
they were asked whether it is a plausible response
to the mentioned claim in the context of the speech.

This two-step annotation procedure was chosen
for three reasons. First, requiring annotators to as-
sess whether a claim is mentioned in a speech mo-
tivates them to review its content again and locate
the relevant parts in which the claim is expressed.
Second, it prevents irrelevant answers from those
who do not think that the claim is mentioned in the
speech. Finally, asking again about a claim’s men-
tion enables result validation, when the answer is
known a-priori with high confidence. Specifically,
claims for which the annotation is unanimous were
used for this purpose.

For each claim, we annotated two randomly
sampled speeches mentioning it. This amounted
to 103 rebuttal-speech pairs, since not all 55 GP-

claims were mentioned in two speeches. We relied
on the same group of crowd annotators who took
part in the previous experiment, and once again re-
quired 10 answers for each question.

Results Measuring agreement using Cohen’s
Kappa in this scenario is problematic. First, the
label distribution is very biased: If rebuttal ar-
guments are always plausible responses, then the
correct answer is always yes. Any deviation from
that will greatly reduce the score, making it an ill-
fitting measure for such data (Jeni et al., 2013).
Second, the small number of questions leads to
many annotator-pairs whose set of common ques-
tions, on which this score is computed, is rather
small. This makes the computation unstable, since
when averaging over all pairs, such small intersec-
tions contribute as much as the large ones.

Instead, looking at the majority annotation for
each rebuttal argument, we observed that in 87%
of the cases it indicates that the rebuttal is plausi-
ble. This suggests that regardless of whether an-
notators agree with one another, they tend to agree
that the rebuttal is usually plausible. Moreover,
computing the average kappa between annotators
and the majority annotation, and considering only
those annotators who answered at least 20 ques-
tions, yields 0.47. This value for such biased data,
alongside an average error rate of 4% on the ques-
tions with known answers, suggests that the anno-
tation is of reasonable quality.

Analysis The results above show most rebut-
tals are appropriate in the vast majority of con-
texts. We therefore decided that continuing with
this costly annotation is not needed. Furthermore,
manual analysis of cases in which the rebuttal
was unanimously found inappropriate showed this
stemmed from the rebuttal being inappropriate for
the topic, rather than a specific speech. For ex-
ample, when discussing goal-line technology, in
response to the claim ”introducing goal-line tech-
nology will lead to greater problems in the future”,
the pre-written rebuttal is ”Governments have an
obligation to their citizens in the here and now.
The better off society is today, the more resources
we will have to make the future better when it
comes”. Such a response makes several assump-
tions which are clearly violated here, such as the
involvement of government. Thus, further valida-
tion of rebuttals may benefit from first verifying
their relevancy to the topic.



5598

4.5 The GPR-KB-55 Dataset
The annotation results show that it is possible to
construct a concise set of general claims, such that
in most speeches at least one of them will come
up. Furthermore, they show that a rebuttal to these
claims can be authored independently of the spe-
cific motions and speeches, while nonetheless be-
ing a plausible response in their context. Table
3 summarizes the statistics for the pair-annotation
experiments. The resulting dataset is freely avail-

Annotation # pairs # positives
Motion – GP-claim 2,750 1,265
Speech – GP-claim 3,246 1,491
Sentence – GP-claim 4,271 854
Sentence –
iDebate claim 2,164 368

Table 3: Summary of annotation experiment results.
Positive pairs are those in which a majority of the an-
notators indicated that the claim is relevant (motion) or
mentioned (speech, sentence).

able, and is one of the main contributions of this
work8. We name the new dataset GPR-KB-55.

5 Detecting claims in speeches

Next, we establish baseline results for determin-
ing whether a GP-claim is mentioned in a speech,
and compare them to results obtained for iDebate
claims. For a fair comparison of the two data
sources, we assume for both prior knowledge as to
which claims are relevant for a motion, as well as
their stance towards it. Hence, we take the label-
ing of GP-claims to motions (described in §4.1) as
given. The following algorithms are considered:

word2vec The best performing baseline of
Mirkin et al. (2018) utilizes a detailed description
of each iDebate claim, comprised of several sen-
tences. It examines the speech sentence by sen-
tence, and for each sentence computes its tf-idf
weighted word2vec (w2v) similarity to the detailed
claim description. A claim is then scored by tak-
ing the maximum over all claim-sentence simi-
larity scores. We use this method (w2v-i18) as a
baseline for the GP-claims as well, yet sentences
are scored by their similarity to the GP-claim text,
since no detailed topic-specific description exists.
The latter is referred to as w2v-GP-claims. For

8https://www.research.ibm.com/haifa/
dept/vst/debating_data.shtml

comparison, we repeat the experiment using only
the iDebate claim texts (w2v-i18-claims).

Bert Recently, the Bert architecture (Devlin
et al., 2018) has proven successful on similar
tasks, and we provide its results as an additional
baseline. Specifically, we select at random 80% of
the motions as an ad-hoc train set, and the remain-
der as a test set (bert-test). Bert was trained on
labeled claim-sentence pairs corresponding to mo-
tions from the train set, in two settings, consider-
ing: (i) GP-claims (∼3K pairs) – bert, and (ii) both
GP-claims and iDebate claims (almost 5K pairs) –
bert+. In inference, given a claim and a speech,
sentences semantically similar to the claim (as in
§4.3) are scored by the fine-tuned network. Their
maximum is the outputted claim-speech score.

Prior One important difference between GP-
claims and iDebate claims is that the same GP-
claim can (and does) appear across different mo-
tions and speeches. Specifically, given a train-
ing set, the a-priori probability that a GP-claim
will be mentioned in a speech can be computed.
Then, test claims are scored with their computed
a-priori probability without considering the text of
the speech. This baseline is referred to as prior.

Results Figure 4 plots precision-recall curves
comparing claim detection baselines over iDebate
claims and GP-claims. As observed by Mirkin
et al. (2018), w2v works best when given a de-
tailed iDebate claim description. Without it, per-
formance is comparable for the two claim sources,
and is rather poor for both. Prior results were ob-
tained by using a leave-one-motion-out cross vali-
dation: at each fold a single motion is left out and
the others are used for training. Its precision-recall
curve shows that when considering these statistics,
it presents a challenging baseline.

To compare the bert baseline to others, the
precision-recall curves for both prior9 and w2v
were computed over speeches from bert-test. As
shown in Figure 5, while bert clearly outperforms
w2v, it nonetheless does not reach the prior base-
line. The additional data provided in training to
bert+ does not help.

Note that this comparison is between methods
which are derived from different types of data.
Here bert is trained only on explicitly-mentioned
claims, with respect to (ostensibly) semantically

9Here, a-priori probabilities were computed on all mo-
tions not in bert-test, then applied to motions of bert-test.

https://www.research.ibm.com/haifa/dept/vst/debating_data.shtml
https://www.research.ibm.com/haifa/dept/vst/debating_data.shtml


5599

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1

P
re
ci
si
o
n

Recall

w2v-i18

w2v-i18-claims

w2v-GP-claims

prior

Figure 4: Precision-Recall curves for the matching of
GP-claims and iDebate claims to all 200 speeches.

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1

P
re
ci
si
o
n

Recall

prior bert
w2v bert+

Figure 5: Precision-Recall curves for matching GP-
claims to speeches, for bert-test (20% of motions).

similar sentences. On the other hand, the prior
baseline is computed based on all claims, and their
annotation w.r.t. the entire speech. This may be
part of the reason why bert, which has proven to
be successful on many NLP tasks, here achieves
lower performance than this simple baseline.

Analysis Although prior seems like a strong
baseline in terms of precision and recall, it is prob-
ably not a desired solution by itself, since it sim-
ply produces high probability responses regardless
of the rebutted content. For example, among its
top-20% predictions, precision is 83% and recall is
40%, yet they include only 22% of available GP-
claims. Moreover, 77% of these top-20% are the
same 5 claims. This reflects a property of the data:
there are a few claims which are relevant to many
motions, and are also implicitly mentioned in most
speeches. Detection algorithms should be aware
of this property, and account for it when evalu-
ating performance. At the same time, a claim’s
acceptance prior can be useful for inference. For
example, it could be combined with other data in
a more sophisticated algorithm, or could direct the
parameter choice of such an algorithm.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

We presented the problem of producing a rebuttal
response to a long argumentative text. This task is
especially challenging when the discussed topic is
not known in advance, and, accordingly, potential
responses are not readily available.

Toward the goal of addressing this problem we
constructed a multi-layered dataset: (i) A Knowl-
edge base of GP-claims and corresponding rebut-
tal arguments, which are shown to be applicable
for a wide variety of topics; (ii) A mapping of
these claims to motions of iDebate18 in which
they might be applicable; (iii) An annotation of
the stance of applicable claims; (iv) An annotation
for which claims are actually mentioned in rele-
vant speeches, and whether they are mentioned ex-
plicitly or implicitly; (v) For explicitly mentioned
claims, a (partial) annotation of which sentences
imply them and which do not.

In addition, we presented baselines for the re-
lated Listening Comprehension task, suggesting
that this is a complicated problem. Using state-of-
the-art sentence embedding yielded an F1-score
of 0.64, while trivially taking the claim with the
highest prior to be mentioned scored 0.7810. This
suggests that careful evaluation is required.

While baselines are provided only for detecting
GP-claims in spoken content, future work should
aim to solve the problem as a whole - either by
developing algorithms that determine relevance
and stance of GP-claims to given motions, or by
forgoing these stages, and successfully deciding
whether a claim was mentioned in a speech, with-
out first focusing on relevant claims.

Our results suggest that GP rebuttal arguments
usually work well as a response to speeches in
which the matching claim was mentioned. How-
ever, this is by no means perfect; and in some 13%
of the cases they do not. It is interesting to further
identify and understand these cases. By doing so,
an automatic system could prefer responses that
it identifies as more appropriate. Moreover, un-
derstanding such cases can lead to improving the
rebuttal arguments themselves.

7 Acknowledgments

We thank the anonymous reviewers for their valu-
able comments, and Hayah Eichler for creating the
initial GPR-KB.

10Scores computed at the precision-recall intersection.



5600

References
Yonatan Bilu, Ariel Gera, Daniel Hershcovich, Ben-

jamin Sznajder, Dan Lahav, Guy Moshkowich,
Anael Malet, Assaf Gavron, and Noam Slonim.
2019. Argument invention from first principles.
In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
1013–1026, Florence, Italy. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Hongshen Chen, Xiaorui Liu, Dawei Yin, and Jiliang
Tang. 2017. A survey on dialogue systems: Recent
advances and new frontiers. ACM SIGKDD Explo-
rations Newsletter, 19(2):25–35.

Jacob Cohen. 1960. A Coefficient of Agreement for
Nominal Scales. Educational and Psychological
Measurement, 20(1):37–46.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understand-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805.

Phan Minh Dung. 1995. On the acceptability of ar-
guments and its fundamental role in nonmonotonic
reasoning, logic programming and n-person games.
Artificial intelligence, 77(2):321–357.

Xinyu Hua, Zhe Hu, and Lu Wang. 2019. Argument
generation with retrieval, planning, and realization.
In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
2661–2672, Florence, Italy. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Xinyu Hua and Lu Wang. 2018. Neural argument
generation augmented with externally retrieved evi-
dence. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers), pages 219–230, Melbourne,
Australia. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

László A Jeni, Jeffrey F Cohn, and Fernando
De La Torre. 2013. Facing imbalanced data–
recommendations for the use of performance met-
rics. In 2013 Humaine Association Conference
on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction,
pages 245–251. IEEE.

Tamar Lavee, Matan Orbach, Lili Kotlerman, Yoav
Kantor, Shai Gretz, Lena Dankin, Shachar Mirkin,
Michal Jacovi, Yonatan Bilu, Ranit Aharonov, and
Noam Slonim. 2019. Towards effective rebuttal:
Listening comprehension using corpus-wide claim
mining. 6th Workshop on Argument Mining.

Pierre-Emmanuel Mazaré, Samuel Humeau, Martin
Raison, and Antoine Bordes. 2018. Training mil-
lions of personalized dialogue agents. In EMNLP.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey
Dean. 2013. Efficient estimation of word represen-
tations in vector space. CoRR, abs/1301.3781.

Shachar Mirkin, Guy Moshkowich, Matan Orbach,
Lili Kotlerman, Yoav Kantor, Tamar Lavee, Michal
Jacovi, Yonatan Bilu, Ranit Aharonov, and Noam
Slonim. 2018. Listening comprehension over argu-
mentative content. In Proceedings of the 2018 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 719–724. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Elena Musi, Debanjan Ghosh, Mark Aakhus,
Smaranda Muresan, and Nina Wacholder. 2017.
Building an ontology of (dis) agreement space for
argument mining. SIGDIAL/SEMDIAL 2017 Joint
Session on Negotiation Dialog (position paper).

Andreas Peldszus and Manfred Stede. 2015a. An an-
notated corpus of argumentative microtexts. In Pro-
ceedings of the First Conference on Argumentation,
Lisbon, Portugal, June. to appear.

Andreas Peldszus and Manfred Stede. 2015b. To-
wards detecting counter-considerations in text. In
Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Argumentation
Mining, pages 104–109.

Alan Ritter, Colin Cherry, and William B Dolan. 2011.
Data-driven response generation in social media. In
Proceedings of the conference on empirical methods
in natural language processing, pages 583–593. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Sara Rosenthal and Kathy McKeown. 2015. I couldnt
agree more: The role of conversational structure in
agreement and disagreement detection in online dis-
cussions. In Proceedings of the 16th Annual Meet-
ing of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and
Dialogue, pages 168–177.

Andrew Shin, Ryohei Sasano, Hiroya Takamura, and
Manabu Okumura. 2015. Context-dependent auto-
matic response generation using statistical machine
translation techniques. In Proceedings of the 2015
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, pages 1345–1350.

Dhanya Sridhar, James Foulds, Bert Huang, Lise
Getoor, and Marilyn Walker. 2015. Joint models of
disagreement and stance in online debate. In Pro-
ceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics and the 7th In-
ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), volume 1,
pages 116–125.

Hiroaki Sugiyama, Toyomi Meguro, Ryuichiro Hi-
gashinaka, and Yasuhiro Minami. 2013. Open-
domain utterance generation for conversational di-
alogue systems using web-scale dependency struc-
tures. In Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2013 Confer-
ence, pages 334–338.

Henning Wachsmuth, Shahbaz Syed, and Benno Stein.
2018. Retrieval of the best counterargument with-
out prior topic knowledge. In Proceedings of the

https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P19-1097
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P19-1255
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P19-1255
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P18-1021
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P18-1021
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P18-1021
http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.11889
http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.11889
http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.11889
http://arxiv.org/abs/1809.01984
http://arxiv.org/abs/1809.01984
http://arxiv.org/abs/1301.3781
http://arxiv.org/abs/1301.3781
http://aclweb.org/anthology/D18-1078
http://aclweb.org/anthology/D18-1078
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P18-1023
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P18-1023


5601

56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 241–251, Melbourne, Australia. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Marilyn A Walker, Jean E Fox Tree, Pranav Anand,
Rob Abbott, and Joseph King. 2012. A corpus for
research on deliberation and debate. In LREC, pages
812–817. Istanbul.

Joseph Weizenbaum. 1966. Eliza–a computer program
for the study of natural language communication be-
tween man and machine. Commun. ACM, 9(1):36–
45.

Tsung-Hsien Wen, Milica Gasic, Nikola Mrksic,
Lina Maria Rojas-Barahona, Pei-Hao Su, Stefan
Ultes, David Vandyke, and Steve J. Young. 2016.
A network-based end-to-end trainable task-oriented
dialogue system. In EACL.

Chen Xing, Wei Wu, Yu Wu, Jie Liu, Yalou Huang,
Ming Zhou, and Wei-Ying Ma. 2017. Topic aware
neural response generation. In Thirty-First AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence.

Rui Yan, Yiping Song, and Hua Wu. 2016. Learning
to respond with deep neural networks for retrieval-
based human-computer conversation system. In
Proceedings of the 39th International ACM SIGIR
conference on Research and Development in Infor-
mation Retrieval, pages 55–64. ACM.

https://doi.org/10.1145/365153.365168
https://doi.org/10.1145/365153.365168
https://doi.org/10.1145/365153.365168
http://arxiv.org/abs/1604.04562
http://arxiv.org/abs/1604.04562

