










































Does more data always yield better translations?


Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 152–161,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 27 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Does more data always yield better translations?
Guillem Gascó, Martha-Alicia Rocha, Germán Sanchis-Trilles,

Jesús Andrés-Ferrer and Francisco Casacuberta
Departament de Sistemes Informàtics i Computació

Universitat Politècnica de València
Camı́ de Vera s/n, 46022 València, Spain

{ggasco,mrocha,gsanchis,jandres,fcn}@dsic.upv.es

Abstract

Nowadays, there are large amounts of data
available to train statistical machine trans-
lation systems. However, it is not clear
whether all the training data actually help
or not. A system trained on a subset of such
huge bilingual corpora might outperform
the use of all the bilingual data. This paper
studies such issues by analysing two train-
ing data selection techniques: one based
on approximating the probability of an in-
domain corpus; and another based on in-
frequent n-gram occurrence. Experimental
results not only report significant improve-
ments over random sentence selection but
also an improvement over a system trained
with the whole available data. Surprisingly,
the improvements are obtained with just a
small fraction of the data that accounts for
less than 0.5% of the sentences. After-
wards, we show that a much larger room for
improvement exists, although this is done
under non-realistic conditions.

1 Introduction

Globalisation and the popularisation of the Inter-
net have lead to a rapid increase in the amount of
bilingual corpora available. Entities such as the
European Union, the United Nations and other
multinational organisations need to translate all
the documentation they generate. Such transla-
tions happen every day and provide very large
multilingual corpora, which are oftentimes diffi-
cult to process and significantly increase the com-
putational requirements needed to train statistical
machine translation (SMT) systems. For instance,
the corpora made available for recent machine
translation evaluations are in the order of 1 billion
running words (Callison-Burch et al., 2010).

However, two main problems arise when at-
tempting to use this huge pool of sentences for
training SMT systems: firstly, a large portion of
this data is obtained from domains that differ from

that in which the SMT system is to be used or as-
sessed; secondly, the use of all this data for train-
ing the system increases the computational train-
ing requirements. Despite the previous remarks,
the de facto standard consists in training SMT sys-
tems with all the available data. This is due to
the widespread misconception that the more data
a system is trained with, the better its performance
should be. Although the previous statement is the-
oretically true if all the data belongs to the same
domain, this is not the case in the problems tack-
led by most of the SMT systems. For instance,
enterprises often need to build on-demand sys-
tems (Yuste et al., 2010). In this case, since we
are interested in translating some specific text, it
is not clear whether training a system with all data
yields better performance than training it with a
wisely selected subset of bilingual sentences.

The bilingual sentence selection (BSS) task is
stated as the problem of selecting the best sub-
set of bilingual sentences from an available pool
of sentences, with which to train a SMT system.
This paper is concerned to BSS, and mainly two
ideas are developed.

On the one hand, two BSS strategies that at-
tempt to build better translation systems are anal-
ysed. Such strategies are able to improve state-of-
the-art translation quality without the very high
computational resources that are required when
using the complete pool of sentences. Both tech-
niques span through two orthogonal criteria when
selecting bilingual sentences from the available
pool: avoiding to introduce a bias in the original
data distribution, and increasing the informative-
ness of the corpus.

On the other hand, we prove that among all pos-
sible subsets from the sentence pool, there is at
least a small one that yields large improvements
(up to 10 BLEU points) with respect to a system
trained with all the data. In order to retrieve such
subset, we had to use an oracle that employs infor-
mation extracted from the reference translations

152



only for the purpose of selecting bilingual sen-
tences. However, references are not used at any
stage within the translation system for obtaining
the hypotheses. Note that although we are not
able to achieve such an improvement without an
oracle, this result restates the BSS problem as an
interesting approach not only for reducing com-
putational effort but also for significantly boost-
ing performance. To our knowledge, no previous
work has quantified the room of improvement in
which BSS techniques could incur.

In order to assess the performance of the dif-
ferent BSS techniques, translation results are ob-
tained by using a standard state-of-the-art SMT
system (Koehn et al., 2007). The most recent lit-
erature defines the SMT problem (Papineni et al.,
1998; Och and Ney, 2002) as follows: given an
input sentence f from a certain source language,
the purpose is to find an output sentence ê in a
certain target language such that

ê = arg max
e

K∑
k=1

λkhk(f , e) (1)

where hk(f , e) is a score function representing an
important feature for the translation of f into e,
as for example the language model of the target
language, a reordering model or several transla-
tion models. λk are the log-linear combination
weights.

The main contributions of this paper are:

• A BSS technique is analysed, which im-
proves the results obtained with a random
bilingual sentence selection strategy when
the specific domain to be translated signifi-
cantly differs from that of the pool of sen-
tences.

• Another BSS technique is analysed that, us-
ing less than 0.5% of the sentences avail-
able, significantly improves over random se-
lection, beating a system trained with all the
pool of sentences.

• We prove, by means of an oracle, that a wise
BSS technique can yield large improvements
when compared with systems trained with all
data available.

The remaining of the paper is structured as fol-
lows. Section 2 summarises the related work.
Sections 3 and 4 present two BSS techniques,
namely, probabilistic sampling and recovery of

infrequent n-grams. In Section 5 experimental re-
sults are reported. Finally, the main results of the
work and several future work directions are dis-
cussed in Section 6.

2 Related Work

Training data selection has been receiving an in-
creasing amount of attention within the SMT
community. For instance, in (Li et al., 2010;
Gascó et al., 2010) several BSS techniques, sim-
ilar to those analysed in this paper, have been
applied for training MT systems when there are
large training corpora available. However, nei-
ther such techniques have been formalised, nor its
performance thoroughly analysed. A similar ap-
proach that gives weights to different subcorpora
was proposed in (Matsoukas et al., 2009).

In (Lu et al., 2007), information retrieval meth-
ods are used in order to produce different sub-
models which are then weighted according to the
sentence to be translated. In such work, authors
define the baseline as the result obtained train-
ing only with the corpus that share the same do-
main of the test. Afterwards they claim that they
are able to improve baseline translation quality by
adding new sentences retrieved with their method.
However, they neither compare their technique
with random sentence selection, nor with a model
trained with all the corpora.

Although the techniques that are applied for
BSS are often very similar to those applied for ac-
tive learning (AL), both problems are essentially
different. Since the AL strategies assume that
the pool of sentences are not translated, they are
usually interested in finding the best monolingual
subset of sentences to be translated by a human
annotator. In contrast, in BSS, it is assumed that a
fairly large amount of bilingual corpora is readily
available, and the main goal consists in selecting
only those sentences which will maximise system
performance.

Some works have applied sentence selection in
small scale AL frameworks. These works extend
the training corpora at most with 5000 sentences.
In (Ananthakrishnan et al., 2010), sentences are
selected by means of discriminative techniques.
In (Haffari et al., 2009) a technique is proposed
for increasing the counts of phrases that are con-
sidered infrequent. Both works significantly dif-
fer from the current work not only on the frame-
work, but also on the scale of the experiments, the

153



proposed techniques and the obtained improve-
ments. Similar ideas applied to adaptation prob-
lems have been proposed in (Moore and Lewis,
2010; Axelrod et al., 2011).

3 Probabilistic Sampling

As discussed in Section 2, BSS has inherently
attached many meaningful links with AL tech-
niques. Selecting samples for learning our mod-
els, incurs in a well-known difficulty in AL, the
so-called sample bias problem (Dasgupta, 2009).
This problem, which is spread to the BSS case,
is summarised as the distortion introduced by the
active strategy into the probability distribution un-
derlying the training corpus. This bias forces the
training algorithm to learn a distorted probability
model which can significantly differ from the ac-
tual one.

In order to further analyse the sampling bias
problem, consider the maximum likelihood esti-
mation (MLE) of a probability model, pθ(e, f)
for a given corpus of N data points,{(en, fn)},
sampled from the actual probability distribution,
Pr(e, f). Recall that e denotes a target sen-
tence whereas f stands for its source counter-
part. MLE techniques aims at minimising the
Kullback-Leibler divergence between the actual
unknown probability distribution and the proba-
bility model (Bishop, 2006), defined as

KL(Pr | pθ) =
∑
e,f

Pr(e, f) log

(
Pr(e, f)

pθ(e, f)

)
(2)

When minimising, Eq. (2) is simplified to

θ̂ = arg max
θ

∑
e,f

Pr(e, f) log(pθ(e, f)) (3)

which is approximated by a sufficiently large
dataset under the commonly hold assumption that
it is independently and identically distributed ac-
cording to Pr(e, f) as

θ̂ = arg max
θ

∑
n

log(pθ(en, fn)) (4)

Therefore, by perturbing the sample {(en, fn)}
with an active strategy, we are, in fact, modifying
the approximation to Eq.(3) and learning a differ-
ent underlying probability distribution.

In this section a statistical framework is pro-
posed to build systems with BSS while avoiding

the sample bias. The proposed approach relies in
conserving the probability distribution of the task
domain by wisely selecting the bilingual pairs to
be used from the whole pool of sentences. Hence,
it is mandatory to exclude sentences from the pool
that distort the actual probability. In order to ap-
proximate the probability distribution, we assume
that a small but representative corpus is avail-
able from the task domain. This corpus, referred
henceforth as the in-domain corpus, provides a
way to build an initial model which approximates
the actual probability of the system. The pool of
sentences will be oppositely denoted as the out-
of-domain corpus.

The actual probability of the task domain, the
so called in-domain probability, is approximated
with the following model

p(e, f , |e|, |f |) = p(e, f | |e|, |f |) · p(|e|, |f |) (5)

where p(|e|, |f |) denotes the in-domain length
probability, and p(e, f | |e|, |f |) the in-domain
bilingual probability.

The length probability is estimated by MLE

p(|e|, |f |) = N(|e|+ |f |)
N

(6)

where N(|e|+|f |) is the number of bilingual pairs
in the in-domain corpus such that their lengths
sum up to |e|+|f | and N denotes the total num-
ber of sentences. Note that no distinction is made
between source and target lengths since the model
is intended for sampling.

The complexity of the in-domain bilingual
probability distribution, p(e, f | |e|, |f |), requires
a more sophisticated approximation

p(e, f/|e|, |f |) =
exp(

∑
k γkfk(e, f))

Z
(7)

being Z a normalisation constant; and where
fk(. . .) and γk are the features of the model and
their respective parametric weights. Specifically,
four logarithmic features were considered for this
sampling technique: a direct and an inverse IBM
model 4 (Brown et al., 1994); and both, source
and target, 5-gram language models. All fea-
ture models are estimated in the in-domain cor-
pus with standard techniques (Brown et al., 1994;
Stolcke, 2002). As a first approach, the parame-
ters of the log-linear model in Eq. (7), γk, were
uniformly fixed to 1.

154



Once we have an appropriate model for the
in-domain probability distribution, the proposed
method randomly samples a given number of
bilingual pairs from the out-of-domain corpora
(the pool of sentences). The process of extend-
ing the in-domain corpus with additional bilin-
gual pairs from the out-of-domain corpus is sum-
marised as follows:

• Decide according to the in-domain length
probability in Eq. (6), how many samples
should be drawn for each length, i.e. divide
the number of sentences to add into length
dependent buckets.

• Randomly draw the number of samples
specified in each bucket according to the
in-domain bilingual probability in Eq. (7)
among all the bilingual sentences that share
the current bucket length.

Although the pool of sentences is typically
large, it is not large enough to gather a signifi-
cant amount of probability mass. Consequently,
a small set of sentences accumulate most of the
probability mass and tend to be selected multi-
ple times. To avoid this awkward and undesired
behaviour, the sampling is performed without re-
placement.

4 Infrequent n-gram Recovery

Another criterion when confronting the BSS task
is to increase the informativeness of the training
set. Thus, it seems important to choose sentences
that provide information not seen in the training
corpus. Note that this criterion is sometimes op-
posed to the one presented in Section 3.

The performance of phrase-based machine
translation systems strongly relies in the quality
of the phrases extracted from the training sam-
ples. In most of the cases, the inference of such
phrases or rules is based on word alignments,
which cannot be computed accurately when ap-
pearing rarely in the training corpus. The extreme
case are the out-of-vocabulary words: words that
do not appear in the training set, cannot be trans-
lated. Moreover, this problem can be extended to
sequences of words (n-grams). Consider a 2-gram
fifj appearing few or no times in the training set.
Although fi and fj may appear separately in the
training set, the system might not be able to in-
fer the translation of the 2-gram fifj , which may

be different from the concatenation of the transla-
tions of both words separately.

When selecting sentences from the pool it is
important to choose sentences that contain n-
grams that have never been seen (or have been
seen just a few times) in the training set. Such
n-grams will be henceforth referred to as infre-
quent n-grams . An n-gram is considered infre-
quent when it appears less times than an infre-
quent threshold t. If the source language sen-
tences to be translated are known beforehand, the
set of infrequent n-grams can be reduced to those
present in such sentences. Then, the technique
consists in selecting from the pool those sentences
which contain infrequent n-grams present in the
source sentences to be translated.

Sentences in the pool are sorted by their infre-
quency score in order to select first the most in-
formative. Let X the set of n-grams that appear
in the sentences to be translated and w one of
them; C(w) the counts of w in the source lan-
guage training set; and N(w) the counts of w
in the source sentence f to be scored. The infre-
quency score of f is:

i(f) =
∑
w∈X

min(1, N(w)) max(0, t−C(w)) (8)

In order to avoid giving a high score to noisy
sentences with a lot of occurrences of the same in-
frequent n-gram, only one occurrence of each n-
gram is taken into account to compute the score.
In addition, the score gives more importance to
the n-grams with lowest counts in the training
set. Although it could be possible to select the
highest scored sentences, we updated the scores
each time a sentence is selected. This decision
was taken to avoid the selection of too many sen-
tences with the same infrequent n-gram. First,
sentences in the pool are scored using Equation
(8). Then, in each iteration, the sentence f∗ with
the highest score is selected, added to the training
set and removed from the pool. In addition, the
counts of the n-grams present in f∗ are updated
and, hence, the scores of the rest of the sentences
in the pool. Since rescoring the whole pool would
incur in a very high computational cost, a subop-
timal search strategy was followed, in which the
search was constrained to a given set of highest
scoring sentences. Here it was set to one million.

155



t = 1 t = 10 t = 25
tr all tr all tr all

1-gr 11.6 1.3 40.5 3.5 59.9 5.1
2-gr 38 9.8 73.2 21.3 84.9 27.9
3-gr 66.8 33.5 91.1 55.7 96.4 64.9
4-gr 87.1 65.8 98.2 85.5 99.4 90.7

Table 1: Percentage of infrequent n-grams in the TED
test set when considering only the TED training set
(tr), and when adding the out-of-domain pool (all),
for different infrequency thresholds t.

Table 1 shows the percentage of source lan-
guage infrequent n-grams for the test of a rela-
tively small corpus such as the TED corpus (for
details see Section 5) when considering just the
in-domain training set (≈ 40K sentences) and the
same percentage when adding the larger out of do-
main corpora. The percentages in the table have
been computed separately for different values of
the threshold t and for n-grams of order from 1 to
4. Note that the reduction in the number of infre-
quent n-grams is very high for the 1-grams but de-
creases progressively when considering n-grams
of higher order. This indicates that the infrequent
n-grams recovery technique should be very effec-
tive for lower order n-grams, but might have less
effect for higher order n-grams. Therefore, and
in order to lower the computational cost involved,
the experiments carried out for this paper were
performed considering only infrequent 1-grams,
2-grams and 3-grams.

5 Experiments

In the present Section, we first describe the exper-
imental framework employed to assess the perfor-
mance of the BSS techniques described. Then, re-
sults for the probabilistic sentence selection strat-
egy are shown, followed by results obtained with
the infrequent n-grams technique. Some exam-
ple translations are shown and, finally, we also
report experiments using the infrequent n-grams
technique in Oracle mode, in order to establish
the potential improvement for such technique and
for BSS in general.

5.1 Experimental Setup
All experiments were carried out using the
open-source SMT toolkit Moses (Koehn et al.,
2007), in its standard non-monotonic configura-
tion. The phrase tables were generated by means
of symmetrised word alignments obtained with

Subset Language |S| |W | |V |

train English 47.5K 747K 24.6KFrench 793K 31.7K

dev English 571 9.2K 1.9KFrench 10.3K 2.2K

test English 641 12.6K 2.4KFrench 12.8K 2.7K

Table 2: TED corpus main figures. K denotes thou-
sands of elements. |S| stands for number of sentences,
|W | for number of running words, and |V | for vocab-
ulary size.

Subset Language |S| |W | |V |

train English 77.2K 1.71M 29.9KFrench 1.99M 48K

dev 08 English 2.1K 49.8K 8.7KFrench 55.4K 7.7K

test 09 English 2.5K 65.6K 8.9KFrench 72.5K 10.6K

test 10 English 2.5K 62K 8.9KFrench 70.5K 10.3K

Table 3: News Commentary corpus main figures.

GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003). The language
model used was a 5-gram with modified Kneser-
Ney smoothing (Kneser and Ney, 1995), built
with SRILM toolkit (Stolcke, 2002). The log-
linear combination weights in Eq. (1) were opti-
mised using Minimum Error Rate Training (Och
and Ney, 2002) on the corresponding develop-
ment sets.

Experiments were carried out on two corpora:
TED (Paul et al., 2010) and News Commentary
(NC) (Callison-Burch et al., 2010). TED is an
English-French corpus composed of subtitles for
a collection of public speeches on a variety of top-
ics. The same partitions as in the IWSLT2010
evaluation task (Paul et al., 2010) have been used.
Subtitles have been concatenated into complete
sentences. NC is a slightly larger English-French
corpus in the news domain. Main figures of both
corpora are shown in Tables 2 and 3. As for the
pool of sentences, three large corpora have been
used: Europarl (Euro), United Nations (UN) and
Gigaword (Giga), in the partition established for
the 2010 workshop on SMT of the ACL (Callison-
Burch et al., 2010). Sentences of length greater
than 50 have been pruned. Table 4 shows the main
figures of the tokenised and lowercased corpora.

When translating between some language
pairs, there are words that remain invariable, like
for example numbers or punctuation marks in the
case of European languages. In fact, an easy and

156



Corpus Language |S| |W | |V |

Euro English 1.25M 25.6M 81KFrench 28.2M 101K

UN English 5M 94.4M 302KFrench 107M 283K

Giga English 15.5M 303M 1.6MFrench 361M 1.6M

Table 4: Figures of the corpora used as sentence pool.
M stands for millions of elements.

effective technique that is commonly used is to re-
produce out-of-vocabulary words from the source
sentence in the target hypothesis. However, in-
variable n-grams are usually infrequent as well,
which implies that the infrequent n-grams tech-
nique would select sentences containing such n-
grams, even though they do not provide further
information. As a first approach, we exclude n-
grams without any letter.

Baseline experiments have been carried out for
TED and NC corpora using the corresponding
training set. For comparison purposes, we also
included results for a purely random sentence se-
lection without replacement. In the plots, each
point corresponding to random selection represent
the average of 10 repetitions. Experiments using
all data are also reported, although a 64GB ma-
chine was necessary, even with binarized phrase
and distortion tables.

Experiments were conducted by selecting a
fixed amount of sentences according to each one
of the techniques described above. Then, these
sentences were included into the training data and
subsequent SMT systems were built for translat-
ing the test set.

Results are shown in terms of BLEU (Papineni
et al., 2001), which is an accuracy metric that
measures n-gram precision, with a penalty for
sentences that are too short. Although it could
be argued that improvements obtained might be
due to a side effect of the brevity penalty, this
was not found to be true: the BSS techniques (in-
cluding random) and considering all data yielded
very similar brevity penalties (±0.005), within
each corpus. In addition, TER scores (Snover et
al., 2006) were also computed, but are omitted
for clarity purposes and since they were found to
be coherent with BLEU. TER is an error metric
that computes the minimum number of edits re-
quired to modify the system hypotheses so that
they match the references translations.

 0

 0.01

 0.02

 0.03

 0  10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80  90  100

R
e
la

ti
v
e
 f
re

q
u
e
n
c
y

Combined sentence length

Europarl
Gigaword

UN
TED
NC

Figure 2: Combined length relative frequency.

5.2 Results for Probabilistic Sampling
In addition to the probabilistic sampling tech-
nique proposed in Section 3, we also analysed the
effect of sampling only according to the combined
source-reference length, with the purpose of es-
tablishing whether potential improvements were
only due to the length component, or rather to the
complete sampling model. Results for the 2009
test set are shown in Figure 1. Several things
should be noted:

• Performing sentence selection only according
to sentence lengths does not achieve better
performance than random selection.

• Selecting sentences according to probabilis-
tic sampling is able to improve random se-
lection in the case of the TED corpus, but
is not able to do so in the case of the NC
corpus. Significance tests for the 500K case
reported that the differences were significant
in the case of the TED corpus, but not in the
case of the NC corpus.

• In the case of the TED corpus, the perfor-
mance achieved with the system built by
sampling 500K sentences is only 0.5 BLEU
points below the performance achieved by
the system built with all the data available.

The explanation to the fact that probabilistic
sampling is able to improve over random sam-
pling only in the case of the TED corpus, but not
in the case of NC, relies in the nature of the cor-
pora. Although both of them belong to a very
generic domain, their characteristics are very dif-
ferent. In fact, the NC data is very similar to the
sentences in the pool, but, in contrast, the sen-
tences present in the TED corpus have a much
more different structure. This difference is illus-
trated in Figure 2, where the relative frequency of

157



 21

 22

 23

 24

0 100K 200K 300K 400K 500K

B
L
E

U

Number of sentences added

TED corpus

in domain
all

random

length
sampling

 19

 20

 21

 22

0 100K 200K 300K 400K 500K

B
L
E

U

Number of sentences added

NC corpus

in domain
all

random

length
sampling

Figure 1: Effect of adding sentences over the BLEU score using the probabilistic sampling, length sampling and
random selection techniques for the two corpora, TED and News Commentary. Horizontal lines represent the
scores when using just the in domain training set and all the data available.

 21

 22

 23

 24

 25

 26

0 50k 100k 200k

B
L
E

U

Number of sentences added

TED corpus

all
t=10

in domain
t=25

random

 19

 20

 21

 22

 23

0 50k 100k 200k

B
L
E

U

Number of sentences added

NC corpus

all
in domain

random
t=10
t=25

Figure 3: Effect of adding sentences over the BLEU score using the infrequent n-grams (with different thresh-
olds) and random selection techniques for the two corpora, TED and News Commentary. Horizontal lines repre-
sent the scores when using just the in domain training set and all the data available.

each combined sentence length is shown. In this
plot, it stands out clearly that the TED corpus has
a very different length distribution than the other
four corpora considered, whereas the NC corpus
presents a very similar distribution. This implies
that, when considering TED, an intelligent data
selection strategy will have better chances to im-
prove random selection than in the case of NC.

5.3 Results for Infrequent n-grams Recovery
Figure 3 shows the effect of adding sentences us-
ing the infrequent n-grams and the random se-
lection techniques on the 2009 test set. Once
all the infrequent n-grams have been covered
t times, the infrequency score for all the sen-
tences remaining in the pool is 0, and none of
them can be selected. Hence, the number of
sentences that can be selected for each t is lim-
ited. Although for clarity we only show results
for t = {10, 25}, experiments have also been car-
ried out for t = {1, 5, 10, 25}. Such results pre-

sented similar curves, although less sentences can
be selected and hence improvements obtained are
slightly lower. Several conclusions can be drawn:

• The translation quality provided by the in-
frequent n-grams technique is significantly
better than the results achieved with random
selection, comparing similar amount of sen-
tences. Specifically, the improvements ob-
tained are in the range of 3 BLEU points.
• Results for the TED corpus are more irreg-

ular. The best performance is achieved for
t = 25 and 50K sentences added. In NC, the
best result is for t = 10 and 112K.
• Selecting sentences with the infrequent n-

grams technique provides better results than
including all the available data. While using
less than 0.5% of the data, improvements be-
tween 0.5 and 1 BLEU points are achieved.

When looking at Figure 3, one might suspect
that t needs to be set specifically for a given test

158



set, and that results from one set are not to be ex-
trapolated to other test sets. For this reason, we
selected the best configuration in Figure 3 and
used it to build a new system for translating the
unseen NC 2010 test set. Such experiment, with
t = 10 and including all sentences with score
greater than 0 (≈ 110K), is shown in Table 5 and
evidences that improvements are actually coher-
ent among different test sets.

technique BLEU TER #phrases
in-domain 19.0 65.2 5.1M

all data 22.7 60.8 1236M
infreq. t = 10 23.6 59.2 16.5M

Table 5: Effect of the infrequent n-gram recovery tech-
nique for an unseen test set, when setting t = 10 and
number of phrases (parameters) of the models.

5.4 Oracle Results
In order to analyse the potential of BSS tech-
niques, the infrequent n-grams recovery tech-
nique in Section 4 was implemented in oracle
mode. In this way, sentences from the pool
were selected according to the infrequent n-grams
present in the reference translations of the test set.
Note that test references were not included into
the training data as such, but were rather used
to establish which bilingual sentences within the
pool were best suitable for training the SMT sys-
tem. In this way, we were able to establish the po-
tential for improvement of a BSS technique. In-
terestingly, the SMT system trained in this way
achieved 31 BLEU points on the News Commen-
tary 2009 test set, i.e. an 8 BLEU points improve-
ment over the system trained with all the data
available. This result would have beaten all the
systems that took part in the 2009 Workshop on
Machine translation (Callison-Burch et al., 2009).
This result is really important: although we are
aware that the sentences were selected in a non-
realistic manner, it proves that an appropriate BSS
technique would be able to boost SMT perfor-
mance in a very significant manner. Similar re-
sults were obtained with the TED and NC 2010
test sets, with 10 and 7 points improvement, re-
spectively.

5.5 Example Translations
Example translations are shown in Figure 4. In
the first example, the baseline system is not able

Src the budget has also been criticised by klaus .
Bsl le budget a également été criticised par m. klaus .
Rdm le budget a également été critiquées par m. klaus .
PS le budget a également été critiquée par klaus .
All le budget a également été critiqué par klaus .
Infr le budget a également été critiqué par klaus .
Ref klaus critique également le budget .
Src and one has come from music .
Bsl et un a de la musique .
Rdm et on vient de musique .
PS et on a viennent de musique .
All et de la musique .
Infr et un est venu de la musique .
Ref et un vient du monde de la musique .

Figure 4: Examples of two translations for each of the
SMT systems built: Src (source sentence), Bsl (base-
line), Rdm (random selection), PS (probabilistic sam-
pling), All (all the data available), Infr (Infrequent n-
grams) and Ref (reference).

to translate criticised, which is considered out-of-
vocabulary. Even though random selection is able
to solve this problem (luckily), it does not achieve
to translate it correctly, introducing a concordance
error. A similar thing happens when using prob-
abilistic sampling, where a grammatical error is
also present, and only Infr and All are able
to present a correct translation. This is not only
casual, since, by ensuring that a given n-gram ap-
pears at least a certain number of times t, the odds
of including all possible translations of criticised
are incremented significantly. Note that, even if
the Infr translation is different from the refer-
ence, it is equally correct. In the second example,
the baseline translation is pretty much correct, but
has a different meaning (something like “and one
has music”). Similarly, when including all data
the translation obtained by the system means “and
some music”. In this case, both random and prob-
abilistic selection present grammatically incorrect
sentences, and only Infr is able to provide a cor-
rect translation, although pretty literal and differ-
ent from the reference.

6 Discussion

Bilingual sentence selection (BSS) might be un-
derstood to be closely related to adaptation, even
though both paradigms tackle problems which
are, in essence, different. The goal of an adap-
tation technique is to adapt model parameters,
which have been estimated on a large out-of-
domain (or generic) data set, so that they are

159



best suitable for dealing with a domain-specific
test set. This adaptation process is ought to be
achieved by means of a (potentially small) adapta-
tion set, which belongs to the same domain as the
test data. In contrast, BSS tackles with the prob-
lem of how to select samples from a large pool
of training data, regardless of whether such pool
of data is in-domain or out-of-domain. Hence, in
one case we can assume to have a fairly well es-
timated translation model, which is to be adapted,
whereas in BSS we still have full control over the
estimation of such model and need not to aim at a
specific domain, although it might often be so.

BSS is related with instance weighting (Jiang
and Zhai, 2007; Foster et al., 2010). Adapta-
tion and BSS can be considered to be orthogo-
nal (yet complementary) problems under the in-
stance weighting paradigm. In such case, instance
weighting can be considered to span a complete
paradigmatic space between both. At one end,
there is sample selection (BSS for SMT), while at
the other end there is adaptation. For instance, it
is quite common to confront the adaptation prob-
lem by extracting different phrase-tables from dif-
ferent corpora, and then interpolate such tables.
This technique could be also applied to promote
the performance of the system built by means of
BSS. However, this is left out as future work.

We thoroughly analysed two BSS approaches
that obtain competitive results, while using a
small fraction of the training data, although there
is still much to be gained. For instance, oracle re-
sults have also been reported in this work, yield-
ing improvements of up to 10 BLEU points. Even
though the use of an oracle typically implies that
the results obtained are not realistic, recall that
the proposed oracle is special, in the sense that it
only uses the reference sentences for the specific
purpose of selecting training samples, but the ref-
erences are not included into the training data as
such. This is useful for assessing the potential be-
hind BSS: ideally, if we were able to design a BSS
strategy that, without using the references, would
select exactly those training samples, we would be
boosting system performance by 10 BLEU points.
This re-states BSS as a compelling technique that
has not yet received the attention it deserves.

BSS is not aimed at optimising computational
requirements, but does so as a byproduct. This
may seem despicable but it would allow to run
more experiments with the same resources, use

larger corpora or even more complex techniques,
such as synchronous grammars or hierarchical
models. For instance, the infrequent n-grams
technique has beaten all the other systems using
just a small fraction of the corpus, only 0.5%, and
is yet able to outperform a system trained with all
the data by 0.9 BLEU points and the random base-
line by 3 points. This baseline has been proved to
be difficult to beat by other works.

Preliminary experiments were performed in or-
der to analyse the perplexity of the references, the
number of out of vocabulary words (OoVs) and
the ratio of target-source phrases. These exper-
iments revealed that the improvements obtained
are largely correlated with a decrease in perplex-
ity and in the number of OoVs. On the one hand,
reducing the amount of OoVs was mirrored by
an important improvement in BLEU when the
amount of additional data was small, and also
entailed a decrease in perplexity. However, a
reduction in perplexity by itself did not always
imply significant improvements. Moreover, no
real conclusion could be drawn from the analy-
sis of target-source phrase ratio. Hence, we un-
derstand that the improvements obtained are pro-
vided mainly by a more specialised estimation of
the model parameters. However, further experi-
ments should still be conducted in order to verify
this conclusion.

Acknowledgments

The research leading to these results has re-
ceived funding from the European Union Seventh
Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under
grant agreement nr. 287755. This work was
also supported by the Spanish MEC/MICINN un-
der the MIPRCV ”Consolider Ingenio 2010” pro-
gram (CSD2007-00018), and iTrans2 (TIN2009-
14511) project. Also supported by the Span-
ish MITyC under the erudito.com (TSI-020110-
2009-439) project and Instituto Tecnológico de
León, DGEST-PROMEP y CONACYT, México.

160



References
Sankaranarayanan Ananthakrishnan, Rohit Prasad,

David Stallard, and Prem Natarajan. 2010. Dis-
criminative sample selection for statistical machine
translation. In Proc. of the EMNLP, pages 626–635,
Cambridge, MA, October.

Amittai Axelrod, Xiaodong He, and Jianfeng Gao.
2011. Domain adaptation via pseudo in-domain
data selection. In Proc of the EMNLP, pages 355–
362.

Christopher M. Bishop. 2006. Pattern Recognition
and Machine Learning. Springer.

Peter F. Brown, Stephen Della Pietra, Vincent J. Della
Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 1994. The mathe-
matics of statistical machine translation: Parameter
estimation. Computational Linguistics, 19(2):263–
311.

Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz,
and Josh Schroeder. 2009. Findings of the 2009
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation. In
Proc of the WSMT, pages 1–28, Athens, Greece,
March.

Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz,
Kay Peterson, Mark Przybocki, and Omar Zaidan.
2010. Findings of the 2010 joint Workshop on Sta-
tistical Machine Translation and Metrics for Ma-
chine Translation. In Proc. of the MATR(ACL),
pages 17–53, Uppsala, Sweden, July.

Sanjoy Dasgupta. 2009. The two faces of active learn-
ing. In Proc. of The twentieth Conference on Algo-
rithmic Learning Theory, page 1, Porto (Portugal),
October.

George Foster, Cyril Goutte, and Roland Kuhn. 2010.
Discriminative instance weighting for domain adap-
tation in statistical machine translation. In Proc. of
the EMNLP, pages 451–459, Cambridge, MA, Oc-
tober.

Guillem Gascó, Vicent Alabau, Jesús Andrés-Ferrer,
Jesús González-Rubio, Martha-Alicia Rocha,
Germán Sanchis-Trilles, Francisco Casacuberta,
Jorge González, and Joan-Andreu Sánchez. 2010.
ITI-UPV system description for IWSLT 2010. In
Proc. of the IWSLT 2010, Paris, France, December.

Gholamreza Haffari, Maxim Roy, and Anoop Sarkar.
2009. Active learning for statistical phrase-based
machine translation. In Proc. of HLT/NAACL’09,
pages 415–423, Morristown, NJ, USA.

Jing Jiang and ChengXiang Zhai. 2007. Instance
weighting for domain adaptation in NLP. In Proc.
of ACL’07, pages 264–271.

Reinhard Kneser and Hermann Ney. 1995. Improved
backing-off for m-gram language modeling. Proc.
of ICASSP, II:181–184, May.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch,
Chris Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola
Bertoldi, Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christie

Moran, Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ontraj Bojar,
Alexandra Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007.
Moses: Open source toolkit for statistical machine
translation. In Proc. of ACL, pages 177–180.

Zhifei Li, Chris Callison-Burch, Chris Dyer, Juri Gan-
itkevitch, Ann Irvine, Sanjeev Khudanpur, Lane
Schwartz, Wren Thornton, Ziyuan Wang, Jonathan
Weese, and Omar Zaidan. 2010. Joshua 2.0: A
toolkit for parsing-based machine translation with
syntax, semirings, discriminative training and other
goodies. In Proc. of the MATR(ACL), pages 139–
143, Uppsala, Sweden, July.

Yajuan Lu, Jin Huang, and Qun Liu. 2007. Improv-
ing statistical machine translation performance by
training data selection and optimization. In Proc. of
the EMNLP-CoNLL, pages 343–350, Prague, Czech
Republic, June.

Spyros Matsoukas, Antti-Veikko I. Rosti, and Bing
Zhang. 2009. Discriminative corpus weight es-
timation for machine translation. In Proc. of the
EMNLP, pages 708–717, Singapore, August.

Robert C. Moore and William Lewis. 2010. Intelli-
gent selection of language model training data. In
ACL (Short Papers), pages 220–224.

Franz J. Och and Hermann Ney. 2002. Discrimina-
tive training and maximum entropy models for sta-
tistical machine translation. In Proc. of ACL, pages
295–302.

Franz J. Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A systematic
comparison of various statistical alignment models.
In Computational Linguistics, volume 29, pages
19–51.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, and Todd Ward.
1998. Maximum likelihood and discriminative
training of direct translation models. In Proc. of
ICASSP’98, pages 189–192.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and
Wei-Jing Zhu. 2001. Bleu: A method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Technical Re-
port RC22176 (W0109-022).

Michael Paul, Marcello Federico, and Sebastian Stker.
2010. Overview of the IWSLT 2010 evaluation
campaign. In Proc. of the IWSLT 2010, Paris,
France, December.

Matthew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, Richard Schwartz, Lin-
nea Micciulla, and John Makhoul. 2006. A study
of translation edit rate with targeted human annota-
tion. In Proc. of AMTA’06.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM – an extensible lan-
guage modeling toolkit. In Proc. of ICSLP.

Elia Yuste, Manuel Herranz, Antonio Lagarda, Li-
onel Tarazón, Isaı́as Sánchez-Cortina, and Fran-
cisco Casacuberta. 2010. Pangeamt - putting
open standards to work... well. In Proc. of the
AMTA2010. Denver, CO, USA, November.

161


