










































Folheador: browsing through Portuguese semantic relations


Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 35–40,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 27 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Folheador: browsing through Portuguese semantic relations

Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira
CISUC, University of Coimbra

Portugal
hroliv@dei.uc.pt

Hernani Costa
FCCN, Linguateca &

CISUC, University of Coimbra
Portugal

hpcosta@dei.uc.pt

Diana Santos
FCCN, Linguateca &

University of Oslo
Norway

d.s.m.santos@ilos.uio.no

Abstract

This paper presents Folheador, an online
service for browsing through Portuguese
semantic relations, acquired from differ-
ent sources. Besides facilitating the ex-
ploration of Portuguese lexical knowledge
bases, Folheador is connected to services
that access Portuguese corpora, which pro-
vide authentic examples of the semantic re-
lations in context.

1 Introduction

Lexical knowledge bases (LKBs) hold informa-
tion about the words of a language and their in-
teractions, according to their possible meanings.
They are typically structured on word senses,
which may be connected by means of semantic re-
lations. Besides important resources for language
studies, LKBs are key resources in the achieve-
ment of natural language processing tasks, such
as word sense disambiguation (see e.g. Agirre et
al. (2009)) or question answering (see e.g. Pasca
and Harabagiu (2001)).

Regarding the complexity of most knowledge
bases, their data formats are generally not suited
for being read by humans. User interfaces have
thus been developed for providing easier ways of
exploring the knowledge base and assessing its
contents. For instance, for LKBs, in addition to
information on words and semantic relations, it is
important that these interfaces provide usage ex-
amples where semantic relations hold, or at least
where related words co-occur.

In this paper, we present Folheador1, an on-
line browser for Portuguese LKBs. Besides an

1See http://www.linguateca.pt/Folheador/

interface for navigating through semantic rela-
tions acquired from different sources, Folheador
is linked to two services that provide access to
Portuguese corpora, thus allowing observation of
related words co-occurring in authentic contexts
of use, some of them even evaluated by humans.

After introducing several well-known LKBs
and their interfaces, we present Folheador and
its main features, also detailing the contents of
the knowledge base currently browseable through
this interface, which contains information ac-
quired from public domain lexical resources of
Portuguese. Then, before concluding, we discuss
additional features planned for the future.

2 Related Work

Here, we mention a few interfaces that ease the
exploration of well-known knowledge bases. Re-
garding the knowledge base structure, some of the
interfaces are significantly different.

Princeton WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) is the
most widely used LKB to date. In addition to
other alternatives, the creators of WordNet pro-
vide online access to their resource through the
WordNet Search interface (Princeton University,
2010)2. As WordNet is structured around synsets
(groups of synonymous lexical items), querying
for a word prompts all synsets containing that
word to be presented. For each synset, its part-
of-speech (PoS), a gloss and a usage example are
provided. Synsets can also be expanded to access
the semantic relations they are involved in.

As a resource also organised in synsets, the

2http://wordnetweb.princeton.edu/perl/

webwn

35



Brazilian Portuguese thesaurus TeP3 has a sim-
ilar interface (Maziero et al., 2008). Neverthe-
less, since TeP does not contain relations besides
antonymy, its interface is simpler and provides
only the synsets containing a queried word and
their part-of-speech.

MindNet (Vanderwende et al., 2005) is a LKB
extracted automatically, mainly from dictionar-
ies, and structured on semantic relations connect-
ing word senses to words. Its authors provide
MNEX4, an online interface for MindNet. After
querying for a pair of words, MNEX provides all
the semantic relation paths between them, estab-
lished by a set of links that connect directly or
indirectly one word to another. It is also possible
to view the definitions that originated the path.

FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998) is a man-
ually built knowledge base structured on se-
mantic frames that describe objects, states or
events. There are several means for explor-
ing FrameNet easily, including FrameSQL (Sato,
2003)5, which allows searching for frames, lexi-
cal units and relations in an integrated interface,
and FrameGrapher6, a graphical interface for the
visualization of frame relations. For each frame,
in both interfaces, a textual definition, annotated
sentences of the frame elements, lists of the frame
relations, and lists with the lexical units in the
frame are provided.

ReVerb (Fader et al., 2011) is a Web-scale
information extraction system that automatically
acquires binary relations from text. Using ReVerb
Search7, a web interface for ReVerb extractions, it
is possible to obtain sets of relational triples where
the predicate and/or the arguments contain given
strings. Regarding that each of the former is op-
tional, it is possible, for instance, to search for all
triples with the predicate loves and first argument
Portuguese. Search results include the matching
triples, organised according to the name of the
predicate, as well as the number of times each
triple was extracted. The sentences where each
triple was extracted from are as well provided.

3http://www.nilc.icmc.usp.br/tep2
4http://stratus.research.microsoft.com/

mnex/
5http://framenet2.icsi.berkeley.edu/

frameSQL/fn2_15/notes/
6https://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu/

fndrupal/FrameGrapher
7http://www.cs.washington.edu/research/

textrunner/reverbdemo.html

Finally, Visual Thesaurus (Huiping et al.,
2006)8 is a proprietary graphical interface that
provides an alternative way of exploring a knowl-
edge base structured on word senses, synonymy,
antonymy and hypernymy relations. It presents a
graph centered on a queried word, connected to its
senses, as well as semantic relations between the
senses and other words. Nodes and edges have a
different color or look, respectively according to
the PoS of the sense or to the type of semantic re-
lation. If a word is clicked, a new graph, centered
on that word, is drawn.

3 Folheador

Folheador, in figure 2, is an online service for
browsing through instances of semantic relations,
represented as relational triples.

Folheador was originally designed as an inter-
face for PAPEL (Gonçalo Oliveira et al., 2010),
a public domain lexical-semantic network, auto-
matically extracted from a proprietary dictionary.
It was soon expanded to other (public) resources
for Portuguese as well (see Santos et al. (2010) for
an overview of Portuguese LKBs).

The current version of Folheador browses
through a LKB that, besides PAPEL, in-
tegrates semantic triples from the following
sources: (i) synonymy acquired from two hand-
crafted thesauri of Portuguese9, TeP (Dias-Da-
Silva and de Moraes, 2003; da Silva et al.,
2002) and OpenThesaurus.PT10; (ii) relations ex-
tracted automatically in the scope of the project
Onto.PT (Gonçalo Oliveira and Gomes, 2010;
Gonçalo Oliveira et al., 2011), which include
triples extracted from Wiktionary.PT11, and from
Dicionário Aberto (Simões and Farinha, 2011),
both public domain dictionaries.

Underlying relation triples in Folheador are
thus in the form x RELATED-TO y, where x and
y are lexical items and RELATED-TO is a predi-
cate. Their interpretation is as follows: one sense
of x is related to one sense of y, by means of a re-
lation whose type is identified by RELATED-TO.

8http://www.visualthesaurus.com/
9We converted the thesauri to triples x synonym-of y,

where x and y are lexical items in the same synset.
10http://openthesaurus.caixamagica.pt/
11http://pt.wiktionary.org/

36



Figure 1: Folheador’s interface.

3.1 Navigation

It is possible to use Folheador for searching for
all relations with one, two, or no fixed arguments,
and one or no types (relation names). Combining
these options, Folheador can be used, for instance,
to obtain: all lexical items related to a particular
item; all relations between two lexical items; or a
sample of relations involving a particular type.

The matching triples are listed and may be
filtered according to the resource they were ex-
tracted from. For each triple, the PoS of the ar-
guments is shown, as well as a list with the iden-
tification of the resources from where it was ac-
quired. The arguments of each triple are also links
that make navigation easier. When clicked, Fol-
heador behaves the same way as if it had been
queried with the clicked word as argument. Also,
since the queried lexical item may occur in the
first or in the second argument of a triple, when
it occurs in the second, Folheador inverts the rela-
tion, so that the item appears always as the first ar-
gument. Therefore, there is no need to store both
the direct and the inverse triples.

Consider the example in figure 2: it shows
the triples retrieved after searching for the word
computador (computer, in English). In most of

the retrieved triples, computador is a noun (e.g.
computador HIPONIMO DE máquina), but there
are relations where it is an adjective (e.g. com-
putador PROPRIEDADE DO QUE computar).
Moreover, as hypernymy relations are stored in
the form x HIPERONIMO DE y, some of the
triples presented, such as computador HIPON-
IMO DE máquina and computador HIPON-
IMO DE aparelho, have been inverted on the fly.

Furthermore, for each triple, Folheador
presents: a confidence value based on the mere
co-occurrence of the words in corpora; and
another based on the co-occurrence of the related
words instantiating discriminating patterns of the
particular relation.

3.2 Graph visualization

Currently, Folheador contains a very simple visu-
alization tool, which draws the semantic relation
graph established by the search results in a page,
as in figure 3.2. In the future, we aim to provide an
alternative for navigation based on textual links,
which would be made through the graph.

3.3 The use of corpora

One of the problems of most lexical resources is
that they do not integrate or contain frequency in-

37



Figure 2: Graph for the results in figure 2.

formation. This is especially true when one is not
simply listing words but going deeper into mean-
ing, and listing semantic properties like word
senses or relationships between senses.

So, a list of relations among words can con-
flate a number of highly specialized and obsolete
words (or word senses) that co-occur with im-
portant and productive relations in everyday use,
which is not a good thing for human and auto-
matic users alike. On the other hand, using cor-
pora allows one to add frequency information to
both participants in the relation and the triples
themselves, and thus provide another axis to the
description of words.

In addition, it is always interesting to observe
language use in context, especially in cases where
the user is not sure whether the relation is cor-
rect or still in use (and the user can and should
be fairly suspicious when s/he is browsing auto-
matically compiled information). A corpus check
therefore provides illustration, and confirmation,
to a user facing an unusual or surprising relation,
in addition to evaluation data for the relation cu-
rator or lexicographer. If these checks have been
done before by a set of human beings (as is the
case of VARRA (Freitas et al., forthcomming)),
one can have much more confidence on the data
browsed, something that is important for users.

Having this in mind, besides allowing to query
for stored relational triples, Folheador is con-
nected to AC/DC (Santos and Bick, 2000; San-
tos, 2011), an online service that provides ac-
cess to a large set of Portuguese corpora. In just

one click, it is possible to query for all the sen-
tences in the AC/DC corpora connecting the argu-
ments of a retrieved triple. Figure 3.3 shows some
of the results for the words computador (com-
puter) and aparelho (apparatus). While some of
the returned sentences might contain the related
words co-occurring almost by chance or without
a clear semantic relation, other sentences validate
the triple (e.g. sentence par=saude16727 in fig-
ure 3.3). Sometimes, the sentences might as well
invalidate the triple.

Furthermore, for some of the relation types, it
is possible to connect to another online service,
VARRA (Freitas et al., forthcomming), which is
based on a set of patterns that express some of the
relation types, in corpora text. After clicking on
the VARRA link, this service is queried for occur-
rences of the corresponding triple in AC/DC. The
presented sentences (a subset of those returned
by the previous service) will thus contain the re-
lated words connected by a discriminating pat-
tern for the relation they hold. Figure 3.3 shows
two sentences returned for the relation computa-
dor HIPONIMO DE máquina.

These patterns, as those proposed by Hearst
(1992) and used in many projects since, may not
be 100% reliable. So, VARRA was designed to
allow human users to classify the sentences ac-
cording to whether the latter validate the relation,
are just compatible with it, or not even that.

In fact, people do not usually write defini-
tions, especially when using common sense terms
in ordinary discourse. Thus, co-occurrence of
semantically-related terms frequently indicates a
particular relation only implicitly. The choice
of assessing sentences as good validators of a
semantic relation is related to the task of auto-
matically finding good illustrative examples for
dictionaries, which is a surprisingly complex
task (Rychlý et al., 2008).

This kind of information, amassed with the
help of VARRA, is much more difficult to cre-
ate, but is of great value to Folheador, since it
provides good illustrative contexts for the related
lexical items.

4 Further work and concluding remarks

We have shown that, as it is, Folheador is very
useful, as it enables to browse for triples with
fixed arguments, it identifies the source of the
triples, and, in one click, it provides real sentences

38



Figure 3: AC/DC: some sentences returned for the related words computador and aparelho.

Figure 4: VARRA: sentences that exemplify the relation computador hyponym-of máquina.

where related lexical items co-occur. Still, we are
planning to implement new basic features, such as
the suggestion of words, when the searched word
is not in the LKB. Also, while currently Folheador
only directly connects to AC/DC and VARRA, in
order to increase its usability, we plan to connect it
automatically to online definitions and other ser-
vices available on the Web. We intend as well to
crosslink Folheador from the AC/DC interface, in
the sense that one can invoke Folheador also by
just one click (Santos, forthcomming).

Currently, Folheador gives access to 169,385
lexical items: 93,612 nouns, 38,409 verbs, 33,497
adjectives and 3,867 adverbs, in a total of 722,589
triples, and it can browse through the following
types of semantic relations: synonymy, hyper-
nymy, part-of, member-of, causation, producer-
of, purpose-of, place-of, and property-of. How-
ever, as the underlying resources, especially the
ones created automatically, will continue to be up-
dated, one important challenge is to create a ser-
vice that does not get outdated, by accompany-
ing the progress of these resources, ideally doing
an automatic update every month. Furthermore,
we believe that quantitative studies on the com-
parison and the aggregation of the integrated re-
sources should be made, deeper than what is pre-
sented in Gonçalo Oliveira et al. (2011).

We would like to end by emphasizing that we
are aware that the proper interpretation of the
semantic relations may vary in the different re-
sources, even disregarding possible mistakes in

the automatic harvesting. It is enough to consider
the (regular morphological) relation between a
verb and an adjective/noun ended in -dor in Por-
tuguese (and which can be paraphrased by one
who Vs). For instance, in relations such as {sofrer
- sofredor}, {correr - corredor}, {roer - roedor},
the kind of verb defines the kind of temporal re-
lation conveyed: a rodent is essentially roendo,
while a sofredor (sufferer) suffers hopefully in a
particular situation and can stop suffering, and a
corredor (runner) runs as job or as role.

The source code of Folheador is open source12,
so it may be used by other authors to explore their
knowledge bases. Technical information about
Folheador may be found in Costa (2011).

Acknowledgements

Folheador was developed under the scope of Lin-
guateca, throughout the years jointly funded by
the Portuguese Government, the European Union
(FEDER and FSE), UMIC, FCCN and FCT. Hugo
Gonçalo Oliveira is supported by the FCT grant
SFRH/BD/44955/2008 co-funded by FSE.

References
Eneko Agirre, Oier Lopez De Lacalle, and Aitor

Soroa. 2009. Knowledge-based WSD on spe-
cific domains: performing better than generic su-
pervised WSD. In Proceedings of 21st Interna-
12Available from http://code.google.com/p/

folheador/

39



tional Joint Conference on Artifical Intelligence,
IJCAI’09, pages 1501–1506, San Francisco, CA,
USA. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.

Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B.
Lowe. 1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project. In
Proceedings of the 17th international conference
on Computational linguistics, pages 86–90, Morris-
town, NJ, USA. ACL Press.

Hernani Costa. 2011. O desenho do novo Folheador.
Technical report, Linguateca.

Bento C. Dias da Silva, Mirna F. de Oliveira, and
Helio R. de Moraes. 2002. Groundwork for the
Development of the Brazilian Portuguese Wordnet.
In Nuno Mamede and Elisabete Ranchhod, editors,
Advances in Natural Language Processing (PorTAL
2002), LNAI, pages 189–196, Berlin/Heidelberg.
Springer.

Bento Carlos Dias-Da-Silva and Helio Roberto
de Moraes. 2003. A construção de um the-
saurus eletrônico para o português do Brasil. ALFA,
47(2):101–115.

Anthony Fader, Stephen Soderland, and Oren Etzioni.
2011. Identifying relations for open information ex-
traction. In Proceedings of the Conference of Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
EMNLP ’11, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.

Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database (Language, Speech, and
Communication). The MIT Press.

Cláudia Freitas, Diana Santos, Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira,
and Violeta Quental. forthcomming. VARRA:
Validação, Avaliação e Revisão de Relações
semânticas no AC/DC. In Atas do IX Encontro de
Linguı́stica de Corpus, ELC 2010.

Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira and Paulo Gomes. 2010.
Onto.PT: Automatic Construction of a Lexical On-
tology for Portuguese. In Proceedings of 5th Eu-
ropean Starting AI Researcher Symposium (STAIRS
2010), pages 199–211. IOS Press.

Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira, Diana Santos, and Paulo
Gomes. 2010. Extracção de relações semânticas
entre palavras a partir de um dicionário: o PAPEL e
sua avaliação. Linguamática, 2(1):77–93.

Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira, Leticia Antón Pérez, Hernani
Costa, and Paulo Gomes. 2011. Uma rede léxico-
semântica de grandes dimensões para o português,
extraı́da a partir de dicionários electrónicos. Lin-
guamática, 3(2):23–38.

Marti A. Hearst. 1992. Automatic acquisition of hy-
ponyms from large text corpora. In Proceedings
of 14th Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 539–545, Morristown, NJ, USA. ACL Press.

Du Huiping, He Lin, and Hou Hanqing. 2006.
Thinkmap visual thesaurus:a new kind of knowl-
edge organization system. Library Journal, 12.

Erick G. Maziero, Thiago A. S. Pardo, Ariani Di Fe-
lippo, and Bento C. Dias-da-Silva. 2008. A Base de

Dados Lexical e a Interface Web do TeP 2.0 - The-
saurus Eletrônico para o Português do Brasil. In VI
Workshop em Tecnologia da Informação e da Lin-
guagem Humana, TIL 2008, pages 390–392.

Marius Pasca and Sanda M. Harabagiu. 2001. The in-
formative role of WordNet in open-domain question
answering. In Proceedings of NAACL 2001 Work-
shop on WordNet and Other Lexical Resources: Ap-
plications, Extensions and Customizations, pages
138–143, Pittsburgh, USA.

Princeton University. 2010. Princeton university
“About Wordnet”. http://wordnet.princeton.edu.

Pavel Rychlý, Miloš Husák, Adam Kilgarriff, Michael
Rundell, and Katy McAdam. 2008. GDEX: Auto-
matically finding good dictionary examples in a cor-
pus. In Proceedings of the XIII EURALEX Interna-
tional Congress, pages 425–432, Barcelona. Institut
Universitari de Lingüı́stica Aplicada.

Diana Santos and Eckhard Bick. 2000. Providing
Internet access to Portuguese corpora: the AC/DC
project. In Proceedings of 2nd International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation,
LREC’2000, pages 205–210. ELRA.

Diana Santos, Anabela Barreiro, Cláudia Freitas,
Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira, José Carlos Medeiros, Luı́s
Costa, Paulo Gomes, and Rosário Silva. 2010.
Relações semânticas em português: comparando o
TeP, o MWN.PT, o Port4NooJ e o PAPEL. In
A. M. Brito, F. Silva, J. Veloso, and A. Fiéis, editors,
Textos seleccionados. XXV Encontro Nacional da
Associação Portuguesa de Linguı́stica, pages 681–
700. APL.

Diana Santos. 2011. Linguateca’s infrastructure
for Portuguese and how it allows the detailed
study of language varieties. OSLa: Oslo Stud-
ies in Language, 3(2):113–128. Volume edited by
J.B.Johannessen, Language variation infrastructure.

Diana Santos. forthcomming. Corpora at linguateca:
vision and roads taken. In Tony Berber Sardinha
and Telma S ao Bento Ferreira, editors, Working
with Portuguese corpora.

Hiroaki Sato. 2003. FrameSQL: A software tool for
FrameNet. In Proceedings of Asialex 2003, pages
251–258, Tokyo. Asian Association of Lexicogra-
phy, Asian Association of Lexicography.

Alberto Simões and Rita Farinha. 2011. Dicionário
Aberto: Um novo recurso para PLN. Vice-Versa,
pages 159–171.

Lucy Vanderwende, Gary Kacmarcik, Hisami Suzuki,
and Arul Menezes. 2005. Mindnet: An
automatically-created lexical resource. In Proceed-
ings of HLT/EMNLP 2005 Interactive Demonstra-
tions, pages 8–9, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada. ACL Press.

40


