










































Managing Uncertainty in Semantic Tagging


Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 840–850,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 27 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Managing Uncertainty in Semantic Tagging

Silvie Cinková and Martin Holub and Vincent Krı́ž
Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics

Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
{cinkova|holub}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

vincent.kriz@gmail.com

Abstract

Low interannotator agreement (IAA) is a
well-known issue in manual semantic tag-
ging (sense tagging). IAA correlates with
the granularity of word senses and they
both correlate with the amount of informa-
tion they give as well as with its reliability.
We compare different approaches to seman-
tic tagging in WordNet, FrameNet, Prop-
Bank and OntoNotes with a small tagged
data sample based on the Corpus Pattern
Analysis to present the reliable information
gain (RG), a measure used to optimize the
semantic granularity of a sense inventory
with respect to its reliability indicated by
the IAA in the given data set. RG can also
be used as feedback for lexicographers, and
as a supporting component of automatic se-
mantic classifiers, especially when dealing
with a very fine-grained set of semantic cat-
egories.

1 Introduction

The term semantic tagging is used in two diver-
gent areas:

1) recognizing objects of semantic importance,
such as entities, events and polarity, often tailored
to a restricted domain, or

2) relating occurrences of words in a corpus to a
lexicon and selecting the most appropriate seman-
tic categories (such as synsets, semantic frames,
wordsenses, semantic patterns or framesets).

We are concerned with the second case, which
seeks to make lexical semantics tractable for com-
puters. Lexical semantics, as opposed to proposi-
tional semantics, focuses the meaning of lexical
items. The disciplines that focus lexical seman-
tics are lexicology and lexicography rather than

logic. By semantic tagging we mean a process of
assigning semantic categories to target words in
given contexts. This process can be either manual
or automatic.

Traditionally, semantic tagging relies on the
tacit assumption that various uses of polysemous
words can be sorted into discrete senses; under-
standing or using an unfamiliar word be then like
looking it up in a dictionary. When building a dic-
tionary entry for a given word, the lexicographer
sorts a number of its occurrences into discrete
senses present (or emerging) in his/her mental lex-
icon, which is supposed to be shared by all speak-
ers of the same language. The assumed common
mental representation of a words meaning should
make it easy for other humans to assign random
occurrences of the word to one of the pre-defined
senses (Fellbaum et al., 1997).

This assumption seems to be falsified by the
interannotator agreement (IAA, sometimes ITA)
constantly reported much lower in semantic than
in morphological or syntactic annotation, as well
as by the general divergence of opinion on which
value of which IAA measure indicates a reliable
annotation. In some projects (e.g. OntoNotes
(Hovy et al., 2006)), the percentage of agreements
between two annotators is used, but a number
of more complex measures are available (for a
comprehensive survey see (Artstein and Poesio,
2008)). Consequently, using different measures
for IAA makes the reported IAA values incompa-
rable across different projects.

Even skilled lexicographers have trouble se-
lecting one discrete sense for a concordance (Kr-
ishnamurthy and Nicholls, 2000), and, more to
say, when the tagging performance of lexicog-
raphers and ordinary annotators (students) was

840



compared, the experiment showed that the men-
tal representations of a word’s semantics differ for
each group (Fellbaum et al., 1997), and cf. (Jor-
gensen, 1990). Lexicographers are trained in con-
sidering subtle differences among various uses of
a word, which ordinary language users do not re-
flect. Identifying a semantic difference between
uses of a word and deciding whether a difference
is important enough to constitute a separate sense
means presenting a word with a certain degree
of semantic granularity. Intuitively, the finer the
granularity of a word entry is, the more oppor-
tunities for interannotator disagreement there are
and the lower IAA can be expected. Brown et al.
proved this hypothesis experimentally (Brown et
al., 2010). Also, the annotators are less confident
in their decisions, when they have many options
to choose from (Fellbaum et al. (1998) reported a
drop in subjective annotators confidence in words
with 8+ senses).

Despite all the known issues in semantic tag-
ging, the major lexical resources (WordNet (Fell-
baum, 1998), FrameNet (Ruppenhofer et al.,
2010), PropBank (Palmer et al., 2005) and the
word-sense part of OntoNotes (Weischedel et al.,
2011)) are still maintained and their annotation
schemes are adopted for creating new manually
annotated data (e.g. MASC, the Manually An-
notated Subcorpus (Ide et al., 2008)). More to
say, these resources are not only used in WSD and
semantic labeling, but also in research directions
that in their turn do not rely on the idea of an in-
ventory of discrete senses any more, e.g. in dis-
tributional semantics (Erk, 2010) and recognizing
textual entailment (e.g. (Zanzotto et al., 2009) and
(Aharon et al., 2010)).

It is a remarkable fact that, to the best of our
knowledge, there is no measure that would relate
granularity, reliability of the annotation (derived
from IAA) and the resulting information gain.
Therefore it is impossible to say where the opti-
mum for granularity and IAA lies.

2 Approaches to semantic tagging

2.1 Semantic tagging vs. morphological or
syntactic analysis

Manual semantic tagging is in many respects sim-
ilar to morphological tagging and syntactic anal-
ysis: human annotators are trained to sort cer-
tain elements occurring in a running text ac-

cording to a reference source. There is, never-
theless, a substantial difference: whereas mor-
phologically or syntactically annotated data ex-
ist separately from the reference (tagset, anno-
tation guide, annotation scheme), a semantically
tagged resource can be regarded both as a cor-
pus of texts disambiguated according to an at-
tached inventory of semantic categories and as
a lexicon with links to example concordances
for each semantic category. So, in semanti-
cally tagged resources, the data and the reference
are intertwined. Such double-faced semantic re-
sources have also been called semantic concor-
dances (Miller et al., 1993a). For instance, one of
the earlier versions of WordNet, the largest lexi-
cal resource for English, was used in the seman-
tic concordance SemCor (Miller et al., 1993b).
More recent lexical resources have been built as
semantic concordances from the very beginning
(PropBank (Palmer et al., 2005), OntoNotes word
senses (Weischedel et al., 2011)).

In morphological or syntactic annotation, the
tagset or inventory of constituents are given be-
forehand and are supposed to hold for all to-
kens/sentences contained in the corpus. Prob-
lematic and theory-dependent issues are few and
mostly well-known in advance. Therefore they
can be reflected by a few additional conventions in
the annotation manual (e.g. where to draw the line
between particles and prepositions or between ad-
jectives and verbs in past participles (Santorini,
1990) or where to attach a prepositional phrase
following a noun phrase and how to treat specific
“financialspeak” structures (Bies et al., 1995)).
Even in difficult cases, there are hardly more than
two options of interpretation. Data manually an-
notated for morphology or surface syntax are reli-
able enough to train syntactic parsers with an ac-
curacy above 80 % (e.g. (Zhang and Clark, 2011;
McDonald et al., 2006)).

On the other hand, semantic tagging actually
employs a different tagset for each word lemma.
Even within the same part of speech, individual
words require individual descriptions. Possible
similarities among them come into relief ex post
rather than that they could be imposed on the lex-
icographers from the beginning. When assign-
ing senses to concordances, the annotator often
has to select among more than two relevant op-
tions. These two aspects make achieving good
IAA much harder than in morphology and syn-

841



tax tasks. In addition, while a linguistically edu-
cated annotator can have roughly the same idea of
parts of speech as the author of the tagset, there
is no chance that two humans (not even two pro-
fessional lexicographers) would create identical
entries for e.g. a polysemous verb. Any human
evaluation of complete entries would be subjec-
tive. The maximum to be achieved is that the en-
try reflects the corpus data in a reasonable gran-
ular way on which annotators still can reach rea-
sonable IAA.

2.2 Major existing semantic resources

The granularity vs. IAA equilibrium is of great
concern in creating lexical resources as well as in
applications dealing with semantic tasks. When
WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) was created, both IAA
and subjective confidence measurements served
as an informal feedback to lexicographers (Fell-
baum et al., (1998), p. 200). In general, WordNet
has been considered a resource too fine-grained
for most annotations (and applications). Nav-
igli (2006) developed a method of reducing the
granularity of WordNet by mapping the synsets
to senses in a more coarse-grained dictionary. A
manual, more coarse-grained grouping of Word-
Net senses has been performed in OntoNotes
(Weischedel et al., 2011). The OntoNotes 90 %
solution (Hovy et al., 2006) actually means such
a degree of granularity that enables a 90-%-IAA.
OntoNotes is a reaction to the traditionally poor
IAA in WordNet annotated corpora, caused by the
high granularity of senses. The quality of seman-
tic concordances is maintained by numerous itera-
tions between lexicographers and annotators. The
categories ‘right’–‘wrong’ have been, for the pur-
pose of the annotated linguistic resource, defined
by the IAA score, which is—in OntoNotes—
calculated as the percentage of agreements be-
tween two annotators.

Two other, somewhat different, lexical re-
sources have to be mentioned to complete the pic-
ture: FrameNet (Ruppenhofer et al., 2010) and
PropBank (Palmer et al., 2005). While Word-
Net and OntoNotes pair words and word senses in
a way comparable to printed lexicons, FrameNet
is primarily an inventory of semantic frames and
PropBank focuses the argument structure of verbs
and nouns (NomBank (Meyers et al., 2008), a re-
lated project capturing the argument structure of
nouns, was later integrated in OntoNotes).

In FrameNet corpora, content words are associ-
ated to particular semantic frames that they evoke
(e.g. charm would relate to the Aesthetics frame)
and their collocates in relevant syntactic positions
(arguments of verbs, head nouns of adjectives,
etc.) would be assigned the corresponding frame-
element labels (e.g. in their dazzling charm, their
would be The Entity for which a particular grad-
able Attribute is appropriate and under considera-
tion and dazzling would be Degree). Neither IAA
nor granularity seem to be an issue in FrameNet.
We have not succeeded in finding a report on IAA
in the original FrameNet annotation, except one
measurement in progress in the annotation of the
Manually Annotated Subcorpus of English (Ide et
al., 2008).1

PropBank is a valency (argument structure) lex-
icon. The current resource lists and labels ar-
guments and obligatory modifiers typical of each
(very coarse) word sense (called frameset). Two
core criteria for distinguishing among framesets
are the semantic roles of the arguments along
with the syntactic alternations that the verb can
undergo with that particular argument set. To
keep low granularity, this lexicon—among other
things—does usually not make special framesets
for metaphoric uses. The overall IAA measured
on verbs was 94 % (Palmer et al., 2005).

2.3 Semantic Pattern Recognition

From corpus-based lexicography to semantic
patterns

The modern, corpus-based lexicology of 1990s
(Sinclair, 1991; Fillmore and Atkins, 1994) has
had a great impact on lexicography. There is a
general consensus that dictionary definitions need
to be supported by corpus examples. Cf. Fell-
baum (2001):

“For polysemous words, dictionaries [. . . ] do
not say enough about the range of possible con-
texts that differentiate the senses. [. . . ] On the
other hand, texts or corpora [. . . ] are not ex-
plicit about the word’s meaning. When we first
encounter a new word in a text, we can usually
form only a vague idea of its meaning; checking a
dictionary will clarify the meaning. But the more
contexts we encounter for a word, the harder it is
to match them against only one dictionary sense.”

1Checked on the project web www.anc.org/MASC/Home
2011-10-29.

842



The lexical description in modern English
monolingual dictionaries (Sinclair et al., 1987;
Rundell, 2002) explicitly emphasizes contextual
clues, such as typical collocates and the syntac-
tic surroundings of the given lexical item, rather
than relying on very detailed definitions. In
other words, the sense definitions are obtained
as syntactico-semantic abstractions of manually
clustered corpus concordances in the modern
corpus-based lexicography: in classical dictionar-
ies as well as in semantic concordances.

Nevertheless, the word senses, even when ob-
tained by a collective mind of lexicographers and
annotators, are naturally hard-wired and tailored
to the annotated corpus. They may be too fine-
grained or too coarse-grained for automatic pro-
cessing of different corpora (e.g. a restricted-
domain corpus). Kilgarriff (1997, p. 115) shows
(the handbag example) that there is no reason to
expect the same set of word senses to be relevant
for different tasks and that the corpus dictates the
word senses and therefore ‘word sense’ was not
found to be sufficiently well-defined to be a work-
able basic unit of meaning (p. 116). On the other
hand, even non-experts seem to agree reasonably
well when judging the similarity of use of a word
in different contexts (Rumshisky et al., 2009). Erk
et al. (2009) showed promising annotation results
with a scheme that allowed the annotators graded
judgments of similarity between two words or be-
tween a word and its definition.

Verbs are the most challenging part of speech.
We see two major causes: vagueness and coer-
cion. We neglect ambiguity, since it has proved to
be rare in our experience.

CPA and PDEV
Our current work focuses on English verbs.

It has been inspired by the manual Corpus Pat-
tern Analysis method (CPA) (Hanks, forthcom-
ing) and its implementation, the Pattern Dictio-
nary of English Verbs (PDEV) (Hanks and Puste-
jovsky, 2005). PDEV is a semantic concordance
built on yet a different principle than FrameNet,
WordNet, PropBank or OntoNotes. The man-
ually extracted patterns of frequent and normal
verb uses are, roughly speaking, intuitively sim-
ilar uses of a verb that express—in a syntacti-
cally similar form—a similar event in which sim-
ilar participants (e.g. humans, artifacts, institu-
tions, other events) are involved. Two patterns

can be semantically so tightly related that they
could appear together under one sense in a tradi-
tional dictionary. The patterns are not senses but
syntactico-semantically characterized prototypes
(see the example verb submit in Table 1). Con-
cordances that match these prototypes well are
called norms in Hanks (forthcoming). Concor-
dances that match with a reservation (metaphor-
ical uses, argument mismatch, etc.) are called ex-
ploitations. The PDEV corpus annotation indi-
cates the norm-exploitation status for each con-
cordance.

Compared to other semantic concordances, the
granularity of PDEV is high and thus discourag-
ing in terms of expected IAA. However, select-
ing among patterns does not really mean disam-
biguating a concordance but rather determining to
which pattern it is most similar—a task easier for
humans than WSD is. This principle seems par-
ticularly promising for verbs as words expressing
events, which resist the traditional word sense dis-
ambiguation the most.

A novel approach to semantic tagging
We present the semantic pattern recognition as

a novel approach to semantic tagging, which is
different from the traditional word-sense assign-
ment tasks. We adopt the central idea of CPA that
words do not have fixed senses but that regular
patterns can be identified in the corpus that ac-
tivate different conversational implicatures from
the meaning potential of the given verb. Our
method draws on a hard-wired, fine-grained in-
ventory of semantic categories manually extracted
from corpus data. This inventory represents the
maximum semantic granularity that humans are
able to recognize in normal and frequent uses of a
verb in a balanced corpus. We thoroughly analyze
the interannotator agreement to find out which of
the highly semantic categories are useful in the
sense of information gain. Our goal is a dynamic
optimization of semantic granularity with respect
to given data and target application.

Like Passonneau et al. (2010), we are con-
vinced that IAA is specific to each respective
word and reflects its inherent semantic properties
as well as the specificity of contexts the given
word occurs in, even within the same balanced
corpus. We accept as a matter of fact that inter-
annotator confusion is inevitable in semantic tag-
ging. However, the amount of uncertainty of the

843



No. Pattern / Implicature

1

[[Human 1 | Institution 1] ˆ [Human 1 | Institution 1 = Competitor]] submit [[Plan | Document
| Speech Act | Proposition | {complaint | demand | request | claim | application | proposal
| report | resignation | information | plea | petition | memorandum | budget | amendment |
programme | . . .}] ˆ [Artifact | Artwork | Service | Activity | {design | tender | bid | entry
| dance | . . .}]] (({to} Human 2 | Institution 2 = authority)ˆ({to} Human 2 | Institution 2 =
referee)) ({for} {approval | discussion | arbitration | inspection | designation | assessment |
funding | taxation | . . .})
[[Human 1 | Institution 1]] presents [[Plan | Document]] to [[Human 2 | Institution 2]] for {approval
| discussion | arbitration | inspection | designation | assessment | taxation | . . .}

2 [Human | Institution] submit [THAT-CL|QUOTE][[Human | Institution]] respectfully expresses {that [CLAUSE]} and invites listeners or readers to
accept that {that [CLAUSE]} is true}

4 [Human 1 | Institution 1] submit (Self) ({to} Human 2 | Institution 2)[[Human 1 | Institution 1]] acknowledges the superior force of [[Human 2 | Institution 2]] and puts
[[Self]] in the power of [[Human 2 | Institution 2]]

5 [Human 1] submit (Self) [[{to} Eventuality = Unpleasant] ˆ [{to} Rule]][[Human 1]] accepts [[Rule |Eventuality = Unpleasant]] without complaining

6
[passive]
[Human| Institution] submit [Anything] [{to} Eventuality]
[[Human 1|Institution 1]] exposes [[Anything]] to [[Eventuality]]

Table 1: Example of patterns defined for the verb submit.

“right” tag differs a lot, and should be quantified.
For that purpose we developed the reliable infor-
mation gain measure presented in Section 3.2.

CPA Verb Validation Sample

The original PDEV had never been tested with
respect to IAA. Each entry had been based on
concordances annotated solely by the author of
that particular entry. The annotation instructions
had been transmitted only orally. The data had
been evolving along with the method, which im-
plied inconsistencies. We put down an annotation
manual (a momentary snapshot of the theory) and
trained three annotators accordingly. For practical
annotation we use the infrastructure developed at
Masaryk University in Brno (Horák et al., 2008),
which was also used for the original PDEV de-
velopment. After initial IAA experiments with
the original PDEV, we decided to select 30 verb
entries from PDEV along with the annotated con-
cordances. We made a new semantic concordance
sample (Cinková et al., 2012) for the validation of
the annotation scheme. We refer to this new col-
lection2 as VPS-30-En (Verb Pattern Sample, 30
English verbs).

We slightly revised some entries and updated
the reference samples (usually 250 concordances

2This new lexical resource, including the complete docu-
mentation, is publicly available at http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/spr.

per verb). The annotators were given the en-
tries as well as the reference sample annotated
by the lexicographer and a test sample of 50 con-
cordances for annotation. We measured IAA, us-
ing Fleiss’s kappa,3 and analyzed the interannota-
tor confusion manually. IAA varied from verb to
verb, mostly reaching safely above 0.6. When the
IAA was low and the type of confusion indicated a
problem in the entry, the entry was revised. Then
the lexicographer revised the original reference
sample along with the first 50-concordance sam-
ple. The annotators got back the revised entry, the
newly revised reference sample and an entirely
new 50-concordance annotation batch. The fi-
nal multiple 50-concordance sample went through
one more additional procedure, the adjudication:
first, the lexicographer compared the three anno-
tations and eliminated evident errors. Then the
lexicographer selected one value for each concor-
dance to remain in the resulting one-value-per-
concordance gold standard data and recorded it
into the gold standard set. The adjudication pro-

3Fleiss’s kappa (Fleiss, 1971) is a generalization of
Scott’s π statistic (Scott, 1955). In contrast to Cohen’s kappa
(Cohen, 1960), Fleiss’s kappa evaluates agreement between
multiple raters. However, Fleiss’s kappa is not a generaliza-
tion of Cohen’s kappa, which is a different, yet related, sta-
tistical measure. Sometimes, the terminology about kappas
is confusing in the literature. For a detailed explanation refer
e.g. to (Artstein and Poesio, 2008).

844



tocol has been kept for further experiments. All
values except the marked errors are regarded as
equally acceptable for this type of experiments.
In the end, we get for each verb:

• an entry, which is an inventory of semantic
categories (patterns)

• 300+ manually annotated concordances (sin-
gle values)

• out of which 50 are manually annotated and
adjudicated concordances (multiple values
without evident errors).

3 Tagging confusion analysis

3.1 Formal model of tagging confusion

To formally describe the semantic tagging task,
we assume a target word and a (randomly se-
lected) corpus sample of its occurrences. The
tagged sample is S = {s1, . . . , sr}, where each
instance si is an occurrence of the target word
with its context, and r is the sample size.

For multiple annotation we need a set of m an-
notators A = {A1, . . . , Am} who choose from
a given set of semantic categories represented
by a set of n semantic tags T = {t1, . . . , tn}.
Generally, if we admitted assigning more tags to
one word occurrence, annotators could assign any
subset of T to an instance. In our experiments,
however, annotators were allowed to assign just
one tag to each tagged instance. Therefore each
annotator is described as a function that assigns a
single member set to each instance Ai(s) = {t},
where s ∈ S, t ∈ T . When a pair of annotators
tag an instance s, they produce a set of one or two
different tags {t, t′} = Ai(s) ∪Aj(s).

Detailed information about interannotator
(dis)agreement on a given sample S is rep-
resented by a set of

(
m
2

)
symmetric matrices

CAkAlij = |{s ∈ S | Ak(s) ∪ Al(s) = {ti, tj}}|,
for 1 ≤ k < l ≤ m, and i, j ∈ {1, . . . , n}.
Note that each of those matrices can be easily
computed as CAkAl = C + CT − InC, where
C is a conventional confusion matrix representing
the agreement between annotators Ak and Al,
and In is a unit matrix.

Definition: Aggregated Confusion Matrix (ACM)

C? =
∑

1≤k<l≤m
CAkAl .

Properties: ACM is symmetric and for any i 6= j
the number C?ij says how many times a pair of
annotators disagreed on two tags ti and tj , while
C?ii is the frequency of agreements on ti; the sum
in the i-th row

∑
j C

?
ij is the total frequency of

assigned sets {t, t′} that contain ti.
An example of ACM is given in Table 2. The

corresponding confusion matrices are shown in
Table 3.

1 1.a 2 4 5
1 85 8 2 0 0

1.a 8 1 2 0 0
2 2 2 34 0 0
4 0 0 0 4 8
5 0 0 0 8 6

Table 2: Aggregated Confusion Matrix.

Our approach to exact tagging confusion analy-
sis is based on probability and information theory.
Assigning semantic tags by annotators is viewed
as a random process. We define (categorical) ran-
dom variable T1 as the outcome of one annota-
tor; its values are single member sets {t}, and we
have mr observations to compute their probabil-
ities. The probability that an annotator will use
ti is denoted by p1(ti) = Pr(T1 = {ti}) and is
practically computed as the relative frequency of
ti among all mr assigned tags. Formally,

p1(ti) =
1

mr

m∑
k=1

r∑
j=1

|Ak(sj) ∩ {ti}|.

The outcome of two annotators (they both tag
the same instance) is described by random vari-
able T2; its values are single or double member
sets {t, t′}, and we have

(
m
2

)
r observations to

compute their probabilities. In contrast to p1, the
probability that ti will be used by a pair of anno-
tators is denoted by p2(ti) = Pr(T2 ⊇ {ti}), and
is computed as the relative frequency of assigned
sets {t, t′} containing ti among all

(
m
2

)
r observa-

tions:

p2(ti) =
1(
m
2

)
r

∑
k

C?ik.

We also need the conditional probability that an
annotator will use ti given that another annotator
has used tj . For convenience, we use the nota-
tion p2(ti | tj) = Pr(T2 ⊇ {ti} | T2 ⊇ {tj}).

845



A1 vs. A2 A1 vs. A3 A2 vs. A3
1 1.a 2 4 5 1 1.a 2 4 5 1 1.a 2 4 5

1 29 1 1 0 0 1 29 2 0 0 0 1 27 2 0 0 0
1.a 0 1 0 0 0 1.a 1 0 0 0 0 1.a 2 0 1 0 0

2 0 1 11 0 0 2 0 0 12 0 0 2 1 0 11 0 0
4 0 0 0 2 0 4 0 0 0 1 1 4 0 0 0 1 4
5 0 0 0 3 1 5 0 0 0 0 4 5 0 0 0 0 1

Table 3: Example of all confusion matrices for the target word submit and three annotators.

Obviously, it can be computed as

p2(ti | tj) =
Pr(T2 = {ti, tj})
Pr(T2 ⊇ {tj})

=
C?ij(

m
2

)
r · p2(tj)

=
C?ij∑
k C

?
jk

.

Definition: Confusion Probability Matrix (CPM)

Cpji = p2(ti | tj) =
C?ij∑
k C

?
jk

.

Properties: The sum in any row is 1. The j-th
row of CPM contains probabilities of assigning ti
given that another annotator has chosen tj for the
same instance. Thus, the j-th row of CPM de-
scribes expected tagging confusion related to the
tag tj .

An example is given in Table 3 (all confusion
matrices for three annotators), in Table 2 (the
corresponding ACM), and in Table 4 (the corre-
sponding CPM).

1 1.a 2 4 5
1 0.895 0.084 0.021 0.000 0.000

1.a 0.727 0.091 0.182 0.000 0.000
2 0.053 0.053 0.895 0.000 0.000
4 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.333 0.667
5 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.571 0.429

Table 4: Example of Confusion Probability Matrix.

3.2 Semantic granularity optimization
Now, having a detailed analysis of expected tag-
ging confusion described in CPM, we are able to
compare usefulness of different semantic tags us-
ing a measure of the information content associ-
ated with them (in the information theory sense).
Traditionally, the amount of self-information con-
tained in a tag (as a probabilistic event) depends

only on the probability of that tag, and would be
defined as I(tj) = − log p1(tj). However, intu-
itively one can say that a good measure of use-
fulness of a particular tag should also take into
consideration the expected tagging confusion re-
lated to the tag. Therefore, to exactly measure
usefulness of the tag tj we propose to compare
and measure similarity of the distribution p1(ti)
and the distribution p2(ti | tj), i = 1, . . . , n.
How much information do we gain when an an-
notator assigns the tag tj to an instance? When
the tag tj has once been assigned to an instance
by an annotator, one would naturally expect that
another annotator will probably tend to assign the
same tag tj to the same instance. Formally, things
make good sense if p2(tj | tj) > p1(tj) and if
p2(ti | tj) < p1(ti) for any i different from j.
If p2(tj | tj) = 100 %, then there is full con-
sensus about assigning tj among annotators; then
and only then the measure of usefulness of the tag
tj should be maximal and should have the value
of − log p1(tj). Otherwise, the value of useful-
ness should be smaller. This is our motivation to
define a quantity of reliable information gain ob-
tained from semantic tags as follows:

Definition: Reliable Gain (RG) from the tag tj is

RG(tj) =
∑
k

−(−1)δkjp2(tk|tj) log
p2(tk|tj)
p1(tk)

.

Properties: RG is similar to the well known
Kullback-Leibler divergence (or information
gain). If p2(ti | tj) = p1(ti) for all i = 1, . . . , n,
then RG(tj) = 0. If p2(tj | tj) = 100 %, then
and only then RG(tj) = − log p1(tj), which
is the maximum. If p2(ti | tj) < p1(ti) for
all i different from j, the greater difference in
probabilities, the bigger (and positive) RG(tj).
And vice versa, the inequality p2(ti | tj) > p1(ti)
for all i different from j implies a negative value
of RG(tj).

846



Definition: Average Reliable Gain (ARG) from
the tagset {t1, . . . , tn} is computed as an expected
value of RG(tj):

ARG =
∑
j

p1(tj)RG(tj)

Properties: ARG has its maximum value if the
CPM is a unit matrix, which is the case of the
absolute agreement among all annotators. Then
ARG has the value of the entropy of the p1 distri-
bution: ARGmax = H(p1(t1), . . . , p1(tn)).

Merging tags with poor RG
The main motivation for developing the ARG

value was the optimization of the tagset granular-
ity. We use a semi-greedy algorithm that searches
for an “optimal” tagset. The optimization process
starts with the fine-grained list of CPA semantic
categories and then the algorithm merges some
tags in order to maximize the ARG value. An ex-
ample is given in Table 5. Tables 6 and 7 show
the ACM and the CPM after merging. The ex-
amples relate to the verb submit already shown in
Tables 1, 2, 3 and 4.

Original tagset Optimal merge
Tag f RG Tag f RG

1 90 +0.300
1 + 1.a 96 +0.425

1.a 6 −0.001
2 36 +0.447 2 36 +0.473
4 8 −0.071

4 + 5 18 +0.367
5 10 −0.054

Table 5: Frequency and Reliable Gain of tags.

1 2 4
1 94 4 0
2 4 34 0
4 0 0 18

Table 6: Aggregated Confusion Matrix after merging.

1 2 4
1 0.959 0.041 0.000
2 0.105 0.895 0.000
4 0.000 0.000 1.000

Table 7: Confusion Probability Matrix after merging.

3.3 Classifier evaluation with respect to
expected tagging confusion

An automatic classifier is considered to be a func-
tion c that—the same way as annotators— assigns
tags to instances s ∈ S, so that c(s) = {t},
t ∈ T . The traditional way to evaluate the ac-
curacy of an automatic classifier means to com-
pare its output with the correct semantic tags on
a Gold Standard (GS) dataset. Within our formal
framework, we can imagine that we have a “gold”
annotatorAg, so that the GS dataset is represented
byAg(s1), . . . , Ag(sr). Then the classic accuracy
score can be computed as 1r

∑r
i=1 |Ag(si)∩c(si)|.

However, that approach does not take into con-
sideration the fact that some semantic tags are
quite confusing even for human annotators. In our
opinion, automatic classifier should not be penal-
ized for mistakes that would be made even by hu-
mans. So we propose a more complex evaluation
score using the knowledge of the expected tagging
confusion stored in CPM.

Definition: Classifier evaluation Score with re-
spect to tagging confusion is defined as the pro-
portion Score(c) = S(c)/Smax, where

S(c) =
α

r

r∑
i=1

|Ag(si) ∩ c(si)| +

+
1− α
r

r∑
i=1

p2(c(si) | Ag(si))

Smax = α+
1− α
r

r∑
i=1

p2(Ag(si) | Ag(si)).

α = 1 α = 0.5 α = 0

Verb Score Score Score
halt 1 0.84 2 0.90 4 0.81
submit 2 0.83 1 0.90 1 0.84
ally 3 0.82 3 0.89 5 0.76
cry 4 0.79 4 0.88 2 0.82
arrive 5 0.74 5 0.85 3 0.81
plough 6 0.70 6 0.81 6 0.72
deny 7 0.62 7 0.74 7 0.66
cool 8 0.58 8 0.69 8 0.53
yield 9 0.55 9 0.67 9 0.52

Table 8: Evaluation with different α values.

Table 8 gives an illustration of the fact that us-
ing different α values one can get different re-

847



sults when comparing tagging accuracy for dif-
ferent words (a classifier based on bag-of-words
approach was used). The same holds true for com-
parison of different classifiers.

3.4 Related work
In their extensive survey article Artstein and Poe-
sio (2008) state that word sense tagging is one
of the hardest annotation tasks. They assume
that making distinctions between semantic cate-
gories must rely on a dictionary. The problem
is that annotators often cannot consistently make
the fine-grained distinctions proposed by trained
lexicographers, which is particularly serious for
verbs, because verbs generally tend to be polyse-
mous rather than homonymous.

A few approaches have been suggested in
the literature that address the problem of the
fine-grained semantic distinctions by (automatic)
measuring sense distinguishability. Diab (2004)
computes sense perplexity using the entropy func-
tion as a characteristic of training data. She also
compares the sense distributions to obtain sense
distributional correlation, which can serve as a
“very good direct indicator of performance ra-
tio”, especially together with sense context con-
fusability (another indicator observed in the train-
ing data). Resnik and Yarowsky (1999) intro-
duced the communicative/semantic distance be-
tween the predicted sense and the “correct” sense.
Then they use it for evaluation metric that pro-
vides partial credit for incorrectly classified in-
stances. Cohn (2003) introduces the concept of
(non-uniform) misclassification costs. He makes
use of the communicative/semantic distance and
proposes a metric for evaluating word sense dis-
ambiguation performance using the Receiver Op-
erating Characteristics curve that takes the mis-
classification costs into account. Bruce and
Wiebe (1998) analyze the agreement among hu-
man judges for the purpose of formulating a re-
fined and more reliable set of sense tags. Their
method is based on statistical analysis of inter-
annotator confusion matrices. An extended study
is given in (Bruce and Wiebe, 1999).

4 Conclusion

The usefulness of a semantic resource depends on
two aspects:

• reliability of the annotation

• information gain from the annotation.

In practice, each semantic resource emphasizes
one aspect: OntoNotes, e.g., guarantees reliabil-
ity, whereas the WordNet-annotated corpora seek
to convey as much semantic nuance as possible.
To the best of our knowledge, there has been no
exact measure for the optimization, and the use-
fulness of a given resource can only be assessed
when it is finished and used in applications. We
propose the reliable information gain, a measure
based on information theory and on the analysis of
interannotator confusion matrices for each word
entry, that can be continually applied during the
creation of a semantic resource, and that provides
automatic feedback about the granularity of the
used tagset. Moreover, the computed information
about the amount of expected tagging confusion
is also used in evaluation of automatic classifiers.

Acknowledgments

This work has been supported by the Czech Sci-
ence Foundation projects GK103/12/G084 and
P406/2010/0875 and partly by the project Euro-
MatrixPlus (FP7-ICT-2007-3-231720 of the EU
and 7E09003+7E11051 of the Ministry of Edu-
cation, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic).

We thank our friends from Masaryk University
in Brno for providing the annotation infrastruc-
ture and for their permanent technical support.
We thank Patrick Hanks for his CPA method, for
the original PDEV development, and for numer-
ous discussions about the semantics of English
verbs. We also thank three anonymous reviewers
for their valuable comments.

848



References
Roni Ben Aharon, Idan Szpektor, and Ido Dagan.

2010. Generating entailment rules from FrameNet.
In Proceedings of the ACL 2010 Conference Short
Papers., pages 241–246, Uppsala, Sweden.

Ron Artstein and Massimo Poesio. 2008. Inter-coder
agreement for computational linguistics. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 34(4):555–596, December.

Ann Bies, Mark Ferguson, Karen Katz, Robert Mac-
Intyre, Victoria Tredinnick, Grace Kim, Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz, and Britta Schasberger. 1995.
Bracketing guidelines for treebank II style. Tech-
nical report, University of Pennsylvania.

Susan Windisch Brown, Travis Rood, and Martha
Palmer. 2010. Number or nuance: Which factors
restrict reliable word sense annotation? In LREC,
pages 3237–3243. European Language Resources
Association (ELRA).

Rebecca F. Bruce and Janyce M. Wiebe. 1998. Word-
sense distinguishability and inter-coder agreement.
In Proceedings of the Third Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP ’98), pages 53–60. Granada, Spain, June.

Rebecca F. Bruce and Janyce M. Wiebe. 1999. Recog-
nizing subjectivity: A case study of manual tagging.
Natural Language Engineering, 5(2):187–205.

Silvie Cinková, Martin Holub, Adam Rambousek, and
Lenka Smejkalová. 2012. A database of seman-
tic clusters of verb usages. In Proceedings of the
LREC ’2012 International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation. To appear.

Jacob Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for
nominal scales. Educational and Psychological
Measurement, 20(1):37–46.

Trevor Cohn. 2003. Performance metrics for word
sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the Aus-
tralasian Language Technology Workshop 2003,
pages 86–93, Melbourne, Australia, December.

Mona T. Diab. 2004. Relieving the data acquisition
bottleneck in word sense disambiguation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting of the ACL,
pages 303–310. Barcelona, Spain. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Katrin Erk, Diana McCarthy, and Nicholas Gaylord.
2009. Investigations on word senses and word us-
ages. In Proceedings of the Joint Conference of the
47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th In-
ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing of the AFNLP, pages 10–18, Suntec,
Singapore, August. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Katrin Erk. 2010. What is word meaning, really?
(And how can distributional models help us de-
scribe it?). In Proceedings of the 2010 Workshop
on GEometrical Models of Natural Language Se-
mantics, pages 17–26, Uppsala, Sweden, July. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Christiane Fellbaum, Joachim Grabowski, and Shari
Landes. 1997. Analysis of a hand-tagging task. In
Proceedings of the ACL/Siglex Workshop, Somer-
set, NJ.

Christiane Fellbaum, J. Grabowski, and S. Landes.
1998. Performance and confidence in a semantic
annotation task. In WordNet: An Electronic Lexical
Database, pages 217–238. Cambridge (Mass.): The
MIT Press., Cambridge (Mass.).

Christiane Fellbaum, Martha Palmer, Hoa Trang Dang,
Lauren Delfs, and Susanne Wolf. 2001. Manual
and automatic semantic annotation with WordNet.

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet. An Electronic
Lexical Database. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Charles J. Fillmore and B. T. S. Atkins. 1994. Start-
ing where the dictionaries stop: The challenge for
computational lexicography. In Computational Ap-
proaches to the Lexicon, pages 349–393. Oxford
University Press.

Joseph L. Fleiss. 1971. Measuring nominal scale
agreement among many raters. Psychological Bul-
letin, 76:378–382.

Patrick Hanks and James Pustejovsky. 2005. A pat-
tern dictionary for natural language processing. Re-
vue Francaise de linguistique applique, 10(2).

Patrick Hanks. forthcoming. Lexical Analysis: Norms
and Exploitations. MIT Press.

Aleš Horák, Adam Rambousek, and Piek Vossen.
2008. A distributed database system for develop-
ing ontological and lexical resources in harmony.
In 9th International Conference on Intelligent Text
Processing and Computational Linguistics, pages
1–15. Berlin: Springer.

Eduard Hovy, Mitchell Marcus, Martha Palmer,
Lance Ramshaw, and Ralph Weischedel. 2006.
OntoNotes: the 90% solution. In Proceedings
of the Human Language Technology Conference
of the NAACL, Companion Volume: Short Papers,
NAACL-Short ’06, pages 57–60, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Nancy Ide, Collin Baker, Christiane Fellbaum, Charles
Fillmore, and Rebecca Passoneau. 2008. MASC:
The Manually Annotated Sub-Corpus of American
English. In Proceedings of the Sixth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’08), pages 28–30. European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA).

Julia Jorgensen. 1990. The psycholinguistic reality of
word senses. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research,
(19):167–190.

Adam Kilgarriff. 1997. “I don’t believe in word
senses”. Computers and the Humanities, 31(2):91–
113.

Ramesh Krishnamurthy and Diane Nicholls. 2000.
Peeling an onion: The lexicographer’s experience
of manual sense tagging. Computers and the Hu-
manities, 34:85–97.

849



Ryan McDonald, Kevin Lerman, and Fernando
Pereira. 2006. Multilingual dependency analysis
with a two-stage discriminative parser. In Proceed-
ings of the Tenth Conference on Computational Nat-
ural Language Learning CoNLLX 06, pages 216–
220. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Adam Meyers, Ruth Reeves, and Catherine Macleod.
2008. NomBank v 1.0.

G. A. Miller, C. Leacock, R. Tengi, and R. T. Bunker.
1993a. A semantic concordance. In Proceedings of
ARPA Workshop on Human Language Technology.

G. A. Miller, C. Leacock, R. Tengi, and R. T. Bunker.
1993b. A semantic concordance. In Proceedings of
ARPA Workshop on Human Language Technology.

Roberto Navigli. 2006. Meaningful clustering of
senses helps boost word sense disambiguation per-
formance. In Proceedings of the 21st International
Conference on Computational Linguistics and 44th
Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 105–112, Syd-
ney, Australia.

Martha Palmer, Dan Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The proposition bank: A corpus annotated
with semantic roles. Computational Linguistics
Journal, 31(1).

Rebecca J. Passonneau, Ansaf Salleb-Aoussi, Vikas
Bhardwaj, and Nancy Ide. 2010. Word sense anno-
tation of PolysemousWords by multiple annotators.
In LREC Proceedings, pages 3244–3249, Valetta,
Malta.

Philip Resnik and David Yarowsky. 1999. Distin-
guishing systems and distinguishing senses: New
evaluation methods for word sense disambiguation.
Natural Language Engineering, 5(2):113–133.

Anna Rumshisky, M. Verhagen, and J. Moszkowicz.
2009. The holy grail of sense definition: Creating
a Sense-Disambiguated corpus from scratch. Pisa,
Italy.

Michael Rundell. 2002. Macmillan English Dictio-
nary for advanced learners. Macmillan Education.

Josef Ruppenhofer, Michael Ellsworth, Miriam R. L.
Petruck, Christopher R. Johnson, and Jan Schef-
fczyk. 2010. FrameNet II: Extended Theory and
Practice. ICSI, University of Berkeley, September.

Beatrice Santorini. 1990. Part-of-Speech tagging
guidelines for the penn treebank project. University
of Pennsylvania 3rd Revision 2nd Printing, (MS-
CIS-90-47):33.

William A. Scott. 1955. Reliability of content analy-
sis: The case of nominal scale coding. Public Opin-
ion Quarterly, 19(3):321–325.

John Sinclair, Patrick Hanks, and et al. 1987. Collins
Cobuild English Dictionary for Advanced Learn-
ers 4th edition published in 2003. HarperCollins
Publishers 1987, 1995, 2001, 2003 and Collins
A–Z Thesaurus 1st edition first published in 1995.
HarperCollins Publishers 1995.

John Sinclair. 1991. Corpus, Concordance, Colloca-
tion. Describing English Language. Oxford Univer-
sity Press.

Ralph Weischedel, Martha Palmer, Mitchell Marcus,
Eduard Hovy, Sameer Pradhan, Lance Ramshaw,
Nianwen Xue, Ann Taylor, Jeff Kaufman, Michelle
Franchini, Mohammed El-Bachouti, Robert Belvin,
and Ann Houston. 2011. OntoNotes release 4.0.

Fabio Massimo Zanzotto, Marco Pennacchiotti, and
Alessandro Moschitti. 2009. A machine learning
approach to textual entailment recognition. Natural
Language Engineering, 15(4):551–582.

Yue Zhang and Stephen Clark. 2011. Syntactic pro-
cessing using the generalized perceptron and beam
search. Computational Linguistics, 37(November
2009):105–151.

850


