










































Not as Awful as it Seems: Explaining German Case through Computational Experiments in Fluid Construction Grammar


Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 829–839,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 27 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Not as Awful as it Seems: Explaining German Case through
Computational Experiments in Fluid Construction Grammar

Remi van Trijp
Sony Computer Science Laboratory Paris

6 Rue Amyot
75005 Paris (France)

remi@csl.sony.fr

Abstract

German case syncretism is often assumed
to be the accidental by-product of historical
development. This paper contradicts this
claim and argues that the evolution of Ger-
man case is driven by the need to optimize
the cognitive effort and memory required
for processing and interpretation. This hy-
pothesis is supported by a novel kind of
computational experiments that reconstruct
and compare attested variations of the Ger-
man definite article paradigm. The exper-
iments show how the intricate interaction
between those variations and the rest of the
German ‘linguistic landscape’ may direct
language change.

1 Introduction

In his 1880 essay, Mark Twain famously com-
plained that The awful German Language is the
most “slipshod and systemless, and so slippery
and elusive to grasp” language of all. A brief
look at the literature on the German case system
seems to provide sufficient evidence for instantly
agreeing with the American author. But what if
the German case system were not the accidental
by-product of diachronic changes as is often as-
sumed? Are there linguistic forces that are not yet
fully appreciated in the field, but which may ex-
plain the German case paradigm?

This paper demonstrates that there indeed are
such forces through a case study on German def-
inite articles. The experiments ‘reconstruct’ deep
language processing models for different variants
of this paradigm, and show how the ‘linguistic
landscape’ of German has allowed its speakers to
reduce their definite article system without loss in
efficiency for processing and interpretation.

2 The Problem of German Case

German articles, adjectives and nouns are marked
for gender, number and case through morpholog-
ical inflection, as illustrated for definite articles in
Table 1.

Case SG-M SG-F SG-N PL
NOM der die das die
ACC den die das die
DAT dem der dem den
GEN des der des der

Table 1: German definite articles.

The system is notorious for its syncretism (i.e.
the same form can be mapped onto different func-
tions), a riddle that has fascinated many formal
and historical linguists looking for explanations.

2.1 Historical Linguistics
Studies in historical linguistics and grammatical-
ization often propose the following three forces to
explain syncretism (Heine and Kuteva, 2005, p.
148):

1. The formal distinction between case markers
is lost through phonological changes.

2. One case takes over the functional domain of
another case and replaces it.

3. A case marker disappears and its functions
are usurped by another marker.

Syncretism is thus considered as the accidental
by-product of such forces, and German case syn-
cretism is typically analyzed according to these
lines (Barðdal, 2009; Baerman, 2009, p. 229).
However, these forces are not explanatory: they
only describe what has happened, but not why.

829



Another problem for the ‘syncretism by acci-
dent’ hypothesis is the fact that the collapsing of
case forms is not randomly distributed over the
whole paradigm as would be expected. Hawkins
(2004, p. 78) observes that instead there is a sys-
tematic tendency for ‘lower’ cells in the paradigm
(e.g. genitive; Table 1) to collapse before cells in
‘higher’ positions (e.g. nominative) do so.

2.2 Formal Linguistics

Many hidden effects of verbal linguistic theo-
ries can be uncovered through explicit formaliza-
tions. Unfortunately, formal linguists also typi-
cally distinguish between ‘systematic’ and ‘non-
systematic’ syncretism when analyzing German
case. For instance, in his review of a number of
studies on German (a.o. Bierwisch, 1967; Blevins,
1995; Wiese, 1996; Wunderlich, 1997), Müller
(2002) concludes that none of these approaches
is able to rule out accidental syncretism.

There is however one major stone that has been
left unturned by formal linguists: processing.
Most formal theories, such as HPSG (Ginzburg
and Sag, 2000), assume a strict division between
‘competence’ and ‘performance’ and therefore
represent linguistic knowledge in a purely declar-
ative, process-independent way (Sag and Wasow,
2011). While such an approach may be desirable
from a ‘mathematical’ point of view, it puts the
burden of efficient processing on the shoulders
of computational linguists, who have to develop
more intelligent interpreters.

One example of the gap between description
and computational implementation is disjunctive
feature representation, which became popular in
feature-based grammar formalisms in the 1980s
(Karttunen, 1984). Disjunctions allow an elegant
notation for multiple feature values, as illustrated
in example 1 for the German definite article die,
which is either assigned nominative or accusative
case, and which is either feminine-singular or plu-
ral. The feature structure (adopted from Kart-
tunen, 1984, p. 30) represents disjunctions by en-
closing the alternatives in curly brackets ({ }).

(1)


AGREEMENT


[

GENDER f
NUM sg

]
[
NUM pl

]


CASE
{

nom acc
}



However, it is a well-established fact that dis-
junctions are computationally expensive, which
is illustrated in the top of Figure 1. This Fig-
ure shows the search tree of a small grammar
when parsing the utterance Die Kinder gaben der
Lehrerin die Zeichnung (‘the children gave the
drawing to the (female) teacher’), which is un-
ambiguous to German speakers. As can be seen
in the Figure, the search tree has to explore sev-
eral branches before arriving at a valid solution.
Most of the splits are caused by disjunctions. For
example, when a determiner-noun construction
specifies that the case features of the definite ar-
ticle die (nominative or accusative) and the noun
Kinder (‘children’; nominative, accusative or gen-
itive) have to unify, the search tree splits into two
hypotheses (a nominative and an accusative read-
ing) even though for native speakers of German,
the syntactic context unambiguously points to a
nominative reading (because it is the only noun
phrase that agrees with the main verb).

It should be no surprise, then, that a lot of work
has focused on processing disjunctions more ef-
ficiently (e.g. Carter, 1990; Ramsay, 1990). As
observed by Flickinger (2000), however, most of
these studies implicitly assume that the grammar
representation has to remain unchanged. He then
demonstrates through computational experiments
how a different representation can directly impact
efficiency, and argues that revisions of the gram-
mar for efficiency should be discussed more thor-
oughly in the literature.

The impact of representation on processing is
illustrated at the bottom of Figure 1, which shows
the performance of a grammar that uses the same
processing technique for handling the same utter-
ance, but a different representation than the dis-
junctive grammar. As can be seen, the alternative
grammar (whose technical details are disclosed
further below) is able to parse the German defi-
nite articles without tears, and the resulting search
tree arguably better reflects the actual processing
performed by native speakers of German.

2.3 Alternative Hypothesis

The effect of processing-friendly representations
on search suggests that answers for the unsolved
problems concerning case syncretism have to
be sought in performance. This paper there-
fore rejects the processing-independent approach
and explores the alternative hypothesis, following

830



(a) Search with disjunctive feature representation:
top

initial
structure top

application
process

queue

reset

sem syn

initial

* der-lex
(lex), die-
lex (lex),
die-lex
(lex),
gaben-lex
(lex),
zeichnung-
lex (lex)

determiner-
nominal-phrase-
cxn
(marked-phrasal)

lehrerin-
lex (lex)

determiner-nominal-
phrase-cxn
(marked-phrasal)

kinder-
lex
(lex)

determiner-nominal-
phrase-cxn
(marked-phrasal)

determiner-nominal-
phrase-cxn
(marked-phrasal)

determiner-
nominal-phrase-
cxn
(marked-phrasal)

kinder-
lex
(lex)

determiner-
nominal-phrase-
cxn
(marked-phrasal)

ditransitive-
cxn (arg)

determiner-nominal-phrase-cxn
(marked-phrasal)

+

determiner-
nominal-phrase-
cxn
(marked-phrasal)

lehrerin-
lex (lex)

determiner-nominal-
phrase-cxn
(marked-phrasal)

kinder-
lex
(lex)

determiner-nominal-
phrase-cxn
(marked-phrasal)

determiner-nominal-
phrase-cxn
(marked-phrasal)

determiner-
nominal-phrase-
cxn
(marked-phrasal)

kinder-
lex
(lex)

determiner-nominal-phrase-cxn
(marked-phrasal)

determiner-
nominal-phrase-
cxn
(marked-phrasal)

ditransitive-
cxn (arg)

determiner-nominal-phrase-cxn (marked-phrasal) kinder-lex (lex) lehrerin-lex (lex) zeichnung-lex (lex)(b) Search with feature matrices:
top

top

Parsing "die Kinder gaben der Lehrerin die Zeichnung ."

Applying construction set (8)  in direction 

Found a solution

initial
structure top

application
process

queue

applied
constructions

... and 1 more

resulting
structure

top

Meaning:
((teacher.f ?recipient-1) (unique-referent ?recipient-1) (drawing ?sem-role-3)  
(unique-referent ?sem-role-3) (children ?ref-2) (unique-referent ?ref-2)  
(gave ?ev-1 ?ref-2 ?sem-role-3 ?recipient-1))

reset

sem syn

initial
* zeichnung-lex,  kinder-lex,  lehrerin-lex,  gaben-lex,  die-lex,  detnp-cxn,
die-lex ,  detnp-cxn,  der-lex,  detnp-cxn

ditransitive-
cxn

detnp-cxn der-lex (t) die-lex (t) die-lex (t)

ditransitive-cxn detnp-cxn der-lex (t) detnp-cxn die-lex (t) detnp-cxn die-lex (t) gaben-lex (t)

lehrerin-lex (t) kinder-lex (t)

ditransitive-
unit-1

detnp-
unit-1

kinder-
1

die-1

detnp-
unit-2

zeichnung-
1

die-2

gaben-1

detnp-
unit-3

lehrerin-
1

der-1

sem syn ditransitive-
unit-1

detnp-
unit-3

der-1

lehrerin-
1

detnp-
unit-2

die-2

zeichnung-
1

detnp-
unit-1

die-1

kinder-
1

gaben-1

Figure 1: The representation of linguistic information has a direct impact on processing efficiency. The top
figure shows a search tree when parsing the unambiguous utterance Die Kinder gaben der Lehrerin die Zeich-
nung (‘The children gave the drawing to the (female) teacher’) using disjunctive feature representation. The
bottom figure shows the search tree using distinctive feature matrices. Labels in the boxes show the names
of the applied constructions; boxes with a bold border are successful end nodes. Both grammars have been
implemented in Fluid Construction Grammar (FCG; Steels, 2011, 2012a) and are processed using a standard
depth-first search algorithm (Bleys et al., 2011) and general unification (without optimization for particular
types or data structures; Steels and De Beule, 2006; De Beule, 2012). The utterance is assumed to be seg-
mented into words. Interested readers can explore the Figure through an interactive web demonstration at
http://www.fcg-net.org/demos/design-patterns/07-feature-matrices/.

Steels (2004, 2012b), that grammar evolves in or-
der to optimize communicative success by damp-
ening the search space in linguistic processing and
reducing the cognitive effort needed for interpre-
tation, while at the same time minimizing the re-
sources required for doing so. More specifically,
this paper explores the following claims:

1. The German definite article system can be
processed as efficiently as its Old High Ger-
man predecessor, which had less syncretism.

2. The presence of other grammatical structures
have made it possible to reduce the definite
article paradigm without increasing the cog-
nitive effort needed for disambiguating the
argument structures that underly German ut-
terances.

3. The decrease of cue-reliability of case for
disambiguation encourages the emergence of
competing systems (such as word order).

The hypothesis is substantiated through com-
putational experiments that reconstruct three dif-
ferent variants of the German definite article sys-
tem (the current system, its Old High German pre-
decessor, Wright, 1906; and the Texas German
dialect system, Boas, 2009a,b) and compare their
performance in terms of processing efficiency and
cognitive effort in interpretation.

3 Operationalizing German Case

An adequate operationalization of German case
requires a bidirectional grammar (for parsing and
production) and easy access to linguistic process-

831



ing data. All experiments reported in this paper
have therefore been implemented in Fluid Con-
struction Grammar (FCG; Steels, 2011, 2012a), a
unification-based grammar formalism that comes
equipped with an interactive web interface and
monitoring tools (Loetzsch, 2012). A second ad-
vantage of FCG is that it features strong bidirec-
tionality: the FCG-interpreter can achieve both
parsing and production using the same linguistic
inventory. Other feature structure platforms, such
as the lkb-system (Copestake, 2002), require a
separate parser and generator for formalizing bidi-
rectional grammars, which make them less suited
for substantiating the claims of this paper.

3.1 Distinctive Feature Matrix
German case has become the litmus test for
demonstrating how well a feature-based grammar
formalism copes with multifunctionality, espe-
cially since Ingria (1990) provocatively stated that
unification is not the best technique for handling
it. People have gone to great lengths to counter
Ingria’s claim, especially within the HPSG frame-
work (e.g. Müller, 1999; Daniels, 2001; Sag,
2003), and various formalizations have been of-
fered for German case (Heinz and Matiasek,
1994; Müller, 2001; Crysmann, 2005). However,
these proposals either do not succeed in avoiding
inefficient disjunctions or they require a complex
double type hierarchy (Crysmann, 2005).

The experiments in this paper use a more
straightforward solution, called a distinctive fea-
ture matrix, which is based on an idea that was
first explored by Ingria (1990) and of which a
variation has recently also been proposed for
Lexical Functional Grammar (Dalrymple et al.,
2009). Instead of treating case as a single-valued
feature, it can be represented as an array of fea-
tures, as shown for the definite article die (ignor-
ing the genitive case for the time being):

(2) die:
CASE

nom ?nomacc ?acc
dat –




The case feature includes a paradigm of three
cases (nom, acc and dat), whose values can ei-
ther be ‘+’ or ‘–’, or left unspecified through a
variable (indicated by a question mark). The two
variables ?nom and ?acc indicate that die can
potentially be assigned nominative or accusative

case, the value ‘–’ for dative means that die can-
not be assigned dative case. We can do the same
for Kinder (‘children’), which can be nominative
or accusative, but not dative:

(3) Kinder:
CASE

nom ?nomacc ?acc
dat –




As demonstrated in Figure 1, disjunctive fea-
ture representation would cause a split in the
search tree when unifying die and Kinder. Us-
ing a feature matrix, however, the choice between
a nominative and accusative reading can simply
be postponed until enough information from the
rest of the utterance is available. Unifying die and
Kinder yields the following feature structure:

(4) die Kinder:
CASE

nom ?nomacc ?acc
dat –




3.2 A Three-Dimensional Matrix
The German case paradigm is obviously more
complex than the examples shown so far. Let’s
consider Table 1 again, but this time we replace
every cell in the table by a variable. This leads to
the following feature matrix for the German defi-
nite articles:

Case SG-M SG-F SG-N PL
?NOM ?n-s-m ?n-s-f ?n-s-n ?n-pl
?ACC ?a-s-m ?a-s-f ?a-s-n ?a-pl
?DAT ?d-s-m ?d-s-f ?d-s-n ?d-pl
?GEN ?g-s-m ?g-s-f ?g-s-n ?g-pl

Table 2: A distinctive feature matrix for German case.

Each cell in this matrix represents a specific
feature bundle that collects the features case,
number, and person. For example, the variable
?n-s-m stands for nominative singular mascu-
line. Note that also the cases themselves have
their own variable (?nom, ?acc, ?dat and
?gen). This allows us to single out a specific di-
mension of the matrix for constructions that only
care about case distinctions, but abstract away
from gender or number. Each linguistic item fills
in as much information as possible in this case
matrix. For example, Table 3 shows how the def-
inite article die underspecifies its potential values
and rules out all other options through ‘–’.

832



Case SG-M SG-F SG-N PL
?NOM – ?n-s-f – ?n-pl
?ACC – ?a-s-f – ?a-pl
– – – – –
– – – – –

Table 3: The feature matrix of die.

The feature matrix of Kinder (‘children’),
which underspecifies for nominative, accusative
and genitive, is shown in Table 4. Notice, how-
ever, that the same variable names are used for
both the column that singles out the case dimen-
sion as for the column of the plural feature bun-
dles.

Case SG-M SG-F SG-N PL
?n-pl – – – ?n-pl
?a-pl – – – ?a-pl
– – – – –
?g-pl – – – ?g-pl

Table 4: The feature matrix of Kinder (‘children’).

Unification of die and Kinder can exploit these
variable ‘equalities’ for ruling out a singular value
of the definite article. Likewise, the matrix of die
rules out the genitive reading of Kinder, as illus-
trated in Table 5.

Case SG-M SG-F SG-N PL
?n-pl – – – ?n-pl
?a-pl – – – ?a-pl
– – – – –
– – – – –

Table 5: The feature matrix of die Kinder.

Argument structure constructions (Goldberg,
2006), such as the ditransitive, can then later as-
sign either nominative or accusative case. The
main advantage of feature matrices is that linguis-
tic search only has to commit to specific feature-
values once sufficient information is available, so
the search tree only splits when there is an actual
ambiguity. Moreover, they can be handled using
standard unification. Interested readers can con-
sult van Trijp (2011) for a thorough description of
the approach, as well as a discussion on how the
FCG implementation differs from Ingria (1990)
and Dalrymple et al. (2009).

4 Experiments

This section describes the experimental set-up and
discusses the experimental results.

4.1 Three Paradigms
The experiments compare three different variants
of the German definite article paradigm.

Standard German. The Standard German
paradigm has been illustrated in Table 1 and its
operationalization has been shown in section 3.2.
The paradigm has been inherited without signifi-
cant changes from Middle High German (1050-
1350; Walshe, 1974) and features six different
forms.

Old High German. The Old High German
paradigm is the direct predecessor of the current
paradigm of definite articles. It contained at least
twelve distinct forms (depending on which varia-
tion is taken) that included gender distinctions in
plural (Wright, 1906, p. 67). It also included one
definite article that marked the now extinct instru-
mental case, which is ignored in this paper. The
variant of the Old High German paradigm that has
been implemented in the experiments is summa-
rized in Table 6.

Case Singular
M F N

NOM dër diu daz̧
ACC dën die daz̧
DAT dëmu dëru dëmu
GEN dës dëra dës

Plural
M F N

NOM die deo diu
ACC die deo diu
DAT dēm dēm dēm
GEN dëro dëro dëro

Table 6: The Old High German definite article system.

Texas German. The third variant is an
American-German dialect called Texas German
(Boas, 2009a,b), which evolved a two-way case
distinction between nominative and oblique. This
type of case system, in which the accusative and
dative case have collapsed, is also a common
evolution in the Low German dialects (Shrier,
1965). The implemented paradigm of Texas
German is shown in Table 7.

833



Case SG-M SG-F SG-N PL
NOM der die das die
ACC/DAT den die den die

Table 7: The Texas German definite article system.

4.2 Production and Parsing Tasks

Each grammar is tested as to how efficiently it can
produce and parse utterances in terms of cognitive
effort and search (see section 4.3). There are three
basic types of utterances:

1. Ditransitive: NOM – Verb – DAT – ACC

2. Transitive (a): NOM – Verb – ACC

3. Transitive (b): NOM – Verb – DAT

The argument roles are filled by noun phrases
whose head nouns always have a distinct form
for singular and plural (e.g. Mann vs. Män-
ner; ‘man’ vs. ‘men’), but that are unmarked for
case. The combinations of arguments is always
unique along the dimensions of number and gen-
der, which yields 216 unique utterance types for
the ditransitive as follows:

(5)

NOM.S.M V DAT.S.M ACC.S.M
NOM.S.M V DAT.S.F ACC.S.M
NOM.S.M V DAT.S.N ACC.S.M
NOM.S.M V DAT.PL.M ACC.S.M

etc.

In transitive utterances, there is an additional
distinction based on animacy for noun phrases in
the Object position of the utterance, which yields
72 types in the NOM-ACC configuration and 72
in the NOM-DAT configuration. Together, there
are 360 unique utterance types. As can be gleaned
from the utterance types, the genitive case is not
considered by the experiments, as the genitive is
not part of basic German argument structures and
it has almost disappeared in most dialects of Ger-
man (Shrier, 1965).

In production, the grammar is presented with a
meaning that needs to be verbalized into an utter-
ance. In parsing, the produced utterance has to be
analyzed back into a meaning. Every utterance is
processed using a full search, that is, all branches
and solutions are calculated.

The experiments exploit types because there
are three different language systems, hence it is
impossible to use a single, real corpus and its to-
ken frequencies. It would also be unwarranted to
use different corpora because corpus-specific bi-
ases would distort the comparative results. Sec-
ondly, as the experiments involve models of deep
language processing (as opposed to stochastic
models), the use of types instead of tokens is
justified in this phase of the research: the first
concern of precision-grammars is descriptive ade-
quacy, for which types are a more reliable source.
Obviously, the effect of token frequency needs to
be examined in future research.

4.3 Measuring Cognitive Effort
The experiments measure two kinds of cognitive
effort: syntactic search and semantic ambiguity.

Search. The search measure counts the number
of branches in the search process that reach an end
node, which can either be a possible solution or
a dead end (i.e. no constructions can be applied
anymore). Duplicate nodes (for instance, nodes
that use the same rules but in a different order)
are not counted. The search measure is then used
as a ‘sanity check’ to verify whether the three dif-
ferent paradigms can be processed with the same
efficiency in terms of search tree length, as hy-
pothesized by this paper. More specifically, the
following conditions have to be met:

1. In production, there should only be one
branch.

2. In parsing, search has to be equal to the se-
mantic effort.

The single branch constraint in production
checks whether the definite articles are suffi-
ciently distinct from one another. Since there is no
ambiguity about which argument plays which role
in the utterance, the grammar should only come
up with one solution. In parsing, the number of
branches has to correspond to ‘real’ semantic am-
biguities and not create additional search, as ar-
gued in section 2.2.

Semantic Ambiguity. Semantic ambiguity
equals the number of possible interpretations
of an utterance. For instance, the utterance
Der Hund beißt den Mann ‘the dog bites the
man’ is unambiguous in Modern High German,

834



since der Hund can only be nominative singular-
masculine, and den Mann can only be accusative
masculine-singular. There is thus only one pos-
sible interpretation in which the dog is the biter
and the man is being bitten, illustrated as follows
using a logic-based meaning representation (also
see Steels, 2004, for this operationalization of
cognitive effort):

(6) Interpretation 1:
Der Hund den Mann.beißt

bite(?ev)
biter(?ev, ?x)
bitten(?ev, ?y)

dog(?a) man(?b)

?a=?x
?b=?y

However, an utterance such as die Katze beißt
die Frau ‘the cat bites the woman’ is ambiguous
because die has both a nominative and accusative
singular-feminine reading:

(7) a. Interpretation 1:
Die Katze die Frau.beißt

bite(?ev)
biter(?ev, ?x)
bitten(?ev, ?y)

cat(?a) woman(?b)

?a=?x
?b=?y

b. Interpretation 2:
Die Katze die Frau.beißt

bite(?ev)
biter(?ev, ?x)
bitten(?ev, ?y)

cat(?a) woman(?b)

?a=?y
?b=?x

Here, German speakers are likely to use word
order, intonation and world knowledge (i.e. cats
are more likely to bite a person than the other way
round) for disambiguating the utterance.

4.4 Experimental Parameters

The experiments (E1-E4) concern the cue-
reliability of the definite articles for disambiguat-
ing event structure. In all experiments, the differ-
ent grammars can exploit the case-number-gender
information of definite articles, and also the gen-
der and number specifications of nouns, and the
syntactic valence of verbs. For instance, the
noun form Frauen ‘women’ is specified as plural-
feminine, and verbs like helfen ‘to help’ are spec-
ified to take a dative object, whereas verbs like
finden ‘to find’ take an accusative object. In other
experiments, different combinations of grammat-
ical cues become available or not:

Cue E1 E2 E3 E4
SV-agreement + +
Selection restrictions + +

SV-agreement restricts the subject to singular
or plural nouns, and semantic selection restric-
tions can disambiguate utterances in which for ex-
ample the Agent-role has to be animate (e.g. in
perception verbs such as sehen ‘to see’). All other
possible cues, such as word order, are ignored.

5 Results

5.1 Search

In all experiments, the constraints of the search
measure were satisfied: every grammar only re-
quired one branch per utterance in production,
and the number of branches in parsing never ex-
ceeded the number of possible interpretations. In
terms of search length, more syncretism therefore
does not automatically harm efficiency, provided
that the grammar uses an adequate representation.
Arguably, the smaller paradigms are even more
efficient because they require less unifications to
be performed.

5.2 Semantic Ambiguity

Now that it has been ascertained that more
syncretism does not harm processing efficiency,
we can compare cue-reliability of the different
paradigms for semantic interpretation.

Ambiguous Utterances. Figure 2 shows the
number of ambiguous utterances in parsing (in %)
per paradigm and per set-up. As can be seen,
the Old High German paradigm (black) is the
most reliable cue in Experiment 1 (E1; when SV-
agreement and selection restrictions are ignored)
with 35.56% of ambiguous utterances, as opposed
to 55.56% for Modern High German (grey) and
77.78% for Texas German (white).

When SV-agreement is taken into account (E2),
the difference between Old and Modern High
German becomes smaller, with both paradigms
offering a reliability of more than 70%, while
Texas German still faces more than 70% of am-
biguous utterances.

Ambiguity is even more reduced when using
semantic selection restrictions of the verb (set-up

835



E3). Here, the difference between Old and Mod-
ern High German becomes trivial with 4.44% and
6.94% of ambiguous utterances respectively. The
difference with Texas German remains apparent,
even though its ambiguity is cut by half.

In set-up E4 (case, SV-agreement and selection
restrictions), the Old and Modern High German
paradigms resolve almost all ambiguities, leaving
little difference between them. Using the Texas
German dialect, one utterance out of five remains
ambiguous and requires additional grammatical
cues or inferencing for semantic interpretation.

Number of possible interpretations. Semantic
ambiguity can also be measured by counting the
number of possible interpretations per utterance.
A non-ambiguous language would thus have 1
possible interpretation per utterance. The aver-
age number of interpretations per utterance (per
paradigm and per set-up) is shown in Table 8.

Paradigm E1 E2 E3 E4
Old High German 1.56 1.22 1.04 1.03
Modern High German 1.56 1.28 1.07 1.04
Texas German 2.84 2.39 1.36 1.22

Table 8: Average number of interpretations per utter-
ance type.

The Old High German paradigm has the least
semantic ambiguity throughout, except in Exper-
iment 1 (E1). Here, Modern High German has
the same average effort despite having more am-
biguous utterances. This means that the Old High
German paradigm provides a better coverage in
terms of construction types, but when ambiguity
occurs, more possible interpretations exist.

6 Discussion

The experiments compare how well three differ-
ent paradigms of definite articles perform if they
are inserted in the grammar of Modern High Ger-
man. The results show that, in isolation, Old High
German offers the best cue-reliability for retriev-
ing who’s doing what to whom in events. How-
ever, when other grammatical cues are taken into
account, it turns out that Modern High German
achieves similar results with respect to syntactic
search and semantic ambiguity, with a reduced
paradigm (using only six instead of twelve forms).

As for the Texas German dialect, which has
collapsed the accusative-dative distinction, the

amount of ambiguity remains more than 20% us-
ing all available cues. One verifiable predic-
tion of the experiments is therefore that this di-
alect should show an increase in alternative syn-
tactic restrictions (such as word order) in order
to make up for the lost case distinctions. Inter-
estingly, such alternatives have been attested in
Low German dialects that have evolved a simi-
lar two-way case system (Shrier, 1965). Modern
High German, on the other hand, has already re-
cruited word order for other purposes (such as in-
formation structure; Lenerz, 1977; Micelli, 2012),
which may explain why the current paradigm has
been able to survive since the Middle Ages.

Instead of an accidental by-product of phono-
logical and morphological changes, then, a new
picture emerges for explaining syncretism in
Modern High German definite articles: German
speakers have been able to reduce their case
paradigm without loss in processing and interpre-
tation efficiency. With cognitive effort as a selec-
tion criterion, subsequent generations of speakers
found no linguistic pressures for maintaining par-
ticular distinctions such as gender in plural arti-
cles. Especially forms whose acoustic distinctions
are harder to perceive are candidates for collapse
if they are no longer functional for processing or
interpretation. Other factors, such as frequency,
may accelerate this evolution, as also argued by
Barðdal (2009). For instance, there may be less
benefits for upholding a case distinction for infre-
quent than for frequent forms.

If case syncretism is not randomly distributed
over a grammatical paradigm, but rather func-
tionally motivated, a new explanatory model is
needed. One candidate is evolutionary linguistics
(Steels, 2012b), a framework of cultural evolu-
tion in which populations of language users con-
stantly shape and reshape their language in re-
sponse to their communicative needs. The ex-
periments reported here suggest that this dynamic
shaping process is guided by the ‘linguistic land-
scape’ of a language. For instance, the pres-
ence of grammatical cues such as gender, num-
ber and SV-agreement may encourage paradigm
reduction. However, reduction may be the start
of a self-enforcing loop in which the decreasing
cue-reliability of a paradigm may pressure lan-
guage users into enforcing the alternatives to take
on even more of the cognitive load of processing.

The intricate interactions between grammati-

836



35.56	  

22.22	  

4.44	   2.78	  

55.56	  

28.89	  

6.94	  
3.61	  

77.78	  

71.11	  

35.56	  

22.22	  

0	  

10	  

20	  

30	  

40	  

50	  

60	  

70	  

80	  

90	  

100	  

E1	   E2	   E3	   E4	  

%	  of	  ambiguous	  u,erances	  

Old	  High	  German	   Modern	  High	  German	   Texas	  German	  

Figure 2: This chart shows the number of ambiguous utterances per paradigm per E(xperimental set-up) in %.

cal systems also requires more sophisticated mea-
sures. A promising extension of this paper could
lie in an information-theoretic approach to lan-
guage (Hale, 2003; Jaeger and Tily, 2011), which
has recently explored a set of tools for assessing
linguistic complexity, processing effort and un-
certainty. Unfortunately, only little work has been
done on morphological paradigms so far (see e.g.
Ackerman et al., 2011), and the approach is typi-
cally applied in stochastic or Probabilistic Context
Free Grammars, hence it remains unclear how the
assumptions of this field fit into models of deep
language processing.

7 Conclusions

More than 130 years after Mark Twain’s com-
plaints, it seems that the German language is not
that awful after all. Through a series of compu-
tational experiments, this paper has proposed a
different explanation for German case syncretism
that answers some of the unsolved riddles of pre-
vious studies. First, the experiments have shown
that an increase in syncretism does not necessar-
ily lead to an increase in the cognitive effort re-
quired for syntactic search, provided that the rep-
resentation of the grammar is processing-friendly.
Secondly, by comparing cue-reliability of differ-
ent paradigms for semantic disambiguation, the

experiments have demonstrated that Modern High
German achieves a similar performance as its Old
High German predecessor using only half of the
forms in its definite article paradigm.

Instead of a series of historical accidents, the
German case system thus underwent a systematic
and “performance-driven [...] morphological re-
structuring” (Hawkins, 2004, p. 79), in which lin-
guistic pressures such as cognitive effort decided
on the maintenance or loss of certain distinctions.
The case study makes clear that formal and com-
putational models of deep language understand-
ing have to reconsider their strict division between
competence and performance if the goal is to ex-
plain individual language development. This pa-
per proposed that new tools and methodologies
should be sought in evolutionary linguistics.

Acknowledgements

This research has been conducted at the Sony
Computer Science Laboratory Paris. I would like
to thank Luc Steels, director of Sony CSL Paris
and the VUB AI-Lab of the University of Brus-
sels, for his support and feedback. I also thank
Hans Boas, Jóhanna Barðdal, Peter Hanappe,
Manfred Hild and the anonymous reviewers for
helping to improve this article. All errors remain
of course my own.

837



References

Farrell Ackerman, James P. Blevins, and Robert
Malouf. Parts and wholes: Implicative patterns
in inflectional paradigms. In J.P. Blevins and
J. Blevins, editors, Analogy in Grammar: Form
and Acquisition, pages 54–81. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, Oxford, 2011.

Matthew Baerman. Case syncretism. In An-
drej Malchukov and Andrew Spencer, editors,
The Oxford Handbook of Case, chapter 14,
pages 219–230. Oxford University Press, Ox-
ford, 2009.

J. Barðdal. The development of case in germanic.
In J. Barðdal and S. Chelliah, editors, The Role
of Semantics and Pragmatics in the Develop-
ment of Case, pages 123–159. John Benjamins,
Amsterdam, 2009.

Manfred Bierwisch. Syntactic features in
morphology: General problems of so-called
pronominal inflection in German. In To Hon-
our Roman Jakobson, pages 239–270. Mouton
De Gruyter, Berlin, 1967.

James Blevins. Syncretism and paradigmatic op-
position. Linguistics and Philosophy, 18:113–
152, 1995.

Joris Bleys, Kevin Stadler, and Joachim De Beule.
Search in linguistic processing. In Luc Steels,
editor, Design Patterns in Fluid Construction
Grammar. John Benjamins, Amsterdam, 2011.

Hans C. Boas. Case loss in Texas German: The
influence of semantic and pragmatic factors. In
J. Barðdal and S. Chelliah, editors, The Role of
Semantics and Pragmatics in the Development
of Case, pages 347–373. John Benjamins, Am-
sterdam, 2009a.

Hans C. Boas. The Life and Death of Texas
German, volume 93 of Publication of the The
American Dialect Society. Duke University
Press, Durham, 2009b.

David Carter. Efficient disjunctive unification
for bottom-up parsing. In Proceedings of the
13th Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 70–75. ACL, 1990.

Ann Copestake. Implementing Typed Feature
Structure Grammars. CSLI Publications, Stan-
ford, 2002.

Berthold Crysmann. Syncretism in german: A
unified approach to underspecification, indeter-

minacy, and likeness of case. In Stefan Müller,
editor, Proceedings of the 12th International
Conference on Head-Driven Phrase Structure
Grammar, pages 91–107, Stanford, 2005. CSLI
Publications.

Mary Dalrymple, Tracy Holloway King, and
Louisa Sadler. Indeterminacy by underspecifi-
cation. Journal of Linguistics, 45:31–68, 2009.

Michael Daniels. On a type-based analysis of fea-
ture neutrality and the coordination of unlikes.
In Proceedings of the 8th International Confer-
ence on HPSG, pages 137–147, Stanford, 2001.
CSLI.

Joachim De Beule. A formal deconstruction of
Fluid Construction Grammar. In Luc Steels, ed-
itor, Computational Issues in Fluid Construc-
tion Grammar. Springer Verlag, Berlin, 2012.

Daniel P. Flickinger. On building a more efficient
grammar by exploiting types. Natural Lan-
guage Engineering, 6(1):15–28, 2000.

Jonathan Ginzburg and Ivan A. Sag. Interroga-
tive Investigations: the Form, the Meaning, and
Use of English Interrogatives. CSLI Publica-
tions, Stanford, 2000.

Adele E. Goldberg. Constructions At Work: The
Nature of Generalization in Language. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 2006.

John T. Hale. The information conveyed by words
in sentences. Journal of Psycholinguistic Re-
search, 32(2):101–123, 2003.

John A. Hawkins. Efficiency and Complexity in
Grammars. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
2004.

Bernd Heine and Tania Kuteva. Language Con-
tact and Grammatical Change. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 2005.

Wolfgang Heinz and Johannes Matiasek. Argu-
ment structure and case assignment in german.
In John Nerbonne, Klaus Netter, and Carl Pol-
lard, editors, German in Head-Driven Phrase
Structure Grammar, volume 46 of CSLI Lec-
ture Notes, pages 199–236. CSLI Publications,
Stanford, 1994.

R.J.P. Ingria. The limits of unification. In Pro-
ceedings of the 28th Annual Meeting of the
ACL, pages 194–204, 1990.

T. Florian Jaeger and Harry Tily. On language
‘utility’: Processing complexity and commu-

838



nicative efficiency. WIREs: Cognitive Science,
2(3):323–335, 2011.

L. Karttunen. Features and values. In Proceedings
of the 10th International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics, Stanford, 1984.

Jürgen Lenerz. Zur Abfolge nominaler
Satzglieder im Deutschen. Narr, Tübin-
gen, 1977.

Martin Loetzsch. Tools for grammar engineering.
In Luc Steels, editor, Computational Issues in
Fluid Construction Grammar. Springer Verlag,
Berlin, 2012.

Vanessa Micelli. Field topology and information
structure: A case study for German constituent
order. In Luc Steels, editor, Computational Is-
sues in Fluid Construction Grammar. Springer
Verlag, Berlin, 2012.

Gereon Müller. Remarks on nominal inflection
in German. In Ingrid Kaufmann and Bar-
bara Stiebels, editors, More than Words: A
Festschrift for Dieter Wunderlich, pages 113–
145. Akademie Verlag, Berlin, 2002.

Stefan Müller. An HPSG-analysis for free rela-
tive clauses in german. Grammars, 2(1):53–
105, 1999.

Stefan Müller. Case in German – towards and
HPSG analysis. In Tibor Kiss and Det-
mar Meurers, editors, Constraint-Based Ap-
proaches to Germanic Syntax. CSLI, Stanford,
2001.

Allan Ramsay. Disjunction without tears. Com-
putational Linguistics, 16(3):171–174, 1990.

Ivan A. Sag. Coordination and underspecifica-
tion. In Jongbok Kom and Stephen Wechsler,
editors, Proceedings of the Ninth International
Conference on HPSG, Stanford, 2003. CSLI.

Ivan A. Sag and Thomas Wasow. Performance-
compatible competence grammar. In Robert D.
Borsley and Kersti Börjars, editors, Non-
Transformational Syntax: Formal and Explicit
Models of Grammar. Wiley-Blackwell, Ox-
ford, 2011.

Martha Shrier. Case systems in German dialects.
Language, 41(3):420–438, 1965.

Luc Steels. Constructivist development of
grounded construction grammars. In Walter
Daelemans, editor, Proceedings 42nd Annual

Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 9–19, Barcelona, 2004.

Luc Steels, editor. Design Patterns in Fluid Con-
struction Grammar. John Benjamins, Amster-
dam, 2011.

Luc Steels, editor. Computational Issues in
Fluid Construction Grammar. Springer, Berlin,
2012a.

Luc Steels. Self-organization and selection in cul-
tural language evolution. In Luc Steels, editor,
Experiments in Cultural Language Evolution.
John Benjamins, Amsterdam, 2012b.

Luc Steels and Joachim De Beule. Unify and
merge in Fluid Construction Grammar. In
P. Vogt, Y. Sugita, E. Tuci, and C. Nehaniv,
editors, Symbol Grounding and Beyond., LNAI
4211, pages 197–223, Berlin, 2006. Springer.

Remi van Trijp. Feature matrices and agreement:
A case study for German case. In Luc Steels,
editor, Design Patterns in Fluid Construction
Grammar. John Benjamins, Amsterdam, 2011.

M. Walshe. A Middle High German Reader: With
Grammar, Notes and Glossary. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, Oxford, 1974.

Bernd Wiese. Iconicity and syncretism. on
pronominal inflection in Modern German. In
Robin Sckmann, editor, Theoretical Linguistics
and Grammatical Description, pages 323–344.
John Benjamins, Amsterdam, 1996.

Joseph Wright. An Old High German Primer.
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 2nd edition, 1906.

Dieter Wunderlich. Der unterspezifizierte Artikel.
In Karl Heinz Ramers Dürscheid and Monika
Schwarz, editors, Sprache im Fokus, pages 47–
55. Niemeyer, Tübingen, 1997.

839


