










































TransAhead: A Writing Assistant for CAT and CALL


Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 16–19,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 27 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

TransAhead: A Writing Assistant for CAT and CALL 

 
*Chung-chi Huang  ++Ping-che Yang  *Mei-hua Chen *Hung-ting Hsieh  +Ting-hui Kao 

    +Jason S. Chang 
*ISA, NTHU, HsinChu, Taiwan, R.O.C.  

++III, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C. +CS, NTHU, HsinChu, Taiwan, R.O.C. 
{u901571,maciaclark,chen.meihua,vincent732,maxis1718,jason.jschang}gmail.com 

 

Abstract 

We introduce a method for learning to 
predict the following grammar and text 
of the ongoing translation given a source 
text. In our approach, predictions are 
offered aimed at reducing users’ burden 
on lexical and grammar choices, and 
improving productivity. The method 
involves learning syntactic phraseology 
and translation equivalents. At run-time, 
the source and its translation prefix are 
sliced into ngrams to generate subsequent 
grammar and translation predictions. We 
present a prototype writing assistant, 
TransAhead1, that applies the method to 
where computer-assisted translation and 
language learning meet. The preliminary 
results show that the method has great 
potentials in CAT and CALL (significant 
boost in translation quality is observed). 

1.  Introduction 

More and more language learners use the MT 
systems on the Web for language understanding 
or learning. However, web translation systems 
typically suggest a, usually far from perfect, one-
best translation and hardly interact with the user. 

Language learning/sentence translation could 
be achieved more interactively and appropriately 
if a system recognized translation as a 
collaborative sequence of the user’s learning and 
choosing from the machine-generated predictions 
of the next-in-line grammar and text and the 
machine’s adapting to the user’s accepting 
/overriding the suggestions. 

Consider the source sentence “我們在結束這個
交易上扮演重要角色” (We play an important role 
in closing this deal). The best learning 
environment is probably not the one solely 

                                                           
1Available at http://140.114.214.80/theSite/TransAhead/ 
which, for the time being, only supports Chrome browsers. 

providing the automated translation. A good 
learning environment might comprise a writing 
assistant that gives the user direct control over 
the target text and offers text and grammar 
predictions following the ongoing translations. 

We present a new system, TransAhead, that 
automatically learns to predict/suggest the 
grammatical constructs and lexical translations 
expected to immediately follow the current 
translation given a source text, and adapts to the 
user’s choices. Example TransAhead responses 
to the source “我們在結束這個交易上扮演重要角色” 
and the ongoing translation “we” and “we play 
an important role” are shown in Figure 12(a) and 
(b) respectively. TransAhead has determined the 
probable subsequent grammatical constructions 
with constituents lexically translated, shown in 
pop-up menus (e.g., Figure 1(b) shows a 
prediction “IN[in] VBG[close, end, …]” due to 
the history “play role” where lexical items in 
square brackets are lemmas of potential 
translations). TransAhead learns these constructs 
and translations during training. 

At run-time, TransAhead starts with a source 
sentence, and iteratively collaborates with the 
user: by making predictions on the successive 
grammar patterns and lexical translations, and by 
adapting to the user’s translation choices to 
reduce source ambiguities (e.g., word 
segmentation and senses). In our prototype, 
TransAhead mediates between users and 
automatic modules to boost users’ writing/ 
translation performance (e.g., productivity). 

2.  Related Work 

CAT has been an area of active research. Our 
work addresses an aspect of CAT focusing on 
language learning. Specifically, our goal is to 
build a human-computer collaborative writing 
assistant: helping the language learner with in- 
text  grammar  and  translation  and  at  the  same 

                                                           
2  Note that grammatical constituents (in all-capitalized 
words) are represented using Penn parts-of-speech and the 
history based on the user input is shown in shades. 

16



 
Figure 1. Example TransAhead responses to a source text under the translation (a) “we” and (b) “we play an important role”. Note 
that the grammar/text predictions of (a) and (b) are not placed directly under the current input focus for space limit. (c) and (d) 
depict predominant grammar constructs which follow and (e) summarizes the translations for the source’s character-based ngrams. 
 

time updating the system’s segmentation 
/translation options through the user’s word 
choices. Our intended users are different from 
those of the previous research focusing on what 
professional translator can bring for MT systems 
(e.g., Brown and Nirenburg, 1990). 

More recently, interactive MT (IMT) systems 
have begun to shift the user’s role from analyses 
of the source text to the formation of the target 
translation. TransType project (Foster et al., 2002) 
describes such pioneering system that supports 
next word predictions. Koehn (2009) develops 
caitra which displays one phrase translation at a 
time and offers alternative translation options. 
Both systems are similar in spirit to our work. 
The main difference is that we do not expect the 
user to be a professional translator and we 
provide translation hints along with grammar 
predictions to avoid the generalization issue 
facing phrase-based system. 

Recent work has been done on using fully-
fledged statistical MT systems to produce target 
hypotheses completing user-validated translation 
prefix in IMT paradigm. Barrachina et al. (2008) 
investigate the applicability of different MT 
kernels within IMT framework. Nepveu et al. 
(2004) and Ortiz-Martinez et al. (2011) further 
exploit user feedbacks for better IMT systems 
and user experience. Instead of trigged by user 
correction, our method is triggered by word 
delimiter and assists in target language learning. 

In contrast to the previous CAT research, we 
present a writing assistant that suggests 
subsequent grammar constructs with translations 
and interactively collaborates with learners, in 
view of reducing users’ burden on grammar and 
word choice and enhancing their writing quality. 

3.  The TransAhead System 

3.1 Problem Statement 

For CAT and CALL, we focus on predicting a 
set of grammar patterns with lexical translations 
likely to follow the current target translation 
given a source text. The predictions will be 
examined by a human user directly. Not to 
overwhelm the user, our goal is to return a 
reasonable-sized set of predictions that contain 
suitable word choices and correct grammar to 
choose and learn from. Formally speaking, 

Problem Statement: We are given a target-
language reference corpus Ct, a parallel corpus 
Cst, a source-language text S, and its target 
translation prefix Tp. Our goal is to provide a set 
of predictions based on Ct and Cst likely to 
further translate S in terms of grammar and text. 
For this, we transform S and Tp into sets of 
ngrams such that the predominant grammar 
constructs with suitable translation options 
following Tp are likely to be acquired. 

3.2  Learning to Find Pattern and Translation 

We attempt to find syntax-based phraseology and 
translation equivalents beforehand (four-staged) 
so that a real-time system is achievable. 

Firstly, we syntactically analyze the corpus Ct. 
In light of the phrases in grammar book (e.g., 
one’s in “make up one’s mind”), we resort to 
parts-of-speech for syntactic generalization. 
Secondly, we build up inverted files of the words 
in Ct for the next stage (i.e., pattern grammar 
generation). Apart from sentence and position 
information, a word’s lemma and part-of-speech 
(POS) are also recorded. 

(b) 

Source text: 
我們在結束這個交易上扮演重要角色 

(a) 

Pop-up predictions/suggestions: 
we MD VB[play, act, ..] , … 
we VBP[play, act, ..] DT , … 
we VBD[play, act, ..] DT , … 

Pop-up predictions/suggestions: 
play role IN[in] VBG[close, end, ..] , … 
important role IN[in] VBG[close, end, ..] , … 
role IN[in] VBG[close, end, ..] , … 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

Patterns for “we”: 
we MD VB , …, 
we VBP DT , …, 
we VBD DT , … 

Patterns for “we play an important role”: 
play role IN[in] DT , 
play role IN[in] VBG , …, 
important role IN[in] VBG , …, 
role IN[in] VBG , … 

Translations for the source text: 
“我們”: we, …; “結束”: close, end, …;  …; “扮演”: 
play, …; “重要”: critical, …; …; “扮”: act, …; …; 
“重”: heavy, …; “要”: will, wish, …; “角”: cents, …; 
“色”: outstanding, … 

Input your source text and start to interact with TransAhead! 

17



We then leverage the procedure in Figure 2 to 
generate grammar patterns for any given 
sequence of words (e.g., contiguous or not). 

 
Figure 2. Automatically generating pattern grammar. 

 
The algorithm first identifies the sentences 

containing the given sequence of words, query. 
Iteratively, Step (3) performs an AND operation 
on the inverted file, InvList, of the current word 
wi and interInvList, a previous intersected results. 

Afterwards, we analyze query’s syntax-based 
phraseology (Step (5)). For each element of the 
form ([wordPosi(w1),…,wordPosi(wn)], sentence 
number) denoting the positions of query’s words 
in the sentence, we generate grammar pattern 
involving replacing words with POS tags and 
words in wordPosi(wi) with lemmas, and 
extracting fixed-window3  segments surrounding 
query from the transformed sentence. The result 
is a set of grammatical, contextual patterns. 

The procedure finally returns top N 
predominant syntactic patterns associated with 
the query. Such patterns characterizing the 
query’s word usages follow the notion of pattern 
grammar in (Hunston and Francis, 2000) and are 
collected across the target language. 

In the fourth and final stage, we exploit Cst for 
bilingual phrase acquisition, rather than a manual 
dictionary, to achieve better translation coverage 
and variety. We obtain phrase pairs through 
leveraging IBM models to word-align the bitexts, 
“smoothing” the directional word alignments via 
grow-diagonal-final, and extracting translation 
equivalents using (Koehn et al., 2003). 

3.3  Run-Time Grammar and Text Prediction 

Once translation equivalents and phraseological 
tendencies are learned, TransAhead then 
predicts/suggests the following grammar and text 
of a translation prefix given the source text using 
the procedure in Figure 3. 

We first slice the source text S and its 
translation prefix Tp into character-level and 
                                                           
3 Inspired by (Gamon and Leacock, 2010). 

word-level ngrams respectively. Step (3) and (4) 
retrieve the translations and patterns learned 
from Section 3.2. Step (3) acquires the active 
target-language vocabulary that may be used to 
translate the source text. To alleviate the word 
boundary issue in MT raised by Ma et al. (2007), 
TransAhead non-deterministically segments the 
source text using character ngrams and proceeds 
with collaborations with the user to obtain the 
segmentation for MT and to complete the 
translation. Note that a user vocabulary of 
preference (due to users’ domain of knowledge 
or errors of the system) may be exploited for 
better system performance. On the other hand, 
Step (4) extracts patterns preceding with the 
history ngrams of {tj}. 

 
Figure 3. Predicting pattern grammar and translations. 
 

In Step (5), we first evaluate and rank the 
translation candidates using linear combination: 

( ) ( )( ) ( )1 1 1 2 2   i i pP t s P s t P t Tλ λ× + + ×  
where λi is combination weight, P1 and P2 are 
translation and language model respectively, and 
t is one of the translation candidates under S and 
Tp. Subsequently, we incorporate the lemmatized 
translation candidates into grammar constituents 
in GramOptions. For example, we would include 
“close” in pattern “play role IN[in] VBG” as 
“play role IN[in] VBG[close]”. 

At last, the algorithm returns the 
representative grammar patterns with confident 
translations expected to follow the ongoing 
translation and further translate the source. This 
algorithm will be triggered by word delimiter to 
provide an interactive environment where CAT 
and CALL meet. 

4.  Preliminary Results 

To train TransAhead, we used British National 
Corpus and Hong Kong Parallel Text and 
deployed GENIA tagger for POS analyses. 

To evaluate TransAhead in CAT and CALL, 
we introduced it to a class of 34 (Chinese) first-
year college students learning English as foreign 
language. Designed to be intuitive to the general 
public, esp. language learners, presentational 
tutorial lasted only for a minute. After the tutorial, 
the participants were asked to translate 15 

procedure PatternFinding(query,N,Ct) 
(1)  interInvList=findInvertedFile(w1 of query) 

for each word wi in query except for w1 
(2)     InvList=findInvertedFile(wi) 
(3a)   newInterInvList= φ ; i=1; j=1 
(3b)   while i<=length(interInvList) and j<=lengh(InvList) 
(3c)      if interInvList[i].SentNo==InvList[j].SentNo 
(3d)         Insert(newInterInvList, interInvList[i],InvList[j]) 

else 
(3e)         Move i,j accordingly 
(3f)    interInvList=newInterInvList 
(4) Usage= φ  

for each element in interInvList 
(5)     Usage+={PatternGrammarGeneration(element,Ct)} 
(6) Sort patterns in Usage in descending order of frequency 
(7) return the N patterns in Usage with highest frequency 

procedure MakePrediction(S,Tp) 
(1) Assign sliceNgram(S) to {si} 
(2) Assign sliceNgram(Tp) to {tj} 
(3) TransOptions=findTranslation({si},Tp) 
(4) GramOptions=findPattern({tj}) 
(5) Evaluate translation options in TransOptions 
           and incorporate them into GramOptions 
(6) Return GramOptions 

18



Chinese texts from (Huang et al., 2011a) one by 
one (half with TransAhead assistance, and the 
other without). Encouragingly, the experimental 
group (i.e., with the help of our system) achieved 
much better translation quality than the control 
group in BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) (i.e., 
35.49 vs. 26.46) and significantly reduced the 
performance gap between language learners and 
automatic decoder of Google Translate (44.82).  
We noticed that, for the source “我們在結束這個交
易上扮演重要角色”, 90% of the participants in the 
experimental group finished with more 
grammatical and fluent translations (see Figure 4) 
than (less interactive) Google Translate (“We 
conclude this transaction plays an important 
role”). In comparison, 50% of the translations of 
the source from the control group were erroneous. 

 
Figure 4. Example translations with TransAhead assistance. 
 

Post-experiment surveys indicate that a) the 
participants found TransAhead intuitive enough 
to collaborate with in writing/translation; b) the 
participants found TransAhead suggestions 
satisfying, accepted, and learned from them; c) 
interactivity made translation and language 
learning more fun and the participants found 
TransAhead very recommendable and would like 
to use the system again in future translation tasks. 

5.  Future Work and Summary 

Many avenues exist for future research and 
improvement. For example, in the linear 
combination, the patterns’ frequencies could be 
considered and the feature weight could be better 
tuned. Furthermore, interesting directions to 
explore include leveraging user input such as 
(Nepveu et al., 2004) and (Ortiz-Martinez et al., 
2010) and serially combining a grammar checker 
(Huang et al., 2011b). Yet another direction 
would be to investigate the possibility of using 
human-computer collaborated translation pairs to 
re-train word boundaries suitable for MT. 

In summary, we have introduced a method for 
learning to offer grammar and text predictions 
expected to assist the user in translation and 
writing (or even language learning). We have 
implemented and evaluated the method. The 
preliminary results are encouragingly promising, 
prompting us to further qualitatively and 
quantitatively evaluate our system in the near 
future (i.e., learners’ productivity, typing speed 
and keystroke ratios of “del” and “backspace” 

(possibly hesitating on the grammar and lexical 
choices), and human-computer interaction, 
among others). 

Acknowledgement 

This study is conducted under the “Project 
Digital Convergence Service Open Platform” of 
the Institute for Information Industry which is 
subsidized by the Ministry of Economy Affairs 
of the Republic of China. 

References  
S. Barrachina, O. Bender, F. Casacuberta, J. Civera, E. 

Cubel, S. Khadivi, A. Lagarda, H. Ney, J. Tomas, E. 
Vidal, and J.-M. Vilar. 2008. Statistical approaches to 
computer-assisted translation. Computer Linguistics, 
35(1): 3-28. 

R. D. Brown and S. Nirenburg. 1990. Human-computer 
interaction for semantic disambiguation. In Proceedings 
of COLING, pages 42-47. 

G. Foster, P. Langlais, E. Macklovitch, and G. Lapalme. 
2002. TransType: text prediction for translators. In 
Proceedings of ACL Demonstrations, pages 93-94. 

M. Gamon and C. Leacock. 2010. Search right and thou 
shalt find … using web queries for learner error 
detection. In Proceedings of the NAACL Workshop on 
Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational 
Applications, pages 37-44. 

C.-C. Huang, M.-H. Chen, S.-T. Huang, H.-C. Liou, and J. 
S. Chang. 2011a. GRASP: grammar- and syntax-based 
pattern-finder in CALL. In Proceedings of ACL. 

C.-C. Huang, M.-H. Chen, S.-T. Huang, and J. S. Chang. 
2011b. EdIt: a broad-coverage grammar checker using 
pattern grammar. In Proceedings of ACL. 

S. Hunston and G. Francis. 2000. Pattern Grammar: A 
Corpus-Driven Approach to the Lexical Grammar of 
English. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 

P. Koehn, F. J. Och, and D. Marcu. 2003. Statistical phrase-
based translation. In Proceedings of NAACL. 

P. Koehn. 2009. A web-based interactive computer aided 
translation tool. In Proceedings of ACL. 

Y. Ma, N. Stroppa, and A. Way. 2007. Bootstrapping word 
alignment via word packing. In Proceedings of ACL. 

L. Nepveu, G. Lapalme, P. Langlais, and G. Foster. 2004. 
Adaptive language and translation models for interactive 
machine translation. In Proceedings of EMNLP. 

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A systematic 
Comparison of Various Statistical Alignment Models. 
Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19-51. 

D. Ortiz-Martinez, L. A. Leiva, V. Alabau, I. Garcia-Varea, 
and F. Casacuberta. 2011. An interactive machine 
translation system with online learning. In Proceedings 
of ACL System Demonstrations, pages 68-73. 

K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, W.-J. Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a 
method for automatic evaluation of machine translation. 
In Proceedings of ACL, pages 311-318. 

1. we play(ed) a critical role in closing/sealing this/the deal. 
2. we play(ed) an important role in ending/closing this/the deal. 

19


