










































Language Resources Factory: case study on the acquisition of Translation Memories


Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1–5,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 27 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Language Resources Factory: case study on the acquisition of
Translation Memories∗

Marc Poch
UPF Barcelona, Spain

marc.pochriera@upf.edu

Antonio Toral
DCU Dublin, Ireland

atoral@computing.dcu.ie

Núria Bel
UPF Barcelona, Spain
nuria.bel@upf.edu

Abstract

This paper demonstrates a novel distributed
architecture to facilitate the acquisition of
Language Resources. We build a factory
that automates the stages involved in the ac-
quisition, production, updating and mainte-
nance of these resources. The factory is de-
signed as a platform where functionalities
are deployed as web services, which can
be combined in complex acquisition chains
using workflows. We show a case study,
which acquires a Translation Memory for a
given pair of languages and a domain using
web services for crawling, sentence align-
ment and conversion to TMX.

1 Introduction

A fundamental issue for many tasks in the field of
Computational Linguistics and Language Tech-
nologies in general is the lack of Language Re-
sources (LRs) to tackle them successfully, espe-
cially for some languages and domains. It is the
so-called LRs bottleneck.

Our objective is to build a factory of LRs that
automates the stages involved in the acquisition,
production, updating and maintenance of LRs
required by Machine Translation (MT), and by
other applications based on Language Technolo-
gies. This automation will significantly cut down
the required cost, time and human effort. These
reductions are the only way to guarantee the con-
tinuous supply of LRs that Language Technolo-
gies demand in a multilingual world.

∗ We would like to thank the developers of Soaplab, Tav-
erna, myExperiment and Biocatalogue for solving our ques-
tions and attending our requests. This research has been
partially funded by the EU project PANACEA (7FP-ICT-
248064).

2 Web Services and Workflows

The factory is designed as a platform of web ser-
vices (WSs) where the users can create and use
these services directly or combine them in more
complex chains. These chains are called work-
flows and can represent different combinations of
tasks, e.g. “extract the text from a PDF docu-
ment and obtain the Part of Speech (PoS) tagging”
or “crawl this bilingual website and align its sen-
tence pairs”. Each task is carried out using NLP
tools deployed as WSs in the factory.

Web Service Providers (WSPs) are institutions
(universities, companies, etc.) who are willing
to offer services for some tasks. WSs are ser-
vices made available from a web server to re-
mote users or to other connected programs. WSs
are built upon protocols, server and program-
ming languages. Their massive adoption has con-
tributed to make this technology rather interoper-
able and open. In fact, WSs allow computer pro-
grams distributed in different locations to interact
with each other.

WSs introduce a completely new paradigm in
the way we use software tools. Before, every
researcher or laboratory had to install and main-
tain all the different tools that they needed for
their work, which has a considerable cost in both
human and computing resources. In addition, it
makes it more difficult to carry out experiments
that involve other tools because the researcher
might hesitate to spend time resources on in-
stalling new tools when there are other alterna-
tives already installed.

The paradigm changes considerably with WSs,
as in this case only the WSP needs to have a deep
knowledge of the installation and maintenance of
the tool, thus allowing all the other users to benefit

1



from this work. Consequently, researchers think
about tools from a high level and solely regard-
ing their functionalities, thus they can focus on
their work and be more productive as the time re-
sources that would have been spent to install soft-
ware are freed. The only tool that the users need
to install in order to design and run experiments is
a WS client or a Workflow editor.

3 Choosing the tools for the platform

During the design phase several technologies
were analyzed to study their features, ease of use,
installation, maintenance needs as well as the es-
timated learning curve required to use them. In-
teroperability between components and with other
technologies was also taken into account since
one of our goals is to reach as many providers and
users as possible. After some deliberation, a set of
technologies that have proved to be successful in
the Bioinformatics field were adopted to build the
platform. These tools are developed by the my-
Grid1 team. This group aims to develop a suite
of tools for researchers that work with e-Science.
These tools have been used in numerous projects
as well as in different research fields as diverse as
astronomy, biology and social science.

3.1 Web Services: Soaplab

Soaplab (Senger et al., 2003)2 allows a WSP to
deploy a command line tool as a WS just by writ-
ing a metadata file that describes the parameters
of the tool. Soaplab takes care of the typical is-
sues regarding WSs automatically, including tem-
porary files, protocols, the WSDL file and its pa-
rameters, etc. Moreover, it creates a Web interface
(called Spinet) where WSs can be tested and used
with input forms. All these features make Soaplab
a suitable tool for our project. Moreover, its nu-
merous successful stories make it a safe choise;
e.g., it has been used by the European Bioinfor-
matics Institute3 to deploy their tools as WSs.

3.2 Registry: Biocatalogue

Once the WSs are deployed by WSPs, some
means to find them becomes necessary. Biocat-
alogue (Belhajjame et al., 2008)4 is a registry

1http://www.mygrid.org.uk
2http://soaplab.sourceforge.net/

soaplab2/
3http://www.ebi.ac.uk
4http://www.biocatalogue.org/

where WSs can be shared, searched for, annotated
with tags, etc. It is used as the main registration
point for WSPs to share and annotate their WSs
and for users to find the tools they need. Bio-
catalogue is a user-friendly portal that monitors
the status of the WSs deployed and offers multi-
ple metadata fields to annotate WSs.

3.3 Workflows: Taverna
Now that users can find WSs and use them, the
next step is to combine them to create complex
chains. Taverna (Missier et al., 2010)5 is an open
source application that allows the user to create
high-level workflows that integrate different re-
sources (mainly WSs in our case) into a single
experiment. Such experiments can be seen as
simulations which can be reproduced, tuned and
shared with other researchers.

An advantage of using workflows is that the
researcher does not need to have background
knowledge of the technical aspects involved in
the experiment. The researcher creates the work-
flow based on functionalities (each WS provides a
function) instead of dealing with technical aspects
of the software that provides the functionality.

3.4 Sharing workflows: myExperiment
MyExperiment (De Roure et al., 2008)6 is a so-
cial network used by workflow designers to share
workflows. Users can create groups and share
their workflows within the group or make them
publically available. Workflows can be annotated
with several types of information such as descrip-
tion, attribution, license, etc. Users can easily find
examples that will help them during the design
phase, being able to reuse workflows (or parts of
them) and thus avoiding reinveinting the wheel.

4 Using the tools to work with NLP

All the aforementioned tools were installed, used
and adapted to work with NLP. In addition, sev-
eral tutorials and videos have been prepared7 to
help partners and other users to deploy and use
WSs and to create workflows.

Soaplab has been modified (a patch has been
developed and distributed)8 to limit the amount of
data being transfered inside the SOAP message in

5http://www.taverna.org.uk/
6http://www.myexperiment.org/
7http://panacea-lr.eu/en/tutorials/
8http://myexperiment.elda.org/files/5

2



order to optimize the network usage. Guidelines
that describe how to limit the amount of concur-
rent users of WSs as well as to limit the maximum
size of the input data have been prepared.9

Regarding Taverna, guidelines and workflow
examples have been shared among partners show-
ing the best way to create workflows for the
project. The examples show how to benefit from
useful features provided by this tool, such as
“retries” (to execute up to a certain number of
times a WS when it fails) and “parallelisation” (to
run WSs in parallel, thus increasing trhoughput).
Users can view intermediate results and parame-
ters using the provenance capture option, a useful
feature while designing a workflow. In case of any
WS error in one of the inputs, Taverna will report
the error message produced by the WS or proces-
sor component that causes it. However, Taverna
will be able to continue processing the rest of the
input data if the workflow is robust (i.e. makes
use of retry and parallelisation) and the error is
confined to a WS (i.e. it does not affect the rest of
the workflow).

An instance of Biocatalogue and one of my-
Experiment have been deployed to be the Reg-
istry and the portal to share workflows and other
experiment-related data. Both have been adapted
by modifying relevant aspects of the interface
(layout, colours, names, logos, etc.). The cate-
gories that make up the classification system used
in the Registry have been adapted to the NLP
field. At the time of writing there are more than
100 WSs and 30 workflows registered.

5 Interoperability

Interoperability plays a crucial role in a platform
of distributed WSs. Soaplab deploys SOAP10

WSs and handles automatically most of the issues
involved in this process, while Taverna can com-
bine SOAP and REST11 WSs. Hence, we can say
that communication protocols are being handled
by the tools. However, parameters and data inter-
operability need to be addressed.

5.1 Common Interface
To facilitate interoperability between WSs and to
easily exchange WSs, a Common Interface (CI)

9http://myexperiment.elda.org/files/4
10http://www.w3.org/TR/soap/
11http://www.ics.uci.edu/˜fielding/

pubs/dissertation/rest_arch_style.htm

has been designed for each type of tool (e.g. PoS-
taggers, aligners, etc.). The CI establishes that all
WSs that perform a given task must have the same
mandatory parameters. That said, each tool can
have different optional parameters. This system
eases the design of workflows as well as the ex-
change of tools that perform the same task inside
a workflow. The CI has been developed using an
XML schema.12

5.2 Travelling Object

A goal of the project is to facilitate the deploy-
ment of as many tools as possible in the form of
WSs. In many cases, tools performing the same
task use in-house formats. We have designed a
container, called “Travelling Object” (TO), as the
data object that is being transfered between WSs.
Any tool that is deployed needs to be adapted to
the TO, this way we can interconnect the different
tools in the platform regardless of their original
input/output formats.

We have adopted for TO the XML Corpus En-
coding Standard (XCES) format (Ide et al., 2000)
because it was the already existing format that re-
quired the minimum transduction effort from the
in-house formats. The XCES format has been
used successfully to build workflows for PoS tag-
ging and alignment.

Some WSs, e.g. dependency parsers, require a
more complex representation that cannot be han-
dled by the TO. Therefore, a more expressive for-
mat has been adopted for these. The Graph Anno-
tation Format (GrAF) (Ide and Suderman, 2007)
is a XML representation of a graph that allows
different levels of annotation using a “feature–
value” paradigm. This system allows different
in-house formats to be easily encapsulated in this
container-based format. On the other hand, GrAF
can be used as a pivot format between other for-
mats (Ide and Bunt, 2010), e.g. there is software
to convert GrAF to UIMA and GATE formats (Ide
and Suderman, 2009) and it can be used to merge
data represented in a graph.

Both TO and GrAF address syntactic interop-
erability while semantic interoperability is still an
open topic.

12http://panacea-lr.eu/en/
info-for-professionals/documents/

3



6 Evaluation

The evaluation of the factory is based on its
features and usability requirements. A binary
scheme (yes/no) is used to check whether each re-
quirement is fulfilled or not. The quality of the
tools is not altered as they are deployed as WSs
without any modification. According to the eval-
uation of the current version of the platform, most
requirements are fulfilled (Aleksić et al., 2012).

Another aspect of the factory that is being eval-
uated is its performance and scalabilty. They do
not depend on the factory itself but on the design
of the workflows and WSs. WSPs with robust
WSs and powerful servers will provide a better
and faster service to users (considering that the
service is based on the same tool). This is analo-
gous to the user installing tools on a computer; if
the user develops a fragile script to chain the tools
the execution may fail, while if the computer does
not provide the required computational resources
the performance will be poor.

Following the example of the Bioinformatics
field where users can benefit of powerful WSPs,
the factory is used as a proof of concept that these
technologies can grow and scale to benefit many
users.

7 Case study

We introduce a case study in order to demonstrate
the capabilities of the platform. It regards the ac-
quisition of a Translation Memory (TM) for a lan-
guage pair and a specific domain. This is deemed
to be very useful for translators when they start
translating documents for a new domain. As at
that early stage they still do not have any content
in their TM, having the automatically acquired
TM can be helpful in order to get familiar with
the characteristic bilingual terminology and other
aspects of the domain. Another obvious potential
use of this data would be to use it to train a Statis-
tical MT system.

Three functionalities are needed to carry out
this process: acquisition of the data, its alignment
and its conversion into the desired format. These
are provided by WSs available in the registry.

First, we use a domain-focused bilingual
crawler13 in order to acquire the data. Given a pair
of languages, a set of web domains and a set of
seed terms that define the target domain for these

13http://registry.elda.org/services/127

languages, this tool will crawl the webpages in
the domains and gather pairs of web documents
in the target languages that belong to the target
domain. Second, we apply a sentence aligner.14

It takes as input the pairs of documents obtained
by the crawler and outputs pairs of equivalent sen-
tences.Finally, convert the aligned data into a TM
format. We have picked TMX15 as it is the most
common format for TMs. The export is done by
a service that receives as input sentence-aligned
text and converts it to TMX.16

The “Bilingual Process, Sentence Alignment of
bilingual crawled data with Hunalign and export
into TMX”17 is a workflow built using Taverna
that combines the three WSs in order to provide
the functionality needed. The crawling part is
ommitted because data only needs to be crawled
once; crawled data can be processed with differ-
ent workflows but it would be very inefficient to
crawl the same data each time. A set of screen-
shots showing the WSs and the workflow, together
with sample input and output data is available.18

8 Demo and Requirements

The demo aims to show the web portals and tools
used during the development of the case study.
First, the Registry19 to find WSs, the Spinet Web
client to easily test them and Taverna to finally
build a workflow combining the different WSs.
For the live demo, the workflows will be already
designed because of the time constraints. How-
ever, there are videos on the web that illustrate
the whole process. It will be also interesting to
show the myExperiment portal,20 where all pub-
lic workflows can be found. Videos of workflow
executions will also be available.

Regarding the requirements, a decent internet
connection is critical for an acceptable perfor-
mance of the whole platform, specially for remote
WSs and workflows. We will use a laptop with
Taverna installed to run the workflow presented
in Section 7.

14http://registry.elda.org/services/92
15http://www.gala-global.org/

oscarStandards/tmx/tmx14b.html
16http://registry.elda.org/services/219
17http://myexperiment.elda.org/

workflows/37
18http://www.computing.dcu.ie/˜atoral/

panacea/eacl12_demo/
19http://registry.elda.org
20http://myexperiment.elda.org

4



References
Vera Aleksić, Olivier Hamon, Vassilis Papavassiliou,

Pavel Pecina, Marc Poch, Prokopis Prokopidis, Va-
leria Quochi, Christoph Schwarz, and Gregor Thur-
mair. 2012. Second evaluation report. Evalu-
ation of PANACEA v2 and produced resources
(PANACEA project Deliverable 7.3). Technical re-
port.

Khalid Belhajjame, Carole Goble, Franck Tanoh, Jiten
Bhagat, Katherine Wolstencroft, Robert Stevens,
Eric Nzuobontane, Hamish McWilliam, Thomas
Laurent, and Rodrigo Lopez. 2008. Biocatalogue:
A curated web service registry for the life science
community. In Microsoft eScience conference.

David De Roure, Carole Goble, and Robert Stevens.
2008. The design and realisation of the myexperi-
ment virtual research environment for social sharing
of workflows. Future Generation Computer Sys-
tems, 25:561–567, May.

Nancy Ide and Harry Bunt. 2010. Anatomy of anno-
tation schemes: mapping to graf. In Proceedings of
the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, LAW
IV ’10, pages 247–255, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Nancy Ide and Keith Suderman. 2007. GrAF: A
Graph-based Format for Linguistic Annotations. In
Proceedings of the Linguistic Annotation Workshop,
pages 1–8, Prague, Czech Republic, June. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Nancy Ide and Keith Suderman. 2009. Bridging
the Gaps: Interoperability for GrAF, GATE, and
UIMA. In Proceedings of the Third Linguistic An-
notation Workshop, pages 27–34, Suntec, Singa-
pore, August. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Nancy Ide, Patrice Bonhomme, and Laurent Romary.
2000. XCES: An XML-based encoding standard
for linguistic corpora. In Proceedings of the Second
International Language Resources and Evaluation
Conference. Paris: European Language Resources
Association.

Paolo Missier, Stian Soiland-Reyes, Stuart Owen,
Wei Tan, Aleksandra Nenadic, Ian Dunlop, Alan
Williams, Thomas Oinn, and Carole Goble. 2010.
Taverna, reloaded. In M. Gertz, T. Hey, and B. Lu-
daescher, editors, SSDBM 2010, Heidelberg, Ger-
many, June.

Martin Senger, Peter Rice, and Thomas Oinn. 2003.
Soaplab - a unified sesame door to analysis tools.
In All Hands Meeting, September.

5


