










































An Unsupervised Dynamic Bayesian Network Approach to Measuring Speech Style Accommodation


Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 787–797,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 27 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

An Unsupervised Dynamic Bayesian Network Approach to Measuring
Speech Style Accommodation

Mahaveer Jain1, John McDonough1, Gahgene Gweon2, Bhiksha Raj1, Carolyn Penstein Rosé1,2
1. Language Technologies Institute; 2. Human Computer Interaction Institute

Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

{mmahavee,johnmcd,ggweon,bhiksha,cprose}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

Speech style accommodation refers to
shifts in style that are used to achieve strate-
gic goals within interactions. Models of
stylistic shift that focus on specific fea-
tures are limited in terms of the contexts
to which they can be applied if the goal of
the analysis is to model socially motivated
speech style accommodation. In this pa-
per, we present an unsupervised Dynamic
Bayesian Model that allows us to model
stylistic style accommodation in a way that
is agnostic to which specific speech style
features will shift in a way that resem-
bles socially motivated stylistic variation.
This greatly expands the applicability of the
model across contexts. Our hypothesis is
that stylistic shifts that occur as a result of
social processes are likely to display some
consistency over time, and if we leverage
this insight in our model,we will achieve
a model that better captures inherent struc-
ture within speech.

1 Introduction

Sociolinguistic research on speech style and its
resulting social interpretation has frequently fo-
cused on the ways in which shifts in style are
used to achieve strategic goals within interac-
tions, for example the ways in which speakers
may adapt their speaking style to suppress differ-
ences and accentuate similarities between them-
selves and their interlocutors in order to build
solidarity (Coupland, 2007; Eckert & Rickford,
2001; Sanders, 1987). We refer to this stylis-
tic convergence as speech style accommodation.
In the language technologies community, one tar-
geted practical benefit of such modeling has been

the achievement of more natural interactions with
speech dialogue systems (Levitan et al., 2011).

Monitoring social processes from speech or
language data has other practical benefits as well,
such as enabling monitoring how beneficial an in-
teraction is for group learning (Ward & Litman,
2007; Gweon, 2011), how equal participation is
within a group (DiMicco et al., 2004), or how
conducive an environment is for fostering a sense
of belonging and identification with a community
(Wang et al., 2011).

Typical work on computational models of
speech style accommodation have focused on spe-
cific aspects of style that may be accommodated,
such as the frequency or timing of pauses or
backchannels (i.e., words that show attention like
’Un huh’ or ’ok’), pitch, or speaking rate (Ed-
lund et al., 2009; Levitan & Hirschberg, 2011). In
this paper, we present an unsupervised Dynamic
Bayesian Model that allows us to model speech
style accommodation in a way that does not re-
quire us to specify which linguistic features we
are targeting. We explore a space of models de-
fined by two independent factors, namely the di-
rect influence of one speaker’s style on another
speaker’s style and the influence of the relational
gestalt between the two speakers that motivates
the stylistic accommodation, and thus may keep
the accommodation moving consistently, with the
same momentum. Prior work has explored the in-
fluence of the first factor. However, because ac-
commodation reflects social processes that extend
over time within an interaction, one may expect a
certain consistency of motion within the stylistic
shift. Furthermore, we can leverage this consis-
tency of style shift to identify socially meaningful
variation without specifying ahead of time which

787



particular stylistic elements we are focusing on.
Our evaluation provides support for this hypothe-
sis.

When stylistic shifts are focused on specific
linguistic features, then measuring the extent of
the stylistic accommodation is simple since a
speaker’s style may be represented on a one or two
dimensional space, and movement can then be
measured precisely within this space using sim-
ple linear functions. However, the rich sociolin-
guistic literature on speech style accommodation
highlights a much greater variety of speech style
characteristics that may be associated with social
status within an interaction and may thus be bene-
ficial to monitor for stylistic shifts. Unfortunately,
within any given context, the linguistic features
that have these status associations, which we re-
fer to as indexicality, are only a small subset of
the linguistic features that are being used in some
way. Furthermore, which features carry this in-
dexicality are specific to a context. Thus, separat-
ing the socially meaningful variation from varia-
tion in linguistic features occurring for other rea-
sons is akin to searching for the proverbial needle
in a haystack. It is this technical challenge that we
address in this paper.

In the remainder of the paper we review the lit-
erature on speech style accommodation both from
a sociolinguistic perspective and from a techno-
logical perspective in order to motivate our hy-
pothesis and proposed model. We then describe
the technical details of our model. Next, we
present an experiment in which we test our hy-
pothesis about the nature of speech style accom-
modation and find statistically significant con-
firming evidence. We conclude with a discussion
of the limitations of our model and directions for
ongoing research.

2 Theoretical Framework

Our research goal is to model the structure of
speech in a way that allows us to monitor so-
cial processes through speech. One common goal
of prior work on modeling speech dynamics has
been for the purpose of informing the design of
more natural spoken dialogue systems (Levitan et
al., 2011). The practical goal of our work is to
measure the social processes themselves, for ex-
ample in order to estimate the extent to which
group discussions show signs of productive con-
sensus building processes (Gweon, 2011). Much

prior work on modeling emotional speech has
sought to identify features that themselves have
a social interpretation, such as features that pre-
dict emotional states like uncertainty (Liscombe
et al., 2005), or surprise (Ang et al., 2002), or
social strategies like flirting (Ranganath et al.,
2009). However, our goal is to monitor social pro-
cesses that evolve over time and are reflected in
the change in speech dynamics. Examples include
fostering trust, forming attachments, or building
solidarity.

2.1 Defining Speech Style Accommmodation

The concept of what we refer to as Speech
Style Accommodation has its roots in the field
of the Social Psychology of Language, where
the many ways in which social processes are re-
flected through language, and conversely, how
language influences social processes, are the ob-
jects of investigation (Giles & Coupland, 1991).
As a first step towards leveraging this broad range
of language processes, we refer to one very spe-
cific topic, which has been referred to as entrain-
ment, priming, accommodation, or adaptation in
other computational work (Levitan & Hirschberg,
2011). Specifically we refer to the finding that
conversational partners may shift their speaking
style within the interaction, either becoming more
similar or less similar to one another.

Our usage of the term accommodation specifi-
cally refers to the process of speech style conver-
gence within an interaction. Stylistic shifts may
occur at a variety of levels of speech or language
representation. For example, much of the early
work on speech style accommodation focused on
regional dialect variation, and specifically on as-
pects of pronunciation, such as the occurrence of
post-vocalic “r” in New York City, that reflected
differences in age, regional identification, and so-
cioeconomic status (Labov, 2010a,b). Distribu-
tion of backchannels and pauses have also been
the target of prior work on accommodation (Lev-
itan & Hirschberg, 2011). These effects may be
moderated by other social factors. For example,
Bilous & Krauss (1988) found that females ac-
commodated to their male partners in conversa-
tion in terms of average number of words uttered
per turn. For example, Hecht et al. (1989) re-
ported that extroverts are more listener adaptive
than introverts and hence extroverts converged
more in their data.

788



Accommodation could be measured either
from textual or speech content of a conversation.
The former relates to ”what” people say whereas
the latter to ’how’ they say it. We are only inter-
ested in measuring accommodation from speech
in this work. There has been work on convergence
in text such as syntactic adaptation (Reitter et al.,
2006) and language similarity in online commu-
nities (Huffaker et al., 2006).

2.2 Social Interpretation of Speech Style
Accommodation

It has long been established that while some
speech style shifts are subconscious, speakers
may also choose to adapt their way of speaking
in order to achieve social effects within an in-
teraction (Sanders, 1987). One of the main mo-
tives for accommodation is to decrease social dis-
tance. On a variety of levels, speech style accom-
modation has been found to affect the impression
that speakers give within an interaction. For ex-
ample, Welkowitz & Feldstein (1970) found that
when speakers become more similar to their part-
ners, they are liked more by partners. Another
study by Putman & Street Jr (1984) demonstrated
that interviewees who converge to the speaking
rate and response latency of their interviewers are
rated more favorably by the interviewers. Giles et
al. (1987) found that more accommodating speak-
ers were rated as more intelligent and supportive
by their partners. Conversely, social factors in
an interaction affect the extent to which speak-
ers engage in, and some times chose not to en-
gage in, accommodation. For example, Purcell
(1984) found that Hawaiian children exhibit more
convergence in interactions with peer groups that
they like more. Bourhis & Giles (1977) found that
Welsh speakers while answering to an English
surveyor broadened their Welsh accent when their
ethnic identity was challenged. Scotton (1985)
found that few people hesitated to repeat lexi-
cal patterns of their partners to maintain integrity.
Nenkova et al. (2008) found that accommodation
on high frequency words correlates with natural-
ness, task success, and coordinated turn-taking
behavior.

2.3 Computational models of speech style
accommodation

Prior research has attempted to quantify accom-
modation computationally by measuring similar-

ity of speech and lexical features either over full
conversations or by comparing the similarity in
the first half and the second half of the conver-
sation. For example, Edlund et al. (2009) mea-
sure accommodation in pause and gap length us-
ing measures such as synchrony and convergence.
Levitan & Hirschberg (2011) found that accom-
modation is also found in special social behaviors
within conversation such as backchannels. They
show that speakers in conversation tend to use
similar kinds of speech cues such as high pitch at
the end of utterance to invite a backchannel from
their partner. In order to measure accommodation
on these cues, they compute the correlation be-
tween the numerical values of these cues used by
partners.

In our work we measure accommodation using
Dynamic Bayesian Networks (DBNs). Our mod-
els are learnt in an unsupervised fashion. What
we are specifically interested in is the manner in
which the influence of one partner on the other is
modeled. What is novel in our approach is the
introduction of the concept of an accommodation
state, or relational gestalt variable, which essen-
tially models the momentum of the influence that
one partner is having on the other partner’s speak-
ing style. It allows us to represent structurally the
insight that accommodation occurs over time as a
reflection of a social process, and thus has some
consistency in the nature of the accommodation
within some span of time. The prior work de-
scribed in this section can be thought of as tak-
ing the influence of the partner’s style directly on
the speaker’s style within an instant as the floor
shifts from one speaker to the next. Thus, no con-
sistency in the manner in which the accommoda-
tion is occurring is explicitly encouraged by the
model. The major advantage of consistency of
motion within the style shift over time is that it
provides a sign post for identifying which style
variation within the speech is salient with respect
to social interpretation within a specific interac-
tion so that the model may remain agnostic and
may thus be applied to a variety of interactions
that differ with respect to which stylistic features
are salient in this respect.

3 A Dynamic Bayesian Network Model
for Conversation

Speech stylistic information is reflected in
prosodic features such as pitch, energy, speak-

789



ing rate etc. In this work, we leverage on sev-
eral of these speech features to quantify accom-
modation. We propose a series of models that
can be trained unsupervised from speech features
and can be used for predicting accommodation.
The models attempt to capture the dependence of
speech features on speaking style, as well as the
effect of persistence and accommodation on style.
We use a dynamic Bayesian network (DBN) for-
malism to capture these relationships. Below we
briefly review DBNs, and subsequently describe
the speech features used, and the proposed mod-
els.

3.1 Dynamic Bayesian Networks
The theory of Bayesian networks is well doc-
umented and understood (Jensen, 1996; Pearl,
1988). A Bayesian network is a probabilistic
model that represents statistical relationships be-
tween random variables via a directed acyclic
graph (DAG). Formally, it is a directed acyclic
graph whose nodes represent random variables
(which may be observable quantities, latent unob-
servable variables, or hypotheses to be estimated).
Edges represent conditional dependencies; nodes
which are connected by an edge represent ran-
dom variables that have a direct influence on one
another. The entire network represents the joint
probability of all the variables represented by the
nodes, with appropriate factoring of the condi-
tional dependencies between variables.

Consider, for instance, a joint distribution
over a set of random variables x1, x2, · · · , xn,
modeled by a Bayesian network. Let V =
v1, v2, · · · , vn represent the set of n nodes in
the network, representing the random variables
x1, x2, · · · , xn respectively. Let ℘(vi) represent
the set of parent nodes of vi, i.e. nodes in V
that have a directed edge into a node vi. Then,
by the dependencies specified by the network,
P (xi|x1, x2, · · · , xn) = P (xi|xj : vj ∈ ℘(vi)).
In other words, any variable xi is directly depen-
dent only on its parent variables, i.e. the random
variables represented by the nodes in ℘(vi), and
is independent of all other variables given these
variables. The joint probability of x1, x2, · · · , xn
is hence given by

p(x1, x2, ..., xn) =
∏

i

p(xi|xπi) (1)

Where xπi represents {xj : vj ∈ ℘(vi), i.e. the

Figure 1: An example Dynamic Bayesian Network
(DBN) showing the temporal relationship between
three random variables (A,B and C). A is observered
and dependent on two hidden variables B and C. Di-
rected edges across time (t− 1 → t) indicate temporal
relationships between variables. In this example, the
variables At and Bt are both dependent on Bt−1 with
the relationship defined through conditional distribu-
tions P (At|Bt−1) and P (Bt|Bt−1).

parents of xi in the network. We note that not
all of these variables need to be observable; of-
ten in such models several of the variables are
unobservable, i.e. they are latent. In order
to obtain the joint distribution of the observable
variables the latent variables must be marginal-
ized out. I.e. if x1, · · · , xm are observable
and xm+1, · · · , xn are latent, P (x1, · · · , xm) =∑

xm+1,··· ,xn
P (x1, x2, · · · , xn).

Dynamic Bayesian networks (DBNs) further
represent time-series data through a recurrent for-
mulation of a basic Bayesian network that repre-
sents the relationship between variables. Within
a DBN a set of random variables at each time in-
stance t is represented as a static Bayesian Net-
work with temporal dependencies to variables at
other instants. Namely, the distribution of a vari-
able xi,t at time t is dependent on other variables
at times t − τ , xj,t−τ through conditional prob-
abilities of the form Pr(xi,t|xj,t−τ ). An exam-
ple DBN, consisting of three variables (A, B and
C), two of which have temporal dependencies is
shown in Figure 1.

One benefit of the DBN formalism is that in
addition to providing a compact graphical way
of representing statistical relationships between
variables in a process, the constrained, directed
network structure also allows for simplified in-
ference. Moreover, the conditional distributions
associated with the network are often assumed
not to vary over time, i.e. Pr(xi,t|xj,t−τ ) =
Pr(xi,t′ |xj,t′−τ ). This allows for a very com-
pact representation of DBNs and allows for ef-
ficient Expectation-Maximization (EM) learning
algorithms to be applied.

790



In the discussion that follows we do not explic-
itly specify the random variables and the form of
the associated probability distributions, but only
present them graphically. The joint distribution of
the variables should nevertheless be obvious from
the figures. We employ EM to learn the param-
eters of the models from training data, and the
junction tree algorithm (Lauritzen & Spiegelhal-
ter, 1988) to perform inference.

3.2 Speech Features

We characterize conversations as a series of spo-
ken turns by the partners. We characterize the
speech in each turn through a vector that cap-
tures several aspects of the signal that are salient
to style. We used the OPENSmile toolkit (opens-
mile, 2011) to compute the features. Specifi-
cally, within each turn the speech was segmented
into analysis windows of 50ms, where adjacent
windows overlapped by 40ms. From each anal-
ysis window a total of 7 features were com-
puted: voice probability, harmonic to noise ratio,
voice quality , three measures of pitch (F0, F raw0 ,
F env0 ), and loudness. A 10-bin histogram of fea-
ture values was computed for each of these fea-
tures, which was then normalized to sum to 1.0.
The normalized histogram effectively represents
both the values and the fluctuation in the features.
For instance, a histogram of loudness values cap-
tures the variation in the loudness of the speaker
within a turn. The logarithms of the normalized
10-bin histograms for the 7 features were concate-
nated to result in a single 70-dimensional obser-
vation vector for the turn. These 70 dimensional
observation vectors for each turn of any speaker
are represented in our model as oit where t is turn
index and i is speaker index.

3.3 Elements of the Models

In this section we formally describe the elements
of our model.
Speaking Style State: These states represent the
speaking styles of the partners in a conversation.
We represent these states as sit, where t represent
turn index and i represents speaker index. These
states are assumed to belong to a finite, discrete
set S = {s1, s2, · · · , sk}, i.e. sit ∈ S ∀(i, t).
Accommodation State: An accommodation state
represents the indirect influence of partners on
each other in a conversation. In our present de-
sign, it can take a value of either 1 or 0. These

Yt-1 Yt+1

O
1
t-1 O

1
t+1

O
1
t

S
1
t-1 S

1
t S

1
t+1

Figure 2: The basic generative model.

Yt-1 Yt+1

O
1
t-1 O

1
t+1

O
1
t

S
1
t-1 S

1
t S

1
t+1

S
2
t-1

O
2
t-1

S
2
t

O
2
t

O
2
t+1

S
2
t+1

Figure 3: ISM: The dynamics of each speaker are in-
dependent of the other speaker.

states are represented as At, where t is turn index.
Observation Vector: The observation vectors are
the feature vectors oit computed for each turn.

3.4 Models for Accommodation

Our models embody two premises. First, a per-
son’s speech in any turn is a function of his/her
speaking style in that turn. Second, a person’s
speaking style at any turn depends not only by
their own personal biases, but also by their ac-
commodation to their partner. We represent these
dependencies as a DBN.

Our basic model to represent the generation of
speech (i.e. speech features) by a speaker in the
absence of other influences is shown in Figure 2.
The speech features oit in any turn depend only on
the speaking style sit in that turn. The style s

i
t in

any turn depends on the style sit−1 in the previ-
ous turn, to capture the speaker-specific patterns
of variation in speaking style. We note that this
is a rather simple model and patterns of variation
in style are captured only through the statistical
dependence between styles in consequent turns.

We now build our models for accommodation
on this basic model.

3.4.1 Style-based models
Our two first models assume that accommo-

dation is demonstrated as a direct dependence
of a person’s speaking sytle on their partner’s
style. Therefore the models only consider speak-
ing styles.
The Independent Speaker Model

Our simplest model for a conversation assumes

791



Yt-1
Yt+1

O
1
t-1 O

1
t+1

O
1
t

S
1
t-1

S
1
t S

1
t+1

S
2
t-1

O
2
t-1

S
2
t

O
2
t

O
2
t+1

S
2
t+1

Figure 4: CSDM: A speaker’s style depends on their
partner’s style at the previous turn.

Yt-1
Yt+1

O
1
t-1

Y
Yt-1At
At+1

O
1
t+1

O
1
t

S
1
t-1

S
1
t S

1
t+1

S
2
t-1

O
2
t-1

S
2
t

O
2
t

O
2
t+1

S
2
t+1

Figure 5: SASM: Both partners’ styles depend on mu-
tual accommodation to one another.

that each person’s speaking style evolves indepen-
dently, uninfluenced by their partner. The DBN
for this is shown in Figure 3. We refer to this
model as the Independent Speaker Model (ISM).
Note that the set of values that the style states can
take is common for both speakers. The speaking
styles for the two speakers may be said to be con-
fluent in any turn if both of them are in the same
style state at that turn.
The Cross-speaker Dependence Model

Intuitively, in a conversation speakers are influ-
enced by their partners’ speaking style in previ-
ous turns. The Cross-Speaker Dependence Model
(CSDM) represents this dependence as shown in
the DBN in Figure 4. In this model a person’s
speaking style depends on both their own and
their partner’s speaking styles in the previous turn.

3.4.2 Accommodation state models

Accommodation state models assume that con-
versations actually have an underlying state of ac-
commodation, and that speakers in fact vary their
speaking styles in response to it. We models this
through a binary-valued accommodation state that
is embedded into the DBN. We posit two types of
accommodation state models.
The Symmetric Accommodation State Model

In the symmetric accommodation state model

Yt-1
Yt+1

O
1
t

Y
Yt-1A2t
A1t

O
1
t+1

S
1
t

S
1
t+1

S
2
t

O
2
t

O
2
t+1

S
2
t+1

Yt-1A
2
t+1

Figure 6: AASM: Accommodation state associated
with every speaker turn

(SASM) we assume that accommodation is a
jointly experienced characteristic of the conversa-
tion at any time, which enjoys some persistence,
but is also affected by the speaking styles exhib-
ited by the speakers at each turn. The accom-
modation at any time in turn affects the speaking
styles of both speakers in the next turn. The DBN
for this model is shown in Figure 5.
The Asymmetric Accommodation State Model

The asymmetric accommodation state model
(AASM) represents accommodation as a speaker-
turn-specific characteristic. In any turn, the ac-
commodation for a speaker depends chiefly on
their partner’s most recent speaking style. The ac-
commodation state can change after each speaker
turn. Figure 6 shows the DBN for this model.
Note that this model captures the asymmetric na-
ture of accommodation, e.g. it may be the case
that only one of the speakers is accommodating.
For instance, if if a1t = 0 and a

2
t = 1, only

speaker2 is accommodating but not speaker1.

3.4.3 Accommodated style dependence
models

While accommodation state models explicitly
models accommodation, they do not explicitly
represent how it is expressed. In reality, accom-
modation is a process of convergence – an ac-
commodating speaker’s speaking style may be ex-
pected to converge toward that of their partner. In
other words, the person’s speaking style depends
not only on whether they are accommodating or
not, but also on their partner’s style at the previ-
ous turn. Accommodated style dependence mod-
els explicitly represent this dependence.
The Symmetric Accommodated Style Depen-
dence Model

The Symmetric Accommodated Style Depen-
dence Model (SASDM) extends the SASM, to in-

792



Yt-1
Yt+1

O
1
t-1

Y
Yt-1At
At+1

O
1
t+1

O
1
t

S
1
t-1

S
1
t S

1
t+1

S
2
t-1

O
2
t-1

S
2
t

O
2
t

O
2
t+1

S
2
t+1

Figure 7: SASDM: A speaker’s style depends both on
mutual accommodation and the partner’s style in the
previous turn.

Yt-1
Yt+1

O
1
t

Y
Yt-1A2t
A1t

O
1
t+1

S
1
t

S
1
t+1

S
2
t

O
2
t

O
2
t+1

S
2
t+1

Yt-1A
2
t+1

Figure 8: AASDM: The accommodation state associ-
ated with every speaker and a speaker’s style depends
on the partner’s style.

dicate that a speaker’s style in any turn depends
both on accommodation and on their partner’s
style in the previous turn. Figure 7 shows the
DBN for this model.
Asymmetric Accommodated Style Dependence
Model

The Asymmetric Accommodated Style Depen-
dence Model (AASDM) extends the AASM by
adding a direct dependence between a speaker’s
style and their partner’s style in their most recent
turn. The DBN for this is shown in Figure 8.

3.5 Interpreting the states

We note that we have referred to the states in the
models above as “style” states. In reality, in all
cases, we learn the parameters of the model in
an unsupervised manner, since the data we use to
train it do not have either speaking style or ac-
commodation indicated (although, if they were la-
beled, the labels could be employed within our
models). Consequently, we have no assurance
that the states learned will actually correspond to
speaking styles. They can only be considered a
proxy for speaking style. Nevertheless, if both
speakers are in the same state, they can both be
expected to be producing similar prosodic fea-

tures, as represented in the observation vectors.
It is hence reasonable to assume that they are both
speaking in similar style. Similarly, the accom-
modation state cannot be expected to actually de-
pict accommodation; nevertheless, it can capture
the dependencies that govern when the two speak-
ers are likely to be in the same state.

4 Evaluation

The model we have just described allows us to in-
vestigate two separate aspects of our concept of
speech style accommodation. The first aspect is
that style accommodation occurs as a local influ-
ence of one speaker’s style on the other speaker’s
style, as depicted by direct links between style
states. The second aspect is that although this is a
local phenomenon, because it is a reflection of a
social process that extends over a period of time,
there will be some persistence of accommodation
over longer periods of time, as characterized by
the accommodation state. We presented two dif-
ferent operationalizations of the accommodation
state above, namely Asymmetric and Symmetric.

Accommodation is a phenomenon that occurs
within interactions between speakers; we can ex-
pect not to observe accommodation occurring be-
tween individuals that have never met and are not
interacting. On average, then, we expect to see
more evidence of speech style accommodation in
pairs of individuals who are interacting (i.e., Real
Pairs) than in pairs of individuals who are not in-
teracting and have never met (i.e., Constructed
Pairs). Thus, we may evaluate the extent to which
our model is sensitive to social dynamics within
pairs by the extent to which it is able to distinguish
between true conversation between Real Pairs of
speaker and synthetic conversation between Con-
structed Pairs. A similar experimental paradigm
has been adopted in prior work on speech style
accommodation (Levitan et al., 2011).
Hypothesis: Our hypothesis is that models that
explicitly represent the notion that accommoda-
tion occurs over a span of time with consistency
of momentum will achieve better success at dis-
tinguishing between Real Pairs and Constructed
Pairs than models that do not.
Experimental Manipulation: Thus, using the
model we have just described, we are able to
test our hypothesis using a 2 × 3 factorial design
in which one factor is the inclusion of direct
links from the style of one speaker to the style

793



of the other speaker, which we refer to as the
DirectInfluence (DI) factor, with values True
(T) and False (F), and the second factor is the
inclusion of links from style states to and from
Accommodation states, which we refer to as the
IndirectInfluence (II) factor, with values False
(F), Asymmetric (A), and Symmetric (S). The
result of this 2 × 3 factorial design are the 6
different models described in Section 3, namely
ISM (DI=False, II=False), CSDM (DI=True,
II=False), SASM (DI=False, II=Symmetric),
AASM (DI=False, II=Asymmetric), SASDM
(DI=True, II=Symmetric), and AASDM
(DI=True, II= Asymmetric).
Corpus: The success criterion in our experiment
is the extent to which models of speech style
accommodation are able to distinguish between
Real Pairs and Constructed pairs. In order to set
up this comparison, we began with a corpus of de-
bates between students about the reasons for the
fall of the Ottoman Empire. We obtained this cor-
pus from researchers who originally collected it
to investigate issues related to learning from con-
versational interactions (Nokes et al., 2010). The
full corpus contains interactions between 76 pairs
of students who interacted for 8 minutes. Within
each pair, one student was assigned the role of ar-
guing that the fall of the Ottoman empire was due
to internal causes, whereas the other student was
assigned the role of arguing that the fall of the Ot-
toman empire was due to external causes. Each
student was given a 4 page packet of supporting
information for their side of the debate to draw
from in the interaction.

The speech from each participant was recorded
on a separate channel. As a first step, we aligned
the speech recordings automatically to their tran-
scriptions at the word and turn level. After align-
ing the corpus at the word level, we identify the
turn interval of each partner in the conversation.
We use 66 of the debates out of the complete set
of 76 for the experiments discussed in this paper.
We had to eliminate 10 dialogues where the seg-
mentation and alignment failed. For each of our
models, we used the same 3 fold cross-validation.
Participants: Participants were all male under-
graduate students between the ages of 18 and 25.
In prior studies, it has been shown that accommo-
dation varies based on gender, age and familiar-
ity between partners. This corpus is particularly
appropriate because it controls for most of these

factors. Furthermore, because the participants did
not know each other before the debate, we can
assume that if accommodation happened, it was
only during the conversation.
Real versus Constructed Pairs: In our analy-
sis below, we compare measured accommodation
between pairs of humans who had a real conver-
sation and a constructed pair in which one per-
son from that conversation is paired with a con-
structed partner, where the partner’s side of the
conversation was constructed from turns that oc-
curred in other conversations. We set up this com-
parison in order to isolate speech style conver-
gence from lexical convergence when we evalu-
ate the performance of our model. The difference
between the measured accommodation between
real and constructed pairs is treated as a weak op-
erationalization of model accuracy at measuring
speech style accommodation.

For each of the 20 Real pairs in the test corpus
we composed one Constructed Pair. Each Con-
structed Pair comprised one student from the cor-
responding Real Pair (i.e., the Real Student) and a
Constructed Partner that resembled the real part-
ner in content but not necessarily style. We did
this by iterating through the real partner’s turns,
replacing each with a turn that matched as well as
possible in terms of lexical content but came from
a different conversation. Lexical content match
was measured in terms of cosine similarity. Turns
were selected from the other Real pairs. Thus, the
Constructed Partner had similar content to the cor-
responding real partner on a turn by turn basis, but
the style of expression could not be influenced by
the Real Student. Thus, ideally we should not see
evidence of speech style accommodation within
the Constructed Pairs.
Experimental Procedure: For each of the four
models we computed an Accommodation Score
for each of the Real Pairs and Constructed Pairs.
In order to obtain a measure that can be used to
compute accommodation for all the models con-
sidered, we compute the accommodation value as
the fraction of turns in a session where partners
exhibited the same speaking style.
Results: In order to test our hypothesis we con-
structed an ANOVA model with Accommodation
Score as the dependent variable and DirectInflu-
ence, IndirectInfluence, RealVsConstructed as in-
dependent variables. Additionally we included
the interaction terms between all pairs of inde-

794



DI II Real Constructed
µ(σ) µ(σ)

SASDM T S .54 (.23) .44 (.29)
SASM F S .54 (.23) .44 (.29)
CSDM T F .6 (.26) .52 (.3)
ISM F F .56 (.25) .51 (.32)
AASM F A .6 (.24) .51 (.3)
AASDM T A .61 (.24) .48 (.3)

Table 1: Accommodation measured using different
models. Legend: µ=mean, σ = standard deviation, DI
= “Direct Influence”, II = “Indirect Influence”.

pendent variables. Using this ANOVA model, we
find a highly significant main effect of the Re-
alVsConstructed factor that demonstrates the gen-
eral ability of the models to achieve separation be-
tween Real Pairs and Constructed Pairs; on aver-
age F(1,780) = 18.22, p < .0001.

However, when we look more closely, we find
that although the trend is consistently to find more
evidence of speech style accommodation in Real
Pairs than in Constructed Pairs, we see differen-
tiation among the models in terms of their abil-
ity to achieve this separation. When we exam-
ine the two way interactions between DirectIn-
fluence and RealVsConstructed as well as be-
tween IndirectInfluence and RealVsConstructed,
although we do not find significant interactions,
we do find some suggestive patterns when we
do the student T posthoc analysis. In particular,
when we explore just the interaction between In-
directInfluence links, we find a significant separa-
tion between Real vs Constructed pairs for models
with Accommodation states, but not for the cases
where no Accommodation states are included.
However, when we do the same for the interaction
between DirectInfluence links and RealVsCon-
structed, we find significant separation with or
without those links. This suggests that IndirectIn-
fluence links are more important than DirectInflu-
ence links. At a finer-grained level, when we ex-
amine the models individually, we only find a sig-
nificant separation between Real and Constructed
pairs with the model that includes both Direct-
Influence and Symmetric IndirectInfluence links.
These results suggest that Symmetric IndirectIn-
fluence links may be slightly better than Asym-
metric ones, and that combining DirectInfluence
links and Symmetric IndirectInfluence links may
be the best combination.

Based on this analysis, we find support for our
hypothesis. We find that the model that includes
Symmetric IndirectInfluence links and DirectIn-
fluence links is the best balance between represen-
tational power and simplicity. The support for the
inclusion of DirectInfluence links in the model is
weaker than that of IndirectInfluence links, how-
ever. On a larger dataset, we may have observed
stronger effects of both factors. Even on this small
dataset, we find evidence that adding that struc-
ture improves the performance of the model with-
out leading to overfitting.

5 Conclusions and Current Directions

In this paper we presented an unsupervised dy-
namic Bayesian modeling approach to modeling
speech style accommodation in face-to-face inter-
actions. Our model was motivated by the idea that
because accommodation reflects social processes
that extend over time within an interaction, one
may expect a certain consistency of motion within
the stylistic shift. Our evaluation demonstrated a
statistically significant advantage for the models
that embodied this idea.

An important motivation for our modeling ap-
proach was that it allows us to avoid targeting
specific linguistic style features in our measure
of accommodation. However, in our evaluation,
we only tested our approach on conversations be-
tween male undergraduate students discussing the
fall of the Ottoman Empire. Thus, while our eval-
uation provides evidence that we have taken a first
important step towards our ultimate goal, we can-
not yet claim that we have a model that performs
equally effectively across contexts. In our future
work, we plan to formally test the extent to which
this allows us to accurately measure accommoda-
tion within contexts in which very different stylis-
tic elements carry strategic social value.

Another important direction of our current re-
search is to explore how measures of speech style
accommodation may predict other important mea-
sures such as how positively partners view one an-
other, how successful partners perform tasks to-
gether, or how well students learn together.

6 Acknowledgments

We gratefully acknowledge John Levine and Tim-
othy Nokes for sharing their data with us. This
work was funded by NSF SBE 0836012.

795



References

Ang, J., Dhillon, R., Krupski, A., Shriberg, E., & Stol-
cke, A. (2002). Prosody-based automatic detection
of annoyance and frustration in human-computer di-
alog. In Proc. ICSLP, volume 3, pages 2037–2040.
Citeseer.

Bilous, F. & Krauss, R. (1988). Dominance and
accommodation in the conversational behaviours
of same-and mixed-gender dyads. Language and
Communication, 8(3), 4.

Bourhis, R. & Giles, H. (1977). The language of in-
tergroup distinctiveness. Language, ethnicity and
intergroup relations, 13, 119.

Coupland, N. (2007). Style: Language variation and
identity. Cambridge Univ Pr.

DiMicco, J., Pandolfo, A., & Bender, W. (2004). Influ-
encing group participation with a shared display. In
Proceedings of the 2004 ACM conference on Com-
puter supported cooperative work, pages 614–623.
ACM.

Eckert, P. & Rickford, J. (2001). Style and sociolin-
guistic variation. Cambridge Univ Pr.

Edlund, J., Heldner, M., & Hirschberg, J. (2009).
Pause and gap length in face-to-face interaction. In
Proc. Interspeech.

Giles, H. & Coupland, N. (1991). Language: Contexts
and consequences. Thomson Brooks/Cole Publish-
ing Co.

Giles, H., Mulac, A., Bradac, J., & Johnson, P. (1987).
Speech accommodation theory: The next decade
and beyond. Communication yearbook, 10, 13–48.

Gweon, G. A. P. U. M. R. B. R. C. P. (2011). The
automatic assessment of knowledge integration pro-
cesses in project teams. In Proceedings of Computer
Supported Collaborative Learning.

Hecht, M., Boster, F., & LaMer, S. (1989). The ef-
fect of extroversion and differentiation on listener-
adapted communication. Communication Reports,
2(1), 1–8.

Huffaker, D., Jorgensen, J., Iacobelli, F., Tepper, P., &
Cassell, J. (2006). Computational measures for lan-
guage similarity across time in online communities.
In In ACTS: Proceedings of the HLT-NAACL 2006
Workshop on Analyzing Conversations in Text and
Speech, pages 15–22.

Jensen, F. V. (1996). An introduction to Bayesian net-
works. UCL Press.

Labov, W. (2010a). Principles of linguistic change:
Internal factors, volume 1. Wiley-Blackwell.

Labov, W. (2010b). Principles of linguistic change:
Social factors, volume 2. Wiley-Blackwell.

Lauritzen, S. L. & Spiegelhalter, D. J. (1988). Local
computations with probabilities on graphical struc-
tures and their application to expert systems. Jour-
nal of the Royal Statistical Society, 50, 157–224.

Levitan, R. & Hirschberg, J. (2011). Measuring
acoustic-prosodic entrainment with respect to mul-
tiple levels and dimensions. In Proceedings of In-
terspeech.

Levitan, R., Gravano, A., & Hirschberg, J. (2011).
Entrainment in speech preceding backchannels. In
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies: short papers-Volume 2,
pages 113–117. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Liscombe, J., Hirschberg, J., & Venditti, J. (2005). De-
tecting certainness in spoken tutorial dialogues. In
Proceedings of INTERSPEECH, pages 1837–1840.
Citeseer.

Nenkova, A., Gravano, A., & Hirschberg, J. (2008).
High frequency word entrainment in spoken dia-
logue. In In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

opensmile (2011). http://opensmile.sourceforge.net/.

Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent
Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. Morgan
Kaufmann.

Purcell, A. (1984). Code shifting hawaiian style: chil-
drens accommodation along a decreolizing contin-
uum. International Journal of the Sociology of Lan-
guage, 1984(46), 71–86.

Putman, W. & Street Jr, R. (1984). The conception
and perception of noncontent speech performance:
Implications for speech-accommodation theory. In-
ternational Journal of the Sociology of Language,
1984(46), 97–114.

Ranganath, R., Jurafsky, D., & McFarland, D. (2009).
It’s not you, it’s me: detecting flirting and its mis-
perception in speed-dates. In Proceedings of the
2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing: Volume 1-Volume 1, pages
334–342. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Reitter, D., Keller, F., & Moore, J. D. (2006). Com-
putational modelling of structural priming in dia-
logue. In In Proc. Human Language Technology
conference - North American chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics annual mtg,
pages 121–124.

Sanders, R. (1987). Cognitive foundations of calcu-
lated speech. State University of New York Press.

Scotton, C. (1985). What the heck, sir: Style shifting
and lexical colouring as features of powerful lan-

796



guage. Sequence and pattern in communicative be-
haviour, pages 103–119.

Wang, Y., Kraut, R., & Levine, J. (2011). To stay or
leave? the relationship of emotional and informa-
tional support to commitment in online health sup-
port groups. In Proceedings of the ACM conference
on computer-supported cooperative work. ACM.

Ward, A. & Litman, D. (2007). Automatically measur-
ing lexical and acoustic/prosodic convergence in tu-
torial dialog corpora. In Proceedings of the SLaTE
Workshop on Speech and Language Technology in
Education. Citeseer.

Welkowitz, J. & Feldstein, S. (1970). Relation of ex-
perimentally manipulated interpersonal perception
and psychological differentiation to the temporal
patterning of conversation. In Proceedings of the
78th Annual Convention of the American Psycho-
logical Association, volume 5, pages 387–388.

797


