










































ElectionWatch: Detecting Patterns in News Coverage of US Elections


Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 82–86,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 27 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

ElectionWatch: Detecting Patterns in News Coverage of US Elections

Saatviga Sudhahar, Thomas Lansdall-Welfare, Ilias Flaounas, Nello Cristianini
Intelligent Systems Laboratory

University of Bristol
(saatviga.sudhahar, Thomas.Lansdall-Welfare,

ilias.flaounas, nello.cristianini)@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract

We present a web tool that allows users to
explore news stories concerning the 2012
US Presidential Elections via an interac-
tive interface. The tool is based on con-
cepts of “narrative analysis”, where the key
actors of a narration are identified, along
with their relations, in what are sometimes
called “semantic triplets” (one example of
a triplet of this kind is “Romney Criticised
Obama”). The network of actors and their
relations can be mined for insights about
the structure of the narration, including the
identification of the key players, of the net-
work of political support of each of them, a
representation of the similarity of their po-
litical positions, and other information con-
cerning their role in the media narration of
events. The interactive interface allows the
users to retrieve news report supporting the
relations of interest.

1 Introduction

U.S presidential elections are major media events,
following a fixed calendar, where two or more
public relation “machines” compete to send out
their message. From the point of view of the me-
dia, this event is often framed as a race, with con-
tenders, front runners, and complex alliances. By
the end of the campaign, which lasts for about one
year, two line-ups are created in the media, one for
each major party. This event provides researchers
an opportunity to analyse the narrative structures
found in the news coverage, the amounts of media
attention that is devoted to the main contenders
and their allies, and other patterns of interest.

We propose to study the U.S Presidential Elec-
tions with the tools of (quantitative) narrative

analysis, identifying the key actors and their polit-
ical relations, and using this information to infer
the overall structure of the political coalitions. We
are also interested in how the media covers such
event that is which role is attributed to each actor
within this narration.

Quantitative Narrative Analysis (QNA) is an
approach to the analysis of news content that re-
quires the identification of the key actors, and of
the kind of interactions they have with each other
(Franzosi, 2010). It usually requires a signifi-
cant amount of manual labour, for “coding” the
news articles, and this limits the analysis to small
samples. We claim that the most interesting rela-
tions come from analysing large networks result-
ing from tens of thousands of articles, and there-
fore that QNA needs to be automated.

Our approach is to use a parser to extract simple
SVO triplets, forming a semantic graph to identify
the noun phrases with actors, and to classify the
verbal links between actors in three simple cate-
gories: those expressing political support, those
expressing political opposition, and the rest. By
identifying the most important actors and triplets,
we form a large weighted and directed network
which we analyse for various types of patterns.

In this paper we demonstrate an automated sys-
tem that can identify articles relative to the 2012
US Presidential Election, from 719 online news
outlets, and can extract information about the key
players, their relations, and the role they play in
the electoral narrative. The system refreshes its
information every 24 hours, and has already anal-
ysed tens of thousands of news articles. The tool
allows the user to browse the growing set of news
articles by the relations between actors, for ex-
ample retrieving all articles where Mitt Romney

82



praises Obama1.
A set of interactive plots allows users to ex-

plore the news data by following specific candi-
dates and also specific types of relations, to see
a spectrum of all key actors sorted by their po-
litical affinity, a network representing relations
of political support between actors, and a two-
dimensional space where proximity again repre-
sents political affinity, but also they can access in-
formation about the role mostly played by a given
actor in the media narrative: that of a subject or
that of an object.

The ElectionWatch system is built on top of our
infrastructure for news content analysis, which
has been described elsewhere. It has also access
to named entities information, with which it can
generate timelines and activity-maps. These are
also available through the web interface.

2 Data Collection

Our system collects news articles from 719 En-
glish language news outlets. We monitor both U.S
and International media. A detailed description of
the underlying infrastructure has been presented
in our previous work (Flaounas, 2011).

In this demo we use only articles related to
US Elections. We detect those articles using a
topic detector based on Support Vector Machines
(Chang, 2011). We trained and validated our
classifier using the specialised Election news feed
from Yahoo!. The performance of the classifier
reached 83.46% precision, 73.29% recall, vali-
dated on unseen articles.

While the main focus of the paper is to present
Narrative patterns in elections stories, the system
presents also timelines and activity maps gener-
ated by detected Named Entities associated with
the election process.

3 Methodology

We perform a series of methodologies for narra-
tive analysis. Figure 1 illustrates the main compo-
nents that are used to analyse news and create the
website.

Preprocessing. First, we perform co-reference
and anaphora resolution on each U.S Election
article. This is based on the ANNIE plugin
in GATE (Cunningham, 2002). Next, we ex-

1Barack Obama and Mitt Romney are the two main op-
posing candidates in 2012 U.S Presidential Elections.

tract Subject-Verb-Object (SVO) triplets using the
Minipar parser output (Lin, 1998). An extracted
triplet is denoted for example like “Obama(S)–
Accuse(V)–Republicans(O)”. We found that news
media contains less than 5% of passive sentences
and therefore it is ignored. We store each triplet in
a database annotated with a reference to the arti-
cle from which it was extracted. This allows us to
track the background information of each triplet
in the database.

Key Actors. From triplets extracted, we make
a list of actors which are defined as subjects and
objects of triplets. We rank actors according to
their frequencies and consider the top 50 subjects
and objects as the key actors.

Polarity of Actions. The verb element in
triplets are defined as actions. We map actions
to two specific action types which are endorse-
ment and opposing. We obtained the endorse-
ment/opposing polarity of verbs using the Verbnet
data (Kipper et al, 2006)).

Extraction of Relations. We retain all triplets
that have a) the key actors as subjects or ob-
jects; and b) an endorse/oppose verb. To ex-
tract relations we introduced a weighting scheme.
Each endorsement-relation between actors a, b is
weighted by wa,b:

wa,b =
fa,b (+)− fa,b (−)

fa,b (+) + fa,b (−)
(1)

where fa,b(+) denotes the number of triplets be-
tween a, b with positive relation and fa,b(−) with
negative relation. This way, actors who had
equal number of positive and negative relations
are eliminated.

Endorsement Network. We generate a triplet
network with the weighted relations where actors
are the nodes and weights calculated by Eq. 1 are
the links. This network reveals endorse/oppose
relations between key actors. The network in the
main page of ElectionWatch website, illustrated
in Fig. 2, is a typical example of such a network.

Network Partitioning. By using graph parti-
tioning methods we can analyse the allegiance of
actors to a party, and therefore their role in the
political discourse. The Endorsement Network
is a directed graph. To perform its partitioning
we first omit directionality by calculating graph
B = A+AT , where A is the adjacency matrix of
the Endorsement Network. We computed eigen-
vectors of the B and selected the eigenvector that

83



Figure 1: The Pipeline

correspond to the highest eigenvalue. The ele-
ments of the eigenvector represent actors. We sort
them by their magnitude and we obtain a sorted
list of actors. In the website we display only ac-
tors that are very polarised politically in the sides
of the list. These two sets of actors correlate well
with the left-right political ordering in our exper-
iments on past US Elections. Since in the first
phase of the campaign there are more than two
sides, we added a scatter plot using the first two
eigenvectors.

Subject/Object Bias of Actors. The Sub-
ject/Object bias Sa of actor a reveals the role it
plays in the news narrative. It is computed as:

Sa =
fSubj (a)− fObj (a)

fSubj (a) + fObj (a)
(2)

A positive value of S for actor a indicates that the
actor is used more often as a subject and a neg-
ative value indicates that the actor is used more
often as an object.

4 The Website

We analyse news related to U.S Elections 2012
every day, automatically, and the results of our
analysis are presented integrated under a publicly
available website2. Figure 2 illustrates the home-
page of ElectionWatch. Here, we list the key fea-
tures of the site:

Triplet Graph – The main network in Fig. 2
is created using the weighted relations. A positive
sign for the edge indicates an endorsement rela-
tion and a negative sign indicates an opposition
relation in the network. By clicking on each edge
in the network, we display triplets and articles that
support the relation.

2ElectionWatch: http://electionwatch.enm.bris.ac.uk

Actor Spectrum – The left side of Fig. 2
shows the Actor Spectrum, coloured from blue
for Democrats to red for Republicans. Actor spec-
trum was obtained by applying spectral graph par-
titioning methods to the triplet network.Note, that
currently there are more than two campaigns that
run in parallel between key actors that dominate
the elections news coverage. Nevertheless, we
still find that the two main opposing candidates
in each party were in either sides of the list.

Relations – On the right hand side of the
website we show the endorsement/opposition re-
lations between key actors. For example, “Re-
publicans Oppose Democrats”. When clicking on
a relation the webpage displays the news articles
that support the relation.

Actor Space – The tab labelled ‘Actor Space’
plots the first and second eigenvector values for
all actors in the actor spectrum.

Actor Bias The tab labelled ‘Actor Bias’ plots
the subject/object bias of actors against the first
eigenvector in a two dimensional space.

Pie Chart – Pie Chart on the left bottom in
the webpage shows the share of each actor with
regard to the total number of articles mentioning
an endorse/oppose relation.

Map – The map geo-locates articles related to
US Elections and refer to US locations.

Bar Chart – The bar chart tab, illustrated in
Fig. 3, plots the number of articles in which ac-
tors were involved in a endorse/oppose relation.
The height of each column reveals the frequency
of it. The default plot focuses on only the first five
actors in the actor spectrum.

Timelines & Activity Map – We track the ac-
tivity of each named entity in the actor spectrum
within the United States and present it in a time-
line. The activity map monitors the media atten-

84



Figure 2: Screenshot of the home page of ElectionWatch

Figure 3: Barchart showing endorse/oppose article fre-
quencies for actor “Obama” with other top actors.

tion for Presidential candidates in each state in the
Unites States. At present we monitor this activity
for Mitt Romney, Rick Perry, Michele Bachmann,
Herman Cain and Barack Obama.

5 Discussion

We have demonstrated the system ElectionWatch
that presents key actors in U.S election news ar-
ticles and their role in political discourse. This
builds on various recent contributions from the
field of Pattern Analysis, such as (Trampus,
2011), augmenting them with multiple analysis
tools that respond to the needs of social sciences

investigations.
We agree on the fact that the triplets extracted

by the system are not very clean. This noise can
be ignored since we perform analysis on only fil-
tered triplets containing key actors and specific
type of actions, and also it’s extracted from huge
amount of data.

We have tested this system on data from all pre-
vious six elections, using the New York Times
corpus as well as our own database. We use only
support/criticism relations revealing a strong po-
larisation among actors and this seems to corre-
spond to the left/right political dimension. Evalu-
ation is an issue due to lack of data but results on
the past six election cycles on New York Times
always seperated the two competing candidates
along the eigenvector spectrum. This is not so
easy in the primary part of the elections, when
multiple candidates compete with each other for
the role of contender. To cover this case, we gen-
erate also a two-dimensional plot using the first
two eigenvalues of the adjacency matrix, which
seems to capture the main groupings in the politi-
cal narrative.

Future work will include making better use of
the information coming from the parser, which

85



goes well beyond the simple SVO structure of
sentences, and developing more sophisticated
methods for the analysis of large and complex net-
works that can be inferred with the methodology
we have developed.

Acknowledgments

I. Flaounas and N. Cristianini are supported by
FP7 CompLACS; N. Cristianini is supported by a
Royal Society Wolfson Merit Award; The mem-
bers of the Intelligent Systems Laboratory are
supported by the ‘Pascal2’ Network of Excel-
lence. Authors would like to thank Omar Ali and
Roberto Franzosi.

References

Chang C.C., and Lin C.J. 2011. LIBSVM: a library
for support vector machines. ACM Transactions on
Intelligent Systems and Technology 2(3):1–27

Cunningham H., Maynard D., Bontcheva K. and
Tablan V. 2002. GATE: A Framework and Graph-
ical Development Environment for Robust NLP
Tools and Applications. Proc. of the 40th Anniver-
sary Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics 168–175.

Earl J., Martin A., McCarthy J.D., Soule S.A. 2004.
The Use of Newspaper Data in the Study of Collec-
tive Action. Annual Review of Sociology, 30:65–
80.

Flaounas I., Ali O., Turchi M., Snowsill T., Nicart F.,
De Bie T., Cristianini N. 2011. NOAM:News Out-
lets Analysis and Monitoring system. Proc. of the
2011 ACM SIGMOD international conference on
Management of data, 1275–1278.

Franzosi R. 2010. Quantitative Narrative Analysis.
Sage Publications Inc, Quantitative Applications in
the Social Sciences, 162–200.

Kipper K., Korhonen A., Ryant N., Palmer M. 2006.
Extensive Classifications of English verbs. 12th
EURALEX International Congress, Turin, Italy.

Lin D. 1998. Dependency-Based Evaluation of
Minipar. Text, Speech and Language Technology
20:317–329.

Sandhaus, E. 2008. The New York Times Annotated
Corpus. Linguistic Data Consortium

Trampus M., Mladenic D. 2011. Learning Event Pat-
terns from Text. Informatica 35

86


