










































Can Click Patterns across User's Query Logs Predict Answers to Definition Questions?


Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 99–108,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 27 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Can Click Patterns across User’s Query Logs Predict Answers to
Definition Questions?

Alejandro Figueroa
Yahoo! Research Latin America

Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago, Chile
afiguero@yahoo-inc.com

Abstract

In this paper, we examined click patterns
produced by users of Yahoo! search engine
when prompting definition questions. Reg-
ularities across these click patterns are then
utilized for constructing a large and hetero-
geneous training corpus for answer rank-
ing. In a nutshell, answers are extracted
from clicked web-snippets originating from
any class of web-site, including Knowledge
Bases (KBs). On the other hand, non-
answers are acquired from redundant pieces
of text across web-snippets.

The effectiveness of this corpus was as-
sessed via training two state-of-the-art
models, wherewith answers to unseen
queries were distinguished. These test-
ing queries were also submitted by search
engine users, and their answer candidates
were taken from their respective returned
web-snippets. This corpus helped both
techniques to finish with an accuracy higher
than 70%, and to predict over 85% of the
answers clicked by users. In particular, our
results underline the importance of non-KB
training data.

1 Introduction

It is a well-known fact that definition queries are
very popular across users of commercial search
engines (Rose and Levinson, 2004). The essen-
tial characteristic of definition questions is their
aim for discovering as much as possible descrip-
tive information about the concept being defined
(a.k.a. definiendum, pl. definienda). Some exam-
ples of this kind of query include “Who is Ben-
jamin Millepied?” and “Tell me about Bank of
America”.

It is a standard practice of definition ques-
tion answering (QA) systems to mine KBs (e.g.,
online encyclopedias and dictionaries) for reli-
able descriptive information on the definiendum
(Sacaleanu et al., 2008). Normally, these pieces of
information (i.e., nuggets) explain different facets
of the definiendum (e.g., “ballet choreographer”
and “born in Bordeaux”), and the main idea con-
sists in projecting the acquired nuggets into the
set of answer candidates afterwards. However,
the performance of this category of method falls
into sharp decline whenever few or no coverage
is found across KBs (Zhang et al., 2005; Han et
al., 2006). Put differently, this technique usually
succeeds in discovering the most relevant facts
about the most promiment sense of the definien-
dum. But it often misses many pertinent nuggets,
especially those that can be paraphrased in several
ways; and/or those regarding ancillary senses of
the definiendum, which are hardly found in KBs.

As a means of dealing with this, current strate-
gies try to construct general definition models
inferred from a collection of definitions com-
ing from the Internet or KBs (Androutsopoulos
and Galanis, 2005; Xu et al., 2005; Han et al.,
2006). To a great extent, models exploiting non-
KB sources demand considerable annotation ef-
forts, or when the data is obtained automatically,
they benefit from empirical thresholds that ensure
a certain degree of similarity to an array of KB
articles. These thesholds attempt to trade-off the
cleanness of the training material against its cov-
erage. Moreover, gathering negative samples is
also hard as it is not easy to find wide-coverage
authoritative sources of non-descriptive informa-
tion about a particular definiendum.

Our approach has different innovative aspects

99



compared to other research in the area of defini-
tion extraction. It is at the crossroads of query
log analysis and QA systems. We study the click
behavior of search engines’ users with regard to
definition questions. Based on this study, we pro-
pose a novel way of acquiring large-scale and het-
erogeneous training material for this task, which
consists of:

• automatically obtaining positive samples in
accordance with click patterns of search en-
gine users. This aids in harvesting a host
of descriptions from non-KB sources in con-
junction with descriptive information from
KBs.

• automatically acquiring negative data in con-
sonance with redundancy patterns across
snippets displayed within search engine re-
sults when processing definition queries.

In brief, our experiments reveal that these pat-
terns can be effectively exploited for devising ef-
ficient models.

Given the huge amount of amassed data, we
additionally contrast the performance of systems
built on top of samples originated solely from
KB, non-KB, and both combined. Our compar-
ison corroborates that KBs yield massive trust-
worthy descriptive knowledge, but they do not
bear enough diversity to discriminate all answer-
ing nuggets within any kind of text. Essentially,
our experiments unveil that non-KB data is richer
and therefore it is useful for discovering more de-
scriptive nuggets than KB material. But its usage
relies on its cleanness and on a negative set. Many
people had these intuitions before, but to the best
of our knowledge, we provide the first empirical
confirmation and quantification.

The road-map of this paper is as follows: sec-
tion 2 touches on related works; section 3 digs
deeper into click patterns for definition questions,
subsequently section 4 explains our corpus con-
struction strategy; section 5 describes our experi-
ments, and section 6 draws final conclusions.

2 Related Work

In recent years, definition QA systems have
shown a trend towards the utilization of several
discriminant and statistical learning techniques
(Androutsopoulos and Galanis, 2005; Chen et al.,
2006; Han et al., 2006; Fahmi and Bouma, 2006;

Katz et al., 2007; Westerhout, 2009; Navigli and
Velardi, 2010). Due to training, there is a press-
ing necessity for large-scale authoritative sources
of descriptive and non-descriptive nuggets. In the
same manner, there is a growing importance of
strategies capable of extracting trustworthy and
negative/positive samples from any type of text.
Conventionally, these methods interpret descrip-
tions as positive examples, whereas contexts pro-
viding non-descriptive information as negative el-
ements. Four representative techniques are:

• centroid vector (Xu et al., 2003; Cui et
al., 2004) collects an array of articles about
the definiendum from a battery of pre-
determined KBs. These articles are then
used to learn a vector of word frequencies,
wherewith answer candidates are rated af-
terwards. Sometimes web-snippets together
with a query reformulation method are ex-
ploited instead of pre-defined KBs (Chen et
al., 2006).

• (Androutsopoulos and Galanis, 2005) gath-
ered articles from KBs to score 250-
characters windows carrying the definien-
dum. These windows were taken from
the Internet, and accordingly, highly sim-
ilar windows were interpreted as positive
examples, while highly dissimilar as nega-
tive samples. For this purpose, two thresh-
olds are used, which ensure the trustwor-
thiness of both sets. However, they also
cause the sets to be less diverse as not all
definienda are widely covered across KBs.
Indeed, many facets outlined within the 250-
characters windows will not be detected.

• (Xu et al., 2005) manually labeled samples
taken from an Intranet. Manual annotations
are constrained to a small amount of exam-
ples, because it requires substantial human
efforts to tag a large corpus, and disagree-
ments between annotators are not uncom-
mon.

• (Figueroa and Atkinson, 2009) capitalized
on abstracts supplied by Wikipedia for build-
ing language models (LMs), thus there was
no need for a negative set.

Our contribution is a novel technique for ob-
taining heterogeneous training material for defi-

100



nitional QA, that is to say, massive examples har-
vested from KBs and non-KBs. Fundamentally,
positive examples are extracted from web snippets
grounded on click patterns of users of a search en-
gine, whereas the negative collection is acquired
via redundancy patterns across web-snippets dis-
played to the user by the search engine. This data
is capitalized by two state-of-the-art definition ex-
tractors, which are different in nature. In addition,
our paper discusses the effect on the performance
of different sorts (KBs and non-KBs) and amount
of training data.

As for user clicks, they provide valuable rele-
vance feedback for a variety of tasks, cf. (Radlin-
ski et al., 2010). For instance, (Ji et al., 2009)
extracted relevance information from clicked and
non-clicked documents within aggregated search
sessions. They modelled sequences of clicks as
a means of learning to globally rank the relative
relevance of all documents with respect to a given
query. (Xu et al., 2010) improved the quality of
training material for learning to rank approaches
via predicting labels using clickthrough data. In
our work, we combine click patterns across Ya-
hoo! search query logs with QA techniques to
build one-sided and two-sided classifiers for rec-
ognizing answers to definition questions.

3 User Click Analysis for Definition QA

In this section, we examine a collection of queries
submitted to Yahoo! search engine during the pe-
riod from December 2010 to March 2011. More
specifically, for this analysis, we considered a
log encompassing a random sample of 69,845,262
(23,360,089 distinct) queries. Basically, this log
comprises the query sent by the user in conjunc-
tion with the displayed URLs and the information
about the sequence of their clicks.

In the first place, we associate each query with
a category in the taxonomy proposed by (Rose
and Levinson, 2004), and in this way definition
queries are selected. Secondly, we investigate
user click patterns observed across these filtered
definition questions.

3.1 Finding Definition Queries
According to (Broder, 2002; Lee et al., 2005;
Dupret and Piwowarski, 2008), the intention of
the user falls into at least two categories: navi-
gational (e.g., “google”) and informational (e.g.,
“maximum entropy models”). The former entails

the desire of going to a specific site that the user
has in mind, and the latter regards the goal of
learning something by reading or viewing some
content (Rose and Levinson, 2004). Navigational
queries are hence of less relevance to definition
questions, and for this reason, these were removed
in congruence with the next three criteria:

• (Lee et al., 2005) pointed out that users will
only visit the web site they bear in mind,
when prompting navigational queries. Thus,
these queries are characterized by clicking
the same URL almost all the time (Lee et al.,
2005). More precisely, we discarded queries
that: a) appear more than four times in the
query log; and which at the same time b) its
most clicked URL represents more than 98%
of all its clicks. Following the same idea, we
additionally eliminated prompted URLs and
queries where the clicked URL is of the form
“www.search-query-without-spaces.”

• By the same token, queries containing key-
words such as “homepage”, “on-line”, and
“sign in” were also removed.

• After the previous steps, many navigational
queries (e.g., “facebook”) still remained in
the query log. We noticed that a substantial
portion was signaled by several frequently
and indistinctly clicked URLs. Take for
instance “facebook”: “www.facebook.com”
and “www.facebook.com/login.php”.

With this in mind, we discarded entries em-
bodied in a manually compiled black list.
This list contains the 600 highest frequent
cases.

A third category in (Rose and Levinson, 2004)
regards resource queries, which we distinguished
via keywords like “image”, “lyrics” and “maps”.
Altogether, an amount of (35.67%) 24,916,610
(3,576,817 distinct) queries were seen as navi-
gational and resource. Note that in (Rose and
Levinson, 2004) both classes encompassed be-
tween 37%-38% of their query set.

Subsequently, we profited from the remaining
44,928,652 (informational) entries for detecting
queries where the intention of the user is find-
ing descriptive information about a topic (i.e.,
definiendum). In the taxonomy delineated by

101



(Rose and Levinson, 2004), informational queries
are sub-categorized into five groups including list,
locate, and definitional (directed and undirected).
In practice, we filtered definition questions as fol-
lows:

1. We exploited an array of expressions that
are commonly utilized in query analysis for
classifying definition questions (Figueroa,
2010). E.g., “Who is/was...”, “What is/was
a/an...”, “define...”, and “describe...”. Over-
all, these rules assisted in selecting 332,227
entries.

2. As stated in (Dupret and Piwowarski, 2008),
informational queries are typified by the user
clicking several documents. In light of that,
we say that some definitional queries are
characterized by multiple clicks, where at
least one belongs to a KB. This aids in cap-
turing the intention of the user when look-
ing for descriptive knowledge and only en-
tering noun phrases like “thoracic outlet syn-
drome”:

www.medicinenet.com
en.wikipedia.org
health.yahoo.net
www.livestrong.com
health.yahoo.net
en.wikipedia.org
www.medicinenet.com
www.mayoclinic.com
en.wikipedia.org
www.nismat.org
en.wikipedia.org

Table 1: Four distinct sequences of hosts clicked by
users given the search query: “thoracic outlet syn-
drome”.

In so doing, we manually compiled a list
of 36 frequently clicked KB hosts (e.g.,
Wikipedia and Britannica encyclopedia).
This filter produced 567,986 queries.

Unfortunately, since query logs stored by
search engines are not publicly available due to
privacy and legal concerns, there is no accessible
training material to build models on top of anno-
tated data. Thus, we exploited the aforementioned
hand-crafted rules to connect queries to their re-
spective category in this taxonomy.

3.2 User Click Patterns
In substance, the first filter recognizes the inten-
tion of the user by means of the formulation given
by the user (e.g., “What is a/the/an...”). With re-
gard to this filter, some interesting observations
are as follows:

• In 40.27% of the entries, users did not visit
any of the displayed web-sites. Conse-
quently, we concluded that the information
conveyed within the multiple snippets was
often enough to answer the respective def-
inition question. In other words, a signifi-
cant fraction of the users were satisfied with
a small set of brief, but quickly generated de-
scriptions.

• In 2.18% of these cases, the search engine re-
turned no results, and a few times users tried
another paraphrase or query, due to useless
results or misspellings.

• We also noticed that definition questions
matched by these expressions are seldom re-
lated to more than one click, although infor-
mational queries produce several clicks, in
general. In 46.44% of the cases, the user
clicked a sole document, and more surpris-
ingly, we observed that users are likely to
click sources different from KBs, in con-
trast to the widespread belief in definition
QA research. Users pick hits originating
from small but domain-specific web-sites as
a result of at least two effects: a) they are
looking for minor or ancillary senses of the
definiendum (e.g., “ETA” in “www.travel-
industry-dictionary.com”); and more perti-
nent b) the user does not trust the information
yielded by KBs and chooses more authorita-
tive resources, for instance, when looking for
reliable medical information (e.g., “What is
hypothyroidism?”, and “What is mrsa infec-
tion?”).

While the first filter infers the intention of the
user from the query itself, the second deduces it
from the origin of the clicked documents. With
regard to this second filter, clicking patterns are
more disperse. Here, the first two clicks normally
correspond to the top two/three ranked hits re-
turned by the search engine, see also (Ji et al.,
2009). Also, sequences of clicks signal that users

102



normally visit only one site belonging to a KB,
and at least one coming from a non-KB (see Ta-
ble 1).

All in all, the insight gained in this analysis al-
lows the construction of an heterogeneous corpus
for definition question answering. Put differently,
these user click patterns offer a way to obtain huge
amounts of heterogeneous training material. In
this way the heavy dependence of open-domain
description identifiers on KB data can be allevi-
ated.

4 Click-Based Corpus Acquisition

Since queries obtained by the previous two filters
are not associated with the actual snippets seen
by the users (due to storage limitations), snip-
pets were recovered by means of submitting the
queries to Yahoo! search engine.

After retrieval, we benefited from OpenNLP1

for detecting sentence boundaries, tokenization
and part-of-speech (POS) information. Here, we
additionally interpreted truncations (“. . .”) as sen-
tence delimiters. POS tags were used to recognize
and replace numbers with a placeholder (#CD#)
as a means of creating sentence templates. We
modified numbers as their value is just as of-
ten confusing as useful (Baeza-Yates and Ribeiro-
Neto, 1999).

Along with numbers, sequences of full
and partial matches of the definiendum were
also substituted with placeholders, “#Q#” and
“#QT#”, respectively. To exemplify, consider
this pre-processed snippet regarding “Benjamin
Millepied” from “www.mashceleb.com”:

#Q# / News &amp; Biography - MashCeleb
Latest news coverage of #Q#
#Q# ( born #CD# ) is a principal dancer
at New York City Ballet and a ballet
choreographer...

We benefit from these templates for building
both a positive and a negative training set.

4.1 Negative Set

The negative set comprised templates appearing
across all (clicked and unclicked) web-snippets,
which at the same time, are related to more
than five distinct queries. We hypothesize that
these prominent elements correspond to non-
informative, and thus non-descriptive, content as

1http://opennlp.sourceforge.net

they appear within snippets across several ques-
tions. In other words: “If it seems to answer every
question, it will probably answer no question”.
Take for instance:

Information about #Q# in the Columbia
Encyclopedia , Computer Desktop
Encyclopedia , computing dictionary

Conversely, templates that are more plausible
to be answers are strongly related to their specific
definition questions, and consequently, they are
low in frequency and unlikely to be in the result
set of a large number of queries. This negative set
was expanded with templates coming from titles
of snippets, which at the same time, have a fre-
quency higher than four across all snippets (inde-
pendent on which queries they appear). This pro-
cess cooperated on gathering 1,021,571 different
negative examples. In order to measure the pre-
cision of this process, we randomly selected and
checked 1,000 elements, and we found an error of
1.3%.

4.2 Positive Set

As for the positive set, this was constructed
only from the summary section of web-snippets
clicked by the users. We constrained these snip-
pets to bear a title template associated with at least
two web-snippets clicked for two distinct queries.
Some good examples are:

What is #Q# ? Choices and Consequences.
Biology question : What is an #Q# ?

Since clicks are linked with entire snippets,
it is uncertain which sentences are genuine de-
scriptions (see the previous example). There-
fore, we removed those templates already con-
tained in the negative set, along with those sam-
ples that matched an array of well-known hand-
crafted rules. This set included:

a. sentences containing words such as “ask”,
“report”, “say”, and “unless” (Kil et al.,
2005; Schlaefer et al., 2007);

b. sentences bearing several named entities
(Schlaefer et al., 2006; Schlaefer et al.,
2007), which were recognized by the number
of tokens starting with a capital letter versus
those starting with a lowercase letter;

c. statements of persons (Schlaefer et al.,
2007); and

103



d. we also profited from about five hundred
common expressions across web snippets in-
cluding “Picture of ”, and “Jump to : naviga-
tion , search”, as well as “Recent posts”.

This process assisted in acquiring 881,726 dif-
ferent examples, where 673,548 came from KBs.
Here, we also randomly selected 1,000 instances
and manually checked if they were actual descrip-
tions. The error of this set was 12.2%.

To put things into perspective, in contrast to
other corpus acquisition approaches, the present
method generated more than 1,800,000 positive
and negative training samples combined, while
the open-domain strategy of (Miliaraki and An-
droutsopoulos, 2004; Androutsopoulos and Gala-
nis, 2005) ca. 20,000 examples, the close-domain
technique of (Xu et al., 2005) about 3,000 and
(Fahmi and Bouma, 2006) ca. 2,000.

5 Answering New Definition Queries

In our experiments, we checked the effectiveness
of our user click-based corpus acquisition tech-
nique by studying its impact on two state-of-the-
art systems. The first one is based on the bi-term
LMs proposed by (Chen et al., 2006). This sys-
tem requires only positive samples as training ma-
terial. Conversely, our second system capitalizes
on both positive and negative examples, and it is
based on the Maximum Entropy (ME) models
presented by (Fahmi and Bouma, 2006). These
ME2 models amalgamated bigrams and unigrams
as well as two additional syntactic features, which
were not applicable to our task (i.e, sentence posi-
tion). We added to this model the sentence length
as a feature in order to homologate the attributes
used by both systems, therefore offering a good
framework to assess the impact of our negative
set. Note that (Fahmi and Bouma, 2006), unlike
us, applied their models only to sentences observ-
ing some specific syntactic patterns.

With regard to the test set, this was constructed
by manually annotating 113,184 sentence tem-
plates corresponding to 3,162 unseen definienda.
In total, this array of unseen testing instances
encompassed 11,566 different positive samples.
In order to build a balanced testing collection,
the same number of negative examples were ran-
domly selected. Overall, our testing set contains

2http://maxent.sourceforge.net/about.html

23,132 elements, and some illustrative annota-
tions are shown in Table 2. It is worth highlight-
ing that these examples signal that our models
are considering pattern-free descriptions, that is
to say, unlike other systems (Xu et al., 2003; Katz
et al., 2004; Fernandes, 2004; Feng et al., 2006;
Figueroa and Atkinson, 2009; Westerhout, 2009)
which consider definitions aligning an array of
well-known patterns (e.g., “is a” and “also known
as”), our models disregard any class of syntactic
constraint.

As to a baseline system, we accounted for the
centroid vector (Xu et al., 2003; Cui et al., 2004).
When implementing, we followed the blueprint
in (Chen et al., 2006), and it was built for each
definiendum from a maximum of 330 web snip-
pets fetched by means of Bing Search. This base-
line achieved a modest performance as it correctly
classified 43.75% of the testing examples. In de-
tail, 47.75% out of the 56.25% of the misclas-
sified elements were a result of data-sparseness.
This baseline has been widely used as a starting
point for comparison purposes, however it is hard
for this technique to discover diverse descriptive
nuggets. This problem stems from the narrow-
coverage of the centroid vector learned for the re-
spective definienda (Zhang et al., 2005). In short,
these figures support the necessity for more robust
methods based on massive training material.

Experiments. We trained both models by sys-
tematically increasing the size of the training ma-
terial by 1%. For this, we randomly split the train-
ing data into 100 equally sized packs, and system-
atically added one to the previously selected sets
(i. e., 1%, 2%, 3%, . . ., 99%, 100%). We also ex-
perimented with: 1) positive examples originated
solely from KBs; 2) positive samples harvested
only from non-KBs; and eventually 3) all positive
examples combined.

Figure 1 juxtaposes the outcomes accom-
plished by both techniques under the different
configurations. These figures, compared with re-
sults obtained by the baseline, indicate the im-
portant contribution of our corpus to tackle data-
sparseness. This contrast substantiates our claim
that click patterns can be utilized as indicators of
answers to definition questions. Since our models
ignore definition patterns, they have the potential
of detecting a wide diversity of descriptive infor-
mation.

Further, the improvement of about 9%-10% by

104



Label Example/Template
+ Propylene #Q# is a type of alcohol made from fermented yeast and carbohydrates and

is commonly used in a wide variety of products .
+ #Q# is aggressive behavior intended to achieve a goal .
+ In Hispanic culture , when a girl turns #CD# , a celebration is held called the #Q#,

symbolizing the girl ’s passage to womanhood .
+ Kirschwasser , German for ” cherry water ” and often shortened to #Q# in English-speaking

countries , is a colorless brandy made from black ...
+ From the Gaelic ’dubhglas ’ meaning #Q#, #QT# stream , or from the #QT# river .
+ Council Bluffs Orthopedic Surgeon Doctors physician directory - Read about #Q#, damage

to any of the #CD# tendons that stabilize the shoulder joint .
+ It also occurs naturally in our bodies in fact , an average size adult manufactures up to

#CD# grams of #Q# daily during normal metabolism .
- Sterling Silver #Q# Hoop Earrings Overstockjeweler.com
- I know V is the rate of reaction and the #Q# is hal ...
- As sad and mean as that sounds , there is some truth to it , as #QT# as age their bodies do

not function as well as they used to ( in all respects ) so there is a ...
- If you ’re new to the idea of Christian #Q#, what I call ” the wild things of God ,
- A look at the Biblical doctrine of the #QT# , showing the biblical basis for the teaching and

including a discussion of some of the common objections .
- #QT# is Users Choice ( application need to be run at #QT# , but is not system critical ) ,

this page shows you how it affects your Windows operating system .
- Your doctor may recommend that you use certain drugs to help you control your #Q# .
- Find out what is the full meaning of #Q# on Abbreviations.com !

Table 2: Samples of manual annotations (testing set).

means of exploiting our negative set makes its
positive contribution clear. In particular, this sup-
ports our hypothesis that redundancy across web-
snippets pertaining to several definition questions
can be exploited as negative evidence. On the
whole, this enhancement also suggests that ME
models are a better option than LMs.

Furthermore, in the case of ME models, putting
together evidence from KB and non-KBs bet-
ters the performance. Conversely, in the case of
LMs, we do not observe a noticeable improve-
ment when unifying both sources. We attribute
this difference to the fact that non-KB data is nois-
ier, and thus negative examples are necessary to
cushion this noise. By and large, the outcomes
show that the usage of descriptive information de-
rived exclusively from KBs is not the best, but a
cost-efficient solution.

Incidentally, Figure 1 reveals that more training
data does not always imply better results. Overall,
the best performance (ME-combined→ 80.72%)
was reaped when considering solely 32% of the
training material. Hence, ME-KB finished with
the best performance when accounting for about
215,500 positive examples (see Table 3). Adding
more examples brought about a decline in accu-

Best True Positive
Conf. of Accuracy positives examples
ME-combined 80.72% 88% 881,726
ME-KB 80.33% 89.37% 673,548
ME-N-KB 78.99% 93.38% 208,178

Table 3: Comparison of performance, the total amount
and origin of training data, and the number of recog-
nized descriptions.

racy. Nevertheless, this fraction (32%) is still
larger than the data-sets considered by other open-
domain Machine Learning approaches (Miliaraki
and Androutsopoulos, 2004; Androutsopoulos
and Galanis, 2005).

In detail, when contrasting the confusion ma-
trices of the best configurations accomplished
by ME-combined (80.72%), ME-KB (80.33%)
and ME-N-KB (78.99%), one can find that ME-
combined correctly identified 88% of the answers
(true positives), while ME-KB 89.37% and ME-
N-KB 93.38% (see Table 3).

Interestingly enough, non-KB data only em-
bodies 23.61% of all positive training material,
but it still has the ability to recognize more an-
swers. Despite of that, the other two strate-
gies outperform ME-N-KB, because they are able

105



Figure 1: Results for each configuration (accuracy).

to correctly label more negative test examples.
Given these figures, we can conclude that this is
achieved by mitigating the impact of the noise in
the training corpus by means of cleaner (KB) data.

We verified this synergy by inspecting the num-
ber of answers from non-KBs detected by the
three top configurations in Table 3: ME-combined
(9,086), ME-KB (9,230) and ME-N-KB (9,677).
In like manner, we examined the confusion ma-
trix for the best configuration (ME-combined →
80.72%): 1,388 (6%) positive examples were mis-
labeled as negative, while 3,071 (13.28%) nega-
tive samples were mistagged as positive.

In addition, we performed significance tests uti-
lizing two-tailed paired t-test at 95% confidence
interval on twenty samples. For this, we used
only the top three configurations in Table 3 and
each sample was determined by using boostrap-
ping resampling. Each sample has the same size
of the original test corpus. Overall, the tests im-
plied that all pairs were statistically different from
each other.

In summary, the results show that both negative
examples and combining positive examples from
heterogeneous sources are indispensable to tackle
any class of text. However, it is vital to lessen the
noise in non-KB data, since this causes a more
adverse effect on the performance. Given the up-
perbound in accuracy, our outcomes indicate that
cleanness and quality are more important than the

size of the corpus. Our figures additionally sug-
gest that more effort should go into increasing di-
versity than the number of training instances. In
light of these observations, we also conjecture that
a more reduced, but diverse and manually anno-
tated, corpus might be more effective. In partic-
ular, a manually checked corpus distilled by in-
specting click patterns across query logs of search
engines.

Lastly, in order to evaluate how good a click
predictor the three top ME-configurations are,
we focused our attention only on the manu-
ally labeled positive samples (answers) that were
clicked by the users. Overall, 86.33% (ME-
combined), 88.85% (ME-KB) and 92.45% (ME-
N-KB) of these responses were correctly pre-
dicted. In light of that, one can conclude that
(clicked and non-clicked) answers to definition
questions can be identified/predicted on the basis
of user’s click patterns across query logs.

From the viewpoint of search engines, web
snippets are computed off-line, in general. In
so doing, some methods select the spans of text
bearing query terms with the potential of putting
the document on top of the rank (Turpin et al.,
2007; Tsegay et al., 2009). This helps to create an
abridged version of the document that can quickly
produce the snippet. This has to do with the trade-
off between storage capacity, indexing, and re-
trieval speed. Ergo, our technique can help to de-

106



termine whether or not a span of text is worth ex-
panding, or in some cases whether or not it should
be included in the snippet view of the document.
In our instructive snippet, we now might have:

Benjamin Millepied / News &amp;
Biography - MashCeleb
Benjamin Millepied (born 1977) is a
principal dancer at New York City Ballet
and a ballet choreographer of
international reputation. Millepied was
born in Bordeaux, France. His...

Improving the results of informational (e.g.,
definition) queries, especially of less frequent
ones, is key for competing commercial search
engines as they are embodied in the non-
navigational tail where these engines differ the
most (Zaragoza et al., 2010).

6 Conclusions

This work investigates into the click behavior of
commercial search engine users regarding defi-
nition questions. These behaviour patterns are
then exploited as a corpus acquisition technique
for definition QA, which offers the advantage of
encompassing positive samples from heterogo-
neous sources. In contrast, negative examples
are obtained in conformity to redundancy pat-
terns across snippets, which are returned by the
search engine when processing several definition
queries. The effectiveness of these patterns, and
hence of the obtained corpus, was tested by means
of two models different in nature, where both
were capable of achieving an accuracy higher than
70%.

As a future work, we envision that answers de-
tected by our strategy can aid in determining some
query expansion terms, and thus to devise some
relevance feedback methods that can bring about
an improvement in terms of the recall of answers.
Along the same lines, it can cooperate on the vi-
sualization of the results by highlighting and/or
extending truncated answers, that is more infor-
mative snippets, which is one of the holy grail of
search operators, especially when processing in-
formational queries.

NLP tools (e.g., parsers and name entity recog-
nizers) can also be exploited for designing better
training data filters and more discriminative fea-
tures for our models that can assist in enhanc-
ing the performance, cf. (Surdeanu et al., 2008;
Figueroa, 2010; Surdeanu et al., 2011). However,

this implies that these tools have to be re-trained
to cope with web-snippets.

Acknowledgements

This work was partially supported by R&D
project FONDEF D09I1185. We also thank our
reviewers for their interesting comments, which
helped us to make this work better.

References
I. Androutsopoulos and D. Galanis. 2005. A prac-

tically Unsupervised Learning Method to Identify
Single-Snippet Answers to Definition Questions on
the web. In HLT/EMNLP, pages 323–330.

R. Baeza-Yates and B. Ribeiro-Neto. 1999. Modern
Information Retrieval. Addison Wesley.

A. Broder. 2002. A Taxonomy of Web Search. SIGIR
Forum, 36:3–10, September.

Y. Chen, M. Zhon, and S. Wang. 2006. Reranking An-
swers for Definitional QA Using Language Model-
ing. In Coling/ACL-2006, pages 1081–1088.

H. Cui, K. Li, R. Sun, T.-S. Chua, and M.-Y. Kan.
2004. National University of Singapore at the
TREC 13 Question Answering Main Task. In Pro-
ceedings of TREC 2004. NIST.

Georges E. Dupret and Benjamin Piwowarski. 2008.
A user browsing model to predict search engine
click data from past observations. In SIGIR ’08,
pages 331–338.

Ismail Fahmi and Gosse Bouma. 2006. Learning to
Identify Definitions using Syntactic Features. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Learning Struc-
tured Information in Natural Language Applica-
tions.

Donghui Feng, Deepak Ravichandran, and Eduard H.
Hovy. 2006. Mining and Re-ranking for Answering
Biographical Queries on the Web. In AAAI.

Aaron Fernandes. 2004. Answering Definitional
Questions before they are Asked. Master’s thesis,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

A. Figueroa and J. Atkinson. 2009. Using Depen-
dency Paths For Answering Definition Questions on
The Web. In WEBIST 2009, pages 643–650.

Alejandro Figueroa. 2010. Finding Answers to Defini-
tion Questions on the Web. Phd-thesis, Universitaet
des Saarlandes, 7.

K. Han, Y. Song, and H. Rim. 2006. Probabilis-
tic Model for Definitional Question Answering. In
Proceedings of SIGIR 2006, pages 212–219.

Shihao Ji, Ke Zhou, Ciya Liao, Zhaohui Zheng, Gui-
Rong Xue, Olivier Chapelle, Gordon Sun, and
Hongyuan Zha. 2009. Global ranking by exploit-
ing user clicks. In Proceedings of the 32nd inter-
national ACM SIGIR conference on Research and

107



development in information retrieval, SIGIR ’09,
pages 35–42, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

B. Katz, M. Bilotti, S. Felshin, A. Fernandes,
W. Hildebrandt, R. Katzir, J. Lin, D. Loreto,
G. Marton, F. Mora, and O. Uzuner. 2004. An-
swering multiple questions on a topic from hetero-
geneous resources. In Proceedings of TREC 2004.
NIST.

B. Katz, S. Felshin, G. Marton, F. Mora, Y. K. Shen,
G. Zaccak, A. Ammar, E. Eisner, A. Turgut, and
L. Brown Westrick. 2007. CSAIL at TREC 2007
Question Answering. In Proceedings of TREC
2007. NIST.

Jae Hong Kil, Levon Lloyd, and Steven Skiena. 2005.
Question Answering with Lydia (TREC 2005 QA
track). In Proceedings of TREC 2005. NIST.

U. Lee, Z. Liu, and J. Cho. 2005. Automatic Iden-
tification of User Goals in Web Search. In Pro-
ceedings of the 14th WWW conference, WWW ’05,
pages 391–400.

S. Miliaraki and I. Androutsopoulos. 2004. Learn-
ing to identify single-snippet answers to definition
questions. In COLING ’04, pages 1360–1366.

Roberto Navigli and Paola Velardi. 2010.
LearningWord-Class Lattices for Definition
and Hypernym Extraction. In Proceedings of
the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL 2010).

Filip Radlinski, Martin Szummer, and Nick Craswell.
2010. Inferring query intent from reformulations
and clicks. In Proceedings of the 19th international
conference on World wide web, WWW ’10, pages
1171–1172, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Daniel E. Rose and Danny Levinson. 2004. Un-
derstanding User Goals in Web Search. In WWW,
pages 13–19.

B. Sacaleanu, G. Neumann, and C. Spurk. 2008.
DFKI-LT at QA@CLEF 2008. In In Working Notes
for the CLEF 2008 Workshop.

Nico Schlaefer, P. Gieselmann, and Guido Sautter.
2006. The Ephyra QA System at TREC 2006. In
Proceedings of TREC 2006. NIST.

Nico Schlaefer, Jeongwoo Ko, Justin Betteridge,
Guido Sautter, Manas Pathak, and Eric Nyberg.
2007. Semantic Extensions of the Ephyra QA Sys-
tem for TREC 2007. In Proceedings of TREC 2007.
NIST.

Mihai Surdeanu, Massimiliano Ciaramita, and Hugo
Zaragoza. 2008. Learning to Rank Answers on
Large Online QA Collections. In Proceedings of the
46th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL 2008), pages 719–727.

Mihai Surdeanu, Massimiliano Ciaramita, and Hugo
Zaragoza. 2011. Learning to rank answers to non-
factoid questions from web collections. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 37:351–383.

Yohannes Tsegay, Simon J. Puglisi, Andrew Turpin,
and Justin Zobel. 2009. Document compaction
for efficient query biased snippet generation. In
Proceedings of the 31th European Conference on
IR Research on Advances in Information Retrieval,
ECIR ’09, pages 509–520, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Springer-Verlag.

Andrew Turpin, Yohannes Tsegay, David Hawking,
and Hugh E. Williams. 2007. Fast generation of
result snippets in web search. In Proceedings of
the 30th annual international ACM SIGIR confer-
ence on Research and development in information
retrieval, SIGIR ’07, pages 127–134, New York,
NY, USA. ACM.

Eline Westerhout. 2009. Extraction of definitions us-
ing grammar-enhanced machine learning. In Pro-
ceedings of the EACL 2009 Student Research Work-
shop, pages 88–96.

Jinxi Xu, Ana Licuanan, and Ralph Weischedel. 2003.
TREC2003 QA at BBN: Answering Definitional
Questions. In Proceedings of TREC 2003, pages
98–106. NIST.

J. Xu, Y. Cao, H. Li, and M. Zhao. 2005. Ranking
Definitions with Supervised Learning Methods. In
WWW2005, pages 811–819.

Jingfang Xu, Chuanliang Chen, Gu Xu, Hang Li, and
Elbio Renato Torres Abib. 2010. Improving qual-
ity of training data for learning to rank using click-
through data. In Proceedings of the third ACM in-
ternational conference on Web search and data min-
ing, WSDM ’10, pages 171–180, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

H. Zaragoza, B. Barla Cambazoglu, and R. Baeza-
Yates. 2010. We Search Solved? All Result Rank-
ings the Same? In Proceedings of CKIM’10, pages
529–538.

Zhushuo Zhang, Yaqian Zhou, Xuanjing Huang, and
Lide Wu. 2005. Answering Definition Questions
Using Web Knowledge Bases. In Proceedings of
IJCNLP 2005, pages 498–506.

108


