










































Automatically Generated Customizable Online Dictionaries


Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 51–57,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 27 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Automatically Generated Customizable Online Dictionaries

Enikő Héja
Dept. of Language Technology

Research Institute for Linguistics, HAS
P.O.Box. 360 H-1394, Budapest

eheja@nytud.hu

Dávid Takács
Dept. of Language Technology

Research Institute for Linguistics, HAS
P.O.Box. 360 H-1394, Budapest

takdavid@nytud.hu

Abstract

The aim of our software presentation is
to demonstrate that corpus-driven bilingual
dictionaries generated fully by automatic
means are suitable for human use. Pre-
vious experiments have proven that bilin-
gual lexicons can be created by applying
word alignment on parallel corpora. Such
an approach, especially the corpus-driven
nature of it, yields several advantages over
more traditional approaches. Most im-
portantly, automatically attained translation
probabilities are able to guarantee that the
most frequently used translations come first
within an entry. However, the proposed
technique have to face some difficulties, as
well. In particular, the scarce availability of
parallel texts for medium density languages
imposes limitations on the size of the result-
ing dictionary. Our objective is to design
and implement a dictionary building work-
flow and a query system that is apt to ex-
ploit the additional benefits of the method
and overcome the disadvantages of it.

1 Introduction

The work presented here is part of the pilot project
EFNILEX 1 launched in 2008. The project objec-
tive was to investigate to what extent LT methods
are capable of supporting the creation of bilingual
dictionaries. Need for such dictionaries shows up
specifically in the case of lesser used languages
where it does not pay off for publishers to in-
vest into the production of dictionaries due to the
low demand. The targeted size of the dictionaries
is between 15,000 and 25,000 entries. Since the

1EFNILEX is financed by EFNIL

completely automatic generation of clean bilin-
gual resources is not possible according to the
state of the art, we have decided to provide lex-
icographers with bilingual resources that can fa-
cilitate their work. These kind of lexical resources
will be referred to as proto-dictionaries hencefor-
ward.

After investigating some alternative approaches
e.g. hub-and-spoke model (Martin, 2007), align-
ment of WordNets, we have decided to use word
alignment on parallel corpora. Former experi-
ments (Héja, 2010) have proven that word align-
ment is not only able to help the dictionary cre-
ation process itself, but the proposed technique
also yields some definite advantages over more
traditional approaches. The main motivation be-
hind our choice was that the corpus-driven nature
of the method decreases the reliance on human in-
tuition during lexicographic work. Although the
careful investigation of large monolingual corpora
might have the same effect, being tedious and
time-cosuming it is not affordable in the case of
lesser used languages.

In spite of the fact that word alignment has
been widely used for more than a decade within
the NLP community to produce bilingual lexi-
cons e.g. Wu and Xia (1994) and several ex-
perts claimed that such resources might also be
useful for lexicographic purposes e.g. Bertels et
al. (2009), as far as we know, this technique has
not been exploited in large-scale lexicographic
projects yet e.g. Atkins and Rundell (2008).

Earlier experiments has shown that although
word alignment has definite advantages over more
traditional approaches, there are also some diffi-
culties that have to be dealt with: The method in
itself does not handle multi-word expressions and

51



the proto-dictionaries comprise incorrect trans-
lation candidates, as well. In fact, in a given paral-
lel corpus the number of incorrect translation can-
didates strongly depends on the size of the proto-
dictionary, as there is a trade-off between preci-
sion and recall.

Accordingly, our objective is to design and im-
plement a dictionary query system that is apt to
exploit the benefits of the method and overcome
the disadvantages of it. Hopefully, such a sys-
tem renders the proto-dictionaries helpful for not
only lexicographers, but also for ordinary dictio-
nary users.

In Section 2 the basic generation process is in-
troduced along with the difficulties we have to
deal with. The various features of the Dictionary
Query System are detailed in Section 3. Finally,
a conclusion is given and future work is listed in
Section 4.

The proto-dictionaries are available at:
http://efnilex.efnil.org

2 Generating Proto-Dictionaries –
One-Token Translation Pairs

2.1 Input data

Since the amount of available parallel data is cru-
cial for this approach, in the first phase of the
project we have experimented with two diffe-
rent language pairs. The Dutch-French language
pair represents well-resourced languages while
the Hungarian-Lithuaninan language pair repre-
sents medium density languages. As for the for-
mer, we have exploited the French-Dutch paral-
lel corpus which forms subpart of the Dutch Pa-
rallel Corpus (Macken et al., 2007). It consists
of 3,606,000 French tokens, 3,215,000 Dutch to-
kens and 186,945 translation units2 (TUs). As for
Hungarian and Lithuanian we have built a paral-
lel corpus comprising 4,189,000 Hungarian and
3,544,000 Lithuanian tokens and 262,423 TUs.
Because our original intention is to compile dic-
tionaries covering every-day language, we have
decided to focus on literature while collecting the
texts. However, due to the scarce availability
of parallel texts we made some concessions that
might be questionable from a translation point of
view. First, we did not confine ourselves purely

2The size of the parallel corpora is given in terms of trans-
lation units instead of in terms of sentence pairs, for many-
to-many alignment was allowed, too.

to the literary domain: The parallel corpus com-
prises also philosophical works. Secondly, in-
stead of focusing on direct translations between
Lithuanian and Hungarian we have relied mainly
on translations from a third language. Thirdly, we
have treated every parallel text alike, regardless of
the direction of the translation, although the DPC
contains that information.

2.2 The Generation Process

As already has been mentioned in Section 1,
word alignment in itself deals only with one-token
units. A detailed description of the generation
process of such proto-dictionaries has been given
in previous papers, e. g. Héja (2010). In the
present paper we confine ourselves to a schematic
overview. In the first step the lemmatized versions
of each input text have been created by means of
morhological analysis and disambiguation3.

In the second step parallel corpora have been
created. We used Hunalign (Varga et al., 2005)
for sentence alignment.

In the next step word alignment has been per-
formed with GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003). Dur-
ing word alignment GIZA++ builds a dictionary-
file that stores translation candidates, i.e. source
and target language lemmata along with their
translation probabilities. We used this dictio-
nary file as the starting point to create the proto-
dictionaries.

In the fourth step the proto-dictionaries have
been created. Only the most likely translation
candidates were kept on the basis of some suit-
able heuristics, which has been developed while
evaluating the results manually.

Finally, the relevant example sentences were
provided in a concordance to give hints on the use
of the translation candidates.

2.3 Trade-off between Precision and Recall

At this stage of the workflow some suitable
heuristics need to be introduced to find the best
translation candidates without the loss of too
many correct pairs. Therefore, several evaluations
were carried out.

3The analysis of the Lithuanian texts was performed
by the Lithuanian Centre of Computational Linguistics
(Zinkevic̆ius et al., 2005). The Hungarian texts were anno-
tated with the tool-chain of the Research Institute for Lin-
guistics, HAS (Oravecz and Dienes, 2002).

52



It is important to note that throughout the man-
ual evaluation we have focused on lexicographi-
cally useful translation candidates instead of per-
fect translations. The reason behind this is that
translation synonymy is rare in general language
e.g. Atkins and Rundell (2008, p. 467), thus other
semantic relations, such as hyponymy or hyper-
onymy, were also considered. Moreover, since the
word alignment method does not handle MWEs in
itself, partial matching between SL and TL trans-
lation candidates occurs frequently. In either case,
provided example sentences make possible to find
the right translation.

We considered three parameters when search-
ing for the best translations: translational proba-
bility, source language lemma frequency and tar-
get language lemma frequency (ptr, Fs and Ft,
respectively).

The lemma frequency had to be taken into ac-
count for at least two reasons. First, a minimal
amount of data was necessary for the word align-
ment algorithm to be able to estimate the transla-
tional probability. Secondly, in the case of rarely
used TL lemmas the alignment algorithm might
assign high translational probabilities to incor-
rect lemma pairs if the source lemma occurs fre-
quently in the corpus and both members of the
lemma pair recurrently show up in aligned units.

Results of the first evaluation showed that
translation pairs with relatively low frequency
and with a relatively high translational probability
yielded cc. 85% lexicographically useful trans-
lation pairs. Although the precision was rather
convincing, it has also turned out that the size of
the resulting proto-dictionaries might be a serious
bottleneck of the method (Héja, 2010). Whereas
the targeted size of the dictionaries is between
15,000 and 25,000 entries, the proto-dictionaries
comprised only 5,521 Hungarian-Lithuanian and
7,007 French-Dutch translation candidates with
the predefined parameters. Accordingly, the cov-
erage of the proto-dictionaries should be aug-
mented.

According to our hypothesis in the case of more
frequent source lemmata even lower values of
translation probability might yield the same result
in terms of precision as in the case of lower fre-
quency source lemmata. Hence, different evalua-
tion domains need to be determined as a function
of source lemma frequency. That is:

1. The refinement of the parameters yields ap-
proximately the same proportion of correct
translation candidates as the basic parameter
setting,

2. The refinement of the parameters ensures a
greater coverage.

Detailed evaluation of the French-Dutch trans-
lation candidates confirmed the first part of our
hypothesis. We have chosen a parameter setting in
accordance with (1) (see Table 1). 6934 French-
Dutch translation candidates met the given con-
ditions. 10 % of the relevant pairs was manually
evaluated. The results are presented in Table 1.
’OK’ denotes the lexicographically useful transla-
tion candidates. For instance, the first evaluation
range (1st row of Table 1) comprised translation
candidates where the source lemma occurs at least
10 times and at most 20 times in the parallel cor-
pus. With these parameters only those pairs were
considered where the translation probability was
at least 0.4. As the 1st and 2nd rows of Table 1
show, using different ptr values as cut-off param-
eters give similar results (87%), if the two source
lemma frequencies also differ.

Fs ptr OK
10 ≤ LF ≤ 20 p ≥ 0.4 83%
100 ≤ LF ≤ 200 p ≥ 0.06 87%
500 ≤ LF p ≥ 0.02 87.5%

Table 1: Evaluation results of the refined French-
Dutch proto-dictionary.

The manual evaluation of the Hungarian-
Lithuanian translation candidates yielded the
same result. We have used this proto-dictionary
to confirm the 2nd part of our hypothesis, i.e. that
the refinement of these parameters may increase
the size of the proto-dictionary. Table 2 presents
the results. Expected refers to the expected
number of correct translation candidates, esti-
mated on the basis of the evaluation sample. 800
translation candidates were evaluated altogether,
200 from each evaluation domain. As Table 2
shows, it is possible to increase the size of the
dictionary through refining the parameters: with
fine-tuned parameters the estimated number of
useful translation candidates was 13,605 instead
of 5,521.

53



Fs ptr OK Expected
5 ≤ LF < 30 p > 0.3 64% 4,296
30 ≤ LF < 90 p > 0.1 80% 4,144
90 ≤ LF < 300 p > 0.07 89% 3,026
300 ≤ LF p > 0.04 79% 2,139

13,605

Table 2: Evaluation results of the refined Hungarian-
Lithuanian proto-dictionary.

However, we should keep in mind when search-
ing for the optimal values for these parameters
that while we aim at including as many translation
candidates as possible, we also expect the gener-
ated resource to be as clean as possible. That is, in
the case of proto-dictionaries there is a trade-off
between precision and recall: the size of the re-
sulting proto-dictionaries can be increased only at
the cost of more incorrect translation candidates.

This leads us to the question of what parame-
ter settings are useful for what usage scenarios?
We think that the proto-dictionaries generated by
this method with various settings match well dif-
ferent user needs. For instance, when the settings
are strict so that the minimal frequencies and pro-
babilities are set high, the dictionary will contain
less translation pairs, resulting in high precision
and relatively low coverage, with only the most
frequently used words and their most frequent
translations. Such a dictionary is especially useful
for a novice language learner. Professional trans-
lators are able to judge whether a translation is
correct or not. They might be rather interested in
special uses of words, lexicographically useful but
not perfect translation candidates, and more sub-
tle cross-language semantic relations, while at the
same time, looking at the concordance provided
along with the translation pairs, they can easily
catch wrong translations which are the side-effect
of the method. This kind of work may be sup-
ported by a proto-dictionary with increased recall
even at the cost of a lower precision.

Thus, the Dictionary Query System described
in Section 3 in more detail, should support various
user needs.

However, user satisfaction has to be evaluated
in order to confirm this hypothesis. It forms part
of our future tasks.

Figure 1: The customized dictionary: the distribu-
tion of the Lithuanian-Hungarian translation candi-
dates. Logarithmic frequency of the source words on
the x-axis, translation probability on the y-axis.

3 Dictionary Query System

As earlier has been mentioned, the proposed
method has several benefits compared to more tra-
ditional approaches:

1. A parallel corpus of appropriate size gua-
rantees that the most relevant translations be
included in the dictionary.

2. Based on the translational probabilities it is
possible to rank translation candidates ensur-
ing that the most likely used translation va-
riants go first within an entry.

3. All the relevant example sentences from the
parallel corpora are easily accessible facili-
tating the selection of the most appropriate
translations from possible translation candi-
dates.

Accordingly, the Dictionary Query System
presents some novel features. On the one hand,
users can select the best proto-dictionary for their
purposes on the Cut Board Page. On the other
hand, the innovative representation of the gene-
rated bilingual information helps to find the best
translation for a specific user in the Dictionary
Browser Window.

3.1 Customizable proto-dictionaries: the Cut
Board Page

The dictionary can be customized on the Cut
Board Page. Two different charts are displayed

54



Figure 2: The customized dictionary: the distribution
of the candidates. Logarithmic frequency ratio of the
source and target words on the x-axis, translation prob-
ability on the y-axis.

here showing the distribution of all word pairs of
the selected proto-dictionary.

1. Plot 1 visualizes the distribution of the log-
arithmic frequency of the source words and
the relevant translation probability for each
word pair, selected by the given custom cri-
teria.

2. Plot 2 visualizes the distribution of the
logarithmic frequency ratio of the target
and source words and the corresponding
translation probability for each word pair,
selected by the given custom criteria..

Proto-dictionaries are customizable by the follow-
ing criteria:

1. Maximum and minimum ratio of the relative
frequencies of the source and target words
(left and right boundary on Plot 1).

2. Overall minimum frequency of either the
source and the target words (left boundary
on Plot 2).

3. Overall minimum translation probability
(bottom boundary on both plots).

4. Several more cut off intervals can be defined
in the space represented by Plot 2: word
pairs falling in rectangles given by their left,
right and top boundaries are cut off.

After submitting the given parameters the charts
are refreshed giving a feedback to the user and
the parameters are stored for the session, i. e. the
dictionary page shows only word pairs fitting the
selected criteria.

3.2 Dictionary Browser
The Dictionary Browser displays four different
types of information.

1. List of the translation candidates ranked by
their translation probabilities. This guaran-
tees that most often used translations come
first in the list (from top to bottom). Abso-
lute corpus frequencies are also displayed.

2. A plot displaying the distribution of the po-
ssible translations of the source word accord-
ing to translation probability and the ratio of
corpus ferquency between the source word
and the corresponding translation candidate.

3. Word cloud reflecting semantic relations bet-
ween source and target lemmata. Words in
the word cloud vary in two ways.

First, their size depends on their translation
probabilities: the higher the probability of
the target word, the bigger the font size is.

Secondly, colours are assigned to target
words according to their frequency ratios rel-
ative to the source word: less frequent target
words are cool-coloured (dark blue and light
blue) while more frequent target words are
warm-coloured (red, orange). Target words
with a frequency close to that of the source
word get gray colour.

4. Provided example sentences with the source
and target words highlighted, displayed by
clicking one of the translation candidates.

According to our hypothesis the frequency ra-
tios provide the user with hints about the se-
mantic relations between source and target words
which might be particularly important when cre-
ating texts in a foreign language. For instance,
the Lithuanian lemma karieta has four Hungar-
ian eqivalents: ”kocsi” (word with general mean-
ing, e.g. ’car’, ’railway wagon’, ’horse-drown ve-
hicle’), ”hintó” (’carriage’), ”konflis” (’a horse-
drawn vehicle for public hire’), ”jármű” (’vehi-
cle’). The various colours of the candidates indi-
cate different semantic relations: the red colour of

55



Figure 3: The Dictionary Browser

”kocsi” marks that the meaning of the target word
is more general than that of the source word. Con-
versely, the dark blue colour of ”konflis” shows
that the meaning of the target word is more spe-
cial. However, this hypothesis should be tested in
the future which makes part of our future work.

3.3 Implementation

The online research tool is based on the LAMP
web architecture. We use a relational database
to store all the data: the multilingual corpus text,
sentences and their translations, the word forms
and lemmata and all the relations between them.
The implementation of such a data structure and
the formulation of the queries is straightforward
and efficient. The data displayed in the dictionary
browser as well as the distributional dataset pre-
sented on the charts is selected on-the-fly. The
size of the database is log-linear with the size of
the corpus and the dictionary.

4 Conclusions and Future Work

Previous experiments have proven that corpus-
driven bilingual resources generated fully by au-
tomatic means are apt to facilitate lexicographic
work when compiling bilingual dictionaries.

We think that the proto-dictionaries generated
by this technique with various settings match well

different user needs, and consequently, beside lex-
icographers, they might also be useful for end
users, both for language learners and for profes-
sional translators. A possible future work is to
further evaluate the dictionaries in real world use
cases.

Some new assumptions can be formulated
which connect the statistical properties of the
translation pairs, e.g. their frequency ratios and
the cross-language semantic relations between
them. Based on the generated dictionaries such
hypotheses may be further examined in the future.

In order to demonstrate the generated proto-
dictionaries, we have designed and implemented
an online dictionary query system, which exploits
the advantages of the data-driven nature of the ap-
plied technique. It provides different visualiza-
tions of the possible translations based on their
translation probabilities and frequencies, along
with their relevant contexts in the corpus. By pre-
setting different selection criteria the contents of
the dictionaries are customizable to suit various
usage scenarios.

The dictionaries are publicly available at
http://efnilex.efnil.org.

56



References
Beryl T. Sue Atkins and Michael Rundell. 2008. The

Oxford Guide to Practical Lexicography. OUP Ox-
ford.

Ann Bertels, Cédrick Fairon, Jörg Tiedemann, and
Serge Verlinde. 2009. Corpus parallèles et corpus
ciblés au secours du dictionnaire de traduction. In
Cahiers de lexicologie, number 94 in Revues, pages
199–219. Classiques Garnier.

Enikő Héja. 2010. The role of parallel corpora in
bilingual lexicography. In Nicoletta Calzolari (Con-
ference Chair), Khalid Choukri, Bente Maegaard,
Joseph Mariani, Jan Odijk, Stelios Piperidis, Mike
Rosner, and Daniel Tapias, editors, Proceedings
of the Seventh International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC’10), Val-
letta, Malta, may. European Language Resources
Association (ELRA).

Lieve Macken, Julia Trushkina, Hans Paulussen, Lidia
Rura, Piet Desmet, and Willy Vandeweghe. 2007.
Dutch parallel corpus : a multilingual annotated
corpus. In Proceedings of Corpus Linguistics 2007.

Willy Martin. 2007. Government policy and the plan-
ning and production of bilingual dictionaries : The
dutch approach as a case in point. International
Journal of Lexicography, 20(3):221–237.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A sys-
tematic comparison of various statistical alignment
models. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Csaba Oravecz and Péter Dienes. 2002. Efficient
stochastic part-of-speech tagging for hungarian. In
Proceedings of the Third International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation, pages
710–717, Las Palmas.

Dániel Varga, László Németh, Péter Halácsy, András
Kornai, Viktor Trón, and Viktor Nagy. 2005. Par-
allel corpora for medium density languages. In
Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing
(RANLP 2005), pages 590–596.

Dekai Wu and Xuanyin Xia. 1994. Learning an
english-chinese lexicon from a parallel corpus. In
In Proceedings of the First Conference of the As-
sociation for Machine Translation in the Americas,
pages 206–213.

Vytautas Zinkevic̆ius, Vidas Daudaravic̆ius, and Erika
Rimkutė. 2005. The Morphologically annotated
Lithuanian Corpus. In Proceedings of The Second
Baltic Conference on Human Language Technolo-
gies, pages 365–370.

57


