



















































A Lightweight Terminology Verification Service for External Machine Translation Engines


Proceedings of the Demonstrations at the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 49–52,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Lightweight Terminology Verification Service for External Machine
Translation Engines

Alessio Bosca†, Vassilina Nikoulina‡, Marc Dymetman‡

†CELI, Turin, Italy
‡Xerox Research Centre Europe, Grenoble, France

†alessio.bosca@celi.it, ‡{first.last}@xrce.xerox.com

Abstract
We propose a demonstration of a domain-
specific terminology checking service
which works on top of any generic black-
box MT, and only requires access to a
bilingual terminology resource in the do-
main. In cases where an incorrect trans-
lation of a source term was proposed by
the generic MT service, our service locates
the wrong translation of the term in the tar-
get and suggests a terminologically correct
translation for this term.

1 Introduction

Today there exist generic MT services for a large
number of language pairs, which allow relatively
easily to make your domain-specific portal mul-
tilingual, and allow access to its documents for a
broad international public. However, applying a
generic MT service to domain-specific texts often
leads to wrong results, especially relative to the
translation of domain-specific terminology. Table
1 illustrates an example of a terminology inconsis-
tent translation provided by a generic MT system.

English Source: Farmers tend to implement a
broad non-focused weed-control strategy, on
the basis of broad spectrum products and mix-
tures of different products.
Bing1: Los agricultores tienden a aplicar una
estrategia amplia para control de malezas no
centrado, sobre la base de productos de am-
plio espectro y las mezclas de diferentes pro-
ductos.

Table 1: Example of the translation produced by
a generic MT model for a domain-specific docu-
ment. Source term : weed-control, official Span-
ish term translation: control de malas hierbas.

The importance of domain-specific terminology
for Machine Translation has been mentioned in

several previous works (eg. (Carl and Langlais,
2002; Skadins et al., 2013)). However, most of
these works handle the case where the terminology
is tightly integrated into the translation process.
This requires both a good expertise in SMT and
a large amount of both in-domain and generic par-
allel texts, which is often difficult, especially for
low-resourced languages like Turkish or Estonian.
Here, we are targeting the situation where the con-
tent provider is not willing to train a dedicated
translation system, for some reason such as lack of
technical skills or lack of necessary resources (par-
allel data or computational resources), but has at
his disposal a multilingual in-domain terminology
which could be helpful for improving the generic
translation provided by an external translation ser-
vice. We propose a demonstration of a multilin-
gual terminology verification/correction service,
which detects the wrongly translated terms and
suggests a better translation of these terms. This
service can be seen as an aid for machine transla-
tion post-editing focused on in-domain terminol-
ogy and as a tool for supporting the workflow of
practicing translators.

2 Related Work

There has recently been a growing interest for ter-
minology integration into MT models. Direct in-
tegration of terminology into the SMT model has
been considered, either by extending SMT train-
ing data (Carl and Langlais, 2002), or via adding
an additional term indicator feature (Pinnis and
Skadins, 2012; Skadins et al., 2013) into the trans-
lation model. However none of the above is possi-
ble when we deal with an external black-box MT
service.

(Itagaki and Aikawa, 2008) propose a post-
processing step for an MT engine, where a
wrongly translated term is replaced with a user-
provided term translation. The authors claim that
translating the term directly often gives a different

49



translation from the one obtained when translating
the term in context: for English-Japanese the out-
of-context term translation matches exactly the in
context term translation in 62% of cases only. In
order to address this problem the authors propose
15 simple context templates that induce the same
term translation as the one obtained in the initial
sentence context. Such templates include ”This
is TERM” or ”TERM is a ...”. The main prob-
lem with this approach is that these templates are
both language-pair and MT engine/model specific.
Thus a certain human expertise is required to de-
velop such templates when moving to a new lan-
guage pair or underlying MT engine.

Our approach is close to the (Itagaki and
Aikawa, 2008) approach, but instead of devel-
oping specific templates we propose a generic
method for wrong terminology translation detec-
tion. We do not aim at producing the final trans-
lation by directly replacing the wrongly translated
term — which can be tricky—, but rather perform
the term correction in an interactive manner, where
the user is proposed a better term translation and
may choose to use it if the suggestion is correct.

3 Terminology-checking service

We assume that the provider of the terminology-
checking service has a bilingual domain-specific
terminology D at his disposal, which he wishes
to use to improve the translation produced by a
generic MT service MT . Our method verifies
whether the terminology was translated correctly
by the MT service (terminology verification), and
if not, locates the wrong translation of the term and
suggests a better translation for it.

3.1 Terminology checking

The basic terminology verification procedure ap-
plied to the source sentence s and to its translation
MT (s) by the generic service is done through the
following steps:

1. For each term T = (Ts, Tt) in D check
whether its source part Ts is present in the
source sentence s.

2. If s contains Ts, check whether the target
part of the term Tt is present in the transla-
tion MT (s). If yes, and the number of oc-
currences of Ts in s is equal to that of Tt
in MT (s) : the term translation is consis-
tent with terminological base. Otherwise, we

attempt to locate the wrong term translation
and suggest a better translation to the user.

Both steps require a sub-string matching algo-
rithm which is able to deal with term detection
problems such as morphological variants or dif-
ferent term variants. We describe the approach we
take for efficient sub-string matching in more de-
tail in section 3.3.

3.2 Terminology correction
Once we have detected that there is a source term
Ts which has been incorrectly translated we would
like to suggest a better translation for this term.
This requires not only knowing a correct transla-
tion Tt of the source term Ts, but also its position
in the target sentence. To do that, we need to iden-
tify what was the incorrect translation proposed by
the MT engine for the term and to locate it in the
translation MT (s).

This can be seen as a sub-problem of the word-
alignment problem, which is usually solved us-
ing bilingual dictionaries or by learning statistical
alignment models out of bilingual corpora. How-
ever, in practice, these resources are not easily
available, especially for low-resourced language
pairs. In order to be able to locate the wrong term
translation in the target sentence without resort-
ing to such resources, our approach is to rely in-
stead on the same external MT engine that was
used for translating the whole source sentence in
the first place, an approach also taken in (Itagaki
and Aikawa, 2008).

To overcome the problem mentioned by (Ita-
gaki and Aikawa, 2008) of non-matching out-of-
context terms translations we propose to com-
bine out-of context term translation (MT (Ts)) and
context-extended term translation, as follows:

• Translate the term Ts extended with
its left and/or right n-gram context:
si−nsi−n+1...Ts...sj+n−1sj+n, where
Ts = si...sj ;

• Find a fuzzy match in MT (s) for the
translation of the context-extended term
MT (si−n...Ts...sj+n) using the same sub-
string matching algorithm as in the terminol-
ogy verification step.

Various combinations of out-of-context term
translation (MT (Ts)) and n-extended term trans-
lation (MT (si−n...Ts...sj+n)) are possible.

50



The term location is performed in a sequential
way: if the wrong term translation was not located
after the first step (out-of-context translation), at-
tempt the following step, extending size of the
context (n) until the term is located.

3.3 Implementation
The implementation of the terminology-checking
service that we demonstrate exploits Bing Trans-
lator2 as SMT service, refers to the Agricul-
ture domain and supports two terminology re-
sources: the multilingual ontology from the Or-
ganic.Edunet portal3 and Agrovoc, a multilingual
theasurus from FAO4. The presented prototype en-
ables terminology checking for all the language
pairs involving English, French, German, Italian,
Portoguese, Spanish and Turkish.

The component for matching the textual input
(i.e. either the source or the translation from the
SMT service) with elements from domain termi-
nologies is based on the open source search engine
Lucene5 and exploits its built-in textual search ca-
pabilities and indexing facilities. We created a
search index for each of the supported languages,
containing the textual representations of the ter-
minology elements in that language along with
their URI (unique for each terminology element).
The terms expressions are indexed in their origi-
nal form as well as in their lemmatized and POS
tagged ones; for Turkish, resources for morpho-
logical analysis were not available therefore stem-
ming has been used instead of lemmatization.

In order to find the terminological entries within
a textual input in a given language a two-steps pro-
cedure is applied:

• In a first step, the text is used as a query over
the search index (in that language) in order
to find a list of all the terminology elements
containing a textual fragment present in the
query.

• In a second step, in order to retain only the
domain terms with a complete match (no par-
tial matches) and locate them in the text, a
new search index is built in memory, con-
taining a single document, namely the orig-
inal textual input (lemmatized or stemmed
according to the resources available for that

2http://www.bing.com/translator
3http://organic-edunet.eu/
4http://aims.fao.org/standards/agrovoc/about
5https://lucene.apache.org

specific language). Then the candidate ter-
minology elements found in the first step are
used as queries over the in-memory index and
the “highlighter” component of the search en-
gine is exploited to locate them in the text
(when found). A longest match criterion is
used when the terminology elements found
refer to overlapping spans of text.

Following this procedure a list with terminology
elements (along with their URIs and the position
within the text) is generated for both the source
text and its translation. A matching strategy based
on the URI allows to pair domain terms from the
two collections. For domain terms in the source
text without a corresponding terminology element
in the translated text, the ”wrong” translation is
located in the text according to the approach de-
scribed in 3.2. The domain term is retranslated
with the same SMT (with context extension, if
needed) in order to obtain the ”wrong” translation
and the translated string is located within the trans-
lation text with the same approach used in the sec-
ond step of the procedure used for locating termi-
nological entries (with an in-memory search index
over the full text and the fragment used as query).

The service outputs two lists: one containing
the pairs of terminology elements found both in
the source and in the translation and another one
with the terminology elements without a ”correct”
translation (according to the domain terminology
used) and for each of those an alternative transla-
tion from the domain terminology is proposed. In
our demonstration a web interface allows users to
access and test the service.

4 Proof of concept evaluation

In order to evaluate the quality of locating the
wrong term translation, we applied the terminol-
ogy verification service to an SMT model trained
with Moses (Hoang et al., 2007) on the Europarl
(Koehn, 2005) corpus. This SMT model was used
for translating a test set in the Agricultural domain
from Spanish into English. In these settings we
have access to the internal sub-phrase alignment
provided by Moses, thus we know the exact loca-
tion of the wrong term translation, which allows
us to evaluate how good our locating technique is.

The test set consists of 100 abstracts in Spanish
from a bibliographical database of scientific publi-
cations in the Agriculture domain. These abstracts
were translated into English with our translation

51



model, and we then applied terminology verifi-
cation and terminology correction procedures to
these translations.

When applying terminology verification we de-
tected in total 171 terms in Spanish, 71 of them
being correctly translated into English (consistent
with terminology), and 100 being wrongly trans-
lated (not consistent with terminology).

We then attempted to locate these wrongly
translated terms in the system translation MT (s).

Matching the out-of-context term translation
with initial translation allowed to find a match for
82 wrongly translated terms (out of 100); Match-
ing 1 left/right word extended term translation
(MT (wi−1Tswj+1)) allowed to find a match for
16 more terms (out of 18 left).

Using the internal word alignments provided by
Moses, we also evaluated how precisely the bor-
ders of the wrongly translated term were recovered
by our term location procedure. This precision is
measured as follows:

• The target tokens identified by our procedure
(as described in 3) are: gT = t1, . . . , tj ;

• We then identify the reference target tokens
corresponding to the translation of the term
Ts using the Moses word alignment : rT =
{rt1 , . . . , rtk}.

We define term location precision p as p =
|tj∈rT∩gT |
|gT | . The precision of term location with

out-of-context term translation is of 0.92; the pre-
cision of term location with context-extended term
translation is 0.91.

Overall, our approach allows to match 98% of
the wrongly translated terms, with an overall lo-
cation precision of 0.91. Although these numbers
may vary for other language pairs and other MT
systems, this performance is encouraging.

5 Conclusion

We propose a demonstration of a terminology ver-
ification system that can be used as an aid for post-
editing machine translations explicitly focused on
bilingual terminology consistency. This system re-
lies on an external black-box generic MT engine
extended with available domain-specific terminol-
ogy. The location of the wrong term translation is
located via re-translation of the original term with
the same MT engine. We show that we partially
overcome the situation where the out-of-context

translation of the term differs from the original
translation of this term (in the full sentence) by
extending the term context with surrounding n-
grams. The terminology verification method is
both MT engine and language independent, does
not require any access to the internals of the MT
engine used, and is easily portable.

Acknowledgments

This work has been partially supported by
the Organic.Lingua project (http://www.organic-
lingua.eu/), funded by the European Commission
under the ICT Policy Support Programme.

References
Michael Carl and Philippe Langlais. 2002. An intel-

ligent terminology database as a pre-processor for
statistical machine translation. In COLING-02: Sec-
ond International Workshop on Computational Ter-
minology, pages 1–7.

Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris Callison-burch,
Richard Zens, Rwth Aachen, Alexandra Constantin,
Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi, Chris Dyer,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, and
Ondej Bojar. 2007. Moses: Open source toolkit for
statistical machine translation. In ACL 2007 Demo
and Poster Sessions, pages 177–180.

Masaki Itagaki and Takako Aikawa. 2008. Post-mt
term swapper: Supplementing a statistical machine
translation system with a user dictionary. In LREC.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A Parallel Corpus for
Statistical Machine Translation. In MT Summit X,
pages 79–86, Phuket Thailand.

Marcis Pinnis and Raivis Skadins. 2012. Mt adapta-
tion for under-resourced domains - what works and
what not. In Baltic HLT, volume 247, pages 176–
184.

Raivis Skadins, Marcis Pinnis, Tatiana Gornostay, and
Andrejs Vasiljevs. 2013. Application of online ter-
minology services in statistical machine translation.
In MT Summit XIV, pages 281–286.

52


