



















































Verbose, Laconic or Just Right: A Simple Computational Model of Content Appropriateness under Length Constraints


Proceedings of the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 636–644,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Verbose, Laconic or Just Right: A Simple Computational Model of
Content Appropriateness under Length Constraints

Annie Louis∗
School of Infomatics

University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh EH8 9AB

alouis@inf.ed.ac.uk

Ani Nenkova
Computer and Information Science

University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19103

nenkova@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract

Length constraints impose implicit re-
quirements on the type of content that
can be included in a text. Here we pro-
pose the first model to computationally as-
sess if a text deviates from these require-
ments. Specifically, our model predicts
the appropriate length for texts based on
content types present in a snippet of con-
stant length. We consider a range of fea-
tures to approximate content type, includ-
ing syntactic phrasing, constituent com-
pression probability, presence of named
entities, sentence specificity and inter-
sentence continuity. Weights for these fea-
tures are learned using a corpus of sum-
maries written by experts and on high
quality journalistic writing. During test
time, the difference between actual and
predicted length allows us to quantify text
verbosity. We use data from manual eval-
uation of summarization systems to as-
sess the verbosity scores produced by our
model. We show that the automatic ver-
bosity scores are significantly negatively
correlated with manual content quality
scores given to the summaries.

1 Introduction

In dialog, the appropriate length of a speaker turn
and the amount of detail in it are hugely influ-
enced by the pragmatic context. For example what
constitutes an appropriate answer to the question
“How was your vacation?” would be very different
when the question is asked as two acquaintances
pass each other in the corridor or right after two
friends have ordered dinner at a restaurant. Simi-
larly in writing, content is tailored to explicitly de-
fined or implicitly inferred constraints on the ap-

∗Work done while at University of Pennsylvania.

50 word summary:
The De Beers cartel has kept the diamond market stable

by matching supply to demand. African nations have

recently demanded better terms from the cartel. After

the Soviet breakup, De Beers contracted for diamonds

with the Yukutian Republic. The US remains the largest

diamond market, followed by Japan.

100 word summary:
The De Beers cartel, controlled by the Oppenheimer

family controls 80% of the uncut diamond market

through its Central Selling Organization. The cartel

has kept the diamond market stable by maintaining a

buffer pool of diamonds for matching supply to demand.

De Beers opened a new mine in 1992 and extended the

life of two others through underground mining.

Innovations have included automated processing and

bussing workers in daily from their homes. African

nations have recently demanded better terms. After

the Soviet breakup, De Beers contracted for diamonds

with the Yukutian Republic. The US remains the largest

diamond market, followed by Japan.

Table 1: 50 and 100 word summaries written by
the same person for the same set of documents

propriate length of text. Many academics have ex-
perienced the frustration of needing to adjust their
writing when they need to write a short abstract of
two hundred words or an answer to reviewer in no
more than five hundred words.

For a specific application-related example con-
sider the texts in Table 1. These are summaries of
a set of news articles discussing the De Beers di-
amond cartel, written by the same person.1 The
first text is written with the instruction to produce
a summary of about 50 words while the latter is
in response to a request for a 100 word summary.
Obviously the longer summary contains more de-
tails. It doesn’t however simply extend the shorter
summary with more sentences; additional details

1These summaries come from the Document Understand-
ing Conference dataset (year 2001).

636



are interspersed with the original shorter summary.
The performance of a range of human-machine

applications can be enhanced if they had the abil-
ity to predict the appropriate length of a system
contribution and the type of content appropriate
for that length. Such applications include docu-
ment generation (O’Donnell, 1997), soccer com-
mentator (Chen and Mooney, 2008) and question
answering with different compression rates for dif-
ferent types of questions (Kaisser et al., 2008).
Predicting the type of content appropriate for the
given length alone would be highly desirable, for
example in automatic essay grading, summariza-
tion and even in information retrieval, in which
verbose writing is particularly undesirable. In this
respect, our work supplements recent computa-
tional methods to predict varied aspects of writing
quality, such as popular writing style and phras-
ing in novels (Ganjigunte Ashok et al., 2013), sci-
ence journalism (Louis and Nenkova, 2013), and
social media content (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et
al., 2012; Lakkaraju et al., 2013).

Our work is the first to explore text verbosity.
We introduce a simple application-oriented defi-
nition of verbosity and a model to automatically
predict verbosity scores. We start with a brief
overview of our approach in the next section.

2 Text length and content
appropriateness

In this first model of verbosity, we do not carry
out an elaborate annotation experiment to create
labels for verbosity. There are two main reasons
for this choice: a) People find it hard to distinguish
between individual aspects of quality and often
the ratings for different aspects are highly corre-
lated (Conroy and Dang, 2008; Pitler et al., 2010)
b) Moreover, for verbosity in particular, the most
appropriate data for annotation would be concise
and verbose versions of the same text (possibly of
similar lengths). It is more likely that people can
distinguish between verbosity of these controlled
pairs compared to ratings on an individual arti-
cle. Such writing samples are not easily available.
So we have avoided the uncertainties in annotation
in this first work by adopting a simpler approach
based on three key ideas.

(i) We define a concise article of length l as “an
article that has the appropriate types of content ex-
pected in an article of length l”. Note that length
is not equal to verbosity in our model. Our defi-

nition allows for articles of different lengths to be
considered concise. Verbosity depends on the ap-
propriateness of content for the article length.

(ii) We model this appropriateness of content
for the given length restriction via a set of easily
computable features that serve as proxies for (a)
type of content and level of detail (syntactic fea-
tures and sentence specificity) (b) sentence com-
plexity (simple readability-related features), (c)
secondary details (syntactic structures with high
compression probability) and (d) structure (dis-
course relations and inter-sentence continuity).

(iii) Forgoing any explicit annotation, we sim-
ply train the model on professionally written text
in which we assume content is appropriately tai-
lored to the length requirements. We train a re-
gression model on the well-written texts to predict
the length of an article based on a single snippet of
fixed (short) length from the article. For a new test
article, we can obtain a predicted length from this
model (length supposing the article is written con-
cisely) based on a short snippet. We use the mis-
match between the predicted and actual text length
of the article to determine if it is verbose.

We believe that this definition of verbosity has
natural uses in applications such as summariza-
tion. For example, current systems do not distin-
guish the task of summary creation for different
target lengths. They simply try to maximize esti-
mated sentence importance and to minimize repet-
itive information. They pay no attention to the fact
that the same type of sentences are unlikely to be
an optimal selection for both a 50 word and a 400
word summary.

We now briefly present the formal definition of
the problem of content appropriateness for a spec-
ified text length. Let T = (t1, t2, ...tn) be a collec-
tion of concisely-written texts and let l(ti) denote
the length of text ti. The learning task is to obtain
a function based on the content type properties of
ti which helps to predict l(ti). More specifically,
we are given a snippet from ti, called sti , of a con-
stant length k where k is a parameter of our model
and k < mintj l(tj). The mapping f is learned
based on the constant length snippet only and the
aim is to predict the original text length.

f(sti)→ l̂(ti)
In our work we choose to work with topical seg-

ments from documents rather than the complete
documents themselves.

637



Once the model is trained, we identify the ver-
bosity for a test article as follows: Let us consider
a new topic segment tx during test time. Let the
length of the segment be l. We obtain a snippet
stx of size k from tx. Now assume that our model
predicts f(stx) = l̂.

Case 1: l̂ ' l, the content type in tx matches
the content types generally present in articles of
length l. We consider such articles as concise.

Case 2: l̂ � l, the type of content included in
tx is really suitable for longer and detailed topic
segments. Thus tx is likely conveying too much
detail given its length i.e. it is verbose.

Case 3: l̂ � l, the content in tx is of the
type that a skillful writer would include in a much
shorter and less detail-oriented text. Thus tx is
likely lacking appropriate details (laconic).

We compute the following scores to quantify
verbosity:

Predicted length. is the model prediction l̂.
Verbosity degree. This score is the difference

between the predicted length and the actual length
of the text, l̂ − l. Positive values of the score indi-
cate the degree of verbosity, negative values indi-
cate that the text is laconic.

Deviation score. Since both being verbose and
being laconic is potentially problematic for text,
we define a score which does not differentiate the
type of mismatch. This score is given by the abso-
lute magnitude |l̂ − l|.

The next section describes the features used for
indicating the content type of a snippet. In Section
4, we test the features on a four-way classification
task to predict the length of a human-written sum-
mary based on a snippet of the summary. In Sec-
tion 5, we extend our model to a regression set-
ting by learning feature weights on news articles of
varied lengths from the New York Times (NYT),
which we consider to be a sample in which content
is chosen appropriately for each article length. Fi-
nally in Section 6 we evaluate the model trained
on NYT articles on machine-produced summaries
and confirm that summaries scored with higher
verbosity by our model also receive poor content
quality scores during manual evaluation.

3 Features mapping content type to
appropriate length

We propose a diverse set of 87 features for charac-
terizing content type. These features are computed
over the constant length snippet sampled from an

article. All the syntax based features are com-
puted from the constituency trees produced from
the Stanford Parser (Klein and Manning, 2003).

Length of units (10 features).
This set of features captures basic word and

sentence length, and redundancy properties of the
snippet. It includes number of sentences, average
sentence length in words, average word length in
characters, and type to token ratio. We also in-
clude the counts of noun phrases, verb phrases
and prepositional phrases and the average length
in words of these three phrase types.

Syntactic realization (30 features).
We compute the grammatical productions in a

set of around 47,000 sentences taken from the
AQUAINT corpus (Graff, 2002) We select the
most frequent 15 productions in this set that in-
volve a description of entities, i.e the LHS (left-
hand side) of the production is a noun phrase. The
count of each of these productions is added as a
feature allowing us to track what type of informa-
tion about the entities is conveyed in the snippet.
We also add features for the most frequent 15 pro-
ductions whose LHS is not a noun phrase.

Discourse relations (5 features).
These features are based on the hypothesis that

different discourse relations would vary in their
appropriateness for articles of different lengths.
For example causal information may be included
only in more detailed texts.

We use a tool (Pitler and Nenkova, 2009) to
identify all explicit discourse connectives in our
snippets, along with the general semantic class
of the connective (temporal, comparison, contin-
gency and expansion). We use the number of dis-
course connectives of each of the four types as fea-
tures, as well as the total number of connectives.

Continuity (6 features).
These features capture the degree to which ad-

jacent sentences in the snippet are related and con-
tinue the topic. The amount of continuity for
subtopics is likely to vary for long and short texts.

We add the number of pronouns and determin-
ers as two features. Another feature is the average
word overlap value between adjacent sentences.
For computing the overlap measure, we represent
every sentence as a vector where each dimension
represents a word. The number of times the word
appears in the sentence is the value for that di-
mension. Cosine similarity is computed between

638



the vectors of adjacent sentences and the average
value of the similarity across all pairs of adjacent
sentences is the feature value.

We also run the Stanford Coreference tool
(Raghunathan et al., 2010) to identity pronoun and
entity coreference links within the snippet. The
number of total coreference links, and the number
of intra- and inter-sentence links are added as three
separate features.

Amount of detail (7 features).
To indicate descriptive words, we compute the

number of adjectives and adverbs (two features).
We also include the total number of named enti-
ties (NEs), average length of NEs in words and
the number of sentences that do not have any NEs.
The named entities were identified using the Stan-
ford NER recognition tool (Finkel et al., 2005).

We also use the predictions of a classifier
trained to identify general versus specific sen-
tences. We use a data set of general and spe-
cific sentences and features described in Louis and
Nenkova (2011) to implement a sentence speci-
ficity model. The classifier produces a binary pre-
diction and also a graded score for specificity. We
add two features—the percentage of specific sen-
tences and the average specificity score of words.

Compression likelihood (29 features).
These features use an external source of infor-

mation about content importance. Specifically, we
use data commonly employed to develop statisti-
cal models for sentence compression (Knight and
Marcu, 2002; McDonald, 2006; Galley and McK-
eown, 2007). It consists of pairs of sentences
in an original text and a professional summary
of that text. In every pair, one of the sentences
(source) appeared in the original text and the other
is a shorter version with the superfluous details
deleted. Both sentences were produced by people.

We use the dataset created by Galley and McKe-
own (2007). The sentences are taken from the Ziff
Davis Corpus which contains articles about tech-
nology products. This data also contains align-
ment between the constituency parse nodes of the
source and summary sentence pair. Through the
alignment it is possible to track nodes that where
preserved during compression.

On this data, we identify for every production
in the source sentence whether it undergoes dele-
tion in the compressed sentence. A production
(LHS → RHS) is said to undergo deletion when
either the LHS node or any of the nodes in the

RHS do not appear in the compressed sentence.
Only productions which involve non-terminals in
the RHS are used for this analysis as lexical items
could be rather corpus-specific. The proportion
of times a production undergoes deletion is called
the deletion probability. We also incorporate fre-
quency of the production with the deletion proba-
bility to obtain a representative set of 25 produc-
tions which are frequently deleted and also occur
commonly. This deletion score is computed as:
deletion probability * log(frequency of production
in source sentences)

Parentheticals appear in the list as would be
expected and also productions involving con-
junctions, prepositional phrases and subordinate
clauses. We expect that such productions will in-
dicate the presence of details that are only appro-
priate for longer texts.

To compute the compression-related features
for a snippet, we first obtain the set of all pro-
ductions in the sentences from the snippet. We
add features that indicate the number of times each
of the top 25 ‘most deleted’ productions was used
in the snippet. We also use the sum, average and
product of deletion probabilities for set of snippet
productions as features. The product feature gives
the likelihood of the text being deleted. We also
add the perplexity value based on this likelihood,
P−1/n where P is the likelihood and n is the num-
ber of productions from the snippet for which we
have deletion information in our data.2

For training a model, we need texts which we
can assume are written in a concise manner. We
use two sources of data—summaries written by
people and high quality news articles.

4 A classification model on expert
summaries

Here we use a collection of news summaries writ-
ten by expert analysts for four different lengths
and build a classification model to predict given
a snippet what is the length of the summary from
which the snippet was taken. This task only differ-
entiates four lengths but is a useful first approach
for testing our assumptions and features.

4.1 Data
We use human written summaries from the Doc-
ument Understanding Conference (DUC3) evalua-

2Some productions may not have appeared in the Ziff
Davis Corpus.

3http://duc.nist.gov

639



tion workshops conducted in 2001 and 2002. An
input given for summarization contains 10 to 15
documents on a topic. The person had to create
50, 100, 200 and 400 word summaries for each of
the inputs. These summary writers are retired in-
formation analysts and we can assume that their
summaries are of high quality and concise nature.
Further, the four different length summaries for an
input are produced by the same person.4 There-
fore differences in length are not confounded by
differences in writing style of different people.

The 2001 dataset has 90 summaries for each of
the four lengths. In 2002, there are 116 summaries
for each length. All of the summaries are abstracts,
i.e. people wrote the summary in their own words,
with the exception of one set. In 2002, abstracts
were only created for 50, 100 and 200 lengths.
However, extracts created by people are available
for 400 words. In extracts, the summary writer
is only allowed to choose complete sentences (no
edits can be done), however, the sentences can be
ordered in the summary and people tend to create
coherent extractive summaries as well. Since it is
desirable to have data for another length, we also
include the 400-word extracts from the 2002 data.

4.2 Snippet selection
We choose 50 words as the snippet length for
our experiment since the length of the shortest
summaries is 50. We experiment with multiple
ways to select a snippet: the first 50 words of the
summary (START), the last 50 words (END) and
50 words starting at a randomly chosen sentence
(RANDOM). However, we do not truncate any sen-
tence in the middle to meet the constraint for 50
words. We allow a leeway of 20 words so that
snippets can range from 30 to 70 words. When a
snippet could not be created within this word limit
(eg. the summary has one sentence which is longer
than 70 words), we ignore the example.

4.3 Classification results
The task is to predict the length of the summary
from which the fixed length snippet was taken, i.e.
4-way classification—50, 100, 200 or a 400 word
summary. We trained an SVM classifier with a ra-
dial basis kernel on the 2001 data. The regulariza-
tion and kernel parameters were tuned using 10-
fold cross validation on the training set. The accu-
racies of classification on the 2002 data are shown

4Different inputs however may be summarized by differ-
ent assessors.

snippet position accuracy
START 38.4
RANDOM 34.4
END 39.3

Table 2: Length prediction results on DUC sum-
maries

in Table 2. Since there are four equal classes, the
random baseline performance is 25%.

The START and END position snippets gave the
best accuracies, 38% and 39% which are 13-14%
absolute improvement above the baseline. At the
same time, there is much scope for improvement.
The confusion matrices showed that 50 and 400
word lengths, the extreme ones in this dataset,
were the easiest to predict. Most of the confusions
occur with the 100 and 200 word summaries.

The overall accuracy is slightly better when
snippets from the END of the summary are cho-
sen compared to those from the START. However,
with START snippets, better prediction of different
length summaries was obtained, whereas the ac-
curacy in the END case comes mainly from correct
prediction of 50 and 400 word summaries. So we
use the START selection for further experiments.

5 A regression approach based on New
York Times editorials

We next build a model where we predict a wider
range of lengths compared to just the four classes
we had before. Here our training set comprises
news articles from the New York Times (NYT)
based on the assumption that edited news from a
good source would be of high quality overall.

5.1 Data

We obtain the text of the articles from the NYT
Annotated Corpus (Sandhaus, 2008). We choose
the articles from the opinion section of the news-
paper since they are likely to have good topic con-
tinuity and related content compared to general
news which often contain lists of facts. We fur-
ther use only the editorial articles to ensure that
the articles are of high quality.

We collect 10,724 opinion articles from years
2000 to 2007 of the NYT. We divide each article
into topic segments using the unsupervised topic
segmentation method developed by Eisenstein and
Barzilay (2008). We use the following heuristic to
decide on the number of topic segments for each
article. If the article has fewer than 50 sentences,
we create segments such that the expected length

640



of a segment is 10 sentences, i.e, we assign the
number of segments as number of sentences di-
vided by 10. When the article is longer, we create
5 segments. This step gives us 18,167 topic seg-
ments, ranging in length from 14 to 773 words.

We use a stratified sampling method to select
training and test examples. Starting from 90 words
and upto a maximum length of 500 words, we di-
vide the range into bins in increments of 30 words.
From each bin we select 100 texts for training and
around 35 for testing. There are 2,100 topic seg-
ments in the training set and 681 for testing.

5.2 Training approach

We use 100 word snippets for our experiments.
We learn a linear regression model on the train-
ing data using lm function in R (R Development
Core Team, 2011). The features which turned out
significant in the model are shown in Table 3. The
significance value shown is associated with a t-test
to determine if the feature can be ignored from the
model. We report the coefficients for the signifi-
cant features under column ‘Beta’. The R-squared
value of the model is 0.219.

Many of the most significant features are related
to entities. Longer texts are associated with larger
number of noun phrases but they tend not to be
proper names. Average word and sentence length
also increase with article length, at the same time,
longer articles have shorter verb phrases. Specific
sentences and determiners are also positively re-
lated to article length. At the discourse level, com-
parison relations increase with length.

5.3 Accuracy of predictions

On the test data, the lengths predicted by the
model have a Pearson correlation of 0.44 with the
true length of the topic segment. The correlation is
highly significant (p-value < 2.2e-16). The Spear-
man correlation value is 0.43 and the Kendall Tau
is 0.29, both also highly significant. These results
show that our model can distinguish content types
for a range of article lengths.

6 Text quality assessment for automatic
summaries

In the models above, we learned weights which re-
late the features to the length of concisely written
human summaries and NYT articles. Now we use
the model to compute verbosity scores and assess

Feature Beta p-value
Positive coefficients

total noun phrases 6.052e+00 ***
avg. word length 3.201e+01 ***
avg. sent. length 3.430e+00 **
avg. NP length 6.557e+00 *
no. of adverbs 4.244e+00 **
% specific sentences 4.773e+01 **
comparison relations 9.296e+00 .
determiners 2.955e+00 *
NP→ NP PP 4.305e+00 *
NP→ NP NP 1.174e+01 *
PP→ IN S 7.268e+00 .
WHNP→WDT 1.196e+01 **

Negative coefficients
NP→ NNP -8.630e+00 ***
no. of sentences -2.498e+01 **
no. of relations -1.128e+01 **
avg. VP length -2.982e+00 **
type token ratio -1.784e+02 *
NP→ NP , SBAR -1.567e+01 *
NP→ NP , NP -9.582e+00 *
NP→ DT NN -3.423e+00 .
VP→ VBD -1.189e+01 .
S→ S : S . -1.951e+01 .
ADVP→ RB -4.198e+00 .

Table 3: Significant regression coefficients in the
length prediction model on NYT editorials. ‘***’
indicates p-value < 0.001, ‘**’ is p-value < 0.01,
‘*’ is < 0.05 and ‘.’ is < 0.1

how well they correlate with text quality scores as-
signed by people.

We perform this evaluation for the system sum-
maries produced during the 2006 DUC evalua-
tion workshop. There are 22 automatic systems in
that evaluation.5 Each system produced 250 word
summaries for each of 20 multidocument inputs.
Each summary was evaluated by DUC assessors
for multiple dimensions of quality. We examine
how the verbosity predictions from our model are
related to these summary scores. In this experi-
ment, we use automatic summaries only.

6.1 Gold-standard summary scores

Two kinds of manual scores—content and linguis-
tic quality—are available for each summary from
the DUC dataset. One type of content score,
the ‘pyramid score’ (Nenkova et al., 2007) com-
putes the overlap of semantic units of the system
summary with that present in human-written sum-
maries for the same input. For the other content
score, called ‘content responsiveness’, assessors
directly provide a rating to summaries on a scale
from 1 (very poor) to 5 (very good) without using
any reference human summaries.

5We use only the set of systems for which pyramid scores
are also available.

641



Verbosity scores Corr. with actual length
predicted length -0.01
verbosity degree -0.29
deviation score -0.27

Table 4: Relationship between verbosity scores
and summary length

Linguistic quality is evaluated separately from
content for different aspects. Manually assigned
scores are available for non-redundancy (absence
of repetitive information), focus (well-established
topic), and coherence (good flow from sentence to
sentence). For each aspect, the summary is rated
on a scale from 1 (very poor) to 5 (very good).

This dataset is less ideal for our task in some
ways as system summaries often lack coherent
arrangement of sentences. Some of our fea-
tures which rely on coreference and adjacent sen-
tence overlaps when computed on these sum-
maries could be misleading. However, this data
contains large scale quality ratings for different
quality aspects which allow us to examine our ver-
bosity predictions across multiple dimensions.

6.2 Verbosity scores and summary quality

We choose the first 100 words of each summary
as the snippet. No topic segmentation was done
on the summary data. We use the NYT regres-
sion model to predict the expected lengths of these
summaries and compute its verbosity and devia-
tion scores as defined in Section 2.

We also compute two other measures for com-
parison.

Actual length. To understand how the ver-
bosity scores are related to the length of the sum-
mary, we also keep track of the actual number of
words present in the summary.

Redundancy score: We also add a simple score
to our analysis to indicate redundancy between ad-
jacent sentences in the summary. It is simple mea-
sure of verbosity since repetitive information leads
to lower informativeness overall. The score is the
cosine similarity based sentence overlap measure
described in Section 3.

For each of the 22 automatic systems, the scores
of its 20 summaries (one for each input) are av-
eraged. (We ignore empty summaries and those
which are much smaller than the 100 word snip-
pet that we require). We find the average val-
ues for both our verbosity based scores above
and the gold-standard scores (pyramid, content re-
sponsiveness, focus, non-redundancy and coher-

Content quality
scores Pyramid Resp.
actual length 0.64* 0.43*
predicted length -0.29 -0.11
verbosity degree -0.47* -0.23
deviation score -0.44* -0.29
redundancy score -0.01 -0.06

Linguistic quality
scores Non-red Focus Coher.
actual length -0.32 -0.25 -0.32
predicted length 0.48* 0.39. 0.38.

verbosity degree 0.55* 0.44* 0.46*
deviation score 0.53* 0.40. 0.42.

redundancy score 0.06 0.32 0.23

Table 5: Pearson correlations between verbosity
scores and gold standard summary quality scores

ence). We also compute the average value of the
summary lengths for each system.

First we examine the relationship between ver-
bosity scores and the actual summary lengths. The
Pearson correlations between the three verbosity
measures and true length of the summaries are re-
ported in Table 4. The verbosity scores are not sig-
nificantly related to summary length. They seem
to have an inverse relationship but the correlations
are not significant even at 90% confidence level.
This result supports our hypothesis that verbosity
scores based on expected length are different from
the actual summary length.

Next Table 5 presents the Pearson correlations
of the verbosity measures with gold standard sum-
mary quality scores. Since the number of points
(systems) is only 22, we indicate whether the cor-
relations are significant at two levels, 0.05 (marked
by a ‘*’ superscript) and 0.1 (a ‘.’ superscript).

The first line of the table indicates that longer
summaries are associated with higher content
scores both according to pyramid and content re-
sponsiveness evaluations. This result also supports
our hypothesis that length alone does not indicate
verbosity. Longer summaries on average have bet-
ter content quality. The length is not significantly
related to linguistic quality scores but there is a
negative relationship in general.

On the other hand, all the three verbosity scores
have a negative correlation with content scores.
The verbosity degree score is the strongest in-
dicator of summary quality with -0.47 (signifi-
cant) correlation with pyramid score. At the same
time however, verbosity is preferred for linguis-
tic quality. This effect could arise due to the fact
these summaries are bags of unordered sentences.
Therefore verbose style could be perceived as hav-

642



System 23’s summary: Actual length = 253 words, Predicted length = 343 words, Verbosity degree = 90
A senior Scotland Yard police officer apologized to the parents of a black teenager slain five years ago in a race killing

that has become the focus of debate over relations between police and ethnic minorities. Black teenager Stephen Lawrence

was stabbed to death at a bus-stop in Eltham, south London by five white youngsters six years ago. The parents of the

murdered black teenager Stephen Lawrence began legal action against the men suspected of his killing. Two suspects in the

Stephen Lawrence murder case and one other man were arrested on suspicion of theft by Kent Police. The five men

suspected of killing Stephen Lawrence were thumped and pelted with bottles by an enraged crowd Tuesday after a day of

evasive and implausible evidence that made a mockery of their appearance before the public inquiry. The dawn raids came

as police questioned three men in connection with the country’s most notorious racist crime: the unsolved 1993 murder of

black teenager Stephen Lawrence. A public inquiry after the Lawrence case found London police institutionally racist,

prompting a government pledge to take a more active role in combating racial intolerance. The report, commissioned after

police botched the investigation into the 1993 racially motivated murder of a black teenager, Stephen Lawrence has put

pressure on Sir Paul Condon, the Metropolitan Police chief, to resign. British authorities and police have learned from

the 1993 murder of black teen-ager Stephen Lawrence by a gang of white youths and the failure of the police to

System 18’s summary: Actual length = 244 words, Predicted length = 597 words, Verbosity degree = 353
The government, which has received praise from backers of the Lawrence family for its pursuit of the case, came in for

criticism on Monday for actions it took this weekend to prevent publication of a leaked version of the report, which is

due to be made public on Wednesday. Sir William Macpherson, a retired High Court justice who was the author of the

report and chairman of the eight-month government inquiry, defined institutional racism as ‘the collective failure of an

organization to provide an appropriate professional service to people because of their color, culture or ethnic origin’

reflected, he said, in ‘processes, attitudes and behavior which amounts to discrimination through unwitting prejudice

ignorance, thoughtlessness and racist stereotyping.’ Richard Norton-Taylor, whose play about Lawrence’s killing, ‘The

Color of Justice,’ has been playing to rave reviews in London, said that the attention paid to the Lawrence case and

others was a sign that British attitudes toward the overarching authority of the police and other institutions were

finally being called into question. She said British authorities and police have learned from the 1993 murder of black

teenager Stephen Lawrence by a gang of white youths and the failure of the police to investigate his death adequately

A senior Scotland Yard police officer Wednesday apologized to the parents of a black teenager slain five years ago in a

race killing that has become the focus of debate over relations between police and ethnic minorities.

Table 6: Summaries produced by two systems for input D0624 (DUC 2006) shown with the verbosity
scores from our model

ing greater coherence compared to short and suc-
cinct sentences which are jumbled such that it is
hard to decipher the full story.

The simple redundancy score (last row of the
table) does not have any significant relationship
to quality scores. One reason could be that most
summarization systems make an effort to reduce
redundant information (Carbonell and Goldstein,
1998) and therefore a simple measure of word
overlap is not helpful for distinguishing quality.

As examples of the predictions from our model,
Table 6 shows two summaries produced for the
same input by two different systems. They both
have almost the same actual length but the first re-
ceived a prediction close to its actual length while
the other is predicted with a much higher verbosity
degree score. Intuitively, the second example is
more verbose compared to the first one. According
to the manual evaluations as well, the first sum-
mary receives a higher score of 0.4062 (pyramid)

compared to 0.2969 for the second summary.

7 Conclusions

There are several ways in which our approach can
be improved. In this first work, we have avoided
the complexities of manual annotation. In fu-
ture, we will explore the feasibility of human an-
notations of verbosity on a suitable corpus, such
as news articles on the same topic from different
sources. In addition, our current approach only
considers a snippet of the text or topic segment
during prediction but ignores the writing in the re-
maining text. In future work, we plan to use a slid-
ing window to obtain and aggregate length predic-
tions while considering the full text.

Acknowledgements

This work was partially supported by a NSF CA-
REER 0953445 award. We also thank the anony-
mous reviewers for their comments.

643



References
J. Carbonell and J. Goldstein. 1998. The use of mmr,

diversity-based reranking for reordering documents
and producing summaries. In Proceedings of SIGIR,
pages 335–336.

D. L. Chen and R. J. Mooney. 2008. Learning to
sportscast: a test of grounded language acquisition.
In Proceedings of ICML, pages 128–135.

J. M. Conroy and H. T. Dang. 2008. Mind the gap:
Dangers of divorcing evaluations of summary con-
tent from linguistic quality. In Proceedings of COL-
ING, pages 145–152.

C. Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, J. Cheng, J. Kleinberg,
and L. Lee. 2012. You had me at hello: How phras-
ing affects memorability. In Proceedings of ACL,
pages 892–901.

J. Eisenstein and R. Barzilay. 2008. Bayesian un-
supervised topic segmentation. In Proceedings of
EMNLP, pages 334–343.

J. R. Finkel, T. Grenager, and C. Manning. 2005. In-
corporating non-local information into information
extraction systems by gibbs sampling. In Proceed-
ings of ACL, pages 363–370.

M. Galley and K. McKeown. 2007. Lexicalized
markov grammars for sentence compression. In
Proceedings of HLT-NAACL.

V. Ganjigunte Ashok, S. Feng, and Y. Choi. 2013. Suc-
cess with style: Using writing style to predict the
success of novels. In Proceedings of EMNLP, pages
1753–1764.

D. Graff. 2002. The AQUAINT Corpus of English
News Text. Corpus number LDC2002T31, Linguis-
tic Data Consortium, Philadelphia.

M. Kaisser, M. A. Hearst, and J. B. Lowe. 2008. Im-
proving search results quality by customizing sum-
mary lengths. In Proceedings of ACL-HLT, pages
701–709.

D. Klein and C.D. Manning. 2003. Accurate unlexi-
calized parsing. In Proceedings of ACL, pages 423–
430.

K. Knight and D. Marcu. 2002. Summarization be-
yond sentence extraction: A probabilistic approach
to sentence compression. Artificial Intelligence,
139(1).

H. Lakkaraju, J. J. McAuley, and J. Leskovec. 2013.
What’s in a name? understanding the interplay be-
tween titles, content, and communities in social me-
dia. In ICWSM.

A. Louis and A. Nenkova. 2011. Automatic identifica-
tion of general and specific sentences by leveraging
discourse annotations. In Proceedings of IJCNLP,
pages 605–613.

A. Louis and A. Nenkova. 2013. What makes writing
great? first experiments on article quality prediction
in the science journalism domain. TACL, 1:341–
352.

R. McDonald. 2006. Discriminative sentence com-
pression with soft syntactic evidence. In Proceed-
ings of EACL.

A. Nenkova, R. Passonneau, and K. McKeown. 2007.
The pyramid method: Incorporating human con-
tent selection variation in summarization evaluation.
ACM Trans. Speech Lang. Process., 4(2):4.

M. O’Donnell. 1997. Variable-length on-line docu-
ment generation. In Proceedings of the 6th Euro-
pean Workshop on Natural Language Generation.

E. Pitler and A. Nenkova. 2009. Using syntax to dis-
ambiguate explicit discourse connectives in text. In
Proceedings of ACL-IJCNLP, pages 13–16.

E. Pitler, A. Louis, and A. Nenkova. 2010. Automatic
evaluation of linguistic quality in multi-document
summarization. In Proceedings of ACL.

R Development Core Team, 2011. R: A Language and
Environment for Statistical Computing. R Founda-
tion for Statistical Computing.

K. Raghunathan, H. Lee, S. Rangarajan, N. Chambers,
M. Surdeanu, D. Jurafsky, and C. Manning. 2010. A
multi-pass sieve for coreference resolution. In Pro-
ceedings of EMNLP, pages 492–501.

E. Sandhaus. 2008. The New York Times Annotated
Corpus. Corpus number LDC2008T19, Linguistic
Data Consortium, Philadelphia.

644


