



















































A Vague Sense Classifier for Detecting Vague Definitions in Ontologies


Proceedings of the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 33–37,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Vague Sense Classifier for Detecting Vague Definitions in Ontologies

Panos Alexopoulos
iSOCO S.A.

Madrid, Spain
palexopoulos@isoco.com

John Pavlopoulos
Department of Informatics,

Athens University of Economics and Business
Athens, Greece

annis@aueb.gr

Abstract

Vagueness is a common human knowl-
edge and linguistic phenomenon, typi-
cally manifested by predicates that lack
clear applicability conditions and bound-
aries such as High, Expert or Bad. In the
context of ontologies and semantic data,
the usage of such predicates within ontol-
ogy element definitions (classes, relations
etc.) can hamper the latter’s quality, pri-
marily in terms of shareability and mean-
ing explicitness. With that in mind, we
present in this paper a vague word sense
classifier that may help both ontology cre-
ators and consumers to automatically de-
tect vague ontology definitions and, thus,
assess their quality better.

1 Introduction

Vagueness is a common human knowledge and
language phenomenon, typically manifested by
terms and concepts like High, Expert, Bad, Near
etc., and related to our inability to precisely de-
termine the extensions of such concepts in certain
domains and contexts. That is because vague con-
cepts have typically blurred boundaries which do
not allow for a sharp distinction between the enti-
ties that fall within their extension and those that
do not (Hyde, 2008) (Shapiro, 2006). For exam-
ple, some people are borderline tall: not clearly
“tall” and not clearly “not tall”.

Ontologies, in turn, are formal shareable con-
ceptualizations of domains, describing the mean-
ing of domain aspects in a common, machine-
processable form by means of concepts and
their interrelations (Chandrasekaran et al., January
February 1999). As such, they are widely used
for the production and sharing of structured data
and knowledge that can be commonly understood
among human and software agents.

When building ontologies and semantic data,
engineers and domain experts often use predi-
cates that are vague. While this is not always
an intentional act, the use of such predicates in-
fluences in a negative way the comprehension of
this data by other parties and limits their value as
a reusable source of knowledge (Alexopoulos et
al., 2013). The reason is the subjective interpreta-
tion of vague definitions that can cause disagree-
ments among the people who develop, maintain or
use a vague ontology. In fact, as shown in (Alex-
opoulos et al., 2013), vagueness in ontologies can
be a source of problems in scenarios involving i)
structuring data with a vague ontology (where dis-
agreements among experts on the validity of vague
statements may occur), ii) utilizing vague facts in
ontology-based systems (where reasoning results
might not meet users’ expectations) and iii) in-
tegrating vague semantic information (where the
merging of particular vague elements can lead to
data that will not be valid for all its users).

In this context, our goal in this paper is to en-
able ontology producers (engineers and domain
experts) as well as consumers (i.e., practitioners
who want to reuse ontologies and semantic data) to
detect, in an automatic way, ontology element def-
initions that are potentially vague. Such a detec-
tion will help ontology creators build more com-
prehensible and shareable ontologies (by refining,
eliminating or just documenting vague definitions)
and consumers assess, in an easier way, their us-
ability and quality before deciding to use it.

Our approach towards such a detection involves
training a classifier that may distinguish between
vague and non-vague term word senses and using
it to determine whether a given ontology element
definition is vague or not. For example, the def-
inition of the ontology class “StrategicClient” as
“A client that has a high value for the company”
is (and should be) characterized as vague while
the definition of “AmericanCompany” as “A com-

33



pany that has legal status in the Unites States” is
not. The classifier is trained in a supervised way,
using vague and non-vague sense examples, care-
fully constructed from WordNet.

The structure of the rest of the paper is as fol-
lows. In the next section we briefly present related
work while in section 3 we describe in detail our
vague sense classifier, including the training data
we used and the evaluation we performed. Sec-
tion 4 describes the results of applying the classi-
fier in an a publicly available ontology, illustrating
its usefulness as an ontology evaluation tool. Fi-
nally, section 5 summarizes our work and outlines
its future directions.

2 Related Work

The phenomenon of vagueness in human language
and knowledge has been studied from a logic
and philosophical point of view in a number of
works (Hyde, 2008) (Shapiro, 2006) and differ-
ent theories and paradigms have been proposed
to accommodate it, including supervaluationism
(Keefe, 2008), many-valued logic and fuzzy logic
(Klir and Yuan, 1995). Moreover, in the context
of ontologies, one may find several works focus-
ing on acquisition, conceptualization and repre-
sentation of vague knowledge, mainly following a
fuzzy logic based approach (Bobillo and Straccia,
2011) (Stoilos et al., 2008) (Abulaish, 2009). Nev-
ertheless all these approaches rely on manual iden-
tification and analysis of vague terms and concepts
by domain experts and, to the best of our knowl-
edge, no work attempts to automate this task.

Another set of related work consists of ap-
proaches for subjectivity and polarity labeling of
word senses (Wiebe and Riloff, 2005) (Wiebe
and Mihalcea, 2006) (Wilson et al., 2005) (Su
and Markert, 2008) (Esuli and Sebastiani, 2006)
(Akkaya et al., 2011). While vagueness is related
to both phenomena (as polarized words are often
vague and vague words are typically subjective),
it is not exactly the same as these (e.g., subjective
statements do not always involve vagueness) and,
thus, requires specialized treatment. To illustrate
that, we compare in subsequent sections our vague
sense classifier with the subjective sense classifier
of (Wilson et al., 2005), showing that the former
performs significantly better than the latter.

3 Supervised Classification for Vague
Term Detection

3.1 Data

We created a dataset of 2,000 adjective senses, col-
lected from WordNet, such that 1,000 of them
had a vague definition and the the rest a non vague
definition. A sample of these senses is shown in
Table 1 while the whole dataset, which to the best
of our knowledge is the first of its kind, is publicly
available for further research1.

The dataset was constructed by an ontology ex-
pert. As the task of classifying a text as vague or
not can be quite subjective, we asked from two
other human judges to annotate a subset of the
dataset’s definitions (100), and we measured inter-
annotator agreement between all three. We found
mean pairwise JPA (Joint Probability of Agree-
ment) equal to 0.81 and mean pairwise K (Co-
hen’s Kappa) equal to 0.64, both of which indicate
a reasonable agreement.

Figure 1: Train and test error rate, per number of
training instances.

3.2 Training and Evaluation

We used the first 80% of the data (i.e., 800 vague
and 800 non vague instances) to train a multino-
mial Naive Bayes classifier.2 We removed stop
words and we used the bag of words assumption
to represent each instance.3 The remaining 20%
of the data (i.e., 200 vague and 200 non vague
instances) was used as a test set. Accuracy was
found to be 84%, which is considerably high. In
Figure 1, is shown the error rate on the test and
train data, as we increase the number of training
instances. We see that the two curves, initially,

1http://glocal.isoco.net/datasets/VagueSynsets.zip
2We used the implementation of Scikit-Learn found at

http://scikit-learn.org/stable/.
3We used the list of stopwords provided by Scikit-Learn.

34



Vague Adjectives Non Vague Adjectives
Abnormal: not normal, not typical or usual or
regular or conforming to a norm

Compound: composed of more than one part

Impenitent: impervious to moral persuasion Biweekly: occurring every two weeks
Notorious: known widely and usually unfavor-
ably

Irregular: falling below the manufacturer’s
standard

Aroused: emotionally aroused Outermost: situated at the farthest possible
point from a center

Yellowish: of the color intermediate between
green and orange in the color spectrum, of
something resembling the color of an egg yolk

Unfeathered: having no feathers

Table 1: Sample Vague and Non-Vague Adjective Senses

Figure 2: Accuracy on the test data, per number of
selected features.

have a big gap between them, but this is progres-
sively reduced. However, more (or more compli-
cated) features could be beneficial; we intend to
study this further in the future.

We also examined the hypothesis of the exis-
tence of a small set of words that are often found
in vague definitions, but not in definitions which
are not vague, as then it would be very easy for
a system to use these words and discriminate be-
tween the two classes. To do this, we performed
feature selection with the chi-squared statistic for
various number of features and computed the ac-
curacy (i.e., one minus the error rate). As we show
in Figure 2, accuracy for only 5 selected features
is 50%, which is the same as if we selected class
in random. However, by increasing the number of
selected features, accuracy increases significantly.
This shows that there is not a subset of words
which could be used to discriminate between the
two classes; by contrast, most of the words play
their role. Again, this is something to be further
studied in future research.

Finally, in order to verify our intuition that

vagueness is not the same phenomenon as subjec-
tiveness (as we suggested in section 2), we used
the subjective sense classifier of (Wilson et al.,
2005) to classify the data of section 3.1 as subjec-
tive or objective, assuming that vague senses are
subjective while non-vague ones objective. The
particular classifier is part of the OpinionFinder4

system and the results of its application in the 2000
adjective senses of our dataset were as follows.
From the 1000 vague senses, only 167 were classi-
fied as subjective while from the 1000 non-vague
ones 993. These numbers do no reflect of course
the quality of OpinionFinder as a subjectivity de-
tection system, they merely illustrate the fact that
treating vagueness in the same way as subjective-
ness is not really effective and, thus, more dedi-
cated, vagueness-specific work is needed.

4 Use Case: Detecting Vagueness in
CiTO Ontology

To evaluate the effectiveness and potential of our
classifier for detecting vague ontological defini-
tions, we considered a publicly available ontology
called CiTO5. CiTO is an ontology that enables
characterization of the nature or type of citations
and consists primarily of relations, many of which
are vague (e.g. the relation cito:plagiarizes). In
order to compare the experts’ vague/non-vague
classification with the output of our system, we
worked as follows. We selected 44 relations from
CiTO (making sure to avoid duplications by e.g.
avoiding having both a relation and its inverse) and
we had again 3 human judges manually classify
them as vague or not. In the end we got 27 vague

4http://mpqa.cs.pitt.edu/opinionfinder/
5http://purl.org/spar/cito/

35



Vague Relations Non Vague Relations
plagiarizes: A property indicating that the au-
thor of the citing entity plagiarizes the cited
entity, by including textual or other elements
from the cited entity without formal acknowl-
edgement of their source.

sharesAuthorInstitutionWith: Each entity has
at least one author that shares a common insti-
tutional affiliation with an author of the other
entity.

citesAsAuthority: The citing entity cites the
cited entity as one that provides an authorita-
tive description or definition of the subject un-
der discussion.

providesDataFor: The cited entity presents
data that are used in work described in the cit-
ing entity.

speculatesOn: The citing entity speculates on
something within or related to the cited entity,
without firm evidence.

retracts: The citing entity constitutes a formal
retraction of the cited entity.

supports: The citing entity provides intellec-
tual or factual support for statements, ideas or
conclusions presented in the cited entity.

includesExcerptFrom: The citing entity in-
cludes one or more excerpts from the cited en-
tity.

refutes: The citing entity refutes statements,
ideas or conclusions presented in the cited en-
tity.

citesAsSourceDocument: The citing entity
cites the cited entity as being the entity from
which the citing entity is derived, or about
which the citing entity contains metadata.

Table 2: Sample Vague and Non-Vague Relations in CiTO

relations and 17 non-vague, a sample of which is
shown in Table 2.

Then we applied the trained vagueness classifier
of the previous section on the textual definitions of
the relations. The results of this were highly en-
couraging; 36/44 (82%) relations were correctly
classified as vague/non-vague with 74% accuracy
for vague relations and 94% for non-vague ones.
Again, for completeness, we classified the same
relations with OpinionFinder (as in the previous
section), in order to check if subjectivity classifi-
cation is applicable for vagueness. The results of
this were consistent to the ones reported in the pre-
vious section with the Wordnet data: 18/44 (40%)
overall correctly classified relations with 94% ac-
curacy for non-vague relations but only 7% for
vague ones.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper we considered the problem of auto-
matically detecting vague definitions in ontologies
and we developed a vague word sense classifier
using training data from Wordnet. Experiments
with both Wordnet word senses and real ontol-
ogy definitions, showed a considerably high accu-
racy of our system, thus verifying our intuition that
vague and non-vague senses can be separable. We

do understand that vagueness is a quite complex
phenomenon and the approach we have followed
in this paper rather simple. Yet, exactly because
of its simplicity, we believe that it can be a very
good baseline for further research in this particu-
lar area. The vague/non-vague sense dataset we
provide will be also very useful for that purpose.

Our future work comprises two main directions.
On the one hand, as we mentioned in the introduc-
tion, we intend to incorporate the current classifier
into an ontology analysis tool that will help ontol-
ogy engineers and users detect vague definitions in
ontologies and thus assess their quality better. On
the other hand, we want to further study the phe-
nomenon of vagueness as manifested in textual in-
formation, improve our classifer and see whether
it is possible to build a vague sense lexicon, similar
to lexicons that have already been built for subjec-
tivity and sentiment analysis.

Acknowledgments

The research leading to this results has received
funding from the People Programme (Marie Curie
Actions) of the European Union’s 7th Frame-
work Programme P7/2007-2013 under REA grant
agreement no 286348.

36



References
M. Abulaish. 2009. An ontology enhancement frame-

work to accommodate imprecise concepts and rela-
tions. Journal of Emerging Technologies in Web In-
telligence, 1(1).

C. Akkaya, J. Wiebe, A. Conrad, and R. Mihal-
cea. 2011. Improving the impact of subjectivity
word sense disambiguation on contextual opinion
analysis. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Confer-
ence on Computational Natural Language Learning,
CoNLL ’11, pages 87–96, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

P. Alexopoulos, B. Villazon-Terrazas, and Pan J.Z. Pan.
2013. Towards vagueness-aware semantic data. In
Fernando Bobillo, Rommel N. Carvalho, Paulo Ce-
sar G. da Costa, Claudia d’Amato, Nicola Fanizzi,
Kathryn B. Laskey, Kenneth J. Laskey, Thomas
Lukasiewicz, Trevor Martin, Matthias Nickles, and
Michael Pool, editors, URSW, volume 1073 of
CEUR Workshop Proceedings, pages 40–45. CEUR-
WS.org.

F. Bobillo and U. Straccia. 2011. Fuzzy ontology rep-
resentation using owl 2. International Journal of
Approximate Reasoning, 52(7):1073–1094, October.

B. Chandrasekaran, J. Josephson, and R. Benjamins.
January - February 1999. What are ontologies and
why do we need them? IEEE Intelligent Systems,
14(1):Page 20–26.

A. Esuli and F. Sebastiani. 2006. Sentiwordnet: A
publicly available lexical resource for opinion min-
ing. In In Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC06, pages
417–422.

D. Hyde. 2008. Vagueness, Logic and Ontology. Ash-
gate New Critical Thinking in Philosophy.

R. Keefe. 2008. Vagueness: Supervaluationism. Phi-
losophy Compass, 3:315–324.

G. Klir and B. Yuan. 1995. Fuzzy Sets and Fuzzy
Logic, Theory and Applications. Prentice Hall.

S. Shapiro. 2006. Vagueness in Context. Oxford Uni-
versity Press.

G. Stoilos, G. Stamou, J.Z. Pan, N. Simou, and
V. Tzouvaras. 2008. Reasoning with the Fuzzy De-
scription Logic f-SHIN: Theory, Practice and Appli-
cations. pages 262–281.

F. Su and K. Markert. 2008. From words to senses: A
case study of subjectivity recognition. In Proceed-
ings of the 22Nd International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics - Volume 1, COLING ’08,
pages 825–832, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

J. Wiebe and R. Mihalcea. 2006. Word sense and sub-
jectivity. In Proceedings of COLING-ACL 2006.

J. Wiebe and E. Riloff. 2005. Creating subjective
and objective sentence classifiers from unannotated
texts. In In CICLing2005, pages 486–497.

T. Wilson, P. Hoffmann, S. Somasundaran, J. Kessler,
J. Wiebe, Y. Choi, C. Cardie, E. Riloff, and
S. Patwardhan. 2005. Opinionfinder: A sys-
tem for subjectivity analysis. In Proceedings of
HLT/EMNLP on Interactive Demonstrations, HLT-
Demo ’05, pages 34–35, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

37


