



















































Resolving Coreferent and Associative Noun Phrases in Scientific Text


Proceedings of the Student Research Workshop at the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 45–55,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Resolving Coreferent and Associative Noun Phrases in Scientific Text

Ina Rösiger
Institute for Natural Language Processing

University of Stuttgart, Germany
Pfaffenwaldring 5b, 70569 Stuttgart

roesigia@ims.uni-stuttgart.de

Simone Teufel
Computer Laboratory

University of Cambridge, UK
15 JJ Thomson Avenue, Cambridge CB3 0FD

sht25@cl.cam.ac.uk

Abstract

We present a study of information sta-
tus in scientific text as well as ongoing
work on the resolution of coreferent and
associative anaphora in two different sci-
entific disciplines, namely computational
linguistics and genetics. We present an an-
notated corpus of over 8000 definite de-
scriptions in scientific articles. To adapt a
state-of-the-art coreference resolver to the
new domain, we develop features aimed at
modelling technical terminology and inte-
grate these into the coreference resolver.
Our results indicate that this integration,
combined with domain-dependent train-
ing data, can outperform the performance
of an out-of-the-box coreference resolver.
For the (much harder) task of resolving as-
sociative anaphora, our preliminary results
show the need for and the effect of seman-
tic features.

1 Introduction

Resolving anaphoric relations automatically re-
quires annotated data for training and testing.
Anaphora and coreference resolution systems
have been tested and evaluated on different genres,
mainly news articles and dialogue. However, for
scientific text, annotated data are scarce and coref-
erence resolution systems are lacking (Schäfer et
al., 2012). We present a study of anaphora in sci-
entific literature and show the difficulties that arise
when resolving coreferent and associative entities
in two different scientific disciplines, namely com-
putational linguistics and genetics.
Coreference resolution in scientific articles is con-
sidered difficult due to the high proportion of def-
inite descriptions (Watson et al., 2003), which
typically require domain knowledge to be re-
solved. The more complex nature of the texts is

also reflected in the heavy use of abstract entities
such as results or variables, while easy-to-resolve
named entities are less frequently used. We test
an existing, state-of-the-art coreference resolution
tool on scientific text, a domain on which it has
not been trained, and adapt it to this new do-
main. We also address the resolution of asso-
ciative anaphora (Clark, 1975; Prince, 1981), a
related phenomenon, which is also called bridg-
ing anaphora. The interpretation of an associative
anaphor is based on the associated antecedent, but
the two are not coreferent. Examples 1 and 2 show
two science-specific cases of associative anaphora
from our data.

(1) Xe-Ar was found to be in a layered structure
with Ar on the surface1.

(2) We base our experiments on the Penn tree-
bank. The corpus size is ...

The resolution of associative links is important be-
cause it can help in tasks which use the concept
of textual coherence, e.g. Barzilay and Lapata
(2008)’s entity grid or Hearst (1994)’s text seg-
mentation. They might also be of use in higher-
level text understanding tasks such as textual en-
tailment (Mirkin et al., 2010) or summarisation
based on argument overlap (Kintsch and van Dijk,
1978; Fang and Teufel, 2014).
Gasperin (2009) showed that biological texts dif-
fer considerably from other text genres, such as
news text or dialogue. In this respect, our results
confirm that the proportion between non-referring
and referring entities in scientific text differs from
that reported for other genres. The same holds for
the type and relative number of linguistic expres-
sions used for reference. To address this issue, we
decided to investigate information status (Nissim
et al., 2004) of noun phrases. Information status
tells us whether a noun phrase refers to an already

1Anaphors are typed in bold face, their antecedents shown
in italics.

45



known entity, or whether it can be treated as non-
referring. Since no corpus of full-text scientific ar-
ticles annotated with both information status and
anaphoric relations was available, we had to cre-
ate and annotate our own corpus. The main con-
tributions of this work are (i) a new information
status-based annotation scheme and an annotated
corpus of scientific articles, (ii) a study of infor-
mation status in scientific text that compares the
distribution of the different categories in scientific
text with the distribution in news text, as well as
between the two scientific disciplines, (iii) exper-
iments on the resolution of coreferent anaphora:
we devise domain adaptation for science and show
how this improves an out-of-the-box coreference
resolver, and (iv) experiments on the resolution of
associative anaphora with a coreference resolver
that is adapted to this new notion of “reference”
by including semantic features. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first work on anaphora res-
olution in multi-discipline, full-text scientific pa-
pers that also deals with associative anaphora.

2 Related Work
Noun phrase coreference resolution is the task of
determining which noun phrases (NPs) in a text or
dialogue refer to the same real-world entities (Ng,
2010). Resolving anaphora in scientific text has
only recently gained interest in the research com-
munity and focuses mostly on the biomedical do-
main (Gasperin, 2009; Batista-Navarro and Ana-
niadou, 2011; Cohen et al., 2010). Some work has
been done for other disciplines, such as compu-
tational linguistics. Schäfer et al. (2012) present
a large corpus of 266 full-text computational lin-
guistics papers from the ACL Anthology, anno-
tated with coreference links. The CoNLL shared
task 2012 on modelling multilingual unrestricted
coreference in OntoNotes (Pradhan et al., 2012)
produced several state-of-the-art coreference sys-
tems (Fernandes et al., 2012; Björkelund and
Farkas, 2012; Chen and Ng, 2012) trained on news
text and dialogue, as provided in the OntoNotes
corpus (Hovy et al., 2006). Other state-of-the-art
systems, such as Raghunathan et al. (2010) and
Berkeley’s Coreference Resolution System (Dur-
rett and Klein, 2013), also treat coreference as
a task on news text and dialogue. We base our
experiments on the IMS coreference resolver by
Björkelund and Farkas (2012), one of the best pub-
licly available English coreference systems. The
resolver uses the decision of a cluster-based de-

coding algorithm, i.e. one that decides whether
two mentions are placed in the same or in different
clusters, or whether they should be considered sin-
gletons. Their novel idea is that the decision of this
algorithm is encoded as a feature and fed to a pair-
wise classifier, which makes decisions about pairs
of mentions rather than clusters. This stacked ap-
proach overcomes problems of previous systems
that are based on the isolated pairwise decision.
The features used are mostly taken from previous
work on coreference resolution and encode a va-
riety of information, i.e, surface forms and their
POS tags, subcategorisation frames and paths in
the syntax tree as well as the semantic distance be-
tween the surface forms (e.g. edit distance).
However, none of this work is concerned with
associative anaphora. Hou et al. (2013) present
a corpus of news text annotated with associative
links that are not limited with respect to semantic
relations between anaphor and antecedent. Their
experiments focus on antecedent selection only,
assuming that the recognition of associative enti-
ties has already been performed. Information sta-
tus has been investigated extensively in different
genres such as news text, e.g. in Markert et al.
(2012). Poesio and Vieira (1998) performed an in-
formation status-based corpus study on news text,
defining the following categories: coreferential,
bridging, larger situation, unfamiliar and doubt.
To the best of our knowledge, there is currently
no study on information status in scientific text.
In this paper, we propose a classification scheme
for scientific text that is derived from Riester et
al. (2010) and Poesio and Vieira (1998). We in-
vestigate the differences between news text and
scientific text by analysing the distribution of in-
formation status categories. We hypothesise that
the proportion of associative anaphora in scientific
text is higher than in news text, making it neces-
sary to resolve them in some form. Our exper-
iments on the resolution of coreferent anaphora
concern the domain-adaptation of a coreference
resolver to this new domain and examine the effect
of domain-dependent training data and features
aimed at capturing technical terminology. We also
present an unusual setup where we assume that an
existing coreference resolver can also be used to
identify associative links. We integrate semantic
features in the hope of detecting cases where do-
main knowledge is required to establish the rela-
tion between the anaphor and the antecedent.

46



Category Example

COREFERENCE LINKS GIVEN (SPECIFIC) We present the following experiment. It deals with ...
GIVEN (GENERIC) We use the Jaccard similarity coefficient in our experiments.

The Jaccard similarity coefficient is useful for ...
ASSOCIATIVE LINKS ASSOCIATIVE Xe-Ar was found to be in a layered structure with Ar

on the surface .
ASSOCIATIVE The structure of the protein ...(SELF-CONTAINING)
DESCRIPTION The fact that the accuracy improves ...

Categories UNUSED Noam Chomsky introduced the notion of ...
without links DEICTIC This experiment deals with ...

PREDICATIVE Pepsin, the enzyme, ...
IDIOM On the one hand ... on the other hand ...
DOUBT

Table 1: Categories in our classification scheme

3 Corpus Creation

We manually annotated a small scientific corpus
to provide a training and test corpus for our exper-
iments, using the annotation tool Slate (Kaplan et
al., 2012).

3.1 Annotation Scheme

Two types of reference are annotated, namely
COREFERENCE and ASSOCIATIVE LINKS.
COREFERENCE LINKS are annotated for all types
of nominal phrases; such links are annotated
between enitites that refer to the same referent
in the real world. ASSOCIATIVE LINKS and
information status categories are only annotated
for definite noun phrases. In our scheme, ASSO-
CIATIVE LINKS are only annotated when there is
a clear relation between the two entities. As we
do not pre-define possible associative relations,
this definition is vague, but it is necessary to keep
the task as general as possible. Additionally,
we distinguish the following nine categories,
as shown in Table 12: The category GIVEN
comprises coreferent entities that refer back to an
already introduced entity. If a coreference link
is detected, the referring expression is marked
as GIVEN and the link with its referent NP is
annotated. The obligatory attribute GENERIC tells
us whether the given entity has a generic or a
specific reading. ASSOCIATIVE refers to entities
that are not coreferent but whose interpretation
is based on a previously introduced entity. A
typical relation between the two noun phrases is
meronymy, but as mentioned above we do not
pre-define a set of allowed semantic relations.

2The entity being classified is typed in bold face, referring
expressions are marked by a box and the referent is shown in
italics.

The category ASSOCIATIVE (SELF-CONTAINING)
comprises cases where we identify an associative
relation between the head noun phrase and the
modifier. ASSOCIATIVE SELF-CONTAINING
entities are annotated without a link between the
two parts. In scientific text, an entity is considered
DEICTIC if it points to an object that is connected
to the current text. Therefore, we include all
entities that refer to the current paper (or aspects
thereof) in this category. Entities that have not
been mentioned before and are not related to any
other entity in the text, but can be interpreted
because they are part of the common knowledge
of the writer and the reader are covered by the
category UNUSED. DESCRIPTION is annotated
for entities that are self-explanatory and typically
occur in particular syntactic patterns such as
NP complements or relative clauses. Idiomatic
expressions or metaphoric use are covered in
the category IDIOM. Predicative expressions,
including appositions, are annotated as PRED-
ICATIVE. Finally, the category DOUBT is used
when the text or the antecedent is unclear. Note
that NEW, a category that has been part of most
previous classification schemes of information
status, is not present as this information status is
typically observed in indefinite noun phrases. As
we deal exclusively with definite noun phrases3,
we do not include this category in our scheme.
In contrast to Poesio and Vieira’s scheme, ours
contains the additional categories PREDICATIVE,
ASSOCIATIVE SELF-CONTAINING, DEICTIC and
IDIOM.

3With the exception of coreferring anaphoric expressions,
as previously discussed.

47



GEN CL
Sentences 1834 1637
Words 43691 38794
Def. descriptions 3800 4247

Table 2: Properties of the annotated two subcor-
pora, genetics (GEN) and computational linguis-
tics (CL)

GEN CL
Coreference links 1976 2043
Associative links 328 324
Given 1977 2064
Associative 315 280
Associative (sc) 290 272
Description 810 1215
Unused 286 286
Deictic 28 54
Predicative 9 19
Idiom 9 34
Doubt 39 22

Table 3: Distribution of information status cate-
gories and links in the two disciplines, in absolute
numbers

3.2 Resulting Corpus

Our annotated corpus contains 16 full-text sci-
entific papers, 8 papers for each of the two
disciplines. The computational linguistics (CL)
papers cover various topics ranging from dialogue
systems to machine translation; the genetics
(GEN) papers deal mostly with the topic of short
interfering RNAs, but focus on different aspects of
it. In total, the annotated computational linguistics
papers contain 1637 sentences, 38,794 words and
4247 annotated definite descriptions while the
annotated genetics papers contain 1834 sentences,
43,691 words and 3800 definite descriptions; the
two domain subcorpora are thus fairly comparable
in size. See Table 2 for corpus statistics and
Table 3 for the distribution of categories and links.

It is well-known that there are large differences
in reference phenomena between scientific text
and other domains (Gasperin, 2009). In scientific
text, it is assumed that the reader has a relatively
high level of background. We would expect this
general property of scientific text to have an im-
pact on the distribution of categories with respect
to information status.
Table 4 compares the two scientific disciplines in
our study with each other. We note that the propor-
tion of entities classified as DESCRIPTION in the
CL papers is considerably higher than in the GEN
papers. The proportions of the other categories are

similar, though the proportion of GIVEN, ASSO-
CIATIVE and UNUSED entities is slightly higher in
the GEN articles.
Table 4 also compares the distribution of cat-
egories in news text (Poesio and Vieira, 1998;
P&V) with that of ours (as far as they are
alignable, using our names for categories). Note
that on a conceptual level, these categories are
equivalent, but there are some differences with re-
spect to the annotation guidelines.
The most apparent difference is the proportion of
UNUSED entities (6-7 % in science, 23 % in news
text) which might be due to the prevalence of
named entities in news text. Compared to the dis-
tribution of categories in news text, the proportion
of GIVEN entities is about 4-8 % higher in scien-
tific text. The proportion of ASSOCIATIVE enti-
ties4 is twice as high in the scientific domain com-
pared to news text. UNUSED entities have a dis-
tinctly lower proportion, with about 7%. As our
guidelines limit deictic references to only those
that refer to (parts of) the current paper, we get
a slightly lower proportion than the 2 % in news
text, reported by Poesio and Vieira (1998) in an
earlier experiment, where no such limitation was
present.

Category GEN CL P&V
Given 52.03 48.60 44.00
Associative 8.29 6.59 8.50
Associative (sc) 7.63 6.40 –
Description 21.31 28.61 21.30
Unused 7.53 6.73 23.50
Deictic 0.74 1.27 –
Predicative 0.24 0.45 –
Idiom 0.24 0.80 (2.00)
Doubt 1.03 0.52 2.60

Table 4: Distribution of information status cate-
gories in different domains, in percent

It has been shown in similar annotation exper-
iments on information status, with similarly fine-
grained schemes (Markert et al., 2012; Riester et
al., 2010), that it is possible to achieve annotation
with marginally to highly reliable inter-annotator
agreement. In our experiments, only one per-
son (the first author) performed the annotation,
so that we cannot compute any agreement mea-
surements. We are currently performing an inter-
annotator study with two additional annotators so
that we can better judge human agreement and use
the annotations as a reliable gold standard.

4The union of categories ASSOCIATIVE and ASSOCIA-
TIVE SELF-CONTAINING.

48



4 Adapting a Coreference Resolver to
the Scientific Domain

To show the difficulties that a coreference resolver
faces in the scientific domain, we ran, out-of-the-
box, a coreference system (Björkelund and Farkas,
2012), that has not been trained on scientific text,
on our corpus and perform an error analysis. In
particular, we are curious about which of the sys-
tem’s errors are domain-dependent. This analysis
motivates a set of terminological features that are
incorporated and tested in Section 6.

4.1 Error Analysis
Domain-dependent errors. The lack of seman-
tic, domain-dependent knowledge results in the
system’s failure to identify coreferent expressions,
e.g. those expressed as synonyms. This type of
error can be prevented by implementing domain-
dependent knowledge. In Example 3, we would
like to generate a link between treebank and cor-
pus as these terms are used as synonyms. The
same is true for protein-forming molecules and
amino acids in Example 4.

(3) Experiments were performed with the clean
part of the treebank. The corpus consists of
1 million words.

(4) Amino acids are organic compounds made
from amine (-NH2) and carboxylic acid (-
COOH) functional groups. The protein-
forming molecules ...

Another common error is that the coreference
resolver links all occurrences of demonstrative
science-specific expressions such as this paper
or this approach to each other, even if they are
several paragraphs apart. In most cases, these
demonstrative expressions do not corefer, but
refer to an approach or a paper recently described
or cited. This type of error is particularly frequent
in the computational linguistics domain and
might be reduced by a feature that captures this
peculiarity. A special case occurs when authors
re-use clauses of the abstract in the introduction.
The coreference resolver then interprets rather
large spans as coreferent which are not annotated
in the gold standard. Yet a different kind of error
is based on the fact that the coreference resolver
has been trained on OntoNotes, i.e. mostly on
non-written text. Thus, the classifier has not seen
certain phenomena and, for example, links all
occurrences of e.g. into one equivalence class as

it is interpreted as a named entity.

General errors. Some errors are general er-
rors of coreference resolvers in the sense that they
have very little to do with domain dependence,
such as choosing the wrong antecedent or link-
ing non-referential occurrences of it (see Exam-
ples 5 and 6).

(5) This approach allows the processes of build-
ing referring expressions and identifying
their referents.

(6) The issue of how to design sirnas that pro-
duce high efficacy is the focus of a lot of cur-
rent research. Since it was discovered that ...

4.2 Terminological Features
This section deals with the design of possible
terminological features for our experiments that
are aimed at capturing some form of domain
knowledge. We create these using the information
in 1000 computational linguistics and 1000
genetics papers that are not part of our scientific
corpus.

Non-coreferring bias list. Our first feature
concentrates on nouns which have a low proba-
bility to be coreferring (i.e. category GIVEN) if
they appear as the head of noun phrase. We as-
sume that the normal case of coreference between
definite noun phrases is that of a concept intro-
duced as an indefinite NP and later referred to as
a definite NP, and compile a list of lexemes that
do not follow this pattern. NPs with those lexemes
should be more likely to be of category UNUSED or
DESCRIPTION. We find the lexemes by recording
head nouns of definite NPs which are not observed
in a prior indefinite NP in the same document (lo-
cal list) or the entire document collection (global
list). We create two lists of such head words for
every discipline. The lexemes are arranged in de-
creasing order of their frequency so that we can
use both their presence or non-presence on the list
and their rank on the list as potential features.
As can be seen in Table 5, the presence, the be-
ginning and the literature are definite descriptions
that are always used without having been intro-
duced to the discourse. These terms are either part
of domain knowledge (the hearer, the reader) or
part of the general scientific terminology (the lit-
erature). In the local list we see expressions that
can be used without having been introduced, but

49



may in some contexts occur in the indefinite form
as well, e.g. the word or the sentence.

CL GEN
(a) global (b) local (a) global (b) local
presence number manuscript data
beginning word respect region
literature sentence prediction gene
hearer training monograph case
reader user notion species

Table 5: Top five terms of local and global non-
coreferring bias lists

Collocation list. One of our hypotheses is that
the NPs occurring in verb-object collocations are
typically not part of any coreference chain. To test
this, we use our collection of 2000 scientific pa-
pers to extract domain-specific verb-object collo-
cations. We assume that for some collocations,
this tendency is stronger (make use, take place)
than for others that could potentially be corefer-
ring (see figure, apply rule). The collocations have
been identified with a term extraction tool (Gojun
et al., 2012). Every collocation that occurs at least
twice in the data is present on the list. Table 6
shows the most frequent terms.

make + use take + place
give + rise silence + activity
derive + form refashion + plan
parse + sentence predict + sirna
sort + feature match + predicate
see + figure use + information
silence + efficiency follow + transfection
embed + sentence apply + rule
focus + algorithm stack + symbol

Table 6: Most frequent occurring collocation can-
didates in scientific text (unsorted)

Argumentation nouns, work nouns and
idioms. As mentioned in Section 4.1, the
baseline classifier often links demonstrative,
science-specific entities, even if they are several
paragraphs apart. To prevent this, we combine a
distance measure with a set of 182 argumentation
and work nouns taken from Teufel (2010), such as
achievement, claim or experiment. We also create
a small list of idioms as they are never part of a
coreference chain.

5 Adapting a Coreference Resolver for
Associative Links in Science

We now turn to the much harder task of resolving
associative anaphora.

5.1 Types of Associative Anaphora

To illustrate the different types of associative
anaphora, we here show a few examples, mostly
taken from the genetics papers. The anaphors
are shown in bold face, the antecedents in italics.
Many associative anaphors include noun phrases
with the same head. In most of these cases, the
anaphor contains a different modifier than the an-
tecedent, such as

(8) the negative strain ... the positive strain;
(9) three categories ... the first category;

(10) siRNAs ... the most effective siRNAs.

We assume that these associative relations can
be identified with a coreference resolver without
adding additional features. Other cases are much
harder to identify automatically, such as those
where semantic knowledge is required to interpret
the relation between the entities:

(11) the classifier ... the training data;
(12) this database ... the large dataset.

In other cases, the nominal phrase in the an-
tecedent tends to be derivationally related to the
head word in the anaphor, as in

(13) the spotty distribution ...the spots;
(14) competitor ... the competitive effect.

There are also a number of special cases, such as

(15) the one interference process ... the other in-
terference process.

We hypothesise that the integration of semantic
features discussed in the previous section enables
the resolver to cover more than just those cases
that are based on the similarity of word forms.

5.2 Semantic Features

It is apparent that the recognition and correct
resolution of associative anaphora requires se-
mantic knowledge. Therefore, we adapt the
coreference resolver by extending the WordNet
feature, one of the features implemented in the
IMS resolver, to capture more than just synonyms.

50



We use the following WordNet relations: Hyper-
nymy (macromolecule → protein), hyponymy
(nucleoprotein → protein), meronymy (surface
→ structure), substance meronymy (amino
acid→ protein), topic member (acute, chronic→
medicine) and topic ( periodic table→ chemistry).

WordNet’s coverage in the scientific domain is
surprisingly good: 75,91 % of all common nouns
in the GEN papers and 88,12 % in the CL papers
are listed in WordNet. Terms that are not cov-
ered are, for example, abbreviations of different
types of ribonucleic acid in genetics or specialist
terms like tagging, subdialogue or SVM in com-
putational linguistics.

6 Experiments

We now compare the performance of an out-
of-the-box coreference system with the resolver
trained on our annotated scientific corpus (Sec-
tion 6.2). We also show the effect of adding ad-
ditional features aimed at capturing technical ter-
minology. In the experiments on the resolution of
associative anaphora (Section 6.3), we test the hy-
pothesis that the coreference resolver is able to ad-
just to the new notion of reference and show the
effect of semantic features.

6.1 Experimental Setup

We perform our experiments using the IMS coref-
erence resolver as a state-of-the-art coreference
resolution system (Björkelund and Farkas, 2012)5.
The algorithm and the features included have not
been changed except where otherwise stated. We
use the OntoNotes datasets from the CoNLL 2011
shared task6 (Pradhan et al., 2012; Hovy et al.,
2006), only for training the out-of-the-box sys-
tem. We also use WordNet version 3.0 as pro-
vided in the 2012 shared task7 as well as JAWS,
the Java API for WordNet searching8. Perfor-
mance is reported on our annotated corpus, us-
ing 8-fold cross-validation and the official CoNLL
scorer (version 5).

5See: www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/forschung/
ressourcen/werkzeuge/IMSCoref.html
We follow their strategy to use the AMP decoder as the
first decoder and the PCF decoder, a pairwise decoder, as a
second. The probability threshold is set to 0.5 for the first
and 0.65 for the second decoder.

6http://conll.cemantix.org/2011/data.html
7http://conll.cemantix.org/2012/data.html
8http://lyle.smu.edu/˜tspell/jaws/

6.2 Resolving Coreferent References

IMS coreference resolver unchanged. To be
able to judge the performance of an existing coref-
erence resolver on scientific text, we first re-
port performance without making any changes to
the resolver whatsoever, using different training
data. The BASELINE version is trained on the
OntoNotes dataset from the CoNLL 2011 shared
task. In the SCIENTIFIC version, we only use our
annotated scientific papers. MIXED contains the
entire OntoNotes dataset as well as the scientific
papers, leading to a larger training corpus which
compensates for the rather small size of the scien-
tific corpus9. Table 7 shows the average CoNLL
scores10 of the two subdomains genetics and com-
putational linguistics.

Training Set GEN CL GEN+CL
Baseline 35.30 40.30 37.80
Scientific 44.94 42.41 43.68
Mixed 47.92 47.44 47.68

Table 7: Resolving coreferent references:
CoNLL metric scores for different training sets

The BASELINE achieves relatively low results
in comparison to the score of 61.24 that was
reported in the shared task (Björkelund and
Farkas, 2012). Even though our scientific corpus
is only 7% the size of the OntoNotes dataset, it
inceases performance of the BASELINE system
by 15,6%. The SCIENTIFIC version outperforms
the BASELINE version for all of the GEN papers
and for 6 out of 8 CL papers. MIXED, the version
that combines the scientific corpus with the entire
OntoNotes dataset, proves to work best (47.92 for
GEN and 47.44 for CL). In THE BASELINE ver-
sion, the performance on the CL papers is better
than on the GEN papers. Interestingly, this is not
true for the SCIENTIFIC version, where the per-
formance on the GEN papers is better. However,
as the main result here, we can see that training
on scientific text was successful. The increase in
score in both the SCIENTIFIC and the MIXED ver-
sion over BASELINE is statistically significant11

9We also experimented with a balanced version, which
contains an equal amount of sentences from the OntoNotes
corpus and our scientific corpus. The results are not reported
here as this version performed worse.

10The CoNLL score is the arithmetic mean of MUC, B3

and CEAFE.
11We compute significance using the Wilcoxon signed rank

test (Siegel and Castellan, 1988) at the 0.01 level unless oth-
erwise stated.

51



(+9.64 and +12.62 in the GEN papers, +2.11 and
+7.14 in the CL papers, absolute in CoNLL score).

IMS coreference resolver, adapted to the do-
main. We show the results from the expansion of
the feature set in Table 8. Each of the single fea-
tures is added to the version in the line above the
current version. Compared to the MIXED version,
adding the features to the resolver results in an
increase in performance for both of the scientific
disciplines. However, when adding the colloca-
tion feature to the version including the bias lists,
the argumentation nouns as well as idioms, perfor-
mance drops slightly. This might indicate the need
for a revised collocation list where those nouns are
filtered out that could potentially be coreferring,
e.g. see figure. For the best version of the CL
papers, the increase in CoNLL score, compared
with the MIXED version, is +1.08; for the GEN pa-
pers it is slightly less, namely +0.22. This increase
in score is promising, but the data is too small to
show significance.

GEN CL GEN+CL
Mixed 47.92 47.44 47.68
+ Bias Lists 48.04 47.79 47.94
+ Arg. Nouns and Idioms 48.14 48.52 48.33
+ Collocations 48.03 48.12 48.08

Table 8: Resolving coreferent references:
CoNLL scores for the extended feature sets

However, compared with the BASELINE ver-
sion, the final version (marked bold) performs sig-
nificantly better and outperforms the out-of-the-
box run by 36.47 % absolute on the CoNLL met-
ric for the GEN papers and by 20.40 % for the CL
papers. The results also show that, in our experi-
ments, the effect of using domain-specific training
material is larger than the effect of adding termi-
nological features.

6.3 Resolving Associative References

IMS coreference resolver unchanged. As
associative references are not annotated in the
OntoNotes dataset, the only possible baseline we
can use is the system trained on the scientific cor-
pus. Average CoNLL scores were 33.52 for GEN
and 32.86 for CL (33.14 overall). As expected,
the performance on associative anaphora is worse
than on coreferent anaphora. We have not made
any changes to the resolver, so it is interesting to
see that the resolver is indeed able to adjust to
the new notion of reference and manages to link

associative references.

We found that the resolver generally identifies
very few associative references and so the most
common error of the system is that it fails to
recognise associative relations, particularly if
the computed edit distance, one of the standard
features in the coreference resolver, is very high.
The easiest associative relations to detect are
those which have similar surface forms. For
example, the coreference resolver correctly links
RNAI and RNAI genes, the sense strand and
the anti-sense strand or siRNAs and efficacious
siRNAs. However, for most of the associative
references, the lack of easily identifiable surface
markers makes the task difficult. Ironically, the
system also falsely classifies many coreference
links as associative, although it has this time of
course been trained only on associative references.
This is not surprising, given that the tasks are
so similar that we are able to use a coreference
resolver for the associative task in the first place.

IMS coreference resolver using semantic fea-
tures. Table 9 gives the results of the extended
feature set that includes the semantic features de-
scribed in Section 5.2. Each of the respective se-
mantic features shown in the table is added to the
version in the line above the current version.
It can be seen that the different WordNet re-
lations have different effects on the two scien-
tific disciplines. For the genetics papers, the in-
clusion of synonyms, hyponyms and hypernyms
results in the highest increase in performance
(+2.02). For the computational linguistics pa-
pers, the inclusion of synonyms, hyponyms, top-
ics and meronyms obtains the best performance
(+1.19). As the effect of the features is discipline-
dependent, we create two separate final feature
sets for the two disciplines. The GEN version con-
tains synonyms, hyponyms and hypernyms while
the CL version contains synonyms, hyponyms,
topics and meronyms. The highest increase in per-
formance for the CL feature set (and the one re-
sulting in the final system) was achieved by drop-
ping topic members and hypernyms. In the final
CL system, the increase in performance compared
to the baseline version is +1.35. Both final ver-
sions significantly outperform the baseline.

When comparing the output of the extended
system to the baseline system, it can be seen that

52



GEN CL GEN+CL
Baseline 33.52 32.86 33.19
+ Synonyms 33.95 32.87 33.41
+ Hyponyms 34.04 32.94 33.49
+ Hypernyms 35.54 31.35 33.45
+ Topic members 34.61 30.61 32.61
+ Topics 34.09 32.88 33.49
+ Meronyms 33.70 34.05 33.88
+ Substance meronyms 33.57 32.40 32.99
Final version 35.54 34.21 34.88
(domain-dependent)

Table 9: Resolving associative references:
CoNLL metric scores for the extended feature sets

the resolver now links many more mentions (5.7
times more in the GEN papers, 3.8 times more
in the CL papers). The reason why this does not
lead to an even larger increase in performance lies
in the large number of false positives. However,
when looking at the data it becomes apparent that
the newly created links are mostly links that poten-
tially could have been annotated during the anno-
tation, but are not part of the gold standard because
the associative antecedent is not absolutely neces-
sary in order to interpret the anaphor or because
the entity has been linked to a different entity
where the associative relation is stronger. The ex-
istence of more-or-less acceptable alternative as-
sociative links casts some doubt on using a gold
standard as the sole evaluation criterion. An alter-
native would be to ask humans for a rating of the
sensibility of the links determined by the system.

7 Conclusion and Future Work

We have presented a study of information status
in two scientific disciplines as well as preliminary
experiments on the resolution of both coreferent
and associative anaphora in these disciplines. Our
results show a marked difference in the distribu-
tions of information status categories between sci-
entific and news text. Our corpus of 16 full-text
scholarly papers annotated with information sta-
tus and anaphoric links, which we plan to release
soon, contains over 8000 annotated definite noun
phrases. We demonstrate that the integration of
domain-dependent terminological features, com-
bined with domain-dependent training data, out-
performs the unadjusted IMS system (Björkelund
and Farkas, 2012) by 36.47 % absolute on the
CoNLL metric for the genetics papers and by
20.40 % absolute for the computational linguistics
papers. The effect of domain-dependent training
material was stronger than the integration of ter-

minological features. As far as the resolution of
associative anaphora is concerned, we have shown
that it is generally possible to adapt a corefer-
ence resolver to this task, and we have achieved
an improvement in performance using novel se-
mantic features. We are currently performing
an inter-annotator study with two additional an-
notators, which will also lead to a better under-
standing of the relative difficulty of the categories.
Furthermore, we plan to convert the coreference-
annotated ACL papers by Schäfer et al. (2012) into
CoNLL format and use them for training the coref-
erence resolver. As we have annotated our corpus
with information status, it might also be interest-
ing to train a classifier on the information status
categories and use its predictions to improve the
performance on anaphora resolution tasks. To do
so, we will create a separate corpus for testing,
annotated solely with coreference and associative
links.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Jonas Kuhn, Ulrich Heid
and Arndt Riester for their valuable comments
as well as the anonymous reviewers for their in-
sightful remarks. We gratefully acknowledge fi-
nancial support from the Deutsche Forschungsge-
meinschaft (DFG) in the framework of project B3
and D7 of the SFB 732. This research is par-
tially supported by the Intelligence Advanced Re-
search Projects Activity (IARPA) via Department
of Interior National Business Center (DoI/NBC)
contract number D11PC20153. The U.S. Gov-
ernment is authorized to reproduce and distribute
reprints for Governmental purposes notwithstand-
ing any copyright annotation thereon. Disclaimer:
The views and conclusions contained herein are
those of the authors and should not be interpreted
as necessarily representing the official policies
or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of
IARPA, DoI/NBC, or the U.S. Government.

References
Regina Barzilay and Mirella Lapata. 2008. Modeling

local coherence: An entity-based approach. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 34(1):1–34.

Riza T. Batista-Navarro and Sophia Ananiadou. 2011.
Building a coreference-annotated corpus from the
domain of biochemistry. In Proceedings of BioNLP
2011 Workshop, pages 83–91. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

53



Anders Björkelund and Richárd Farkas. 2012. Data-
driven multilingual coreference resolution using re-
solver stacking. In Joint Conference on EMNLP and
CoNLL-Shared Task, pages 49–55. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Chen Chen and Vincent Ng. 2012. Combining the
best of two worlds: A hybrid approach to multilin-
gual coreference resolution. In Joint Conference on
EMNLP and CoNLL - Shared Task, pages 56–63,
Jeju Island, Korea, July. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Herbert H. Clark. 1975. Bridging. In Proceedings
of the 1975 workshop on Theoretical issues in nat-
ural language processing, pages 169–174. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Kevin B. Cohen, Arrick Lanfranchi, William Cor-
vey, William A. Baumgartner Jr, Christophe Roeder,
Philip V. Ogren, Martha Palmer, and Lawrence
Hunter. 2010. Annotation of all coreference in
biomedical text: Guideline selection and adaptation.
In Proceedings of BioTxtM 2010: 2nd workshop
on building and evaluating resources for biomedical
text mining, pages 37–41.

Greg Durrett and Dan Klein. 2013. Easy victories and
uphill battles in coreference resolution. In Proceed-
ings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing, Seattle, Washington, Oc-
tober. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Yimai Fang and Simone Teufel. 2014. A summariser
based on human memory limitations and lexical
competition. In Proceedings of the EACL. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics. (to appear).

Eraldo Fernandes, Cı́cero dos Santos, and Ruy Milidiú.
2012. Latent structure perceptron with feature in-
duction for unrestricted coreference resolution. In
Joint Conference on EMNLP and CoNLL - Shared
Task, pages 41–48, Jeju Island, Korea, July. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Caroline V. Gasperin. 2009. Statistical anaphora
resolution in biomedical texts. Technical Re-
port UCAM-CL-TR-764, University of Cambridge,
Computer Laboratory, December.

Anita Gojun, Ulrich Heid, Bernd Weissbach, Carola
Loth, and Insa Mingers. 2012. Adapting and evalu-
ating a generic term extraction tool. In Proceedings
of the 8th international conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC), pages 651–656.

Marti A. Hearst. 1994. Multi-paragraph segmentation
of expository text. In Proceedings of the 32nd An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 9–16.

Yufang Hou, Katja Markert, and Michael Strube. 2013.
Global inference for bridging anaphora resolution.
In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT, pages 907–917.

Eduard Hovy, Mitchell Marcus, Martha Palmer,
Lance Ramshaw, and Ralph Weischedel. 2006.
OntoNotes: the 90% solution. In Proceedings of
the human language technology conference of the
NAACL, Companion Volume: Short Papers, pages
57–60. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Dain Kaplan, Ryu Iida, Kikuko Nishina, and Takenobu
Tokunaga. 2012. Slate – a tool for creating and
maintaining annotated corpora. Journal for Lan-
guage Technology and Computational Linguistics,
pages 89–101.

Walter Kintsch and Teun A. van Dijk. 1978. Toward a
model of text comprehension and production. Psy-
chological Review, 85(5):363–394.

Katja Markert, Yufang Hou, and Michael Strube. 2012.
Collective classification for fine-grained information
status. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Long Papers-Volume 1, pages 795–804. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Shachar Mirkin, Ido Dagan, and Sebastian Padó. 2010.
Assessing the role of discourse references in entail-
ment inference. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, ACL 2010, pages 1209–1219. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Vincent Ng. 2010. Supervised noun phrase coref-
erence research: The first fifteen years. In Pro-
ceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 1396–
1411. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Malvina Nissim, Shipra Dingare, Jean Carletta, and
Mark Steedman. 2004. An annotation scheme for
information status in dialogue. LREC 2004.

Massimo Poesio and Renata Vieira. 1998. A corpus-
based investigation of definite description use. Com-
putational linguistics, 24(2):183–216.

Sameer Pradhan, Alessandro Moschitti, Nianwen Xue,
Olga Uryupina, and Yuchen Zhang. 2012. CoNLL-
2012 shared task: Modeling multilingual unre-
stricted coreference in OntoNotes. In Proceedings
of the Joint Conference on EMNLP and CoNLL:
Shared Task, pages 1–40.

Ellen F. Prince. 1981. Toward a taxonomy of given-
new information. In Radical Pragmatics, pages
223–55. Academic Press.

Karthik Raghunathan, Heeyoung Lee, Sudarshan Ran-
garajan, Nathanael Chambers, Mihai Surdeanu, Dan
Jurafsky, and Christopher Manning. 2010. A multi-
pass sieve for coreference resolution. In Proceed-
ings of EMNLP 2010.

Arndt Riester, David Lorenz, and Nina Seemann.
2010. A recursive annotation scheme for referential
information status. In Proceedings of the Seventh In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC), pages 717–722.

54



Ulrich Schäfer, Christian Spurk, and Jörg Steffen.
2012. A fully coreference-annotated corpus of
scholarly papers from the acl anthology. In Proceed-
ings of the 24th International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics. International Conference on
Computational Linguistics (COLING-2012), De-
cember 10-14, Mumbai, India, pages 1059–1070.

Sidney Siegel and N. John Jr. Castellan. 1988. Non-
parametric Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences.
McGraw-Hill, Berkeley, CA, 2nd edition.

Simone Teufel. 2010. The Structure of Scientific Arti-
cles: Applications to Citation Indexing and Summa-
rization. CSLI Publications.

Rebecca Watson, Judita Preiss, and Ted Briscoe.
2003. The contribution of domain-independent
robust pronominal anaphora resolution to open-
domain question-answering. In Proceedings of the
Symposium on Reference Resolution and its Appli-
cations to Question Answering and Summarization.
Venice, Italy June, pages 23–25.

55


