



















































Now We Stronger than Ever: African-American English Syntax in Twitter


Proceedings of the Student Research Workshop at the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 31–37,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Now We Stronger Than Ever: African-American Syntax in Twitter

Ian Stewart
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755

ian.b.stewart.14@dartmouth.edu

Abstract
African American English (AAE) is a
well-established dialect that exhibits a dis-
tinctive syntax, including constructions
like habitual be. Using data mined from
the social media service Twitter, the pro-
posed senior thesis project intends to study
the demographic distribution of a sub-
set of AAE syntactic constructions. This
study expands on previous sociolinguistic
Twitter work (Eisenstein et al., 2011) by
adding part-of-speech tags to the data, thus
enabling detection of short-range syntac-
tic features. Through an analysis of eth-
nic and gender data associated with AAE
tweets, this project will provide a more ac-
curate description of the dialect’s speakers
and distribution.

1 Introduction

Most modern studies of sociolinguistics focus on
phonetic or lexical variation to draw conclusions
about a dialect or a social group. For example,
the Atlas of North American English (2005) maps
language variation entirely by the differences in
production and perception of phonetic variables.
Although this is an integral part of sociolinguis-
tics, research has given less attention to synchronic
variation in syntax, which is also an important as-
pect of language change. Recent initiatives like
Yale’s Grammatical Diversity Project (2014) have
been invaluable in demonstrating the breadth of
syntactic variation in North America, and smaller-
scale research like Kendall et al. (2011) has
been equally vital for investigating the properties
of constructions within a “ nonstandard” dialect.
While other sociolinguistic studies have used a
systematic analysis of corpora to detect phonetic
and lexical change (Yaeger-Dror and Thomas,
2010; Eisenstein et al., 2011), such approaches are
under-utilized with respect to syntactic variation.

Varieties of African American English pro-
vide a wide range of syntactic features to study,
with constructions ranging from aspectual par-
ticles like done (such as “ he done eaten” for
“ he’s just eaten” ) to double negation (such as
“ can’t nobody” ) (Wolfram, 2004). AAE shares
some features with Southern American English
but is spoken throughout the United States. The
majority of research in AAE syntax relies on
data collected from interview-based conversations
(Labov, 2012), published letters (Kendall et al.,
2011) and observations of dialect acquisition in
children (Green and Roeper, 2007). Though valu-
able, this kind of data is often restricted to a spe-
cific location and cannot always keep pace with
the most recent language developments among flu-
ent young speakers. The proposed study seeks to
systematically study AAE syntax in a more youth-
centric environment and describe the geographical
or gender-based correlation in the distribution of
such syntax.

2 Proposal

This thesis’s primary hypothesis is that there is a
quantifiable correlation between ethnicity and fea-
tures of AAE syntax found in large-scale social
media. This will be supported or challenged by
the geographic and demographic data associated
with the constructions, as previous studies of di-
alect reappropriation have suggested a spread of
AAE beyond expected areas (Reyes, 2005). As a
secondary hypothesis, the project will investigate
a correlation between AAE syntax and gender,
which has been suggested but not tested on a large
scale. Eckert and McConnell-Ginet (2013) argue
for a connection between gender and identity ex-
pression (often associated with “ speech style” ),
which would generally suggest greater AAE syn-
tax usage among women. Even if the neither cor-
relation is proven plausible, the study will pro-
vide valuable insight about the frequency and ge-

31



ographic location of specific AAE syntactic fea-
tures. This project is being co-supervised by a
professor of sociolinguistics and a postdoctoral re-
searcher in computer science.

3 Procedure

3.1 Preprocessing

As a data source, the online social media service
Twitter is a firehose of information, comprising
16% of all Internet users (Duggan and Brenner,
2013) and millions of “ tweets” (140-character
posts) per day. Using data from Twitter, Eisenstein
et al. (2011) demonstrated an empirical correla-
tion between regional vocabulary and the location
of Twitter users. In a similar approach, this project
combines metadata of tweets with their content
and uses this information to investigate the rela-
tionship between AAE syntax and region.

The Twitter data was collected from July to De-
cember 2013. We used the website’s API that pro-
vides a stream of publicly available tweets (ap-
proximately 5% of the total tweet volume), re-
stricting our data to geotagged tweets from within
the United States. Each tweet includes geographi-
cal coordinates (latitude and longitude), name and
identity of the Twitter user, and time of creation,
as well as its content. The content is broken up
and simplified in separate tokens for analysis (e.g.
“ What’s up?” becomes “ [what] [’ s] [up] [?]” ).
Following previous work (Eisenstein et al., 2010),
we minimize spam posts by removing tweets that
contain URLs, and tweets from users that con-
tributed fewer than 20 messages to this data. This
gives us a corpus of about 200 million tweets.

Before mining the data, we seek to first elimi-
nate as many retweets as possible to avoid skewing
the data. Although we can easily detect retweets
that are made through the standard Twitter inter-
face, or are preceded by the token RT, we no-
tice that the data contains several unstructured
retweets, where a user quotes a tweet from an-
other user without explicitly indicating that it is
a retweet. We handle these by simply filtering
out every line containing a high-frequency higher
order n-gram. After qualitatively observing the
results of filtering with different n-gram and fre-
quency combinations, the most efficient and least
error-prone filter was determined to be a 6-gram
with frequency over 10. Making the assumption
that most retweets occur within the same 24-hour
period, the tweets of each day were segmented

into 6-grams. The 6-grams were tabulated, and all
tweets containing a 6-gram with frequency over 10
were omitted. Each day’s filtered tweets were then
recombined to form the full monthly data. This re-
duced the size of the corpus by about 26%.

After being filtered, the content of each tweet is
fed into a part-of-speech (POS) tagging program
developed by Gimpel et al. (2011). This program
has achieved over 90% accuracy by using statis-
tics gathered from Twitter data hand-labeled with
POS tags. The tagging task is accomplished with
a conditional random field using features includ-
ing non-standard orthography, distributional simi-
larity, and phonetic normalization.

The above uses only 25 tags that range from
simple lexemes like O (non-possessive pronoun)
to complex morphemes like M (proper noun +
verbal). In addition to these basic POS tags, the
tweets were tagged with a Penn Treebank-style
model trained over another hand-labelled data set
(Derczynski et al., 2013). This additional tag set is
crucial in detecting constructions like 3rd-person
singular -s drop (e.g. “ she keep her face down” ),
which depends on verbal morphology that can be
described with PTB tags, but not the simplified
tagset of Gimpel et al. (2011).

Owoputi et al. (2013) address the possibil-
ity that some AAE tense-aspect-mood (TAM)
particles may fall outside the standard POS-
tag systems. However, we have observed that
“ nonstandard” morphemes like finna were tagged
similarly to Standard American English mor-
phemes, which is likely due to the AAE mor-
phemes exhibiting similar distributional properties
to corresponding standard morphemes.

3.2 Querying and Analysis

Using the preprocessed data, it is possible to
search through the tagged tweets for a particu-
lar syntactic construction by combining the lex-
ical and POS information in a search phrase.
For instance, one might use the phrase PRO-
ADJ (“ we cool,” “ he cute” ) to detect cop-
ula deletion or PRO-be-V for habitual be. Us-
ing regular expressions, these searches can
be fine-tuned to ignore noise in the data by
searching for patterns like !V-PRO-ADJ (“ non-
verb+pronoun+adjective” ), which ignore false
positives like “ made me hot.” In addition, cases
of long-distance constructions like negative con-
cord (“ there ain’t nobody” ) can be handled by

32



Table 1: AAE Constructions and Patterns of Detection

Construction Example from Corpus Simplified Pattern Tagger Used
copula deletion we stronger than ever not(V)+PRO+ADJ PTB
habitual be now i be sober af not(V)+PRO+be+ADJ PTB
continuative steady steady getting bigger steady+not(N) Gimpel
completive done u done pissed me off done+VPST PTB
future finna (fixing to) i’m finna tweet finna+V Gimpel
remote past been i been had it PRO/N+been+VPST PTB

negative concord don’t say nothing
don’t/ain’t/can’t+V+
nobody/nothing/nowhere/no

Gimpel

null genitive marking time of they life PRONOM+N Gimpel
ass camouflage construc-
tion
(Collins et al. 2008)

divorced his ass V+PROPOSS+ass PTB

accounting for a wider context than the keywords
themselves, using gaps in the expression. For in-
stance, we detected copula deletion with !V-PRO-
ADJ as well as !V-PRO-ADV-ADJ. This strategy
was especially useful in preventing false negatives
that would otherwise be filtered by rigid patterns
(e.g. “ he too cute” ignored by !V-PRO-ADJ).

Table 1 contains a list of all constructions
queried for this project. To the extent of our
knowledge, this is the first study to use regu-
lar expressions to use regular expressions and
POS tagged data to capture “ non-standard” En-
glish syntax. The “ Tagger” column refers to the
POS tagger used to detect the construction: either
“ Gimpel” (Gimpel et al., 2011) or “PTB” (Der-
czynski et al., 2013).

Some of the constructions, such as the null gen-
itive (e.g. “ time of they life” ), could be classified
as morphological rather than syntactic phenomena
and thus may appear to fall outside the scope of
this project. However, it must be noted that these
phenomena would not be easily detectable without
a POS tagger, which relies on the syntactic con-
text to accurately tag such ambiguous words as
“they” (which could be a misspelling of “their”).
Furthermore, studies such as Wolfram (2004) that
survey AAE grammar also consider morphologi-
cal phenomena to have comparable frequency and
distributional tendencies as syntactic phenomena.
Thus, this project chooses to analyze such mor-
phological patterns in the same manner as syntac-
tic patterns.

After querying the data using the regular ex-
pressions, the resulting tweets are associated with

the metadata corresponding to each tweet. This
includes demographic information about the ZIP
Code Tabulation Area (ZCTA) associated with the
tweet (based on the latitude and longitude coor-
dinates) as well as the estimated gender of the
tweeter. ZCTAs are regions defined by the Cen-
sus Bureau that roughly correspond to postal ZIP
codes. Each ZCTA’s demographic data includes
a number of features. We focus on ethnicity
population percentages, overall population in the
ZCTA, median age, and percentage of the pop-
ulation living in rented housing (which in some
cases could be used to approximate a ZIP code’s
relative “urban-ness”). The gender of a user is
guessed by comparing the tweeter’s name with
the Social Security Administration’s list of baby
names from 1995 (http://www.ssa.gov/
oact/babynames/limits.html), with any
user whose name does not appear in the list being
assigned a gender of “Unknown”. This is a com-
mon method used to determine gender in large-
scale datasets (Sloan et al., 2013) and one suited
to Twitter’s younger user base (Duggan and Bren-
ner, 2013).

4 Results

4.1 Comparison of Average Demographics
Our initial approach to the hypothesis – namely,
that Twitter shows a quantifiable correlation be-
tween ethnicity and usage of AAE syntax – was
a comparison of the demographics of the tweeters
that use the AAE constructions listed in Table 1
to the average demographics over all users in our
data. The constructions’ average demographics

33



Table 2: Mean Demographic Profiles of AAE Construction Users
Mean % Mean % Gender Ratio

Construction User % African-American Caucasian Female : Male : Unknown
Population Population

Overall Statistics 1, 135, 019 13.67± 18.66% 71.81± 21.66% 36.78 : 31.17 : 32.05
users total

Copula Deletion 45.62% 13.64% 71.80% 37.27 : 30.18 : 32.55
ass Camouflage 40.25% 14.09% 71.4% 36.27 : 28.88 : 34.84
Construction
Future finna 17.33% 14.46% 70.97% 35.37 : 27.65 : 36.98
Habitual be 31.63% 14.43% 71.24% 36.04 : 28.44 : 35.52
Continuative steady 1.304% 15.45% 69.44% 33.20 : 26.32 : 40.48
Completive done 6.061% 14.81% 70.44% 34.06 : 26.95 : 38.98
Remote Past been 8.384% 14.83% 70.48% 33.58 : 25.99 : 36.80
Negative Concord 18.14% 14.47% 70.92% 35.30 : 27.70 : 37.00
Negative Inversion 17.66% 14.50% 70.92% 35.30 : 27.63 : 37.07
Null Genitive 13.59% 14.61% 70.75% 34.84 : 27.56 : 37.60

were calculated counting each construction-user
only once, regardless of how many times they use
that construction.

While reasonable, this approach did not provide
encouraging results, as demonstrated by Table 2.
The constructions’ demographics deviated only
slightly from the overall demographics, though the
variation reflected the expected trend of higher
African-American population (avg. +0.859%) and
lower Caucasian population (avg. -0.974%). The
constructions showed similar standard deviations
to those of the overall demographics. Further eth-
nic statistics such as average Asian population,
which might have been interesting in light of re-
search on dialect reappropriation (Reyes, 2005),
were also highly uniform when comparing con-
structions to overall data.

In addition to ethnic demographics, the gender
breakdown was somewhat uninformative as both
female and male users were less represented than
expected. This may have indicated a failure on
the part of the gender-guesser to guess more un-
usual names like “ Notorious J. $tash” that could
be associated with AAE syntax. With such negli-
gible deviations from the mean demographics, ad-
ditional data analysis techniques such as linear re-
gression and clustering of users with similar de-
mographic data would seem to yield negligible re-
sults. Thus, these techniques were deemed unnec-
essary for these averages.

There are a few possible explanations for the
inconclusive results in ethnic demographics and
gender. First, the information associated with the
ZCTA is drawn from the 2010 U.S. census data,
which may not match the demographics of so-

cial media users. While the time difference be-
tween 2010 and 2013 is unlikely to make a sig-
nificant difference, the discrepancy between real-
life statistics and social media metadata may re-
sult in statistics contradictory to the Twitter user
demographics proposed by Duggan and Brenner
(2013). The current study accepts this as a possi-
ble source of error and looks toward future stud-
ies that directly associate social media users with
geographic demographics. More importantly, this
thesis relies on ethnic demographics derived from
users’ environments rather than directly available
data such as names, as in Eisenstein et al. (2011).
This distinction is crucial, as it dampens the appar-
ent presence of black Twitter users in ZCTAs with
low African American population percentages.

While statistically inconclusive for individual
constructions, the apparent pervasiveness of AAE
syntax as a whole is surprising, even considering
the observation by Duggan and Brenner (2013)
that 26% of African-American Internet users are
on Twitter. Admittedly, no regular expression is
free from error, but the apparent 45.62% copula
deletion usage rate is impressive for a construc-
tion that was once used to parody the speech of
AAE speakers (Green, 2002). Furthermore, the
users of each construction tend to be located in
the data’s most common ZCTAs, which are of-
ten youth-centric college towns such as San Mar-
cos, Texas. The non-trivial user percentages and
significant diffusion of usage outside of expected
urban areas build on claims by Wolfram (2004)
about “ new and intensifying structures in urban
AAVE,” such as habitual be, as well as “ receding
urban features” such as remote past been. The

34



relatively homogenous distribution of such con-
structions may even reflect a stable position for
AAE as a unified dialect across typical Ameri-
can English dialect regions. However, a long-term
Twitter corpus will be necessary to test the di-
achronic behavior of these apparently “ receding”
and “ intensifying” features.

4.2 Logistic Regression

Following the initial results, we adopted a differ-
ent approach to measure AAE usage by perform-
ing a logistic regression over the demographics
collected for the AAE constructions as well as
their Standard American English (SAE) counter-
parts. For example, the SAE equivalent of the
AAE future finna was considered to be regular
genitive pronouns (e.g. AAE “ they house” vs.
SAE “their house”). At the time of submission, we
only extracted SAE demographics for a subset of
the constructions. The most salient results of the
regression are displayed in Table 3. The variables
under consideration are the correlation coefficients
relating each construction to the demographics as-
sociated with the users, with positive values indi-
cating a trend toward the AAE construction and
negative values indicating a trend toward the SAE
construction.

Before observing the coefficients, the first no-
table characteristic of the SAE data is the high
rate of occurrence for most standard construc-
tions, such as “ Standard be+Ving” . This may in-
dicate that there is overlap in SAE and AAE usage
among Twitter users, which is unsurprising given
the prevalence of code-switching among AAE
speakers in non-virtual environments (Labov,
2012) as well as the strong potential for di-
alect spread (Reyes, 2005). To investigate this
possibility, future refinement of this regression
approximation will compare Twitter users who
only employ SAE constructions versus those who
only employ the corresponding AAE construction.
Though perhaps an artificial distinction that will
tend more toward data sparsity than abundance,
this strategy will hopefully reveal a split between
speakers that tend more toward one dialect than
the other, from which further proposals can be
tested (e.g. the most reliable construction charac-
terizing each dialect).

The correlation coefficients in Table 3 gener-
ally tend toward positive for population of the
ZCTA, suggesting a prevalence of AAE in high-

population areas and a diffusion of SAE through-
out all populated areas. However, the correlation
coefficients for Caucasian population and African-
American population are less informative and tend
slightly toward SAE constructions, with the no-
table exceptions of negative concord and inver-
sion, which Wolfram (2004) classified as “ stable”
urban AAE features.

In all cases, the numeric values of the demo-
graphic correlation coefficients (including those
not shown such as Asian-American population)
are so low as to be statistically inconclusive. How-
ever, in all AAE/SAE syntax pairs except for the
negations, the correlation coefficients for female
users showed a tendency toward positive. This
could provide support for the female identity-
expression hypothesis proposed by Eckert and
McConnell-Ginet (2013) but could also indicate
an error with the samples obtained using the cur-
rent AAE syntax patterns (e.g. smaller samples
tend to skew toward areas with more women). Fur-
ther comparison of male vs. female AAE usage is
necessary to provide more evidence for the appar-
ent tendency toward women.

5 Conclusion and Future Directions

This thesis proposes (a) a method for detecting
AAE syntactic constructions in tweets, and (b) us-
ing the metadata from said tweets to approximate
the demographics of the users of AAE construc-
tions. The goal of this thesis is to estimate the cur-
rent state of AAE usage among American social
media users. This project has not yet uncovered
a clear connection between ethnic demographics
and the use of AAE syntax, suggesting that the
dialect is more widespread than previous studies
such as Wood and Zanuttini (2014) may have pre-
dicted. However, several analyses of the data have
suggested that women on Twitter employ AAE
syntax more than men, even taking into considera-
tion the slightly higher proportion of women using
social media. A different approach to data anal-
ysis, and potentially stricter syntax-detection pat-
terns (e.g. only detecting special sub-cases of cop-
ula deletion), will be necessary to discover trends
of AAE usage within the massive dataset.

Since the synchronic approach seemed to yield
limited results, the next step in the project will be
analyzing the data on a diachronic scale. The first
goal of this approach is to corroborate or chal-
lenge the claims of Wolfram (2004) concerning

35



Table 3: Regression Results over AAE and SAE Demographics

AAE/SAE SAE User % Coefficient Coefficient Coefficient Coefficient
Syntax Pair (Population) (%Caucasian) (%African-American) (Female)
Copula Deletion/ 93.30% 0.0208 −0.0001 −0.0005 0.0321
Standard Copula
Future finna/ 61.75% 0.0312 −0.0024 −0.0006 0.0458
Future gonna
Habitual be/ 79.79% 0.0361 −0.0032 −0.0019 0.0529
Standard be+Ving
Continuative steady/ 79.79% 0.0669 −0.0077 −0.0027 0.0505
Standard be+Ving
Completive done/ 94.12% 0.0846 −0.0076 −0.0045 0.0685
Standard VPST
Negative Concord/ 22.15% 0.0091 0.0009 0.0014 −0.0006
Standard Negation
Negative Inversion/ 20.16% −0.0181 0.0005 0.0006 0.0018
Non-Inverted Negation

“ intensifying,” “ stable,” and “ receding” AAE
syntax features by extrapolating a larger pattern of
change from the limited time series available (July
- December 2013). Secondarily, assuming that
some of these features are changing in usage over
time, this approach will test whether female Twit-
ter users are leaders of change-in-progress, a trend
proven by previous sociolinguistic studies (Eckert
and McConnell-Ginet, 2013). In contrast, Reyes
(2005) proposes that Asian-American young men
adopt AAE slang to emulate African American
“ hyper-masculinity” , a trend which could lead to
men rather than women being leaders of dialect
reappropriation. To discover such trends of adop-
tion among individual users, it may also make
sense to track each tweeter’s AAE vs. SAE us-
age to determine the extent to which an individual
user’s syntax can change over time.

Outside the scope of this study, future work
might consider using a semi-supervised training
method over POS n-grams to automatically de-
tect certain syntactic constructions. This would
eliminate the need for rigid regular expressions in
searching for tweets with AAE syntax, and also
enable the detection of a variety of other construc-
tions. In addition, future AAE studies in Twitter
may benefit from the approach of Bergsma et al.
(2013), which use user names and patterns of in-
teraction to infer “ hidden properties” such as gen-
der and race. Under this framework, researchers
might leverage online social media metadata to

explore emergent linguistic behavior of various
speech communities linked by patterns of interac-
tion. This is an intriguing possibility to consider
with the increasing presence of online communi-
ties like “ Black Twitter” (Sharma, 2013), which
allow real-world linguistic trends like AAE syntax
to propagate in virtual space.

Acknowledgments

This study was funded in part by the Neukom
Institute for Computational Science (http://
neukom.dartmouth.edu/) and the Presiden-
tial Scholars Program at Dartmouth. The project is
being supervised by Professor James Stanford and
postdoctorate scholar Dr. Sravana Reddy of Dart-
mouth College.

References
Shane Bergsma, Mark Dredze, Benjamin van

Durme, Theresa Wilson, and David Yarowsky.
2013. Broadly Improving User Classification
via Communication-Based Name and Location
Clustering on Twitter. Proceedings of NAACL-HLT
2013, pages 1010–1019.

Leon Derczynski, Alan Ritter, Sam Clark, and Kalina
Bontcheva. 2013. Twitter Part-of-Speech Tagging
for All: Overcoming Sparse and Noisy Data. Pro-
ceedings of Recent Advances in Natural Language
Processing, pages 198–206.

Maeve Duggan and Joanna Brenner. 2013. The De-
mographics of Social Media Users - 2012. Pew Re-

36



search Center’s Internet & American Life Project,
pages 1–14.

Penelope Eckert and Sally McConnell-Ginet. 2013.
Language and Gender. Cambridge University
Press, New York, 2 edition.

Jacob Eisenstein, Brendan O’Connor, Noah Smith, and
Eric Xing. 2010. A latent variable model for geo-
graphic lexical variation. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP).

Jacob Eisenstein, Noah A. Smith, and Eric P. Xing.
2011. Discovering Sociolinguistic Associations
with Structured Sparsity. Proceedings of the 49th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 1(49):1365–1374.

Kevin Gimpel, Nathan Schneider, Brendan O’Connor,
Dipanjan Das, Daniel Mills, Jacob Eisenstein,
Michael Heilman, Dani Yogatama, Jeffrey Flanigan,
and Noah A. Smith. 2011. Part-of-Speech Tagging
for Twitter: Annotation, Features, and Experiments.
Proceedings of NAACL-HLT, pages 380–390.

Lisa Green and Thomas Roeper. 2007. The Acquisi-
tion Path for Tense-Aspect: Remote Past and Habit-
ual in Child African American English. Language
Acquisition, 14(3):269–313.

Lisa Green. 2002. African American English: A Lin-
guistic Introduction. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

Tyler Kendall, Joan Bresnan, and Gerard van Herk.
2011. The dative alternation in African American
English: Researching syntactic variation and change
across sociolinguistic datasets. Corpus Linguistics
and Linguistics Theory, 7(2):229–244.

William Labov, Sharon Ash, and Charles Boberg.
2005. The Atlas of North American English: Pho-
netics, Phonology, and Sound Change. Walter de
Gruyer, Berlin.

Wiliam Labov. 2012. Language in the inner city: Stud-
ies in the black English vernacular. University of
Philadelphia Press, Philadelphia, PA.

Olutobi Owoputi, Brendan O’Connor, Chris Dyer,
Kevin Gimpel, Nathan Schneider, and Noah A.
Smith. 2013. Improved Part-of-Speech Tagging
for Online Conversational Text with Word Clusters.
Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2013, pages 380–390.

Angela Reyes. 2005. Appropriation of African Amer-
ican slang by Asian American youth. Journal of So-
ciolinguistics, 9(4):509–532.

Sanjay Sharma. 2013. Black Twitter?: Racial Hash-
tags, Networks and Contagion. new formations: a
journal of culture/theory/politics, 78(1):46–64.

Luke Sloan, Jeffrey Morgan, William Housley,
Matthew Williams, Adam Edwards, Pete Burnap,
and Omer Rana. 2013. Knowing the Tweeters: De-
riving Sociologically Relevant Demographics from
Twitter. Sociological Research Online, 18(3).

Walt Wolfram. 2004. Urban African American Ver-
nacular English: morphology and syntax*. In
Bernard Kortmann, editor, A handbook of varieties
of English. 1. Phonology, Volume 2, volume 2, pages
319–340. Walter de Gruyer.

Jim Wood and Natalie Zanuttini. 2014.
The Yale Grammatical Diversity Project.
http://microsyntax.sites.yale.edu/.

Malcah Yaeger-Dror and Erik R. Thomas. 2010.
African American English Speakers and Their Par-
ticipation in Local Sound Changes: A Comparative
Study. Duke University Press for the American Di-
alect Society, Durham, NC.

37


