



















































Modelling Irony in Twitter


Proceedings of the Student Research Workshop at the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 56–64,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Modelling Irony in Twitter

Francesco Barbieri
Pompeu Fabra University

Barcelona, Spain
francesco.barbieri@upf.edu

Horacio Saggion
Pompeu Fabra University

Barcelona, Spain
horacio.saggion@upf.edu

Abstract

Computational creativity is one of the
central research topics of Artificial Intel-
ligence and Natural Language Process-
ing today. Irony, a creative use of
language, has received very little atten-
tion from the computational linguistics
research point of view. In this study
we investigate the automatic detection of
irony casting it as a classification prob-
lem. We propose a model capable of de-
tecting irony in the social network Twit-
ter. In cross-domain classification experi-
ments our model based on lexical features
outperforms a word-based baseline previ-
ously used in opinion mining and achieves
state-of-the-art performance. Our features
are simple to implement making the ap-
proach easily replicable.

1 Introduction

Irony, a creative use of language, has received very
little attention from the computational linguistics
research point of view. It is however considered an
important aspect of language which deserves spe-
cial attention given its relevance in fields such as
sentiment analysis and opinion mining (Pang and
Lee, 2008). Irony detection appears as a difficult
problem since ironic statements are used to ex-
press the contrary of what is being said (Quintilien
and Butler, 1953), therefore being a tough nut to
crack by current systems. Being a creative form of
language, there is no consensual agreement in the
literature on how verbal irony should be defined.
Only recently irony detection has been approached
from a computational perspective. Reyes et al.
(2013) cast the problem as one of classification
training machine learning algorithms to sepatare
ironic from non-ironic statements. In a similar
vein, we propose and evaluate a new model to

detect irony, using seven sets of lexical features,
most of them based on our intuitions about “un-
expectedness”, a key component of ironic state-
ments. Indeed, Lucariello (1994) claims that irony
is strictly connected to surprise, showing that un-
expectedness is the feature most related to situa-
tional ironies.

In this paper we reduce the complexity of the
problem by studying irony detection in the micro-
blogging service Twitter1 that allows users to send
and read text messages (shorter than 140 charac-
ters) called tweets.

We do not adopt any formal definition of irony,
instead we rely on a dataset created for the study
of irony detection which allows us to compare our
findings with recent state-of-the-art approaches
(Reyes et al., 2013).

The contributions of this paper are as follows:

• a novel set of linguistically motivated, easy-
to-compute features

• a comparison of our model with the state-of-
the-art; and

• a novel set of experiments to demonstrate
cross-domain adaptation.

The paper will show that our model outperforms
a baseline, achieves state-of-the-art performance,
and can be applied to different domains.

The rest of the paper is organised as follows: in
the next Section we describe related work. In Sec-
tion 3 we described the corpus and text process-
ing tools used and in Section 4 we present our ap-
proach to tackle the irony detection problem. Sec-
tion 5 describes the experiments while Section 6
interprets the results. Finally we close the paper in
Section 7 with conclusions and future work.

1https://twitter.com/

56



2 Related Work

Verbal irony has been defined in several ways over
the years but there is no consensual agreement
on the definition. The standard definition is con-
sidered “saying the opposite of what you mean”
(Quintilien and Butler, 1953) where the opposi-
tion of literal and intended meanings is very clear.
Grice (1975) believes that irony is a rhetorical fig-
ure that violates the maxim of quality: “Do not
say what you believe to be false”. Irony is also de-
fined (Giora, 1995) as any form of negation with
no negation markers (as most of the ironic utter-
ances are affirmative, and ironic speakers use in-
direct negation). Wilson and Sperber (2002) de-
fined it as echoic utterance that shows a negative
aspect of someone’s else opinion. For example if
someone states “the weather will be great tomor-
row” and the following day it rains, someone with
ironic intents may repeat the sentence “the weather
will be great tomorrow” in order to show the state-
ments was incorrect. Finally irony has been de-
fined as form of pretence by Utsumi (2000) and
Veale and Hao (2010b). Veale states that “ironic
speakers usually craft their utterances in spite of
what has just happened, not because of it. The
pretence alludes to, or echoes, an expectation that
has been violated”.

Past computational approaches to irony detec-
tion are scarce. Carvalho et. al (2009) created
an automatic system for detecting irony relying on
emoticons and special punctuation. They focused
on detection of ironic style in newspaper articles.
Veale and Hao (2010a) proposed an algorithm for
separating ironic from non-ironic similes, detect-
ing common terms used in this ironic comparison.
Reyes et. al (2013) have recently proposed a model
to detect irony in Twitter, which is based on four
groups of features: signatures, unexpectedness,
style, and emotional scenarios. Their classification
results support the idea that textual features can
capture patterns used by people to convey irony.
Among the proposed features, skip-grams (part of
the style group) which captures word sequences
that contain (or skip over) arbitrary gaps, seems to
be the best one.

There are also a few computational model that
detect sarcasm ((Davidov et al., 2010); (González-
Ibáñez et al., 2011); (Liebrecht et al., 2013)) on
Twitter and Amazon, but even if one may argue
that sarcasm and irony are the same linguistic phe-
nomena, the latter is more similar to mocking or

making jokes (sometimes about ourselves) in a
sharp and non-offensive manner. On the other
hand, sarcasm is a meaner form of irony as it tends
to be offensive and directed towards other people
(or products like in Amazon reviews). Textual ex-
amples of sarcasm lack the sharp tone of an ag-
gressive speaker, so for textual purposes we think
irony and sarcasm should be considered as differ-
ent phenomena and studied separately (Reyes et
al., 2013).

3 Data and Text Processing

The dataset used for the experiments reported
in this paper has been prepared by Reyes et al.
(2013). It is a corpus of 40.000 tweets equally di-
vided into four different topics: Irony, Education,
Humour, and Politics where the last three topics
are considered non-ironic. The tweets were au-
tomatically selected by looking at Twitter hash-
tags (#irony, #education, #humour, and #politics)
added by users in order to link their contribution to
a particular subject and community. The hashtags
are removed from the tweets for the experiments.
According to Reyes et. al (2013), these hashtags
were selected for three main reasons: (i) to avoid
manual selection of tweets, (ii) to allow irony anal-
ysis beyond literary uses, and because (iii) irony
hashtag may “reflect a tacit belief about what con-
stitutes irony.”

Another corpora is employed in our approach to
measure the frequency of word usage. We adopted
the Second Release of the American National Cor-
pus Frequency Data2 (Ide and Suderman, 2004),
which provides the number of occurrences of a
word in the written and spoken ANC. From now
on, we will mean with “frequency of a term” the
absolute frequency the term has in the ANC.

3.1 Text Processing

In order to process the tweets we use the freely
available vinhkhuc Twitter Tokenizer3 which al-
lows us to recognise words in each tweet. To part-
of-speech tag the words, we rely on the Rita Word-
Net API (Howe, 2009) that associates to a word
with its most frequently used part of speech. We
also adopted the Java API for WordNet Searching

2The American National Corpus (http://www.anc.org/) is,
as we read in the web site, a massive electronic collection of
American English words (15 million)

3https://github.com/vinhkhuc/Twitter-
Tokenizer/blob/master/src/Twokenizer.java

57



(Spell, 2009) to perform some operation on Word-
Net synsets. It is worth noting that although our
approach to text processing is rather superficial for
the moment, other tools are available to perform
deeper tweet linguistic analysis (Bontcheva et al.,
2013; Derczynski et al., 2013).

4 Methodology

We approach the detection of irony as a classifica-
tion problem applying supervised machine learn-
ing methods to the Twitter corpus described in
Section 3. When choosing the classifiers we had
avoided those requiring features to be independent
(e.g. Naive Bayes) as some of our features are not.
Since we approach the problem as a binary deci-
sion (deciding if a tweet is ironic or not) we picked
two tree-based classifiers: Random Forest and De-
cision tree (the latter allows us to compare our
findings directly to Reyes et. al (2013)). We use
the implementations available in the Weka toolkit
(Witten and Frank, 2005).

To represent each tweet we use six groups of
features. Some of them are designed to detect im-
balance and unexpectedness, others to detect com-
mon patterns in the structure of the ironic tweets
(like type of punctuation, length, emoticons). Be-
low is an overview of the group of features in our
model:

• Frequency (gap between rare and common
words)

• Written-Spoken (written-spoken style uses)
• Intensity (intensity of adverbs and adjectives)
• Structure (length, punctuation, emoticons)
• Sentiments (gap between positive and nega-

tive terms)

• Synonyms (common vs. rare synonyms use)
• Ambiguity (measure of possible ambiguities)

In our knowledge Frequency, Written Spoken, In-
tensity and Synonyms groups have not been used
before in similar studies. The other groups have
been used already (for example by Carvalho et. al
(2009) or Reyes et al. (2013)) yet our implemen-
tation is different in most of the cases.

In the following sections we describe the the-
oretical motivations behind the features and how
them have been implemented.

4.1 Frequency

As said previously unexpectedness can be a sig-
nal of irony and in this first group of features we
try to detect it. We explore the frequency imbal-
ance between words, i.e. register inconsistencies
between terms of the same tweet. The idea is that
the use of many words commonly used in English
(i.e. high frequency in ANC) and only a few terms
rarely used in English (i.e. low frequency in ANC)
in the same sentence creates imbalance that may
cause unexpectedness, since within a single tweet
only one kind of register is expected. We are able
to explore this aspect using the ANC Frequency
Data corpus.

Three features belong to this group: frequency
mean, rarest word, frequency gap. The first one
is the arithmetic average of all the frequencies of
the words in a tweet, and it is used to detect the
frequency style of a tweet. The second one, rarest
word, is the frequency value of the rarest word,
designed to capture the word that may create im-
balance. The assumption is that very rare words
may be a sign of irony. The third one is the abso-
lute difference between the first two and it is used
to measure the imbalance between them, and cap-
ture a possible intention of surprise. We have ver-
ified that the mean of this gap in each tweet of the
irony corpus is higher than in the other corpora.

4.2 Written-Spoken

Twitter is composed of written text, but an infor-
mal spoken English style is often used. We de-
signed this set of features to explore the unexpect-
edness created by using spoken style words in a
mainly written style tweet or vice versa (formal
words usually adopted in written text employed in
a spoken style context). We can analyse this aspect
with ANC written and spoken, as we can see us-
ing this corpora whether a word is more often used
in written or spoken English. There are three fea-
tures in this group: written mean, spoken mean,
written spoken gap. The first and second ones are
the means of the frequency values, respectively, in
written and spoken ANC corpora of all the words
in the tweet. The third one, written spoken gap,
is the absolute value of the difference between the
first two, designed to see if ironic writers use both
styles (creating imbalance) or only one of them. A
low difference between written and spoken styles
means that both styles are used.

58



4.3 Structure

With this group of features we want to study the
structure of the tweet: if it is long or short (length),
if it contains long or short words (mean of word
length), and also what kind of punctuation is used
(exclamation marks, emoticons, etc.). This is a
powerful feature, as ironic tweets in our corpora
present specific structures: for example they are
often longer than the tweets in the other corpora,
they contain certain kind of punctuation and they
use only specific emoticons. This group includes
several features that we describe below.

The length feature consists of the number of
characters that compose the tweet, n. words is
the number of words, and words length mean is
the mean of the words length. Moreover, we use
the number of verbs, nouns, adjectives and adverbs
as features, naming them n. verbs, n. nouns, n.
adjectives and n. adverbs. With these last four
features we also computed the ratio of each part
of speech to the number of words in the tweet; we
called them verb ratio, noun ratio, adjective ra-
tio, and adverb ratio. All these features have the
purpose of capturing the style of the writer. Some
of them seem to be significant; for example the
average length of an ironic tweet is 94.8 charac-
ters and the average length of education, humour,
and politics tweets are respectively 82.0, 86.6, and
86.5. The words used in the irony corpus are usu-
ally shorter than in the other corpora, but they
amount to more.

The punctuation feature is the sum of the num-
ber of commas, full stops, ellipsis and exclama-
tion that a tweet presents. We also added a feature
called laughing which is the sum of all the internet
laughs, denoted with hahah, lol, rofl, and lmao that
we consider as a new form of punctuation: instead
of using many exclamation marks internet users
may use the sequence lol (i.e. laughing out loud) or
just type hahaha. As the previous features, punc-
tuation and laughing occur more frequently in the
ironic tweets than in the other topics.

The emoticon feature is the sum of the emoti-
cons :), :D, :( and ;) in a tweet. This feature works
well in the humour corpus because is the one that
presents a very different number of them, it has
four times more emoticons than the other corpora.
The ironic corpus is the one with the least emoti-
cons (there are only 360 emoticons in the Irony
corpus, while in Humour, Education, and Poli-
tics tweets they are 2065, 492, 397 respectively).

In the light of these statistics we can argue that
ironic authors avoid emoticons and leave words to
be the central thing: the audience has to under-
stand the irony without explicit signs, like emoti-
cons. Another detail is the number of winks ;). In
the irony corpus one in every five emoticon is a
wink, whereas in the Humour, Education and Pol-
itics corpora the number of winks are 1 in every
30, 22 and 18 respectively. Even if the wink is not
a usual emoticon, ironic authors use it more of-
ten because they mean something else when writ-
ing their tweets, and a wink is used to suggest that
something is hidden behind the words.

4.4 Intensity
A technique ironic authors may employ is saying
the opposite of what they mean (Quintilien and
Butler, 1953) using adjectives and adverbs to, for
example, describe something very big to denote
something very small (e.g. saying “Do we hike
that tiny hill now?” before going on top of a very
high mountain). In order to produce an ironic ef-
fect some authors might use an expression which
is antonymic to what they are trying to describe,
we believe that in the case the word being an ad-
jective or adverb its intensity (more or less exag-
gerated) may well play a role in producing the in-
tended effect. We adopted the intensity scores of
Potts (2011) who uses naturally occurring meta-
data (star ratings on service and product reviews)
to construct adjectives and adverbs scales. An ex-
ample of adjective scale (and relative scores in
brackets) could be the following: horrible (-1.9)
→ bad (-1.1)→ good (0.2)→ nice (0.3)→ great
(0.8).

With these scores we evaluate four features for
adjective intensity and four for adverb intensity
(implemented in the same way): adj (adv) tot,
adj (adv) mean, adj (adv) max, and adj (adv)
gap. The sum of the AdjScale scores of all the ad-
jectives in the tweet is called adj tot. adj mean is
adj tot divided by the number of adjectives in the
tweet. The maximum AdjScale score within a sin-
gle tweet is adj max. Finally, adj gap is the differ-
ence between adj max and adj mean, designed to
see “how much” the most intense adjective is out
of context.

4.5 Synonyms
Ironic authors send two messages to the audience
at the same time, the literal and the figurative one
(Veale, 2004). It follows that the choice of a term

59



(rather than one of its synonyms) is very impor-
tant in order to send the second, not obvious, mes-
sage. For example if the sky is grey and it is
about to rain, someone with ironic intents may say
“sublime weather today”, choosing sublime over
many different, more common, synonyms (like
nice, good, very good and so on, that according to
ANC are more used in English) to advise the lis-
tener that the literal meaning may not be the only
meaning present. A listener will grasp this hid-
den information when he asks himself why a rare
word like sublime was used in that context where
other more common synonyms were available to
express the same literal meaning.

For each word of a tweet we get its synonyms
with WordNet (Miller, 1995), then we calculate
their ANC frequencies and sort them into a de-
creasing ranked list (the actual word is part of this
ranking as well). We use these rankings to define
the four features which belong to this group. The
first one is syno lower which is the number of syn-
onyms of the word wi with frequency lower than
the frequency of wi. It is defined as in Equation 1:

slwi = |syni,k : f(syni,k) < f(wi)| (1)

where syni,k is the synonym of wi with rank k,
and f(x) the ANC frequency of x. Then we also
defined syno lower mean as mean of slwi (i.e. the
arithmetic average of slwi over all the words of a
tweet).

We also designed two more features: syno
lower gap and syno greater gap, but to define
them we need two more parameters. The first one
is word lowest syno that is the maximum slwi in a
tweet. It is formally defined as:

wlst = max
wi
{|syni,k : f(syni,k) < f(wi)|}

(2)
The second one is word greatest syno defined as:

wgst = max
wi
{|syni,k : f(syni,k) > f(wi)|}

(3)
We are now able to describe syno lower gap
which detects the imbalance that creates a com-
mon synonym in a context of rare synonyms. It is
the difference between word lowest syno and syno
lower mean. Finally, we detect the gap of very
rare synonyms in a context of common ones with
syno greater gap. It is the difference between
word greatest syno and syno greater mean, where
syno greater mean is the following:

sgmt =
|syni,k : f(syni,k) > f(wi)|

n. words of t
(4)

The arithmetic averages of syno greater gap
and of syno lower gap in the irony corpus are
higher than in the other corpora, suggesting that a
very common (or very rare) synonym is often used
out of context i.e. a very rare synonym when most
of the words are common (have a high rank in our
model) and vice versa.

4.6 Ambiguity
Another interesting aspect of irony is ambiguity.
We noticed that the arithmetic average of the num-
ber of WordNet synsets in the irony corpus is
greater than in all the other corpora; this indi-
cates that ironic tweets presents words with more
meanings. Our assumption is that if a word has
many meanings the possibility of “saying some-
thing else” with this word is higher than in a term
that has only a few meanings, then higher possibil-
ity of sending more then one message (literal and
intended) at the same time.

There are three features that aim to capture
these aspects: synset mean, max synset, and
synset gap. The first one is the mean of the num-
ber of synsets of each word of the tweet, to see if
words with many meanings are often used in the
tweet. The second one is the greatest number of
synsets that a single word has; we consider this
word the one with the highest possibility of being
used ironically (as multiple meanings are available
to say different things). In addition, we calculate
synset gap as the difference between the number
of synsets of this word (max synset) and the av-
erage number of synsets (synset mean), assuming
that if this gap is high the author may have used
that inconsistent word intentionally.

4.7 Sentiments
We think that sign of irony could also be found
using sentiment analysis. The SentiWordNet sen-
timent lexicon (Esuli and Sebastiani, 2006) as-
signs to each synset of WordNet sentiment scores
of positivity and negativity. We used these scores
to examine what kind of sentiments characterises
irony. We explore ironic sentiments with two dif-
ferent views: the first one is the simple analysis
of sentiments (to identify the main sentiment that
arises from ironic tweets) and the second one con-
cerns sentiment imbalances between words, de-

60



Training Set
Education Humour Politics

Test set P R F1 P R F1 P R F1
Education .85/.73 .84/.73 .84/.73 .57/.61 .53/.61 .46/.61 .61/.67 .56/.67 .51/.67

Humour .64/.62 .51/.62 .58/.62 .85/.75 .85/.75 .85/.75 .65/.61 .59/.61 .55/.60
Politics .61/.67 .58/.67 .55/.67 .55/.61 .60/.60 .56/.60 .87/.75 .87/.75 .87/.75

Table 1: Precision, Recall and F-Measure of each topic combination for word based algorithm and our
algorithm in the form “Word Based / Ours”. Decision Tree has been used as classifier for both algorithms.
We marked in bold the results that, according to the t-test, are significantly better.

signed to explore unexpectedness from a senti-
ment prospective.

There are six features in the Sentiments group.
The first one is named positive sum and it is the
sum of all the positive scores in a tweet, the sec-
ond one is negative sum, defined as sum of all the
negative scores. The arithmetic average of the pre-
vious ones is another feature, named positive neg-
ative mean, designed to reveal the sentiment that
better describe the whole tweet. Moreover, there
is positive-negative gap that is the difference be-
tween the first two features, as we wanted also to
detect the positive/negative imbalance within the
same tweet.

The imbalance may be created using only one
single very positive (or negative) word in the
tweet, and the previous features will not be able
to detect it, thus we needed to add two more. For
this purpose the model includes positive single
gap defined as the difference between most posi-
tive word and the mean of all the sentiment scores
of all the words of the tweet and negative single
gap defined in the same way, but with the most
negative one.

4.8 Bag of Words Baseline

Based on previous work on sentiment analysis and
opinon classification (see (Pang et al., 2002; Dave
et al., 2003) for example) we also investigate the
value of using bag of words representations for
irony classification. In this case, each tweet is rep-
resented as a set of word features. Because of the
brevity of tweets, we are only considering pres-
ence/absence of terms instead of frequency-based
representations based on tf ∗ idf .

5 Experiments and Results

In order to carry out experimentation and to be
able to compare our approach to that of (Reyes et
al., 2013) we use three datasets derived from the

corpus in Section 3. Irony vs Education, Irony
vs Humour and Irony vs Politics. Each topic
combination was balanced with 10.000 ironic
and 10.000 of non-ironic examples. The task at
hand it to train a classifier to identify ironic and
non-ironic tweets.

Figure 1: Information gain value of each group
(mean of the features belonged to each group) over
the three balanced corpus.

We perform two types of experiments:

• we run in each of the datasets a 10-fold cross-
validation classification;

• across datasets, we train the classifier in one
dataset and apply it to the other two datasets.
To perform these experiments, we create
three balanced datasets containing each one
third of the original 10.000 ironic tweets (so
that the datasets are disjoint) and one third of
the original domain tweets.

The experimental framework is executed for the
word-based baseline model and our model. In Ta-
ble 1 we present precision, recall, and F-measure

61



Figure 2: Information gain of each feature of the model. Irony corpus is compared to Education, Humor,
and Politics corpora. High values of information gain help to better discriminate ironic from non-ironic
tweets.

figures for the different runs of the experiments.
Table 3 shows precision, recall, and F-measure
figures for our approach compared to (Reyes et
al., 2013). Table 2 compares two different algo-
rithms: Decision Tree and Random Forest using
our model.

In order to have a clear understanding about the
contribution of each set of features in our model,
we also studied the behaviour of information gain
in each dataset. We compute information gain
experiments over the three balanced corpora and
present the results in Figure 1. The graphic shows
the mean information gain for each group of fea-
tures. We also report in Figure 2 the information
gain of each single feature, where one can under-
stand if a feature will be important to distinguish
ironic from non-ironic tweets.

6 Discussion

The results obtained with the bag-of-words base-
line seem to indicate that this approach is work-
ing as a topic-based classifier and not as an irony
detection procedure. Indeed, within each domain
using a 10 fold cross-validation setting, the bag-
of-words approach seems to overtake our model.
However, a clear picture emerges when a cross-
domain experiment is performed. In a setting
where different topics are used for training and
testing our model performs significantly better

than the baseline. t-tests were run for each ex-
periment and differences between baseline and our
model were observed for each cross-domain con-
dition (with a 99% confidence level). This could
be an indication that our model is more able to cap-
ture ironic style disregarding domain.

Analysing the data on Figure 2, we observe that
features which are more discriminative of ironic
style are rarest value, synonym lower, synonym
greater gap, and punctuation, suggesting that
Frequency, Structure and choice of the Synonym
are important aspects to consider for irony detec-
tion in tweets (this latter statement can be appre-
ciated in Figure 1 as well). Note, however, that
there is a topic or theme effect since features be-
have differently depending on the dataset used:
the Humour corpus seems to be the least consis-
tent. For instance punctuation well distinguishes
ironic from educational tweets, but behaves poorly
in the Humour corpus. This imbalance may cause
issues in a not controlled environment (e.g. no
preselected topics, only random generic tweets).
In spite of this, information gain values are fairly
high with four features having information gain
values over 0.1. Finding features that are signif-
icant for any non-ironic topic is hard, this is why
our system includes several feature sets: they aim
to distinguish irony from as many different topics
as possible.

62



Training Set
Education Humour Politics

Test set P R F1 P R F1 P R F1
Education .78/.73 .78/.73 .78/.73 .65/.61 .63/.61 .62/.61 .71/.67 .71/.67 .70/.67

Humour .64/.62 .61/.62 .60/.62 .80/.75 .80/.75 .80/.75 .64/.61 .62/.61 .60/.60
Politics .71/.67 .70/.67 .69/.67 .63/.61 .51/.60 .59/.60 .79/.75 .79/.75 .79/.75

Table 2: Precision, Recall and F-Measure for each topic combination of our model when Decision Tree
and Random Forest are used. Data are in the format “Random Forest / Decision Tree”. We marked in
bold the F-Measures that are better.

Education Humour Politics
Model P R F1 P R F1 P R F1

Reyes et. al .76 .66 .70 .78 .74 .76 .75 .71 .73
Our model .73 .73 .73 .75 .75 .75 .75 .75 .75

Table 3: Precision, Recall, and F-Measure over the three corpora Education, Humour, and Politics. Both
our and Reyes et al. results are shown; the classifier used is Decision Tree for both models. We marked
in bold the F-Measures that are better compared to the other model.

With respect to results for two different classi-
fiers trained with our model (Random Forest (RF)
and Decision Trees (DT)) we observe that (see Ta-
ble 2) RF is better in cross-validation but across-
domains both algorithms are comparable.

Turning now to the state of the art we compare
our approach to (Reyes et al., 2013), the num-
bers presented in Table 3 seem to indicate that (i)
our approach is more balanced in terms of preci-
sion and recall and that (ii) our approach performs
slightly better in terms of F-Measure in two out of
three domains.

7 Conclusion and Future Work

In this article we have proposed a novel linguisti-
cally motivated set of features to detect irony in the
social network Twitter. The features take into ac-
count frequency, written/spoken differences, senti-
ments, ambiguity, intensity, synonymy and struc-
ture. We have designed many of them to be able
to model “unexpectedness”, a key characteristic of
irony.

We have performed controlled experiments with
an available corpus of ironic and non-ironic tweets
using classifiers trained with bag-of-words fea-
tures and with our irony specific features. We have
shown that our model performs better than a bag-
of-words approach across-domains. We have also
shown that our model achieves state-of-the-art per-
formance.

There is however much space for improve-

ments. The ambiguity aspect is still weak in this
research, and it needs to be improved. Also exper-
iments adopting different corpora (Filatova, 2012)
and different negative topics may be useful in or-
der to explore the system behaviour in a real situa-
tion. Finally, we have relied on very basic tools for
linguistic analysis of the tweets, so in the near fu-
ture we intend to incorporate better linguistic pro-
cessors. A final aspect we want to investigate is
the use of n-grams from huge collections to model
“unexpected” word usage.

Acknowledgments

We are greatful to three anonymous reviewers for
their comments and suggestions that help improve
our paper. The research described in this paper is
partially funded by fellowship RYC-2009-04291
from Programa Ramón y Cajal 2009 and project
number TIN2012-38584-C06-03 (SKATER-UPF-
TALN) from Ministerio de Economı́a y Competi-
tividad, Secretarı́a de Estado de Investigación, De-
sarrollo e Innovacı́on, Spain.

References
Kalina Bontcheva, Leon Derczynski, Adam Funk,

Mark A. Greenwood, Diana Maynard, and Niraj
Aswani. 2013. TwitIE: An Open-Source Informa-
tion Extraction Pipeline for Microblog Text. In Pro-
ceedings of Recent Advances in Natural Language
Processing Conferemce.

Paula Carvalho, Luı́s Sarmento, Mário J Silva, and

63



Eugénio de Oliveira. 2009. Clues for detect-
ing irony in user-generated contents: oh...!! it’s
so easy;-). In Proceedings of the 1st international
CIKM workshop on Topic-sentiment analysis for
mass opinion, pages 53–56. ACM.

Kushal Dave, Steve Lawrence, and David M. Pennock.
2003. Mining the peanut gallery: Opinion extraction
and semantic classification of product reviews. In
Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on
World Wide Web, WWW ’03, pages 519–528, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

Dmitry Davidov, Oren Tsur, and Ari Rappoport. 2010.
Semi-supervised recognition of sarcastic sentences
in twitter and amazon. In Proceedings of the Four-
teenth Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning, pages 107–116. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Leon Derczynski, Alan Ritter, Sam Clark, and Kalina
Bontcheva. 2013. Twitter part-of-speech tagging
for all: Overcoming sparse and noisy data. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Recent
Advances in Natural Language Processing.

Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2006. Sen-
tiwordnet: A publicly available lexical resource
for opinion mining. In Proceedings of Language
Resources and Evaluation Conference, volume 6,
pages 417–422.

Elena Filatova. 2012. Irony and sarcasm: Corpus
generation and analysis using crowdsourcing. In
Proceedings of Language Resources and Evaluation
Conference, pages 392–398.

Rachel Giora. 1995. On irony and negation. Discourse
processes, 19(2):239–264.

Roberto González-Ibáñez, Smaranda Muresan, and
Nina Wacholder. 2011. Identifying sarcasm in twit-
ter: A closer look. In ACL (Short Papers), pages
581–586. Citeseer.

H Paul Grice. 1975. Logic and conversation. 1975,
pages 41–58.

Daniel C Howe. 2009. Rita wordnet. java based api to
access wordnet.

Nancy Ide and Keith Suderman. 2004. The Ameri-
can National Corpus First Release. In Proceedings
of the Language Resources and Evaluation Confer-
ence.

Christine Liebrecht, Florian Kunneman, and Antal
van den Bosch. 2013. The perfect solution for
detecting sarcasm in tweets# not. WASSA 2013,
page 29.

Joan Lucariello. 1994. Situational irony: A concept of
events gone awry. Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy: General, 123(2):129.

George A Miller. 1995. Wordnet: a lexical
database for english. Communications of the ACM,
38(11):39–41.

Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2008. Opinion Mining and
Sentiment Analysis. Found. Trends Inf. Retr., 2(1-
2):1–135, January.

Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up?: Sentiment classification using
machine learning techniques. In Proceedings of the
ACL-02 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing - Volume 10, EMNLP ’02,
pages 79–86, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Christopher Potts. 2011. Developing adjective scales
from user-supplied textual metadata. NSF Work-
shop on Restructuring Adjectives in WordNet. Ar-
lington,VA.

Quintilien and Harold Edgeworth Butler. 1953. The
Institutio Oratoria of Quintilian. With an English
Translation by HE Butler. W. Heinemann.

Antonio Reyes, Paolo Rosso, and Tony Veale. 2013.
A multidimensional approach for detecting irony in
twitter. Language Resources and Evaluation, pages
1–30.

Brett Spell. 2009. Java api for wordnet searching
(jaws).

Akira Utsumi. 2000. Verbal irony as implicit dis-
play of ironic environment: Distinguishing ironic
utterances from nonirony. Journal of Pragmatics,
32(12):1777–1806.

Tony Veale and Yanfen Hao. 2010a. Detecting ironic
intent in creative comparisons. In ECAI, volume
215, pages 765–770.

Tony Veale and Yanfen Hao. 2010b. An ironic fist
in a velvet glove: Creative mis-representation in the
construction of ironic similes. Minds and Machines,
20(4):635–650.

Tony Veale. 2004. The challenge of creative informa-
tion retrieval. In Computational Linguistics and In-
telligent Text Processing, pages 457–467. Springer.

Deirdre Wilson and Dan Sperber. 2002. Relevance
theory. Handbook of pragmatics.

Ian H Witten and Eibe Frank. 2005. Data Mining:
Practical machine learning tools and techniques.
Morgan Kaufmann.

64


