



















































Unsupervised Relation Extraction of In-Domain Data from Focused Crawls


Proceedings of the Student Research Workshop at the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 11–20,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Unsupervised Relation Extraction of In-Domain Data
from Focused Crawls

Steffen Remus
FG Language Technology

Computer Science Department, Technische Universität Darmstadt

Information Center for Education
German Institute for Educational Research (DIPF)

remus@cs.tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract

This thesis proposal approaches unsuper-
vised relation extraction from web data,
which is collected by crawling only those
parts of the web that are from the same do-
main as a relatively small reference cor-
pus. The first part of this proposal is con-
cerned with the efficient discovery of web
documents for a particular domain and in
a particular language. We create a com-
bined, focused web crawling system that
automatically collects relevant documents
and minimizes the amount of irrelevant
web content. The collected web data is
semantically processed in order to acquire
rich in-domain knowledge. Here, we focus
on fully unsupervised relation extraction
by employing the extended distributional
hypothesis. We use distributional similar-
ities between two pairs of nominals based
on dependency paths as context and vice
versa for identifying relational structure.
We apply our system for the domain of
educational sciences by focusing primarily
on crawling scientific educational publica-
tions in the web. We are able to produce
promising initial results on relation identi-
fication and we will discuss future direc-
tions.

1 Introduction

Knowledge acquisition from written or spoken
text is a field of interest not only for theoretical
reasons but also for practical applications, such as
semantic search, question answering and knowl-
edge management, just to name a few.

In this work, we propose an approach for un-
supervised relation extraction (URE) where we
make use of the Distributional Hypothesis by Har-
ris (1954). The underlying data set is collected

from the world wide web by focusing on web doc-
uments that are from the same domain as a small
initialization data set that is provided beforehand.
We hereby enrich this existing, domain-defining,
corpus with more data of the same kind. This is
needed for practical reasons when working with
the Distributional Hypothesis (Harris, 1954): A lot
of data is required for plausible outcomes and an
appropriate coverage. However, we want as little
irrelevant data as possible. The proposal’s contri-
bution is thus twofold: a) focused crawling, and
b) unsupervised relation extraction. As a partic-
ular use case, we are especially interested in sci-
entific publications from the German educational
domain. However, we would like to point out that
the methodology itself is independent of language
and domain and is generally applicable to any do-
main.

This work is structured as follows: First we will
motivate our combined approach and introduce
each part individually. We then present related
work in Section 2. Section 3 explains the method-
ology of both parts, and in Section 4 we outline the
evaluation procedure of each of the components
individually. This is followed by some prelimi-
nary results in Section 5, and Section 6 concludes
this proposal with some prospects for future work.

1.1 Motivation

The identification of relations between entities
solely from text is one of many challenges in
the development of language understanding sys-
tem (Carlson et al., 2010; Etzioni et al., 2008);
and yet it is the one step with the highest informa-
tion gain. It is used e.g. for taxonomy induction
(Hearst, 1992) or ontology accumulation (Mintz et
al., 2009) or even for identifying facts that express
general knowledge and that often recur (Cham-
bers and Jurafsky, 2011). Davidov et al. (2007)
performed unsupervised relation extraction by ac-
tively mining the web and showed major improve-

11



ments in the detection of new facts from only little
initial seed. They used a major web search engine
as a vital component of their system. According to
Kilgarriff (2007), however, this strategy is unreli-
able and should be avoided. Nevertheless, the web
is undeniably the largest source for any kind of
data, and we feel the need for developing easy-to-
use components that make it possible to create cor-
pora from the web with only little effort (cf. e.g.
Biemann et al. (2013)). When it comes to specific
in-domain information, the complete world wide
web is first of all too vast to be processed conve-
niently, and second the gain is little because of too
much irrelevant information. Thus we need meth-
ods for reducing the size of data to process without
losing the focus on the important information and
without using web search engines. The combina-
tion of a focused crawling system with a subse-
quent unsupervised relation extraction system en-
ables the acquisition of richer in-domain knowl-
edge than just relying on little local data, but with-
out having to process petabytes of data and still not
relying of web search. And yet, by using the web
as a resource, our system is generally applicable
and independent of language and target domain.

1.2 Focused Crawling
The first part of this proposal is concerned with
the efficient discovery of publications in the web
for a particular domain. The domain definition is
given as a limited number of reference documents.
An extra challenge is, that non-negligible amounts
of scientific publications are only available as pdf
documents, which makes the necessity of new fo-
cused crawling techniques even more important.
This holds especially for our target use case, the
German educational domain. In Section 2.1 we
will discuss this issue in more detail. We develop
a focused web crawling system which collects pri-
marily relevant documents and ignores irrelevant
documents and which is particularly suited for har-
vesting documents from a predefined specific do-
main.

1.3 Unsupervised Relation Extraction
The second part of this proposal is the semantic
structuring of texts — in our particular use case
scientific publications from the educational do-
main — by using data-driven techniques of com-
putational semantics. The resulting structure en-
ables forms of post-processing like inference or
reasoning. In the semantic structuring part, the

overall goal is to discover knowledge which can
then be used in further steps. Specifically, we will
focus on unsupervised relation extraction.

2 Related Work

2.1 Focused Crawling

The development of high-quality data-driven se-
mantic models relies on corpora of large sizes
(Banko and Brill, 2001; Halevy et al., 2009), and
the world wide web is by far the biggest avail-
able source of textual data. Nowadays, a large
number of research projects rely on corpora that
comes from data in the world wide web. The Web-
as-Corpus Kool Yinitiative1 (WaCKy) (Baroni et
al., 2009) for example produced one of the largest
corpora used in linguistic research which comes
from web documents. Another research initia-
tive which produces a variety of corpora by crawl-
ing the web is the COW2 (corpora from the web)
project (Schäfer and Bildhauer, 2012). Currently
one of the largest N-gram corpora coming from
web data is the Google V1 and Google V2 (Lin et
al., 2010), which are used e.g. for improving noun
phrase parsing (Pitler et al., 2010). Also the pre-
decessor Google Web1T (Brants and Franz, 2006),
which is computed from 1 Trillion words from the
web, is heavily used in the community.

All these corpora are generated from general
texts which either come from crawling specific
top-level-domains (tlds) or preprocessing and fil-
tering very large amounts of texts for a specified
language. Additionally, we are not aware of any
corpus that is created by collecting pdf documents.
This is especially an issue when aiming at a cor-
pus of scientific publications, such as e.g. the ACL
anthology3 (Bird et al., 2008). As of today, elec-
tronic publications are primarily distributed as pdf
documents. Usually these are omitted by the par-
ticular crawler because of a number of practical
issues, e.g. difficulties in extracting clean plain-
text.

Further, we are not interested in sheer collec-
tion size, but also in domain specificity. Crawling
is a time-consuming process and it comes with lo-
gistic challenges for processing the resulting data.
While standard breadth-first or depth-first crawl-
ing strategies can be adjusted to include pdf files,
we want to avoid to harvest the huge bulk of data

1http://wacky.sslmit.unibo.it/
2http://hpsg.fu-berlin.de/cow/
3http://acl-arc.comp.nus.edu.sg/

12



that we are not interested in, namely those docu-
ments that are of a different topical domain as our
initial domain definition.

In focused crawling, which is sometimes also
referred to as topical crawling, web crawlers are
designed to harvest those parts of the web first
that are more interesting for a particular topic
(Chakrabarti et al., 1999). By doing so, task-
specific corpora can be generated fast and ef-
ficient. Typical focused crawlers use machine
learning techniques or heuristics to prioritize
newly discovered URIs (unified resource iden-
tifier) for further crawling (Blum and Mitchell,
1998; Chakrabarti et al., 1999; Menczer et al.,
2004). In our scenario however, we do not rely on
positively and negatively labeled data. The source
documents that serve as the domain definition are
assumed to be given in plain text. The develop-
ment of tools that are able to generate in-domain
web-corpora from focused crawls is the premise
for further generating rich semantic models tai-
lored to a target domain.

2.2 Unsupervised Relation Extraction

The unsupervised relation extraction (URE) part
of this proposal is specifically focused on ex-
tracting relations between nominals. Typically the
choice of the entity type depends merely on the
final task at hand. Kinds of entities which are usu-
ally considered in relation extraction are named
entities like persons or organizations. However,
we will focus on nominals which are much more
general and also include named entities since they
are basically nouns or noun phrases (Nastase et
al., 2013). Nominals are discussed in more de-
tail in Section 3.2. Unsupervised methods for re-
lation extraction is a particularly interesting area
of research because of its applicability across lan-
guages without relying on labeled data. In con-
trast to open information extraction, in unsuper-
vised relation extraction the collected relations are
aggregated in order to identify the most promising
relations for expressing interesting facts. Here, the
grouping is made explicit for further processing.

One possible application of relation extraction
is the establishment of so-called knowledge graphs
(Sowa, 2000), which encode facts that manifest
solely from text. The knowledge graph can then
be used e.g. for reasoning, that is finding new facts
from existing facts.

Many approaches exist for acquiring knowledge

from text. Hearst (1992) first discovered that rela-
tions between entities occur in a handful of well
developed text patterns. For example ’X is a Y’
or ’X and other Ys’ manifest themselves as hy-
ponymic relations. However, not every kind of re-
lation is as easy to identify as those ’is-a’ relations.
Often semantic relations cannot be expressed by
any pattern. A variety of methods were devel-
oped that automatically find new patterns and en-
tities with or without supervision. These methods
reach from bootstrapping methods (Hearst, 1992)
over distant supervision (Mintz et al., 2009) and
latent relational analysis (LRA) (Turney, 2005)
to extreme unsupervised relation extraction (Davi-
dov and Rappoport, 2008a), just to name a few.
The importance of unsupervised methods for re-
lation extraction is obvious: The manual creation
of knowledge resources is time consuming and ex-
pensive in terms of manpower. Though manual re-
sources are typically very precise they are almost
always lacking of lexical and relational coverage.

The extraction of relations between entities is a
crucial process which is performed by every mod-
ern language understanding system like NELL4

(Carlson et al., 2010) or machine reading5, which
evolved among others from TextRunner6 (Etzioni
et al., 2008). The identification of relations in nat-
ural language texts is at the heart of such systems.

3 Methodology

3.1 Focused Crawling

Language models (LMs) are a rather old but
well understood and generally accepted concept
in Computational Linguistics and Information Re-
trieval. Our focused crawling strategy builds upon
the idea of utilizing a language model to discrim-
inate between relevant and irrelevant web docu-
ments. The key idea of this methodology is that
web pages which come from a certain domain —
which implies the use of a particular vocabulary
(Biber, 1995) — link to other documents of the
same domain. The assumption is that the crawler
will most likely stay in the same topical domain
as the initial language model was generated from.
Thus the crawling process can be terminated when
enough data has been collected.

4Never Ending Language Learner:
http://rtw.ml.cmu.edu/

5http://ai.cs.washington.edu/
projects/open-information-extraction

6http://openie.cs.washington.edu/

13



A language model is a statistical model over
short sequences of consecutive tokens called N-
grams. The order of a language model is defined
by the length of such sequences, i.e. the ’N’ in N-
gram. The probability of a sequence of m words,
that could be for example a sentence, is computed
as:

p(w1, ..., wm) ≈
m∏

i=1

p(wi|wi−N+1:i−1) , (1)

where N is the order of the language model and
p(wi|wi−n+1:i−1) is the probability of the particu-
lar N-gram. In the simplest case the probability of
an N-gram is computed as:

p(wi|wi−n+1:i−1) = count(wi−N+1:i)
count(wi−N+1:i−1)

, (2)

where count(N-gram) is a function that takes as
argument an N-gram of length N or an N-gram
of length N − 1 and returns the frequency of ob-
servations in the source corpus. This model has
some obvious limitations when it comes to out-
of-vocabulary (OOV) terms because of probabil-
ities being zero. Due to this limitation, a number
of LMs were proposed which handle OOV terms
well.

One of the most advanced language models is
the Kneser-Ney language model (Kneser and Ney,
1995), which applies an advanced interpolation
technique for OOV issues. According to Halevy
et al. (2009), simpler models that are trained on
large amounts of data often outperform complex
models with training procedures that are feasible
only for small data. Anyway, we have only little
data in the initial phase, thus we use Kneser and
Ney’s model.

Perplexity is used to measure the amount of
compatibility with another model X:

Perplexity(X) = 2H(X) , (3)

where H(X) = − 1|X|
∑

x∈X log2 p(x) is the
cross entropy of a model X . Using perplexity we
are able to tell how well the language model fits
the data and vice versa.

The key idea is that documents which come
from a certain register or domain — which im-
plies the use of a particular vocabulary (Biber,
1995) — link to other documents of the same reg-
ister. Using perplexity, we are able to rank out-
going links by their deviation from our initial lan-
guage model. Hence weblinks that are extracted

from a highly deviating webpage are less priori-
tized for harvesting. The open source crawler soft-
ware Heritrix7 (Mohr et al., 2004) forms the basis
of our focused crawling strategy, since it provides
a well-established framework which is easily ex-
tensible through its modularity.

3.2 Identification of Nominals

Nominals are defined to be expressions which syn-
tactically act like nouns or noun phrases (Quirk
et al., 1985, p.335). Another definition according
to Nastase et al. (2013) is that nominals are de-
fined to be in one of the following classes: a) com-
mon nouns, b) proper nouns, c) multi-word proper
nouns, d) deverbal nouns, e) deadjectival nouns,
or f) non-compositional (adjective) noun phrases.
In this work we will follow the definition given
by Nastase et al. (2013). We will further address
only relations that are at least realized by verbal or
prepositional phrases and ignore relations that are
implicitly present in compounds, which is a task
of its own, cf. (Holz and Biemann, 2008). Note
however we do not ignore relations between com-
pounds, but within compounds.

The identification of nominals can be seen
as the task of identifying reliable multi-word-
expressions (MWEs), which is a research question
of its own right. As a first simplified approach
we only consider nouns and heads of noun com-
pounds to be representatives for nominals. E.g. a
compound is used as an entity, but only the head
is taken into further consideration as a represen-
tative since it encapsulates the main meaning for
that phrase.

3.3 Unsupervised Relation Extraction

Our system is founded in the idea of distributional
semantics on the level of dependency parses. The
Distributional Hypothesis by Harris (1954) (cf.
also (Miller and Charles, 1991)) states that words
which tend to occur in similar contexts tend to
have similar meanings. This implies that one can
estimate the meaning of an unknown word by con-
sidering the context in that it occurs. Lin and Pan-
tel (2001) extended this hypothesis to cover short-
est paths in the dependency graph — so-called de-
pendency paths — and introduced the Extended
Distributional Hypothesis. This extended hypoth-
esis states that dependency paths which tend to oc-
cur in similar contexts, i.e. they connect the simi-

7http://crawler.archive.org

14



lar sets of words, also tend to have similar mean-
ings.

Sun and Grishman (2010) used an agglomera-
tive hierarchical clustering based approach in or-
der to group the patterns found by Lin and Pan-
tel’s method. The clusters are used in a semi-
supervised way to extract relation instances that
are used in a bootstrapping fashion to find new
relations. While Sun and Grishman (2010) per-
formed a hard clustering, meaning every relation is
assigned exactly to one cluster, we argue that rela-
tions are accompanied by a certain degree of am-
biguity. Think for example about the expression
’X comes from Y’ which could be both, a causal
relation or a locational relation depending on the
meaning of X and Y.

That being said, we use the Extended Distri-
butional Hypothesis in order to extract meaning-
ful relations from text. We follow Lin and Pantel
(2001) and use the dependency path between two
entities to identify both, similar entity pairs and
similar dependency paths. Specifically we use the
Stanford Parser8 (Klein and Manning, 2003) to get
a collapsed dependency graph representation of a
sentence, and apply the JoBimText9 (Biemann and
Riedl, 2013) software for computing the distribu-
tional similarities.

By using the JoBimText framework, we ac-
cept their theory, which states that dimensionality-
reduced vector space models are not expressive
enough to capture the full semantics of words,
phrases, sentences, documents or relations. Tur-
ney and Pantel (2010) surveyed that vector space
models are commonly used in computational se-
mantics and that they are able to capture the mean-
ing of words. However, by doing various kinds of
vector space transformations, e.g. dimensionality
reduction with SVD10 important information from
the long tail, i.e. items that do not occur often,
is lost. Instead, Biemann and Riedl (2013) intro-
duced the scalable JoBimText framework, which
makes use of the Distributional Hypothesis. We
take this as a starting point to steer away from the
use of vector space models.

For each entity pair ’X::Y’, where ’X’ and ’Y’
are nominals, we collect all dependency paths that

8http://nlp.stanford.edu/downloads/
lex-parser.shtml

9http://sf.net/p/jobimtext
10Singular Value Decomposition, used for example in la-

tent semantic analysis, latent relational analysis, principal
component analysis and many more.

rain :: seawater @1
nsubj←−−−− comes prep from−−−−−−−→ @2

rain :: seawater @1
dobj←−−− causes nsubj−−−−→ @2

seawater :: rain @1
prep from←−−−−−−− comes nsubj−−−−→ @2

seawater :: rain @1
nsubj←−−−− causes dobj−−−→ @2

Figure 1: Upper12: collapsed dependency parses
of the example sentences ’Rain comes from evapo-
rated seawater.’ and ’Evaporated seawater causes
rain’. Lower: extracted entity pairs plus shortest
dependency paths per entity pair from both sen-
tences.

co-occur with it in the complete dataset. A par-
ticular path for a particular relation instance has
form ’@1-PATH-@2’, where ’-PATH-’ is the in-
stantiation of the directed shortest path in the col-
lapsed dependency path starting from a particu-
lar ’X’ and ending in a particular ’Y’. The @1,
resp. @2, symbolizes the place where ’X’ and ’Y’
were found in the path. Here we restrict the path
to be shorter than five edges and additionally we
ignore paths that have only nn relations, i.e. com-
pound dependency relations. See Figure 1 for an
illustration of this strategy on two small example
sentences. Note that this procedure strongly co-
heres with the methodologies proposed by Lewis
and Steedman (2013) or Akbik et al. (2013).

We then compute the distributional similarities
for both directions: a) similarities of entity pairs
by paths, and b) similarities of paths by entity
pairs. This gives us two different views on the
data.

4 Evaluation

The two major directions of this paper, i.e. the fo-
cused crawling part and the unsupervised relation
extraction part are evaluated individually and in-
dependent of each other. First we will present an

12Images generated with GrammarScope:
http://grammarscope.sf.net .

15



evaluation methodology to assess the quality of the
crawler and second we will outline the evaluation
of relations. While we can only show anecdotical
evidence of the viability of this approach, since the
work is in progress, we are able to present encour-
aging preliminary results in Section 5.

4.1 Focused Crawling

The quality of a focused crawl is measured in
terms of perplexity (cf. Section 3.1) by creating
a language model from the harvested data during
a particular crawl. Perplexity is then calculated
with respect to a held out test set. The follow-
ing three phases describe the evaluation procedure
more precisely:

1. The source corpus is split i.i.d.13 into a train-
ing and test set.

2. We create a language model U of the training
data, which is applied according to Section
3.1 for automatically focusing the crawl. In
order to compare the data of different crawls,
the repeated crawls are initialized with the
same global parameter settings, e.g. polite-
ness settings, seed, etc. are the same, and are
terminated after reaching a certain number of
documents.

3. From the harvested data, another language
model V is produced which is used for the
evaluation of the test data. Here we argue
that a crawl which collects data that is used
for evaluating V and V results in a lower per-
plexity score, is preferred as it better models
the target domain.

Figure 2 shows a schematic overview of the three
phases of evaluation.

4.2 Unsupervised Relation Extraction

The evaluation of relation extraction is a non-
trivial task, as unsupervised categories do usually
not exactly match the distinctions taken in annota-
tion studies. For the evaluation of our method we
consider the following three approaches:

1. We test our relations directly on datasets that
were provided as relation classification chal-
lenge datasets (Girju et al., 2007; Hendrickx

13independent and identically distributed

U

V

w w w

Phase 1

Phase 3

Phase 2

Figure 2: Schematic overview of the evaluation
procedure for a particular crawl.

et al., 2010). Whereas the first dataset is pro-
vided as a binary classification task, the sec-
ond is a multi-way classification task. How-
ever, both datasets can be transformed to ad-
dress the one or the other task. This is possi-
ble because the challenge is already finished.

2. We apply our extracted relations for assisting
classification algorithms for the task of tex-
tual entailment (Dagan et al., 2006).

3. Following Davidov and Rappoport (2008b)
we would further like to apply our system to
the task of question answering.

While the first approach is an intrinsic evaluation,
the other three approaches are extrinsic, i.e. the
extracted relations are used in a particular task
which is then evaluated against some gold stan-
dard.

5 Preliminary Results

5.1 Focused crawling

Table 1 shows some quantitative characteristics of
a non-focused crawl. Here the crawl was per-
formed as a scoped crawl, which means that it was
bounded to the German top-level-domain ’.de’ and
additionally by a maximum number of 20 hops
from the start seed14. The crawl was terminated
after about two weeks. Although these numbers

14The start seed for the first crawl consists of five web page
urls which are strongly connected to German educational re-
search.

16



pdf html
size in GBytes 17 400
number of documents 43K 9M
runtime ≈ 2 weeks

Table 1: Numbers are given as approximate num-
bers.

do not seem surprising, they do support the main
argument of this proposal. Focused crawling is
necessary in order to reduce the massive load of
irrelevant data.

Initial encouraging results on the comparison of
a focused vs. a non-focused crawl are shown in
Figure 3. The crawls were performed under the
same conditions and we recorded the perplexity
value during the process. We plot the history for
the first 300,000 documents. Although these re-
sults are preliminary, a trend is clearly observable.
The focused crawl harvests more relevant doc-
uments as it proceeds, whereas the non-focused
crawl deviates more as longer the crawl proceeds,
as indicated by higher perplexity values for later
documents — an effect that is likely to increase as
the crawl proceeds. The focused crawl, on the
other hand, stays within low perplexity limits. We
plan to evaluate settings and the interplay between
crawling parameters and language modeling more
thoroughly in future evaluations.

5.2 Unsupervised Relation Extraction

The unsupervised extraction of relations was per-
formed on a small subset of one Million sentences
of the news corpus from the Leipzig Corpora Col-
lection (Richter et al., 2006).

Preliminary example results are shown in Ta-
ble 2 and in Table 3. Table 2 shows selected results
for similar entity pairs, and Table 3 shows selected
results for similar dependency paths.

In Table 2, three example entity pairs are shown
together with their most similar counterparts. It is
interesting to see that the relation of gold to ounce
is the same as stock to share or oil to barrel and
we can easily agree here, since the one is the mea-
suring unit for the other.

Table 3 shows for three example prepositional
paths the similar paths. We have chosen prepo-
sitional phrases here because of their intuitive in-
terpretability. The example output shows that the
similar phrases which were identified by the sys-
tem are also interpretable for humans.

Figure 3: Two crawl runs under same conditions
and with same settings. Upper: a focused crawl
run. Lower: a non-focused crawl run.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

This research thesis proposal addressed the two
major objectives:

1. crawling with a focus on in-domain data by
using a language model of an initial corpus,
which is small compared to the expected re-
sult of the crawls, in order to discriminate
relevant web documents from irrelevant web
documents, and

2. unsupervised relation extraction by follow-
ing the principles of the Distributional Hy-
pothesis by Harris (1954) resp. the Extended
Distributional Hypothesis by Lin and Pantel
(2001).

The promising preliminary results encourage
us to examine this approach for further direc-
tions. Specifically the yet unaddressed parts of the
evaluation will be investigated. Further, the un-
supervised relation extraction techniques will be
applied on the complete set of in-domain data,
thus finalizing the workflow of enriching a small
amount of domain defining data with web data

17



gold/NN :: ounce/NN
crude/NN :: barrel/NN

oil/NN :: barrel/NN
futures/NNS :: barrel/NN

stock/NN :: share/NN

graduate/NN :: University/NNP
graduate/NN :: School/NNP
graduate/NN :: College/NNP

goals/NNS :: season/NN
points/NNS :: season/NN
points/NNS :: game/NN

touchdowns/NNS :: season/NN

Table 2: Example results for selected entity pairs.
Similar entity pairs with respect to the boldface
pair are shown.

from focused crawls in order to extract rich in-
domain knowledge, particularly from the german
educational domain as our application domain.
While we made clear that crawling the web is a
crucial process in order to get the amounts of in-
domain data needed by the unsupervised relation
extraction methods, we did not yet point out that
we will also examine the reverse direction, i.e. the
possibility to use the extracted relations for fur-
ther improving the focused crawler. A focused
crawler that is powered by semantic relations be-
tween entities would raise a new level of semanti-
cally focused crawls. Additionally, we will inves-
tigate possibilities for further narrowing the rela-
tions found by our system. Here it is possible to
further categorize or cluster the relations by using
either the similarity graph or the features itself, as
done by Pantel and Lin (2002).

Acknowledgments

This work has been supported by the German In-
stitute for Educational Research (DIPF) under the
KDSL program.

References
Alan Akbik, Larysa Visengeriyeva, Johannes

Kirschnick, and Alexander Löser. 2013. Ef-
fective selectional restrictions for unsupervised
relation extraction. In Proceedings of the Sixth In-
ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (IJCNLP), pages 1312–1320, Nagoya,
Japan.

Michele Banko and Eric Brill. 2001. Scaling to very

@1 <= prep above = @2
@1 <= prep below = @2

@1 <= nsubj = rose/V BD = dobj => @2
@1 <= nsubj = dropped/V BD = dobj => @2

@1 <= nsubj = fell/V BD = dobj => @2

@1 <= prep regarding = @2
@1 <= prep about = @2
@1 <= prep on = @2

@1 <= prep like = @2
@1 <= prep such as = @2

@1 <= prep including = @2
@1 <= nsubj = are/V BP = prep among => @2

Table 3: Example results for selected dependency
paths. Similar paths with respect to the boldface
path are shown.

very large corpora for natural language disambigua-
tion. In Proceedings of the 39th Annual Meeting on
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL),
pages 26–33, Toulouse, France.

Marco Baroni, Silvia Bernardini, Adriano Ferraresi,
and Eros Zanchetta. 2009. The wacky wide web:
a collection of very large linguistically processed
web-crawled corpora. Language Resources and
Evaluation, 43(3):209–226.

Douglas Biber. 1995. Dimensions of Register Varia-
tion: A Cross-Linguistic Comparison. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.

Chris Biemann and Martin Riedl. 2013. Text: Now
in 2d! a framework for lexical expansion with con-
textual similarity. Journal of Language Modelling
(JLM), 1(1):55–95.

Chris Biemann, Felix Bildhauer, Stefan Evert, Dirk
Goldhahn, Uwe Quasthoff, Roland Schäfer, Jo-
hannes Simon, Swiezinski Swiezinski, and Torsten
Zesch. 2013. Scalable construction of high-quality
web corpora. Journal for Language Technology and
Computational Linguistics (JLCL), 27(2).

Steven Bird, Robert Dale, Bonnie Dorr, Bryan Gibson,
Mark Joseph, Min-Yen Kan, Dongwon Lee, Brett
Powley, Dragomir Radev, and Yee Fan Tan. 2008.
The acl anthology reference corpus: A reference
dataset for bibliographic research in computational
linguistics. In Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC), Marrakech, Morocco.

Avrim Blum and Tom Mitchell. 1998. Combining
labeled and unlabeled data with co-training. In
Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual Conference on
Computational Learning Theory (COLT), pages 92–
100, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

18



Thorsten Brants and Alex Franz. 2006. Web 1T 5-gram
Version 1. Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadel-
phia.

Andrew Carlson, Justin Betteridge, Bryan Kisiel, Burr
Settles, Estevam R. Hruschka Jr., and Tom M.
Mitchell. 2010. Toward an architecture for never-
ending language learning. In Proceedings of the
24th Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI),
Atlanta, GA, USA.

Soumen Chakrabarti, Martin van den Berg, and Byron
Dom. 1999. Focused crawling: a new approach
to topic-specific web resource discovery. Computer
Networks, 31(11–16):1623–1640.

Nathanael Chambers and Dan Jurafsky. 2011.
Template-based information extraction without the
templates. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: Human Language Technologies, pages 976–
986, Portland, Oregon, USA.

Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2006. The pascal recognising textual entailment
challenge. In Machine Learning Challenges. Evalu-
ating Predictive Uncertainty, Visual Object Classifi-
cation, and Recognising Tectual Entailment, volume
3944 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
177–190. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

Dmitry Davidov and Ari Rappoport. 2008a. Clas-
sification of semantic relationships between nomi-
nals using pattern clusters. In Proceedings of the
46th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies (ACL-HLT), pages 227–235, Columbus, Ohio.

Dmitry Davidov and Ari Rappoport. 2008b. Unsuper-
vised discovery of generic relationships using pat-
tern clusters and its evaluation by automatically gen-
erated SAT analogy questions. In Proceedings of the
46th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies (ACL-HLT), pages 692–700, Columbus, Ohio.

Dmitry Davidov, Ari Rappoport, and Moshe Koppel.
2007. Fully unsupervised discovery of concept-
specific relationships by web mining. In Proceed-
ings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association of
Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages 232–239,
Prague, Czech Republic.

Oren Etzioni, Michele Banko, Stephen Soderland, and
Daniel S. Weld. 2008. Open information extrac-
tion from the web. Communications of the ACM,
51(12):68–74.

Roxana Girju, Preslav Nakov, Vivi Nastase, Stan Sz-
pakowicz, Peter Turney, and Deniz Yuret. 2007.
Semeval-2007 task 04: Classification of semantic
relations between nominals. In Proceedings of the
Fourth International Workshop on Semantic Evalu-
ation (SemEval), pages 13–18, Prague, Czech Re-
public.

Alon Halevy, Peter Norvig, and Fernando Pereira.
2009. The unreasonable effectiveness of data. IEEE
Intelligent Systems, 24(2):8–12.

Zellig S. Harris. 1954. Distributional structure. Word,
10(23):146–162.

Marti A. Hearst. 1992. Automatic acquisition of hy-
ponyms from large text corpora. In Proceedings of
the 15th Conference on Computational Linguistics
(Coling), pages 539–545, Nantes, France.

Iris Hendrickx, Su Nam Kim, Zornitsa Kozareva,
Preslav Nakov, Diarmuid Ó Séaghdha, Sebastian
Padó, Marco Pennacchiotti, Lorenza Romano, and
Stan Szpakowicz. 2010. Semeval-2010 task 8:
Multi-way classification of semantic relations be-
tween pairs of nominals. In Proceedings of the
Fifth International Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
tion (SemEval), pages 33–38, Los Angeles, Califor-
nia.

Florian Holz and Chris Biemann. 2008. Unsupervised
and knowledge-free learning of compound splits and
periphrases. In CICLing 2008: Proceedings of the
Conference on Intelligent Text Processing and Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 117–127, Haifa, Israel.

Adam Kilgarriff. 2007. Googleology is bad science.
Computational Linguististics (CL), 33(1):147–151.

Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Ac-
curate unlexicalized parsing. In Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL), pages 423–430, Sapporo,
Japan.

Reinhard Kneser and Hermann Ney. 1995. Improved
backing-off for m-gram language modeling. In In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, pages
181–184, Detroit, Michigan.

Mike Lewis and Mark Steedman. 2013. Unsuper-
vised induction of cross-lingual semantic relations.
In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), pages 681–692, Seattle, WA, USA.

Dekang Lin and Patrick Pantel. 2001. Dirt - discov-
ery of inference rules from text. In Proceedings of
the Seventh International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining (KDD), pages 323–328,
San Francisco, California.

Dekang Lin, Kenneth Church, Heng Ji, Satoshi Sekine,
David Yarowsky, Shane Bergsma, Kailash Patil,
Emily Pitler, Rachel Lathbury, Vikram Rao, Kapil
Dalwani, and Sushant Narsale. 2010. New tools
for web-scale n-grams. In Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC), pages 2221–2227, Valletta,
Malta.

19



Filippo Menczer, Gautam Pant, and Padmini Srini-
vasan. 2004. Topical web crawlers: Evaluating
adaptive algorithms. ACM Transactions Internet
Technology (TOIT), 4(4):378–419.

George A Miller and Walter G Charles. 1991. Contex-
tual correlates of semantic similarity. Language and
Cognitive Processes (LCP), 6(1):1–28.

Mike Mintz, Steven Bills, Rion Snow, and Dan Ju-
rafsky. 2009. Distant supervision for relation ex-
traction without labeled data. In Proceedings of the
Joint Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting of the
ACL and the 4th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing of the AFNLP, pages
1003–1011, Suntec, Singapore.

Gordon Mohr, Michele Kimpton, Micheal Stack, and
Igor Ranitovic. 2004. Introduction to heritrix,
an archival quality web crawler. In Proceedings
of the 4th International Web Archiving Workshop
IWAW’04, Bath, UK.

Vivi Nastase, Preslav Nakov, Diarmuid Ó Séaghdha,
and Stan Szpakowicz. 2013. Semantic relations be-
tween nominals. In Synthesis Lectures on Human
Language Technologies, volume 6. Morgan & Cay-
pool Publishers.

Patrick Pantel and Dekang Lin. 2002. Document
clustering with committees. In Proceedings of the
25th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference
on Research and Development in Information Re-
trieval, pages 199–206.

Emily Pitler, Shane Bergsma, Dekang Lin, and Ken-
neth Church. 2010. Using web-scale n-grams to im-
prove base np parsing performance. In Proceedings
of the 23rd International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (Coling), pages 886–894, Beijing,
China.

Randolph Quirk, Sidney Greenbaum, Geoffrey Leech,
and Jan Svartvik. 1985. A Comprehensive Gram-
mar of the English Language. Longman, London.

Matthias Richter, Uwe Quasthoff, Erla Hallsteinsdóttir,
and Chris Biemann. 2006. Exploiting the leipzig
corpora collection. In Proceesings of the IS-LTC,
Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Roland Schäfer and Felix Bildhauer. 2012. Building
large corpora from the web using a new efficient
tool chain. In Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC), pages 486–493, Istanbul, Turkey.

John Sowa. 2000. Knowledge Representation: Logi-
cal, Philosophical and Computational Foundations.
Brooks Cole Publishing Co., Pacific Grove, CA.

Ang Sun and Ralph Grishman. 2010. Semi-supervised
semantic pattern discovery with guidance from un-
supervised pattern clusters. In Proceedings of the
23rd International Conference on Computational
Linguistics (Coling), pages 1194–1202, Beijing,
China.

Peter D. Turney and Patrick Pantel. 2010. From fre-
quency to meaning: Vector space models of seman-
tics. Journal for Artificial Intelligence Research
(JAIR), 37:141–188.

Peter D. Turney. 2005. Measuring semantic similar-
ity by latent relational analysis. In Proceedings of
the 19th International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (IJCAI), pages 1136–1141, Edinburgh,
Scotland, UK.

20


