



















































Special Techniques for Constituent Parsing of Morphologically Rich Languages


Proceedings of the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 135–144,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Special Techniques for Constituent Parsing of Morphologically Rich
Languages

Zsolt Szántó, Richárd Farkas
University of Szeged

Department of Informatics
{szanto,rfarkas}@inf.u-szeged.hu

Abstract

We introduce three techniques for improv-
ing constituent parsing for morphologi-
cally rich languages. We propose a novel
approach to automatically find an optimal
preterminal set by clustering morphologi-
cal feature values and we conduct exper-
iments with enhanced lexical models and
feature engineering for rerankers. These
techniques are specially designed for mor-
phologically rich languages (but they are
language-agnostic). We report empirical
results on the treebanks of five morpho-
logically rich languages and show a con-
siderable improvement in accuracy and in
parsing speed as well.

1 Introduction

From the viewpoint of syntactic parsing, the
languages of the world are usually categorized
according to their level of morphological rich-
ness (which is negatively correlated with config-
urationality). At one end, there is English, a
strongly configurational language while there is
Hungarian at the other end of the spectrum with
rich morphology and free word order (Fraser et al.,
2013). A large part of the methodology for syn-
tactic parsing has been developed for English but
many other languages of the world are fundamen-
tally different from English. In particular, mor-
phologically rich languages – the other end of the
configurational spectrum – convey most sentence-
level syntactic information by morphology (i.e. at
the word level), not by configuration. Because of
these differences the parsing of morphologically
rich languages requires techniques that differ from
or extend the methodology developed for English
(Tsarfaty et al., 2013). In this study, we present
three techniques to improve constituent parsing
and these special techniques are dedicated to han-

dle the challenges of morphologically rich lan-
guages.

Constituency parsers have advanced consider-
ably in the last two decades (Charniak, 2000;
Charniak and Johnson, 2005; Petrov et al., 2006;
Huang, 2008) boosted by the availability of the
Penn Treebank (Marcus et al., 1993). While
there is a progress on parsing English (especially
the Penn Treebank), the treebanks of morphologi-
cally rich languages have been attracted much less
attention. For example, a big constituent treebank
has been available for Hungarian for almost 10
years (Csendes et al., 2005) and to the best of
our knowledge our work is the first one report-
ing results on this treebank. One reason for the
moderate level of interest in constituent parsing of
morphologically rich languages is the widely held
belief that dependency structures are better suited
for representing syntactic analyses for morpho-
logically rich languages than constituent represen-
tations because they allow non-projective struc-
tures (i.e. discontinuous constituents). From a
theoretical point of view, Tsarfaty et al. (2010)
point out, however, this is not the same as prov-
ing that dependency parsers function better than
constituency parsers for parsing morphologically
rich languages. For a detailed discussion, please
see Fraser et al. (2013).

From an empirical point of view, the organiz-
ers of the recent shared task on ‘Statistical Pars-
ing of Morphologically Rich Languages’ (Seddah
et al., 2013) provided datasets only for languages
having treebanks in both dependency and con-
stituency format and their cross-framework evalu-
ation – employing the unlabeled TedEval (Tsarfaty
et al., 2012) as evaluation procedure – revealed
that at 4 out of 9 morphologically rich languages,
the results of constituent parsers were higher than
the scores achieved by the best dependency pars-
ing system. Based on these theoretical issues and
empirical results, we support the conclusion of

135



Fraser et al. (2013) that “... there is no clear
evidence for preferring dependency parsing over
constituency parsing in analyzing languages with
rich morphology and instead argue that research
in both frameworks is important.”

In this study, we propose answers to the two
main challenges of constituent parsing of mor-
phologically rich languages, which are finding the
optimal preterminal set and handling the huge
number of wordforms. The size of the pretermi-
nal set in the standard context free grammar envi-
ronment is crucial. If we use only the main POS
tags as preterminals, we lose a lot of information
encoded in the morphological description of the
tokens. On the other hand, using the full mor-
phological description as preterminal yields a set
of over a thousand preterminals, which results in
data sparsity and performance problems as well.
The chief contribution of this work is to propose a
novel automatic procedure to find the optimal set
of preterminals by merging morphological fea-
ture values. The main novelties of our approach
over previous work are that it is very fast – it
operates inside a probabilistic context free gram-
mar (PCFG) instead of using a parser as a black
box with re-training for every evaluation of a fea-
ture combination – and it can investigate particular
morphological feature values instead of removing
a feature with all of its values.

Another challenge is that because of the inflec-
tional nature of morphologically rich languages
the number of wordforms is much higher com-
pared with English. Hence the number of
unknown and very rare tokens – i.e. the tokens
that do not appear in the training dataset – is
higher here, which hurts the performance of PCFG
parsers. Following Goldberg and Elhadad (2013),
we enhance the lexical model by exploiting an
external lexicon. We investigate the applicabilities
of fully supervised taggers instead of unsupervised
ones for gathering external lexicons.

Lastly, we introduce novel feature templates
for an n-best reranker operating on the top of a
PCFG parser. These feature templates are exploit-
ing atomic morphological features and achieve
improvements over the standard feature set engi-
neered for English.

We conducted experiments by the above men-
tioned three techniques on Basque, French, Ger-
man, Hebrew and Hungarian, five morphologi-
cally rich languages. The BerkeleyParser (Petrov

et al., 2006) enriched with these three techniques
achieved state-of-the-art results on each language.

2 Related Work

Constituent parsing of English is a well researched
area. The field has been dominated by data-driven,
i.e. treebank-based statistical approaches in the
last two decades (Charniak, 2000; Charniak and
Johnson, 2005; Petrov et al., 2006). We extend
here BerkeleyParser (Petrov et al., 2006), which
is a PCFG parser using latent annotations at non-
terminals. Its basic idea is to iteratively split each
non-terminal into subsymbols thus capturing the
different subusage of them instead of manually
designed annotations.

The constituent parsing of morphologically
rich languages is a much less investigated field.
There exist constituent treebanks for several lan-
guages along with a very limited number of
parsing reports on them. For instance, Petrov
(2009) trained BerkeleyParser on Arabic, Bulgar-
ian, French, German and Italian and he reported
good accuracies, but there has been previous work
on Hebrew (Goldberg and Elhadad, 2013), Korean
(Choi et al., 1994) and Spanish (Le Roux et al.,
2012) etc. The recently organized ‘Statistical Pars-
ing of Morphologically Rich Languages’ (Seddah
et al., 2013) addressed the dependency and con-
stituency parsing of nine morphologically rich lan-
guages and provides useful benchmark datasets
for these languages.

Our chief contribution in this paper is a pro-
cedure to merge preterminal labels. The related
work for this line of research includes the studies
on manual refinement of preterminal sets such as
Marton et al. (2010) and Le Roux et al. (2012).
The most closely related approach to our proposal
is Dehdari et al. (2011), who defines metaheuris-
tics to incrementally insert or remove morphologi-
cal features. Their approach uses parser – training
and parsing – as a black box evaluation of a preter-
minal set. In contrast, our proposal operates as a
submodule of the BerkeleyParser, hence does not
require the re-training of the parser for every pos-
sible preterminal set candidate, thus it is way more
faster.

The most successful supervised constituent
parsers contain a second feature-rich discrimina-
tive parsing step (Charniak and Johnson, 2005;
Huang, 2008; Chen and Kit, 2012) as well. At
the first stage they apply a PCFG to extract pos-

136



Basque French German Hebrew Hungarian
#sent. in training 7577 14759 40472 5000 8146
#sent. in dev 948 1235 5000 500 1051
#sent. in test 946 2541 5000 716 1009
avg. token/sent. 12.92 30.13 17.51 25.33 21.76
#non-terminal labels 3000 770 994 1196 890
#main POS labels 16 33 54 46 16
unknown token ratio (dev) 18.35% 3.22% 6.34% 19.94% 19.94%

Table 1: Basic statistics of the treebanks used.

sible parses. The n-best list parsers keep just
the 50-100 best parses according to the PCFG
(Charniak and Johnson, 2005). These methods
employ a large feature set (usually a few mil-
lion features) (Collins, 2000; Charniak and John-
son, 2005). These feature sets are engineered for
English. In this study, we introduce feature tem-
plates for exploiting morphological information
and investigate their added value over the standard
feature sets.

3 Experimental Setup

We conducted experiments on the treebanks of
the 2013 shared task on ‘Statistical Parsing of
Morphologically Rich Languages’ (Seddah et al.,
2013). We used the train/dev/test splits of the
shared task’s Basque (Aduriz et al., 2003), French
(Abeillé et al., 2003), Hebrew (Sima’an et al.,
2001), German (Brants et al., 2002) and Hun-
garian (Csendes et al., 2005) treebanks. Table 1
shows the basic statistics of these treebanks, for
a more detailed description about their annotation
schemata, domain, preprocessing etc. please see
Seddah et al. (2013).

As evaluation metrics we employ the PARSE-
VAL score (Abney et al., 1991) along with the
exact match accuracy (i.e. the ratio of perfect
parse trees). We use the evalb implementation of
the shared task1.

4 Enhanced Lexical Models

Before introducing our proposal and experiments
with preterminal set optimisation, we have to offer
a solution for the out-of-vocabulary (OOV) prob-
lem, which – because of the inflectional nature –
is a crucial problem in morphologically rich lan-

1Available at http://pauillac.inria.fr/
˜seddah/evalb_spmrl2013.tar.gz. An important
change in this version compared to the original evalb is the
penalization of unparsed sentences.

guages. We follow here Goldberg and Elhadad
(2013) and enhance a lexicon model trained on the
training set of the treebank with frequency infor-
mation about the possible morphological analyses
of tokens. We estimate the tagging probability
P (t|w) of the tag t given the word w by

P (t|w) =
{

Ptb(t|w), if c(w) ≥ K
c(w)Ptb(t|w)+Pex(t|w)

1+c(w) , otherwise

where c(w) is the count of w in the training set,
K is predefined constant, Ptb(t|w) is the proba-
bility estimate from the treebank (the relative fre-
quency with smoothing) and Pex(t|w) is the prob-
ability estimate from an external lexicon. We
calculate the emission probabilities P (w|t) from
the tagging probabilities P (t|w) by applying the
Bayesian rule.

The key question here is how to construct the
external lexicon. For a baseline, Goldberg and
Elhadad (2013) suggest using the uniform dis-
tribution over all possible morphological analy-
ses coming from a morphological analyser (’uni-
form’).

Goldberg and Elhadad (2013) also report con-
siderable improvements over the ‘uniform’ base-
line by relative frequencies counted on a large
corpus which was automatically annotated in the
unsupervised POS tagging paradigm (Goldberg
et al., 2008). Here we show that even a super-
vised morphological tagger without a morpho-
logical analyzer can achieve the same level of
improvement. We employ MarMot2 (Mueller
et al., 2013) for predicting full morphological
analysis (i.e. POS tags and morphological fea-
tures jointly). MarMot is a Conditional Random
Field tagger which incrementally creates forward-
backward lattices of increasing order to prune the

2https://code.google.com/p/cistern/

137



sizable space of possible morphological analy-
ses. We used MarMoT with the default param-
eters. This purely data-driven tagger achieves a
tagging accuracy of 97.6 evaluated at full mor-
phological analyses on the development set of the
Hungarian treebank, which is competitive with the
state-of-the-art Hungarian taggers which employ
language-specific rules (e.g. magyarlanc (Zsibrita
et al., 2013)). The chief advantage of using Mar-
Mot instead of an unsupervised tagger is that the
former does not require any morphological lex-
icon/analyser (which can lists the possible tags
for a given word). This morphological lexi-
con/analyser is language-dependent, usually hand-
crafted and it has to be compatible with the tree-
bank in question. In contrast, a supervised mor-
phological tagger can build a reasonable tagging
model on the training part of the treebanks – espe-
cially for morphologically rich languages, where
the tag ambiguity is generally low – thus each of
these problems is avoided.

Table 2 shows the results of various Pex(t|w)
estimates on the Hungarian development set. The
first row ‘BerkeleyParser’ is our absolute base-
line, i.e. the original implementation of Berke-
leyParser3 defining signatures for OOVs. For
the ‘uniform’ results, we used the morphologi-
cal analyser module of magyarlanc (Zsibrita et al.,
2013). The last two rows show the results achieved
by training MarMot on the treebank’s training
dataset, having tagged the development set plus
a huge unlabeled corpus (10M sentences from the
Hungarian National Corpus (Váradi, 2002)) with it
then having counted relative tag frequencies. We
report scores on only using the frequencies from
the development set (’dev’) and from the concate-
nation of the development set and the huge corpus
(’huge’).

After a few preliminary experiments, we set
K = 7 and use this value thereafter.

Table 2 shows that even ‘dev’ yields a consid-
erable improvement over the baseline parser and
‘uniform’. These results are also in line with
the findings of Goldberg and Elhadad (2013), i.e.
‘uniform’ has some added value and using relative
frequencies gathered from automatically tagged
corpora contributes more. Although we can see
another nice improvement by exploiting unlabeled
corpora (’huge’), we will use the ‘dev’ setting in

3http://code.google.com/p/
berkeleyparser/

PARSEVAL EX
BerkeleyParser 87.22 12.75
uniform 87.31 14.78
dev 88.29 15.22
huge 89.27 16.97

Table 2: The results achieved by using various
external lexical models on the Hungarian devel-
opment set.

the experiments of the next sections as we did not
have access to huge, in-domain unlabeled corpora
for each language used in this study.

5 Morphological Feature Values as
Preterminals

Finding the optimal set of morphological features
incorporating into the perterminal labels is cru-
cial for any PCFG parsers. Removing morpho-
logical features might reduce data sparsity prob-
lems while it might lead to loss of information for
the syntactic parser. In this section, we propose
a novel method for automatically finding the opti-
mal set of preterminals then we present empirical
results with this method and compare it to various
baselines.

Merge Procedure for Morphological Feature
Values: There have been studies published on
the automatic reduction of the set of pretermi-
nals for constituent parsing. For instance, Dehdari
et al. (2011) proposed a system which iteratively
removes morphological features as a unit then
evaluates the preterminal sets by running the train-
ing and parsing steps of a black-box constituent
parser. Our motivation here is two-fold. First,
morphological features should not be handled as
a unit because different values of a feature might
behave differently. Take for instance the degree
feature in Hungarian adjectives. Here the val-
ues positive and superlative behave similarly (can
be merged) while distinguishing comparative and
positive+superlative is useful for syntactic pars-
ing because comparative adjectives often have an
argument (e.g. x is more beautiful than y) while
positive and superlative adjectives are not syntac-
tic governors thus have no arguments. Second,
keeping a morphological feature can be useful for
particular POS tags and useless at other particular
POS tags (e.g. the number of possessed in Hun-
garian for nouns and pronouns).

138



Algorithm 1 The preterminal set merger algorithm.
1. training the standard BerkeleyParser using only main POS tags as preterminals

2. merging each subsymbols at the preterminal level

3. for each POS tag - morphological feature pair

(a) split the POS tag for the values of the morphological feature4

(b) recalculating the rule probabilities where there are preterminals in the right-hand side by uni-
formly distribute the probability mass among subsymbols

(c) set the lexical probabilities according to the relative frequencies of morphological values
counted on gold standard morphological tags of the treebank

(d) running 10 iterations of the Expectation-Maximization procedure on the whole treebank ini-
tialized with (b)-(c)

(e) constructing a fully connected graph whose nodes are the morphological values of the feature
in question

(f) for every edge of the graph, calculate the loss in likehood for the merging the two subsymbols
(the same way as for BerkeleyParser’s merge procedure)

4. removing edges from the entire set of graphs (controlled by the parameter th)

5. merge the morphological values of the graphs’ connected components

Based on these observations we propose a pro-
cedure which starts from the full morphological
description of a treebank then iteratively merges
particular morphological feature values and it han-
dles the same feature at the different POS tags sep-
arately. The result of this procedure is a clustering
of the possible values of each morphological fea-
ture. The removal of a morphological feature is a
special case of our approach because if the values
of the feature in question form one single cluster
it does not have any discriminative function any-
more. Hence our proposal can be regarded as a
generalisation of the previous approaches.

This general approach requires much more eval-
uation of intermediate candidate preterminal sets,
which is not feasible within the external black-box
parser evaluation scenario (training and parsing
an average sized treebank by the BerkeleyParser
takes more than 1 hour). Our idea here is that re-
training a parser for the evaluation of each preter-
minal set candidates is not necessary. They key
objective here is to select among preterminal sets
based on their usefulness for the syntactic parser.
This is the motivation of the merge procedure of
the BerkeleyParser. After randomly splitting non-
terminals, BerkeleyParser calculates for each split
the loss in likelihood incurred when merging the
subsymbols back. If this loss is small, the new

annotation does not carry enough useful informa-
tion and can be removed (Petrov et al., 2006). Our
task is the same at the preterminal level. Hence at
the preterminal level, – instead of using the auto-
matic subsymbol splits of the BerkeleyParser – we
call this merging procedure over the morpholog-
ical feature values. Algorithm 1 shows our pro-
posal for the preterminal merging procedure.

Baseline Preterminal Set Constructions: The
two basic approaches for preterminal set con-
struction are the use of only the main POS tag
set (’mainPOS’) and the use of the full morpho-
logical description as preterminals (’full’). For
Hungarian, we also had access to a linguistically
motivated, hand-crafted preterminal set (’man-
ual’) which was designed for a morphological tag-
ger (Zsibrita et al., 2013). This manual code set
keeps different morphological features at differ-
ent POS tags and merges morphological values
instead of fully removing features hence it inspired
our automatic merge procedure introduced in the
previous section.

Our last baseline is the repetition of the experi-
ments of Dehdari et al. (2011). For this, we started
from the full morphological feature set and com-
pletely removed features (from all POS) one-by-
one then re-trained our parser. We observed the
greatest drop in PARSEVAL score at removing the

139



Basque French German Hebrew Hungarian
mainPOS 68.8/3.9 16 78.4/13.9 33 82.3/38.7 54 88.3/12.0 46 82.6/7.3 16
full 81.8/18.4 2976 78.9/15.0 676 82.3/40.3 686 88.9/15.2 257 88.3/15.2 680
preterminal merger 81.6/16.9 2791 79.7/15.6 480 82.3/39.3 111 89.0/14.6 181 88.5/15.4 642

Table 3: PARSEVAL / exact match scores on the development sets. The third small numbers in cells
show the size of the preterminal sets.

‘Num’ feature and the least severe one at remov-
ing ‘Form’. ’Num’ denotes number for verbs and
nominal elements (nouns, adjectives and numer-
als), and since subject-verb agreement is deter-
mined by the number and person features of the
predicate (the verb) and the subject (the noun),
deleting the feature ‘Num’ results in a serious
decline in performance. On the other hand, ‘Form’
denotes whether a conjunction is single or com-
pound (which is a lexical feature) or whether a
number is spelt with letters, Arabic or Roman
numbers (which is an orthographic feature). It is
interesting to see that their deletion hardly harms
the PARSEVAL scores, moreover, it can even
improve the exact match scores, which is probably
due to the fact that the distinction between differ-
ent orthographic versions of the same number (e.g.
6 and VI) just confused the parser. On the other
hand, members of a compound conjunction are not
attached to each other in any way in the parse tree,
and behave similar to single compounds, so this
distinction might also be problematic for parsing.

Results with Various Preterminal Sets: Table
4 summarizes the results achieved by our four
baseline methods along with the scores of two
preterminal sets output by our merger approach at
two different merging threshold th value.

#pt PARSEVAL EX
mainPOS 16 82.36 5.52
manual 72 85.38 9.23
full 680 88.29 15.22
full - Num 479 87.43 14.49
full - Form 635 88.24 15.73
merged (th = 0.5) 378 88.36 15.92
merged (th = 0.1) 642 88.52 15.44

Table 4: The results achieved by using various
preterminal sets on the Hungarian development
set.

The difference between mainPOS and full is
surprisingly high, which indicates that the mor-

phological information carried in preterminals is
extremely important for the constituent parser and
the BerkeleyParser can handle preterminal sets of
the size of several hundreds. For Hungarian, we
found that the full removal of any feature cannot
increase the results. This finding is contradictory
with Dehdari et al. (2011) in Arabic, where remov-
ing ‘Case’ yielded a gain of 1.0 in PARSEVAL.
We note that baselines for Arabic and Hungar-
ian are also totally different, Dehdari et al. (2011)
reports basically no difference between mainPOS
and full in Arabic.

We report results of our proposed procedure
with two different merging thresholds. The th =
0.1 case merges only a few morphological feature
values and it can slightly outperform the ‘full’ set-
ting (statistically significant5 in exact match.). On
the other hand, the th = 0.5 setting is competitive
with the ‘full’ setting in terms of parsing accuracy
but it uses only the third of the preterminals used
by ‘full’. Although it is not statistically better than
‘full’ in accuracy, it almost halves the running time
of parsing6.

Table 3 summarizes the results achieved by
the most important baselines and our approach
along with the size of the particular preterminal
sets applied. The ‘full’ results outperform ‘main-
POS’ at each language with a striking difference at
Basque and Hungarian. These results show that –
contradictory to the general belief – the detailed
morphological description is definitely useful in
constituent parsing as well. The last row of the
table contains the result achieved by our merger
approach. Here we run experiments with several
merging threshold th values and show the highest
scores for each language.

Our merging proposal could find a better preter-
minal set than full on French and Hungarian, it
found a competitive tag set in terms of accuracies

5According to two sample t-test with p<0.001.
6Parsing the 1051 sentences of the Hungarian develop-

ment set takes 15 and 9 minutes with full and th = 0.5
respectively (on an Intel Xeon E7 2GHz).

140



which are much smaller than full on German and
Hebrew and it could not find any useful merge at
Basque. The output of the merger procedure con-
sists of one sixth of preterminals compared with
full. Manually investigating the clusters, we can
see that it basically merged every morphological
feature except case at nouns and adjectives (but
merged case at personal pronouns). This finding
is in line with the experimental results of Fraser et
al. (2013).

6 Morphology-based Features in n-best
Reranking

n-best rerankers (Collins, 2000; Charniak and
Johnson, 2005) are used as second stage after a
PCFG parser and they usually achieve consider-
able improvement over the first stage parser. They
extract a large feature set to describe the n best
output of a PCFG parser and they select the best
parse from this set (i.e. rerank the parses). Here,
we define feature templates exploiting morpho-
logical information and investigate their added
value for the standard feature sets (engineered for
English). We reimplemented the feature templates
from Charniak and Johnson (2005) and Versley
and Rehbein (2009) excluding the features based
on external corpora and use them as our baseline
feature set.

We used n = 50 in our experiment and fol-
lowed a 5-fold-cross-parsing (a.k.a. jackknifing)
approach for generating unseen parse candidates
for the training sentences (Charniak and Johnson,
2005). The reranker is trained for the maximum
entropy objective function of Charniak and John-
son (2005), i.e. the sum of posterior probabilities
of the oracles. We used a slightly modified version
of the Mallet toolkit for reranking (McCallum,
2002) and L2 regularizer with its default value for
coefficient.

The feature templates of the baseline feature set
frequently incorporate preterminals as atomic fea-
ture. As a first step, we investigated which preter-
minal set is the most useful for the baseline fea-
ture set. We took the 50 best output from the
parser using the merged preterminal set and used
its preterminals (’merged’) or only the main POS
tag (’mainPOS’) as atomic building blocks for the
reranker’s feature extractor. Table 5 shows that
mainPOS outperformed full. This is probably due
to data sparsity problems.

Based on this observation, we decided to use

mainPOS as preterminal in the atomic building
block of the baseline features and designed new
feature templates capturing the information in the
morphological analysis. We experimented with
the following templates:

For each preterminal of the candidate parse and
for each morphological feature value inside the
preterminal we add the pair of wordform and mor-
phological feature value as a new feature. In a sim-
ilar way, we define a reranker feature from every
morphological feature value of the head word of
the constituent. For each head-daughter attach-
ment in the candidate parse we add each pair of the
morphological feature values from the head words
of the attachment’s participants. Similarly we take
each combination of head word’s morphological
features values from sister constituents.

The first two templates enable the reranker to
incorporate information into its learnt model from
the rich morphology of the language at the lexi-
cal and constituent levels, while the last two tem-
plates might capture (dis)agreement at the mor-
phological level. The motivation for using these
features is that because of the free(er) word order
of morphologically rich languages, morphological
(dis)agreement can be a good indicator of attach-
ment.

Table 5 shows the added value of these fea-
ture templates over mainPOS (’extended’), which
is again statistically significant in exact match.
Exploiting the morphological agreement in syn-
tactic parsing has been investigated in previous
studies, e.g. the Bohnet parser (Bohnet, 2010)
employs morphological feature value pairs simi-
lar to our feature templates and Seeker and Kuhn
(2013) introduces an integer linear programming
framework including constraints for morpholog-
ical agreement. However, these works focus on
dependency parsing and to the best of our knowl-
edge, this is the first study on experimenting with
atomic morphological features and their agree-
ment in a constituency parsing.

PARSEVAL EX
reranker (merged morph) 89.05 18.45
reranker (mainPOS) 89.33 18.64
reranker (extended) 89.47 20.35

Table 5: The results achieved by using various
feature template sets for 50-best reranking on the
Hungarian development set.

141



Basque French German Hebrew Hungarian
BerkeleyParser 79.21 / 19.03 79.53 / 18.46 74.77 / 26.56 87.87 / 14.53 88.22 / 26.96
+ Lexical model 82.02 / 25.69 78.91 / 17.87 75.64 / 28.36 88.53 / 13.69 89.09 / 26.76
+ Preterminal merger 83.19 / 24.74 79.53 / 18.58 77.12 / 30.02 88.07 / 13.83 89.15 / 28.05
+ reranker 83.81 / 25.66 80.31 / 18.91 77.78 / 29.80 88.38 / 15.12 89.57 / 30.23
+ reranker + morph feat 84.03 / 26.28 80.41 / 20.07 77.74 / 29.23 88.55 / 15.24 89.91 / 30.55

Table 6: PARSEVAL / exact match scores on the test sets.

7 Results of the Full System

After our investigations focusing on building
blocks of our system independently from each
other on the development set, we parsed the test
sets of the treebanks adding steps one-by-one.
Table 6 summarizes our final results. We start
from the BerkeleyParser using the full morpholog-
ical descriptions as preterminal set, then we enrich
the lexical model with tagging frequencies gath-
ered from the automatic parsing of the test sets
(’+ lexical model’). In the third step we replace
the full preterminal set by the output of our preter-
minal merger procedure (’+ preterminal merger’).
We tuned the merging threshold of our method
on the development set for each language. The
last two rows contain the results achieved by the
50-best reranker with the standard feature set (’+
reranker’) and with the feature set extended by
morphological features (’+ morph features’).

The enhanced lexical model contributes a lot
at Basque and considerable improvements are
present at German and Hungarian as well while
it harmed the results in French. The advance of
the preterminal merger approach over the full set-
ting is clear at French and Hungarian, similarly to
the development set. It is interesting that an ratio-
nalized preterminal set could compensate the loss
suffered by a inadequate lexical model at French.

Although the reranking step could further
improve the results at each languages we have
to note that the gain (0.5 in average) is much
smaller here than the gains reported on English
(over 1.5). This might be because of the high
number of wordforms at morphologically rich lan-
guages i.e. most of feature templates are incor-
porate the words itself and the huge dictionary
can indicate data sparsity problems again. Our
morphology-based reranking features yielded a
moderate improvement at four languages, but we
believe there a lots of space for improvement here.

8 Conclusions

In this study we introduced three techniques for
better constituent parsing of morphologically rich
languages. We believe that research in con-
stituency parsing is important next to dependency
parsing. In general, we report state-of-the-art
results with constituent parsers with our entirely
language-agnostic techniques.

Our chief contribution here is the pretermi-
nal merger procedure. This is a more general
approach than previous proposals and still much
faster thank to operating on probabilities from a
PCFG instead of employing a full train+parse step
for evaluating every preterminal set candidate. We
found that the inclusion of the rich morphological
description into the preterminal level is crucial for
parsing morphologically rich languages. Our pro-
posed preterminal merger approach could outper-
form the full setting at 2 out of 5 languages, i.e. we
have reported gains in parsing accuracies by merg-
ing morphological feature values. At the other lan-
guages, the results with the full preterminal set and
our approach are competitive in terms of parsing
accuracies while our approach could achieve these
scores with a smaller preterminal set, which leads
to considerable parsing time advantages.

We also experimented with exploiting external
corpora in the lexical model. Here we showed
that automatic tagging of an off-the-shelf super-
vised morphological tagger (MarMot) can con-
tribute to the results. Our last experiment was car-
ried out with the feature set of an n-best reranker.
We showed that incorporating feature templates
built on morphological information improves the
results.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by the Euro-
pean Union and the European Social Fund through
project FuturICT.hu (grant no.: TÁMOP-4.2.2.C-
11/1/KONV-2012-0013).

142



References
Anne Abeillé, Lionel Clément, and François Toussenel.

2003. Building a treebank for french. In Anne
Abeillé, editor, Treebanks. Kluwer, Dordrecht.

S. Abney, S. Flickenger, C. Gdaniec, C. Grishman,
P. Harrison, D. Hindle, R. Ingria, F. Jelinek, J. Kla-
vans, M. Liberman, M. Marcus, S. Roukos, B. San-
torini, and T. Strzalkowski. 1991. Procedure for
quantitatively comparing the syntactic coverage of
english grammars. In E. Black, editor, Proceedings
of the workshop on Speech and Natural Language,
pages 306–311.

I. Aduriz, M. J. Aranzabe, J. M. Arriola, A. Atutxa,
A. Dı́az de Ilarraza, A. Garmendia, and M. Oronoz.
2003. Construction of a Basque dependency tree-
bank. In TLT-03, pages 201–204.

Bernd Bohnet. 2010. Top accuracy and fast depen-
dency parsing is not a contradiction. In Proceedings
of the 23rd International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (Coling 2010), pages 89–97.

Sabine Brants, Stefanie Dipper, Silvia Hansen, Wolf-
gang Lezius, and George Smith. 2002. The TIGER
treebank. In Erhard Hinrichs and Kiril Simov, edi-
tors, Proceedings of the First Workshop on Tree-
banks and Linguistic Theories (TLT 2002), pages
24–41.

Eugene Charniak and Mark Johnson. 2005. Coarse-
to-fine n-best parsing and maxent discriminative
reranking. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meet-
ing on Association for Computational Linguistics,
ACL ’05, pages 173–180.

Eugene Charniak. 2000. A maximum-entropy-
inspired parser. In Proceedings of the 1st North
American chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics conference, pages 132–139.

Xiao Chen and Chunyu Kit. 2012. Higher-order con-
stituent parsing and parser combination. In Pro-
ceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short
Papers), pages 1–5.

Key-Sun Choi, Young S Han, Young G Han, and Oh W
Kwon. 1994. Kaist tree bank project for korean:
Present and future development. In Proceedings
of the International Workshop on Sharable Natural
Language Resources, pages 7–14. Citeseer.

Michael Collins. 2000. Discriminative reranking for
natural language parsing. In Proceedings of the
Seventeenth International Conference on Machine
Learning, ICML ’00, pages 175–182.

Dóra Csendes, János Csirik, Tibor Gyimóthy, and
András Kocsor. 2005. The Szeged Treebank. In
TSD, pages 123–131.

Jon Dehdari, Lamia Tounsi, and Josef van Gen-
abith. 2011. Morphological features for parsing

morphologically-rich languages: A case of arabic.
In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Statis-
tical Parsing of Morphologically Rich Languages,
pages 12–21, Dublin, Ireland, October. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Alexander Fraser, Helmut Schmid, Richárd Farkas,
Renjing Wang, and Hinrich Schütze. 2013. Knowl-
edge sources for constituent parsing of german, a
morphologically rich and less-configurational lan-
guage. Computational Linguistics, 39(1):57–85.

Yoav Goldberg and Michael Elhadad. 2013. Word
segmentation, unknown-word resolution, and mor-
phological agreement in a hebrew parsing system.
Computational Linguistics, 39(1):121–160.

Yoav Goldberg, Meni Adler, and Michael Elhadad.
2008. EM can find pretty good HMM POS-taggers
(when given a good start). In Proceedings of ACL-
08: HLT, pages 746–754.

Liang Huang. 2008. Forest reranking: Discriminative
parsing with non-local features. In Proceedings of
ACL-08: HLT, pages 586–594.

Joseph Le Roux, Benoit Sagot, and Djamé Seddah.
2012. Statistical parsing of spanish and data driven
lemmatization. In Proceedings of the ACL 2012
Joint Workshop on Statistical Parsing and Seman-
tic Processing of Morphologically Rich Languages,
pages 55–61.

Mitchell P. Marcus, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz, and
Beatrice Santorini. 1993. Building a large anno-
tated corpus of english: the penn treebank. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 19(2):313–330.

Yuval Marton, Nizar Habash, and Owen Rambow.
2010. Improving arabic dependency parsing with
lexical and inflectional morphological features. In
Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 First Work-
shop on Statistical Parsing of Morphologically-Rich
Languages, pages 13–21.

Andrew Kachites McCallum. 2002. Mal-
let: A machine learning for language toolkit.
http://mallet.cs.umass.edu.

Thomas Mueller, Helmut Schmid, and Hinrich
Schütze. 2013. Efficient higher-order CRFs for
morphological tagging. In Proceedings of the 2013
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 322–332.

Slav Petrov, Leon Barrett, Romain Thibaux, and Dan
Klein. 2006. Learning accurate, compact, and
interpretable tree annotation. In Proceedings of
the 21st International Conference on Computational
Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 433–440.

Slav Petrov. 2009. Coarse-to-Fine Natural Language
Processing. Ph.D. thesis, University of California at
Bekeley, Berkeley, CA, USA.

143



Djamé Seddah, Reut Tsarfaty, Sandra Kübler, Marie
Candito, Jinho D. Choi, Richárd Farkas, Jennifer
Foster, Iakes Goenaga, Koldo Gojenola Gallete-
beitia, Yoav Goldberg, Spence Green, Nizar Habash,
Marco Kuhlmann, Wolfgang Maier, Yuval Mar-
ton, Joakim Nivre, Adam Przepiórkowski, Ryan
Roth, Wolfgang Seeker, Yannick Versley, Veronika
Vincze, Marcin Woliński, and Alina Wróblewska.
2013. Overview of the SPMRL 2013 shared
task: A cross-framework evaluation of parsing
morphologically rich languages. In Proceedings
of the Fourth Workshop on Statistical Parsing of
Morphologically-Rich Languages, pages 146–182.

Wolfgang Seeker and Jonas Kuhn. 2013. Morphologi-
cal and syntactic case in statistical dependency pars-
ing. Computational Linguistics, 39(1):23–55.

Khalil Sima’an, Alon Itai, Yoad Winter, Alon Altman,
and Noa Nativ. 2001. Building a Tree-Bank for
Modern Hebrew Text. In Traitement Automatique
des Langues.

Reut Tsarfaty, Djamé Seddah, Yoav Goldberg, Sandra
Kuebler, Yannick Versley, Marie Candito, Jennifer
Foster, Ines Rehbein, and Lamia Tounsi. 2010. Sta-
tistical parsing of morphologically rich languages
(spmrl) what, how and whither. In Proceedings of
the NAACL HLT 2010 First Workshop on Statistical
Parsing of Morphologically-Rich Languages, pages
1–12.

Reut Tsarfaty, Joakim Nivre, and Evelina Andersson.
2012. Cross-framework evaluation for statistical
parsing. In Proceedings of the 13th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 44–54.

Reut Tsarfaty, Djamé Seddah, Sandra Kübler, and
Joakim Nivre. 2013. Parsing morphologically rich
languages: Introduction to the special issue. Com-
putational Linguistics, 39(1):15–22.

Tamás Váradi. 2002. The hungarian national cor-
pus. In In Proceedings of the Second International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation,
pages 385–389.

Yannick Versley and Ines Rehbein. 2009. Scalable dis-
criminative parsing for german. In Proceedings of
the 11th International Conference on Parsing Tech-
nologies (IWPT’09), pages 134–137.

János Zsibrita, Veronika Vincze, and Richárd Farkas.
2013. magyarlanc: A toolkit for morphological and
dependency parsing of hungarian. In Proceedings of
RANLP.

144


