



















































Anaphora - Clause Annotation and Alignment Tool.


Proceedings of the Demonstrations at the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 69–72,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Anaphora – Clause Annotation and Alignment Tool 

 

 

Borislav Rizov 
Department of Computational 

Linguistics, IBL-BAS 
52 Shipchenski Prohod Blvd., bl. 17 

1113 Sofia, Bulgaria 
boby@dcl.bas.bg 

Rositsa Dekova 
Department of Computational 

Linguistics, IBL-BAS 
52 Shipchenski Prohod Blvd., bl. 17 

1113 Sofia, Bulgaria 
rosdek@dcl.bas.bg 

 

  

 

Abstract 

The paper presents Anaphora – an OS and 
language independent tool for clause 
annotation and alignment, developed at the 
Department of Computational Linguistics, 
Institute for Bulgarian Language, Bulgarian 
Academy of Sciences. The tool supports 
automated sentence splitting and alignment 
and modes for manual monolingual annotation 
and multilingual alignment of sentences and 
clauses. Anaphora has been successfully 
applied for the annotation and the alignment of 
the Bulgarian-English Sentence- and Clause-
Aligned Corpus (Koeva et al. 2012a) and a 
number of other languages including French 
and Spanish. 

1 Introduction 

For years now corpus annotation has played an 
essential part in the development of various NLP 
technologies. Most of the language resources, 
however, do not include clause annotation and 
alignment which are considered quite useful in 
recent research on Machine Translation (MT) 
and parallel text processing (Piperidis et al., 
2000; Sudoh et al., 2010; Ramanathan et al., 
2011).  

Aiming to facilitate and improve the process 
of clause annotation and alignment of 
multilingual texts, we developed Anaphora.  

The tool is OS and language independent and 
supports automated sentence splitting and 
alignment, manual  sentence and clause splitting, 
validation, correction and alignment, selection 
and annotation of conjunctions (including 
compounds (MWE)), and identification of the 
type of relation between pairs of syntactically 
connected clauses.  

2 User Interface and Functionalities 

Anaphora supports two kinds of operating modes: 
a monolingual and a multilingual one. 

The monolingual mode is designed for manual 
editing and annotation of each part of the parallel 
corpus. The window consists of three active 
panes (Fig. 1): Text view (top pane), Sentence 
view (bottom left-hand pane) and Clause view 
and annotation (bottom right-hand pane). 

 

Figure 1. Anaphora – monolingual mode. 

69



In this mode the user may chose a file for 
verification and post-editing of the automatically 
performed sentence alignment. The individual 
monolingual texts which are part of an aligned 
pair are selected by the file tabs.  

The monolingual mode offers the following 
functionalities:  

• sentence splitting;  

• clause splitting; 

• correction of wrong splitting (merging of 
split sentences/clauses); 

• annotation of conjunctions; 

• selection of compounds; 

• identification of the type of relation 
between pairs of syntactically connected 
clauses. 

The end of a sentence may be changed by 
choosing the last word of the sentence and 
marking it using the End button from the top 
menu. Thus, the selection of the word as a 
sentence end is toggled and if it was marked as 
an End word, it is no longer such and the 
following sentence is automatically merged to 
the current one. If the word has not been already 
marked as an end, it is thus marked as one and 
the sentence is automatically split. 

Clicking on any word of a sentence in the Text 
view pane results in the sentence appearing in the 
Sentence view pane, where clause segmentation 
and choice of conjunction are performed. The 
user defines the boundaries of clauses by 
selecting the words in them. This is achieved by 
marking the particular fragment of the text in the 
Sentence view pane with the mouse and pressing 
the 'space' key. This operation toggles the 
selection. Thus, a repeated use causes deselection. 
Marking a disconnected clause is done by 
marking the block of text containing it and 
unmarking the unnecessary words. When a 
clause is defined, it is listed in the bottom right-
hand pane in a new color following the surface 
order of the sentence. Selection of a clause 
within another clause is also possible. Then the 

inner clause is listed directly after the split clause 
while the order of the split clause in the Clause 
view pane depends on the position of its first 
word in the sentence. 

Once the clauses are defined, the user may 
annotate the conjunction of two clauses, also 
referred to as a marker. The marker may consist 
of one or more words or an empty word. Empty 
words (w="====") are artificial elements 
automatically introduced at the beginning of a 
potential new clause. An empty word may be 
selected as a marker when the conjunction is not 
explicit or the clauses are connected by means of 
a punctuation mark (for simplicity of annotation 
punctuation marks are not identified as 
independent tokens but are attached to the 
preceding token). When a word or a 
compound from one clause is selected in the 
Sentence view pane the user chooses another 
clause from the Clause view pane to create a pair 
of syntactically linked clauses. Then the relation 
for the pair is identified by selecting its type with 
the grey buttons N_N (coordination), N_S 
(subordinated clause following the main clause), 
S_N (subordinated clause preceding the main 
clause), etc.  

The multilingual mode is selected with the 
align tab. In this mode annotators can create, 
validate and correct the alignment of the parallel 
units – sentences and/or clauses. 

The window (Fig. 2) has two parallel Text 
view panes (on the top) and two parallel List 
view panes (in the bottom). Depending on the 
chosen menu (Clause or Sentence) the bottom 
panes show lists of aligned clauses or sentences.   

 

Figure 2. Anaphora – multilingual mode. 

70



The multilingual mode uses the output of the 
monolingual sentence and clause splitting and 
supports the following functionalities:  

• automated sentence alignment;  

• manual sentence alignment;  

• manual clause alignment. 

Automated sentence alignment is available as 
a menu command (Auto Sentence Align) in the 
multilingual mode. 

Тo switch to manual sentence or clause 
alignment the corresponding menu commands 
are used – Sentence and Clause. 

In the sentence menu the two bottom panes 
show lists of aligned sentences, each pair in a 
distinct color. The user may correct the 
alignment by choosing one or more sentences in 
each of the bottom panes and pressing the 'space' 
button to create a new alignment bead. 

In the clause menu, when a sentence is 
selected in one of the two Text panes, its clauses 
are listed in the respective bottom pane. The 
corresponding aligned sentence appears in the 
parallel top pane with its clauses listed in the 
bottom. Alignment is performed when the user 
chooses one or more clauses from each of the 
bottom panes and then presses the 'space' button. 
Thus a new clause alignment bead is created. 

3 Applications 

Anaphora was successfully used for the 
annotation and the alignment of the Bulgarian-
English Sentence- and Clause-Aligned Corpus 
(Koeva et al. 2012a) which was created as a 
training and evaluation data set for automatic 
clause alignment in the task of exploring the 
effect of clause reordering on the performance of 
SMT (Koeva et al., 2012b).  

Since its development the tool is continuously 
used for annotation and clause alignment of 
different parts of the Bulgarian-X language 
Parallel Corpus (Koeva et al. 2012c) covering a 
number of languages including French and 
Spanish. 

4 Implementation  

Anaphora was designed as a self-sufficient 
module for annotation and clause alignment 
within the multi-functional platform Chooser 
(Koeva et al. 2008) which supports various NLP 
tasks that involve corpora annotation.  

The tool is a stand-alone single user 
application implemented in Python and it uses 
the standard GUI library tkinter (the Tcl/Tk 
python binding) which makes it highly OS 
independent. 

5 Data Processing and Representation 

5.1 Input Data  

The used format is a flat xml with root 
element text. The text is a list of word elements 
with several attributes like ‘w’ – wordform, ‘l’ – 
lemma, ‘u’ – annotator, ‘t’ – timestamp, ‘e’ – 
sentence end, etc.  

Special attributes are responsible for marking 
the compounds (MWE) and clauses. The words 
that are members of a compound share a 
common value for the attribute ‘p’ (parent). 
Similarly, the words in a clause share a common 
value for clause – ‘cl’.  

This format is compatible with the other 
modules of the Chooser platform. Thus, one file 
can be annotated with several different types of 
annotation like POS, semantic annotation, etc.  

The system provides import scripts for two 
formats – plain text and the output of the 
Bulgarian Language Processing Chain (Koeva 
and Genov, 2011) – a TSV/CSV family format, 
where the text is tokenized and lemmatized. 

Sentence splitting depends on the format of 
the input text. If it is a plain text, sentence 
splitting is based on the presence of end of 
sentence punctuation (full stop, exclamation 
mark, and question mark) followed by a capital 
letter. When the file is of the TSV/CSV family 
format sentence splitting is part of the Language 
Processing Chain. 

71



5.2 Automated Sentence Alignment  

The automated sentence alignment is 
performed using the Gale-Church aligning 
algorithm (Gale and Church, 1993). 

6 Conclusions and Future Work 

We believe that, based on its design and 
functionalities, Anaphora can be easily used and 
it will perform well for any given pair of 
languages, that is, it is to a great extent language 
independent. The system can also be applied as it 
is for phrase segmentation and word and phrase 
alignment. However, if we want to include 
simultaneous alignment of words, phrases, and 
clauses the system needs to be adopted.  

We work on including additional functionalities 
to facilitate corpora annotation and parallel text 
processing such as anaphora annotation.  

Our future intentions include also publishing it as 
an Open Source code so that it can serve the NLP 
community.  

Acknowledgments 

The present paper was prepared within the 
project Integrating New Practices and 
Knowledge in Undergraduate and Graduate 
Courses in Computational Linguistics 
(BG051PO001-3.3.06-0022) implemented with 
the financial support of the Human Resources 
Development Operational Programme 2007-2013 
co-financed by the European Social Fund of the 
European Union. The authors take full 
responsibility for the content of the present paper 
and under no conditions can the conclusions 
made in it be considered an official position of 
the European Union or the Ministry of Education, 
Youth and Science of the Republic of Bulgaria. 

References  

William A. Gale and Kenneth W. Church. 1993. A 
Program for Aligning Sentences in Bilingual 
Corpora, Computational Linguistics 19(1): 75–102. 

Svetla Koeva and Angel Genov. 2011. Bulgarian 
Language Processing Chain. In: Proceeding to The 
Integration of multilingual resources and tools in 

Web applications Workshop in conjunction with 
GSCL 2011, University of Hamburg. 

Svetla Koeva, Borislav Rizov, Svetlozara Leseva. 
2008. Chooser - A Multi-Task Annotation Tool. In: 
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference 
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC'08), 
Marrakech, ELRA electronic publication, 728-734. 

Svetla Koeva, Borislav Rizov, Ekaterina 
Tarpomanova, Tsvetana Dimitrova, Rositsa 
Dekova, Ivelina Stoyanova, Svetlozara Leseva, 
Hristina Kukova, Angel Genov. 2012a. Bulgarian-
English Sentence- and Clause-Aligned Corpus. In 
Proceedings of the Second Workshop on 
Annotation of Corpora for Research in the 
Humanities (ACHR-2), Lisboa: Colibri, 51-62. 

Svetla Koeva, Borislav Rizov, Ekaterina 
Tarpomanova, Tsvetana Dimitrova, Rositsa 
Dekova, Ivelina Stoyanova, Svetlozara Leseva, 
Hristina Kukova, and Angel Genov. 2012b. 
Application of clause alignment for statistical 
machine translation. In Proceedings of the Sixth 
Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in 
Statistical Translation (SSST-6), Korea, 2012. 

Svetla Koeva, Ivelina Stoyanova, Rositsa Dekova, 
Borislav Rizov, and Angel Genov. 2012c. 
Bulgarian X-language parallel corpus. In 
Proceedings of the Eighth International 
Conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation (LREC'12). N. Calzolari et al. (Eds.) 
Istanbul: ELRA, 2480-2486. 

Stelios Piperidis, Harris Papageorgiou, and Sotiris 
Boutsis. 2000. From sentences to words and 
clauses. In J. Veronis, editor, Parallel Text 
Processing, Alignment and Use of Translation 
Corpora, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 117–138. 

Ananthakrishnan Ramanathan, Pushpak 
Bhattacharyya, Karthik Visweswariah, Kushal 
Ladha and Ankur Gandhe. 2011. Clause-based 
reordering constraints to improve statistical 
machine translation. In Proceedings of the 5th 
International Joint Conference on NLP, Thailand, 
November 8-13, 2011, 1351–1355. 

Katsuhito Sudoh, Kevin Duh, Hajime Tsukada, 
Tsutomu Hirao, Masaaki Nagata. 2010. Divide and 
translate: improving long distance reordering in 
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of 
the Joint 5thWorkshop on SMT and Metrics 
MATR,  418–427. 

72


