



















































Semantic Annotation, Analysis and Comparison: A Multilingual and Cross-lingual Text Analytics Toolkit


Proceedings of the Demonstrations at the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 13–16,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Semantic Annotation, Analysis and Comparison:
A Multilingual and Cross-lingual Text Analytics Toolkit

Lei Zhang
Institute AIFB

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
76128 Karlsruhe, Germany
l.zhang@kit.edu

Achim Rettinger
Institute AIFB

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
76128 Karlsruhe, Germany
rettinger@kit.edu

Abstract

Within the context of globalization,
multilinguality and cross-linguality for
information access have emerged as issues
of major interest. In order to achieve
the goal that users from all countries
have access to the same information,
there is an impending need for systems
that can help in overcoming language
barriers by facilitating multilingual and
cross-lingual access to data. In this
paper, we demonstrate such a toolkit,
which supports both service-oriented and
user-oriented interfaces for semantically
annotating, analyzing and comparing
multilingual texts across the boundaries
of languages. We conducted an extensive
user study that shows that our toolkit
allows users to solve cross-lingual entity
tracking and article matching tasks more
efficiently and with higher accuracy
compared to the baseline approach.

1 Introduction

Automatic text understanding has been an
unsolved research problem for many years. This
partially results from the dynamic and diverging
nature of human languages, which results in many
different varieties of natural language. These
variations range from the individual level, to
regional and social dialects, and up to seemingly
separate languages and language families.
In recent years there have been considerable
achievements in approaches to computational
linguistics exploiting the information across
languages. This progress in multilingual and
cross-lingual text analytics is largely due
to the increased availability of multilingual
knowledge bases such as Wikipedia, which helps
at scaling the traditionally monolingual tasks

to multilingual and cross-lingual applications.
From the application side, there is a clear need
for multilingual and cross-lingual text analytics
technologies and services.

Text analytics in this work is defined as
three tasks: (i) semantic annotation by linking
entity mentions in the documents to their
corresponding representations in the knowledge
base; (ii) semantic analysis by linking the
documents by topics to the relevant resources in
the knowledge base; (iii) semantic comparison
by measuring semantic relatedness between
documents. While multilingual text analytics
addresses these tasks for multiple languages,
cross-lingual text analytics goes one step beyond,
as it faces these tasks across the boundaries of
languages, i.e., the text to be processed and the
resources in the knowledge base, or the documents
to be compared, are in different languages.

Due to the ever growing richness of its
content, Wikipedia has been increasingly gaining
attention as a precious knowledge base that
contains an enormous number of entities and
topics in diverse domains. In addition, Wikipedia
pages that provide information about the same
concept in different languages are connected
through cross-language links. Therefore, we use
Wikipedia as the central knowledge base.

With the goal of overcoming language barriers,
we would like to demonstrate our multilingual
and cross-lingual text analytics toolkit, which
supports both service-oriented and user-oriented
interfaces for semantically annotating, analyzing
and comparing multilingual texts across the
boundaries of languages.

2 Techniques

In this section, we first present the techniques
behind our toolkit w.r.t. its three components:
semantic annotation (Sec. 2.1), semantic analysis
and semantic comparison (Sec. 2.2).

13



2.1 Wikipedia-based Annotation

The process of augmenting phrases in text with
links to their corresponding Wikipedia articles
(in the sense of Wikipedia-based annotation) is
known as wikification. There is a large body
of work that links phrases in unstructured text
to relevant Wikipedia articles. While Mihalcea
and Csomai (Mihalcea and Csomai, 2007) met
the challenge of wikification by using link
probabilities obtained from Wikipedia’s articles
and by a comparison of features extracted from the
context of the phrases, Milne and Witten (Milne
and Witten, 2008) could improve the wikification
service significantly by viewing wikification even
more as a supervised machine learning task:
Wikipedia is used here not only as a source of
information to point to, but also as training data
to find always the appropriate link.

For multilingual semantic annotation, we
adopted the wikification system in (Milne and
Witten, 2008) and trained it for each language
using the corresponding Wikipedia version. To
perform cross-lingual semantic annotation, we
extended the wikification system by making use of
the cross-language links in Wikipedia to find the
corresponding Wikipedia articles in the different
target languages. More details can be found in our
previous work (Zhang et al., 2013).

2.2 Explicit Semantic Analysis

Explicit Semantic Analysis (ESA) has been
proposed as an approach for semantic modeling
of natural language text (Gabrilovich and
Markovitch, 2006). Based on a given set of
concepts with textual descriptions, ESA defines
the concept-based representation of documents.
Various sources for concept definitions have
been used, such as Wikipedia and Reuters Corpus.
Using the concept-based document representation,
ESA has been successfully applied to compute
semantic relatedness between texts (Gabrilovich
and Markovitch, 2007). In the context of the
cross-language information retrieval (CLIR) task,
ESA has been extended to a cross-lingual setting
(CL-ESA) by mapping the semantic document
representation from a concept space of one
language to an interlingual concept space (Sorg
and Cimiano, 2008).

The semantic analysis and semantic comparison
components of our toolkit are based on CL-ESA
in (Sorg and Cimiano, 2008). The semantic

Figure 2: Architecture of our Toolkit.

analysis component takes as input a document in a
source language and maps it to a high-dimensional
vector in the interlingual concept space, such
that each dimension corresponds to an Wikipedia
article in any target language acting as a
concept. For semantic comparison, the documents
in different languages are first translated into
vectors in the interlingual concept space and then
the cross-lingual semantic relatedness between
the documents in different languages can be
calculated using the standard similarity measure
between the resulting vectors.

3 Implementation

Our multilingual and cross-lingual toolkit is
implemented using a client-server architecture
with communication over HTTP using a XML
schema defined in XLike project1. The server
is a RESTful web service and the client user
interface is implemented using Adobe Flex as
both Desktop and Web Applications. The
toolkit can easily be extended or adapted to
switch out the server or client. In this way, it
supports both service-oriented and user-oriented
interfaces for semantically annotating, analyzing
and comparing multilingual texts across the
boundaries of languages. The architecture of our
toolkit is shown in Figure 2.

For all three components, namely semantic
annotation, analysis and comparison, we use
Wikipedia as the central knowledge base. Table 1
shows the statistics of the Wikipedia articles in
English, German, Spanish and French as well as
the cross-language links between the them in these
languages extracted from Wikipedia snapshots of
May 20122, which are used to build our toolkit.

We now describe the user interfaces of these
1http://www.xlike.org/
2http://dumps.wikimedia.org/

14



Figure 1: Screenshot of the Semantic Annotation Component of our Toolkit.

English (EN) German (DE) Spanish (ES) French (FR)
#Articles 4,014,643 1,438,325 896,691 1,234,567

(a) Number of articles.
EN-DE EN-ES EN-FR DE-ES DE-FR ES-FR

#Links (→) 721,878 568,210 779,363 295,415 455,829 378,052
#Links (←) 718,401 581,978 777,798 302,502 457,306 370,552
#Links (merged) 722,069 593,571 795,340 307,130 464,628 383,851

(b) Number of cross-language links.

Table 1: Statistics about Wikipedia.

components. Due to the lack of space, we only
show the screenshot of the semantic annotation
component in Figure 1. The semantic annotation
component allows the users to find the entities
in Wikipedia mentioned in the input document.
Given the input document in one language, the
users can select the output language, namely
the language of Wikipedia articles describing
the mentioned entities. In the left pie chart,
the users can see the percentage of Wikipedia
articles in different languages as annotations of the
input document. According to their weights, the
Wikipedia articles in each language are organized
in 3 relevance categories: high, medium and low.
In the middle bar chart, the number of Wikipedia
articles in each language and in each category
is illustrated. The right data grid provides the
Wikipedia article titles with their weights in the
output language and the mentions in the input
document. Clicking an individual title opens
the corresponding Wikipedia article in the output
language. The semantic analysis component
has the similar user interface as the semantic
annotation component. The difference is that the
Wikipedia articles listed in the right data grid are
topically relevant to the input documents instead
of being mentioned as entities. Regarding the user
interface of semantic comparison component, the
main inputs are two documents that might be in

different languages and the output is the semantic
relatedness between them.

4 User Study

We conducted a task-based user study and the
goal is to assess the effectiveness and usability of
our multilingual and cross-lingual text analytics
toolkit. We design two tasks reflecting the real-life
information needs, namely entity tracking and
article matching, to assess the functionality of
our toolkit from different perspectives. The entity
tracking task is to detect mentions of the given
entities in the articles, where the descriptions
of the entities and the articles are in different
languages. Given articles in one language as
context, the article matching task is to find the
most similar articles in another language.

The participants of our user study are 16
volunteers and each of them got both tasks, which
they had to solve in two ways: (1) using a major
online machine translation service as baseline
and (2) using our multilingual and cross-lingual
text analytics toolkit with all the functionality.
For each task, we randomly selected 10 parallel
articles in English, French and Spanish from the
JRC-Acquis parallel corpus3. After a survey,

3http://langtech.jrc.it/JRC-Acquis.
html

15



(a) Avg. successrate per task / method

(b) Avg. time spent per task / method

Figure 3: Evaluation Results of the User Study.

we decided to provide the entity descriptions for
entity tracking task and the context documents
for article matching task in English, which all
participants can speak. Regarding the articles to
be processed, we set up the tasks using Spanish
articles for the participants who do not know
Spanish, and tasks with French articles for the
participants who cannot speak French.

To measure the overall effectiveness of our
toolkit, we have analysed the ratio of tasks that
were completed successfully and correctly and the
time the participants required for the tasks. The
average success rate and time spent per task and
per method are illustrated in Figure 3. For entity
tracking task, we observe that a success rate of
80% was achieved using our toolkit in comparison
with the success rate of 70% yielded by using the
baseline. In addition, there is a significant gap
between the time spent using different methods.
While it took 21.5 minutes on average to solve
the task using the baseline, only 6.75 minutes
were needed when using our toolkit. Regarding
the article matching task, both methods performed
very well. Using our toolkit obtained a slightly
higher success rate of 99% than 94% using the
baseline. The time spent using both methods is not

so different. The participants spent 15.75 minutes
on average using the baseline while 2 minutes less
were needed using our toolkit.

In terms of the user study, our toolkit is
more effective than the baseline for both entity
tracking and article matching tasks. Therefore,
we conclude that our toolkit provides useful
functionality to make searching entities, analyzing
and comparing articles more easily and accurately
in the multilingual and cross-lingual scenarios.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the European
Community’s Seventh Framework Programme
FP7-ICT-2011-7 (XLike, Grant 288342).

References
[Gabrilovich and Markovitch2006] Evgeniy

Gabrilovich and Shaul Markovitch. 2006.
Overcoming the Brittleness Bottleneck using
Wikipedia: Enhancing Text Categorization with
Encyclopedic Knowledge. In AAAI, pages
1301–1306.

[Gabrilovich and Markovitch2007] Evgeniy
Gabrilovich and Shaul Markovitch. 2007.
Computing semantic relatedness using
wikipedia-based explicit semantic analysis. In
Proceedings of the 20th international joint
conference on artificial intelligence, volume 6,
page 12.

[Mihalcea and Csomai2007] Rada Mihalcea and
Andras Csomai. 2007. Wikify!: linking documents
to encyclopedic knowledge. In In CIKM ’07:
Proceedings of the sixteenth ACM conference
on Conference on information and knowledge
management, pages 233–242. ACM.

[Milne and Witten2008] David Milne and Ian H.
Witten. 2008. Learning to link with wikipedia.
In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on
Information and knowledge management, CIKM
’08, pages 509–518, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

[Sorg and Cimiano2008] P. Sorg and P. Cimiano. 2008.
Cross-lingual Information Retrieval with Explicit
Semantic Analysis. In Working Notes of the Annual
CLEF Meeting.

[Zhang et al.2013] Lei Zhang, Achim Rettinger,
Michael Frber, and Marko Tadic. 2013. A
comparative evaluation of cross-lingual text
annotation techniques. In CLEF, pages 124–135.

16


