



















































Chinese Open Relation Extraction for Knowledge Acquisition


Proceedings of the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 12–16,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Chinese Open Relation Extraction for Knowledge Acquisition 

Yuen-Hsien Tseng1, Lung-Hao Lee1,2, Shu-Yen Lin1, Bo-Shun Liao1, 
 Mei-Jun Liu1, Hsin-Hsi Chen2, Oren Etzioni3, Anthony Fader4  

 
1Information Technology Center, National Taiwan Normal University 

 2Dept. of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Taiwan University 
3Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Seattle, WA 

4Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington  
{samtseng, lhlee, sylin, skylock, meijun}@ntnu.edu.tw, 

hhchen@ntu.edu.tw, OrenE@allenai.org, afader@cs.washington.edu 
 

Abstract 

This study presents the Chinese Open Relation 
Extraction (CORE) system that is able to 
extract entity-relation triples from Chinese free 
texts based on a series of NLP techniques, i.e., 
word segmentation, POS tagging, syntactic 
parsing, and extraction rules. We employ the 
proposed CORE techniques to extract more 
than 13 million entity-relations for an open 
domain question answering application. To 
our best knowledge, CORE is the first Chinese 
Open IE system for knowledge acquisition.  

1 Introduction  

Traditional Information Extraction (IE) involves 
human intervention of handcrafted rules or 
tagged examples as the input for machine 
learning to recognize the assertion of a particular 
relationship between two entities in texts (Riloff, 
1996; Soderland, 1999). Although machine 
learning helps enumerate potential relation 
patterns for extraction, this approach is often 
limited to extracting the relation sets that are 
predefined. In addition, traditional IE has 
focused on satisfying pre-specified requests from 
small homogeneous corpora, leaving the question 
open whether it can scale up to massive and 
heterogeneous corpora such as the Web (Banko 
and Etzioni, 2008; Etzioni et al., 2008, 2011). 

Open IE, a new domain-independent 
knowledge discovery paradigm that extracts a 
diverse set of relations without requiring any 
relation-specific human inputs and a pre-
specified vocabulary, is especially suited to 

massive text corpora, where target relations are 
unknown in advance. Several Open IE systems, 
such as TextRunner (Banko et al., 2007), WOE 
(Wu and Weld, 2010), ReVerb (Fader et al., 
2011), and OLLIE (Mausam et al., 2012) achieve 
promising performance in open relation 
extraction on English sentences. However, 
application of these systems poses challenges to 
those languages that are very different from 
English, such as Chinese, as grammatical 
functions in English and Chinese are realized in 
markedly different ways. It is not sure whether 
those techniques for English still work for 
Chinese. This issue motivates us to extend the 
state-of-the-art Open IE systems to extract 
relations from Chinese texts. 

The relatively rich morpho-syntactic marking 
system of English (e.g., verbal inflection, 
nominal case, clausal markers) makes the 
syntactic roles of many words detectable from 
their surface forms. A tensed verb in English, for 
example, generally indicates its main verb status 
of a clause. The pinning down of the main verb 
in a Chinese clause, on the other hand, must rely 
on other linguistic cues such as word context due 
to the lack of tense markers. In contrast to the 
syntax-oriented English language, Chinese is 
discourse-oriented and rich in ellipsis – meaning 
is often construable in the absence of explicit 
linguistic devices such that many obligatory 
grammatical categories (e.g., pronouns and BE 
verbs) can be elided in Chinese.  For example, 
the three Chinese sentences “蘋果營養豐富” 
(‘Apples nutritious’), “蘋果是營養豐富的 ” 
(‘Apples are nutritious’), and “蘋果富含營養” 

12



(‘Apples are rich in nutrition’) are semantically 
synonymous sentences, but the first one, which 
lacks an overt verb, is used far more often than 
the other two. Presumably, an adequate 
multilingual IE system must take into account 
those intrinsic differences between languages. 

This paper introduces the Chinese Open 
Relation Extraction (CORE) system, which 
utilizes a series of NLP techniques to extract 
relations embedded in Chinese sentences. Given 
a Chinese text as the input, CORE employs word 
segmentation, part-of-speech (POS) tagging, and 
syntactic parsing, to automatically annotate the 
Chinese sentences. Based on this rich 
information, the input sentences are chunked and 
the entity-relation triples are extracted. Our 
evaluation shows the effectiveness of CORE, and 
its deficiency as well. 

2 Related Work 

TextRunner (Banko et al., 2007) was the first 
Open IE system, which trains a Naïve Bayes 
classifier with POS and NP-chunk features to 
extract relationships between entities. The 
subsequent work showed that employing the 
classifiers capable of modeling the sequential 
information inherited in the texts, like linear-
chain CRF (Banko and Etzioni, 2008) and 
Markov Logic Network (Zhu et al., 2009), can 
result in better extraction performance. The 
WOE system (Wu and Weld, 2010) adopted 
Wikipedia as the training source for their 
extractor. Experimental results indicated that 
parsed dependency features lead to further 
improvements over TextRunner.  

ReVerb (Fader et al., 2011) introduced another 
approach by identifying first a verb-centered 
relational phrase that satisfies their pre-defined 
syntactic and lexical constraints, and then split 
the input sentence into an Argument-Verb-
Argument triple. This approach involves only 
POS tagging for English and “regular 
expression”-like matching. As such, it is suitable 
for large corpora, and likely to be applicable to 
Chinese.  

For multilingual open IE, Gamallo et al. (2012) 
adopts a rule-based dependency parser to extract 
relations represented in English, Spanish, 
Portuguese, and Galician. For each parsed 
sentence, they separate each verbal clause and 
then identify each one’s verb participants, 
including their functions: subject, direct object, 
attribute, and prepositional complements. A set 
of rules is then applied on the clause constituents 
to extract the target triples. For Chinese open IE, 
we adopt a similar general approach. The main 
differences are the processing steps specific to 
Chinese language. 

3 Chinese Open Relation Extraction 

This section describes the components of CORE. 
Not requiring any predefined vocabulary, 
CORE’s sole input is a Chinese corpus and its 
output is an extracted set of relational tuples. The 
system consists of three key modules, i.e., word 
segmentation and POS tagging, syntactic parsing, 
and entity-relation triple extraction, which are 
introduced as follows: 

Chinese is generally written without word 
boundaries. As a result, prior to the 
implementation of most NLP tasks, texts must 
undergo automatic word segmentation. 
Automatic Chinese word segmenters are 
generally trained by an input lexicon and 
probability models. However, it usually suffers 
from the unknown word (i.e., the out-of-
vocabulary, or OOV) problem. In CORE, a 
corpus-based learning method to merge the 
unknown words is adopted to tackle the OOV 
problem (Chen and Ma, 2002). This is followed 
by a reliable and cost-effective POS-tagging 
method to label the segmented words with part-
of-speeches (Tsai and Chen, 2004). Take the 
Chinese sentence “愛迪生發明了燈泡” (‘Edison 
invented the light bulb’) for instance. It was 
segmented and tagged as follows: 愛迪生/Nb  發
明/VC  了/Di  燈泡/Na. Among these words, the 
translation of a foreign proper name “愛迪生” 
(‘Edison’) is not likely to be included in a 
lexicon and therefore is extracted by the 
unknown word detection method. In this case, 

13



the special POS tag ‘Di’ is a tag to represent a 
verb’s tense when its character “了” follows 
immediately after its precedent verb. The 
complete set of part-of-speech tags is defined in 
the technical report (CKIP, 1993). In the above 
sentence, “了 ” could represent a complete 
different meaning if it is associate with other 
character, such as “了解” meaning “understand”. 
Therefore, “愛迪生發明了解藥 ” (‘Edison 
invented a cure’) would be segmented incorrectly 
once “了 ” is associated with its following 
character, instead of its precedent word. 

We adopt CKIP, the best-performing parser in 
the bakeoff of SIGHAN 2012 (Tseng et al., 
2012), to do syntactic structure analysis. The 
CKIP solution re-estimates the context-
dependent probability for Chinese parsing and 
improves the performance of probabilistic 
context-free grammar (Hsieh et al., 2012). For 
the example sentence above, ‘愛迪生/Nb’ and 
‘燈泡 /Na’ were annotated as two nominal 
phrases (i.e., ‘NP’), and ‘發明/VC  了/Di’ was 
annotated as a verbal phrase (i.e., ‘VP’). 

CKIP parser also adopts dependency decision-
making and example-based approaches to label 
the semantic role “Head”, showing the status of a 
word or a phrase as the pivotal constituent of a 
sentence (You and Chen, 2004). CORE adopts 
the head-driven principle to identify the main 
relation in a given sentence (Huang et al., 2000). 
Firstly, a relation is defined by both the “Head”-
labeled verb and the other words in the syntactic 
chunk headed by the verb. Secondly, the noun 
phrases preceding/preceded by the relational 
chunk are regarded as the candidates of the 
head’s arguments. Finally, the entity-relation 
triple is identified in the form of (entity1, relation, 
entity2). Regarding the example sentence 
described above, the triple (愛迪生/Edison, 發明
了/invented, 燈泡/light bulb) is extracted by this 
approach. 

Figure 1 shows the parsed tree of a Chinese 
sentence for the relation extraction by CORE. 
The Chinese sentence “白宮預算委員會的民主

黨星期一發佈報告” (‘Democrats on the House 
Budget Committee released a report on Monday’) 
is the manual translation of one of the English 
sentences evaluated by ReVerb (Fader et al., 
2011). The first step of CORE involves word-
segmentation and POS-tagging, thus returning 
eight word/POS pairs: 白宮/Nc, 預算/Na, 委員
會/Nc, 的/DE, 民主黨/Nb, 星期一/Nd, 發怖/VE, 
報告 /Na. Next, “星期一 /Nd 發佈 /VE” is 
identified as the verbal phrase that heads the 
sentence. This verbal phrase is regarded as the 
center of a potential relation. The two noun 
phrases before and after the verbal phrase, i.e., 
the NP “白宮 預算 委員會 的 民主黨” and NP 
“報告” are regarded as the entities that complete 
the relation. A potential entity-relation-entity 
triple (i.e., 白宮預算委員會的民主黨 / 星期一
發佈 / 報告, ‘Democrats on the House Budget 
Committee / on Monday released / a report’) is 
extracted accordingly. This triple is chunked 
from its original sentence fully automatically. 
Finally, a filtering process, which retains 
“Head”-labeled words only, can be applied to 
strain out from each component of this triple the 
most prominent word: “民主黨 / 發佈 / 報告” 
(‘Democrats / released / report’). 

 
Figure 1: The parsed tree of a Chinese sentence. 

4 Experiments and Evaluation 

We adopted the same test set released by ReVerb 
for performance evaluation. The test set consists 
of 500 English sentences randomly sampled from 
the Web and were annotated using a pooling 
method. To obtain “gold standard” relation 
triples in Chinese, the 500 test sentences were 
manually translated from English to Chinese by a 

14



trained native Chinese speaker and verified by 
another. Additionally, two other native Chinese 
speakers annotated the relation triples for each 
Chinese sentence. In total, 716 Chinese entity-
relation triples with an agreement score of 0.79 
between the two annotators were obtained and 
regarded as gold standard.  

Performance evaluation of CORE was 
conducted based on: 1) exact match; and 2) 
relation-only match. For exact match, each 
component of the extracted triple must be 
identical with the gold standard. For relation-
only match, the extracted triple is regarded as a 
correct case if an extracted relation agreed with 
the relation of the gold standard. 

 Without another Chinese Open IE system for 
performance comparison, we compared CORE 
with a modification of ReVerb system capable of 
handling Chinese sentences. The modification of 
ReVerb’s verb-driven regular expression 
matching was kept to a minimum to deal with 
language-specific processing. As such, ReVerb 
remains mostly the same as its English 
counterpart so that a bilingual (Chinese/English) 
Open IE system can be easily implemented. 

Table 1 shows the experimental results. Our 
CORE system obviously performs better than 
ReVerb when recall is considered for both exact 
and relation-only match. The results suggest that 
utilizing more sophisticated NLP techniques is 
effective to extract relations without any specific 
human intervention. In addition, there is a slight 
decrease in the precision of exact match for 
CORE. This reveals that ReVerb’s original 
syntactic and lexical constraints are also useful to 
identify the arguments and their relationship 
precisely. In summary, CORE achieved 
relatively promising F1 scores. These results 
imply that CORE method is more suitable for 
Chinese open relation extraction. 

Chinese Open IE Precision Recall F1 
Exact 
Match 

ReVerb 0.5820 0.0987 0.1688 
CORE 0.5579 0.3291 0.4140 

Relation 
Only 

ReVerb 0.8361 0.1425 0.2435 
CORE 0.8463 0.5000 0.6286 

Table 1: Performance evaluation on Chinese Open IE. 

We also analyzed the errors made by the 
CORE model. Almost all the errors resulted from 
incorrect parsing. Enhancing the parsing 
effectiveness is most likely to improve the 
performance of CORE. The relatively low recall 
rate also indicates that CORE misses many types 
of relation expression. Ellipsis and flexibility in 
Chinese syntax are so difficult not only to fail the 
parser, but also the extraction attempts to bypass 
the parsing errors. 

To demonstrate the applicability of CORE, we 
implement a Chinese Question-Answering (QA) 
system based on two million news articles from 
2002 to 2009 published by the United Daily 
News Group (udn.com/NEWS). CORE extracted 
more than 13 million unique entity-relation 
triples from this corpus. These extracted relations 
are useful for knowledge acquisition. Take the 
question “什麼源自於中國？ ” (‘What is 
originated from China?’) as an example, the 
relation is automatically identified as “源 ” 
(‘originate’) that heads the following entity “中
國 ” (‘China’). Our open QA system then 
searched the triples and returned the first entity 
as the answers. In addition to the obvious answer 
“中醫” (‘Chinese medicine’), which is usually 
considered as common-sense knowledge, we also 
obtained those that are less known, such as the 
traditional Japanese food “納豆” (‘natto’) and 
the musical instrument “手風琴” (‘accordion’). 

5 Conclusions 

This work demonstrates the feasibility of 
extracting relations from Chinese corpus without 
the input of any predefined vocabulary to IE 
systems. This work is the first to explore Chinese 
open relation extraction to our best knowledge.  

Acknowledgments 

This research was partially supported by 
National Science Council, Taiwan under grant 
NSC102-2221-E-002-103-MY3, and the “Aim 
for the Top University Project” of National 
Taiwan Normal University, sponsored by the 
Ministry of Education, Taiwan. 

15



References  

Anthony Fader, Stephen Soderland, and Oren Etzioni. 
2011. Identifying relations for open information 
extraction. Proceedings of EMNLP’11, pages 
1535-1545. 

Chu-Ren Huang, Feng-Yi Chen, Keh-Jiann Chen, 
Zhao-Ming Gao, and Kuang-Yu Chen. 2000. 
Sinina Treebank: design criteria, annotation 
guidelines, and on-line interface. Proceedings of 
SIGHAN’00, pages 29-37. 

Chinese Knowledge Information Processing (CKIP) 
Group. 1993. Categorical analysis of Chinese. 
ACLCLP Technical Report # 93-05, Academia 
Sinica.  

Fei Wu and Daniel S. Weld. 2010. Open information 
extraction using Wikipedia. Proceedings of 
ACL’10, pages 118-127. 

Jia-Ming You, and Keh-Jiann Chen. 2004. Automatic 
semantic role assignment for a tree structure.  In 
Proceedings of SIGHAN’04, pages 1-8. 

Jun Zhu, Zaiqing Nie, Xiaojiang Lium Bo Zhang, and 
Ji-Rong Wen. 2009. StatSnowball: a statistical 
approach to extracting entity relationships. In 
Proceedings of WWW’09, pages 101-110. 

Keh-Jiann Chen and Wei-Yun Ma. 2002. Unknown 
word extraction for Chinese documents. In 
Proceedings of COLING’02, pages 169-175. 

Michele Banko, Michael J. Cafarella, Stephen 
Soderland, Matt Broadhead, and Oren Etzioni. 
2007. Open information extraction from the web. 
Proceedings of IJCAI’07, pages 2670-2676. 

Michele Banko, and Oren Etzioni. 2008. The 
tradeoffs between open and traditional relation 
extraction. Proceedings of ACL’08, pages 28-26.   

Oren Etzioni, Anthony Fader, Janara Christensen, 
Stephen Soderland, and Mausam. 2011. Open 
information extraction: the second generation. In 
Proceedings of IJCAI’11, pages 3-10. 

Oren Etzioni, Michele Banko, Stephen Soderland, and 
Daniel S. Weld. 2008. Open information extraction 
from the web. Communications of the ACM, 
51(12):68-74. 

Pablo Gamallo, Marcos Garcia, and Santiago 
Fernández-Lanza. 2012. Dependency-based open 
information extraction. In Proceedings of ROBUS-
UNSUP’12, pages 10-18.  

Elleen Riloff. 1996. Automatically constructing 
extraction patterns from untagged text. In 
Proceedings of AAAI’96, pages 1044-1049.  

Stephen Soderland. 1999. Learning information 
extraction rules for semi-structured and free text.  
Machine Learning, 34(1-3):233-272. 

Yu-Ming Hsieh, Ming-Hong Bai, Jason S. Chang, and 
Keh-Jiann Chen. 2012. Improving PCFG Chinese 
Parsing with Context-Dependent Probability Re-
estimation. Proceedings of CLP’12, pages 216-221. 

Yu-Fang Tsai, and Keh-Jiann Chen. 2004. Reliable 
and cost-effective pos-tagging. International 
Journal of Computational Linguistics and Chinese 
Language Processing, 9(1):83-96. 

Yuen-Hsien Tseng, Lung-Hao Lee, and Liang-Chih 
Yu 2012. Traditional Chinese parsing evaluation at 
SIGHAN Bake-offs 2012. Proceedings of CLP’12, 
pages 199-205. 

 
 

16


