



















































Map Translation Using Geo-tagged Social Media


Proceedings of the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 59–63,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Map Translation Using Geo-tagged Social Media

Sunyou Lee, Taesung Lee, Seung-won Hwang
POSTECH, Korea

{sylque,elca4u,swhwang}@postech.edu

Abstract

This paper discusses the problem of map
translation, of servicing spatial entities in
multiple languages. Existing work on
entity translation harvests translation ev-
idence from text resources, not consider-
ing spatial locality in translation. In con-
trast, we mine geo-tagged sources for mul-
tilingual tags to improve recall, and con-
sider spatial properties of tags for transla-
tion to improve precision. Our approach
empirically improves accuracy from 0.562
to 0.746 using Taiwanese spatial entities.

1 Introduction

A map is becoming an essential online service for
mobile devices, providing a current location and
generating directions to spatial entities (SEs). Al-
though major map services aim to support a map
in more than 100 local languages, their current
support is often biased either to English or local
maps. For example, Figure 1 contrasts richly pop-
ulated Taiwanese entities (in the local language)
whereas only some of those entities are translated
in English version. Our goal is to translate richly
populated SEs into another language, in the finer
granularity such as restaurants.

A baseline approach would be adopting
existing work on entity transliteration work,
which uses phonetic similarity, such as trans-
lating ‘Barack Obama’ into ‘贝拉克·奥巴马’
[Beilake·Aobama]. Another approach is using
automatically-harvested or manually-built transla-
tion resources, such as multilingual Gazetteer (or,
SE dictionary1). However, these resources are
often limited to well-known or large SEs, which
leads to translation with near-perfect precision but
low recall.

1For example, http://tgnis.ascc.net provides SE transla-
tion pairs.

Moreover, blindly applying existing entity
translation methods to SE translation leads to ex-
tremely low accuracy. For example, an SE ‘十
分車站’ should be translated into ‘Shifen sta-
tion’, where ‘十分’ is transliterated to [Shifen],
whereas ‘車站’ is semantically translated based
on its meaning ‘station’. However, due to this
complex nature often observed in SE translation,
an off-the-shelf translation service (e.g., Google
Translate) returns ‘very station’2 as an output. In
addition, SE names are frequently abbreviated so
that we cannot infer the meanings to semantically
translate them. For instance, ‘United Nations’ is
often abbreviated into ‘UN’ and its translation is
also often abbreviated. As a result, the abbrevia-
tion in the two languages, (UN, 联合国), shares
neither phonetic nor semantic similarity.

To overcome these limitations, we propose to
extract and leverage properties of SEs from a so-
cial media, namely Flickr. Especially, we ex-
ploit co-occurrence of names in two different lan-
guages. For example, ‘台北’ co-occurs with its
English translation ‘Taipei’ as tags on the same
photo. This is strong evidence that they are trans-
lations of each other. In addition to co-occurrence,
we leverage spatial properties of SEs. For ex-
ample, among tags that frequently co-occur with
‘台北’, such as ‘Taipei’ and ‘Canon’, ‘Taipei’ is

2As of Dec 26, 2013.

Figure 1: A map of Taipei in English. Google
Maps, as of Oct 14, 2013

59



Symbols Description

C A set of all Chinese spatial entities
c A Chinese spatial entity, c ∈ C
e An English entity

p A photo

D Photos

Dc Photos with c

De Photos with e

Ec a set of English tags from Dc
Gc a set of GPS coordinates from Dc
Ge a set of GPS coordinates from De

Table 1: Overview of symbols

more likely to be its correct translation because
the spatial distributions of the two tags are simi-
larly skewed in the same area. Our approach sig-
nificantly improves the F1-score (0.562 to 0.746),
compared to an off-the-shelf translators.

2 Overall Framework

We provide the framework of our proposed
method using predefined symbols (Table 1). We
consider a scenario of translating each SE c in a
set of all SEs C in a Chinese map into English so
that we obtain an English map3.

STEP 1. Finding a set Dc: We crawl a photo
set D with tags from Flickr. We consider each of
the tags as an entity. Given an SE c ∈ C, we find a
set Dc ⊆ D. For each photo in Dc, we obtain a set
of tags in multiple languages and GPS coordinates
of the photo as translation evidence (Table 2).

STEP 2. Collecting candidate English tags:
To obtain translation candidates of c, we build a
set Ec of English tags that co-occur with c, and a
set De ⊆ D of photos for each e ∈ Ec.

STEP 3. Calculating matching score w(c, e):
For an English candidate e ∈ Ec, we calculate the
matching score between c and e, and translate c
into e with the highest w(c, e) score. We describe
the details of computing w(c, e) in Section 3.

3We use an example of translating from Chinese to En-
glish for illustration, but we stress that our work straightfor-
wardly extends if multilingual tags of these two languages are
sufficient.

Photos Chinese tag English tag
p1 女女女王王王頭頭頭 Taipei, The Queen’s

Head, food

p2 愛河 love river, food, park,
dog

p3 野柳,女女女王王王頭頭頭 Yehliu, Taipei, food

p4 台北, 東北角,
女女女王王王頭頭頭

The Queen’s Head,

Taipei, restaurant

p5 淡水河 Taipei, Tamsui river,
dog, food

Table 2: Structure of crawled photos D = {p1, p2,
p3, p4, p5}

e The Queen’s Head Taipei
De {p1, p4} {p1, p3, p4, p5}
CF (c, e) (FB) 2 3
TS(c, e) 0 -0.3
w(c, e) (SB) 0 -0.9

Table 3: SB vs. FB: Translating c = 女王頭 into
e ∈ E女王頭 where D女王頭 = {p1, p3, p4}

3 Matching Score

3.1 Naive Approach: Frequency-based
Translation (FB)

A naive solution for map translation is to use co-
occurrence of multilingual tags. For example, if a
Chinese tag ‘女王頭’ frequently co-occurs with an
English tag ‘The Queen’s Head’, we can translate
‘女王頭’ into ‘The Queen’s Head’. Specifically,
for a given Chinese SE c and a candidate English
tag e, we define co-occurring frequency CF (c, e).

Definition. Co-occurring Frequency CF (c, e).
Co-occurring frequency CF (c, e) is the number of
photos in which c and e are co-tagged,

CF (c, e) = |Dc ∩De|, (1)
where Dc and De are photos with a Chinese SE c
and an English tag e, respectively.

We compute CF (c, e) for all candidates in e ∈
Ec and rank them. Then, FB translates c into e
with the highest CF (c, e) score. However, FB
cannot address the following two challenges that
occur due to tag sparseness.

• C1 : Large regions such as ‘Taiwan’, ‘Taipei’
(Section 3.2)

• C2 : Non-SEs such as ‘dog’, ‘food’ (Section
3.3)

60



3.2 Overcoming C1: Scarcity-biased
Translation (SB)

Users tend to tag photos with both a specific SE
and large administrative regions such as ‘Taiwan’
and ‘Taipei’, which makes FB score of large re-
gions higher than the proper one. For exam-
ple, ‘Taipei’ is tagged in most photos in D (Ta-
ble 2); therefore, CF (女王頭, Taipei) larger than
CF (女王頭, The Queen’s Head) (Table 3).

To reduce the effect of large regions, we intro-
duce a new feature to give high scores for specific
SEs (e.g., ‘The Queen’s Head’). We observe that
a large region’s tag is associated with many pho-
tos in D − Dc, whereas a scarce but useful tag
is particularly tagged in Dc. We consider

|De|
|D−Dc|

to measure how many photos have e without c.
Therefore, |De||D−Dc| increases as e frequently ap-
pears where c does not. In contrast, if e appears
mostly with c, the ratio decreases. Taking inverse
of the ratio to give higher score when e appears
mostly with c, we define tag scarcity TS(c, e) and
apply it to the candidate ranking function.

Definition. Tag scarcity TS(c, e). Given an SE
c and a candidate English tag e ∈ Ec, the tag
scarcity is defined as

TS(c, e) = log |D −Dc|/|De|. (2)
Definition. Scarcity-biased Matching Score
w(c, e). Given an SE c and a candidate English
tag e ∈ Ec, the matching score between c and e is

w(c, e) = CF (c, e)× TS(c, e). (3)
To illustrate the effect of SB with our run-

ning example (Table 2), we compare ‘The Queen’s
Head’ to ‘Taipei’ for translating ‘女王頭’ (Ta-
ble 3). FB gives a higher score to ‘Taipei’ than
to the correct translation ‘The Queen’s Head’. In
contrast, by reflecting TS, SB correctly concludes
that ‘The Queen’s Head’ is the best match.

Apart from SB, we can also leverage an ad-
ditional resource such as an administrative hier-
archy, if exists, to blacklist some large regions’
names from Ec. By first translating larger re-
gions and excluding them, the precision for trans-
lating small SEs can increase. For instance, we
translate a country ‘台灣 (Taiwan)’ earlier than a
city ‘台北 (Taipei)’. Then, when translating ‘台
北’, even though CF (台北, Taiwan) is higher than
CF (台北, Taipei), we ignore ‘Taiwan’ in E台北 be-
cause it is already matched with ‘台灣’.

3.3 Overcoming C2: Pruning Non-SEs (PN)
We prune non-SEs such as ‘food’ based on spatial
locality of a tag. We observe that the GPS coor-
dinates Ge of photos with an SE tag e tend to be
more concentrated in a specific region than those
of photos with a non-SE. For instance, comparing
a non-SE ‘food’ and an SE ‘The Queen’s Head’,
the GPS coordinates in Gfood are more widespread
all over Taiwan than those in GThe Queen’s Head.

We leverage the coordinates of a distant SE
pair. For example, two spatially far SEs ‘台北
(Taipei)’ and ‘台東 (Taitung)’ compose a distant
SE pair. Because both SEs are unlikely to be
tagged in a single photo, an English tag that co-
occurs with both of them would be a non-SE.

Formally, we define two Chinese SEs c1 and c2
as a distant SE pair if Gc1 ∩ Gc2 = ∅, and M as a
set of all distant SE pairs among C×C. We judge
that an English tag e is a non-SE if Ge intersects
with both Gc1 and Gc2 for a distant pair c1 and
c2. Formally, an English tag e is non-SE if the
following equation PN(e) is nonzero.

PN(e) =
∑

(c1,c2)∈M
|Gc1 ∩Ge| × |Gc2 ∩Ge|. (4)

4 Evaluation

4.1 Experimental Setting
Photo Data and Ground Truth: We crawled
227,669 photos taken in Taipei from Flickr, which
also provided GPS coordinates of photos. We took
a set D of 148,141 photos containing both Chinese
and English tags and manually labelled 200 gold
standard Chinese-English SE pairs whose names
appeared together in at least one photo in D.

Administrative Hierarchy: An administrative
hierarchy was obtained from Taiwan Geographi-
cal Names Information System 4.

Baselines: We chose baselines available for
many languages except for the gazetteer and ex-
cluded methods that used specific textual corpora.

• Phonetic Similarity (PH) (Kim et al., 2013)
• Off-the-shelf Translator: Google Translate5,

Bing Translator6

• Taiwanese-English Gazetteer (official SE
translation4)

4http://tgnis.ascc.net/. Its latest modification
has done on August 23, 2013.

5http://translate.google.co.kr/
6http://www.bing.com/translator

61



Chinese SE SB+PN PH Google Translate Bing Translator Gazetteer
[Transliteration]

兔子餐廳 To House Astrid Rabbit Restaurant Hare House ø
[Tuzi Canting]

典華旗艦館 Denwell Restaurant Taipei Restaurants Dianhua Flagship Classic China ø
[Dianhua Gijianguan] Museum Flagship Center

Table 4: Example translation from our method and the baselines (Correct translations are boldfaced.)

Method P R F1
Transliteration .463 .463 .463

Google Translate .562 .562 .562
Bing Translator .425 .425 .425

Taiwanese-English Gazetteer .960 .485 .645

Table 5: P, R, and F1 of baselines

Measures: We measured precision (P), recall
(R), F1-Score (F1), and mean reciprocal rank
(MRR) where MRR = 1|P |

∑
(c,e0)∈P

1
rank(c,e0)

,
for which P is a set of gold standard pairs (c, e0)
of a Chinese SE c and its correct translation e0, and
rank(c, e0) indicates the rank of w(c, e0) among
all w(c, e) s.t. e ∈ Ec.

4.2 Experimental Results

Comparison to Baselines: The proposed ap-
proach (SB + PN) with or without the administra-
tive hierarchy provided higher R and F1 than did
the baseline methods (Table 5, 6).

The baseline methods showed generally low P,
R, and F1. Especially, the gazetteer produced
high precision, but poor recall because it could not
translate lesser-known SEs such as ‘兔子餐廳 (To
House)’ and ‘典華旗艦館 (Denwell Restaurant)’
(Table 4).

Effect of SB and PN: We experimented on the
effect of the combinations of the features (Ta-
ble 6). Using all the features FB+SB+PN with
hierarchy, which translated the upper level of the
hierarchy with FB and the lower level with SB,
showed the best effectiveness. Simple FB gave
both low precision and very low recall regardless
of whether we used the hierarchy. Replacing FB
with SB yielded both higher F1 and higher MRR.

PN increased F1, especially greatly when it was
used with SB or the hierarchy because PN filtered
out different types of noises, non-SEs. Apply-
ing PN, we classified 361 non-SEs and 6 SEs as
noises in total. Despite some misclassifications, it

Method P R F1 MRR
FB .215 .215 .215 .439
FB + PN .220 .220 .220 .454
SB .640 .640 .640 .730
SB + PN .680 . 670 .675 .752

(a) Without administrative hierarchy

Method P R F1 MRR
FB .515 .515 .515 .641
FB + PN .624 .615 .620 .730
SB .655 .655 .655 .733
SB + PN .706 .695 .700 .763
FB + SB + PN .751 .740 .746 .806

(b) With given hierarchy

Table 6: Effect of FB, SB, PN, and the hierarchy

improved the overall accuracy by ignoring highly
ranked non-SEs such as ‘dog’ and ‘food’.

5 Conclusion

We propose a scalable map translator that uses
a geo-tagged corpus from social media to mine
translation evidence to translate between English
and maps in local languages. Our approach lever-
ages both co-occurrence of the SE tags in Chinese
and English and their scarcity and spatial property.
Our approach can translate small or emerging spa-
tial entities such as restaurants, which major map
services cannot support currently. We empirically
validated that our approach provided higher P, R,
F1, and MRR than the existing methods including
popular off-the-shelf translation services.

Acknowledgments

This research was supported by the MSIP (The
Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning),
Korea and Microsoft Research, under IT/SW
Creative research program supervised by the
NIPA(National IT Industry Promotion Agency).
(NIPA-2013-H0503-13-1009).

62



References
Jinhan Kim, Seung-won Hwang, Long Jiang, Y Song,

and Ming Zhou. 2013. Entity translation mining
from comparable corpora: Combining graph map-
ping with corpus latent features. IEEE Transactions
on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 25(8):1787–
1800.

63


