



















































Identifying fake Amazon reviews as learning from crowds


Proceedings of the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 279–287,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Identifying fake Amazon reviews as learning from crowds

Tommaso Fornaciari
Ministero dell’Interno

Dipartimento della Pubblica Sicurezza
Segreteria del Dipartimento

ComISSIT
tommaso.fornaciari@interno.it

Massimo Poesio
University of Essex

CSEE
University of Trento

CIMeC
poesio@essex.ac.uk

Abstract
Customers who buy products such as
books online often rely on other customers
reviews more than on reviews found on
specialist magazines. Unfortunately the
confidence in such reviews is often mis-
placed due to the explosion of so-called
sock puppetry–authors writing glowing
reviews of their own books. Identifying
such deceptive reviews is not easy. The
first contribution of our work is the cre-
ation of a collection including a number
of genuinely deceptive Amazon book re-
views in collaboration with crime writer
Jeremy Duns, who has devoted a great
deal of effort in unmasking sock puppet-
ing among his colleagues. But there can
be no certainty concerning the other re-
views in the collection: all we have is a
number of cues, also developed in collab-
oration with Duns, suggesting that a re-
view may be genuine or deceptive. Thus
this corpus is an example of a collection
where it is not possible to acquire the
actual label for all instances, and where
clues of deception were treated as anno-
tators who assign them heuristic labels. A
number of approaches have been proposed
for such cases; we adopt here the ‘learn-
ing from crowds’ approach proposed by
Raykar et al. (2010). Thanks to Duns’ cer-
tainly fake reviews, the second contribu-
tion of this work consists in the evaluation
of the effectiveness of different methods of
annotation, according to the performance
of models trained to detect deceptive re-
views.

1 Introduction

Customer reviews of books, hotels and other prod-
ucts are widely perceived as an important rea-

son for the success of e-commerce sites such as
amazon.com or tripadvisor.com. How-
ever, customer confidence in such reviews is often
misplaced, due to the growth of the so-called sock
puppetry phenomenon: authors / hoteliers writing
glowing reviews of their own works / hotels (and
occasionally also negative reviews of the competi-
tors).1 The prevalence of this phenomenon has
been revealed by campaigners such as crime writer
Jeremy Duns, who exposed a number of fellow au-
thors involved in such practices.2 A number of
sites have also emerged offering Amazon reviews
to authors for a fee.3

Several automatic techniques for exposing such
deceptive reviews have been proposed in recent
years (Feng et al., 2012; Ott et al., 2001). But like
all work on deceptive language (computational or
otherwise) (Newman et al., 2003; Strapparava and
Mihalcea, 2009), such works suffer from a seri-
ous problem: the lack of a gold standard contain-
ing ‘real life’ examples of deceptive uses of lan-
guage. This is because it is very difficult to find
definite proof that an Amazon review is either de-
ceptive or genuine. Thus most researchers recre-
ate deceptive behavior in the lab, as done by New-
man et al. (2003). For instance, Ott et al. (2001),
Feng et al. (2012) and Strapparava and Mihalcea
(2009) used crowdsourcing, asking turkers to pro-
duce instances of deceptive behavior. Finally, Li
et al. (2011) classify reviews as deceptive or truth-
ful by hand on the basis of a series of heuristics:
they start by excluding anonymous reviews, then
use their helpfulness and other criteria to decide

1The phenomenon predates Internet - see e.g., Amy Har-
mon, ‘Amazon Glitch Unmasks War Of Reviewers’, New
York Times, February 14, 2004.

2See Andrew Hough, ‘RJ Ellory: fake book reviews
are rife on internet, authors warn’, telegraph.co.uk,
September 3, 2012

3See Alison Flood, ‘Sock puppetry and fake reviews:
publish and be damned’, guardian.co.uk, September 4,
2012 and David Streitfeld, ‘Buy Reviews on Yelp, Get Black
Mark’, nytimes.com, October 18, 2012.

279



whether they are deceptive or not. Clearly a more
rigorous approach to establishing the truth or oth-
erwise of reviews on the basis of such heuristic
criteria would be useful.

In this work we develop a system for identify-
ing deceptive reviews in Amazon. Our proposal
makes two main contributions:

1. we identified in collaboration with Jeremy
Duns a series of criteria used by Duns and
other ‘sock puppet hunters’ to find suspicious
reviews / reviewers, and collected a dataset of
reviews some of which are certainly false as
the authors admitted so, whereas others may
be genuine or deceptive.

2. we developed an approach to the truthful-
ness of reviews based on the notion that the
truthfulness of a review is a latent variable
whose value cannot be known, but can be es-
timated using some criteria as potential indi-
cators of such value–as annotators–and then
we used the learning from crowds algorithm
proposed by Raykar et al. (2010) to assign a
class to each review in the dataset.

The structure of the paper is as follows. In Sec-
tion 2 we describe how we collected our dataset;
in Section 3 we show the experiments we carried
out and in Section 4 we discuss the results.

2 Deception clues and dataset

2.1 Examples of Unmasked Sock Puppetry
After reading an article by Alison Flood on The
Guardian of September 4th, 2012 4, discussing
how crime writer Jeremy Duns had unmasked a
number of ‘sock puppeteers,’ we contacted him.
Duns was extremely helpful; he pointed us to the
other articles on the topic, mostly on The New York
Times, and helped us create a set of deception
clues and the dataset used in this work.

On July 25th, 2011, an article appeared on
www.moneytalksnews.com, entitled ‘3 Tips
for Spotting Fake Product Reviews - From Some-
one Who Wrote Them’.5 Sandra Parker, author
of the text, in that page described her experience
as ‘professional review writer’. According to her

4Sock puppetry and fake reviews: publish and be damned,
http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/
sep/04/sock-puppetry-publish-be-damned

5http://www.moneytalksnews.com/2011/07/25
/3-tips-for-spotting-fake-product-reviews--
-from-someone-who-wrote-them/

statements, advertising agencies were used to pay
her $10-20 for writing reviews on sites like Ama-
zon.com. She was not asked to lie, but ‘if the re-
view wasn’t five star, they didn’t pay’. In an arti-
cle of August 19th, written by David Streitfeld on
www.nytimes.com,6 she actually denied that
point: ‘We were not asked to provide a five-star
review, but would be asked to turn down an as-
signment if we could not give one’.

In any case, in her article Sandra Parker gave
the readers some common sense-based advices, in
order to help them to recognize possible fake re-
views. One of these suggestions were also useful
for this study, as discussed in Section 2.3. From
our point of view, however, the most interesting
aspect of the article relied in the fact that, letting
know the name of an author of fake reviews, it
made possible to identify them in Amazon.com,
with an high degree of confidence.

A further article written on August 25th by
David Streitfeld gave us another similar opportu-
nity.7 In fact, thanks to his survey, it was possible
to come to know the titles of four books, whose the
authors paid an agency in order to receive reviews.

2.2 The corpus

Using the suggestions of Jeremy Duns and the in-
formation in these articles we built a corpus we
called DEREV (DEception in REViews), consist-
ing of clearly fake, possibly fake, and possibly
genuine book reviews posted on www.amazon.
com. The corpus, which will be freely available
on demand, consists of 6819 reviews downloaded
from www.amazon.com, concerning 68 books
and written by 4811 different reviewers. The 68
books were chosen trying to balance the number
of reviews (our units of analysis) related to sus-
pect books which probably or surely received fake
reviews, with the number of reviews hypothesized
to be genuine in that we expected the authors of
the books not to have bought reviews. In partic-
ular, we put into the group of the suspect books -
henceforth SB - the reviews of the four books in-
dicated by David Streitfeld. To this first nucleus,
we also added other four books, written by three
of the authors of the previous group. We also in-

6http://www.nytimes.com/2011/08/20/
technology/finding-fake-reviews-online.
html?_r=1&

7http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/26/busin
ess/book-reviewers-for-hire-meet-a-demand-
for-online-raves.html?pagewanted=all

280



cluded in the SB group the 22 books for which
Sandra Parker wrote a review. Lastly, we noticed
that some reviewers of the books pointed out by
David Streitfeld tended to write reviews of the
same books: we identified 16 of them, and consid-
ered suspect as well. In total, on November 17th,
2011 we downloaded the reviews of 46 books con-
sidered as suspect, which received 2707 reviews.8

We also collected the reviews of 22 so called ‘in-
nocent books’, for a total of 4112 reviews. These
books were mainly chosen among classic authors,
such as Conan Doyle or Kipling, or among liv-
ing writers who are so renowned that any reviews’
purchase would be pointless: this is the case, for
example, of Ken Follett and Stephen King. As
shown by the number of the reviews, the books
of these authors are so famous that they receive a
great amount of readers’ opinions.

The size of DEREV is 1175410 tokens, con-
sidering punctuation blocks as single token. The
mean size of the reviews is 172.37 tokens. The ti-
tles of the reviews were neither included in these
statistics nor in the following analyses.

2.3 Deception clues
Once created the corpus, we identified a set of
clues, whose presence suggested the deceptiveness
of the reviews. These clues are:

Suspect Book - SB The first clue of deceptive-
ness was the reference of the reviews to a sus-
pect book, identified as described above. This
is the only clue which is constant for all the
reviews of the same book.

Cluster - Cl The second clue comes from the
suggestions given by Sandra Parker in her
mentioned article. As she pointed out, the
agencies she worked for were used to give her
48 hours to write a review. Being likely that
the same deadline was given to other review-
ers, Sandra Parker warns to pay attention if
the books receive many reviews in a short pe-
riod of time. Following her advice, we con-
sidered as positive this clue of deceptiveness
if the review belonged to a group of at least
two reviews posted within 3 days.

Nickname - NN A service provided by Amazon
is the possibility for the reviewers to register

8We specify the date of the download because, obviously,
if the data collection would be repeated today, the overall
number of reviews would be greater.

in the website and to post comments using
their real name. Since the real identity of the
reviewers involves issues related to their rep-
utation, we supposed it is less probable that
the writers of fake reviews post their texts us-
ing their true name. Moreover, a similar as-
sumption was probably accepted by Li et al.
(2011), who considered the profile features of
the reviewers, and among them the use or not
of their real name.

Unknown Purchase - UP Lastly, the probably
most interesting information provided by
Amazon is whether the reviewer bought the
reviewed book through Amazon itself. It
is reasonable to think that, if the reviewer
bought the book, he also read it. Therefore,
the absence of information about the certified
purchase was considered a clue of deceptive-
ness.

2.4 Gold and silver standard

The clues of deception discussed above give us
a heuristic estimate of the truthfulness of the re-
views. Such estimation represents a silver stan-
dard of our classes, as these are not determined
through certain knowledge of the ground truth, but
simply thanks to hints of deceptiveness. The meth-
ods we used in order to assign the heuristic classes
to the reviews are described in the next Section;
however for our purposes we needed a gold stan-
dard, that is at least a subset of reviews whose
ground truth was known with a high degree of con-
fidence. This subset was identified as follows.

First, we considered as false the 22 reviews
published by Sandra Parker, even though not all
her reviews are characterized by the presence of
all the deception clues. Even though we cannot
really say whether her reviews reflect her opin-
ion of the books in question or not, she explic-
itly claimed to have been paid for writing them;
and she only bought on Amazon three of these
22 books. This is the most accurate knowledge
about fake reviews not artificially produced we
have found in literature. Then we focused on the
four books whose authors admitted to have bought
the reviews.9 Three of them received many re-
views, which made it difficult to understand if
they were truthful or not. However, one of these

9http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/26/busin
ess/book-reviewers-for-hire-meet-a-demand-
for-online-raves.html?pagewanted=all

281



Table 1: The distribution of deception clues in the
reviews

Nr. clues Reviews Tot. %

False 4 903
rev. 3 1913 2816 41.30%

True 2 2528
rev. 1 1210

0 265 4003 58.70%

books (‘Write your first book’, by Peter Biadasz)
received only 20 reviews, which therefore could
be considered as fake with high degree of proba-
bility. Even though we have no clear evidence that
a small number of reviews correlates with a greater
likelihood of deception, since we know this book
received fake reviews, and there are only few re-
views for it, we felt it is pretty likely that those
are fake. Therefore we examined the reviews writ-
ten by these twenty authors, and considered as
false only those showing the presence of all the
deception clues described above. In this way, we
found 96 reviews published by 14 reviewers, and
we added them to the 22 of Sandra Parker, for a
total of 118 reviews written by 15 authors.

Once identified this subset of fake reviews, we
selected other 118 reviews which did not show
the presence of any deception clue, that is chosen
from books above any suspicion, written by au-
thors who published the review having made use
of their real name and having bought the book
through Amazon and so on.

In the end, we identified a subset of DEREV
constituted by 236 reviews, whose class was
known with high degree of confidence and con-
sidered them as our gold standard.

3 Experiments

We carried out two experiments, in which the
classes assigned to the reviews of DEREV were
found adopting two different strategies. In the first
experiment the classes of the reviews were de-
termined using majority voting of our deception
clues. This experiment is thus conceptually simi-
lar to those of Li et al. (2011), who trained models
using supervised methods with the aim of identi-
fying fake reviews. We discuss this experiment in
the next Section. In the second experiment, learn-
ing from crowds was used (Raykar et al., 2010).

This approach is discussed in Section 3.2.1.
In both experiments we carried out a 10-fold

cross-validation where in each iteration feature se-
lection and training were carried out using 90% of
the part of the corpus with only silver standard an-
notation and 90% of the subset with gold. The test
set used in each iteration consisted of the remain-
ing tenth of reviews with gold standard classes,
which were employed in order to evaluate the pre-
dictions of the models. This allowed to estimate
the efficiency of the strategies we used to deter-
mine our silver standard classes.

3.1 Majority Voting
3.1.1 Determining the class of reviews by

majority voting
The deception clues discussed in Section 2.3 were
used in our first experiment to identify the class of
each review using majority voting. In other words,
those clues were considered as independent pre-
dictors of the class; the class predicted by the ma-
jority of the annotators/clues was assigned to the
review. Specifically, if 0, 1 or 2 deception clues
were found, the review was classified as true; if
there were 3 or 4, the review was considered false.
Table 1 shows the distribution of the number of
deception clues in the reviews in DEREV.

3.1.2 Feature selection
In both experiments each review was represented
as feature vector. The features were just of uni-
grams, bigrams and trigrams of lemmas and part-
of-speech (POS), as collected from the reviews
through TreeTagger10 (Schmid, 1994).

Since in each experiment we applied a 10-fold
cross-validation, in every fold the features were
extracted from the nine-tenths of DEREV em-
ployed as training set. Once identified the train-
ing set, we computed the frequency lists of the
n-grams of lemmas and POS. The lists were col-
lected separately from the reviews belonging to
the class ‘true’ and to the class ‘false’. Such sep-
aration was aimed to take into consideration the
most highly frequent n-grams of both genuine and
fake reviews. However, for the following steps of
the feature selection, only the n-grams which ap-
peared more than 300 times in every frequency list
were considered: a threshold empirically chosen
for ease of calculations. In fact, among the most

10 http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.
de/projekte/corplex/TreeTagger/
DecisionTreeTagger.html

282



Table 2: The most frequent n-grams collected

N-grams Lemmas POS Total

Unigrams 34 21
Bigrams 21 13
Trigrams 13 8

Total 68 42 110

frequents, in order to identify the features most
effective in discriminating the two classes of re-
views, the Information Gain (IG) of the selected n-
grams was computed (Kullback and Leibler, 1951;
Yang and Pedersen, 1997).

Then, after having found the Information Gain
of the n-grams of lemmas and part-of-speech, a
further reduction of the features was realized. In
fact, we selected a relatively small amount of fea-
tures, in order to facilitate the computation of the
Raykar et al.’s algorithm (discussed in Sub-section
3.2.1), and only the n-grams with the highest IG
values were selected to be taken as features of the
vectors which represented the reviews. In par-
ticular, the n-grams were collected according to
the scheme shown in Table 2. By the way, 8,
13, 21 and 34 are numbers belonging to the Fi-
bonacci series (Sigler, 2003). They were chosen
because they grow exponentially and are used, in
our case, to give wider representation to the short-
est n-grams.

Lastly, two more features were added to the fea-
ture set, that is the length of the review, considered
with and without punctuation. Therefore, in each
fold of the experiment, the vectors of the reviews
were constituted by 112 values: 2 corresponding
to the length of the review, and 110 representing
the (not normalized) frequency, into the review it-
self, of the selected n-grams of lemmas and POS.

3.1.3 Baselines

The best way to assess the improvement coming
from the algorithm would have been with respect
to a supervised baseline. However this was not
possible as we could only be certain regarding the
classification of a fraction of the reviews (our gold
standard: 236 reviews, for a total of about 23,000
tokens). We felt such a small dataset could not be
used for training, but only for evaluation; therefore
we used instead two simple heuristic baselines.

Majority baseline. The simplest metric for per-
formance evaluation is the majority baseline: al-
ways assign to a review the class most represented
in the dataset. Since in the subset of DEREV with
gold standard we had 50% of true and false re-
views, simply 50% is our majority baseline.

Random baseline. Furthermore, we estimated a
random baseline through a Monte Carlo simula-
tion. This kind of simulation allows to estimate the
performance of a classifier which performs several
times a task over random outputs whose distribu-
tion reflects that of real data.

In particular, for this experiment, since we had
236 reviews whose 50% were labeled as false,
100000 times we produced 236 random binomial
predictions, having p = .5. In each simulation,
the random prediction was compared with our real
data. It turned out that in less than .01% of tri-
als the level of 62.29% of correct predictions was
exceeded. The thresholds for precision and recall
in detecting deceptive reviews were 62.26% and
66.95% respectively.

3.1.4 Models
We tested a number of supervised learning meth-
ods to learn a classifier using the classes deter-
mined by majority voting, but the best results
were obtained using Support Vector Machines
(SVMs) (Cortes and Vapnik, 1995), already em-
ployed in many applications involving text classi-
fication (Yang and Liu, 1999).

3.1.5 Results
The results obtained by training a supervised clas-
sifier over the dataset with classes identified with
majority voting are shown in the Table 3. The
highest results are in bold. The methodological
approach and performance achieved in this exper-
iment seems to be comparable to that of Strappar-
ava and Mihalcea (2009) and, more recently, of Li
et al. (2011). However Li et al. (2011) evaluate the
effectiveness of different kind of features with the
aim of annotating unlabeled data, while we try to
evaluate the reliability of heuristic classes in train-
ing.

3.2 Learning from Crowds

3.2.1 The Learning from Crowds algorithm
As pointed out by Raykar et al. (2010), major-
ity voting is not necessarily the most effective
way to determine the real classes in problems like

283



Table 3: The experiment with the majority voting classes

Correctly Incorrectly Precision Recall F-measure
classified reviews classified reviews

False reviews 75 43 83.33% 63.56% 72.12%
True reviews 103 15

Total 178 58

Total accuracy 75.42%

Random baseline 62.29% 62.26% 66.95%

those of reviews where there is no gold standard.
This is because annotators are not equally reli-
able, and the reviews are not equally challenging.
Hence the output of the majority voting may be af-
fected by unevaluated biases. To address this prob-
lem, Raykar et al. (2010) presented a maximum-
likelihood estimator that jointly learns the classi-
fier/regressor, the annotator accuracy, and the ac-
tual true label.

For ease of exposition, Raykar et al. (2010) use
as classifier the logistic regression, even though
they specify their algorithm would work with any
classifier. In case of logistic regression, the prob-
ability for an entity x ∈ X of belonging to a class
y ∈ Y with Y = {1, 0} is a sigmoid function
of the weight vector w of the features of each in-
stance xi, that is p[y = 1|x,w] = σ(w>x), where,
given a threshold γ, the class y = 1 if w>x ≥ γ.

Annotators’ performance, then, is evaluated ‘in
terms of the sensitivity and specificity with respect
to the unknown gold standard’: in particular, in a
binary classification problem, for the annotator j
the sensitivity αj is the rate of positive cases iden-
tified by the annotator –i.e., the recall of positive
cases– while the specificity βj is the annotator’s
recall of negative cases.

Given a dataset D constituted of indepen-
dently sampled entities, a number of annotators
R, and the relative parameters θ = {w,α, β},
the likelihood function which needs to be maxi-
mized, according to Raykar et al. (2010), would
be p[D|θ] = ∏Ni=1 p[y1i , ...yRi |xi, θ], and the
maximum-likelihood estimator is obtained by
maximizing the log-likelihood, that is

θ̂ML = {α̂, β̂, ŵ} = argmax
θ

{ln p[D|θ]}. (1)

Raykar et al. (2010) propose to solve this max-
imization problem (Bickel and Doksum, 2000)
through the technique of Expectation Maximiza-

tion (EM) (Dempster et al., 1977). The EM al-
gorithm can be used to recover the parameters of
the hidden distributions accounting for the distri-
bution of data. It consists of two steps, an Expecta-
tion step (E-step) followed by a Maximization step
(M-step), which are iterated until convergence.
During the E-step the expectation of the term yi is
computed starting from the current estimate of the
parameters. In the M-step the parameters θ are up-
dated by maximizing the conditional expectation.
Regarding the third parameter, w, Raykar et al.
(2010) admit there is not a closed form solution
and suggest to use the Newton-Raphson method.

3.2.2 Determining the class of reviews using
Learning from Crowds

In order to apply Raykar’s algorithm, we pro-
ceeded as follows. First, we applied the procedure
for feature selection described in Subsection 3.1.2
to create a single dataset: that is, the corpus was
not divided in folds, but the feature selection in-
volved all of DEREV. This dataset was built using
the classes resulting from the majority voting ap-
proach and included these columns:

• The class assignments of the four clues dis-
cussed in Sub-section 2.3 – SB, Cl, NN, UP;

• The majority voting class;
• The 112 features identified according to the

procedure presented in Sub-section 3.1.2.

Then, we implemented the algorithm proposed
by Raykar et al. (2010) in R.11 We computed a Lo-
gistic Regression (Gelman and Hill, 2007) on the
dataset to compute the weight vectorw, used to es-
timate for each instance the probability pi for the
review of belonging to the class ‘true’. For the lo-
gistic regression we used the 112 surface features

11 http://www.r-project.org/

284



Table 4: The experiment with Raykar et al.’s algorithm classes

Correctly Incorrectly Precision Recall F-measure
classified reviews classified reviews

False reviews 85 33 78.70% 72.03% 75.22%
True reviews 95 23

Total 180 56

Total accuracy 76.27%

Random baseline 62.29% 62.26% 66.95%

mentioned above, adopting as class the majority
voting, as suggested by Raykar et al. (2010).

The parameters α and β were estimated regard-
ing the three clues Cl - Cluster, NN - Nickname
and UP - Unknown Purchase. The attribute SB -
Suspect Book was not used, in order to carry out
the EM algorithm exclusively on heuristic data, re-
moving the information obtained through sources
external to the dataset. The parameters α and β
of the three clues were obtained not from ran-
dom classes, as the EM algorithm would allow, but
again comparing the clues’ labels with the major-
ity voting class. In fact, aware of the local maxi-
mum problem of EM, in this way we tried to en-
hance the reliability of the results posing a config-
uration which could be, at least theoretically, bet-
ter than a completely random one.

Knowing these values for each instance of the
dataset, we computed the E-step and we updated
our parameters in M-step.

The E-step and the M-step were iterated 100
times, in which the log-likelihood increases mono-
tonically, indicating a convergence to a local max-
imum.

The final value of pi determined the new class of
each instance: if pi > .5 the review was labeled as
true, otherwise as false. In the end, the EM clus-
terization allowed to label 3267 reviews as false
and 3552 as true, that is 47.91% and 52.09% of
DEREV respectively.

3.2.3 Feature selection

The feature selection for this experiment was ex-
actly the same presented for the previous one in
Sub-section 3.1.2; the only, fundamental differ-
ence was that in the first experiment the classes
derived from the majority voting rule, while in
the second experiment the classes were identified
through the Raykar et al.’s strategy.

3.2.4 Baselines
As in the first experiment, we compared the per-
formance of the models with the same majority
and random baselines discussed in Sub-section
3.1.3.

3.2.5 Models
We used the classes determined through the Learn-
ing by Crowds algorithm to train SVMs models,
with the same settings employed in the first exper-
iments.

3.2.6 Results
Table 4 shows the results of the classifier trained
over the dataset whose the classes were identified
through the Raykar et al.’s algorithm.

4 Discussion

4.1 Deceptive language in reviews

Of the 4811 reviewers who wrote reviews included
in our corpus, about 900 were anonymous, and
only 16 wrote 10 or more reviews. If, in one hand,
this prevented us from verifying the performance
of the models with respect to particular reviewers,
on the other hand we had the opportunity of evalu-
ating the style in writing reviews across many sub-
jects.

In our experiments, we extracted simple surface
features constituted by short n-grams of lemmas
and part-of-speech. In literature there is evidence
that also other kinds of features are effective in de-
tecting deception in reviews: for example, infor-
mation about the syntactic structures of the texts
(Feng et al., 2012). In our pilot studies we did not
obtain improvements using syntactic features. But
even the frequency of n-grams can provide some
insight regarding deceptive language in reviews;
and with this aim we focused on the unigrams ap-
pearing more than 50 times in the 236 reviews

285



constituting the gold standard of DEREV, whose
un/truthfulness is known. The use of self-referred
pronouns and adjectives is remarkably different in
true and fake reviews: in the genuine ones, the pro-
nouns ‘I’, ‘my’ and ‘me’ are found 371, 74 and 51
times respectively, while in the fake ones the pro-
noun ‘I’ is present only 149 and ‘me’ and ‘my’
less than 50 times. This reduced number of self-
references is coherent with the findings of other
well-known studies regarding deception detection
(Newman et al., 2003); however, while in truthful
reviews the pronoun ‘you’ appears only 84 times,
in the fake ones the frequency of ‘you’ and ‘your’
is 151 and 75. It seems that while the truth-tellers
simple state their opinions, the deceivers address
directly the reader. Probably they tend to give ad-
vice: after all, this is what they are paid for. The
frequency of the word ‘read’ - that is the activ-
ity simulated in fake reviews - is also quite imbal-
anced: 137 in true reviews and 97 in the fake ones.
Lastly, it is maybe surprising that in the false re-
views terms related to positive feelings/judgments
do not have the highest frequency; instead in truth-
ful reviews we found 52 times the term ‘good’
(and 56 times the ambiguous term ‘like’): also this
outcome is similar to that of the mentioned study
of Newman et al. (2003).

4.2 Estimating the gold standard

The estimation of the gold standard is a recur-
rent problem in many tasks of text classification
and in particular with deceptive review identifica-
tion, that is an application where the deceptiveness
of the reviews cannot be properly determined but
only heuristically assessed.

In this paper we introduced a new dataset for
studying deceptive reviews, constituted by 6819
instances whose 236 (that is about 3.5% of the cor-
pus) were labeled with the highest degree of confi-
dence ever seen before. We used this subset to test
the models that we trained on the other reviews of
DEREV, whose the class was heuristically deter-
mined.

With this purpose, we adopted two techniques.
First, we simply considered the value of our clues
of deception as outputs of just as many annotators,
and we assigned the classes to each review accord-
ing to majority voting. Then we clustered our in-
stances using the Learning from Crowd algorithm
proposed by Raykar et al. (2010). Lastly we car-
ried out the two experiments of text classification

described above.

The results suggest that both methods achieve
accuracy well above the baseline. However, the
models trained using Learning from Crowd classes
not only achieved the highest accuracy, but also
outperformed the thresholds for precision and re-
call in detecting deceptive reviews (Table 4), while
the models trained with the majority voting classes
showed a very high precision, but at the expense of
the recall, which was lower than the baseline (Ta-
ble 3).

Since the results even with simple majority vot-
ing classes were positive, we carried out two more
experiments, identical to those described above
except that we included in the feature set the three
deception clues Cluster - Cl, Nickname - NN and
Unknown Purchase - UP. Both with majority vot-
ing and with learning from Crowds classes, the ac-
curacy of the models exceeded 97%. This might
seem to suggest that those clues are very effective;
but given that the deception clues were used to de-
rive the silver standard, their use as features could
be considered to some extent circular (Subsection
2.4). Moreover, not all of our non-linguistic cues
may be found in all review scenarios, and therefore
the applicability of our methods to all review sce-
narios will have to be investigated. Specifically,
Cluster is likely to be applicable to most review
domains, Nickname and Unknown Purchase are
Amazon features that may or may not be adopted
by other services allowing users to provide re-
views. However, our main concern was not to
evaluate the effectiveness of these specific clues of
deception, but to investigate whether better strate-
gies for labeling instances than simple majority
voting could be found.

In this perspective, the performance of our
second experiment, in which the Learning from
Crowds algorithm was employed, stands out. In
fact in that case we tried to identify the classes of
the instances abstaining from making use of any
external information regarding the reviews: in par-
ticular, we ignored the Suspect Book - SB clue of
deception which, by contrast, took part in the cre-
ation of the majority voting classes.

This outcome suggests that, even in scenarios
where the gold standard is unknown, the Learning
from Crowds algorithm is a reliable tool for label-
ing the reviews, so that effective models can be
trained in order to classify them as truthful or not.

286



References

Bickel, P. and Doksum, K. (2000). Mathemati-
cal statistics: basic ideas and selected topics.
Number v. 1 in Mathematical Statistics: Basic
Ideas and Selected Topics. Prentice Hall.

Cortes, C. and Vapnik, V. (1995). Support-vector
networks. Machine Learning, 20.

Dempster, A. P., Laird, N. M., and Rubin, D. B.
(1977). Maximum Likelihood from Incomplete
Data via the EM Algorithm. Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodolog-
ical), 39(1):1–38.

Feng, S., Banerjee, R., and Choi, Y. (2012). Syn-
tactic stylometry for deception detection. In
Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 2: Short Papers), pages 171–175, Jeju
Island, Korea. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Gelman, A. and Hill, J. (2007). Data Analysis
Using Regression and Multilevel/Hierarchical
Models. Analytical Methods for Social Re-
search. Cambridge University Press.

Kullback, S. and Leibler, R. A. (1951). On in-
formation and sufficiency. Ann. Math. Statist.,
22(1):79–86.

Li, F., Huang, M., Yang, Y., and Zhu, X. (2011).
Learning to identify review spam. In Proceed-
ings of the Twenty-Second international joint
conference on Artificial Intelligence-Volume
Volume Three, pages 2488–2493. AAAI Press.

Newman, M. L., Pennebaker, J. W., Berry, D. S.,
and Richards, J. M. (2003). Lying Words:
Predicting Deception From Linguistic Styles.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
29(5):665–675.

Ott, M., Choi, Y., Cardie, C., and Hancock, J.
(2001). Finding deceptive opinion spam by any
stretch of the imagination. In Proceedings of
the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, pages 309–319, Portland, Ore-
gon, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Raykar, V. C., Yu, S., Zhao, L. H., Valadez, G. H.,
Florin, C., Bogoni, L., and Moy, L. (2010).
Learning from crowds. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 11:1297–1322.

Schmid, H. (1994). Probabilistic part-of-speech
tagging using decision trees. In Proceedings
of International Conference on New Methods in
Language Processing.

Sigler, L., editor (2003). Fibonacci’s Liber Abaci:
A Translation Into Modern English of Leonardo
Pisano’s Book of Calculation. Sources and
Studies in the History of Mathematics and Phys-
ical Sciences. Springer Verlag.

Strapparava, C. and Mihalcea, R. (2009). The Lie
Detector: Explorations in the Automatic Recog-
nition of Deceptive Language. In Proceed-
ing ACLShort ’09 - Proceedings of the ACL-
IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Papers.

Yang, Y. and Liu, X. (1999). A re-examination of
text categorization methods. In Proceedings of
the 22nd annual international ACM SIGIR con-
ference on Research and development in infor-
mation retrieval, SIGIR ’99, pages 42–49, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

Yang, Y. and Pedersen, J. O. (1997). A
comparative study on feature selection in
text categorization. CiteSeerX - Scientific
Literature Digital Library and Search En-
gine [http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/oai2] (United
States).

287


