



















































DKIE: Open Source Information Extraction for Danish


Proceedings of the Demonstrations at the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 61–64,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

DKIE: Open Source Information Extraction for Danish

Leon Derczynski
University of Sheffield
leon@dcs.shef.ac.uk

Camilla Vilhelmsen Field
University of Southern Denmark

cafie13@student.sdu.dk

Kenneth S. Bøgh
Aarhus University

ksb@cs.au.dk

Abstract

Danish is a major Scandinavian language
spoken daily by around six million peo-
ple. However, it lacks a unified, open set
of NLP tools. This demonstration will in-
troduce DKIE, an extensible open-source
toolkit for processing Danish text. We im-
plement an information extraction archi-
tecture for Danish within GATE, including
integrated third-party tools. This imple-
mentation includes the creation of a sub-
stantial set of corpus annotations for data-
intensive named entity recognition. The
final application and dataset is made are
openly available, and the part-of-speech
tagger and NER model also operate in-
dependently or with the Stanford NLP
toolkit.

1 Introduction

Danish is primarily spoken in the northern hemi-
sphere: in Denmark, on the Faroe islands, and on
Greenland. Having roots in Old Norse, Danish
bears similarities to other Scandinavian languages,
and shares features with English and German.

Previous tools and language resources for Dan-
ish have suffered from license restrictions, or from
using small or non-reusable datasets. As a result,
it is often difficult to use Danish language tech-
nologies, if anything is available at all. In cases
where quality tools are available, they often have
disparate APIs and input/output formats, making
integration time-consuming and prone to error.

To remedy this, this paper presents an open-
source information extraction toolkit for Danish,
using the established and flexible GATE text pro-
cessing platform (Cunningham et al., 2013). To
this end, there are three main goals:

Adaptation: The application adapts to collo-
quial and formal Danish.

Interoperability: DKIE is internally consistent
and adopts unified, well-grounded solutions to the
problems of processing Danish. Where possible,
DKIE re-uses existing components, and strives for
compatibility with major text processing architec-
tures.

Portability: It is preferable for developed com-
ponents to be readily movable within the chosen
architecture, GATE, and without, usable indepen-
dently.

Openness: The resultant application, and cor-
pora and annotations developed in its creation, are
as freely-available as possible.

The remainder of this paper first discusses con-
siderations specific to the language and prior
work, then introduces the information extraction
pipeline, followed by an evaluation of the tools
provided.

2 Processing Danish

There are a few representational issues for Danish
that are not solved in a unified fashion across exist-
ing technological issues. DKIE builds upon major
standards in general linguistic annotation and in
Danish to unify these solutions.

Danish is written using the Latin alphabet, with
the addition of three vowels: æ, ø and å, which
may be transliterated as ae, oe and aa respectively.
It is similar to English in terms of capitalisation
rules and character set.

Over time, the orthography of Danish has
shifted. Among other things, a spelling reform
in 1948 removed the capitalisation of nouns, and
introduced the three vowel characters to repre-
sent existing vowel digraphs. There were also
spelling shifts in this reform (e.g. kjærlighed to
kærlighed). In addition, some towns and mu-
nicipalities have changed the spelling of their
name. For example, Denmarks second-largest city
Aarhus changed its name to Århus with the 1948

61



Figure 1: The ANNIE-based information extraction pipeline for Danish

reform, although Aalborg and Aabenraa did not.
Later, in 2011, the city reverted from Århus to
Aarhus. The city’s university retained the Aarhus
spelling throughout this period.

The effect of these relatively recent changes is
that there exist digitised texts using a variety of or-
thographies not only to represent the same sound,
as also in English, but also the same actual word.
A language processing toolkit for Danish must ex-
hibit sensitivity to these variances.

In addition, Danish has some word bound-
ary considerations. Compound nouns are com-
mon (e.g. kvindehåndboldlandsholdet for “the
women’s national handball team”), as are hyphen-
ated constructions (fugle-fotografering for “bird
photography”) which are often treated as single to-
kens.

Finally, abbreviations are common in Danish,
and its acronyms can be difficult to disambiguate
without the right context and language resource
(e.g. OB for Odense Boldklub, a football club).

3 Background

The state of the art in Danish information extrac-
tion is not very interoperable or open compared to
that for e.g. English. Previous work, while high-
performance, is not available freely (Bick, 2004),
or domain-restricted.1 This makes results diffi-
cult to reproduce (Fokkens et al., 2013), and leads
to sub-optimal interoperability (Lee et al., 2010).
Even recent books focusing on the topic are heav-
ily licensed and difficult for the average academic
to access. Further, prior tools are often in the form
of discrete components, hard to extend or to inte-
grate with other systems.

Some good corpus resources are available, most
recently the Copenhagen Dependency Treebank

1E.g. CST’s non-commercial-only anonymisation tool, at
http://cst.dk/online/navnegenkender/

(CDT) (Buch-Kromann and Korzen, 2010), which
built on and included previously-released corpora
for Danish. This 200K-token corpus is taken
from news articles and editorials, and includes
document structure, tokenisation, lemma, part-of-
speech and dependency relation information.

The application demonstrated, DKIE, draws
only on open corpus resources for annotation, and
the annotations over these corpora are released
openly. Further, the application is also made open-
source, with each component having similar or
better performance when compared with the state-
of-the-art.

4 Information Extraction Pipeline

This section details each step in the DKIE
pipeline. A screenshot of the tool is shown in Fig-
ure 1.

4.1 Tokeniser
We adopt the PAROLE tokenisation scheme (Ke-
son and Norling-Christensen, 1998). This makes
different decisions from Penn Treebank in some
cases, concatenating particular expressions as sin-
gle tokens. For example, the two word phrase i alt
– meaning in total – is converted to the single to-
ken i alt. A set list of these group formations is
given in the Danish PAROLE guidelines.

Another key difference is in the treatment of
quoted phrases and hyphenation. Phrases con-
nected in this way are often treated as single to-
kens. For example, the phrase “Se og hør”-
læserne (readers of “See and Hear”, a magazine)
is treated as a single token under this scheme.

4.2 Part-of-Speech tagger
We use a machine-learning based tag-
ger (Toutanova et al., 2003) for Danish part-
of-speech labelling. The original PAROLE

62



Tagger Token accuracy % Sentence acc. %
DKIE 95.3 49.1
TnT 96.2 39.1

Table 1: Part-of-speech labelling accuracy in
DKIE

scheme introduces a set of around 120 tags, many
of which are used only rarely. The scheme com-
prises tags built up of up to nine features. These
features are used to describe information such
as case, degree, gender, number, possessivity,
reflexivity, mood, tense and so on (Keson and
Norling-Christensen, 1998).

The PAROLE data includes morphological en-
coding in tags. We separate this data out in
our corpus, adding morphological features distinct
from part-of-speech data. This data may then be
used by later work to train a morphological anal-
yser, or by other tools that rely on morphological
information.

We combine PAROLE annotations with the re-
duced tagset employed by the Danish Dependency
Treebank (DDT) (Kromann, 2003). This has 25
tags. We adapted the tagger to Danish by in-
cluding internal automatic mapping of æ, ø and
å to two-letter diphthongs when both training and
labelling, by adding extra sets of features for
handling words and adjusting our unknown word
threshold to compensate for the small corpus (as
in Derczynski et al. (2013)), and by specifying the
closed-class tags for this set and language. We
also prefer a CRF-based classifier in order to get
better whole-sequence accuracy, providing greater
opportunities for later-stage tools such as depen-
dency parsers to accurately process more of the
corpus.

Results are given in Table 1, comparing token-
and sentence-level accuracy to other work using
the DDT and the TnT tagger (Brants, 2000). State-
of-the-art performance is achieved, with whole-
sentence tagging accuracy comparable to that of
leading English taggers.

4.3 Gazetteers

High precision entity recognition can be achieved
with gazetteer-based named entity recognition.
This is a low-cost way of quickly getting decent
performance out of existing toolkits. We include
two special kinds of gazetteer for Danish. Firstly,
it is important to annotation the names of enti-
ties specific to Denmark (e.g. Danish towns).

id expression interpretation
-- ---------- --------------
3 igaa ADD(DCT,day,-1)
13 Num._jul ADD(DATE_MONTH_DAY(DCT, 12, 24),

day, TOKEN(0))

Figure 2: Example normalisation rules in TIMEN.
“DCT” refers to the document creation time.

Secondly, entities outside of Denmark sometimes
have different names specific to the Danish lan-
guage (e.g. Lissabon for Lisboa / Lisbon).

As well as a standard strict-matching gazetteer,
we include a “fuzzy” gazetteer specific to Dan-
ish that tolerates vowel orthography variation and
the other changes introduced in the 1948 spelling
reform. For locations, we extracted data for
names of Danish towns from DBpedia and a lo-
cal gazetteer, and from Wikipedia the Danish-
language versions of the world’s 1 000 most popu-
lous cities. For organisations, we used Wikipedia
cross-language links to map the international or-
ganisations deemed notable in Wikipedia to their
Danish translation and acroynm (e.g. the United
Nations is referred to as FN). The major Danish
political parties were also added to this gazetteer.
For person names, we build lists of both notable
people,2 and also populated GATE’s first and last
name lists with common choices in Denmark.

4.4 Temporal Expression Annotation
We include temporal annotation for Danish in this
pipeline, making DKIE the first temporal anno-
tation tool for Danish. We follow the TimeML
temporal annotation standard (Pustejovsky et al.,
2004), completing just the TIMEX3 part.

Danish is interesting in that it permits flexible
temporal anchors outside of reference time (Re-
ichenbach, 1947) and the default structure of a cal-
endar. For example, while in English one may use
numbers to express a distance in days (two days
from now) or into a month (the second of March),
Danish permits these offsets from any agreed time.
As a result, it is common to see expressions of the
form 2. juledag, which in this case is the second
christmas day and refers to 26th December.

For this pipeline, we use finite state transducers
to define how Danish timexes may be recognised.
We then use the general-purpose TIMEN (Llorens
et al., 2012) timex normalisation tool to provide
calendar or TIMEX3 values for these expressions.
Example rules are shown in Figure 2.

2See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List of Danes, minus
musicians due to stage names

63



4.5 Named entities

In addition to gazetteers, we present a machine
learning-based approach to entity recognition and
classification in Danish. We annotated the Copen-
hagen Dependency Treebank for person, location
and organisation entities, according to the ACE
guidelines (or as close as possible). This led
to a total of 100 000 extra tokens annotated for
NEs in Danish, doubling the previously-available
amount. We used three annotators, achieving
inter-annotator agreement of 0.89 on the first
100 000 tokens; annotation is an ongoing effort.

The data was used to learn a model tuned to
Danish with an existing NER tool (Finkel et al.,
2005). We removed word shape conjunctions fea-
tures from the default configuration in an effort to
reduced sensitivities introduced by the group noun
tokenisation issue. This model, and the Stanford
NER tool, were then wrapped as a GATE process-
ing resource, contributing general-purpose Danish
NER to the toolkit.

5 Conclusion

We will demonstrate a modern, interoperable,
open-source NLP toolkit for information extrac-
tion in Danish. The released resources are: a
GATE pipeline for Danish; tools for temporal ex-
pression recognition and normalisation for Dan-
ish; part-of-speech and named entity recognition
models for Danish, that also work in the Stanford
NLP architecture; and named entity corpus an-
notations over the Copenhagen Dependency Tree-
bank.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by EU funding un-
der grant FP7-ICT-2013-10-611233, Pheme, and
grant agreement No. 296322, AnnoMarket. We
are grateful to Anders Søgaard of Copenhagen
University for comments on an earlier draft and
kind help with gazetteers. The first author would
also like to thank Aarhus University for their kind
provision of research facilities.

References
E. Bick. 2004. A named entity recognizer for Danish.

In Proceedings of LREC.

T. Brants. 2000. TnT: a statistical part-of-speech tag-
ger. In Proceedings of the sixth conference on Ap-

plied natural language processing, pages 224–231.
ACL.

M. Buch-Kromann and I. Korzen. 2010. The unified
annotation of syntax and discourse in the Copen-
hagen Dependency Treebanks. In Proceedings of
the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages
127–131. ACL.

H. Cunningham, V. Tablan, A. Roberts, and
K. Bontcheva. 2013. Getting More Out of
Biomedical Documents with GATE’s Full Lifecycle
Open Source Text Analytics. PLoS computational
biology, 9(2):e1002854.

L. Derczynski, A. Ritter, S. Clark, and K. Bontcheva.
2013. Twitter Part-of-Speech Tagging for All: Over-
coming Sparse and Noisy Data. In Proceedings of
Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

J. R. Finkel, T. Grenager, and C. Manning. 2005. In-
corporating non-local information into information
extraction systems by Gibbs sampling. In Proceed-
ings of the 43rd Annual Meeting on Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 363–370. ACL.

A. Fokkens, M. van Erp, M. Postma, T. Pedersen,
P. Vossen, and N. Freire. 2013. Offspring from
reproduction problems: What replication failure
teaches us. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 1691–1701. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

B. Keson and O. Norling-Christensen. 1998.
PAROLE-DK. The Danish Society for Language
and Literature.

M. T. Kromann. 2003. The Danish Dependency Tree-
bank and the DTAG treebank tool. In Proceedings
of the Second Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic
Theories, page 217.

K. Lee, L. Romary, et al. 2010. Towards interoperabil-
ity of ISO standards for Language Resource Man-
agement. Proc. ICGL 2010.

H. Llorens, L. Derczynski, R. J. Gaizauskas, and E. Sa-
quete. 2012. TIMEN: An Open Temporal Ex-
pression Normalisation Resource. In LREC, pages
3044–3051.

J. Pustejovsky, B. Ingria, R. Sauri, J. Castano,
J. Littman, and R. Gaizauskas. 2004. The Specifica-
tion Language TimeML. In The Language of Time:
A Reader, pages 545–557. Oxford University Press.

H. Reichenbach. 1947. The tenses of verbs. In Ele-
ments of Symbolic Logic. Macmillan.

K. Toutanova, D. Klein, C. D. Manning, and Y. Singer.
2003. Feature-rich part-of-speech tagging with a
cyclic dependency network. In Proceedings of the
2003 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 173–180. ACL.

64


