



















































Using a Random Forest Classifier to Compile Bilingual Dictionaries of Technical Terms from Comparable Corpora


Proceedings of the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 111–116,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Using a Random Forest Classifier to Compile Bilingual Dictionaries of
Technical Terms from Comparable Corpora

Georgios Kontonatsios1,2 Ioannis Korkontzelos1,2 Jun’ichi Tsujii3 Sophia Ananiadou1,2
National Centre for Text Mining, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK1

School of Computer Science, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK2

Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China3

{gkontonatsios,ikorkontzelos,sananiadou}@cs.man.ac.uk
jtsujii@microsoft.com

Abstract

We describe a machine learning approach,
a Random Forest (RF) classifier, that is
used to automatically compile bilingual
dictionaries of technical terms from com-
parable corpora. We evaluate the RF clas-
sifier against a popular term alignment
method, namely context vectors, and we
report an improvement of the translation
accuracy. As an application, we use the
automatically extracted dictionary in com-
bination with a trained Statistical Machine
Translation (SMT) system to more accu-
rately translate unknown terms. The dic-
tionary extraction method described in this
paper is freely available 1.

1 Background

Bilingual dictionaries of technical terms are im-
portant resources for many Natural Language
Processing (NLP) tasks including Statistical Ma-
chine Translation (SMT) (Och and Ney, 2003) and
Cross-Language Information Retrieval (Balles-
teros and Croft, 1997). However, manually cre-
ating and updating such resources is an expensive
process. In addition to this, new terms are con-
stantly emerging. Especially in the biomedical
domain, which is the focus of this work, there is
a vast number of neologisms, i.e., newly coined
terms, (Pustejovsky et al., 2001).

Early work on bilingual lexicon extraction
focused on clean, parallel corpora providing
satisfactory results (Melamed, 1997; Kay and
Röscheisen, 1993). However, parallel corpora are
expensive to construct and for some domains and
language pairs are scarce resources. For these rea-
sons, the focus has shifted to comparable corpora

1http://personalpages.manchester.
ac.uk/postgrad/georgios.kontonatsios/
Software/RF-TermAlign.tar.gz

that are more readily available, more up-to-date,
larger and cheaper to construct than parallel data.
Comparable corpora are collections of monolin-
gual documents in a source and target language
that share the same topic, domain and/or docu-
ments are from the same period, genre and so
forth.

Existing methods for bilingual lexicon extrac-
tion from comparable corpora are mainly based
on the same principle. They hypothesise that a
word and its translation tend to appear in simi-
lar lexical context (Fung and Yee, 1998; Rapp,
1999; Morin et al., 2007; Chiao and Zweigen-
baum, 2002). Context vector methods are reported
to achieve robust performance on terms that occur
frequently in the corpus. Chiao and Zweigenbaum
(2002) achieved a performance of 94% accuracy
on the top 20 candidates when translating high fre-
quency, medical terms (frequency of 100 or more).
In contrast, Morin and Daille (2010) reported an
accuracy of 21% for multi-word terms occurring
20 times or less, noting that translating rare terms
is a challenging problem for context vectors.

Kontonatsios et al. (2013) introduced an RF
classifier that is able to automatically learn as-
sociation rules of textual units between a source
and target language. However, they applied their
method only on artificially constructed datasets
containing an equal number of positive and neg-
ative instances. In the case of comparable cor-
pora, the datasets are highly unbalanced (given n,
m source and target terms respectively, we need to
classify n×m instances). In this work, we incor-
porate the classification margin into the RF model,
to allow the method to cope with the skewed dis-
tribution of positive and negative instances that oc-
curs in comparable corpora.

Our proposed method ranks candidate transla-
tions using the classification margin and suggests
as the best translation the candidate with the max-
imum margin. We evaluate our method on an

111



English-Spanish comparable corpus of Wikipedia
articles that are related to the medical sub-domain
of “breast cancer”. Furthermore, we show that dic-
tionaries extracted from comparable corpora can
be used to dynamically augment an SMT sys-
tem in order to better translate Out-of-Vocabulary
(OOV) terms.

2 Methodology

A pair of terms in a source and target language is
represented as a feature vector where each dimen-
sion corresponds to a unique character n-gram.
The value of each dimension is 0 or 1 and desig-
nates the occurrence of the corresponding n-gram
in the input terms. The feature vectors that we
use contain 2q dimensions where the first q dimen-
sions correspond to the n-gram features extracted
from the source terms and the last q dimensions to
those from the target terms. In the reported experi-
ments, we use the 600 (300 source and 300 target)
most frequently occurring n-grams.

The underlying mechanism that allows the RF
method to learn character gram mappings between
terms of a source and target language is the de-
cision trees. A node in the decision tree is a
unique character n-gram. The nodes are linked
through the branches of the trees and therefore the
two sub-spaces of q source and q target charac-
ter grams are combined. Each decision tree in the
forest is constructed as follows: every node is split
by considering |φ| random n-gram features of the
initial feature set Ω, and a decision tree is fully
grown. This process is repeated |τ | times and con-
structs |τ | decision trees. We tuned the RF clas-
sifier using 140 random trees where we observed
a plateau in the classification performance. Fur-
thermore, we set the number of random features
using |φ| = log2 |Ω|+ 1 as suggested by Breiman
(2001).

The classification margin that we use to rank
the candidate translations is calculated by simply
subtracting the average number of trees predicting
that the input terms are not translations from the
average number of decision trees predicting that
the terms are mutual translations. A larger classi-
fication margin means that more decision trees in
the forest classify an instance as a translation pair.

For training an RF model, we use a bilingual
dictionary of technical terms. When the dictionary
lists more than one translation for an English term,
we randomly select only one. Negative instances

are created by randomly matching non-translation
pairs of terms. We used an equal number of posi-
tive and negative instances for training the model.
Starting from 20, 000 translation pairs we gener-
ated a training dataset of 40, 000 positive and neg-
ative instances.

2.1 Baseline method

The context projection method was first pro-
posed by (Fung and Yee, 1998; Rapp, 1999) and
since then different variations have been suggested
(Chiao and Zweigenbaum, 2002; Morin et al.,
2007; Andrade et al., 2010; Morin and Prochas-
son, 2011). Our implementation more closely
follows the context vector method introduced by
(Morin and Prochasson, 2011).

As a preprocessing step, stop words are re-
moved using an online list 2 and lemmatisation
is performed using TreeTagger (Schmid, 1994) on
both the English and Spanish part of the compa-
rable corpus. Afterwards, the method proceeds
in three steps. Firstly, for each source and target
term of the comparable corpus, i.e., i, we collect
all lexical units that: (a) occur within a window
of 3 words around i (a seven-word window) and
(b) are listed in the seed bilingual dictionary. The
lexical units that satisfy the above two conditions
are the dimensions of the context vectors. Each
dimension has a value that indicates the correla-
tion between the context lexical unit and the term
i. In our approach, we use the log-likelihood ra-
tio. In the second step, the seed dictionary is used
to translate the lexical units of the Spanish context
vectors. In this way the Spanish and English vec-
tors become comparable. When several transla-
tions are listed in the seed dictionary, we consider
all of them. In the third step, we compute the con-
text similarity, i.e., distance metric, between the
vector of an English term to be translated with ev-
ery projected, Spanish context vector. For this we
use the cosine similarity.

3 Experiments

In this section, we evaluate the two dictionary ex-
traction methods, namely context vectors and RF,
on a comparable corpus of Wikipedia articles.

For the evaluation metric, we use the top-k
translation accuracy 3 and the mean reciprocal

2http://members.unine.ch/jacques.savoy/clef/index.html
3the percentage of English terms whose top k candidates

contain a correct translation

112



rank (MRR) 4 as in previous approaches (Chiao
and Zweigenbaum, 2002; Chiao and Zweigen-
baum, 2002; Morin and Prochasson, 2011; Morin
et al., 2007; Tamura et al., 2012). As a refer-
ence list, we use the UMLS metathesaurus5. In
addition to this, considering that in several cases
the dictionary extraction methods retrieved syn-
onymous translations that do not appear in the ref-
erence list, we manually inspected the answers.
Finally, unlike previous approaches (Chiao and
Zweigenbaum, 2002), we do not restrict the test
list only to those English terms whose Spanish
translations are known to occur in the target cor-
pus. In such cases, the performance of dictionary
extraction methods have been shown to achieve a
lower performance (Tamura et al., 2012).

3.1 Data
We constructed a comparable corpus of Wikipedia
articles. For this, we used Wikipedia’s search en-
gine 6 and submitted the queries “breast cancer”
and “cáncer de mama” for English and Spanish
respectively. From the returned list of Wikipedia
pages, we used the 1, 000 top articles for both lan-
guages.

The test list contains 1, 200 English single-word
terms that were extracted by considering all nouns
that occur more than 10 but not more than 200
times and are listed in UMLS. For the Spanish part
of the corpus, we considered all nouns as candi-
date translations (32, 347 in total).

3.2 Results
Table 1 shows the top-k translation accuracy and
the MRR of RF and context vectors.

Acc1 Acc10 Acc20 MRR
RF 0.41 0.57 0.59 0.47

Cont.

Vectors 0.1 0.21 0.26 0.11

Table 1: top-k translation accuracy and MRR of
RF and context vectors on 1, 200 English terms

We observe that the proposed RF method
achieves a considerably better top-k translation ac-

4MRR = 1|Q|
∑Q

i=1
1

ranki
where |Q| is the number of

English terms for which we are extracting translations and
ranki is the position of the first correct translation from re-
turned list of candidates

5nlm.nih.gov/research/umls
6http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Searching

curacy and MRR than the baseline method. More-
over, we segmented the 1, 200 test terms into 7
frequency ranges 7, from high-frequency to rare
terms. Figure 1 shows the translation accuracy at
top 20 candidates for the two methods. We note

Figure 1: Translation accuracy of top 20 candi-
dates on different frequency ranges

that for high frequency terms, i.e. [100,200] range,
the performance achieved by the two methods is
similar (53% and 52% for the RF and context vec-
tors respectively). However, for lower frequency
terms, the translation accuracy of the context vec-
tors continuously declines. This confirms that con-
text vectors do not behave robustly for rare terms
(Morin and Daille, 2010). In contrast, the RF
slightly fluctuates over different frequency ranges
and presents approximately the same translation
accuracy for both frequent and rare terms.

4 Application

As an application of our method, we use the pre-
viously extracted dictionaries to on-line augment
the phrase table of an SMT system and observe
the translation performance on test sentences that
contain OOV terms. For the translation probabil-
ities in the phrase table, we use the distance met-
ric given by the dictionary extraction methods i.e.,
classification margin and cosine similarity of RF
and context vectors respectively, normalised by
the uniform probability (if a source term has m
candidate translations, we normalise the distance
metric by dividing by m as in (Wu et al., 2008) .

4.1 Data and tools
We construct a parallel, sentence-aligned corpus
from the biomedical domain, following the pro-
cess described in (Wu et al., 2011; Yepes et al.,
2013). The parallel corpus comprises of article ti-
tles indexed by PubMed in both English and Span-
ish. We collect 120K parallel sentences for train-

7each frequency range contains 100 randomly sampled
terms

113



ing the SMT and 1K sentences for evaluation. The
test sentences contain 1, 200 terms that do not ap-
pear in the training parallel corpus. These terms
occur in the Wikipedia comparable corpus. Hence,
the previously extracted dictionaries list a possible
translation. Using the PubMed parallel corpus, we
train Moses (Koehn et al., 2007), a phrase-based
SMT system.

4.2 Results

We evaluated the translation performance of the
SMT that uses the dictionary extracted by the RF
against the following baselines: (i) Moses using
only the training parallel data (Moses), (ii) Moses
using the dictionary extracted by context vectors
(Moses+context vector). The evaluation metric is
BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002).

Table 2 shows the BLEU score achieved by the
SMT systems when we append the top-k transla-
tions to the phrase table.

BLEU
on top-k translations

1 10 20
Moses 24.22 24.22 24.22
Moses+
RF 25.32 24.626 24.42
Moses+
Context Vectors 23.88 23.69 23.74

Table 2: Translation performance when adding
top-k translations to the phrase table

We observe that the best performance is
achieved by the RF when we add the top 1 trans-
lation with a total gain of 1.1 BLEU points over
the baseline system. In contrast, context vec-
tors decreased the translation performance of the
SMT system. This indicates that the dictionary ex-
tracted by the context vectors is too noisy and as
a result the translation performance dropped. Fur-
thermore, it is noted that the augmented SMT sys-
tems achieve the highest performance for the top 1
translation while for k greater than 1, the transla-
tion performance decreases. This behaviour is ex-
pected since the target language model was trained
only on the training Spanish sentences of the par-
allel corpus. Hence, the target language model
does not have a prior knowledge of the OOV trans-
lations and as a result it cannot choose the correct
translation among k candidates.

To further investigate the effect of the language
model on the translation performance of the aug-
mented SMT systems, we conducted an oracle ex-
periment. In this ideal setting, we assume a strong
language model, that is trained on both training
and test Spanish sentences of the parallel corpus,
in order to assign a higher probability to a correct
translation if it exists in the deployed dictionary.
As we observe in Table 3, a strong language model
can more accurately select the correct translation
among top-k candidates. The dictionary extracted
by the RF improved the translation performance
by 2.5 BLEU points for the top-10 candidates and
context vectors by 0.45 for the top-20 candidates.

BLEU
on top-k translations

1 10 20
Moses 28.85 28.85 28.85
Moses+
RF 30.98 31.35 31.2
Moses+
Context Vectors 28.18 29.17 29.3

Table 3: Translation performance when adding
top-k translations to the phrase table. SMT sys-
tems use a language model trained on training and
test Spanish sentences of the parallel corpus.

5 Discussion

In this paper, we presented an RF classifier that
is used to extract bilingual dictionaries of techni-
cal terms from comparable corpora. We evaluated
our method on a comparable corpus of Wikipedia
articles. The experimental results showed that our
proposed method performs robustly when translat-
ing both frequent and rare terms.

As an application, we used the automatically
extracted dictionary to augment the phrase table of
an SMT system. The results demonstrated an im-
provement of the overall translation performance.

As future work, we plan to integrate the RF clas-
sifier with context vectors. Intuitively, the two
methods are complementary considering that the
RF exploits the internal structure of terms while
context vectors use the surrounding lexical con-
text. Therefore, it will be interesting to investigate
how we can incorporate the two feature spaces in
a machine learner.

114



6 Acknowledgements

This work was funded by the European Commu-
nity’s Seventh Framework Program (FP7/2007-
2013) [grant number 318736 (OSSMETER)].

References
Daniel Andrade, Tetsuya Nasukawa, and Jun’ichi Tsu-

jii. 2010. Robust measurement and comparison of
context similarity for finding translation pairs. In
Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, COLING ’10, pages 19–
27, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Lisa Ballesteros and W.Bruce Croft. 1997. Phrasal
translation and query expansion techniques for
cross-language information retrieval. In ACM SIGIR
Forum, volume 31, pages 84–91. ACM.

Leo Breiman. 2001. Random Forests. Machine Learn-
ing, 45:5–32.

Yun-Chuang Chiao and Pierre Zweigenbaum. 2002.
Looking for Candidate Translational Equivalents in
Specialized, Comparable Corpora. In International
Conference on Computational Linguistics.

Pascale Fung and Lo Yuen Yee. 1998. An ir approach
for translating new words from nonparallel, compa-
rable texts. In Proceedings of the 17th international
conference on Computational linguistics-Volume 1,
pages 414–420. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Martin Kay and Martin Röscheisen. 1993. Text-
translation alignment. computational Linguistics,
19(1):121–142.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, et al. 2007. Moses: Open source
toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL
on Interactive Poster and Demonstration Sessions,
pages 177–180. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Georgios Kontonatsios, Ioannis Korkontzelos, Jun’ichi
Tsujii, and Sophia Ananiadou. 2013. Using ran-
dom forest to recognise translation equivalents of
biomedical terms across languages. In Proceed-
ings of the Sixth Workshop on Building and Using
Comparable Corpora, pages 95–104. Association
for Computational Linguistics, August.

I. Dan Melamed. 1997. A portable algorithm for map-
ping bitext correspondence. In Proceedings of the
35th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics and Eighth Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 305–312. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Emmanuel Morin and Béatrice Daille. 2010. Com-
positionality and lexical alignment of multi-word
terms. Language Resources and Evaluation, 44(1-
2):79–95.

Emmanuel Morin and Emmanuel Prochasson. 2011.
Bilingual lexicon extraction from comparable cor-
pora enhanced with parallel corpora. In Proceedings
of the 4th Workshop on Building and Using Compa-
rable Corpora: Comparable Corpora and the Web,
pages 27–34, Portland, Oregon, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Emmanuel Morin, Béatrice Daille, Koichi Takeuchi,
and Kyo Kageura. 2007. Bilingual terminology
mining - using brain, not brawn comparable corpora.
In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation of Computational Linguistics, pages 664–
671, Prague, Czech Republic, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A sys-
tematic comparison of various statistical alignment
models. Computational linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 40th annual meeting on association for compu-
tational linguistics, pages 311–318. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

James Pustejovsky, Jose Castano, Brent Cochran, Ma-
ciej Kotecki, and Michael Morrell. 2001. Au-
tomatic extraction of acronym-meaning pairs from
medline databases. Studies in health technology and
informatics, (1):371–375.

Reinhard Rapp. 1999. Automatic identification of
word translations from unrelated english and german
corpora. In Proceedings of the 37th annual meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics on
Computational Linguistics, pages 519–526. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech
tagging using decision trees. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on New Methods in Lan-
guage Processing, volume 12, pages 44–49. Manch-
ester, UK.

Akihiro Tamura, Taro Watanabe, and Eiichiro Sumita.
2012. Bilingual lexicon extraction from compara-
ble corpora using label propagation. In Proceedings
of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and Computational
Natural Language Learning, pages 24–36. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Hua Wu, Haifeng Wang, and Chengqing Zong. 2008.
Domain adaptation for statistical machine transla-
tion with domain dictionary and monolingual cor-
pora. In Proceedings of the 22nd International
Conference on Computational Linguistics-Volume
1, pages 993–1000. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

115



Cuijun Wu, Fei Xia, Louise Deleger, and Imre Solti.
2011. Statistical machine translation for biomedical
text: are we there yet? In AMIA Annual Sympo-
sium Proceedings, volume 2011, page 1290. Ameri-
can Medical Informatics Association.

Antonio Jimeno Yepes, Élise Prieur-Gaston, and
Aurélie Névéol. 2013. Combining medline and
publisher data to create parallel corpora for the auto-
matic translation of biomedical text. BMC bioinfor-
matics, 14(1):146.

116


