



















































A Spinning Wheel for YARN: User Interface for a Crowdsourced Thesaurus


Proceedings of the Demonstrations at the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 101–104,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Spinning Wheel for YARN:
User Interface for a Crowdsourced Thesaurus

Pavel Braslavski
Ural Federal University

Kontur Labs
pbras@yandex.ru

Dmitry Ustalov
Ural Federal University

IMM UB RAS
dau@imm.uran.ru

Mikhail Mukhin
Ural Federal University

mfly@sky.ru

Abstract

YARN (Yet Another RussNet) project
started in 2013 aims at creating a large
open thesaurus for Russian using crowd-
sourcing. This paper describes synset
assembly interface developed within the
project — motivation behind it, design, us-
age scenarios, implementation details, and
first experimental results.

1 Introduction

Creation of linguistic resources and annotations
using crowdsourcing and gamification is becom-
ing a common practice. Untrained workers con-
tribute to development of thesauri, dictionaries,
translation memories, and corpora annotations.
Crowdsourcing can employ both paid workers,
e.g. on Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) plat-
form1 and volunteers as in case of Wiktionary2 —
a large wiki-style online multilingual dictionary.

The goal of the YARN (Yet Another RussNet)
project3 launched in 2013 is to create a large open
thesaurus for Russian language using crowdsourc-
ing (Braslavski et al., 2013). Despite the fact
that there were several attempts to create a Rus-
sian Wordnet (Azarova et al., 2002; Balkova et al.,
2004; Gelfenbein et al., 2003; Loukachevitch and
Dobrov, 2002), there is no open resource of ac-
ceptable quality and coverage currently available.
The choice of crowdsourcing is also advocated by
successful projects that are being evolved by vol-
unteers: Russian Wiktionary4, corpus annotation
project OpenCorpora5 and a wiki for linguistic re-
sources related to Russian NLPub6.

1http://www.mturk.com/
2http://www.wiktionary.org/
3http://russianword.net/
4http://ru.wiktionary.org/
5http://opencorpora.org/
6http://nlpub.ru/

Wordnets had been traditionally developed
within small research teams. This approach main-
tains conceptual consistency and project manage-
ability, facilitates informal exchange of ideas in a
small group of contributors. However, this prac-
tice is hardly scalable and can potentially lead
to a biased description of linguistic phenomena
caused by the preferences of a close group of
researchers. Crowdsourcing can possibly reduce
costs, increase development pace, and make the
results more robust, but puts additional demands
on project management and tools, including user
interface. Requirements for a crowdsourcing the-
saurus development interface are as follows: 1) a
low entry threshold for new users and a gradual
learning curve; 2) no need for users to install addi-
tional software; 3) central data storage, collabora-
tive work for several users in a competitive mode,
and permission management; 4) change history
tracking to protect data against vandalism.

Princeton WordNet editors had worked directly
with lexicographer files stored in a version control
system (Fellbaum, 1998). In later thesauri creation
projects specialized tools were developed that fea-
tured more user-friendly interface, graphical rep-
resentation of thesaurus relationships, centralized
data storage, possibility of collaborative work, and
data consistency checks. Examples of thesauri
development tools are DEBVisDic (Horák et al.,
2006), GernEdiT (Henrich and Hinrichs, 2010), as
well as WordNetLoom (Piasecki et al., 2012) (see
(Piasecki et al., 2012) for a brief overview of the-
sauri editing tools). Wiktionary and OmegaWiki7

use MediaWiki engine and wiki markup to encode
dictionary information.

In the preparatory stage of the project we con-
sidered adoption of the above mentioned tools.
However, we estimated that the amount of work
needed for adaptation of existing tools to YARN

7http://www.omegawiki.org/

101



data formats and usage scenarios is quite costly
and decided to develop a series of specialized
tools.

The paper briefly describes YARN project and
its noun synsets assembly interface in particular —
motivation behind it, current state and appearance,
usage scenarios, as well as results of a preliminary
user study and future plans.

2 Project Outline

YARN is conceptually similar to Princeton Word-
net (Fellbaum, 1998) and its followers: it con-
sists of synsets — groups of quasi-synonyms cor-
responding to a concept. Concepts are linked
to each other, primarily via hierarchical hy-
ponymic/hypernymic relationships. According to
the project’s outline, YARN contains nouns, verbs,
and adjectives. We aim at splitting the process of
thesaurus creation into smaller tasks and develop-
ing custom interfaces for each of them. The first
step is an online tool for building noun synsets
based on content of existing dictionaries. The goal
of this stage is to establish YARN core content,
test and validate crowdsourcing approach, prepare
annotated data for automatic methods, and create
a basis for the work with the other parts of speech.

As mentioned above, important characteristics
of the project are its openness and recruitment of
volunteers. Our crowdsourcing approach is differ-
ent, for example, from the one described in (Bie-
mann and Nygaard, 2010), where AMT turkers
form synsets using the criterion of contextual sub-
stitutability directly. In our case, editors assem-
ble synsets using word lists and definitions from
dictionaries as “raw material”. Obviously, such
a task implies minimal lexicographical skills and
is more complicated than an average task offered
to AMT workers. Our target editors are college
or university students, preferably from linguistics
departments, who are native Russian speakers. It
is desirable that students are instructed by a uni-
versity teacher and may seek their advice in com-
plex cases. As in the case of Wikipedia and Wik-
tionary, we foresee two levels of contributors: line
editors and administrators with the corresponding
privileges. According to our expectations, the to-
tal number of line editors can reach two hundreds
throughout a year.

3 Raw Materials for YARN

We used two sources of “raw materials” for
YARN: 1) Russian Wiktionary and 2) Small
Academic Dictionary (SAD). Russian Wiktionary
dump as of March 2012 was parsed and con-
verted to database format using Wikokit software
(Krizhanovsky and Smirnov, 2013). Wiktionary
dump contains 51,028 nouns, including 45,646
single-word nouns; 30,031 entries have at least
one definition. Besides the words and definitions
Wiktionary dump contains occasionally synonym
references and word usage examples. SAD data
contain 33,220 word entries and 51,676 defini-
tions. All single-word nouns were provided with
frequencies based on the Russian National Cor-
pus8.

4 User Interface

The current synset editing interface can be ac-
cessed online 9; its main window is presented in
Figure 1.

“Raw data” are placed on the left-hand side of
the interface: definitions of the initial word and ex-
amples, possible synonyms for each of the mean-
ings in turn with definitions and examples. The
right-hand part represents resulted synsets includ-
ing words, definitions, and examples. In principle,
an editor can assemble a “minimal” synset from
the dictionary “raw material” simply with several
mouse clicks, without any typing.

Synset assembly begins with a word, or “synset
starter”. The editor selects an item from the list
of words ranked by decreasing frequency; already
processed words are shaded. The editor can go
through the words one after another or choose an
arbitrary word using search box.

The top left-hand pane displays definitions of
the initial word and usage examples if any. To sim-
plify the view, editor can turn out examples or to
blind individual definitions. Possible synonyms of
the initial word are listed at the bottom-left pane,
in turn with definitions and examples. The top-
right pane displays a list of synsets containing the
initial word. The editor can copy definitions and
usage examples of the initial word from the top left
of the interface to the current synset with mouse
clicks. From the synonyms pane one can transfer
bare words or words along with definitions and ex-
amples. The editor can add a new word to the list

8http://ruscorpora.ru/en/
9http://russianword.net/editor

102



Figure 1: Main window of YARN synset assembly interface (interface captions are translated for con-
venience of readers into English; originally all interface elements are in Russian): 1) initial word; 2)
definitions and examples of the initial word; 3) possible synonyms of the initial word with definitions
and examples; 4) a list of synsets containing the initial word (active synset is highlighted); 5) words con-
stituting the current synset; 6) definitions of the current synset. The arrows show how the information
items from the left-hand side form synsets in the right-hand side.

of synonyms; it will appear with dictionary defini-
tions and examples if presented in the parsed data.
If the editor is not satisfied with the collected def-
initions, they can create a new one — either from
scratch or based on one of the existing descrip-
tions. Additionally, a word or a definition within a
synset can be flagged as “main”; and be provided
with labels. All synset edits are tracked and stored
in the database along with timestamps and editor
ID.

YARN software is implemented using Ruby on
Rails framework. All data are stored in a Post-
greSQL database. User authentication is per-
formed through an OAuth endpoint provided by
Facebook. The user interface is implemented as
a browser JavaScript application. The applica-
tion interacts with the server application via JSON
API. The entire source code of the project is avail-
able in an open repository10.

10https://github.com/russianwordnet

5 Preliminary Results

In the fall 2013 we conducted a pilot user study
with 45 students of the linguistics department at
the Ural Federal University. The experiment re-
sulted in 1390 synsets; 970 of them are ‘non-
trivial’, i.e. contain more than a single word (253
contain 2 words, 228 — 3 words, 207 — 4, 282 —
5+). Editors spent about two minutes on building
a ‘non-trivial’ synset on average, which we find a
very good result. Figure 2 shows the distribution
of edit times for 2+ word synsets. Distribution of
completed synsets by students is also skewed, e.g.
top-5 contributors account for more than a third of
all non-trivial synsets (329).

Figure 3 shows a linear trend of time spent by
five top contributors on constructing consecutive
non-trivial synsets. Four out of five demonstrate
a learning effect: average time per synset tends to
decrease while the editor proceeds through tasks.

In general, students were very positive about

103



0

30

60

90

0 120 240 360 480 600 720 840

editing time, sec

s
y
n
s
e
ts

Figure 2: Distribution of times spent on non-trivial
synset editing.

their participation in the experiment and the
YARN interface. Participants mentioned flaws in
parsed data, inability to delete an existing synset
(we disabled this option during the experiment),
and the inconvenience of label assignments as
main disadvantages.

6 Conclusions

YARN synset assembly tool passed an initial test-
ing and proved to be a usable tool for creation of
thesaurus building blocks. Upon reading simple
instructions, volunteers were able to quickly learn
an intuitive interface and accomplish the synset as-
sembly task without problems.

During the experiment we were able to diag-
nose some flaws related to interface design, editor
guidelines, and internal data representation. In the
future we will elaborate instructions and learning
materials, clean existing and add more dictionary
data, and perform a thorough evaluation of the in-
terface. Then, we will work on an interface for
linking synsets and expand YARN with verbs and
adjectives.

Acknowledgments. This work is supported by
the Russian Foundation for the Humanities,
project #13-04-12020 “New Open Electronic The-
saurus for Russian”.

References
Irina Azarova et al. 2002. RussNet: Building a Lex-

ical Database for the Russian Language. In Proc.
of Workshop on WordNet Structures and Standardi-
sation, and How These Affect WordNet Applications
and Evaluation, Gran Canaria, Spain, pages 60–64.

25

50

75

100

125

0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75

synset, #

e
d
it
in

g
 t
im

e
, 
s
e
c

user 1 2 3 4 5

Figure 3: Linear trend of time spent on sequential
edits of nontrivial synsets by top-5 contributors.

Valentina Balkova et al. 2004. Russian wordnet. In
Proc. of the Second Global WordNet Conference,
pages 31–38. Citeseer.

Chris Biemann and Valerie Nygaard. 2010. Crowd-
sourcing Wordnet. In Proc. of the 5th Global Word-
Net conference, Mumbai, India.

Pavel Braslavski et al. 2013. YARN Begins. In Proc.
of Dialog-2013 (in Russian).

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic
Database.

Ilya Gelfenbein et al. 2003. Avtomaticheskij perevod
semanticheskoj seti WORDNET na russkij yazyk.
In Proc. of Dialog’2003 (in Russian).

Verena Henrich and Erhard Hinrichs. 2010. GernEdiT-
The GermaNet Editing Tool. In ACL (System
Demonstrations), pages 19–24.

Aleš Horák et al. 2006. DEBVisDic–First Version of
New Client-Server Wordnet Browsing and Editing
Tool. In Proc. of the Third International Wordnet
Conference.

Andrew Krizhanovsky and Alexander Smirnov. 2013.
An Approach to Automated Construction of a Gen-
eral Purpose Lexical Ontology Based on Wiktionary.
Journal of Computer and Systems Sciences Interna-
tional, 52(2):215–225.

Natalia Loukachevitch and Boris Dobrov. 2002. De-
velopment and Use of Thesaurus of Russian Lan-
guage RuThes. In Proc. of Workshop on Word-
Net Structures and Standardisation, and How These
Affect WordNet Applications and Evaluation, Gran
Canaria, Spain, pages 65–70.

Maciej Piasecki et al. 2012. WordnetLoom: a Wordnet
Development System Integrating Form-based and
Graph-based Perspectives. International Journal of
Data Mining, Modelling and Management.

104


