



















































The New Thot Toolkit for Fully-Automatic and Interactive Statistical Machine Translation


Proceedings of the Demonstrations at the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 45–48,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

The New THOT Toolkit for Fully-Automatic and Interactive Statistical
Machine Translation

Daniel Ortiz-Martı́nez
Dpto. de Sist. Inf. y Comp.
Univ. Politéc. de Valencia

46071 Valencia, Spain
dortiz@dsic.upv.es

Francisco Casacuberta
Dpto. de Sist. Inf. y Comp.
Univ. Politéc. de Valencia

46071 Valencia, Spain
fcn@dsic.upv.es

Abstract

We present the new THOT toolkit for fully-
automatic and interactive statistical ma-
chine translation (SMT). Initial public ver-
sions of THOT date back to 2005 and did
only include estimation of phrase-based
models. By contrast, the new version of-
fers several new features that had not been
previously incorporated. The key innova-
tions provided by the toolkit are computer-
aided translation, including post-editing
and interactive SMT, incremental learn-
ing and robust generation of alignments
at phrase level. In addition to this, the
toolkit also provides standard SMT fea-
tures such as fully-automatic translation,
scalable and parallel algorithms for model
training, client-server implementation of
the translation functionality, etc. The
toolkit can be compiled in Unix-like and
Windows platforms and it is released un-
der the GNU Lesser General Public Li-
cense (LGPL).

1 Introduction

Open-source software constitutes a valuable re-
source for researchers or companies. Due to the
inherent difficulties of developing good quality
software (correct, efficient, modular, extensible,
well-documented, etc.), there are interesting re-
search ideas that not always receive enough atten-
tion from the open-source software community.

We present the THOT toolkit for statistical ma-
chine translation (SMT). The first public version
of THOT was initially created in 2005 (Ortiz et
al., 2005) and its functionality was restricted to
train phrase-based models (Koehn et al., 2003).
Here we present a new version of THOT which
includes several new features related to phrase-
based translation. More specifically, the set of fea-

tures provided by THOT can be classified into ad-
vanced features and standard features. Advanced
features correspond to sophisticated functionality
that has received poor or no attention in existing
SMT toolkits. By contrast, standard features cor-
respond to functionality already provided by pop-
ular tools such as Moses (Koehn et al., 2007). In
this regard, THOT neither is based on Moses nor
shares any source code with it.

THOT includes the following advanced features:

• Computer-aided translation, including post-
editing and interactive machine translation
(IMT). This functionality has been inte-
grated in a translation tool developed in the
CasMaCat project1 (the so-called CasMaCat
Workbench).

• Incremental estimation of all of the models
involved in the translation process.

• Robust generation of phrase-based align-
ments.

Computer-aided translation and more specifi-
cally two of its applications, post-editing and IMT,
constitute a field of increasing interest in SMT. In
particular, IMT has been studied in numerous re-
search papers during the last years. In spite of
this, this application has not previously been im-
plemented in open-source software tools.

Incremental (or online) learning is a hot re-
search topic in SMT due to the great interest of
quickly incorporating incoming data into exist-
ing translation systems. In spite of the fact that
the Moses toolkit already implements incremental
learning techniques, such techniques are designed
to work by incrementally processing large blocks
of data and not in a sentence-wise manner, as it is
pointed out in (Mirking and Cancedda, 2013). By

1http://www.casmacat.eu/

45



contrast, the incremental learning techniques im-
plemented by THOT allows to process new train-
ing samples individually in real time.

Finally, the necessity of generating phrase-level
alignments is present in a wide range of tasks,
from multisource SMT to discriminative training.
However, as far as we know this functionality also
is not included in existing SMT tools.

In addition to the above mentioned advanced
features, THOT offers a set of standard features:

• Phrase-based SMT decoder.
• Scalable training and search algorithms.
• Client-server implementation.
• Miscellaneous SMT tools

2 The THOT toolkit

THOT can be downloaded from GitHub2 and is
distributed under the GNU Lesser General Public
License (LGPL). It has been developed using C++
and shell scripting. The design principles that have
led the development process were:

• Modularity: The THOT code is organised
into separate packages for each main func-
tional component (training of phrase-based
and language models, decoding, etc.). Each
component can be treated as a stand-alone
tool and does not rely on the rest of the code.

• Extensibility: The functionality provided by
each package is structured into classes. Ab-
stract classes are used when appropriate to
define the basic behaviour of the functional
components of the toolkit, allowing us to eas-
ily extend the toolkit functionality.

• Scalability: THOT is able to train statisti-
cal models from corpora of an arbitrary size.
Moreover, the toolkit takes advantage of par-
allel and distributed computing to reduce the
time cost of the implemented algorithms. Ad-
ditionally, the parameters of the resulting
models can be pruned or accessed from disk
during the decoding process.

• Portability: It is known to compile on Unix-
like and Windows (using Cygwin) systems.

In the rest of the paper we give additional details
about the different toolkit features that have been
mentioned above.

2https://github.com/daormar/thot

3 Computer-Aided Translation

Current MT systems are not able to produce ready-
to-use texts. Indeed, they usually require hu-
man post-editing in order to achieve high-quality
translations. This motivates an alternative applica-
tion of MT in which the MT system collaborates
with the user to generate the output translations.
This alternative application receives the name of
computer-assisted translation (CAT).

CAT can be instantiated in different ways. The
THOT toolkit incorporates tools that are useful
in two different CAT instantations, namely, post-
editing and interactive machine translation.

3.1 Post-Editing

Post-editing (PE) involves making corrections and
amendments to machine generated translations
(see (TAUS, 2010) for a detailed study). In the
PE scenario, the user only edits the output of the
MT system without further system intervention.

3.2 Interactive Machine Translation

In the IMT framework (Foster et al., 1997;
Langlais et al., 2002), the user obtains her desired
translations in a series of interactions with an MT
system. Specifically, the system initially generates
a translation without human intervention and af-
ter that, the user validates a prefix of the transla-
tion and introduce the next correct character of it.
With this information, the IMT system returns the
suffix which best completes the user prefix. This
process is repeated until the user gets the sentence
she has in mind. In (Barrachina et al., 2009), SMT
techniques were embedded within the interactive
translation environment.

A common problem in IMT arises when the
user sets a prefix which cannot be explained by the
statistical models. This problem requires the in-
troduction of specific techniques to guarantee that
the suffixes can be generated. The majority of the
IMT systems described in the literature use error-
correcting techniques based on the concept of edit
distance to solve the coverage problems. Such
error-correction techniques, although they are not
included in the statistical formulation of the IMT
process, are crucial to ensure that the suffixes com-
pleting the user prefixes can be generated.

THOT implements an alternative formalisation
that introduces stochastic error-correction models
in the IMT statistical formulation. Such a formal-
isation was introduced in (Ortiz-Martı́nez, 2011)

46



and it generates the suffixes required in IMT by
partially aligning a prefix of the target hypotheses
with the user prefix. Once the partial alignment
is determined, the suffix is given by the unaligned
portion of the target sentence.

Experiments to test the above mentioned IMT
proposal were carried out using THOT. The re-
sults showed that the proposed IMT system out-
performs the results of other state-of-the-start IMT
systems that are based on word graphs (see (Ortiz-
Martı́nez, 2011) for more details).

3.3 Integration with the CasMaCat
Workbench

THOT can be combined with the CasMaCat Work-
bench3 that is being developed within the project
of the same name. The CasMaCat Workbench of-
fers novel types of assistance for human transla-
tors, using advanced computer aided translation
technology that includes PE and IMT.

4 Incremental Learning for SMT

Thot incorporates techniques to incrementally up-
date the parameters of the statistical models in-
volved in the translation process. Model updates
can be quickly executed in a sentence-wise man-
ner allowing the system to be used in a real time
scenario. For this purpose, a log-linear SMT
model where all its score components are incre-
mentally updateable is defined. The implemented
proposal uses the incremental version of the EM
algorithm (Neal and Hinton, 1998) and the spe-
cific details can be found in (Ortiz-Martı́nez et al.,
2010; Ortiz-Martı́nez, 2011).

Empirical results obtained with THOT and re-
ported in (Ortiz-Martı́nez et al., 2010; Ortiz-
Martı́nez, 2011) show that incremental learning al-
lows to significantly reduce the user effort in IMT
tasks with respect to that required by a conven-
tional IMT system.

Additionally, the incremental learning tech-
niques provided by THOT are currently being used
in other sophisticated applications such as active
learning for SMT (González-Rubio et al., 2012).

5 Generation of Phrase-Based
Alignments

The generation of phrase-level alignments is inter-
esting due to its utility in a wide range of appli-

3See installation instructions at http://www.casmacat.
eu/index.php?n=Workbench.Workbench

cations, including multi-source SMT, Viterbi-like
estimation of phrase-based models or discrimina-
tive training, just to name a few.

A very straightforward technique can be pro-
posed for finding the best phrase-alignment.
Specifically, the search process only requires a
regular SMT system which filters its phrase table
in order to obtain those target translations for the
source sentence that are compatible with the given
target sentence. Unfortunately, this technique has
no practical interest when applied on regular tasks
due to problems with unseen events.

To overcome the above-mentioned difficulty, an
alternative technique that is able to consider every
source phrase of the source sentence as a possi-
ble translation of every target phrase of the target
sentence can be defined. The THOT toolkit imple-
ments the proposal described in (Ortiz-Martı́nez et
al., 2008), which combines a specific search al-
gorithm with smoothing techniques to enable ef-
ficient exploration of the set of possible phrase-
alignments for a sentence pair.

Phrase-based alignment quality was difficult to
evaluate since there is not a gold standard for this
task. One way to solve this problem consists in re-
fining the phrase alignments to word alignments
and compare them with those obtained in exist-
ing shared tasks on word alignment evaluation.
Results obtained with THOT reported in (Ortiz-
Martı́nez et al., 2008) clearly show the efficacy of
the implemented method.

6 Standard Features

THOT incorporates a number of standard features
that are present in existing translation tools. Such
standard features are briefly enumerated and de-
scribed in the following paragraphs.

Phrase-Based SMT Decoder The toolkit im-
plements a state-of-the-art phrase-based SMT de-
coder. The decoder uses a log-linear model with
a complete set of components similar to those im-
plemented in other tools such as Moses. Results
reported in (Ortiz-Martı́nez, 2011) show that the
translation quality obtained by THOT is compara-
ble to that obtained by means of Moses.

Scalable Training and Search Algorithms
Due to the increasing availability of large train-
ing corpora, it is necessary to implement scalable
training and search algorithms. THOT incorpo-
rates tools to train statistical models from corpora

47



of an arbitrary size. Such tools can take advan-
tage of the availability of multiple processors or
computer clusters. The parameters of the result-
ing models can be pruned or accessed from disk
during the decoding stage.

Client-Server Implementation An important
part of the functionality provided by the toolkit can
be accessed using a client-server model. This is a
useful feature to build web applications offering
SMT services.

Miscellaneous SMT tools THOT reduces de-
pendencies with third-party software by integrat-
ing most critical components of a typical machine
translation pipeline, from the estimation of phrase-
based and language models to the generation of
translations and their automatic evaluation. The
estimation of word-alignment models using the in-
cremental EM algorithm is also implemented by
the toolkit.

7 Conclusions

THOT is an open-source toolkit for SMT de-
signed for its use in Unix-like and Windows sys-
tems. It has been developed using C++ and shell
scripting, and it is released under LGPL license.
THOT incorporates three advanced features that
have received little attention in previous publicly-
available SMT tools, namely, interactive machine
translation, incremental learning and generation of
phrase-based alignments. Additionally, THOT also
implements standard features such as training of
statistical models or decoding. The functionality
of the toolkit has been empirically tested, showing
its efficacy in different SMT-related tasks.

Acknowledgments

Work supported by the European Union 7th

Framework Program (FP7/2007-2013) under the
CasMaCat project (grant agreement no 287576),
by Spanish MICINN under grant TIN2012-31723,
and by the Generalitat Valenciana under grant
ALMPR (Prometeo/2009/014).

References
S. Barrachina, O. Bender, F. Casacuberta, J. Civera,

E. Cubel, S. Khadivi, A. L. Lagarda, H. Ney,
J. Tomás, E. Vidal, and J. M. Vilar. 2009. Statistical
approaches to computer-assisted translation. Com-
putational Linguistics, 35(1):3–28.

G. Foster, P. Isabelle, and P. Plamondon. 1997. Target-
text mediated interactive machine translation. Ma-
chine Translation, 12(1):175–194.

Jesús González-Rubio, Daniel Ortiz-Martı́nez, and
Francisco Casacuberta. 2012. Active learning for
interactive machine translation. In Procs. of the 13th
Conference of the European Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 245–254.

P. Koehn, F. J. Och, and D. Marcu. 2003. Statisti-
cal phrase-based translation. In Procs. of the Hu-
man Language Technology and North American As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics Conference,
pages 48–54, Edmonton, Canada, May.

P. Koehn, H. Hoang, A. Birch, C. Callison-Burch,
M. Federico, N. Bertoldi, B. Cowan, W. Shen,
C. Moran, R. Zens, C. Dyer, O. Bojar, A. Constantin,
and E. Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open source toolkit
for statistical machine translation. In Procs. of the
45th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 177–180, Prague, Czech
Republic, June.

P. Langlais, G. Lapalme, and M. Loranger. 2002.
Transtype: Development-evaluation cycles to boost
translator’s productivity. Machine Translation,
15(4):77–98.

S. Mirking and N. Cancedda. 2013. Assessing quick
update methods of statistical translation models. In
Procs. of International Workshop of Spoken Lan-
guage Translation, pages 264–271, Heidelberg, Ger-
many.

R.M. Neal and G.E. Hinton. 1998. A view of the
EM algorithm that justifies incremental, sparse, and
other variants. In Procs. of the NATO-ASI on Learn-
ing in graphical models, pages 355–368, Norwell,
MA, USA.

D. Ortiz, I. Garcı́a-Varea, and F. Casacuberta. 2005.
Thot: a toolkit to train phrase-based statistical trans-
lation models. In Machine Translation Summit,
pages 141–148, Phuket, Thailand, September.

D. Ortiz-Martı́nez, I. Garcı́a-Varea, and F. Casacuberta.
2008. Phrase-level alignment generation using a
smoothed loglinear phrase-based statistical align-
ment model. In Procs. of the European Association
for Machine Translation.

D. Ortiz-Martı́nez, I. Garcı́a-Varea, and F. Casacuberta.
2010. Online learning for interactive statistical ma-
chine translation. In Procs. of the 2010 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 546–554.

D. Ortiz-Martı́nez. 2011. Advances in Fully-
Automatic and Interactive Phrase-Based Statistical
Machine Translation. Ph.D. thesis, Universidad
Politécnica de Valencia.

TAUS. 2010. Postediting in practice. a TAUS report.
Technical report, March.

48


