



















































Converting Russian Dependency Treebank to Stanford Typed Dependencies Representation


Proceedings of the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 143–147,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Converting Russian Dependency Treebank to Stanford Typed 
Dependencies Representation 

 

Janna Lipenkova 
Institut für Deutsche und 

Niederländische Philologie 
 Freie Universität Berlin 

janna.lipenkova@fu-berlin.de 

Milan Souček 
Lionbridge Technologies, Inc. 

Tampere, Finland 
milan.soucek@lionbridge.com 

 
 
 

Abstract 

In this paper, we describe the process of rule-
based conversion of Russian dependency 
treebank into the Stanford dependency (SD) 
schema. The motivation behind this project is 
the expansion of the number of languages that 
have treebank resources available in one 
consistent annotation schema. Conversion 
includes creation of Russian-specific SD 
guidelines, defining conversion rules from the 
original treebank schema into the SD model 
and evaluation of the conversion results. The 
converted treebank becomes part of a 
multilingual resource for NLP purposes. 

1 Introduction 

Dependency parsing has provided new methods 
and resources for natural language technology 
tasks in recent years. Dependency treebanks are 
now available for many languages and parsed 
data is used for improving machine translation, 
search engines and other NLP applications. 
While data resources are relatively common for 
monolingual tasks, there is a growing need for 
consistently annotated multilingual data. First 
larger activities in generating comparable 
standardized sets of multilingual parsed data 
were presented in CONLL shared tasks 
(Buchholz and Marsi, 2006; Nivre et al., 2007; 
Surdeanu et al., 2008; Hajič et al., 2009). More 
recently, cross-language consistency has been 
achieved by using one universal schema for all 
covered languages (McDonald et al., 2013). This 
universal treebank schema uses consistent sets of 

part-of-speech (POS) (Petrov et al., 2012) and 
dependency labels (deprel) following the 
Stanford typed dependencies representation (SD) 
(de Marneffe and Manning, 2008). The 
consistent treebank schema has many advantages, 
mainly the more straightforward possibility to 
build applications for multiple languages 
(McDonald et al., 2011), though it also presents 
challenges such as handling language-specific 
features among languages of different types 
without introducing conflicts. A certain level of 
generalization of language features that might 
lead to simplification is needed, as already 
highlighted by McDonald et al. (2013). For such 
universal multilingual treebank model, more 
resources can be built manually or they can be 
obtained by converting existing treebanks that 
follow different parsing schemas into one 
consistent treebank model. For the SD schema, 
treebanks for several languages already have 
been built using the manual annotation 
procedures (McDonald et al, 2013; Souček et al., 
2013). There are also other existing treebanks 
covering languages from different families where 
the SD schema was applied (e.g. Chang et al., 
2009 for Chinese; Haverinen et al., 2010 for 
Finnish; Seraji et al., 2012 for Persian; Tsarfaty, 
2013 for Hebrew). Treebank conversion was 
applied e.g. in Italian (Bosco et al, 2013). The 
conversion model is a more suitable option for 
languages for which treebanks are already 
available, since manual annotation can be limited 
and the annotation/conversion process can be 
automated. In this paper, we describe the 
conversion of an existing Russian treebank 

143



(SynTagRus, Boguslavsky et al., 2000) into the 
SD schema. We present the conversion process 
(2), introduce the source and the target model, 
including adaptations of the SD schema for 
Russian (3), describe the conversion script (4) 
and finally compare the conversion results (in 
terms of process efficiency and output accuracy) 
to other tasks for which a similar process was 
applied (5). 

2 Conversion process 

The conversion procedure used in our project is 
similar to the process described in Bosco et al. 
(2013). The very first step was the development 
of the Russian-specific set of POS and the list of 
Stanford dependency relations, compliant with 
the standards presented by Petrov et al. (2012) 
and de Marneffe and Manning (2008). Next, we 
investigated POS and deprel sets for the original 
treebank and defined conversion rules for 
adapting data to our specific schema. A rule-
based conversion script was developed on a 
small portion of the original data and the 
remaining data was automatically converted. The 
quality of the conversion output was monitored 
by manual review of samples of converted data 
and also using parser evaluation methods. During 
the manual review, errors in samples of 
converted data were manually corrected in order 
to produce a gold standard data set; at the same 
time further conversion rules were reported for 
improving the conversion script. This cycle was 
repeated several times until an acceptable output 
quality was reached. 

3 Source and target models 

3.1 Source model 

The source data for Russian are taken from the 
SynTagRus treebank (Boguslavsky et al., 2000). 
Just as in the basic SD model, SynTagRus pro- 
vides a dependency tree for each sentence where 
each word is connected to a head and assigned 
one of 78 deprels, theoretically motivated by 
Melcuk’s Meaning-Text theory (Melcuk, 1981). 
Additionally, the treebank specifies POS 
information as well as applicable morphological 

information (gender, number, case, degree of 
comparison, aspect, tense, person, voice). 

3.2 Target model 

The basic version of SD (de Marneffe and 
Manning, 2008) counts approximately 53 
dependency labels. They are used in conjunction 
with a “universal” set of part-of-speech labels 
(Petrov et al., 2012). Although our aim is to build 
a resource that follows a consistent schema with 
other existing SD languages, we decided to make 
some minor modifications to the SD model to 
account for language-specific phenomena and 
thus minimize the loss of structural information. 
Both the set of SD dependencies and of POS 
labels were slightly adjusted to adapt the model 
to Russian. All these specifics can be further 
converted to the fully consistent SD model. The 
following modifications were made to the 
dependencies annotation schema: 

• scomp is introduced for the complements of 
(ellipted) copulas. 

• ocomp is introduced for verb complements that 
are semantically predicated by the object of the 
verb (e.g., I find [this idea]i interestingi.).  

• gmod is introduced for genitive modifiers of 
nominals; in turn, the poss relation for 
prenominal possessive modifiers is eliminated. 

• interj is introduced for discourse particles 
attaching to nominals or verbs. 

Despite the modifications, the adopted model 
still leads to losses in more fine-grained 
information. An example where this becomes 
especially visible are objects of verbs: the SD 
model uses the two labels dobj and iobj for direct 
and indirect objects. In Russian, there is a larger 
range of object types; they are distinguished not 
only morphologically, but also syntactically (e.g. 
genitive of negation, whereby the negation of the 
verb leads to the `switch' of the direct object 
from accusative to genitive). In order to capture 
these distinctions, the original treebank uses five 
relations (1-compl, 2-compl etc.). However, the 
reduction to the two types dobj and iobj assumed 

144



for our SD model `deletes' these more fine-
grained distinctions. 

4 Conversion Script 

4.1 General approach 

The conversion script works with conversion 
patterns, which specify the possible targets of a 
source label and the conditions for this target to 
be applied. Conditions can be specified in terms 
of POS, morphological, lexical and structural 
information. Most conversion patterns have a 
regular formal basis and can be grouped into data 
structures that are processed by standardized 
functions. However, there are many patterns, 
especially less frequent ones, that have an 
irregular, more complex structure and thus have 
to be described individually. In order to increase 
the flexibility in formulating conversion patterns 
by specifying lexical information, the script is 
enriched with a set of lexical lists. These lexical 
lists mostly contain closed classes of functional 
words or idiosyncratic items, such as pronouns, 
subordinating conjunctions or idioms. 

4.2 Conversion 

Conversion acts on three types of information – 
POS tags, dependency relations and tree 
structures. 

4.2.1 POS tags 

The original data are annotated with five POS 
labels (NOUN, VERB, ADJ, ADV, CONJ); the 
target set contains 15 POS labels. One-to-many 
correspondences, for example the ambiguity of 
original NOUN between target NOUN and 
PRON, mostly occur in cases where the original 
POS tag subsumes some smaller class of 
functional words. As described above, word lists 
were used to identify these closed classes and to 
choose between the possible target POS tags. 

4.2.2 Dependency relations 

In the original treebank, 78 dependency relations 
are used; the target model contains 51 relations. 
For some original dependency labels, a one-to- 
one correspondence can be established. For 

example, the original label advrb-subj, used for 
nominals with an adverbial function, is always 
converted to npadvmod. However, most original 
dependency labels have multiple SD counterparts; 
conditional branching is used to determine the 
target relation for a given case. All types of 
information available in the treebank – POS, 
morphological, lexical and structural information 
– can be used to formulate conditions; in most 
cases, the specification for a given source 
relation involves a mix of the different 
information types. 

Examples for the different types of conversion 
conditions are as follows: 

• POS tag condition: attrib: convert to nn if 
NOUN, amod when ADJ, prep when ADP 

• Morphological condition: aux: convert to 
npadvmod if in ablative case, iobj if in dative 
case. 

• Structural condition: explet: convert to mark 
if dependent of purpcl or rcmod; ccomp if de- 
pendent of complm. 

• Lexical condition: aux: convert to neg if ex- 
pressed by не/ни, else interj. 

4.2.3 Structural modifications 

Structural modifications were introduced in 
several cases; most of them are caused by the 
reliance of SD on semantic heads and, thus, on 
content words as heads. During conversion, 
head-dependent structures are “switched” in 
cases where the original head does not 
correspond to the “semantic” head. Specifically, 
this occurs in the following cases: 

• Structures with auxiliary verbs (future tense, 
passive voice): switch between auxiliary and 
lexical verb, so that the auxiliary depends on the 
lexical verb. 

• Clauses introduced by subordinating con- 
junctions: switch between introducing con- 
junction and verb in the subordinate clause, so 
that the verb in the subordinate clause depends 

145



no more on the conjunction, but on the verb in 
the matrix clause. 

• Coordination structures: in the original data, the 
conjuncts and coordination particles form a chain, 
whereby each node depends on the previous one. 
In the target representation, all conjuncts and 
coordination particles attach to the first conjunct. 

4.2.4 Problems and inaccuracies - syntactic 
under-specification  

Under the SD model, different dependency 
relations may apply to structurally identical, but 
semantically different relations. For example, 
postverbal nominals in instrumental case can be 
either iobj (indirect object, corresponding to the 
instrument argument) or npadvmod (nominal 
adverbial); the relation applicable in a given case 
depends on the lexical semantics of the verb and 
the nominal: 

(1) a. npadvmod(gaze, wolf):  
смотреть волком 

 gaze wolf.INS  
 ‘to gaze angrily’ 

b. iobj(cut, knife): 
резать  ножом 
cut knife.INS  

 ‘to cut with a knife’ 
 
The semantic difference is not visible at a surface 
level:  there is no structural criterion which might 
condition the choice of the target relation. Since 
both structures are lexically productive, basing 
the choice on word lists is also not a satisfactory 
solution. Rather, the disambiguation of these and 
similar cases would require a more fine-grained 
semantic classification specifying valence frames 
and selectional restrictions of verbs as well as 
semantic features of nouns; in example (1), such 
a classification would allow to identify verbs that 
semantically select instruments (corresponding to 
iobj) as well as nouns that can potentially act as 
instruments. Besides, machine learning 
techniques can also be used for disambiguation 
based on the frequency of the lexical 
constellations for a particular dependency 
relation. Another problem are non-frequent 

dependency relations and contexts of occurrence 
which do not provide enough evidence for 
postulating a reliable, universally applicable 
conversion pattern. In the original treebank, 24 
out of 78 dependency relations have a frequency 
of occurrence of less than 100. Besides, after the 
application of the conversion patterns, numerous 
dependency relations remain non-converted, 
because their contexts of occurrence are non-
frequent and thus also cannot be reliably 
captured by conversion patterns. Our model uses 
the generic label xdep to identify tokens for 
which conversion was not successful. This label 
mostly appears for tokens whose original deprels 
do not allow for a rule-based characterization 
because they are partially defined in semantic 
terms, such as nonself-agent, distrib, elaborat 
and mod-descr. 

5 Results 

The presented script converts the original 
Russian treebank fully into the SD schema. The 
converted treebank data is owned by Google and 
its availability can be checked with the data 
owners. Conversion output precision was 
measured with MaltEval (Nilsson and Nivre, 
2008) using manually annotated 500 sentences as 
gold standard and the same set processed with 
the conversion script as a test data. We achieved 
76.21% LAS and 83.84% UAS. Achieved LAS 
is slightly lower than for similar work reported 
for Italian (Bosco et al., 2013), where LAS for 
different sub-models is between 79.94% and 
84.14% in the parser output. Since the aim of this 
project is to create comparable cross-language 
data with acceptable precision within reasonable 
time frame, the precision that we achieved seems 
to be in acceptable range for the described 
conversion task. 

6 Conclusions and future work 

Our further target is to build similar conversion 
tasks for other languages, where existing 
treebanks are available. We also plan to take 
advantage of machine learning mechanisms that 
can make the conversion work more efficient. 

146



Acknowledgemnts 

This work was performed by Lionbridge NLS 
team for Google. We would like to thank Google 
for giving us the opportunity to work on this 
project and to publish our results. 

References  

Igor Boguslavsky; Svetlana Grigorieva; Nikolai 
Grigoriev; Leonid Kreidlin; Nadezhda Frid. 2000. 
Dependency Treebank for Russian: Concept, Tools, 
Types of Information. In: COLING 2000 Volume 2. 

Cristina Bosco, Simonetta Montemagni, Maria Simi. 
2013. Converting Italian Treebanks: Towards an 
Italian Stanford Dependency Treebank. In 
Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL). 

Sabine Buchholz and Erwin Marsi. 2006. CoNLL X 
shared task on multilingual dependency parsing. In 
Proceedings of CoNLL. 

Pi-Chuan Chang, Huihsin Tseng, Dan Jurafsky, and 
Christopher D. Manning. 2009. Discriminative 
reordering with Chinese grammatical relations 
features. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on 
Syntax and Structure in Statistical Translation 
(SSST-3) at NAACL HLT 2009. 

Jan Hajič, Massimiliano Ciaramita, Richard 
Johansson, Daisuke Kawahara, Maria Antónia 
Martí, Lluís Márquez, Adam Meyers, Joakim Nivre, 
Sebastian Padó, Jan Štěpánek, Pavel Straňák, 
Mihai Surdeanu, Nianwen Xue, Yi Zhang. 2009. 
The CoNLL-2009 Shared Task: Syntactic and 
Semantic Dependencies in Multiple Languages. In 
Proceedings of CoNLL. 

Katri Haverinen, Timo Viljanen, Veronika Laippala, 
Samuel Kohonen, Filip Ginter, and Tapio 
Salakoski. 2010. Treebanking Finnish. In 
Proceedings of TLT9, pp. 79–90 

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Christopher D. 
Manning. 2008. Stanford typed dependencies 
manual. 

Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, and Keith Hall. 2011. 
Multi-source transfer of delexicalized dependency 
parsers. In Proceedings of EMNLP. 

Ryan McDonald, Joakim Nivre, Yvonne Quirmbach-
Brundage, Yoav Goldberg, Dipanjan Das, Kuzman 
Ganchev, Keith Hall, Slav Petrov, Hao Zhang, 
Oscar Täckström, Claudia Bedini, Núria Bertomeu 
Castelló, and Jungmee Lee. 2013. Universal 
Dependency Annotation for Multilingual Parsing. 
In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL). 

Igor Melcuk. 1981. Meaning-Text Models: A recent 
Trend in Soviet Linguistics. Annual Review of 
Anthropology 10, 27–62. 

Jens Nilsson, and Joakim Nivre. 2008. MaltEval: An 
Evaluation and Visualization Tool for Dependency 
Parsing. In Proceedings of LREC. 

Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Sandra Kübler, Ryan 
McDonald, Jens Nilsson, Sebastian Riedel, and 
Deniz Yuret. 2007. The CoNLL 2007 shared task 
on dependency parsing. In Proceedings of 
EMNLPCoNLL. 

Slav Petrov, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan McDonald. 
2012. A universal part-of-speech tagset. In 
Proceedings of LREC. 

Mojgan Seraji, Be´ata Megyesi, and Nivre Joakim. 
2012. Bootstrapping a Persian dependency 
treebank. Linguistic Issues in Language 
Technology, 7. 

Milan Souček, Timo Järvinen, Adam LaMontagne. 
2013. Managing a Multilingual Treebank Project. 
In Proceedings of the Second International 
Conference on Dependency Linguistics. 

Mihai Surdeanu, Richard Johansson, Adam Meyers, 
Lluís Màrquez, and Joakim Nivre. 2008. The 
CoNLL-2008 shared task on joint parsing of 
syntactic and semantic dependencies. In 
Proceedings of CoNLL.  

Reut Tsarfaty. 2013. A unified morpho-syntactic 
scheme of Stanford dependencies. Proceedings of 
the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics (ACL). 

 

147


