



















































CASMACAT: A Computer-assisted Translation Workbench


Proceedings of the Demonstrations at the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 25–28,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

CASMACAT: A Computer-assisted Translation Workbench
V. Alabau?, C. Buck‡, M. Carl†, F. Casacuberta?, M. Garcı́a-Martı́nez†

U. Germann‡, J. González-Rubio?, R. Hill‡, P. Koehn‡, L. A. Leiva?
B. Mesa-Lao†, D. Ortiz?, H. Saint-Amand‡, G. Sanchis?, C. Tsoukala‡

?PRHLT Research Center, Universitat Politècnica de València
{valabau,fcn,jegonzalez,luileito,dortiz,gsanchis}@dsic.upv.es

†Copenhagen Business School, Department of International Business Communication
{ragnar.bonk,mc.isv,mgarcia,bm.ibc}@cbs.dk
‡School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh

{cbuck,ugermann,rhill2,pkoehn,hsamand,ctsoukal}@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract

CASMACAT is a modular, web-based
translation workbench that offers ad-
vanced functionalities for computer-aided
translation and the scientific study of hu-
man translation: automatic interaction
with machine translation (MT) engines
and translation memories (TM) to ob-
tain raw translations or close TM matches
for conventional post-editing; interactive
translation prediction based on an MT en-
gine’s search graph, detailed recording and
replay of edit actions and translator’s gaze
(the latter via eye-tracking), and the sup-
port of e-pen as an alternative input device.
The system is open source sofware and in-
terfaces with multiple MT systems.

1 Introduction

CASMACAT1 (Cognitive Analysis and Statistical
Methods for Advanced Computer Aided Trans-
lation) is a three-year project to develop an
advanced, interactive workbench for computer-
assisted translation (CAT). Currently, at the end of
the second year, the tool includes an array of inno-
vative features that combine to offer a rich, user-
focused working environment not available in any
other CAT tool.

CASMACAT works in close collaboration with
the MATECAT project2, another open-source web-
based CAT tool. However, while MATECAT is
concerned with conventional CAT, CASMACAT is
focused on enhancing user interaction and facili-
tating the real-time involvement of human trans-
lators. In particular, CASMACAT provides highly
interactive editing and logging features.

1http://www.casmacat.eu
2http://www.matecat.com

Through this combined effort, we hope to foster
further research in the area of CAT tools that im-
prove the translation workflow while appealing to
both professional and amateur translators without
advanced technical skills.

GUI webserver

CAT
server

MT
server

Javascript      PHP

    Python

  Python

web socket
HTTP

HTTP

Figure 1: Modular design of the workbench: Web-
based components (GUI and web server), CAT
server and MT server can be swapped out.

2 Design and components

The overall design of the CASMACAT workbench
is modular. The system consists of four com-
ponents. (1) a front-end GUI implemented in
HTML5 and JavaScript; (2) a back-end imple-
mented in PHP; (3) a CAT server that manages the
editing process and communicates with the GUI
through web sockets; (4) a machine translation
(MT) server that provides raw translation of source
text as well as additional information, such as a
search graph that efficiently encodes alternative
translation options. Figure 1 illustrates how these
components interact with each other. The CAT
and MT servers are written in Python and inter-
act with a number of software components imple-
mented in C++. All recorded information (source,
translations, edit logs) is permanently stored in a
MySQL database.

These components communicate through a
well-defined API, so that alternative implementa-
tions can be used. This modular architecture al-

25



Figure 2: Translation view for an interactive post-editing task.

lows the system to be used partially. For instance,
the CAT and MT servers can be used separately as
part of a larger translation workflow, or only as a
front-end when an existing MT solution is already
in place.

2.1 CAT server
Some of the interactive features of CASMACAT
require real-time interaction, such as interactive
text-prediction (ITP), so establishing an HTTP
connection every time would cause a significant
network overhead. Instead, the CAT server relies
on web sockets, by means of Python’s Tornadio.

When interactive translation prediction is en-
abled, the CAT server first requests a translation
together with the search graph of the current seg-
ment from the MT server. It keeps a copy of the
search graph and constantly updates and visualizes
the translation prediction based on the edit actions
of the human translator.

2.2 MT server
Many of the functions of the CAT server require
information from an MT server. This information
includes not only the translation of the input sen-
tence, but also n-best lists, search graphs, word
alignments, and so on. Currently, the CASMACAT
workbench supports two different MT servers:
Moses (Koehn et al., 2007) and Thot (Ortiz-
Martı́nez et al., 2005).

The main call to the MT server is a request for
a translation. The request includes the source sen-
tence, source and target language, and optionally
a user ID. The MT server returns an JSON object,
following an API based on Google Translate.

3 Graphical User Interface

Different views, based on the MATECAT GUI,
perform different tasks. The translation view is
the primary one, used when translating or post-
editing, including logging functions about the

translation/post-editing process. Other views im-
plement interfaces to upload new documents or to
manage the documents that are already in the sys-
tem. Additionally, a replay view can visualize all
edit actions for a particular user session, including
eye tracking information, if available.

3.1 Post-Editing
In the translation view (Figure 2), the document
is presented in segments and the assistance fea-
tures provided by CASMACAT work at the segment
level. If working in a post-editing task without
ITP, up to three MT or TM suggestions are pro-
vided for the user to choose. Keyboard shortcuts
are available for performing routine tasks, for in-
stance, loading the next segment or copying source
text into the edit box. The user can assign different
status to each segment, for instance, “translated”
for finished ones or “draft” for segments that still
need to be reviewed. Once finished, the translated
document can be downloaded in XLIFF format.3

In the translation view, all user actions re-
lated to the translation task (e.g. typing activity,
mouse moves, selection of TM proposals, etc.) are
recorded by the logging module, collecting valu-
able information for off-line analyses.

3.2 Interactive Translation Prediction
Here we briefly describe the main advanced CAT
features implemented in the workbench so far.

Intelligent Autocompletion: ITP takes place
every time a keystroke is detected by the sys-
tem (Barrachina et al., 2009). In such event, the
system produces a prediction for the rest of the
sentence according to the text that the user has al-
ready entered. This prediction is placed at the right
of the text cursor.

Confidence Measures: Confidence mea-
sures (CMs) have two main applications in

3XLIFF is a popular format in the translation industry.

26



MT (González-Rubio et al., 2010). Firstly, CMs
allow the user to clearly spot wrong translations
(e.g., by rendering in red those translations
with very low confidence according to the MT
module). Secondly, CMs can also inform the user
about the translated words that are dubious, but
still have a chance of being correct (e.g., rendered
in orange). Figure 3 illustrates this.

Figure 3: Visualisation of Confidence Measures

Prediction Length Control: Providing the user
with a new prediction whenever a key is pressed
has been proved to be cognitively demanding (Al-
abau et al., 2012). Therefore, the GUI just displays
the prediction up to the first wrong word according
to the CMs provided by the system (Figure 4).

Figure 4: Prediction Length Control

Search and Replace: Most of CAT tools pro-
vide the user with intelligent search and replace
functions for fast text revision. CASMACAT fea-
tures a straightforward function to run search and
replacement rules on the fly.

Word Alignment Information: Alignment of
source and target words is an important part of
the translation process (Brown et al., 1993). To
display their correspondence, they are hihglighted
every time the user places the mouse or the text
cursor on a word; see Figure 5.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Figure 5: Visualisation of Word Alignment

Prediction Rejection: With the purpose of eas-
ing user interaction, CASMACAT also supports a
one-click rejection feature (Sanchis-Trilles et al.,
2008). This feature invalidates the current predic-
tion made for the sentence that is being translated,
and provides the user with an alternate one.

3.3 Replay mode and logging functions
The CASMACAT workbench implements detailed
logging of user activity data, which enables both
automatic analysis of translator behaviour and
retrospective replay of a user session. Replay
takes place in the translation view of the GUI
and it displays the screen status of the recorded
translation/post-editing process. The workbench
also features a plugin to enrich the replay mode
with gaze data coming from an eye-tracker. This
eye-tracking integration is possible through a
project-developed web browser extension which,
at the moment, has only been fully tested with SR-
Research EyeLinks4.

4 E-pen Interaction

E-pen interaction is intended to be a complemen-
tary input rather than a substitution of the key-
board. The GUI features the minimum compo-
nents necessary for e-pen interaction; see Figure 6.
When the e-pen is enabled, the display of the cur-
rent segment is changed so that the source seg-
ment is shown above the target segment. Then the
drawing area is maximised horizontally, facilitat-
ing handwriting, particularly in tablet devices. An
HTML canvas is also added over the target seg-
ment, where the user’s drawings are handled. This
is achieved by means of MINGESTURES (Leiva
et al., 2013), a highly accurate, high-performance
gesture set for interactive text editing that can dis-
tinguish between gestures and handwriting. Ges-
tures are recognised on the client side so the re-
sponse is almost immediate. Conversely, when
handwritten text is detected, the pen strokes are
sent to the server. The hand-written text recog-
nition (HTR) server is based on iAtros, an open
source HMM decoder.

if any feature not is available on your networksubstitution

Figure 6: Word substitution with e-pen interaction

5 Evaluation

The CASMACAT workbench was recently evalu-
ated in a field trial at Celer Soluciones SL, a
language service provider based in Spain. The
trial involved nine professional translators work-
ing with the workbench to complete different post-
editing tasks from English into Spanish. The pur-

4http://www.sr-research.com

27



pose of this evaluation was to establish which of
the workbench features are most useful to profes-
sional translators. Three different configurations
were tested:

• PE: The CASMACAT workbench was used
only for conventional post-editing, without
any additional features.

• IA: Only the Intelligent Autocompletion fea-
ture was enabled. This feature was tested sep-
arately because it was observed that human
translators substantially change the way they
interact with the system.

• ITP: All features described in Section 3.2
were included in this configuration, except-
ing CMs, which were deemed to be not accu-
rate enough for use in a human evaluation.

For each configuration, we measured the aver-
age time taken by the translator to produce the fi-
nal translation (on a segment basis), and the aver-
age number of edits required to produce the final
translation. The results are shown in Table 1.

Setup Avg. time (s) Avg. # edits

PE 92.2 ± 4.82 141.39 ± 7.66
IA 86.07 ± 4.92 124.29 ± 7.28
ITP 123.3 ± 29.72 137.22 ± 13.67

Table 1: Evaluation of the different configurations
of the CASMACAT workbench. Edits are measured
in keystrokes, i.e., insertions and deletions.

While differences between these numbers are
not statistically significant, the apparent slowdown
in translation with ITP is due to the fact that all
translators had experience in post-editing but none
of them had ever used a workbench featuring in-
telligent autocompletion before. Therefore, these
were somewhat unsurprising results.

In a post-trial survey, translators indicated that,
on average, they liked the ITP system the best.
They were not fully satisfied with the freedom of
interactivity provided by the IA system. The lack
of any visual aid to control the intelligent auto-
completions provided by the system made transla-
tors think that they had to double-check any of the
proposals made by the system when making only
a few edits.

6 Conclusions

We have introduced the current CASMACAT work-
bench, a next-generation tool for computer as-
sisted translation. Each of the features available
in the most recent prototype of the workbench has
been explained. Additionally, we have presented
an executive report of a field trial that evaluated
genuine users’ performance while using the work-
bench. Although E-pen interaction has not yet
been evaluated outside of the laboratory, it will the
subject of future field trials, and a working demon-
stration is available.

Acknowledgements

Work supported by the European Union 7th

Framework Program (FP7/2007-2013) under the
CASMACAT project (grant agreement no 287576).

References
Vicent Alabau, Luis A. Leiva, Daniel Ortiz-Martı́nez,

and Francisco Casacuberta. 2012. User evaluation
of interactive machine translation systems. In Proc.
EAMT, pages 20–23.

Sergio Barrachina et al. 2009. Statistical approaches to
computer-assisted translation. Computational Lin-
guistics, 35(1):3–28.

Peter Brown et al. 1993. The mathematics of statistical
machine translation: Parameter estimation. Compu-
tational linguistics, 19(2):263–311.

Jesús González-Rubio, Daniel Ortiz-Martı́nez, and
Francisco Casacuberta. 2010. On the use of confi-
dence measures within an interactive-predictive ma-
chine translation system. In Proc. of EAMT.

Philipp Koehn et al. 2007. Moses: Open source toolkit
for statistical machine translation. In Proc. of ACL,
pages 177–180.

Luis A. Leiva, Vicent Alabau, and Enrique Vidal.
2013. Error-proof, high-performance, and context-
aware gestures for interactive text edition. In Proc.
of CHI, pages 1227–1232.

Daniel Ortiz-Martı́nez, Ismael Garcı́a-Varea, and Fran-
cisco Casacuberta. 2005. Thot: a toolkit to train
phrase-based statistical translation models. In Proc.
of MT Summit X, pages 141–148.

G. Sanchis-Trilles et al. 2008. Improving interactive
machine translation via mouse actions. In Proc. of
EMNLP, pages 485–494.

28


