



















































RAMBLE ON: Tracing Movements of Popular Historical Figures


Proceedings of the EACL 2017 Software Demonstrations, Valencia, Spain, April 3-7 2017, pages 77–80
c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

RAMBLE ON: Tracing Movements of Popular Historical Figures

Stefano Menini1-2, Rachele Sprugnoli1-2, Giovanni Moretti1,
Enrico Bignotti2, Sara Tonelli1 and Bruno Lepri1

1Fondazione Bruno Kessler / Via Sommarive 18, Trento, Italy
2University of Trento / Via Sommarive 9, Trento, Italy

{menini,sprugnoli,moretti,satonelli,lepri}@fbk.eu
{enrico.bignotti}@unitn.it

Abstract

We present RAMBLE ON, an application
integrating a pipeline for frame-based in-
formation extraction and an interface to
track and display movement trajectories.
The code of the extraction pipeline and
a navigator are freely available; moreover
we display in a demonstrator the outcome
of a case study carried out on trajectories
of notable persons of the XX Century.

1 Introduction

At a time when there were no social media, emails
and mobile phones, interactions were strongly
shaped by movements across cities and countries.
In particular, the movements of eminent figures of
the past were the engine of important changes in
different domains such as politics, science, and the
arts. Therefore, tracing these movements means
providing important data for the analysis of cul-
ture and society, fostering so-called cultural ana-
lytics (Piper, 2016).
This paper presents RAMBLE ON, a novel appli-
cation that embeds Natural Language Processing
(NLP) modules to extract movements from un-
structured texts and an interface to interactively
explore motion trajectories. In our use case, we
focus on biographies of famous historical figures
from the first half of the XX Century extracted
from the English Wikipedia. A web-based navi-
gator1 related to this use case is meant for schol-
ars without a technical background, supporting
them in discovering new cultural migration pat-
terns with respect to different time periods, geo-
graphical areas and domains of occupation. We
also release the script to generate trajectories and
a stand-alone version of the RAMBLE ON navi-

1Available at http://dhlab.fbk.eu/rambleon/

gator2, where users can upload their own set of
movements taken from Wikipedia biographies.

2 Related Work

The analysis of human mobility is an impor-
tant topic in many research fields such as so-
cial sciences and history, where structured data
taken from census records, parish registers, mobile
phones etc. are employed to quantify travel flows
and find recurring patterns of movements (Pooley
and Turnbull, 2005; Gonzalez et al., 2008; Cat-
tuto et al., 2010; Jurdak et al., 2015). Other stud-
ies on mobility rely on a great amount of manu-
ally extracted information (Murray, 2013) or on
shallow extraction methods. For example Gergaud
et al. (2016) detect movements in Wikipedia bi-
ographies assuming that cities linked in biogra-
phy pages are locations where the subject lived or
spent some time.

However we believe that, even if NLP contribu-
tion has been quite neglected in cultural analytics
studies, language technologies can greatly support
this kind of research. For this reason, in RAMBLE
ON we combine state-of-the-art Information Ex-
traction and semantic processing tools and display
the extracted information through an advanced in-
teractive interface. With respect to previous work,
our application allows to extract a wide variety of
movements going beyond the birth-to-death mi-
gration that is the focus of Schich et al. (2014)
or the transfers to the concentration camps of de-
portees during Nazism as in Russo et al. (2015).

3 Information Extraction

In Figure 1, we show the general NLP workflow
behind information extraction in RAMBLE ON.
The goal is to obtain, starting from an unstructured

2Both can be downloaded at http://dh.fbk.eu/
technologies/rambleon

77



Figure 1: Information extraction workflow.

text, a set of destinations together with their coor-
dinates and a date, each representative of the place
where a person moved or lived at the given time-
point.

Input Data In our approach information ex-
traction is performed on Wikipedia biographical
pages. In the first step, these pages are cleaned up
by removing infoboxes, tables and tags, keeping
only the main body as raw text.

Pre-processing Raw text is processed using
PIKES (Corcoglioniti et al., 2015), a suite of tools
for extracting frame oriented knowledge from En-
glish texts. PIKES integrates Semafor (Das et al.,
2014), a system for Semantic Role Labeling based
on FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998), whose output is
used to identify predicates related to movements
and their arguments because its high-level organi-
zation in semantic frames is an useful way to gen-
eralize over predicates. PIKES also includes Stan-
ford CoreNLP (Manning et al., 2014). Its mod-
ules for Named Entity Recognition and Classifica-
tion (NERC), coreference resolution and recogni-
tion of time expressions are used to detect for each
text: (i) mentions related to the person who is the
subject of the biography; (ii) locations and orga-
nizations that can be movement destinations; (iii)
dates.

Frame Selection Starting from the frames re-
lated to the Motion frames in FrameNet and a man-
ual analysis of a set of biographies, we identified
45 candidate frames related to direct (e.g. De-
parting) or indirect (e.g. Residence) movements
of people. After a manual evaluation of these
45 frames on a set of biographies annotated with
PIKES, we removed 16 of them from the list of
candidate frames because of the high number of
false positives. These include for example Es-
caping, Getting underway and Touring. Combin-

FRAME FRAME
Arriving Meet with
Attending Motion
Becoming a member Receiving
Being employed Residence
Bringing Scrutiny
Cause motion Self motion
Colonization Sending
Come together Speak on topic
Conquering State continue
Cotheme Temporary stay
Departing Transfer
Detaining Travel
Education teaching Used up
Fleeing Working on
Inhibit movement

Table 1: List of frames selected for RAMBLE ON4

ing the information from the CoreNLP modules in
PIKES with the remaining 29 frames listed in Ta-
ble 1, our application extracts a list of candidate
sentences, containing a date and a movement of
the subject together with a destination. These rep-
resent the geographical position of a person at a
certain time.

Georeferencing To georeference all the des-
tinations mentioned in the candidate sentences
RAMBLE ON uses Nominatim5. Due to errors by
the NERC module (e.g., Artaman League anno-
tated as geographical entity), some destinations
can lack coordinates and thus are discarded. More-
over, for each biography, the places and dates of
birth and death of the subject are added as taken
from DBpedia.

Output Data Details about the movements ex-
tracted from each Wikipedia biography, e.g. date,
coordinates and the original snippet of text, are
saved in a JSON file as shown in the example be-
low. This output format accepts additional fields
with information about the subject of the biogra-
phy, e.g. gender, occupation domain, that could be
extracted from other resources.
"name": "Maria_Montessori",
"movements": [{
"date": 19151100,
"place": "Italy",
"latitude": 41.87194,
"longitude": 12.5673,
"predicate_id": "t3147",
"predicate": "returned",
"resource": "FrameNet",
"resource_frame": "Arriving",
"place_frame": "@Goal",
"snippet": "Montessori’s father died in
November 1915, and she returned to Italy."
}]

5https://nominatim.openstreetmap.org/

78



4 Ramble On Navigator

Movements as extracted with the procedure de-
scribed in Section 3 are graphically presented on
an interactive map that visualizes trajectories be-
tween places. The interface, called RAMBLE ON
Navigator, is built using technology based on
web standards (HTML5, CSS3, Javascript) and
open source libraries for data visualization and ge-
ographical representation, i.e. d3.js and Leaflet.
Through this interface, see Figure 2, it is possible
to filter the movements on the basis of the time
span or to search for a specific individual. More-
over, if information about nationality and domain
of occupation is provided in the JSON files, the
Navigator allows to further filter the search. Hov-
ering the mouse on a trajectory, the snippet of text
from which it was automatically extracted appears
on the bottom left. Information about all the move-
ments related to a place is displayed when hover-
ing on a spot on the map. The trajectories have
an arrow indicating the route destination and are
dashed if the movement described by the snippet
is started before the selected time span.
The online version of the Navigator shows the
output of the case study presented in Section 5,
while the stand-alone application also allows to
upload another set of data.

5 Case Study

We relied on the Pantheon dataset (Yu et al., 2016)
to identify a list of notable figures to be used in
our case study. We chose Pantheon since it pro-
vides a ready-to-use set of people already classi-
fied into categories based on their domain occupa-
tion (e.g., Arts, Sports), birth year, nationality and
gender. More specifically, we considered 2,407
individuals from Europe and North America liv-
ing between 1900 and 1955. First we downloaded
the corresponding Wikipedia pages, as published
in April 2016, collecting a corpus of more than
7,5 million words. Then we used the workflow de-
scribed in Section 3 and we enriched output data
with the categories taken from Pantheon. We man-
ually refined the output by removing the sentences
wrongly identified as movements (14.02%), for
example those not referring to the subject of the
biography (e.g., When communist North Korea in-
vaded South Korea in 1950, he sent in U.S. troops).
The final dataset resulted in 2,929 sentences from
1,283 biographies, since 1,124 individuals had no
associated movements. This may be due to either

DOMAIN # ofindividuals
# of
movements

Arts 647 (348) 788
Science & Technology 591 (318) 631
Humanities 502 (276) 709
Institutions 483 (255) 633
Public Figure 69 (30) 55
Sports 59 (30) 54
Business & Law 38 (13) 22
Exploration 18 (13) 37
TOTAL 2,407 (1,283) 2,929

Table 2: Domain distribution of individuals in our
use case. In brackets the number of individuals
with movements.

an actual lack of sentences concerning movements
or errors in the automatic processing, e.g., missed
identification of places or dates. Table 2 shows
the distribution per domain of the individuals with
associated movements. Moreover, we corrected
the coordinates of places wrongly georeferenced
(6.7%). The extracted movements are evoked by
predicates associated to 66 different lemmas (lex-
ical units in FrameNet). The most frequent lem-
mas (> 100 occurrences) are: return (567), move
(556), visit (253), travel (188), attend (182), go
(153), live (111), arrive (107).

6 Conclusion and Future Work

We presented an automatic approach for the ex-
traction and visualisation of motion trajectories,
which is easy to extend to different datasets, and
that can provide insights for studies in many fields,
e.g., history and sociology.

In the future, we will mainly focus on improv-
ing the system coverage. Currently, missing tra-
jectories are mainly due to (i) the presence of pred-
icates not recognized as lexical units in FrameNet,
e.g. exile; (ii) the lack of information in the
English Wikipedia biography, and (iii) the pres-
ence of sentences with complex temporal struc-
tures, e.g., Cummings returned to Paris in 1921
and remained there for two years before return-
ing to New York. These issues can be dealt with
by adding missing predicates to FrameNet, ex-
tend Pikes to other languages and experimenting
with different systems for temporal information
processing (Llorens et al., 2010). We also plan
to apply the methodology presented in (Aprosio
and Tonelli, 2015) to automatically recognize the
Wikipedia text passages dealing with biographical
information, so to discard sections containing use-
less information.

79



Figure 2: Screenshot of Ramble On Navigator.

References
Alessio Palmero Aprosio and Sara Tonelli. 2015. Rec-

ognizing Biographical Sections in Wikipedia. In
Proceedings of EMNLP 2015.

Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe.
1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project. In Proceed-
ings of COLING-ACL ’98, pages 86–90.

Ciro Cattuto, Wouter Van den Broeck, Alain Barrat,
Vittoria Colizza, Jean-François Pinton, and Alessan-
dro Vespignani. 2010. Dynamics of person-to-
person interactions from distributed RFID sensor
networks. PloS one, 5(7):e11596.

Francesco Corcoglioniti, Marco Rospocher, and
Alessio Palmero Aprosio. 2015. Extracting Knowl-
edge from Text with PIKES. In Proceedings of the
International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC).

Dipanjan Das, Desai Chen, André F. T. Martins,
Nathan Schneider, and Noah A. Smith. 2014.
Frame-semantic parsing. Computational linguistics,
40(1):9–56.

Olivier Gergaud, Morgane Laouénan, Etienne Wasmer,
et al. 2016. A brief history of human time: Explor-
ing a database of’notable people’. Technical report,
Sciences Po Departement of Economics.

Marta C. Gonzalez, Cesar A. Hidalgo, and Albert-
Laszlo Barabasi. 2008. Understanding individual
human mobility patterns. Nature, 453(7196):779–
782.

Raja Jurdak, Kun Zhao, Jiajun Liu, Maurice Abou-
Jaoude, Mark Cameron, and David Newth. 2015.
Understanding human mobility from Twitter. PloS
one, 10(7):e0131469.

Hector Llorens, Estela Saquete, and Borja Navarro.
2010. Tipsem (English and Spanish): Evaluating
CRFs and Semantic Roles in Tempeval-2. In Pro-
ceedings of the 5th SemEval, pages 284–291.

Christopher D. Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Rose Finkel, Steven Bethard, and David Mc-
Closky. 2014. The Stanford CoreNLP Natural Lan-
guage Processing Toolkit. In ACL (System Demon-
strations), pages 55–60.

Sarah Murray. 2013. Spatial Analysis and Humanities
Data: A Case Study from the Grand Tour Travelers
Project. In A CESTA Anthology. Stanford.

Andrew Piper. 2016. There will be numbers. CA:
Journal of Cultural Analytics, 1(1).

Colin Pooley and Jean Turnbull. 2005. Migration
and mobility in Britain since the eighteenth century.
Routledge.

Irene Russo, Tommaso Caselli, and Monica Mona-
chini. 2015. Extracting and Visualising Biograph-
ical Events from Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the
1st Conference on Biographical Data in a Digital
World.

Maximilian Schich, Chaoming Song, Yong-Yeol Ahn,
Alexander Mirsky, Mauro Martino, Albert-László
Barabási, and Dirk Helbing. 2014. A net-
work framework of cultural history. Science,
345(6196):558–562.

Amy Zhao Yu, Shahar Ronen, Kevin Hu, Tiffany Lu,
and César A. Hidalgo. 2016. Pantheon 1.0, a manu-
ally verified dataset of globally famous biographies.
Scientific data, 3.

80


