



















































Multilingual CALL Framework for Automatic Language Exercise Generation from Free Text


Proceedings of the EACL 2017 Software Demonstrations, Valencia, Spain, April 3-7 2017, pages 49–52
c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Multilingual CALL Framework for Automatic Language Exercise
Generation from Free Text

Naiara Perez and Montse Cuadros
Vicomtech-IK4 research center

Mikeletegi 57, Donostia-San Sebastián, Spain
{nperez,mcuadros}@vicomtech.org

Abstract

This paper describes a web-based appli-
cation to design and answer exercises
for language learning. It is available in
Basque, Spanish, English, and French.
Based on open-source Natural Language
Processing (NLP) technology such as
word embedding models and word sense
disambiguation, the system enables users
to create automatically and in real time
three types of exercises, namely, Fill-in-
the-Gaps, Multiple Choice, and Shuffled
Sentences questionnaires. These are gen-
erated from texts of the users’ own choice,
so they can train their language skills with
content of their particular interest.

1 Introduction

This paper describes a web-based computer-
assisted language learning (CALL) framework for
automatic generation and evaluation of exercises1.
The aim of this application is mainly to allow
agents in the language learning sector, both teach-
ers and learners alike, to create questionnaires
from texts of their own interest with little effort.
To do so, the application includes state-of-the-
art open source NLP technology, namely part-of-
speech tagging, word sense disambiguation, and
word embedding models. Its main features are the
following:

• Multilingual. The platform enables to train
Spanish, Basque, English and French skills.
Interface messages appear in the chosen lan-
guage too.

1The application is at edunlp.vicomtech.org. The
web page asks for credentials to log in; the username is ”vi-
comtech”, and the password ”edunlp”. You will also need
your own account, which you can obtain by writing an e-mail
to the authors of the paper.

• Three formats. Users can design and an-
swer exercises of three types: a) Fill-in-the-
Gaps (FG): learners must fill in the gaps in a
text with the correct words, based on some
clues given or just the context provided by
the text; b) Multiple Choice (MC): learners
must choose the correct answers from a set of
words given to fill in the gaps in a text; and, c)
Shuffled Sentences (SS): learners must order
a set of given words to formulate grammati-
cal sentences.

• Highly configurable. Each exercise format
offers a variety of settings that users can
control. The input texts from which exer-
cises are built are always given by the users.
They also choose the pedagogical target of
the exercises based on language-specific part-
of-speech (PoS) tags and morphological fea-
tures. Other settings include the type of clues
in FG mode and the amount of distractors in
MC. Furthermore, users can select the exer-
cise items themselves or let the system do it
automatically.

• Exportable. The exercises can be down-
loaded in Moodle’s CLOZE2 syntax to im-
port them into Moodle quizzes, an exten-
sively exploited platform by teaching institu-
tions all over the world.

• Evaluation. The questionnaires designed
can be answered in the same application,
which prompts the percentage of correct an-
swers upon submission. Correct answers are
shown in green and the incorrect ones in red,
so the learner can try to guess again.

• Real-time generation, easy to use.
2https://docs.moodle.org/23/en/

Embedded_Answers_(Cloze)_question_type

49



2 Related Work

There exist countless tools, both web-based and
desktop software, that facilitate the creation of
teaching material for general purposes, some of
the best known being Moodle3, Hot Potatoes4,
ClassTools.net5, and ClassMarker6. However, the
focus of such tools is on enabling users to adapt
the pedagogical content they are interested in,
whichever it is, to certain exercise formats (i.e.,
quizzes, open clozes, crosswords, drag-and-drops,
and so on). That is, these tools do not offer sup-
port for assessing the contents on their pedagogi-
cal suitability nor other exercise-dependent tasks,
such as building clues for quizzes or distractors for
multiple-choice exercises.

In the domain of language learning in particular,
exercise authoring very often implies a lot of word
list curation, searching for texts that contain cer-
tain linguistic patterns or expressions, retrieving
definitions, and similar tasks. The availability of
resources for language teachers that simplify these
processes, such as on-line dictionaries or teaching-
oriented lexical databases (e.g., English Profile7),
depends on the target language. To the best of this
paper’s authors’ knowledge, there does not exist
at the moment an exercise generation and evalu-
ation framework specific to learn Basque, Span-
ish, English, and French, that not only automa-
tizes formatting the content given by the user for
several exercises but also incorporates natural lan-
guage processing (NLP) techniques to ease the au-
thoring process. Volodina et al. (2014) describe a
similar framework named Lärka. Lärka designs
multiple-choice exercises in Swedish for linguis-
tics or Swedish learners. The questions are based
on controlled corpora, that is, the users cannot
choose the texts they will be working on.

3 Workflow description

All the exercise formats mentioned share a com-
mon building process. Users must choose a lan-
guage, provide a text –in that language–, and
choose a pedagogical target from the options
given. Pedagogical targets are based on PoS tags
and morphological features. Different possible
targets have been implemented for each language,

3https://moodle.org/
4https://hotpot.uvic.ca/
5https://www.classtools.net/
6https://www.classmarker.com/
7http://www.englishprofile.org/

depending on the languages’ characteristics and
the richness of the parsing models available. For
instance, exercises in Spanish can target the sub-
junctive conjugation or the definite/indefinite arti-
cles. In English, one can target, for example, past
and present participle tenses. Once the initial con-
figuration has been set, the workflow continues as
follows:

3.1 Extraction of candidate items
The text given is segmented, tokenized and tagged
with IXA pipes (Agerri et al., 2014), using the lat-
est models provided with the tools. The tokens
with a PoS tag or morphological feature selected
by the user as pedagogical target are chosen as
candidate items. In the case of the SS format, item
candidates are sentences containing tokens with
the relevant PoS tags or morphological features.
If the text does not contain any candidate item, the
application alerts the user that it is not possible to
build an exercise with the configuration given.

3.2 Final item selection
The system has two ways of getting the final items
from the candidates identified: the user can choose
whether to select them or let the application do it
randomly. In the latter case, the user can set an up-
per bound to the amount of items generated. The
system never yields two contiguous items, since it
would increase substantially the difficulty in an-
swering them.

3.3 Exercise generation
Once the final items have been chosen, the actual
questionnaire must be designed. This depends on
the format chosen by the user and the specific set-
tings available to that format:

Fill-in-the-Gaps (FG). The system substitutes
the items chosen with gaps that have to be filled in
with the appropriate words. Users can choose to
show, for all the languages, at least three types of
clues to help learners do the exercise: the lemmas
of the correct words, their definition, or a word
bank of all the correct words (and how many times
they occur). For Spanish and English, the sys-
tem is also capable of prompting the morphologi-
cal features of the words to be guessed, in addition
to the lemma. This feature is interesting to train on
singulars and plurals, grammatical gender, verbal
tenses, and so on. Moreover, depending on the
pedagogical target chosen, the system automati-
cally disables certain types of clues. It would not

50



make much sense, for instance, to give the lem-
mas of the correct words if the pedagogical target
were prepositions, given that prepositions cannot
be lemmatized. The user can also choose to not
give any help.

To generate clues based on lemmas and/or mor-
phologial features, the system turns to the linguis-
tic annotation given by the IXA pipes during can-
didate extraction. The annotation contains all the
information necessary for each token in the text.

Retrieving definitions requires additional pro-
cessing, since a word’s definition depends on the
context it appears in. That is, choosing the correct
definition of a word in the text provided by the user
translates to disambiguating the word. The appli-
cation relies on Babelfy (Moro et al., 2014) and
BabelNet (Navigli and Ponzetto, 2010) APIs in or-
der to do so. It passes the whole text as the con-
text and asks Babelfy to assign a single sense to
the words chosen as targets of the exercise. Then,
it retrieves from BabelNet the definitions associ-
ated to those senses. Babelfy is not always able to
assign a sense to a word; when this happens, the
application returns the lemma of the word as its
clue.

Multiple Choice (MC). Again, the exercise
consists of gaps in the text to be filled with the
correct words. In this case, the learner is given
a set of words from which to choose an answer.
This set of words contains the right answer and
some incorrect words called “distractors”. When
this exercise format is chosen, the system automat-
ically generates as many distractors as specified by
the user. This is achieved by consulting, for each
correct answer, a word embedding model and re-
trieving the most similar words. The models are
word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013b; Mikolov et al.,
2013a) trained on Leipzig University’s corpora8

with the library Gensim for Python9. Thus, dis-
tractors tend to be words that appear often in con-
texts similar to the right answer, but not seman-
tically or grammatically correct. Distractors are
then transformed to the same case as the correct
word and finally shuffled for their visualization.

Shuffled Sentences (SS). This exercise con-
sists in ordering a set of words given to formu-
late a grammatical sentence. In this case, the sys-
tem substitutes the sentences chosen by gaps and
shows the sentence shuffled as a lead.

8http://corpora.uni-leipzig.de/
9http://radimrehurek.com/gensim/

3.4 Evaluation

The user can answer the questionnaire it has de-
signed and get it assessed by the system. For
all the exercise formats, the evaluation consist in
comparing the correct answers with the input re-
ceived from the user. The answer is right only
when it is the same to the correct answer.

4 The demonstrator

The application has a clean interface and is easy
to follow. An exercise can be designed, answered
and evaluated visiting less than four pages:

The home page. In the home page, the user
chooses a language –Spanish, Basque, English or
French–, and an exercise format –FG, MC, or SS.
It leads to the exercise configuration page of the
exercise chosen.

The configuration page. All the configuration
pages share a common structure. A text field oc-
cupies the top of the page. This is where the user
introduces the text they want to work with. Below
the text field are the configuration options, pre-
sented as radio-button lists. All the exercise for-
mats require that users choose a pedagogical tar-
get. Then come the format-specific settings, the
only section of the page that varies.

For an FG exercise, two properties must be set:
the type of clue and how the clues must be visu-
alized. They can be shown below the gapped text
with a reference to the gap they belong to, or as
description boxes of the gaps (i.e., “tooltips”).

In a MC exercise, users must choose the amount
of distractors they want the system to create.

For the SS mode, users can set an upper limit to
the sentences that will be selected as candidates.

Finally, the user can choose whether to let the
system select the items of the exercise or choose
them themselves among the candidates that the
system generates. In the former case, the system
asks the user how many items it should create at
most, and takes the user directly to the “Answer
and evaluate” page. In the latter case, the user is
taken to the “Choose the items” page.

If the text does not contain any token that meets
the pedagogical target, the system asks the user to
provide a different text or change the configura-
tion set. That is, the application allows for users
to know with a single click whether the texts they
choose are suitable for the pedagogical objective
they have set, without them having had previously
read the text thoroughly.

51



Choose the items. In this page users choose
the items it wants to create among the words that
meet the pedagogical target they chose. The in-
terface shows the whole text with all the available
candidates selected. They can be toggled simply
by clicking on them. There are also buttons to se-
lect all and remove all the candidates. Once users
are satisfied with their selection, they are led to the
“Answer and evaluate” page.

Answer and evaluate. This is the page where
the final questionnaire is displayed and can be
filled. The appearance varies a little depending on
the format chosen. FG exercises consist of the text
given and gaps where the correct words should be
written. If the tooltip clues option has been en-
abled, clues appear in description boxes when hov-
ering over the gaps; otherwise, they appear listed
below the text. Word bank clues appear boxed
on to the right of the text. In MC exercises, the
choices are radio-button groups listed to the right
of the text. As for SS exercises, page-wide gaps re-
place the sentences chosen, and the shuffled words
are given above the gaps.

At the bottom of this page there is a link to
download the exercise in Moodle CLOZE syntax.
The file that is downloaded can be imported to
Moodle in order to generate a quiz.

Users can fill in the exercise they designed and
submit them to get the percentage of correct an-
swers. Furthermore, the answers are colored in
green or red, depending on whether they are cor-
rect or not, respectively. This way learners can try
to answer again.

5 Conclusions

We have described a web-based framework for
language learning exercise generation. It is avail-
able for Spanish, Basque, English, and French.
Users can design three types of exercises to train
diverse skills in these languages. The framework
is highly configurable and lets the user choose
whether they want to select the exercise items or
have the system do it.

As future work, the system should be improved
in various ways. To begin with, the actual system
delegates to the user the task of making the exer-
cises more or less difficult by choosing the items
themselves. The application will be endowed with
technology that allows the users to create automat-
ically exercises which vary in difficulty starting
from the same text.

Another aspect that can be improved is the fact
that exercise items are created from unigrams. It
would be very interesting that the application were
capable of generating multi-word candidates. This
would be useful to revise collocations or phrasal
verbs, for instance. In this same regard, the appli-
cability of the system would increase if it based
item candidate generation not only on PoS tags
or morphological features, but on other criteria as
well like the semantics of the text.

There is also room for improvement in the con-
figurability of the application. Users should be al-
lowed to control two key features: definition clues
in FG exercises and MC distractors. Currently, the
application imposes the definitions and distractors
it generates, instead of presenting them as options
for the users to choose.

Finally, we plan to implement more formats that
add to the available three.

Acknowledgements

This work has been funded by the Spanish Gov-
ernment (project TIN2015-65308-C5-1-R).

References
Rodrigo Agerri, Josu Bermudez, and German Rigau.

2014. IXA pipeline: Efficient and Ready to Use
Multilingual NLP tools. In LREC, volume 2014,
pages 3823–3828.

Tomas Mikolov, Greg Corrado, Kai Chen, and Jeff
Dean. 2013a. Efficient Estimation of Word Rep-
resentations in Vector Space. CoRR, abs/1301.3.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013b. Distributed Represen-
tations of Words and Phrases and their Composition-
ality. In NIPS, pages 3111–3119.

Andrea Moro, Francesco Cecconi, and Roberto Nav-
igli. 2014. Multilingual word sense disambiguation
and entity linking for everybody. In Proceedings
of the 2014 International Conference on Posters &
Demonstrations Track-Volume 1272, pages 25–28.
CEUR-WS. org.

Roberto Navigli and Simone Paolo Ponzetto. 2010.
BabelNet: Building a very large multilingual seman-
tic network. In ACL, pages 216–225.

Elena Volodina, Ildikó Pilán, Lars Borin, and
Therese Lindström Tiedemann. 2014. A flexible
language learning platform based on language re-
sources and web services. In LREC, pages 3973–
3978.

52


