



















































Optimal encoding! - Information Theory constrains article omission in newspaper headlines


Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Volume 2, Short Papers, pages 131–135,
Valencia, Spain, April 3-7, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Optimal encoding! – Information Theory constrains
article omission in newspaper headlines∗

Robin Lemke, Eva Horch, Ingo Reich
Universität des Saarlandes

Postbox 15 11 50
D-66041 Saarbrücken, Germany

robin.lemke@uni-saarland.de
{e.horch,i.reich}@mx.uni-saarland.de

Abstract

In this paper we argue that the distribution
of article omission in newspaper headlines
is constrained by information-theoretical
principles (Shannon 1948). To this effect,
we present corpus data and results from an
acceptability rating study. Both point in
the same direction: In our corpus, articles
are significantly more frequent, when they
precede a less predictable head noun. And
subjects perceive article omission as more
acceptable, if the head noun is (compara-
bly) more predictable. This is in line with
the information-theoretical prediction that
article omission should be preferred over
the overt realization of an article (provided
that article omission is grammatical in the
first place), if the head noun is comparably
predictable in its local context.

1 Introduction

Functional deletion, that is the non-realization of,
for example, complementizers (1), or articles (2),
is a frequent phenomenon across text types.

(1) My boss thinks (that) I’m absolutely crazy.
(Jaeger 2010:31)

(2) Gündogan set to miss ∅ rest of ∅ season
with ∅ cruciate injury.

(guardian.co.uk, 16.12.2016)

As the brackets in example (1) indicate, functional
deletion is typically optional. However, if it is in
fact an optional process (in a given genre), this
raises the question why functional expressions are
overtly realized in some cases, but not in others.
In this paper, we want to argue that Information

∗ We would like to thank four anonymous reviewers
for valuable comments and suggestions. All remaining errors
are, of course, ours.

Theory is at least part of the story. This has al-
ready been shown in Jaeger (2010) with respect to
the phenomenon of complementizer deletion, and
we would like to add further evidence in support
of this hypothesis from article omission.

In contrast to standard written German, see (4),
newspaper headlines in German (and many other
languages) allow for bare singular noun phrases
(NPs), see for example the headline in (3) from the
online newspaper Zeit.de (2016/12/01); for a more
thorough overview over the phenomenon, see e.g.
Sandig (1971), Stowell (1996), or Reich in press
as well as the references cited therein.

(3) ∅
∅

Niederlage
defeat

für
for

die
the

ganze
whole

Gesellschaft
society

(4) Er
he

berichtet
reports

von
of

*(einer)
*(a)

Niederlage
defeat

für
for

die
the

ganze
whole

Gesellschaft
society

Like complementizer deletion, article omission in
newspaper headlines is an optional process. Both
the attested Niederlage für die ganze Gesellschaft
and the constructed Eine Niederlage für die ganze
Gesellschaft are, at least in principle, grammatical
/ acceptable newspaper headlines in German.

Previous research on article omission focused
on specific structural constraints (e.g. to account
for the structural asymmetry in article omission
observed in Stowell 1996), and on specific con-
structions (like article omission in the complement
of a preposition; see Kiss 2010), but less so on
the question why in a given utterance token in a
specific context an article is or is not realized. A
notable exception is the work by De Lange and
colleagues (see for example De Lange 2008, De
Lange et al. 2009). De Lange and colleagues,
however, investigate article omission in newspa-
per headlines primarily from a typological per-
spective and relate omission frequencies (on the

131



basis of Information Theory) to the overall com-
plexity of the respective article systems along the
following lines: The more complex an article sys-
tem is, the less predictable is a given article (like
German der, die or das, for example); and the
less predictable a given article is, the more pres-
sure there is to overtly realize the article. Like De
Lange and colleagues, we will also argue in the
following that information-theoretical considera-
tions are relevant in the description and analysis
of article omission. In contrast to De Lange and
colleagues, however, we consider article omission
as a function of the predictability of the follow-
ing head noun in a given local linguistic context
(rather than as a function of the predictability of
an article relative to a given article system).

2 Background: Information Theory and
functional deletion

Information Theory relies on a probabilistic no-
tion of information, whereby the amount of in-
formation conveyed by some unit is derived from
its probability to occur given the previous con-
text. Applied to sentence comprehension, the in-
formation, or surprisal (Hale 2001), of a word α
in a given context c is calculated as the negative
logarithm of the probability of α in c , in short
Surprisal(α) = −log2P(α|c). Hence, highly pre-
dictable words are less informative while highly
unpredictable words are more informative. Com-
munication is modeled as occurring through a
noisy channel with limited capacity, which speak-
ers should approximate in order to communicate
efficiently. Exceedance of channel capacity is to
be avoided and penalized with additional process-
ing load. Consequently, speakers tend to distribute
information uniformly across an utterance at a
transmission rate close to channel capacity. This
is argued for by Aylett & Turk (2004), De Lange
et al. (2009), Genzel & Charniak (2002), Levy &
Jaeger (2007), among others. In Jaeger (2010) the
principle guiding the speaker in choosing between
grammatical alternatives is called the Uniform In-
formation Density Hypothesis (UID):

Uniform Information Density (UID)
Within the bounds defined by grammar,
speakers prefer utterances that distribute
information uniformly across the signal
(information density). Where speakers
have a choice between several variants
to encode their message, they prefer the

variant with more uniform information
density (ceteris paribus).

(Jaeger 2010: 25)

To get an idea of how the UID might relate to arti-
cle omission, consider figure 1. Figure 1 illustrates
the surprisal profiles of three different encodings
of one and the same message (that tomorrow the
judge pronounces the sentence). These encodings
only differ in the (non-)realization of the relevant
articles. As is apparent from the surprisal profiles,
the low surprisal values of the articles der and das
create substantial troughs. As a result, the sur-
prisal profile of the encoding with overt articles is
significantly less uniform than the surprisal profile
without articles. The UID thus predicts that, other
things being equal, the latter encoding should be
preferred over the former encoding.

Figure 1: The surprisal profile of the headline
Morgen verkündet der Richter das Urteilis more
uniform in case of article omission across the
board (based on trigrams calculated on the FraC
corpus)

Jaeger (2010) argues, based on a corpus study, that
the UID constrains the distribution of complemen-
tizer deletion in English. He shows that the inser-
tion of a complementizer systematically reduces
the surprisal on the following word(s). Thus, if
the occurrence of a complement clause is highly
unpredictable, the insertion of a complementizer
might lead to a more uniform surprisal profile
by significantly reducing the high surprisal of the
word(s) to follow. On the other hand, if a comple-
ment clause is highly predictable and its onset less
informative, dropping the complementizer might
be the better option with respect to the UID.

132



A similar reasoning could apply to article omis-
sion: Again, speakers have to choose between
grammatical alternatives which convey essentially
the same proposition, which however differ in the
way they distribute the relevant information across
the utterance. Horch & Reich (2016) argue, based
on language models trained on POS tags, that the
insertion of an article systematically lowers the
surprisal of the following noun. Now, given the
results in Jaeger (2010), it seems straightforward
to assume that speakers also exploit this kind of
variation in order to optimize the surprisal pro-
files of their utterances. Specifically, speakers are
expected to prefer overt articles if they precede
nouns with rather high surprisal, and to prefer ar-
ticle omission, if they precede nouns with rather
low surprisal (in order to raise the surprisal on
the noun and to distribute the information encoded
more uniformly across the utterance).

3 Corpus study

If speakers (and writers) try to optimize their ut-
terances w.r.t. information-theoretic constraints,
this should be reflected in production preferences
and therefore in corpora of text types which allow
for the respective omissions. However, accurately
finding all instances of article omission is not a
trivial issue, as there are several special cases of
singular nouns which allow for or even require ar-
ticle omission even in standard written German,
e.g. predicative (5a) or mass nouns (5b). The dis-
tinction between those cases and “genuine” cases
of article omission thus requires a corpus, in which
the relevant cases are explicitly annotated.

(5) a. Ich
I

bin
am

(ein)
a

Student.
student.

I am a student.
b. Wir

We
brauchen
need

noch
still

(*ein/#das)
a/the

Mehl.
flour
We still need flour.

Therefore, we tested our hypothesis on the FraC
corpus (Horch 2016), which is text type-balanced
and has been annotated by hand for different types
of ellipses. Omitted articles are annotated with
a placeholder NoArt in the corpus. The corpus
contains about 17 different text types (2.000 sen-
tences each) ranging from prototypically written
(e.g. newspaper articles) to prototypically spoken

(e.g. dialogues) text types.
We pre-processed the corpus by removing all ar-

ticles and lemmatizing it. Then we computed each
word’s surprisal by training a bigram language
model using Kneser-Ney smoothing (Kneser &
Ney 1995) in an interpolated backing-off scheme
(Katz 1987) with the SRILM toolkit (SRI Interna-
tional). Bigram surprisal was chosen in order to
obtain a sensible measure given the small size of
the corpus.

For reasons of comparison, we restricted our in-
vestigation to noun phrases that immediately fol-
low a finite verb. The (bigram) surprisal of a noun
is then equivalent to −log2p(noun|verb). Due to
the elimination of the articles from the training set,
this figure only reflects the subcategorization pref-
erences of the verb lemma in question and is not
affected by the occurrence of an article in the orig-
inal corpus. We take this to be a psychologically
sensible measure of noun informativity.

For the analysis, we extracted all 131 postver-
bal nouns from the corpus. 50 of these are headed
by an overt article, while the remaining 81 are
not. The histogram in figure 2 shows the distribu-
tion of article omission across surprisal values and
indicates that article omission is preferred more
strongly for less informative nouns. We analyzed
the data with a mixed effects logistic regression
with random intercepts for noun lemmata and verb
lemmata using the lme4 (Bates et al., 2015) pack-
age in R (R Core Team, 2016). The integration of
random slopes into the model were not appropri-
ate due to the small size of the data set. A likeli-
hood ratio test computed with the anova function
in R shows that the model containing SURPRISAL
as main effect fits significantly better to the data
than a baseline model with random effects and the
intercept only (χ2 = 9.7, p < 0.01). The main ef-
fect of SURPRISAL indicates that, as predicted by
the UID, article omission is more likely the less
informative the corresponding noun is.

4 Experimental study

The corpus study provides first support for our hy-
pothesis, but the amount of appropriate data in the
FraC headlines is rather small in absolute terms. It
would be desirable to test the validity of the hy-
pothesis on a larger corpus, but this is complicated
by the reasons discussed in the previous section.

If speakers have a general preference for encod-
ings conforming to UID though, these are proba-

133



0

5

10

15

20

2.5
5.0

7.5
10.0

12.5
Surprisal

co
un

t ArticleOmission
Art_omitted
Art_present

Figure 2: Histogram of NPs with and without
overt articles in the headlines in FraC.

bly not only reflected in their production choices
but also in the perception of well-formedness. We
therefore shifted towards investigating our hypoth-
esis with an acceptability rating study, which com-
pared the acceptability of ARTICLEOMISSION as
a function of SURPRISAL of a postverbal noun in
constructed newspaper headlines a 2 × 2 design.

In order to obtain verb subcategorization pref-
erences from a larger corpus, in this occasion
we used the German Reference Corpus DeReKo
(Kupietz & Keibel 2009), which contains mostly
written text of different text types, e.g. scientific
literature, fiction and newspaper articles. The cor-
pus is accessible and searchable with the COS-
MAS II web interface, which we used to extract
around 3.1 M instances of immediately postverbal
nouns from the corpus. By “immediately postver-
bal” we understand such nouns that are at most
separated by an article and/or one adjective from
the preceding verb. The data set was pre-processed
by removing all intervening articles and adjec-
tives between noun and verb and lemmatized. Af-
ter that, we computed surprisal as Surprisal =
−log2p(noun|verb). Our measure of surprisal is
hence identical to the one used in the corpus study
and reflects the subcategorization preference of the
verb.

A sample item is given in (6). We constructed
versions of the items with and without article
omission and with a low (Projekt in (6)) and a
highly informative noun (Klage), yielding 4 condi-
tions. While surprisal was treated as a binary vari-
able for distributing the materials across subjects,
in the statistical analysis it was a numeric predictor
in order to account for relative differences between

more and less informative nouns.

(6) Papst
pope

Franziskus
Francis

unterstützt
supports

(das| ∅)
(das|∅)

(Projekt|Klage)
(project|claim)

gegen
against

Kinderarbeit.
child.labor

‘Pope Francis supports the project/claim
against child labor.’

74 subjects rated 28 items (7 per condition) which
were mixed with 92 unrelated fillers (constructed
headlines as well) in a web-based questionnaire on
a 7-point Likert scale. Subjects participated in a
lottery of 10 × 30 euros as a reward. The rolling
averages plot in figure 3 provides an overview of
the distribution of ratings across the range of sur-
prisal values tested and indicates that article omis-
sion is preferred for uninformative nouns.

5.00

5.25

5.50

5.75

6.00

4 6 8 10 12
Interval mean

M
ea

n 
ra

tin
g

Article
absent
present

Figure 3: Rolling averages plot for the rating data.
The plot shows mean ratings for all items con-
tained in an interval of size 3, whose mean is dis-
played on the x-axis of the plot. For instance, the
value at x = 6 is equivalent to the mean rating of
all items ranging from a noun surprisal of 4.5 to
7.4. This smoothing technique allows to observe a
general trend by averaging over individual values.

We analyzed the data with Cumulative Link
Mixed Models for ordinal data with the ordinal
package in R (Christensen, 2015). Besides a gen-
eral preference for article omission across our
items in fillers which is in line with the prefer-
ence for article omission in the postverbal NPs
in the corpus and is thus not of theoretic inter-
est to us on itself, there is a significant interac-
tion (z = 2.9, p < 0.01) between ARTICLEOMIS-
SION and NOUNPREDICTABILITY indicating that
article omission is specifically preferred for low

134



informative nouns, while the difference between
conditions vanishes for informative nouns. This
indicates that the article is specifically redundant
in the context of uninformative nouns.

5 Discussion and outlook

Starting from the observation that the insertion of
articles lowers the surprisal of the following noun
(Horch & Reich 2016), we investigated in this pa-
per whether article omission is the more preferred
the less informative the following head noun is,
as predicted by Information Theory. We modeled
the linguistic context by falling back on the sub-
categorization preferences of verbs and confirmed
our hypothesis with both a corpus study on article
omission in German newspaper headlines and an
acceptability rating study. The rating study sug-
gests that subjects are in fact aware of the sub-
tle and gradient contrasts in terms of information
density and indicates that their preferences mirror
the corpus data. Our results are thus in line with
Jaeger’s (2010) study on complementizer deletion
and provide further evidence for the usefulness of
applying information-theoretical concepts to the
analysis of natural language.

It would be desirable, of course, to confirm
these results with larger corpora and for a larger
variety of contexts. This, however, requires high
quality automatic annotation of article omissions
in large-scale corpora, which is to the best of our
knowledge currently not yet available.

References
Douglas Bates, Martin Mächler, Ben Bolker, and Steve

Walker. 2015. Fitting linear mixed-effects mod-
els using lme4. Journal of Statistical Software,
67(1):1–48.

R. H. B. Christensen. 2015. ordinal—regression mod-
els for ordinal data. R package version 2015.6-28.
http://www.cran.r-project.org/package=ordinal/.

Eva Horch and Ingo Reich. 2016. On ‘Article
Omission’ in German and the ‘Uniform Informa-
tion Density Hypothesis’. In Stefanie Dipper, Felix
Neubarth, and Heike Zinsmeister, editors, Proceed-
ings of the 13thConference on Natural Language
Processing (KONVENS).

Eva Horch. 2016. Article missing? Talk at the 38th
DGfS annual meeting, Konstanz.

SRI International. SRI Language Modeling Toolkit.
http://www.speech.sri.com/projects/srilm/.

T. Florian Jaeger and Roger P. Levy. 2007. Speakers
optimize information density through syntactic re-
duction. In B. Schlökopf, J. Platt, and T. Hoffman,
editors, Advances in neural information processing
systems, pages 849–856. MIT Press.

T. Florian Jaeger. 2010. Redundancy and reduc-
tion: Speakers manage syntactic information den-
sity. Cognitive Psychology, 61:23–62.

Slava M. Katz. 1987. Estimation of probabilities from
sparse data for the language model component of a
speech recognizer. IEEE transactions on Acoustics,
Speech, and Signal Processing, ASP-35(3).

Reinhard Kneser and Hermann Ney. 1995. Improved
backing-off for m-gram language modeling. IEEE
transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Pro-
cessing.

Marc Kupietz and Holger Keibel. 2009. The
Mannheim German Reference Corpus (DeReKo) as
a basis for empirical linguistic research. pages 53–
59.

Joke De Lange, Nada Vasic, and Sergey Avrutin. 2009.
Reading between the (head)lines: A processing ac-
count of article omission in newspaper headlines and
child speech. Lingua, 119:1523–1540.

Joke De Lange. 2008. Article omission in child speech
and headlines: a processing account. Ph.D. thesis,
Utrecht University, Utrecht.

R Core Team, 2016. R: A Language and Environment
for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statis-
tical Computing, Vienna, Austria.

Ingo Reich. in press. On the omission of articles and
copulae in German newspaper headlines. In D. Mas-
sam and Tim Stowell, editors, Register variation and
syntactic theory. Special issue of Linguistic Varia-
tion. Benjamins.

Barbara Sandig. 1971. Syntaktische Typologie der
Schlagzeile. In Linguistische Reihe, volume 6. Hue-
ber Verlag, Ismaning.

Claude Shannon. 1948. A mathematical theory of
communications. The Bell System Technical Jour-
nal, 27:379–423.

Tim Stowell. 1996. Empty heads in abbreviated en-
glish. In GLOW 1991 (revised 1996). de Gruyter.

135


