



















































Machine Translation of Spanish Personal and Possessive Pronouns Using Anaphora Probabilities


Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Volume 2, Short Papers, pages 631–636,
Valencia, Spain, April 3-7, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Machine Translation of Spanish Personal and Possessive
Pronouns Using Anaphora Probabilities

Ngoc Quang Luong
Andrei Popescu-Belis
Idiap Research Institute
Centre du Parc, CP 592

1920 Martigny, Switzerland
{nluong,apbelis}@idiap.ch

Annette Rios Gonzales
Don Tuggener

Institute of Computational Linguistics
University of Zürich

8050 Zürich, Switzerland
{arios,tuggener}@cl.uzh.ch

Abstract

We implement a fully probabilistic model
to combine the hypotheses of a Spanish
anaphora resolution system with those of a
Spanish-English machine translation sys-
tem. The probabilities over antecedents
are converted into probabilities for the fea-
tures of translated pronouns, and are in-
tegrated with phrase-based MT using an
additional translation model for pronouns.
The system improves the translation of
several Spanish personal and possessive
pronouns into English, by solving trans-
lation divergencies such as ella → she | it
or su → his | her | its | their. On a test set
with 2,286 pronouns, a baseline system
correctly translates 1,055 of them, while
ours improves this by 41. Moreover, with
oracle antecedents, possessives are trans-
lated with an accuracy of 83%.

1 Introduction

The divergencies of pronoun systems across lan-
guages require in many cases the understanding of
the antecedent of a source pronoun to decide its
correct translation. For instance, Spanish 3rd per-
son personal and possessive pronouns generally
have more than one translation into English: él can
be rendered by he or it depending on the human-
ness of the antecedent, while the possessive deter-
miner su can be translated by his, her, its or their
depending on the gender, number and humanness
of the possessor.

In this paper, we provide a fully probabilistic
integration of a Spanish anaphora resolution sys-
tem into a phrase-based machine translation (MT)
one, building upon a coreference-aware decod-
ing model that we proposed earlier (Luong and

Popescu-Belis, 2016). We extend this model by
using actual probabilities of antecedents instead of
the best candidate only, and by applying the model
to Spanish-English pronoun translation, which re-
quires a larger range of antecedent features than
English-French. In addition, the test set is con-
siderably larger than in the previous study, and in-
cludes possessive determiners (also called adjec-
tives or, as we do here, pronouns), which exhibit
larger translation divergencies.

The paper is organized as follows. After a re-
view of related work (Section 2), we present in
Section 3 the coreference-aware translation model,
which is learned from texts with probabilistic
anaphoric links hypothesized by a coreference re-
solution system. This model is combined with a
classic phrase-based MT model, as explained in
Section 4. The results, presented in Section 5,
show an improvement in pronoun translation ac-
curacy of 4% when measured automatically, and
reach 83% correct translations with oracle antece-
dents of possessives.

2 Related Work

Recent years have witnessed an increasing in-
terest in improving machine translation of pro-
nouns. Several studies have attempted to integrate
anaphora resolution with statistical MT (Le Na-
gard and Koehn, 2010; Hardmeier and Federico,
2010; Guillou, 2012), but have often been limited
by the accuracy of anaphora resolutions systems,
even on the best-resourced language, English. For
instance, Le Nagard and Koehn (2010) trained an
English-French translation model on an annotated
corpus in which each occurrence of the English
pronouns it and they was annotated with the gen-
der of its antecedent on the target side, but failed
to improve over the baseline due to anaphora reso-
lution errors. Hardmeier and Federico (2010) in-

631



tegrated a word dependency model into the SMT
decoder as an additional feature, to keep track of
pairs of source words acting respectively as ante-
cedent and anaphor in a coreference link, and im-
proved English-German MT over the baseline.

The recent shared tasks on pronoun-focused
translation (Hardmeier et al., 2015; Guillou et al.,
2016) have promoted a pronoun correction task,
which relies on information about the reference
translation of the words surrounding the pronoun
to be corrected, thus allowing automatic evalua-
tion. Several systems developed for this task avoid
direct use of anaphora resolution, but still reach
competitive performance. Callin et al. (2015) de-
signed a classifier based on a feed-forward neural
network, which considered as features the preced-
ing nouns and determiners along with their parts-
of-speech. Stymne (2016) combined the local con-
text surrounding the source and target pronouns
(lemmas and POS tags) together with source-side
dependency heads. The winning systems of the
WMT 2016 pronoun task used neural networks:
Luotolahti et al. (2016) and Dabre et al. (2016)
summarized the backward and forward local con-
texts and passed them to a deep Recurrent Neural
Network to predict pronoun translation.

In this paper, we exploit anaphora resolution
as the main knowledge source, building upon
the model we have proposed earlier (Luong and
Popescu-Belis, 2016), in which coreference fea-
tures are directly used during the decoding process
through an additional translation table. However,
we extend our previous model and use additional
features, including the source word, and the gen-
der, number and humanness of the antecedent can-
didates. In addition, instead of training and testing
an SMT system on the gender-marked datasets (as
did Le Nagard and Koehn (2010)), and use ante-
cedents with absolute confidence, we model the
probabilistic connection between a given pronoun
and a given gender/number on the training set,
and use the probabilistic scores of the antecedent
within a coreference model, along with the trans-
lation and language models, when decoding. We
do not deal, however, with null pronouns, which
raise different challenges, addressed e.g. by Wang
et al. (2016) for Chinese-to-English MT and by
Rios Gonzales and Tuggener (2017) for Spanish-
to-English MT.

3 Learning the Coreference Model

The coreference model is the essential component
of the general framework we proposed earlier (Lu-
ong and Popescu-Belis, 2016). The goal of the
coreference model is to learn the probabilities of
translating a given source pronoun, represented by
the features of its antecedent, into a target pro-
noun. Due to anaphora resolution errors and vari-
ability in translation, the coreference model is not
deterministic, but contains probabilities of trans-
lations, which are later combined with those from
the translation and language models. We build a
fully probabilistic coreference model, unlike our
previous attempt, which relied only on the best
candidate antecedent. Building the model requires
two stages, presented in 3.1 and 3.2 below.

The Spanish 3rd-person pronouns that we con-
sider are: (a) the two singular subject pronouns
él and ella; (b) the two possessive determiners su
and sus; (c) the two singular possessive pronouns
suyo and suya. The possessive determiners agree
in number with the possessed entity (which they
determine) and refer to a possessor with unspeci-
fied gender and number, hence each of them can
be translated by his, her, its or their. The pos-
sessive pronouns refer both to a possessed entity
(with which they agree in gender and number)
and a possessor of unspecified gender and num-
ber. Hence, they can be translated into English as
his own (one), her own, its own or their own – but
not with plural, e.g. not his own ones.

3.1 Antecedent Identification using CorZu

The goal of the first stage is to identify candidate
antecedents of each source pronoun in the train-
ing data with their probabilities. The Spanish data
is processed as follows. More detailed descrip-
tions of the annotations are given by Rios (2016)
and Rios Gonzales and Tuggener (2017) who also
make them public.1

We use FreeLing2 (Padro and Stanilovsky,
2012) for morphological analysis and named
entity recognition and classification, Wapiti3

(Lavergne et al., 2010) for PoS tagging, and the
MaltParser4 (Nivre et al., 2006) for parsing. The
models for tagging, parsing and co-reference re-
solution are all trained on the AnCora-ES Spanish

1https://github.com/a-rios/CorefMT
2http://nlp.cs.upc.edu/freeling/
3https://wapiti.limsi.fr/
4http://www.maltparser.org/

632



treebank (Taulé et al., 2008).5

The CorZu coreference resolution system
(Klenner and Tuggener, 2011; Tuggener, 2016)
annotates the dependency trees with referential
entities. CorZu implements a variant of the
entity-mention coreference model, and enforces
morphological consistency in coreference chains.
For selecting antecedents of pronouns, CorZu
uses a mention ranking approach: all antecedent
candidates are considered at once, and each of
them is given a score based on its features (see
Tuggener (2016), Section 5.3.3). The features in-
clude standard ones (distance, grammatical rela-
tions, etc.) along with novel ones (animacy, dis-
course status, morphology, etc.). Their weights are
learned using a Naive Bayes classifier.

Rather than selecting the candidate with the
highest score as the antecedent, we retain a list
of the most likely antecedents with their scores,
namely all candidates with scores greater than 1%
of the highest one, keeping at least two of them (if
available).

For each candidate antecedent, we extract the
following features (obtained from FreeLing): gen-
der (masculine, feminine, or neuter), number (sin-
gular or plural) and human (person vs. other). The
newly used ‘human’ feature is intended to help
with the English divergencies he/it, his/its, she/it
and her/its.

3.2 Assignment of the Coreference Score

To build the coreference model, for each of the
anaphoric links found by CorZu, we append to
each Spanish pronoun (noted P) the feature val-
ues of the respective antecedent (noted G, N, H).
Moreover, we consider the English side of the par-
allel corpus (available with AnCora-ES), and us-
ing word-level alignments generated by GIZA++
(Och and Ney, 2003) we identify the transla-
tion of the Spanish pronoun. This results in
a set of weighted triples of the form (P-G-N-
H, pron EN, probability) – e.g., (ella-feminine-
singular-person, she, 0.686453) – where proba-
bility results from the normalization of the cur-
rent candidate score with respect to the total of
the whole list. We gather all possible triples over
the training data. If the candidates do not fully
cover all possible P-G-N-H combinations, the re-
maining combinations will be generated, but with
zero probability, and appended to the list in the

5http://clic.ub.edu/corpus/en/ancora

coreference model.
Improving significantly on our previous study,

we now compute the co-occurrence probability be-
tween each English pronoun (pEN ) and a specific
P-G-N-H combination by integrating probability
scores from all triples in which they appear, with a
normalization factor, as follows:

P (pEN|PGNH) =
∑

score(PGNH, pEN)∑
score(PGNH)

If coreference resolution and word alignment
were perfect, the resulting list would contain
only trivial pairs, such as (ella-feminine-singular-
person, she, 1.0), but this is far from being the
case. Indeed, even after filtering out triples with
p < 10−5, we are left with 13,584 triples in the
coreference model.

The excerpt from the coreference model in Fig-
ure 1 shows other translation options for ella-
feminine-singular-person: although there are sev-
eral wrong triples as a consequence of alignment
errors, they have small scores compared to that of
the likely correct translation.

ella-fem-sg-person ||| she ||| 0.4126277679763829
ella-fem-sg-person ||| her ||| 0.227395364221136694
ella-fem-sg-person ||| it ||| 0.2572878334919262
ella-fem-sg-person ||| herself ||| 0.043076623150016244
ella-fem-sg-other ||| it ||| 0.360478391856570536
ella-fem-sg-other ||| they ||| 6.720430107526882E-4

Figure 1: Inside the coreference model: examples
of (P-G-N-H, pron EN, probability) triples for the
Spanish pronoun ella.

4 Using the Coreference Model for SMT

The Coreference Model (CM) is used within the
Moses phrase-based SMT system (Koehn et al.,
2007) as a second translation model, which will
be called instead of the main model whenever
the system encounters a Spanish pronoun that is
marked as above with its G-N-H features (hence
in the form P-G-N-H). We use the configuration
declarations in the Moses environment (Koehn et
al., 2007), as we previously described (Luong and
Popescu-Belis, 2016), to integrate the CM into the
decoder as an additional translation model. The
weights of the CM are optimized on a held-out set,
unlike our previous study (Luong and Popescu-
Belis, 2016) in which they were manually set.

Before decoding, we first perform anaphora re-
solution on the source document. Then, the G-N-

633



C1 C3 C4 C5 C6
BL 1055 (46%) 850 12 358 11
CM 1096 (48%) 817 4 363 6

Table 1: APT scores of the baseline (BL) and the
coreference aware system (CM). CM outperforms
BL by 41 pronouns.

H features extracted from the best candidate an-
tecedent are appended to the pronoun.6 For in-
stance, on the following example: “Mi hermana
va a la escuela. Su escuela está detrás de la cat-
edral.”, hermana (sister) is the antecedent of the
possessive determiner su, and it is a singular, fem-
inine and human noun. Therefore, su in the second
sentence is changed to: “Su-singular-femimine-
human escuela está detrás de la catedral.” and is
given as an input to the MT system, which will use
the CM to translate the first word.

5 Results and Analysis

5.1 Experimental Settings

The MT training set for Moses is a part of the
News Commentary (NC) 2011 set from WMT,
combined with part of NC 2010, with a total of
250,000 ES-EN sentence pairs (see Section 3.1).
The parameters are tuned using MERT (Och,
2003) on an NC 2011 development subset of 2,713
pairs. Another subset of NC 2011 with 13,000 sen-
tences is used for testing. The language model is
trained on an NC 2011 monolingual set with ca.
1.1M sentences.

The test data contains 6,134 occurrences of the
Spanish pronouns we study here, but CorZu found
an antecedent only for 2,286 occurrences. For all
other pronouns, our method will not translate them
differently from the baseline system, therefore we
do not count them below.

We measure the Accuracy of Pronoun Transla-
tion (APT) by comparing the translated pronouns
with those in the reference translation (Miculi-
cich Werlen and Popescu-Belis, 2016). The metric
first aligns the pronouns in the MT output against
a reference translation, using GIZA++ (Och and
Ney, 2003) to align words and then a simple set
of heuristics to refine the alignment of pronouns,
based on position approximations and knowledge
of expected tokens.7 The APT software then com-

6In future work, we will explore the use of several candi-
date antecedents with their probabilities.

7A more complex set of rules for English-Czech align-

Baseline (BL) its his her their
its 499 97 2 80
his 66 224 1 28
her 6 24 9 9
their 166 70 1 148
Coref. (CM) its his her their
its 463 165 2 80
his 28 273 2 19
her 4 21 13 5
their 87 60 2 220
Oracle (OR) its his her their
its 4 0 0 0
his 0 20 0 0
her 0 0 23 0
their 0 0 0 6

Table 2: Confusion matrices when translating ‘su’
by three systems. The oracle antecedents (‘OR’)
are only available on a smaller dataset (see 5.3).

putes several scores: the number of identical pro-
nouns (noted C1) and of different ones (C3), the
number of untranslated pronouns in the candi-
date (C4), in the reference (C5) or in both (C6).8

The goal is to increase C1 and decrease all other
scores. APT was found to correlate well with hu-
man evaluation, but is stricter than it.

5.2 Results with CorZu Antecedents

The APT scores of the Moses baseline (BL) and
our system (CM) are shown in Table 1. Our sys-
tem outperforms the baseline by 41 pronouns (net
balance of improvements minus degradations), in-
creasing the C1 score from 46% to 48%. Besides,
it leaves fewer pronouns untranslated (C4).

When examining the translation of the deter-
miner su, the comparison of the first two confusion
matrices in Table 2 shows that CM translates su
more poorly than BL. In particular, it misses many
occurrences of su that should have been translated
as its, rendering them generally by his. This is
likely due to the wrong labeling of the humanness
feature on antecedents found by CorZu, in addi-
tion to anaphora resolution errors. In contrast, the
occurrences of su that should have been translated
with human pronouns (his, her) are better trans-
lated by the CM. Notably, despite its ambiguity,

ment, assuming the availability of parse trees, has been pro-
posed by Novák and Nedoluzhko (2015).

8The C2 score for “synonymous” pronouns is not appli-
cable here.

634



Example 1
SRC: no podrá sentirse en su-masc-sg-pers
casa en ese paı́s
CM: will not be able to be in his house in the
country
REF: he will scarcely be able to feel at home
there

Example 2
SRC: y si posible de la UE en su-masc-sg-other
conjunto
CM: if possible , and of the EU in its set
REF: if not the EU as a whole

Figure 2: Examples of wrong translations made by
the coreference model (CM), due to a context-free
translation of su.

su was often correctly linked by CorZu to a plural
noun phrase, leading to a large improvement over
the baseline for translations by their (220 vs. 148).

One limitation of the CM system is exemplified
in Figure 2. Both mistakes (in red) are due to the
CM not considering the context surrounding the
pronoun su, i.e. the idiomatic expressions. Indeed,
“su casa” and “su conjunto” mean respectively
“to feel at home” and “as a whole” as idiomatic
expressions, yet they are wrongly translated into
“to be in his house” and “in its set” by the coref-
erence model, which simply uses the features as-
signed to su after the substitution. Although the
translations of su are correct in terms of features,
the expressions should have been translated by the
default translation model. A different strategy to
pass antecedent information to the decoder while
still using the standard translation model should be
found in the future.

5.3 Results Using Oracle Antecedents

To confirm the relevance of our model, and ana-
lyze the impact of coreference resolution errors,
we selected a subset of 168 sentences with 64 oc-
currences of su. A native Spanish speaker anno-
tated the correct antecedents and the correspond-

C1 C3 C4 C5 C6
CM 31 (48%) 16 8 6 3
OR 53 (83%) 5 0 6 0

Table 3: APT scores of CM and oracle systems.
C1 is the number of su identical to the reference.
Using oracle antecedents rather than CorZu ones
significantly increases C1.

ing gender-number-humanness features for each
pronoun. We then translated this data with our CM
system, and compared it with the output of CM us-
ing CorZu antecedents, in Table 3. The accuracy
when using oracle antecedents is 83%, and among
the 11 errors (translations differing from the refer-
ence), 8 are in fact considered as correct by a hu-
man judge. Oracle antecedents thus lead to nearly
perfect translations, as confirmed by the confusion
matrix, shown in the lower part of Table 2.

6 Conclusion and Perspectives

We presented a method that uses the morpho-
logical and semantic features of antecedents to
improve the translation of Spanish personal and
possessive pronouns into English. The method
brings measurable improvements, and an oracle
experiment indicates that better anaphora resolu-
tion should be even more beneficial to pronoun
translation.

Future work should integrate coreference into
the MT decoder as an additional feature function,
so that the surrounding contexts of pronouns are
properly considered. In addition, we will attempt
to improve the quality of the labels predicted by
our resolver, we will use multiple hypotheses on
antecedents when decoding, and finally consider
the translation of null pronouns as well.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful for support to the Swiss Na-
tional Science Foundation (SNSF) under the Sin-
ergia MODERN project (grant n. 147653, see
www.idiap.ch/project/modern/) and to
the European Union under the Horizon 2020
SUMMA project (grant n. 688139, see www.
summa-project.eu). We thank the three
anonymous reviewers for their suggestions.

References
Jimmy Callin, Christian Hardmeier, and Jörg Tiede-

mann. 2015. Part-of-speech driven cross-lingual
pronoun prediction with feed-forward neural net-
works. In Proceedings of the Second Workshop
on Discourse in Machine Translation, pages 59–64,
Lisbon, Portugal.

Raj Dabre, Yevgeniy Puzikov, Fabien Cromieres, and
Sadao Kurohashi. 2016. The Kyoto University
cross-lingual pronoun translation system. In Pro-
ceedings of the First Conference on Machine Trans-
lation, pages 571–575, Berlin, Germany.

635



Liane Guillou, Christian Hardmeier, Preslav Nakov,
Sara Stymne, Jörg Tiedemann, Yannick Vers-
ley, Mauro Cettolo, Bonnie Webber, and Andrei
Popescu-Belis. 2016. Findings of the 2016 WMT
shared task on cross-lingual pronoun prediction. In
Proceedings of the First Conference on Machine
Translation, pages 525–542, Berlin, Germany.

Liane Guillou. 2012. Improving pronoun translation
for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings
of the Student Research Workshop at the 13th Con-
ference of the European Chapter of the ACL, pages
1–10, Avignon, France.

Christian Hardmeier and Marcello Federico. 2010.
Modelling pronominal anaphora in statistical ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of Interna-
tional Workshop on Spoken Language Translation
(IWSLT), Paris, France.

Christian Hardmeier, Preslav Nakov, Sara Stymne, Jörg
Tiedemann, Yannick Versley, and Mauro Cettolo.
2015. Pronoun-focused MT and cross-lingual pro-
noun prediction: Findings of the 2015 DiscoMT
shared task on pronoun translation. In Proceedings
of the Second Workshop on Discourse in Machine
Translation, pages 1–16, Lisbon, Portugal.

Manfred Klenner and Don Tuggener. 2011. An incre-
mental entity-mention model for coreference resolu-
tion with restrictive antecedent accessibility. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference Recent Ad-
vances in Natural Language Processing, pages 178–
185, Hissar, Bulgaria.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open
source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages
177–180, Prague, Czech Republic.

Thomas Lavergne, Olivier Cappé, and François Yvon.
2010. Practical very large scale CRFs. In Proceed-
ings the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages 504–513.

Ronan Le Nagard and Philipp Koehn. 2010. Aiding
pronoun translation with co-reference resolution. In
Proceedings of the Joint 5th Workshop on Statisti-
cal Machine Translation and Metrics (MATR), pages
258–267, Uppsala, Sweden.

Ngoc Quang Luong and Andrei Popescu-Belis. 2016.
Improving pronoun translation by modeling corefer-
ence uncertainty. In Proceedings of the First Confer-
ence on Machine Translation, pages 12–20, Berlin,
Germany.

Juhani Luotolahti, Jenna Kanerva, and Filip Ginter.
2016. Cross-lingual pronoun prediction with deep
recurrent neural networks. In Proceedings of the

First Conference on Machine Translation, pages
596–601, Berlin, Germany.

Lesly Miculicich Werlen and Andrei Popescu-Belis.
2016. Validation of an automatic metric for the ac-
curacy of pronoun translation (APT). Research Re-
port 29, Idiap Research Institute.

Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, and Jens Nilsson. 2006.
MaltParser: A data-driven parser-generator for de-
pendency parsing. In Proceedings of the 5th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC), volume 6, pages 2216–2219,
Genoa, Italy.

Michal Novák and Anna Nedoluzhko. 2015. Corre-
spondences between Czech and English coreferen-
tial expressions. Discours, 16.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A sys-
tematic comparison of various statistical alignment
models. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training in
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL), pages 160–167, Sapporo,
Japan.

Lluı́s Padro and Evgeny Stanilovsky. 2012. Freeling
3.0: Towards wider multilinguality. In Proceedings
of the Language Resources and Evaluation Confer-
ence (LREC), Istanbul, Turkey.

Annette Rios Gonzales and Don Tuggener. 2017. Co-
reference resolution of elided subjects and posses-
sive pronouns in Spanish-English statistical machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference
of the European Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (EACL), Valencia, Spain.

Annette Rios. 2016. A Basic Language Technol-
ogy Toolkit for Quechua. PhD thesis, University of
Zurich, Switzerland.

Sara Stymne. 2016. Feature exploration for cross-
lingual pronoun prediction. In Proceedings of the
First Conference on Machine Translation, pages
609–615, Berlin, Germany.

Mariona Taulé, M. Antònia Martı̀, and Marta Recasens.
2008. AnCora: Multilevel annotated corpora for
Catalan and Spanish. In Proceedings of the 6th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC), Marrakech, Morocco.

Don Tuggener. 2016. Incremental Coreference Reso-
lution for German. PhD thesis, University of Zurich,
Switzerland.

Longyue Wang, Zhaopeng Tu, Xiaojun Zhang, Hang
Li, Andy Way, and Qun Liu. 2016. A novel ap-
proach to dropped pronoun translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 2016 Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages
983–993, San Diego, California.

636


