



















































Lingmotif: Sentiment Analysis for the Digital Humanities


Proceedings of the EACL 2017 Software Demonstrations, Valencia, Spain, April 3-7 2017, pages 73–76
c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Lingmotif: Sentiment Analysis for the Digital Humanities

Antonio Moreno-Ortiz
University of Málaga

Spain
amo@uma.es

Abstract

Lingmotif is a lexicon-based,
linguistically-motivated, user-friendly,
GUI-enabled, multi-platform, Sentiment
Analysis desktop application. Lingmotif
can perform SA on any type of input
texts, regardless of their length and topic.
The analysis is based on the identification
of sentiment-laden words and phrases
contained in the application’s rich core
lexicons, and employs context rules to
account for sentiment shifters. It offers
easy-to-interpret visual representations of
quantitative data (text polarity, sentiment
intensity, sentiment profile), as well as a
detailed, qualitative analysis of the text
in terms of its sentiment. Lingmotif can
also take user-provided plugin lexicons
in order to account for domain-specific
sentiment expression. Lingmotif currently
analyzes English and Spanish texts.

1 Introduction

Lingmotif1 is a lexicon-based Sentiment Anal-
ysis (SA) system that employs a set of lexical
sources and analyzes context, by means of senti-
ment shifters in order to identify sentiment-laden
text segments and produce two scores that qual-
ify a text from a SA perspective. In a nutshell, it
breaks down a text into its constituent sentences,
where sentiment-carrying words and phrases are
searched for, identified, and assigned a valence
(i.e., a sentiment index). The overall score for
a text is computed as a function of the accumu-
lated negative, positive and neutral scores. Spe-
cific domains can be accounted for by applying

1This research was supported by Spain’s MINECO
through the funding of project Lingmotif2 (FFI2016-78141-
P).

user-provided dictionaries, which can be imported
from CSV files, and used along with the applica-
tion’s core dictionary.

Lingmotif’s SA approach could be loosely char-
acterized as bag-of-words, since sentiment is com-
puted solely based on the presence of certain lex-
ical items. However, Lingmotif is not just a clas-
sifier. It also offers a visual representation of the
sentiment profile of texts, allows to compare the
profile of multiple documents side by side, and
can process ordered document series. Such fea-
tures are useful in discourse analysis tasks where
sentiment changes are relevant, whether within or
across texts, such as political speeches and narra-
tives, or to track the evolution in sentiment towards
a given topic (in news, for example).

Being focused on the end user, Lingmotif uses
a simple, easy-to-use GUI that allows users to
select input and options, and launch the analy-
sis (see Figure 1). Results are generated as an
HTML/Javascript document, which is saved to a
predefined location and automatically sent to the
user’s default browser for immediate display. In-
ternally, the application generates results as an
XML document containing all the relevant data;
this XML document is then parsed against one of
several available XSL templates, and transformed
into the final HTML.

Lingmotif is available for the Mac OS, MS Win-
dows, and Linux platforms. It is free for non-
commercial purposes.

2 Lexicon-based Sentiment Analysis

Lingmotif is a lexicon-based SA system, since it
uses a rich set of lexical sources and analyzes
context in order to identify sentiment laden text
segments and produce two scores that qualify a
text from a SA perspective. In a nutshell, it
breaks down a text into its constituent sentences,

73



Figure 1: Lingmotifs GUI

where sentiment-carrying words and phrases are
searched for, identified, and assigned a valence.
For each language, Lingmotif uses a core lexicon,
a set of context rules, and, optionally, one or more
plugin lexicons.

In the following sections, the most salient as-
pects of the application’s sentiment analysis en-
gine are described. A more thorough description
can be found in (Moreno-Ortiz, 2017).

2.1 Core sentiment lexicon

A lexical item in a Lingmotif lexicon can be either
a single word or a multiword expression. Each en-
try is defined by a specification of its form, part
of speech, and valence. The valence is an in-
teger from -5 to -2 for negatives and 5 to 2 for
positives. The items form can either be a literal
string or a lemma. For the part-of-speech specifi-
cation, Lingmotif uses the Penn Treebank tag set.
A wildcard (ALL) can be used for cases where all
possible parts of speech for that lemma share the
same valence. Sentiment disambiguation is cur-
rently dealt with using exclusively formal features:
part-of speech tags and multi-word-expressions.
MWEs usually include words that may or may not
have the same polarity of the expression. includ-
ing such expressions can solve disambiguation for

many cases. For example, we can classify as neg-
ative the word kill and then include phrases such
as kill time with a neutral valence. When this is
not possible, the options are to include it with the
more statistically probable polarity or simply leave
it out when the chances of getting the item with
one polarity or another are similar.

2.2 Context rules

Context rules are Lingmotifs mechanism to deal
with sentiment shifters. They work by specifying
words or phrases that can appear in the immedi-
ate vicinity of the identified sentiment word. Basi-
cally, we use the same approach as (Polanyi and
Zaenen, 2006). Previous implemented systems
following this approach are (Kennedy and Inkpen,
2006), (Taboada et al., 2011), and (Moreno-Ortiz
et al., 2010). We use simple addition or subtrac-
tion (of integers on a -5 to 5 scale in our case).
When a context rule is matched, the resulting text
segment is marked as a single unit and assigned
the calculated valence, as specified in the rule.
Lingmotifs context rules were compiled by ex-
tensive corpus analysis, studying concordances of
common polarity words (adjectives, verbs, nouns,
and adverbs), and then testing the rules against
texts to further improve and refine them.

2.3 Plugin lexicons

Topic has been consistently shown to determine
the semantic orientation of a text (Aue and Ga-
mon, 2005), (Pang and Lee, 2008). Being a
general-purpose SA system, Lingmotif provides
a flexible mechanism to adapt to specific do-
mains by means of user-provided lexicons. Lexi-
cal information contained in plugin lexicons over-
rides Lingmotifs core lexicon, providing domain-
specific sentiment items. They can be created as a
CSV file following a simple format, which is then
imported into Lingmotif’s internal database.

3 Single and multi-document modes

From a classification perspective, it only makes
sense to use a large set of texts to be analyzed (i.e.,
classified). However, since Lingmotif is able to
specifically identify and mark those text segments
that convey sentiment, we can take advantage of
this feature to measure sentiment not only in the
text as a whole, but in subsections of the text, pro-
ducing a sentiment map of the text and display the
result in several ways.

74



A single input text can be typed or pasted in the
text box area, or text files can be loaded, depend-
ing on the selected input type. Loading files al-
lows the user to select one of them and analyze it
in single-mode, or select the complete set of files.

3.1 Single-document mode
For every text analyzed, either in single or multi-
document mode, Lingmotif produces a number of
metrics for each individual text. The two metrics
that summarize the text’s overall sentiment are the
Text Sentiment Score (TSS) and the Text Senti-
ment Intensity (TSI). Both are displayed by means
of visual, animated (Javascript) gauges at the top
of the results page. The numeric indexes (on a
0-100 scale) are categorized in ranges, from ”ex-
tremely negative” to ”extremely positive”, to make
numeric results more intuitively interpretable by
the user. Both gauges are also color and intensity-
coded in the red (negative) to green (positive)
range (see Figure 2).

Figure 2: Sentiment scores gauges

For long texts, Lingmotif will also generate a
sentiment profile, which is a visual representation
of the text’s internal structure and organization in
terms of sentiment expression. This Javascript
graph is interactive: hovering the data points will
display the lexical items that make up that partic-
ular text segment (see Figure 3).

Figure 3: Document sentiment profile

The next three sections of the results document
are shown in Figure 4 below. First is the quan-

titative data tables, which include common text
metrics and a breakdown of the sentiment analysis
data for the analyzed text. The final results sec-
tion shows the input text after processing, where
the identified sentiment items are color-coded to
represent their polarity. This makes it possible to
know exactly what the analyzer found in the text.

Figure 4: Sentiment scores gauges

An option exists (advanced view) to also show
specific data for each lexical item

Figure 5: Detail in Advanced Mode

3.2 Multi-document analysis

Multiple input texts can be analyzed in one of sev-
eral modes (see below). When in multi-document
mode, Lingmotif will analyze documents one by
one, generating one HTML file for each, although
they will not be displayed on the browser, just
saved to the output folder. When the analysis is
finished, a single results page will be displayed.
This page is a summary of results, and is different
from the single-document results page: the gauges
for TSS and TSI are now the average for the ana-
lyzed set and the detailed analysis section contains
a quantitative analysis of each of the files in the
set. The first column in this table shows the title
of the document (file name without extension) as a
hyperlink to the HTML file for that particular file.

Available multi-document analysis modes are
the following:

• Classifier (default): a stacked bar graph and
data table are offered showing classification

75



results based on their TSS category. The
graph offers a visualization of results (see
Figure 6); both its legend and the graph it-
self are interactive. A table summarizing the
classification results is also offered.

Figure 6: Classifier graph

To facilitate analysis of large sets of docu-
ments, they can be loaded from a single text
file where each line is assumed to be an indi-
vidual document. Lingmotif classifies docu-
ments according to their TSS, which will al-
ways include the neutral category.

• Series: the set of loaded files is assumed to be
in order, chronological (time series) or other-
wise. Each data point in the Sentiment Anal-
ysis Profile represents one document. The
data point is the average TSS for that partic-
ular document.

• Parallel: produces a graph with one line for
each file (this mode is limited to 15 docu-
ments). This is useful to compare sentiment
flow in texts side by side (see Figure 7).

• Merge: this is a convenience option merges
all loaded individual files into one single text.

4 Conclusions

Lingmotif goes beyond what SA classifiers have
to offer. It offers automatic identification of
sentiment-laden words and phrases, as well as text
segments. Its many visual representations of the
text’s structure from a sentiment perspective make

Figure 7: Multi-document analysis in parallel
mode (5 documents)

it a valuable tool for research in the Digital Hu-
manities where such tasks are relevant. The pos-
sibility to integrate user-provided lexicons enables
it to adapt to any subject domain.

References
A. Aue and M. Gamon. 2005. Customizing sentiment

classifiers to new domains: A case study.

A. Kennedy and D. Inkpen. 2006. Sentiment classi-
fication of movie reviews using contextual valence
shifters. Computational Intelligence 22(2):110–
125.

A. Moreno-Ortiz. 2017. Lingmotif: A user-
focused sentiment analysis tool. Procesamiento del
Lenguaje Natural 58:21–29.

A. Moreno-Ortiz, Á. Pérez Pozo, and S. Tor-
res Sánchez. 2010. Sentitext: sistema de análisis
de sentimiento para el español. Procesamiento del
Lenguaje Natural 45:297–298.

B. Pang and L. Lee. 2008. Opinion mining and senti-
ment analysis. Foundations and Trends in Informa-
tion Retrieval 2(12):1–135.

L. Polanyi and A. Zaenen. 2006. Contextual valence
shifters. In Computing Attitude and Affect in Text:
Theory and Applications, Springer, Dordrecht, The
Netherlands, volume 20 of The Information Re-
trieval Series, pages 1–10. Shanahan, james g., qu,
yan, wiebe, janyce edition.

M. Taboada, J. Brooks, M. Tofiloski, K. Voll, and
M. Stede. 2011. Lexicon-based methods for
sentiment analysis. Computational Linguistics
37(2):267–307.

76


