



















































Paraphrasing Revisited with Neural Machine Translation


Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Volume 1, Long Papers, pages 881–893,
Valencia, Spain, April 3-7, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Paraphrasing Revisited with Neural Machine Translation

Jonathan Mallinson, Rico Sennrich and Mirella Lapata
Institute for Language, Cognition and Computation

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
10 Crichton Street, Edinburgh EH8 9AB

J.Mallinson@ed.ac.uk, {rsennric,mlap}@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract

Recognizing and generating paraphrases is
an important component in many natural
language processing applications. A well-
established technique for automatically
extracting paraphrases leverages bilin-
gual corpora to find meaning-equivalent
phrases in a single language by “pivot-
ing” over a shared translation in another
language. In this paper we revisit bilin-
gual pivoting in the context of neural ma-
chine translation and present a paraphras-
ing model based purely on neural net-
works. Our model represents paraphrases
in a continuous space, estimates the de-
gree of semantic relatedness between text
segments of arbitrary length, or generates
candidate paraphrases for any source in-
put. Experimental results across tasks and
datasets show that neural paraphrases out-
perform those obtained with conventional
phrase-based pivoting approaches.

1 Introduction

Paraphrasing can be broadly described as the task
of using an alternative surface form to express
the same semantic content (Madnani and Dorr,
2010). Much of the appeal of paraphrasing stems
from its potential application to a wider range of
NLP problems. Examples include query and pat-
tern expansion (Riezler et al., 2007), summariza-
tion (Barzilay, 2003), question answering (Lin and
Pantel, 2001), semantic parsing (Berant and Liang,
2014), semantic role labeling (Woodsend and La-
pata, 2014), and machine translation (Callison-
Burch et al., 2006).

Most of the recent literature has focused on the
automatic extraction of paraphrases from various
different types of corpora consisting of parallel,
non-parallel, and comparable texts. One of the
most successful proposals uses bilingual parallel
corpora to induce paraphrases based on techniques
from phrase-based statistical machine translation
(SMT, Koehn et al. (2003)). The intuition behind

Bannard and Callison-Burch’s (2005) bilingual
pivoting method is that two English strings e1 and
e2 that translate to the same foreign string f can be
assumed to have the same meaning. The method
then pivots over f to extract 〈e1,e2〉 as a pair of
paraphrases. Drawing inspiration from syntax-
based SMT, several subsequent efforts (Callison-
Burch, 2008; Ganitkevitch et al., 2011) extended
this technique to syntactic paraphrases leading to
the creation of PPDB (Ganitkevitch et al., 2013;
Ganitkevitch and Callison-Burch, 2014), a large-
scale paraphrase database containing over a billion
of paraphrase pairs in 23 different languages.

In this paper we revisit the bilingual pivoting
approach from the perspective of neural machine
translation, a new approach to machine transla-
tion based purely on neural networks (Kalchbren-
ner and Blunsom, 2013; Bahdanau et al., 2014;
Sutskever et al., 2014; Luong et al., 2015). At
its core, NMT uses a deep neural network trained
end-to-end to maximize the conditional probabil-
ity of a correct translation given a source sen-
tence, using a bilingual corpus. NMT models
have obtained state-of-the art performance for sev-
eral language pairs (Jean et al., 2015b; Luong et
al., 2015), using only parallel data for training,
and minimal linguistic information. In this pa-
per we show how the bilingual pivoting method
can be ported to NMT and argue that it offers at
least three advantages over conventional methods.
Firstly, our neural paraphrasing model learns con-
tinuous space representations for phrases and sen-
tences (aka embeddings) that can be usefully in-
corporated in downstream tasks such as recogniz-
ing textual similarity and entailment. Secondly,
the proposed model is able to either score a pair
of paraphrase candidates (of arbitrary length) and
generate target paraphrases for a given source in-
put. Due to the architecture of NMT, genera-
tion takes advantage of wider context compared to
phrase-based approaches: target paraphrases are
predicted based on the meaning of the source input
and all previously generated target words.

In the remainder of the paper, we introduce our

881



paraphrase model and experimentally compare it
to the phrase-based pivoting approach. We eval-
uate the model’s paraphrasing capability both in-
trinsically in a paraphrase detection task (i.e., de-
cide the degree of semantic similarity between
two sentences) and extrinsically in a generation
task. Across tasks and datasets our results show
that neural paraphrases yield superior performance
when assessed automatically and by humans.

2 Related Work

The literature on paraphrasing is vast with meth-
ods varying according to the type of paraphrase
being induced (lexical or structural), the type of
data used (e.g., monolingual or parallel corpus),
the underlying representation (surface form or
syntax trees), and the acquisition method itself.
For an overview of these issues we refer the in-
terested reader to Madnani and Dorr (2010). We
focus on bilingual pivoting methods and aspects
of neural machine translation pertaining to our
model. We also discuss related work on paraphras-
tic embeddings.

Bilingual Pivoting Paraphrase extraction using
bilingual parallel corpora was proposed by Ban-
nard and Callison-Burch (2005). Their method
first extracts a bilingual phrase table and then ob-
tains English paraphrases by pivoting through for-
eign language phrases. Paraphrases for a given
phrase are ranked using a paraphrase probability
defined in terms of the translation model proba-
bilities P( f |e) and P(e| f ) where f and e are the
foreign and English strings, respectively.

Motivated by the wish to model sentential
paraphrases, follow-up work focused on syntax-
driven techniques again within the bilingual piv-
oting framework. Extensions include represent-
ing paraphrases via rules obtained from a syn-
chronous context free grammar (Ganitkevitch et
al., 2011; Madnani et al., 2007) as well as label-
ing paraphrases with linguistic annotations such as
CCG categories (Callison-Burch, 2008) and part-
of-speech tags (Zhao et al., 2008).

In contrast, our model is syntax-agnostic, para-
phrases are represented on the surface level with-
out knowledge of any underlying grammar. We
capture paraphrases at varying levels of granular-
ity, words, phrases or sentences without having to
explicitly create a phrase table.

Neural Machine Translation There has been a
surge of interest recently in repurposing sequence
transduction neural network models for machine

translation (Sutskever et al., 2014). Central to
this approach is an encoder-decoder architecture
implemented by recurrent neural networks. The
encoder reads the source sequence into a list of
continuous-space representations from which the
decoder generates the target sequence. An atten-
tion mechanism (Bahdanau et al., 2014) is used to
generate the region of focus during decoding.

We employ NMT as the backbone of our para-
phrasing model. In its simplest form our model ex-
ploits a one-to-one NMT architecture: the source
English sentence is translated into k candidate
foreign sentences and then back-translated into
English. Inspired by multi-way machine trans-
lation which has shown performance gains over
single-pair models (Zoph and Knight, 2016; Dong
et al., 2015; Firat et al., 2016a), we also explore an
alternative pivoting technique which uses multiple
languages rather than a single one. Our model in-
herits advantages from NMT such as a small mem-
ory footprint and conceptually easy decoding (im-
plemented as beam search). Beyond paraphrase
generation, we experimentally show that the rep-
resentations learned by our model are useful in se-
mantic relatedness tasks.

Paraphrastic Embeddings The successful use
of word embeddings in various NLP tasks has pro-
vided further impetus to use paraphrases. Wiet-
ing et al. (2015) take the paraphrases contained
in PPDB and embed them into a low-dimensional
space using a recursive neural network similar to
Socher et al. (2013). In follow-up work (Wiet-
ing et al., 2016), they learn sentence embeddings
based on supervision provided by PPDB. In our
approach, embeddings are learned as part of the
model and are available for any-length segments
making use of no additional machinery beyond
NMT itself.

3 Neural Paraphrasing

In this section we present PARANET, our
Paraphrasing model based on Neural Machine
Translation. PARANET uses neural machine trans-
lation to first translate from English to a foreign
pivot, which is then back-translated to English,
producing a paraphrase. In the following, we
briefly overview the basic encoder-decoder NMT
framework and then discuss how it can be ex-
tended to paraphrasing.

882



3.1 NMT Background
In the neural encoder-decoder framework for MT
(Sutskever et al., 2014; Bahdanau et al., 2014; Lu-
ong et al., 2015), the encoder, a recurrent neural
network (RNN), is used to compress the mean-
ing of the source sentence into a sequence of vec-
tors. The decoder, a conditional RNN language
model, generates a target sentence word-by-word.
For the language pair, an encoder takes in a source
sentence X = {x1, ...,xTX}, as a sequence of lin-
guistic symbols and produces a sequence of con-
text vectors C = {h1, ...hTX}. PARANET uses a bi-
directional RNN, where each context vector ht is
the concatenation of the forward and the backward
RNN’s hidden states at time t.

The decoder is a conditional RNN language
model that produces, given the source sentence,
a probability distribution over the translation. At
each time step t ′, the decoder’s hidden state is up-
dated:

zt ′ = RNN(zt ′−1,yt ′−1,ct ′) (1)

The update uses the previous hidden state zt ′−1, the
previous target symbol yt ′−1 and the time depen-
dent context ct ′ , which is computed by an attention
mechanism αt,t ′ over the source sentences’ context
vectors:

ct ′ =
Tx

∑
t=1

αt ′,tht (2)

αt ′,t ∝ e f (zt′−1,ht) (3)

g is a feedforward neural network with a softmax
activation function in the output layer which re-
turns the probability of the next target symbol. The
probability of the target sentence Y = {y1, ...,yTX},
is the product of the probabilities of the symbols
within the sentence:

P(Y |X) =
TY

∏
t ′=1

P(yt ′ |y<t ′ ,X) (4)

3.2 Pivoting
Pivoting is often used in machine translation to
overcome the shortage of parallel data, i,e., when
there is not a translation path from the source lan-
guage to the target. Instead, pivoting takes advan-
tage of paths through an intermediate language.
The idea dates back at least to Kay (1997), who
observed that ambiguities in translating from one
language onto another may be resolved if a transla-
tion into some third language is available, and has
met with success in traditional phrase-based SMT
(Wu and Wang, 2007; Utiyama and Isahara, 2007)

and more recently in neural MT systems (Firat et
al., 2016b).

In the case of paraphrasing, there is not a path
from English to English. Instead, a path from En-
glish to French to English can be used. In other
words, we translate a source sentence into a pivot
language and then translate the pivot back into the
source language. Pivoting using NMT ensures that
the entire sentence is considered when choosing a
pivot. The fact that contextual information is con-
sidered when translating, allows for a more accu-
rate pivoted sentence. It also places greater em-
phasis on capturing the meaning of the sentence,
which is a key part of paraphrasing.

A naive approach to pivoting is one-to-one
back-translation. The source English sentence E1,
is translated into a single French sentence F . Next,
F is translated back into English, giving a proba-
bility distribution over English sentences, E2. This
translation distribution acts as the paraphrase dis-
tribution P(E2|E1,F):

P(E2|E1,F) = P(E2|F) (5)

One-to-one back-translating offers an easy way to
paraphrase, because existing NMT systems can be
used with no additional training or changes. How-
ever, there are several disadvantages; for example
the French sentence F must fully capture the ex-
act meaning of E1, as E1 and E2 are conditionally
independent given F . Since there is rarely a clear
one-to-one mapping between sentences in differ-
ent languages, information about the source sen-
tence can be lost, leading to inaccuracies in the
paraphrase probabilities. To avoid this, we pro-
pose back-translating through multiple sentences
within one and multiple foreign languages.

Multi-pivoting PARANET pivots through the
set of K-best translations F = {F1, ...FK} of E1.
This ensures that multiple aspects (semantic
and syntactic) of the source sentence are cap-
tured. Moreover, multiple pivots provide re-
silience against a single bad translation, which
would prevent one-to-one back-translation from
producing accurate paraphrase probabilities.

Translating from multiple pivot sentences into
one target sentence requires that the decoder be re-
defined. Firat et al. (2016b) propose several ways
in which multiple pivot sentences can be incorpo-
rated into a NMT decoder. We extended their late
averaging approach to incorporate weights. Con-
sider the case of two pivot sentences from the same
language, F1 and F2. Each translation path individ-

883



s0

il

s1

fait

s2

grande

s3

EOL

s0

Le

s1

temps

s2

est

s3

superbe

s4

EOL

s4

The

s5

weather

s6

is

s7

great

s8

EOL

s5 s6 s7 s8 s9

Figure 1: Late-weighted combination: two pivot sentences are simultaneously translated to one target
sentence. Blue circles indicate the encoders, which individually encode the two source sentences. After
the EOL token is seen, decoding starts (red circles). At each time step the two decoders produce a prob-
ability distribution over all words, which are then combined (in the yellow square) using Equation (6).
From this combined distribution a word is chosen, which is then given as input to each decoder.

ually computes the distribution over the target vo-
cabulary P(yt ′ = w|y<t ′ ,F1) and P(yt ′ = w|y<t ′ ,F2).
Our late-weighted combination approach defines
the path with respect to both translations as:

P(yt ′ = w|y<t ′ ,F1,F2) = λ1P(yt ′ = w|y<t ′ ,F1)
+λ2P(yt ′ = w|y<t ′ ,F2)

While Firat et al. (2016b) train a new model to
capture these joint translations, we leave the model
unchanged, instead treating PARANET as a meta
encoder-decoder model (see Figure 1).

Unlike late averaging, PARANET assigns
weights λ to each pivot sentence. These weights
are set to the initial translation probabilities
P(Fi|E1), thus capturing the model’s confidence in
the accuracy of the translation:

P(yt ′=w|y<t ′ ,F1,F2) = P(F1|E1)P(yt ′=w|y<t ′ ,F1)
+P(F2|E1)P(yt ′=w|y<t ′ ,F2)

Which can be trivially extended to include all
translations from the K-best list:

(6)P(yt ′ = w|y<t ′ ,F ) =
∑Ki=1 P(Fi|E1) ·P(yt ′ = w|y<t ′ ,Fi)

To ensure a probability distribution, we normalize
the K-best list F , such that the translation proba-
bilities sum to one.

Multi-lingual Pivoting PARANET further ex-
pands on the multi pivot approach by pivoting
not only over multiple sentences from one lan-
guage, but also over multiple sentences from mul-
tiple languages. Multi-lingual pivoting has been
recently shown to improve translation quality (Fi-
rat et al., 2016b), especially for low-resource lan-
guage pairs. Here, we hypothesize that it will also
lead to more accurate paraphrases.

Multi-lingual pivoting requires a small exten-
sion to late-weighted combination. We illus-
trate with German as a second language. First,

the source sentence is translated into a K-best
list of French F Fr, and a K-best list of Ger-
man F De. Late-weighted combination is then ap-
plied, producing P(yt ′ = w|y<t ′ ,F Fr) and P(yt ′ =
w|y<t ′ ,F De). These two output distributions
are averaged, producing a multi-sentence, multi-
lingual paraphrase probability:

P(yt ′ = w|y<t ′ ,F Fr,F De) =
1
2
(
P(yt ′ = w|y<t ′ ,F Fr)+P(yt ′ = w|y<t ′ ,F De)

)
which is used to obtain probability distributions
over sentences:

P(E2|E1) =
TE2

∏
t ′=1

P(yt ′ |y<t ′ ,F Fr,F De) (7)

This can be trivially generalized to multiple lan-
guages. In this paper we use up to three.

3.3 PARANET Applications

The applications of PARANET are many and
varied. We discuss some of these here and
present detailed experimental evidence in Sec-
tion 4. PARANET can be readily used for para-
phrase detection (the task of analyzing two text
segments and determining if they have the same
meaning), by computing Equation (7). In
addition, it can identify which linguistic units
are considered paraphrases and to what extent.
PARANET’s explanatory power stems from the at-
tention mechanism inherent in the NMT systems.

In encoder-decoder models, attention is used
during each step of decoding to indicate which
are the relevant source words. In our case, each
word of the paraphrase attends to words within
the pivot sentence and each word in the pivot sen-
tence attends to words within the source sentence.
By summing out the weighted pivot sentence, it
is possible to see the attention from paraphrase to

884



Two men sailing in a small boat

couple sailing in a tiny sail boat

Figure 2: Attention between two sentences. Line
thickness indicates the strength of the attention.

source:

α(E i2,E
j
1 ,F )=

F

∑
F

(
P(E2|E1,F)·

TF

∑
m

(αE2,Fi,m ·αF,E1m, j )
)

(8)

An example shown in Figure 2 where attention
has successfully identified the semantically equiv-
alent parts of two sentences. Beyond providing
interpretable paraphrasing, attention scores can be
used as features in both generation and classifica-
tion tasks.

Furthermore, PARANET can be readily used to
perform text generation (via the NMT decoder)
without additional resources or parameter estima-
tion. It also learns phrase and sentence embed-
dings for free without any model adjustments or
recourse to resources like PPDB.

4 Experiments

We evaluated PARANET in several ways: (a) we
examined whether the paraphrases learned by our
model correlate with human judgments of para-
phrase quality; (b) we assessed PARANET in para-
phrase and similarity detection tasks; and (c) in a
sentence-level paraphrase generation task. We first
present details on how PARANET and comparison
models were trained and then discuss our results.

4.1 Neural Machine Translation Training
We used Groundhog1 as the implementation of the
NMT system for all experiments. We generally
followed the settings and training procedure from
previous work (Bahdanau et al., 2014; Sennrich et
al., 2016a). As such, all networks have a hidden
layer size of 1000, and an embedding layer size
of 620. During training, we used Adadelta (Zeiler,
2012), a minibatch size of 80, and the training set
was reshuffled between epochs. We trained a net-
work for approximately 7 days on a single GPU,
then the embedding layer was fixed and training
continued, as suggested in Jean et al. (2015a), for
12 hours. Additionally, the softmax was calcu-
lated over a filtered list of candidate translations.
Following Jean et al. (2015a), we set the common

1github.com/sebastien-j/LV groundhog

vocabulary size as 10000 and 25 uni-gram trans-
lations, using a bilingual dictionary based on fast-
align (Dyer et al., 2013).

In our experiments, we used up to
six encoder-decoder NMT models (three
pairs); English→French, French→English,
English→Czech, Czech→English, English→Ger-
man, German→English. All systems were
trained on the available training data from the
WMT15 shared translation task (4.2 million,
15.7 million, and 39 million sentence pairs for
EN↔DE, EN↔CS, and EN↔FR, respectively).
For EN↔DE and EN→CS, we also had access
to back-translated monolingual training data
(Sennrich et al., 2016a), which we also used
in training. The data was pre-processed using
standard pre-processing scripts found in MOSES
(Koehn et al., 2007). Rare words were split into
sub-word units, following Sennrich et al. (2016b).
BLEU scores for each NMT system can be seen
in Table 1.

4.2 Statistical Machine Translation Training
Throughout our experiments we compare
PARANET against a paraphrase model trained
with a commonly used Statistical Machine Trans-
lation system (SMT), which we henceforth refer to
as PARASTAT. Specifically, for each language pair
used, an equivalent IBM Model 4 phrase-based
translation model was trained. Additionally, an
Operation Sequence Model (OSM) was included,
which has been shown to improve the perfor-
mance of SMT systems (Durrani et al., 2011).
SMT translation models were implemented using
both GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003) and MOSES
(Koehn et al., 2007) and were trained using the
same pre-processed bilingual data provided to the
NMT systems. The SMT systems used a KenLM
5-gram language model (Heafield, 2011), trained
on the mono-lingual data from WMT 2015. For
all languages pairs, both KenLM and MOSES
were trained using the standard settings. BLEU
scores for the SMT systems are given in Table 1.

Under the SMT models, paraphrase probabili-
ties were calculated analogously to Equation (7):

P(E2|E1,F ) =
F

∑
F

P(E2|F)P(F |E1) (9)

where P(E2|F) and (F |E1), are defined by the
phrase based translation model, and F denotes the
K-best translations of E1, whose probabilities are
normalized. Unlike PARANET these pivot sen-
tences have to be combined outside of the decoder.

885



Direction F→E E→F
System SMT NMT SMT NMT
French 0.241 0.201 0.233 0.271
German 0.207 0.282 0.208 0.248
Czech 0.216 0.197 0.145 0.176

Table 1: BLEU scores (WMT 2015 test set) for
SMT and NMT models (foreign to English (F→E)
and English to foreign (E→F) directions).

4.3 Correlation with Human Judgments
The PPDB 2.0 Human Evaluation data set is
a sample of paraphrase pairs taken from PPDB
which have been human annotated for semantic
similarity (Pavlick et al., 2015). 26,455 samples
were taken from range of syntactic categories, re-
sulting in paraphrase candidates varying from sin-
gle words to multi-word expressions. Each para-
phrase pair was judged by five people on a 5-point
scale. Ratings were then averaged giving each
paraphrase pair a score between 1 and 5.

Using this dataset we measure the correla-
tion (Spearman ρ) between (length normalized)
PARANET probabilities (Equation (7)) assigned
to paraphrase pairs and human judgments. Fig-
ure 3 shows correlation coefficients for all lan-
guage pairs using a single foreign pivot and 200
pivots. Across all language combinations multiple
pivots2 achieve better correlations, with the Ger-
man, Czech pair performing best with ρ = 0.53.
For comparison, Pavlick et al. (2015) report a cor-
relation of ρ = 0.41 using Equation (9) and PPDB
(Ganitkevitch et al., 2013). The latter contains
over 100 million paraphrases and was constructed
over several English-to-foreign parallel corpora
including Europarl v7 (Koehn, 2005) which con-
tains bitexts for the 19 European languages.

Following Pavlick et al. (2015), we next de-
veloped a supervised scoring model. Specif-
ically, we fit a decision tree regressor on the
PPDB 2.0 dataset using the implementation pro-
vided in scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011). To
improve accuracy and control over-fitting we built
an ensemble of regression trees using the Extra-
Trees algorithm (Geurts et al., 2006) which fits a
number of randomized decision trees (a.k.a. extra-
trees) on various sub-samples of the dataset. In
our experiments 1,000 trees were trained to mini-
mize mean square error. The regressor was trained
with the following basic features: sentence length,

2Across tasks and datasets we find that multiple pivots
outperform single pivots. We omit these comparisons from
subsequent experiments for the sake of brevity.

fr de cs fr, de fr, cs de, cs fr, cs, de
Language

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

S
p
e
a
rm

a
n
's

 ρ

0.30
0.31

0.29
0.33 0.31 0.32

0.34

0.46
0.49

0.52 0.50 0.51
0.53 0.52

Single

Multiple

Figure 3: Correlation of PARANET predictions
against human ratings for paraphrase pairs. Com-
parison using single and multiple pivots, across
language combinations.

1-4 gram string similarity, the paraphrase proba-
bility P(E2|E1), the language model score P(E1),
cosine distance of the sentence vectors, as calcu-
lated by the encoder. To address the problem of
rare sentences receiving low probabilities regard-
less of the source sentence, we create an inverse
weighting by P(E2|E2), which approximates how
difficult it is to recover E2:

pscore(E2,E1) =
P(E2|E1)

P(E2|E1)+P(E2|E2) (10)

Two features reflect the alignment between can-
didate paraphrases. We built an alignment matrix
according to Equation (8), and used the mean of
the diagonal as feature. This acts as a proxy of
how much movement there is between two para-
phrases. The second feature is the number of un-
aligned words which we compute by calculating
hard alignments between the two paraphrases.

Regressors varied with respect to how P(E2|E1)
was computed, keeping the string based features
the same. Equations (7) and (9) were used to cal-
culate paraphrase probability for PARANET and
PARASTAT, respectively. For both models beam
search (with width set to 100) was used to gener-
ate the K-best list. For each language, the K-best
list is the union of the 100-best list of E1 and the
100-best list of E2, giving a maximum of 200 pivot
sentences. As set out in Pavlick et al. (2015) eval-
uation is done using cross validation: in each fold,
we hold out 200 phrases. Table 2 presents results
for PARANET and PARASTAT using different lan-
guages as pivots. PARANET outperforms PARA-
STAT across the board. Furthermore, despite us-
ing fewer features and pivot languages, it obtains
a closer correspondence to human data compared
to PPDB 2.0 (Pavlick et al., 2015).

886



Model PARASTAT PARANET
fr 0.574 0.700
de 0.638 0.710
cz 0.564 0.713
de,fr 0.566 0.722
de,cz 0.640 0.731
fr,cz 0.569 0.724
fr, cz, de 0.633 0.735
PPDB 2.0 0.713

Table 2: Correlation (Spearman ρ) of supervised
models against human ratings for paraphrase pairs.
Boldface indicates the best performing model.

4.4 Paraphrase Identification and Similarity

The SemEval-2015 shared task on Paraphrase and
Semantic Similarity In Twitter (PIT) uses a train-
ing and development set of 17,790 sentence pairs
and a test set of 972 sentence pairs. By design, the
dataset contains colloquial sentences representing
informal language usage and sentence pairs which
are lexically similar but semantically dissimilar.
Sentence pairs were crawled from Twitter’s trend-
ing topics and associated tweets (see Xu et al.
(2014) for details). The shared task consists of a
(binary) paraphrase identification subtask (i.e., de-
termine whether two sentences are paraphrases)
and an optional semantic similarity task (i.e., de-
termine the similarity between two sentences on a
scale of 1–5, where 5 means completely equivalent
and 1 not equivalent).

We trained a decision tree regressor on the
PIT-2015 similarity dataset using the features de-
scribed above. Once trained, the decision tree re-
gressor can be readily applied to the semantic sim-
ilarity subtask. For the paraphrase detection sub-
task, we use the same model and apply a threshold
(optimized on the validation set) such that those
pairs that are over this threshold are deemed para-
phrases.

Tables 3 and 4 present our results on the two
subtasks together with previously published re-
sults. We evaluate system performance on the de-
tection task using F1 (the harmonic mean of pre-
cision and recall). For semantic similarity, sys-
tem outputs are compared by Pearson correlation
against human scores. The first block in the ta-
bles summarize results for PARANET and PARA-
STAT using different languages as pivots. The
second block includes three baselines provided by
the organizers of the shared task: a random base-
line, a logistic regression baseline with minimal

Model PARASTAT PARANET
fr 0.613 0.624
de 0.616 0.620
cz 0.620 0.622
de, fr 0.602 0.622
de, cz 0.606 0.615
fr, cz 0.600 0.634
fr, cz, de 0.596 0.620
random 0.266
WTMF 0.536
logistic reg 0.589
ASOBEK 0.674
MITRE 0.667

Table 3: Paraphrase detection results (F1) on the
PIT-2015 data set. Boldface indicates the best per-
forming paraphrasing model.

Model PARASTAT PARANET
fr 0.540 0.569
de 0.543 0.571
cz 0.547 0.569
de, fr 0.543 0.569
de, cz 0.540 0.570
fr, cz 0.546 0.568
fr, cz, de 0.539 0.568
random 0.017
WTMF 0.350
logistic reg 0.511
ASOBEK 0.475
MITRE 0.619

Table 4: Semantic similarity results (Pearson) on
the PIT-2015 data set. Boldface indicates the best
performing paraphrasing model.

n-gram word overlap features; and a model which
uses weighted matrix factorization (WTMF) and
has access to dictionary definitions provided in
WordNet, OntoNotes, and Wiktionary (Guo and
Diab, 2012). The last two rows show the highest
scoring systems: ASOBEK (Eyecioglu and Keller,
2015) ranked 1st in the identification subtask and
MITRE (Zarrella et al., 2015) in the similarity
subtask. Whereas ASOBEK uses knowledge-lean
features based on word and character n-gram over-
lap, MITRE is a combination of multiple sys-
tems including mixtures of string matching met-
rics, alignments using tweet-specific word repre-
sentations, and recurrent neural networks.

As can be seen, PARANET achieves better
similarity and detection score than all baselines
and PARASTAT, for any combinations of lan-

887



Model PARASTAT PARANET
fr 0.657 0.682
de 0.666 0.678
cz 0.649 0.688
de, fr 0.665 0.684
de, cz 0.662 0.687
fr, cz 0.654 0.690
fr, cz, de 0.658 0.689
Tokencos 0.587
DLS@CU 0.801

Table 5: Results on the Semeval-2015 semantic
similarity dataset. Boldface indicates the best per-
forming paraphrasing model.

guages. This is particularly impressive as the
translation models were trained on very dissimilar
data. Compared to the state of the art, PARANET
fares worse, however our model was not partic-
ularly optimized on the PIT-2015 dataset which
was merely used as a testbed for a fair compar-
ison. It is thus reasonable to assume that taking
into account more elaborate features (e.g., based
on character embeddings) would improve perfor-
mance. The highest semantic similarity score
is obtained with PARANET trained using Ger-
man data. The highest scoring paraphrase detec-
tion model was PARANET trained on French and
Czech data. Interestingly, using multiple pivot lan-
guages seems to offer small improvements in most
cases. The languages selected as pivots in our ex-
periments were somewhat ad-hoc. We expect to
get more mileage if these are selected from the
same language family or with more linguistic in-
sight (e.g., morphologically rich vs. poor).

4.5 Semantic Textual Similarity

In semantic textual similarity (STS), systems
rate the degree of semantic equivalence between
two text snippets. We present results on the
Semeval-2015 English subtask which contains
sentences from a wide range of domains, including
newswire headlines, image descriptions, and an-
swers from Q&A websites. The training/test sets
consist of 11,250 and 3,000 sentence pairs, respec-
tively. Sentence pairs are rated on a 1–5 scale, with
5 indicating they are completely equivalent.

We used the decision tree regressor with the
same features described in the previous section.
Again, we experimented with one, two, and three
languages as pivots, and compared PARANET and
PARASTAT directly. Our results are summarized
in Table 5. The third block in the table presents a

simple cosine-based baseline provided by the or-
ganizers (Tokencos) and the top-performing sys-
tem (DLS@CU) which uses PPDB paraphrases to
identify semantically similar words and word2vec
embeddings trained on approximately 2.8 billion
tokens (Sultan et al., 2014).

PARANET outperforms PARASTAT on all lan-
guages and language combinations. Both systems
outperform the Semeval baseline but are worse
compared to the top scoring system. We see for
PARANET Czech achieves the highest scores, this
could be in part due to Czech non-strict word or-
der, which allows paraphrases that are simple re-
arrangements not be penalized.

4.6 Paraphrase Generation

Finally, we evaluated PARANET (and PARAS-
TAT) in a paraphrase generation task. We created
sentential paraphrases for three (parallel mono-
lingual) datasets representative of different do-
mains and genres: (a) the Multiple-Translation
Chinese (MTC) corpus (Huang et al., 2002) con-
tains news stories from three sources of journalis-
tic Mandarin Chinese text translated into English
by 4 translation agencies; we sampled 1,000 sen-
tences for training and testing, respectively (each
source sentence had an average of 4 paraphrases);
(b) the Jules Vernes Twenty Thousand Leagues
Under the Sea novel (Leagues) corpus (Pang et
al., 2003) contains two English translations of the
French novel; we sampled 500 sentences for train-
ing/testing (each source sentence had one para-
phrase); and (c) the Wikianswers corpus (Fader et
al., 2013) which contains questions taken from the
website3 wiki answers; we sampled 1,000 ques-
tions for training/testing (each question has on av-
erage 21 paraphrases).

In order to select the best paraphrase candidate
for a given input sentence, PARASTAT was opti-
mized on the training set using Minimum Error
Training (MERT, Och and Ney (2003)). MERT
integrates automatic evaluation metrics such as
BLEU into the training process to achieve opti-
mal end-to-end performance. Naively optimizing
for BLEU, however, will result in a trivial para-
phrasing system heavily biased towards producing
identity “paraphrases”. Sun and Zhou (2012) in-
troduce iBLEU which we also adopt. iBLEU pe-
nalizes paraphrases which are similar to the source

3http://wiki.answers.com/

888



Model PARASTAT PARANET
fr 0.280 0.299
de 0.282 0.295
cz 0.280 0.291

Gold 0.599

Table 6: Mean iBLEU across three datasets.

sentence and rewards those close to the target:

iBLEU(s,rs,c) = αBLEU(c,rs)
− (1−α)BLEU(c,s)

where s, is the source sentence, rs, is the target and
c is the candidate paraphrase. (1−α)BLEU(c,s),
measures the originality of the candidate para-
phrase, BLEU(c,rs) measures semantic adequacy,
and α is a tuning parameter which balances the
two. Sentence level BLEU is calculated using plus
one smoothing (Lin and Och, 2004).

PARANET relies on a relatively simple archi-
tecture which is trained end-to-end with the ob-
jective of maximizing the likelihood of the train-
ing data. Since evaluation metrics cannot be
straightforwardly integrated into this training pro-
cedure, we reranked the k-best paraphrases ob-
tained from PARANET using a simple classifier
which favors sentences which are dissimilar to the
source. Specifically, we trained a decision tree re-
gression model with iBLEU as the target variable
using the same features described in Section 4.4.
Examples of paraphrases generated by PARANET
are shown in the Appendix.

System output was assessed automatically using
iBLEU with human-written paraphrases as refer-
ence. In addition, we evaluated the generated text
by eliciting human judgments via Amazon Me-
chanical Turk. We randomly selected 100 source
sentences from each data set and generated output
with PARANET and PARASTAT (using German as
a pivot). We also included a randomly selected
human paraphrase as a goldstandard. Workers
(self-reported native English speakers) were asked
to rank the three paraphrases from best to worst
(ties were allowed) in order of semantic equiva-
lence (does the paraphrase convey the same mean-
ing as the source?) and fluency (is the descrip-
tion written in well-formed English?). Participants
were explicitly told to give high ranks to output
demonstrating a fair amount of paraphrasing and
low ranks to trivial paraphrases (e.g., deletion of
articles or punctuation). We collected 5 responses
per input sentence.

Table 6 summarizes our results across the three

Model Wikianswers Leagues MTC All
PARASTAT 2.09 2.38 2.23 2.26
PARANET 1.86 1.94 1.70 1.83
Humans 2.17 1.81 2.0 2.0

Table 7: Mean Rankings given to paraphrases by
human participants (a lower score is better).

datasets. For the sake of brevity, we only show
results with one pivot language since combina-
tions performed slightly worse for both models.
We set α = 0.8 for iBLEU as we experimentally
found it offers the best trade-off between seman-
tic equivalence and dissimilarity. As an upper-
bound we also measure iBLEU amongst the gold
paraphrases provided by humans. Again, we ob-
serve that PARANET has a slight advantage over
PARASTAT in terms of iBLEU, however both sys-
tems tend to paraphrase less compared to the gold-
standard. Table 7 shows the mean ranks given
to these systems by human subjects. An Analy-
sis of Variance (ANOVA) revealed a reliable effect
of system type. Post-hoc Tukey tests showed that
PARANET is significantly (p < 0.01) better than
PARASTAT across datasets; PARANET is also sig-
nificantly (p < 0.01) better than the the gold stan-
dard on both MTC and the Wikianswers dataset.
We attribute this to the noisy nature of these two
datasets which contain a wealth of paraphrases,
a few of which are ungrammatical, contain typos
or abbreviations leading to low scores among hu-
mans.

5 Conclusions

In this work we presented PARANET, a neural
paraphrasing model based on bilingual pivoting.
Experimental results across several tasks (similar-
ity prediction, paraphrase identification, and para-
phrase generation) show that PARANET outper-
forms conventional paraphrasing methods. In the
future, we plan to exploit the attention scores more
directly for extracting paraphrase pairs (in anal-
ogy to PPDB) and as features for classification
tasks (e.g., textual entailment). We would also like
to investigate how PARANET can be adapted us-
ing reinforcement learning (Ranzato et al., 2016)
to text generation tasks such as simplification and
sentence compression.

Acknowledgments The authors gratefully ac-
knowledge the support of the UK Engineering
and Physical Sciences Research Council (grant
EP/L016427/1; Mallinson) and the European Re-
search Council (award number 681760; Lapata).

889



Appendix

Tables 8–10 show examples of PARANET output
on the Wikianswers, Leagues, and MTC datasets.

Wikianswers
a. How many calories in a handful of strawberries?
b. The number of calories in a handful of strawberries.
a. Beauty is not in the eye of the beholder.
b. Beauty is not in the mind of the viewer.
a. What is the importance of employee satisfaction in an or-

ganization?
b. What is the significance of staff satisfaction at an organisa-

tion?
a. What is the difference between electrical power and elec-

trical energy?
b. What is the difference between electrical energy and elec-

trical power?
a. How many high tides happen at a given coast in any 24 hour

period?
b. How many high tides occur on a certain coast in 24 hours?
a. What is a beverage that starts with the letter p?
b. What is a drink that begins with the letter p?
a. What Swiss mathematician and teacher was responsible for

instituting the use of the symbol for π in mathematical no-
tation?

b. What Swiss mathematicians and teachers were responsible
for the introduction of the symbol for π in math notation?

a. How do you make a pina colada?
b. How do you do a Pina colada?
a. What is the difference between a captain and a skipper?
b. What is the difference between being a captain and skipper?

Table 8: Sentences marked (a) are the input and
(b) are PARANET paraphrases.

Leagues
a. “Faith i should never have believed it,” said Conseil.
b. “Faith, I never would have believed”, Conseil said.
a. “I owed myself this revenge!” Said the Captain to the Cana-

dian.
b. “I am indebted to this revenge!” the captain told the Cana-

dian.
a. “Well, sir, you will only get your deserts.”
b. “Well, sir, you are only getting your deserts.”
a. “That’s what I’ve been telling you Ned.”
b. “That’s what I said, Ned.”
a. Very much embarrassed, after having vainly exhausted our

speaking resources, I knew not what part to take, when
Conseil said: “if master will permit me I will relate it in
German.”

b. It was very embarrassing that I had used up our speaking
time, and I did not know what to do, as Conseil said: “If
the Masters allow me, I shall refer to German.”

a. Almost every day the panels in the lounge were open for
some hours, and our eyes never tired of probing the mys-
teries of the underwater world.

b. Almost every day, the panels opened in the lounge for a few
hours, and our eyes never tired, the secrets of the underwa-
ter world.

a. I bowed, and desired to be conducted to the cabin destined
for me.

b. I bow to and wish I headed to the cabin for me.
a. I had one question left to address to Captain Nemo.
b. I had a question left to Captain Nemo.
a. “I have not the foggiest notion, Professor Aronnax.”
b. I have no idea, Professor Aronnax.

Table 9: Sentences marked (a) are the input and
(b) are PARANET paraphrases.

MTC
a. China expresses strong dissatisfaction over the Japanese

leader’s move this time.
b. China expresses a strong dissatisfaction over Japanese

leader’s move.
a. We will accelerate the drafting of telecommunications le-

galization, amend the law of post and the regulations gov-
erning wireless telecommunications.

b. We will speed up the design of telecommunications,
change the law and regulations governing wireless
telecommunication.

a. Liu said: the poverty-stricken areas are badly hit in the
first stage of this year’s floods and many counties and
cities are listed as the poorest ones in the country.

b. Liu said: poverty-stricken areas are hit hard in the first
phase of this year’s flooding and many counties and towns
are listed as the poorest in the country.

a. (London, AP) The British government is working on re-
solving the increasingly serious problems of street crimes
and will strengthen patrolling police.

b. London, AP The British government is working to re-
solve the increasingly serious problems of street crime
and will strengthen patrols.

a. Kida said that the dead killed by the heat wave were
mostly old people with heart diseases.

b. Kida said the dead by heatwave were mostly old people
with heart disease.

a. Growth of Mobile Phone users in Mainland China to
Slow Down.

b. Growth of Mobile Phone users in Mainland China on
Slow Down.

a. The survey report said that in the first six months of last
year 18 sandstorms struck Beijing and they all originated
from Inner Mongolia where 60% of the land is desert.

b. The report said that 18 sandstorms struck Beijing in the
first six months of last year, and they were all from Inner
Mongolia, where 60% of the desert is desert.

a. The World Cup co-host by Japan and South Korea, will
inaugurate on May 31.

b. The World Cup, co-host Japan and South Korea, will
open on May 31.

a. Two days ago, President Bush seemed opposed to this
idea when he held talks with Sharon.

b. Two days ago President Bush opposed this idea when he
talks to Sharon.

a. Russia Faces Population Crisis.
b. Russia’s demographics problem.
a. Computer Crimes Cost US billions of Dollars Last Year.
b. Computer Crimes Cost American Billions of Dollars.
a. However, many sports associations in Chile hope to co-

operate with China not just for the table tennis alone.
b. However, many sports federations in Chile are hoping to

collaborate with China, not only for the table tennis play-
ers.

Table 10: Sentences marked (a) are the input and
(b) are PARANET paraphrases.

References
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua

Bengio. 2014. Neural machine translation by
jointly learning to align and translate. CoRR,
abs/1409.0473.

Colin Bannard and Chris Callison-Burch. 2005. Para-
phrasing with bilingual parallel corpora. In Pro-
ceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Associa-

890



tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 597–604,
Ann Arbor, Michigan.

Regina Barzilay. 2003. Information Fusion for Multi-
Document Summarization: Praphrasing and Gener-
ation. Ph.D. thesis, Columbia University.

Jonathan Berant and Percy Liang. 2014. Seman-
tic parsing via paraphrasing. In Proceedings of the
52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
1415–1425, Baltimore, Maryland.

Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, and Miles Os-
borne. 2006. Improved statistical machine transla-
tion using paraphrases. In Proceedings of the main
conference on Human Language Technology Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation of Computational Linguistics, pages 17–24,
New York City, USA.

Chris Callison-Burch. 2008. Syntactic constraints on
paraphrases extracted from parallel corpora. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2008 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 196–
205, Honolulu, Hawaii.

Daxiang Dong, Hua Wu, Wei He, Dianhai Yu, and
Haifeng Wang. 2015. Multi-task learning for mul-
tiple language translation. In Proceedings of the
53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics and the 7th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers), pages 1723–1732, Beijing,
China.

Nadir Durrani, Helmut Schmid, and Alexander Fraser.
2011. A joint sequence translation model with in-
tegrated reordering. In Proceedings of the 49th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies-Volume
1, pages 1045–1054, Portland, Oregon, USA.

Chris Dyer, Victor Chahuneau, and Noah A. Smith.
2013. A simple, fast, and effective reparameteriza-
tion of ibm model 2. In Proceedings of the 2013
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, pages 644–648, Atlanta,
Georgia.

Asli Eyecioglu and Bill Keller. 2015. Twitter para-
phrase identification with simple overlap features
and svms. In Proceedings of the 9th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2015),
pages 64–69, Denver, Colorado.

Anthony Fader, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Oren Etzioni.
2013. Paraphrase-driven learning for open question
answering. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1608–1618, Sofia,
Bulgaria.

Orhan Firat, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio.
2016a. Multi-way, multilingual neural machine
translation with a shared attention mechanism. In
Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 866–875, San Diego, California.

Orhan Firat, Baskaran Sankaran, Yaser Al-Onaizan,
Fatos T. Yarman-Vural, and Kyunghyun Cho.
2016b. Zero-resource translation with multi-lingual
neural machine translation. CoRR, abs/1606.04164.

Juri Ganitkevitch and Chris Callison-Burch. 2014. The
multilingual paraphrase database. In The 9th edition
of the Language Resources and Evaluation Confer-
ence, Reykjavik, Iceland.

Juri Ganitkevitch, Chris Callison-Burch, Courtney
Napoles, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2011. Learn-
ing sentential paraphrases from bilingual parallel
corpora for text-to-text generation. In Proceedings
of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 1168–1179,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.

Juri Ganitkevitch, Benjamin Van Durme, and Chris
Callison-Burch. 2013. Ppdb: The paraphrase
database. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, pages 758–764, Atlanta, Georgia.

Pierre Geurts, Damien Ernst, and Louis Wehenkel.
2006. Extremely randomized trees. Machine Learn-
ing, 63(1):3–42.

Weiwei Guo and Mona Diab. 2012. A simple unsuper-
vised latent semantics based approach for sentence
similarity. In Proceedings of the First Joint Con-
ference on Lexical and Computational Semantics-
Volume 1: Proceedings of the main conference and
the shared task, and Volume 2: Proceedings of the
Sixth International Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
tion, pages 586–590.

Kenneth Heafield. 2011. KenLM: faster and smaller
language model queries. In Proceedings of the
EMNLP 2011 Sixth Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation, pages 187–197.

Shudong Huang, David Graff, George Doddington,
Linguistic Data Consortium, et al. 2002. Multiple-
translation Chinese corpus. Linguistic Data Con-
sortium, University of Pennsylvania.

Sébastien Jean, Kyunghyun Cho, Roland Memisevic,
and Yoshua Bengio. 2015a. On using very large
target vocabulary for neural machine translation.
In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics and the
7th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
1–10, Beijing, China.

891



Sébastien Jean, Orhan Firat, Kyunghyun Cho, Roland
Memisevic, and Yoshua Bengio. 2015b. Montreal
neural machine translation systems for wmt15. In
Proceedings of the Tenth Workshop on Statistical
Machine Translation, pages 134–140, Lisbon, Por-
tugal.

Nal Kalchbrenner and Phil Blunsom. 2013. Recurrent
continuous translation models. In Proceedings of
the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 1700–1709, Seattle,
Washington, USA.

Martin Kay. 1997. The proper place of men and ma-
chines in language translation. Machine Transla-
tion, 12(1-2):3–23.

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics on Human Language Technology-
Volume 1, pages 48–54, Sapporo, Japan.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexan-
dra Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses:
Open source toolkit for statistical machine transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics Com-
panion Volume Proceedings of the Demo and Poster
Sessions, pages 177–180, Prague, Czech Republic.

Philip Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 10th Machine Translation Summit, pages 79–86,
Phuket, Thailand.

Chin-Yew Lin and Franz Josef Och. 2004. Auto-
matic evaluation of machine translation quality us-
ing longest common subsequence and skip-bigram
statistics. In Proceedings of the 42nd Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, Main
Volume, pages 605–612, Barcelona, Spain.

Dekang Lin and Patrick Pantel. 2001. Discovery of in-
ference rules for question answering. Natural Lan-
guage Engineering, 7(4):342–360.

Thang Luong, Hieu Pham, and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2015. Effective approaches to attention-based
neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the
2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 1412–1421, Lisbon,
Portugal.

Nitin Madnani and Bonnie J. Dorr. 2010. Gener-
ating phrasal and sentential paraphrases: A survey
of data-driven methods. Computational Linguistics,
36(3):341–387.

Nitin Madnani, Necip Fazil Ayan, Philip Resnik, and
Bonnie Dorr. 2007. Using paraphrases for parame-
ter tuning in statistical machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the Second Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation, pages 120–127, Prague, Czech
Republic.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A sys-
tematic comparison of various statistical alignment
models. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Bo Pang, Kevin Knight, and Daniel Marcu. 2003.
Syntax-based alignment of multiple translations:
Extracting paraphrases and generating new sen-
tences. In Proceedings of the 2003 Human Lan-
guage Technology Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 102–109, Edmonton, Canada.

Ellie Pavlick, Pushpendre Rastogi, Juri Ganitkevitch,
Benjamin Van Durme, and Chris Callison-Burch.
2015. Ppdb 2.0: Better paraphrase ranking, fine-
grained entailment relations, word embeddings, and
style classification. In Proceedings of the 53rd An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 7th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (Volume 2:
Short Papers), pages 425–430, Beijing, China.

F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel,
B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-
hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Pas-
sos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
E. Duchesnay. 2011. Scikit-learn: Machine learn-
ing in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Re-
search, 12:2825–2830.

Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Sumit Chopra, Michael Auli,
and Wojciech Zaremb. 2016. Sequence level train-
ing with recurrent neural networks. In Proceed-
ings of the 4th International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations, San Juan, Puerto Rico.

Stefan Riezler, Alexander Vasserman, Ioannis
Tsochantaridis, Vibhu Mittal, and Yi Liu. 2007.
Statistical machine translation for query expansion
in answer retrieval. In Proceedings of the 45th
Annual Meeting of the Association of Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 464–471, Prague, Czech
Republic.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2016a. Improving neural machine translation mod-
els with monolingual data. In Proceedings of the
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
86–96, Berlin, Germany.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2016b. Neural machine translation of rare words
with subword units. In Proceedings of the 54th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1715–
1725, Berlin, Germany.

892



Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason
Chuang, Christopher D. Manning, Andrew Ng, and
Christopher Potts. 2013. Recursive deep models
for semantic compositionality over a sentiment tree-
bank. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 1631–1642, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Md Arafat Sultan, Steven Bethard, and Tamara Sum-
ner. 2014. DLS@CU: Sentence similarity from
word alignment. In Proceedings of the 8th Interna-
tional Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval
2014), pages 241–246.

Hong Sun and Ming Zhou. 2012. Joint learning of a
dual smt system for paraphrase generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short
Papers), pages 38–42, Jeju Island, Korea.

Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. 2014.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural net-
works. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, pages 3104–3112. Curran Associates,
Inc.

Masao Utiyama and Hitoshi Isahara. 2007. A com-
parison of pivot methods for phrase-based statistical
machine translation. In Human Language Technolo-
gies 2007: The Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics; Proceedings of the Main Conference, pages
484–491, Rochester, New York.

John Wieting, Mohit Bansal, Kevin Gimpel, and Karen
Livescu. 2015. From paraphrase database to com-
positional paraphrase model and back. Transactions
of the Association of Computational Linguistics –
Volume 3, Issue 1, pages 345–358.

John Wieting, Mohit Bansal, Kevin Gimpel, and Karen
Livescu. 2016. Towards universal paraphrastic sen-
tence embeddings. In Proceedings of 4th Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations, San
Juan, Puerto Rico.

Kristian Woodsend and Mirella Lapata. 2014. Text
rewriting improves semantic role labeling. Journal
of Artificial Intelligence Research, 51:133–164.

Hua Wu and Haifeng Wang. 2007. Pivot language ap-
proach for phrase-based statistical machine transla-
tion. Machine Translation, 21(3):165–181.

Wei Xu, Alan Ritter, Chris Callison-Burch, William B.
Dolan, and Yangfeng Ji. 2014. Extracting lexi-
cally divergent paraphrases from Twitter. Transac-
tions of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 2:435–448.

Guido Zarrella, John Henderson, Elizabeth M.
Merkhofer, and Laura Strickhart. 2015. Mitre:
Seven systems for semantic similarity in tweets. In
Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2015), pages 12–17,
Denver, Colorado.

Matthew D. Zeiler. 2012. ADADELTA: an adaptive
learning rate method. CoRR, abs/1212.5701.

Shiqi Zhao, Haifeng Wang, Ting Liu, and Sheng Li.
2008. Pivot approach for extracting paraphrase pat-
terns from bilingual corpora. In Proceedings of
ACL-08: HLT, pages 780–788, Columbus, Ohio.

Barret Zoph and Kevin Knight. 2016. Multi-source
neural translation. In Proceedings of the 2016 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, pages 30–34, San Diego, Cali-
fornia.

893


