



















































The arText prototype: An automatic system for writing specialized texts


Proceedings of the EACL 2017 Software Demonstrations, Valencia, Spain, April 3-7 2017, pages 57–60
c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

The arText prototype: An automatic system for writing specialized texts

Iria da Cunha
Universidad Nacional de

Educación a Distancia (UNED)
Senda del Rey 7, 28040

Madrid, Spain
iriad@flog.uned.es

M. Amor Montané
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Roc Boronat 138, 08018

Barcelona, Spain
amor.montane@upf.edu

Luis Hysa
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Roc Boronat 122, 08018

Barcelona, Spain
luis.hysa@gmail.com

Abstract

This article describes an automatic system
for writing specialized texts in Spanish.
The arText prototype is a free online text
editor that includes different types of lin-
guistic information. It is designed for a va-
riety of end users and domains, including
specialists and university students working
in the fields of medicine and tourism, and
laypersons writing to the public adminis-
tration. ArText provides guidance on how
to structure a text, prompts users to include
all necessary contents in each section, and
detects lexical and discourse problems in
the text.

1 Introduction

In the field of Natural Language Processing
(NLP), various types of linguistic information in-
cluding phonological, morphological, lexical, syn-
tactic, semantic and discourse-related features can
be used to develop applications. To date, tools
for writing texts have often been designed for gen-
eral subject areas and included information on or-
thographic, grammatical and/or lexical aspects of
the writing process. NLP researchers have tended
not to study systems for structuring and writing
specialized texts, although a few researchers have
bucked this trend: Kinnunen et al. (2012) devel-
oped a system to identify and correct writing prob-
lems in English in several domains; Aluisio et al.
(2001)’s system helps non-native speakers write
scientific publications in English; the Writing Pal
(Dai et al., 2011) and Estilector1 systems help im-
prove academic writing in English and Spanish,
respectively; and LanguageTool2 is an open source
proofreading program for non-specialized texts in

1http://www.estilector.com/index.php.
2https://www.languagetool.org/.

several languages. To our knowledge, none of the
systems that are currently available have consid-
ered the specific characteristics of textual genres
in specialized domains, such as medicine, tourism
and the public administration.

Writing specialized texts is more challenging
than writing general texts (Cabré, 1999). Tex-
tual, lexical and discourse features are an essential
component of textual genres, such as medical re-
search papers, travel blog posts, or claims submit-
ted to the public administration. Against this back-
drop, this article aims to present a prototype for an
automatic system that provides assistance in writ-
ing specialized texts in Spanish. The arText sys-
tem includes textual, lexical and discourse-related
information, and is useful for different end users.
It provides guidance on how to structure a text,
prompts users to include all necessary contents
in each section, and detects lexical and discourse
problems in the text.

Da Cunha et al. (in press) determined the most
frequent textual genres that pose the greatest writ-
ing challenges for three groups: specialists and
university students in medicine and tourism, and
laypersons writing to the public administration.
ArText was designed to help these users write the
15 textual genres included in Table 1.

Section 2 describes the characteristics of the
system and its modules. Section 3 explains how
the system was evaluated, while Section 4 presents
conclusions and future lines of research.

2 Description of the System

ArText is a free online text editor that anyone
can use, with no registration required. The sys-
tem was developed in a LINUX environment us-
ing an Apache server and a MySQL database. A
variety of resources were utilized in the back end
(BASH, PERL, and PHP, with a Laravel Frame-

57



Medicine Research article
Review article
Medical history
Abstract
Bachelor’s thesis

Tourism Informative article
Travel blog post
Report
Rules and regulations
Business plan

Public Administration Allegation
Cover letter
Letter of complaint
Claim
Application

Table 1: Specialized fields and textual genres in-
cluded in arText.

work) and front end (HTML, CSS, JAVASCRIPT,
with AJAX and JQUERY); Google Analytics is in-
tegrated into the site to measure traffic.

Documents can be exported in four formats:
PDF, TXT, HTML and ARTEXT. Previously
saved documents can be uploaded using the AR-
TEXT format, and the website includes a detailed
user manual and a contact section for comments,
questions and suggestions.

ArText can be accessed at http:
//sistema-artext.com/,3 and has been
optimized for the Google Chrome browser. To use
arText, click on “Start using arText” and pick one
of the 15 textual genres mentioned above. This
brings you to the text editor, where you can start
writing using the text editor and the three modules
integrated into arText: Structure, Contents and
Phraseology; Format and Spellchecking; and
Lexical and Discourse-based Recommendations.

2.1 Module 1. Structure, Contents and
Phraseology

The left-hand column helps users structure and
draft documents. Its interactive template includes
typical sections, contents and phraseology for
each textual genre. This information was extracted
from da Cunha and Montané (2016), a corpus-
based analysis following van Dijk (1989)’s textual
approach. Specifically, users can insert:

- Typical document sections
- Typical contents found in each section
- Phraseology related to each of these contents

The text editor displays the sections which typi-
cally appear in a given textual genre. For example,

3A demo is available at https://canal.uned.es/
mmobj/index/id/54433

the template for a “claim” to be submitted to the
public administration includes the following sec-
tions:

- Header
- Addressee
- Introductory clause
- Supporting details
- Request
- Closing

A drop-down menu in the left-hand column pro-
vides sample texts for each section, including sec-
tion titles, where appropriate. For example, the
“Supporting details” section includes two differ-
ent contents:

- Grounds for the claim
- Attachments

When users click on a specific content, arText dis-
plays a list of sample phrases that can be incor-
porated into the final text. For example, “Attach-
ments” includes the following phrases:

- Attached please find [document name].4

- The following supporting documents are at-
tached: [list of documents].
Users can click on a stock phrase to include it in
the text.

2.2 Module 2. Format and Spellchecking

The toolbar at the top of the screen includes an
open source spellchecker (WebSpellChecker Ltd.)
and various formatting options, e.g. to change font
or font size; insert bullet points, images, tables and
links; cut, copy and paste; print; and search. Since
online storage is not provided, the user’s manual
includes instructions for uploading an image to
Google Drive and inserting it into a document pro-
duced using arText.

2.3 Module 3. Lexical and Discourse-based
Recommendations

By clicking on the review button in the right-
hand column, users can see a series of lexical and
discourse-related recommendations for improving
their texts. These recommendations are derived
from da Cunha and Montané (2016), which is
based on Cabré (1999)’s Communicative Theory
of Terminology and Mann and Thompson (1988)’s
Rhetorical Structure Theory. The module includes
a series of algorithms based on linguistic rules and
two NLP tools: the Freeling shallow parser (At-

4Users are instructed to fill in the information indicated in
square brackets (e.g. names, dates and numbers).

58



serias et al., 2006) and the DiSeg discourse seg-
menter (da Cunha et al., 2012).

This module includes 11 main recommenda-
tions, all of which are displayed in the right-hand
column, when appropriate. A subset of these rec-
ommendations is assigned to each textual genre,
and all recommendations are adapted to the lin-
guistic characteristics of each genre (da Cunha and
Montané, 2016). Recommendations cover the fol-
lowing 11 topics:

1. Spelling out acronyms
2. Using acronyms systematically
3. Providing definitions
4. Using the passive voice
5. Using the 1st person systematically
6. Using subjectivity indicators
7. Repeating words
8. Using long sentences
9. Segmenting long sentences
10. Considering alternative discourse markers
11. Varying discourse markers

By clicking on a given recommendation, users can
see a more detailed explanation and suggestions.
In some cases, arText also highlights phrases or
content in the text editor. For example, one lexical
recommendation, “Spelling out acronyms,” high-
lights acronyms that are not spelled out when they
first appear in the text (i.e. arText would high-
light “COPD” if “chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease” did not appear next to this acronym the
first time the term was used). Some recommenda-
tions also actively engage users in the revision pro-
cess. For example, the recommendation “Repeat-
ing words” shows a list of repeated words; when
users click on a word in the right-hand column,
all occurrences of this word in the text are high-
lighted. This recommendation is not displayed for
highly specialized textual genres (e.g. research ar-
ticles and abstracts), since lexical variation is usu-
ally avoided in these types of texts (Cabré, 1999).

Some recommendations focus on the discourse
level. For example, “Segmenting long sentences”
highlights one or more long sentences; users can
click to see suggestions for splitting them into
shorter sentences. In this case, arText proposes
these discourse segments in the right-hand col-
umn. The number of words used to determine long
sentences differs for each textual genre, following
da Cunha and Montané (2016).

Another discourse level recommendation refers
to “Varying discourse markers.” In this case, ar-

Text displays a list of discourse markers repeated
in the text. When users click on one of these mark-
ers, all of its occurrences are highlighted, and a list
of alternative discourse markers used to express
the same relationship (e.g. Cause, Restatement,
Contrast and Condition, etc.) is displayed in the
right-hand column. For instance, for the discourse
marker “that is,” used to express Restatement, ar-
Text suggests the alternatives “in other words,”
“that is to say,” “i.e.” and “to put it another way.”

3 Evaluation

Real and ad hoc texts were used to test arText’s al-
gorithms and linguistic rules and improve the sys-
tem. Subsequently, the prototype was launched
and data-driven and user-driven evaluations were
conducted.

The data-driven evaluation was based on a test
corpus with 24 texts corresponding to one textual
genre from each domain; the corpus comprised
eight medical abstracts, eight tourism-related in-
formative articles and eight applications to the
public administration. The linguistic characteris-
tics of these texts were manually annotated, and
the manual annotation and arText results were
compared. Precision and recall were measured for
a series of recommendations; the results are pre-
sented in Table 2.5

Recommendation ID Precision Recall
1 0.76 0.68
2 0.75 0.94
3 x x
4 1 0.94
5: sing. verbal forms 0.87 0.97
5: pl. verbal forms 1 0.99
6 - -
9 0.74 0.87
10 1 1

Table 2: Data-driven results.

Recommendation 7 did not apply in the medi-
cal subcorpus; in the tourism and public admin-
istration subcorpora, 91.67% and 94.70% of de-
tected words, respectively, were repeated in the
text. For Recommendation 8, 100% of highlighted
sentences in the medicine and tourism subcor-
pora were long sentences according to the thresh-
olds for abstracts and informative articles; no long
sentences appeared in the public administration

5In light of the degree of specialization, Recommendation
4 did not apply for any of the textual genres included in the
test corpus. No cases for which Recommendation 6 applies
were found in the test corpus.

59



subcorpus, so this recommendation could not be
tested for this genre. No cases of Recommenda-
tion 11 were found in the medical and administra-
tion subcorpora; in the tourism corpus, 100% of
detected discourse markers were repeated in the
text, and adequate alternatives were proposed.

The user-driven evaluation aimed to determine
how useful arText is. A survey designed using
Google Forms focused on accessibility, the use-
fulness of the three modules and general issues.
Three doctors, three tourism professionals, and 25
laypersons completed the survey; all laypersons
were between 30-50 years old and had both higher
education experience and internet skills. In gen-
eral, respondents found arText to be user-friendly
and useful; 100% of them would recommend the
system to other people. Respondents found the
section on structure to be the most useful module,
while the approach to uploading images was con-
sidered the system’s greatest weakness.

4 Conclusions and Future Work

This paper describes a prototype of an automatic
system to assist users in writing specialized texts.
The online arText editor helps users draft texts
for 15 textual genres in three specialized domains:
medicine, tourism and the public administration.
It lays out the structure for each section of the
document, suggests appropriate contents and stock
phrases for each section, and detects typical lin-
guistic errors. This innovative system is the first
tool that considers lexical, textual and discourse
features for specific textual genres. Moreover, the
arText project is based on the idea that academic
research can be shared with and used construc-
tively by the general public.

In the future, the results of the data-driven eval-
uation will be utilized to improve arText’s algo-
rithms. A second user-driven evaluation will in-
clude a broader population (e.g. students). Finally,
arText may be adapted to other textual genres, spe-
cialized domains and languages.

Acknowledgments

This article is part of the “Automatic system
to help in writing specialized texts in domains
relevant to Spanish society” research project,
funded by “2015 BBVA Foundation Grants for
Researchers and Cultural Creators”. It was also
supported by a Ramón y Cajal contract (RYC-
2014-16935). We would like to thank Josh Gold-

smith for the proofreading of the text, and the eval-
uation survey respondents and the research groups
ACTUALing and IULATERM for their support.

References
Sandra M. Aluı́sio, Iris Barcelos, Jandir Sampaio, and

Osvaldo N. Oliveira Jr. 2001. How to learn the
many unwritten “rules of the game” of the academic
discourse: A hybrid approach based on critiques
and cases to support scientific writing. Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Advanced
Learning Technologies, 2001.

Jordi Atserias, Bernardino Casas, Elisabet Comelles,
Meritxell González, Lluı́s Padró, and Muntsa Padró.
2006. Freeling 1.3. syntactic and semantic services
in an open-source nlp library. Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC 2006), pages 48–55.

M. Teresa Cabré. 1999. La Terminologı́a. Repre-
sentación y comunicación. Institut for Applied Lin-
guistics, Barcelona.

Iria da Cunha and M. Amor Montané. 2016. Un
análisis lingüı́stico de los géneros textuales del
ámbito de la administración con repercusión en la
vida de los ciudadanos. Proceedings of the XV Sym-
posium of the Ibero-American Terminology Network
(RITerm 2016), pages 61–62.

Iria da Cunha, Eric SanJuan, Juan-Manuel Torres-
Moreno, Marina Lloberes, and Irene Castellón.
2012. Diseg 1.0: The first system for spanish dis-
course segmentation. Expert Systems with Applica-
tions, 39(2):1671–1678.

Iria da Cunha, M. Amor Montané, and Alba Coll. in
press. Detección de géneros textuales que presentan
dificultades de redacción: un estudio en los ámbitos
de la administración, la medicina y el turismo. Pro-
ceedings of the 34th International Conference of the
Spanish Association of Applied Linguistics.

Jianmin Dai, Roxanne B. Raine, Rod Roscoe, Zhiqiang
Cai, and Danielle S. McNamara. 2011. The
writing-pal tutoring system: Development and de-
sign. Journal of Engineering and Computer Innova-
tions, 2(1):1–11.

Tomi Kinnunen, Henri Leisma, Monika Machunik,
Tuomo Kakkonen, and Jean-Luc Lebrun. 2012.
Swan scientific writing assistant a tool for helping
scholars to write reader-friendly manuscripts. Pro-
ceedings of the 13th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 20–24.

William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. 1988.
Rhetorical structure theory: Toward a functional the-
ory of text organization. Text, 8(3):243–288.

Teun A. van Dijk. 1989. La ciencia del texto. Paidós,
Barcelona.

60


