



















































The SUMMA Platform Prototype


Proceedings of the EACL 2017 Software Demonstrations, Valencia, Spain, April 3-7 2017, pages 116–119
c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

The SUMMA Platform Prototype

Renars Liepins†
renars.liepins@leta.lv

Ulrich GermannH
ugermann@inf.ed.ac.uk

Guntis Barzdins† · Alexandra BirchH · Steve RenalsH · Susanne Weberu
Peggy van der Kreefti · Hervé BourlardU · João PrietoJ · Ondřej KlejchH
Peter BellH · Alexandros LazaridisU · Alfonso MendesJ · Sebastian Riedels
Mariana S. C. AlmeidaJ · Pedro BalageJ · Shay CohenH · Tomasz DwojakH

Phil GarnerU · Andreas Gieferi · Marcin Junczys-DowmuntH · Hina Imrani
David NogueiraJ · Ahmed Ali? · Sebastião MirandaJ · Andrei Popescu-BelisU
Lesly Miculicich WerlenU · Nikos PapasarantopoulosH · Abiola Obamuyide‡
Clive Jonesu · Fahim Dalvi? · Andreas Vlachos‡ · Yang WangU · Sibo TongU
Rico SennrichH · Nikolaos PappasU · Shashi NarayanH · Marco DamonteH
Nadir Durrani? · Sameer Khurana? · Ahmed Abdelali? · Hassan Sajjad?

Stephan Vogel? · David Sheppeyu · Chris Hernonu · Jeff Mitchells
†Latvian News Agency HUniversity of Edinburgh iDeutsche Welle uBBC

UIdiap Research Institute JPriberam Informatica S.A. sUniversity College London
‡University of Sheffield ?Qatar Computing Research Institute

Abstract

We present the first prototype of the SUMMA
Platform: an integrated platform for multilin-
gual media monitoring. The platform contains
a rich suite of low-level and high-level natural
language processing technologies: automatic
speech recognition of broadcast media, ma-
chine translation, automated tagging and clas-
sification of named entities, semantic parsing
to detect relationships between entities, and
automatic construction / augmentation of fac-
tual knowledge bases. Implemented on the
Docker platform, it can easily be deployed,
customised, and scaled to large volumes of in-
coming media streams.

1 Introduction

SUMMA (Scalable Understanding of Multilingual Me-
dia)1 is a three-year Research and Innovation Action
(February 2016 through January 2019), supported by
the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and in-
novation programme. SUMMA is developing a highly

1 www.summa-project.eu

scalable, integrated web-based platform to automat-
ically monitor an arbitrarily large number of public
broadcast and web-based news sources.

Two concrete use cases and an envisioned third use
case drive the project.

1.1 Monitoring of External News Coverage
BBC Monitoring, a division of the British Broadcasting
Corporation (BBC), monitors a broad variety of news
sources from all over the world on behalf of the BBC
and external customers. About 3002 staff journalists
and analysts track TV, radio, internet, and social media
sources in order to detect trends and changing media
behaviour, and to flag breaking news events. A single
monitoring journalist typically monitors four TV chan-
nels and several online sources simultaneously. This
is about the maximum that any person can cope with
mentally and physically. Assuming 8-hour shifts, this
limits the capacity of BBC Monitoring to monitoring
about 400 TV channels at any given time on average.
At the same time, BBC Monitoring has access to about
13,600 distinct sources, including some 1,500 TV and
1,350 radio broadcasters. Automating the monitoring
process not only allows the BBC to cover a broader
2 To be reduced to 200 by the end of March, 2017.

116



Data feed modules

Live stream monitoring

Light-weight node.js
wrappers integrate
components into the
SUMMA infrastructure.

Journalists access the
system through a
web-based GUI.

RethinkDB stores media
content and
meta-information.

RabbitMQ handles
communication bet-
ween database and NLP
modules that augment
the monitored data.

NLP modules for ASR,
MT, Named Entity
Tagging, etc. run as
applications in Docker
containers.

Docker Compose
orchestrates all the
components into a
working infrastructure.

Docker provides
containerization of the
various components.

Figure 1: Architecture of the SUMMA Platform

spectrum of news sources, but also allows journalists
to perform deeper analysis by enhancing their ability
to search through broadcast media across languages in
a way that other monitoring platforms do not support.

1.2 Monitoring Internal News Production
Deutsche Welle is Germany’s international public ser-
vice broadcaster. It provides international news and
background information from a German perspective in
30 languages worldwide, 8 of which are used within
SUMMA. News production within Deutsche Welle is
organized by language and regional departments that
operate and create content fairly independently. In-
terdepartmental collaboration and awareness, however,
is important to ensure a broad, international perspec-
tive. Multilingual internal monitoring of world-wide
news production (including underlying background re-
search) helps to increase awareness of the work be-
tween the different language news rooms, decrease la-
tency in reporting and reduce cost of news production
within the service by allowing adaptation of existing
news stories for particular target audiences rather than
creating them from scratch.

1.3 Data Journalism
The third use case is data journalism. Measurable data
is extracted from the content available in and produced
by the SUMMA platform and graphics are created with
such data. The data journalism dashboard will be able
to provide, for instance, a graphical overview of trend-
ing topics over the past 24 hours or a heatmap of sto-

rylines. It can place geolocations of trending stories
on a map. Customised dashboards can be used to fol-
low particular storylines. For the internal monitoring
use case, it will visualize statistics of content that was
reused by other language departments.

2 System Architecture

Figure 1 shows an overview of the SUMMA Platform
prototype. The Platform is implemented as an orches-
tra of independent components that run as individual
containers on the Docker platform. This modular ar-
chitecture gives the project partners a high level of in-
dependence in their development.

The system comprises the following individual pro-
cessing components.

2.1 Data Feed Modules and Live Streams

These modules each monitor a specific news source
for new content. Once new content is available, it is
downloaded and fed into the database via a common
REST API. Live streams are automatically segmented
into logical segments.

2.2 Database Back-end

Rethink-DB3 serves as the database back-end. Once
new content is added, Rethink-DB issues processing re-
quests to the individual NLP processing modules via
RabbitMQ.

3 www.rethinkdb.com

117



Storyline Index
Quick access to current storylines.

Storyline Summary
Multi-item/document summary of news
items in the storyline.

Individual news stories
Within the storyline
Left: frame to play the original video (if
applicable);
Right: tabbed text box with auto-
matic transcription of the original audio
source, automatic translation (plaintext),
and automatic translation with recognized
named entities marked up.

Figure 2: Web-based User Interface of the SUMMA Platform (Storyline View)

2.3 Automatic Speech Recognition

Spoken language from audio and video streams is first
processed by automatic speech recognition to turn it
into text for further processing. Models are trained
on speech from the broadcast domain using the Kaldi
toolkit (Povey et al., 2011); speech recognition is per-
formed using the CloudASR platform (Klejch et al.,
2015).

2.4 Machine Translation

The lingua franca within SUMMA is English. Machine
translation based on neural networks is used to translate
content into English automatically. The back-end MT
systems are trained with the Nematus Toolkit (Sennrich
et al., 2017); translation is performed with AmuNMT
(Junczys-Dowmunt et al., 2016).

2.5 Entity Tagging and Linking

Depending on the source language, Entity Tagging and
Linking is performed either natively, or on the En-
glish translation. Entities are detected with TurboEn-
tityRecognizer, a named entity recognizer within Tur-
boParser4 (Martins et al., 2009). Then, we link the
detected mentions to the knowledge base with a system
based on our submission to TAC-KBP 2016 (Paikens et
al., 2016).

4 https://github.com/andre-martins/
TurboParser

2.6 Topic Recognition and Labeling
This module labels incoming news documents and
transcripts with a fine-grained set of topic labels. The
labels are learned from a multilingual corpus of nearly
600k documents in 8 of the 9 SUMMA languages (all
except Latvian), which were manually annotated by
journalists at Deutsche Welle. The document model is
a hierarchical attention network with attention at each
level of the hierarchy, inspired by Yang et al. (2016),
followed by a sigmoid classification layer.

2.7 Deep Semantic Tagging
The system also has a component that performs seman-
tic parsing into Abstract Meaning Representations (Ba-
narescu et al., 2013) with the aim to incorporate them
into the storyline generation eventually. The parser was
developed by Damonte et al. (2017). It is an incremen-
tal left-to-right parser that builds an AMR graph struc-
ture using a neural network controller. It also includes
adaptations to German, Spanish, Italian and Chinese.

2.8 Knowledge Base Construction
This component provides a knowledge base of factual
relations between entities, built with a model based on
Universal Schemas (Riedel et al., 2013), a low-rank
matrix factorization approach.The entity relations are
extracted jointly across multiple languages, with enti-
ties pairs as rows and a set of structured relations and
textual patterns as columns. The relations provide in-
formation about how various entities present in news

118



documents are connected.

2.9 Storyline Construction and Summarization
Storylines are constructed via online clustering, i.e., by
assigning storyline identifiers to incoming documents
in a streaming fashion, following the work in Aggar-
wal and Yu (2006). The resulting storylines are subse-
quently summarized via an extractive system based on
Almeida and Martins (2013).

3 User Interface
Figure 2 shows the current web-based SUMMA Plat-
form user interface in the storyline view. A storyline is
a collection of news items that concerning a particular
“story” and how it develops over time. Details of the
layout are explained in the figure annotations.

4 Future Work
The current version of the Platform is a prototype de-
signed to demonstrate the orchestration and interaction
of the individual processing components. The look
and feel of the page may change significantly over the
course of the project, in response to the needs and re-
quirements and the feedback from the use case part-
ners, the BBC and Deutsche Welle.

5 Availability
The public release of the SUMMA Platform as open
source software is planned for April 2017.

6 Acknowledgments

This work was conducted within the scope of
the Research and Innovation Action SUMMA,

which has received funding from the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme un-
der grant agreement No 688139.

References
Charu C. Aggarwal and Philip S. Yu. 2006. A frame-

work for clustering massive text and categorical data
streams. In SIAM Int’l. Conf. on Data Mining, pages
479–483. SIAM.

Miguel B. Almeida and Andre F. T. Martins. 2013.
Fast and robust compressive summarization with
dual decomposition and multi-task learning. In ACL,
pages 196–206.

Laura Banarescu, Claire Bonial, Shu Cai, Madalina
Georgescu, Kira Griffitt, Ulf Hermjakob, Kevin
Knight, Philipp Koehn, Martha Palmer, and Nathan
Schneider. 2013. Abstract meaning representation
for sembanking. Linguistic Annotation Workshop.

Marco Damonte, Shay B. Cohen, and Giorgio Satta.
2017. An incremental parser for abstract meaning
representation. In EACL.

Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt, Tomasz Dwojak, and Hieu
Hoang. 2016. Is neural machine translation ready
for deployment? A case study on 30 translation di-
rections. CoRR, abs/1610.01108.

Ondřej Klejch, Ondřej Plátek, Lukáš Žilka, and Filip
Jurčíček. 2015. CloudASR: platform and service.
In Int’l. Conf. on Text, Speech, and Dialogue, pages
334–341. Springer.

André F. T. Martins, Noah A. Smith, and Eric P. Xing.
2009. Concise integer linear programming formula-
tions for dependency parsing. In ACL, pages 342–
350.

Peteris Paikens, Guntis Barzdins, Afonso Mendes,
Daniel Ferreira, Samuel Broscheit, Mariana S. C.
Almeida, Sebastião Miranda, David Nogueira, Pedro
Balage, and André F. T. Martins. 2016. SUMMA at
TAC knowledge base population task 2016. In TAC,
Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA.

Daniel Povey, Arnab Ghoshal, Gilles Boulianne, Lukáš
Burget, Ondr̆ej Glembek, Nagendra Goel, Mirko
Hannemann, Petr Motlíček, Yanmin Qian, Petr
Schwarz, Jan Silovský, Georg Stemmer, and Karel
Veselý. 2011. The Kaldi speech recognition toolkit.
In ASRU.

Sebastian Riedel, Limin Yao, Benjamin M. Marlin, and
Andrew McCallum. 2013. Relation extraction with
matrix factorization and universal schemas. In HLT-
NAACL, June.

Rico Sennrich, Orhan Firat, Kyunghyun Cho, Alexan-
dra Birch, Barry Haddow, Julian Hitschler, Marcin
Junczys-Dowmunt, Samuel Läubli, Antonio Valerio
Miceli Barone, Jozef Mokry, and Maria Nadejde.
2017. Nematus: a toolkit for neural machine trans-
lation. In EACL Demonstration Session, Valencia,
Spain.

Zichao Yang, Diyi Yang, Chris Dyer, Xiaodong He,
Alexander J. Smola, and Eduard H. Hovy. 2016.
Hierarchical attention networks for document clas-
sification. In NAACL, San Diego, CA, USA.

119


