



















































Neoveille, a Web Platform for Neologism Tracking


Proceedings of the EACL 2017 Software Demonstrations, Valencia, Spain, April 3-7 2017, pages 95–98
c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Neoveille, a Web Platform for Neologism Tracking

Emmanuel Cartier
Université Paris 13 Sorbonne Paris Cité - LIPN - RCLN UMR 7030 CNRS

99 boulevard Jean-Baptiste Clément
93430 Villetaneuse, FRANCE

emmanuel.cartier@lipn.univ-paris13.fr

Abstract

This paper details a software designed
to track neologisms in seven languages
through newspapers monitor corpora. The
platform combines state-of-the-art pro-
cesses to track linguistic changes and a
web platform for linguists to create and
manage their corpora, accept or reject
automatically identified neologisms, de-
scribe linguistically the accepted neolo-
gisms and follow their lifecycle on the
monitor corpora. In the following, after
a short state-of-the-art in Neologism Re-
trieval, Analysis and Life-tracking, we de-
scribe the overall architecture of the sys-
tem. The platform can be freely browsed
at www.neoveille.org where de-
tailed presentation is given. Access to the
editing modules is available upon request.

1 Credits

Neoveille is an international Project funded by the
ANR IDEX specific funding scheme. It gathers
seven Linguistics and Research Centers. See web-
site for details.

2 Introduction

Linguistic change is one of the fundamental prop-
erties of language, even if, at least on a short-term
period, languages appear to be extremely conser-
vative and reluctant to change. Whereas NLP ef-
forts have mainly focused on synchronic language
analysis, research and applications are very sparse
on the diachronic side, especially concerning short
term diachrony. But, with the availability of big
web corpora, the maturity of automatic linguis-
tic analysis and especially those able to process
big data while maintaining a reasonable quality, it

is now possible to monitor language change and
track linguistic innovations.

3 Previous Work in Neology and Neology
Tracking

Linguistic change has been studied for decades
and even centuries in linguistics, and has been
dealt with more recently in computational linguis-
tics.

3.1 Linguistic Neology Models

3.1.1 Neologism Categories

Linguistic change has been first focused on by
the Comparative Grammars School, whose main
goal was to study languages diachronically. They
have mainly based their descriptions and analysis
on linguistic forms, describing phonetical, phono-
logical, morphological, syntactical and semantic
change on a long-term basis (Geeraerts, 2010).
More recently, several attempts have emerged in
the field of linguistic change, mainly focusing on
the lexical units and proposing typology of neolo-
gisms (Schmid, 2015),(Sablayrolles, 2016).

3.1.2 Synchrony, Diachrony, Diastraty

A complementary approach is due to (Gevaudan
and Koch, 2010) who state that every lexical evo-
lution can be described through three parameters :
two are universal, the semantic parameter (explic-
iting a continuity of meaning or a discontinuity,
in this case further described) and the stratic pa-
rameter (linking the linguistic structure to its so-
ciological context : borrowings are explained this
way); the third one is linked to every specific lin-
guistic formal structure, with four generic matri-
ces : conversion, morphological extension, com-
position and clipping).

95



3.1.3 Neologism Life-cycle(s)
Neology is one of the aspect of linguistic change,
with necrology and stability. One important aspect
is thus to model the lifecycle of a neologism, from
its first occurrence to its potential disappearance
or conventionalization. (Traugott and Trousdale,
2013) have proposed three salient states : innova-
tion, propagation and conventionalisation, linking
each to several more-or-less obvious properties.
With these models in mind, NLP has developed
several algorithms to track and study the lifecycle
of neologisms.

3.2 Computational Models of Neology

Computational Linguistics has begun to work on
linguistic change not long ago, mainly because it
needs to have at hand large diachronic electronic
corpora. Neology is moreover still considered as
an secondary topic, as novel lexical units repre-
sents less than 5 percent of lexical units in corpora,
according to several studies. But linguistic change
is the complementary aspect of the synchronic
structure. Every lexical unit is subjected to time,
form and meaning can change, due to diastratic
events and situations. The advent of electronic
(long and short-term) diachronic corpora, scien-
tific research and advances on word-formation and
machine learning techniques able to manage big
corpora, have permitted the emergence of neology
tracking systems. Apart from a best knowledge of
language lifecyle(s), these tools would permit to
update lexicographic resources, computational as-
sets and parsers.

From the CL point of view, the main ques-
tions are : how can we automatically track neolo-
gisms, categorize them and follow their evolution,
from their first appearance to their conventionali-
sation or disappearance? At best, can we induce
neology-formation procedures from examples and
therefore predict potential neologisms?

3.3 Existing Neology Tracking System

3.3.1 the Exclusion Dictionary Architecture
(EDA)

The main achievement of neology tracking con-
sists in system extracting novel forms from mon-
itor corpora, using lexicographic resources as a
reference exclusion dictionary to induce unknown
words, what we can call the ”exclusion dictionary
architecture” (EDA). The first system is due to
(Renouf, 1993) for English : a monitor corpora

and a reference dictionary from which unknown
words can be derived. Further filters then apply to
eliminate spellings errors and Proper Nouns. Sub-
sequent developments all replicate this architec-
ture : OBNEO (Cabré and De Yzaguirre, 1995),
NeoCrawler (Kerremans et al., 2012), Logoscope
(Gérard et al., 2014) and more recently Neoveille
(Cartier, 2016).

Four main difficulties arise from these architec-
ture : first, EDA can not track semantic neolo-
gisms, as they use existing lexical units to con-
vey innovative meanings; second, the design of
a reference exclusion dictionary is not that ob-
vious as it requires the existence of a machine-
readable dictionary : this entails specific proce-
dures to apply this architecture to less-resourced
languages, and the availability of an up-to-date
machine-readable dictionary for more resourced
languages ; third, the EDA architecture is not suf-
ficient in itself : among unknown forms, most
of them are Proper Nouns, spelling mistakes and
other cases derived from corpus boilerplate re-
moval : this entails a post-processing phase to de-
part cases; Fourth, these systems do not take into
account the sociological and diatopic aspects of
neologism, as they limit their corpora to specific
domains : a ideal system should be able to ex-
tend its monitoring to new corpora and maintain
diastratic meta-datas to characterize novel forms.
To the best of our knowledge, Neoveille (Cartier,
2016) is the only system implementing this aspect.

3.3.2 Semantic Neology Approaches
As for semantic neology, three approaches have
been recently proposed, none of them being ex-
ploited in an operational system. The first one
stems from the idea that meaning change is linked
to domain change : every texts and thus the con-
stituent existing lexical units are assigned one or
more topic; if a lexical unit emerges in a new do-
main, a change in meaning should have occurred
(Gérard et al., 2014). The main drawback of this
approach is that it is limited to specific semantic
change (it can not tackle conventional metaphors
if appeared in the same domain, nor detect exten-
sion or restriction of meaning) and mainly limited
to Nouns.

An other approach is linked to the distributional
paradigm : ”You shall know a word by the com-
pany it keeps”(Firth, 1957). The main idea is to re-
trieve from a large corpora all the collocates or col-
lostructions, and classify them according to sev-

96



eral metrics. The main salient resulting context
words represent the ”profile” (Blumenthal, 2009)
or ”sketch” (Kilgarriff et al., 2004) of a lexical
unit for the given synchronic period. The most
elaborated system is surely the Sketch Engine sys-
tem, which propose for every lexical engine its
”sketch”, i.e. a list, for any user-defined syntac-
tic schemas (for example modifiers, nominal sub-
ject, object and indirect object for verb) of occur-
rences, sorted by one or several association mea-
sure. This system can be improved in two main
ways : first, it does not propose complete syntac-
tic schemas for lexical units like verbs (it is limited
to either a SUBJ-VERB or VERB-OBJ relation,
but does not propose SUBJ-VERB-OBJ relations);
second, it does not propose a clustering of occur-
rences, whereas distributional semantics could fill
the gap and propose distributional classes at any
place in the schema, instead of flat list of occur-
rences.

A third approach consists in tracking semantic
change by applying the second aspect of the distri-
butional hypothesis, that lexical units sharing the
most of contexts are most likely to be semantically
similar. This assumption has been applied to many
computational semantic tasks. Applied to seman-
tic change, if you have at your disposal a bunch
of diachronic corpora, you can build the semantic
vectors of any lexical unit corresponding to sev-
eral periods, and track the changes from one pe-
riod to another. First experiments have been pro-
posed by (Hamilton et al., 2016). The main ad-
vantage of this approach resides in the fact that it
proposes for a given word a list of semantically
similar words, among which synonyms and hyper-
nyms, which permits to clearly explicit the mean-
ing of a word. The main drawback of this ap-
proach is to be unable to distinguish meanings for
polysemous units. Another relative drawback re-
lies on the fuzzy notion of similarity, which results
in semantically too-slightly similar words (anal-
ogy), or even opposite words (antonymy). But this
approach is clearly of great help to humanly grasp
the meaning of a word.

In the Neoveille Project, we are currently devel-
oping a approach combining the Sketch approach
mixed with semantic distributions on the main lex-
ical unit and its arguments.

3.3.3 Tracking the Lifecycle of Neologisms
In our view, we postulate that neologisms are new
form-meaning pairs (Lexical units) and thus exist

from their first occurrence. Tracking the lifecycle
of neologisms requires to fix criteria to identify the
main phases : emergence, dissemination, conven-
tionalization (Traugott and Trousdale, 2013). In
operational systems, the main tool to follow the
life of a neologism is the timeline rendering the ab-
solute or relative frequency of the lexical unit. In
Neoveille, these figures are relative to specific di-
astratic and diatopic paramaters, visually enabling
to distinguish emergence, spread and convention-
alization. These analysis are available for each
identified neologism by clicking on the stats icon
(see website, last neologisms menu).

4 Neoveille Tracking System
Architecture

The Neoveille architecture aims at enabling a
complete synergy between NLP system and expert
linguists : expert linguists are not able to monitor
the vast amount of textual data whereas automatic
processes can help tackle this amount: experts can
accurately decide if a word is or is not a neolo-
gism; our current point of view is that linguists
must have the last word on what is and is not a
neologism, and on the linguistic description; but
as knowledge and description will grow up with
time, we will build Supervised Machine Learning
techniques able to predict potential neologisms.

The Neoveille web architecture has five main
components:

1. A corpora manager: corpora is the main feed
for NLP systems, and we propose to linguists
a system enabling to choose their corpora and
to add to them several meta-datas. The cor-
pora, once defined by the user, are retrieved
on a daily basis, indexed and searched for ne-
ologisms. Corpora management is available
in the restricted area on the left menu;

2. An advanced search engine on the corpora;
: not only corpora can be monitored, but
also the system should propose a search en-
gine with advanced capabilities : advanced
querying, filtering and faceting of results; the
Neoveille search engine is available on the
restricted area on the left menu; based on
Apache Solr, it enables to query the corpora
in a multifactorial manner, with facets and vi-
sual filters;

3. Advanced Data Analytics expliciting the life-
cycle of neologisms and their diachronic, di-

97



atopic and diastratic parameters : Neoveille
provides such a Data Analytics Framework
by combining meta-data to text mining;
These visual analysis are available for every
neologisms by clicking the stats icon;

4. A linguistic description component for ne-
ologisms : this module, whose microstruc-
ture has been setup for several years, could
be used for knowledge of neology in a given
language, and could also be used by a super-
vised machine learning system, as these fea-
tures include a lot of formal properties. This
component is accessible in the restricted area
on the left menu.

5. formal and semantic neologisms tracking
with state-of-the-art techniques The formal
and semantic neologism components are ac-
cessible in the restricted area on the left
menu. They work for the seven languages of
the project.

5 Conclusion and perspectives

This short presentation has evoked the design and
the overall architecture of a software for linguistic
analysis focusing on linguistic change in a con-
temporary monitor corpora. It has several interest-
ing properties :

• real-time tracking, analysis and visualization
of linguistic change;

• complete synergy between Computational
Linguistics processing and linguistic experts
intuitions and knowledge, especially the pos-
sibility of editing automatic results by experts
and exploitation of linguistic annotations by
machine learning processes;

• modularity of software : corpora manage-
ment, state-of-the-art search engine including
analysis and visualization, neologisms min-
ing, neologism linguistic description, lifecy-
cle tracking.

This project, currently focusing on seven lan-
guages is in the path to extend to other languages.

References
P. Blumenthal. 2009. Éléments d’une théorie de la

combinatoire des noms. Cahiers de lexicologie 94
(2009-1), 11-29.

Maria Teresa Cabré and Luis De Yzaguirre. 1995.
Stratégie pour la détection semi-automatique des
néologismes de presse. TTR : traduction, terminolo-
gie, rédaction, 8 (2), p. 89-100.

Emmanuel Cartier. 2016. Néoveille, système de
repérage et de suivi des néologismes en sept langues.
Neologica, 10, Revue internationale de néologie,
p.101-131.

John R. Firth. 1957. Papers in linguistics 1934–1951,
london, oxford university press, 1957.

Dirk Geeraerts. 2010. Theories of Lexical Semantics.
Oxford University Press.

Paul Gevaudan and Peter Koch. 2010. Sémantique
cognitive et changement sémantique. Grandes voies
et chemins de traverse de la sémantique cognitive,
Mémoire de la Société de linguistique de Paris,
XVIII, pp. 103-145.

Christophe Gérard, Ingrid Falk, and Delphine Bern-
hard. 2014. Traitement automatisé de la néologie :
pourquoi et comment intégrer l’analyse thématique?
Actes du 4e Congrès mondial de linguistique
française (CMLF 2014), Berlin, p. 2627-2646.

William L. Hamilton, Jure Leskovec, and Dan Juraf-
sky. 2016. Diachronic Word Embeddings Reveal
Statistical Laws of Semantic Change. ACL 2016.

Daphné Kerremans, Susanne Stegmayr, and Hans-Jörg
Schmid. 2012. The NeoCrawler: identifying and
retrieving neologisms from the internet and moni-
toring on-going change. Kathryn Allan and Justyna
A. Robinson, eds., Current methods in historical se-
mantics, Berlin etc.: de Gruyter Mouton, 59-96.

A. Kilgarriff, R. Pavel, Pavel S., and Tugwell D. 2004.
The Sketch Engine. Proceedings of Euralex, pages
105–116, Lorient.

Antoinette Renouf. 1993. Sticking to the Text : a cor-
pus linguist’s view of language. ASLIB Proceedings,
45 (5), p. 131-136.

Jean-François Sablayrolles. 2016. Les néologismes.
Collection Que sais-je? Presses Universitaires de
France.

Hans-Jörg Schmid. 2015. The scope of word-
formation research. Peter O. Müller, Ingeborg Ohn-
heiser, Susan Olsen and Franz Rainer, eds., Word-
Formation. An International Handbook of the Lan-
guages of Europe. Vol. I.

Elizabeth Closs Traugott and Graeme Trousdale. 2013.
Constructionalization and constructional changes.

98


