



















































A Web-Based Interactive Tool for Creating, Inspecting, Editing, and Publishing Etymological Datasets


Proceedings of the EACL 2017 Software Demonstrations, Valencia, Spain, April 3-7 2017, pages 9–12
c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Web-Based Interactive Tool for Creating, Inspecting, Editing, and
Publishing Etymological Datasets

Johann-Mattis List
Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History

Kahlaische Straße 10
07745 Jena

list@shh.mpg.de

Abstract

The paper presents the Etymological DIC-
tionary ediTOR (EDICTOR), a free, in-
teractive, web-based tool designed to aid
historical linguists in creating, editing,
analysing, and publishing etymological
datasets. The EDICTOR offers interac-
tive solutions for important tasks in histor-
ical linguistics, including facilitated input
and segmentation of phonetic transcrip-
tions, quantitative and qualitative analyses
of phonetic and morphological data, en-
hanced interfaces for cognate class assign-
ment and multiple word alignment, and
automated evaluation of regular sound cor-
respondences. As a web-based tool writ-
ten in JavaScript, the EDICTOR can be
used in standard web browsers across all
major platforms.

1 Introduction

The amount of large digitally available datasets for
various language families is constantly increasing.
In order to analyse these data, linguists turn more
and more to automatic approaches. Phylogenetic
methods from biology are now regularly used
to create evolutionary trees of language families
(Gray and Atkinson, 2003). Methods for the com-
parison of biological sequences have been adapted
and allow to automatically search for cognate
words in multilingual word lists (List, 2014) and
to automatically align them (List, 2014). Complex
workflows are used to search for deep genealogi-
cal signals between established language families
(Jäger, 2015).

In contrast to the large arsenal of software for
automatic analyses, the number of tools help-
ing to manually prepare, edit, and correct lexical
datasets in historical linguistics is extremely rare.

This is surprising, since automatic approaches still
lag behind expert analyses (List et al., 2017).
Tools for data preparation and evaluation would
allow experts to directly interact with computa-
tional approaches by manually checking and cor-
recting their automatically produced results. Fur-
thermore, since the majority of phylogenetic ap-
proaches makes use of manually submitted expert
judgments (Gray and Atkinson, 2003), it seems in-
dispensable to have tools which ease these tasks.

2 The EDICTOR Tool

The Etymological DICtionary ediTOR (EDIC-
TOR) is a free, interactive, web-based tool that
was specifically designed to serve as an inter-
face between quantitative and qualitative tasks in
historical linguistics. Inspired by powerful fea-
tures of STARLING (Starostin, 2000) and RefLex
(Segerer and Flavier, 2015), expanded by inno-
vative new features, and based on a very simple
data model that allows for a direct integration with
quantitative software packages like LingPy (List
and Forkel, 2016), the EDICTOR is a lightweight
but powerful toolkit for computer-assisted appli-
cations in historical linguistics.

2.1 File Formats and Data Structure

The EDICTOR was designed as a lightweight file-
based tool that takes a text file as input, allowing
to modify and save it. The input format is a plain
tab-separated value (TSV) file, with a header indi-
cating the value of the columns. This format is es-
sentially identical with the format used in LingPy.
Although the EDICTOR accepts all regular TSV
files as input, its primary target are multi-lingual
word lists, that is, datasets in which a given num-
ber of concepts has been translated into a certain
range of target languages.

9



Word
List

Cognate
Sets

Align-
ments Phono-logy

Morpho-
logy

/əu/ -th-a- {one} ID: 1

ID: 1

Partial
Cognates

ID: 1

th o x t ə rd  o: - t a -

{one}

Corres-
pondences

Transcription
Phonetic Segmentation
Morphological Segmentation
Cognate Assignment
Phonetic Alignment

/əu/
-th-a-
{one}
ID: 1
th o x t ə rd  o: - t a -

DATA EDITING

PANEL INTERACTION
Activation
Editing
Filtering

   D T
   E EDICTOR

Frequency Analysis
Structural Analysis

DATA ANALYSIS

Figure 1: Basic panel structure of the EDICTOR.

ID DOCULECT CONCEPT ...
1 German Woldemort valdəmar ...
2 English Woldemort wɔldəmɔrt ...
3 Chinese Woldemort fu⁵¹ti⁵¹mɔ³⁵ ...
4 Russian Woldemort vladimir ...
... ... ... ... ...
10 German Harry haralt ...
11 English Harry hæri ...
12 Russian Harry gali ...
... ... ... ... ...

TRANSCRIPTION

Figure 2: Basic file format in the EDICTOR

2.2 User Interface

The EDICTOR is divided into different panels
which allow to edit or analyse the data in diffe-
rent ways. The core module is the Word List panel
which displays the data in its original form and
can be edited and analysed as one knows it from
spreadsheet applications. For more complex tasks
of data editing and analysis, such as cognate as-
signment or phonological analysis, additional pan-
els are provided. Specific modes of interaction be-
tween the different panels allow for a flexible in-
teraction between different tasks. Using drag-and-
drop, users can arrange the panels individually or
hide them completely. Figure 1 illustrates how the
major panels of the EDICTOR interact with each
other.

2.3 Technical Aspects

The EDICTOR application is written in plain
JavaScript and was tested in Google Chrome, Fire-
fox, and Safari across different operating systems
(Windows, MacOS, Linux). For the purpose of
offline usage, users can download the source code.

For direct online usage, the tool can be accessed
via its project website.

3 Data Editing in the EDICTOR

3.1 Editing Word List Data

Editing data in the Word List panel of the EDIC-
TOR is straightforward by inserting values in text-
fields which appear when clicking on a given field
or when browsing the data using the arrow keys of
the keyboard. Additional keyboard shortcuts allow
for quick browsing. For specific data types, auto-
matic operations are available which facilitate the
input or test what the user inserts. Transcription,
for example supports SAMPA-input. The segmen-
tation of phonetic entries into meaningful sound
units is also carried out automatically. Sound seg-
ments are highlighted with specific background
colors based on their underlying sound class and
sounds which are not recognized as valid IPA sym-
bols are highlighted in warning colors (see the il-
lustration in Figure 3). The users can decide them-
selves in which fields they wish to receive auto-
matic support, and even Chinese input using an
automatic Pīnyīn converter is provided.

ID DOCULECT CONCEPT SEGMENTS

22 Chinese Woldemort f u ⁵¹ d i ⁵¹ m ɔ ³⁵

4 English Woldemort wOld@mO:Rt

3 German Woldemort v a l t ə r

21 Russian Woldemort В л а д и м и р

wOld@mO:Rt

       Conversion and Segmentation

Highlighting of Unrecognized 
Phonetic Symbols

wOld@mO:Rt

wɔldəmɔːʁt

w ɔ l d ə m ɔː ʁ t

Figure 3: Editing word lists in the EDICTOR

10



3.2 Cognate Assessment

Defining which words in multilingual word lists
are cognate is still a notoriously difficult task for
machines (List, 2014). Given that the majority
of datasets are based on manually edited cognate
judgments, it is important to have tools which fa-
cilitate this task while at the same time control-
ling for typical errors. The EDICTOR offers two
ways to edit cognate information, the first assum-
ing complete cognacy of the words in their en-
tirety, and the second allowing to assign only spe-
cific parts of words to the same cognate set. In
order to carry out partial cognate assignment, the
data needs to be morphologically segmented in a
first stage, for example with help of the Morpho-
logy panel of the EDICTOR (see Section 4.2). For
both tasks, simple and intuitive interfaces are of-
fered which allow to browse through the data and
to assign words to the same cognate set.

German
English
Russian
Chinese
IGNORE

Figure 4: Aligning words in the EDICTOR

3.3 Phonetic Alignment

Since historical-comparative linguistics is essen-
tially based on sequence comparison (List, 2014),
alignment analyses, in which words are arranged
in a matrix in such a way that corresponding
sounds are placed in the same column, are un-
derlying all cognate sets. Unfortunately they are
rarely made explicit in classical etymological dic-
tionaries. In order to increase explicitness, the
EDICTOR offers an alignment panel. The align-
ment panel is essentially realized as a pop-up win-
dow showing the sounds of all sequences which
belong to the same cognate set. Users can edit the
alignments by moving sound segments with the
mouse. Columns of the alignment which contain
unalignable parts (like suffixes or prefixes) can be
explicitly marked as such. In addition to manual
alignments, the EDICTOR offers a simple align-
ment algorithm which can be used to pre-analyse
the alignments. Figure 4 shows an example for
the alignment of four fictive cognates in the EDIC-
TOR.

4 Data Analysis in the EDICTOR

4.1 Analysing Phonetic Data
Errors are inevitable in large datasets, and this
holds also and especially for phonetic transcrip-
tions. Many errors, however, can be easily spot-
ted by applying simple sanity checks to the data.
A straightforward way to check the consistency
of the phonetic transcriptions in a given dataset is
provided in the Phonology panel of the EDICTOR.
Here all sound segments which occur in the seg-
mented transcriptions of one language are counted
and automatically compared with an internal set
of IPA segments. Counting the frequency of seg-
ments is very helpful to spot simple typing er-
rors, since segments which occur only one time
in the whole data are very likely to be errors. The
internal segment inventory adds a structural per-
spective: If segments are found in the internal in-
ventory, additional phonetic information (manner,
place, etc.) is shown, if segments are missing, this
is highlighted. The results can be viewed in tabu-
lar form and in form of a classical IPA chart.

4.2 Analysing Morphological Data
The majority of words in all languages consist
of more than one morpheme. If historically re-
lated words differ regarding their morpheme struc-
ture, this poses great problems for automatic ap-
proaches to sequence comparison, since the al-
gorithms usually compare words in their entirety.
German Großvater ‘grandfather’, for example,
is composed of two different morphemes, groß
‘large’ and Vater ‘father’. In order to analyse
multi-morphemic words historically, it is impor-
tant to carry out a morphological annotation anal-
ysis. In order to ease this task, the Morphology
panel of the EDICTOR offers a variety of straight-
forward operations by which morpheme structure
can be annotated and analysed at the same time.
The core idea behind all operations is a search
for similar words or morphemes in the same lan-
guage. These colexifications are then listed and
displayed in form of a bipartite word family net-
work in which words are linked to morphemes, as
illustrated in Figure 5. The morphology analysis
in the EDICTOR is no miracle cure for morpheme
detection, and morpheme boundaries need still to
be annotated by the user. However, the dynam-
ically produced word family networks as well as
the explicit listing of words sharing the same sub-
sequence of sounds greatly facilitates this task.

11



faːtər «the father»

ʃtiːf+faːtər «the stepfather»

ʃviːɡər+faːtər «the father-in-law»

ɡroːs+faːtər «the grandfather»

ɡroːs+mʊtər «the grandmother»

MOTHER

LARGE

FATHER

FATHER-OF-SPOUSE

NON-BIOLOGICAL

Figure 5: Word family network in the EDICTOR:
The morphemes (in red) link the words around
German Großvater ‘grandfather’ (in blue).

4.3 Analysing Sound Correspondences

Once cognate sets are identified and aligned,
searching for regular sound correspondences in the
data is a straightforward task. The Correspon-
dences panel of the EDICTOR allows to analyse
sound correspondence patterns across pairs of lan-
guages. In addition to a simple frequency count,
however, conditioning context can be included in
the analysis. Context is modeled as a separate
string that provides abstract context symbols for
each sound segment of a given word. This means
essentially that context is handled as an additional
tier of a sequence. This multi-tiered represen-
tation is very flexible and also allows to model
suprasegmental context, like tone or stress. If
users do not provide their own tiers, the EDIC-
TOR employs a default context model which dis-
tinguishes consonants in syllable onsets from con-
sonants in syllable offsets.

5 Customising the EDICTOR

The EDICTOR can be configured in multiple
ways, be it while editing a dataset or before load-
ing the data. The latter is handled via URL pa-
rameters passed to the URL that loads the applica-
tion. In order to facilitate the customization proce-
dure, a specific panel for customisation allows the
users to define their default settings and creates a
URL which users can bookmark to have quick ac-
cess to their preferred settings.

The EDICTOR can be loaded in read-only
mode by specifying a “publish” parameter.
Additionally, server-side files can be directly
loaded when loading the application. This
makes it very simple and straightforward to
use the EDICTOR to publish raw etymological

datasets in a visually appealing format as can
be seen from this exemplary URL: http:
//edictor.digling.org?file=Tujia.
tsv&publish=true&preview=500.

6 Conclusion and Outlook

This paper presented a web-based tool for creat-
ing, inspecting, editing, and publishing etymologi-
cal datasets. Although many aspects of the tool are
still experimental, and many problems still need to
be solved, I am confident that – even in its current
form – the tool will be helpful for those working
with etymological datasets. In the future, I will de-
velop the tool further, both by adding more useful
features and by increasing its consistency.

Acknowledgements

This research was supported by the DFG research
fellowship grant 261553824 Vertical and lateral
aspects of Chinese dialect history. I thank Nathan
W. Hill, Guillaume Jacques, and Laurent Sagart
for testing the prototype.

References
Russell D. Gray and Quentin D. Atkinson. 2003.

Language-tree divergence times support the Ana-
tolian theory of Indo-European origin. Nature,
426(6965):435–439.

Gerhard Jäger. 2015. Support for linguistic
macrofamilies from weighted alignment. PNAS,
112(41):1275212757.

Johann-Mattis List and Robert Forkel. 2016. LingPy.
Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human His-
tory, Jena. URL: http://lingpy.org.

Johann-Mattis List, Simon J. Greenhill, and Russell D.
Gray. 2017. The potential of automatic word
comparison for historical linguistics. PLOS ONE,
12(1):1–18, 01.

Johann-Mattis List. 2014. Sequence comparison in
historical linguistics. Düsseldorf University Press,
Düsseldorf.

Guillaume Segerer and S. Flavier. 2015. RefLex.
Laboratoire DDL, Paris and Lyon. URL: http:
//reflex.cnrs.fr.

Sergej Anatol’evič Starostin. 2000. STARLING.
RGGU, Moscow. URL: http://starling.
rinet.ru.

Supplementary Material
Supplements for this paper contain a demo video (https://youtu.be/
IyZuf6SmQM4), the application website (http://edictor.digling.
org), the source (v. 0.1, https://zenodo.org/record/48834), and
the development version (http://github.com/digling/edictor).

12


