



















































Mapping the Perfect via Translation Mining


Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Volume 2, Short Papers, pages 497–502,
Valencia, Spain, April 3-7, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Mapping the PERFECT via Translation Mining

Martijn van der Klis
Digital Humanities Lab

Utrecht University
M.H.vanderKlis@uu.nl

Bert Le Bruyn
UiL OTS

Utrecht University
B.S.W.LeBruyn@uu.nl

Henriëtte de Swart
UiL OTS

Utrecht University
H.deSwart@uu.nl

Abstract

Semantic analyses of the PERFECT often
defeat their own purpose: by restricting
their attention to ‘real’ perfects (like the
English one), they implicitly assume the
PERFECT has predefined meanings and us-
ages. We turn the tables and focus on
form, using data extracted from multilin-
gual parallel corpora to automatically gen-
erate semantic maps (Haspelmath, 1997)
of the sequence ‘HAVE/BE + past partici-
ple’ in five European languages (German,
English, Spanish, French, Dutch). This
technique, which we dub Translation Min-
ing, has been applied before in the lexical
domain (Wälchli and Cysouw, 2012) but
we showcase its application at the level of
the grammar.

1 Introduction

The PERFECT is a diachronically and linguisti-
cally unstable category (Lindstedt, 2000) and is
subject to widespread cross-linguistic variation.
We zoom in on the HAVE PERFECT that Dahl and
Velupillai (2013) trace back to a transitive pos-
sessive construction, and manifests itself mainly
in Western European languages. Despite exten-
sive literature on the PERFECT, the goal of provid-
ing a proper semantics has not been reached (Ritz,
2012).

We propose to use semantic maps (Haspelmath,
1997) for this purpose. Semantic maps are geo-
graphical layouts that graphically represent how
meanings of grammatical functions are related to
each other. While current formal semantic ap-
proaches to the PERFECT (e.g. Portner (2003)) are
driven by sets of predefined usages exemplified by
prototypical instantiations, we aim to generate se-
mantic maps directly from data.

We believe multilingual parallel corpora are an
excellent source for this. Translation equivalents
provide us with form variation across languages
in contexts where the meaning is stable. Paral-
lel corpora have been frequently used in the do-
main of lexical semantics (e.g. Dyvik (1998)). We
showcase a method (adapted from Wälchli and
Cysouw (2012)) to create semantic maps directly
from multilingual parallel corpora, and adapt it to
the level of grammar. We focus on a set of five
European languages (German, English, Spanish,
French, Dutch), although the methodology can
easily be adapted to include more languages.

Linguists commonly distinguish the three core
PERFECT meanings in (1):

(1) a. Mary has visited Paris.
(her past visit is relevant now) [experiental]

b. Mary has moved to Paris.
(she currently lives in Paris) [resultative]

c. Mary has lived in Paris for five years (now).
(she moved there five years ago) [continuative]

The resultative meaning in (1b) is thought to
constitute the core of the PERFECT. However,
(2) (taken from the subtitles of “Body of Proof”)
shows that the same meaning of a past event and a
result with current relevance can be conveyed by a
PAST, PERFECT or PRESENT.

(2) a. In case you hadn’t noticed, we just got a con-
fession. [en-PAST]

b. Falls
If

es
it

ihnen
you

entging,
escaped,

er
he

hat
has

gestanden.
confessed.

[de-PERFECT]
c. Si

If
vous
you

ne
not

l’avez
it have

pas remarqué,
noticed,

on
we

a
have

des aveux.
confessions.

[fr-PRESENT]

Taking (1) as a starting point for cross-linguistic
variation, and ignoring other tense-aspect forms
(as in (2)) would lead to a skewed view on vari-
ation and on the PERFECT itself. As Ritz (2012)

497



states, the PERFECT is the ‘shapeshifter’ of tense-
aspect categories, and adapts its meaning to fit into
a given system. Our final goal is to provide a com-
positional semantics of the PERFECT across lan-
guages that takes the variation in (2) and (2) into
account. The competing, form-based methodol-
ogy that we outline in the next section constitutes
the stepping stone that enables us to reach this
goal.

2 Methodology

To construct semantic maps directly from data
extracted from multilingual parallel corpora, we
apply an existing method in the lexical domain
(Wälchli and Cysouw, 2012) at the level of gram-
mar. We dub our method Translation Mining. In
the following paragraphs, we lay out the method
in detail.

2.1 Step 1) Extraction of PERFECTs

In the first phase, we extract fragments containing
verbs phrases that match the ‘HAVE/BE + past par-
ticiple’ pattern from the EuroParl corpus (Tiede-
mann, 2012). To do so, we modify an existing
algorithm by van der Klis et al. (2015), that takes
care of three difficulties in extracting these forms
from corpora: (1) words between the auxiliary
verb and the past participle, (2) lexical restrictions
for BE in French, German and Dutch and (3) a re-
versed order in subordinate clauses in German and
Dutch.

The algorithm searches each of the five lan-

guages under investigation (German, English,
Spanish, French and Dutch) for PERFECTs and
will then return the aligned sentences in the other
languages. This yields five-tuples of fragments
consisting of at least one PERFECT. Note that
this approach is necessary to find the triplet in (2),
because only in German a PERFECT is involved.
This scheme therefore allows for competing forms
within a language to enter the realm of investi-
gation. Also, taking five languages into account
will create a broader perspective on the semantics
of the PERFECT than monolingual research would
do.1

2.2 Step 2) Word-level alignment of verb
phrases

After extracting fragments containing a PERFECT
in step 1, we asked a single human annotator
(a BSc student proficient in all languages un-
der investigation) to mark the corresponding verb
phrases in the aligned fragments. To facilitate
the annotator’s job we created a web application
(dubbed TimeAlign) that allows users to see two
aligned fragments (a “source” and a “translation”)
and to mark the corresponding verb phrase in the
target language.2 The annotator can also signal

1The source code of this algorithm can be found on
GitHub: https://github.com/UUDigitalHumanitieslab/
perfectextractor.

2The source code of this application can be found on
GitHub: https://github.com/UUDigitalHumanitieslab/
timealign. The application has been built in Django, a Python
web framework (https://www.djangoproject.com/).

Figure 1: The annotation interface used in step 2. The annotator can select (by clicking on words) a suitable translation for the
marked words in the source fragment, or use the checkboxes to mark the source as not being a PERFECT or as the translated
fragment as an incorrect translation of the source fragment.

Generic tense DE EN ES FR NL
PERFECT Perfekt present perfect

present perfect continuous
pretérito perfecto compuesto passé composé vtt

PRESENT Präsens present presente présent ott
PAST Präterium simple past pretérito imperfecto

pasado receinte
pretérito perfecto simple

imparfait
passé récent

ovt

PAST PERFECT Plusquamperfekt past perfect pretérito pluscuamperfecto plus-que-parfait vvt
OTHER Futur I/II - participio futur antérieur -

Table 1: Possible tenses in step 3 for each language, categorized in a more generic tense category. We also allow to attribute
‘other’ if none of the tenses fit.

498



when the target fragment is not a correct transla-
tion of the source, or when the verb phrase in the
source is in fact not a PERFECT (see Figure 1).

Fragments without a PERFECT in the source
and incorrect translations are removed from the
dataset. The remaining pairs are merged back into
five-tuples. Step 2 thus yields five-tuples of verb
phrases, at least one of which (the source) is a
PERFECT.

2.3 Step 3) Tense attribution

In the third step, we assign tenses to the verb
phrases marked in the translations (see step 2). For
the tense labelling, we opted for the categories dis-
played in Table 1. The tenses are automatically
or manually assigned, depending on the level of
detail of part-of-speech tags per language. The
tense attribution for English, French and Dutch is
straightforward: we used the part-of-speech tag-
ging of the EuroParl corpus to retrieve the label.3

However, for German and Spanish we opt for man-
ual tense attribution, because the part-of-speech-
tagging of the auxiliary verbs in EuroParl was too
coarse-grained.

2.4 Step 4) Dissimilarity matrix

The tense attribution process of step 3 yields five-
tuples of aligned tense attributions (see Table 2 for

3The source code of this algorithm is part of TimeAlign,
see link above.

# DE EN ES FR NL
1 Perfekt present perf. passé comp. pretérito perf. comp. vtt
2 Präterium simple past passé comp. pretérito perf. comp. vtt
3 Perfekt present perf. passé récent pasado receinte vtt

Table 2: Example set of tense attributions.

#1 #2 #3
#1 - 2/5 2/5
#2 2/5 - 4/5
#3 2/5 4/5 -

Table 3: Dissimilarity matrix for the example tense attribu-
tions in Table 2.

an example outcome). We design a simple dis-
tance function: we define five-tuples to be similar
(distance = 0) if all the tense attributions match
up, if not, we add 1 for each mismatch and divide
the sum by 5. We use the distance function on the
five-tuples to create a (dis)similarity matrix. Table
3 shows an application of the distance function and
the resulting matrix.

We decided to remove five-tuples from the re-
sults in which one of the translations was missing
or contained a non-verbal translation. We believe
including these examples in the current pilot study,
with a limit dataset and only five languages in to-
tal, would have a negative effect on our analyses.
We will address this issue in future research.

Figure 2: Visualization of the dissimilarity matrix via multidimensional scaling. The points are labelled using the tenses of
the selected language. Users can also change the dimensions shown. Clicking on a point allows to inspect a single five-tuple
(example shown in Figure 3).

499



2.5 Step 5) Visualization via
multidimensional scaling

The resulting matrix from step 4 is then plotted
using multidimensional scaling (MDS)4. On top of
that, we created an interactive visualization (see
Figure 2).

This visualization shows which space the var-
ious tenses (PERFECT and other) occupy on the
map, and thus enables researchers to see how
tenses interact within a language. The visual-
ization also allows for comparison between lan-
guages, because it uses a color labeling that re-
mains constant between languages (e.g. the Ger-
man Perfekt has the same color as the English
present perfect). Furthermore, being able to filter
tenses allows to focus on one specific tense or in-
teraction between specific tenses. The researcher
can also choose to show other dimensions of the
MDS algorithm, which facilitates interpretation.
Hovering over a point on the map directly shows
you the five-tuple the point is based on, and click-
ing on a point will yield a new page in which you
can inspect the underlying data (see Figure 3 for
an example).5

Compared to Wälchli and Cysouw (2012), our
main contributions in this methodology are (1) the
web application to allow for easier annotation and
(2) the interactive visualization of the MDS algo-

4We use the MDS algorithm from the scikit-learn pack-
age (Pedregosa et al., 2011), a Python package for machine
learning, and visualized the results using the nvd3 package
(http://nvd3.org/).

5The source code of this visualization is part of
TimeAlign, see link above.

DE EN ES FR NL
PERFECT 360 347 371 481 438
PRESENT 19 18 47 20 20

PAST 124 146 897 88 36
PAST PERFECT 4 1 3 2 18

other 5 - 2 1 -

Table 4: Descriptive statistics of tense attributions in all five
languages.

rithm, which allows for researchers to more easily
compare PERFECT usage within and across lan-
guages, as well as interpret dimensions.

3 Premilinary results

In this pilot study we analyzed a small part of the
Q4/2000 portion of the EuroParl corpus.6 Run-
ning the Translation Mining methodology on this
corpus yielded 512 complete five-tuples in total.

We first observe the descriptive statistics in
Table 4 that result from mapping the language-
specific tense labelling in step 3 to more generic
tenses (e.g. simple past to PAST, see Table 1). As
is commonly reported in literature (see de Swart
(2007) and references therein), the French passé
composé takes responsibility for a wide range of
PERFECT uses. In German and English one tends
to use PAST for quite a few contexts where French
would use the passé composé. In Spanish, the pre-
sente also competes with the PAST in this respect.

6Specifically, the files 00-12-11.xml, 00-12-14.xml and
00-12-15.xml, totaling 106k tokens for the English transla-
tion.

7This consists of 79 fragments labelled as préterite per-
fecto simple, 6 as pasado reciente and 4 as préterite imper-
fecto.

Figure 3: Detailed view of a five-tuple of fragments. The “source” fragment shows the extracted sentence from step 1 with the
PERFECT marked in green. The “translations” are the aligned fragments with manually annotated verb phrases from step 2 and
semi-automatically annotated tenses from step 3.

500



Moving from descriptive statistics to the MDS
visualization, we look at dimensions governing
the competition between languages. The Ger-
man data (depicted in Figure 2) is most obvious
in this respect, where the x-axis shows a transi-
tion from PERFECT to unmarked (aspectual per-
spective), and the y-axis from PRESENT to PAST
(temporal orientation). However, this attribution is
not so easily translated into other languages, even
though in each language we do find clear clusters
of PERFECT use.

In the visualization, we can also look at outliers
to find cases where one language is different from
the other languages. We can confirm e.g. that En-
glish requires a PAST with a locating time adver-
bial, whereas German, Dutch and French tolerate
a PERFECT in this configuration. Spanish patterns
with English (see Schaden (2009)) in this respect.
An example of this phenomenon can be found in
(3) below.

(3) a. [de] Frau Präsidentin, wir haben am 4. Dezem-
ber abgestimmt.

b. [en] Madam President, we voted on 4 Decem-
ber.

c. [es] Señora Presidenta, votamos el pasado 4 de
diciembre.

d. [fr] Madame la Présidente, nous avons voté le
4 décembre.

e. [nl] Mevrouw de Voorzitter, op 4 december
hebben wij hierover gestemd.

Another interesting outlier is the RECENT
PAST, available for French and Spanish. This pe-
riphrastic tense signals recency and is expressed
in German, English and Dutch through the use of
a PERFECT combined with an additional time ad-
verbial: gerade, just, kortgeleden respectively, see
(4) below. A tentative conclusion could be that the
RECENT PAST is a dimension of the PAST or of
the PERFECT, but in both cases this recency re-
quires additional marking.

(4) a. [de] Der Gerichtshof hat nämlich gerade die
Richtlinie aus dem Jahr 1998, die Werbung
und Sponsoring fr Tabakerzeugnisse verbietet,
aufgehoben.

b. [en] The fact is that the Court of Justice has just
repealed the 1998 Directive banning advertis-
ing and sponsorship of tobacco products.

c. [es] El Tribunal de Justicia, efectivamente,
acaba de anular la directiva de 1998 que pro-
hibı́a la publicidad y el patrocinio de los pro-
ductos del tabaco.

8This consists of 7 fragments labelled as passé recent and
1 as imparfait.

d. [fr] La Cour de justice, en effet, vient
d’annuler la directive de 1998 interdisant la
publicité et le parrainage en faveur des produits
du tabac.

e. [nl] Het Hof van Justitie heeft kortgeleden de
richtlijn van 1998 betreffende het verbod op
reclame en sponsoring in de tabakssector gean-
nuleerd.

4 Discussion

The interactive maps allowed us to reproduce
earlier research (e.g. de Swart (2007), Schaden
(2009)), but also to draw new conclusions on
the tense/aspect role of the PERFECT across lan-
guages. Our methodology can be applied to a wide
range of grammatical phenomena. There are some
remaining issues though.

First of all, interpreting the results of the MDS
algorithm is more qualitative than quantitative.
While the visualization helps researchers to form
ideas on the role of the PERFECT, these intu-
itions will need to be supported by statistics.
We are currently looking into applying Analysis
of Similarities (ANOSIM, Clarke (1993)) on the
(dis)similarity matrices to pair this with the MDS
visualization.

A second limitation is that the EuroParl cor-
pus contains only political dialogue, and there-
fore might not cover the whole range of PER-
FECT use. We should also check for register varia-
tion. Our plan is to repeat our methodology on the
OpenSubtitles2016 corpus (Lison and Tiedemann,
2016), as well as to find (or create) a multilingual
parallel corpus of literary texts.

Lastly, we think the distance function we now
use might be too simplistic. It considers all tense
differences to be equal, even though it is quite
clear that e.g. a PRESENT is semantically more
distant from a PAST PERFECT than a PERFECT.
Also, there is no cross-language comparison. We
plan to experiment with the distance function to
finetune our results.

References
K. R. Clarke. 1993. Non-parametric multivariate anal-

yses of changes in community structure. Australian
Journal of Ecology, 18(1):117–143.

Östen Dahl and Viveka Velupillai. 2013. The perfect.
In Martin Haspelmath, editor, The World Atlas of
Language Structures Online.

Henriëtte de Swart. 2007. A cross-linguistic dis-
course analysis of the perfect. Journal of pragmat-
ics, 39(12):2273–2307.

501



Helge Dyvik. 1998. A translational basis for seman-
tics. In Stig Johansson and Signe Oksefjell, edi-
tors, Corpora and Crosslinguistic Research: Theory,
Method, and Case Studies, pages 51–86. Rodopi,
Amsterdam.

Martin Haspelmath. 1997. Indefinite pronouns.
Clarendon Press, Oxford.

Jouko Lindstedt. 2000. The perfect – aspectual, tem-
poral and evidential. In Ö. Dahl, editor, Tense and
Aspect in the languages of Europe, pages 365–384.
De Gruyter, Berlin.

Pierre Lison and Jörg Tiedemann. 2016. Opensub-
titles2016: Extracting large parallel corpora from
movie and tv subtitles. In Nicoletta Calzolari,
Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck, Sara Goggi,
Marko Grobelnik, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mari-
ani, Hélène Mazo, Asunción Moreno, Jan Odijk,
and Stelios Piperidis, editors, Proceedings of the
Tenth International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2016), pages 923–
929, Portorož, Slovenia, May. European Language
Resources Association (ELRA).

Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gram-
fort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier
Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron
Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, et al. 2011. Scikit-learn:
Machine learning in python. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 12(Oct):2825–2830.

Paul Portner. 2003. The (temporal) semantics and
(modal) pragmatics of the perfect. Linguistics and
Philosophy, 26(4):459–510.

Marie-Eve Ritz. 2012. Perfect tense and aspect.
In Östen Dahl, editor, The Oxford Handbook of
Tense and Aspect, pages 881–907. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, Oxford.

Gerhard Schaden. 2009. Present perfects compete.
Linguistics and Philosophy, 32(2):115–141.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2012. Parallel data, tools and in-
terfaces in OPUS. In Nicoletta Calzolari, Khalid
Choukri, Thierry Declerck, Mehmet Uğur Doğan,
Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Jan Odijk, and
Stelios Piperidis, editors, Proceedings of the Eighth
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC-2012), pages 2214–2218, Is-
tanbul, Turkey, May. European Language Resources
Association (ELRA). ACL Anthology Identifier:
L12-1246.

Martijn van der Klis, Bert Le Bruyn, and Henriëtte
de Swart. 2015. Extracting present perfects from a
multilingual corpus. Presentation at Computational
Linguistics in the Netherlands 26.

Bernhard Wälchli and Michael Cysouw. 2012. Lex-
ical typology through similarity semantics: To-
ward a semantic map of motion verbs. Linguistics,
50(3):671–710.

502


