



















































Universal Dependencies and Morphology for Hungarian - and on the Price of Universality


Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Volume 1, Long Papers, pages 356–365,
Valencia, Spain, April 3-7, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Universal Dependencies and Morphology for Hungarian
– and on the Price of Universality

Veronika Vincze1,2, Katalin Ilona Simkó1, Zsolt Szántó1, Richárd Farkas1
1University of Szeged
Institute of Informatics

2MTA-SZTE Research Group on Artificial Intelligence
kata.simko@gmail.com

{vinczev,szantozs,rfarkas}@inf.u-szeged.hu

Abstract

In this paper, we present how the princi-
ples of universal dependencies and mor-
phology have been adapted to Hungarian.
We report the most challenging grammati-
cal phenomena and our solutions to those.
On the basis of the adapted guidelines,
we have converted and manually corrected
1,800 sentences from the Szeged Tree-
bank to universal dependency format. We
also introduce experiments on this manu-
ally annotated corpus for evaluating auto-
matic conversion and the added value of
language-specific, i.e. non-universal, an-
notations. Our results reveal that convert-
ing to universal dependencies is not nec-
essarily trivial, moreover, using language-
specific morphological features may have
an impact on overall performance.

1 Introduction

Morphological tagging and syntactic parsing are
key components in most natural language process-
ing (NLP) applications. Linguistic resources and
parsers for morphological and syntactic analysis
have been developed for several languages, see
e.g. the shared tasks on morphologically rich lan-
guages (Seddah et al., 2013; Seddah et al., 2014).
However, the comparison of results achieved for
different languages is not straightforward as most
languages and databases apply a unique tagset,
moreover, they were annotated following differ-
ent guidelines. In order to overcome these issues,
the project Universal Dependencies and Morphol-
ogy (UD) has recently been initiated within the
NLP community (Nivre, 2015). The main goal of
the UD project is to develop a “universal”, i.e. a
language-independent morphological and syntac-
tic representation which can contribute to the im-

plementation of multilingual morphological and
syntactic parsers from a computational linguistic
point of view. Furthermore, it can enhance studies
on linguistic typology and contrastive linguistics.

From the viewpoint of syntactic parsing, the
languages of the world are usually categorized ac-
cording to their level of morphological richness
(which is negatively correlated with configura-
tionality). At one end, there is English, a strongly
configurational language while there is Hungarian
at the other end of the spectrum with rich mor-
phology and free word order (Fraser et al., 2013).
In this paper, we present how UD principles were
adapted to Hungarian, with special emphasis on
Hungarian-specific phenomena.

Hungarian is one of the prototypical morpho-
logically rich languages thus our UD principles
can provide important best practices for the uni-
versalization of other morphologically rich lan-
guages. The UD guidelines for Hungarian were
motivated by both linguistic considerations and
data-driven observations. We developed a con-
verter from the existing Szeged Dependency Tree-
bank (Vincze et al., 2010) to UD and manually
corrected 1,800 sentences from the newspaper do-
main. The experiences gained during the converter
development and during the manual correction
could reinforce the linguistic guidelines. More-
over, the manually corrected gold standard corpus
provides the opportunity for empirical evaluations
like assessing the converter and comparing depen-
dency parsers employing the original and the uni-
versal morphological representations. Thus, we
evaluated the quality of the automatic conversion,
which reveals that converting to universal depen-
dencies is not necessarily trivial, at least for Hun-
garian. We also show that using different morpho-
logical tagsets may have an impact on overall pars-
ing performance and utilizing language-specific,
i.e. non-universal, information has a considerable

356



added value at both the morphological and syntac-
tic layers.

The chief contributions of the paper are the in-
troduction of

• the universal morphology and dependency
principles for Hungarian, leading to insights
for other morphologically rich languages,

• empirical experiments on the upper bound
of the accuracy of automatic conversion and
pre-parsing,

• comparative evaluations for assessing the
added value of language-specific informa-
tion at the morphological and syntactic layers
along with the interaction of these two.

2 Related Work

Standardized tagsets for both morphological and
syntactic annotations have been constantly devel-
oped in the international NLP community. For
instance, the MSD morphological coding system
was developed for a set of Eastern European lan-
guages (Erjavec, 2012), within the MULTEXT-
EAST project. Interset functions as an interlingua
for several morphological coding systems, which
can convert different tagsets to the same mor-
phological representation (Zeman, 2008). There
have also been some attempts to define a com-
mon set of parts-of-speech: Rambow et al. (2006)
defined a multilingual tagset for part-of-speech
(POS) tagging and parsing, while McDonald and
Nivre (2007) identified eight POS tags based on
data from the CoNLL-2007 Shared Task (Nivre
et al., 2007). Petrov et al. (2012) offered a tagset
of 12 POS tags and applied this tagset to 22 lan-
guages.

Now, Universal Dependencies (UD) is the latest
standardized tagset that we are aware of. UD is
an international project that aims at developing a
unified annotation scheme for dependency syntax
and morphology in a language-independent frame-
work (Nivre, 2015). Hungarian was among the
first 10 languages of the project, participating also
in the first official release in January 2015. In the
latest release (Version 1.3, May 2016), there are
annotated datasets available for 40 languages, in-
cluding English, German, French, Hungarian and
Irish, among others1. In these datasets, the very
same tagsets are applied at the morphological and

1http://universaldependencies.org/

syntactic levels and texts are annotated on the ba-
sis of the same linguistic principles, to the widest
extent possible.

The UD tagset encodes morphological informa-
tion in the form of POS tags and feature–value
pairs. As for syntactic information, each word is
assigned to its parent word in the dependency tree
and the grammatical function of the specific word
is encoded in dependency labels. Dependency la-
bels, POS tags and features are universal (i.e. there
is a fixed set of them without the possibility of in-
troducing new members), but values and depen-
dency labels can have language-specific additions
if needed. Features are divided into the categories
lexical features and inflectional features. Lexical
features are features that are characteristics of the
lemmas rather than the word forms, whereas in-
flectional features are those that are characteristics
of the word forms. Both lexical and inflectional
features can have layered features: some features
are marked more than once on the same word,
e.g. a Hungarian noun may denote its possessor’s
number as well as its own number. In this case, the
Number feature has an added layer, Num[psor].

Up to now, several papers have been published
on the general principles behind UD (Nivre, 2015;
Nivre et al., 2016) or on specific treebanks. For
instance, there are UD treebanks available for ag-
glutinative languages such as Finnish (Haverinen
et al., 2014; Pyysalo et al., 2015), Estonian (Muis-
chnek et al., 2016) and Japanese (Tanaka et al.,
2016), for Slavic languages (Zeman, 2015) and
spoken Slovenian (Dobrovoljc and Nivre, 2016)
and for Nordic languages such as Norwegian
(Øvrelid and Hohle, 2016), Danish (Johannsen et
al., 2014) and Swedish (Nivre, 2014), together
with several other languages (Persian (Seraji et al.,
2016) and Basque (Aranzabe et al., 2014), just to
name a few). Recently, a further extension on the
UD relations has been proposed: enhanced En-
glish dependencies are described in Schuster and
Manning (2016).

Our UD principles introduced in this paper
follow the central UD guidelines (Nivre, 2015)
and we did our best to align with the exist-
ing guidelines for other morphologically rich lan-
guages as well. On the other hand, there are sev-
eral Hungarian-specific phenomena that required
changes and extensions of the original UD princi-
ples.

The only available manually annotated tree-

357



bank for Hungarian is the Szeged Corpus (Csendes
et al., 2004) and Szeged Dependency Treebank
(Vincze et al., 2010). It contains approximately
82,000 sentences and 1.5 million tokens, all man-
ually annotated for POS-tagging and constituency
and dependency syntax. We developed an au-
tomatic tool that converts the morphological de-
scriptions of the Szeged Corpus to universal mor-
phology tags and the dependency trees of the
Szeged Treebank to universal dependencies.

3 Universal Morphology for Hungarian

In this section, we present the morphological
tagset applied to Hungarian.

When adapting the principles of Universal Mor-
phology to Hungarian, we were able to automati-
cally convert most of the morphological features
used in the Szeged Treebank 2.5 (Vincze et al.,
2014), which was based on MSD principles (Er-
javec, 2012). However, we faced some problem-
atic issues, which we will discuss in detail in this
section. The details of universal morphological
codeset of Hungarian are available on our web-
site2.

3.1 Possessive constructions

The possessor in Hungarian possessive construc-
tions can have two different surface forms, without
any difference in meaning: the possessor can be
morphologically marked or not, just like the En-
glish constructions the girl’s doll and the doll of
the girl. Thus, both of the following possessive
constructions are widely used:

(1) a
the

szomszéd
neighbor

kertje
garden-3SGPOSS

the neighbor’s garden

(2) a
the

szomszédnak
neighbor-DAT

a
the

kertje
garden-3SGPOSS

the neighbor’s garden

In Example 1, the possessor is not marked, i.e. it
shares its form with the nominative form of the
noun, however, in Example 2, the possessor is
morphologically marked, sharing its from with the
dative form of the noun. Nevertheless, the pos-
sessed is morphologically marked in both cases,
which was a novelty in the UD project as the lan-
guages already included in the data do not mark

2http://rgai.inf.u-szeged.hu/project/
nlp/research/msdkr/univmorph.html

the possessor on the possessed noun but use deter-
miners for this purpose (cf. my car but az autóm
(the car-1SGPOSS)). Moreover, the number of the
possessed can be marked on the noun in elliptical
constructions such as:

(3) Láttam
see-PAST-2SGPOSS-ACC

az
the

autódat
car-2SG-POSS

,
,
de
but

a
the

szomszédét
neighbor-POSSD.SG-ACC

nem
not

.

I could see your car but not that of the
neighbor.

(4) Láttam
see-PAST-2SGPOSS-ACC

a
the

gyerekeidet
child-2SG-PL-POSS

,
,
de
but

a
the

szomszédéit
neighbor-POSSD.PL-ACC

nem
not

.

I could see your children but not those of
the neighbor.

Hence, we had to introduce novel morpholog-
ical features to mark the person and number fea-
tures of the possessor on Hungarian nouns. Num-
ber denotes the number of the noun, Number[psor]
and Person[psor] denote the number and person
of the possessor, and Number[psed] denotes the
number of the possessed. Below, there is a sample
word annotated according to the Universal Mor-
phology principles.

(5) házaiménak
house-1SGPOSS-PL-POSSD.SG-DAT
to that of my houses
NOUN
Case=Dat|Number=Plur|Number[psed]=Sing
|Number[psor]=Sing|Person[psor]=1

3.2 Object-verb agreement
Another Hungarian-specific feature was the def-
initeness of the object. As a special type of
agreement, the definiteness of their objects deter-
mines which paradigm of the verb is to be cho-
sen. In other words, the form of the verb changes
when the definiteness of the object also changes
(Törkenczy, 2005). For instance, proper nouns and
NPs with a definite article are typical examples of
definite objects and trigger the objective form of
the verb (see Example 6) while bare nouns and
NPs with an indefinite article are indefinite objects

358



(see Example 7) and trigger the subjective form of
the verb. Second person objects also trigger a spe-
cial form of the verb as listed in Example 8:

(6) Látom
see-1SGOBJ

Pistit
Steve-ACC

.

.
I can see Steve.

(7) Látok
see-1SGSUBJ

egy
a

gyereket
kid-ACC

az
the

udvaron
yard-SUP

.

.
I can see a kid in the yard.

(8) Látlak
see-1SGOBJ2

.

.
I can see you.

In this way, the feature Definiteness needs to be
applied to verbs in Hungarian, moreover, it has a
language-specific feature due to the special form
triggered by the second person objects. Thus, Def-
initeness has three possible values in Hungarian:
Definite, Indefinite, 2.

3.3 Determiners and pronouns
Determiners, pronouns and ordinal numbers also
constituted a peculiarity. According to Hungarian
grammatical traditions, ordinal numbers have been
treated as numerals but in the universal morphol-
ogy, they have to be annotated as adjectives. Thus,
their POS tags were automatically converted to ad-
jectives.

Demonstrative pronouns were also treated dif-
ferently in the original annotation used in the
Szeged Treebank and in universal morphology.
While demonstrative pronouns ez and az are
tagged as pronouns independently of their posi-
tions, in universal morphology such words occur-
ring before an article should be tagged as a deter-
miner (see Example 9) but when they are used as
an NP, they should be tagged as a pronoun (see
Example 10).

(9) Olvastam
read-PAST-1SGOBJ

azt
that-ACC

a
the

könyvet
book-ACC

.

.
I have read that book.

(10) Olvastam
read-PAST-1SGOBJ

azt
that-ACC

.

.
I have read that.

These cases were also automatically converted,
following the universal morphology guidelines.

3.4 Verbal prefixes

In our original treebank, verbal particles that were
spelt as a separate token had their own part-of-
speech, i.e. verbal particle. According to the
UD description however, not all function words
that are traditionally called particles automatically
qualify for the PART tag. They may be adpositions
or adverbs by origin, therefore should be tagged
ADP or ADV, respectively. Thus, we manually
compiled a list that contained the original part-of-
speech of words that were tagged as verbal pre-
fixes, for instance, el “away” was treated as an ad-
verb and agyon brain-SUP as a noun – the latter
is usually used in phrases like agyonüt “kill some-
one by hitting on his head”. Based on this list, we
were able to automatically assign UD POS tags to
verbal prefixes.

4 Universal Dependency in Hungarian

When adapting the universal dependency labels to
Hungarian, we could find a one-to-one correspon-
dence between the original labels of the Szeged
Treebank and the UD labels only in most of the
cases, and these labels could be automatically con-
verted to the UD format, making use of the de-
pendency and morphological annotations found in
the original treebank. However, we encountered
some problematic cases during conversion, which
we will discuss below in detail. The details of uni-
versal dependency rules of Hungarian are avail-
able on our website3.

4.1 Non-overt copulas

Traditionally, it is the verb that functions as the
head of the clause in dependency grammars but in
certain languages, there are verbless clauses where
the predicate consists of a single nominal element
(typically a noun or an adjective) at the surface
level. The dependency analysis of such sentences
may be problematic due to the lack of an overt
verb. Some studies such as Polguère and Mel’čuk
(2009) argue for a zero copula in such cases, es-
pecially when the copula is empty only in certain
slots of the verbal paradigm. For instance, in Hun-
garian, the copula has its zero form only in the
present tense, indicative mood, third person forms
as shown in Examples 11-14:

(11) Present tense, indicative mood, Sg1:

3http://rgai.inf.u-szeged.hu/
dependency

359



Én
I

tanár
teacher

vagyok
be-1SG

.

.

I am a teacher.

(12) Present tense, indicative mood, Sg3:

Ő
he

tanár
teacher

.

.

He is a teacher.

(13) Past tense, indicative mood, Sg3:

Ő
he

tanár
teacher

volt
be-PAST-3SG.

.

He was a teacher.

(14) Present tense, imperative mood, Sg3:

Ő
he

legyen
be-IMP-3SG

tanár
teacher

!
!

He should be a teacher.

The original dependency analysis in the Szeged
Treebank inserts a zero copula (VAN), i.e. a virtual
node in the dependency tree, which functions as
the head of the clause and the nominal predicate is
attached to it. Figure 1 shows such an analysis of
the sentence E gondolat sem új (this thought not
new) “This thought is not novel at all”.

Beside the function head analysis (i.e. where
function words, e.g. the copula is the head), there
is another approach to dependencies, namely, the
content head analysis, where the head is a con-
tent word instead of a function word. In the latter
case, the main grammatical relations can be found
among content words and all the other function
words are attached to the main structure. UD ap-
plies the content head analysis, which means that
in copular constructions, the nominal element is
the head and the copula (if present) is attached to
it with a cop relation. In a similar way, the head
of adpositional constructions is the noun and the
adposition is attached to it.

Sentences with nominal predicates were au-
tomatically converted from the original treebank
into the UD format: Figure 2 shows the UD anal-
ysis of the sentence found in Figure 1. Likewise,
postpositional constructions were converted: the
noun was treated as the head and the postposition
was attached to it with a case label.

E gondolat sem VAN új .

ROOT

DET

SUBJ

NEG PRED
PUNCT

Figure 1: A function head analysis in the Szeged
Dependency Treebank (E gondolat sem VAN új
(this thought IS not new) “This thought is not
novel at all”).

E gondolat sem új .

root

det

nsubj

neg punct

Figure 2: A content head analysis in the Hungarian
UD treebank (E gondolat sem új (this thought not
new) “This thought is not novel at all”).

4.2 Subordinate clauses
Subordinate clauses proved also to be a problem-
atic issue as UD principles make a sharp distinc-
tion among several types of subordinate clauses
– e.g. clausal subject, clausal object, adverbial
clause – in contract with the Szeged Dependency
Treebank, which applies one single label for all
types of subordinate clauses. Some types of sub-
ordinate clauses had a special label in the con-
stituency version of the treebank hence their con-
version was straightforward. In other cases, we
could rely on manually constructed conversion
rules but the resulting trees had to be corrected
manually.

4.3 Multiword named entities
The UD treatment of multiword named entities re-
quired a Hungarian-specific solution. According
to the UD principles, the first token of the multi-
word expressions should be marked as the head.
However, in Hungarian, it is always the last ele-
ment of the multiword expression that is inflected.
Examples 15-16 demonstrate that the first element
cannot be inflected, only the last one:

(15) Találkoztam
meet-PAST-1SG

Kovács
Kovács

Jánossal
János-INSTR

.

.

I met János Kovács4.
4The standard order of person names is surname + first

360



(16) *Találkoztam
meet-PAST-1SG

Kováccsal
Kovács-INSTR

János
János

.

.
I met János Kovács.

Due to the above morphosyntactic facts, we
marked the last token of multiword named entities
as the head in the Hungarian UD treebank while
all the other UD treebanks mark the first token as
the head.

4.4 Dative forms

In Hungarian, nouns that bear the suffix -nAk can
fulfill several grammatical roles in the sentence
such as:

(17) indirect object:

Laci
Leslie

adott
give-PAST-3SG

a
the

barátjának
friend-3SGPOSS-DAT

egy
an

almát
apple-ACC

.

.

Leslie gave an apple to his friend.

(18) possessor:

Laci
Leslie

elvette
take-PAST-3SGOBJ

a
the

barátjának
friend-3SGPOSS-DAT

a
the

könyvét
book-3SGPOSS-ACC

.

.

Leslie took his friend’s book.

(19) dativus ethicus:

Nekem
I-DAT

nehogy
so.as.not.to

eladd
sell-IMP-2SGOBJ

az
the

autódat
car-2SGPOSS-ACC

!
!

As for me, you should not sell you car.

(20) experiencer:

Nekem
I-DAT

nagyon
very

tetszett
like-PAST-3SG

az
the

előadás
performance

.

.

I really liked the performance.

(21) semantic subject:

name in Hungarian.

Lacinak
Leslie-DAT

bocsánatot
apology-ACC

kellett
must-PAST-3SG

kérnie
ask-INF-3SG

a
the

barátjától
friend-3SGPOSS-ABL

.

.

Leslie had to apologize to his friend.

While these forms do not show any difference at
the morphological level, they have very different
roles at the syntactic and semantic levels. Thus we
decided not to make any distinction in the morpho-
logical annotation but they should have different
syntactic labels. Indirect objects are marked with
the label iobj, possessors with the label nmod:poss
and other occurrences with nmod:obl. Obviously,
these annotations had to be carried out manually
as most of these cases could not be easily and un-
equivocally converted to the UD format only on
the basis of morphology and syntax. Consider the
following examples (Example 19 is repeated for
convenience):

(22) Nekem
I-DAT

nehogy
so.as.not.to

eladd
sell-IMP-2SGOBJ

az
the

autódat
car-2SGPOSS-ACC

!
!

As for me, you should not sell your car.

(23) Nehogy
so.as.not.to

eladd
sell-IMP-2SGOBJ

nekem
I-DAT

az
the

autódat
car-2SGPOSS-ACC

!
!

You should not sell your car to me.

Example 22 contains a dativus ethicus whereas
Example 23 contains an indirect object. The two
sentences only have different word orders thus
their automatic distinction would not be straight-
forward.

4.5 Light verb constructions
Light verb constructions are verb + noun combi-
nations where most of the semantic content of the
whole expression is carried by the noun while the
syntactic head is the verb (e.g. to have a shower, to
make a decision). They are not uniformly treated
in Version 1.3 of the UD treebanks. Light verb
constructions are either not marked at all or if they
are marked, they may have a special structure or
special labels (Nivre and Vincze, 2015). The Hun-
garian treebank belongs to the latter group, that is,
members of light verb constructions bear a special

361



label. For instance, Figure 3 shows that the label
dobj:lvc can be found between the nominal
and verbal component of the light verb construc-
tion döntést hoz (decision-ACC bring) “to make a
decision”. In this way, the dobj part of the la-
bel marks that syntactically it is a verb–object re-
lation but semantically, it is a light verb construc-
tion, marked by the lvc extension of the label.

A bizottság döntést hozott az ülésen .

root

nsubj

det

punct

dobj:lvc
nmod:obl

det

Figure 3: Light verb construction in the Hungar-
ian UD treebank (A bizottság döntést hozott az
ülésen (the committee decision-ACC bring-PAST-
3SG the meeting-SUP) “The committee made a
decision at the meeting”).

5 Experiments

We developed a converter from the existing
Szeged Dependency Treebank (Vincze et al.,
2010) to UD and manually corrected 1,800 sen-
tences from the newspaper domain. The manually
corrected UD sentences are available in the UD
repository v3.0. The experiences gained during
the manual correction could reinforce the linguis-
tic conversion rules and the manually corrected
gold standard corpus provides the opportunity for
empirical evaluations which we introduce in this
section.

5.1 On the Accuracy of Automatic
Converters

Most of the UD treebanks are the result of auto-
matic conversion from a dependency treebank of
originally different principles. The accuracy of
these automatic converters is unknown, i.e. we do
not know how much information was lost or how
much noise was introduced by the converters. To
empirically investigate this in the case of Hungar-
ian UD, we compared the converted and the manu-
ally corrected, i.e. gold standard, trees of the 1800
sentences.

The converter itself is based on linguistic rules
(it is available on our website5) which were itera-

5http://rgai.inf.u-szeged.hu/
dependency

tively improved by manually investigating the re-
sults of conversion on sentences of the Szeged De-
pendency Treebank. The final version of the con-
verted achieves an UAS of 87.81 and a LAS of
75.99 on the 1800 sentences compared against the
manually corrected UD trees. We believe that this
level of accuracy is not sufficient for releasing the
rest of the 80,000 sentences of the automatically
converted Szeged Dependency Treebank. On the
other hand, some of the shortcomings of the auto-
matic conversion could be corrected by exploiting
annotation found in other versions of the Szeged
Treebank. For instance, the type of certain subor-
dinate clauses is marked in the constituency ver-
sion of the treebank, which can be transformed
into UD labels. Moreover, coreference annota-
tions from the subcorpora annotated for corefer-
ence relations could enhance the proper attach-
ment of relative clauses. We intend to add these
pieces of information to our converter in the fu-
ture, hence higher accuracy scores can be provi-
sioned for the automatic conversion process: just
with the above mentioned corrections, an addi-
tional 6 percentage points could be achieved in
terms of LAS as about 20% of the errors are due
to subordinate or relative clauses.

5.2 On the Price of Universality

We carried out experiments for investigating
whether is there any difference between using the
original MSD (Vincze et al., 2014) and the new
universal morphological (UM) descriptions. We
were particularly interested in the utility of the
two representations for dependency parsing. We
trained two models of the MarMot morphological
tagger (Mueller et al., 2013) using the two mor-
phological representation in 10-fold cross-tagging
on our manually corrected 1800 sentences. Then
we trained and evaluated the Bohnet dependency
parser (Bohnet, 2010) on the train/test split of the
UD repository v3.0 utilizing the two different pre-
dicted morphological descriptions. We used the
default parameters for both the MarMot and the
Bohnet parser.

Table 1 presents unlabeled (UAS) and labeled
(LAS) attachment scores achieved by the parser
on the test set. The first column of the table in-
dicates whether the universal morphology (UM)
or the original MSD morphological codes were
employed in the experiment. The second column
of the table shows which dependency label set

362



Morph. labels Dep labels UAS LAS (full label) LAS (main label)
UM full label 81.94 76.98 78.39
MSD full label 82.27 77.50 78.75
UM main label 81.70 – 78.39
MSD main label 82.17 – 78.58

Table 1: Dependency parsing results on the Hungarian Universal Dependency dataset. In the case of
LAS(main label) we do not check the language specific part of the dependency labels in the evaluations
while we compare the universal and language-specific dependency labels at LAS(full label).

was used for training the Bohnet parser. main la-
bel refers here to the universal dependency labels
while full label refers to using the concatenation
of universal and language-specific labels. The dif-
ference between the last two columns of the table
is that we checked the full or only the main depen-
dency labels at evaluations.

Table 1 shows the MSD outperforms UM con-
sistently at each of the experiments. Although
these differences are not high, this suggests that
some information encoded in the MSD morphol-
ogy is not represented in UM, i.e. we have to
pay a price to be universal. We can observe the
greatest difference when training and evaluating
on full dependency labels, i.e. language-specific
morphological features contribute to the predic-
tion of language-specific dependency labels.

We made a manual error analysis of the results
with regard to attachment (UAS) errors, i.e. we
compared the outputs of the dependency parsers
trained by using predicted universal codes and pre-
dicted MSD morphological codes, respectively.
Results are presented in Table 2. We found that
the benefits of the original language-specific an-
notation (MSD) mostly manifests in the treatment
of subordinate clauses, adverbial modifiers and in-
finitival complements. These results might be ex-
plained by the fact that in certain cases, MSD
contains more detailed grammatical information
than the UM formalism. For instance, MSD en-
codes whether a conjunction connects clauses or
words/phrases, which information is missing from
UM. Also, higher results were achieved for cases
when two nouns or adjectives were following each
other and one of them modified the other (as in
magas rangú képviselői “representatives of high
standings”). However, sentences containing an
overt or covert form of the copula could be parsed
more effectively by using universal morphology
codes.

Error type MSD % UM %
Coordination 100 32.05 98 30.34
Article 44 14.10 44 13.62
Adverbial 35 11.22 43 13.31
Other 37 11.86 31 9.60
Part/adj compl. 31 9.94 32 9.91
Adjacent N/A 15 4.81 20 6.19
Subordination 13 4.17 17 5.26
Copula 14 4.49 11 3.41
Infinitive 9 2.88 15 4.64
Nominal arg. 8 2.56 8 2.48
Possessor 6 1.92 4 1.24
Total 312 100 323 100

Table 2: Error analysis: the number and ratio of
specific error types.

5.3 The Added Value of Language-specific
UD Labels

We also investigated the impact of the language-
specific parts of the dependency labels. As the
numbers in Table 1 show, slightly better results can
be achieved both in terms of UAS and LAS when
training the model with full labels than with main
labels. This highlights the importance of adding
language specific distinctions to the universal ones
because they may contain information that can be
exploited during the tree decoding. They con-
tribute even to unlabeled attachment decisions. To
take an example, UD does not make any distinc-
tion among different types of nominal modifiers,
treating them as nmod. However, for Hungarian,
we applied extra labels such as nmod:poss for
possessors (see Section 3.1) and nmod:obl for
nominal arguments of the verb. As for the first, it
should always be attached to the possessed noun,
whereas the second one is attached to a verb (see
also Examples 18 and 19 with the dative morpho-
logical case). Thus, the parser can learn these fine-
grained distinctions, which might be beneficial for
the unlabeled attachment scores as well.

363



Also, we would like to point out that the uti-
lization of language-specific labels does not con-
tradict the UD principles. In UD, each language
should select the appropriate labels according to
their needs but there is no need to apply all of
the labels/features. General labels like nsubj or
dobj will be used in most (maybe all) of the UD
languages but there are other labels or feature-
value pairs that are applicable for only a hand-
ful of languages. These ones are now called as
“language-specific” features but in principle, their
status is not different from those that are more
widely applied. So we believe that introducing
“language-specific” additions does not harm the
UD principles. Moreover, the chief objective of
our experiments was to highlight the added value
of language-specific features and we were able to
show that they can even improve parsing accuracy
when evaluated exclusively on the general labels.
The main goal of UD is to provide a way where
the parsing results over languages are compara-
ble, hence using language specific features during
decoding but evaluating only on general labels is
in line with this comparison principle. Moreover,
it indicates for UD treebank developers that – be-
sides general labels – language-specific ones have
to be taken seriously.

6 Conclusions

In this paper, the principles of universal depen-
dencies and morphology for Hungarian were in-
troduced by reporting the most challenging gram-
matical phenomena and our solutions to those.
We converted then manually corrected 1,800 sen-
tences from the Szeged Treebank to universal
dependency format and introduced experiments
on this manually annotated corpus for evaluat-
ing automatic conversion and the added value of
language-specific, i.e. non-universal, annotations.
We would like to draw the attention to the im-
portance of understanding i) the information loss
of the automatic UD converters; ii) what is the
price of being constrained by universal morphol-
ogy principles and; iii) the utility of exploiting
language-specific dependency labels in UD.

Acknowledgments

The research of Richárd Farkas was funded by the
János Bolyai Scholarship.

References
Maria Jesus Aranzabe, Aitziber Atutxa, Kepa Ben-

goetxea, Arantza Diaz de Illarraza, Iakes Goenaga,
Koldo Gojenola, and Larraitz Uria. 2014. Auto-
matic Conversion of the Basque Dependency Tree-
bank to Universal Dependencies. In Proceedings
of the Fourteenth International Workshop on Tree-
banks and Linguistic Theories (TLT 14).

Bernd Bohnet. 2010. Top accuracy and fast depen-
dency parsing is not a contradiction. In Proceedings
of the 23rd International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (Coling 2010), pages 89–97.

Dóra Csendes, János Csirik, and Tibor Gyimóthy.
2004. The Szeged Corpus. A POS Tagged and Syn-
tactically Annotated Hungarian Natural Language
Corpus. In COLING 2004 5th International Work-
shop on Linguistically Interpreted Corpora, pages
19–22.

Kaja Dobrovoljc and Joakim Nivre. 2016. The Uni-
versal Dependencies Treebank of Spoken Slovenian.
In Proceedings of the Tenth International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2016).

Tomaž Erjavec. 2012. MULTEXT-East: morphosyn-
tactic resources for Central and Eastern European
languages. Language Resources and Evaluation,
46(1):131–142.

Alexander Fraser, Helmut Schmid, Richárd Farkas,
Renjing Wang, and Hinrich Schütze. 2013. Knowl-
edge sources for constituent parsing of german, a
morphologically rich and less-configurational lan-
guage. Computational Linguistics, 39(1):57–85.

Katri Haverinen, Jenna Nyblom, Timo Viljanen,
Veronika Laippala, Samuel Kohonen, Anna Mis-
silä, Stina Ojala, Tapio Salakoski, and Filip Gin-
ter. 2014. Building the essential resources for
finnish: the turku dependency treebank. Language
Resources and Evaluation, 48(3):493–531.

Anders Johannsen, Héctor Martínez Alonso, and Bar-
bara Plank. 2014. Universal Dependencies for
Danish. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth Interna-
tional Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theo-
ries (TLT 14).

Ryan McDonald and Joakim Nivre. 2007. Charac-
terizing the errors of data-driven dependency pars-
ing models. In Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and Computational Natural Language
Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), pages 122–131.

Thomas Mueller, Helmut Schmid, and Hinrich
Schütze. 2013. Efficient higher-order CRFs for
morphological tagging. In Proceedings of the 2013
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 322–332.

364



Kadri Muischnek, Kaili Müürisep, and Tiina Puo-
lakainen. 2016. Estonian Dependency Treebank:
from Constraint Grammar tagset to Universal De-
pendencies. In Proceedings of the Tenth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC 2016).

Joakim Nivre and Veronika Vincze. 2015. Light verb
constructions in universal dependencies. Poster at
the 5th PARSEME meeting, Iaşi, Romania.

Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Sandra Kübler, Ryan Mc-
Donald, Jens Nilsson, Sebastian Riedel, and Deniz
Yuret. 2007. The CoNLL 2007 shared task on de-
pendency parsing. In Proceedings of the CoNLL
Shared Task Session of EMNLP-CoNLL 2007, pages
915–932.

Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip Gin-
ter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajic, Christopher D. Man-
ning, Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo,
Natalia Silveira, Reut Tsarfaty, and Daniel Zeman.
2016. Universal Dependencies v1: A Multilingual
Treebank Collection. In Proceedings of the Tenth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2016).

Joakim Nivre. 2014. Universal Dependencies for
Swedish. In Proceedings of SLTC 2014.

Joakim Nivre. 2015. Towards a Universal Grammar
for Natural Language Processing. In Computational
Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing, pages 3–
16.

Lilja Øvrelid and Petter Hohle. 2016. Universal De-
pendencies for Norwegian. In Proceedings of the
Tenth International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2016).

Slav Petrov, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan McDonald. 2012.
A universal part-of-speech tagset. In Proceedings of
LREC.

Alain Polguère and Igor Aleksandrovič Mel’čuk, edi-
tors. 2009. Dependency in Linguistic Description.
Studies in language companion series.

Sampo Pyysalo, Jenna Kanerva, Anna Missilä,
Veronika Laippala, and Filip Ginter. 2015. Uni-
versal Dependencies for Finnish. In Proceedings of
Nodalida.

Owen Rambow, Bonnie Dorr, David Farwell, Rebecca
Green, Nizar Habash, Stephen Helmreich, Eduard
Hovy, Lori Levin, Keith J. Miller, Teruko Mitamura,
Reeder, Florence, and Advaith Siddharthan. 2006.
Parallel syntactic annotation of multiple languages.
In Proceedings of LREC.

Sebastian Schuster and Christopher D. Manning. 2016.
Enhanced English Universal Dependencies: An Im-
proved Representation for Natural Language Under-
standing Tasks. In Proceedings of the Tenth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC 2016).

Djamé Seddah, Reut Tsarfaty, Sandra Kübler, Marie
Candito, Jinho D. Choi, Richárd Farkas, Jennifer
Foster, Iakes Goenaga, Koldo Gojenola Gallete-
beitia, Yoav Goldberg, Spence Green, Nizar Habash,
Marco Kuhlmann, Wolfgang Maier, Yuval Mar-
ton, Joakim Nivre, Adam Przepiórkowski, Ryan
Roth, Wolfgang Seeker, Yannick Versley, Veronika
Vincze, Marcin Woliński, and Alina Wróblewska.
2013. Overview of the SPMRL 2013 shared
task: A cross-framework evaluation of parsing
morphologically rich languages. In Proceedings
of the Fourth Workshop on Statistical Parsing of
Morphologically-Rich Languages, pages 146–182.

Djamé Seddah, Sandra Kübler, and Reut Tsarfaty.
2014. Introducing the SPMRL 2014 Shared Task on
Parsing Morphologically-rich Languages. In Pro-
ceedings of the First Joint Workshop on Statisti-
cal Parsing of Morphologically Rich Languages and
Syntactic Analysis of Non-Canonical Languages,
pages 103–109.

Mojgan Seraji, Filip Ginter, and Joakim Nivre. 2016.
Universal Dependencies for Persian. In Proceedings
of the Tenth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016).

Takaaki Tanaka, Yusuke Miyao, Masayuki Asahara,
Sumire Uematsu, Hiroshi Kanayama, Shinsuke
Mori, and Yuji Matsumoto. 2016. Universal Depen-
dencies for Japanese. In Proceedings of the Tenth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2016).

Miklós Törkenczy. 2005. Practical Hungarian Gram-
mar. Corvina, Budapest.

Veronika Vincze, Dóra Szauter, Attila Almási, György
Móra, Zoltán Alexin, and János Csirik. 2010. Hun-
garian Dependency Treebank. In Proceedings of
LREC 2010.

Veronika Vincze, Viktor Varga, Katalin Ilona Simkó,
János Zsibrita, Ágoston Nagy, Richárd Farkas, and
János Csirik. 2014. Szeged Corpus 2.5: Mor-
phological Modifications in a Manually POS-tagged
Hungarian Corpus. In Proceedings of LREC 2014,
pages 1074–1078.

Daniel Zeman. 2008. Reusable tagset conversion us-
ing tagset drivers. In Proceedings of the Sixth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC’08).

Daniel Zeman. 2015. Slavic Languages in Universal
Dependencies. In Slovko 2015: Natural Language
Processing, Corpus Linguistics, E-learning.

365


