



















































The Parallel Meaning Bank: Towards a Multilingual Corpus of Translations Annotated with Compositional Meaning Representations


Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Volume 2, Short Papers, pages 242–247,
Valencia, Spain, April 3-7, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Parallel Meaning Bank: Towards a Multilingual Corpus of
Translations Annotated with Compositional Meaning Representations

Lasha Abzianidze1, Johannes Bjerva1, Kilian Evang1, Hessel Haagsma1,
Rik van Noord1, Pierre Ludmann2, Duc-Duy Nguyen3 and Johan Bos1

1CLCG, University of Groningen, The Netherlands
2École Normale Supérieure de Cachan, France

3University of Trento, Italy
{l.abzianidze,j.bjerva,k.evang}@rug.nl

{hessel.haagsma,r.i.k.van.noord,johan.bos}@rug.nl
pierre.ludmann@ens-cachan.fr

ducduy.nguyen@studenti.unitn.it

Abstract
The Parallel Meaning Bank is a cor-
pus of translations annotated with shared,
formal meaning representations compris-
ing over 11 million words divided over
four languages (English, German, Ital-
ian, and Dutch). Our approach is based
on cross-lingual projection: automatically
produced (and manually corrected) se-
mantic annotations for English sentences
are mapped onto their word-aligned trans-
lations, assuming that the translations are
meaning-preserving. The semantic anno-
tation consists of five main steps: (i) seg-
mentation of the text in sentences and lexi-
cal items; (ii) syntactic parsing with Com-
binatory Categorial Grammar; (iii) uni-
versal semantic tagging; (iv) symboliza-
tion; and (v) compositional semantic anal-
ysis based on Discourse Representation
Theory. These steps are performed us-
ing statistical models trained in a semi-
supervised manner. The employed annota-
tion models are all language-neutral. Our
first results are promising.

1 Introduction

There is no reason to believe that the ingredi-
ents of a meaning representation for one language
should be different from that for another language.
Hence, a meaning-preserving translation from a
sentence to another language should, arguably,
have equivalent meaning representations. Hence,
given a parallel corpus with at least one language
for which one can automatically generate mean-
ing representations with sufficient accuracy, indi-
rectly one also produces meaning representations

for aligned sentences in other languages. The aim
of this paper is to present a method that imple-
ments this idea in practice, by building a paral-
lel corpus with shared formal meaning representa-
tions, that is, the Parallel Meaning Bank (PMB).

Recently, several semantic resources—corpora
of texts annotated with meanings—have been de-
veloped to stimulate and evaluate semantic pars-
ing. Usually, such resources are manually or semi-
automatically created, and this process is expen-
sive since it requires training of and annotation
by human annotators. The AMR banks of Ab-
stract Meaning Representations for English (Ba-
narescu et al., 2013) or Chinese and Czech (Xue
et al., 2014) sentences, for instance, are the result
of manual annotation efforts. Another example is
the development of the Groningen Meaning Bank
(Bos et al., 2017), a corpus of English texts an-
notated with formal, compositional meaning rep-
resentations, which took advantage of existing se-
mantic parsing tools, combining them with human
corrections.

In this paper we propose a method for pro-
ducing meaning banks for several languages (En-
glish, Dutch, German and Italian), by taking ad-
vantage of translations. On the conceptual level
we follow the approach of the Groningen Mean-
ing Bank project (Basile et al., 2012), and use
some of the tools developed in it. The main rea-
son for this choice is that we are not only inter-
ested in the final meaning of a sentence, but also
in how it is derived—the compositional semantics.
These derivations, based on Combinatory Catego-
rial Grammar (CCG, Steedman, 2001), give us the
means to project semantic information from one
sentence to its translated counterpart.

The goal of the PMB is threefold. First, it will

242



Figure 1: Annotation pipeline of the PMB. Manual corrections can be added at each annotation layer.

serve as a test bed for cross-lingual compositional
semantics, enabling systematic studies of the chal-
lenges arising from loose translations and differ-
ent semantic granularities. The second goal is to
produce data for building semantic parsers for lan-
guages other than English. This, in turn, will help
with the third, long-term goal, which concerns the
process of translation itself. Human translators
purposely change meaning in translation to yield
better translations (Langeveld, 1986). The third
goal is thus to develop methods to automatically
detect such shifts in meaning.

2 Languages and Corpora

The foundation of the PMB is a large set of raw,
parallel texts. Ideally, each text has a parallel ver-
sion in every language of the meaning bank, but in
practice, having a version for the pivot language
(here: English) and one other language is suffi-
cient for our purposes. Another criterion for selec-
tion is that freely distributable texts are preferable
over texts which are under copyright and require
(paid) licensing.

Besides English we chose two other Germanic
languages, Dutch and German, because they are
similar to English. We also include one Romance
language, Italian, in order to test whether our
method works for languages which are typologi-
cally more different from English.

The texts in the PMB are sourced from twelve
different corpora from a wide range of gen-
res, including, among others: Tatoeba1, News-
Commentary (via OPUS, Tiedemann, 2012), Rec-
ognizing Textual Entailment (Giampiccolo et al.,
2007), Sherlock Holmes stories2, and the Bible
(Christodouloupoulos and Steedman, 2015).

These corpora are divided over 100 parts in a
balanced way. Initially, two of these parts, 00 and

1https://tatoeba.org
2http://gutenberg.org, http://etc.usf.

edu/lit2go, http://gutenberg.spiegel.de

10, are selected to be the gold standard (and thus
will be manually annotated). This ensures that the
gold standard represents the full range of genres.

The resulting corpus contains over 11.3 million
tokens, divided into 285,154 documents. All of
them have an English version. 72% have a German
version, 14% a Dutch one and 42% an Italian one.
9% have German and Dutch, 6% have Dutch and
Italian and 18% have Italian and German. 5% exist
in all four languages.

3 Automatic Annotation Pipeline

Our goal is first to richly annotate the English cor-
pus, with annotations ranging from segmentation
to deep semantics, and then project these annota-
tions to the other languages via alignment. The an-
notation consists of several layers, each of which
will be presented in detail below. Figure 1 gives
an overview of the pipeline while Figure 2 shows
the annotation example.

3.1 Segmentation

Text segmentation involves word and sentence
boundary detection. Multiword expressions that
represent constituents are treated as single tokens.
Closed compound words that have a semantically
transparent structure are decomposed. For exam-
ple, impossible is decomposed into im and possi-
ble while Las Vegas and 2 pm are analysed as a
single token. In this way we aim to assign ‘atomic’
meanings to tokens and avoid redundant lexical se-
mantics. Segmentation follows an IOB-annotation
scheme on the level of characters, with four labels:
beginning of sentence, beginning of word, inside a
word, and outside a word. We use the same sta-
tistical tokenizer, Elephant (Evang et al., 2013),
for all four languages, but with language-specific
models.

243



NP
Er

S\NP
kam

((S\NP )\(S\NP ))/NP
um

N
fünf Uhr

(S\NP )\(S\NP )
zurück

He
PRO
male
NP

λp.D

=

∗ px
x

male(x)

came
EPS
come
S\NP

λGp.G(λx.D

=

; pe)

e t1 t2
come(e)
Theme(e, x)
Time(e, t2)
now(t1) t2 < t1

back
IST
back

(S\NP )\(S\NP )
λV Gp.V G(λx.D

=

; px)

s

Manner(x, s)
back(s)

<
S\NP

at
REL
at

((S\NP )\(S\NP ))/NP
λGVHp.V H(λx.G(λy.D

=

; px))

at(x, y)

∅
DIS
∅

NP/N
λpq.D

=

; (px; qx)

x

5 o’clock
CLO
17 :00

N
λx.D

=

time(x)
value(x, 17 :00)

>
NP

>
(S\NP )\(S\NP )

<
S\NP

<
S

x y e s t1 t2
come(e) T ime(e, t2) Theme(e, x) Manner(e, s) at(e, y) time(y)
now(t1) t2 < t1 male(x) back(s) value(y, 17 :00)

Figure 2: Document 00/3178: Projection of the annotation from English to German. The source sentence
is annotated, in this order, with semtags, symbols, CCG categories and lexical semantics. The DRS for
the whole sentence is obtained compositionally from the lexical DRSs.

3.2 Syntactic Analysis
We use CCG-based derivations for syntactic anal-
ysis. The transparent syntax-semantic interface
of CCG makes the derivations suitable for wide-
coverage compositional semantics (Bos et al.,
2004). CCG is also a lexicalised theory of
grammar, which makes cross-lingual projection
of grammatical information from source to target
sentence more convenient (see Section 4).

The version of CCG that we employ differs
from standard CCG: in order to facilitate the cross-
lingual projection process and retain composition-
ality, type-changing rules of a CCG parser are
explicated by inserting (unprojected) empty ele-
ments which have their own semantics (see the to-
ken ∅ in Figure 2).

For parsing, we use EasyCCG (Lewis and
Steedman, 2014), which was chosen because it
is accurate, does not require part-of-speech anno-
tation (which would require different annotation
schemes for each language) and is easily adaptable
to our modified grammar formalism.

3.3 Universal Semantic Tagging
To facilitate the organization of a wide-coverage
semantic lexicon for cross-lingual semantic analy-
ses, we develop a universal semantic tagset. The
semantic tags (semtags, for short) are language-
neutral, generalise over part-of-speech and named
entity classes, and also add more specific infor-
mation when needed from a semantic perspective.

Given a CCG category of a token, we specify a
general schema for its lexical semantics by tagging
the token with a semtag.

Currently the tagset comprises 80 different fine-
grained semtags divided into 13 coarse-grained
classes (Bjerva et al., 2016). We do not list all
possible semtags here, but give some examples in-
stead. For instance, the semtag NOT marks nega-
tion triggers, e.g., not, no, without and affixes, e.g.,
im- in impossible; the semtag POS is assigned to
possibility modals, e.g., might, perhaps and can.
ROL identifies roles and professions, e.g., boxer
and semanticist, while CON is for concepts like ta-
ble and wheel. Distinguishing roles from concepts
is crucial to get accurate semantic behaviour. 3

We use the semantic tagger based on deep resid-
ual networks. It works directly on the words as in-
put, and therefore requires no additional language-
specific features. The first results on semantic tag-
ging, with an accuracy of 83.6%, are reported by
Bjerva et al. (2016).

3.4 Symbolization

The meaning representations that we use contain
logical symbols and non-logical symbols. The lat-
ter are based on the words mentioned in the input
text. We refer to this process as symbolization. It
combines lemmatization with normalization, and

3Roles are mostly consistent with each other while con-
cepts are not. For instance, an entity can be a boxer and a
semanticist at the same time but not a wheel and a table.

244



performs some lexical disambiguation as well. For
example, male is the symbol of the pronouns he
and himself, europe of the adjective European,
and 14 :00 for the time expression 2 pm. A sym-
bol together with a CCG category and a semtag
are sufficient to determine the lexical semantics
of a token (see Figure 2). Some function words
do not need symbols since their semantics are ex-
pressed with logical symbols, e.g., auxiliary verbs,
conjunctions, and most determiners.

Notice that the employed symbols are not as
radical and verbalized as the concepts in AMRs,
e.g., the symbol of opinion is opinion rather than
opine. First, using deep forms as symbols often
makes it difficult to recover the original and se-
mantically related forms, e.g., if opinion had the
symbol opine, then it would be difficult to re-
cover opinion and its semantic relation with idea.
Second, alignment of translations does not al-
ways work well with deep forms, e.g., opinion can
be translated as parere in Italian and mening in
Dutch, but it is unnatural to align their symbols to
opine. After all, having such alignments would
make it difficult to judge good and bad transla-
tions, which is one of the goals of the PMB.

The symbolizer could either be implemented
as a rule-based system with multiple modules, or
as a system that learns the required transforma-
tions from examples. The advantage of the lat-
ter is that it is more robust to typos and other
spelling variants without manual engineering. To
evaluate the feasibility of this approach, we built a
character-based sequence-to-sequence model with
deep recurrent neural networks, which uses words,
semtags, and additional data from existing knowl-
edge sources, such as WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998),
Wikipedia, and UNECE codes for trade4, to do
symbolization. We are currently investigating how
the performance of machine learning-based sym-
bolizer compares to a rule-based one incorporating
the lemmatizer Morpha (Minnen et al., 2001).

3.5 Semantic Interpretation
Discourse Representation Theory (DRT, Kamp
and Reyle, 1993), is the semantic formalism that
is used as a semantic representation in the PMB. It
is a well-studied theory from a linguistic seman-
tic viewpoint and suitable for compositional se-
mantics.5 Expressions in DRT, called Discourse

4http://unece.org/cefact/codesfortrade
5In particular, we employ Projective DRT (Venhuizen,

2015)—an extension of DRT that accounts for presupposi-

Representation Structures (DRSs), have a recur-
sive structure and are usually depicted as boxes.
An upper part of a DRS contains a set of referents
while the lower part lists a conjunction of atomic
or compound conditions over these referents (see
an example of a DRS in the bottom of Figure 2).

Boxer (Bos, 2015), a system that employs
λ-calculus to construct DRSs in a compositional
way, is used to derive meaning representations
of the documents. However, the original ver-
sion of Boxer is tailored to the English language.
We have adapted Boxer to work with the univer-
sal semtags rather than English-specific part-of-
speech tags. Boxer also assigns VerbNet/LIRICS
thematic roles (Bonial et al., 2011) to verbs so
that the lexical semantics of verbs include the cor-
responding thematic predicates (see came in Fig-
ure 2).

Hence an input to Boxer is a CCG derivation
where all tokens are decorated with semtags and
symbols. This information is enough for Boxer to
assign a lexical DRS to each token and produce a
DRS for the entire sentence in a compositional and
language-neutral way (see Figure 2).

4 Cross-lingual Projection

The initial annotation for Dutch, German and Ital-
ian is bootstrapped via word alignments. Each
non-English text is automatically word-aligned
with its English counterpart, and non-English
words initially receive semtags, CCG categories
and symbols based on those of their English coun-
terparts (see Figure 2).

CCG slashes are flipped as needed, and 2:1
alignments are handled through functional com-
position. Then, the CCG derivations and DRSs
can be obtained by applying CCG’s combinatory
rules in such a way that the same DRS as for the
English sentence results (Evang and Bos, 2016;
Evang, 2016).

If the alignment is incorrect, it can be corrected
manually (see Section 5). The idea behind this
way of bootstrapping is to exploit the advanced
state-of-the-art of NLP for English, and to encour-
age parallelism between the syntactic and seman-
tic analyses of different languages.

To facilitate cross-lingual projection, alignment
has to be done at two levels: sentences and words.
Sentence alignment is initially done with a simple

tions, anaphora and conventional implicatures in a general-
ized way.

245



one-to-one heuristic, with each English sentence
aligned to a non-English sentence in order, to be
corrected manually. Subsequently, we automati-
cally align words in the aligned sentences using
GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003).

Although we use existing tools for the initial an-
notation of English and projection as the initial an-
notation of non-English documents, our aim is to
train new language-neutral models. Training new
models on just the automatic annotation will not
yield better performance than the combination of
existing tools and projection. However, we im-
prove these models constantly by adding manual
corrections to the initial automatic annotation, and
retraining them. In addition, this approach lets us
adapt to revisions of the annotation guidelines.

5 Adding Bits of Wisdom

For each annotation layer, manual corrections can
be applied to any of the four languages. These an-
notations are called Bits of Wisdom (BoWs, fol-
lowing Basile et al. (2012)), and they overrule
the annotations of the models if they are in con-
flict. Based on the BoWs, we distinguish three
disjoint classes of annotation layers: gold standard
(manually checked), silver standard (including at
least one BoW) and bronze standard (no BoWs).
Table 1 shows how these classes are distributed
across languages and documents.

Layer Lang Gold Silver Bronze

Tokens

EN 6,810 2,548 275,796
DE 4,757 736 198,776
IT 2,843 384 117,792
NL 945 528 38,942

Semtags EN 316 17,479 267,359

Symbols EN 313 1,177 283,664

Table 1: Number of gold, silver and bronze doc-
uments per layer and language, as of 13-02-2017.

In addition to adding BoWs in general, we also
use annotations to improve the models in a more
targeted way, by focusing on annotation conflicts.
Annotation conflicts arise when a certain annota-
tion layer for a document has manually checked
and marked ‘gold’. When the automatic annota-
tion of such a layer changes, e.g., after retraining a
model, new annotation errors might be introduced,
and these are marked as annotation conflicts. The

annotation conflicts are then slated for resolution
by an expert annotator. This has two main ben-
efits: it concentrates human annotation efforts on
difficult cases, for which the models’ judgements
are still in flux, so that the bits of wisdom can steer
the model more effectively. In addition, by en-
forcing conflicts to be re-judged by a human, we
have a chance to correct human errors and incon-
sistencies, and, if necessary, improve the annota-
tion guidelines.

6 Conclusion

Our ultimate goal is to provide accurate, language-
neutral natural language analysis tools. In the
pipeline that we presented in this paper, we
have laid the foundation to reach this goal. For
every task in the pipeline—tokenization, pars-
ing, semantic tagging, symbolization, semantic
interpretation—we have a single component that
uses a language-specific model. We proposed new
language-neutral tagging schemes to reach this
goal (e.g., for tokenization and semantic tagging)
and adapted existing formalisms (making CCG
more general by introducing lexical categories for
empty elements).

Our first results for Dutch show that our method
is promising (Evang and Bos, 2016), but we still
need to assess how much manual effort is involved
in other languages, such as German and Italian.
We will also explore the idea of combining CCG
parsing with Semantic Role Labelling, following
Lewis et al. (2015), and whether we can derive
word senses in a data-driven fashion (Kilgarriff,
1997) rather than using WordNet. Furthermore,
we will assess whether our cross-lingual projec-
tion method yields accurate tools with time and
annotation costs lower than would be needed when
starting from scratch for a single language.

The annotated data of the PMB is now publicly
accessible through a web interface.6 Stable re-
leases will be made available for download peri-
odically.

Acknowledgements

This work was funded by the NWO-VICI grant
”Lost in Translation – Found in Meaning” (288-
89-003). The Tesla K40 GPU used for this re-
search was donated by the NVIDIA Corporation.
We also wish to thank the two anonymous review-
ers for their comments.

6http://pmb.let.rug.nl

246



References
Laura Banarescu, Claire Bonial, Shu Cai, Madalina

Georgescu, Kira Griffitt, Ulf Hermjakob, Kevin
Knight, Philipp Koehn, Martha Palmer, and Nathan
Schneider. 2013. Abstract Meaning Representation
for sembanking. In Proceedings of the 7th Linguis-
tic Annotation Workshop and Interoperability with
Discourse, pages 178–186, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Valerio Basile, Johan Bos, Kilian Evang, and Noortje
Venhuizen. 2012. A platform for collabora-
tive semantic annotation. In Proceedings of the
Demonstrations at the 13th Conference of the Euro-
pean Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (EACL 2012), pages 92–96, Avignon,
France.

Johannes Bjerva, Barbara Plank, and Johan Bos. 2016.
Semantic tagging with deep residual networks. In
Proceedings of COLING 2016, the 26th Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics:
Technical Papers, pages 3531–3541, Osaka, Japan.

Claire Bonial, William J. Corvey, Martha Palmer,
Volha Petukhova, and Harry Bunt. 2011. A hierar-
chical unification of LIRICS and VerbNet semantic
roles. In Proceedings of the 5th IEEE International
Conference on Semantic Computing (ICSC 2011),
pages 483–489.

Johan Bos, Stephen Clark, Mark Steedman, James R.
Curran, and Julia Hockenmaier. 2004. Wide-
coverage semantic representations from a CCG
parser. In Proceedings of the 20th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING
2004), pages 1240–1246, Geneva, Switzerland.

Johan Bos, Valerio Basile, Kilian Evang, Noortje Ven-
huizen, and Johannes Bjerva. 2017. The Gronin-
gen Meaning Bank. In Nancy Ide and James Puste-
jovsky, editors, Handbook of Linguistic Annotation.
Springer Netherlands.

Johan Bos. 2015. Open-domain semantic parsing with
Boxer. In Beáta Megyesi, editor, Proceedings of the
20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguis-
tics (NODALIDA 2015), pages 301–304.

Christos Christodouloupoulos and Mark Steedman.
2015. A massively parallel corpus: the Bible in
100 languages. Language Resources and Evalua-
tion, 49(2):375–395.

Kilian Evang and Johan Bos. 2016. Cross-lingual
learning of an open-domain semantic parser. In Pro-
ceedings of COLING 2016, the 26th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics: Techni-
cal Papers, pages 579–588, Osaka, Japan.

Kilian Evang, Valerio Basile, Grzegorz Chrupała, and
Johan Bos. 2013. Elephant: Sequence labeling for
word and sentence segmentation. In Proceedings of
the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1422–
1426, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Kilian Evang. 2016. Cross-lingual Semantic Parsing
with Categorial Grammars. Ph.D. thesis, University
of Groningen.

Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet. An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, Ma., USA.

Danilo Giampiccolo, Bernardo Magnini, Ido Dagan,
and Bill Dolan. 2007. The third PASCAL Recog-
nizing Textual Entailment challenge. In Proceed-
ings of the ACL-PASCAL Workshop on Textual En-
tailment and Paraphrasing, pages 1–9.

Hans Kamp and Uwe Reyle. 1993. From Discourse
to Logic; An Introduction to Modeltheoretic Seman-
tics of Natural Language, Formal Logic and DRT.
Kluwer, Dordrecht.

Adam Kilgarriff. 1997. “I don’t believe in word
senses”. Computers and the Humanities, 31(2):91–
113.

Arthur Langeveld. 1986. Vertalen wat er staat. Syn-
these, De Arbeiderspers.

Mike Lewis and Mark Steedman. 2014. A* CCG
parsing with a supertag-factored model. In Proceed-
ings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages
990–1000, Doha, Qatar.

Mike Lewis, Luheng He, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2015.
Joint A* CCG parsing and semantic role label-
ing. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), pages 1444–1454.

Guido Minnen, John Carroll, and Darren Pearce. 2001.
Applied morphological processing of English. Nat-
ural Language Engineering, 7(3):207–223.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A sys-
tematic comparison of various statistical alignment
models. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Mark Steedman. 2001. The Syntactic Process. The
MIT Press, Cambridge, Ma., USA.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2012. Parallel data, tools and in-
terfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the Eight In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2012), pages 2214–2218, Istan-
bul, Turkey.

Noortje Joost Venhuizen. 2015. Projection in Dis-
course: A data-driven formal semantic analysis.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Groningen.

Nianwen Xue, Ondrej Bojar, Jan Hajic, Martha Palmer,
Zdenka Uresova, and Xiuhong Zhang. 2014. Not
an interlingua, but close: Comparison of English
AMRs to Chinese and Czech. In Proceedings of
the Ninth International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2014), volume 14,
pages 1765–1772.

247


