



















































The Semantic Proto-Role Linking Model


Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Volume 2, Short Papers, pages 92–98,
Valencia, Spain, April 3-7, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Semantic Proto-Role Linking Model

Aaron Steven White
Science of Learning Institute

Johns Hopkins University
aswhite@jhu.edu

Kyle Rawlins
Cognitive Science

Johns Hopkins University
kgr@jhu.edu

Benjamin Van Durme
Computer Science

Johns Hopkins University
vandurme@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract

We propose the semantic proto-role
linking model, which jointly induces both
predicate-specific semantic roles and
predicate-general semantic proto-roles
based on semantic proto-role property
likelihood judgments. We use this model
to empirically evaluate Dowty’s thematic
proto-role linking theory.

1 Introduction

A linking theory explains how predicates’ se-
mantic arguments—e.g. HITTER, HITTEE, and
HITTING-INSTRUMENT for hit—are mapped to
their syntactic arguments—e.g. subject, direct ob-
ject, or prepositional object (see Fillmore 1970;
Zwicky 1971; Jackendoff 1972; Carter 1976;
Pinker 1989; Grimshaw 1990; Levin 1993).

(1) a. [John]HITTER hit [the fence]HITTEE.
b. [The stick]INST hit [the fence]HITTEE.

A semantic role labeling (SRL) system imple-
ments the inverse of a linking theory: where a
linking theory maps a predicate’s observed seman-
tic arguments to its latent syntactic arguments, an
SRL system maps a predicate’s observed syntac-
tic arguments to its latent semantic arguments (see
Gildea and Jurafsky 2002; Litkowski 2004; Car-
reras and Marquez 2004; Marquez et al. 2008).

SRL is generally treated as a supervised task—
requiring semantic role annotation, which is ex-
pensive, time-consuming, and hard to scale. This
has led to the development of unsupervised sys-
tems for semantic role induction (SRI), which in-
duce predicate-specific roles—cf. PropBank roles
(Palmer et al., 2005)—from syntactic and lexical
features of a predicate and its arguments.

One approach to SRI that has proven fruitful
is to explicitly implement linking as a compo-

nent of generative (cf. Grenager and Manning,
2006) or discriminative (cf. Lang and Lapata,
2010) models. But while most SRI systems have
some method for generalizing across predicate-
specific roles, few explicitly induce predicate-
general roles—cf. VerbNet roles (Kipper-Schuler,
2005)—separately from predicate-specific roles.
This is a missed opportunity, since the nature of
such roles is a contentious topic in the theoreti-
cal literature, and the SRI task seems likely to be
useful for approaching questions about them in an
empirically rigorous way.

We focus in particular on empirically assess-
ing the semantic proto-role theory developed by
Dowty (1991). We propose the semantic proto-
role linking model (SPROLIM), which jointly in-
duces both predicate-specific roles and predicate-
general semantic proto-roles (Dowty, 1991) based
on semantic proto-role property likelihood judg-
ments (Reisinger et al., 2015; White et al., 2016).

We apply SPROLIM to Reisinger et al.’s proto-
role property annotations of PropBank. To
evaluate SPROLIM’s ability to recover predicate-
specific roles, we compare the predicate-specific
roles it induces against PropBank, finding that
SPROLIM outperforms baselines that do not dis-
tinguish predicate-specific and predicate-general
roles. We then compare the predicate-general
roles that SPROLIM induces against those Dowty
proposes, finding a predicate-general role that
matches Dowty’s PROTOAGENT. Finally, our
work could be viewed as an approach to associat-
ing a vector-space semantics to the categorical la-
bels of existing type-level semantic role resources,
and so we release a resource that maps from Prop-
Bank roles to semantic vectors as fit by SPROLIM.

2 Related work

Prior work in SRI has tended to focus on using
syntactic and lexical features to cluster arguments

92



l a

θ z

s

ψ

c

φ

ηµ

κ

δ

Tvj

S
SR

P
j ∈ Cv

Av |Av|
v ∈ V

Figure 1: Plate diagram for SPROLIM

into semantic roles. Swier and Stevenson (2004)
introduce the first such system, which uses a boot-
strapping procedure to first associate verb tokens
with frames containing typed slots (drawn from
VerbNet), then iteratively compute probabilities
based on cooccurrence counts and fill unfilled slots
based on these probabilities.

Grenager and Manning (2006) introduce the
idea of generating syntactic position based on a
latent semantic role representation learned from
syntactic and selectional features. Lang and La-
pata (2010) expand on Grenager and Manning
(2006) by introducing the notion of a canonical-
ized linking. The idea behind canonicalization is
to account for the fact that the syntactic argument
that a particular semantic argument is mapped to
can change depending on the syntax. For instance,
when hit is passivized, the HITTEE argument is
mapped to subject position, where it would nor-
mally be mapped to object position.

(2) [The fence]HITTEE was hit.

We incorporate both ideas into our Semantic
Proto-Role Linking Model (SPROLIM).

SRI approaches that do not explicitly incorpo-
rate the idea of a linking theory have also been
popular. Lang and Lapata (2011a, 2014) use graph
clustering methods and Lang and Lapata (2011b)
use a split-merge algorithm to cluster arguments
based on syntactic context. Titov and Klementiev
(2011) use a non-parametric clustering method
based on the Pitman-Yor Process, and Titov and
Klementiev (2012) propose nonparametric cluster-

Algorithm 1 Semantic Proto-Role Linking Model
1: for verb type v ∈ V do
2: for argument type i ∈ Av do
3: draw semantic protorole zvi ∼ Cat(θvi)
4: for verb token j ∈ Cv do
5: draw canonicalization k ∼ Cat(φv|Tvj |)
6: cvj ← element of symmetric group S|Tvj |,k
7: let r : |Tvj |-length tuple
8: for argument token t ∈ Tvj do
9: rt ← semantic protorole zvcvjt

10: for property p ∈ P do
11: draw avjt ∼ Bern(ηrvjtp)
12: if avjt = 1 then
13: draw lvjt ∼ Cat(Ordκ(µrtp))
14: let ρ : |S|Tvj ||-length vector
15: for linking s′ ∈ S|Tvj | do
16: ρs′ ←

∏
t softmax

(
ψrt +

∑
o6=t δs′ts′o

)
17: draw linking k ∼ Cat(ρ)
18: svj ← S|Tvj |k

ing models based on the Chinese Restaurant Pro-
cess (CRP) and distance dependent CRP.

While each of these SRI systems have some
method for generalizing across predicate-specific
roles, few induce explicit predicate-general roles,
like AGENT and PATIENT, separately from
predicate-specific roles. One obstacle is that there
is no agreed upon set of roles in the theoretical
literature, making empirical evaluation difficult.
One reason that such a set does not exist is that
reasonably wide-coverage linking theories require
an ever-growing number of roles to capture linking
regularities—a problem that Dowty (1991) refers
to as role fragmentation (see also Dowty, 1989).

As a solution to role fragmentation, Dowty
proposes the proto-role linking theory (PRLT).
Instead of relying on categorical roles, such as
AGENT and PATIENT—like traditional linking the-
ories do—PRLT employs a small set of relational
properties (e.g. volition, instigation, change of
state, etc.) that a predicate can entail about its ar-
guments. Dowty partitions these relational prop-
erties into two sets, indexed by two proto-roles:
PROTOAGENT and PROTOPATIENT. The syntac-
tic position that a particular predicate-specific role
is mapped to is then determined by how many
properties from each set hold of arguments that
fill that role. The reason PROTOAGENT and PRO-
TOPATIENT are known as proto-roles is that they
amount to role prototypes (Rosch and Mervis,
1975): a particular predicate-specific role can be
closer or further from a PROTOAGENT or PRO-
TOPATIENT depending on its properties.

Reisinger et al. (2015) crowd-sourced annota-

93



svj1svj2

svj3

zvcvj1zvcvj2

zvcvj3

Figure 2: Linking model factor graph for token j of predi-
cate v with three arguments.

tions of Dowty’s proto-role properties by gather-
ing answers to simple questions about how likely,
on a five-point scale, it is that particular relational
properties hold of arguments in PropBank (cf.
Kako, 2006; Greene and Resnik, 2009; Hartshorne
et al., 2013). We use these annotations, known as
SPR1 (White et al., 2016), to train our semantic
proto-role linking model (SPROLIM).1

3 Semantic Proto-Role Linking Model

SPROLIM implements a generalization of Dowty’s
semantic proto-role linking theory that allows for
any number of proto-roles—i.e. predicate-general
roles. Figure 1 shows a plate diagram for the full
model, and Algorithm 1 gives its generative story.
There are two main components of SPROLIM: (i)
the property model and (ii) the mapping model.

Property model The property model relates
each predicate-general role—i.e. proto-role—to
(i) the likelihood that a property is applicable to an
argument with that role and, (ii) if applicable, how
likely it is the property holds of that argument.

We implement this model using a cumulative
link logit hurdle model (see Agresti, 2014). In this
model, each semantic proto-role r ∈ R is associ-
ated with two |P|-length real-valued vectors: ηr,
which gives the probability that each property p is
applicable to an argument that has role r, and µr,
which corresponds to the likelihood of each prop-
erty p ∈ P when an argument has role r.

In the hurdle portion of the model, a Bernoulli
probability mass function for applicability a ∈
{0, 1} is given by P(a | η) = ηa(1− η)1−a. What
makes this a hurdle model is that the rating prob-
ability only kicks in if the rating crosses the ap-
plicability “hurdle” (cf. Mullahy, 1986). The pro-

1SPR1 is available at http://decomp.net.

cedural way of thinking about this is that, first, a
rater decides whether a property is applicable; if
it is not, they stop; if it is, they generate a rating.
The joint probability of l and a is then defined as

P(l, a | µ, η,κ) ∝ P(a | η)P(l | µ,κ)a

In the cumulative link logit portion of the model, a
categorical probability mass function with support
on the property likelihood ratings l ∈ {1, . . . , 5}
is determined by a latent µ and a nondecreasing
real-valued cutpoint vector κ.

P(l = j | µ,κ) =
{

1− qj−1 if j = 5
qj − qj−1 otherwise

where qj ≡ logit−1(κj+1 − µ) and q0 ≡ 0. In
Algorithm 1, we denote the parameters of this dis-
tribution as Ordκ(µ).

Mapping model The mapping model has two
components: (i) the canonicalizer, which maps
from argument tokens to predicate-specific roles,
and (ii) the linking model, which maps from
predicate-specific roles to syntactic positions.

We implement the canonicalizer by assuming
that, for each predicate (verb) v, there is some
canonical ordering of its predicate-specific roles
and that for each sentence (clause) j ∈ Cv that
v occurs in, there is some permutation of v’s argu-
ment tokens in that sentence that aligns them with
their predicate-specific role in the canonical order.
Denoting the set of argument tokens in sentence j
with Tvj , the set of possible mappings is the sym-
metric group S|Tvj |. We place a categorical distri-
bution with parameter φv on this group.

We implement the linking model using the con-
ditional random field whose factor graph is de-
picted in Figure 2. This diagram corresponds to
the s node and all of its parents in Figure 1.

4 Experiments

In this experiment, we fit SPROLIM to the SPR1
data and investigate the predicate-specific and
predicate-general roles it learns.2

Baseline models We use two kinds of Gaus-
sian Mixture Models (GMMs) as baselines: one
that uses only the property judgments associated
with each argument and another that uses both

2All code, along with the learned predicate and role rep-
resentations, are available at http://decomp.net.

94



0.75

0.80

0.85

0.90

0.95

2 3 4 5 6 7

Number of roles

C
lu

s
te

r 
p

u
ri

ty

Baseline (sem only) Baseline (sem + syn) SPROLIM

macroaverage microaverage

Figure 3: Cluster purity for predicate-specific roles with
baselines and SPROLIM.

those property judgments and the syntactic posi-
tion. We treat each GMM component as a seman-
tic role, extracting each argument’s role by taking
the maximum over that argument’s mixture distri-
bution. Since there is no principled distinctions
among GMM components, these baselines imple-
ment systems that does not distinguish between
predicate-specific and predicate-general roles.

Model fitting To fit SPROLIM, we use projected
gradient descent with AdaGrad (Duchi et al.,
2011) to find an approximation to the maximum
likelihood estimates for Θ, Φ, M, E, Ψ, ∆, and
κ, with the categorical variables Z and C inte-
grated out of the likelihood. To fit the GMM base-
lines, we use Expectation Maximization.

Results Following Lang and Lapata (2010) and
others, we evaluate the model using cluster purity.

purity(C, T ) =
|C|∑
i

1
|ci| maxj |ci ∩ tj |

where C = {ci} is the partition of a predicate’s ar-
guments given by a model, and T = {tj} is some
ground truth partition—here, PropBank roles.

Figure 3 shows the micro- and macro-average
cluster purity for both the GMM baselines and
SPROLIM fit with differing numbers of semantic
roles. We see that even with only two predicate-
general proto-roles, SPROLIM is better able to as-
sign correct predicate-specific roles than the two
baseline GMMs. SPROLIM reaches maximum
cluster purity at six proto-roles.

Figure 4 shows the estimates of the property
likelihood centroids L for |R| ∈ {2, 6}. Columns
give the prototype centroid for a single proto-role.

At |R| = 2, the first proto-role centroid corre-
sponds nearly perfectly to the PROTOAGENT role
proposed by Dowty. Furthermore, by inspect-
ing the role-syntax associations Ψ, we see that
this proto-role is more strongly associated with
the subject position than proto-role 2, and so we
henceforth refer to it as the PROTOAGENT role.

A proto-role analogous to the PROTOAGENT
role is found for all other values of |R| that we fit.
For instance, at |R| = 6, the first proto-role cen-
troid is highly correlated with the first proto-role
centroid at |R| = 2. The only difference between
this centroid and the one found at |R| = 2 is that
the one at |R| = 6 loads even more positively on
Dowty’s proto-agent properties.

At |R| = 6, the second proto-role centroid ap-
pears to be a modified version of the PROTOA-
GENT role that does not require physical exis-
tence or sentience and is negatively associated
with physical contact. By investigating the proto-
role mixtures Θ for each argument, we see that
this captures cases of nonsentient or abstract—but
still agentive—subjects—e.g. Mobil in (3).

(3) Mobil restructured the entire company dur-
ing an industrywide shakeout.

The rest of the roles are more varied. For |R| =
2, the second proto-role centroid loads negatively
(or near zero) on all PROTOAGENT properties, and
really, all other properties besides MANIPULATED
BY ANOTHER. This non-PROTOAGENT role ap-
pears to split into four separate roles at |R| = 6,
three of which load heavily on manipulated by an-
other (proto-roles 4-6) and the fourth of which
(proto-role 3) requires makes physical contact.
Each of these four non-PROTOAGENT roles might
be considered to be different flavors of PROTOPA-
TIENT, which does not appear to be a unified con-
cept. This is corroborated by examples of argu-
ments that load on each of these four proto-roles.

For instance, the objects of sign, want, and di-
vert load heavily on the third proto-role.

(4) a. President Bush signed a disaster decla-
ration covering seven CA counties.

b. The U.S. wants a higher won to make
South Korea ’s exports more expensive
and help trim Seoul’s trade surplus.

95



c. They divert law-enforcement resources
at a time they are most needed for pro-
tecting lives and property.

The subjects of verbs like date, stem, and recover
(in their intransitive form) load heavily on the
fourth proto-role.

(5) a. His interest in the natural environment
dates from his youth.

b. Most of the telephone problems
stemmed from congestion.

c. Junk bonds also recovered somewhat,
though trading remained stalled.

The objects of verbs like reduce, lower, and slash
load heavily on the fifth proto-role.

(6) a. The firm reduced those stock holdings
to about 70%.

b. It also lowered some air fares.
c. Robertson Stephens slashed the value of

the offering by 7%.

And the objects of verbs like gain, lose, and drop,
which tend to involve measurements, load heavily
on the sixth proto-role.

(7) a. Fujisawa gained 50 to 2,060.
b. A&W Brands lost 1/4 to 27 .
c. B.F. Goodrich dropped 1 3/8 to 49 1/8 .

This last category is interesting because it raises
a question about how sensitive SPROLIM is to the
particular domain on which the proto-role prop-
erties are annotated. For instance, outside of
newswire, the senses of the verbs in (7) are less
likely to include measure arguments, and so per-
haps SPROLIM would not find such a proto-role in
annotations of text from a different genre.

We believe this warrants further investigation.
But we also note that (7) does not exhaust the
kinds of arguments that load heavily on the sixth
proto-role: the objects of consume and borrow
(among many others) also do so.

(8) a. In fact, few consume much of anything.
b. All they are trying to do is borrow some

of the legitimacy of the Bill of Rights.

The fact that the arguments in (8) are at least su-
perficially unlike the measure arguments found in
(7) may suggest that SPROLIM is discovering that
measure arguments such as those in (7) fall into a

2 6 protoroles

created

destroyed

changes possession

predicate changed argument

stationary

change of location

change of state

makes physical contact

manipulated by another

location of event

volition

sentient

instigation

exists as physical

awareness

existed after

existed before

existed during
p

ro
to

ty
p

e
 c

e
n

tro
id

1 2 1 2 3 4 5 6

Figure 4: Heatmap of prototype centroids for property like-
lihood ratings for models with 2 proto-roles and 6 proto-roles.
Black is + and red is −.

larger category, in spite of genre-related biases.

5 Conclusion

In this paper, we proposed the semantic proto-
role linking model, which jointly induces both
predicate-specific semantic roles and predicate-
general semantic proto-roles based on semantic
proto-role property likelihood judgments. We
used this model to empirically evaluate Dowty’s
thematic proto-role linking theory, confirming the
existence of Dowty’s PROTOAGENT role but find-
ing evidence that his PROTOPATIENT role may
consist of at least four subtypes.

We have three aims for future work: (i) to as-
sess how robust the proto-roles we induce here are
to genre effects; (ii) to assess whether languages
differ in the set of proto-roles they utilize; and
(iii) to extend this model to incorporate annota-
tions that semantically decompose noun meanings
and verb meanings in theoretically motivated ways
(cf. White et al., 2016).

Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by the JHU HLT-
COE and DARPA LORELEI. The U.S. Govern-
ment is authorized to reproduce and distribute
reprints for Governmental purposes. The views
and conclusions contained in this publication are
those of the authors and should not be interpreted
as representing official policies or endorsements
of DARPA or the U.S. Government.

96



References

Alan Agresti. Categorical Data Analysis. John
Wiley & Sons, 2014. ISBN 1-118-71085-1.

Xavier Carreras and Llus Marquez. Introduc-
tion to the CoNLL-2004 shared task: Seman-
tic role labeling. In Proceedings of the Ninth
Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning, pages 152–164. Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2004.

Richard Carter. Some linking regularities. In On
Linking: Papers by Richard Carter, Lexicon
Project Working Papers (Vol. 25). MIT Center
for Cognitive Science, Cambridge, MA, 1976.

David Dowty. Thematic proto-roles and argument
selection. Language, 67(3):547–619, 1991.

David R. Dowty. On the semantic content of the
notion of thematic role. In Properties, types and
meaning, pages 69–129. Springer, 1989.

John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer.
Adaptive subgradient methods for online learn-
ing and stochastic optimization. The Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 12:2121–2159,
2011.

Charles John Fillmore. The grammar of hitting
and breaking. In R.A. Jacobs and P.S. Rosen-
baum, editors, Readings in English Trans-
formational Grammar, pages 120–133. Ginn,
Waltham, MA, 1970.

Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky. Automatic la-
beling of semantic roles. Computational Lin-
guistics, 28(3):245–288, 2002.

Stephan Greene and Philip Resnik. More than
words: Syntactic packaging and implicit sen-
timent. In Proceedings of Human Language
Technologies: The 2009 Annual Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 503–
511. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 2009. ISBN 1-932432-41-8.

Trond Grenager and Christopher D. Manning. Un-
supervised discovery of a statistical verb lexi-
con. In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 1–8. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 2006. ISBN 1-932432-73-6.

Jane Grimshaw. Argument structure. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1990. ISBN 0262071258.

Joshua K. Hartshorne, Claire Bonial, and Martha
Palmer. The VerbCorner Project: Toward an
Empirically-Based Semantic Decomposition of
Verbs. In Proceedings of the 2013 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 1438–1442, 2013.

Ray Jackendoff. Semantic Interpretation in Gen-
erative Grammar. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
1972. ISBN 0-262-10013-4.

Edward Kako. Thematic role properties of sub-
jects and objects. Cognition, 101(1):1–42,
2006.

Karin Kipper-Schuler. VerbNet: A broad-
coverage, comprehensive verb lexicon. PhD
thesis, University of Pennsylvania, 2005.

Joel Lang and Mirella Lapata. Unsupervised in-
duction of semantic roles. In Human Lan-
guage Technologies: The 2010 Annual Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages
939–947. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, 2010. ISBN 1-932432-65-5.

Joel Lang and Mirella Lapata. Unsupervised se-
mantic role induction with graph partitioning.
In Proceedings of the Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 1320–1331. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 2011a. ISBN 1-937284-11-5.

Joel Lang and Mirella Lapata. Unsupervised se-
mantic role induction via split-merge cluster-
ing. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, vol-
ume 1, pages 1117–1126. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, 2011b. ISBN 1-932432-
87-6.

Joel Lang and Mirella Lapata. Similarity-driven
semantic role induction via graph partition-
ing. Computational Linguistics, 40(3):633–669,
2014.

Beth Levin. English verb classes and alterna-
tions: A preliminary investigation. University
of Chicago Press, 1993. ISBN 0226475336.

Ken Litkowski. Senseval-3 task: Automatic label-
ing of semantic roles. Senseval-3: Third Inter-
national Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems
for the Semantic Analysis of Text, 1:141–146,
2004.

97



Lluis Marquez, Xavier Carreras, Kenneth C.
Litkowski, and Suzanne Stevenson. Semantic
role labeling: an introduction to the special is-
sue. Computational linguistics, 34(2):145–159,
2008.

John Mullahy. Specification and testing of some
modified count data models. Journal of econo-
metrics, 33(3):341–365, 1986.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kings-
bury. The proposition bank: An annotated cor-
pus of semantic roles. Computational Linguis-
tics, 31(1):71–106, 2005.

Steven Pinker. Learnability and Cognition: The
Acquisition of Argument Structure. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1989. ISBN 0-262-51840-6.

Drew Reisinger, Rachel Rudinger, Francis Fer-
raro, Craig Harman, Kyle Rawlins, and Ben-
jamin Van Durme. Semantic Proto-Roles.
Transactions of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 3:475–488, 2015.

Eleanor Rosch and Carolyn B. Mervis. Family
resemblances: Studies in the internal structure
of categories. Cognitive psychology, 7(4):573–
605, 1975.

Robert S. Swier and Suzanne Stevenson. Unsuper-
vised semantic role labelling. In Proceedings of
EMNLP, volume 95, page 102, 2004.

Ivan Titov and Alexandre Klementiev. A Bayesian
model for unsupervised semantic parsing. In
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: Human Language Technologies, volume 1,
pages 1445–1455. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 2011. ISBN 1-932432-87-6.

Ivan Titov and Alexandre Klementiev. Crosslin-
gual induction of semantic roles. In Proceed-
ings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Long Pa-
pers, volume 1, pages 647–656. Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2012.

Aaron Steven White, Drew Reisinger, Keisuke
Sakaguchi, Tim Vieira, Sheng Zhang, Rachel
Rudinger, Kyle Rawlins, and Benjamin
Van Durme. Universal decompositional seman-
tics on universal dependencies. In Proceedings
of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages
1713–1723, Austin, TX, 2016. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Arnold M. Zwicky. In a manner of speaking. Lin-
guistic Inquiry, 2(2):223–233, 1971.

98


