



















































Evaluating Persuasion Strategies and Deep Reinforcement Learning methods for Negotiation Dialogue agents


Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Volume 2, Short Papers, pages 480–484,
Valencia, Spain, April 3-7, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Evaluating Persuasion Strategies and Deep Reinforcement Learning
methods for Negotiation Dialogue agents

Simon Keizer1, Markus Guhe2, Heriberto Cuayáhuitl3,
Ioannis Efstathiou1, Klaus-Peter Engelbrecht1, Mihai Dobre2, Alex Lascarides2 and Oliver Lemon1

1Department of Computer Science, Heriot-Watt University
2School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh

3School of Computer Science, University of Lincoln
1{s.keizer,ie24,o.lemon}@hw.ac.uk

2{m.guhe,m.s.dobre,alex}@inf.ed.ac.uk
3hcuayahuitl@lincoln.ac.uk

Abstract

In this paper we present a comparative
evaluation of various negotiation strate-
gies within an online version of the
game “Settlers of Catan”. The compar-
ison is based on human subjects play-
ing games against artificial game-playing
agents (‘bots’) which implement differ-
ent negotiation dialogue strategies, using a
chat dialogue interface to negotiate trades.
Our results suggest that a negotiation strat-
egy that uses persuasion, as well as a strat-
egy that is trained from data using Deep
Reinforcement Learning, both lead to an
improved win rate against humans, com-
pared to previous rule-based and super-
vised learning baseline dialogue negotia-
tors.

1 Introduction

In dialogues where the participants have conflict-
ing preferences over the outcome, Gricean max-
ims of conversation break down (Asher and Las-
carides, 2013). In this paper we focus on a non-
cooperative scenario – a win-lose board game – in
which one of the components of the game involves
participants negotiating trades over restricted re-
sources. They have an incentive to agree trades,
because alternative means for getting resources are
more costly. But since each player wants to win
(and so wants the others to lose), they not only
make offers and respond to them, but also bluff,
persuade, and deceive to get the best deal for them-
selves at perhaps a significant cost to others (Afan-
tenos et al., 2012).

In recent work, computational models for
non-cooperative dialogue have been developed

(Traum, 2008; Asher and Lascarides, 2013; Guhe
and Lascarides, 2014a). Moreover, machine learn-
ing techniques have been used to train negotia-
tion strategies from data, in particular reinforce-
ment learning (RL) (Georgila and Traum, 2011;
Efstathiou and Lemon, 2015; Keizer et al., 2015).
In particular, it has been shown that RL dia-
logue agents can be trained to strategically select
offers in trading dialogues (Keizer et al., 2015;
Cuayahuitl et al., 2015c), but also to bluff and
lie (Efstathiou and Lemon, 2015; Efstathiou and
Lemon, 2014).

This paper presents an evaluation of 5 variants
of a conversational agent engaging in trade nego-
tiation dialogues with humans. The experiment is
carried out using an online version of the game
“Settlers of Catan”, where human subjects play
games against artificial players, using a Natural
Language chat interface to negotiate trades. Our
results suggest that a negotiation strategy using
persuasion (Guhe and Lascarides, 2014b) when
making offers, as well as a strategy for selecting
offers that is trained from data using Deep Re-
inforcement Learning (Cuayahuitl et al., 2015c),
both lead to improved win rates against humans,
compared to previous rule-based approaches and
a model trained from a corpus of humans playing
the game using supervised learning.

2 Task domain

“Settlers of Catan” is a complex multi-player
board game1; the board is a map consisting of
hexes of different types: hills, mountains, mead-
ows, fields and forests. The objective of the game
is for the players to build roads, settlements and
cities on the map, paid for by combinations of re-

1See www.catan.com for the full set of game rules.

480



sources of five different types: clay, ore, sheep,
wheat and wood, which are obtained according
to the numbers on the hexes adjacent to which a
player has a settlement or city after the roll of a
pair of dice at each player’s turn. In addition, play-
ers can negotiate trades with each other in order to
obtain the resources they desire. Players can also
buy Development Cards, randomly drawn from a
stack of different kinds of cards. Players earn Vic-
tory Points (VPs) for their settlements (1 VP each)
and cities (2 VPs each), and for having the Longest
Road (at least 5 consecutive roads; 2 VPs) or the
Largest Army (by playing at least 3 Knight devel-
opment cards; 2 VPs). The first player to have 10
VPs wins the game.

2.1 The JSettlers implementation

For testing and evaluating our models for trade ne-
gotiation, we use the JSettlers2 open source im-
plementation of the game (Thomas, 2003). The
environment is a client-server system supporting
humans and agents playing against each other in
any combination. The agents use complex heuris-
tics for the board play—e.g., deciding when, what
and where to build on the board—as well as what
trades to aim for and how to negotiate for them.

2.2 Human negotiation corpus

With the aim of studying strategic conversations,
a corpus of online trading chats between humans
playing “Settlers of Catan” was collected (Afan-
tenos et al., 2012). The JSettlers implementa-
tion of the game was modified to let players use
a chat interface to engage in conversations with
each other, involving the negotiation of trades in
particular. Table 1 shows an annotated chat be-
tween players W, T, and G; in this dialogue, a trade
is agreed between W and G, where W gives G a
clay in exchange for an ore. For training the data-
driven negotiation strategies, 32 annotated games
were used, consisting of 2512 trade negotiation di-
alogue turns.

3 Overview of the artificial players

For all the artificial players (‘bots’), we distin-
guish between their game playing strategy (Game
Strategy) and their trade negotiation strategy (Ne-
got. Strategy), see Table 2. The game playing
strategy involves all non-linguistic moves in the
game: e.g., when and where to build a settlement,

2jsettlers2.sourceforge.net

where to move the robber when a 7 is rolled and
who to steal from, and so on. The negotiation
strategy, which is triggered when the game play-
ing strategy chooses to attempt to trade with other
players (i.e. the trade dialogue phase), involves
deciding which offers to make to opponents, and
whether to accept or reject offers made by them.
This strategy takes as input the resources available
to the player, the game board configuration, and a
‘build plan’ received from the game playing strat-
egy, indicating which piece the bot aims to build
(but does not yet have the resources for).

One of the bots included in the experiment uses
the original game playing strategy from JSettlers
(Thomas, 2003), whereas the other 4 bots use an
improved strategy developed by Guhe and Las-
carides (2014a). We distinguish between the fol-
lowing negotiation strategies:

1. the original strategy from JSettlers uses hand-
crafted rules to filter and rank the list of legal
trades;

2. an enhanced version of the original strategy,
which includes the additional options of us-
ing persuasion arguments to accompany a pro-
posed trade offer (rather than simply offering
it)—for example “If you accept this trade of-
fer, then you get wheat that you need to imme-
diately build a settlement”—and hand-crafted
rules for choosing among this expanded set of
options (Guhe and Lascarides, 2014a);

3. a strategy which uses a legal trade re-ranking
mechanism trained on the human negotiation
corpus described in (Afantenos et al., 2012)
using supervised learning (Random Forest)
(Cuayáhuitl et al., 2015a; Cuayáhuitl et al.,
2015b; Keizer et al., 2015); and

4. an offer selection strategy that is trained using
Deep Reinforcement Learning, in which the
feature representation and offer selection pol-
icy are optimised simultaneously using a fully-
connected multilayer neural network. The state
space of this agent includes 160 non-binary
features that describe the game board and the
available resources. The action space includes
70 actions for offering trading negotiations (in-
cluding up to two giveable resources and only
one receivable resource) and 3 actions (ac-
cept, reject and counteroffer) for replying to of-
fers from opponents. The reward function is

481



Speaker Utterance Game act Surface act Addressee Resource

W can i get an ore? Offer Request all Receivable(ore,1)
T nope Refusal Assertion W
G what for.. :D Counteroffer Question W
W a wheat? Offer Question G Givable(wheat,1)
G i have a bounty crop Refusal Assertion W
W how about a wood then? Counteroffer Question G Givable(wood,1)
G clay or sheep are my

primary desires Counteroffer Request W Receivable( (clay,?) OR (sheep,?) )
W alright a clay Accept Assertion G Givable(clay,1)
G ok! Accept Assertion W

Table 1: Example trade negotiation chat.

based on victory points—see (Cuayahuitl et al.,
2015c) for further details.

4 Experiment

The evaluation was performed as an online exper-
iment. Using the JSettlers environment, an exper-
imental setup was created, consisting of a game
client that the participants could download and use
to play online games, and a server for running the
bot players and logging all the games.

We decided to compare the five bot types de-
scribed in Section 3 in a between-subjects design,
as we expected that playing a game against each
of the 5 bot types would take more time than most
participants would be willing to spend (about 4
hours) and furthermore would introduce learning
effects on the human players that would be diffi-
cult to control. Each participant played one game
against three bots of the same type. The bot was
chosen randomly.

In order to participate, the subjects registered
and downloaded the game client. Next, they were
asked to first play a short training game to famil-
iarise themselves with the interface (see Fig. 1),
followed by a full game to be included in the eval-
uation. The training game finishes when the sub-
ject reaches 3 VPs, i.e., when they have built at
least one road and one settlement in addition to
the two roads and two settlements (making 2 VPs)
each player starts with. Although subjects were
allowed to play more games after they completed
their full game, we only used their first full game
in the evaluation to avoid bias in the data through
learning effects.

We advertised the experiment online through
university mailing lists, twitter, and “Settlers of
Catan” forums. We also hung out posters at the
university and in a local board gaming pub. We
particularly asked for experienced Settlers players,

who had played the game at least three times be-
fore, since the game is quite complex, and we ex-
pected that data from novice players would be too
noisy to reveal any differences between the differ-
ent bot types. Each subject received a £10 Amazon
UK voucher after completing both training and
full game, and we included two prize draws of £50
vouchers to further encourage participation.

5 Results

After running the experiments for 16 weeks, we
collected 212 full games in total (including the
training ones), but after only including the first full
game from each subject (73 games/subjects), and
removing games in which the subject did not en-
gage in any trade negotiations, we ended up with
62 games.

The evaluation results are presented in Table 2
and Fig. 2, which show how the human subjects
fared playing against our different bots: the num-
bers of Table 2 refer to the performance of the hu-
mans, but of course measure the performance of
the bots. Indicated in the table are the percent-
age of games won by the humans (WinRate, so
the lower the WinRate the stronger the bot’s per-
formance on the task) and the average number of
victory points the humans gained (AvgVPs). Since
JSettlers is a four-player game, each human plays
against 3 bots, so a win rate of 25% would indicate
that the humans and bots are equally good players.

Although the size of the corpus is too small to
make any strong claims about the relative strength
of the different bots, we are encouraged by the re-
sults so far. The results confirm our expectation,
based on game simulations in which one agent
with the ‘improved’ game strategy beat 3 original
opponents by significantly more than 25% (Guhe
and Lascarides, 2014b), that the improved game
strategy is superior to the original strategy against

482



Figure 1: Graphical interface of the adapted online Settlers game-playing client, showing the state of the board itself, and
in each corner information about one of the four players, seen from the perspective of the human player sitting at the top left
(playing with blue; the other 3 players are bots). The human player is prompted to accept the trade displayed in the top middle
part, as agreed in the negotiation chat shown in the panel on the right hand side.

Figure 2: Box plots representing the victory points
(VPs) scored by humans against each bot (as
shown on Table 2). Humans scored lower against
the bots 3 and 4 (i.e. on Table 2 the bots of the 3rd
and 4th row respectively). Red line: median VPs.

human opponents (70.0% vs. 26.7%). Improving
the game strategy is important because negotiation
is only a small part of what one must do to win this
particular game.

The lowest win rates for humans are achieved
when playing against the Deep Reinforcement
Learning (DRL) negotiation strategy (18.2%).
This confirmed its superiority over the supervised
learning bot (RandForest) against which it was

Game
strategy

Negot.
strategy

Games Human
WinRate

AvgVPs

1. Orig Persuasion 10 70.0% 7.8
2. Impr Original 17 29.4% 8.4
3. Impr Persuasion 15 26.7% 7.5
4. Impr DeepRL 11 18.2% 6.5
5. Impr RandForest 9 44.4% 8.7

Overall 62 37.7% 7.8

Table 2: Results of human subjects playing a game against
3 instances of one of 5 different bot types. Human Win-
Rate is the percentage of games won by human players, and
AvgVPs is the (mean) average number of VPs gained by the
human players. If the humans were equally strong as the bots,
they would achieve approximately a 25% win rate.

trained (18.2% vs. 44.4%, using the same game
playing strategy). This confirms previous results
in which the DRL achieved a win rate of 41.58%
against the supervised learning bot (Cuayahuitl et
al., 2015c). Since the win rate is also well be-
low the 25% win rate one expects if the 4 play-
ers are of equal strength, the deep learning bot
beats the human players on average. As described
in Section 3, the DRL bot uses a large set of in-
put features and uses its neural network to auto-
matically learn the patterns that help finding the
optimal negotiation strategy. In contrast, human
players, even experienced ones, have limited cog-
nitive capacity to adequately oversee game states
and make the best trades.

483



Against the bots using a negotiation strat-
egy with persuasion, the human players achieved
lower win rates than against the bot with the orig-
inal, rule-based negotiation strategy (26.7% vs.
29.4%), and much lower win rates than the bot
with the supervised learning strategy (26.7% vs.
44.4%). In terms of average victory points, both
persuasion and deep learning bots outperform the
rule-based and supervised learning baselines.

6 Conclusion

We evaluated different trading-dialogue strate-
gies (original rule-based/persuasion/random for-
est/deep RL) and game-playing strategies (origi-
nal/improved) in online games with experienced
human players of “Settlers of Catan”. The ran-
dom forest and deep RL dialogue strategies were
trained using human-human game-playing data
collected in the STAC project (Afantenos et al.,
2012). The results indicate that the improved
game strategy of (Guhe and Lascarides, 2014a) is
beneficial, and that dialogue strategies using per-
suasion (Guhe and Lascarides, 2014b) and deep
RL (Cuayahuitl et al., 2015c) outperform both the
original rule-based strategy (Thomas, 2003) and a
strategy created using supervised learning meth-
ods (random forest). The deep RL dialogue strat-
egy also outperforms human players, similarly to
recent results for other (non-dialogue) games such
as “Go” and Atari games (Silver et al., 2016; Mnih
et al., 2013). More data is being collected.

Acknowledgements

This research was funded by the European Re-
search Council, grant number 269427, STAC
project https://www.irit.fr/STAC/

References
Stergos Afantenos, Nicholas Asher, Farah Benamara,

Anaı̈s Cadilhac, Cédric Dégremont, Pascal De-
nis, Markus Guhe, Simon Keizer, Alex Lascarides,
Oliver Lemon, Philippe Muller, Saumya Paul,
Vladimir Popescu, Verena Rieser, and Laure Vieu.
2012. Modelling strategic conversation: model, an-
notation design and corpus. In Proc. Workshop on
the Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue (Sem-
DIAL).

Nicholas Asher and Alex Lascarides. 2013. Strategic
conversation. Semantics and Pragmatics, 6(2):1–
62.

Heriberto Cuayáhuitl, Simon Keizer, and Oliver
Lemon. 2015a. Learning to trade in strategic board

games. In Proc. IJCAI Workshop on Computer
Games (IJCAI-CGW).

Heriberto Cuayáhuitl, Simon Keizer, and Oliver
Lemon. 2015b. Learning trading negotiations using
manually and automatically labelled data. In Proc.
27th IEEE International Conference on Tools with
Artificial Intelligence (ICTAI).

Heriberto Cuayahuitl, Simon Keizer, and Oliver
Lemon. 2015c. Strategic dialogue management via
deep reinforcement learning. In Proc. NIPS work-
shop on Deep Reinforcement Learning.

Ioannis Efstathiou and Oliver Lemon. 2014. Learning
non-cooperative dialogue behaviours. In Proc. An-
nual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Dis-
course and Dialogue (SIGDIAL).

Ioannis Efstathiou and Oliver Lemon. 2015. Learning
non-cooperative dialogue policies to beat opponent
models: “the good, the bad and the ugly”. In Proc.
Workshop on the Semantics and Pragmatics of Dia-
logue (SemDIAL).

Kallirroi Georgila and David Traum. 2011. Reinforce-
ment learning of argumentation dialogue policies in
negotiation. In Proc. INTERSPEECH.

Markus Guhe and A. Lascarides. 2014a. Game strate-
gies for The Settlers of Catan. In Proc. IEEE Con-
ference on Computational Intelligence and Games
(CIG).

Markus Guhe and Alex Lascarides. 2014b. Persua-
sion in complex games. In Proc. Workshop on the
Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue (SemDIAL).

Simon Keizer, Heriberto Cuayahuitl, and Oliver
Lemon. 2015. Learning trade negotiation policies
in strategic conversation. In Proc. Workshop on the
Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue (SemDIAL).

Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver,
Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wierstra,
and Martin Riedmiller. 2013. Playing atari with
deep reinforcement learning. In Proc. NIPS Deep
Learning Workshop.

David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur
Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driessche, Ju-
lian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Pan-
neershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander Dieleman, Do-
minik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya
Sutskever, Timothy Lillicrap, Madeleine Leach, Ko-
ray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hass-
abis. 2016. Mastering the game of Go with deep
neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529.

Robert Shaun Thomas. 2003. Real-time decision mak-
ing for adversarial environments using a plan-based
heuristic. Ph.D. thesis, Northwestern University.

David Traum. 2008. Extended abstract: Computa-
tional models of non-cooperative dialogue. In Proc.
of SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue.

484


