















































Extending the adverbial coverage of a NLP oriented resource for French


Proceedings of the 5th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 1225–1233,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 8 – 13, 2011. c©2011 AFNLP

Extending the adverbial coverage of a NLP oriented resource for French 

 

Elsa Tolone 

LIGM, Université Paris-Est, France 

FaMAF, Universidad Nacional de 

Córdoba, Argentina 

tolone@univ-paris-est.fr 

Stavroula Voyatzi 

LIGM, Université Paris-Est, France 
voyatzi@univ-mlv.fr 

  

 

Abstract 

This paper presents work on extending the ad-

verbial entries of LGLex, a NLP oriented syn-

tactic resource for French. Adverbs were ex-

tracted from the Lexicon-Grammar tables of 

both simple adverbs ending in –ment „–ly‟ 

(Molinier and Levrier, 2000) and compound 

adverbs (Gross, 1986; 1990). This work relies 

on the exploitation of fine-grained linguistic 

information provided in existing resources. 

Various features are encoded in both LG tables 

and they haven‟t been exploited yet. They de-

scribe the relations of deleting, permuting, in-

tensifying and paraphrasing that associate, on 

the one hand, the simple and compound ad-

verbs and, on the other hand, different types of 

compound adverbs. The resulting syntactic re-

source is manually evaluated and freely avail-

able under the LGPL-LR license. 

1 Introduction 

Recognising adverbs such as extrêmement „ex-

tremely‟ and à long terme „in the long run‟ in 

texts is likely to be useful for information re-

trieval and extraction because of the information 

that some of these adverbials convey. 

Adverbs, or more generally circumstantial 

complements, have often been overlooked in the 

compilation of lexical resources (Nølke, 1990: 

3). Several reasons explain this lack of interest. 

Firstly, adverbials are usually felt as less useful 

than nouns for information retrieval and extrac-

tion. Secondly, compound adverbs in particular 

are difficult to distinguish from prepositional 

phrases assuming other syntactic functions, such 

as arguments or noun modifiers: the distinction is 

hardly correlated to any material markers in texts 

and lies in complex linguistic notions (Vil-

lavicencio, 2002; Merlo, 2003). 

The availability of large-coverage lexicons 

providing lexical, syntactic and semantic infor-

mation is essential in order to gain insight on the 

recognition of adverbs, including the dual prob-

lems of variability and ambiguity. In addition, it 

is likely to help solving prepositional phrase at-

tachment during shallow or deep parsing (Agirre 

et al., 2008). 

In this paper, we present work on extending 

the adverbial entries of LGLex, a NLP oriented 

syntactic resource for French. These adverbs 

were extracted from the Lexicon-Grammar tables 

(hereafter LG tables) of both simple adverbs end-

ing in –ment „–ly‟ (Molinier and Levrier, 2000) 

and compound adverbs (Gross, 1986; 1990).  

The paper is organized as follows. In sec-

tion 2, we provide an overview of the three re-

sources used in our work. In section 3, we de-

scribe how we enhanced LGLex thanks to vari-

ous features that are encoded in LG tables. In 

section 4, we present results and discuss the ma-

nual evaluation process. Finally, we conclude in 

section 5 by pointing out several possible exten-

sions and issues for future research. 

2 Resources 

Lexicon-Grammar tables (hereafter LG tables) 

are currently one of the major sources of lexical 

syntactic information for the French language; 

several LG tables exist for other languages (see 

section 2.1). Their development was initiated as 

early as the 1970s by Maurice Gross, at the 

LADL (Gross, 1975; 1994), and then at the 

LIGM, University Paris-Est (Boons et al., 1976; 

Guillet and Leclère, 1992). 

Lexical information is represented in the form 

of tables. Each table puts together elements of a 

given lexical-grammatical category (for a given 

language) that share a certain number of defining 

features, which usually concern subcategoriza-

tion information. These elements form a class. 

These tables are represented as matrices (see sec-

tion 2.1.2): each row corresponds to a lexical 

item of the corresponding class; each column 

lists all features that may be valid or not for the 

different members of the class; at the intersection 

1225



of a row and a column, the symbol + (resp. –) 

indicates that the feature corresponding to the 

column is valid (resp. not valid) for the lexical 

entry corresponding to the row. 

The resources described in this paper corres-

pond to the LG tables of both simple and com-

pound adverbs, in which previously implicit fea-

tures have been made explicit
1
 for more conve-

nient use in NLP. All tables are fully available
2
 

under a free license (LGPL-LR). 

2.1 The LG tables of adverbs 

LG tables of adverbs are available in several lan-

guages, notably in English (Gross, 1986), Ger-

man (Seelbach, 1990), Spanish (Blanco and Ca-

talà, 1998/1999), Italian (De Gioia, 2001), Portu-

guese (Baptista, 2003), Korean (Jung, 2005) and 

Modern Greek (Voyatzi, 2006).  

In French, there are two resources of adverbs 

that follow different principles both in classifica-

tion and in representation within the Lexicon-

Grammar framework. That is, firstly, tables of 

simple adverbs ending in –ment „–ly‟ (Moliner, 

1984; Molinier and Lévrier, 2000), which are 

mainly derived from adjectives and, secondly, 

tables of compound adverbs (Gross, 1986; 1990). 

In this section, we describe briefly the different 

classes, morphosyntactic structures and features 

provided in the tables of both types of adverbs. 

2.1.1 The LG tables of simple adverbs 

According to Molinier and Levrier (2000), ad-

verbs ending in –ment „–ly‟ form a large class of 

French adverbs. Moreover, as opposed to other 

types of adverbs, they form a quite open class. 

These adverbs constitute a morphologically 

homogeneous class, since most of them are 

created according to the pattern adjective + 

-ment ‘–ly’. In total, there are 3,203 simple 

adverbial entries which are represented in sixteen 

LG tables. 

The first partition has been established be-

tween sentential adverbs and adverbs integrated 

into the sentence; that means attached to the pre-

dicate or any other component of the sentence. 

                                                 
1 In order to make previous implicit features explicit, a table 

of classes has been created (Tolone, 2009; 2011). Its role is 

to assign features when their value is constant over a class, 

e.g. class definition features. Each row stands for a class and 

each column stands for a feature. Each cell corresponds to 

the validity of a feature in a class. In particular, the table of 

French adverb classes is composed of 32 different classes 

and 163 features. 
2
 http://infolingu.univ-mlv.fr/english > Language Resources 

> Lexicon-Grammar > Download. 

Three major classes of sentential adverbs are 

worth mentioning: conjuncts, style disjuncts (or 

utterance-level adverbs) and attitude disjuncts (or 

statement adverbs). The latter are divided into 

four classes: evaluative adverbs, e.g. curieuse-

ment „curiously‟, adverbs of habit, e.g. habi-

tuellement „usually‟, modal adverbs, e.g. cer-

tainement „certainly‟, and subject oriented atti-

tude adverbs, e.g. bêtement „foolishly‟. 

On the other hand, there are six major classes 

of adverbs integrated into the sentence: 

(i) adverbs of subject oriented manner, e.g. 
gentiment „kindly‟, Max traite les gens 

gentiment = Max est gentil dans la (façon + 

manière) dont il traite les gens „Max treats 

people kindly = Max is kind in the way he 

treats people‟; 

(ii) adverbs of verbal manner, e.g. démocrati-
quement „democratically‟, Ce parti est ar-

rivé au pouvoir démocratiquement = C’est 

démocratiquement que ce parti est arrivé au 

pouvoir „This party came to power demo-

cratically = It is democratically that this par-

ty came to power‟; 

(iii) adverbs of quantity (including intensifiers), 
e.g. excessivement „excessively‟; 

(iv) adverbs of time expressing time, e.g. ac-
tuellement „actually‟, duration, e.g. tempo-

rairement „temporarily‟ or frequency, e.g. 

régulièrement „regularly‟; 

(v) viewpoint adverbs, e.g. linguistiquement = 
d’un point de vue linguistique „linguistically 

= from a linguistic point of view‟; 

(vi) focus adverbs, e.g. essentiellement „essen-
tially‟. 

Features included in the LG tables can be or-

ganized into four main groups: distributional fea-

tures (e.g. the possibility for an adverb to occur 

at the beginning of a negative clause), local syn-

tactic features (e.g. the possibility for an adverb 

to have a function as an indefinite determiner), 

semantic features (e.g. knowing what type of 

interrogative adverb corresponds to an adverb 

allows it to be categorized semantically), and 

paraphrasing features (e.g. Adv, Pindicatif = C’est 

Adj que Psubjonctif =: Bizarrement, Marie n’est 

pas venue à la soirée = C’est bizarre que Marie 

ne soit pas venue à la soirée „ Oddly, Mary did 

not come to the party = It is odd that Mary did 

not come to the party‟). 

2.1.2 The LG tables of compound adverbs 

The scope of the LG tables of compound adverbs 

is delimited by the intersection of two criteria: (i) 

multiword expressions and (ii) adverbial func-

1226



tion. As Laporte and Voyatzi (2008) state “a 

phrase composed of several words is considered 

to be a multiword expression if some or all of its 

components are tied together, that is, if their 

combination does not obey productive rules of 

syntactic and semantic compositionality”. This 

criterion ensures a complementarity between 

lexicon and grammar. In other words, it tends to 

ensure that any combination of linguistic ele-

ments which is correct in the language, but is not 

represented in common syntactic-semantic 

grammars, should be stored in lexicons. 

In terms of the adverbial function, LG tables 

of compound adverbs deal only with circumstan-

tial complements, namely, complements that 

modify the predicate or any other element of the 

sentence in which they occur. Sentential adverbs 

modify or enhance the entire sentence. They are 

identified through criteria (Gross, 1986; 1990) 

involving the fact that they are optional, they 

combine freely with a wide range of predicates 

and some of them typically answer questions 

such as comment? „how?‟, où? „where?‟, quand? 

„when?‟, etc. The compound adverbs described 

in LG tables (Gross, 1986; 1990) take several 

morphosyntactic forms: unsuffixed adverbs, e.g. 

demain
3
 „tomorrow‟, suffixed adverbs, e.g. nui-

tamment
4
 „by night‟, prepositional phrases, e.g. à 

la dernière minute „at the last minute‟, noun 

phrases, e.g. le cas échéant „if necessary‟ or ad-

verbial clauses, e.g. jusqu’à ce que mort 

s’ensuive „until death comes‟. 

These compound adverbs are classified ac-

cording to their internal morphosyntactic struc-

ture which is described at the elementary level of 

sequences of parts of speech. The classification 

is based mainly on the number, type and position 

of the fixed and variable lexical components of 

adverbs. These classificatory morphosyntactic 

                                                 
3
 According to Gross (1990: 153), demain „tomorrow‟ is a 

compound form from an etymological point of view: from 

the Latin expression de mane which means literally “in the 

morning”. But, it is now regarded as a simple form since it 

is represented by a single word. These forms are derived 

from noun or prepositional noun phrases previously ana-

lyzed that were tied at various times. 
4 According to Gross (1986: 2), nuitamment „by night‟ can 

also be considered as an idiomatic compound, though not 

constituted of words but of a word and a suffix. Lack of 

compositionality stems from the observation that 

quotidiennement „daily’, mensuellement „monthly’, etc. 

which are derived adverbs of the same formal type have a 

regular formation, in the sense that their interpretation is 

homogeneous. Thus, nuitamment „by night‟ is an isolated 

case, as opposed to an open series of identical forms with a 

different interpretation. 

structures have a three-fold aim: first, they are 

intended as an aid to organize the heterogeneous 

compound adverbs in an electronic lexicon; 

second, they are intended as an aid to identify the 

compound adverbs in a parser; finally, they have 

impact on the syntactic-semantic subcategoriza-

tion of compound adverbs. For instance, most of 

the adverbial clauses represented in table PF are 

interpolated clauses, e.g. si ma mémoire est 

bonne  „if my memory serves me well”. 

Table 1 illustrates the sixteen formal classes, 

together with their defining internal morphosyn-

tactic structure, an illustrative example
5
 and the 

number of entries listed: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Table 1. Morphosyntactic structures of French 

compound adverbs 

Compound adverbs are represented in sixteen LG 

tables
6
, one for each of the defining morphosyn-

tactic structures
7
. Unlike simple adverbs, com-

pound adverbs are represented in the tables 

within a structure of elementary sentence which 

is composed of a verbal predicate (intransitive in 

most cases) and its arguments. This representa-

tion takes into account the combination of the 

                                                 
5
 It is possible that one or more of the components defined 

in a morphosyntactic structure are absent. For instance, in 

the adverb à cent pour cent „one hundred percent‟, which is 

assigned the structure PCPC, Dét1 and Dét2 are empty. 
6 The LG tables of adverbs described in this paper have 

been updated by the members of LIGM, so that previously 

implicit linguistic information becomes explicit and conve-

nient for NLP applications. Tolone (2009; 2011) and Tolone 

et al. (2010) give a thorough account of this work. 
7  Symbols with obvious interpretation are used such as: 

Prép (preposition), Det (determiner), Adj (adjective), 

Modif pré-adj (pre-adjectival modifier), N (noun), V 

(verb), Conj (conjunction), and C (noun tied with the rest 

of the adverbial). 

1227



adverb with a structure of elementary sentence, 

and, thus provides precise information about 

various types of constraints occurring between 

compound adverbs and the predicate they mod-

ify. An example of time constraint is given be-

low: 

Les tablettes (remplaceront + *ont remplacé + 

*remplacent) les PC dans un avenir proche  
 

„Ipads (will replace + *replaced + *replace) 

desktop PC in a near future‟  

The LG tables of French compound adverbs con-

tain 7,283 entries. Table 2 displays a sample of 

the table PCA which is defined by the morpho-

syntactic structure Preposition, Determin-
er, Constrained noun, Pre-adjectival 

Modifier, Adjective: 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Table 2. Compound adverbs of table PCA 

In this table, each row corresponds to a lexical 

item with adverbial function, and each column 

corresponds to: 

- one of the components in the morphosyntac-

tic structure of the items, i.e. features with identi-

fiers Prép, Det, C, Modif pré-adj, and 

Adj; 

- a syntactic feature holding binary values, for 

example: Prép Det Modif pré-adj Adj C 

describes the possible permutation (without loss 

of information) of the adjectival phrase repre-

sented in this table as Modif pré-adj Adj; 

moreover, Neg obl encodes the constraint that 

the adverbial occurs obligatorily in a negative 

clause; 

- a semantic feature holding binary values, for 

instance, Conjonction points out whether the 

compound adverb has a connector function in 

discourse, i.e. it links the clause in which it oc-

curs with the previous clause as, for example, 

dans le cas contraire „otherwise‟; 

- an item of information provided as an aid to 

help human readers find examples of sentences 

containing the compound adverb: features with 

identifiers Ppv and Prédicat type give an 

example of a verbal predicate that combines 

commonly with the adverb. 

Unlike simple adverbs, the sixteen classes of 

compound adverbs, represented in sixteen LG 

tables, are both syntactically and semantically 

heterogeneous. For instance, the table PAC en-

codes adverbs that are defined by the morpho-

syntactic structure Prép Det Adj C, but be-

long to different syntactic and semantic classes 

of Molinier and Lévrier (2000): conjuncts, e.g. 

dans un premier temps „initially‟, disjuncts, e.g. 

à Posss0 humble avis „in Poss0 humble opinion‟, 

adverbs of time, e.g. depuis cent sept ans „one 

hundred and seven years since‟, adverbs of ver-

bal manner, e.g. n’importe comment „no matter 

how‟, etc.  

Despite their differences, both types of ad-

verbs are often related by productive and regular 

relations such as, for example, paraphrasing rela-

tions allowing the creation of pairs of synonyms, 

as shown in Table 3:  
 

Adverbs encoded in LG 

tables of simple adverbs 

Adverbs encoded in LG 

tables of compound adverbs 

pratiquement 

(ADVPS) 

‘practically’ 

en pratique (PC) 

‘in practice’ 

franchement 

(ADVPS) 

‘frankly’ 

à franchement parler 

(PV) 

‘frankly speaking’ 

sincèrement 

(ADVMS) 

‘sincerely’ 

de (E+une) (manière+ 

façon) sincère (PCA) 

‘in a sincere way’ 

politiquement 

(ADVMP) 

‘politically’ 

du point de vue  

politique (PCA) 

‘from a political 

point of view’ 

 

Table 3. Paraphrasing relations between 

simple and compound adverbs 

2.2 The syntactic lexicon LGLex 

The current version of the French LG tables has 

to consider the use of these lexical data in NLP 

tools (Tolone, 2009). Therefore, the tables have 

been converted into an interchange format, based 

on the same linguistic concepts as those handled 

in the tables. This conversion is based on LGEx-

tract: a generic tool for generating a syntactic 

lexicon for NLP from the LG tables (Constant 

and Tolone, 2010). It relies, first, on a global ta-

ble of classes in which we added the missing fea-

tures and, second, on a single extraction script 

1228



including all operations related to each feature to 

be performed for all tables.  

Thanks to LGExtract, a French lexicon for 

NLP has been generated from all LG tables and 

for most lexical-grammatical categories: verbs, 

predicative nouns, idioms and adverbs. This syn-

tactic lexicon is named LGLex (Constant and 

Tolone, 2010; Tolone, 2011) and it is freely 

available
8  

under the LGPL-LR license in both 

plain text format and XML. 

LGLex is currently composed of 13,867 ver-

bal entries (from 67 tables), 12,696 nominal en-

tries (from 78 tables), 39,628 idioms (from 

69 tables) and 10,487 adverbial entries (from 

32 tables) of which 3,203 are simple adverbs 

(from 16 tables) and 7,284 are compound ad-

verbs (from 16 tables). 

3 Extending the LGLex 

Each entry of the lexicon includes three sections: 

(i) section Lexical information identi-

fies the lexical entry, for instance, the adverb 

jusqu’à la fin des (=de les) temps „until the end 

of time‟ which is encoded in table PCDC, and 

also gives the category of each lexical compo-

nent. We added the information of paraphras-

es, other structures and other entries 

with intensification (see section 3.2); 

(ii) section Arguments gives information 

about the arguments of the predicate: for in-

stance, the subject argument N0, assigned to the 

predicate that can be modified by the adverb jus-

qu'à la fin des temps „until the end of time‟ is a 

non human noun phrase, represented by N0 = 

N-hum;  

(iii) section Constructions enumerates the 

identifiers of all constructions of the lexical entry 

(e.g. N0 V Adv W or Adv parlant, P) and of 

all internal morphosyntactic structures, that is 

Adv for all simple adverbs or Prép1 Det1 C1 

Prép2 Det2 C2 for compound adverbs like 

jusqu’à la fin des temps „until the end of time‟, 

but also Prép1 Det1 C1 for its variant without 

prepositional noun phrase modifier, e.g. jusqu’à 

la fin „until the end‟. 

So, we first extended LGLex with respect to 

adverbial entries by using various types of fea-

tures that are encoded in the tables of both sim-

ple and compound adverbs. We added 11,328 

entries (+108%), so the lexicon is now composed 

of 21,815 adverbial entries in total. 

                                                 
8
 http://infolingu.univ-mlv.fr/english > Language Resources 

> Lexicon-Grammar > Download. 

3.1 Using the paraphrasing features 

The viewpoint adverb linguistiquement 

„linguistically‟ accepts the following paraphra-

sing constructions (Sekine, 2005) that are 

encoded in the table ADVMP by means of binary 

features:  

linguistiquement „linguistically‟ 

=    (du+d’un+au) point de vue linguistique  

      „from a linguistic point of view‟ 

=    du point de vue de la linguistique  

      „from the point of view of linguistics‟ 

=    au niveau linguistique  

      „at the linguistic level‟ 

=    (au+sur le) plan linguistique  

      „on the linguistic level‟  

=     en linguistique  

      „in linguistics‟ 

=     linguistiquement parlant  

      „linguistically speaking‟.  

For this work, we first dealt with paraphrasing 

constructions that are described directly in the 

LG tables through explicit features, as it is 

shown in Table 4: 
 

Paraphrasing features 

encoded in the LG tables 

Lexical values of the para-

phrasing features in the 

script  

Adj-ment = avec 

Adj-n 
"avec @Adj-n@" 

Adj-ment = 

(du+d’un) point de 

vue Adj 

"d'un point de vue 

@Adj@", "du point 

de vue @Adj@" 

Adj-ment = du 

point de vue de 

Ddef Ndomaine 

"du point de vue de 

Ddef @Ndomaine@" 

Adj-ment = au  

niveau Adj 
"au niveau @Adj@" 

Adj-ment = au 

point de vue Adj 

"au point de vue 

@Adj@" 

Adj-ment = au plan 

Adj 
"au plan @Adj@" 

Adj-ment = sur le 

plan Adj 
"sur le plan @Adj@" 

Adj-ment = de 

source Adj 
"de source @Adj@" 

Adj-ment =  

en Adj-n 
"en @Adj-n@" 

Adj-ment =  

en Ndomaine 
"en @Ndomaine@" 

Adj-ment =  

en termes Adj 
"en termes @Adj@" 

Adj-ment =  

en toute Adj-n 
"en toute @Adj-n@" 

 

Table 4. Paraphrasing features encoded direct-

ly in LG tables 

1229



The notation @...@ specifies the lexical value of 

a lexical feature which is encoded systematically 

in a LG table. For instance, when @Adj@ refers 

to table ADVMP, it can take the following val-

ues: linguistique „linguistic‟, politique „political‟, 

informatique „computational‟, etc . 

Thanks to these features, we added to LGLex 

2,084 adverbial entries (+20%).  

However, a certain number of paraphrases are 

part of construction features, and thus need to be 

extracted from them. Construction features are 

encoded in LG tables by means of binary fea-

tures, as it is shown in Table 5: 
 

Construction features 

encoded in the LG tables 

Lexical values of the paraph-

rasing features in the script  

Adv parlant, P "@<ENT>Adv@ parlant" 

N0 V W C-a-ment "@C-a-ment@" 

N0 V W avec Adj-n "avec @Adj-n@" 

N0 V W de (E+une) 

(façon + manière) 

C-a 

"de façon @C-a@",  

"de manière @C-a@", 

"d'une façon @C-a@", 

"d'une manière @C-

a@" 

N0 V W de (E+une) 

(façon + manière) 

Adj 

"de façon @Adj@", 

"de manière @Adj@", 

"d’une façon @Adj@", 

"d’une manière 

@Adj@" 

N0hum V W avec 

Adj-n 
"avec @Adj-n@" 

N0hum V W de 

(E+une) (façon + 

manière) Adj 

"de façon @Adj@", 

"de manière @Adj@", 

"d’une façon @Adj@", 

"d’une manière 

@Adj@" 

à Adv parler, P 
"à @<ENT>Adv@ par-

ler" 

 

Table 5. Paraphrasing features embedded in 

construction features 

 

Using this type of features, we enhanced LGLex 

with 7,125 adverbial entries (+68%). Using both 

types of paraphrasing features, the number of 

adverbial entries in LGLex raised from 10,487 to 

19,695 (+88%). 

3.2 Other structures 

Within the other structures, we distinguish 

three types of features: deletion, permutation and 

transformation. They are all described in the fol-

lowing sections.  

3.2.1 Using the deletion features 

The adverb jusqu'à la fin des (=de les) temps 

„until the end of time‟ is defined by the morpho-

syntactic structure Prép1 Det1 C1 Prép2 

Det2 C2. It accepts also the substructure jusqu'à 

la fin „until the end‟, which is obtained after de-

letion of the prepositional noun phrase modifier 

des (=de les) temps „of time‟, and without loss of 

information. The new adverb has the structure 

Prép1 Det1 C1. Table 6 displays the deletion 

features present in LG tables of adverbs: 
 

Deletion features encoded 

in the LG tables 

Lexical value of the dele-

tion features in script  

ConjC Det1 C1 

Prép2 C2 = Det1 C1 

Prép2 C2 

"@<ENT>Det1@ 

@<ENT>C1@ 

@<ENT>Prép2@ 

@<ENT>C2@" 

Prép Det C "@<ENT>Prép@ 

@<ENT>Det@ 

@<ENT>C@" 

Prép1 Det1 C1 "@<ENT>Prép1@ 

@<ENT>Det1@ 

@<ENT>C1@" 

 

Table 6. Deletion features encoded in LG tables 

The notation @<ENT>...@ specifies the lexical 

value of an entry described in a LG table. In the 

case of compound adverbs, an entry is composed 

by two or more lexical components. 

Thanks to the deletion features, we added to 

LGLex 1,519 adverbial entries (+14%). 

3.2.2 Using the permutation features 

The adverb dans un avenir proche „in a near fu-

ture‟, which is defined by the morphosyntactic 

structure Prép Det C Modif pré-adj Adj, 

can also take the form dans un proche avenir due 

to the permutation of the adjectival phrase 

proche „near‟. The new adverb has the structure 

Prép Det Modif pré-adj Adj C, as it is 

shown in the Table 7: 
 

Permutation features 

encoded in the LG tables 

Lexical value of the permu-

tation features in the script  

Prép Det Modif 

pré-adj Adj C 

"@<ENT>Prép@ 

@<ENT>Det@ 

@<ENT>Modif@ 

@<ENT>pré-adj@ 

@<ENT>Adj@ @<ENT>C@" 

Prép Modif pré-

adj Adj C 

"@<ENT>Prép@ 

@<ENT>Modif@ 

@<ENT>pré-adj@ 

@<ENT>Adj@ @<ENT>C@" 

 

Table 7. Permutation features encoded in LG 

tables 

1230



Let us consider now the compound adverb dans 

les délais les plus brefs „as soon as possible‟, 

which is defined by the morphosyntactic struc-

ture Prép Det C Modif pré-adj Adj. Al-

though it accepts the permutation of the adjectiv-

al phrase les plus brefs „the shortest‟, it produces 

an agrammatical entry *dans les les plus brefs 

délais. This happens only when Modif pré-

adj corresponds to a complex unit, that is, in our 

example, the superlative determiner les plus „the 

most‟. To remedy this situation, we added to ta-

ble PCA a specific feature enabling both the de-

letion and permutation of certain components 

without loss of information, i.e. the feature Prép 

Modif pré-adj Adj C. 

This kind of problem is rather widespread 

since multiword units raise specific difficulties as 

regards their representation
9
 in an electronic re-

source. Semantically, by definition, compound 

adverbs cannot be decomposed into simple units. 

In other words, the resulting overall meaning of 

the compound adverb cannot usually be deduced 

from the sum of the meaning of its component 

elements. Consequently, the various lexical 

components of compound adverbs are sometimes 

represented in the tables in an ambiguous or even 

arbitrary way. This is due, of course, to their ir-

regular syntax and internal word combination 

constraints.  

By means of the permutation features, we en-

hanced LGLex with 103 adverbial entries (+1%). 

3.2.3 Using transformational features 

Finally, other structures can result from 

general transformations applied to the free pre-

positional noun phrase modifier de N „of N‟, 

which is part of semi-fixed adverbial expres-

sions. For instance, the adverb pour le bénéfice 

„for the benefit‟, defined by the morphosyntactic 

structure Prép1 Det1 C1 de N2, can take the 

following two forms: pour le bénéfice général 

„for the general benefit‟ and pour son benefice 

„for his benefit‟. Table 8 displays the transforma-

                                                 
9
 According to Gross (1986: 1), the unit of representation in 

a linear lexicon is roughly the word, defined as a sequence 

of letters separated from neighboring sequences by boun-

dary blanks or other kind of separators, e.g. apostrophe. As 

a consequence, multiword units cannot be put directly into a 

lexicon the way simple words are. An identification proce-

dure is needed for their occurrences in texts, and this proce-

dure will make use of the various simple lexical components 

included in the multiword unit (and described in the LG 

tables at the elementary level of sequences of parts-of-

speech). Hence, the formal linguistic properties of multi-

word units will determine both the procedure of identifica-

tion in texts and the type of storage they require. 

tional features that are encoded in the corres-

ponding LG tables: 
 

Transformation features 

encoded in the LG tables 

Lexical value of the trans-

formational features in 

the script  

Prép1 Det1 C1 de N2 

= Prép1 Det1 C1 gé-

néral 

"@Prép1@ @Det1@ 

@C1@ général" 

Prép1 Det1 C1 de N2 

= Prép1 Poss2 C1 

"@Prép1@ Poss2 

@C1@" 

 

Table 8. Transformational features encoded in 

LG tables 

Thanks to these features, we added to LGLex 288 

adverbial entries (+3%). 

Taking into account the three different types 

of features included in other structures, the 

number of adverbial entries in LGLex increased 

from 10,487 to 12,397 (+18%). 

3.2.4 Using the intensifying features 

The focus adverb particulièrement „particularly‟ 

can be modified by two specific intensifiers con-

veying a greater emphasis to its meaning, and 

thus produce the two following entries: tout par-

ticulièrement „quite particularly‟ and plus parti-

culièrement „more particularly‟. Intensifying fea-

tures are represented in LG tables as shown in 

Table 9: 
 

Intensifying features 

encoded in the LG tables 

Lexical value of the intensi-

fying features in the script  

bien Adv "bien @<ENT>Adv@" 

fort Adv "fort @<ENT>Adv@" 

plus Adv "plus @<ENT>Adv@" 

tout Adv "tout @<ENT>Adv@" 

très Adv "très @<ENT>Adv@" 

(plus+moins) Adv "plus @<ENT>Adv@", 

"moins @<ENT>Adv@" 

 

Table 9. Intensifying features encoded in LG 

tables 

Thanks to these features, the number of adverbial 

entries in LGLex augmented from 10,487 to 

10,697 (+2%). 

4 Evaluation of the extended LGLex  

The Table 10 shows the number of the initial ad-

verbial entries in LGLex and the detail of the 

11,328 new entries: 
 

 

1231



Initial entries 10,487 

   Paraphrases   9,208 

   Other structures   1,910 

   Intensifying features      210 

Final entries 21,815 

 

Table 10. Number of entries in LGLex 

The results are quite satisfactory as we obtain 

more than double, precisely 108% new entries in 

the lexicon, only by exploiting precise linguistic 

information of high coverage, which is freely 

available in existing resources. 

We manually evaluated the new entries of the 

lexicon in order to detect errors. 

Indeed, a manual validation was necessary 

when the generated entries corresponded to one 

single word. For example, the adverb pourboire 

compris „tip included‟, which is defined by the 

morphosyntactic structure Prép Det C Modif 

pré-adj Adj, accepted the deletion of the par-

ticipial phrase modifier compris „included‟, but 

produced a non-adverbial entry *pourboire „tip‟. 

Then, we mention the problem of duplicates 

that may be produced once the generation of new 

adverbial entries completed. They concern a few 

pairs of tables, notably, the pairs PCDC and 

PCDN, PCA and PAC or PDETC. For example, 

ces temps derniers „recently‟, defined by the 

morphosyntactic structure Prép Det C Modif 

pré-adj Adj and encoded in table PCA, can 

also take the form ces derniers temps due to the 

permutation of the adjective derniers „recent‟. 

This latter is already encoded in table PAC.  

We can also evoke the case of the deleting re-

lation that associates the adverbs of table PCDC 

with those of table PCDN. For example, en l’état 

actuel des choses „in the current state of things‟ 

accepts also the substructure en l’état actuel
10

 „in 

the current state‟, which is obtained after deletion 

of the prepositional noun phrase modifier des 

choses „of things‟, and without loss of informa-

tion. The generated substructure is already an 

entry of table PCDN. In a similar manner, en 

l’état actuel des connaissances „in the current 

state of knowledge‟ produces the same substruc-

ture. Moreover, the adverbs dans l’état actuel des 

choses „in the current state of things‟ and dans 

l’état actuel des connaissances „in the current 

state of knowledge‟, which are both encoded in 

                                                 
10

 Normally, in table PCDN, the fixed part of the semi-fixed 
adverbial expression comprises also the second preposition 

de „of‟ which is constant for all entries of the table, and for 

that reason it is not encoded explicitly.  

table PCDC, accept the substructure dans l’état 

actuel „in the current state‟.  

In fact, each substructure provides informa-

tion about the corresponding entry, and the gen-

erated substructures can be filtered automatically 

to easily delete duplicates. 

Last, errors in the new entries are sometimes 

due to the way initial adverbial entries are en-

coded in tables. Considering the adverb à cette 

heure-ci „at the present time‟ represented in table 

PCA: the noun component heure „time‟ is en-

coded together with the hyphen, and thus form 

an amalgam that is automatically reproduced in 

the substructure à cette heure- „at this time‟. 

5 Conclusion and future work  

At a time when the lack of large scale lexical 

syntactic resources for French impedes on NLP 

research, we showed the interest of using fine-

grained linguistic information, which is provided 

in existing resources, in order to enrich or diver-

sify their content. This work led to an increase of 

108% of the adverbial entries in LGLex. 

These encouraging results confirm it is 

worthwhile exploiting features such as paraph-

rases. Therefore, we plan to complete the LG 

tables in that direction, starting, for example, 

with the table of verbal manner adverbs:  

Adj-ment = en tout Nabstrait =:  

amicalement = en toute amitié 

„friendly‟          „in all friendship‟ 
 

Adj-ment = par Nmoyen_communication =:  

téléphoniquement = par téléphone 

„by telephone‟          „by telephone‟ 
 

Furthermore, we plan to convert the new adver-

bial entries into the Lefff format (Sagot, 2010), in 

order to integrate them into a parser, following 

similar work by Tolone and Sagot (2011) and 

Tolone (2011).  

Besides, the new adverbial entries will be 

added to the French morphological lexicon 

DELA, which will enable us to evaluate their 

accuracy by means of both a corpus‟ annotation 

practice and a detailed comparison with related 

work by Laporte et al. (2008). 

Finally, we can also consider enhancing the 

French Wordnet with respect to adverbial entries 

(Sagot et al., 2009). 

References  

E. Agirre, T. Baldwin and D. Martinez. 2008. Improv-

ing parsing and PP attachment performance with 

1232



sense information. In Proceedings of ACL, Colum-

bus, Ohio. 

J. Baptista. 2003. Some Families of Compound Tem-

poral Adverbs in Portuguese. In Proceedings of the 

Workshop on Finite-State Methods for Natural 

Language Processing, Budapest, Hungaria. 

X. Blanco and D. Català. 1998/1999. Quelques re-

marques sur un dictionnaire électronique 

d‟adverbes composés en espagnol. Lingvisticae In-

vestigationes, 22: 213-232. 

J.-P. Boons, A. Guillet and C. Leclère. 1976. La struc-

ture des phrases simples en français: Constructions 

intransitives. Droz, Genève, Suisse. 

M. Constant and E. Tolone. 2010. A generic tool to 

generate a lexicon for NLP from Lexicon-Grammar 

tables. Lingue d'Europa e del Mediterraneo, 

Grammatica comparata, 1: 79-93. 

M. De Gioia. 2001. Avverbi idiomatici dell’italiano. 

Analisi lessico-grammaticale, prefazione di Mau-

rice Gross. L‟Harmattan, Torino. 

M. Gross. 1975. Méthodes en syntaxe : Régimes des 

constructions complétives. Hermann, Paris, France. 

M. Gross. 1986. Lexicon-Grammar. The representa-

tion of compound words. In Proceedings of the 

Eleventh International Conference on Computa-

tional Linguistics, Bonn, West Germany. 

M. Gross. 1990. Grammaire transformationnelle du 

français: 3. Syntaxe de l’adverbe. ASSTRIL, Paris. 

A. Guillet and C. Leclère. 1992. La structure des 

phrases simples en français : les constructions 

transitives locatives. Droz, Geneva, Switzerland. 

J. E. Jung. 2005. Grammaire des adverbes de durée et 

de date en coréen. Thèse de doctorat en Informa-

tique Linguistique. Université Paris-Est Marne-la-

Vallée, France. 

E. Laporte and S. Voyatzi. 2008. An electronic dic-

tionary of French multiword adverbs. In Proceed-

ings of the the LREC workshop Towards a Shared 

Task on Multiword Expressions. Marrakech, Mo-

rocco.  

E. Laporte, T. Nakamura and S. Voyatzi. 2008. A 

French corpus annotated for multiword expressions 

with adverbial function. In Proceedings of the 

LREC Second Linguistic Annotation workshop. 

Marrakech, Morocco. 

P. Merlo. 2003. Generalised PP-attachment Disambi-

guisation using Corpus-based Linguistic Dia- gnos-

tics. In Proceedings of the 10th Conference of the 

European Chapter of the Association for Computa-

tional Linguistics, EACL. Budapest, Hungaria. 

C. Moliner. 1984. Etude syntaxique et sémantique des 

adverbes de manière en -ment. Thèse de doctorat, 

Université de Toulouse – Le Mirail, France. 

C. Molinier and F. Lévrier. 2000. Grammaire des ad-

verbes : description des formes en -ment. Droz, 

Genève, Suisse.  

H. Nølke. 1990. Classification des adverbes. Langue 

française, 88: 3-127. 

B. Sagot, K. Fort and F. Venant. 2009. Extending the 

adverbial coverage of a French wordnet. In Pro-

ceedings of the NODALIDA 2009 workshop on 

WordNets and other Lexical Semantic Resources. 

Odense, Danemark.  

B. Sagot. 2010. The Lefff, a freely available and 

large-coverage morphological and syntactic lex-

icon for French. In Proceedings of the Seventh 

Language Resources and Evaluation Conference. 

La Valette, Malte. 

D. Seelbach. 1990. Zur Entwicklung von bilingualen 

Mehrwortlexica Französisch-Deutsch-Stützverbkon 

struktionen und adverbiale Ausdrücke. Lexicon und 

Lexikographie, 11: 179-207. 

S. Sekine. 2005. Automatic Paraphrase Discovery 

based on Context and Keywords between NE Pairs. 

In Proceedings of the Third International Work-

shop on Paraphrase, Jeju Island, South Korea. 

E. Tolone. 2009. Les tables du Lexique-Grammaire au 

format TAL. In Proceedings of MajecSTIC 2009, 

Avignon, France. 

E. Tolone, S. Voyatzi and C. Leclère. 2010. Construc-

tions définitoires des tables du Lexique-

Grammaire. In Proceedings of the Twenty Ninth In-

ternational Conference on Lexis and Grammar, 

Belgrade, Serbie. 

E. Tolone and B. Sagot. To appear. Using Lexicon-

Grammar tables for French verbs in a large-

coverage parser. Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelli-

gence. Springer Verlag. 

E. Tolone. 2011. Analyse syntaxique à l’aide des 

tables du Lexique-Grammaire du français. Thèse 

de doctorat en Informatique Linguistique, Univer-

sité Paris-Est, 340 pp. 

A. Villavicencio. 2002. Learning to distinguish PP 

arguments from adjuncts. In Proceedings of the 6th 

Conference on Natural Language Learning, Taipei, 

Taiwan. 

S. Voyatzi. 2006. Description morphosyntaxique et 

sémantique des adverbes figés en vue d’un système 

d’analyse automatique des textes grecs. Thèse de 

doctorat en Informatique Linguistique. Université 

Paris-Est, France, 406 pp. 

1233


