















































Integration of Reduplicated Multiword Expressions and Named Entities in a Phrase Based Statistical Machine Translation System


Proceedings of the 5th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 1304–1312,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 8 – 13, 2011. c©2011 AFNLP

Integration of Reduplicated Multiword Expressions and Named Entities 

in a Phrase Based Statistical Machine Translation System 

 

 

Thoudam Doren Singh
†
 

Department of Computer Science and 

Engineering 

Jadavpur University 

Kolkata-700032, India 

thoudam.doren@gmail.com 

Sivaji Bandyopadhyay 

Department of Computer Science and 

Engineering 

Jadavpur University 

Kolkata-700032, India 

sivaji_cse_ju@yahoo.com 

  

 
 

Abstract 

 

The language specific Multiword expressions 

(MWEs) play important roles in many natural 

language processing (NLP) tasks. Integrating 

reduplicated multiword expressions (RMWEs) 

into the Phrase Based Statistical Machine 

Translation (PBSMT) to improve translation 

quality is reported in the present work between 

Manipuri, a highly agglutinative Tibeto-Burman 

language and English. In addition, Multiword 

Named Entities (MNEs) coupled with 

Transliterated non-named entities (non-NE) 

between Manipuri and English phrase based 

SMT system are also integrated. The tighter 

integration of RMWEs and NEs into the PBSMT 

is carried out after automatic extraction using 

SVM based machine learning technique 

followed by automatic bilingual RMWE and 

MNE extraction using GIZA++ alignment. Our 

experimental results show improvement in the 

PBSMT system BLEU and NIST scores over the 

baseline system. Subjective evaluation indicates 

the improvement in the adequacy. 

1 Introduction 

Multiword expressions (MWEs) are a key 

challenge for the development of large-scale, 

linguistically sound natural language processing 

technology (Sag et al, 2002). The various kinds of 

multiword expressions should be analyzed in 

distinct ways. An adequate comprehensive analysis 

of multiword expressions must employ both 

symbolic and statistical techniques. MWEs span a 

range of constructions, from completely frozen, 

semantically opaque idiomatic expressions, to 

frequent but morphologically productive and 

semantically compositional collocations. Various 

linguistic processes (orthographic, morphological, 

syntactic, semantic and cognitive) apply to MWEs 

in idiosyncratic ways. Notably, MWEs blur the 

distinction between the lexicon and the grammar, 

since they often have some properties of words and 

some properties of phrases. The MWE 

identification works concentrate on compound 

nouns, noun-verb combination, idioms and phrases 

for several languages such as Hindi and Hebrew 

but not much on RMWEs. The reason may be that 

the reduplicated words are either rare or easy to 

identify for these languages since only complete 

duplication and some amount of partial 

reduplication may be present in these languages.  

On the other hand, reduplicated MWEs 

(RMWE) of several varieties are widely present in 

Manipuri
1
. In the present work, the identification 

of Manipuri Named Entities (NEs) and the 

identification and classification of RMWEs is 

carried out using the SVM based machine learning 

approach. 

                                                           
† Presently at Center for Development of Advanced 

Computing (CDAC), Mumbai, India 

 
1   Manipuri, locally known as Meiteilon or Meeteilon, is a 

less privileged, morphologically rich, highly agglutinative 

language spoken basically in the states of Manipur, Assam, 

Tripura and Mizoram in India and in the neighboring countries 

of Myanmar and Bangladesh approximately by three million 

speakers. Manipuri became the first Tibeto-Burman (TB) 

language to receive recognition in the year 1992 as a schedule 

VIII language of India. 

1304



Manipuri is very rich in RMWEs like other 

Tibeto-Burman languages. The work of (Singh, 

2000) describes the linguistic rules for identifying 

reduplicated words. Manipuri is the direct 

descendant of the conglomeration of Tibeto-

Burman dialects of seven different clans. This is 

reflected in the commonly found use of double 

synonyms in Manipuri, technically known as 

‘semantic reduplication’. The process of 

reduplication (Singh, 2000) is defined as: 

‘reduplication is that repetition, the result of which 

constitutes a unit word’.  These single unit words 

are the MWEs. The RMWEs in Manipuri are 

classified as: (i) Complete RMWEs, (ii) Partial 

RMWEs, (iii) Echo RMWEs and (iv) Mimic 

RMWEs. Apart from these four types of RMWEs, 

there are also cases of (a) Double RMWEs and (b) 

Semantic RMWEs. 

 

Complete RMWEs: In the complete RMWEs 

the single word or phrase is repeated once forming 

a single unit regardless of the phonological or 

morphological variations. Interestingly in Manipuri 

these complete reduplicated MWEs can occur as 

Noun, Adjective, Adverb, Wh- question type, 

Verbs, Command and Request. 

 

মরিক মরিক (‘marik marik’) which means ‘drop by 
drop’. [Noun] 

 অটেক অটেকপা (‘atek atek-pa’ ) which means ‘fresh’ 
[Adjective] 

করি করি (‘kari kari’) means ‘what/which’. [Wh-
question] 

 

Partial RMWEs: In case of partial 
reduplication the second word carries some part of 

the first word as an affix to the second word, either 

as a suffix or a prefix. 
 

For example, চটথাক চত্রিন (‘chat-thok chat-
sin’) means ‘to go to and fro’; শামী লানমী (‘saa-mi 
laan-mi’) means ‘army’. 
 

Mimic RMWEs: In the mimic  reduplication 

the words are complete reduplications but the 

morphemes are onomatopoetic, usually emotional 

or natural sounds. For example, কিক কিক  (‘krak 
krak’ ) means ‘cracking sound of earth in drought’. 
 

Echo RMWEs: The second word does not 

have a dictionary meaning and is basically an echo 

word of the first word. For example, থকরি খারি 
(‘thak-si kha-si‘) means ‘good manner’. 
 

Double RMWEs: Such type of reduplication 

generally consists of three words where the prefix 

or suffix of the first two words is reduplicated but 

in the third word the prefix or suffix is absent. An 

example of double prefix reduplication is ইমুন ইমুন 
মুনবা (‘i-mun i-mun mun-ba’) which means, 
‘completely ripe’. 
 

Semantic RMWEs: Both the reduplication 

words have the same meaning that is shared by the 

MWE itself. Such types of MWEs are very special 

to the Manipuri language. For example, পামবা কক 
(‘paamba kei’) means ‘tiger’ and each of the 

component words means ‘tiger’. 
 

The performance of the SMT is heavily 

dependent on the quality of the Parallel Corpora 

and the alignment models used. Integrating MWEs 

into the Machine Translation (MT) systems in 

general and phrase based Statistical Machine 

Translation (PBSMT) system in particular is a 

critical problem. Thus, there is the need for 

identifying Manipuri RMWE and integrating into 

the PBSMT system. In the present work, we 

integrate Manipuri Named entities (both single 

word and multiword), RMWEs and non-NE 

transliterated entities into the existing phrase-based 

model. 

2 Related Works 

Koehn and Knight (2003) discussed empirical 

methods for compound splitting by learning rules 

from monolingual and parallel corpora. Lambert 

and Banchs (2005) proposed technique for 

extracting bilingual MWEs based on grouping as 

units before performing the statistical alignment. 

(Ren et al., 2009) presented the Log Likelihood 

Ratio based hierarchical reducing algorithm to 

automatically extract bilingual MWE and 

investigated the performance of three different 

strategies in applying bilingual MWEs for SMT 

system using Moses (Koehn et al., 2007). Carpuat 

and Diab (2010) explored static integration 

strategy that segments training and test sentences 

according to the MWE vocabulary, and dynamic 

integration strategy that adds a new MWE-based 

feature in SMT translation lexicon. Handling of 

1305



named entities and compound verbs in PBSMT 

(Pal et al., 2010) has been reported in the English-

Bengali task in the Indian language context. They 

established prior NE alignments in the parallel 

corpora by transliterating source NEs into the 

target language using modified joint source 

channel transliteration technique (Ekbal et al., 

2006) which incorporates different contextual 

information into the model. In the process, the 

identified NEs and compound verbs are converted 

into a single token by replacing spaces between the 

constituent words by underscores. 

3 Manipuri-English Parallel Corpora 

The Manipuri-English Parallel corpus (Singh and 

Bandyopadhyay, 2010b) on News Domain is used 

for training and testing. The Manipuri news corpus 

is collected from the website 

http://www.thesangaiexpress.com/. On analyzing 

the corpus, the statistics shows that Named entities 

(both single word and multiword), RMWEs and 

non-NE transliterated entities are present in 

significant numbers.  

The presence of NEs in the Manipuri News 

corpus is approximated at 11.39%. However, the 

presence of non-NE transliterated entities is lesser 

and estimated at 9.2%. The following example (a) 

demonstrates the usage of the transliterated non-

NE in the Manipuri news. 

The following translation examples 

demonstrate the usage of NEs, transliterated non-

NEs and RMWEs in the Manipuri source 

sentences. 

 
(a) 

হায় পৱাি করিটিগী ইন্সত্রক্সন মতুুং ইন্না য়ুঠ এরিয়ািস 
এণ্ড স্পােস িরক স্ াইন্ট স্িটেেরিনা চরহ অরিগী এরিল 
২৪ দা রিপােস টমন্টরশুংদগী অহাঙবা স্পাষ্টরশুং পীখত্লক্নবা  
খঙহনখ্রবরন 
 
According to the instruction of the high power 

committee, the joint secretary of youth affairs 

and sports notified to submit the vacant posts in 

the departments on 24 April of this year. 

 

Considering the above translation example (a) 

between Manipuri and English sentence, the 

Manipuri transliteration of the non-NE is shown in 

Table 1. This significant presence of these entities 

plays an important role in the news corpus. These 

are the examples of enrichment of Manipuri 

languages using Manipuri transliteration from 

English. 
 

Manipuri 

Transliteration 

English Words 

ইন্সত্রক্সন Instruction 

স্ াইন্ট Joint 

স্িটেেরি Secretary 

এরিল April 

রিপােস টমন্ট Department 

স্পাষ্ট Post 

হায় High 

পৱাি Power 

করিটি Committee 

য়ুঠ  Youth 

এরিয়ািস  Affairs 

এণ্ড  And 

স্পােস ি Sports 

Table 1: Sample Manipuri Transliterated non-NE 
 

(b) 

স্মারনকা ইম্ফালদা স্থািক্নবা ফ্লাইেরক টিটকত্ তান্নবদা 
িুংরখদবদগী স্থািকপা ঙমরখদবরন 
 

Monika could not come due to the unavailability 

of the flight ticket to Imphal. 

 

From the example (b), the NEs are given in 

Table 2. 
 

Manipuri Named 

Entities 

English 

Transliteration 

স্মারনকা Monika 

ইম্ফাল Imphal 

Table 2: Sample Manipuri Named Entities 
 

(c) 

অটশাক অপন , মীরশ মীনা , অিা অপুন য়াওিক্লবরদ 
মদদুা স্থাক্লকপা অি িত্ত পূম্নমরক দায়ত্ব পল্ফনা 

1306



পুগদবরন হায়নিু ঙরিগী মীিমনা মত অমত্তা ওইনা 
য়ানরখ হায়রি 
 
It is said that the meeting unanimously agreed 

that PULF should be held sole responsible of dire 

consequences in case of untoward incidents, 

killing and kidnapping. 

 

From the translation example (c), the Manipuri 

RMWEs are given in Table 3. 
 

Manipuri RMWE English Meaning 

অটশাক অপন untoward incidents 

মীরশ মীনা killing 

অিা অপুন kidnapping 

অি িত্ত dire consequences 

Table 3: Sample Manipuri RMWEs 

4 NE Transliteration 

A transliteration system takes as input a character 

string in the source language and generates a 

character string in the target language as output. 

The process can be conceptualized as two levels of 

decoding: segmentation of the source string into 

transliteration units; and relating the source 

language transliteration units to units in the target 

language, by resolving different combinations of 

alignments and unit mappings. The problem of 

machine transliteration has been studied 

extensively in the paradigm of the noisy channel 

model. Translation of named entities is a tricky 

task: it involves both translation and transliteration. 

For example, the organization name Jadavpur 

viswavidyalaya is translated to Jadavpur 

University in which Jadavpur is transliterated to 

Jadavpur and viswavidyalaya is translated to 

University.  

A bilingual training set of Manipuri NEs and 

their respective English transliterations, has been 

created by collecting Manipuri person, location 

and organization names from Manipuri news 

corpus and then manually entering their English 

transliterations. This bilingual training set is 

automatically analyzed to acquire mapping 

knowledge in order to transliterate new Manipuri 

person, location and organization names to 

English. Transliteration units (TUs) are extracted 

from the Manipuri-English name pairs and 

Manipuri TUs are associated with their English 

counterparts. Some examples are given below: 
 

(a) মনিপুর(manipur)  ম | নি | পু | র 

manipur  ma | ni | pu | r 

(b) রাজকুমার(rajkumar) রা | জ | কু | মা | র   

rajkumar  ra | j | ku | ma | r 

(c) অনিিন্দি(abhinandan)অ | নি | ি | ন্দ |ি 

abhinandan  a | bhi | na | nda | n 

The TUs are the lexical units for machine 

transliteration. The Manipuri NE is divided into 

Transliteration Units (TU) with patterns C+M?, 

where C represents a consonant or a vowel or a 

conjunct and M represents the vowel modifier or 

matra. An English NE is divided into TUs with 

patterns C*V*, where C represents a consonant 

and V represents a vowel. The system 

automatically learns mappings from the bilingual 

training set of 20,000 NEs. Aligned TUs along 

with their contexts are automatically derived from 

this bilingual training set to generate the 

collocation statistics.Transliteration units (TUs) are 

extracted from the Manipuri and the corresponding 

English names, and Manipuri TUs are associated 

with their English counterparts along with the TUs 

in context. For K aligned TUs, the Manipuri-

English transliteration model based on the 

Modified Joint Source Channel Model for 

transliteration (Ekbal et. al., 2006) is given by the 

following equations (1) and (2). 
 

𝑃 𝑆, 𝑇 =  𝑃(< 𝑠, 𝑡 >𝑘 | < 𝑠, 𝑡 >𝑘−1)

𝐾

𝑘=1

s𝑘+1 

                          (1) 

 

ST(S)=arg maxT {P(T) × P(S,T)}                (2) 

 

A TU correspondence <s, t> is called a 

transliteration pair of the source language S and the 

target language T. In this model, the previous TUs 

in both the source and target sides are considered 

as context. This model is extended to Manipuri 

since the Bengali script is used in Manipuri also.   

1307



5 SVM based RMWEs identification and 
Bilingual RMWE Extraction 

The Support Vector Machine (SVM) based 

machine learning approach (Vapnik, 1995) works 

on discriminative approach and makes use of both 

positive and negative examples to learn the 

distinction between the two classes. The SVMs are 

known to robustly handle large feature sets and to 

develop models that maximize their 

generalizability. Consider a set of training data for 

a two-class problem: , where 

xi R
D
 is a feature vector of the i

th
 sample in the 

training data and yi{+1, -1} is the class to which xi 

belongs. The goal is to find a decision function that 

accurately predicts class y for an input vector x.  

A non-linear SVM classifier gives a decision 

function f (x) = sign (g(x)) for an input vector 

where, 

1

( ) ( , )i
m

i

i

g x wK x z b


                    (3)
 

Here, f(x) = +1 means x is a member of a certain 

class and f(x) = -1 means x is not a member. The 

support vectors that are representatives of training 

examples are zi and m is the number of support 

vectors. Therefore, the computational complexity 

of g(x) is proportional to m. Support vectors and 

other constants are determined by solving a certain 

quadratic programming problem. is a 

kernel that implicitly maps vectors into a higher 

dimensional space. Typical kernels use dot 

products: . A polynomial kernel 

of degree d is given by = (1+x)
d
. We can 

use various kernels and the design of an 

appropriate kernel for a particular application is an 

important research issue. 

The MNE/RMWE tagging system includes two 

main phases: training and classification. The 

training process has been carried out by YamCha
2
 

toolkit, an SVM based tool for detecting classes in 

documents and formulating the MNE/RMWE 

tagging task as a sequence labeling problem. Here, 

both one vs rest and pairwise multi-class decision 

methods have been used. Different experiments 

with the various degrees of the polynomial kernel 

function have been carried out. In one vs rest 

strategy, K binary SVM classifiers may be created 
                                                           
2http://chasen-org/~taku/software/yamcha/  

where each classifier is trained to distinguish one 

class from the remaining K-1 classes. In pairwise 

classification, we constructed K (K-1)/2 classifiers 

considering all pairs of classes, and the final 

decision is taken by their weighted voting. For 

classification, the TinySVM-0.07
3

 classifier has 

been used that seems to be one of the best 

optimized among publicly available SVM toolkits. 

In the present work, the bilingual RMWEs are 

extracted automatically. The difficulty lies in how 

to integrate the bilingual MWEs into existing the 

SMT system to improve system performance. The 

RMWEs are identified from the Manipuri source 

side of the parallel corpora. The RMWEs are 

identified (Singh and Bandyopadhyay, 2010) using 

support vector machine (SVM) based machine 

learning technique. The various features used are 

context word, prefix, suffix, previous RMWE 

information, POS information, word length, digit 

and infrequent word features. The SVM based 

RMWE identification system shows recall, 

precision and F-Score of 94.62%, 93.53% and 

94.07% respectively. 

The target equivalents of the RMWEs are 

extracted by running the GIZA++ alignment tool 

followed be candidate translation extraction from 

the sentence pairs using the algorithm described in 

(Och, 2002). There are 25,921 RMWEs in the 

training corpus. Thus, an additional phrase table 

containing the automatically extracted RMWEs is 

constructed. 

6 Bilingual NEs Extraction 

Named Entities (NEs) are indentified using the 

SVM based Manipuri named entity recognition 

technique (Singh et al., 2010a) on news corpus. At 

present, 4649016 Manipuri wordforms has been 

collected from the website. The NE identification 

in Manipuri is difficult and challenging because (a) 

Manipuri is less privileged and resource 

constrained language, (b) unlike English, Manipuri 

lacks capitalization, (c) NEs can appear in the 

Manipuri dictionary as well and (d) Manipuri is 

highly agglutinative. The major NE tags are person 

name, location name, organization name and 

miscellaneous name. The identified Manipuri NEs 

are transliterated using the modified joint source 

channel techniques discussed in Section 4. There 

                                                           
3http://cl.aist-nara.ac.jp/~taku-ku/software/TinySVM  

1 1{( , ),.....( , )}N Nx y x y

( , )iK x z

( , ) ( . )iK x z k x z

( , )iK x z

1308



are 529522 NEs identified and transliterated of 

which 284521 are multiword named entities 

(MNE). An additional phrase table of the bilingual 

NEs is constructed. 

7 Transliterated non-NE list Preparation 

Manipuri is influenced and enriched by the Indo-

Aryan languages of Sanskrit origin and English. So 

the presence of transliterated English words in the 

Manipuri news corpus is significantly high and it is 

important to handle these words during the 

translation process at the appropriate step. So, a list 

of 2611 Manipuri words and their English 

transliterations is developed from the news corpus. 

The non-NE list consists of both single word as 

well as multiple words. An additional phrase table 

based on this non-NE transliteration list is built in 

order to integrate in the present system. 

8 Integration of MWE 

In the present task, we employed multiple phrase 

tables using the Moses decoder. One phrase table 

is trained from the parallel corpora and second one 

is built using the MWEs extracted using the 

techniques described in section 5 and 6. For 

simplicity, the probability 1 is assigned to all the 

four probabilities of the MWE phrase table. During 

the decoding process, the MWEs are searched in 

both the phrase tables.  

One of the possible techniques of integrating 

MWE in the SMT system is by introducing a new 

feature in a phrase table that indicates the presence 

of MWE. 

9 The SMT Systems 

We developed the Manipuri-English SMT systems 

using the state-of-the-art Moses. The various 

features are combined in the log-linear model. The 

log linear model to obtain the best translation ê of 

the source sentence f is given by the equation 

below: 

  ê = arg  max
         𝑒

 𝑃(𝑒|𝑓) 

       

where, ℎ𝑖  and 𝜆𝑖 denote the i
th 

feature function and 

weight respectively. The feature weight λi in the 

log linear model is determined by using the 

minimum error rate training method (Och, 2003). 

Intuitively, the 𝑃(𝑒|𝑓) depend on language model 
— P(e) and translation model — P(f|e). 

10 Experimental Setup 

The first Manipuri-English SMT task is reported in 

(Singh and Bandyopadhyay, 2010c) on news 

domain using factored translation model 

demonstrating improvement not only in the BLEU 

and NIST scores but also improvement in the 

fluency and adequacy by subjective evaluation 

method. Earlier, an English-Manipuri SMT system 

using morpho-syntactic and semantic information 

is reported by (Singh and Bandyopadhyay, 2010d).  

In the present experimental setup, Moses decoder 

(Koehn et al., 2005) is used which can support 

multiple phrase tables. The target language model 

is developed using the SRILM (Stolcke, 2002) 

toolkit. The language model is the 4-gram model 

using Kneser-Ney smoothing (Kneser and Ney, 

1995) of the target language news corpus collected 

from the www.thesangaiexpress.com. GIZA++ is 

used to build IBM Model 4. The minimum error 

rate training (Och, 2003) determine the feature 

weights on the development set. 

Several experiments are conducted using the 

phrase tables built from the MWEs. There is also 

an experiment on the combination of all the phrase 

tables consisting of the baseline, RMWE, NEs and 

transliterated non-NEs. 

11 Evaluation Results 

The corpus statistics used in the experiment is 

given in the table below. 

 

 Number of 

sentences 

Number of 

words 

Training 10350 296728 

Development 600 16520 

Test 500 15204 

Table 4: Corpus Statistics 

 

The automatic scoring metrics are useful for fast 

evaluation of higher number of test sentences. The 

=  arg max
      𝑒

 𝜆𝑖 ℎ𝑖 𝑒, 𝑓  

n

𝑖=1

 
 

     (4) 

1309



automatic evaluation scores are carried out using 

the BLEU (Papineni, 2002) with brevity penalty 

and NIST (Doddington, 2002). The BLEU and 

NIST automatic scores of various models are given 

in the table below: 

 

Model BLEU NIST 

Baseline 13.452 4.31 

Baseline + RMWE 13.829 4.43 

Baseline +NE 13.901 4.47 

Baseline + Transliterated 

non-NE 

13.911 4.21 

Baseline + RMWE + NE + 

Transliterated non-NE 
15.023 5.21 

Table 5: Automatic Scores of Manipuri-English 

SMT systems  
 

 Level Interpretation 

4 Flawless with no grammatical error 

3 Good output with minor errors 

2 Disfluent ungrammatical with correct phrase 

1 Incomprehensible 

Table 6: Fluency scale 

 

Level Interpretation 

4 Full meaning is conveyed 

3 Most of the meaning is conveyed 

2 Poor meaning is conveyed 

1 No meaning is conveyed 

Table 7: Adequacy scale 

 

Subjective evaluation is carried out on 100 test 

sentences using the fluency and adequacy scales 

given in the Tables 6 and 7. The subjective 

evaluation is carried out by two bilingual human 

judges. The evaluation indicates the improvement 

in adequacy but not much on fluency as shown in 

Table 8. The case markers and the inflectional 

suffixes are not taken care of with special 

treatment despite the agglutinative behavior of 

Manipuri language towards RMWEs, NEs and 

non-NEs; hence the fluency is not addressed 

significantly. 

Statistical significant test is performed to judge 

if a change in score that comes from a change in 

the system reflects a change in the overall 

translation quality. It is found that the difference 

between the baseline and the (Baseline + RMWE + 

NE + Transliterated non-NE) model is significant 

producing statistically significant improvements as 

measured by the bootstrap resampling method 

(Koehn, 2004) on BLEU. 

 

 Manipuri 

Sentence 

length 

Fluency Adequacy 

Baseline <=15 words 1.93 2.31 

>15 words 1.51 1.76 

Baseline+ 

RMWE 

<=15 words 1.92 2.85 

>15 words 1.62 2.07 

Baseline + 

NE  

<=15 words 2.06 2.82 

>15 words 1.75 2.10 

Baseline + 

Transliterated 

non-NE 

<=15 words 2.10 2.79 

>15 words 1.67 2.10 

Baseline + 

RMWE + NE 

+ 

Transliterated 

non-NE 

<=15 words 2.11 3.11 

>15 words 1.72 2.78 

Table 8: Subjective Evaluation Scores 

12 Conclusion and Future Work 

The present work reports the tight integration of 

the RMWE, named entities (both single word and 

multiword) and transliterated non-NE entities into 

the Manipuri-English SMT task. The presence of 

these entities in the Manipuri news corpus is 

significantly high and their special treatment in the 

machine translation is absolutely necessary. In 

order to identify the language specific multiword 

expressions, the SVM based machine learning 

technique is utilized. Since the translation output of 

the SMT system is further propagated from the 

quality of the automatic RMWE and MNE 

identification using SVM based machine learning 

1310



technique and multiword extraction using GIZA++ 

alignment, it is very important that these steps are 

better addressed in an effective way with more 

training data in future. By integrating RMWEs, 

MNEs and non-NEs, the adequacy of the 

translation output is improved; however, there is 

no significant improvement in the fluency. The 

fluency can be better addressed by incorporating 

morphological information such as proper handling 

of the case markers of the MNEs. On the other 

hand, the BLEU and NIST scores are improved 

over the baseline from 13.452 and 4.31 to 15.023 

and 5.21 respectively. 

References  

Carpuat, Marine, and Mona Diab. 2010. Task based 

Evaluation of Multiword Expressions: aPilot Study in 

Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of 

Human Language Technology conference and the 

North American Chapter of the Association for 

Computational Linguistics conference (HLT-

NAACL 2010), Pages 242-245, Los Angeles, CA. 

Doddington, George. 2002. Automatic evaluation of 

machine translation quality using n-gram co-

occurrence statistics. In Proceedings of the Second 

International Conference on Human Language 

Technology Research (HLT-2002), Pages 128-132, 

San Diego, CA. 

Ekbal, Asif, Sudip Kumar Naskar, Bandyopadhyay, S. 

2006. A Modified Joint Source-Channel Model for 

Transliteration, Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 

2006 Main Conference Poster Sessions, Pages 191–

198, Sydney. 

Lambert, Patrik and Rafael Banchs. 2005. Data inferred 

multi-word expressions for statistical machine 

translation. In Proceedings of Machine Translation 

Summit X, Pages 396–403. 

Koehn, Philipp and Knight, Kevin. 2003. Empirical 

Methods for Compound Splitting, Proceedings of the 

EACL 2003. Pages 187-194. 

Koehn, Philipp. 2004. Statistical significance tests for 

machine translation evaluation. In EMNLP- 2004: 

Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on Empirical 

Methods in Natural Language Processing, 25-26 July 

2004, Pages 388-395, Barcelona, Spain. 

Koehn, Philipp, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris 

Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi, 

Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, 

Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondřej Bojar, Alexandra 

Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: open 

source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In 

Proceedings of the 45th Annual meeting of the 

Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 

2007): Proceedings of demo and poster sessions, 

Pages 177-180, Prague, Czech Republic.  

Och, Franz J., 2002, Statistical Machine Translation: 

From Single-Word Models to Alignment Templates. 

Ph.D. Thesis, Computer Science Department, 

RWTH, Aachen, Germany. 

Och, Franz J., 2003. Minimum error rate training in 

Statistical Machine Translation, Proceedings of ACL. 

Och, Franz J. and H. Ney. 2003. A systematic 

comparison of various statistical alignment models. 

Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51. 

Pal, Santanu, Sudip Kumar Naskar , Pavel Pecina, Sivaji 

Bandyopadhyay, Andy Way, 2010. Handling Named 

Entities and Compound Verbs in Phrase-Based 

Statistical Machine Translation, In Proceedings of the 

Multiword Expressions: From Theory to 

Applications (MWE 2010), Pages 46–54, Beijing. 

Papineni, K.A., Roukos, S., Ward, T., and Zhu, W.J., 

2002. BLEU: a Method for Automatic Evaluation of 

Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the 40th 

Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 

Linguistics (ACL), Philadelphia,.  

Ren, Zhixiang, Yajuan Lü, Jie Cao, Qun Liu, and Yun 

Huang. 2009. Improving statistical machine 

translation using domain bilingual multiword 

expressions. In Proceedings of the 2009 Workshop 

on Multiword Expressions, ACLIJCNLP 2009, Pages 

47-54, Suntec, Singapore. 

Sag, Ivan A., Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann 

Copestake, and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword 

expressions: A pain in the neck for NLP. In 

Proceedings of the 3th International Conference on 

Intelligent Text Processing and Computational 

Linguistics(CICLing-2002), Pages 1–15. 

Singh, Thoudam Doren, Nongmeikapam Kishorjit, Asif 

Ekbal, Sivaji Bandyopadhyay, 2009. Named Entity 

Recognition for Manipuri using Support Vector 

Machine, In proceedings of 23rd Pacific Asia 

Conference on Language, Information and 

Computation (PACLIC 23), Pages 811-818, Hong 

Kong.  

Singh, Thoudam Doren and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay, 

2010a. Web Based Manipuri Corpus for Multiword 

NER and Reduplicated MWEs Identification using 

SVM, Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on South and 

Southeast Asian Natural Language Processing 

(WSSANLP), the 23rd International Conference on 

Computational Linguistics (COLING), Pages 35–42, 

Beijing. 

1311



Singh, Thoudam Doren and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay, 

2010b. Semi Automatic Parallel Corpora Extraction 

from Comparable News Corpora, In the International 

Journal of POLIBITS, Issue 41 (January - June 

2010), ISSN 1870-9044, Pages 11-17. 

Singh, Thoudam Doren and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay, 

2010c. Manipuri-English Bidirectional Statistical 

Machine Translation Systems using Morphology and 

Dependency Relations, In Proceedings of Syntax and 

Structure in Statistical Translation (SSST-4) of 23rd 

International Conference on Computational 

Linguistics (COLING), Pages 75-83, Beijing. 

Singh, Thoudam Doren and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay, 

2010d. Statistical Machine Translation of English-

Manipuri using Morpho-Syntactic and Semantic 

Information, In proceedings of Ninth Conference of 

the Association for Machine Translation in Americas 

(AMTA 2010), Pages 333-340, Denver, Colorado, 

USA. 

Singh, Ch. Yashawanta, 2000, Manipuri Grammar, 

Rajesh Publications, Pages 190-204, Delhi. 

Vapnik, Vladimir N. 1995: The nature of Statistical 

learning theory. Springer 

 

 

1312


