















































Toward a Parallel Corpus of Spoken Cantonese and Written Chinese


Proceedings of the 5th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 1462–1466,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 8 – 13, 2011. c©2011 AFNLP

Toward a Parallel Corpus of Spoken Cantonese and Written Chinese 

 

 

John Lee 

The Halliday Centre for Intelligent Applications of Language Studies  

Department of Chinese, Translation and Linguistics 

City University of Hong Kong 

jsylee@cityu.edu.hk 

 

  

 

Abstract 

 

We introduce a parallel corpus of spoken Can-

tonese and written Chinese.  This sentence-

aligned corpus consists of transcriptions of 

Cantonese spoken in television programs in 

Hong Kong, and their corresponding Chinese 

(Mandarin) subtitles.  Preliminary evaluation 

shows that the corpus reflects known syntactic 

differences between Cantonese and Mandarin, 

facilitates quantitative analyses on these dif-

ferences, and already reveals some phenomena 

not yet discussed in the literature. 

1 Introduction 

While standard Chinese, also known as Manda-

rin or Putonghua, is served by an ever-expanding 

set of linguistic resources
1
, its various dialects 

have received relatively little attention.  The use 

of these Chinese dialects, however, is as wide-

spread as many other national languages. For 

example, Cantonese is spoken by more than 52 

million people, mostly in southern China and 

overseas Chinese communities. 

Although considered the “most widely known 

and influential variety of Chinese other than 

Mandarin” (Matthews & Yip, 1994), Cantonese 

currently has rather limited linguistic resources.  

This paucity may be due to its unofficial status, 

as opposed to Mandarin, which is the official 

language of China. Furthermore, as a primarily 

spoken language, it does not traditionally have 

any standard written form.  This paper presents 

the first parallel corpus of transcribed Cantonese 

speech and its equivalent written Mandarin.  The 

corpus is expected to be useful for language 

                                                 
1
 For example, (Chen et al., 1996), (Xue et al., 2005),  and 

(Tsou & Kwong, 2006), among many others 

learners, linguists and developers of natural lan-

guage processing applications. 

The corpus provides students with authentic, 

parallel examples of sentences in both languages, 

which are not mutually intelligible.  Native 

speakers of Cantonese must learn Mandarin for 

use in writing and official communication; con-

versely, many Mandarin speakers living in Hong 

Kong also want to learn Cantonese. 

The corpus also serves as a repository for lin-

guistic research.  In particular, it facilitates re-

search in comparative grammar, by lending sta-

tistical evidence, and potentially demonstrating 

exceptions or other differences yet unnoticed. 

Finally, it can be exploited as training material 

for natural language processing systems, such as 

cross-lingual spoken document retrieval (Meng 

& Hui, 2001), and especially machine translation 

(MT) systems. For example, MT systems may be 

trained to automatically generate Chinese subti-

tles for Cantonese television programs, as has 

been done for Scandinavian languages (Volk et 

al., 2010). 

2 Previous Work 

Cantonese grammar has been well studied (Mat-

thews & Yip, 1994; Cheung, 2007), and a few 

monolingual corpora for Cantonese have been 

compiled (Lee & Wong, 1998; Leung & Law, 

2001; Wong, 2006). While the present corpus 

may also be used simply as Cantonese data, its 

primary contribution is as parallel data between 

Cantonese and Mandarin. 

The main difference between Cantonese and 

Mandarin is in phonology and vocabulary; in-

deed, various bilingual dictionaries and lexical 

comparisons are already available (Zhang & 

Yang, 2008). In terms of syntax, although the 

“grammatical structure is similar in most major 

respects”, the differences are not insignificant 

(Ouyang, 1993).  So far, there have been few 

1462



studies on direct comparisons between the 

grammars of Cantonese and Mandarin (Ouyang 

1993; Liang 1996), none of which was conducted 

on a large-scale, empirical methodology using 

naturally occurring Cantonese speech. This cor-

pus is intended to lay the foundation for this di-

rection of research. 

3 Corpus  

We motivate the design principles of the corpus 

(section 3.1), then describe how the corpus was 

constructed and processed (section 3.2). 

3.1 Choice of material 

The material of the corpus comes from television 

programs, including news and dramas, broadcast 

on a Cantonese channel in Hong Kong (see Table 

1). All have Mandarin subtitles, which we 

aligned to the transcription of the Cantonese that 

was simultaneously spoken. The corpus contains 

4,135 pairs of such “sentences”, with a total of 

36,775 characters in Mandarin, and 39,192 in 

Cantonese. 

The choice of these sources of material fol-

lows considerations on two main issues: register 

variations, and speech and translation quality. 

Cantonese has a wide range of registers, from 

formal to colloquial.  The formal register closely 

resembles Mandarin, and diverges significantly 

from the colloquial; this divergence is in fact a 

topic of active research in its own right. For any 

contrastive studies between Cantonese and Man-

darin, a corpus balanced between formal and col-

loquial registers would be desirable. Thus, the 

TV drama provides the colloquial register; the 

news program contributes mostly to the formal 

register with the speeches of the anchor and re-

porters, but also some colloquial register with 

those of the spontaneous interviewees. 

With the exception of these spontaneous inter-

views, all materials consist of pre-planned 

speech.  They are thus largely free of false starts, 

sentence fragments, repairs, repetitions and other 

errors, which would have led to a considerable 

amount of spurious word alignments.  This is an 

important advantage, as the parallel corpus will 

be used for word-level comparative studies. 

The Mandarin subtitles, professionally trans-

lated, are in general of high quality.  However, 

they are sometimes condensed, likely due to con-

straints posed by speech timing and screen size 

(Prokopidis, 2008). 

3.2 Corpus construction 

The Mandarin side of the corpus comes from 

subtitles, which consist of characters only; in 

contrast, the Cantonese side mixes orthographic 

transcriptions (characters) with a small number 

of phonetic transcriptions and English. Phonetic 

transcriptions, conforming to the Jyutping stand-

ard, are used when the Cantonese morpheme 

does not traditionally correspond to any standard 

Chinese characters.  Code-mixing between Eng-

lish and Cantonese is not infrequent, and the 

English words are preserved in these cases. 

Sentence-final particles in Cantonese, such as 

啦 la, present a challenge for orthographic tran-
scription.  “Many of the particles differ only in 

tone and in nuance of meaning.  Given that there 

is little uniformity of representation in relation to 

these particles”, they are written as the same 

form in (Leung & Law, 2001).  We also follow 

this practice. 

The metadata records both the name and the 

category of the speaker.  Speakers in the drama 

are always assigned as the “Character” category; 

those in the news are assigned one of four, name-

ly “Anchor”, “Reporter”, “Live Reporter”, or 

“Interviewee”.  “Anchor” and “Reporter” are 

considered to belong to the formal register, and 

all others, to the colloquial.  Overall, about 60% 

of the corpus belongs to the colloquial. 

Automatic word segmentation was performed 

on the Mandarin sentences (Chang et al., 2008). 

A subset of these words was then manually 

aligned to their Cantonese counterparts to facili-

tate a preliminary investigation, which will be 

reported in the next section. 

 

TV Program Size 

六點半新聞報

道 “TVB News at 
Six-Thirty” (2011) 

Time: 5 episodes x 20 min  

Length (chars): 19,069 

Mandarin; 20,900 Can-

tonese 

溏心風暴之家

好月圓 “Moonlight 
Resonance” (2008) 

Time: 2 episodes x 45 min  

Length (chars): 17,706 

Mandarin; 18,292 Can-

tonese  

Table 1. The source material of the corpus 

comes from two TV programs, news (top) 

and drama (bottom). 

4 Evaluation  

The usefulness of the corpus may be gauged in 

two ways.  First, it should reflect known differ-

ences between Mandarin and Cantonese (section 

1463



4.1), and those between formal and colloquial 

registers in Cantonese (section 4.2). Secondly, it 

should not only corroborate, but also contribute 

new information to previous studies.  For this 

second goal, we give examples in three specific 

areas, namely the plural marker for personal 

nouns (section 4.3), agentless passives (section 

4.4), and possessive constructions (section 4.5). 

In what follows, ‘CL’ refers to “classifier” and 

“PL” to “plural”. 

4.1 Coverage of Grammatical Differences 

One of the most detailed comparative study be-

tween Mandarin and Cantonese to-date is 

(Ouyang, 1993), which lists 18 major differ-

ences. Table 2 lists some of these
2
. 

To investigate the degree to which the corpus 

exhibits known grammatical differences the two 

languages, we search for examples for each of 

the 18 differences in the corpus. Out of these 18 

differences, 15 are found. The three differences 

for which no examples exist are the following. 

The first is concerned with word order involving 

the gender marker of animals. For example, The 

marker gong precedes the animal in Mandarin 公

鷄 gong ji ‘rooster’, but its Cantonese equivalent 

gung follows the animal, as in 鷄公 gai gung 
‘rooster’. The second deals with word order in a 

negated resultative verb when the direct object is 

a personal pronoun.  In Mandarin, the pronoun is 

always placed after the two-character verb, but in 

Cantonese it may be placed between as an infix.  

For example, 我 ngo ‘I’ is placed between the 

resultative verb 打贏 daa-jeng ‘beat’ in the sen-

tence 你打我唔贏 ‘you did not beat me’. Finally, 

the third is the use of 過 gwo as a dative marker 

in Cantonese verbs of giving, e.g., 話過你知 ‘tell 
gwo you know’ “tell you”.  This marker is nor-

mally omitted in contemporary Cantonese spo-

ken in Hong Kong.  

                                                 
2
 For lack of space, we describe here briefly the other dif-

ferences, and refer the interested reader to (Ouyang, 1993).  

They include: the lack of distinction in Cantonese between 

inclusive and exclusive “we”; the use of the dak construc-

tion with 有 you ‘have’, and in the negated resultative 

verbs, both impossible in Mandarin; the use of 去 heoi ‘go’ 

in Cantonese without a preceding 到  dou ‘arrive’, as in 

Mandarin; the reduplication of verbs and adjectives in 

yes/no questions; and finally, the distinctive use of a num-

ber of particles in Cantonese, including the assertive parti-

cles 嚟㗎 lai-gaa in copular sentences; the delimitative 

particle 吓 haa, and the verbal particle 過 gwo for repeti-

tion. 

In summary, the corpus reflects well the 

known grammatical differences between the two 

languages as set out in (Ouyang, 1993).  Two of 

the missing differences deal with rather specific 

constructions, and the third is no longer valid for 

the Hong Kong variety of the language.  

 

Modal verbs: verbs such as 能 neng is used 

in Mandarin, vs. the 得 dak construction in 
Cantonese 
能       忍耐                  就真的  不是  人     了 

           忍            得      嗰個都  唔係  人     嚟㗎 
‘can’ ‘tolerate’ ‘can’                 ‘not’ ‘man’ 

‘No man can tolerate [that]’ 

Plural marker of personal nouns: Suffix們 

men for Mandarin, prefix 啲 di for Cantonese 
你要               照顧                 弟妹     們 

你要               睇住         啲  細        㗎 

‘you should’ ‘take care’ PL  ‘young’ PL 

‘You should take care of your younger siblings’ 

Double objects: different word orders 

那          你      給      我     一個地址 

咁一係  你      俾               個地址      我   呀 
           ‘you’ ‘give’ ‘me’ ‘address’    ‘me’ 

‘Please give me an address’ 

Predicative adjectives: the adjective may be 

placed in front of the topic in Cantonese 
她                  年紀   這麼大      演秦香蓮? 

佢   咁大  年紀           演秦香蓮呀? 

‘she’ ‘so big’ ‘age’  ‘so big’ 

‘She is so old, can she still play Chin Xianglian?’ 

Comparison of quantities: the adjective 多

do is placed after the verb in Cantonese 
多         補                               半天假 

             補                   多        半日假 
‘more’ ‘compensate’ ‘more’ ‘half-day holiday’ 

‘compensate for another half-day holiday’ 

Comparison of adjectives: different word 

orders 
保管得               比              你的容貌   還        好 

keep得  好         過              你個樣喎 
‘keep’    ‘good’ ‘compare’ ‘your face’ ‘more’ ‘good’ 

‘keep [one’s face] in better conditions’ 

Use of Numerals: Certain numerals can be 

omitted in Cantonese in large numbers 

我 出夠 一   萬     五 千 

我 出夠      萬     五 
‘I’ ‘pay’ ‘one’  ‘10000’ ‘5’ ‘thousand’ 

‘I pay 15000’ 

 

Table 2. Grammatical differences between 

Cantonese and Mandarin listed in (Ouyang, 

1993).  In the example sentences, Mandarin is 

placed on top and Cantonese at the bottom, with 

their words roughly aligned.  A total of 18 differ-

ences are discussed in (Ouyang, 1993); please 

see footnote 2 for the rest. 

1464



4.2 Coverage of Register Differences 

It has been observed that “almost any Mandarin 

grammatical pattern can be used in Cantonese 

and be understood, but such locutions are often 

not idiomatic'' (Ramsey, 1987), and in general 

formal Cantonese is closer to Mandarin.  These 

remarks are corroborated by our corpus. In the 

formal portion of the corpus, 30% of the Canton-

ese sentences are identical to the Mandarin; 

whereas in the colloquial portion, only 4% are. 

Modality also highlights the differences in 

registers. To express modality, Mandarin typical-

ly uses modal verbs such as可以 ke-yi or 能夠 
neng-gou ‘may’.  While Cantonese has its equiv-

alents ho-ji and nang-gau, in many contexts it is 

more idiomatic to employ syntactic constructions 

with 得 dak and 到 dou. The former indicates 
potential, and can mean possibility or permis-

sion; the latter is a verbal particle.  Both can also 

be used in Mandarin, but much less frequently. 

A comparison between the formal and collo-

quial registers again confirms their known differ-

ences (Matthews & Yip, 1994) and provides 

some quantitative evidence. In the colloquial reg-

ister, there were 88 instances of ke-yi and neng-

gou and their respective abbreviated forms; 27% 

of these instances were spoken in Cantonese with 

the dak or dou construction.  In contrast, in the 

23 instances of the same modal words in the 

formal register, neither dak nor dou appear. 

4.3 Plural marker for personal nouns  

Although not mentioned in the list of (Ouyang, 

1993), it is well known that Mandarin uses the 

suffix 們 men to mark personal nouns as plural, 

while Cantonese has the analogous suffix 哋 dei 

for personal pronouns, and the classifier 啲 di 
for other nouns (Matthew & Yip, 1994). Our 

corpus shows, however, two additional details. 

First, the Cantonese suffix may be omitted.  

For example, in the noun phrase 你兩個 nei 
loeng go ‘you two CL’, the suffix dei is expected 

to mark ‘you’ as plural but is missing.  These 

omissions all occur in the colloquial register. 

Second, besides dei and di, the classifier 班 
baan ‘group’ can also serve as the plural marker.  

For example, 孩子們 hai-zi-men ‘child PL’ 

‘children’ is equivalent to 班細路 baan-sai-lou 
‘group child’ ‘children’.  These also were ob-

served exclusively in the colloquial register.  

This classifier is also used for the vocative case.  

In Mandarin, men is used in vocative plural, but 

the Cantonese di itself will not do. Instead, both 

the plural ‘you’ and baan are prefixed before the 

personal noun, as in你哋班師奶 nei dei baan si 
naai ‘you PL group wife’ ‘O you wives’. 

4.4 Agentless passive  

Both Cantonese and Mandarin mark passives 

with the word 被 bei, followed by the agent.  If 
the agent unknown, it can be simply dropped in 

Mandarin, but in Cantonese the “generic” agent

人 jan ‘person’ must still be supplied. 
Of the 16 sentences with passives, 9 are 

agentless in Mandarin.  As for their Cantonese 

counterparts, 7 conform to the normal practice 

using jan, but the other two are agentless.  These 

latter may be considered a form of “Mandarin-

ism”, i.e., usage that is not ungrammatical, but  

atypical of Cantonese speech.  As expected, one 

of these occurs in the formal portion of the cor-

pus; the other, in the colloquial, turns out to be a 

read speech in the drama. 

4.5 Possessive constructions  

Mandarin uses the possessive marker 的  de, 

whose Cantonese counterpart is 嘅 ge.   In Can-
tonese, the marker may be omitted when express-

ing kinship or a “close” and “inalienable” link 

(Matthews & Yip, 1994; Pacioni 1998), as in 佢

哋老豆 keoi-dei lou-dau ‘they father’ ‘their fa-

ther’, without ge in between ‘they’ and ‘father’. 

The corpus shows, on the one hand, that this 

phenomenon extends to other nouns such as 佢

心願 sam jyun ‘wish’. On the other hand, for 
some expressions of kinship, the marker is not 

simply omitted but replaced by a classifier, such 

as 我個仔 ngo-go-zai ‘I CL son’ ‘my son’. The 
number of syllables may be a determining factor. 

5 Conclusion  

We have presented the first large-scale parallel 

corpus of transcribed spoken Cantonese and writ-

ten Chinese. Have shown its coverage of gram-

matical differences between the two languages, 

and its potential in corroborating and adding to 

known issues, we plan to further exploit it for 

quantitative studies in comparative grammars. 

 

Acknowledgments 

The author gratefully thanks Man Chong Mak 

for transcribing the TV programs and performing 

initial analyses.  This work was partially sup-

ported by a Small-Scale Research Grant from the 

Department of Chinese, Translation and Linguis-

tics at City University of Hong Kong. 

1465



References  

Pi-Chuan Chang, Michel Galley, and Chris Manning, 

2008.  Optimizing Chinese Word Segmentation for 

Machine Translation Performance.  Proc. ACL 3
rd

 

Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation. 

K.-J. Chen, C.-R. Huang, L.-P. Chang, and H.-L. Hsu, 

1996.  Sinica Corpus: Design Methodology for 

Balanced Corpora.  Proc. 11
th
 Pacific Asia Confer-

ence on Language, Information and Computation 

(PACLIC).  Seoul, Korea. 

Samuel Hung-nin Cheung, 2007. Cantonese as Spo-

ken in Hong Kong  香港粵語語法的研究.  The 

Chinese University of Hong Kong Press,  Hong 

Kong. 

T. H. T. Lee and C. Wong, 1998.  CANCORP: The 

Hong Kong Cantonese Child Language Corpus.  

Cahiers de Linguistique Asie Orientale 27(2):211--

-228. 

Man-Tak Leung and Sam-Po Law.  2001.  HKCAC: 

The Hong Kong Cantonese Adult Language Cor-

pus.  International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 

6(2):305---325. 

Stephen Matthews and Virginia Yip, 1994.  Canton-

ese: A Comprehensive Grammar.  Routledge, Lon-

don. 

Helen M. Meng and Pui Yu Hui.  2001.  Spoken Doc-

ument Retrieval for the Languages of Hong Kong.  

Proc. International Symposium on Intelligent Mul-

timedia, Video and Speech Processing.  Hong 

Kong, China. 

Jueya Ouyang 歐陽覺亞, 1993. 《普通話廣州話的

比較與學習》。北京：中國社會科學出版社。 

Patrizia Pacioni, 1998.  Possessive Constructions, 

Classifiers and Specificity in Cantonese.  Studies in 

Cantonese Linguistics, Stephen Matthew (ed.), 

Linguistic Society of Hong Kong. 

Prokopis Prokopidis, Vassia Karra, Aggeliki Papagi-

anopoulou, and Stelios Piperidis, 2008.  Condens-

ing Sentences for Subtitle Generation.  Proc. Lin-

guistic Resources and Evaluation Conference 

(LREC). 

S. R. Ramsey, 1987. The Languages of China.  

Princeton University Press.  

B. K. Tsou and O. Y. Kwong, 2006.  Toward a Pan-

Chinese Thesaurus.  Proc. 5
th

 International Confer-

ence on Language Resources and Evaluation 

(LREC).  Genoa, Italy. 

Martin Volk, Rico Sennrich, Christian Hardmeier, and 

Frida Tidström, 2010.  Machine Translation of TV 

Subtitles for Large Scale Production.  Proc. 2
nd

 

Joint EM+/CNGL Workshop on Bringing MT to 

the User: Research on Integrating MT in the 

Translation Industry (JEC).  Denver, CO. 

Ping-Wai Wong, 2006.  The Specification of POS 

Tagging of the Hong Kong University Cantonese 

Corpus.  International Journal of Technology and 

Human Interaction 2(1):21---38. 

Nianwen Xue, Fei Xia, Fu-Dong Chiou, and Martha 

Palmer, 2005. The Penn Chinese TreeBank: Phrase 

structure annotation of a large corpus.  Natural 

Language Engineering 11:207-238. 

Yaling Liang 梁雅玲, 1996. 《普通話與廣州話常用

句型對譯》。香港：香港文化出版社。 

Bennan Zhang 張本楠, Ruowei Yang 楊若薇, 2008. 

《同形異義：粵普詞語對比例釋》。香港：三

聯書局。 

 

 

1466


