















































Compiling Learner Corpus Data of Linguistic Output and Language Processing in Speaking, Listening, Writing, and Reading


Proceedings of the 5th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 1418–1422,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 8 – 13, 2011. c©2011 AFNLP

Compiling Learner Corpus Data of Linguistic Output and Language 

Processing in Speaking, Listening, Writing, and Reading 

 

 

Katsunori Kotani 

Kansai Gaidai University / Osaka, Japan 

kkotani@kansaigaidai.ac.jp 

Takehiko Yoshimi 

Ryukoku University / Shiga, Japan 

yoshimi@rins.ryukoku.ac.jp 

Hiroaki Nanjo 

Ryukoku University / Shiga, Japan 

nanjo@rins.ryukoku.ac.jp 

Hitoshi Isahara 

Toyohashi University of Technology / 

Aichi, Japan 

isahara@tut.jp 

 

Abstract 

A learner’s language data of speaking, writing, 

listening, and reading have been compiled for 

a learner corpus in this study. The language 

data consist of linguistic output and language 

processing. Linguistic output refers to data of 

pronunciation, sentences, listening compre-

hension rate, and reading comprehension rate. 

Language processing refers to processing time 

and learners’ self-judgment of their difficulty 

of processing in speaking, listening, and read-

ing and the fluency of their writing. This 

learner corpus will contribute to making the 

language learning process more clearly visible. 

1 Introduction 

Learner corpora have contributed to second lan-

guage acquisition (SLA) research. For instance, 

SLA research using learner corpora examines 

learners’ proficiency on the basis of what voca-

bularies/grammars learners actually use (Tono 

2009, among others). Thus, most learner corpora 

are compiled of linguistic outputs that learners 

produce in speaking and/or writing. 

In order to enhance SLA research, a learner 

corpus should be compiled of a learner’s lan-

guage data of the four modalities (speaking; lis-

tening; writing; reading). Language data of each 

modality are further classified into two types: 

linguistic output and language processing data. 

Language output data consist of linguistic objects 

that learners produce. Language processing data 

indicate how they produce linguistic outputs. 

Thus, we have eight types of language data that 

are useful for the SLA research on the develop-

ment of learners’ proficiency (Hinkel 2010, Sega-

lowitz 2003). Among these eight types of lan-

guage data, the previous studies (Granger et al. 

2009, Izumi et al. 2004, Meurers et al. 2010, Wen 

et al. 2008) compiled the language output data of 

speaking, writing, and reading for constructing a 

learner corpus. See Section 2 for further detail. 

On the other hand, the other previous studies 

(Zechner & Bejar 2006, Arthur 1979, Hirai 1999, 

Kotani et al. 2010, Chang 2010) compiled the 

language processing data not for constructing a 

learner corpus but for examining learners’ per-

formance. See Section 3 for further detail. Thus, 

there is a shortage of language output data of lis-

tening, and furthermore we have to construct a 

learner corpus that integrates all these eight types 

of data. Hereafter, we refer to this corpus as 

I(ntegrated)-Learner Corpus. In order to construct 

I-Learner Corpus, we have compiled data of lin-

guistic output and language processing of the four 

modalities when learners actually use the target 

language, which in this study is English. 

2 Background 

Written data are compiled in the International 

Corpus of Learner English (ICLE) (Granger et al. 

2009). The written data are taken from essays 

written by learners of English as a foreign lan-

guage (EFL). ICLE consists of learners’ essays 

(approximately 500 words long) and learner in-

formation, but has no error tags. 

Spoken data are compiled in the National In-

stitute of Information and Communication Tech-

nology Japanese Learner English (NICT JLE) 

Corpus (Izumi et al. 2004). The spoken data are 

obtained by transcribing one-to-one interviews of 

EFL learners whose native language is Japanese. 

The NICT JLE Corpus includes error tags and 

reference data spoken by native speakers, but has 

no sound data for phonetic/phonological analyses. 

Both spoken and written data are compiled in 

the Spoken and Written Corpus of Chinese 

1418



Learners (SWECCL) (Wen et al. 2008). The 

spoken data of SWECCL consist of both sound 

data and transcription data of retelling, monolo-

gues, and role plays. This corpus also includes 

three years’ worth of longitudinal data. 

Read data are compiled in the Task-based 

Corpus (Meurers et al. 2010). This corpus con-

sists of written answers for text comprehension 

questions. Since written answers for text com-

prehension questions can demonstrate both 

learners’ reading and writing proficiency, the 

Task-based Corpus is taken as a learner corpus 

that integrates written and read data. 

3 Corpus design 

Table 1 summarizes the design criteria of the I-

Learner Corpus on attributes of learners and 

those of language. The criteria follow the 

attributes of a learner corpus (Granger 2007). 

 

 Attributes 

Age 18 years old and older 

Sex male, female 

Mother tongue Japanese 

Level beginner, intermediate, advanced 

Learning context EFL 

Experience 36 months or more 

Modality 
spoken (S), written (W), lis-

tened (L), read (R) 

Medium 
S, L, R  news broadcast 

W question answering, description 

Genre expository language use 

Topic 
S, L, R 

general news topic/topic re-

lated to university life 

W learning profiles, daily events 

Technicality general 

Task setting paid task, no dictionary 

Table 1. Design criteria. 

 

The target learners are EFL learners of univer-

sity students whose native language is Japanese. 

In Japan, students study English at least three 

years in junior high school. 

The modality of language data covers spoken, 

written, listened, and read data. Spoken, listened, 

and read data are taken from news broadcast. 

Written data are taken from question answering 

and picture description. The genre is expository 

contexts in daily-life language use. Though there 

are other contexts such as academic/professional 

contexts, these contexts contain more non-

linguistic aspects. Thus, we chose daily-life con-

texts in order to minimize non-linguistic aspects 

such as background knowledge. Hence, the top-

ics in news broad cast are general news topic and 

the ones related to university life. The topic of 

writing covers learners’ learning profiles and 

daily events.  

We basically use the compiling procedure 

stated in the previous studies reviewed in Section 

2. Following the Task-based Corpus (Meurers et 

al. 2010), we compile read and listened data from 

answers to comprehension questions. 

Although the comprehension-question-based 

procedure is suitable for compiling comprehen-

sion rate of a whole text or that of some part(s) 

of a text, it unfits for compiling comprehension 

rate at a sentence level. Of course, it is possible 

to compile comprehension rate at the sentence 

level by preparing comprehension questions for 

each sentence, but this is just not realistic. How-

ever, we have to compile read and listened data 

at the sentence level just like for spoken and 

written data. 

Our solution of this problem is to compile lan-

guage processing. It is reported that language 

performance can be evaluated on the basis of 

language processing: speaking performance 

(Zechner & Bejar 2006), writing performance 

(Arthur 1979), listening performance (Hirai 

1999), and reading performance (Kotani et al. 

2010, Chang 2010). An advantage of language 

processing is the possibility to measure at the 

sentence level. In addition, language processing 

(speaking speed) is compiled in native speaker 

corpora (Braun 2006, Gut 2009). Hence, we 

compile data of both language processing and 

linguistic output across the four modalities. 

Language processing has two parts. One is the 

processing time how long a learner takes for lin-

guistic output. The other is the judgment how 

difficult a learner judges processing in speaking, 

listening, and reading to be and how fluent a 

learner judges his or her writing to be. Table 2 

lists the data to be stored in the I-Learner Corpus. 

 

 Linguistic Output Language Processing 

Speaking sound output time, difficulty 

Writing sentence output time, fluency 

Listening comprehension rate difficulty 

Reading comprehension rate time, difficulty 

Table 2. Data specification. 

 

Spoken data of the I-Learner Corpus consist of 

recordings of oral reading (linguistic output), and 

oral reading time and a learner’s judgment of 

pronunciation difficulty on a five-point scale (1: 

Very Easy, 2: Easy, 3: Moderate, 4: Difficult, 5: 

1419



Very Difficult) (language processing). In addi-

tion to learners’ data, we prepare reference sound 

data read by native speakers. 

Written data of the I-Learner Corpus consist of 

sentences of question answering, sentences of 

picture description (linguistic output), writing 

time, and a learner’s judgment of his or her flu-

ency on a five-point scale (language processing). 

Listened data of the I-Learner Corpus consist 

of comprehension rate (linguistic output) and a 

learner’s judgment of listening difficulty (lan-

guage processing). 

Read data of the I-Learner Corpus consist of 

the comprehension rate (linguistic output), read-

ing time, and a learner’s judgment of reading 

difficulty on a five-point scale (language 

processing). 

4 Data compiling 

4.1 Procedures 

Data compiling proceeded in the following order: 

listening task, reading task, speaking task, and 

writing task. 

In the listening task, learners listened to four 

news articles that were read by native speakers of 

English sentence-by-sentence using a data col-

lecting tool described in Section 4.4. Learners 

judged listening difficulty of a sentence after lis-

tening to it. When learners finished listening to 

an article, they answered five comprehension 

questions on the data collecting tool. Learners 

could listen to a sentence only once. 

Listened data are often gathered in a situation 

where learners listen to sentences in an article 

from start to finish without a stop. However, 

learners in this study listened to a news article 

sentence-by-sentence in order to report their 

judgments for listening difficulty. 

In the reading task, learners silently read four 

news articles sentence-by-sentence using the data 

collecting tool. Learners judged reading difficul-

ty of a sentence after reading it. When learners 

finished reading an article, they answered five 

comprehension questions. Learners could not 

read a sentence again nor use a dictionary. 

Read data are often taken in a situation where 

learners see a news article as a whole. However, 

learners in this study read a news article sen-

tence-by-sentence so that processing time and 

their judgments of reading difficulty could be 

kept track of. 

In the speaking task, learners read aloud four 

news articles sentence-by-sentence using the data 

collecting tool. Learners judged pronunciation 

difficulty of a sentence after reading it aloud. 

Learners had no comprehension questions in the 

speaking task, because the speaking task and the 

reading task used the same articles in order for 

learners to grasp the contents of the articles be-

fore reading aloud. 

Spoken data are often taken from utterances in 

actual discourse (Izumi et al. 2004). However, 

we chose an oral reading task in which learners 

read the same sentences, because we can directly 

compare phonetic/phonological properties be-

tween learners. 

The writing task had two sub-tasks. In the first, 

learners wrote answers for twenty questions on 

their profiles. In the second, learners wrote sen-

tences describing four pictures of a series of 

events on the data collecting tool. Learners were 

instructed to write at least five sentences for a 

picture. In both tasks, learners judged the fluency 

of a sentence after writing it. Learners could not 

rewrite a sentence after moving on to another 

sentence nor use a dictionary. 

Although written data are often taken from es-

says (Granger et al. 2009), we chose question 

answering and picture description in order to mi-

nimize the non-linguistic aspects. While essay 

writing depends on logical, analytical, and criti-

cal thinking, learners can answer profile ques-

tions and describe pictures without depending 

too much on non-linguistic skills as long as ques-

tions and pictures are simple enough. 

4.2 Participants 

Ninety EFL learners took part in the data compil-

ing (48 Male, 42 Female: mean age 21.6 years 

old, ranging from 19–40 years old). They were 

university students in Tokyo, Japan. Their prac-

tical experience ranged 53 months to 216 months. 

The learners were paid for their participation. 

The learners submitted scores of the Test of 

English for International Communication 

(TOEIC) taken within a year before the data 

started to be compiled. On the basis of the 

TOEIC scores, they were classified into three 

proficiency levels: beginner (N=30, TOEIC score 

range, 280-495), intermediate (N=30, TOEIC 

score range, 500-725), and advanced (N=30, 

TOEIC score range, 730-985) levels. 

4.3 Materials 

The following are questions for learner profiles 

in the writing task: ―Which languages do you 

speak and read, and how well?‖ ―What language 

did you learn?‖ (Ehrman 1996, Eignor et al. 

1420



1998). Pictures (Figure 3) described in the writ-

ing task were cited from Hughes (2003). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 3. Pictures for description. 

 

News articles used in the speaking, listening, 

and reading tasks were taken from Voice of 

America (VOA) (http://www.voanews.com). The 

length of articles was approximately 350 words 

(within plus/minus 5%). Each article had five 

comprehension questions that were made by the 

authors following question formats (Nation & 

Malarcher 2007). 

These articles had two difficulty levels. Low-

difficulty articles were taken from Special Eng-

lish program developed for learners of English, 

e.g., ―Grading Grades.‖ These articles are written 

in short, simple sentences that contain only one 

idea, and the sentences consist of a core vocabu-

lary of 1500 words without idiomatic expressions. 

Low-difficulty articles were limited to the topic 

―studying in the U.S.‖ High-difficulty articles 

were taken from VOA editorials that present dif-

fering points of view on a wide variety of issues, 

e.g., ―Educating Marginalized Children.‖ 

4.4 Data compiling devices 

The data collecting tool that learners used 

presents a sentence on a computer screen in the 

speaking and reading tasks. This tool keeps track 

of processing time for a sentence in the speaking, 

writing, and reading tasks. This tool provides 

comprehension questions and saves answers in 

the listening and reading tasks. In the writing 

task, this tool presents a question/a picture, and 

provides a blank space in which to write a sen-

tence. The tool further keeps scores (1-5) of sen-

tence difficulty/fluency judged by a learner in all 

the tasks. 

In addition to this data collecting tool, the fol-

lowing devices were used. In the listening task, 

learners listened to audio files of news articles 

with headphones. In the speaking task, each 

learner reads aloud news articles in a recording 

booth. The recording booth is a sound-attenuated 

chamber (1700mm, 1900mm, 2100mm (approx-

imately WDH)). A learner sat on a chair at a 

desk. The oral reading was recorded using a un-

idirectional electric-condenser microphone on a 

solid-state stereo. The sampling rate used was 

44.1KHz, and quantization was set to 16 bits. 

5 Application of the corpus 

One application of the I-Learner Corpus is to use 

the corpus data as a language resource for ex-

amining learners’ performances across multiple 

modalities, because the I-Learner Corpus in-

cludes linguistic output and language processing 

of the four modalities. This examination will re-

veal whether a learner’s proficiencies in these 

modalities have developed equally. It will also 

enable us to examine how learners’ proficiency 

develops from beginner to advanced levels, be-

cause the I-Learner corpus includes data of 

learners at these levels. These linguistic analyses 

constitute an important part of the I-Learner 

Corpus. 

Another application is to use the corpus data 

as training data for a machine learning algorithm 

to construct an automatic evaluation method for 

learners’ performances of the four modalities. 

When this automatic evaluation method and the 

data compiling devices are implemented in a 

computer-assisted language learning (CALL) 

system, the CALL system becomes able to com-

pile learners’ data. The CALL system can add 

new corpus, especially, longitudinal data if 

learners use the system for a certain period. 

6 Conclusion 

This paper described data compiling for con-

structing an I-Learner Corpus, a learner corpus 

that is compiled of data of linguistic output and 

of language processing of the four modalities. 

The I-Learner Corpus enables us to examine 

learners’ performances in more detail and serves 

as a language resource for a learner model that 

predicts learners’ performance. 

A future work is to provide annotation data 

such as error information of pronunciation and 

written sentences. Another work is to enlarge 

corpus data by adding data of learners with dif-

ferent native languages. 

 

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported in part by Grant-in-Aid 

for Scientific Research (B) (22300299). 

1421



References  

Arthur, Bradford R. 1979 Short-term changes in EFL 

composition skills. In Carlos A. Yorio, Kyle Per-

kins, and Jacquelyn Schachter, editors, On TESOL 

‘79: The Learner in Focus. TESOL, Washington 

D.C., pages 330-342. 

Braun, Sabine. 2006. ELISA: A pedagogically 

enriched corpus for language learning purposes. In 

Sabine Braun, Kurt Kohn, and Joybrato Mukherjee, 

editors, Corpus Technology and Language Peda-

gogy: New Resources, New Tools, New Methods. 

Peter Lang, Frankfurt, pages 25-47. 

Chang, Anna C.-S. 2010. The effect of a timed read-

ing activity on EFL learners: Speed, comprehen-

sion, and perceptions. Reading in a Foreign Lan-

guage, 22(2): 284-303. 

Ehrman, Madeline E. 1996. Understanding Second 

Language Learning Difficulties. SAGE Publica-

tions, London. 

Eignor, Daniel, Carol Taylor, Irwin Kirsch, and Joan 

Jamieson. 1998. Development of a scale for assess-

ing the level of computer familiarity of TOEFL ex-

aminees. Research Reports RR98-7, Educational 

Testing Service, Princeton, New Jersey. 

Granger, Sylviane. 2007. The computer learner cor-

pus: A versatile new source of data for SLA re-

search. In Wolfgang Teubert and Ramesh Krish-

namurthy, editors, Corpus Linguistics: Critical 

Concepts in Linguistics, volume 2. Routledge, 

London, pages 166-182. 

Granger, Sylviane, Estelle Dagneaux, Fanny Meunier 

and Magali Paquot. 2009. International Corpus of 

Learner English, version 2. Presses Universitaires 

de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium. 

Gut, Ulrike. 2009. Non-native Speech: A Corpus-

based Analysis of Phonological and Phonetic 

Properties of L2 English and German. Peter Lang, 

Frankfurt. 

Hinkel, Eli. 2010. Integrating the four skills: Current 

and historical perspectives. In Robert B. Kaplan, 

editor, Oxford Handbook in Applied Linguistics, 

2nd edition. Oxford University Press, New York, 

pages 110-126. 

Hirai, Akiyo. 1999. The relationship between listen-

ing and reading rates of Japanese EFL learners. The 

Modern Language Journal, 83(3): 367-384. 

Hughes, Arthur. 2003. Testing for Language Teachers, 

2nd edition. Cambridge University Press, Cam-

bridge, UK. 

Izumi, Emi, Kiyotaka Uchimoto, and Hitoshi Isahara, 

editors. 2004. Nihonjin 1200 nin no Eigo Spiking 

Koopasu [A Speaking Corpus of 1200 Japanese 

Learners of English]. ALC Press, Tokyo, Japan. 

Kotani, Katsunori, Takehiko Yoshimi, and Hitoshi 

Isahara. 2010. A prediction model of foreign lan-

guage reading proficiency based on reading time 

and text complexity. US-China Education Review, 

7(10): 1-9. 

Meurers, Detmar, Niels Ott, and Ramon Ziai. 2010. 

Compiling a task-based corpus for the analysis of 

learner language in context. In Sam Featherston 

and Britta Stolterfoht, editors, Proceedings of Lin-

guistic Evidence 2010, pages 214—217. 

Nation, Paul and Casey Malarcher. 2007. Reading for 

Speed and Fluency. Compass Publishing, Seoul, 

Korea. 

Segalowitz, Norman. 2003. Automaticity and second 

languages. In Catherine J. Doughty and Michael H. 

Long, editors, The Handbook of Second Language 

Acquisition. Blackwell, Oxford, pages 382-408. 

Tono, Yukio. 2009. Integrating learner corpus analy-

sis into a probabilistic model of second language 

acquisition. In Paul Baker, editor, Contemporary 

Corpus Linguistics. Continuum International Pub-

lishing Group, London, pages 184-203. 

Wen, Qiufang, Maocheng Liang, and Xiaoqin Yan. 

2008. Spoken and Written Corpus of Chinese 

Learners (SWECCL) 2.0. Foreign Language Teach-

ing and Research Press, Beijing, China.  

Zechner, Klaus and Isaac I. Bejar. 2006. Towards 

automatic scoring of non-native spontaneous 

speech. In Robert C. Moore, Jeff A. Bilmes, Jenni-

fer Chu-Carroll, Mark Sanderson, editors, Proceed-

ings of the 2006 Human Language Technology 

Conference and the North Linguistics Annual 

Meeting (HLT/NAACL 2006), pages 216-223. 

1422


