










































Building Chinese Event Type Paradigm Based on Trigger Clustering


International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 311–319,
Nagoya, Japan, 14-18 October 2013.

Building Chinese Event Type Paradigm Based on Trigger Clustering 

 

 

Xiao Ding, Bing Qin, Ting Liu* 

Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval 

Harbin Institute of Technology, China 

{xding, qinb, tliu}@ir.hit.edu.cn 

 

 

Abstract 

Traditional Event Extraction mainly focuses 

on event type identification and event partici-

pants extraction based on pre-specified event 

type annotations. However, different domains 

have different event type paradigms. When 

transferring to a new domain, we have to build 

a new event type paradigm. It is a costly task 

to discover and annotate event types manually. 

To address this problem, this paper proposes a 

novel approach of building an event type para-

digm by clustering event triggers. Based on 

the trigger clusters, the event type paradigm 

can be built automatically. Experimental re-

sults on three different corpora – ACE (small, 

homogeneous, open corpus), Financial News 

and Musical News (large scale, specific do-

main, web corpus) indicate that our method 

can effectively build an event type paradigm 

and can be easily adapted to new domains. 

1 Introduction 

Event extraction techniques have been widely 

used in several different specific domains, such 

as musical reports (Ding et al., 2011), financial 

analysis (Lee et al., 2003), biomedical investiga-

tion (Yakushiji et al., 2001) and legal documents 

(Schilder et al., 2007). Traditional event extrac-

tion systems achieved excellent performance in 

some important information extraction bench-

marks, such as MUC (Message Understanding 

Conference, Chinechor et al., 1994) and ACE 

(Automatic Content Extraction). However, most 

of these methods require pre-specified event 

types as their prior knowledge. For example, 

ACE defines an event as a specific occurrence 

involving participants, and it annotates 8 types 

and 33 subtypes of events (LDC, 2005). Howev-

er, building an event type paradigm in this way 

not only requires massive human effort but also 

tends to be very data dependent. As a result, it 

                                                 
 * Email correspondence 

may prevent the event extraction from being 

widely applicable. Since event types among do-

mains are different, the event type paradigm of 

ACE, which does not define music related events, 

is useless for the music domain event extraction. 

So we have to build a totally different event type 

paradigm for the music domain from scratch. 

Recently, some researchers have been aware 

of the limitations of only considering pre-defined 

paradigm as well. In the same vein, some studies 

work on the problem of relation extraction 

(Chambers and Jurasky, 2011 and 2009; Poon 

and Domingos, 2009 and 2008; Yates and Etzio-

ni, 2009). Rosenfeld and Feldman (2006) built a 

high-performance unsupervised relation extrac-

tion system without target relations in advance. 

Hasegawa et al. (2004) discovered relations 

among named entities from large corpora by 

clustering pairs of named entities. However, 

most of the above work focuses on relation ex-

traction rather than event extraction. 

In contrast to the well-studied problem of rela-

tion extraction, only a few works focused on 

event extraction.  For example, Li (2010) pro-

posed a domain-independent novel event discov-

ery approach. They exploited a cross-lingual 

clustering algorithm based on sentence-aligned 

bilingual parallel texts to discover event trigger 

clusters. Their motivation is to discover novel 

events for a new domain rather than build a new 

event type paradigm from scratch. So it takes 

domain specific event triggers as the input. How-

ever, it is also a costly task to annotate triggers 

for new domains. 

To address above issues, this paper proposes a 

series of novel algorithms to automatically build 

event type paradigm. The proposed approach is 

based on the definition of event trigger: the word 

that most clearly expresses an event’s occur-

rence, and our key observations: triggers are the 

most important lexical units to represent events. 

A set of triggers with similar meaning or usage 

represents the same event type. Event types can 

311



be discovered based on trigger clustering. Our 

approach involves three steps: 1) we introduce a 

trigger extraction algorithm based on the de-

pendency syntactic structure; 2) a trigger filter is 

then constructed to remove some noisy candidate 

triggers; 3) we develop an event type discovery 

algorithm based on our proposed trigger cluster-

ing methods. The clustered event types are used 

to construct an event type paradigm. 

Experimental results show that our approach 

not only achieve significantly better performanc-

es than the baseline method, but also are more 

stable across different corpora. On the ACE, Fi-

nancial News and Musical News corpus, the av-

erage accuracy is 73%. It shows that trigger clus-

tering based method is effective on building an 

event type paradigm which is the premise of 

event extraction. We extract 33 event types for 

the ACE corpus, nine event types for the Finan-

cial News corpus and seven event types for the 

Musical News corpus. 

Our contributions are as follows.  

1. In this paper, we put forward the problem of 
event type paradigm building, and develop a 

novel framework as the solution.  

2. This paper exploits a series of novel algo-
rithms for automatically discovering and 

clustering domain independent event types. 

The remainder of this paper is organized as 

follows.  Section 2 presents our approach for 

event type paradigm building. Section 3 evalu-

ates the proposed method. The related work on 

event extraction is discussed in Section 4, and we 

conclude the paper in Section 5. 

2 Approach Overview 

Since event trigger is the word that most clearly 

expresses an event’s occurrence, the key idea of 

this paper is to automatically construct an event 

type paradigm by clustering event triggers. For 

example, in the ACE corpus, a set of event trig-

gers {倒闭, 闭门, 关闭, 停业, 解散} ({bankrupt, 

shut down, close, close down, dismiss}) repre-

sents the sense of the event type “Business/End-

Org”. As shown in Figure 1, our system has three 

main components: trigger extractor, trigger filter 

and trigger cluster. The input of the system is a 

raw corpus, such as the ACE corpus, the Finan-

cial News corpus and the Musical News corpus, 

and the output is the event type paradigms which 

are shown in Table 2, Table 3 and Table 4. 

2.1 Trigger Extractor 

An event trigger is the center of an event, which 

is an important feature for recognizing the event 

type. Kiyoshi Sudo (2003) summarized three 

classical models for representing events. All of 

these three models rely on the syntactic tree 

structure and the trigger is specified as a predi-

cate in this structure. In order to accurately ex-

tract event triggers, we employ the predicate-

argument model (Yangarder et al., 2000) which 

is based on a direct syntactic relation between a 

predicate and its arguments. We extract the syn-

tactic relation for predicate-argument model by 

means of the HIT (Harbin Institute of Technolo-

gy) Dependency Parser (Che et al., 2009). Based 

on the predicate-argument model, we propose a 

trigger extraction algorithm (TE). The details are 

shown in Figure 2. 

Take the following sentence as an example: 

毛泽东 1893 年 出生 于 湖南湘潭。 
     1              2              3        4             5 

→ Mao Zedong was born in Xiangtan, Hunan  
         1                 2       3      4                      5 

Province in 1893. 
           6       7 
The HIT Chinese Dependency Parser 

dependencies are: 

SBV (出生-3, 毛泽东-1) 
→ (born-3, Mao Zedong-1) 

VOB (出生-3, 湖南湘潭-5) 
→ (born-3, Xiangtan, Hunan Province-5) 

Sentence Splitting 
Word Segmentation 

Dependency Parsing 

 Extractor 

Filter 

 

 

Corpus 

Verb Detail Classification 

Ranking Algorithm 

Event Type Discovery Algorithm 

  Event Type 
Paradigm 

Cluster 

Figure 1. Architecture of the proposed system 

Algorithm 1: TE algorithm 

Input: Raw corpus D 

Output: Candidate triggers 

1: Foreach document d in raw corpus D Do 

2:    d ← Paragraph Splitting 

3:    d ← Sentence Splitting 

4:    Foreach sentence s in document d Do 

5:       s ← Word Segmentation 

6:       s ← Chinese Dependency Parsing 

7:       s ← Identify subject-predicate relation (SBV) pair 

(VSBV, Sub) and verb-object relation (VOB) 

pair (VVOB, Obj) 

8:       If VSBV = VVOB = Vt, Then 

9:          Extract Vt as candidate trigger 

10:   End For 

11: End For 

Figure 2. The algorithm for trigger extraction 

312



ADV (出生-3, 1893 年-2) 
→ (born-3, 1893-7) 

POB (湖南湘潭-5, 于-4) 
→ (Hunan Province-5, in-4) 

where each atomic formula represents a binary 

dependence from the governor (the first token) to 

the dependent (the second token). The SBV rela-

tion, which stands for the subject-predicate 

structure, means that the head is a predicate verb 

and the dependent is a subject of the predicate 

verb; the VOB dependency relation, which 

stands for the verb-object structure, means that 

the head is a verb and the dependent is an object 

of the verb; the ADV relation, which stands for 

the adverbial structure, means that the head is a 

verb and the dependent is an adverb of the verb; 

the POB relation, which stands for the prep-

object structure, means that the head is an object 

and the dependent is a preposition of the object. 

Since VSBV = VVOB = Vt =出生 (born) in this 
case, based on the predicate-argument model, the 

word “出生 ” should be extracted as a candidate 
event trigger. 

2.2 Trigger Filter 

Although we obtain some useful candidate trig-

gers, certain meaningless candidate triggers 

come along in the results of the trigger extractor 

as well. Therefore, we introduce a trigger filter 

which uses heuristic rule and ranking algorithm 

to filter out these less informative candidates. 

These rules are applied in order as follows: 

Rule (1): Subdividing Verbs 

Since event trigger words are extracted based 

on the predicate-argument model, most of these 

candidate trigger words are verb terms. However, 

not all of verb terms can be used as trigger words. 

For example, the copular verb (e.g. “is”) rarely 

acts as the event trigger. To investigate which 

categories of verbs can serve as event triggers, 

we classify Chinese verbs into eight subclasses 

listed in Table 1. Such classification makes each 

subclass function as one grammatical role. For 

example, a modal verb will never be the 

predicate of a sentence and a nominal verb will 

always function as a noun. 

We perform the verb sub-classification model 

based on the work by Liu et al. (2007). Statisti-

cally, about 94% of ACE Chinese event triggers 

are general verbs or nominal verbs and other 

types of verbs are rarely as trigger words. In or-

der to ensure the accuracy of trigger clustering, 

we stress that the candidate trigger must be gen-

eral verb or nominal verb. 

Rule (2): Domain Relevance Ranking 

Domain relevancy degree is an important 

measure of the trigger’s significance. According 

to the candidate trigger distribution in the do-

main corpus and the general corpus, we can 

compute its domain relevancy degree as follows: 

         ( ) ( ) / ( )t D t G tDR V Freq V Freq V           (1) 

where DR(Vt) is the domain relevancy degree of 

the candidate trigger Vt, FreqD(Vt) is the frequen-

cy count of the candidate trigger Vt in the domain 

corpus (financial and musical news), and 

FreqG(Vt) is the frequency count in the general 

corpus (People’s Daily corpus). We will rank 

candidate triggers by their domain relevancy de-

grees and retain top Nt1 candidate triggers. 

2.3 Trigger Clustering and Event Type 
Paradigm Building 

The trigger word is the most important lexical 

unit to represent events. A set of triggers with the 

same meaning and usage represents the same 

event type. Event type can be discovered based 

on trigger clustering. We propose the event type 

discovery (ETD) algorithm based on trigger 

clustering without giving the number of clusters 

in advance. The algorithm is shown in Figure 3. 

For two triggers Vi and Vj in ETD, the similari-

ty function Sim(Vi, Vj) in clustering is calculated 

using semantic information provided by HowNet 

(Dong et al., 2006) as 
2

( , ) si j
i j

N
Sim V V

N N



                       (2) 

where Ns denotes the number of identical sem-

emes in the DEFs  (the concept definition in 

HowNet) of Vi and Vj; Ni and Nj denote the num-

ber of sememes in the DEFs of Vi and Vj, respect- 

                                                 
1 We test different Nt on dev set; and Nt is 50% of candidate 

triggers achieved the best gains. 

Verb Description Examples 

vx copular verb 他 是 对 的  
(He is right) 

vz modal verb 你 应该 努力 工作  
(You should work hard) 

vf formal verb 他 要求 予以 澄清  
(He’d demand an explanation) 

vq directional 

verb 
他 认识 到 困难  
(He has realized the difficulties) 

vb resultative 

verb 
他 看 完 了 电影  
(He has seen the movie) 

vg general verb 他 喜欢 踢 足球  
(He likes playing football) 

vn nominal verb 参加 我们 的 讨论  
(Take part in our discussion) 

vd adverbial verb 产量 持续 增长  
(Production increases steadily) 

Table 1.  The scheme of verb subclass 

313



tively. Hownet uses sememes to interpret con-

cepts. Sememes are regarded as the basic unit of 

the meaning. For example, “paper” can be 

viewed as a concept, and its sememes are 

“white”, “thin”, “soft”, “flammable”, etc. 

As referred in Section 2.1, most of trigger 

words are verb terms. Polysemic verbs are a ma-

jor issue in NLP, such as “to fire a gun” and “to 

fire a manager”, where “fire” has two different 

meanings. The state-of-the-art verb sense disam-

biguation approach (Wagner et al., 2009) stresses 

that verbs which agree on their selectional pref-

erences belong to a common semantic class. For 

example, “to arrest the suspect” and “to capture 

the suspect”. Based on this approach, we propose 

a PAC (predicate-argument clustering) model 

which group the verbs based on their subcatego-

risation and selectional preferences. ETD consid-

ers only the verb subcategorisation, whereas 

PAC involves the verb argument tuple, such as 

<bomb, US Army, weapon warehouse>, where 

“US Army” and “weapon warehouse” are the 

subject word and the object word of the trigger 

word “bomb”. The clustering process of PAC 

which is shown in Figure 4 is the same as ETD, 

except for the similarity measurement. PAC cal-

culates the similarity between all the verb argu-

ment tuples by the following function: 

Sim(Tuplei, Tuplej) = 2Sums / (Sumi + Sumj)            (3) 

Sums = Ns + Ss + Os, Sumi = Ni + Si + Oi, Sumj = Nj 

+ Sj + Oj                                                            (4) 

where Ss and Os denotes the number of identical 

sememes in the DEFs of Subji and Subjj, Obji and 

Objj; Si and Sj denote the number of sememes in 

the DEFs of Subji and Subjj, respectively; Oi and 

Oj denote the number of sememes in the DEFs of 

Obji and Objj, respectively. 

A group of triggers are aggregated to a trigger 

cluster according to their semantic distance, and 

we view each trigger cluster as one kind of event 

type. Then all these event types are finally em-

ployed to construct an event type paradigm. 

3 Experimental Results and Analysis  

3.1 Experiment Settings 

3.1.1 Data Description 

In order to test how robust our approach is, we 

evaluate it using three different data sets: ACE 

05, Financial News2 and Musical News3.  ACE 

05 is a public corpus with a pre-defined event 

type paradigm. Financial News and Musical 

News are specific domain corpora collected by 

ourselves. To justify the effectiveness of our 

method, we carefully conducted user studies into 

two specific domain corpora. For each sentence 

in the data, two annotators were asked to label 

and cluster all potential triggers. The agreement 

between our two annotators, measured using Co-

hen’s kappa coefficient, is substantial (kappa = 

0.75). We asked the third annotator to adjudicate 

the trigger clusters on which the former tow an-

notators disagreed. Each trigger cluster is used to 

represent one type of event. All these events con-

struct our final event type paradigm. In particular, 

we carry out experiment on 633 documents from 

the ACE 05 corpus, 6000 sentences from the Fi-

nancial News corpus and 6000 sentences from 

the Musical News corpus, respectively. One third 

of these data is used as development set and the 

remaining data is used as test set. 

The gold standard event type paradigm of 

ACE, Financial News and Musical News are 

shown in Table 2, Table 3 and Table 4. 

3.1.2 Evaluation Measure 

We adopt F-Measure (F) and Purity (Halkidi et 

al., 2001) to determine the correctness of an 

event cluster: 

( , ) ( , ) / rp i r n i r n                          (5) 

                                                 
2 http://www.10jqka.com.cn/ 
3 http://yue.sina.com.cn/ 

Algorithm 2: ETD algorithm 

Input: Candidate triggers from Section 2.2 and       

Threshold θ (refer to Section 3.2) 

Output: Event trigger clusters  

1: Foreach trigger Vt in candidate triggers Do 

2:     Compute the similarity (Sim) between Vt and the rest 

of other triggers, using function (2) 

3:     If Sim >= θ Then 

4:         add Vt  to the related event type ETre ∪{ Vt} 

5:     Else If Sim < θ Then 

6:         set up a new event type ETnew 

7: End For 

Figure 3. The ETD algorithm 

Algorithm 3: PAC model 

Input: Verb-argument tuples <Vt, Subj, Obj>, where Vt is 

the trigger from Section 2.2 and Subj and Obj are 

the arguments of Vt; and Threshold θ (refer to Sec-

tion 3.2) 

Output: Event trigger and arguments clusters 

1: Foreach tuple p in verb-argument tuples 

 <Vt, Subj, Obj> Do 

2:     Compute the similarity (Sim) between p and the rest 

of other tuples, using function (3) and (4) 

3:     If Sim >= θ Then 

4:         add Vt  to the related event type ETre ∪{ Vt} 

5:     Else If Sim < θ Then 

6:         set up a new event type ETnew 

7: End For 

Figure 4. The PAC model 

 

314



 

( , ) ( , ) / ir i r n i r n                            (6) 

2* ( , )* ( , )
( , )

( , ) ( , )

p i r r i r
f i r

p i r r i r



                   (7) 

( / )max{ ( , )}i
i

F n n f i r                   (8) 

( / )max{ ( , )}r
r

Purity n n p i r           (9) 

where i is the gold standard event trigger cluster, 

and r is the event trigger cluster which has the 

most identical triggers with i. So ni is the number 

of triggers in cluster i; nr is the number of trig-

gers in cluster r; n is the number of all triggers; 

and n(i, r) is the number of identical triggers be-

tween i and r. For every cluster we first compute 

p(i, r), r(i, r) and f(i, r), then we obtain F-

Measure and Purity for the whole clustering re-

sult. Note that the evaluation is based on word 

instances rather than word types. 

3.2 Selection of Trigger Cluster Threshold 

During development, we tuned the trigger clus-

tering threshold to find the best value. Figure 5 

presents the effect on F-Measure of varying the 

threshold for trigger clustering. This figure 

shows that the best performance on the develop-

ment set can be obtained by selecting threshold 

0.6 for the ACE corpus, 0.7 for the Financial 

News corpus and 0.9 for the Musical News cor-

pus. Figure 5 suggests that the performance did 

not dramatically change with the threshold when 

θ from 0.6 to 0.9. Hence, we can firstly set θ = 

0.6 for new domains. We also test different 

threshold values for PAC, the result of which is 

the same as ETD. Then we directly use 0.6 as 

threshold value to the blind test. 

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9

F
-M

e
a
s
u

r
e
(%

)

Trigger Cluster Threshold

ACE

Finance

Music

 
Figure 5. ETD algorithm with thresholding on the 

development set 

 

 

Types Subtype 
Life Be-Born, Marry, Divorce, Injure, Die 

Movement Transport 

Transaction Transfer-Ownership, Transfer-Money 

Business Start-Org, Merge-Org, Declare-Bankruptcy, 

End-Org 

Conflict Attack, Demonstrate 

Contact Meet, Phone-Write 

Personnel Start-Position, End-Position, Nominate, Elect 

Justice Arrest-Jail, Release-Parole, Trial-Hearing, 

Charge-Indict, Sue, Convict, Sentence, Fine, 

Execute, Extradite, Acquit, Appeal, Pardon 

Table 2. ACE event type paradigm 

Event Type Examples 
Start-Org MIUI is found in 2010 by Xiaomi Tech. 

End-Org Sears closed more stores as holiday sales 

slide. 

Merge-Org Two of Tucson’s oldest and most respected 

landscape companies have decided to merge. 

Declare  

Bankruptcy 

American airlines are falling sharply for the 

second straight day on the fears that the 

company might be forced to file for bank-

ruptcy. 

Go-Public Chinese video site Youku filed to go public 

on the New York Stock. 

Raise-Price Gold price rises higher in Hong Kong. 

Cut-Price Sony cuts Tablet S price by $100, 16GB 

version now $399. 

Cooperation Nokia and Microsoft announce plans for a 

broad strategic partnership to build a new 

global mobile ecosystem. 

Investment Tencent, one of the biggest web companies 

in China, is investing $300m in Digital Sky 

Technologies of Russia. 

Table 3. Financial News event type paradigm 

Event Type Examples 
Vocal Con-

cert 

Chinese rock singer Cui Jian is to hold his 

first concert in Beijing at the Capital Gymna-

sium on Aug. 24. 

Album 'Super Girls' release 1st album 'Terminal PK' 

on August 29, 2005. 

Awards Kanye West won best rap album at the 48th 

annual Grammy Awards in Los Angeles. 

Sign-Org Lady Gaga was signed with Streamline Rec-

ords by the end of 2007. 

Breakup-Org Singer Chen Chusheng broke up with his 

agent E.E. Media after September. 

Quit-Singing Hong Kong pop queen and actress Faye 

Wong will soon quit her singing career. 

Return-Stage Faye Wong returned to the stage in 2010 

amidst immense interest in the Sinosphere. 

Table 4. Musical News event type paradigm 

Method Corpus F-Measure (%) Purity (%) 

Baseline ACE 42.05 61.47 
  

ETD ACE 63.21 68.17 

PAC ACE 69.57 70.24 
  

ETD Financial News 71.52 74.81 

PAC Financial News 74.42 76.18 
  

ETD Musical News 72.23 78.35 

PAC Musical News 75.08 80.28 

Table 5. F-Measure and Purity scores on the test set. All the improvements are significant (p < 0.05) 

 

 

315



3.3 Comparative Experiments 

All the evaluation results are shown in Table 5. 

We first compare our approach with Li et al., 

2010 (denoted as baseline) on the ACE 05 corpus. 

They exploit a cross-lingual clustering algorithm 

based on sentence-aligned bilingual parallel texts 

to discover event trigger clusters. The baseline 

approach can generate both English and Chinese 

event trigger clusters. We only compare with its 

Chinese result. Our approach achieves better per-

formance than the baseline approach (about 8% 

significant improvement on Purity and more than 

20% significant improvement on F-Measure). In 

addition, the baseline approach uses 1233 gold 

standard English event triggers and 852 gold 

standard Chinese event triggers in the ACE 05 as 

the input. However, we automatically extract 

event triggers based on our trigger extraction 

algorithm. 

We carry out the second comparison experi-

ment between ETD algorithm which is based on 

trigger clustering and PAC model which is based 

on predicate-argument clustering. The trigger 

and its corresponding arguments (selectional 

preferences) play an important role in our ap-

proach. We observe that the F-Measure score is 

boosted from 63.21% to 69.57% on the ACE 

corpus by using the PAC model. This can be ex-

plained by the reason that single trigger is not 

quite enough for representing event. Trigger’s 

arguments can contribute to trigger disambigua-

tion. The experiment results also confirm the as-

sumption (Wagner et al., 2009) that verbs which 

agree on their selectional preferences belong to a 

common semantic class. 

We also run the third comparison experiment 

using three different corpora (ACE 05, Financial 

News and Musical News) to evaluate the robust-

ness and domain adaptiveness of our system. The 

performances on the specific domain corpora are 

better than that on the ACE corpus (about 5% 

absolute improvement on F-Measure and 6%-10% 

on Purity). The main reason is that the events in 

specific domain are more specific. In addition, 

the experiment results on both specific domain 

corpora can achieve good performance. This in-

dicates that our system is domain independent. 

In order to evaluate whether the filter rules 

used in Section 2.2 are effective, we introduce 

the fourth comparison experiment. We use the 

Purity score to evaluate the effectiveness of the 

two filter rules. The evaluation results are shown 

in Table 6. We find that the average improve-

ment using only rule (1) is 6.93% absolute for 

three corpora compared with the performance 

without using rule; using only rule (2) is 5.84% 

absolute; and using  both rules, the average im-

provement  is 12.61% absolute. This indicates 

that our two filter rules can improve the experi-

ment performance significantly. 

3.4 Discussion 

Analysis of Experimental Errors 

We first inspect the errors produced by our ap-

proach. The errors are mainly caused by the 

sparse event triggers in corpus. Table 7 shows 

the distribution of the errors in detail. 

After error analysis, we found that the most 

number of errors are caused by trigger extraction. 

The main reasons are: firstly, not all of event 

triggers are verbs, such as “婚姻 (marriage)” for 
“Life/Marry” event, although it is reasonable to 

assume that event triggers are verbs because on 

average, there are more than 95% event triggers 

are verbs in our three different data sets. Second-

ly, since only verbs with subject and object are 

extracted, non-predicate verbs and the verbs 

without subject/object will not be extracted as 

candidate triggers. However, the coverage of 

possible triggers by our trigger extraction algo-

rithm is reasonable good (more than 85%), be-

cause most of the trigger words appear repeated-

ly in the corpus, and their usages are varied. As 

long as one of their usages is fit for our extrac-

tion algorithm, they can be extracted as candidate 

triggers. Note that the goal of this paper is to 

build an event type paradigm for new domains. 

We concern more on the coverage of event type 

rather than event triggers. The event triggers ex-

tracted by us can cover all of event types. We 

will exploit more effective trigger extraction al-

gorithm in future work. 

 

 Error types Proportion 

1 Trigger Extraction 33.0% 

2 Trigger ambiguous 28.3% 

3 Trigger Filter 19.5% 

4 Others 19.2% 

Table 7. Error types in the experiment 

                   Performance 

Method 

Purity (%) 

ACE Finance Music 

ETD 55.59 60.82 62.31 

ETD+Rule(1) 65.13 66.51 69.37 

ETD+Rule(2) 58.22 68.26 70.25 

ETD+Rule(1)+Rule(2) 68.17 74.81 78.35 
 

PAC 60.17 62.45 66.24 

PAC+Rule(1) 68.04 69.24 72.38 

PAC+Rule(2) 62.86 70.32 73.21 

PAC+Rule(1)+Rule(2) 70.24 76.18 80.28 

Table 6. The performance for filter rules 

316



Trigger ambiguity also accounts for a big pro-

portion of the errors. As discussed in Section 2.3, 

we cannot judge the event type only by the trig-

ger itself, such as “撤 (withdraw/dismiss)” for 
both “Personnel/End-Position” event and 

“Movement/ Transport” event. This kind of er-

rors can be partially fixed by the PAC model. For 

example, we cluster “撤职务 (dismiss duties)” 

for “Personnel/End-Position” event and “撤军队 
(withdraw troop)” for “Movement/Transport” 

event. These examples indicate that selectional 

preferences seem to be a reasonable feature even 

for highly ambiguous verbs like “撤” which en-
courages to improve argument extraction. 

There are still some errors caused by trigger 

filter. This is mainly due to the fact that not all of 

triggers are general verb or nominal verb. Do-

main relevance ranking filter rule will ignore the 

common event types, which might also be very 

important for general event extraction, such as 

“Life/Die” event in the ACE corpus. More effec-

tive filter rules will be exploited in future. 

Some other errors are caused by NLP tools, 

such as word segmentation, part-of-speech tag-

ging and dependency parsing. We believe that 

our algorithms can be improved with the im-

provement of these NLP tools. In addition, there 

are about 10% of good event triggers extracted 

but put into the wrong cluster by trigger cluster. 

Analysis of Different Corpus Sources 

The third comparison experiment shows that 

the performance of our approach on three corpo-

ra is not very consistent (F-Measure 69.57%, 

74.42% and 75.08% on the ACE, Financial and 

Musical corpus, respectively). The F-Measure on 

the ACE corpus is lower than that on the other 

two domain corpora. The performances on the 

other two domain corpora are comparable. The 

main reasons are as follows: firstly, the discrimi-

nation between some event types in the ACE 

paradigm is very small, such as the “Jus-

tice/Charge-Indict” event and the “Justice/Sue” 

event; the “Personnel/Nominate” event and the 

“Personnel/Start-Position” event; the “Life/Die” 

event and the “Conflict/Attack” event. Secondly, 

some events rarely occur in the ACE corpus, 

such as “Justice/Extradite” event occurs only 

three times in the ACE corpus. Thirdly, some 

events have a lot of triggers in the ACE corpus, 

but not all of these event triggers appear fre-

quently. For example, the “Movement/Transport” 

event has 188 triggers and 64.89% of its triggers 

appear only once. As compared to ACE corpus, 

the similarity among event types in the other two 

corpora is low. Finally, we analyze that the quan-

tity of event types also results in the different 

performance between the ACE corpus and the 

domain-specific corpus. There are 33 subtypes of 

events in the ACE corpus which are far more 

than the number of events in the Financial and 

Musical corpus. 

Analysis of Different Filter Rules 

The fourth comparison experiment indicates 

that both the filter rules are effective. As shown 

in Table 4, the improvement obtained using rule 

(1) is 7.87%, 6.79% and 6.14% on the ACE, Fi-

nancial and Musical News corpus, respectively. 

The experiment result verifies that verb subdivid-

ing is helpful for the Chinese event extraction 

task. The improvement obtained using rule (2) is 

2.69%, 7.87% and 6.97% on the ACE, Financial 

and Musical News corpus, respectively. The per-

formances on all these three different corpora are 

improved by rule (2); however, it is obvious that 

rule (2) is not much effective on the ACE corpus 

(2.69%) compared with the other two domain-

specific corpora (7.87% and 6.97%). The main 

reason is that the ACE corpus contains many 

common events and the domain-specific infor-

mation is not very useful. For the other two do-

main-specific corpora, rule (2) has improved the 

performance more than rule (1) did. This is due 

to the fact that rule (2) is more effective on the 

domain-specific corpus. 

4 Related Work 

4.1 Word Cluster Discovery 

Our approach of automatically building an event 

type paradigm is related to some prior work on 

word cluster discovery (e.g. Barzilay and McKe-

own, 2001; Ibrahim et al., 2003; Pang et al., 

2003). Most of these works are based on ma-

chine translation techniques to solve paraphrase 

extraction problem. However, several recent re-

searches have stressed the benefits of using word 

clusters to improve the performance of infor-

mation extraction tasks. For example, Miller et 

al., (2004) proved that word clusters could sig-

nificantly improve English name tagging per-

formance. In the same vein, some studies work 

on the problem of relation extraction (Chambers 

and Jurasky, 2011 and 2009; Poon and Domin-

gos, 2009 and 2008; Yates and Etzioni, 2009). In 

these work, “relation words” were extracted and 

clustered. In this paper, our work confirmed that 

trigger clusters are also effective for event type 

paradigm building. The problem of event trigger 

317



words extraction and clustering is also a chal-

lenge problem. 

4.2 Traditional Event Extraction 

The commonly used approaches for most event 

extraction systems are the knowledge engineer-

ing approach and the machine learning approach.  

Grishman et al., (2005) used a combination of 

pattern matching and statistical modeling tech-

niques. They extract two kinds of patterns: 1) the 

sequence of constituent heads separating anchor 

and its arguments; and 2) a predicate argument 

sub-graph of the sentence connecting anchor to 

all the event arguments. In conjunction, they 

used a set of Maximum Entropy based classifiers 

for 1) Trigger labeling, 2) Argument 

classification and 3) Event classification. Ji and 

Grishman, (2008) further exploited a correlation 

between senses of verbs (that are the triggers for 

events) and topics of documents. They first pro-

posed refining event extraction through unsuper-

vised cross-document inference. Following Ji’s 

work, Liao et al., (2010) used document level 

cross-event inference to improve event extraction. 

Chen and Ji, (2009) combined word-based classi-

fier with character-based classifier; and explored 

effective features for the Chinese event extrac-

tion task. Liao and Grishman, (2010) ranked two 

semi-supervised learning methods for adapting 

the event extraction system to new event types. 

Hong et al, (2011) proposed a blind cross-entity 

inference method for event extraction, which 

well uses the consistency of entity mention to 

achieve sentence-level trigger and argument (role) 

classification. Lu and Roth, (2012) presented a 

novel model based on the semi-Markov condi-

tional random fields for the challenging event 

extraction task. The model takes in coarse men-

tion boundary and type information and predicts 

complete structures indicating the corresponding 

argument role for each mention. 

However, for all the above approaches, it is 

necessary to specify the target event type in ad-

vance. Defining and identifying those types 

heavily rely on expert knowledge, and reaching 

an agreement among the experts or annotators 

requires a lot of human labor. Li et al., (2010) 

proposed a domain-independent novel event dis-

covery approach. They exploited a cross-lingual 

clustering algorithm based on sentence-aligned 

bilingual parallel texts to discover event trigger 

clusters. Their motivation is to discover novel 

events for a new domain rather than build a new 

event type paradigm from scratch. Therefore, it 

takes domain specific event triggers as the input. 

However, it is also a costly task to annotate trig-

gers for new domains. The motivation of this 

paper is to build event type paradigm from 

scratch rather than discover novel events based 

on the existing event type paradigm. 

5 Conclusion and Future Work 

Traditionally, in the topic of event detection, we 

have to categorize the events into various pre-

defined event-types. In this paper, we aim to 

tackle the situation when the category of event-

type is undefined, and we try to derive the event-

types from the corpus. In particular, we automat-

ically build an event type paradigm by using a 

trigger clustering algorithm: 1) we introduce a 

trigger extraction algorithm based on the de-

pendency syntactic structure; 2) a trigger filter is 

then constructed to remove some noisy candidate 

triggers; 3) we develop an event type discovery 

algorithm based on our proposed trigger cluster-

ing methods. The clustered event types are used 

to construct an event type paradigm. Experi-

mental results on three different corpora – ACE 

(small, homogeneous, open corpus), Financial 

News and Musical News (large scale, specific 

domain, web corpus) indicate that our method 

can effectively build an event type paradigm and 

that it is easy to adapt the proposed method to 

new domains. 

In the future, more sophisticated algorithm 

will be exploited. Furthermore, a bottom-up 

event extraction system can be built based on our 

event type paradigm. 

 

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by National Natural 

Science Foundation of China (NSFC) via grant 

61273321, 61133012 and the Nation-al 863 

Leading Technology Research Project via grant 

2012AA011102. 

References  

R. Barzilay and K. McKeown. 2001. Extracting Para-

phrases from a Parallel Corpus. In Proceedings of 

ACL/EACL. 

N. Chambers and D. Jurafsky. 2009. Unsupervised 

Learning of Narrative Schemas and their Partici-

pants. In Proceedings of ACL-IJCNLP. 

N. Chambers and D. Jurafsky. 2011. Template-Based 

Information Extraction without the Templates. In 

Proceedings of ACL. 

318



W. Che, Z. Li, Y. Li, Y. Guo, B. Qin, T. Liu. 

2009. Multilingual dependency-based syntactic and 

semantic parsing. In Proceedings of CoNLL 2009.  

H. Chieu and H. Ng. 2002. A Maximum Entropy Ap-

proach to Information Extraction from Semi-

structured and Free Text. In Proceedings of AAAI. 

N. Chinchor, L. Hirschman and D. D. LewW. 1994. 

Evaluating Message Understanding Systems: An 

Analysis of the Third Message Uderstanding Con-

ference (MUC-3). In Computational Linguistics 3, 

pages 409-449.  

X. Ding, F. Song, B. Qin and T. Liu. 2011. Research 

on Typical Event Extraction Method in the Field of 

Music. Journal of Chinese Information Processing 

Vol. 25, No. 2, 15-20. 

Z. Dong and Q. Dong. 2006. HowNet and the Compu-

tation of Meaning. World Scientific Publishing Co. 

Pte. Ltd. 2006. 

R. Grishman, D. Westbrook and A. Meyers. 2005. 

Nyu’s English ACE 2005 System Description. In 

Proceedings of NIST 2005. 

M. Halkidi, Y. Batistakis, M. Vazirgiannis. On Clus-

tering Validation Techniques[J]. Intelligent Infor-

mation Systems 2001. 17( 2-3): 107-145. 

T. Hasegawa, S. Sekine and R. Grishman. 2006. Dis-

covering Relations among Named Entities from 

Large Corpora. In Proceedings of ACL.  

Y. Hong, J. Zhang, B. Ma, J. Yao, G. Zhou, Q. Zhu. 

2011. Using Cross-Entity Inference to Improve 

Event Extraction. In Proceedings of ACL. 

A. Ibrahim, B. Katz and J. Lin. 2003. Extracting 

Structural Paraphrases from Aligned Monolingual 

Corpora. In Proceedings of the Second Interna-

tional Workshop on Paraphrasing (IWP 2003). 

H. Ji and R. Grishman. 2008. Refining Event Extrac-

tion through Unsupervised Cross-document Infer-

ence. In Proceedings of ACL.  

LDC. 2005.  ACE (Automatic  Content  Extraction)  

English  Annotation  Guidelines  for  Events. 

http://projects.ldc.upenn.edu/ace/docs/English-

Events-Guidelines_v5.4.3.pdf 

C. S. Lee, Y. J. Chen, and Z. W. Jian, Ontology-based 

fuzzy event extraction agent for chinese e-news 

summarization. Expert Systems With Applications, 

vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 431–447, 2003. 

H. Li, X. Li, H. Ji, and Y. Marton. Domain-

Independent Novel Event Discovery and Semi-

Automatic Event Annotation. In Proceedings of 

PACLIC. 

S. Liao and R. Grishman. 2010. Filtered Ranking for 

Bootstrapping in Event Extraction. In Proceedings 

of Coling. 

T. Liu, J. Ma, H. Zhang and S. Li. 2007. Subdividing 

Verbs to Improve Syntactic Pasing. Journal of 

Electronics, 24(3): 347-352. 

W. Lu and D. Roth. 2012. Automatic Event Extrac-

tion with Structured Preference Modeling. In Pro-

ceedings of ACL. 

S. Miller, J. Guinness and A. Zamanian. 2004. Name 

Tagging with Word Clusters and Discriminative 

Training. In Proceedings of HLT/ACL. 

B. Pang, K. Knight and D. Marcu. 2003. Syntax-

based Alignment of Multiple Translations: Extract-

ing Paraphrases and Generating New Sentences. In 

Proceedings of NAACL. 

H. Poon and P. Domingos. 2008. Joint Unsupervised 

Coreference Resolution with Markov Logic. In 

Proceedings of EMNLP. 

H. Poon and P. Domingos. 2009. Unsupervised Se-

mantic Parsing. In Proceedings of EMNLP. 

B. Rosenfeld and R. Feldman. 2006. URES: an Unsu-

pervised Web Relation Extraction System. In Pro-

ceedings of the COLING/ACL.  

F. Schilder. 2007. Event Extraction and Temporal 

Reasoning in Legal Documents. In Proceedings of 

Annotating, Extracting and Reasoning about Time, 

LNAI-Volume 4795/2007, pp: 59-71. 

K. Sudo, S. Sekine, and R. Grishman. 2001. Automat-

ic pattern acquisition for Japanese information ex-

traction. In Proceedings of HLT. 

K. Sudo, S. Sekine, and R. Grishman. 2003. An Im-

proved Extraction Pattern Representation Model 

for Automatic IE Pattern Acquisition. In Proceed-

ings of ACL. 

M. Thelen and E. Riloff. 2002. A Bootstrapping 

Method for Learning Semantic Lexicons using Ex-

traction Pattern Contexts. In Proc. of EMNLP. 

W. Wagner, H. Schmid, and S. Schulte im Walde. 

2009. Verb Sense Disambiguation using a Predi-

cate Argument-Clustering Model. In Proceedings 

of the CogSci Workshop on Distributional Seman-

tics beyond Concrete Concepts. 

A.Yakushiji, Y.Tateisi, Y.Miyao, and J.Tsujii, 2001. 

Event extraction from biomedical papers using a 

full parser. Pacif. Symp. Biocomp, 6, pp: 408-419. 

M. Yankova 2003. Focusing on Scenario Recognition 

in Information Extraction. In Proceedings of ECAL. 

A. Yates and O. Etzioni. 2009. Unsupervised Methods 

for Determining Object and Relation Synonyms on 

the Web. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Re-

search 34 (2009) 255-296. 

Q. Zhou and M. Sun. 1999. Build a Chinese treebank 

as the test  suite  for  Chinese  parsers. In Proceed-

ings of the workshop MAL’99 and NLPRS’99. 

319


