










































Semi-supervised Classification of Twitter Messages for Organization Name Disambiguation


International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 869–873,
Nagoya, Japan, 14-18 October 2013.

Semi-supervised Classification of Twitter Messages for  

 Organization Name Disambiguation 

 

Shu Zhang
1
, Jianwei Wu

2
, Dequan Zheng

2
, Yao Meng

1
 and Hao Yu

1
 

1 Fujitsu Research and Development Center, Beijing, China 

{zhangshu, mengyao, yu}@cn.fujitsu.com 

2 School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, 

Harbin, China 

{jwwu, dqzheng}@mtlab.hit.edu.cn 

  

Abstract 

In this paper, we probe the problem of organi-

zation name disambiguation on twitter mes-

sages. This task is challenging due to the fact 

of lacking sufficient information in a tweet 

message. Instead of conventional methods 

based on mining external information from 

web sources to enrich information about or-

ganization, we propose to mine the relation-

ship among tweets in data set to utilize context 

information for disambiguation. With a small 

scale of labeled tweets, we propose LP-based 

and TSVM-based semi-supervised methods to 

classify tweets. We aim to mine both related 

and non-related information for a given organ-

ization. The experiments on WePS-3 show 

that proposed methods are effective.  

1 Introduction 

Twitter is an online social networking and 

microblogging service, which rapidly gained 

worldwide popularity. How to retrieval, analyze 

and monitor Twitter information has been receiv-

ing a lot of attention in natural language pro-

cessing and information retrieval research com-

munity (Kwak, et al., 2010; Boyd, et al.,2010; 

Tsagkias, et al., 2011). One of the essential 

things of these researches is first to get the in-

formation which is related to the studied entity. 

This is caused by the ambiguity of entities. For 

example, the name of company “Apple” has a 

separate meaning referring to one kind of fruit. 

The word “Amazon” also could refer to river or 

company.  

In this paper, we focus on finding related 

tweets for a given organization, which can be 

treated as a binary classification problem. As-

suming that tweets are retrieved by a query, such 

as “apple”, the task is to classify whether each 

retrieved tweet is relevant to the target organiza-

tion (“Apple Inc.”) or not. However, constructing 

such a classifier is a challenging task, as tweets 

are short and informal. Additionally, the infor-

mation about a given organization is limited, 

which is difficult to cover the word occurrences 

in the given organization related tweets. 

Different from previous work on mining ex-

ternal information from web sources to enrich 

information about the given organization, we 

propose to mine the relationship among retrieved 

tweets in data set. With a small scale of labeled 

tweets, we propose semi-supervised methods to 

mine the relationships between labeled and unla-

beled tweets for the given organization. 

The remainder of the paper is organized as fol-

lows: Section 2 describes the related work on 

name disambiguation. Section 3 gives problem 

description and an overview of our approach. 

Section 4 and Section 5 present LP-based and 

TSVM-based semi-supervised methods to classi-

fy tweets. Section 6 gives the experiments and 

results. Finally section 7 summarizes this paper. 

2 Related Work 

Twitter contains little information in each tweet, 

with no more than 140 characters. This makes 

the tasks of analyzing Twitter messages more 

challenge, and attracts much interest from the 

research community in recent years (Meij et al., 

2012; Liu et al., 2011; Sriram et al., 2011 ). 

The most related works are WePS-3 Online 

Reputation Management
1
 held in 2010, which 

aims to identify tweets which are related to a 

given company (Amigó et al., 2010). 

In WePS-3, the research of (Yerva et al., 2010) 

shows the best performance in the evaluation 

                                                 
1
 http://nlp.uned.es/weps/ 

869



campaign. They adopt SVM classifier with ex-

ternal resources, including Wordnet, metadata 

profile, category profile, Google set, and user 

feedback, to enrich the information of the given 

organization. Yoshida et al. (2010) classify or-

ganization names into “organization-like names” 

or “general-word-like names”. Kalmar (2010) 

adopts bootstrapping method to classify the 

tweets. The research of (García-Cumbreras et al., 

2010) shows the named entities in tweets are ap-

propriate for certain company names. 

There are some similar works. Perez-Tellez et 

al. (2011) adopt clustering technique to solve the 

problem of organization name disambiguation. 

Focus on identifying relevant tweets for social 

TV, Dan et al. (2011) propose a bootstrapping 

algorithm utilizing a small manually labeled da-

taset, and a large dataset of unlabeled messages. 

Different from their works, we utilize semi-

supervised methods to classify the tweets. We 

aim to transfer related or unrelated information 

of the given organization among tweets based on 

a small scale of labeled data. 

Compared with bootstrapping algorithm, 

which is based on a local consistency assumption, 

LP algorithm is based on a global consistency 

assumption, and can effectively capture the natu-

ral clustering structure in both the labeled and 

unlabeled data to smooth the labeling function. 

3 Overview 

3.1 Problem Statement 

Given a set of tweets and an organization name, 

the goal is to decide whether each tweet in the set 

talks about the given organization or not. 

In detail, the input information per tweet 

contains: the tweet identifier, the entity name, the 

query used to retrieve the tweet, the author 

identifier and the tweet content. 

For each organization in the dataset, it gives 

the organization name and its homepage URL. 

The output per tweet is True or False tag 

corresponding to related or non-related with the 

given organization. 

3.2 Our Method 

In this paper, we propose semi-supervised 

methods to classify tweets for a given 

organization. This is considered from the 

following two points: 

 Organization information automatically 
mined from web pages is limited, which 

could not cover the potentially infinite 

words occurred in tweets. However, how to 

mine the high quality organization related 

information is also a problem. 

 Both positive and negative samples are 
important for classification task. Though, it 

is possible to mine organization related 

information as positive sample from web by 

some key words or human input. However, 

it is difficult to obtain negative information 

about the other meanings of the given 

organization name which do not refer to the 

given organization. 

Therefore, instead of mining external 

information from web sources to enrich 

information about organization, we propose to 

mine information directly from tweet set. The 

organization related information is extracted 

from the positive samples, which reflects 

keywords related to the given organization in 

tweets. The information extracted from the 

negative samples, gives the possible different 

interpretations of the given organization name. 

With a small scale of labeled tweets for a giv-

en organization name, we utilize LP and TSVM 

based semi-supervised classifiers to mine unla-

beled tweets, which will be described in the fol-

lowing section in detail. 

4 LP Based Semi-supervised Classifier 

Label Propagation (LP) is a graph-based semi-

supervised algorithm, proposed by Zhu et al. 

(2002). The main idea of graph-based semi-

supervised learning is to use pair-wise 

similarities between instances to enhance 

classification accuracy. It is a diffusion process 

on graphs, where the information is propagated 

from the labeled instances to the rest of 

unlabeled instances.  

LP algorithm is to represent labeled (served as 

seeds) and unlabeled examples as nodes in a 

connected graph, then propagating the label in-

formation from any vertex to nearby nodes 

through weighted edges iteratively, finally get 

the labels of unlabeled examples after the propa-

gation process converges. The labels of unla-

beled examples are determined by considering 

both the similarity between labeled and unla-

beled examples, and the similarity between unla-

beled examples (Chen, et al.,2008). 

LP algorithm has achieved good performance 

in many applications, such as noun phrase 

anaphoricity in coreference resolution (Zhou, et 

al., 2009), word sense disambiguation (Niu, et al., 

2005) and entity relation extraction (Chen, et al., 

2006). 

870



4.1 Graph Building 

Let 
n

iixX 1}{  be a set of tweets for a given 

organization, where ix represents ith tweet, n is 

the total number of tweets. The first l tweets are 

labeled ),)..., 11 ll yxyx （（ , }...,{ ,1 lL yyY  are labels. 

Here, Cyi  , C refers to two known classes 

(True or False) for this task. The others 

), 11  ll yx（ … ), ulul yx （ are the unlabeled tweets, 

where }...,{ ,1 ullU yyY  are unknown.  

For the graph, the nodes represent both labeled 

and unlabeled tweets. The edge between any two 

nodes ix and jx is weighted by some distance 

measure. Based on assumption, the closer the 

two nodes are in some distance measure, the 

larger the weight ijw , which is defined as follows: 

)
),(

exp()exp(
2

2

2

2



jiij

ij

xxCoss
w 

 
Where ijs is the distance measure, we adopt 

cosine similarity to measure two nodes ix  and jx . 

 is a constant parameter to scale the weights. 

For measuring the similarity of two nodes, we 

adopt two types of features to represent each 

tweet: one is the unigram word unit, the other is 

4-gram character unit. 

Unigram word: the words contain in a tweet 

after filtering stop words. 

4-gram character unit: the possible 4-gram 

character for each unigram word. 

The tweet is short and informal. There are lit-

tle information contain in one tweet. One key-

word missing may lead the change of the tweet’s 

classification result. Therefore, we adopt charac-

ter unit as feature to allow the mistake of spelling 

in some extent. 

4.2 Algorithm 

All nodes in graph have soft labels that can be 

interpreted as distribution over labels. The label 

of a node is propagated to all nodes through the 

edges. Larger edge weights allow labels to travel 

through easier. Define a nn probabilistic transi-

tion matrix T, ( uln  ). 







ul

k kj

ij

ij

w

w
ijPT

1

)(

 
Here Tij is the probability to jump from node j 

to node i. We define a Cul  ）（ label matrix Y, 

the ith row representing the label probability dis-

tribution of node 
ix . 

The label propagation algorithm is as follows: 

(1) Propagate TYY   

(2) Row-normalize Y, to maintain the label 
probability interpretation 

(3) Clamp the labeled tweets, replace the YL 
with the initial value 

(4) Repeat from step (1) to (3) until Y con-
verges 

Here, we make use of JUNTO Label Propaga-

tion toolkit
2
 to implement this algorithm. 

5 Transductive SVM 

Transductive Support Vector Machines (TSVM) 

is a semi-supervised learning method, which can 

be treated as an extension of SVM by 

introducing unlabeled data. Similar with SVM, 

TSVM tries to label the unlabeled data, and find 

the maximum margin separation hypersurface 

that separates the positive and negative instances 

of labeled data and the unlabeled data. The basic 

idea of TSVM is to seek a decision surface away 

from the dense regions of unlabeled data. 

For the given labeled tweets niii Rxyx |),{(  

L

iiy 1}}1,1{   , iy refers to two known classes 

(True or False) for this task, and unlabeled data 
*

1

** }|{ Lj
n

jj Rxx  . This can be written as minimiz-

ing 





*

1

**

1

2

*,,, 2

1
minarg

L

j

j

L

i

i
ybw

CCw 


 
Subject to 

Rb,R      w

yj

j

i

bxwyj

bxwyi

m

j

j

i

jjj

iii













}1,1{:

0:

0:

1)(:

1)(:

*

*

**









 
Similar with LP, we adopt two types of fea-

tures to represent each tweet: one is the unigram 

word unit, the other is 4-gram character unit. 

Here, we make use of SVMLight tools to imple-

ment this algorithm. 

6 Experiments and Results 

6.1 Corpus and Evaluation Metric 

We have conducted experiments on the WePS-3 

task 2 data. The test data contain about 50 organ-

ization names with about 450 tweets for each 

organization.

                                                 
2
 http://code.google.com/p/junto/ 

871



 P+ R+ F+ P- R- F- 

LP 0.8097  0.5008  0.4120  0.8059  0.5593  0.5166  

TSVM 0.6683  0.6969  0.7144  0.6942  0.6484  0.6972  

Top_1 0.7108  0.7445  0.6264  0.8443  0.5195  0.5606  

Top_2 0.7546  0.5409  0.4935  0.7413  0.6049  0.5651  

Top_3 0.7410  0.6157  0.5062  0.7365  0.4911  0.4683  

Baseline (NR) 1.0000  0.0000  0.0000  0.5652  1.0000  0.6563  

Baseline (R) 0.4348  1.0000  0.5274  1.0000  0.0000  0.0000  

Table 1. Performances of semi-supervised methods and other systems 

 

The task is to classify the tweets related or 

non-related with the given organization, it 

belongs to classification task. Therefore, we 

measure the performance by accuracy, precision, 

recall and F-measure.  

6.2 Results and Analysis 

Based on the test data, we testify the perfor-

mance of our proposed methods. 

Seed selection for semi-supervised classifiers 

We random select 100 tweets as seeds from 

the test data for each organization name, which 

is about 20% for tweet set. 

Decreasing the influence of seed selection for 

the performances of semi-supervised classifiers, 

we try out the experiments five times and get the 

average values for the final results. 

Performance of semi-supervised classifiers 

For comparison, we select five system results 

as references, three of them are the top 3 

systems in WePS contest, the other two systems 

are the baseline systems. Two baseline systems 

tag all tweets as related (Baseline (R)) or non-

related (Baseline (NR)) to each organization.  

Figure 1 and Table 1 show the performances 

of semi-supervised methods and other systems. 

 
Figure 1. Accuracies of semi-supervised 

methods and other systems 

 

In Figure 1, the accuracy of Baseline (NR) is 

higher than that of Baseline (R), which shows 

there are more unrelated tweets in the whole test 

data, the disambiguation of tweets is necessary. 

The accuracies of our proposed methods and 

Top 3 systems are all much higher than those of 

two baselines. It proves that adopting some 

methods to disambiguate tweets is feasible. 

The accuracies of our proposed semi-

supervised methods based on LP and TSVM are 

both higher than that of Top_2 system. The 

accuracy of TSVM is 0.8391, which is higher 

than that of Top_1 (0.8267). It proves that semi-

supervised methods are effective for this task. 

Instead of mining web sources, it is also effec-

tive to mine the information among tweets, 

especially which including both related and non-

related information about the organization name. 

In Table 1, it shows the performance of each 

system on precision, recall and F-measure. The 

values are calculated on the average 

performance for each organization name in test 

data set. Though P+ and R+ values of TSVM 

are not the highest ones, the F+ value is highest 

among the five systems. F- value is also the 

highest one. it shows that TSVM-based classifier 

gets gets the best balance between precision and 

recall for classification. F+ value is important to 

measure the ability of finding the related tweets 

to a given organization. 

7 Conclusion 

In this paper, we probe the problem of 

organization name disambiguation on twitter 

information. We utilize LP and TSVM based 

semi-supervised method to implement the 

disambiguation system. The experiments on 

WePS-3 show that both LP-based classifier and 

TSVM-based classifier are effective. Especially, 

TSVM-based classifier gets higher performance 

than that of the best result in WePS contest, 

which proves that semi-supervised method is a 

feasible way to classify the related tweets 

information for a given organization on Twitter. 

872



References  

Enrique Amigó, Javier Artiles, Julio Gonzalo, 

Damiano Spina, Bing Liu, and Adolfo Corujo. 

2010. WePS-3 Evaluation Campaign: Overview of 

the Online Reputation Management Task. In Pro-

ceedings of 3rd Web People Search Evaluation 

Workshop. 

Surender R. Yerva, Zoltán Miklós, and Karl Aberer. 

2010. It was Easy, when Apples and Blackberries 

were only Fruits. In Proceedings of 3rd Web Peo-

ple Search Evaluation Workshop. 

Minoru Yoshida, Shin Matsushima, Shingo Ono, 

Issei Sato, and Hiroshi Nakagawa. 2010. ITC-UT: 

Tweet Categorization by Query Categorization for 

On-line Reputation Management. In Proceedings 

of 3rd Web People Search Evaluation Workshop. 

Paul Kalmar. 2010. Bootstrapping Websites for Clas-

sification of Organization Names on Twitter. In 

Proceedings of 3rd Web People Search Evaluation 

Workshop. 

M.A. García-Cumbreras, M. García-Vega M, F. 

Martínez-Santiago and J.M. Peréa-Ortega. 2010.  

SINAI at WePS-3: Online Reputation Manage-

ment. In Proceedings of 3rd Web People Search 

Evaluation Workshop. 

Fernando Perez-Tellez, David Pinto, John Cardiff, 

and Paolo Rosso. 2011. On the Difficulty of Clus-

tering Microblog Texts for Online Reputation 

Management. In Proceedings of 2nd Workshop on 

Computational Approaches to Subjectivity and 

Sentiment Analysis, ACL-HLT. 

Ovidiu Dan, Junlan Feng, and Brian D. Davison. 

2011. A Bootstrapping Approach to Identifying 

Relevant Tweets for Social TV. In Proceedings of 

5th International AAAI Conference Weblogs and 

Social Media. 

Xuan Hieu Phan, Le Minh Nguyen, and Susumu 

Horiguchi. 2008. Learning to Classify Short and 

Sparse Text & Web with Hidden Topics from 

Large-scale Data Collections. In Proceeding of 

17th WWW, pages 91-100. 

Haewoon Kwak, Changhyun Lee, Hosung Park, and 

Sue Moon. 2010. What is Twitter, a Social Net-

work or a News Media? In Proceeding of 19th 

WWW, pages 591-600. 

Danah Boyd, Scott Golder, and Gilad Lotan. 2010. 

Tweet, Tweet, Retweet: Conversational Aspects of 

Retweeting on Twitter. In Hawaii International 

Conference on System Sciences, pages 1-10. 

Manos Tsagkias, Maarten de Rijke, and Wouter 

Weerkamp. 2011. Linking Online News and So-

cial Media. In Proceedings of 4th ACM Web 

Search and Data Mining, pages 565-574. 

Edgar Meij, Wouter Weerkamp, and Maarten de 

Rijke. 2012. Adding Semantic to Microblog Posts. 

In proceedings of 5th ACM Web Search and Data 

Mining, pages 563-572. 

Xiaohua Liu, Shaodian Zhang, Furu Wei, and Ming 

Zhou. 2011. Recognizing Named Entities in 

Tweets. In Proceedings of 49th Annual Meeting of 

the Association for Computational Linguistics, 

pages 359-367. 

Bharath Sriram, David Fuhry, Engin Demir, Hakan 

Ferhatosmanoglu, and Murat Demirbas. 2011. 

Short  Text Classification in Twitter to Improve 

Information Filtering. In Proceedings of the ACM 

SIGIR 2011, pages 841-842. 

Guo Dong Zhou and Fang Kong. 2009. Global Learn-

ing of Noun Phrase Anaphoricity in Coreference 

Resolution via Label Propagation. In Proceedings 

of Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-

cessing, pages 978-986. 

Zheng Yu Niu, Dong Hong Ji, and Chew Lim Tan. 

2005. Word Sense Disambiguation Using Label 

Propagation Based Semi-Supervised Learning. In 

Proceedings of 43rd Annual Meeting on Associa-

tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 395-402.  

Jin Xiu Chen, Dong Hong Ji, Chew Lim Tan, and 

Zheng Yu Niu. 2006. Relation Extraction Using 

Label Propagation Based Semi-supervised Learn-

ing. In Proceedings of 21st International Confer-

ence on Computational Linguistics and 44th An-

nual Meeting on Association for Computational 

Linguistics, pages 129-136.  

Jin Xiu Chen, and Dong Hong Ji. 2008. Graph-Based 

Semi-supervised Relation Extraction. In Journal of 

Software, 19(11): 2843-2852. 

Xiao Jin Zhu and Zou Bin Ghahramani. 2002. Learn-

ing from Labeled and Unlabeled Data with Label 

Propagation. Technical Report CMU-CALD-02-

107, Carnegie Mellon University 

 

 

873


