










































A Factoid Question Answering System Using Answer Pattern Matching


International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 854–858,
Nagoya, Japan, 14-18 October 2013.

A Factoid Question Answering System  
Using Answer Pattern Matching 

 
 

Nagehan Pala Er  
Department of Computer Engineering, 

Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey 
nagehan@cs.bilkent.edu.tr 

Ilyas Cicekli 
Department of Computer Engineering, 
Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey 
ilyas@cs.hacettepe.edu.tr 

 
 

Abstract 
 
In this paper, we describe a Turkish factoid 
QA system which uses surface level patterns 
called answer patterns in order to extract the 
answers from the documents that are retrieved 
from the web. The answer patterns are learned 
using five different answer pattern extraction 
methods with the help of the web. Our novel 
approach to extract named entity tagged an-
swer patterns and our new confidence factor 
assignment approach have an important role in 
the successful performance of our QA system. 
We also describe a novel query expansion 
technique to improve the performance. The 
evaluation results show that the named entity 
tagging in answer patterns and the query ex-
pansion leads to significant performance im-
provement. The scores of our QA system are 
comparable with the results of the best factoid 
QA systems in the literature. 

1 Introduction  
Question answering is the task of returning a 
particular piece of information in response to a 
natural language question. The aim of a question 
answering system is to present the required in-
formation directly, instead of documents contain-
ing potentially relevant information. Questions 
can be divided into five categories (Modolvan et. 
al., 2002; Schone et. al., 2005 ): factoid ques-
tions, list questions, definition questions, com-
plex questions, and speculative questions. A fac-
toid question has exactly one correct answer 
which can be extracted from short text segments. 
The difficulty level of factoid questions is lower 
than the other categories. In this paper, we pre-
sent a Turkish factoid question answering system 
which retrieves the documents that contain an-
swers, and extracts the answers from these re-
trieved documents with the help of a set of 
learned answer extraction patterns. List, defini-

tion, complex, and speculative questions are out 
of the scope of this paper. 

At TREC-10 QA track (Voorhees, 2001), most 
of the question answering systems used Natural 
Language Processing (NLP) tools such as a natu-
ral language parser and WordNet (Fellbaum, 
1998). However, the best performing system at 
TREC-10 QA track used only an extensive list of 
surface patterns (Soubbotin and Soubbotin, 
2001). Therefore we have decided to investigate 
their potential for Turkish factoid question an-
swering. Our factoid question answering system 
learns answer patterns that are surface level pat-
terns, and it uses them in the extraction of the 
answers of new questions. Our answer patterns 
are learned from the web using machine learning 
approaches. In addition to the creation of raw 
string answer patterns, we tried different meth-
ods for answer pattern creation such as stemming 
and named entity tagging. Our novel answer pat-
tern creation method using named entity tagging 
produces most successful results. 

One of the important issues in the factoid 
question answering is the answer ranking. The 
correct answer for a question should be in the top 
of the produced answer list by a QA system. The 
learned answer patterns in our QA system are 
associated with confidence factors, and their con-
fidence factors indicate their precision values for 
the training set. The confidence factors of the 
rules that extracted the answers are also used to 
rank the answers and this approach produces 
very good results. 

The question answering systems that extract 
the answers from the retrieved web pages should 
be able to retrieve the web pages that contain the 
answers. These QA systems form a search engine 
query and submit this query to retrieve the relat-
ed web pages containing the answers. The re-
trieved web pages may or may not contain the 
answers. The QA systems can only consider the 
first retrieved web pages in order to extract an-

854



swers from them, and the QA systems have a 
bigger chance to extract the correct answers if 
the first retrieved web pages contain the answers. 
In order to increase the chance that the first re-
trieved web pages contain the possible answers, 
we apply a novel query expansion approach us-
ing answer patterns. Our evaluation results indi-
cate that our query expansion approach improves 
the performance of our factoid question answer-
ing system. 

The factoid question answering system de-
scribed here is the first successful Turkish fac-
toid question answering system. Our new confi-
dence factor assignment approach to the learned 
answer patterns has an important role in the suc-
cess of our factoid QA system. The contributions 
of our paper also include the introduction of a 
novel query expansion approach and the creation 
of named entity tagged answer patterns. The per-
formance results of our factoid question answer-
ing system are competitive with the results of the 
state of art QA systems in the literature. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 discusses our answer pattern extraction 
methods and confidence factor assignments to 
the extracted answer patterns. In Section 3, we 
describe the question answering phase of our QA 
system. Section 4 presents the detailed discus-
sions about the evaluation results. Section 5 con-
tains concluding remarks. 

2 Answer Pattern Extraction 
In the learning phase of our question answering 
system, a set of answer patterns are inferred for 
each question type using the training set of that 
question type and the web. For each question 
type, we prepared a set of training examples 
which consists of question and answer phrase 
pairs. A query is formed as a conjunction of 
question and answer phrases in each training 
example. This query is used to retrieve top doc-
uments (DocSet1) containing the question and 
answer phrases. The retrieved documents are 
used in the extraction of answer patterns without 
confidence factors. For each training example, 
we also form a query which only consists of the 
question phrase. The retrieved documents 
(DocSet2) using this query may or may not con-
tain answer phrases. Two document sets are used 
in the calculation of the confidence factors of the 
learned answer patterns. 

Although the retrieved documents in DocSet1 
contain both question and answer phrases, ques-
tion and answer phrases may not appear together 

in a sentence of a document. In order to deter-
mine answer pattern strings, the sentences that 
contain the question and the answer phrases to-
gether are selected from documents, and answer 
pattern strings are extracted from these sentenc-
es. An answer pattern string is a substring that 
starts with the answer phrase and ends with the 
question phrase, or starts with the question 
phrase and ends with the answer phrase. In addi-
tion, we extract an answer pattern string with a 
boundary word in order to determine the bounda-
ry of the answer phrase.  

After an answer pattern string is extracted, we 
apply five different methods in order to learn 
answer patterns: Raw String (Raw), Raw String 
with Answer Type (RawAT), Stemmed String 
(Stemmed), Stemmed String with Answer Type 
(StemmedAT), and Named Entity Tagged String 
(NETagged). Raw string methods learn more 
specific rules than Stemmed string methods, and 
NETagged method learns more general rules.  

In order to extract a raw string answer pattern 
using our Raw method, question phrase and an-
swer phrase in an answer pattern string are re-
placed with appropriate variables QP and AP. QP 
is replaced with the given question phrase during 
question answering, and AP is bound to the an-
swer phrase of the question if the pattern match-
es. The length of the found answer phrase is de-
termined by the boundary word if the answer 
pattern contains a boundary word. Otherwise, a 
fixed size is used as its length.  

There can be many strings that can match with 
an answer pattern that is learned using Raw 
method. One reason for this is that there is no 
type checking for the string to which AP binds. 
As long as the pattern matches, AP binds with a 
string. Our RawAT method associates AP varia-
bles with answer types. An answer type is a 
named entity type that is determined by our 
Turkish named entity tagger. During question 
answering, the found answer phrase is checked 
by our named entity tagger in order to make sure 
that it satisfies the type restriction. For this rea-
son, an answer pattern with an answer type is 
more specific than the corresponding answer 
pattern without a type.  

Answer patterns obtained by raw string meth-
ods contain surface level words, and they have to 
match exactly with words in extracted strings. 
Stemmed string methods replace words with 
their stems in answer patterns. In order to match 
a string with a stemmed answer pattern, all its 
words are stemmed first and its stemmed version 
matches with the stemmed answer pattern to ex-

855



tract the answer. The extracted answer patterns 
can be still more specific since they may contain 
specific words. NETagged method can further 
generalize answer patterns by replacing all 
named entities in the string by typed variables.   

After all answer patterns are extracted from 
the training set, the confidence factors are as-
signed to these extracted answer patterns. A con-
fidence factor of an answer pattern indicates its 
accuracy in the training set. In question answer-
ing phase, we use only the answer patterns 
whose confidence factors are above a certain 
threshold. From two document sets (DocSet1 and 
DocSet2), the sentences containing the question 
phrase are collected as a training set for confi-
dence factor assignment. The confidence factor 
of an answer pattern is the proportion of correct 
results to all results extracted by that pattern. 

3 QA Using Answer Patterns  
Our base question answering module uses the 
given question phrase as a search engine query. 
Using Bing web search engine top documents 
containing the given question phrase are re-
trieved. In these documents, the sentences con-
taining the question phrase are extracted. The 
question phrases in the retrieved sentences are 
replaced by QP, and these sentences are used in 
the answer processing phase. 

In the answer processing phase, the answer 
patterns of the given question type are applied to 
the selected sentences in order to extract answer 
phrases. The preprocessing of the sentences may 
be required depending on the method of the used 
answer pattern. If the applied method is a raw 
string method, there is no need for the prepro-
cessing of the sentence, and the raw string an-
swer pattern is directly applied to the sentence. If 
the answer pattern is a stemmed string answer 
pattern, all the words are stemmed first, and the 
answer pattern is applied to the stemmed version 
of the sentence. If the answer pattern is a NE 
tagged answer pattern, the sentence is analyzed 
by the named entity tagger in order to determine 
all named entities in the sentence, and the answer 
pattern is applied to the named entity tagged ver-
sion of the sentence. 

If the applied answer pattern matches the sen-
tence, an answer phrase is extracted as a result. If 
the answer phrase in the applied answer pattern 
is named entity tagged, the extracted answer 
phrase must also satisfy conditions of that named 
entity. The confidence value of an extracted an-
swer is the confidence factor of the matched an-

swer pattern. The top ranked answer is returned 
as the result of the question. 

Our base QA algorithm creates a search en-
gine query and that query only contains the given 
question phrase.  The retrieved documents may 
be insufficient to extract the correct answer be-
cause the query is too general and the retrieved 
documents may not contain the answer. We want 
to retrieve documents that contain many sentenc-
es holding the question phrase and answer phrase 
together. Thus, there is a bigger chance that our 
answer patterns match those sentences, and the 
correct answer can be extracted. In order to re-
trieve the documents that are more likely to con-
tain the answer, we use a query expansion ap-
proach. The answer patterns with high confi-
dence factors are used to expand the query, so 
that the more related documents can be retrieved. 

4 Evaluation Results   
In order to evaluate the performance of our sys-
tem, we prepared a training set and a test set and 
they do not contain any common item. Each of 
them contains 15 question-answer phrase pairs 
from seven different question types (Author, Capi-
tal, DateOfBirth, DateOfDeath, LanguageOfCountry, 
PlaceOfBirth, PlaceOfDeath). Since we obtained 
our best results, when we use the answer patterns 
higher than 0.75 confidence factors, we only 
used these answer patterns for evaluations. The 
answer patterns are tested with the question-
answer phrase pairs in the test set. 

We used four standard evaluation metrics: 
Precision, Recall, Fmeasure and MRR. Precision 
is the proportion of the number of correct an-
swers to the number of returned answers, and 
Recall is the proportion of the number of correct 
answers to the number of test questions. 
Fmeasure is the harmonic mean of Precision and 
Recall.  Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) considers 
the rank of the first correct answer in the list of 
possible answers (Voorhees, 2001). 

 
    MRR   Recall Precision   Fmeas 
Raw  0.28 0.24 0.57 0.34 
RawAT 0.31 0.30 0.86 0.44 
Stemmed  0.29 0.26 0.57 0.36 
StemmedAT 0.30 0.29 0.88 0.44 
NETagged 0.45 0.45 0.94 0.61 
AllWithNE 0.58 0.56 0.86 0.68 

Table 1. Evaluation results  

We evaluated each of our five methods sepa-
rately and their best combination. The evaluation 
results are given in Table 1. The results in the 

856



columns 2-5 of Table 1 are the average values of 
the results of the seven question types. The rows 
2-6 give the results for individual methods and 
the last row gives the results of their best combi-
nation AllWithNE which contains the answer 
patterns that are learned from methods RawAT, 
StemmedAT and NETagged. According to the 
results, our best method is NETagged method 
which accomplishes the best scores for all four 
evaluation metrics. These results indicate that the 
usage of named entity tagged string answer pat-
terns increases the performance. The results indi-
cate that the effect of stemming is not as good as 
expected. The usage of answer types blocks the 
extraction of most of the incorrect answers. 

In our query expansion method, we use the 
words appearing in the high confidence answer 
patterns. One way to test the effectiveness of our 
query expansion mechanism is to measure the 
change in the number of sentences containing 
both the question phrase and the answer phrase 
in the retrieved documents. According to our 
results, the number of such sentences is increased 
from 3227 to 6647 when the query expansion is 
employed. This means that our answer patterns 
have almost twice the chance to extract answers 
using query expansion. We applied our answer 
patterns in our best combination AllWithNE to 
the documents returned as a result of the query 
expansion. The highest increase (29%) occurred 
in Recall result because the answers of more 
questions are retrieved as a result of the query 
expansion. Precision result is also improved from 
0.86 to 0.94 (9% increase). The increase in 
MMR result is 26% percent and the increase in 
Fmeasure result is 20%. As a conclusion, the 
query expansion is a useful tool to improve the 
performance since it leads to increases in all 
measures. 
 
QA System MRR 
TREC-8 (max,avg,min) 0.66, 025, 0.02 
TREC-10 (max,avg,min) 0,68, 0.39, 0.27 
Ephyra 0.40 
Ravichandran and Hovy’s QA sys.  0.57 
BayBilmis 0.31 
Our Best without query expansion 0.62 
Our Best with query expansion 0.73 

Table 2. Comparisons of QA systems 

Although it is difficult to directly compare the 
results of our QA system with the published re-
sults of other factoid question answering sys-
tems, we still discuss the MRR results of our QA 
system and other factoid question answering 

systems. Table 2 compares our best MRR results 
with the MRR results of the other systems 
(Voorhees, 1998;  Voorhees, 2001; Schlaefer and 
Gieselmann, 2006; Ravichandran and Hovy, 
2001; Amasyali and Diri, 2005). Although these 
scores may not give fair comparisons, they still 
show that our QA system is competitive to the 
best factoid QA systems. 

5 Conclusion and future work  
The answer pattern matching technique has been 
used successfully for English Factoid QA (Ravi-
chandran and Hovy, 2001; Schlaefer and 
Gieselmann, 2006; Soubbotin and Soubbotin, 
2001), we therefore decided to apply various 
answer pattern extraction methods for Turkish 
factoid QA. These methods are compared ac-
cording to MRR, Fmeasure, Recall and Precision 
scores. The scores of stemmed string methods 
are slightly better than the scores of raw string 
methods, so stemming slightly improves the per-
formance of the system. The scores of RawAT 
and StemmedAT methods are better than the 
scores of Raw and Stemmed methods, so check-
ing the answer type improves the performance of 
the system significantly. NETagged method has 
the best scores. So, replacing words with their 
named entity tags improves the performance. 

We have also implemented a novel query ex-
pansion approach using answer patterns. We use 
the most reliable raw string answer patterns to 
extend queries. The number of sentences con-
taining the answer phrase increases when the 
query expansion is applied. The performance 
scores increase significantly when the query ex-
pansion is applied.  

The question answering system described in 
this paper is the first successful Turkish factoid 
question answering system. The evaluation re-
sults indicate that the performance of our QA 
system is comparable with the performances of 
the state of the art factoid question answering 
systems. 

Investigating the potential of more generic an-
swer patterns is left as a future work. Stemmed, 
StemmedAT and NETagged methods extract 
more generic answer patterns compared to Raw 
and RawAT methods and they achieve better re-
sults. More generic answer patterns can be ex-
tracted by using linguistic techniques such as 
phrase chunking and morphological analysis. We 
believe that combining different answer pro-
cessing techniques can improve the performance 
of the QA system significantly.  

857



References 

M.F. Amasyalı and B. Diri, Bir soru cevaplama 
sistemi: Baybilmiş, Türkiye Bilişim Vakfı Bilg-
isayar Bilimleri ve Mühendisliği Dergisi, 2005  
(in Turkish). 

C. Fellbaum, WordNet: An Electronic Lexical 
Database, The MIT Press, (1998). 

D. Modolvan, M. Pasca, S. Harabagiu and M. 
Surdeanu, Performance issues and error analy-
sis in an open-domain question answering sys-
tem, Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting 
of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (ACL-02) (2002). 

R. Ravichandran and E. Hovy, Learning surface 
text patterns for a question answering system, 
Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting on 
Association for Computational Linguistics 
(2001). 

N. Schlaefer and P. Gieselmann, A pattern learn-
ing approach to question answering within the 
Ephyra framework, Proceedings of the 9th In-
ternational Conference on Text, Speech and 
Dialogue (2006). 

P. Schone, G. Ciany, R. Cutts, J. Mayfield and T. 
Smith, QACTIS-based question answering at 
TREC-2005, Proceedings of the 14th Text Re-
trieval Conference (2005). 

M. Soubbotin and S. Soubbotin, Patterns of po-
tential answer expressions as clues to the right 
answer, Proceedings of the 10th Text Retrieval 
Conference (2001). 

E.M. Voorhees, The TREC-8 question answering 
track report, Proceedings of the 8th Text Re-
trieval Conference (1999).   

E.M. Voorhees, Overview of the TREC 2001 
question answering track, Proceedings of the 
10th Text Retrieval Conference (2001). 

 
 

858


