










































Two Case Studies on Translating Pronouns in a Deep Syntax Framework


International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 1037–1041,
Nagoya, Japan, 14-18 October 2013.

Two Case Studies on Translating Pronouns in a Deep Syntax Framework

Michal Novák, Zdeněk Žabokrtský and Anna Nedoluzhko
Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics

Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
Malostranské náměstı́ 25, CZ-11800

{mnovak,zabokrtsky,nedoluzko}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Abstract
We focus on improving the translation of
the English pronoun it and English reflex-
ive pronouns in an English-Czech syntax-
based machine translation framework.
Our evaluation both from intrinsic and ex-
trinsic perspective shows that adding spe-
cialized syntactic and coreference-related
features leads to an improvement in trans-
lation quality.

1 Introduction

Machine Translation (MT) is an extremely broad
task and can be decomposed along various di-
rections. One of them lies in using specialized
translation models (TMs) for certain types of lan-
guage expressions. For instance, different types
of named entities often receive specialized treat-
ment in real translation systems. This paper deals
with introducing specialized TMs for two types of
pronouns: the pronoun it and reflexive pronouns.
The models are integrated into an English-Czech
syntax-based MT framework.

Several works have previously focused on trans-
lating pronouns. The linguistic study of Morin
(2009) investigated the translation of pronouns,
proper names and kinship terms from Indonesian
into English. Onderková (2010) has conducted a
corpus-based research on possesive pronouns in
Czech and English, focusing especially on their
use with parts of the human body.

From the perspective of MT, translating per-
sonal pronouns from English to morphologically
richer languages, such as French (Le Nagard and
Koehn, 2010), German (Hardmeier and Federico,
2010) and Czech (Guillou, 2012) has recently
aroused higher interest. In these languages, one
usually has to ensure agreement in gender and
number between the pronoun and its direct an-
tecedent, which requires a coreference resolver to
be involved.

In this work, we make use of the English-to-
Czech translation implemented within the Tec-
toMT system (Žabokrtský et al., 2008). In contrast
to the phrase-based approach (Koehn et al., 2003),
TectoMT performs a tree-to-tree machine transla-
tion. An input English sentence is first analyzed
into its deep-syntactic representation, which is
subsequently transferred into Czech. The pipeline
ends with generating a surface form of the Czech
translation from its deep representation.

The deep syntactic representation of a sentence
in TectoMT follows the Prague tectogrammatics
theory (Sgall, 1967; Sgall et al., 1986). It is a de-
pendency tree whose nodes correspond to content
words. Personal pronouns missing on the surface
are reconstructed in special nodes. All nodes are
assigned semantic roles and coreference relations
are annotated.

Originally, translation of both it and reflexive
pronouns was treated by rules in TectoMT. The
English deep representation of it was translated as
to and a simple heuristics determined if it is be-
ing expressed on the surface. Similarly, reflexives
were always translated as se. This paper evalu-
ates the translation quality reached using special-
ized classifiers for these pronouns. Unlike the re-
lated work on pronouns in MT, we focus on im-
proving the lexical choice, not tuning other com-
ponents that affect generating a particular surface
form (e.g. coreference resolution).

2 Linguistic analysis

We started with an analysis of how the pronouns
under investigation are translated1 in two Czech-
English parallel treebanks – Prague Czech-English
Dependency Treebank 2.0 (Hajič et al., 2011,
PCEDT) and CzEng 1.0 (Bojar et al., 2012).

1Note that besides the means mentioned below, there are
other ways of translating these pronouns. However, in most
cases they can be replaced by one of the variants listed with
no harm to the quality of the Czech output.

1037



En
gl
is
h Czech

emphasis on object

object affected by 
its own action reflexive pronoun se

pronoun sám

both sám and se

adjective samotný

coreferential with VP 
or a segment

demonstrative 
pronoun to

coreferential with NP personal pronoun

pleonastic nothing, structure changes

[PersPron]

[To]

[Null]

[Samotny]

[Sam]

[Se]

[SamSe]

It

Reflexives

Figure 1: The mapping of the types of English it (top) and
reflexive pronouns (bottom) to their Czech counterparts.

2.1 Translating it from English to Czech

In English, three coarse-grained types of it are tra-
ditionally distinguished: referential it pointing to a
noun phrase in the preceding or following context,
anaphoric it referring to a verbal phrase or a larger
discourse segment, and non-referential pleonastic
it, whose presence is imposed only by the syntac-
tic rules of English.

There are three prevailing ways of translat-
ing it into Czech, also three different ways pre-
vail. Personal pronouns or zero forms2, whose
gender and number are determined by their an-
tecedent, are the most frequent variant (referred to
as the PersPron class in the following). Another
way is using the Czech demonstrative pronoun to,
which is a neuter singular form of the pronoun ten
(To class). The third option results in fact no lex-
ical counterpart in the Czech translation, the En-
glish and Czech sentences thus having a different
syntactic structure (Null class).

The mapping between English and Czech types
is shown in Figure 1. The To class is particu-
larly overloaded. Even if a given occurrence of
it corefers with a noun phrase, translating it to to
does not require identifying the antecedent since
the gender and number of to are always fixed (see
Example 1).

(1) Some investors say Friday’s sell-off was a
good thing. “It was a healthy cleansing,”
says Michael Holland.

Někteřı́ investoři řı́kajı́, že pátečnı́
výprodej byla dobrá věc. “Byla to zdravá
očista,” řı́ká Michael Holland.

2Czech is a pro-drop language.

2.2 Translating reflexive pronouns from
English to Czech

According to the Longman Dictionary of Contem-
porary English,3 reflexive pronouns are typically
used in two scenarios: to show that the object is
affected by its own action and to emphasize that
the utterance relates to one particular thing, per-
son etc. (see Example 2).

(2) The Gambia’s President himself partici-
pated in the hunt last year.

The most usual Czech counterparts of English
reflexives comprise the Czech reflexive pronoun
se (Se class), the adjective samotný (Samotny
class) and the pronoun sám (Sam class), all in var-
ious morphological forms. Moreover, sám often
appears with se to emphasize that the action af-
fecting the object is performed by the object itself
(SamSe class). Figure 1 illustrates the correspon-
dence between English usages and Czech expres-
sions.

3 Data

To train and intrinsically evaluate TMs for it and
English reflexives, we have extracted data from the
entire PCEDT and 11 sections of CzEng. Both
treebanks follow the annotation style based on the
Prague tectogrammatics theory (Sgall, 1967; Sgall
et al., 1986). While PCEDT consists of 50,000
sentence pairs annotated mostly manually, the an-
notation of CzEng with 15 million parallel sen-
tences is entirely automatic. Both treebanks have
been provided with a fully automatic alignment of
Czech and English nodes (Mareček et al., 2008),
which is, however, prone to errors for it and its
Czech counterparts. Since they are pronouns, they
can replace a wide range of content words and
their meaning is inferred mainly from the context.
The situation is better for verbs as their usual par-
ents in dependency trees: since they carry meaning
in a greater extent, their automatic alignment is of
a higher quality.

We took advantage of this property and the gold
annotation of semantic roles in PCEDT, obtaining
Czech translations as the argument of the Czech
verb aligned with the English parent verb that fills
the same semantic role as the given it. Using this
approach, we succeeded in reaching the Czech
counterpart in more than 60% of instances. The
rest had to be done manually.

3
http://www.ldoceonline.com

1038



It Train Test Reflexives Train Test
PCEDT sections 00–19 20–21 CzEng sections 00–09 98
PersPron 576 322 Se 6,305 652
To 231 138 Sam 2,271 205
Null 133 83 SamSe 1,361 129

Samotny 804 89
Total 940 543 Total 10,741 1,075

Table 1: Distribution of classes in the data sets.

Czech counterparts of English reflexive pro-
nouns have been collected directly from the align-
ment in CzEng, ignoring the cases where the
aligned Czech word does not fall in one of the
classes mentioned in Section 2.2.

The overall statistics of the train and the test set
are shown in Table 1. The disproportion of train-
ing instances for it results from the manual anno-
tation of classes, which could not be completely
finished due to time reasons. In order to maintain
the overall distribution, we also had to limit the
number of automatically annotated classes.

Given the observation (see Section 2), we de-
signed features to differentiate between the ways
it and reflexives are translated.

3.1 Features for it
The translation mapping in Figure 1 suggests that
identifying the English type of it might be infor-
mative. We thus constructed a binary coreference-
related feature based on the output of the system
NADA (Bergsma and Yarowsky, 2011) giving an
estimate of whether an instance of it is coreferen-
tial.

Some verbs are more likely to bind with it
that refers to a longer utterance. Such it is rel-
atively consistently translated as a demonstrative
to. However, PCEDT is too small to be a suffi-
cient sample from a distribution over lexical prop-
erties. Hence, we took advantage of CzEng and
collected co-occurrence counts between a seman-
tic role that the given it fills concatenated with a
lemma of its verbal parent and a Czech counter-
part having the same semantic role (denoted as
csit). We filtered out all occurrences where csit
was neither a personal pronoun nor to. For both
possible values of csit a feature is constructed by
looking up frequencies for a concrete occurrence
in the co-occurrence counts collected on CzEng
and quantized into 4-5 bins following the formula:

bin(log(
count(semrole : parent ∧ csit)

count(semrole : parent)count(csit)
)).

Linguistic analysis suggested including syntax-

be

it
subj

obj adj:compl v:to+inf
v:that+fin

be

it
subj

a) b)

Figure 2: Examples of syntactic features capturing typical
constructions with a verb be.

oriented patterns related to the verb to be such as
those shown in Figure 2. For instance, nominal
predicates4 tend to be translated as to even if it
is coreferential. On the other hand, an adjectival
predicate followed by a subordinating clause in-
troduced by the English connectives to or that usu-
ally indicates a pleonastic usage of it translated as
a null subject.

3.2 Features for reflexive pronouns

Here we focused on distinguishing between the
two most frequent meanings (see Section 2.2).
Ideally, the POS tag of the parent would be a
sufficient feature because reflexives in the second
meaning should depend on a noun. However, since
we deal with automatically parsed trees we had to
support the parent POS tag by the POS tag of the
immediately preceding word. Moreover, another
feature indicates if the preceding word is a noun
and agrees with the pronoun in gender and num-
ber.

Furthermore, we observed that sám rarely ap-
pears in other case than nominative. Although this
feature exploits the target side, we can use it since
the case of the governing Czech noun is already
known at the point when reflexives are translated.

Last but not least, the morpho-syntactic pattern
(including a possible preposition) in which the re-
flexive pronoun appears is a valuable feature.

4 Experiments and Evaluation

To mitigate a possible error caused by a wrong
classifier choice, we built several models based on
various Machine Learning classification methods
including Maximum Entropy inplemented in the
AI::MaxEntropy Perl library,5 logistic regression
with one-against-all strategy from Vowpal Wab-
bit6 as well as decision trees, k-NN and SVM from
Scikit-learn library (Pedregosa et al., 2011).

4The verb to be has an object.
5
http://search.cpan.org/˜laye/AI-MaxEntropy-0.20

6
http://hunch.net/˜vw

1039



It Reflexives
Train Test Train Test

Baseline 60.70 59.30 58.70 60.65
AI::MaxEntropy 85.99 76.61 76.37 77.77
VW (passes=20, l2=10e-5) 89.99 76.43 76.98 77.77
sklearn:decision-trees 93.36 73.66 81.78 76.37
sklearn:k-NN (k=10) 82.51 73.30 77.64 76.74
sklearn:SVM (kernel=linear) 90.83 75.51 76.55 78.14

Table 2: Accuracy of both translation models on the training
and test data.

We compare our results with a majority class
baseline (PersPron and Se classes) in Table 2.
The results show a 17% gain when our approach
is used.

The specialized models have been integrated in
the TectoMT system and extrinsically evaluated
on the English-Czech test set for the WMT 2011
Translation Task (Callison-Burch et al., 2011).7

This data set contains 3,003 English sentences
with one Czech reference translation, out of which
430 contain at least one occurrence of it and 52
contain a reflexive pronoun.

The new approach was compared to the origi-
nal TectoMT rule-based pronoun handling heuris-
tics (see Section 1). The shift from the original
settings to the new translation models results in
166 changed sentences with it and 17 changed sen-
tences with English reflexives. In terms of BLEU
score, we observe a marginal drop from 0.1404 to
0.1403 using the new approach. However, BLEU
may be too coarse for this kind of experiment.

In order to give a more realistic view, we car-
ried out a manual evaluation. All 17 modified
sentences for reflexives and 50 randomly sampled
changed sentences containing it were presented to
one annotator who assessed which of the two sys-
tems gave a better translation. Table 3 shows that
improved sentences dominate in both cases. Over-
all, the improved sentences account for around
8.5% of all sentences with it and 23% sentences
containing a reflexive pronoun.

5 Discussion

Looking into the types of improvements and er-
rors in the manually evaluated sentences, we have
found that the new model for it opted for a dif-
ferent translation only in cases where the original
system decided to express to on the surface. In
13 out of 24 improvements, the new model for it
succeeded in correctly resolving the Null class

7
http://www.statmt.org/wmt11/test.tgz

It Reflexives
new better than old 24 12
old better than new 13 0
equal quality 13 5

Table 3: The results of manual evaluation on sentences trans-
lated by TectoMT in the original settings and using the new
translation models

while in the remaining 11 cases, the corrected
class was PersPron. It took advantage mostly
of the syntax-based features in the former case and
the coreference-related feature in the latter.

Regarding the reflexive pronouns the pronoun
was used in its emphasizing meaning in all but two
altered sentences. This accords with the design
of features, which are mainly targeted at revealing
this usage of reflexives. Moreover, the feature in-
dicating if a Czech noun is in nominative case has
proved to be particularly useful, correctly driving
the lexical choice between sám and samotný. The
majority of errors stem from incorrect activation
of syntactic features due to parsing and POS tag-
ging errors.

6 Conclusions

In this work, we presented specialized translation
models for two types of English pronouns: it and
reflexives. Integrating them into an English-Czech
syntax-based MT system TectoMT we succeeded
in improving the concerned sentences measured
by human evaluation.

Generally, it is intractable to design a specific
feature set for every word. However, this work
shows on two examples that the correct transla-
tion of some words depends on many linguistic
aspects, e.g. syntax and coreference and that is
worth taking these aspects into account.

Acknowledgments

This work has been supported by the Grant
Agency of the Czech Republic (grants
P406/12/0658 and P406/2010/0875), the grant
GAUK 4226/2011 and EU FP7 project Khresmoi
(contract no. 257528). This work has been using
language resources developed and/or stored and/or
distributed by the LINDAT-Clarin project of the
Ministry of Education of the Czech Republic
(project LM2010013).

1040



References
Shane Bergsma and David Yarowsky. 2011. NADA:

A Robust System for Non-Referential Pronoun De-
tection. In DAARC, pages 12–23, Faro, Portugal,
October.

Ondřej Bojar, Zdeněk Žabokrtský, Ondřej Dušek, Pe-
tra Galuščáková, Martin Majliš, David Mareček, Jiřı́
Maršı́k, Michal Novák, Martin Popel, and Aleš Tam-
chyna. 2012. The Joy of Parallelism with CzEng
1.0. In Proceedings of LREC 2012, Istanbul, Turkey,
May. ELRA, European Language Resources Associ-
ation.

Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz,
and Omar Zaidan. 2011. Findings of the 2011
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation. In
Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Statisti-
cal Machine Translation, pages 22–64, Edinburgh,
Scotland, July. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Liane Guillou. 2012. Improving Pronoun Translation
for Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings
of the Student Research Workshop at the 13th Con-
ference of the EACL, pages 1–10, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jan Hajič, Eva Hajičová, Jarmila Panevová, Petr Sgall,
Silvie Cinková, Eva Fučı́ková, Marie Mikulová, Petr
Pajas, Jan Popelka, Jiřı́ Semecký, Jana Šindlerová,
Jan Štěpánek, Josef Toman, Zdeňka Urešová, and
Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2011. Prague Czech-English
Dependency Treebank 2.0.

Christian Hardmeier and Marcello Federico. 2010.
Modelling Pronominal Anaphora in Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. In Marcello Federico, Ian Lane,
Michael Paul, and François Yvon, editors, Proceed-
ings of the seventh International Workshop on Spo-
ken Language Translation (IWSLT), pages 283–289.

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical Phrase-based Translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2003 Conference of the NAACL HLT
– Volume 1, pages 48–54, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Ronan Le Nagard and Philipp Koehn. 2010. Aid-
ing Pronoun Translation with Co-Reference Resolu-
tion. In Proceedings of the Joint Fifth Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation and MetricsMATR,
pages 252–261, Uppsala, Sweden, July. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

David Mareček, Zdeněk Žabokrtský, and Václav
Novák. 2008. Automatic Alignment of Czech and
English Deep Syntactic Dependency Trees. In Pro-
ceedings of the Twelfth EAMT Conference, pages
102–111.

Izak Morin. 2009. Translating Pronouns, Proper
Names and Kinship Terms from Indonesian into En-
glish and vice versa. TEFLIN Journal: A publica-
tion on the teaching and learning of English, 16(2).

Kristýna Onderková. 2010. Possessive Pronouns in
English and Czech Works of Fiction, Their Use with
Parts of Human Body and Translation. Master’s the-
sis, Masaryk University, Faculty of Arts.

Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gram-
fort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier
Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron
Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, Jake Vanderplas, Alexan-
dre Passos, David Cournapeau, Matthieu Brucher,
Matthieu Perrot, and Édouard Duchesnay. 2011.
Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. Jour-
nal of Machine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830,
November.

Petr Sgall, Eva Hajičová, and Jarmila Panevová. 1986.
The Meaning of the Sentence in Its Semantic and
Pragmatic Aspects. D. Reidel Publishing Company,
Dordrecht.

Petr Sgall. 1967. Generativnı́ popis jazyka a česká
deklinace. Academia, Prague, Czech Republic.

Zdeněk Žabokrtský, Jan Ptáček, and Petr Pajas. 2008.
TectoMT: Highly Modular MT System with Tec-
togrammatics Used as Transfer Layer. In Proceed-
ings of the Third Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation, pages 167–170, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

1041


