










































Introducing the Prague Discourse Treebank 1.0


International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 91–99,
Nagoya, Japan, 14-18 October 2013.

Introducing the Prague Discourse Treebank 1.0

Lucie Poláková, Jiří Mírovský, Anna Nedoluzhko, Pavlína Jínová,
Šárka Zikánová and Eva Hajičová

Charles University in Prague
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics

Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
Czech Republic

{polakova|mirovsky|nedoluzko|jinova|zikanova|hajicova}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Abstract

We  present  the  Prague  Discourse  Treebank 
1.0, a collection of Czech texts annotated for 
various discourse-related phenomena "beyond 
the sentence boundary". The treebank contains 
manual annotations of (1), discourse connect-
ives,  their  arguments  and senses,  (2),  textual 
coreference,  and  (3),  bridging  anaphora,  all 
carried out on 50k sentences of the treebank. 
Contrary to most similar projects, the annota-
tion was performed directly on top of syntactic 
trees (from the previous project of the Prague 
Dependency  Treebank  2.5),  benefiting  thus 
from the linguistic information already exist-
ing on the same data. In this article, we present 
our  theoretical  background,  describe  the  an-
notations in detail, and offer evaluation num-
bers and corpus statistics.

1 Introduction and Motivation

Large collections of gold standard language data 
are  known  to  build  an  indispensable  base  for 
many  NLP  algorithms.  Reliable  morphological 
tagging  and  syntactic  analysis  (phrasal  or  de-
pendency) are nowadays quite a standard inform-
ation in  language corpora  released all  over  the 
world. With the gradually increasing interest in 
modeling discourse  structure  or  using  various 
discourse features1 in different NLP tasks  (ana-
phora resolution,  summarization,  MT),  also the 
development of resources aimed at representing 
various discourse-related aspects has gained on 
importance. Moreover, both theoretical discourse 
research and NLP algorithms can benefit from a 
reliable  multi-dimensional analysis  of  the data 
(Webber  et  al.,  2003,  Stede,  2004).  There  are 
already several elaborate theoretical concepts on 
1 The term of discourse in this paper is used in two mean-
ings. The broader interpretation is roughly equal to text (as 
in discourse structure, discourse features  or discourse co-
herence) whereas the narrower sense denotes semantic rela-
tions between propositions (as in discourse relations).

discourse coherence brought to life in real-data 
annotation (see Sections  1.1 and  1.2).  Still, it is 
only in recent years that large-scale corpora with 
manual  annotations  of  sentential  and discourse 
level  phenomena  have  become  available.  Even 
fewer  such  corpora  exist  that  combine  more 
types of manual discourse-level annotations.

In this paper, we present a large-scale manual 
annotation project for Czech in which, apart from 
the "standard" analysis  of  a  sentence (morpho-
logy,  synctactic  trees),  several  discourse  phe-
nomena are marked, all over the same data: pro-
nominal,  nominal  and  zero2 coreference,  dis-
course connectives (henceforth DCs) and the se-
mantic relations they express, and the associative 
relations of the so-called bridging anaphora.

The paper is structured as follows: In Sections 
1.1 and  1.2,  brief  overviews of  recent  projects 
concerning discourse relations and coreference + 
bridging anaphora are described, respectively. In 
Section 2,  data  and  tools  used  in  Prague  Dis-
course  Treebank  (PDiT)  are  introduced.  Sec-
tion 3 describes  the  annotation  scenario  and  is 
followed by evaluation of the project in compar-
ison with similar  projects (Section 4) and basic 
distribution  numbers  (Section 5).  We  conclude 
with discussion (Section 6).

1.1 Corpora of Discourse Relations

The first attempts in representing discourse struc-
ture date over a decade back. One of very first 
and most influential projects was the RST-Tree-
bank (Carlson et al., 2001), an annotation project 
over the English texts of Wall Street  Journal. In 
accordance with the Rhetorical Structure Theory 
of Mann and Thompson (1988), the whole docu-
ment is represented as a single tree-like structure. 
Wolf  and  Gibson  (2005)  propose  a  less  con-

2 Czech is a pro-drop language. The restored ellipses in the 
underlying sentence analysis allow us to annotate zero 
forms as co-referential.

91



strained model in Discourse Graphbank by giv-
ing up the requirement of a tree-structure. These 
approaches  are  referred  to  as  "deep  discourse 
parsing" or modeling of global coherence (whole 
document = one connected structure) in contrast 
to  the  so-called "shallow discourse  parsing" or 
local coherence modeling of the lexically groun-
ded approaches,  which are based on identifica-
tion of discourse markers and relations they ex-
press.  The  most  influential  of  the  latter  is  the 
Penn  Discourse  Treebank  (for  English,  PDTB, 
Prasad et. al., 2008) with several subsequent sim-
ilarly aimed corpora for different languages, the 
project presented here being one of them. 

Resources manually annotated for (some type 
of) discourse phenomena are already available or 
work-in-progress for  various languages,  includ-
ing Chinese (Zhou and Xue, 2012), Arabic (Al-
Saif and Markert, 2010), Turkish (Zeyrek et al., 
2010),  Hindi  (Oza  et  al.,  2009),  French 
(Afantenos et al., 2012, Danlos et al., 2012), Ger-
man (Stede, 2004, Gastel et al., 2011) and others. 
Additionally, the relevance of the PDTB annota-
tion concept  was further tested on specific  do-
mains, e.g. on spoken dialogs (Italian, Tonelli et 
al.,  2010)  and  on  biomedical  texts  (English, 
Prasad et al., 2011).

1.2 Corpora  of Coreference  and  Bridging 
Relations

There is a number of different large-scale annot-
ated corpora for coreference and anaphoric rela-
tions. The largest annotated corpora for English 
include MUC (Hirschman and Chinchor, 1997), 
ACE (Doddington et al., 2004), OntoNotes (Pra-
dhan et al., 2007), GNOME (Poesio, 2004), AR-
RAU (Poesio and Artstein, 2008). The corefer-
ence annotations for other languages than Eng-
lish are more limited. The most well-known cor-
pora  including  anaphoric  information  are 

AnCora (Recasens and Martí, 2009) for Spanish 
and Catalan, VENEX (Poesio et al., 2004a) for 
spoken  and  written  Italian,  the  Italian  Live 
Memories  Corpus  (Rodríguez  et  al.,  2010), 
TüBA-D/Z (Hinrichs et al., 2004) and Postdam 
Commentary Corpus  (Stede,  2004,  Krasavina 
and Chiarcos, 2007) for German, and some oth-
ers.

Early work on bridging relations dates back to 
the  mid-70s. Clark  (1975)  documents  several 
ways in which an inference is needed to under-
stand the meaning intended by the speaker. Clark 
names several types of bridging relations such as 
set-membership,  part-whole,  roles,  reasons  and 
consequences. Bridging relations have been later 
investigated by Poesio et al. (1997, 2004b). The 
annotation of bridging relations in different pro-
jects includes different types of relations. In the 
GNOME  corpus  (Poesio,  2004),  such  bridging 
relations  as  set-membership,  subset,  and  part-
whole are annotated. The Copenhagen Depend-
ency  Treebank  (Korzen  and  Buch-Kromann, 
2011)  has  a  very  detailed  annotation  scheme 
based on general semantic roles. Another way to 
capture  bridging  relations  is  to  define  them 
vaguely,  e.g. as a reference which is made to a 
subpart of an object that has already been men-
tioned in the discourse (Hendrickx et al., 2011) 
or  to  mark  as  bridging  all  non-coreferent  ana-
phoric references. The last approach was used in 
Hou et al. (2013), providing a reasonably sized 
and reliably annotated corpus for English.

To our knowledge, there are only few corpus 
projects portraying phenomena "beyond the sen-
tence  boundary"  that  gather  different  types  of 
textual  information,  or,  in  other  words,  offer 
some  kind  of  multi-dimensional  discourse  an-
notation. The texts of Wall Street Journal have 
undergone  various  annotations  but  they  arose 
within different projects and frameworks –  rhet-

Figure 1. Annotation of two sentences. Discourse relations are represented by thick orange arrows, textual corefer-
ence by dark blue slim arrows, bridging anaphora by light blue slim arrows. Grammatical coreference (the only 
one in the figure is between nodes co [what] and upouštět [to abandon]) is represented by a brown slim arrow.

92



orical  structure  analysis  in  RST-Treebank (385 
WSJ articles),  Discourse  Graphbank (135 texts 
from AP Newswire  and WSJ),  Penn Discourse 
Treebank 2.0 (2,159 WSJ articles), OntoNotes (a 
substantial  portion  of  the  WSJ-Penn  Treebank 
annotated  for  coreference)  etc.  A  multi-dimen-
sional analysis within a single project was con-
ducted for French in AnnoDis (Afantenos et al. 
2012, an intersection of all annotations on 13 art-
icles), for  German in the Potsdam Commentary 
Corpus  (Stede,  2004,  170  texts),  and  lately  in 
TüBa-D/Z (Gastel et al., 2011, 919 sentences in 
31  articles).  These  projects  include  inter  alia 
some particular version of a "global" discourse 
analysis,  annotation  of  connectives  and  their 
senses, and coreference annotation.

2 Data and Tools

As the base data for the annotation, we used the 
Prague Dependency Treebank 2.5 (PDT, Bejček 
et al.,  2012), which is an update of the Prague 
Dependency Treebank 2.0 (Hajič et al., 2006). It 
is a treebank of almost 50 thousand sentences of 
Czech newspaper  texts,  annotated  manually on 
three levels of annotation: morphological, analyt-
ical  and tectogrammatical.  The annotation of  a 
sentence  at  the  highest,  tectogrammatical  layer 
captures  the  deep  syntax  and  the  information 
structure of a sentence and is  represented by a 
dependency tree.

For the annotation of discourse relations, tex-
tual coreference and bridging anaphora, we used 
several extensions to a highly customizable tree 
editor TrEd (Pajas and Štěpánek, 2008). Technic-
ally, each of the annotated relations is represen-
ted as an arrow connecting two tectogrammatical 
nodes.  The  two nodes  represent  the  two  argu-
ments of the relation, i.e. typically the subtrees of 
the nodes. All information about the relation is 
kept in a set of dedicated attributes at the initial 
node of the relation, containing a unique identifi-
er of the target node of the relation, type of the 
relation,  and  other  pieces  of  information  (de-
pending on the relation, e.g. a connective for the 

discourse relation). The relation is depicted as a 
curved arrow between the nodes,  see  Figure 1. 
For details on the annotation tool for discourse, 
see Mírovský et al. (2010a), for details on the an-
notation tool for textual coreference and bridging 
anaphora, see Mírovský et al. (2010b).

3 Annotation
The following subsections  3.1 and  3.2 describe 
the annotation principles for the two subprojects 
in  PDiT,  the  annotation  of  discourse  relations 
and  the  annotation  of  textual  coreference  and 
bridging anaphora.  Detailed descriptions  of  the 
annotation guidelines can be found in annotation 
manuals (Poláková et al., 2012a, Nedoluzhko et 
al., 2011). Figure 1 shows the annotation of two 
sentences in Example 1 in all these aspects.

(1)  Zato  londýnská  Chelsea  je  velkou  neznámou  
nejen  pro  Viktorii  Žižkov.  Podle  zpráv  však 
anglický  klub  upouští  od  typického  ostrovního  
fotbalu, což by mohlo být výhodou.

But  then  London Chelsea  is  a  big  unknown  not  
only  for  Victoria  Žižkov.  According  to  reports,  
however, the English club abandons the typical is-
land football, which could be an advantage.

3.1 Discourse
Annotating  discourse  relations  in  PDiT  is  in-
spired by the PDTB lexical approach of connect-
ive identification (Prasad et. al., 2008) but it also 
takes  advantage  of  the  Prague  tradition  of  de-
pendency  treebanking.  This  means  in  practice 
that some discourse information (intra-sentential) 
could have been extracted from the previous rich 
annotation of syntax, with only minor enhance-
ments (Jínová et al., 2012b). In the first release 
of PDiT, we only focused on discourse relations 
indicated by overly present  (explicit)  discourse 
connectives,  i.e.  expressions like  but,  however,  
as  a  result,  even  though etc.3 Every  DC  is 
thought  of  as  a  discourse-level  predicate  that 
3 Some remarks on annotation of the implicit DCs and of the 
so-called alternative lexicalizations of connectives (AltLex) 
are added in the discussion in Section 6.

TEMPORAL CONTINGENCY CONTRAST EXPANSION
synchronous reason – result confrontation conjunction
asynchronous pragmatic reason – result opposition exemplification

condition pragmatic contrast specification
pragmatic condition restrictive opposition equivalence
explication concession generalization
purpose correction conjunctive alternative

gradation disjunctive alternative

Table 1: Distribution of discourse types in the data

93



takes two discourse units as its arguments. Only 
discourse relations connecting clausal arguments 
(with  a  predicate  verb),  i.e.  not  those  between 
nominalizations or deictic expressions were an-
notated in version 1.0.  Additionally,  the Prague 
discourse  annotation  includes  marking  of  list 
structures (as a separate type of discourse struc-
ture) and marking of some smaller text phenom-
ena: article headings,  figure captions, non-coher-
ent texts like collections of news etc. 

The annotation of discourse relations consisted 
of two phases,  first  being manual  and the sub-
sequent including automatic extraction of relev-
ant  syntactic features.  For the manual  part, the 
annotators  had at  their  disposal  both plain text 
and the tree structures, the annotation itself was 
carried  out  on  syntactic  (tectogrammatical)  de-
pendency trees, as we did not want to lose con-
nection with and information from the analyses 
of previous levels. Intra-sentential discourse rela-
tions,  i.e.  those that  had already been captured 
within the syntactic (tectogrammatical) analysis, 
were  only  to  be  newly  annotated  if  their  dis-
course  semantics  differed from  the  tectogram-
matical interpretation (Jínová et al., 2012b), oth-
erwise  they  were  automatically  extracted  and 
mapped onto the discourse annotation.

Automatic Extraction of Syntactic Features
An automatic procedure was designed to extract 
discourse-relevant  features  from  the  syntactic 
level of description, i.e. the intra-sentential dis-
course relations. As mentioned earlier, the tecto-
grammatical tree structures offer some types of 
information  that  can  be  transferred  to  the  dis-
course-level annotation. In general, this concerns 
subordinate  syntactic  relations  between  clauses 
with labels like causality, conditionality, tempor-
ality,  concession  etc.;  and  coordinate  syntactic 
relations between clauses of one sentence with 
selected coordinative labels like conjunction, dis-
junction,  opposition  or  contrast,  confrontation 
etc.  These  relations  were  semi-automatically 
mapped onto the discourse annotation. (Jínová et 
al., 2012b).

Semantic labels
The Prague discourse label set was inspired by 
the tectogrammatical  functors (Mikulová et  al., 
2005)  and  also  by  Penn  sense  tag  hierarchy 
(Miltsakaki et al., 2008). Table 1 shows the dis-
course-semantic label set used for PDiT 1.0. The 
four  main  semantic  classes,  Temporal,  Contin-
gency, Contrast (Comparison) and Expansion are 
identical to those in PDTB but the hierarchy it-

self is only two-level. The third level is captured 
by the direction of the discourse arrow. The an-
notators, unlike in the Penn approach, were not 
allowed to only assign the major class, they al-
ways had to decide for a single relation within 
one of the classes.4 Within these four classes, the 
types of the relations partly differ from the Penn 
types and go closer to Prague tectogrammatical 
functors and/or are a matter of language-specific 
distinctions. Compared to the PDTB label set, we 
added the categories of  purpose and  explication 
in the Contingency group and restrictive opposi-
tion and  gradation to the Contrast group.  In the 
PDTB,  four  pragmatic  meanings  are  distin-
guished and annotated:  pragmatic cause, condi-
tion,  contrast and  concession.  In  the  Prague 
scenario, three pragmatic senses were annotated, 
pragmatic  concession  and  pragmatic  contrast 
joined to one group, for the lack of reliable dis-
tinctive features.5

Post-annotation checks and fixes
After  the  manual  annotation  of  discourse  rela-
tions was finished, some checks turned up to be 
necessary,  especially for relations whose nature 
revealed to be more complicated in real data than 
we had expected on the basis of linguistic hand-
books.  After  having  collected  all  examples  of 
these relations (namely specification, explication, 
generalization,  exemplification and  equivalence) 
in our data and established more complex defini-
tions of their nature, annotation of these relations 
was  manually  unified  in  the  whole  data.  Also 
some DCs required unification via post-annota-
tion. Additionally, the part of the data which was 
annotated first was fully re-annotated at the end 
since we expected it  might  have suffered from 
initial inexperience of the annotators.

Results  of  the  automatic  extraction  were 
checked  randomly  on  several  hundreds  of  ex-
amples. All discrepancies found were integrated 
in  an  automatic  script  (treatment  of  multiple 
DCs, multiple coordinations etc.). Only two situ-
ations required manual checks and fixes: i) Due 
to a complicated situation in a tree, the automatic 
extraction failed in 23 cases of DC identification 
(opposed to 10,482 cases with correct identifica-
tion). ii) Solely manual treatment was necessary 
for constructions with a discourse-relevant clause 
dependent on a complex predicate structure with 
4 In special cases, they had the option to assign an additional 
secondary relation.
5 It may be that different text types require slightly different 
sets of semantic labels. For instance, some discourse pro-
jects use a more fine-grained set of pragmatic senses (e.g. 
for spoken dialogs).

94



an infinitive or a noun phrase. In such cases only 
semantics allowed to distinguish if the clause is 
related to the whole structure or only to the infin-
itive or noun phrase.6 

3.2 Coreference and Bridging Relations

In PDiT 1.0, two types of coreference  (grammat-
ical and textual) and six types of bridging rela-
tions are marked. The grammatical coreference 
typically  occurs  within  a  single  sentence,  the 
antecedent being able to be derived on the basis 
of  grammatical  rules  of  a  given  language 
(Czech). It  includes relative pronouns, verbs of 
control,   reflexive  pronouns,  reciprocity  and 
verbal  complements  (Mikulová  et  al.,  2005). 
Textual  coreference marks  coreferential  rela-
tions between language expressions referring to 
the same discourse entity when the reference is 
not expressed  by grammatical means alone, but 
also  via  context.  Anaphoric  (occasionally cata-
phoric)  relations  are  expressed  by  various  lin-
guistic means (pronouns, synonyms, generalizing 
nouns etc.).  Textual coreference has been annot-
ated in two time periods. First, the so-called pro-
nominal textual coreference was manually annot-
ated. It was restricted to cases in which a demon-
strative  this or an anaphoric pronoun of the 3rd 
person, also in its zero form, are used (Kučová 
and Hajičová,  2004). Afterwards, the annotation 
of  textual  coreference  was  extended  to  cases 
where the anaphoric expression is represented by 
other means such as full noun phrases, adverbs 
(there, then etc.) and some types of numerals and 
pronouns  left  out  during  the  first  stage  (Ne-
doluzhko et al., 2013). 

The  textual  coreference  is  further  classified 
into  two  types  –  coreference  of  noun  phrases 
with specific (type SPEC) or generic (type GEN) 
reference. Compare examples (2) and (3):

(2) Mary and John went together to Israel, but  
Mary [type SPEC] had to return because of the ill-
ness.

(3) Dogs bark. This is the way how they [type 
GEN] express their emotions. 

Discourse  deixis (reference  to  a  non-nominal 
antecedent) is annotated as a textual coreference 
link when referring to a clause or a sentence. If a 
noun phrase endophorically refers to a discourse 
segment that is larger than one sentence or it is 
understood  by  inferencing  from a  broader  co-
text, the antecedent is not specified.7 

6 For more details, see Jínová et al. (2012b).

A specifically marked link for  exophora de-
notes that the referent is "out" of the co-text, it is 
known  only  from  the  actual  situation.  In  the 
same way as for segments, the new nominal and 
adverbial links were added. 

For  the  bridging  relations,  the  following 
types are distinguished: part-of relation (room  -  
ceiling),  set – subset (students  –  some students) 
and FUNCT  (trainer  –  football team)  tradi-
tional relations, CONTRAST for coherence rel-
evant discourse opposites (e.g.  this year – next  
year),  ANAF  for  explicitly  anaphoric  relations 
without coreference (second world war – at that  
time)  and  the  further  underspecified  group 
REST,  which  is  mainly  used  to  capture  such 
types of bridging relations as location – inhabit-
ants or  event  – argument.  A more detailed de-
scription  of  the  types  can  be  found  in  Ne-
doluzhko and Mírovský (2011).

Automatic Preannotation
For the textual coreference, only a limited pre-
annotation  was  carried  out:  We  used  a  list  of 
pairs of words that with a high probability form a 
coreferential pair in texts. Most of the pairs in the 
list  consist  of  a  noun  and  a  derived  adjective, 
which  are  different  in  Czech,  e.g.  Praha  – 
pražský (in English: Prague – Prague, like in the 
sentence:  He arrived in  Prague and found the  
Prague atmosphere quite casual). The rest of the 
list is formed by pairs consisting of an abbrevi-
ation  and  its  one-word  expansion,  e.g.  ČR  – 
Česko (similarly in English: USA – States). The 
whole list consists of more than 6 thousand pairs 
obtained  automatically  from the  morphological 
synthesizer  for  Czech,  manually  checked  and 
slightly extended.

4 Inter-Annotator Agreement

Several annotators annotated the data but (for ob-
vious reasons of limited resources) each part of 
the data has only been annotated by one of them. 
Only 4% of the data (44 documents, 2,084 sen-
tences) have been annotated in parallel  by two 
annotators  of  discourse  relations,  and  3%  (39 
documents,  1,606  sentences)  have  been  annot-
ated in parallel by two annotators of textual core-
ference and bridging anaphora. We used the par-
allel (double) annotations for measuring the in-
ter-annotator  agreement,  and  for  analyzing  the 
most common errors, i.e. difficult parts of the an-
notation.
7 This decision is considered to be provisional. The ante-
cedents are supposed to be specified in further phases of the 
annotation.

95



To evaluate the inter-annotator agreement on 
texts annotated in parallel by two annotators, we 
used several measures. The connective-based F1-
measure (Mírovský et  al.,  2010c) was used  for 
measuring the agreement on the recognition of a 
discourse  relation,  the  chain-based  F1-measure 
was used for measuring the agreement on the re-
cognition of a coreference or bridging relation. A 
simple ratio and Cohen's κ were used for measur-
ing the agreement on the type of the relations in 
cases where the annotators recognized the same 
relation.8

In the connective-based measure, we consider 
the annotators to be in agreement on recognizing 
a discourse relation if the two connectives they 
mark (each of the connectives marked by one of 
the  annotators)  have  a  non-empty  intersection 
(technically, a connective is a set of tree nodes). 
For details, see Jínová et al. (2012a).

In the chain-based measure,  we consider the 
annotators to be in agreement on recognizing a 
coreference or a bridging relation if two nodes 
connected by an arrow by one of the annotators 
have also been connected by the other annotator; 
coreference chains are taken into account, i.e. it 
is sufficient for the agreement if the arrow starts 
in or goes to a node that is coreferentially con-
nected (possibly transitively) with the node used 
for the relation by the other annotator.

Table 2 shows the results of the inter-annotat-
or agreement measurements.

relation F1 agreementon types Cohen's κ

discourse 0.83 0.77 0.71
text. coref. 0.72 0.90 0.73
bridging 0.46 0.92 0.89

Table 2: Inter-annotator agreement

Comparison  of  the  inter-annotator  agreement 
with other similar projects is difficult, as the pro-
jects  usually  use  different  annotation  schemes 
and different scores. Nevertheless, some compar-
isons can be done:

The simple  ratio  agreement  on types  in  dis-
course  relations  (0.77  on  all  parallel  data,  the 
third column of Table 2) is the closest measure to 
the way of measuring the inter-annotator agree-
ment  used on subsenses in the Penn Discourse 
Treebank 2.0,  reported  in  Prasad  et  al.  (2008). 
Their agreement was 0.8.

8 In all our measurements, only inter-sentential discourse re-
lations have been counted, as the intra-sentential relations 
were mostly annotated automatically.

In  the  annotation  of  coreference  relations  in 
OntoNotes,  the  inter-annotator  agreement  on 
English was 80.9 for newspaper texts and 78.4 
for magazine texts.  On Chinese,  the agreement 
was  73.6  for  newspaper  texts  and  74.9  for 
magazine texts (reported in Pradhan et al. 2012). 
These numbers can be compared with our chain-
based F1 measure (0.72 in the second column of 
Table 2), as it is similar to the MUC-6 score they 
used.

As to the bridging anaphora, we can compare 
our  chain-based  F1  score  (0.46  in  the  second 
column of Table 2) to F1 score on recognition of 
bridging relations reported for the annotation of 
the  COREA corpus  (Dutch  texts);  their  agree-
ment on newspaper texts was 0.39 (reported in 
Hendrickx et al., 2011).

5 The Corpus in Numbers9

Table 3 shows total numbers  of annotated rela-
tions in the whole data of PDiT.

relation count
discourse relations 20,542
 - discourse inter-sentential 6,195
 - discourse intra-sentential 14,347
textual coreference 87,299
grammatical coreference10 23,272
bridging anaphora 33,154

Table 3: Total numbers of annotated relations in PDiT

bridging type count
ANAF 847
CONTRAST 2,305
FUNCT_P 516
PART_WHOLE 2,017
P_FUNCT 1,743
REST 2,226
SET_SUB 13,106
SUB_SET 5,885
WHOLE_PART 4,509
total 33,154

Table 4: Distribution of bridging types in PDiT

In addition to the numbers in Table 3, there have 
been  annotated  445  members  of  lists,  4,188 
headings, 1,505 coreference relations to segment 
and 689 references  out  of  the  text  (exophora). 

9 Please note that 1/10 if the PDT/PDiT data has been desig-
nated to evaluation tests. Numbers presented in this section 
include also this part of the data. Therefore, these numbers 
should not be used in any experiments tested on the evalu-
ation test data of PDT/PDiT!
10 mostly annotated already in PDT

96



Table 4 shows  a  distribution  of  bridging  types 
annotated in PDiT. Table 5 shows the total num-
ber  of  individual  discourse  types  annotated  in 
PDiT.

discourse type full name count
conc concession 878
cond condition 1,369
confr confrontation 654
conj conjunction 7,551
conjalt conj. alternative 90
corr correction 440
disjalt disj. alternative 270
equiv equivalence 104
exempl exemplification 142
explicat explication 225
f_cond pragm. condition 16
f_opp pragm. contrast 50
f_reason pragm. reason 40
gener generalization 106
grad gradation 430
opp opposition 3,209
preced asynchronous 808
purp purpose 414
reason reason-result 2,626
restr restr. opposition 269
spec specification 627
synchr synchronous 222
other other 2
total 20,542

Table 5: Distribution of discourse types in PDiT

6 Discussion 

In the first release of PDiT, the annotation of dis-
course relations is limited to relations expressed 
by  explicit  DCs  (coordinating  conjunctions, 
particles, adverbs etc.), other tags between adja-
cent sentences were not inserted, unlike in some 
similar  projects. Alternative  lexicalizations 
(AltLex) are not annotated in PDiT,  their  thor-
ough analysis is a recent work in progress. En-
tity-based relations (EntRel) are, in our view, a 
matter of coreference and bridging annotation.

Implicit connectives 
Annotation of  implicit  connectives  has been in 
all  known  attempts  a  problematic  task,  as  the 
IAA numbers  are rather low. For implicit  con-
nectives (not present on the surface, a DC must 
be "inferred" from the context), we conducted an 
experimental annotation of 100 sentences, trying 
to remove factors known as repeatedly disturb-
ing.11 The annotators agreed in 49% on type of 
11 The annotation was carried out by two most experienced 
annotators, the chosen text types were from an accessible 
domain (cultural event description), the texts were short, up 

the relation. If only the distinction between  any 
discourse  relation  on  one  side  and  coref  + 
bridging relation on the other side was taken into 
consideration, the agreement was slightly higher 
– 58%. The most problematic issue revealed to 
be  distinguishing  between  elaborative  relations 
and relations based only on coreference. The re-
striction of the annotation only to slots between 
adjacent sentences was found useful for simplify-
ing the annotation but it did not always match the 
annotators' intuition where the argument borders 
should be (e.g. if only the sentence-last depend-
ent clause relates to the following sentence). Al-
though the annotators were able to agree in most 
cases after discussion, the results convinced us to 
reconsider the annotation setting for implicit DCs 
before any future annotation. 

Another phenomenon not present in PDiT in 
comparison  with  PDTB  is  attribution.  We  be-
lieve that this information can be at least partially 
obtained from syntactic features of the syntactic 
layers of PDT (e.g. attributes for direct speech, 
parentheses, verbal valency etc.).

7 Conclusion

We  described  the  Prague  Discourse  Tree-
bank 1.0, PDiT 1.0, a large collection of Czech 
texts that offers a rare combination of manual an-
notations of discourse relations, textual corefer-
ence and bridging anaphora.  PDiT 1.0 is an ex-
tension of PDT 2.5 and all the annotation presen-
ted in this paper was carried out on the depend-
ency trees of the tectogrammatical (deep syntax) 
layer. It was released in November 2012 under 
the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommer-
cial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License  and it  is 
available  at  the  LINDAT-Clarin  repository12 
(Poláková et al., 2012b).

Recently,  we focus on extensions of  the  an-
notation for the upcoming release of PDT 3.0. A 
genre  classification  of  the  corpus  texts  for  the 
purposes of data clustering in automatic experi-
ments has been finished.  Annotation of alternat-
ive  lexicalizations  (AltLex)  and  anaphoric  ex-
pressions of 1st and 2nd person are in progress.

Acknowledgment

We  gratefully  acknowledge  support  from  the 
Grant Agency of the Czech Republic (projects n.

to 35 sentences each. Another option would be to underspe-
cify the sense hierarchy but we did not do that. Instead, we 
allowed for labels coref, bridging (=EntRel) and NoRel.
12 http://hdl.handle.net/11858/00-097C-0000-0008-E130-A

97



P406/12/0658 and P406/2010/0875), the  LIND-
AT-Clarin project (LM2010013) and SVV of the 
Charles University (267 314).

References 
S. D. Afantenos, N. Asher, F. Benamara et al. 2012. 

An  empirical  resource  for  discovering  cognitive 
principles  of  discourse  organization:  the 
ANNODIS corpus. In: Proceedings of LREC 2012, 
Istanbul, Turkey. 

A. Al-Saif, K. Markert. 2010. The Leeds Arabic Dis-
course Treebank: Annotating discourse connectives 
for Arabic. In: Proceedings of the 7th International  
Conference  on  Language  Resources  and  Evalu-
ation  (LREC  2010),  Valletta,  Malta,  pp.  2046–
2053.

E. Bejček, J. Panevová, J. Popelka et al. 2012. Prague 
Dependency Treebank 2.5 – a revisited version of 
PDT 2.0. In: Proceedings of the 24th International  
Conference on Computational Linguistics (Coling  
2012), Mumbai, India, pp. 231–246.

L. Carlson, D. Marcu, M. E. Okurowski. 2001. Build-
ing a discourse-tagged corpus in the framework of 
rhetorical  structure theory.  In  Proceedings of  the  
2nd  SIGDIAL  Workshop  on  Discourse  and  Dia-
logue, Eurospeech 2001.

H. H. Clark. 1975. Bridging. In:  The Conference on 
Theoretical Issues in NLP, pp. 169–174.

L. Danlos, D. Antolinos-Basso, C. Braud et al. 2012. 
Vers  le  FDTB:  French  Discourse  Tree  Bank  In: 
Actes  de  la  conférence  conjointe  JEP-TALN-RE-
CITAL, Grenoble, France, volume 2 : TALN, 2, pp. 
471–478.

G. Doddington, A. Mitchell, M. Przybocki et al. 2004. 
The Automatic Content Extraction (ACE) program 
– tasks,  data,  and  evaluation.  In:  Proceedings  of  
LREC 2004, Lisbon.

A. Gastel, S. Schulze, Y. Versley et al. 2011. Annota-
tion of Explicit and Implicit Discourse Relations in 
the  TüBa-D/Z  Treebank.  In:  Multilingual  Re-
sources  and  Multilingual  Applications,  Proceed-
ings of the German Society of Computational Lin-
guistics and Language Technology (GSCL) 2011. 
Hamburg, pp. 99–104.  

J. Hajič, J. Panevová, E. Hajičová et al. 2006. Prague 
Dependency  Treebank  2.0. Software  prototype, 
Linguistic  Data  Consortium,  Philadelphia,  PA, 
USA, ISBN 1-58563-370-4,  http://www.ldc.upen-
n.edu, Jul 2006.

I. Hendrickx, O. De Clercq, V. Hoste. 2011. Analysis 
and  Reference  Resolution  of  Bridge  Anaphora 
across  Different  Text  Genres.  In:  Anaphora Pro-
cessing and Applications. Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science Volume 7099, pp. 1–11.

E. Hinrichs, S. Kübler; K. Naumann et al. 2004. Re-
cent developments in linguistic annotations of the 

TüBa-D/Z treebank.  In  Proceedings  of  the Third 
Workshop on Treebanks  and Linguistic Theories. 
Tübingen.

L.  Hirschman,  N. Chinchor.  1997.  MUC-7 Corefer-
ence Task Definition – Version 3.0.

Y. Hou, K. Markert, M. Strube. 2013. Integrating se-
mantics and saliences for brodging resolution using 
Markov logic. In NAACL 2013 to appear.

P. Jínová, J. Mírovský, L. Poláková. 2012a. Analyz-
ing the Most Common Errors in the Discourse An-
notation of the Prague Dependency Treebank. In: 
Proceedings  of  the  11th  International  Workshop  
on  Treebanks  and  Linguistic  Theories  (TLT  11), 
Lisbon, Portugal, November 2012.

P.  Jínová,  J.  Mírovský,  L.  Poláková.  2012b.  Semi-
Automatic Annotation of Intra-sentential Discourse 
Relations in PDT. In: Proceedings of the 24th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics  
(COLING  2012),  ADACA  Discourse  Workshop,  
Mumbai, India, December 2012.

I. Korzen, M. Buch-Kromann. 2011. Anaphoric rela-
tions in the Copenhagen dependency treebanks. In: 
Beyond Semantics: Corpus-based Investigations of  
Pragmatic  and  Discourse  Phenomena. DGfS 
Workshop, pp. 83–98.

O. Krasavina, Ch. Chiarcos. 2007. PoCoS –Potsdam 
Coreference  Scheme.  In  Proceedings  of  the  Lin-
guistic Annotation Workshop, Prague.

L. Kučová, E. Hajičová. 2004. Coreferential Relations 
in the Prague Dependency Treebank. In  Proceed-
ings of the 5th Discourse Anaphora and Anaphor  
Resolution Colloquium, S. Miguel.

W.C. Mann, S. A. Thompson. 1988. Rhetorical struc-
ture theory. Toward a functional theory of text or-
ganization. In: Text, 8(3):243–281.

M.  Mikulová  et  al.  2005.  Annotation  on  the  tecto-
grammatical  layer  in  the  Prague  Dependency  
Treebank. The  Annotation  Guidelines. Prague: 
UFAL  MFF.  Available  at: 
http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.0/doc/manuals/en/t-layer/html/in-
dex.html.

E. Miltsakaki, L. Robaldo, A. Lee et al. 2008. Sense 
Annotation  in  the  Penn  Discourse  Treebank.  In: 
Proceedings  of  the  9th  International  Conference  
on Intelligent Text Processing and Computational  
Linguistics.

J. Mírovský, L. Mladová, Z. Žabokrtský. 2010a. An-
notation Tool for Discourse in PDT. In:  Proceed-
ings of the 23rd International Conference on Com-
putational  Linguistics  (Coling  2010),  Tsinghua 
University Press, Beijing, China, ISBN 978-7-302-
23456-2, pp. 9–12.

J.  Mírovský,  P.  Pajas,  A.  Nedoluzhko.  2010b.  An-
notation  Tool  for  Extended  Textual  Coreference 
and Bridging Anaphora. In: Proceedings of the 7th  
International Conference on Language Resources  

98



and  Evaluation  (LREC  2010),  Valletta,  Malta, 
ISBN 2-9517408-6-7, pp. 168–171.

J. Mírovský,  L. Mladová, Š. Zikánová. 2010c. Con-
nective-Based  Measuring  of  the  Inter-Annotator 
Agreement in the Annotation of Discourse in PDT. 
In:  Proceedings of the 23rd International Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics (Coling 2010), 
Tsinghua  University  Press,  Beijing,  China,   pp. 
775–781.

A.  Nedoluzhko,  J.  Mírovský,  M.  Novák.  2013.  A 
Coreferentially  annotated  Corpus  and  Anaphora 
Resolution for Czech. To appear in Computational  
Linguistics  and  Intellectual  Technologies. Papers 
from  the  Annual  International  Conference  "Dia-
logue 2013". Moskva.

A. Nedoluzhko, J. Mírovský. 2011. Annotating Exten-
ded Textual Coreference and Bridging Relations in  
the  Prague  Dependency  Treebank. Technical  re-
port no. 2011/44, ÚFAL MFF UK, Prague, Czech 
Republic, 69 pp.

U.  Oza,  R.  Prasad,  S.  Kolachina  et  al.  2009.  The 
Hindi Discourse Relation Bank. In: Proc. Linguist-
ic Annotation Workshop, pp.158–161. 

P. Pajas, J. Štěpánek. 2008. Recent advances in a fea-
ture-rich  framework  for  treebank  annotation.  In 
Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference  
on  Computational  Linguistics  (Coling  2008), 
Manchester, pp. 673–680.

M.  Poesio,  R.  Vieira,  S.  Teufel.  1997.  Resolving 
bridging  references  in  unrestricted  text.  In:  ACL 
Workshop on Robust Anaphora Resolution, pp. 1–
6.

M. Poesio. 2004. The MATE/GNOME Proposals for 
Anaphoric Annotation, Revisited. In:  Proceedings  
of  The  5th  SIGdial  Workshop  on  Discourse  and  
Dialogue, Boston.

M. Poesio, R. Delmonte, A. Bristot et al. 2004a. The 
Venex  corpus  of  anaphora  and deixis  in  spoken  
and written Italian. Manuscript. 

M.  Poesio,  R.  Mehta,  A.  Maroudas  et  al.  2004b. 
Learning to resolve bridging references.  In:  42nd 
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (ACL 2004), pp. 143–150.

M. Poesio, R. Artstein. 2008. Anaphoric annotation in 
the  ARRAU  corpus.  In  Proceedings  of  LREC 
2008, Marrakech. 

L.  Poláková,  P.  Jínová,  Š.  Zikánová  et  al.  2012a. 
Manual for Annotation of Discourse Relations in  
the  Prague  Dependency  Treebank. Technical  re-
port,  UFAL  MFF  UK,  Prague,  Czech  Republic. 
Available at: http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/techrep/tr47.pdf.

L.  Poláková,  P.  Jínová,  Š.  Zikánová  et  al.  2012b. 
Prague  Discourse  Treebank  1.0.  Data/software, 
ÚFAL  MFF  UK,  Prague,  Czech  Republic, 
http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/discourse/, Nov 2012.

S. Pradhan, E. Hovy, M. Marcus et al. 2007. Onton-
otes: A unified relational semantic representation. 
In: Proceedings of the International Conference on  
Semantic Computing, Washington DC.

S. Pradhan, A. Moschitti, N. Xue et al. 2012. CoNLL-
2012 Shared Task: Modeling Multilingual Unres-
tricted  Coreference  in  OntoNotes. Jeju,  South 
Korea, Jul 2012. 

R. Prasad, N. Dinesh, A. Lee et al. 2008. The Penn 
Discourse Treebank 2.0. In: Proceedings of the 6th 
International Conference on Language Resources  
and  Evaluation  (LREC  2008),  Marrakech,  Mo-
rocco, pp. 2961–2968.

R.  Prasad,  S.  McRoy,  Nadya  Frid  et  al.  2011.  The 
Biomedical  Discourse  Relation  Bank,  BMC 1, 
12:188 

M. Recasens, A. M. Martí. 2009. AnCora-CO: Core-
ferentially  annotated  corpora  for  Spanish  and 
Catalan. In: Language Resources and Evaluation.

K. Rodríguez, F. Delogu, Y. Versley et al. 2010. Ana-
phoric Annotation of Wikipedia and Blogs in the 
Live Memories Corpus.  In  Proceedings of  LREC 
2010, Valletta, Malta.

M. Stede.  2004. The Potsdam Commentary Corpus. 
Proc. of the ACL 2004 Workshop on Discourse An-
notation, pp. 96–102.

S. Tonelli, G. Riccardi, R. Prasad et al. 2010. Annota-
tion  of  Discourse  Relations  for  Conversational 
Spoken Dialogs. 2010.  In Proceedings of the Sev-
enth  International  Conference  on  Language  Re-
sources  and Evaluation (LREC 2010), pp.  2084–
2090. Valletta, Malta.

B. Webber, A. Knott, M. Stone et al. 2003. Anaphora 
and Discourse Structure.  Computational Linguist-
ics 29(4), pp. 545–588.

F. Wolf, E. Gibson. 2005. Representing discourse co-
herence:  A  corpus-based  study.  Computational  
Linguistics, 31(2).

D. Zeyrek, I. Demirşahin, A. Sevdik-Çalli et al. 2010. 
The Annotation Scheme of the Turkish Discourse 
Bank  and  an  Evaluation  of  Inconsistent  Annota-
tions. In: Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic An-
notation  Workshop. Pages  282–289.  Uppsala, 
Sweden.

Y.  Zhou,  N. Xue.  2012.  PDTB-style  Discourse An-
notation of Chinese Text.  In:  Proceedings of  the  
50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics. pp. 69–77. Jeju, Republic of 
Korea. July 2012.

99


