










































Morphological Analysis of Tunisian Dialect


International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 992–996,
Nagoya, Japan, 14-18 October 2013.

Morphological Analysis of Tunisian Dialect 

 

Inès Zribi 

ANLP Research group, 

MIRACL Lab., 

University of Sfax, Tunisia 

ineszribi@gmail.com 

Mariem Ellouze Khemakhem 

ANLP Research group, 

MIRACL Lab., 

University of Sfax, Tunisia 

mariem.ellouze@planet.tn 

Lamia Hadrich Belguith 

ANLP Research group, 

MIRACL Lab., 

University of Sfax, Tunisia 

l.belguith@fsegs.rnu.tn 

 

Abstract 

In this paper, we address the problem of the 

morphological analysis of an Arabic dialect. 

We propose a method to adapt an Arabic mor-

phological analyzer for the Tunisian dialect 

(TD). In order to do that, we create a lexicon 

for the TD. The creation of the lexicon is done 

in two steps. The first step consists in adapting 

a Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) lexicon. We 

adapted a list of MSA derivation patterns to 

TD. The second step consists in improving the 

resulting lists of patterns and roots by using 

TD specific roots and patterns. The proposed 

method has been tested and has achieved an F-

measure performance of 88%. 

1 Introduction 

The Arabic Dialect (AD) is a collection of 

spoken varieties of Arabic. It is used in everyday 

communication. So, it is so important to consider 

it in the new technologies like dialogue systems, 

telephone applications, etc. (Zribi et al., 2013). 

The majority of these applications need a 

morphological analysis to segment words and to 

exploit their morphological features.  

Many important works have focused on the 

morphological analysis of the Arabic language, 

mainly on Modern Standard Arabic (MSA). AD 

has not received much attention due to the lack 

of dialectal tools and resources (Duh and 

Kirchhoff, 2005). However, there are differences 

between MSA and AD, they are considered as 

two related languages.  

Therefore, we suggest in this paper to exploit 

and adapt an MSA morphological analyzer (MA) 

to Tunisian Dialect (TD). The adaptation is done 

in two steps. The first step is to adapt an MSA 

lexicon to TD and to improve the resulting 

lexicon with TD specific roots and derivation 

patterns
1
. The second step is to integrate the 

                                                 
1 The Arabic derivation system consists to use a set of pat-

terns and roots to generate words. To generate the word 

 yaktibu, he write”, we replace the ri letters in the , َي ْك ِت ُب “

resulting lexicon into the MSA morphological 

analyzer.  

The paper has 5 main sections. Section 2 

presents a lexical study of the TD. We present in 

section 3 an overview of previous works. We 

describe in section 4 our method for adapting 

MSA resources to TD. In section 5, we give the 

results of the system evaluation, and finally, we 

discuss some analysis errors. 

2 TD lexical study  

TD is characterized by a phonology, a 

morphology, a syntax and a lexicon which have 

differences and similarities compared to MSA 

and even to other Arabic dialects (Zribi et al., 

2013). There are many regional varieties. In this 

paper, we focus on the standard TD (the dialect 

used in the media that is the most understood by 

all Tunisians). 

2.1 STAC corpus presentation 

In order to develop and test our method, we 

created the STAC corpus by recording and 

manually transcribing some radio and TV 

broadcasts. STAC corpus consists of 3 hours and 

20 minutes of speech. The corpus relates to 

various fields: politics, health, social issues, 

religious issues and others. STAC corpus is 

composed of about 27,144 words. We used ¾ of 

the corpus for the training of our method. This 

portion of the corpus contains 443 distinct nouns 

and 235 distinct verbs. We used the rest of the 

corpus to test the performance of our system (see 

section 5). We used OTTA conventions (Zribi et 

al., 2013) while transcribing and annotating our 

STAC corpus. It is to be noted that we respect in 

this paper the OTTA conventions (Zribi et al., 

2013) when writing examples of words in TD.  

                                                                          
following pattern “yar1r2ir3u” with the letters of the root 

“ktb” by respecting the order of letters. (a,i,u) represent the 

Arabic short vowels. The Arabic orthographic transliteration 

used in this paper is presented in (Habash et al., 2007). 

992



2.2 Classification of the TD lexicon 

The linguistic study of the words composing our 

TD corpus shows that its lexicon can be classi-

fied into four classes. The first class (C1) 

includes words that are derived from MSA roots 

via the application of the derivation patterns of 

MSA. These patterns are generally modified 

compared to those of MSA. They witness small 

changes, mainly, in vowels and in some letters 

forming these patterns (some letters are added, 

deleted or modified). For example, the derivation 

patterns ( ِت ْك َي ْك , yir1r2ar3) and (ا َية  r1r2aAyap) are ,فْك َي

the result of some changes of the pattern ( َي ْك َي ُب , 

yar1r2ar3u) and the pattern (الَية  .(r1ir2aAr3ap ,فِت َي

This class presents 85.13% of our STAC corpus. 

The second class (C2) includes words that are 

derived from TD specific roots via the 

application of patterns following the MSA deri-

vation patterns (the patterns used in (C1)). For 

example, the verb (ْكنَيڤِتز , ynagiz, “he jumps”) is 

derived from the Tunisian root (نڤز, ngz) and the 

pattern ( ْك َي ِت ْك , yr1ar2ir3). This class presents 8% of 

our STAC corpus. The third class (C3) includes 

words that are derived from the MSA roots with 

the application of TD specific patterns. These 

patterns do not match with MSA patterns. For 

example, the word (ي اجِت -qahwaAjiy, “a wai ,قَيهْكوَي

ter”) is derived from the MSA root (قهو, qhw) 

and the derivation pattern (ي جِت َلَي  .(r1ar2r3aAjiy ,فَي ْك

This class presents 4.26% of our STAC corpus. 

The fourth class (C4) contains words which are 

derived from foreign languages specifically 

French. For example, the word ( ْك َي ِت ْك , ydawi$) is 

derived from the French sentence (il prend une 

douche, “he is having a shower”). This class 

presents 2.62% of our STAC corpus.  

From this study, we deduce that to create a TD 

lexicon, we should determine the list of TD pat-

terns and apply them to the list of MSA roots, or 

determine the list of TD roots, and apply the pat-

terns of the MSA to generate a TD lexicon.  

3 Related works 

Arabic dialects can be considered as under-

resourced languages because of the absence of 

tools and resources. Therefore, we will study 

some works dealing with the automatic 

processing of under-resourced languages. 

Among these works, we cite the works of Borin 

(2002), Das and Petrov (2011), Lindström and 

Müürisep (2009), Shalonova and Golénia (2010), 

etc. Some of these works ((Rambow et al, 2005), 

(Lindström and Müürisep, 2009), (Das and 

Petrov, 2011), etc.) are based on resources and 

tools of cognate languages that are adapted for 

the processing the under-resourced language. 

Other works ((Yang et al., 2007), (Shalonova and 

Golénia, 2010), etc.) are based on a small 

amount of data for the analysis of under-

resourced languages. Hana (2008) adopted this 

approach to propose a method for the 

morphological analysis of Czech language. He 

used a small list of words accompanied by 

information about their lemma and tags to 

develop a Guesser. The role of the Guesser is to 

deduce from a corpus the lemma-stem-paradigm 

candidates for each unknown word. These 

candidate paradigms are, then, validated and 

added to a lexicon. Hana (2008) utilized the 

resulting lexicon for developing a Czech MA. 
Some works have tackled the task of the 

morphological analysis of AD. The general idea 

of these works is to adapt existing tools designed 

for MSA. Among these works, we cite the work 

of Salloum and Habash (2011) and Almeman 

and Lee (2012) who added a list of dialectal 

affixes to two MSA MA (BAMA (Buckwalter, 

2004) and Al-Khalil (Boudlal et al, 2011)). Ha-

bash et al. (2012) transformed an Egyptian di-

alect lexicon into a tabular form that is compati-

ble the MA SAMA (Graff et al., 2009). Habash 

and Rambow (2006) developed MAGEAD, a MA 

for the Arabic language and its dialects.  

We propose in this work to adapt a MSA MA. 

We propose first to adapt an MSA lexicon to TD 

and to improve the resulting lexicon with TD 

specific roots and patterns. Then, we integrate 

the resulting lexicon into the MSA MA.  

4 Adapting MSA resources to TD  

Our goal in this paper is to develop a TD mor-

phological analyzer taking advantage of the ex-

isting resources of the Arabic language. Like 

previous works on AD morphological analyzers, 

we propose to adapt an existing MA analyzer and 

to create the necessary resources for its adapta-

tion. We do not limit to add dialectal affixes, but 

we propose to incorporate a lexicon to a MA for 

MSA. Given that we don’t have such a lexicon, 

we exploit the points of similarity between TD 

and MSA for its creation. First, we start from 

MSA lexicon to generate a small lexicon for the 

TD. We use this list for building a TD lexicon.  

The process of creation of TD lexicon is similar 

to the ending-based Guesser module of Hana 

(2008) that suggests a lemma-stem-paradigm 

candidate for each word in the corpus. Our me-

thod for building our TD lexicon is composed of 

993



two main steps: the transformation of MSA pat-

terns into TD patterns, and the extraction of TD 

specific roots and patterns. We detail in this sec-

tion the different steps of our method. Then, we 

present the list of TD function words, affixes and 

clitics. 

Transformation of MSA patterns into TD 

patterns: The first step of our method consists in 

determining from a set of MSA patterns the cor-

responding patterns in TD. Firstly, we classify 

the roots of the lexicon. Indeed, the Arabic roots 

can be classified according to several criteria: the 

number of root letters, the presence and the 

number of defective letters, etc. We adopt in our 

work the classification based on the presence and 

the number of defective letters. The study of TD 

morphology done by Ouerhani (2009) shows that 

the verbs belonging to the Mahmouz class 

(which includes the roots containing the letter ء) 

share the same patterns and features and follow 

the same rules when they are transformed in TD. 

This deduction is also applicable to other root 

classes. For example, the verbs (ب أ, bada>a, “he 

started”) and (مأل, mala>a, “he filled”) in MSA 

that have respectively the roots (ب ء, bd') and (م ء, 

ml') are transformed into (ب ا, bdA) and (مَل, mlA) 

in TD. These verbs follow the same derivation 

pattern in MSA ( فَي َي َي, r1ar2ar3a) as in TD (ا  ,فْك َي

r1r2aA) keeping the same morphological features. 

For each class of roots and for each MSA pat-

tern, we determine the corresponding TD deriva-

tion pattern(s) and, we update their lists of fea-

tures. In the case of verbs, we determine for each 

person and for each aspect, the different patterns 

in TD. For example, the MSA pattern ( فَي ِت َي, 

r1ar2ir3a) belonging to the Defective class (which 

includes the roots ending with defective letters) 

is transformed into (فْك َيى, r1r2aY) in TD. In the 

case of nouns, we determine for each type (noun, 

adjective, etc.) and for each gender, the different 

patterns in TD. For example, for the Mahmouz 

class, the derivation pattern ( فَيااِت َيةُب, r1aAr2ir3ap) in 

MSA is transformed to (فَيا ْك َية, r1Ayr3ap)  in TD. 

The result of this step is a TD lexicon composed 

of 6,092 patterns (nominal and verbal) and 6,030 

roots. Six hundred and fifty patterns were kept 

from the MSA lexicon during this step. This lex-

icon covers the first class (C1). 

Root and pattern extraction: After convert-

ing MSA patterns to TD, the next step is in-

tended to enhance the coverage of TD lexicon. 

This step is composed of two phases. The first 

phase consists in extracting TD specific roots. 

The aim of this step is to cover the second class 

(C2). We try to extract roots from  a training 

corpus which contains specific TD words such as 

the verb (نڤز, nagiz, “he jumped”) and the noun 

 ,karhbap, “a car”). To perform these tasks ,كَيرهبَية)

we proceed as follows: We analyze all the words 

of the corpus using the lexicon generated in the 

first step. If there is no analysis, we try to extract 

roots for these words corresponding to patterns 

derived from the first step. The extracted roots 

are saved in a temporal list. If the frequency of a 

root is greater than two, we add this root to the 

lexicon. For example, using the verbal patterns 

 r1ar2r3ir4), we can ,فَي ْك ِت ْك ) yar1r2ir3) and , َي ْك ِت ْك )

extract  respectively the root (نڤز, ngz) and the 

root ( نڤز  , yngz) for the unrecognized word ( نَيڤِتزْك ْك , 

ynagiz, “he jumps”). Similarly, using the 

nominal patterns (ي َية  ,ت َي ْك ِت َية) tar1r2iyr3ap) and ,تَي ْك ِت

tr1ar2r3ir4ap), we can extract respectively the 

root (نڤز, ngz) and the root (نڤ ز ngyz) for the 

unknown word (تَينڤِت زَية, tangyzap, “a jump”). The 

frequency of the root (نڤز) is equal to 2. So, we 

consider that the root of the words ( نڤز   and تنڤ زة) 

is (نڤز). In the second phase, we adopt the same 

idea as in the first phase. It consists to extract TD 

specific patterns. We aim in this step to cover the 

third class (C3). We use in this phase the list of 

roots derived from the first step. The difference 

between the root extraction step and this step is 

the validation of generated patterns by an expert. 

The expert determines the morphological 

features corresponding to the patterns. 

Function words and affixes: Based on our 

training corpus and the MSA lexicon, we 

determined the list of TD clitics and the list of 

function words. From the MSA lexicon, we de-

termined the possible translations for each func-

tion word. We noted that some MSA function 

words are transformed into TD function word(s) 

and/or clitics but some others cannot be trans-

lated to TD. For example, the future particle 

 ,$bA ,با ) swf, “I will”) can be translated to ,سوف)

“I will”). However, the Arabic preposition (من, 

mn, “from”) keeps the same form in TD but in 

some cases it is transformed to a proclitic (م, m, 

“from”). Similarly, we determine from the MSA 

lexicon the possible translations for each affix 

and clitic. Some MSA clitics are transformed 

into TD function word(s) and/or clitics and some 

others don’t have an equivalent in TD. For ex-

ample, the future prefix (سـ, s, “I will”) is trans-

formed in TD to ( با, bA$, “I will”). However, 

the interrogation prefix “أ” is transformed to a 

suffix (شي, $y, “what”). We note also the defini-

tion of many other affixes and clitics: such as the 

new form ( , w, “him”) of the enclitic (ـه, h, 

994



“him”). We obtained 289 function words, and 66 

affixes and clitics for the TD. 

5 Implementation and evaluation  

We have chosen the MSA MA Al-Khalil 

(Boudlal et al, 2011) to adapt it for analyzing 

TD. We selected Al-Khalil because it had been 

elated the best MA among ten morphological 

analyzers in a competition held in ALESCO in 

2010. We also used its lexicon for generating the 

TD lexicon. It is composed of 7,503 roots and 

3,681 unvoweled patterns. To enable Al-Khalil to 

analyze TD, we integrated the TD lexicon in its 

morphological analysis process. Moreover, we 

added new rules in the process of word tokeniza-

tion (e.g. rules for segmenting the new enclitic 

“ ”). We have corrected, also, some gaps in Al-

Khalil (e.g. no difference between affixes and 

clitics in the segmentation process). 

5.1 Results and discussion 

To test the performance of our system, we used 

our training corpus STAC (see section 2.1). To 

our knowledge, there is no existing TD MA to 

compare with, we, therefore, used the MSA ver-

sion of Al-Khalil as a baseline to compare the 

performance of our TD MA. The system’s per-

formance is evaluated in two ways. Firstly, the 

system is tested according to the number of 

words recognized by the analyzer. We calculate 

the number of words for which the analyzer 

attributes at least one correct analysis. The objec-

tive of this evaluation is to measure the analyz-

er’s coverage of the different classes of the TD 

lexicon. To measure the correctness of the results 

given by our TD MA, we tried another evalua-

tion. The system’s performance was evaluated 

with reference to the generated analysis. We cal-

culated the number of correct analyses given for 

each word. An analysis is considered correct if 

all of its features (part-of-speech, mood, gender, 

number, root, pattern, etc.) are fully correct.   

In the evaluation process, we calculated the 

performance of the system using the TD lexicon 

generated in the first step of our method. Then, 

we evaluated the system using the lexicon result-

ing from the second step. Table 1 shows the re-

sults of the evaluation.  

 Baseline Step 1 Step 2 

 Eval1 Eval2 Eval1 Eval2 Eval1 Eval2 

Recall 54% 70% 78% 86% 79% 89% 

Precision 70% 65% 52% 60% 77% 80% 

F-measure 54% 63% 67% 77% 78% 88% 

Table 1 : Evaluation results  

The two evaluations processes show that the 

second step of creation of the lexicon has im-

proved the result of the TD MA. First, we used 

the MSA version of Al-Khalil (Boudlal et al, 

2011). We obtained an F-measure equal to 63%. 

This result justifies the importance of the shared 

part between MSA and TD. Then, the evaluation 

of the first step of our method shows an im-

provement in the results. Indeed, the system can 

cover 86% of the words of the test corpus. We 

obtained an improvement of about 14% in F-

measure metric. Finally, the evaluation of the 

system by using the lexicon resulting from the 

second step shows also an improvement of re-

sults. We got an overall F-measure equal to 88%. 

The results show clearly that the extraction root 

and pattern module has an improvement effect 

(about 10%). The failure in the analysis of some 

words can be explained by the lack of some 

patterns and/or roots in the training corpus. In 

addition, the wrong extraction of roots presents 

another cause of analysis failure. Certainly, the 

errors generated by the step of extraction of roots 

were caused by the use of the same patterns for 

different root classes. As a consequence, the 

system proposed different roots for the same 

conjugated verb. Some incorrect roots were 

added to the lexicon. So these wrong roots 

increase the number of incorrect analyses of 

some words. For example, the extraction of roots 

module has extracted the root (نڤز , ynagiz, “he 

jumps”) from the verbs (نڤز , ynagiz, “he jumps”) 

and (  ynagzuwA, “they jump”). This root is , ا نڤز

automatically added to the TD lexicon. We note 

that the root (نڤز , yngz) is wrong. Other cases of 

failure were caused by the foreign origin of 

certain words (words derived from foreign 

languages such as French).  

6 Conclusion  

In this paper, we have proposed an original me-

thod to create a lexicon for TD. This method is 

based on two steps: the first step converts MSA 

patterns to TD ones; the second step extracts 

roots and patterns. The resulted lexicon was inte-

grated in the Al-Khalil MA. This system has 

shown encouraging results (F-measure = 

88.86%). As for our perspectives, we intend to 

extend the TD lexicon by covering words de-

rived from foreign languages. Then, we plan to 

develop a module allowing the disambiguation of 

the output of the system by applying machine 

learning techniques.  

995



References  

Almeman, K., and Lee, M. 2012. Towards Develop-

ing a Multi-Dialect Morphological Analyser 

for Arabic. 4th International Conference on Arab-
ic Language Processing, May 2–3, 2012, Rabat, 

Morocco (pp. 19–25).  

Borin, L. 2002. Alignment and tagging. Selected 
papers from a symposium on parallel and compa-

rable corpora at Uppsala University (pp. 157–167). 

Amsterdam, Rodopi. 

Boudlal, A., Lakhouaja, A., Azzeddine. M., and Ab-

delouafi M. 2011. Alkhalil Morpho Sys1: A 

Morphosyntactic analysis System for Arabic 

texts. Proceedings of ACIT’2010, Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia. 

Buckwalter, T. 2004. Buckwalter Arabic morpho- 

logical analyzer version 2.0. LDC catalog num-
ber LDC2004L02, ISBN 1-58563-324-0. 

Das, D., and Petrov, S. 2011. Unsupervised Part-of-

Speech Tagging with Bilingual Graph-Based 

Projections. Proceedings of the 49th Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-

guistics, (pp. 600–609). Portland, Oregon. 

Duh, K. and Kirchhoff, K. 2005. POS Tagging of 

Dialectal Arabic: A Minimally Supervised Ap-

proach. Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on 
Computational Approaches to Semitic Languages, 

Ann Arbor, June 2005. 

Habash, N. Soudi, A. and Buckwalter, T. 2007. On 

Arabic Transliteration. In Arabic Computational 
Morphology: Knowledge-based and Empirical Me-

thods. Soudi, Abdelhadi; van den Bosch, Antal; 

Neumann, Günter (Eds.), 2007. ISBN: 978-1-4020-

6045-8. 

Habash, N., Eskander, R., and Hawwari, A. 2012. A 

Morphological Analyzer for Egyptian Arabic. 
Proceedings of the Twelfth Meeting of the Special 

Interest Group on Computational Morphology and 

Phonology (SIGMORPHON2012). (pp. 1–9). 

Montréal, Canada. 

Habash, N., Rambow, O., and Kiraz, G. 2006. Mor-

phological Analysis and Generation for Arab-

ic Dialects. Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on 
Computational Approaches to Semitic Languages, 

Ann Arbor (pp. 17–24). 

Hana, J. 2008. Knowledge and Labor-Light mor-

phological analysis. OSUWPL, 58, 52–84. 

Ouerhani, B. 2009. Interférence entre le dialectal 

et le littéral en Tunisie : Le cas de la morpho-

logie verbale. Synergies Tunisie, 1, 75–84. 

Rambow, O., Chiang, D., Diab, M., Habash, N., Hwa, 

R., Sima’an, K., Lacey, V., Levy, R., Nichols, C. 

and Shareef, S. 2005. Parsing Arabic dialects. 
Final Report, 2005 JHU Summer Workshop. 

Salloum, W., and Habash, N. 2011. Dialectal to 

Standard Arabic Paraphrasing to Improve 

Arabic-English Statistical Machine Transla-

tion. Proceedings of EMNLP 2011, Conference on 
Empirical Methods in Natural Language 

Processing, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK (pp. 10–21). 

Shalonova, K., and Golénia, B. 2010. Weakly Super-

vised Morphology Learning for Agglutinating 

Languages Using Small Training Sets. Pro-
ceedings of the 23rd International Conference on 

Computational Linguistics (Coling 2010) (pp. 976–

983). Beijing. 

Yang, M., Zheng, J., Kathol, A. 2007. A Semi-

Supervised Learning Approach for Morpheme 

Segmentation for an Arabic Dialect. Proceed-
ings of Interspeech 2007. 

Zribi, I., Graja, M., Khmekhem, M. E., Jaoua, M., and 

Belguith, L. H. 2013. Orthographic Transcrip-

tion for Spoken Tunisian Arabic. CICLing 2013, 
Part I, LNCS 7816 (pp. 153–163). 

 

996


