










































Using the Semantic-Syntactic Interface for Reliable Arabic Modality Annotation


International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 410–418,
Nagoya, Japan, 14-18 October 2013.

Using the Semantic-Syntactic Interface for Reliable Arabic Modality
Annotation

Rania Al-Sabbagh
Department of Linguistics

University of Illinois at Urba-
na-Champaign

alsabba1@illinois.edu

Jana Diesner
School of Library and Infor-

mation Science
University of Illinois at Urba-

na-Champaign
jdiesner@illinois.edu

Roxana Girju
Department of Linguistics

University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign

girju@illinois.edu

Abstract

We introduce a novel modality scheme where
triggers are words and phrases that convey
modality meanings and subcategorize for
clauses and verbal phrases. This semantic-
syntactic working definition of modality ena-
bles us to design practical and replicable anno-
tation guidelines and procedures that alleviate
some shortcomings of current purely semantic
modality annotation schemes and yield high
inter-annotator agreement rates. We use this
scheme to annotate a tweet-based Arabic cor-
pus for modality information. This novel lan-
guage resource, being the first, initiates NLP
research on Arabic modality.

1 Introduction

Modality is the grammaticalized expression of
the "speaker's subjective attitudes" (Bybee et al.,
1994:176) and "psychological stances" (Mitchell
and al-Hassan, 1994:7) towards propositions and
events and their factuality status. In NLP applica-
tions and domains, modality is considered as one
linguistic means to convey and detect attitudes
and opinions (Wiebe at al., 2005; Abdul-Mageed
and Diab, 2012), commitments and beliefs (Diab
et al., 2009), power relations (Prabhakaran et al.,
2012), uncertainties and speculations (Szarvas et
al., 2008; Matsuyoshi et al., 2010).

We herein present the first work on Arabic
modality annotation, which is part of a larger
research project to (1) automatically identify
modality triggers (i.e. words and phrases convey-
ing modality meanings), holders (i.e. modality
experiencers) and scopes (i.e. the range of lin-
guistic constituents modified by the modality
triggers), and (2) automatically detect power re-

lations among participants in the social network
of Twitter by using this modality information.

Despite solid work on Arabic modality in the-
oretical linguistics (Mitchell and al-Hassan,
1994; Brustad, 2000; Moshref, 2012), there are
no Arabic corpora annotated for modality, not
even the widely used Penn Arabic Treebank.
However, there is a plethora of work and anno-
tated corpora for modality in other languages,
including English (Saurí et al, 2006; Baker et al.,
2010; Prabhakaran et al., 2012; Rubinstein  et al.,
2013), Portuguese (Hendrickx et al., 2010; Avila
and Mello, 2013), Japanese (Matsuyoshi et al.
2010) and Chinese (Cui and Chi, 2013).

Arabic modality annotation involves multiple
challenges. First, the paradigm of Arabic modali-
ty triggers is complex as it includes auxiliaries,
lexical verbs, nominals and particles - like many
other languages as well. Second, triggers can be
lexically and/or semantically ambiguous: a lexi-
cally-ambiguous trigger is a word or phrase that
may or may not convey a modality meaning
based on context. A semantically-ambiguous
trigger is a word or phrase that may convey two
or more modality meanings. Third, implicit
scopes are common in Arabic and annotators
have to be made aware of them. Fourth, Arabic
word order flexibility allows triggers - especially
adverbials - to occur in the scope’s initial, medial
or final positions, which makes it challenging for
annotators to identify scope spans. Finally, mo-
dality scopes are not necessarily adjacent to their
triggers, which furthermore complicates the de-
tection of their spans.

The tweets genre on which we work poses an
additional challenge due to language variation.
We select a random sample of Arabic tweets
from the YADAC corpus (Al-Sabbagh and Girju,
2012) posted in Egypt during the first six months

410



of the 2011 revolution. All selected tweets are
about the political situation at that time. Tweets
are not only in the Egyptian Arabic (EA) dialect,
but also in Modern Standard Arabic (MSA), es-
pecially tweets from press agencies and celebri-
ties. Therefore, our annotation scheme has to
work on both MSA and EA modality.

Arabic and the tweets genre are not the only
original aspects of this paper. We present a novel
linguistically-motivated annotation scheme with
a semantic-syntactic working definition of mo-
dality triggers as words and phrases that convey
modality meanings and subcategorize for clauses
and verbal phrases. Modality meanings are
based on Palmer's (1989, 2001) cross-lingual
typology of modality, which is proven valid for
both MSA and EA (Mitchell and al-Hassan,
1994; Brustad, 2000; Moshref, 2012).

The semantic-syntactic interface between mo-
dality triggers and their scopes depicted in our
definition is well-established in theoretical lin-
guistics for Arabic (Moshref, 2012) and for Eng-
lish (Jackendoff, 1972; Brennan, 1993; Butler,
2003). Semantics and syntax work simultaneous-
ly such that semantics guarantees not to tag all
words and phrases that subcategorize for clauses
and verbal phrases as modality triggers. Syntax
guarantees not to tag words and phrases that
share some semantic meanings with modality
triggers, but do not subcategorize for clauses and
verbal phrases, as modality triggers.

Subcategorization frames of modality triggers
are sporadically mentioned in the NLP literature
on modality annotation. For English, Saurí et al.
(2006) stated in their definition of event modality
triggers that "they subcategorize for a that, ge-
rundive or infinitival clause, but also an NP
headed by event denoting nouns" (p.334). For
Portuguese, Hendrickx et al. (2010) stated that
"in the majority of the cases, the target [i.e.
scope] is a subordinate clause or a verbal phrase
... in some cases, also main clauses can be targets
[i.e. scopes]" (p. 1810). However, no prior work
integrates the semantic-syntactic interface into a
modality annotation scheme.

Our conceptualization and implementation of
this semantic-syntactic interface provide annota-
tors with practical annotation guidelines that
yield highly-reliable results, as shown herein.
Furthermore, they define modality in terms of
concrete syntactic features which we use in our
future work for the automatic identification of
triggers and their scopes.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows:
section 2 briefly reviews related work. Section 3

gives details about Arabic modality and its com-
plexities. Section 4 presents our data, annotation
guidelines and procedures. Section 5 reports the
annotation results. Finally, we conclude with fu-
ture work in Section 6.

2 Related Work

Recent work on modality annotation focuses on
English, Portuguese, Japanese and Chinese.
Baker et al. (2010) used an idiosyncratic catego-
rization of English modality that distinguished 8
semantic meanings: requirement, permissive,
success, effort, intension, ability, want and be-
lief. They defined each type as a pattern of the
form H (modal) P where H is the sentence’s
agent and P is the proposition (e.g. H permits [P
to be true/false]). They obtained an average inter-
annotator agreement rate of 0.82. The error anal-
ysis of their modality tagger showed that errors
resulted primarily from the triggers’ lexical am-
biguity.

Prabhakaran et al. (2012) focused on 5 seman-
tic meanings of English modality, and used the
same HP patterns as Baker et al. (2010) for anno-
tation guidelines. They reported an inter-
annotator agreement rate of 0.95. Their modality
tagger yielded a 0.44 F1 score against a gold-
standard and 0.79 and 0.91 F1 scores against dif-
ferent testing sets from their crowdsourced data.

Rubinstein et al. (2013) used a more standard-
ized typology of English modality that entailed
(1) priority modality divided into bouletic, teleo-
logical and deontic triggers; and (2) non-priority
modality divided into epistemic, circumstantial
and ability triggers. Their purely semantic anno-
tation scheme returned an alpha reliability score
of 0.89 only when collapsing the subtypes of pri-
ority and non-priority triggers. The scheme
yielded an alpha reliability score of 0.65 for
scope span annotation.

Cui and Chi (2013) applied Rubinstein et al.’s
(2013) scheme for modality annotation to the
Penn Chinese Treebank. They obtained a reliabil-
ity score of 0.94 for triggers' annotation using the
collapsed binary typology of modality triggers as
priority vs. non-priority. Their error analysis re-
ported vagueness in the annotation guidelines as
one disagreement factor.

The lack of previous NLP work on Arabic
modality, modality annotation in tweets and syn-
tactically-guided modality annotation schemes
render direct comparisons to our work impossi-
ble. Yet, the two main distinguishing factors of
our work are: (1) to guarantee the replicability of

411



our study, we avoid idiosyncratic typologies of
modality that were used in some previous work;
and (2) to better guide our annotators, we use
practical guidelines that rely on both semantics
and syntax rather than semantics only as in pre-
vious annotation schemes.

3 Arabic Linguistic Modality

3.1 Background

Among multiple typologies of modality, Palmer's
(1989, 2001) was validated for both MSA and
EA in theoretical linguistics (Mitchell and al-
Hassan, 1994; Brustad, 2000; Moshref, 2012).

Palmer distinguishes two main classes of mo-
dality: propositional and event. Propositional
modality is concerned with the speaker’s attitude
to the truth-value of a proposition, and includes:
 Epistemic modality, which expresses the

speaker's judgment about the factual status of
the proposition as well as the speaker's opin-
ion and attitude towards that proposition.

 Evidential modality, which indicates the evi-
dence the speaker has for his or her judgment
or opinion. Evidence can be reported as in
hearsay and quotes or sensory.

Event modality refers to events that are not ac-
tualized but are merely potential, and includes:

 Deontic modality, which relates to obliga-
tions and permissions that emanate from an
external source, and commissives, which
originate from an internal source as speakers
lay an obligation on themselves for a poten-
tial event.

 Dynamic modality, which relates to ability,
willingness and wishes.

3.2 Challenges

The challenges of Arabic modality annotation
are attributed to (1) the complexity of the Arabic
modality paradigm, (2) the lexical and semantic
ambiguity of Arabic modality triggers, (3) im-
plicit scopes, (4) word order flexibility and (5)
potential long dependencies between triggers and
their scopes.

The paradigm of Arabic modality triggers in-
cludes a large set of auxiliaries, lexical verbs,
nominals and particles. Except for auxiliaries,
adverbs and some particles, all modality triggers
inflect for gender, number, person, tense, aspect
and mood. Furthermore, generic modality pat-
terns such as أن* من الـ mn Al-* >n (it is * that),
where * is typically an adjective (e.g. من المھم أن

mn Almhm >n (it’s important that)), are com-
mon.

Modality triggers can be lexically and/or se-
mantically ambiguous. The noun زمان zmAn is
one example of a lexically-ambiguous trigger
because in 1 it is an epistemic with a clause
scope. Yet, in 2 it is a non-modal standing for
era.

بیحكمنامبارك لسھزمانكانعندھا خبرةكالم الناس الليلو سمعنا.1
lw smEnA klAm AlnAs Ally EndhA xbrp kAn zmAn
mbArk lsh byHkmnA

If we'd listened to the elite, Mubarak would have been
still ruling us.

خالصالحكم الفردي انتھى زمان.2
zmAn AlHkm Alfrdy AnthY xlAS

The era of individual rulers has come to an end.

The MSA particle البد lAbd is one example of
semantically-ambiguous triggers because in 3 it
is an epistemic with a clause scope; whereas in 4
it is an obligative with a verbal-phrase scope.

وھو یستلقي على سریره الطبي تذكر صدام حسینأنھوالبدمباركنإ.3
في قاعة المحكمة

<n mbArk lAbd w>nh tzkr SdAm Hsyn whw ystlqy ElY
sryrh AlTby fy qAEp AlmHkmp

It must be that Mubarak remembered Saddam Hussein
as he was lying on his medical bed in the court.

فى السجنمباركیوضع انالبد.4
lAbd An ywDE mbArk fY Alsjn

Mubarak must be put in jail.

Implicit modality scopes are common in Ara-
bic and come in different realizations. In 5, the
scope of the permissive نسمح nsmH (allow) is the
deictic ذلك *lk (that) which refers to the clause یھان 
المصریون لن ln yhAn AlmSrywn (Egyptians won't

be humiliated). That is, the scope of nsmH is ac-
tually a clause.

.بذلكنسمحلن . .ونمصریالیھان لن.5
ln yhAn AlmSrywn. ln nsmH b*lk.

Egyptians won't be humiliated. We won't allow it.

In 6, the abilitives عرفا AErf (can) and عارف
EArf (can) share the same verbal-phrase scope of

شوفا A$wf (see). To avoid redundancy, the
speaker elides the scope of the second abilitive -

عرفا AErf (can) - and does not replace it with any
deictic expression. Thus AErf modifies an implic-
it verbal-phrase scope.

حكلمكعرفالما حاجةشوفاعارفمش .6
m$ EArf A$wf HAjp lmA AErf Hklmk

I can't see anything. When I can, I'll call you.

On the surface level, the obligative الزم lAzm
(must) in 7 is followed by the noun phrase a real
reaction against military trials. Yet, on a deeper
level, the tweet is the short version of we must

412



(take) a real reaction against military trials. This
means that lAzm has an implicit verbal-phrase
scope.

العسكریةالمحاكماتموقف بجد ضد ) ناخذ(الزم.7
lAzm (naxd) mwqf bjd Dd AlmHAkmAt AlEskryp

We must (take) a real reaction against military trials

Word order flexibility allows for some mo-
dality triggers - especially adverbials - to occur
before, after or in the middle of their scope(s).

Long dependencies between modality triggers
and their scope(s) are the last challenge with Ara-
bic modality annotation. The obligative اطلب ATlb
(ask; require) in 8 subcategorizes for a comple-
ment clause, which starts 9 words later (affixes
excluded).

من عناصر االجھزة األمنیة المصریة المتخفیة في مالبس مدنیة اطلب.8
عشان سلوكھم ولبسھم ونظرتھم مھروشة أويعلي كونانانھم یتفرجو

ATlb mn EnASr AlAjhzp Al>mnyp AlmSryp Almtxfyp fy
mlAbs mdnyp Anhm ytfrjw Ely kwnAn E$An slwkhm
wlbshm wnZrthm mhrw$p >wy

I ask Egyptian security individuals disguising in civil
outfits to watch Conan because their behavior, outfit and
looks are ridiculously revealed.

4 Arabic Modality Annotation

4.1 Corpus Encoding and Description

We randomly selected a corpus of 1,704 raw
tweets (33,349 tokens and 11,013 unique types)
from the YADAC corpus (Al-Sabbagh and Girju,
2012). The considered time span ranges from
January 25, 2011 to June 30, 2011. All tweets
were posted in Egypt by ordinary individuals,
celebrities (e.g. politicians, actors, singers, TV
hosts), and the press (e.g. newspapers, TV sta-
tions, NGOs, election campaigns).

The corpus includes tweets in both MSA and
EA because press users always post in MSA,
while celebrities and ordinary individuals fre-
quently switch between MSA and EA. Based on
our manual annotation of user types, we have
1,318 tweets posted by individuals, 369 tweets
by celebrities and 17 tweets by the press.

4.2 Annotators and Annotation Units

Two EA native speakers performed the annota-
tion. Being linguistics students, they can be as-
sumed to master MSA. They were given a one-
hour video tutorial covering the annotation
guidelines and procedures in Sections 4.3 and
4.4, respectively, followed by a 30-minute work-
shop dedicated to training and discussion.

Each annotator is required to label each (1)
modality trigger, (2) its semantic meaning, (3) its
scope type(s), and (4) its scope span(s). We keep

holder annotation for future work as it poses ad-
ditional challenges.

4.3 Annotation Guidelines

Our core annotation guidelines are summarized
in the semantic-syntactic working definition of
modality given in Section 1. We define modality
triggers as words and phrases that (1) convey a
modality meaning from Palmer's (1989, 2001)
typology, (2) and subcategorize for clauses and
verbal phrases; representing propositions and
events, respectively. We also give the annotators
a number of supplementary guidelines.

Annotators have to label each trigger and its
scope(s). Multiple triggers may have the same
scope as in 9 where the two epistemic triggers
عارف EArf (I know) and متأكد mt>kd (I'm sure)
share the clause scope of that Mubarak won't be
executed.

حیتعدمن مبارك مش امتأكدوعارفأنا .9
AnA EArf wmt>kd An mbArk m$ HytEdm

I know and I'm sure that Mubarak won't be executed.

Annotators have to label all the scopes of the
modality trigger for type and then identify their
spans. In 10, the obligative الزم lAzm (must)
modifies three verbal-phrase scopes linked by
the coordinating conjunction و w (and).

عشان نجیبھ من جدورهومانسكتش علیھونتابع الموضوعالزماحنا .10
یحصلش تانيما

AHnA lAzm ntAbE AlmwDwE wmAnskt$ Elyh wnjybh mn
jdwrh E$An mA yHSl$ tAny

We must follow up with this, not ignore it and investi-
gate it well so it won't happen again.

Finally, annotators have to retrieve implicit
scopes whether they are referred to in-text or us-
ing their own real-world knowledge.

4.4 Annotation Procedure

Annotation proceeded in four stages. For
Stage 0, we used our novel, manually-built,
large-scale Arabic Modality Lexicon (AML) to
automatically pre-highlight candidate modality
triggers. AML was built in three steps:
 First, we manually generated the person,

gender, number, tense, mood and aspect in-
flections as well as the present and past par-
ticiple derivations of 276 lemmas compiled
from Mitchell and al-Hassan (1994), Brustad
(2000) and Moshref (2012).

 Second, we added a list of triggers including
particles, adverbs and multi-word generic
expressions that do not inflect for person,
gender, number, tense, mood and aspect.

 Finally, we labeled each entry for an English

413



<entry id="997" token="متھیألي" trans.="mthy>ly" gloss="I think" ambiguity="NA" dialect="EA"
semClass="epistemic" features="NA"  </entry>

<entry id="2032" token="من المحتم" trans="mn AlmHtm" gloss="it's essential that" ambiguity="NA" dialect="MSA"
semClass="obligative" features="MWE" </entry>

<entry id="3423" token="عجز" trans="Ejz" gloss="failed to" ambiguity="lexical" dialect="MSA/EA"
semClass="abilitive" features="inherentlyNeg,Quasi"</entry>

Table 1: An expert from the Arabic Modality Lexicon (AML)

gloss, ambiguities {lexical, semantic, both,
NA}, dialects {MSA, EA, both}, modality
semantic meaning and special features {quasi;
inherently-negative, multi-word expression}
as in Table 1.

Currently, AML has 7,584 entries, with the
statistical distributions in Table 2. Despite the
large size of AML, annotators were instructed to
add any words or phrases that match our working
semantic-syntactic definition of modality.
Semantic meanings Ambiguity
Epistemic 3,144 Lexical 2,363
Sensory 134 Semantic 155
Reported 427 Lexical/Semantic 116
Obligative 1,091 Unambiguous 4,950
Permissive 815
Commissive 132
Abilitive 957
Volitive 884
Dialects Special Features
MSA 2,268 Quasi 777
EA 3,100 Inherently-Neg. 788
MSA/EA 2,216 MWE 276

Table 2: AML statistics

For Stage 1, annotators labeled each pre-
highlighted modality trigger for its modality se-
mantic meaning. We defined modality semantic
annotation as a synonymy judgment task where
the annotators, given a number of synsets, had to
decide to which synset the pre-highlighted trig-
ger belongs. We used 8 synsets; each of which
featured one modality semantic meaning from
Palmer's (1989; 2001) typology. The average
size of the synsets is 15 words/phrases to repre-
sent different shades of meaning. Yet, due to
space limitations, we only included sample
synsets in Table 3. To avoid fatigue, disinterest,
and distraction effects, we used counterbalancing
and prompted the annotators to provide their own
synonym(s) for the pre-highlighted candidate
trigger if none of the given synsets seemed syn-
onymous.

For Stage 2, annotators labeled the syntactic
type of the linguistic constituents modified by
the pre-highlighted modality trigger (i.e. scope
type) where applicable. Annotators had to choose
whether the modified constituent was a clause, a
verbal phrase, or another type of constituency
(e.g. a noun phrase, an adjectival phrase). Once

the clause or the verbal phrase option was select-
ed, annotators were prompted to extract that
clause or verbal phrase.

Epistemic (opinion,
conclusion, possibility)

- حسب - ظن -افترض - أعتقد 
ھفي رأی-من المحتمل - تصور 

Evidential (reported) أخبر - أذاع -أفاد -صرح - قال 
أفصح عن -أعرب عن -أنبأ - 

Evidential (sensory) الحظ - سمع بنفسھ -شاھد بعینیھ 
Obligative
(and necessity)

من -ضروري - حتما -یجب 
استوجب - بحاجة إلى - الالزم

Permissive
(and prohibitive)

وافق -اجاز -اباح - اذن - سمح 
... نھى عن - منع - 

Commissive ... عاھد - تعھد - وعد -أقسم 
Abilitive
(incapability)

- تمكن من - قادر على - استطاع 
...فشل -عجز عن - تسنى لھ 

Volitive قد النیة على ع-على عزم- أراد 

Table 3: Sample synsets used for modality semantic
annotation

For Stage 3, we automatically extracted the
triggers that followed our semantic-syntactic
working definition of modality. That is, triggers
labeled as synonymous to one of the synsets in
Table 3 AND as modifying a clause or a verbal
phrase. In this stage, instances such as افتكروا
AftkrwA in 11 were automatically excluded: alt-
hough it modifies a complement clause, it means
remember which is a non-modality meaning.

أصعببیبقىنمشي تحقیق مطالبناإن كل مرة بفتكرواا.11
AftkrwA <n kl mrp bnm$y tHqyq mTAlbnA bybqY <SEb

Remember that every time we leave, it becomes harder
to achieve our demands!

Similarly, instances such as أعلنوا >ElnwA
(they announced) in 12 were automatically fil-
tered out. It is synonymous with the evidential
reported synset, yet it modifies a prepositional
phrase.

عن أسماء المعتقلین في السجن الحربيأخیرا أعلنوا.12
>ElnwA >xyrA En >smA' AlmEtqlyn fy Alsjn AlHrby

They finally announced the names of all prisoners in the
military jail.

Instances such as قادر qAdr (able to) in 13 were
automatically admitted as valid modality trig-
gers. It belongs to the dynamic abilitive synset,
and modifies the verbal phrase أن یصنع >n ySnE
(to make).

أن یصنع مصیره بیدهقادرالشعب المصري .13
Al$Eb AlmSry qAdr >n ySnE mSyrh bydh

414



The Egyptian people are able to make their own
destiny.

Our annotation procedure pinpoints the effi-
ciency and applicability of each dimension of our
definition of modality. These guidelines also
speed up the annotation process and increase an-
notation reliability because they provide annota-
tors with practical and concrete prompts, and
elicit well-structured answers that can be auto-
matically converted into the modality annotation
profiles described in Section 4.5.

4.5 Modality Annotation Profiles

Twitter terms of services prohibit redistrib-
uting raw tweet texts. Thus at the end of the an-
notation process, a profile was built for each
tweet with its user name, tweet ID, and modality-
related information. Associated software is to be
given to help reconstruct tweets using their IDs.
Although at the time of writing this paper all
tweet IDs are still active, there is a potential of
degradation if users delete their tweets or make
their accounts private. This does not affect the
modality-related profile, however, the complete
tweet text will not be available. Modality-related
information presents chunks of the tweet texts
that represent the trigger word/phrase and the
scope clause/verbal phrase. Thus we assume that
we are not violating the terms of services.

Triggers are marked with 4-character labels.
The first character is T for Trigger. The second
two characters indicate the semantic meaning of
the trigger {Ep: epistemic, Rp: reported, Sn: sen-
sory, Ob: obligative, Pr: permissive, Cm:
commissive, Ab: abilitive, Vl: volitive}. The
fourth character is an index to indicate whether
the trigger is the 1st, 2nd and so on in the tweet
and to relate the trigger to its scope(s).

Scopes are marked with 3-character labels.
The first is S for Scope. The second represents
the syntactic type of the scope - {C: clause, P:
verbal phrase}. The last is an index matching that
of its trigger. Table 4 shows the modality annota-
tion profiles for examples 1 and 9, respectively.

user="alaa"
tweet_id=" 71857458888458240"
[[ ("zmAn", "TEP1"),

(("mbArk lsh byHkmnA", "SC1")) ]]

user="eAiNet"
tweet_id="46316910177697792"
[[   ("EArf", "TEP1"),

(("An mbArk m$ HytEdm", "SC1"))],
[("mt>kd", "TEP2"),

(("An mbArk m$ HytEdm", "SC2")) ]]
Table 4: Example modality annotation profiles

5 Annotation Results

5.1 Inter-Annotator Agreement Rates and
Disagreement Factors

AML pre-highlighted 2,892 candidate triggers in
our 1,704 tweets. We used the kappa κ statistics
to measure the Inter-Annotator Agreement (IAA)
rates for:
 Modality semantic annotation: this labels

each candidate trigger as synonymous to one
of the synsets in Table 3 featuring Palmer's
(1989; 2001) typology.

 Modality syntactic annotation: this in-
cludes (1) identifying the scope type as to
whether it is a clause, a verbal phrase, or
none; and (2) identifying the scope span in
terms of the beginning and the end of each
scope.

Our macro kappa κ IAA rate for modality se-
mantic annotation is 0.899 (Table 5). It is hard to
measure if this rate is significantly higher than
rates reported in the literature of modality seman-
tic annotation because direct comparison with
prior work is not possible as explained in Section
2. Yet, one point to highlight is that we do not
use a collapsed typology of modality semantic
meanings as in Rubenstein et al. (2013) and Cui
and Chi (2013), who both collapsed modality
semantic meanings into two major classes only:
priority vs. non-priority.

Kappa
Percent
Agreement

Semantic annotation 0.899 0.918
Scope type 0.846 0.902
Scope span 0.929 0.973

Table 5: Macro kappa κ inter-annotator agreement rates
for modality semantic and syntactic annotations

We attribute our high IAA rate for modality
semantic annotation to: (1) the large-scale AML,
which provides annotators with an extensive list
of candidate triggers; and (2) using synonymy
judgments to give annotators practical, self-
evident annotation prompts instead of subjective
guidelines, defining modality triggers as expres-
sions of alternative states in which the world
could be.

There are, however, two limitations to using
synonymy judgments for modality semantic an-
notation. First, the quality of the annotation relies
on the quality of the used synsets. It is important
to select unambiguous triggers to represent the
modality semantic meanings in different con-
texts. This is because triggers interact with other
linguistic features such as modification, negation
and grammatical mood. Second, to better guide

415



the annotators, especially when working on a
morphologically-rich language such as Arabic, it
is better to have the synset members inflected for
the same person, gender, number, tense, mood
and aspect as the candidate trigger.

It took us three iterations of annotations - each
one with two different annotators - to come up
with the best final synsets used in this paper.
This process is time and labor consuming. Yet,
once the synsets have been created, the annota-
tion process is fast and replicable with a potential
to be crowdsourced. We will examine this option
in future work.

Highly-ambiguous lemmas are the first disa-
greement factor for modality semantic annota-
tion. Epistemic lemmas such as شاف $Af (saw),
عرف Erf (knew), فھم fhm (understood), صدق Sdq
(believed) and قال qAl (said) among others have
multiple meanings of which one or more might
be modality-related. This explains why most of
the disagreement scores in Table 6 are between
modality and non-modality meanings (i.e. NA).

Ep Rp Sn Ob Pr Cm Ab Vl NA
Ep 610 10 3 1 9 0 9 0 33
Rp 7 261 0 13 0 0 0 0 20
Sn 2 0 192 0 0 0 0 0 5
Ob 0 8 0 299 3 0 1 1 0
Pr 0 0 0 1 93 0 6 0 0
Cm 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0
Ab 0 0 0 0 0 0 124 0 0
Vl 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 267 1
NA 98 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 802

Table 6: Confusion matrix for semantic annotation

For one annotator نفھم nfhm in 14 is synony-
mous to نشرح n$rH (explain) and thus does not
belong to any of the modality synsets in Table 3.
For the other annotator, this trigger still means
explain, but not as in explaining factual infor-
mation, but as in making people adopt a specific
point of view or a belief. Thus it is synonymous
to أنننجعلھم یؤمنو njElhm y&mnwn >n (make
them believe that) and is an epistemic trigger.

إن المجلس العسكري حاجة والجیش حاجةالناس نفھمالبد .14
lAbd nfhm AlnAs <n Almjls AlEskry HAjp wAljy$ Hajp

We must explain to people that the Supreme Council of
Armed Forces is one thing and the army is another.

The same lemma may also have more than
one closely-related modality meaning; (i.e. it is
semantically-ambiguous). For one annotator
بیقول byqwl in 15 is an evidential reported trigger
meaning is saying; whereas it is an epistemic
trigger meaning is thinking for the other.

بیقولقفشوا ناس معاھم سالح وطلعوھم بره المیدان عشان بس اللي .15
یعرف إنھ غلطانإننا بلطجیة

qf$wA nAs mEAhm slAH wTlEwhm brh AlmydAn E$an
Ally byqwl <nnA blTjyp yErf <nh glTAn

They arrested some people with guns and kicked them
out of the square so that those saying we're thugs realize
that they are wrong.

Modality triggers not included in AML are
the second disagreement factor for modality se-
mantic annotation. A total of 168 triggers were
identified as new; 85 of which were agreed upon
by both annotators. For future modality annota-
tion, agreed-upon new triggers will be added to
AML and controversial ones are to be examined
by experts prior to inclusion.

The macro kappa κ IAA rate for scope type
identification is 0.846 according to Table 5.
Main factors of disagreement are:
 Clauses vs. verbal phrases: in some con-

texts, triggers such as ممكن mmkn (may, it's
possible that) and ضروري Drwry (must; it is
necessary that) can be understood either as
auxiliaries subcategorizing for verbal phrases
or as adjuncts subcategorizing for clauses.
Thus ضروري ننزل نقول أل Drwry nnzl nqwl l>
can be either we must protest and say no or
it's necessary that we protest and say no.

 Implicit scope recovery: implicit scopes with
deictic expressions or in-text reference were
easy to retrieve unlike implicature-based
scopes. For instance, احنا صدقنا خطابھ AHnA
SdqnA xTAbh (we believed his speech) was
perceived by one annotator as we believed
what he said in his speech was true. Thus the
annotator selected the clause option for the
scope type. The other annotator did not see
such an implicature and thus selected NA,
meaning that the scope is unrecognizable or is
neither a clause nor a verbal phrase.
The macro kappa κ IAA rate for scope span

recognition in Table 5 is 0.929 which is quite
high. We attribute this to the simplicity of the
tweet genre, which entails short sentences (140
characters or less) and a writing style that resem-
bles short telegraphic notes more than formal and
lengthy sentences. Interjections, adjuncts and
subordinate conjunctions are the main reasons
for disagreement. In 16, one annotator ends the
span of the clause-based scope before علشان
El$An (so that); while the other includes the en-
tire sentence into the scope span. We will add
clearer guidelines for when interjections, ad-
juncts and subordinate clauses should be consid-
ered into the scope span in future work.

)علشان اللي في الشارع یحسوا ان فیھ حد جنبھم(الناس تنزلزمال.16
lAzm AlnAs tnzl (El$An Ally fy Al$ArE yHswA An fyh
Hd jnbhm)

416



People must go to protests (so that those already protest-
ing won't feel as if left alone).

As we implemented Stage 3 of our annotation
procedure, we sought triggers that adhere to our
semantic-syntactic working definition of modali-
ty. Triggers labeled as conveying a modality
meaning AND subcategorizing for either clauses
or verbal phrases were 1,746 and 1,619 triggers
by Annotators 1 and 2, respectively. Triggers
labeled as not conveying a modality meaning
and/or not modifying a clause or a verbal phrase
were 1,146 and 1,273 triggers by Annotators 1
and 2, respectively. Exact matches between the
two annotators (i.e. triggers labeled similarly for
modality meanings, scope type(s) and scope
span(s)) amount to 1,343 valid modality triggers
according to our definition.

Modal Non-Modal
Annotator 1 1,746 1,146
Annotator 2 1,619 1,273
Agreed-Upon (Exact-Match) 1,343 1,034
Total Exact matches 2,377

Table 7: Exact-match modality annotated corpus

5.2 Annotated Corpus Statistics

In this section, we give statistics on candidate
triggers labeled identically by both annotators:
whether triggers eventually considered as valid
modality triggers (i.e. 1,343 triggers) or triggers
eventually rejected as invalid modality triggers
(i.e. 1,034). Table 8 shows the correlation be-
tween modality semantic meanings and their
scope types. We conclude that:
 Except for evidential sensory, modality trig-

gers are more likely to modify clauses and
verbal phrases than other linguistic constitu-
ents such as noun, adjective and adverb
phrases. That is, modality triggers subcatego-
rize for clauses and verbal phrases.

 Propositional modality (i.e. epistemic, evi-
dential reported and sensory) subcategorizes
more frequently for clauses; whereas event
modality (i.e. deontic and dynamic) is more
likely to subcategorize for verbal phrases.

 Triggers that were pre-highlighted as candi-
dates by AML and later rejected for being
invalid according to our definition correlate
more frequently with linguistic constituents
other than clauses and verbal phrases.

 Only 2% of scopes are implicit.
Based on AML dialect labels, valid modality

triggers are: (1) 77.3% EA-exclusive such as
متھیألي mthy>ly (I think) and عایز EAyz (I want),
(2) 15.6% either MSA or EA based on context
such as قال qAl (he said) and عرف Erf (he knew),

and (3) 7% MSA-exclusive such as استوجب
Astwjb (it necessitated) and وددت wddt (I want-
ed).

Clause V. Phrase Implicit NA Total
Ep 477 23 15 33 548
Rp 197 6 7 33 243
Sn 49 1 2 120 172
Ob 54 77 15 21 167
Pr 15 47 5 11 78

Cm 2 0 0 4 6
Ab 3 97 4 9 113
Vl 80 167 0 1 248
NA 36 6 0 760 802

Total 913 424 48 992 2377
Table 8: Modality semantic meanings and scope types

Ambiguity accounts for 37% and 5% of the
valid modality lemmas for lexical and semantic
ambiguity, respectively. Some of the most fre-
quent lemmas from each ambiguity type are il-
lustrated in Tables 9 and 10.

Lemma Trans. Modal Freq. Non-Modal Freq.
قال qAl 171 40
نفس nfs 56 186
شاف $Af 80 129
فھم fhm 88 45

Table 9: Top frequent lexically-ambiguous lemmas

Lemma Trans. Modality meanings Freq.

شاف $Af epistemic (think)
sensory (watch; witness)

47
95

عرف Erf epistemic (know)
abilitive (can)

41
40

ممكن mmkn epistemic (possible that)
abilitive (can)

28
17

Table 10: Top frequent semantically-ambiguous lemmas

Finally, about 82% of the scope heads are
adjacent to their triggers. This is expected given
that tweets are typically short.

6 Conclusion and Outlook

We presented a novel modality annotation
scheme and applied it to the Arabic language in
the tweets genre. This work is part of a larger
project to use linguistic modality to detect power
relations among participants on Twitter. The
presented scheme uses both semantics and syntax
to increase annotation reliability. Results show
that Arabic modality triggers have regular
subcategorization patterns that yield high annota-
tion agreement when used as guidelines.

Currently, we are working on an updated
version of this corpus with improved guidelines
to tackle disagreement factors that emerged here.
The new version will also include annotations for
modality holders and trigger-related features
such as negation, modification and mood.

417



Acknowledgement

This work has been partially supported by a grant
on social media and mobile computing from the
Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and
Technology.

References

Muhammad Abdul-Mageed and Mona Diab. 2012.
AWATIF: A Multi-Genre Corpus for Modern
Standard Arabic Subjectivity and Sentiment Analy-
sis. The 8th International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC'12), Istanbul,
Turkey, 21-27 May 2012.

Rania Al-Sabbagh and Roxana Girju. 2012. YADAC:
Yet another Dialectal Arabic Corpus. The 8th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC'12), Istanbul, Turkey, 21-27
May 2012.

Kathrin Baker, Michael Bloodgood, Bonnie Dorr,
Nathaniel W. Filardo, Lori Levin, and Christine
Piatko. 2010. A Modality Lexicon and its Use in
Automatic Tagging. The 7th International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC'10), Valletta, Malta, 19-21 May 2010.

Virginia Brennan. 1993. Root and Epistemic Modal
Auxiliary Verbs, PhD Thesis, University of Massa-
chusetts, Amherst.

Kristen E. Brustad. 2000. The Syntax of Spoken Ara-
bic: A Comparative Study of Moroccan, Egyptian,
Syrian and Kuwaiti Dialects. Georgetown Univer-
sity Press, Washington DC, USA.

John Butler. 2003. A Minimalist Treatment of Modal-
ity. Lingua, vol. 113 (10): 967-996.

Joan L. Bybee, R. D. Perkins and W. Pagliuca. 1994.
The Evolution of Grammar: Tense, Aspect and
Modality in the Languages of the World.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, USA.

Mona Diab, Lori Levin, Teruko Mitamura, Owen
Rambow, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran and  Wei Wei
Guo. 2009. Commited Belief Annotation and
Tagging. Proceedings of the Third Linguistic
Annotation Workshop (ACL-IJCNLP '09), August
2009, Suntec, Singapore.

Iris Hendrickx, Amália Mendes, and Silvia
Mencarelli. 2010. Modality in Text: A Proposal for
Corpus Annotation. The 7th International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC'10), Valletta, Malta, 19-21 May 2010

Ray Jackendoff. 1972. Semantic Interpretation in
Generative Grammar. Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press.

Suguru, Matsuyoshi, Megumi Eguchi, Chitose Sao,
Koji Murakami, Kentaro Inui, and Yuji Matsumo-

to. 2010. Annotating Event Mentions in Text with
Modality, Focus, and Source Information. The 7th
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC'10), Valletta, Malta, 19-21
May 2010

T. F. Mitchell and S. A. Al-Hassan. 1994. Modality,
Mood and Aspect in Spoken Arabic with Special
Reference to Egypt and the Levant. London and
NY: Kegan Paul International.

Ola Moshref. 2012. Corpus Study of Tense, Aspect,
and Modality in Diaglossic Speech in Cairene Ara-
bic. PhD Thesis. University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign.

Frank R. Palmer. 1989. Mood and Modality. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Frank R. Palmer. 2001. Mood and Modality. 2nd Edi-
tion. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Vinodkumar Prabhakaran. 2012. Detecting Power
Relations from Written Dialog. Proceedings of the
2012 Student Research Workshop, Jeju, Republic
of Korea.

Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Michael Bloodgood, Mona
Diab, Bonnie Dorr, Lori Levin, Christine D.
Piatko, Owen Rambow and Benjamin Van Durme.
2012. Statistical Modality Tagging from Rule-
Based Annotations and Crowdsourcing.
Proceedings of the ACL-2012 Workshop on Extra-
Propositional Aspects of Meaning in
Computational Linguistics (ExProM-2012),  Jeju,
Republic of Korea.

Roser Saurí, March Verhagen and James Pustejovsky.
2006. Annotating and Recognizing Event Modality
in Text. The 19th International FLAIRS Confer-
ence, pages: 335-339, Florida, USA, May 2006

György Szarvas, Veronika Vincze, Richárd Farkas,
and János Csirik. 2008. The BioScope Corpus:
Annotation for Negation, Uncertainty and their
Scope in Biomedical Texts. BioNLP 2008: Current
Trends in Biomedical Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages: 38-45, Columbus, Ohio, USA, June
2008

Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, and Claire Cardie.
2005. Annotating Expressions of Opinions and
Emotions in Language. Language Resources and
Evaluations, 39:165-210

418


