










































An Empirical Assessment of Contemporary Online Media in Ad-Hoc Corpus Creation for Social Events


International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 1375–1382,
Nagoya, Japan, 14-18 October 2013.

An Empirical Assessment of Contemporary Online Media in Ad-Hoc
Corpus Creation for Social Events

Kanika Narang, Seema Nagar, Sameep Mehta, L V Subramaniam, Kuntal Dey
IBM Research Labs, India

{kaninara,senagar3,sameepmehta,lvsubram,kuntadey}@in.ibm.com

Abstract

Social networking sites such as Facebook
and Twitter have become favorite portals
for users to discuss and express opinions.
Research shows that topical discussions
around events tend to evolve socially on
microblogs. However, sources like Twitter
have no explicit discussion thread which
will link semantically similar posts. More-
over, the discussion may be evolving in
multiple different threads (like Facebook).
Researchers have proposed the use of on-
line contemporary documents to act as ex-
ternal corpus to connect pairs of contex-
tually related semantic topics. This moti-
vates the question: given a significant so-
cial event, what is a good choice of exter-
nal corpus to identify evolution of discus-
sion topics around the event’s context? In
this work, we compare the effectiveness of
contemporary blog posts, online news me-
dia and forum discussions in creating ad-
hoc external corpus. Using social propen-
sity of evolution of topical discussions on
Twitter to assess the goodness of the cre-
ation, we find online news media as most
effective. We evaluate on three large real-
life Twitter datasets to affirm our findings.

1 Introduction

Social media has become a hotbed of user gen-
erated content. Multiple online platforms have
emerged for users to participate, interact and dis-
cuss. Social contact and activity networks like
Facebook, video sharing networks like Youtube,
photo/image sharing platforms like Pinterest, so-
cial bookmarking platforms like Digg, and mi-

croblogging platforms like Twitter have become
prominent online social media platforms.

Research suggests that social microblogging
platforms, like Twitter, diffuse information in a
manner similar to news media (Kwak and Lee,
2010). In a world of millions of people (Twitter
subscribers) with inherent entropy, in absence of
explicit discussion threads (unlike online forums,
for example), conversations around any event are
expected to move towards different directions over
time. Contradictory to this apparent expectation,
research suggests that these discussions tend to
temporally grow and evolve along social relation-
ships of people engaging in these discussions,
much more strongly, compared to random evolu-
tion (Narang and Nagar, 2013).

Interestingly, trending events on unstructured
microblogs often get built around non-traditional,
temporary and contemporary factors, entities and
relationships. Because of the sheer number of di-
verse contemporary events, event types and asso-
ciated documents, it is impossible to prepare well-
defined, validated and clean corpus for each and
every event. For instance, political turmoils have
existed for ages; however, one may not expect a
dedicated corpus to preexist for the Libya 2011
turmoil associating its places and locations, con-
temporary leaders, and all the other global politi-
cal factors. Hence, there is a strong need of using
contemporary online media for ad-hoc corpus cre-
ation in such a setting.

The use of external corpus has been shown to
improve performance in language tasks such as
question-answering, machine translation, and in-
formation retrieval (Kilgarriff, 2003; Clarke and
Cormack, 2002; Dumaisl and Banko, 2002; Met-
zler and Diaz, 2005; Xu and Croft, 2000; Diaz and
Metzler, 2006). But questions relating to the rele-

1375



vance of the corpus have not been studied as much.
The finding of (Narang and Nagar, 2013) that

topical discussions on microblogs tend to evolve
socially is interesting. However, it simply uses
contemporary online news media as the only
source of external corpus, to establish extended
semantic relationships across topic clusters. It
does not attempt to use any other source of rel-
evant semantic data for creating external corpus;
nor does it assess the goodness of contemporary
online news portals for this purpose.

In this study, we propose evaluating the good-
ness of different sources of external data for con-
structing ad-hoc corpus to connect topic clusters
using extended semantic edges. In addition to the
contemporary online news media corpus, we use
two other independent external corpus for con-
structing extended semantic edges, namely con-
temporary online forum discussions and contem-
porary blog posts. To the best of our knowledge,
ours is the first study of its kind.

We use three large scale real-life Twitter
datasets, namely Libya 2011 political turmoil,
Egypt 2011 political turmoil and London 2012
Olympics, having thousands of users and up to
millions of tweets, to conduct experiments. For
all datasets, we find online news media to best
capture the evolution of discussion topics along
social relationships, measured by the normalized
mutual information or NMI (Coombs and Dawes,
1970) of the social discussion threads to discus-
sion sequences. We believe this insight to be both
novel and interesting. We further observe that, for
most cases, online discussion forums perform bet-
ter compared to blogs.

In summary, the main contributions of our work
are the following.

• We empirically evaluate different contempo-
rary relevant external documents, to establish
extended semantic relationships across topi-
cal clusters formed around events.

• We assess the goodness of contemporary on-
line discussion forums, blogs, online news
media and Random search results, in form-
ing extended semantic relationships, and find
online news media to be most effective in cre-
ating ad-hoc corpus around given events.

• We demonstrate our findings on microblog-
ging data using three real events.

2 Problem settings and our approach

Problem settings
We observe the following:

1. There exist several concepts that are con-
nected in a given context, but are not connected
by any widely accepted relationship such as syn-
onyms, antonyms, hypernymns, hyponymns etc.
when taken in isolation. As an example, damage
and relief are intuitively connected concepts in se-
mantic clusters containing {damage, fire, death,
toll} and {fire, relief, spray, water}. Yet, none of
the traditional semantic relationships will connect
these when considered in absence of the larger
context, namely an event of fire. Practically, dis-
cussions on microblogs about damage caused by
fire stands a realistic chance to evolve towards dis-
cussions about relief.

2. Events on microblog networks form around
non-traditional, temporary and contemporary fac-
tors, entities and relationships. It is impractical to
expect well-defined corpus to exist a priori.

Clearly, creating corpus applicable for a given
event, to be able to connect concepts that are
related in context of the event, is a research
problem to solve. It is also important to assess the
quality of the corpus created in the process.

Algorithm
In absence of traditional a priori corpus, we at-
tempt to construct ad-hoc corpus applicable to the
context of the event. We follow the approach of
(Narang and Nagar, 2013) to construct our graphs,
conducting our experiments and measuring the
goodness of our results. We use Twitter as our
testbed. We attempt to use four independent types
of contemporary external documents to be able to
connect concepts related contextually, namely on-
line forum discussions, blog posts, news media
and Random search documents, to derive the ex-
tended semantic relationships. Our approach con-
sists of the following steps.

2.1 Topic-based cluster creation

We collect tweets belonging to an event from Twit-
ter for our experiments. The whole tweet corpus
is divided into clusters of tweets which are se-
mantically related . Event topic cluster detection
not being the focus of our work, we use an ex-
isting online clustering algorithm (Weng and Lee,
2011) to create clusters of topics related semanti-
cally. A semantic event cluster Ei is represented

1376



as {Ki, [T is , T ie ]}, where Ki denotes the set of key-
words extracted from the tweets which form the
event Ei and T i is time period of the event. We
use existing established methods for computing
K and T. K contains idf vector and proper nouns
(extracted by PoS tagging) from the tweets, and
uses Standford’s NLP Toolkit and the associated
Named Entity Recognizer. T is simply the time of
first and last tweet in the event cluster.

2.2 Extracting the relationships

Essentially, we generate an event topic graph G =
{E , {R}}, in which E represents the event top-
ics (topical clusters), and act as the vertices of
the graph. The set {R} represents the relation-
ship edges between the clusters, and are formed
from each of contextual semantic, temporal and
social perspectives.We, hereby, elaborate on the
algorithm used for extracting these relationships.

Extended Semantic Relationships: This rela-
tionship is extremely useful but challenging to es-
tablish. Lets us motivate the need for such rela-
tionship by a simple example. Consider two events
with associated keywords E1 = {damage, earth-
quake, dead, toll} and E2 = {earthquake, relief,
shelter}. Now, lets pick one work from each set
damage and relief. One cannot establish any of
the widely accepted relationships like synonym,
antonyms, hypernyms, hyposnyms etc when the
words are taken in isolation. However, coupled
with prior knowledge about the larger event earth-
quake, the words can be semantically related. In
essence (with abuse of notation and terminology),
damage and relief are independent variables with-
out extra information, however, they are related
given earthquake. Therefore, we would like to add
the semantic edge between these events. We use
external corpus to extract and quantify such se-
mantic relationships. (Narang and Nagar, 2013)
used only Google News for creation of the ex-
ternal corpus. But, due to the increased pres-
ence of users on Internet, these global and promi-
nent topics are bound to be discussed in blogs and
online discussions forums. The natural question
which arise is then, which corpus is deemed to be
best for the purpose.In this paper, we use different
data sources as ad-hoc corpus, namely contempo-
rary online discussions, blogs , online news and
Random Search documents, to form four differ-
ent graphs extended semantic per event.The nov-
elty of our work lies in empirically determining

the goodness of each of these four different data
source types in forming ad-hoc corpus.

Extended semantic relationship extraction
We establish weighted extended semantic relation-
ships across event clusters by the following steps.
The input to the extended semantic relationship
extraction algorithm for two events Ei and Ej is
keyword list Ki and Kj .
Step 1: Generating Pairs and Pruning
Mechanism- We generate |Ki| × |Kj | pairs of
keywords which need to be evaluated for ex-
tended semantic relationship. Such large number
of pairs would pose computational issues. To han-
dle this, we prune pairs which are related semanti-
cally (synonyms, antonyms, hypernymns and hy-
ponynms).We look at the similarity scores of Ki

and Kj in Wordnet. We use the well-established
Lin’s method (Lin, 1998) to compute similarity
scores of Ki and Kj using the feature vector built
into the Wordnet lexical database.For sake of com-
pleteness, please note that Lin’s measure of simi-
larity between pair of words w1 and w2 is defined
as:

sim(w1; w2) = 2I(F (w1)∩F (w2))I(F (w1))+I(F (w2))

, where F (w) is the set of features of a word
w, and I(S) is the amount of information con-
tained in a set of features S. Assuming that
features are independent of one another, I(S)
=−

∑
f∈S Plog(P (f)), where P (f) is the prob-

ability of feature f.

We retain a pair of words if the similarity score
Sij is lesser than a desirable similarity threshold
S, and discard the pair otherwise. Since POS
tagging is done on the tweets in the event, we also
remove pairs where one of the word is Proper
Noun or Active Verbs.
Step 2: Document Corpus Generation and
Searching- We use the keywords used for fil-
tering Twitter Public API to search for news
stories for the same time period on contemporary
external documents.The retrieved documents act
as our external corpus. We create an inverted
index for this corpus, where for each word we
store the document ids as well as the frequency
of the word in the documents. Given the pair
of words (Kil , K

j
m) (we will omit subscript l

and m, when there is no ambiguity), we find
the intersection of corresponding document lists.
Therefore, at the end of this step we have list of
documents (denoted by Dlm) in which both the

1377



words co-occur along with their frequency in the
documents.
Step 3: Pairwise Score Computation - For each
of the selected document, we compute the cou-
pling of the pair of words. Assume, C(Kil , Dt)
gives the tf-idf score of word Ki in document
Dt. The pairwise coupling can be computed as
minimum (C(Kil , Dt), C(K

j
m, Dt)). The overall

coupling is calculated as average of coupling over
all documents.

Step 4: Overall Score Computation - This
process is repeated for all pair of words in Ei and
Ej . Finally, for a given pair of event clusters Ei

and Ej , if wij words were discarded and the rest
were retained, then

overallscore =
∑

Ki,Kj
Coupling

(|Ki|×|Kj |−wij) .

The final scores are ranked in descending order
and top K% are selected based on user preference
or can be pruned based on threshold.

Social Relationships: Direct social connections
are the core constituent elements of social rela-
tionships. Higher order social relationships can
be established by exploring the social network
structure. Well-defined structures such as com-
munities with maximum modularity (Girvan and
Newman, 2002; Clauset and Newman, 2004) can
be extracted using efficient modularity maximiza-
tion algorithms such as BGLL (Blondel and Guil-
laume, 2008).
Social relationship extraction
We construct social linkage graphs between pairs
of events using social connections of event cluster
members to construct edges. Each event associates
a number of microblog posts (tweets) from a set of
members of the microblog network (Twitter).

A person P is said to belong to an event cluster
Ei iff (∃M), a microblog post, made by P , such
that M ∈ Ei. Please note that with this definition,
a person can potentially belong to multiple event
clusters at the same time.

These connections are established by partici-
pation of direct social neighbors of individuals
across multiple events. We draw an edge across a
given pair of events if there is at least one direct
(one-hop) neighbor in each event belonging to the
pair of events. The weight of an edge between
event cluster Ei and Ej is determined by the total
number of one-hop neighbors existing between

these two clusters. So if Ei has P i memberships,
Ej has P j memberships, the average number of
neighbors in Ej of a member belonging to Ei

is aij and the average number of neighbors in
Ei of a member belonging to Ej is aji then the
strength of the social edge between Ei and Ej is
(P i.aij + P

j .aji).

Temporal relationship The third kind of rela-
tionship we extracted is temporal relationship. We
look at two kinds of temporal relationships. (a) We
draw a temporal edge from event Ei to event Ej if
Ei ended before Ej started and the timespan be-
tween the two events has to be less than or equal to
2 days. This follows from the assumption that on
microblogging services like Twitter, a discussion
thread will not last longer than this.This threshold-
ing also prevents the occurrence of spurious edges
across different clusters.It captures the meets and
disjoint relationships described by (Allen and J.F.,
1983). We call this a T1 temporal relationship. (b)
We draw a temporal edge from event Ei to event
Ej if Ei started before Ej started, and ended after
the start but before the end of Ej . This captures
the overlaps relationship described by (Allen and
J.F., 1983). We call this a T2 temporal relation-
ship. Please note that unlike the undirected se-
mantic and social relationship edges, a temporal
relationship edge is always directed. The source
of a temporal relationship edge is the event with
the earlier starting time, and the sink is the one
with the later starting time.

2.3 Identifying and characterizing
discussions

Finally, after establishing the relationships, we
identify Discussion and Social discussion se-
quences in the same manner as described
by(Narang and Nagar, 2013).

Identifying discussion sequences: A discus-
sion sequence graph is defined as, a directed
acyclic graph (DAG) of topics that are related us-
ing the semantic edges obtained by our earlier se-
mantic relationship extraction process, where the
relationships are established over time. Intuitively,
a discussion sequence captures the topical evolu-
tion of discussions over time. We identify dis-
cussion sequences using the logical intersection
(AND) of the relationship set of the undirected
semantic and the directed temporal graphs, with
the directions of the latter preserved in the output.

1378



So, the discussion sequence DAG GDS is formed
as: GDS = {E , {{RT } ∩ {RS}}}, where the set
{RT } represents the edge set of the directed tem-
poral graph and the set {RS} represents the edge
set of the undirected semantic graph.

Identifying Social discussion sequences: We
take the above graph, and take an edge set in-
tersection with the social graph. This results in
retaining the discussion sequences that are so-
cially connected and eliminating the discussion se-
quences that are socially disconnected. The re-
tained discussion sequences show the social evo-
lution of discussion topics around events on mi-
croblogs. Hence, these socially connected discus-
sion sequences are identified as social discussion
threads.

2.4 Evaluation

In order to measure the goodness of the approach,
we find the BGLL (Blondel and Guillaume, 2008)
communities for the discussion sequence graphs
and social discussion threads, and compute the
normalized mutual information (NMI) (Coombs
and Dawes, 1970) for each of these intersections.
Please note that NMI values range between 0 and
1, and higher NMI values indicate higher overlaps
of the two inputs.
(Narang and Nagar, 2013) showed that Discussion
threads tend to evolve socially and as a result,
the NMI values between communities formed
on Discussion Sequences and Social Discussion
thread is higher than in between BGLL com-
munities formed on purely Social and Semantic
Graph. In this paper, we will compare the NMI
values between Discussion threads and Social
Discussion threads with taking different extended
semantic graphs for their construction.The corpus
which results in highest NMI value between the
two graphs has most relevant retrieved documents
for the event.

3 Results

We collect Twitter data from three events that
had created significant impact on social media
- Libya 2011 political turmoil (collected 4 - 24
Mar’11), Egypt 2011 political turmoil (collected
1 - 4 Mar’11) and the London 2012 Olympics
(collected 27 Jun - 13 Aug’12). We use Google
News (http://news.google.com) with custom date
ranges to collect the contemporary online news

data, and Google blog and discussions search
options on Google’s portal (http://w.google.com)
with custom date ranges to collect the blog and
forum discussions data respectively.We also used
Google Search (http://google.com) to collect ran-
dom search results for the same events which will
be a mixture of all the data sources to act as
a baseline.We gave the same keywords over the
same time range while collecting documents from
Google which were used for collection of tweets
in the Twitter. Table 1 shows the basic statistics of
the datasets.

Following the approach outlined in Section 2,
we form semantic topic clusters from the tweets
following the algorithm of (Weng and Lee, 2011).
We now establish extended semantic, social and
temporal relationships. For extended semantic re-
lationships, we form four graphs, one each for on-
line news media, discussions, blog and Random
documents. For temporal relationships, we form
two graphs, one each for the follows and over-
laps relationships. Thus overall, for each dataset
(Libya, Egypt and London), we construct 8 dif-
ferent graphs, constructing a total of 24 graphs
for experimentation.

We now identify the discussion sequences by
taking a logical intersection of the extended se-
mantic and temporal graphs, and the social dis-
cussion threads by taking a logical intersection
of the discussion sequences with the social rela-
tionship graph. We find the NMI (Coombs and
Dawes, 1970) across these two graphs using the
BGLL (Blondel and Guillaume, 2008) communi-
ties formed around these two graphs. We retain the
top 10%, 20%, 30%, 40% and 50% of the graph
edges and repeat our experiments to observe the
overall trend. Figure 1 captures our findings for
the temporal follows relationships.

The results clearly indicate that in each case,
contemporary online news yields the best results
(maximum NMI values). In most cases (except
Egypt), online discussion forums give better re-
sults compared to blogs. This trend becomes more
yet prominent as we retain higher fraction of the
relationships.Random search results generally be-
have the worst, except in London which is a little
surprising and interesting.

Table 2 shows the corresponding results for the
temporal overlaps relationship for Libya, which
also prominently shows a similar trend. We
observe similar trends for other temporal over-

1379



Table 1: Keywords used to collect the Twitter datasets, dates of data collection, number of users, tweets
collected and clusters, and number of contemporary external news, forum and blogs documents collected

Dataset Keywords NumUsers Tweets Clusters #News #Forum #Blogs
Libya Libya, Gaddafi 83,177 1,011,716 1,344 3,266 280 263

Olympics London, Olympic 1,313,578 2,319,519 299 1,186 516 307
Egypt Egypt, Protest 37,961 60,948 141 1,753 513 285

Table 2: NMI values for temporal overlaps based
graphs of Libya

Source 10% 20% 30% 40% 50%
Blogs 0.01 0.04 0.09 0.09 0.13

Forums 0.01 0.06 0.06 0.11 0.16
News 0.02 0.09 0.14 0.09 0.17

Random 0.02 0.04 0.00 0.08 0.11

laps graphs also, with the London Olympics data
shows a few exceptions (omitted for space con-
straints).

To eliminate the possible bias due to the num-
ber of documents received for each type of corpus,
we also repeated the experiment with taking top
200 documents from each sources namely, Online
news, blogs, discussions and Random documents.
We, then evaluated the performance of these cor-
pora on the Libya dataset.

The figure 2 shows the NMI graph for the Libya
dataset with taking only top 200 articles from each
of the data sources. The contemporary news arti-
cle consistently give best results even in this case
which corresponds to the finding in the above ex-
periment. Although, Random results also give an
equivalent performance but this can be attributed
to the fact that the initial results in Google search
mostly contains Google News results which will
be in prominence because of the low number of
documents selected in this experiment.

4 Related Work

Significant research has been conducted on con-
tent analysis of information discussed on social
media sites (Kwak and Lee, 2010). Grinev et al.
(Grinev and Grineva, 2009) demonstrate Tweet-
Sieve, a system that obtains news on any given
subject by sifting through the Twitter stream.
Along similar lines, Twinner by Abrol et al. Abrol
and Khan (Abrol and Khan, 2010) identify news
content of a query by taking into account the geo-
graphic location and the time of query. Nagar et al.

(Nagar and Seth, 2013) demonstrate how content
flow occurs during natural disasters.

Several ways to cluster social content have been
studied. There has been work on clustering based
on links between the users by doing agglomera-
tive clustering, min-cut based graph partitioning,
centrality based and Clique percolation methods
((Porter and Onnela, 2009), (Fortunato, 2007)).
Other approaches consider only the semantic con-
tent of the social interactions for the clustering
(Zhou, 2006). More recently there has been work
on combining both the links and the content for
doing the clustering ((Pathak and Delong, 2008),
(Sachan and Contractor, 2012)). In (Narang and
Nagar, 2013) relationships between clusters are
determined based on semantic, social and tempo-
ral information but did not study the impact of dif-
ferent corpus on their results.

External corpora have been used by researchers
to create knowledge base in various fields like for
question-answering (Clarke and Cormack, 2002;
Dumaisl and Banko, 2002) models such as Chat-
bots etc, helping machine to translate documents
like expanding queries (Kilgarriff, 2003; Metzler
and Diaz, 2005) and also for improving Informa-
tion retrieval using external information (Xu and
Croft, 2000; Diaz and Metzler, 2006). They use
generic corpora and to the best of our knowledge,
there is no study which analyses the relevance of
different corpora for the given problem.

5 Conclusions

In this work, we studied different contemporary
online external data sources for constructing ad-
hoc corpus to connect event topic clusters. We ex-
plored the content of contemporary online discus-
sion forums, blogs, online news media and Mix-
ture of different corpus, and evaluated their ef-
fectiveness in establishing semantic relationships
across topical clusters. Exploiting the social
propensity of evolution of such discussions, we as-
sessed the goodness of these diverse data sources

1380



(a) NMI for Libya turmoil

(b) NMI for London Olympics

(c) NMI for Egypt turmoil

Figure 1: NMI of social discussion threads (SDT)
with respect to discussion sequences (DS): tempo-
ral follows relationship

using Twitter as a microblogging platform, and
eventual NMI values as a qualitative indicator of
the goodness of the extended semantic relation-
ships established.

We found contemporary online news media to
be the most effective type of external data source
for creating ad-hoc corpus, using three large real-
life Twitter datasets collected around major events.
Further, we found contemporary online discussion
forums to be usually, but not always, more ef-
fective compared to contemporary blogs.We also
found using Mixture of all documents to be mostly
give the worst performance.

Our work will be useful to studies and applica-
tions that require capturing the evolution of top-
ical discussions on microblogs like Twitter. As
future work, we propose evaluating other external

Figure 2: NMI of social discussion threads (SDT)
with respect to discussion sequences (DS): tempo-
ral follows relationship with retaining only top 200
articles

sources of semantic data, and also apply on other
microblogging platforms and data sets, for a more
comprehensive and complete study.

References
S. Abrol and L. Khan. Twinner: Understanding news

queries with geo-content using twitter. In Proceed-
ings of the GIS, 2010.

Allen J. F.: Maintaining Knowledge about Temporal
Intervals. In: Communications of the ACM (1983).

Blondel V.D., Guillaume J.L., Lambiotte R., Lefebvre
E.: Fast unfolding of communities in large networks.
In: J. Stat. Mech. P10008 (2008).

Clarke C. L. A., Cormack G. V., Laszlo M., Lynam T.
R., Terra E. L.: The impact of corpus size on ques-
tion answering performance. In: SIGIR 02: Pro-
ceedings of the 25th annual international ACM SI-
GIR conference on Research and development in in-
formation retrieval (2002).

M. Girvan and M. E. J. Newman. Community structure
in social and biological networks. In Proc. Ntl. Acad.
Sci, USA, 99(7821),2002.

Clauset A., Newman M. E. J., Moore C.: Finding com-
munity structure in very large networks. In: Phys.
Rev. E. 70(066111) (2004).

Coombs C. H., Dawes R. M., Tversky A.: Mathemati-
cal psychology: An elementary introduction In: En-
glewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall (1970).

Diaz F., Metzler D.: Improving the estimation of rele-
vance models using large external corpora. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 29th annual international ACM SI-
GIR conference on Research and development in in-
formation retrieval. ACM, 2006.

Dumais S., Banko M., Brill E., Lin J., Ng. A. : Web
question answering: is more always better? In SI-
GIR 02: Proceedings of the 25th annual interna-
tional ACM SIGIR conference on Research and de-
velopment in information retrieval (2002).

1381



S. Fortunato and M. Barthelemy. Resolution limit in
community detection. In Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences, 104(1):3641, 2007.

M. Grinev, M. Grineva, A. Boldakov, L. Novak, A.
Syssoev and D. Lizorkin. Tweetsieve: Sifting mi-
croblogging stream for events of user interest. In
Proceedings of the SIGIR, 2009.

Kilgarriff A., Grefenstette. G.: Introduction to the spe-
cial issue on the web as corpus. In: Computational
linguistics 29.3 (2003): 333-347.

Kwak H., Lee C., Park H., Moon S.: What is Twitter,
a Social Media or a News Media. In: Proceedings
of the WWW (2010). In: Proceedings of the WWW
(2010).

Lin D.: An information-theoretic definition of similar-
ity. In: Proceedings of the International Conference
on Machine Learning (1998).

Metzler D., Diaz F., Strohman T., Croft W. B.: Umass
at robust 2005: Using mixtures of relevance models
for query expansion. In: The Fourteenth Text RE-
trieval Conference (TREC 2005) Notebook (2005).

Narang K., Nagar S., Mehta S., Subramaniam L.V.,
Dey K.: Discovery and analysis of evolving topi-
cal social discussions on unstructured microblogs.
In: European Conference on Information Retrieval
(2013).

S. Nagar, A. Seth and A. Joshi. Characterization of So-
cial Media Response to Natural Disasters. In Pro-
ceedings of the WWW, 2012.

N. Pathak, C. DeLong, A. Banerjee and K. Erickson.
Social topics models for community extraction. In
Proceedings of the 2nd SNA-KDD Workshop, 2008.

M. A. Porter, J.-P. Onnela and P. J. Mucha. Communi-
ties in networks. In Notices of the American Mathe-
matical Society, 56(9):1082-1097, 2009.

M. Sachan, D. Contractor, T. A. Faruquie and L. V.
Subramaniam. Using Content and Interactions for
Discovering Communities in Social Networks. In
Proceedings of the WWW, 2012.

Weng J., Lee B.S: Event detection in Twitter. In: IC-
SWM - Proceedings of the AAAI conference on we-
blogs and social media (2011).

Xu J., Croft. W. B.: Improving the effectiveness of in-
formation retrieval with local context analysis. In:
ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., 18(1):79-112 (2000).

D. Zhou, E. Manavoglu, J. Li, C. L. Giles and H. Zha.
Probabilistic models for discovering e-communities.
In Proceedings of the WWW, 2006.

1382


