










































Word in a Dictionary is used by Numerous Users


International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 874–877,
Nagoya, Japan, 14-18 October 2013.

 

Word in a Dictionary is used by Numerous Users 

  Eiji Aramaki     Sachiko Maskawa 
    Kyoto University/PRESTO            Photonic System Solutions 
      eiji.aramaki@gmail.com         sachiko.maskawa@gmail.com 

 
                Mai Miyabe               Mizuki Morita         Sachi Yasuda 
            Kyoto University           University of Tokyo        NINJAL 
      mai.miyabe@gmail.com              morita.mizuki@gmail.com          yasudasac@gmail.com 

 
  

 
 

Abstract 

Dictionary editing requires enormous time to 
dis-cuss whether a word should be listed in a 
dictionary or not. So as to define a dictionary 
word, this study employs the number of word 
users as a novel metrics for selecting a dic-
tionary word. In order to obtain the word user, 
we used about 0.25 billion tweets of approxi-
mately 100,000 people published for five 
months. This study compared the classification 
performance of various measures. The result 
of the experiments revealed that a word in a 
dictionary is used by numerous users. 

 

1 Introduction 
Dictionary editing requires numerous time to 

discuss whether a word should be listed in a dic-
tionary or not. In order to define a dictionary 

word, this study assumes that the following two 
scales are essential than word frequency: 

 
(1) Usage period: a dictionary word has been 

used for lager period of time.  
(2) User population: a dictionary word has 

been used by more people.  
 

The first scale is hard to measure in practice, be-
cause the usage period requires a longitudinal 
data. For the investigation, the second clue has 
more feasibility by social media resources, which 
enables to know the word usage for each user. 

The objective of this study is to retrieve a 
dictionary word. This study approaches this 
problem by drawing on a binary classification 
task, which divides the words into two catego-

ries: a dictionary word (listed in a dictionary) and 
a out-of-dictionary word. 

For the database, we have collected 0.25 bil-
lion tweets of 100,000 people from Twitter. The 
experimental results have revealed that a diction-
ary word is highly correlated with the number of 
word users. Although the experiment is con-
ducted in Japanese language, the proposed 
method does not depend on a specified language. 

2 Related Work 
So far, a strong clue for dictionary editing is a 
word frequency. The relation between a word 
frequency and its coverage has been an interest 
for many researchers (Crowley 2003, Freeborn 
2006, Burridge and Kortmann 2008). In English, 
the frequent 2,000 words cover 90% of spoken 
language (West 1953), and the most frequent 
6,000 words cover 90% of written language 
(Francis, Kučera et al. 1982). The results in Jap-
anese are similar to them. The frequent 10,000 
words cover almost all vocabulary used in maga-
zines (90 magazines) (NINJAL 1997), and 
17,000 words cover the vocabulary spoken in 
television programs (Ishino 2000). Although the 
target media differs, they share the same findings 
that frequent words cover most of the corpus. 
This study presents another word measure. 

3 Materials 
This study has used two types of data: user cor-
pus (Section 3.1), and a gold standard data (Sec-
tion 3.2): 

3.1 Corpus: 100,000 people tweets 
This study employs Twitter as a fundamental data-
base, because Twitter has two strong advantages 
for the purpose of this study: (1) it has numerous 

874



users and (2) the author information is available for 
each tweet. This study sampled 0.25 billion tweets 
from 99,964 people, as described below. 
 
 Data collection period: 143 days from 

November 3rd 2009 to March 25th 2010. 
 Number of users: 99,964 people, as ex-

tracted based on the following three quali-
fications: 
 A user who posts at least 5 tweets per a 

month 
 Total posts contain over 5,000 words. 
 Japanese language users: at least one 

Japanese UTF code characters are 
used in the first tweet. 

 Total number of tweets: 253,482,784 
tweets (4,258,707,255 words): the words 
are analyzed by a morphological analyzer 
(Kurohashi, Nakamura et al. 1994) 

3.2 Gold standard Data 
The gold standard data of this study is a word 
listed in the IWANAMI Japanese Dictionary 7th 
edition (Nishio, Iwabuchi et al. 2009). This dic-
tionary is one of the best selling dictionaries in 
Japanese. 

4 Methods 
The task of this study is to classify whether a 
word is listed in a dictionary or not.  For the clas-
sification, this study employs four measures:  
 
1. freq(w):  a word frequency of a word w. 
2. Rfreq(w): a rank of freq (w). 
3. user(w): the number of users of a word w.  
4. Ruser(w): a rank of user(w). 
  
While the first two (freq(w) and Rfreq(w)) are con-
ventional measures used among the many previ-
ous researches, the other two (user(w) and Rus-
er(w)) are newly introduced by this study.  

Baseline Approach 

A easy approach is to select a word which has 
enough frequency (more than αtimes). This ap-
proach is formalized as follows:  freq(w) > α. 

Proposed Approach 

Instead of the frequency, the proposed approach 
relied on the number of users (user(w)). This ap-
proach is formalized as follows:  user (w) > α 

Another Proposed Approach 

This approach makes balance between the num-
ber of users (user(w)) and the word frequency 
(freq(w)). If both measures stay in balance, the 
both ranks should equal, satisfying the following 
formula: 

Ruser(w) ＝ Rfreq(w) . 
If a certain user prefers to use specific words, the 
rank of the frequency (Rfreq) become larger than 
that of users (Rusers): 

Ruser(w)＞Rfreq(w). 
In the same method, a widely used word could be 
extracted by using the following formula: 

Ruser(w)＜Rfreq(w). 

5 Experiment 
5.1 Test-set: Wikipedia entry names 
A test-set consists of 4,000 nouns, which are 
randomly sampled from Wikipedia entry names. 
Half of them (2,598 nouns) are listed in the dic-
tionary (positive examples). The other 1,402 
words are out-of-dictionary (negative examples). 

5.2 Comparable Methods 
We compared the following classification meth-
ods: 
 Rfreq: this method selects the words 

whose frequency is in the top α  rank:  
Rfreq(w)＜α . 

 Ruser: this method selects the words 
whose user size is in the top α rank:  
Ruser (w)＜α . 

 Ruser’ (weighted based): this method is 
essentially based on the number of users. 
However, it is weighted by the frequency as 
follows:  − log (freq(w))・user(w)＜α . 

 Ruser/Rfreq: this approach is based on the 
balance of two ranks: R-Ratio＜α . 
Here, R-Ratio = Ruser(w)／Rfreq(w). 
 

The evaluation is conducted in possibleα range 
(α=0～∞). 

5.3 Evaluation Metrics 
The methods are evaluated using information 

retrieval metrics: 
 Precision (P): # of correct outputs / # of 

system positive outputs. 
 Recall (R): # of correct outputs / # of posi-

tive examples (=2,598). 
 F-measure (F): harmonic mean between 

the precision and the recall. 

875



5.4 Result 
The precision-recall curve for each method is 
presented in Figure 1. The best F-measure points 
of all methods are the same (Recall=1; Preci-
sion=0.6). However, the accuracies differ in the 
low-recall area. Basically Ruser (partly Rus-
er/Rfreq) showed the best performance. Rfreq 
constantly showed poor performance rather than 
the others. These results indicated that the num-
ber of users is an essential factor. 

Figure 2 shows the distribution of dictionary 
words plots in Rfreq(w) and Ruser(w). Numerous 
words are distributed on the balanced line (X=Y), 
indicating that Rfreq(w) and Ruser(w) correlated 
with each other. 
       We found several outliers in the TOP-LEFT 
area (Y>>X), suggesting that several words have 
the low number of users compared to the fre-
quency metrics. The examples of such words are 
presented in Table 1 (b), consisting of many out-
of-dictionary words. 

5.5 Discussion 
This study reveals that the number of users is an 
important clue to classify a dictionary word. This 
result has a number of applications; e.g., the 
popular vocabulary learning, a user number-
based spell checking system, and so on. 
    However, this study has several limitations, 
which comes from the following factors: 
 User bias: Most Twitter users are 20–30 

years old. This population gap might bias 
the results. 

 Device bias: The type of input device, such 
as keyboard typing, touch pad, and input 
suggestion, might bias the results. 

 Twitter bias: The length limit of Twitter 
(140 characters) might prefers shorter 
words.  

 
Reducing the above biases is one of the remain-
ing problems. 

6 Conclusion 
This study proposes a method to classify a dic-
tionary word. We assume that a dictionary word 
should be used by many users. To prove this 
point, we have obtained the 100,000 user texts 
from Twitter. Then, we have evaluated various 
measures: a frequency based, a user based, and 
the ratio based. The experimental result has re-
vealed that the number of word users is an essen-
tial indicator for classifying a dictionary word.  

 

 
 

 
Figure 1: The precision-recall curve for each method.  

Figure 2: The Rank of Word User (Ruser) and the 
Rank of Word Frequency (Rfreq). 

The X-axis indicates the rank of word frequency (Rfreq); the 
Y-axis indicates the rank of word users. The dotted line 
indicates Rfreq=2000 and Ruser =2000. The line indicates that 
the balanced line (Rfreq= Ruser). The RIGHT-BOTTOM area 
contains words that are high user words.  The LEFT-TOP 
area contains words that are low user words. As shown in 
the figure, most of low user words are out-of-dictionary 
words. 
	 

	 

	 

	 

	 

	 

	 

	 

	 

	 

876



	 
 

Table 1: Word Example of Ruser/Rfreq.  
(a) High, and (b) Low 

 
* indicates a Japanese slang, which is hardly to translate. 

	 

Table 2: Low R-ratio words (out-of-dictionary).	 

 
 

References 

Burridge, K. and B. Kortmann (2008). Varieties of 
English: vol 3, Berlin and NY: Mouton de Gruyter. 
Crowley, T. (2003). Standard English and the Politics 
of Language, Palgrave Macmillan. 
Francis, W. N., H. Kučera and A. W. Mackie (1982). 
Frequency analysis of English usage: lexicon and 
grammar, Houghton Mifflin. 
Freeborn, D. (2006). From Old English to Standard 
English: A Course Book in Language Variations 
Across Time, Palgrave Macmillan. 
Ishino, H. (2000). "studies in the Japanese language " 
Kokugogaku 51(3): 41-47. 
Kurohashi, S., T. Nakamura, Y. Matsumoto and M. 
Nagao (1994). Improvements of Japanese 
Morphological Analyzer JUMAN. The International 
Workshop on Sharable Natural Language Resources. 
NINJAL (1997). The total vocabulary and their 
written forms in ninety magazines of today. 
Nishio, M., E. Iwabuchi and S. Mizutani (2009). 
IWANAMI Japanese dictionary 7th, Iwanamishoten. 

Smith, J. (1996). An Historical Study of English: 
Function, Form and Change. London, Routledge. 
West, M. (1953). A General Service List of English 
Words, Longman. 

 

 

877


