



















































Acquisition and Assessment of Semantic Content for the Generation of Elaborateness and Indirectness in Spoken Dialogue Systems


Proceedings of the The 8th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 915–925,
Taipei, Taiwan, November 27 – December 1, 2017 c©2017 AFNLP

Acquisition and Assessment of Semantic Content for the Generation of
Elaborateness and Indirectness in Spoken Dialogue Systems

Louisa Pragst1, Koichiro Yoshino2, Wolfgang Minker1,
Satoshi Nakamura2 and Stefan Ultes3

1Ulm University, Ulm, Germany
2 Nara Institute of Science and Technology (NAIST), Nara, Japan

3 University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
{louisa.pragst,wolfgang.minker}@uni-ulm.de

{koichiro,s-nakamura}@is.naist.jp, su259@cam.ac.uk

Abstract

In a dialogue system, the dialogue man-
ager selects one of several system actions
and thereby determines the system’s be-
haviour. Defining all possible system ac-
tions in a dialogue system by hand is a te-
dious work. While efforts have been made
to automatically generate such system ac-
tions, those approaches are mostly focused
on providing functional system behaviour.
Adapting the system behaviour to the user
becomes a difficult task due to the limited
amount of system actions available. We
aim to increase the adaptability of a dia-
logue system by automatically generating
variants of system actions. In this work,
we introduce an approach to automatically
generate action variants for elaborateness
and indirectness. Our proposed algorithm
extracts RDF triplets from a knowledge
base and rates their relevance to the origi-
nal system action to find suitable content.
We show that the results of our algorithm
are mostly perceived similarly to human
generated elaborateness and indirectness
and can be used to adapt a conversation
to the current user and situation. We also
discuss where the results of our algorithm
are still lacking and how this could be im-
proved: Taking into account the conver-
sation topic as well as the culture of the
user is likely to have beneficial effect on
the user’s perception.

1 Introduction

In a dialogue system (DS), the dialogue man-
ager (DM) is responsible for choosing the sys-
tem’s contribution to a conversation. Several stud-
ies (e.g. (Ultes et al., 2015; Bertrand et al., 2011;

Jaksic et al., 2006; Partala and Surakka, 2004))
show that adjusting the system’s behaviour to the
user can improve the user experience. To enable
such adaptivity, the system needs several possi-
ble dialogue actions from which to choose. Of-
ten, those system actions are predefined manu-
ally. Hence, the amount of variants that the DM
can choose from to adapt the system behaviour
is limited by conversational skills, creativity and
time of the person responsible for creating those
actions. Foreseeing every possible situation the
DS could find itself in and coming up with mul-
tiple viable system actions while considering pos-
sible types of users and their preferences in a con-
versation is demanding work. Approaches to the
automatic generation of system actions, such as
(Kadlec et al., 2015), have been presented to fa-
cilitate that process. However, those approaches
often consider only system actions that are nec-
essary from a functional point of view. There is
no variety of system actions produced that would
enable the DM to adapt to specific users charac-
teristics or preferences. However, automatically
generating variants of system actions can greatly
increase the adaptability of a DM and thereby im-
prove the user experience.

Studies (e.g. (Miehle et al., 2016; Pragst et al.,
2017)) have shown that elaborateness and indirect-
ness can be useful in adaptive DM. Here, elabo-
rateness refers to the amount of additional infor-
mation provided to the user and the level of indi-
rectness describes how concretely information is
addressed by a speaker. We have proposed the au-
tomatic generation of elaborateness and indirect-
ness in (Pragst et al., 2016). In this work, we intro-
duce an algorithm that, given a core statement on
a semantic level, automatically creates more elab-
orated or indirect versions of that statement by re-
trieving semantic content from a knowledge base
(KB) and assessing its relevance to the original

915



statement. Additionally, we ascertain that elabo-
rateness and indirectness are suitable options for
providing adaptability to the DM, and that our au-
tomatically generated system actions are mostly
perceived similarly compared to human instances
of elaborated and indirect statements. We further
examine the circumstances under which the per-
ception of automatically generated system actions
deviates from human ones and discuss how to im-
prove our algorithm based on those insights.

The remainder of the paper is structured as fol-
lows: In Section 2, we discuss related work. Sec-
tion 3 gives an overview of the DS our approach is
employed in. Our algorithm for the automatic gen-
eration of elaborateness and indirectness is pre-
sented in Section 4 and evaluated in Section 5. Fi-
nally, we draw a conclusion in Section 6.

2 Related Work

Adaptive DMs can be beneficial to the user expe-
rience (Ultes et al., 2015; Bertrand et al., 2011;
Jaksic et al., 2006; Partala and Surakka, 2004) and
has been implemented in a number of DMs (e.g.
(Gnjatović and Rösner, 2008; Ultes and Minker,
2014; Rieser and Lemon, 2011)). Often, adaptive
DMs consider user characteristics such as culture
(Aylett and Paiva, 2012; Mascarenhas et al., 2013)
or emotion (André et al., 2004; Gnjatović and
Rösner, 2008; Pittermann and Pittermann, 2007).
Komatani et al. (2005) use the amount of infor-
mation presented as adaptation mechanism to the
user’s knowledge and the degree of urgency. Such
architectures provide the decision making process
necessary for choosing the best suited system ac-
tion. However, they depend on the availability of
suitable system actions to perform optimally.

To facilitate the process of defining system
actions, efforts have been made to model di-
alogues automatically, e.g (Beveridge and Fox,
2006; Kadlec et al., 2015; Zhai and Williams,
2014; Niraula et al., 2014). Those approaches are
mostly focused on functional system behaviour.
Only system actions that are necessary to solve a
task are defined, limiting the possibilities for adap-
tation. Our goal is to generate variants of system
actions that address the same functionality, and
thereby increase the adaptability.

Our efforts to generate variants of system ac-
tions is paralleled by a number of tasks in the
area of natural language generation. Natural lan-
guage generators produce human-readable sen-

Dialogue
Manager

Elaborateness/Indirectness
Generator

Knowledge
Integration
Knowledge Base

Language
Generation

System Action

User Action

Selection of System Actions

Core Statement

Related RDF Triplets

Subject/Predicate/Object

Figure 1: Partial architecture of the KRISTINA
system, enhanced by the proposed algorithm.

tences from a more structured representation.
With regard to surface realisation, one character-
istic of good generators is their ability to provide
variation in the generated sentences, which has
been explored, among others, by Wen et al. (2015).
With a similar goal, efforts towards the paraphras-
ing of sentences have been made (e.g. (Kozlowski
et al., 2003; Langkilde and Knight, 1998)). Those
approaches provide variation at the word level and
preserve the semantic content of a sentence. They
are complemented by our approach that focuses
on variations of the semantic content of a sys-
tem action. The content selection task is con-
cerned with choosing relevant information that is
to be communicated in the generated text, often
with the goal of creating summaries (e.g. (Duboue
and McKeown, 2003; Barzilay and Lapata, 2005)).
While this research area certainly provides impor-
tant insights to the generation of elaborateness,
they need to be considered with respect to the pe-
culiarities of dialogue. Instead of providing an
overview over the most important information in
a larger amount of data, the goal of our work is
to augment an already determined piece of infor-
mation with relevant further information. Hence,
content selection is more concerned with filter-
ing information, while our approach focuses on
adding information.

3 System Architecture

We embed our approach to the generation of elab-
orateness and indirectness into an existing DS, the
KRISTINA system (Wanner et al., 2016; Medit-
skos et al., 2016). It is employed in the health-
care domain, with the overarching goal to support
immigrants with health-care related issues in a so-
cially competent manner. To enable a deeper un-
derstanding of the workings of the proposed algo-

916



rithm, this section presents the system architecture
of KRISTINA. A graphic representation of the rel-
evant parts can be found in Figure 1.

The KRISTINA system does not rely on prede-
fined system actions. Instead, a knowledge inte-
gration component (KI) (Meditskos et al., 2017)
is responsible for interpreting the user request and
searching a KB for the required information. The
information retrieved from the KB is represented
as RDF triplets. RDF triplets consist of sub-
ject, predicate and object and are used to describe
the relationship between objects, e.g (s:mother,
p:is from, o:Berlin). As a result of this repre-
sentation, system actions are given as a set of
RDF triplets that represent the semantic content
to be conveyed to the user. A language generation
component (Bouayad-Agha et al., 2012) transfers
those RDF triplets into sentences.

To enhance our system from a purely function-
ally oriented DS to a user oriented DS, our goal is
to transform the RDF triplets retrieved by the KI in
a way that makes them either more elaborated or
more indirect, while preserving the original mean-
ing. Thereby, the DM has more choices than just
the functional answer to the user question. The
KB employed by the KI is utilised to gather suit-
able RDF triplets for the new system action vari-
ants. Newly created system actions can be trans-
formed to sentences by the language generation in
the same manner as the output from the KI.

4 Generation of Elaborateness and
Indirectness

The starting point for both the generation of elabo-
rateness and indirectness is the set of RDF triplets
that was selected to answer the user request by the
KI. We call this set the core statement. To gen-
erate a more elaborated version of the core state-
ment, further RDF triplets that are relevant to the
core statement are added. To achieve a more indi-
rect variant, the core statement is omitted from the
system response and instead a set of RDF triplets
that is closely related to it is used. This process
is divided in two parts: the acquisition of relevant
RDF triplets from the KB and the assessment of
those triplets to find the ones most suitable with
regard to the core statement. In the following, the
procedure is described in more detail.

Algorithm 1: Pseudocode for the acquisition
of RDF triplets from the KB.

Data: coreStmt, the set of RDF triplets selected by
the KI
spo, a function that relates each triplet to the set of its
subject, predicate and object
maxDist, the maximal number of iterations for the
search of the KB
minDist, the minimal number of iterations after which
triplets are included
retrAll, a function that retrieves all triplet containing
the given resource or predicate from the KB
Result: triplets, the set of gathered triplets
stmtSet←− coreStmt
rmStmt←− ∅
if minDist > 0 then

rmStmt←− coreStmt
for dist = 1 to maxdist do

stmtSet←− ⋃x∈stmtSet ⋃y∈spo(x) retrAll(y)
if dist < minDist then

rmStmt←− stmtSet
triplets←− stmtSet \ rmStmt

4.1 Acquisition of Semantic Content

To avoid having to assess every RDF triplet stored
in the KB with regard to its relevance to the core
statement, triplets that are connected to the core
statement are preselected. The pseudocode for
this process is depicted in Algorithm 1. For every
triplet in the core statement, the KB is searched
for all further triplets that contain either its sub-
ject, predicate or object. Exemplary, if (s:mother,
p:is from, o:Berlin) is part of the core state-
ment, the triplets (s:Berlin, p:is in, o:Germany)
and (s:mother, p:has age, o:42) could be retrieved
from the KB. This process is repeated for the
newly gathered triplets to find further candidates.
The number of iterations is determined by the de-
sired level of elaborateness. The higher the tar-
geted elaborateness, the more iterations are per-
formed. A further parameter is used to adjust the
level of indirectness. It determines the number
of iterations that have to be performed before a
triplet can be added to the final system action. If
a triplet is encountered before sufficient iterations
have been performed, it can be used to find further
triplets, but is not allowed as part of the final sys-
tem action. If an elaborated, but direct answer is
desired, this parameter is set to 0. After gathering
potential RDF triplets as candidates, the next step
is to assess their relevance to the core statement.

917



Algorithm 2: Pseudocode for the assessment
of semantic content.

Data: coreStmt, the set of RDF triplets selected by
the KI
triplets, the set of gathered RDF triplets
nrTriplets, the number of desired triplets, derived
from the level of elaborateness
f , a function to adjust the weight of the individual
inputs to the rating
Result: addStmt, the set of additional
statements chosen

addStmt←− ∅
while |addStmt| < nrTriplets do

allStmts←− coreStmt ∪ addStmt
p←− getCondProb(t, allStmt)
d←− getDistance(t, allStmt)
i←− getInterrelation(t, allStmt)
best←− argmaxt∈triplets f(p, d, i)
addStmt←− addStmt ∪ best
triplets←− triplets \ best

Algorithm 3: The function that estimates the
conditioned probability of a triplet given the
core statement.

Data: p, the probability function
spo, a function that relates each triplet to the set of its
subject, predicate and object

Function getCondProb(t, coreStmt)
return
means∈coreStmtmeanx∈spo(s)meany∈spo(t)

p(x,y)
p(x)

4.2 Assessment of Semantic Content

The overall process to choose triplets for the final
system action is depicted in Algorithm 2, with Al-
gorithms 3, 4 and 5 contributing necessary func-
tions. All gathered RDF triplets are ranked with
regard to the core statement and those with the
highest rank are included in the final system ac-
tion. After the inclusion of each new RDF triplet,
the ranking is repeated. It takes as reference the
newly added triplets as well as the core statement.
This improves the overall consistency. The num-
ber of triplets in the final system action is restricted
by the targeted level of elaborateness.

The ranking function f takes into account sev-
eral factors: p, the probability for the triplet to oc-
cur given the core statement, d, the mean distance
between triplet and core statement in the KB, and
i, the number of triplets in the core statement re-
lated to the triplet. It can be chosen freely to reflect
the importance of the individual factors. In our ex-
periments, we choose f(p, d, i) = p + 2di.

The probability for a triplet to occur given the
core statement is derived from a corpus of dia-

Algorithm 4: The function that calculates the
mean distance between a triplet and the core
statement.

Data: spo, a function that relates each triplet to the set
of its subject, predicate and object
maxDist, the maximal number of iteration for the
search of the KB
retrAll, a function that retrieves all triplet containing
the given resource or predicate from the KB

Function getDistance(t, coreStmt)
accDist←− 0
for s ∈ coreStmt do

dist←− 0
stmtSet←− {s}
while t 6∈ stmtSet ∧ dist ≤ maxDist do

dist←− dist + 1
stmtSet←−⋃

x∈stmtSet
⋃

y∈spo(x) retrAll(y)

if t 6∈ stmtSet then
meanDist←− meanDist + 100

else
meanDist←− meanDist + dist

return accDist|coreStmt|

logues between humans. An automated mapping
of words to the semantic concepts that are used in
the KB was performed and this data was used to
calculate the probability that two concepts would
appear in one dialogue turn as well as the overall
probability that a concept would occur in a dia-
logue turn. From those probabilities, the condi-
tioned probability that the concept of a new triplet
will be in a turn if a concept of the core statement
occurs in that turn can be calculated, as is shown in
Algorithm 3. The mean of all conditioned proba-
bilities between the concepts of the core statement
and the triplet that is to be rated is used as input to
the ranking.

Pseudocode for the calculation of the mean dis-
tance between a triplet and the core statement is
given in Algorithm 4. The distance between two
triplets in the KB refers to the number of itera-
tions that have to be performed to find one triplet
when starting from the other. If the triplet can-
not be found due to the elaborateness restriction,
a high number is assumed instead. The mean dis-
tance between a triplet and the core statement is
used as a metric on how closely related they are.

The process to determine the number of triplets
a triplet is related to can be found in Algorithm
5. A triplet is related to another triplet of the core
statement if the triplet could be reached from it
during the acquisition. It can be assumed that a

918



Algorithm 5: The function that calculates the
number of relations between a triplet and the
core statement.

Data: spo, a function that relates each triplet to the set
of its subject, predicate and object
maxDist, the maximal number of iteration for the
search of the KB
retrAll, a function that retrieves all triplet containing
the given resource or predicate from the KB

Function getInterrelation(t, coreStmt)
nrRel←− 0
for s ∈ coreStmt do

stmtSet←− {s}
for dist = 1 to maxdist do

stmtSet←−⋃
x∈stmtSet

⋃
y∈spo(x) retrAll(y)

if t ∈ stmtSet then
nrRel←− nrRel + 1

return nrRel

triplet that is related to the whole core statement
is more relevant to the situation than one that is
related to part of it.

5 Evaluation

Our approach has been evaluated in an online
user study. Participants were asked to rate both
human generated (HG) and computer generated
(CG) variants of dialogue contributions with re-
gard to the original statement. The research ques-
tion of the study was twofold: First, to compare
the variants produced by our algorithm to HG
ones. Second, to show that elaborateness and indi-
rectness have the potential to be used in adaptive
DM. In the following, an overview of the partici-
pants of the user study, the study design as well as
the results are presented. Finally, the findings and
their implications for the proposed algorithm and
adaptive DM in general are discussed.

5.1 Participants
The study included 21 Japanese and 21 German
participants, most of which were between the age
of 20 and 30. The 26 male participants slightly
outweigh the female participants. The language
of the study was English, so to identify potential
influences of the individual English reading skill,
participants were asked to rate their English skill
using either the Common European Framework of
Reference for Languages (CEFR), which is often
used in Germany to assess language skills, or the
Test of English for International Communication
(TOEIC), which is more common in Japan. All

Statement 4
KRISTINA: Your mother is not originally from here?
Does she miss Germany sometimes?
TOM (ORIG.): Yes, my mother misses Germany.
TOM (HG): I think my mother misses Germany because
most of her relatives and friends are there and when she is
there she is able to communicate much better.
TOM (CG): My mother misses Germany. She and my fa-
ther married there. They immigrated, but they visit Ger-
many. My father is happy.
Statement 6
TOM: Do you know how the weather is going to be?
KRISTINA (ORIG.): It is going to rain this afternoon.
KRISTINA (HG): It is going to rain this afternoon, but it’s
not going to be cold, still 20◦C. But I would take an um-
brella.
KRISTINA (CG): It is going to rain this afternoon. It is
not going to be cold in the afternoon, 20◦C by then. The
temperature tomorrow is also going to be 20◦C.

Figure 2: Examples for human and computer gen-
erated elaborated statements.

of the participants reported English reading skills
above the beginner level (CEFR: A1/TOEIC read-
ing: 115), with the majority even reporting skills
at or above the upper intermediate level (CEFR:
B2/TOEIC reading: 385 or better).

5.2 Study Design
The proposed algorithm was evaluated by compar-
ing its results to actual human generated exam-
ples of elaborateness and indirectness. To this end,
ten elaborated and ten indirect statements were ex-
tracted from natural conversations. The conver-
sations take place between caregivers, caretakers
and their relatives, with topics ranging from bio-
graphical information, eating preferences, health
issues to recreational activities. For the extracted
statements, the concise/direct version of the state-
ment was determined manually, taking into con-
sideration both previous and following parts of
the conversation. Those concise/direct statements
are referred to as the original statements for the
remainder of the paper. The original statements
were transformed into semantic representations of
their content and the proposed algorithm was used
to produce an altered semantic representation, ei-
ther aiming to be more elaborated or more indi-
rect. As the performance of our content acquisi-
tion and rating component was to be tested, not
that of a language generation component, a hu-
man transformed the semantic representation of
the content into sentences. They were instructed
to create simple sentences and only include the in-
formation provided by the RDF triplets. Examples

919



Statement 1
TOM: My mother doesn’t speak English very well.
KRISTINA (ORIG.): Can you translate for the nurses?
KRISTINA (HG): If the nurses need someone for transla-
tion can they contact you?
KRISTINA (CG): Can the nurses contact you to give them
information about your mother?
Statement 6
KRISTINA: How much support does your father need?
Can he walk on his own?
TOM (ORIG.): My father needs support walking.
TOM (HG): My father is unsteady and shaky if he has
nothing to hold onto. He can do two, three steps if some-
one holds him.
TOM (CG): My father can do two, three steps if someone
holds him.

Figure 3: Examples for human and computer gen-
erated indirect statements.

of the resulting sentence pairs can be found in Fig-
ure 2 and 3. A full list of the sentences pairs is
provided in the additional material.

The study consisted of an online questionnaire,
presenting pairs of an original statement and a HG
or CG variant of it to the participants. The partici-
pants were not made aware that some of the state-
ments were computer generated. Furthermore, the
exchanges were presented as human-human in-
stead of human-computer interaction. All partic-
ipants assessed all HG and CG variants, resulting
in 20 evaluated statements pairs for elaborateness
and indirectness each. For elaborated variants,
the participants were asked how relevant the addi-
tional information is. This question was rated on a
five point scale from 1 - ‘not at all’ to 5 - ‘very re-
levant’. For indirect statements, participants rated
how easily they could derive the meaning of the
original statement from the indirect statement on
a five point scale from 1 - ‘it is impossible’ to 5 -
‘it is obvious’. For all sentence pairs, participants
were asked to rate which statement they preferred
on a 5 point scale from 1 - ‘the original one’ to 5 -
‘the elaborated/indirect variant’.

Apart from the comparison of the generation
methods, differences between the nationalities and
the individual original statements were also con-
sidered. Differing ratings in those areas suggest
possible adaptations that may be employed by a
DM to cater to different cultures or different situ-
ations.

The results for each research question were ob-
tained using a three-way mixed ANOVA.

1 2 3 4 5

HG

CG

How relevant is the additional information?
Which Statement do you prefer? (Elaborateness)

How easily is the meaning of the statement derived?
Which statement do you prefer? (Indirectness)

Figure 4: Comparison of the mean rating and stan-
dard error by the generation method used.

Statement Japanese GermanHG CG HG CG
1 4.05 3.43 4.29 2.38
2 3.95 3.00 4.48 1.95
3 4.62 3.71 2.76 2.81
4 4.38 3.38 3.76 2.57
5 3.71 2.29 3.00 2.81
6 3.86 3.67 3.48 2.76
7 4.00 3.67 3.57 2.71
8 4.33 4.33 3.52 3.14
9 4.29 3.10 4.19 2.48

10 3.57 3.62 3.71 3.19

Table 1: Mean ratings for the question ‘How rele-
vant is the additional information?’.

5.3 Results

Figure 4 depicts the mean and standard error of the
rating for each of our research questions. Statisti-
cal tests show that HG and CG statements yield
mostly similar results. No significant differences
between the generation methods can be found for
a significance level of 0.05, except for the ease
with which indirect statements can be interpreted.
Here, CG statements are harder to understand than
HG ones. However, this does not significantly in-
fluence the preference of participants for either di-
rect or indirect statements. Additionally, we find
that nationality and situation influence the rating,
suggesting that adapting to them by changing the
level of elaborateness and indirectness is viable.
Apart from the main factors generation method,
nationality and original statement, we also tested
for influences of age, gender or proficiency in En-
glish on the results of our study but found no sig-
nificant effects.

In the following, a more detailed description of
the results is presented. A complete list of mean
ratings for each research question can be found in
Tables 1, 2, 3 and 4.

920



Statement Japanese GermanHG CG HG CG
1 3.75 2.95 4.14 2.24
2 3.76 2.86 4.48 1.90
3 3.95 3.57 2.86 2.57
4 4.29 2.81 3.95 2.62
5 3.29 2.00 2.57 2.81
6 2.86 2.62 3.62 2.57
7 3.24 1.95 3.76 2.43
8 3.90 3.90 3.76 3.19
9 4.33 3.10 4.24 2.52

10 4.10 3.10 4.05 3.14

Table 2: Mean ratings for the question ‘Which
statement do you prefer?’ (Elaborateness).

Statement Japanese GermanHG CG HG CG
1 4.19 3.24 4.81 3.00
2 3.33 3.14 4.24 2.86
3 1.67 1.19 2.29 1.00
4 2.67 2.19 2.48 1.71
5 4.00 3.48 4.76 4.38
6 3.86 3.81 4.62 4.24
7 2.81 1.81 4.14 1.71
8 3.29 2.71 3.95 2.38
9 3.00 1.38 2.90 1.05

10 4.52 4.10 5.00 4.38

Table 3: Mean ratings for the question ‘How easy
is it to derive the original meaning?’.

5.3.1 Impact of Generation Method
The relevance of additional information as well as
the user preference for either the original or the
elaborated/indirect statement do not show signifi-
cant differences regarding the generation method
with a significance level of 0.05. Only the ease
with which the meaning of an indirect statement
can be derived is significantly influenced by the
generation method (F (1, 37) = 5.401,p = .026).
This indicates that overall participants perceived
HG and CG statements to be similar, but had prob-
lems to interpret CG indirect statements. In addi-
tion to those results, several significant interaction
effects can be found. Those interaction effects of-
fer valuable information about potential improve-
ments that can be made to the proposed algorithm.
Hence, they are examined in closer detail in the
following.

Significant interaction effects between genera-
tion method, nationality and original statement ex-
ist for both the relevance of additional informa-
tion (F (9, 333) = 2.731, p = .004) as well as the
user preference for either the original or the elab-
orated statement (F (9, 333) = 2.486, p = .009).
For both question, several interaction patterns can
be observed, depending on the original statement:

Statement Japanese GermanHG CG HG CG
1 3.57 3.05 4.19 2.57
2 3.05 2.38 2.95 1.43
3 2.62 2.14 2.24 1.38
4 1.95 1.52 2.00 1.38
5 3.90 2.57 3.90 2.57
6 3.86 3.29 3.76 3.19
7 4.33 3.00 3.10 2.38
8 3.81 3.67 3.71 2.76
9 3.95 2.29 2.71 1.52

10 3.29 3.10 3.62 1.33

Table 4: Mean ratings for the question ‘Which
statement do you prefer?’ (Indirectness).

1 2 3 4 5

HG
CG

(a) Statement 3

1 2 3 4 5

HG
CG

(b) Statement 4

1 2 3 4 5

HG
CG

(c) Statement 5

1 2 3 4 5

HG
CG

(d) Statement 6

Japanese German

Figure 5: Interactions between nationality and
generation method for the question ‘Which state-
ment do you prefer?’ (Elaborateness). Different
patterns can be found: Nearly no difference be-
tween HG and CG, a sharp decline for CG, a sharp
decline only for Japanese and a sharp decline only
for Germans.

The generation method can have almost no impact
or lead to a declining rating from either Japanese,
Germans or both, as can be seen exemplary in Fig-
ure 5. For some statements, one of the cultures
rates the CG statement in a similar manner as the
HG one, while the rating of the other culture shows
a sharp decline for CG statements. As a conse-
quence of the different perceptions across cultures,
it might be beneficial to consider the target culture
during the generation process and thereby improve

921



its performance. Furthermore, a few original state-
ments receive a worse rating for CG variants than
for HG variants by both cultures. This suggests
that while the generation of elaborateness often
works well, potential for improvements still exists
in those cases.

The ease with which the meaning of an indirect
statement can be derived depends significantly on
the interaction between generation method and na-
tionality (F (1, 37) = 10.469, p = .003). The cor-
responding interaction pattern is depicted in Fig-
ure 6. If the indirect statement is HG, Germans
seem to have an easier time to derive the orig-
inal meaning than Japanese (F (1, 37) = 5.547,
p = .024), who mostly rate this question neutrally.
This difference between cultures disappears for
CG statements. It is possible that Germans have an
advantage with the HG statements, as those state-
ments were extracted from German dialogues and
the original statements were derived by a German.
Hence, the implicit connections between original
and indirect statement could be more obvious to
Germans due to a similar cultural imprint. This
advantage disappears when the implicit connec-
tion between original statement and indirect one
is made automatically by an algorithm and there-
fore foreign to both cultures. This would suggest
that an effort should be made to better capture
the human approach to generating indirectness and
thereby reduce the difficulty of interpreting it. In
this endeavour, the target culture needs to be taken
into account.

The preference for either the original or the in-
direct statement is influenced significantly by the
interaction between generation method, national-
ity and original statement (F (9, 333) = 3.124,
p = .001). Here, patterns similar to the ones found
for the preference regarding elaborated statements
can be observed: The generation method can have
almost no impact or lead to a declining rating from
either Japanese, Germans or both, depending on
the original statement. This affirms the potential
for improvements regarding the adjustment to the
target culture as well as the overall performance.

5.3.2 Potential for Adaptation
To ascertain the ability of elaborateness and indi-
rectness to contribute to the adaptability of a DM,
we assess the impact of nationality and original
statement on user preferences.

A significant interaction effect of nationality
and original statement on the preference for ei-

1 2 3 4 5

HG

CG

Japanese
German

Figure 6: Interactions between nationality and
generation method for the question ‘How easy is
it is to derive the original meaning?’.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

2

3

4

Statement

Japanese German

Figure 7: Interactions between nationality and
original statement for the question ‘Which state-
ment do you prefer?’ (Elaborateness).

ther the original or the elaborated statement can be
found (F (9, 333) = 2.578, p = .007). As can be
seen in Figure 7, Germans seem to be rather indif-
ferent to the level of elaborateness. They mostly
rate neutrally. In contrast, a clear distinction be-
tween topics can be found for Japanese. They
tend to prefer concise statements if the topic of
conversation is uncritical, such as the weather or
day trips. This can be seen for Statements 5, 6
and 7. When talking about family members, more
elaborated statements are preferred. Considering
those findings, a culture and situation adaptive DM
could utilise elaborateness as means to implement
suitable adaptation.

As discussed in Section 5.3.1, there exist sig-
nificant interactions of generation method, nation-
ality and original statement on the preference of
elaborateness/indirectness. If the generation meth-
ods are examined separately, the interaction of na-
tionality and original statement still impacts the
rating for both elaborateness (HG: F (9, 333) =
2.197, p = .022, CG: F (9, 333) = 2.838, p =
.003) and indirectness (HG: F (9, 333) = 2.143,
p = .026, CG: F (9, 333) = 1.922, p = .048).
This implies that, while nationality and origi-
nal statement always influence the user prefer-
ence, the way they impact it is not the same for
HG and CG statements. The different interac-

922



1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

2

3

4

Statement

(a) HG

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

2

3

4

Statement

(b) CG

Japanese German

Figure 8: Comparison of the interaction pattern
between nationality and original statement for the
question ‘Which statement do you prefer?’ (Elab-
orateness) for HG and CG statements.

tion patterns are depicted exemplary in Figure 8.
Those results suggests that an adaptive DM should
not learn its dialogue strategy based on human-
human dialogue containing examples of elaborate-
ness/indirectness, as this can lead to wrong as-
sumption about the user preferences. Instead, the
dialogue strategy should be based on CG vari-
ants that reflect more accurately the elaborate-
ness/indirectness variants that will be used.

5.4 Discussion

Overall, CG statements perform well compared to
HG ones. However, there are cases when the rat-
ing of CG generated statements decreases for one
or both of the considered cultures when compared
to the HG statement. Therefore, it might be benefi-
cial to consider both nationality as well as the topic
of the original statement during the generation of
system action variants. Another possibility would
be to generate multiple elaborated/indirect vari-
ants and let the DM choose the most suitable with
regard to the context and culture. Both approaches
might improve the results of CG statements in
cases where participants rated them worse than
HG ones with the current approach.

In our study, the potential for adaptivity that is

provided by system actions with different levels
elaborateness and indirectness was investigated.
For elaborateness, we could show that different
preferences exist depending on the culture and
original statement. Therefore, it is feasible for an
adaptive DM to choose either the elaborated or the
concise variant depending on both the culture of
the user as well as the current context of the con-
versation to improve the user satisfaction. Further-
more, our results show that the interaction between
generation method, nationality and original state-
ment has an impact on the user’s preference for
elaborated/indirect statements. This implies that,
while both elaborateness and indirectness can be
used for adaptation, the DM should base its dia-
logue policy on experiences with CG statements
instead of HG ones.

6 Conclusion

In this work, an approach to the automatic gener-
ation of more elaborated or indirect variants of a
system action on the semantic level has been dis-
cussed. We proposed an algorithms for the acqui-
sition of semantic data and the assessment of this
data with regard to the dialogue contribution un-
der consideration. Furthermore, a user study was
performed to investigate the performance of our
approach compared to humans and the applica-
bility of elaborateness and indirectness for adap-
tiveness. The results show that, while the vari-
ants produced by the proposed algorithm are often
perceived in a similar manner as human generated
variants, complex interactions exist with both na-
tionality and topic of the statement. Taking those
into account can further improve the performance.
Additionally, the study shows that differing pref-
erences across cultures and statements exist and
hence can be considered in adaptive DM.

In future work, the presented approach will be
integrated into a fully functional DS, including
the knowledge integration and language genera-
tion components that it relies on. Furthermore,
the proposed algorithm will be further improved
to better adjust to the user culture and the topic of
the conversation.

Acknowledgements

This work is part of a project that has received
funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme under grant
agreement No 645012.

923



References
Elisabeth André, Matthias Rehm, Wolfgang Minker,

and Dirk Bühler. 2004. Endowing spoken language
dialogue systems with emotional intelligence. In Af-
fective Dialogue Systems, pages 178–187. Springer.

Ruth Aylett and Ana Paiva. 2012. Computational
modelling of culture and affect. Emotion Review,
4(3):253–263.

Regina Barzilay and Mirella Lapata. 2005. Collective
content selection for concept-to-text generation. In
Proceedings of the conference on Human Language
Technology and Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 331–338. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Gregor Bertrand, Florian Nothdurft, Wolfgang Minker,
Harald Traue, and Steffen Walter. 2011. Adapting
dialogue to user emotion-a wizard-of-oz study for
adaptation strategies. Proc. of IWSDS, pages 285–
294.

Martin Beveridge and John Fox. 2006. Automatic
generation of spoken dialogue from medical plans
and ontologies. Journal of biomedical informatics,
39(5):482–499.

Nadjet Bouayad-Agha, Gerard Casamayor, Simon
Mille, Marco Rospocher, Horacio Saggion, Luciano
Serafini, and Leo Wanner. 2012. From ontology to
NL: generation of multilingual user-oriented envi-
ronmental reports. In Natural Language Process-
ing and Information Systems - 17th International
Conference on Applications of Natural Language to
Information Systems, NLDB 2012, Groningen, The
Netherlands, June 26-28, 2012. Proceedings, pages
216–221.

Pablo A Duboue and Kathleen R McKeown. 2003. Sta-
tistical acquisition of content selection rules for nat-
ural language generation. In Proceedings of the
2003 conference on Empirical methods in natural
language processing, pages 121–128. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Milan Gnjatović and Dietmar Rösner. 2008. Adap-
tive dialogue management in the NIMITEK proto-
type system. In Perception in Multimodal Dialogue
Systems, pages 14–25. Springer.

Nada Jaksic, Pedro Branco, Peter Stephenson, and
L Miguel Encarnação. 2006. The effectiveness of
social agents in reducing user frustration. In CHI’06
extended abstracts on Human factors in computing
systems, pages 917–922. ACM.

Rudolf Kadlec, Martin Schmid, and Jan Kleindienst.
2015. Improved deep learning baselines for ubuntu
corpus dialogs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.03753.

Kazunori Komatani, Shinichi Ueno, Tatsuya Kawa-
hara, and Hiroshi G Okuno. 2005. User modeling
in spoken dialogue systems to generate flexible guid-
ance. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction,
15(1):169–183.

Raymond Kozlowski, Kathleen F McCoy, and K Vijay-
Shanker. 2003. Generation of single-sentence para-
phrases from predicate/argument structure using
lexico-grammatical resources. In Proceedings of the
second international workshop on Paraphrasing-
Volume 16, pages 1–8. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Irene Langkilde and Kevin Knight. 1998. Gener-
ation that exploits corpus-based statistical knowl-
edge. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics and 17th International Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics-Volume 1, pages 704–710. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Samuel Mascarenhas, Rui Prada, Ana Paiva, and
Gert Jan Hofstede. 2013. Social importance dynam-
ics: a model for culturally-adaptive agents. In Intel-
ligent virtual agents, pages 325–338. Springer.

Georgios Meditskos, Stamatia Dasiopoulou, Louisa
Pragst, Stefan Ultes, Stefanos Vrochidis, Ioannis
Kompatsiaris, and Leo Wanner. 2016. Towards an
ontology-driven adaptive dialogue framework. In
Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on
Multimedia Analysis and Retrieval for Multimodal
Interaction, pages 15–20. ACM.

Georgios Meditskos, Stefanos Vrochidis, and Ioannis
Kompatsiaris. 2017. Description Logics and Rules
for Multimodal Situational Awareness in Health-
care. Springer International Publishing, Cham.

Juliana Miehle, Koichiro Yoshino, Louisa Pragst, Ste-
fan Ultes, Satoshi Nakamura, and Wolfgang Minker.
2016. Cultural communication idiosyncrasies in
human-computer interaction. In Proceedings of the
17th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group
on Discourse and Dialogue (SIGDIAL), Los Ange-
les, USA. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Nobal B Niraula, Amanda Stent, Hyuckchul Jung,
Giuseppe Di Fabbrizio, I Dan Melamed, and Vasile
Rus. 2014. Forms2dialog: Automatic dialog gen-
eration for web tasks. In Spoken Language Tech-
nology Workshop (SLT), 2014 IEEE, pages 608–613.
IEEE.

Timo Partala and Veikko Surakka. 2004. The effects of
affective interventions in human–computer interac-
tion. Interacting with computers, 16(2):295–309.

Johannes Pittermann and Angela Pittermann. 2007.
A data-oriented approach to integrate emotions in
adaptive dialogue management. In Proceedings of
the 12th international conference on Intelligent user
interfaces, pages 270–273. ACM.

Louisa Pragst, Juliana Miehle, Stefan Ultes, and Wolf-
gang Minker. 2016. Automatic modification of com-
munication style in dialogue management. In Pro-
ceedings of the INLG 2016 Workshop on Computa-
tional Creativity in Natural Language Generation,

924



pages 36–40. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Louisa Pragst, Wolfgang Minker, and Stefan Ultes.
2017. Exploring the applicability of elaborateness
and indirectness in dialogue management. In Pro-
ceedings of the 8th International Workshop On Spo-
ken Dialogue Systems (IWSDS).

Verena Rieser and Oliver Lemon. 2011. Reinforcement
learning for adaptive dialogue systems: a data-
driven methodology for dialogue management and
natural language generation. Springer Science &
Business Media.

Stefan Ultes, Matthias Kraus, Alexander Schmitt, and
Wolfgang Minker. 2015. Quality-adaptive spoken
dialogue initiative selection and implications on re-
ward modelling. In Proceedings of the 16th Annual
Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse
and Dialogue (SIGDIAL), pages 374–383.

Stefan Ultes and Wolfgang Minker. 2014. Manag-
ing adaptive spoken dialogue for intelligent environ-
ments. Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Smart
Environments, 6(5):523–539.

Leo Wanner, Josep Blat, Stamatia Dasiopoulou,
Mónica Domı́nguez, Gerard Llorach, Simon
Mille, Federico Sukno, Eleni Kamateri, Stefanos
Vrochidis, Ioannis Kompatsiaris, et al. 2016.
Towards a multimedia knowledge-based agent
with social competence and human interaction
capabilities. In Proceedings of the 1st International
Workshop on Multimedia Analysis and Retrieval for
Multimodal Interaction, pages 21–26. ACM.

Tsung-Hsien Wen, Milica Gasic, Nikola Mrksic, Pei-
Hao Su, David Vandyke, and Steve Young. 2015.
Semantically conditioned lstm-based natural lan-
guage generation for spoken dialogue systems.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.01745.

Ke Zhai and Jason D Williams. 2014. Discovering la-
tent structure in task-oriented dialogues. In ACL (1),
pages 36–46.

925


