



















































STCP: Simplified-Traditional Chinese Conversion and Proofreading


The Companion Volume of the IJCNLP 2017 Proceedings: System Demonstrations, pages 61–64,
Taipei, Taiwan, November 27 – December 1, 2017. c©2017 AFNLP

STCP: Simplified-Traditional Chinese Conversion and Proofreading

Jiarui Xu1 and Xuezhe Ma1 and Chen-Tse Tsai2 and Eduard Hovy1
1 Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University

2 Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{jiaruix, xuezhem}@cs.cmu.edu, ctsai12@illinois.edu, hovy@cmu.edu

Abstract

This paper aims to provide an effec-
tive tool for conversion between Sim-
plified Chinese and Traditional Chinese.
We present STCP, a customizable system
comprising statistical conversion model,
and proofreading web interface. Experi-
ments show that our system achieves com-
parable character-level conversion per-
formance with the state-of-art systems.
In addition, our proofreading interface
can effectively support diagnostics and
data annotation. STCP is available at
http://lagos.lti.cs.cmu.edu:8002/

1 Introduction

There are two standard character sets of the con-
temporary Chinese written language: Simplified
Chinese and Traditional Chinese. Simplified Chi-
nese is officially used in mainland China and Sin-
gapore, while Traditional Chinese is used in Tai-
wan, Hong Kong, and Macau. The conversion has
become an essential problem with the increasing
communication and collaboration among Chinese-
speaking regions.

Although several conversion systems have been
made available to the public, the conversion prob-
lem, however, remains unsolved. In this pa-
per, we present an open-source system that pro-
vides a statistical model for conversion, as well
as a web interface for proofreading. Our system
achieves comparable performance with state-of-
art systems. To the best of our knowledge, it is
the first open-source statistical conversion system.

Another contribution of our system is the proof-
reading web interface. It is important for users to
proofread the converted result and to make edits
based on the linguistic information.

2 Levels of Conversion

Halpern and Kerman (1999) discussed the pitfalls
and complexities of Chinese-to-Chinese conver-
sion and introduced four conversion levels: code
level, orthographic level, lexemic level, and con-
textual level, respectively. In this paper, we com-
pact them into two levels of conversion: character
level and cord level.

2.1 Character level

There exists a mapping between Simplified Chi-
nese characters and Traditional Chinese char-
acters. Most characters only have a single
corresponding character, while some characters
may have multiple corresponding characters. In
Simplified-to-Traditional conversion, characters
with one-to-many mappings constitute about 12%
of commonly used Chinese characters (Halpern
and Kerman, 1999). Such phenomenon exists in
Traditional-to-Simplified as well but to a much
lesser extent. Character-level conversion of a
given sentence involves both replacing characters
that have one-to-one mapping with correspond-
ing characters and disambiguating characters that
have one-to-many mappings.

2.2 Word level

A concept may have different string surfaces due
to the differences in word usage among various
Chinese-speaking areas. For example, is re-
ferred to as ”football” in British English but ”soc-
cer ball” in American English. Such phenomenon
is quite typical in Chinese-speaking areas. For ex-
ample, Sydney is 悉尼 in mainland China but 雪
梨 in Taiwan. Word-level conversion of a sentence
involves determining if a word should be replaced
with a corresponding word in look-up table. Dis-
ambiguation is also necessary if there are multiple
corresponding words.

61



Figure 1: Screenshot of proofreading interface

We use the following sentence in Simplified
Chinese to elaborate the conversion process:

我 了解 云端 软件
I know cloud software

Based on look-up tables of the character map-
pings, we list characters with one-to-one map-
pings in the above example sentence in Table 1
and those with one-to-many mappings in Table 2
Word mapping is shown in Table 3.

SC 我 解 端 软 件
TC 我 解 端 軟 件

Table 1: one-to-one character mapping

SC TC English

了
了 (auxiliary)
瞭 know

云
云 say
雲 cloud

Table 2: one-to-many character mapping

SC 软件
TC 軟體

Table 3: Word mapping in example sentence.

We decide to replace ‘软件’ with ‘軟體’ and

finally get the target sentence in Traditional Chi-
nese: 我瞭解雲端軟體

3 System Architecture

3.1 Model
The Simplified-Traditional conversion problem is
formulated as a translation problem (Brown et al.,
1990):

Given a sentence s from source language (e.g.
Simplified Chinese), return a sentence t in tar-
get language (e.g. Traditional Chinese) that maxi-
mizes the conditional probability:

P (t|s) = P (t)P (s|t)
P (s)

∝ P (t)P (s|t)

Here we let P (s|t) be the same for any candidate
sentence t. Therefore, P (t|s) ∝ P (t) and the goal
is to find:

t∗ = argmax
t

P (t)

We describe how to generate candidate sen-
tences through word and character conversion in
section 3.1.1 and 3.1.2. The language model we
used is briefly introduced in section 3.1.3.

3.1.1 Word Conversion
We tokenize the source sentence s into word se-
quence w1, w2, ..., wn. In our system, we use
Jieba1 Chinese text segmentation. For each word

1https://github.com/fxsjy/jieba

62



wi, if there exists a mapping of wi in mapping ta-
ble, we convert wi into word w

′
i in target language.

3.1.2 Character Conversion
After word conversion, the characters in words
that have not been converted have one-to-one or
one-to-many mapping. We generate candidate set
T that contains all possible sentences by combin-
ing every possible conversions of each character.

3.1.3 Language Model
By default, the system uses a character-level lan-
guage model with order of 5, estimated by KenLM
(Heafield, 2011; Heafield et al., 2013). We choose
KenLM because of its advantage in time and stor-
age efficiency. User can substitute it with other
trained language model.

3.2 Proofreading Interface
We provide a web-based proofreading interface
that allows users to correct the converted text. Au-
tomatic conversion between Simplified Chinese
and Traditional Chinese can never achieve 100%
accuracy and we believe that, in many scenarios,
such as government, commercial and legal doc-
ument conversion, it is important to convert all
characters and words as accurately as possible.
Characters and words that have alternatives will be
highlighted. When user selects these ambiguous
fragments, explanation and example will be dis-
played and user can easily choose an alternative to
replace the automatic results. Example proofread-
ing of a paragraph and its highlights are shown in
Figure 1.

4 Experimentation

Ministry of Education of the P.R.C. and Chinese
Information Processing Society of China held a
competition on the Evaluation of Intelligent Con-
version System of Simplified Chinese and Tradi-
tional Chinese 2 (MOE-CIPSC) in 2013. There
are two core tasks: Character Conversion and Ter-
minology Conversion. Few high-quality parallel
corpus is available (Chang and Kung, 2007) and
it is expensive to build one. Most websites that
claim to have both Simplified Chinese and Tradi-
tional Chinese versions are using automatic sys-
tems without proofreading, thus are prone to er-
rors. Our evaluation strategy adopts the task one
of MOE evaluation.

2http://www.moe.edu.cn/s78/A19/A19_
gggs/s8478/201302/t20130225_181150.html

4.1 Data

We use the Chinese Gigaword Fifth Edition
(Parker et al., 2011) produce by the Linguistic
Data Consortium (LDC). We select documents of
type ‘story’ from Central News Agency (CMA),
Taiwan after 2004, which are written in Tradi-
tional Chinese. In order to evaluate character con-
version, we need to assume that there is no differ-
ence in word usage. Since conversion from Tradi-
tional Chinese to Simplified Chinese is not prob-
lematic on character level(Halpern and Kerman,
1999), we convert the CMA corpus into Simpli-
fied Chinese and use it as source language text set.
The original CMA corpus becomes the target lan-
guage text set. We split the entire data set into 80%
training and 20% testing data randomly.

4.2 Evaluation

MOE-CIPSC evaluation provides a list of char-
acters that have one-to-many mapping3. Over-
all accuracy is defined as: (#correctly converted
ambiguous characters) / (#ambiguous characters).
We also use Macro-average accuracy to evaluate
performance across different characters.

4.3 Results and Analysis

Accuracies on character conversion are reported
in Table 4 and Table 5. Note that XMUCC is a
pre-trained system and OpenCC is a rule-based
system. STCP outperforms OpenCC in terms of
both accuracies and achieved comparable accu-
racy with XMUCC. Comparisons of these system
are in section 5.

OpenCC XMUCC STCP

Overall Accuracy 98.90 99.81 99.64

Table 4: Overall accuracies

OpenCC XMUCC STCP

Macro-avg Acc. 91.75 96.98 95.73

Table 5: Macro-average accuracies

5 Related Work

There are several statistical approaches that have
been proposed. Chen et al. (2011) integrates statis-
tical features, including language models and lex-

3http://bj.bcebos.com/cips-upload/dzb.
txt

63



ical semantic consistencies, into log-linear mod-
els. Li et al. (2010) uses look-up tables retrieved
from Wikipedia to perform word substitution and
disambiguate characters through language model.
We adopt this method to build our conversion
model. We use different look-up tables and we use
higher order language model while they only use
bigram and unigram.

The four most popular and publicly available
systems are Google Translate, Microsoft Trans-
lator, Open Chinese Convert (OpenCC), and a
system co-developed by Xiamen University, Min-
istry of Education of The People’s Republic of
China, and Beijing Normal University (XMUCC).
OpenCC 4 is an open-source project that performs
conversion based on lookup tables constructed
manually. XMUCC 5 integrates language models
and lexical semantic consistencies into log-linear
models (Chen et al., 2011). However, XMUCC
can be accessed through web interface and but it
can only be executed in Windows command line
as standalone program.

In end-use applications, especially when high
quality conversion is required, human proofread-
ing is required. Compared to (Zhang, 2011, 2014),
our conversion is based on language model, in-
stead of simply choosing the most frequent tar-
get characters. In addition, our proofreading inter-
face highlights not only ambiguous characters, but
also words. Users can also customize the system
by importing look-up tables and language model,
which can be useful for particular domains, such
as science, business, and law.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

We develop an open-source customizable Chinese
conversion system that is based on look-up tables
and language model with a proofreading interface
that assists end-use application. For future work,
we will experiment with different language mod-
eling approaches, such as neural language model.
We will use the proofreading interface to construct
parallel corpus of high quality to evaluate word-
level conversion.

Acknowledgments

References
Peter F. Brown, John Cocke, Stephen A. Della

Pietra, Vincent J. Della Pietra, Fredrick Jelinek,
4https://github.com/BYVoid/OpenCC
5http://jf.cloudtranslation.cc/

John D. Lafferty, Robert L. Mercer, and Paul S.
Roossin. 1990. A statistical approach to ma-
chine translation. Comput. Linguist. 16(2):79–85.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=92858.92860.

Jing-Shin Chang and Chun-Kai Kung. 2007. A
chinese-to-chinese statistical machine translation
model for mining synonymous simplified-traditional
chinese terms. Proceedings of Machine Translation
Summit XI .

Yidong Chen, Xiaodong Shi, and Changle Zhou.
2011. A simplified-traditional chinese char-
acter conversion model based on log-linear
models. In 2011 International Conference
on Asian Language Processing. pages 3–6.
https://doi.org/10.1109/IALP.2011.15.

Jack Halpern and Jouni Kerman. 1999. Pitfalls and
complexities of chinese to chinese conversion. In
International Unicode Conference (14th) in Boston.

Kenneth Heafield. 2011. Kenlm: Faster and smaller
language model queries. In Proceedings of the Sixth
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 187–
197.

Kenneth Heafield, Ivan Pouzyrevsky, Jonathan H
Clark, and Philipp Koehn. 2013. Scalable modified
kneser-ney language model estimation. In Proceed-
ings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics. pages 690–696.

Min-Hsiang Li, Shih-Hung Wu, Yi-Ching Zeng, Ping-
che Yang, and Tsun Ku. 2010. Chinese characters
conversion system based on lookup table and lan-
guage model. Computational Linguistics and Chi-
nese Language Processing 15(1):19–36.

Robert Parker, David Graff, Junbo Kong, Ke Chen, and
Kazuaki Maeda. 2011. English gigaword fifth edi-
tion LDC2011T07. DVD. Philadelphia: Linguistic
Data Consortium .

Xiaoheng Zhang. 2011. A simplified-traditional chi-
nese conversion tool with a supporting environment
for human proofreading. The 11th Chinese National
Conference on Computational Linguistics, CNCCL .

Xiaoheng Zhang. 2014. A Comparative Study
on Simplified-Traditional Chinese Translation,
Springer International Publishing, Cham, pages
212–222. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
12277-9 19.

64


