



















































Learning Synchronous Grammar Patterns for Assisted Writing for Second Language Learners


The Companion Volume of the IJCNLP 2017 Proceedings: System Demonstrations, pages 53–56,
Taipei, Taiwan, November 27 – December 1, 2017. c©2017 AFNLP

Learning Synchronous Grammar Patterns for Assisted Writing for
Second Language Learners

Chi-En Wu, Jhih-Jie Chen, Jim Chang, Jason S. Chang
Department of Computer Science

National Tsing Hua University
{tony, jjc, jim, jason}@nlplab.cc

Abstract

In this paper, we present a method for
extracting Synchronous Grammar Patterns
(SGPs) from a given parallel corpus in or-
der to assisted second language learners in
writing. A grammar pattern consists of a
head word (verb, noun, or adjective) and
its syntactic environment. A synchronous
grammar pattern describes a grammar pat-
tern in the target language (e.g., English)
and its counterpart in an other language
(e.g., Mandarin), serving the purpose of
native language support. Our method in-
volves identifying the grammar patterns in
the target language, aligning these patterns
with the target language patterns, and fi-
nally filtering valid SGPs. The extracted
SGPs with examples are then used to de-
velop a prototype writing assistant system,
called WriteAhead/bilingual. Evaluation
on a set of randomly selected SGPs shows
that our system provides satisfactory writ-
ing suggestions for English as a Second
Language (ESL) learners.

1 Introduction

Lexicography is the discipline of analyzing the
syntax, semantics, and pragmatics of the language
to compile a dictionary, with a description of vo-
cabulary and grammar. The compiling process in-
volves time-consuming delineating word senses,
analyzing grammatical information, and provid-
ing example sentences. Since 1970s, computa-
tional approach of statistical analysis of large-
scale corpora was widely adopted in lexicography,
which originates from the COBUILD project, led
by John Sinclair, aiming at building a large-scale
electronic corpus. The COBUILD project lead to
dictionaries and grammar books, including Collins

COBUILD Grammar Patterns 1: Verbs (Patterns,
1996) and Collins COBUILD Grammar Patterns
2: Nouns and Adjectives (Patterns, 1998). These
two books describe grammar patterns of common
verbs, nouns and adjectives in English, with the
concept that most English words tend to follow
only a limited set of patterns, which relates to the
structure, usage, and the meaning of a word.

Later, Hunston and Francis (2000) propose Pat-
tern Grammar with rules describing the intricate
relation between word and grammar in one sim-
ple representational scheme, which explores the
local regularities such as complementation struc-
ture, consisting of a headword with a sequence of
preposition, noun phrase, verb phrase, clause (e.g.,
apologize for n), or a limited set of special words
and phrases.

In this paper, we describe a method for automat-
ically identifying the Chinese counterpart (e.g.,
“與 n 接觸”) of a given English grammar pat-
tern (e.g., “contact with n”), along with the bilin-
gual examples. Such pair of extracted patterns is
call a Synchronous Grammar Pattern (SGP). SGPs
can be used to support the compilation process
of bilingual dictionary reducing the construction
time and to improve the learning efficiency of ESL
learners. With this in mind, we develop a proto-
type system, WriteAway, to assist writing for Chi-
nese EFL learners.

2 Translation Pattern Assistant

We have implemented a prototype system as a
web application, aimed at assisting second lan-
guage learner in writing with native language sup-
port. At run time, WriteAway obtains the last
content word the user just types in and displays
relevant SGPs instantly as the user writes away.
The prototype system, WriteAway, is accessible at
https://spg-write.herokuapp.com

53



Figure 1: The prototype system, WriteAway

3 Extracting Synchronous Grammar
Patterns

The extracting process involves recognizing the
grammar patterns in the target language, aligning
these patterns with their native language counter-
part, and finally filtering valid SGPs with bilin-
gual examples. We use a much simpler ap-
proach than previous work (Yen et al., 2015).
We rely on a list of English grammar patterns
from the HTML version of COLLINS COBUILD
GRAMMAR PATTERNS 1: VERBS available
at (http://arts-ccr-002.bham.ac.uk/
ccr/patgram/). Therefore, the main focus is
to identify the instances of these verb patterns and
their counter part and to convert the counterpart
instances into patterns.

3.1 Identifying English Grammar Patterns
In the identification process, we first use the GE-
NIA Tagger (Tsuruoka et al., 2005) to shallow
parse English sentences to obtain part of speech
(POS) and chunk information (“B”,“I”,“O” sym-
bols respectively indicate words at the beginning
of a chunk, inside a chunk, and not part of NP, VP,
ADJP, and ADVP).

Then, we identify head context words and ele-
ments of possible grammar patterns in the given
sentences. Considering the input sentence “I apol-
ogize for my behavior.”, we identify the verb
“apologize” as a headword “V” followed by the
preposition “for” and a noun phrase “V” ‘my be-
havior’ with ’n’ based on the simple relation be-
tween the parse results and the notation of Pattern
Grammar. In so doing, we identify an instance of
the pattern “V for n” for headword “apologize”,
after we verify that this pattern can be found in
COLLINS COBUILD GRAMMAR PATTERNS 1:
VERBS. The phrase “apologize for my behavior”
is retained for further processing (See Table 1).

Word POS B-I-O Annotation Pattern
I PRP B-NP
apologize VBP B-VP V (V for n)
for IN B-PP for
my PRP$ B-NP NP
behavior NN I-NP NP
. . O

Table 1: Anchor ’apologize for n’ to a sentence

3.2 Align English Pattern to Chinese
After obtaining the target language grammar pat-
terns and instances for each headword, we then
proceed to extract the corresponding native lan-
guage grammar pattern and its example instances.

For that, we use a Chinese word segment sys-
tem, CKIP (Ma and Chen, 2003), to tokenize and
tag Chinese sentence with POS information. We
also use a word aligner, fast align (Dyer et al.,
2013) to explore the crossing-lingual relationship
between the target language and native language
words (e.g., English and Mandarin words). Fi-
nally, we convert the aligned native counterpart in-
stances into grammar patterns.

Figure 2: SGP and example phrase extraction ac-
cording to alignment

See Figure 2 for an example of aligning “apol-
ogize: V for n“ in a English sentence with its Chi-
nese counterpart. When word alignment is 100%
accurate, aligning and deriving synchronous pat-
terns is straightforward. As shown in Figure 2,
the headword “apologize” is aligned to “道歉”,
the preposition “for” to “為” and the noun phrase
“my behavior” to “我的行為” converted to the
same phrase label “n”. Consequently, we can de-
rive the SGP pair (e.g., “apologize for n”, <“為 n
道歉”>) from the aligned bilingual instance (e.g.,
“apologize for my behaviour”, <“為自己的行為
道歉”>).

However, word alignment is prone to errors,
causing the SGP extraction process to derive er-
roneous results. Typically, a target-language word
may be aligned incorrectly leading to incorrect

54



links, missing links, or unnecessary links leading
to an incorrectly identified counterpart instance
and pattern.

Figure 3: A SGP extraction failure

An example of word alignment error is shown
in Figure 3. The pattern “exchange n1 with n2” is
retrieved from sentence “I should like to exchange
a few words with you in confidence . ”. However,
we derive an incorrect grammar pattern “n1 和
n2 交換 n1”, caused by the incorrect alignments
(“words”, “私下”). If “words“ is only related with
“意見”, we obtain the correct grammar pattern “和
n2 交換 n1” and bilingual example (“exchange a
few words with you” “和你交換點意見”).

To cope with word alignment errors, we stipu-
late that content phrase alignments are one-to-one.
For one-to-two alignment, we select the longest
consecutive Chinese segment (e.g., “點 意見”),
and ignore the remaining disjoint segment (e.g.,
“私下”) aligned to an English phrase chunk, be-
cause longer segments tend to be correct. With
this method, we can let the noun phrase “a few
words” only align to the Chinese phrase. In so do-
ing, we can extract the correct Chinese grammar
pattern “和 n2交換 n1”.

3.3 Re-rank the Chinese Pattern

Rank Ch Template Frequency Instance
1 V n 15900 run for n,競選 n
2 N n 2000 run for n,競選 n
3 P n 1950 apologize for n,向 n道歉
4 n V 1900 apologize for n, n道歉
5 D V n 1850 care for n,來照顧 n
6 V V n 1670 care for n,負責照顧 n
7 P V n 1400 run for n,為了競選 n
8 P n V 1390 apologize for n,為 n道歉

Table 2: The potential Chinese pattern templates
for English pattern template ’V for n’

We designed a heuristic scoring scheme to re-
rank the native-language patterns based on how
likely are the specific template that match the pat-
tern (see Table 2). We ask two linguistics stu-
dents to come up with the scores for ranking of

these templates. First, we generate TET a list
of i most frequent Chinese patterns (templates),
t1, t2, t3, . . . ., ti, for the English (template) ET ,
with frequency F = f1, f2, f3. . . .., fi , is in de-
scending order. These two annotators then as-
sign a set of weight W = w1, w2, w3, . . . ., wi such
that the new order of re-ranked TET satisfy the
expected rank TET−expected = T1, T2, T3, . . . .., Ti
according to the weighted score, w1 ∗ f1, w2 ∗
f2, w3 ∗ f3, . . . .., wi ∗ fi, and then apply these
weights to Chinese template instance. For exam-
ple, based on these scores, we upgrade the ranks of
the grammatical Chinese template ‘V NP’ and ‘P
NP V’ , and degrade the ranks of the others tend to
be ungrammatical. For example, we obtained the
ranks of Chinese pattern template, [ V n, P n V, N
n, D V n, V V n, P V n, n V, P n ] as the most likely
top 8 Chinese templates for the English pattern ‘V
for n’. For the Chinese pattern template shown in
Table 2, we can choose w3 = 0.3, w4 = 0.5, w8 =
5 and otherwise 1 consistent with the expected or-
dering. Thus, we obtain a weight table for ’V for
n’ template. Finally, we multiply the frequency of
each Chinese pattern by its weight in the weight
table and re-rank for better results See Table 3 for
an example re-ranking process of Chinese patterns
of English pattern ’run for n’.

Ch Pattern (Template) Frequency Weighted Score Rank
競選 n (V n) 36 36 * 1 = 36.0 1 ->1
參選 n (V n) 18 18 * 1 = 18.0 2 ->2
n競選 (n V) 10 10 * 0.4 = 4.0 3 ->6
為 n (P n) 6 6 * 0.3 = 1.8 4 ->7
往 n跑 (P n V) 2 2 * 5 = 10.0 5 ->3
為 n奔波 (P n V) 1 1 * 5 = 5.0 6 ->4
為 n跑 (P n V) 1 1 * 5 = 5.0 7 ->5

Table 3: rerank the Chinese patterns of ’run for n’

3.4 Selecting Good Example Phrases
In order to give concrete examples of these rather
abstract synchronous grammar patterns, we extend
the method described in (Kilgarriff et al., 2008) to
select bilingual examples from the parallel corpus.
The principles are as follows:

1. Correctness (English). The length of English
pattern example multiplied by r must be sim-
ilar with the length of the Chinese pattern ex-
ample. Note that r is the average sentence
length ratio between English and Chinese.
This is to avoid selecting examples with word
alignment errors.

2. Readability. Let lE and lC be the aver-

55



Annotation Description Count Percentage
CC Perfect 660 44.2%
CA Good 82 5.5%
AA Acceptable 300 20.1%
CI ambivalent 7 0.5%
AI Bad 91 6.1%
II Incorrect 350 23.7%

Table 4: The evaluation result of sampled SGPs

age lengths of the English/Chinese pattern
instances. We prefer bilingual examples of
length closest to to lE and lC .

4 Evaluation

Our evaluation focused on verifying the correct-
ness of extracted SGPs. First, we grouped SGPs
by their corresponding English pattern templates.
Next, we randomly sampled 10 English grammar
patterns from each group along with top 5 cor-
responding Chinese grammar patterns. Then, we
asked two linguisitcs to assess the appropriateness
and quality of using the SGP for translation. In
the assessment, each Chinese pattern is given a la-
bel of (C)orrect, (A)cceptable or (I)ncorrect. We
evaluated a set of 1,497 Chinese grammar patterns
for 31 different types of English patterns. Table 4
lists the counts and the proportion of the annota-
tion results. There are 44% SGPs tagged with CC,
5.5% with CA, and 20% with AA. Overall, there
are approximately 70% sampled SGPs are correct
or acceptable.

In addition, we calculated the average score of
the evaluation while assessing the scores of C = 2,
A = 1 and I = 0. The average score is 1.2, which in-
dicates that the results are only slightly better than
acceptable, and obvious there is much room for
improvement.

5 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we have presented a method for
automatically extracting Synchronous Grammar
Patterns from a parallel corpus. The procedure
involves extracting English patterns from paral-
lel corpora, performing alignment of pattern se-
quences to Chinese sequences, generating and re-
ranking counterpart Chinese patterns. The eval-
uation results show that our approach provides
mostly correct or acceptable translation patterns
that can be effectively exploited in assisted writing
for second language learners. For that, we have
also developed a prototype system so that ESL
learners can write more confidently and frequently

based on the synchronous grammar patterns dis-
played by the system.

We also conducted a preliminary investigation
into the origins of incorrect SPGs and found that
these errors were mainly due to alignment errors
and segmentation errors. Moreover, idioms are
usually hard to aligned and generalized into an
SPG (e.g., “樂不思蜀” to “reluctant to leave”).
Overall, common patterns with literal translation
tend to leand to correct and useful SPGs for
learner-writers, implying that a larger corpus can
help producing more accurate SPGs. We will con-
tinue to work on the cases of SPG for nouns and
adjectives.

References
Chris Dyer, Victor Chahuneau, and Noah A Smith.

2013. A simple, fast, and effective reparameteriza-
tion of ibm model 2. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Susan Hunston and Gill Francis. 2000. Pattern gram-
mar: A corpus-driven approach to the lexical gram-
mar of english. Computational Linguistics, 27(2).

Adam Kilgarriff, Milos Husák, Katy McAdam,
Michael Rundell, and Pavel Rychlỳ. 2008. Gdex:
Automatically finding good dictionary examples in
a corpus. In Proc. Euralex.

Wei-Yun Ma and Keh-Jiann Chen. 2003. Introduction
to ckip chinese word segmentation system for the
first international chinese word segmentation bake-
off. In Proceedings of the second SIGHAN work-
shop on Chinese language processing-Volume 17,
pages 168–171. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Collins COBUILD Grammar Patterns. 1996. 1: Verbs.
Collins COBUILD, the University of Birmingham.

Collins Cobuild Grammar Patterns. 1998. 2: Nouns
and adjectives.

Yoshimasa Tsuruoka, Yuka Tateishi, Jin-Dong Kim,
Tomoko Ohta, John McNaught, Sophia Ananiadou,
and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2005. Developing a robust part-
of-speech tagger for biomedical text. In Panhel-
lenic Conference on Informatics, pages 382–392.
Springer.

Tzu-Hsi Yen, Jian-Cheng Wu, Jim Chang, Joanne Bois-
son, and Jason S Chang. 2015. Writeahead: Mining
grammar patterns in corpora for assisted writing. In
ACL (System Demonstrations), pages 139–144.

56


