



















































TOTEMSS: Topic-based, Temporal Sentiment Summarisation for Twitter


The Companion Volume of the IJCNLP 2017 Proceedings: System Demonstrations, pages 21–24,
Taipei, Taiwan, November 27 – December 1, 2017. c©2017 AFNLP

TOTEMSS: Topic-based, Temporal Sentiment Summarisation for Twitter

Bo Wang1, Maria Liakata1,2, Adam Tsakalidis1, Spiros Georgakopoulos Kolaitis1,
Symeon Papadopoulos3, Lazaros Apostolidis3, Arkaitz Zubiaga1, Rob Procter1,2

Yiannis Kompatsiaris3
1 University of Warwick, UK

2 The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK
3 Information Technologies Institute (ITI), CERTH, Greece

{bo.wang, a.tsakalidis, m.liakata}@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract

We present a system for time-sensitive,
topic-based summarisation of sentiment
around target entities and topics in collec-
tions of tweets. We describe the main ele-
ments of the system and present two exam-
ples of sentiment analysis of topics related
to the 2017 UK general election.

1 Introduction

In recent years social media such as Twitter have
gained prominence as a rich resource for opinion
mining and sentiment analysis on diverse topics.
However, analysing sentiment about diverse topics
and how it evolves over time in large volumes of
tweets is a difficult task. In this paper, we present
a system for analysing sentiment about specific
topics or entities over time while providing fine-
grained summaries to give insights into the under-
lying reasons. We illustrate its use with examples
of topics discussed on Twitter during the 2017 UK
general election.

Our problem formulation is related to work on
prospective information needs, represented by the
Microblog (Lin et al., 2015), Temporal Sum-
marisation (Aslam et al., 2015) and Real-Time
Summarisation (Lin et al., 2016) tracks at recent
Text Retrieval Conferences (TRECs). However,
while the aim of these tasks is to keep users up-
to-date with topics of interest via push notifica-
tions or email digests, our aim is to provide an in-
teractive user interface that shows how sentiment
towards specific entities or topics develops over
time. We have incorporated an automatic sum-
marisation feature to assist users in understanding
the underlying reasons. Thus, our motivation is re-
lated to the one discussed in (Meng et al., 2012),
which also proposes a topic-oriented opinion sum-
marisation framework. However, we use state-of-

the-art methods enabling intuitive and interactive
visualisation of sentiments in chronological order.
This provides a useful tool for analysing an impor-
tant event over time, such as elections, both quan-
titatively and qualitatively.

Here, we describe our system that aims at the
aforementioned objectives. Its interactive web in-
terface is accessible online1. We also present two
use cases to demonstrate how the system can be
used in analysing public sentiment.

2 System Design

An overview of the system is depicted in Figure 1
and comprises: 1) Data collection and sampling;
2) Sentiment classification; 3) Tweet summarisa-
tion; and 4) Data visualisation.

Figure 1: System overview.

2.1 Data Collection and Sampling
We collected a corpus of tweets about the 2017
UK general election through Twitter’s streaming
API by tracking 15 hashtags2. Data harvesting
was performed between 26 May and 21 June 2017
1Live demo: http://bit.ly/2g5lBcH
2#ukelection2017, #ge2017, #ge17, #ukge2017, #ukgeneral-
election2017, #bbcqt, #bbcdp, #marrshow, #generalelec-
tion2017, #generalelection, #electionuk, #ukelection, #elec-
tionuk2017 and #brexit

21



to capture discussions in the two weeks running
up to and after the election. To identify relevant
topics and entities in each tweet, we match tweets
against two manually curated lists of keywords
(both were created during the 2015 UK election
cycle) which include 438 topic keywords relevant
to nine popular election issues (e.g., immigration,
NHS) and a list of 71 political party aliases (e.g.
‘tories’, ‘lib dems’). The resulting corpus contains
3,663,090 tweets, with each tweet mentioning at
least one keyword. To increase data quality and
reduce noise in the corpus, we trained and applied
a Twitter spam detection model using features de-
scribed in (Wang et al., 2015).

2.2 Sentiment Classification

Jiang et al. (2011) showed that 40% of Twitter sen-
timent classification errors are caused by tweet-
level approaches that disregard topics/entities. We
go beyond tweet-level approaches and adopt the
multi-target-specific approach proposed in (Wang
et al., 2017b), which finds the syntactically con-
nected parts of a tweet associated with each topic
or entity, and extracts word embedding features
from them to classify sentiment as ‘negative’,
‘positive’ or ‘neutral’. This approach obtained
state-of-the-art performance in both single- and
multi-target benchmark data sets (Wang et al.,
2017b). The whole data pipeline of Figure 1 is
designed to dispatch work to many machines in
parallel3, processing many data batches simulta-
neously, which makes it very fast.

2.3 Tweet Summarisation

Here we aim to extract a list of representa-
tive tweets summarising the sentiment(s) ex-
pressed towards each topic/entity on each day
(e.g. tweets containing positive sentiment towards
‘NHS’ posted on 26 June 2017).

As a prerequisite for summarisation, we group
tweets containing the same sentiment towards a
topic/entity on a day into a number of clusters,
with each cluster assumed to represent a common
theme or reason underlying the particular choice
of sentiment. We adopt the two-stage hierarchi-
cal topic modelling approach proposed in (Wang
et al., 2017a) and select the GSDMM+OLDA
model for this task due to its effectiveness and ef-
ficiency. If there are fewer than 10 unique tweets
containing the same sentiment towards a topic (or

3We ran it on a server with 40 CPU cores and 64 GB of RAM.

entity) on a particular day, we skip clustering and
treat each of these tweets as a cluster.

To extract representative tweets summarising
each cluster, we place every tweet in one com-
mon embedding space and identify 20 tweets clos-
est to the cluster centroid (also known as metroid
tweets) as summary candidates. The embedding
space here is constructed using a simple but ef-
fective sentence embedding method proposed by
Arora et al. (2017), which reported good perfor-
mance on 22 textual similarity data sets, including
a Twitter corpus. We then rank the 20 summary
candidates based on weighted average tf-idf scores
in the cluster; these scores can be regarded as a
measure of informativeness.

We select the most informative tweet from the
20 candidates as the summary for that cluster and
the final summary for the sentiment expressed to-
wards the topic/entity is the combination of all its
cluster summaries (e.g., tweets containing positive
sentiment towards ‘NHS’ posted on 26 June 2017,
comprise 8 clusters, each summarised by a single
informative tweet).

2.4 Data Visualisation

For each topic/entity we calculate the following
daily features: # of tweets, # of unique users, #
of tweets per sentiment type (pos, neg, neutral)
and # of unique users per sentiment. These fea-
tures were selected on the basis of previous work
on election prediction with social media (Tsaka-
lidis et al., 2015). These are accompanied by the
daily summaries of each sentiment type for a given
topic/entity as described above.

In addition to showing the raw values of the
above features, we also normalised sentiment fea-
tures (# of tweets per sentiment, # of unique users
per sentiment) to reflect the percentage of senti-
ment of a particular type towards a topic/entity on
a particular day. To allow time series comparisons
across different topics/entities we normalised the #
of tweets and # of unique users of all topics/entities
across all days in the range [0, 1]. Finally, to ac-
count for differences in popularity, we calculated
the average (per-topic and across all days) # of
tweets and # of unique users.

The web interface is implemented on Web stan-
dards (HTML5/CSS3). The timeline graphs are
built using the NVD34 library (reusable charts
for d3.js), while the auto-complete function-

4http://nvd3.org/

22



ality is based on the ‘Ajax AutoComplete for
jQuery’ library5. In addition, jQuery from
Google Hosted Libraries6 and D3.js from Cloud-
fare Hosted Libraries7 are used for DOM manip-
ulation (add/remove elements, click events, etc.)
and accessing data (from tsv files) respectively.

3 Example Use Cases

We use two use cases to demonstrate how our sys-
tem can help analyse public sentiment on Twitter.

3.1 Use Case #1 – Party Sentiment
Recent election campaigns suggest that the Twit-
tersphere tends to contain more negative sentiment
during the election period. Hence, in the first
case study, we compare negative sentiment trends
on Twitter for the two major UK political parties,
‘Conservative’ and ‘Labour’, before and after the
2017 UK general election. As described in sec-
tion 2.4, the negative sentiment reflects the per-
centage of negative sentiment for each party on
each day over all sentiment bearing tweets.

Figure 2 reveals consistently more negative sen-
timent towards ‘Conservative’ than ‘Labour’, es-
pecially for the week before election day (8 June).

Figure 2: Negative sentiment trends for ‘Labour’
(red) and ‘Conservative’ (blue).

3.2 Use Case #2 – Grenfell Tower Fire
To provide deeper insight into the advantages of
our opinion summarisation system, we present a
case study on how public sentiment towards the
topic ‘housing’ developed before and after the
Grenfell Tower Fire disaster8. Figure 3 shows the
percentage of users expressing negative sentiment
towards ‘housing’ as well as the governing party
5https://www.devbridge.com/sourcery/
components/jquery-autocomplete/

6https://developers.google.com/speed/
libraries/

7https://cdnjs.com/
8https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grenfell_
Tower_fire

‘conservative’ over the period covering the inci-
dent. Our web interface allows users to click on
each circle shown on the graph to display tweet
summaries for that topic on that particular day.

We can see the number of users expressing neg-
ative sentiment for the topic ‘housing’ fluctuated
throughout the election period while it remained
fairly constant for ‘Conservative’. Negative senti-
ment peaked in both cases on June 16th.

Table 1 presents a negative sentiment summary
for each day between June 12 and 15, and all three
negative opinion summary tweets on the peak day
of June 16 showing each summary tweet repre-
sents a different aspect of the topic. Along with
the graph shown in Figure 3, this summary offers
a tight integration of topic, sentiment and insight
into reasons behind the sentiment. Before the fire,
negative sentiment towards ‘housing’ was auster-
ity related; after the fire, the incident dominated
the ‘housing’ discussion on Twitter. A large por-
tion of users blame the Conservative government
for the decline of social housing and ultimately the
Grenfell Tower fire. Finally, on June 16 each of the
negative opinion summaries represents one theme
related to this topic, namely ‘the decline of so-
cial housing’, ‘immigration and housing’ and ‘the
votes on housing safety’.

4 Conclusion

We presented a monitoring system for topic-entity
sentiment on Twitter that summarises public opin-
ion around the sentiment towards each entity. The
system deployment for the 2017 UK election, pro-
vides an interactive visualisation for comparing
sentiment trends and display opinion summaries
on the graph. In the future, we plan to improve our
system to produce more concise summaries and al-
low near real-time processing of new events.

References
Sanjeev Arora, Yingyu Liang, and Tengyu Ma. 2017.

A simple but tough-to-beat baseline for sentence em-
beddings. In Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).

Javed Aslam, Fernando Diaz, Matthew Ekstrand-
Abueg, Richard McCreadie, Virgil Pavlu, and Tet-
suya Sakai. 2015. Trec 2015 temporal summariza-
tion track overview. In Proceedings of the 24th Text
REtrieval Conference, TREC.

Long Jiang, Mo Yu, Ming Zhou, Xiaohua Liu, and
Tiejun Zhao. 2011. Target-dependent twitter senti-

23



Figure 3: Negative sentiment trends for ‘housing’ (red) and ’conservative’ (blue), with a summary tweet
displayed for the former.

Topic entity Opinion Summaries Date

housing
rt @user1 : the audacity to even refer to tackling a “ housing crisis ”

after being in government for 7 years . https://t.co/lifwybhryp
12 June 2017

housing
austerity is still here , bedroom tax , foodbanks , pip , housing cap ,

universal credit taper , welfare freeze , esa cuts , inflation is up . #ge17
13 June 2017

housing
@bbcnews @skynews @itvnews tories cuts in society kill just look at social

housing #grenfelltower sold to cheapest bidding #ge17 #bbcqt
14 June 2017

housing
tory capitalism cutting kills social housing on the cheap #grenfelltower cuts

in fire ambulance police nhs services #victorialive #ge17
15 June 2017

housing
rt @user2 : govt is turned their backs on social housing and families

living in them . it is a class war . we must rebuild & value thes ...
16 June 2017

housing
rt @user3 : laura perrins again blaming the death toll of #grenfelltower

on immigration - putting pressure on housing . laura bt ...
16 June 2017

housing
rt @user4 : it is a shame the ministers hearts did not go out to the people

in grenfell tower when they were voting on housing safety #bbcqt
16 June 2017

Table 1: Negative opinion summary for ‘housing’ before and after the Grenfell Tower fire

ment classification. In Proceedings of the 49th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Jimmy Lin, Miles Efron, Yulu Wang, Garrick Sherman,
and Ellen Voorhees. 2015. Overview of the trec-
2015 microblog track. In Proceedings of the 24th
Text REtrieval Conference, TREC.

Jimmy Lin, Adam Roegiest, Luchen Tan, Richard Mc-
Creadie, Ellen Voorhees, and Fernando Diaz. 2016.
Overview of the trec 2016 real-time summarization
track. In Proceedings of the 25th Text REtrieval
Conference, TREC, volume 16.

Xinfan Meng, Furu Wei, Xiaohua Liu, Ming Zhou, Su-
jian Li, and Houfeng Wang. 2012. Entity-centric
topic-oriented opinion summarization in twitter. In
Proceedings of the 18th ACM SIGKDD.

Adam Tsakalidis, Symeon Papadopoulos, Alexandra I

Cristea, and Yiannis Kompatsiaris. 2015. Predict-
ing elections for multiple countries using twitter and
polls. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 30(2):10–17.

Bo Wang, Maria Liakata, Arkaitz Zubiaga, and Rob
Procter. 2017a. A hierarchical topic modelling ap-
proach for tweet clustering. In Proceedings of the
9th International Conference on Social Informatics
(SocInfo).

Bo Wang, Maria Liakata, Arkaitz Zubiaga, and Rob
Procter. 2017b. Tdparse-multi-target-specific senti-
ment recognition on twitter. In Proceedings of the
15th Conference of the European Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Bo Wang, Arkaitz Zubiaga, Maria Liakata, and Rob
Procter. 2015. Making the most of tweet-inherent
features for social spam detection on twitter. In 5th
Workshop on Making Sense of Microposts (#Micro-
posts2015) WWW, volume 1395, pages 10–16.

24


