



















































Reusing Neural Speech Representations for Auditory Emotion Recognition


Proceedings of the The 8th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 423–430,
Taipei, Taiwan, November 27 – December 1, 2017 c©2017 AFNLP

Reusing Neural Speech Representations for Auditory Emotion
Recognition

Egor Lakomkin Cornelius Weber Sven Magg Stefan Wermter
Department of Informatics, Knowledge Technology

University of Hamburg
Vogt-Koelln Str. 30, 22527 Hamburg, Germany

{lakomkin, weber, magg, wermter}@informatik.uni-hamburg.de

Abstract

Acoustic emotion recognition aims to cat-
egorize the affective state of the speaker
and is still a difficult task for machine
learning models. The difficulties come
from the scarcity of training data, general
subjectivity in emotion perception result-
ing in low annotator agreement, and the
uncertainty about which features are the
most relevant and robust ones for clas-
sification. In this paper, we will tackle
the latter problem. Inspired by the re-
cent success of transfer learning methods
we propose a set of architectures which
utilize neural representations inferred by
training on large speech databases for the
acoustic emotion recognition task. Our ex-
periments on the IEMOCAP dataset show
10% relative improvements in the accu-
racy and F1-score over the baseline recur-
rent neural network which is trained end-
to-end for emotion recognition.

1 Introduction

Speech emotion recognition (SER) has received
growing interest and attention in recent years. Be-
ing able to predict the affective state of a person
gives valuable information which could improve
dialog systems in human-computer interaction. To
fully understand a current emotion expressed by a
person, also knowledge of the context is required,
like facial expressions, the semantics of a spoken
text, gestures and body language, and cultural pe-
culiarities. This makes it challenging even for peo-
ple that have all this information to accurately pre-
dict the affective state. In this work, we are fo-
cusing solely on inferring the speaker’s emotional
state by analysing acoustic signals which are also
the only source of information in situations when

Figure 1: High-level system architecture. Acous-
tic emotion recognition system uses neural speech
representations for affective state classification.

the speaker is not directly observable.

With recent advances in deep learning, which
made it possible to train large end-to-end mod-
els for image classification (Simonyan and Zis-
serman, 2014), speech recognition (Hannun
et al., 2014) and natural language understanding
(Sutskever et al., 2014), the majority of the current
work in the area of acoustic emotion recognition
is neural network-based. Diverse neural architec-
tures were investigated based on convolutional and
recurrent neural networks (Fayek et al., 2017; Tri-
georgis et al., 2016). Alternatively, methods based
on linear models, like SVM with careful feature
engineering, still show competitive performance
on the benchmark datasets (Schuller et al., 2013,
2009). Such methods were popular in computer
vision until the AlexNet approach (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012) made automatic feature learning more
wide-spread. The low availability of annotated au-
ditory emotion data is probably one of the main
reasons for traditional methods being competitive.
The appealing property of neural networks com-
pared to SVM-like methods is their ability to iden-
tify automatically useful patterns in the data and
to scale linearly with the number of training sam-
ples. These properties drive the research commu-
nity to investigate different neural architectures.

423



In this paper, we present a model that neither
solely learns feature representations from scratch
nor uses complex feature engineering but uses the
features learned by a speech recognition network.

Even though the automatic speech recognition
(ASR) task is agnostic to the speaker’s emotion
and focuses only on the accuracy of the lan-
guage transcription, low-level neural network lay-
ers trained for ASR might still extract useful infor-
mation for the task of SER. Given that the size of
the data suitable for training ASR systems is sig-
nificantly larger than SER data, we can expect that
trained ASR systems are more robust to speaker
and condition variations. Recently, a method of
transferring knowledge learned by the neural net-
work from one task to another has been proposed
(Rusu et al., 2016; Anderson et al., 2016). This
strategy also potentially prevents a neural network
from overfitting to the smaller of the two datasets
and could work as an additional regularizer. More-
over, in many applications, such as dialog systems,
we would need to transcribe spoken text and iden-
tify its emotion jointly.

In this paper, we evaluate several dual architec-
tures which integrate representations of the ASR
network: a fine-tuning and a progressive network.
The fine-tuning architecture reuses features learnt
by the recurrent layers of a speech recognition net-
work and can use them directly for emotion classi-
fication by feeding them to a softmax classifier or
can add additional hidden SER layers to tune ASR
representations. Additionally, the ASR layers can
be static for the whole training process or can
be updated as well by allowing to backpropagate
through them. The progressive architecture com-
plements information from the ASR network with
SER representations trained end-to-end. There-
fore, in contrast to the fine-tuning model, a pro-
gressive network allows learning such low-level
emotion-relevant features which the ASR network
never learns since they are irrelevant to the speech
recognition task. Our contribution in this paper
is two-fold: 1) we propose several neural archi-
tectures allowing to model speech and emotion
recognition jointly, and 2) we present a simple
variant of a fine-tuning and a progressive network
which improves the performance of the existing
end-to-end models.

Figure 2: Architecture of the ASR model used in
this work, following the DeepSpeech 2 architec-
ture.

2 Related work

The majority of recent research is aimed at search-
ing for optimal neural architectures that learn
emotion-specific features from little or not pro-
cessed data. An autoencoder network (Ghosh
et al., 2016) was demonstrated to learn to com-
press the speech frames before the emotion clas-
sification. An attention mechanism (Huang and
Narayanan, 2016) was proposed to adjust weights
for each of the speech frames depending on their
importance. As there are many speech frames that
are not relevant to an expressed emotion, such as
silence, the attention mechanism allows focusing
only on the significant part of the acoustic signal.
Another approach probabilistically labeling each
speech frame as emotional and non-emotional was
proposed by (Chernykh et al., 2017). A combi-
nation of convolutional and recurrent neural net-
works was demonstrated by (Trigeorgis et al.,
2016) by training a model directly from the raw,
unprocessed waveform, significantly outperform-
ing manual feature engineering methods.

One of the first examples of the knowledge
transfer among neural networks was demonstrated
by (Bengio, 2012) and (Yosinski et al., 2014).
Eventually, fine-tuning became the de-facto stan-
dard for computer vision tasks that have a small
number of annotated samples, leveraging the abil-
ity of trained convolutional filters to be applicable
to different tasks. Our work is mainly inspired by
recently introduced architectures with an ability to
transfer knowledge between recurrent neural net-
works in a domain different from computer vision
(Rusu et al., 2016; Anderson et al., 2016).

Previously, to our knowledge, there was only
one attempt to analyze the correlation between au-
tomatic speech and emotion recognition (Fayek
et al., 2016). This approach showed the possibil-
ity of knowledge transfer from the convolutional
neural acoustic model trained on the TIMIT cor-
pus (Garofolo et al., 1993) for the emotion recog-

424



nition task. The authors proposed several vari-
ants of fine-tuning. They reported a significant
drop in the performance by using the ASR net-
work as a feature extractor and training only the
output softmax layer, compared to an end-to-end
convolution neural network model. Gradual im-
provements were observed by allowing more ASR
layers to be updated during back-propagation but,
overall, using ASR for feature extraction affected
the performance negatively.

3 Models and experiment setup

3.1 Models

We introduce two models that use a pre-trained
ASR network for acoustic emotion recognition.
The first one is the fine-tuning model which only
takes representations of the ASR network and
learns how to combine them to predict an emo-
tion category. We compare two variants of tuning
ASR representations: simply feeding them into a
softmax classifier or adding a new Gated Recur-
rent Units (GRU) layer trained on top of the ASR
features. The second is the progressive network
which allows us to train a neural network branch
parallel to the ASR network which can capture ad-
ditional emotion-specific information. We present
all SER models used in this work in Figure 3.

3.1.1 ASR model
Our ASR model (see Figure 2) is a combina-
tion of convolutional and recurrent layers inspired
by the DeepSpeech (Hannun et al., 2014) archi-
tecture for speech recognition. Our model con-
tains two convolutional layers for feature extrac-
tion from power FFT spectrograms, followed by
five recurrent bi-directional GRU layers with the
softmax layer on top, predicting the character dis-
tribution for each speech frame (ASR network in
all our experiments, left branch of the network in
the Figures 3b, 3c and 3d). The ASR network is
trained on pairs of utterances and the correspond-
ing transcribed texts (see 3.2.2 “Speech data“ sec-
tion for details). Connectionist Temporal classifi-
cation (CTC) loss (Graves et al., 2006) was used as
a metric to measure how good the alignment pro-
duced by the network is compared to the ground
truth transcription. Power spectrograms were ex-
tracted using a Hamming window of 20ms width
and 10 ms stride, resulting in 161 features for each
speech frame. We trained the ASR network with
Stochastic Gradient Descent with a learning rate of

0.0003 divided by 1.1 after every epoch until the
character error rate stopped improving on the val-
idation set (resulting in 35 epochs overall). In all
our experiments we keep the ASR network static
by freezing its weights during training for SER.

3.1.2 Baseline
As a baseline (see Figure 3a), we used a two-
layer bi-directional GRU neural network. Utter-
ances were represented by averaging hidden vec-
tor representations obtained on the second GRU
layer and fed to a softmax layer for emotion clas-
sification. Dropout with the probability of 0.25
was applied to the utterance representation during
training to prevent overfitting. We evaluate this ar-
chitecture as a baseline as it was proven to yield
strong results on the acoustic emotion recogni-
tion task (Huang and Narayanan, 2016). As there
are significantly less emotion-annotated samples
available the SER-specific network is limited to
two layers compared to the ASR network.

3.1.3 Fine-tuning model
We propose several variants of reusing speech rep-
resentations: 1) By averaging hidden memory rep-
resentations of the layer number x of the ASR net-
work (Fine-tuning MP-x later in the text where
MP stands for Mean Pooling), we train only the
output softmax layer to predict an emotion class.
(2) We feed hidden memory representations as in-
put to a new GRU network (emotion-specific) ini-
tialized randomly and trained for emotion classifi-
cation (Fine-tuning RNN-x). The intuition is that
bottom layers of the ASR network can be used as
feature extractors and the top level GRU can com-
bine them to predict the emotion class. Similar
to the Fine-tuning MP-x setup we average repre-
sentations of the newly attached GRU layer and
feed them to the classifier. In both experiments,
dropout with the rate of 0.25 was applied to av-
eraged representations. Figure 3b shows the Fine-
tuning MP-1 model pooling ASR representation of
the first ASR layer, and Figure 3c shows the Fine-
tuning RNN-1 setup.

3.1.4 Progressive neural network
The progressive network combines fine-tuning
with end-to-end training. The scheme of the
model is presented in Figure 3d. It contains two
branches: first, a speech recognition branch (left in
Figure 3d and identical to Figure 2) which is static
and not updated, and second, an emotion recogni-

425



Figure 3: (a) Baseline speech emotion recognition (SER) model, containing two bi-directional GRU
layers (b) A variant of the fine-tuning network (Fine-tuning MP-1) which uses the temporal pooled rep-
resentations of the first recurrent layer of the ASR network. (c) A variant of the fine-tuning network
(Fine-tuning RNN-1) which uses hidden memory representations of the first recurrent layer of the ASR
network as input to a new emotion-specific GRU layer. (d) The progressive network combines represen-
tations from the emotion recognition path with the temporal pooled first layer representations of the ASR
network (here Progressive net 1). A concatenated vector is fed into the softmax layer for the final emotion
classification. The ASR branch of the network remains static and is not tuned during backpropagation in
(b), (c) and (d).

tion branch (right), with the same architecture as
the baseline model which we initialized randomly
and trained from scratch. We feed the same fea-
tures to the emotion recognition branch as to the
baseline model for a fair comparison. Theoreti-
cally, a network of such type can learn task spe-
cific features while incorporating knowledge al-
ready utilized in the ASR network if it contributes
positively to the prediction.

3.2 Data

3.2.1 Emotion data
The Interactive Emotional Dyadic Motion Cap-
ture dataset IEMOCAP (Busso et al., 2008) con-
tains five recorded sessions of conversations be-
tween two actors, one from each gender. The total
amount of data is 12 hours of audio-visual infor-
mation from ten speakers annotated with categor-
ical emotion labels (Anger, Happiness, Sadness,
Neutral, Surprise, Fear, Frustration and Excited),
and dimensional labels (values of the activation
and valence from 1 to 5). Similarly as in previous
work (Huang and Narayanan, 2016), we merged
the Excited class with Happiness. We performed
several data filtering steps: we kept samples where
at least two annotators agreed on the emotion la-

bel, discarded samples where an utterance was an-
notated with 3 different emotions and used sam-
ples annotated with neutral, angry, happy and sad,
resulting in 6,416 samples (1,104 of Anger, 2,496
of Happiness, 1,752 of Neutral and 1,064 of Sad-
ness). We use 4 out of 5 sessions for training and
the remaining one for validation and testing (as
there are two speakers in the session, one was used
for validation and the other for testing).

3.2.2 Speech data
We concatenated three datasets to train the ASR
model: LibriSpeech, TED-LIUM v2, and Vox-
Forge. LibriSpeech (Panayotov et al., 2015) con-
tains around 1,000 hours of English-read speech
from audiobooks. TED-LIUM v2 (Rousseau et al.,
2014) is a dataset composed of transcribed TED
talks, containing 200 hours of speech and 1495
speakers. VoxForge is an open-source collection
of transcribed recordings collected using crowd-
sourcing. We downloaded all English record-
ings1, which is around 100 hours of speech. Over-
all, 384,547 utterances containing 1,300 hours of
speech from more than 3,000 speakers were used

1http://www.repository.voxforge1.
org/downloads/SpeechCorpus/Trunk/Audio/
Original/48kHz_16bit/

426



Figure 4: Representations of the IEMOCAP utterances generated by the Fine-tuning MP-x and Fine-
tuning RNN-x networks (x stands for the ASR layer number of which the representation is used) pro-
jected into 2-dimensional space using the t-SNE technique. Top: all four classes, bottom: only Sadness
and Anger. Color mapping: Anger - red, Sadness - blue, Neutral - cyan, Happiness - green. We can
observe that Fine-tuning MP-2 and MP-3 networks can separate Anger and Sadness classes even though
these representations are directly computed from the ASR network without any emotion-specific train-
ing. Fine-tuning RNN networks benefit from being trained directly for emotion recognition and form
visually distinguishable clusters.

to train the ASR model. We conducted no prepro-
cessing other than the conversion of recordings to
WAV format with single channel 32-bit format and
a sampling rate of 16,000. Utterances longer than
15 seconds were filtered out due to GPU memory
constraints.

3.3 Extracted features

The ASR network was trained on power spectro-
grams with filter banks computed over windows of
20ms width and 10ms stride. For the progressive
network, we used the same features as for the ASR
branch, and for the SER-specific branch, we used
13 MFCC coefficients and their deltas extracted
over windows of 20ms width and 10ms stride. We
have extracted pitch values smoothed with mov-
ing average with a window size of 15 using the
OpenSMILE toolkit (Eyben et al., 2013). The
reason for the choice of high-level features like
MFCC and pitch for the SER-branch was the lim-
ited size of emotion annotated data, as learning ef-
ficient emotion representation from low-level fea-
tures like raw waveform or power-spectrograms
might be difficult on the dataset of a size of IEMO-

CAP. In addition, such feature set showed state-of-
the-art results (Huang and Narayanan, 2016). In
both cases, we normalized each feature by sub-
tracting the mean and dividing by standard devi-
ation per utterance.

3.3.1 Training

The Adam optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2014) was
used in all experiments with a learning rate of
0.0001, clipping the norm of the gradient at the
level of 15 with a batch size of 64. During the
training, we applied learning rate annealing if the
results on the validation set did not improve for
two epochs and stopped it when the learning rate
reaches the value of 1e-6. We applied the Sorta-
Grad algorithm (Amodei et al., 2015) during the
first epoch by sorting utterances by the duration
(Hannun et al., 2014). We performed data aug-
mentation during the training phase by randomly
changing tempo and gain of the utterance within
the range of 0.85 to 1.15 and -3 to +6 dB respec-
tively. The model with the lowest cross-entropy
loss on the validation set was picked to evaluate
the test set performance.

427



Figure 5: Confusion matrices for our best baseline, Fine-tuning MP and Progressive models averaged
over 10-folds on the IEMOCAP dataset.

Table 1: Utterance-level emotion 4-way classification performance (unweighted and weighted accuracy
and f1-score). Several variants of fine-tuning and progressive networks are evaluated: using first, second
or third ASR layers as input for Fine-tuning MP, Fine-tuning RNN, and progressive networks.

Model U-Acc W-acc F1-score
Most frequent class 0.39± 0.04 0.33± 0.2 NaN
Random prediction 0.25± 0.02 0.25± 0.02 0.24± 0.02
Baseline 64 units 0.52± 0.04 0.54± 0.06 0.48± 0.05
Baseline 96 units 0.53 ± 0.01 0.55 ± 0.03 0.51 ± 0.02
Baseline 128 units 0.50± 0.04 0.51± 0.06 0.47± 0.05
Fine-tuning MP-1 0.46± 0.05 0.52± 0.07 0.31± 0.11
Fine-tuning MP-2 0.54± 0.04 0.54± 0.06 0.52± 0.04
Fine-tuning MP-3 0.55 ± 0.02 0.56 ± 0.03 0.53 ± 0.03
Fine-tuning RNN-1 0.53± 0.04 0.57± 0.04 0.48± 0.08
Fine-tuning RNN-2 0.57 ± 0.03 0.59 ± 0.05 0.56 ± 0.03
Fine-tuning RNN-3 0.56± 0.02 0.57± 0.04 0.55± 0.03
Progressive net-1 0.56± 0.02 0.57± 0.04 0.55± 0.03
Progressive net-2 0.58 ± 0.03 0.61 ± 0.04 0.57 ± 0.03
Progressive net-3 0.57± 0.03 0.59± 0.03 0.56± 0.04

4 Results

Table 1 summarizes the results obtained from
ASR-SER transfer learning. We evaluate several
baseline models by varying the number of GRU
units in a network, and three variants for Fine-
tuning MP-x, Fine-tuning RNN-x and Progressive
net-x by utilizing representations of layer x of
the ASR network. We report weighted and un-
weighted accuracy and f1-score to reflect imbal-
anced classes. These metrics were averaged over
ten runs of a ten-fold leave-one-speaker-out cross-
validation to monitor an effect of random initial-
ization of a neural network. Also, our results re-
veal the difficulty of separating Anger and Hap-
piness classes, and Neutral and Happiness (see

Figure 5). Our best Fine-tuning MP-3 model
achieved 55% unweighted and 56% weighted ac-
curacy, which significantly outperforms the base-
line (p-value ≤ 0.03) end-to-end 2-layer GRU
neural network similar to (Huang and Narayanan,
2016) and (Ghosh et al., 2016). The fine-tuning
model has around 30 times less trainable param-
eters (as only the softmax layer is trained) and
achieves significantly better performance than the
baseline. These results show that putting an ad-
ditional GRU layer on top of ASR representations
affects the performance positively and shows sig-
nificantly better results than the baseline (p-value
≤ 0.0007). Results prove our hypothesis that in-
termediate features extracted by the ASR network

428



contain useful information for emotion classifica-
tion.

The progressive network consistently outper-
forms baseline end-to-end models, reaching 58%
unweighted and 61% weighted accuracy. In all
variants, the addition of the second recurrent layer
representations of the ASR’s network contributes
positively to the performance compared to the
baseline. Our results support the hypothesis that
the progressive architecture of the network al-
lows to combine the ASR low-level representa-
tions with the SER-specific ones and achieve the
best accuracy result.

In addition to the quantitative results, we tried
to analyze the reason of such effectiveness of the
ASR representations, by visualizing the represen-
tations of the utterances by Fine-tuning MP-x and
Fine-tuning RNN-x networks (see Figure 4). We
observe that a prior ASR-trained network can sep-
arate Sadness and Anger samples even by pooling
representations of the first ASR layer. On the 3rd
layer, Anger, Sadness and Happiness form visu-
ally distinguishable clusters which could explain
the surprising effectiveness of Fine-tuning MP-2/3
models. Fine-tuning RNN-x networks can sepa-
rate four classes better due to an additional trained
GRU network on top of the ASR representations.
Also, we found that activations of some neurons in
the ASR network correlate significantly with the
well-known prosodic features like loudness. Fig-
ure 6 shows the activation of the neuron number
840 of the second GRU layer of the ASR network
and the loudness value of the speech frame for two
audio files. We found that, on average, the Pear-
son’s correlation between loudness and activation
of the 840th neuron calculated on the IEMOCAP
dataset is greater than 0.64 which is an indica-
tor that the ASR network is capable of learning
prosodic features which is useful for emotion clas-
sification.

5 Discussion and conclusion

In this paper, various neural architectures were
proposed utilizing speech recognition representa-
tions. Fine-tuning provides an ability to use the
ASR network for the emotion recognition task
quickly. A progressive network allows to com-
bine speech and emotion representations and train
them in parallel. Our experimental results confirm
that trained speech representations, even though
expected to be agnostic to a speaker’s emotion,

Figure 6: Activations of the neuron number 840
of the second GRU layer of the ASR model (blue)
and loudness of two utterances selected randomly
from IEMOCAP dataset (orange).

contain useful information for affective state pre-
dictions.

A possible future research direction would be to
investigate the influence of linguistic knowledge
on the speech representations and how it affects
the system performance. Additionally, the ASR
system can be fine-tuned in parallel with the emo-
tion branch by updating the layers of the ASR net-
work. Potentially, this could help the system to
adapt better to the particular speakers and their
emotion expression style. Furthermore, analyz-
ing linguistic information of the spoken text pro-
duced by the ASR network could possibly allevi-
ate the difficulty of separating Anger and Happi-
ness classes, and Neutral and Happiness.

Acknowledgments

This project has received funding from the Eu-
ropean Union’s Horizon 2020 research and inno-
vation programme under the Marie Sklodowska-
Curie grant agreement No 642667 (SECURE) and
partial support from the German Research Foun-
dation DFG under project CML (TRR 169).

References
Dario Amodei, Rishita Anubhai, Eric Battenberg, Carl

Case, Jared Casper, and et al. 2015. Deep speech 2:
End-to-end speech recognition in English and Man-
darin. CoRR, abs/1512.02595.

429



Ark Anderson, Kyle Shaffer, Artem Yankov, Court
Corley, and Nathan Hodas. 2016. Beyond Fine Tun-
ing: A Modular Approach to Learning on Small
Data. CoRR, abs/1611.01714.

Yoshua Bengio. 2012. Deep learning of representa-
tions for unsupervised and transfer learning. ICML
Unsupervised and Transfer Learning, 27:17–36.

Carlos Busso, Murtaza Bulut, Chi-Chun Lee, Abe
Kazemzadeh, Emily Mower, Samuel Kim, Jean-
nette N. Chang, Sungbok Lee, and Shrikanth S.
Narayanan. 2008. IEMOCAP: interactive emotional
dyadic motion capture database. Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, 42(4):335.

Vladimir Chernykh, Grigoriy Sterling, and Pavel Pri-
hodko. 2017. Emotion recognition from speech with
recurrent neural networks. CoRR, abs/1701.08071.

Florian Eyben, Felix Weninger, Florian Gross, and
Björn Schuller. 2013. Recent developments in
opensmile, the munich open-source multimedia fea-
ture extractor. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM Inter-
national Conference on Multimedia, pages 835–838.
ACM.

Haytham M. Fayek, Margaret Lech, and Lawrence
Cavedon. 2016. On the Correlation and Trans-
ferability of Features Between Automatic Speech
Recognition and Speech Emotion Recognition.
pages 3618–3622.

Haytham M. Fayek, Margaret Lech, and Lawrence
Cavedon. 2017. Evaluating deep learning architec-
tures for Speech Emotion Recognition. Neural Net-
works, vol. 92:60–68.

J. S. Garofolo, L. F. Lamel, W. M. Fisher, J. G. Fiscus,
and D. S. Pallett. 1993. DARPA TIMIT acoustic-
phonetic continuous speech corpus CD-ROM. NIST
speech disc 1-1.1. NASA STI/Recon Technical Re-
port N, 93.

Sayan Ghosh, Eugene Laksana, Louis-Philippe
Morency, and Stefan Scherer. 2016. Representa-
tion Learning for Speech Emotion Recognition.
INTERSPEECH, pages 3603–3607.

Alex Graves, Santiago Fernandez, Faustino Gomez,
and Jrgen Schmidhuber. 2006. Connectionist
temporal classification: labelling unsegmented se-
quence data with recurrent neural networks. In Pro-
ceedings of the 23rd International Conference on
Machine Learning, pages 369–376. ACM.

Awni Hannun, Carl Case, Jared Casper, Bryan Catan-
zaro, and et al. 2014. Deep Speech: Scaling up end-
to-end speech recognition. CoRR, abs/1412.5567.

Che-Wei Huang and Shrikanth S. Narayanan. 2016.
Attention Assisted Discovery of Sub-Utterance
Structure in Speech Emotion Recognition. In Pro-
ceedings of Interspeech, pages 1387–1391.

Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014.
Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization.
arXiv:1412.6980 [cs]. ArXiv: 1412.6980.

Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hin-
ton. 2012. ImageNet Classification with Deep Con-
volutional Neural Networks. In F. Pereira, C. J. C.
Burges, L. Bottou, and K. Q. Weinberger, editors,
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
25, pages 1097–1105. Curran Associates, Inc.

Vassil Panayotov, Guoguo Chen, Daniel Povey, and
Sanjeev Khudanpur. 2015. Librispeech: an ASR
corpus based on public domain audio books. In
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP),
2015 IEEE International Conference on, pages
5206–5210. IEEE.

Anthony Rousseau, Paul Deléglise, and Yannick
Estève. 2014. Enhancing the ted-lium corpus with
selected data for language modeling and more ted
talks. In LREC, pages 3935–3939.

Andrei A. Rusu, Neil C. Rabinowitz, Guillaume
Desjardins, Hubert Soyer, James Kirkpatrick, Ko-
ray Kavukcuoglu, Razvan Pascanu, and Raia
Hadsell. 2016. Progressive Neural Networks.
arXiv:1606.04671 [cs]. ArXiv: 1606.04671.

Björn Schuller, Stefan Steidl, Anton Batliner, Alessan-
dro Vinciarelli, Klaus Scherer, Fabien Ringeval, Mo-
hamed Chetouani, Felix Weninger, Florian Eyben,
Erik Marchi, et al. 2013. The interspeech 2013 com-
putational paralinguistics challenge: social signals,
conflict, emotion, autism.

Björn Schuller, Bogdan Vlasenko, Florian Eyben,
Gerhard Rigoll, and Andreas Wendemuth. 2009.
Acoustic emotion recognition: A benchmark com-
parison of performances. In Automatic Speech
Recognition & Understanding, pages 552–557.
IEEE.

Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. 2014. Very
deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
recognition. CoRR, abs/1409.1556.

Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V. Le. 2014.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural net-
works. In Advances in neural information process-
ing systems, pages 3104–3112.

George Trigeorgis, Fabien Ringeval, Raymond Brueck-
ner, Erik Marchi, Mihalis A. Nicolaou, Bjrn
Schuller, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. 2016. Adieu fea-
tures? End-to-end speech emotion recognition using
a deep convolutional recurrent network. In Acous-
tics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2016
IEEE International Conference on, pages 5200–
5204. IEEE.

Jason Yosinski, Jeff Clune, Yoshua Bengio, and Hod
Lipson. 2014. How transferable are features in deep
neural networks? In Advances in neural information
processing systems, pages 3320–3328.

430


