



















































Semantics-Enhanced Task-Oriented Dialogue Translation: A Case Study on Hotel Booking


The Companion Volume of the IJCNLP 2017 Proceedings: System Demonstrations, pages 33–36,
Taipei, Taiwan, November 27 – December 1, 2017. c©2017 AFNLP

Semantics-Enhanced Task-Oriented Dialogue Translation:
A Case Study on Hotel Booking

Longyue Wang† Jinhua Du† Liangyou Li§ Zhaopeng Tu‡∗ Andy Way† Qun Liu†
†ADAPT Centre, School of Computing, Dublin City University, Ireland

{longyue.wang, jinhua.du, andy.way, qun.liu}@adaptcentre.ie
§Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies, China ‡Tencent AI Lab, China

liliangyou@huawei.com zptu@@tencent.com

Abstract

We showcase TODAY, a semantics-
enhanced task-oriented dialogue transla-
tion system, whose novelties are: (i) task-
oriented named entity (NE) definition and
a hybrid strategy for NE recognition and
translation; and (ii) a novel grounded se-
mantic method for dialogue understanding
and task-order management. TODAY is a
case-study demo which can efficiently and
accurately assist customers and agents in
different languages to reach an agreement
in a dialogue for the hotel booking.

1 Introduction

Applications of machine translation (MT) in some
human–human communication scenarios still exist
many challenging problems due to the characteris-
tics of spoken languages and dialogues. For exam-
ple, general-purpose MT systems cannot perform
efficiently and effectively on specific tasks such as
hotel booking because of the low accuracy of entity
recognition and translation in dialogues between
customers and hotel agents as shown below:

Source: 我想定个房间，{十二月二十五号} (星期
二) [三点]入住。

Reference: I would like to reserve a room on {December
the 25th}, (Tuesday) and I will check in at
[three o‘clock].

Google: I’d like to have a room, [three] on (Tuesday),
{February 25}.

App1: I want to book a room, (Two) or [Three]
rooms at the {December 25} week.

In this example, App1 is a commercialised trans-
lation system for the travel domain. We found that
check-in date/time and week day were not trans-
lated correctly either by Google or App1. Wrong

∗ Work was done when Zhaopeng Tu was working at
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.

translations of these entities will impede communi-
cation between the customer and agent.

We showcase our task-oriented semantics-
enhanced dialogue machine translation (DMT) sys-
tem TODAY1 which alleviates these problems for
the hotel booking scenario.

2 System Description

In the hotel booking scenario, customers and agents
speak different languages.2 Customers access the
hotel website to request a conversation, and the
agent accepts the customer’s request to start the
conversion. Figure 1 shows the detailed workflow
of TODAY. We first recognise entities by inferring
their specific types based on information such as
contexts, speakers etc. (cf. Section 2.1 and 2.2).
Then, the recognised entities will be represented
as logical expressions or semantic templates using
the grounded semantics module (cf. Section 2.2).
Finally, candidate translations of semantically rep-
resented entities will be marked up and fed into a
unified bi-directional translation process.

2.1 Task-Oriented Named Entity Recognition
and Translation

As standard types of entities (e.g. people, organi-
zations, locations) cannot exactly match our task-
oriented entity types, we define a series of task-
oriented entity types in TODAY, including {time,
number, date, currency, room type, person name,
hotel name, location, payment type }. We combine
rule-based and dictionary-based methods for our
NE recognition and translation. For bilingual dic-
tionary construction, we employ the ICE toolkit.3

ICE can guide users through a series of linguis-

1The demo system can be found at http://
computing.dcu.ie/˜lwang/demo.html.

2The rest of the paper will assume that customers speak
English and agents speak Chinese.

3Available at http://nlp.cs.nyu.edu/ice.

33



Figure 1: Workflow of TODAY.

tic processing steps, presents them with entities
and dependency relations that are potential seeds,
and helps them to expand the seeds by answering
yes/no questions. Other types of NEs such as time,
data etc. can be recognised and translated using
rules because of their formulaic and common ex-
pressions.

Our hybrid strategy can generates multiple trans-
lation candidates. For example, the date have vari-
ous formats in both English and Chinese. Then the
recognised entities and their candidate translations
are formalise by XML markup in the source-side
sentence. Finally the sentence is fed into the de-
coder to compete with the translation model.

2.2 Grounded Semantic Representation and
Form Filling

We propose a specific semantic module for our task-
oriented dialogues: grounded semantics module
which is in the form of Feature-Value (FV) pairs.

In TODAY, we define two types of features (Ta-
ble 1): customer features and room features. While
the customer features include information about
the customer of the current order, room features
describe the details of the order, including check-in
and check-out date, room type, room price, and
payment information. All these features and their
values can be recognised by the NE recogniser (cf.
Section 2.1) but extended by adding extra patterns.
These new patterns are used to label an entity with

Type Feature Example value

Customer
Name John
Tel. NO. 1234567

Room

Check-In Date 1st April 2017
Check-Out Date 2nd April 2017
Room Type Single
Price Per. Night 300 Dollars
Payment Type VISA
Card NO. 987654321

Table 1: An example of a booking order which
represents the grounded semantic of a dialogue.

more detailed categories, such as determining a
date to be one of the two features: check-in date
and check-out date. To achieve this, patterns take
contexts into consideration. For example, accord-
ing to the phrase from 1st Jan to 2nd Jan, 1st Jan is
a check-in date while 2nd Jan is a check-out date.

After recognising all features and their values,
we need to solve conflicts when a feature appears
multiple times with different values.

Customer: I’d like to have a single room.
Hotel: Sorry. I only have double rooms available.
Customer: OK. A double room would also be fine.

In this example, the feature room type appears three
times with values single and double. To determine
which value should be chosen, we propose to score
each candidate value of a feature by comparing its
contexts with predefined attributes of the feature.
The candidate with the highest score is then taken
as the final feature value.

We define four attributes on each feature:

• Speaker: Its value is either hotel or customer.
For example, because the room type is usually
chosen by a customer, we define the speaker
attribute of this feature to be “customer”.

• Position: It defines a range of positions in dia-
logues that a feature should be within. For exam-
ple, we define the position attribute of a customer
name as [1–3], because a dialogue usually starts
from self-introduction and greetings, but in other
features we set the position to infinity.

• Patterncur: It consists of a set of patterns that
usually appear in the current utterance. For ex-
ample, the customer name usually follows I am
or my name is.

• Patternpre: It consists of a set of patterns that
usually appear in the previous utterance.

Given these predefined attributes on a feature, we
calculate a score for each candidate value of the

34



feature, according to Equation (1):

Score(v) = S · P · (λc +Mc) · (λp +Mp) (1)

where S ∈ {0, 1} indicates whether the current
speaker equals to the speaker defined in the feature
or not, P ∈ {0, 1} denotes whether the position of
the feature is within the range given by its position
attributes or not, and Mc and Mp are the number
of matched patterns in the current utterance and
previous utterance, respectively. We use λc = 1
and λp = 1 as smooth factors.

3 Experiments and Analysis

3.1 Setup

From the IWSLT DIALOG corpus,we select 1,023
and 1053 hotel booking sentences (34/36 dia-
logues) as development set and test set, respectively.
We combine our home-made travel domain corpora
as in-domain training data (180K). We also use
domain adaptation techniques to select in-domain
data from movie subtitles (Wang et al., 2016b).

We carry out our experiments using the phrase-
based SMT model in Moses (Koehn et al., 2007) on
Chinese (ZH)–English (EN). Furthermore, we train
a 5-gram language model using the SRI Language
Toolkit (Stolcke, 2002). We run GIZA++ (Och and
Ney, 2003) for alignment and use MERT (Och,
2003) to optimize the feature weights. We de-
velop TODAY on the basis of an open-source
live support application Mibew4 by integrating our
semantics-enhanced SMT system and the semantic
form filling.

3.2 Evaluation of Dialogue Translation

We first evaluate the domain adaptation and NE
approaches on DMT, respectively. Then, we com-
bine these best sub-models to further improve the
translation quality.

The baseline systems are trained on the in-
domain corpus and the results show that an MT
system trained on small-scale data can only obtain
24.20 and 17.90 BLEU points on English–Chinese
and Chinese–English, respectively. Combining the
models trained on the selected pseudo in-domain
data can improve the performance by at most +1.09
and +1.24 on EN-ZH (top-50K) and ZH-EN (top-
50K), respectively. However, bring more pseudo
in-domain data (> top− 250K), the performance
drops sharply.

4Available at https://mibew.org.

System EN-ZH 4 ZH-EN 4
In-domain 24.20 - 17.90 -
1-best Entity 30.70 +6.5 20.30 +2.4
N-best Entity 31.10 +6.9 20.20 +2.3

Table 2: Performance with task-oriented NE recog-
nition.

Task SYS BLEU (%)

ZH-EN
Google 10.3
App1 10.4

TODAY 21.5

EN-ZH
Google 16.9
App1 15.5

TODAY 32.7

Table 3: Overall performance.

About NE component, we employ XML markup
technique to insert bilingual entities into the trans-
lation. As the entity may have multiple translations,
we also explore N-best entity lists. After inserting
entities into the MT system, the performance im-
proves by +6.5 (EN-ZH) and +2.4 (ZH-EN) BLEU
points as shown in Table 2. When using the N-best
entity method, it can further improve the perfor-
mance by +0.4 BLEU on English–Chinese.

Based on the individual performance of each
component, we design our DMT: 1) build transla-
tion models on selected top-50K data and combine
it with baseline; 2) integrate N-best NE models to
our MT our system. In Table 3, it shows that combi-
nation further improve the translation performance.
Comparing with App1 and Google Translate, our
system significantly outperforms these systems by
+17.2 and +11.2 BLEU points on EN-ZH and ZH-
EN, respectively.

3.3 Evaluation of Task-Oriented Named
Entity and Translation

We manually annotated Chinese and English sen-
tences in the test set to evaluate the proposed task-
oriented NE recognition and translation in terms
of accuracy, recall and F1. In Table 4, Recog indi-
cates NE recognition on the source language, and
Trans indicates translation task. All F1 scores are
over 90% in terms of recognition and translation,

Lang Task Acc. (%) Rec. (%) F1 (%)

ZH-EN Recog 98.21 99.76 98.99Trans 91.86 93.33 92.59

EN-ZH Recog 97.78 96.04 96.90Trans 97.24 95.52 96.37

Table 4: Results of NE recognition and translation.

35



Task SYS Trans. Acc. (%)

ZH-EN
Google 72.08
App1 85.28

TODAY 97.24

EN-ZH
Google 58.11
App1 66.42

TODAY 95.52

Table 5: Comparison on entity translation with
different systems.

Feature Precision (%)
Customer Name 97.1
Customer Tel. NO. 91.2
Check-In Date 100.0
Check-Out Date 76.5
Room Type 73.5
Price Per. Night 79.4
Payment Type 100.0
Card NO. 97.1
Average 89.4

Table 6: Performance of form-filling (EN).

which shows that the proposed fine-grained NE def-
initions and hybrid strategy for NE recognition and
translation is effective in TODAY.

We also compared TODAY with Google and
App1 as shown in Table 5. Since we cannot obtain
NE recognition information from both third-part
applications, we manually inspected the top-300
sentences (in test set) and only calculate accuracy
of translations of entities. If the translation of an
entity matches the reference, we count it as correct;
otherwise, it is regarded as incorrect. It shows that
TODAY significantly outperforms both Google and
App1 in terms of accuracy of entity translation.

3.4 Evaluation of Grounded Semantic
Extraction

We tested our grounded semantic module on the
test set in terms of feature recognition and form
filling. Each dialogue is manually annotated with
semantic features and has an associated order form
as a reference. Since our feature recognizer is a
simple extension of the NE recogniser, in this sec-
tion we ignore the performance of the recognizer.
Table 6 shows evaluation results of the form-filling
given golden feature annotations.

Five features (customer name, customer Tel.
NO., check-in date, payment type, and Card NO.)
achieve an accuracy over 90%. The reason of such
high accuracy we analyse is that there are fewer
conflicts for them in a single dialogue. By con-
trast, on the other 3 features, (check-out date, room
type, and price per. night) the accuracy is between

70%–80%. By inspecting the dialogues, we found
that (i) the check-out date is not always explicitly
mentioned in the dialogues; (ii) the room type and
price per. night have a relatively higher repetition.
These observations suggest that it is harder to solve
the conflicts on these three features.

4 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper we described TODAY, a semantics-
enhanced task-oriented dialogue translation system
for hotel booking scenarios and evaluated its perfor-
mance. In future work, we plan to integrate neural
MT into our demo system based on our advanced
approaches (Wang et al., 2016a, 2017).

Acknowledgments

This work is supported by the Science Foun-
dation of Ireland (SFI) ADAPT project (Grant
No.:13/RC/2106), and partly supported by the
DCU-Huawei Joint Project (Grant No.:201504032-
A (DCU), YB2015090061 (Huawei)).

References
Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris

Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, and et al. 2007. Moses: Open
source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 45th ACL: Demo and Poster Ses-
sions, pages 177–180.

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training
in statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 41st ACL, pages 160–167.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A systematic
comparison of various statistical alignment models.
Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM – an extensible lan-
guage modeling toolkit. In Proceedings of the 7th
ICSLP, pages 901–904.

Longyue Wang, Zhaopeng Tu, Andy Way, and Qun Liu.
2017. Exploiting cross-sentence context for neural
machine translation. In Proceedings of the 2017
EMNLP, pages 2816–2821.

Longyue Wang, Zhaopeng Tu, Xiaojun Zhang, Hang
Li, Andy Way, and Qun Liu. 2016a. A novel ap-
proach for dropped pronoun translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 2016 NAACL, pages 983–993.

Longyue Wang, Xiaojun Zhang, Zhaopeng Tu, Andy
Way, and Qun Liu. 2016b. The automatic construc-
tion of discourse corpus for dialogue translation. In
Proceedings of the 10th LREC, pages 2748–2754.

36


