



















































Automatic Difficulty Assessment for Chinese Texts


The Companion Volume of the IJCNLP 2017 Proceedings: System Demonstrations, pages 45–48,
Taipei, Taiwan, November 27 – December 1, 2017. c©2017 AFNLP

Automatic Difficulty Assessment for Chinese Texts

John Lee, Meichun Liu, Chun Yin Lam, Tak On Lau, Bing Li, Keying Li
Department of Linguistics and Translation

City University of Hong Kong
jsylee@cityu.edu.hk, meichliu@cityu.edu.hk, mickey1224@gmail.com,

tolau2@cityu.edu.hk, bli232-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, keyingli3-c@my.cityu.edu.hk

Abstract

We present a web-based interface that au-
tomatically assesses reading difficulty of
Chinese texts. The system performs word
segmentation, part-of-speech tagging and
dependency parsing on the input text, and
then determines the difficulty levels of the
vocabulary items and grammatical con-
structions in the text. Furthermore, the sys-
tem highlights the words and phrases that
must be simplified or re-written in order to
conform to the user-specified target diffi-
culty level. Evaluation results show that
the system accurately identifies the vocab-
ulary level of 89.9% of the words, and de-
tects grammar points at 0.79 precision and
0.83 recall.

1 Introduction

Reading is critical to foreign language acquisi-
tion (Krashen, 2005). While language textbooks
provide a convenient source of reading materials,
these materials are limited in quantity and do not
always match the language learners’ interest. To
supplement textbooks, teachers often utilize texts
from other sources, such as newspapers, maga-
zines and the web. Since they were not origi-
nally written for pedagogical purposes, these texts
typically require adjustments: teachers must sim-
plify or re-write difficult vocabulary items and
grammatical constructions so that the text be-
comes “comprehensible input” (Krashen and Ma-
son, 2015) to the learners; conversely, teachers
might desire more advanced language usage to
challenge the learners. This editing process can be
time consuming and labor intensive.
To assist the editor, we built a web-based in-

terface that automatically determines the difficulty
level of Chinese texts. It detects vocabulary items

and grammar points covered by the Hanyu Shuip-
ing Kaoshi (HSK) guidelines, the official curricu-
lum for Chinese as a foreign language (CFL) in
mainland China. Furthermore, the editor can spec-
ify a target difficulty level, and ask the interface to
highlight all words and grammatical constructions
that must be simplified or re-written to reach the
target level.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first sys-

tem that assists editors of CFL pedagogical mate-
rial by explicitly pinpointing the words and gram-
matical constructions that exceed the target diffi-
culty level in an official curriculum.

2 Previous Work

Most text difficulty assessment systems aim at na-
tive speakers, both for Chinese (Chen et al., 2013;
Sung et al., 2015) and for other languages (Pitler
and Nenkova, 2008; Sato et al., 2008). Among
those that target language learners, most give a
holistic score on the overall difficulty level of the
text (François and Fairon, 2012; Pilán et al., 2014),
but do not specifically indicate the difficult words
or grammatical constructions. Hence, while these
systems can help identify suitable reading material
for language learners (Brown and Eskenazi, 2004),
they are not designed to facilitate editing of lan-
guage teaching materials, which is the goal of our
system.
Targeting learners of English as a foreign lan-

guage, FLAIR (Chinkina et al., 2016) can detect 87
linguistic forms in the official English curriculum
in a German state. The system attains an average
precision and recall of 0.94 and 0.90 in detecting
grammar points. Most systems for CFL determine
the difficulty level of a text on the basis of vo-
cabulary difficulty alone. ChineseTA (Chu, 2005),
for example, estimate vocabulary difficulty on the
basis of word frequencies interpolated from var-

45



Sentence 据说， 齐⽩⽯ ⼀开始 画 的 虾 太 重 写真
jushuo qibaishi yikaishi hua de xia tai zhong xiezhen

‘reportedly’ ‘Qibaishi’ ‘at first’ ‘paint’ DE ‘shrimp’ too ‘emphasize’ ‘realism’
“It is said that realism was overly emphasized in the shrimps painted by Qibaishi in early times.”

Vocabulary 5 NR 6+ 3 1 6+ 1 5 6+
Grammar 5 3 - - 1 1

Parenthetical Relative clause with subject Adverb of Verbal predicate
expression and predicate degree

Table 1: Vocabulary and grammar difficulty level of an example sentence, according to the HSK scale.
“NR” refers to a proper noun; 6+ is the vocabulary level attributed to words not found in the HSK vo-
cabulary lists.

Lv Vocab. Gram. Lv Vocab. Gram.
items points items points

1 150 35 4 1200 38
2 150 58 5 2500 39
3 600 68 6 5000 28

Table 2: Number of vocabulary items and gram-
mar points at each HSK level

POS tag: DT ... M ... NOUN
Example: zhe这 duo朵 hua花

‘this’ CL ‘flower’

det

clf

Figure 1: Parse tree pattern, in StanfordDependen-
cies for Chinese, for detecting the grammar point
“Determiner and classifier”

ious corpora. The Guidelines for CLT Materials
Development website (http://www.cltguides.com),
the system that is most similar to ours, also con-
centrates on vocabulary assessment. It can detect a
number of grammar constructions, but does not in-
dicate their HSK levels or specific grammar points.

3 System Description

For Chinese as a foreign language, the two major
assessment scales are the Test of Chinese as a For-
eign Language (Zeng, 2014) and theHanyu Shuip-
ing Kaoshi (HSK) (Hanban, 2014). Both contain
six levels and can be mapped to the Common Eu-
ropean Framework of Reference for Languages,
a global standard for measuring foreign language
proficiency. Our system adopts HSK, the more
widely used of the two in mainland China.
Upon input of any Chinese passage, the system

performs word segmentation, POS tagging and de-
pendency parsing using the Stanford Parser (Man-
ning et al., 2014). It then offers difficulty as-
sessment in terms of vocabulary and grammar
(Section 3.1), and guides the user in editing the
sentence towards the target difficulty level (Sec-
tion 3.2).

3.1 Difficulty assessment

The HSK guidelines provide a vocabulary list and
a set of grammar points for each level; as shown
in Table 2), there are a total of 9,600 vocabulary
items and 266 grammar points. For vocabulary
assessment, the system matches each word with
these lists, but does not assess the difficulty level
of proper nouns, except those included in the HSK
scheme. Table 1 shows an example sentence; the
vocabulary difficulty levels of its word range from
level 1 (e.g., tai ‘too’) to 6+ (e.g., xiezhen ‘real-
ism’);Qibaishi, a proper name, is not assigned any
level.
For grammar assessment, we manually crafted

parse tree patterns for the grammar points. A pat-
tern may contain a combination of constraints in
lexical, POS and dependency features. Figure 1
shows the pattern for the grammar point “Deter-
miner and classifier” (指⽰代词和量词), requir-
ing a noun to have two modifiers in the ‘det’ and
‘clf’ relations. The system performs dependency
parsing on the input text, and then searches for
matching parse tree patterns. In Table 1, the sen-
tence exhibits four grammar points, the highest
of which is the use of “Parenthetical expression”
(jushuo, ‘reportedly’), at level 5.
Most grammar points in the HSK guidelines

provide concrete examples. The only exception is
the grammar point for quadrasyllabic idiomatic ex-
pressions (成語), for which we use a list of about
1,000 expressions collected fromWiktionary. Fur-
ther, three grammar points— semantic passive (意

46



Figure 2: Screenshot of the system on input of the Chinese sentence in Table 1, with level 4 as the
target vocabulary level, and level 3 as the target grammar level. The interface (i) highlights in yellow
all words (jushuo ‘reportedly’, yikaishi ‘at first’, xia ‘shrimp’, zhong ‘emphasize’, and xiezhen ‘realism’)
that exceed level 4; and (ii) underlines in red all grammatical points (jushuo) that exceed level 3.

义上的被动词), rhetorical questions with inter-
rogative pronouns (⽤疑问代词的反问句) and
directional complement (趋向补语) — require
deeper semantic analysis, and thus have not been
implemented.

3.2 Editing

If the user specifies the target vocabulary level
and grammar level, the interface highlights in yel-
low all words that exceed the target level, and un-
derlines in red all words participating in grammar
structures that exceed the target level. For detailed
information, the user can mouse over each word to
view the vocabulary level detected, as well as the
name of the grammatical structure detected (Fig-
ure 2). The user can edit the text accordingly, then
re-submit the updated version for assessment, in
an iterative manner until the text reaches the de-
sired level of difficulty, or when the percentage of
words exceeding the level falls below an accepted
threshold, as shown by the distribution of statistics
at the bottom of the page.

In case the system’s word segmentation is in-
accurate, the user may correct it and re-submit
the text with the option “Words already separated
by space”, thereby asking the system to adopt the
manual segmentation.

Level # sentences # words # grammar
points

1 18 105 69
2 51 407 296
3 52 639 403
4 60 1241 540
5 65 1211 577
6 85 1970 801

Table 3: Statistics of the evaluation dataset

4 Evaluation

In order to evaluate system performance, we har-
vested sentences from sample HSK exams from
levels 1 to 6, obtained from the chinesetest.cn web-
site. Our dataset contained a total of 331 sentences,
including all sentences in the “Reading” sections
of the examination papers for levels 1 to 4, and all
sentences from reading comprehension exercises
for levels 5 and 6. We performedmanual word seg-
mentation on these sentences, and annotated the
HSK levels of each individual word and grammat-
ical construction; Table 3 shows statistics of this
dataset.
We evaluated system performance on both vo-

cabulary and grammar assessment on this dataset;
Table 4 presents the results according to HSK
level. For vocabulary assessment, using automatic
word segmentation, the system correctly recog-

47



Level Vocabulary Grammar
Accuracy Precision Recall

1 0.810 0.747 0.812
2 0.958 0.962 0.865
3 0.890 0.960 0.896
4 0.895 0.649 0.778
5 0.898 0.739 0.842
6 0.891 0.670 0.777

Table 4: System accuracy on vocabulary assess-
ment, and precision and recall on grammar point
detection

nized overall 89.9% of words and their vocabulary
level. Most errors are due to word segmentation
errors during automatic parsing, or misrecognition
of proper names.
The average precision and recall of grammar

points are 0.788 and 0.828. The system performs
best in categories involving lexical features with
unambiguous POS, such as “Pronouns” (⼈称代
词), and worse in categories that requires accu-
rate dependency parsing, such as double object
(双宾语). Errors in recall were mostly due to
the non-exhaustive nature of the examples in the
HSK guidelines. Precision is most challenging for
grammar points that can be disambiguated only
through semantic analysis, for example between
the use of hui (会) to express ability vs. predic-
tion.

5 Conclusions and future work

Wehave presented aweb-based interface that auto-
matically assesses the difficulty level of a Chinese
text. The system indicates the vocabulary level and
grammar level of specific words and grammatical
structures according to the HSK scale, and high-
light those that need to be simplified or re-written
in order for the text to conform to the target level.
We have also reported the performance of the sys-
tem on vocabulary and grammar level assessment.
In future work, we plan to estimate the overall

difficulty level of a sentence; to offer suggestions
for lexical simplification; and to extend the scope
to other linguistic features, beyond the HSK guide-
lines, that can help estimate the difficulty of a text.

References
Jonathan Brown and Maxine Eskenazi. 2004. Re-

trieval of authentic documents for reader-specific

lexical practice. In Proc. InSTIL/ICALL Symposium.
Venice, Italy.

Yu-Ta Chen, Yaw-Huei Chen, and Yu-Chih Cheng.
2013. Assessing chinese readability using term fre-
quency and lexical chain. Computational Linguis-
tics and Chinese Language Processing 18(2):1–18.

Maria Chinkina, Madeeswaran Kannan, and Detmar
Meurers. 2016. Online Information Retrieval for
Language Learning. In Proc. ACL System Demon-
strations.

Chengzhi Chu. 2005. ChineseTA 1.1. Beijing Lan-
guage and Culture University Press, Beijing, China.

Thomas François and Cédric Fairon. 2012. An “AI
Readability” Formula for French as a Foreign Lan-
guage. In Proc. EMNLP-CONLL.

Hanban. 2014. International Curriculum for Chinese
Language and Education. Beijing Language and
Culture University Press, Beijing, China.

S. Krashen. 2005. Free voluntary reading: New re-
search, applications, and controversies. In G. Poe-
diosoedarmo, editor, Innovative approaches to read-
ing and writing instruction, Anthology Series 46.
SEAMEO Regional Language Centre, Singapore,
pages 1–9.

S. Krashen and B. M. Mason. 2015. Can Second Lan-
guage Acquirers Reach High Levels of Proficiency
through Self-selected Reading? International Jour-
nal of Foreign Language Teaching 10(2):10–19.

Christopher D. Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Finkel, Steven J. Bethard, and David Mc-
Closky. 2014. The Stanford CoreNLP Natural Lan-
guage Processing Toolkit. In Proc. ACL System
Demonstrations. pages 55–60.

Ildikó Pilán, Elena Volodina, and Richard Johans-
son. 2014. Rule-based and Machine Learning Ap-
proaches for Second Language Sentence-level Read-
ability. In Proc. 9th Workshop on Innovative Use of
NLP for Building Educational Applications.

Emily Pitler and Ani Nenkova. 2008. Revisiting read-
ability: a unified framework for predicting text qual-
ity. In Proc. EMNLP.

Satoshi Sato, Suguru Matsuyoshi, and Yohsuke Kon-
doh. 2008. Automatic Assessment of Japanese Text
Readability based on a Textbook Corpus. In Proc.
LREC.

Yao-Ting Sung, Ju-Ling Chen, Ji-Her Cha, Hou-Chiang
Tseng, Tao-Hsing Chang, and Kuo-En Chang. 2015.
Constructing and validating readability models: the
method of integrating multilevel linguistic features
with machine learning. Behavior Research Methods
47:340–354.

Wenxuan Zeng. 2014. Huayu baqianci ciliang fenji
yanjiu 华语⼋千词词汇分级研究 (Classification
on Chinese 8 000 Vocabulary). Huayu xuekan华语
学刊 6:22–33.

48


