



















































Speaker Role Contextual Modeling for Language Understanding and Dialogue Policy Learning


Proceedings of the The 8th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 163–168,
Taipei, Taiwan, November 27 – December 1, 2017 c©2017 AFNLP

Speaker Role Contextual Modeling for Language Understanding
and Dialogue Policy Learning

Ta-Chung Chi? Po-Chun Chen? Shang-Yu Su† Yun-Nung Chen?
?Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering

†Graduate Institute of Electrical Engineering
National Taiwan University

{b02902019,r06922028,r05921117}@ntu.edu.tw y.v.chen@ieee.org

Abstract

Language understanding (LU) and dia-
logue policy learning are two essential
components in conversational systems.
Human-human dialogues are not well-
controlled and often random and unpre-
dictable due to their own goals and speak-
ing habits. This paper proposes a role-
based contextual model to consider differ-
ent speaker roles independently based on
the various speaking patterns in the multi-
turn dialogues. The experiments on the
benchmark dataset show that the proposed
role-based model successfully learns role-
specific behavioral patterns for contextual
encoding and then significantly improves
language understanding and dialogue pol-
icy learning tasks1.

1 Introduction

Spoken dialogue systems that can help users to
solve complex tasks such as booking a movie
ticket become an emerging research topic in the ar-
tificial intelligence and natural language process-
ing area. With a well-designed dialogue system
as an intelligent personal assistant, people can ac-
complish certain tasks more easily via natural lan-
guage interactions. Today, there are several vir-
tual intelligent assistants, such as Apple’s Siri,
Google’s Home, Microsoft’s Cortana, and Ama-
zon’s Echo. Recent advance of deep learning has
inspired many applications of neural models to di-
alogue systems. Wen et al. (2017), Bordes et al.
(2017), and Li et al. (2017) introduced network-
based end-to-end trainable task-oriented dialogue
systems.

1The source code is available at: https://github.
com/MiuLab/Spk-Dialogue.

A key component of the understanding sys-
tem is a language understanding (LU) module—
it parses user utterances into semantic frames that
capture the core meaning, where three main tasks
of LU are domain classification, intent determi-
nation, and slot filling (Tur and De Mori, 2011).
A typical pipeline of LU is to first decide the do-
main given the input utterance, and based on the
domain, to predict the intent and to fill associated
slots corresponding to a domain-specific semantic
template. Recent advance of deep learning has in-
spired many applications of neural models to nat-
ural language processing tasks. With the power
of deep learning, there are emerging better ap-
proaches of LU (Hakkani-Tür et al., 2016; Chen
et al., 2016b,a; Wang et al., 2016). However, most
of above work focused on single-turn interactions,
where each utterance is treated independently.

The contextual information has been shown
useful for LU (Bhargava et al., 2013; Xu and
Sarikaya, 2014; Chen et al., 2015; Sun et al.,
2016). For example, the Figure 1 shows conver-
sational utterances, where the intent of the high-
lighted tourist utterance is to ask about location
information, but it is difficult to understand with-
out contexts. Hence, it is more likely to estimate
the location-related intent given the contextual ut-
terance about location recommendation. Contex-
tual information has been incorporated into the re-
current neural network (RNN) for improved do-
main classification, intent prediction, and slot fill-
ing (Xu and Sarikaya, 2014; Shi et al., 2015; We-
ston et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2016c). The LU
output is semantic representations of users’ behav-
iors, and then flows to the downstream dialogue
management component in order to decide which
action the system should take next, as called dia-
logue policy. It is intuitive that better understand-
ing could improve the dialogue policy learning,
so that the dialogue management can be further

163



Task 1: Language Understanding (User Intents)

Task 2: Dialogue Policy Learning (System Actions)

Guide: so you of course %uh you can have dinner there and %uh of course 
you also can do sentosa , if you want to for the song of the sea , right ?

Tourist: yah .

Tourist: what 's the song in the sea ?

Guide: a song of the sea in fact is %uh laser show inside sentosa

FOL_RECOMMEND:FOOD; 

QST_CONFIRM:LOC; 

QST_RECOMMEND:LOC

RES_CONFIRM

QST_WHAT:LOC Task 1

FOL_EXPLAIN:LOC Task 2

Figure 1: The human-human conversational utterances and their associated semantics from DSTC4.

boosted through interactions (Li et al., 2017).
Most of previous dialogue systems did not take

speaker roles into consideration. However, we dis-
cover that different speaker roles can cause no-
table variance in speaking habits and later af-
fect the system performance differently (Chen
et al., 2017). From Figure 1, the benchmark dia-
logue dataset, Dialogue State Tracking Challenge
4 (DSTC4) (Kim et al., 2016)2, contains two spe-
cific roles, a tourist and a guide. Under the sce-
nario of dialogue systems and the communication
patterns, we take the tourist as a user and the guide
as the dialogue agent (system). During conversa-
tions, the user may focus on not only reasoning
(user history) but also listening (agent history), so
different speaker roles could provide various cues
for better understanding and policy learning.

This paper focuses on LU and dialogue pol-
icy learning, which targets the understanding of
tourist’s natural language (LU; language under-
standing) and the prediction of how the system
should respond (SAP; system action prediction)
respectively. In order to comprehend what the
tourist is talking about and predict how the guide
reacts to the user, this work proposes a role-
based contextual model by modeling role-specific
contexts differently for improving system perfor-
mance.

2 Proposed Approach

The model architecture is illustrated in Figure 2.
First, the previous utterances are fed into the con-
textual model to encode into the history summary,
and then the summary vector and the current ut-
terance are integrated for helping LU and dia-
logue policy learning. The whole model is trained
in an end-to-end fashion, where the history sum-
mary vector is automatically learned based on two

2http://www.colips.org/workshop/dstc4/

downstream tasks. The objective of the proposed
model is to optimize the conditional probability
p(ŷ | x), so that the difference between the pre-
dicted distribution q(ŷk = z | x) and the target
distribution q(yk = z | x) can be minimized:

L = −
K∑
k=1

N∑
z=1

q(yk = z | x) log p(ŷk = z | x),
(1)

where the labels y can be either intent tags for un-
derstanding or system actions for dialogue policy
learning.

Language Understanding (LU) Given the cur-
rent utterance x = {wt}T1 , the goal is to predict the
user intents of x, which includes the speech acts
and associated attributes shown in Figure 1; for ex-
ample, QST WHAT is composed of the speech act
QST and the associated attribute WHAT. Note that
we do not process the slot filling task for extract-
ing LOC. We apply a bidirectional long short-term
memory (BLSTM) model (Schuster and Paliwal,
1997) to integrate preceding and following words
to learn the probability distribution of the user in-
tents.

vcur = BLSTM(x,Whis · vhis), (2)
o = sigmoid(WLU · vcur), (3)

whereWhis is a dense matrix and vhis is the history
summary vector, vcur is the context-aware vector
of the current utterance encoded by the BLSTM,
and o is the intent distribution. Note that this is
a multi-label and multi-class classification, so the
sigmoid function is employed for modeling the
distribution after a dense layer. The user intent la-
bels y are decided based on whether the value is
higher than a threshold θ.

Dialogue Policy Learning For system action
prediction, we also perform similar multi-label

164



Role-Based
Contextual Model

Role-Based
Contextual Model

Dense Layer

Σ

Current Utterance
wt wt+1 wT… …

Dense Layer

Language Understanding 
(Intent Prediction)

Dialogue Policy Learning
(System Action Prediction)

Contextual Module

Natural LanguageSemantic Label

Intenth-3

History
Summary

Intenth-2 Intenth-1
Intenth-3

History
Summary

Intenth-2 Intenth-1

Sentence 
Encoder

Sentence 
Encoder

Sentence 
Encoder

Utterh-3 Utterh-2 Utterh-1

Intermediate 
Guidance

History
Summary

u2

u4User 
(Tourist)

u3
Agent 

(Guide)

u1

u5
Current

Figure 2: Illustration of the proposed role-based contextual model.

multi-class classification on the context-aware
vector vcur from (2) using sigmoid:

o = sigmoid(Wπ · vcur), (4)
and then the system actions can be decided based
on a threshold θ.

2.1 Contextual Module
In order to leverage the contextual information,
we utilize two types of contexts: 1) semantic la-
bels and 2) natural language, to learn history sum-
mary representations, vhis in (2). The illustration
is shown in the top-right part of Figure 2.

Semantic Label Given a sequence of annotated
intent tags and associated attributes for each his-
tory utterance, we employ a BLSTM to model the
explicit semantics:

vhis = BLSTM(intentt), (5)

where intentt is the vector after one-hot encoding
for representing the annotated intent and the at-
tribute features. Note that this model requires the
ground truth annotations of history utterances for
training and testing.

Natural Language (NL) Given the natural lan-
guage history, a sentence encoder is applied to
learn a vector representation for each prior utter-
ance. After encoding, the feature vectors are fed
into a BLSTM to capture temporal information:

vhis = BLSTM(CNN(uttt)), (6)

where the CNN is good at extracting the most
salient features that can represent the given natural

‘s
the

song

what

in

convolutional layer with 
multiple filter widths

max-over-
time 

pooling

the
sea

word embeddings dim filter depth

fully-
connected 

layer

Figure 3: Illustration of the CNN sentence encoder
for the example sentence “what’s the song in the
sea”.

language utterances illustrated in Figure 3. Here
the sentence encoder can be replaced into differ-
ent encoders3, and the weights of all encoders are
tied together.

NL with Intermediate Guidance Considering
that the semantic labels may provide rich cues,
the middle supervision signal is utilized as inter-
mediate guidance for the sentence encoding mod-
ule in order to guide them to project from input
utterances to a more meaningful feature space.
Specifically, for each utterance, we compute the
cross entropy loss between the encoder outputs
and corresponding intent-attributes shown in Fig-
ure 2. Assuming that lt is the encoding loss for
uttt in the history, the final objective is to mini-
mize (L+∑t lt). This model does not require the

3In the experiments, CNN achieved slightly better perfor-
mance with fewer parameters compared with BLSTM.

165



ground truth semantics for history when testing,
so that it is more practical compared to the above
model using semantic labels.

2.2 Speaker Role Modeling

In a dialogue, there are at least two roles com-
municating with each other, each individual has
his/her own goal and speaking habit. For example,
the tourists have their own desired touring goals
and the guides are try to provide the sufficient tour-
ing information for suggestions and assistance.
Prior work usually ignored the speaker role in-
formation or only modeled a single speaker’s his-
tory for various tasks (Chen et al., 2016c; Yang
et al., 2017). The performance may be degraded
due to the possibly unstable and noisy input fea-
ture space. To address this issue, this work pro-
poses the role-based contextual model: instead of
using only a single BLSTM model for the his-
tory, we construct one individual contextual mod-
ule for each speaker role. Each role-dependent
recurrent unit BLSTMrolex receives corresponding
inputs xi,rolex (i = [1, ..., N ]), which have been
processed by an encoder model, we can rewrite (5)
and (6) into (7) and (8) respectively:

vhis = BLSTMrolea(intentt,rolea) (7)
+ BLSTMroleb(intentt,roleb).

vhis = BLSTMrolea(CNN(uttt,rolea)) (8)
+ BLSTMroleb(CNN(uttt,roleb))

Therefore, each role-based contextual module fo-
cuses on modeling the role-dependent goal and
speaking style, and vcur from (2) is able to carry
role-based contextual information.

3 Experiments

To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed
model, we conduct the LU and dialogue policy
learning experiments on human-human conversa-
tional data.

3.1 Setup

The experiments are conducted on DSTC4, which
consists of 35 dialogue sessions on touristic infor-
mation for Singapore collected from Skype calls
between 3 tour guides and 35 tourists (Kim et al.,
2016). All recorded dialogues with the total length
of 21 hours have been manually transcribed and
annotated with speech acts and semantic labels
at each turn level. The speaker labels are also

annotated. Human-human dialogues contain rich
and complex human behaviors and bring much
difficulty to all dialogue-related tasks. Given the
fact that different speaker roles behave differently,
DSTC4 is a suitable benchmark dataset for evalu-
ation.

We choose a mini-batch adam as the optimizer
with the batch size of 128 examples (Kingma
and Ba, 2014). The size of each hidden re-
current layer is 128. We use pre-trained 200-
dimensional word embeddings GloV e (Penning-
ton et al., 2014). We only apply 30 training epochs
without any early stop approach. The sentence en-
coder is implemented using a CNN with the fil-
ters of size [2, 3, 4], 128 filters each size, and max
pooling over time. The idea is to capture the most
important feature (the highest value) for each fea-
ture map. This pooling scheme naturally deals
with variable sentence lengths. Please refer to Kim
(2014) for more details.

For both tasks, we focus on predicting multiple
labels including speech acts and attributes, so the
evaluation metric is average F1 score for balancing
recall and precision in each utterance. Note that
the final prediction may contain multiple labels.

3.2 Results

The experiments are shown in Table 1, where we
report the average number over five runs. The first
baseline (row (a)) is the best participant of DSTC4
in IWSDS 2016 (Kim et al., 2016), the poor per-
formance is probably because tourist intents are
much more difficult than guide intents (most sys-
tems achieved higher than 60% of F1 for guide in-
tents but lower than 50% for tourist intents). The
second baseline (row (b)) models the current utter-
ance without contexts, performing 62.6% for un-
derstanding and 63.4% for policy learning.

3.2.1 Language Understanding Results
With contextual history, using ground truth se-
mantic labels for learning history summary vec-
tors greatly improves the performance to 68.2%
(row (c)), while using natural language slightly
improves the performance to 64.2% (row (e)). The
reason may be that NL utterances contain more
noises and the contextual vectors are more difficult
to model for LU. The proposed role-based con-
textual models applying on semantic labels and
NL achieve 69.2% (row (d)) and 65.1% (row (f))
on F1 respectively, showing the significant im-
provement all model without role modeling. Fur-

166



Model Language PolicyUnderstanding Learning
Baseline (a) DSTC4-Best 52.1 -

(b) BLSTM 62.6 63.4
Contextual-Sem (c) BLSTM 68.2 66.8

(d) + Role-Based 69.2† 70.1†

Contextual-NL (e) BLSTM 64.2 66.3
(f) + Role-Based 65.1† 66.9†

(g) + Role-Based w/ Intermediate Guidance 65.8† 67.4†

Table 1: Language understanding and dialogue policy learning performance of F-measure on DSTC4
(%). † indicates the significant improvement compared to all methods without speaker role modeling.

thermore, adding the intermediate guidance ac-
quires additional improvement (65.8% from the
row (g)). It is shown that the semantic labels
successfully guide the sentence encoder to obtain
better sentence-level representations, and then the
history summary vector carrying more accurate se-
mantics gives better performance for understand-
ing.

3.2.2 Dialogue Policy Learning Results
To predict the guide’s next actions, the baseline
utilizes intent tags of the current utterance with-
out contexts (row (b)). Table 1 shows the similar
trend as LU results, where applying either role-
based contextual models or intermediate guidance
brings advantages for both semantics-encoded and
NL-encoded history.

3.3 Discussion
In contrast to NL, semantic labels (intent-attribute
pairs) can be seen as more explicit and concise in-
formation for modeling the history, which indeed
gains more in our experiments for both LU and di-
alogue policy learning. The results of Contextual-
Sem can be treated as the upper bound perfor-
mance, because they utilizes the ground truth se-
mantics of contexts. Among the experiments of
Contextual-NL, which are more practical because
the annotated semantics are not required during
testing, the proposed approaches achieve 5.1% and
6.3% relative improvement compared to the base-
line for LU and dialogue policy learning respec-
tively.

Between LU and dialogue policy learning tasks,
most LU results are worse than dialogue policy
learning results. The reason probably is that the
guide has similar behavior patterns such as pro-
viding information and confirming questions etc.,
while the user can have more diverse interac-

tions. Therefore, understanding the user intents is
slightly harder than predicting the guide policy in
the DSTC4 dataset.

With the promising improvement for both LU
and dialogue policy learning, the idea about mod-
eling speaker role information can be further ex-
tended to various research topics in the future.

4 Conclusion

This paper proposes an end-to-end role-based con-
textual model that automatically learns speaker-
specific contextual encoding. Experiments on a
benchmark multi-domain human-human dialogue
dataset show that our role-based model achieves
impressive improvement in language understand-
ing and dialogue policy learning, demonstrating
that different speaker roles behave differently and
focus on different goals.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank reviewers for their insight-
ful comments on the paper. The authors are sup-
ported by the Ministry of Science and Technology
of Taiwan, Google Research, Microsoft Research,
and MediaTek Inc..

References
Anshuman Bhargava, Asli Celikyilmaz, Dilek

Hakkani-Tur, and Ruhi Sarikaya. 2013. Easy
contextual intent prediction and slot detection. In
Proceedings of 2013 IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing. IEEE,
pages 8337–8341.

Antoine Bordes, Y-Lan Boureau, and Jason Weston.
2017. Learning end-to-end goal-oriented dialog. In
ICLR.

Po-Chun Chen, Ta-Chung Chi, Shang-Yu Su, and Yun-
Nung Chen. 2017. Dynamic time-aware attention

167



to speaker roles and contexts for spoken language
understanding. In Proceedings of 2017 IEEE Work-
shop on Automatic Speech Recognition and Under-
standing.

Yun-Nung Chen, Dilek Hakanni-Tür, Gokhan Tur,
Asli Celikyilmaz, Jianfeng Guo, and Li Deng.
2016a. Syntax or semantics? knowledge-guided
joint semantic frame parsing. In Proceedings of
2016 IEEE Spoken Language Technology Workshop.
IEEE, pages 348–355.

Yun-Nung Chen, Dilek Hakkani-Tur, Gokhan Tur,
Asli Celikyilmaz, Jianfeng Gao, and Li Deng.
2016b. Knowledge as a teacher: Knowledge-
guided structural attention networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.03286 .

Yun-Nung Chen, Dilek Hakkani-Tür, Gökhan Tür,
Jianfeng Gao, and Li Deng. 2016c. End-to-end
memory networks with knowledge carryover for
multi-turn spoken language understanding. In Pro-
ceedings of The 17th Annual Meeting of the Inter-
national Speech Communication Association. pages
3245–3249.

Yun-Nung Chen, Ming Sun, Alexander I. Rudnicky,
and Anatole Gershman. 2015. Leveraging behav-
ioral patterns of mobile applications for personalized
spoken language understanding. In Proceedings of
17th ACM International Conference on Multimodal
Interaction. ACM, pages 83–86.

Dilek Hakkani-Tür, Gökhan Tür, Asli Celikyilmaz,
Yun-Nung Chen, Jianfeng Gao, Li Deng, and Ye-
Yi Wang. 2016. Multi-domain joint semantic frame
parsing using bi-directional rnn-lstm. In Proceed-
ings of The 17th Annual Meeting of the Interna-
tional Speech Communication Association. pages
715–719.

Seokhwan Kim, Luis Fernando DHaro, Rafael E
Banchs, Jason D Williams, and Matthew Henderson.
2016. The fourth dialog state tracking challenge. In
Proceedings of the 7th International Workshop on
Spoken Dialogue Systems.

Yoon Kim. 2014. Convolutional neural net-
works for sentence classification. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1408.5882 .

Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam: A
method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980 .

Xuijun Li, Yun-Nung Chen, Lihong Li, Jianfeng Gao,
and Asli Celikyilmaz. 2017. End-to-end task-
completion neural dialogue systems. In Proceedings
of The 8th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D
Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word
representation. In Proceedings of EMNLP. vol-
ume 14, pages 1532–1543.

Mike Schuster and Kuldip K Paliwal. 1997. Bidirec-
tional recurrent neural networks. IEEE Transactions
on Signal Processing 45(11):2673–2681.

Yangyang Shi, Kaisheng Yao, Hu Chen, Yi-Cheng Pan,
Mei-Yuh Hwang, and Baolin Peng. 2015. Contex-
tual spoken language understanding using recurrent
neural networks. In Proceedings of 2015 IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing. IEEE, pages 5271–5275.

Ming Sun, Yun-Nung Chen, and Alexander I. Rud-
nicky. 2016. An intelligent assistant for high-level
task understanding. In Proceedings of The 21st An-
nual Meeting of the Intelligent Interfaces Commu-
nity. pages 169–174.

Gokhan Tur and Renato De Mori. 2011. Spoken lan-
guage understanding: Systems for extracting seman-
tic information from speech. John Wiley & Sons.

Zhangyang Wang, Yingzhen Yang, Shiyu Chang, Qing
Ling, and Thomas S Huang. 2016. Learning a deep
l encoder for hashing. In Proceedings of the Twenty-
Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial In-
telligence, IJCAI. pages 2174–2180.

Tsung-Hsien Wen, Milica Gasic, Nikola Mrksic,
Lina M Rojas-Barahona, Pei-Hao Su, Stefan Ultes,
David Vandyke, and Steve Young. 2017. A network-
based end-to-end trainable task-oriented dialogue
system. In Proceedings of EACL.

Jason Weston, Sumit Chopra, and Antoine Bordesa.
2015. Memory networks. In Proceedings of Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations.

Puyang Xu and Ruhi Sarikaya. 2014. Contextual do-
main classification in spoken language understand-
ing systems using recurrent neural network. In Pro-
ceedings of 2014 IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing. IEEE,
pages 136–140.

Xuesong Yang, Yun-Nung Chen, Dilek Hakkani-Tür,
Paul Crook, Xiujun Li, Jianfeng Gao, and Li Deng.
2017. End-to-end joint learning of natural lan-
guage understanding and dialogue manager. In Pro-
ceedings of 2017 IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing. IEEE,
pages 5690–5694.

168


