



































A Response to Richard Sproat on Random Systems, Writing, and Entropy


Commentary and Discussion

A Response to Richard Sproat on Random
Systems, Writing, and Entropy

Rob Lee∗

School of Biosciences

Philip Jonathan∗∗

University of Lancaster

Pauline Ziman†

PHS Consulting, Ltd.

In his article “Ancient symbols and computational linguistics” (Sproat 2010), Professor
Sproat raised two concerns over a method that we have proposed for analyzing small
data sets of symbols using entropy (Lee, Jonathan, and Ziman 2010): first, that the
method is unable to detect random but non-equiprobable systems; and second, that
it misclassifies kudurru texts. We address these concerns in the following response.

1. Random Systems

Random systems can contain unigrams drawn from an equiprobable or from a non-
equiprobable distribution. For small data sets, random but equiprobable systems are
likely to have a non-equiprobable actual frequency of unigram occurrence due to the
sample size. A method for determining whether a data set is unlikely to be random but
equiprobable was given in Lee, Jonathan, and Ziman (2010).

For a given script set, first order entropy (E1) summarizes the frequencies at which
unigrams occur. E1 is maximized when all unigrams occur with equal probability. In
written language, unigrams occur with unequal probabilities—for example, the letters
e and t occur more frequently in English than the letters x and z, thereby lending some
degree of predictability to the occurrence of a particular unigram, and reducing the
value of E1. Random script sets drawn from a non-equiprobable distribution could
have the same actual frequencies of unigram occurrence as a written language script
set. However, whereas there is unigram-to-unigram dependence in a language, there is
no such dependency in a random system. For example, q tends to be followed by u in
English. The digram qu would therefore occur more often than other digrams starting
with q. This second-order dependency is captured in the second-order entropy, E2. Thus
it is one of the fundamental outcomes of Shannon’s theory that the dependency in

∗ School of Biosciences, Geoffrey Pope Building, University of Exeter, Stocker Road, Exeter EX4 4QD, UK.
E-mail: R.Lee@exeter.ac.uk.

∗∗ Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Lancaster, Lancaster LA1 4YF, UK.
E-mail: p.jonathan@lancaster.ac.uk.

† PHS Consulting Limited, Pryors Hayes Farm, Willington Road, Oscroft, Tarvin, Chester CH3 8NL, UK.

© 2010 Association for Computational Linguistics



Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4

language script sets reduces E2 compared to random script sets with the same actual
frequencies of unigram occurrences but no unigram-to-unigram dependency (Shannon
1948; Yaglom and Yaglom 1983). This provides a basis for investigating whether a script
set is unlikely to be an example of a random system drawn from a non-equiprobable
distribution of unigram occurrence.

2. Digram Dependence

The significance of dependence with digrams for a script set can be quantified by com-
paring its value of E2 with the distribution of values E2(R) obtained from randomized
permutations of the unigrams in the script set. A script set with significant dependence
would yield a value of E2 which was extreme in the distribution of E2(R). This is
indeed the case for a large proportion of the scripts sets analyzed here (see Figure 1). To
construct Figure 1, E2 was calculated for both the original script set and 1,000 different
randomizations, the latter giving rise to an empirical distribution of E2(R) for randomly
generated script sets of the same size and structure as the original. For each script

Figure 1
Characterizing dependence within digrams. For a given script set, the value of second-order
entropy, E2, is calculated and compared with the corresponding value, E2(R), for a randomized
script R consisting of a randomized permutation of the unigrams comprising the original script
set. The probability P = Prob(E2(R) > E2) is estimated empirically using 1,000 randomized
permutations. The sorted values of probability P are shown in black for the 286 script sets (of
small unigram sample size) examined. For approximately 80% of the script sets, the value of
probability P is unity, that is, E2 is the smallest of the corresponding values E2(R) observed (for
script sets of larger unigram sample size, this percentage would be expected to increase towards
unity). For both Pictish script sets, the estimated value of probability P is unity (note that their
positioning within the subset of script sets where P = unity is arbitary since all these sets have
the same value of P). For comparison, we also calculate the probability P* corresponding to
scripts sets which are themselves randomized permutations of the original script set. The sorted
values of P* (in gray) are seen to be approximately uniformly distributed as expected, whereas
the values of P are not.

792

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showImage?doi=10.1162/coli_c_00029&iName=master.img-000.jpg&w=383&h=237


Lee, Jonathan, and Ziman A Response to Sproat

set we estimate the probability that E2 for the original script set is less than that for
the corresponding randomized script sets. In most cases these estimated probabilities
are unity. Figure 1 shows the probabilities as an ordered sequence of script sets. The
lower line on Figure 1 depicts the corresponding ordered probabilities for script sets
which are themselves randomized permutations of language script sets. As expected,
the probability associated with randomized script sets approximately follows a uniform
distribution. For a genuinely random but non-equiprobable script processed in the same
manner, it is highly unlikely that this script set would yield a value of E2 which was
extreme in the distribution of E2(R). Figure 1 also shows the probabilities of the Pictish
symbol script sets. The values of E2 for the two Pictish script sets are seen to be extreme
with respect to the corresponding E2(R) distributions. We conclude that the Pictish
script sets show dependence within digrams in the same way as the other script sets
analyzed which are known examples of dependent digram communication (given here
as “language character set”).

3. Kudurru

With regard to the question raised by the kudurrus, the issue appears to be a differ-
ence in viewpoint over terminology as to the definition of what constitutes “writing.”
Professor Sproat uses a stricter definition of writing than some other researchers, such
as Powell (2009, page 13), who defines writing more broadly: “writing is a system of
markings with a conventional reference that communicates information.” For example,

Figure 2
The effect on the empirical cumulative distributions of Ur of increasing the character constraint
for words. As the vocabulary becomes constrained, the distribution of Ur becomes narrower and
the mean value decreases.

793

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showImage?doi=10.1162/coli_c_00029&iName=master.img-001.jpg&w=383&h=248


Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4

genealogical name lists, which for individual inscriptions or persons may be very short
(two or three names), would not be considered a full linguistic system and hence not
meet Professor Sproat’s criteria for writing. However, we have included these types
of communication in the model along with less constrained linguistic systems, many
of which would be classed as writing by Professor Sproat. Although the model does
not differentiate between these different levels of linguistic systems, their effects upon
E2 can be observed using the structural variable Ur (Lee, Jonathan, and Ziman 2010).
Figure 2 illustrates the effect on Ur of increasing constraint on the vocabulary and
syntax in moving from prose and poetry to genealogical name lists (including king
lists) to very constrained name lists utilizing only “diminutive” name stems (for the
“diminutive” name stems data set, the names contained in the genealogical lists have
been reduced to their “familiar” form, such as Al for Albert, Alan, and Alfred). This
constraint further constrains the vocabulary by removing a multitude of names and
replacing them with a much smaller and less diverse set. As stated in the paper (Lee,
Jonathan, and Ziman 2010), one of the corpora of Pictish symbol types gives values
of the structure variables (Ur and Cr) defined in the original paper that are consistent
with digram communication encoding at the constrained vocabulary level such as name
lists. The values that Professor Sproat calculates for the kudurrus data set places them in
a similar level of communication.

References
Lee, Rob, Philip Jonathan, and Pauline

Ziman. 2010. Pictish symbols revealed
as a written language through
application of Shannon entropy.
Proceedings of the Royal Society A,
466:2545–2560.

Powell, Barry B. 2009. Writing: Theory and
History of the Technology of Civilization.
Wiley-Blackwell, London.

Shannon, Claude E. 1948. A mathematical
theory of communication. Bell System
Technical Journal, 27:379–423 and 623–656,

July and October. Reprinted in N. J. A.
Sloane and A. D. Wyner (eds). [1993].
Claude E. Shannon: Collected Papers. IEEE
Press, Piscataway, NJ.

Sproat, Richard. 2010. Ancient symbols,
computational linguistics, and the
reviewing practices of the general science
journals. Computational Linguistics,
36(3):585–594.

Yaglom, Akiva M. and Isaak M. Yaglom.
1983. Probability and Information [Translated
by V. K. Jain]. D. Reidal Publishing Co.,
Dordrecht.

794


