



































Reply to Rao et al. and Lee et al.


Commentary and Discussion

Reply to Rao et al. and Lee et al.

Richard Sproat∗

Center for Spoken Language Understanding

1. Introduction

In the last issue of this journal, I presented a piece that called into question some of the
techniques reported in two papers in high-profile journals that purported to provide
statistical evidence for the linguistic status of some ancient symbol systems (Sproat
2010a).

Not surprisingly, the authors of those two papers took issue with a number of
my claims, and have requested the opportunity to respond. The two responses, taken
together, are rather lengthy and as a result it is not possible, given limitations of space,
for me to address each and every one of their criticisms. I will therefore focus on what I
consider to be the most important objections.

2. Rao et al.’s Response

The essential claim of Rao and his colleagues (henceforth “Rao”) is that I have misrep-
resented the claims of Rao et al. (2009), and painted an incomplete picture of their work.
They also take the opportunity to discuss at some length a wide range of evidence that
they feel supports the Indus script hypothesis.

I want to make two things clear at the outset. First, my critique was about the paper
that appeared in Science in 2009. Although I mentioned some of Rao’s later work, it was
not a critique of that later work. It seemed reasonable to assume that the paper in Science
was intended to be taken seriously and to stand on its own merits. If so, then I felt—
and still feel—that the paper had serious problems. A problematic paper that cannot
stand on its own does not become unproblematic even if subsequent research were to
show the conclusions to be correct. To give a stark example, if someone should even-
tually demonstrate rigorously that cottontop tamarins are capable of learning “regular”
grammars, that would have no bearing on the questions currently surrounding Marc
Hauser’s 2002 publication in Cognition (Johnson 2010).

Second, it was not my purpose in my piece to use the pages of Computational
Linguistics as a forum for promoting the non-script theory for the Indus. Indeed I spent
exactly one short paragraph on this, where I discussed our work in Farmer, Sproat, and
Witzel (2004) as a way of setting the stage for the current discussion. In contrast, Rao
spends a significant portion of his response discussing the Indus symbols, the case for
the script theory, and the case against the non-script theory, and repeatedly refers to our
2004 paper and claimed problemswith our arguments. The desire to keepmy discussion

∗ Center for Spoken Language Understanding, Oregon Health & Science University, 20000 NWWalker Rd,
Beaverton, OR, 97006, USA. E-mail: rws@xoba.com.

© 2010 Association for Computational Linguistics



Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4

of the background short was what prompted me not to expand on my claim that our
arguments had “been accepted by many archaeologists and linguists.” Rao notes that I
do not actually cite “who these ’many archaeologists and linguists’ are.” Perhaps they
do not exist? But they do: Andrew Lawler, a science reporter who in 2004 interviewed
a large number of people on both sides of the debate notes that “many others are
convinced that Farmer, Witzel, and Sproat have found a way to move away from sterile
discussions of decipherment, and they find few flaws in their arguments” (Lawler
2004, page 2029), and quotes the Sanskrit scholar George Thompson and University
of Pennsylvania Professor Emeritus of Indian studies Frank Southworth.

2.1 Misunderstandings about Nonlinguistic Symbols

A large part of the discussion in Rao’s response centers, as it should, on the question
of the “Type 1” (random) and “Type 2” (rigidly ordered) models, which I argued did
not accurately characterize any nonlinguistic symbol systems. At the core of this debate
is the Old European sign system of the Vinča, which is claimed to be a good instance
of Type 1, and the Mesopotamian deity symbols found on kudurru stones, which are
claimed to be good instances of Type 2.

To support the claims for Vinča, Rao provides a quote from Winn (1990), which
notes that the signs do not seem to have any ordering, and are “characteristically
disarranged.” But if one sees the broader context of this quote, it becomes clear that
Winn is talking here about a subset of the corpus, which is found on small vessels
and spindle whorls. He contrasts the inscriptions discussed in the quote given by
Rao with “the more arranged format of tablets and seals” (page 270), and then again
(page 276) where he notes that “[d]ifferences in complexity of sign usage is denoted
by sign ordering, which occurs on tablets and other objects, such as the plaque from
Gradešnica.” On page 263 he refers to the “discovery of tablets with script-like content
at Tartaria in 1961,” a clear indicator that the Vinča tablets would seem to involve some
form of sign ordering. It is clear then, that Winn is not saying that the system is in
general unordered, only that a subset of the corpus is. Winn also suggests that the small
vessels in particular probably had a ritualistic function (page 276). Furthermore, the
text that was ellipted in Rao’s quote suggests that order was probably unimportant on
the spindle whorls “since concepts or mnemonic aids could be inferred or interpreted
by an individual cognizant of the culture-specific content of the signs” (page 269),
suggesting a situation where the Vinča “reader” could interpret the jumbled signs since
they knew the structure of the system. It is unfortunate that most of Winn’s interesting
work has been published in obscure locations, and is therefore not something the
average reader would run across. Fortunately though, Winn maintains a Web page at
http://www.prehistory.it/ftp/winn.htm, where one can see what the sign texts look
like and where Winn also notes (page 8) that “the distinction between signs on pottery
and the more organized signs on tablets and other artifacts may signify functional
differences or different levels of usage and formality.”

Winn’s description does not support the claim that Vinča sign texts were generally
without structure. But suppose, counterfactually, it did. Would Rao et al.’s “Type 1” be
a good model of the system? Their Type 1 data is modeled by a random process that
generates texts “based on the assumption that each sign has an equal probability of fol-
lowing any other” (Rao et al. 2009, Supplement, page 2), or in other words a system that
is random and equiprobable. But where does Winn say that the system is equiprobable?
The most Rao’s excerpted quote could be taken to mean is that the system is random,
but Winn certainly does not say that the signs occur with equal frequency. Amuchmore

808



Sproat Reply to Rao et al. and Lee et al.

plausible model of a random ancient sign systemwould be one where the symbols have
a non-equiprobable distribution: as I argued in my article “symbols represent things,
and the things they represent typically do not occur with equal probability.” Further, we
know that many things, from nonlinguistic systems such as kudurrus (see the following)
to populations of sets of species, have a Zipfian distribution, so a reasonable model
of such a system might well be one in which the unigram probability follows a Zipf-
Mandelbrot distribution. But to have presented Type 1 in this way would have been
problematic: As I discussed in my piece, such random texts easily “fool” the bigram
conditional entropy measure that Rao et al. proposed in their Science paper. Rao objects
to the statement in my piece that at least some of the discussion surrounding their
paper depends on the confusion between “random” and “random and equiprobable,”
deeming that statement “unwarranted and not worthy of comment.” Yet their model of
Vinča as a random equiprobable system depends precisely on this confusion.

At the other extreme are the kudurru texts, which are claimed to be good examples
of Type 2, a rigidly ordered system. In support, Rao quotes Slanski (2003), who says
“to a certain extent, the divine symbols were deployed upon the Entitlement narûs
(kudurrus) according to the deities’ relative positions in the pantheon. The symbols
for the higher gods of the pantheon . . . are generally found upon or toward the top
and most prominent part of the monument.” Crucial phrases here are “to a certain
extent” and “the symbols for the higher gods . . . are generally found.” No doubt these
are partly true; indeed it is very often true that the “sun disk,” “crescent moon,” and
“star” symbols occur at the beginnings of texts—though ordering within those three
varies. But the kudurru texts are still far from rigid, as we showed in Farmer, Sproat, and
Witzel (2004) and as my own sample from Seidl shows. Over and above this, the quoted
excerpts would only seem to support a hierarchy, not a model “based on the assumption
that each sign has a unique successor sign” or even one where based on “variations of
this theme where each sign could be followed by, for example, 2 or 3 other signs” (Rao
et al. 2009, Supplement, page 3). All the hierarchy implies is that a symbol Y that is
lower on the hierarchy should come after a symbol X that is higher on the hierarchy.
But for any given X there may be several symbols lower on the hierarchy, which means
that X could be followed directly by any of these, assuming that no concepts from the
intervening elements are “mentioned” in the “text.”

It is puzzling to me that, given these considerations and my own description of
my close examination of the kudurru corpus, Rao still suggests that “we expect the
entropy of the kudurru sequences to be lower than linguistic systems and perhaps
slightly above the minimum entropy (Min Ent) range in Figure 1(b).” Surely one would
like to examine the data and see whether such a statement is likely to be supported.
In any case there seems to be little point in arguing about this. I have the data for the
kudurrus that I transcribed from Seidl and I will be happy to make them available to
anyone who wants them. As the reader will have seen in Lee et al.’s reply, and as I
discuss in Section 3, Lee et al. took a different attitude to the deity symbols than Rao
has. Rather than argue from “first principles” about what the corpus might look like,
they actually went to the trouble of replicating my experiment and developed their own
corpus from Seidl’s work (Rob Lee, personal communication): They concluded that by
their measures kudurrus would also count as (logographic) writing (an issue I get back
to subsequently)—suggesting a much less rigid ordering than Rao et al. seem to believe.

Rao contrasts the hierarchy that is certainly partly true of kudurru texts with the
situation in linguistic systems, which “have no such hierarchy imposed on characters
or words.” Interestingly, although this is generally true, there are pockets of such
hierarchies that do occur in language. A good example is from Egyptian (Allen 2000),

809



Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4

where there is a hierarchy that determines the order in which terms denoting human
or divine entities are written. Thus terms for gods will occur in writing before terms for
humans or other things, even if the divine terms would be spoken after the other terms.
This occurs a lot in royal names, so that for example Tutankhamen, whose name means
‘living image of Amen’, is written in cartouches with the god Amen’s name first.

In my piece, I made the point that relevant nonlinguistic symbol systems abound,
a point that Rao seems to be calling into question. As a minor point, they object to
my use of Boy Scout merit badges and highway signs as relevant to the discussion,
inviting the reader to examine these and see “whether such a comparison bears merit.”
Unfortunately this is due to a misinterpretation of what I meant by these comparisons,
and it is perfectly possible that I did not explain my point well enough. I was not
discussing the forms of the individual signs, but rather the fact that for merit badges
and highway signs the symbols can be combined into “texts” that are invariably linearly
arranged. Boy Scout badges are worn on sashes, where they are neatly arranged in rows.
Informational highway signs, such as indicators for gas stations, accommodations, and
food, frequently occur together and when they do they are arranged linearly. Of course
the individual signs are not linearly composed any more than the Indus symbols are
linearly composed or, in general, the basic symbols in any script.

A more serious objection surrounds my claim that to have done the job properly,
Rao et al. (2009) would have to have compared awider set of linguistic and nonlinguistic
systems, but I also suggested this would depend upon having a good set of corpora for
real nonlinguistic systems, something which I claimed nobody has done the legwork
of compiling. Rao claims that this ignores the work of Vidale (2007), who included a
description of ten ancient South Asian nonlinguistic systems in his rebuttal to Farmer,
Sproat, andWitzel (2004). This is misleading at best. If the reader will care to rereadwhat
I said in my article, it is clear that what I meant was that electronic corpora do not exist
onwhich one could carry out the kinds of statistical tests that Rao and colleagueswish to
perform. I believe that remains true. Vidale does indeed discuss ten systems, discusses
their distribution and use, and lists numbers of signs in each. But by “legwork,” I was
not referring to discussion of such systems, but rather the development of corpora of such
systems whereby one could actually perform serious statistical analyses and compare
among a range of linguistic and nonlinguistic systems. As far as I am aware, there
is no such set of corpora. As Rao highlights, Vidale notes the “systematic, large-scale
redundancy” of symbol distributions of some of the systems he examines. Perhaps, but
as we have seen in the discussion of Vinča symbols and kudurrus earlier, translating
such broad statements into precise statistical characterizations of the kind necessary for
Rao’s methods is tricky at best.

Rao also makes a point of noting Vidale’s observation that the number of distinct
signs in the systems he examines is 44, “a far cry from the 400 or so signs in the Indus
script.” To that statistic one could add kudurru symbols, which number about 60 in
Seidl’s (1989) catalog. In fact, Vidale challenges Farmer, Witzel and me to “identify
another South Asian system datable to the 3rd millennium B.C. of nonlinguistic signs
amounting to 400 basic signs or more” (page 344). Nonlinguistic systems with hundreds
of symbols certainly exist: heraldry (where the sign set is open-ended; see any text on
heraldry such as Slater [2002]) would be one such example, though of course that does
not meet the time and space restrictions required by Vidale. But then, what is the basis of
those restrictions? A symbol system has as many symbols as it needs. Chinese writing
has thousands of characters because it has chosen to represent linguistic units at the
level of the morpheme; the Greek alphabet is much smaller due to its decision to repre-
sent phonemic segments. If the Indus symbols are nonlinguistic, then the vocabulary

810



Sproat Reply to Rao et al. and Lee et al.

size of over 400 symbols would merely reflect that it represented a rich underlying
set of concepts. Proponents of the script thesis always like to discuss the advanced
state of Indus civilization, arguing that such an advanced civilization could easily have
invented writing, and would be hard pressed to do without it. The Indus certainly was
one of the most advanced civilizations of the third millenium BCE: Would it therefore
not be reasonable to suppose that they could have invented a rich nonlinguistic symbol
system, even if their less advanced neighbors could not?

I end the discussion of Type 1 and Type 2 systems by noting that Rao characterizes
the objection to the use of artificial data sets as “a red herring” that “does not change the
result that the Indus script is entropically similar to linguistic scripts.” But within the
first two paragraphs of the Science paper, Rao et al. state: “We compared the statistical
structure of sequences of signs in the Indus script with those from a representative
group of linguistic and nonlinguistic systems. Twomajor types of nonlinguistic systems
are those that do not exhibit much sequential structure (type 1 systems) and those that
follow rigid sequential order (type 2 systems).” These (artificial) systems are clearly
central to their argument yet, as I have argued, they are poor models of any relevant
nonlinguistic system. Objections hardly seem to constitute a red herring.

Rao takes strong issue with the fact that whereas I discuss Figure 1A from their
Science paper, nowhere do I discuss their Figure 1B, nor do I do more than mention their
later work. On the latter point, let me reiterate: My article was about the paper that
appeared in Science, not any later work. I was not, for example, making any claims about
the block entropy calculations in Rao (2010): I simply have not analyzed those. But as I
said, I assume that at the point the Science paper appeared, the methods proposed were
intended to be taken seriously on their own, and the evidence presented was intended
to be taken to support those methods. It is therefore perfectly reasonable for me to have
failed to discuss later work. What about Figure 1B? It is true that I did not present
this figure, which shows high entropy for DNA and proteins, includes Sanskrit among
the linguistic examples, and shows that Fortran has a somewhat lower entropy than the
natural language samples they include. My question about DNA and proteins would
be: Why are these relevant? Although they are possibly “the two ‘most ancient’ non-
linguistic systems,” the topic of discussion surely is symbol systems that were products
of the human mind.

Fortran is of course a different matter, but here the question that has always puzzled
me is why Fortran was not included in Figure 1A: Why did Rao and colleagues not
show the entropy growth curve for Fortran in 1A, as Rao (2010) did and as they also
show in their Figure 1(b) in their response? I suspect I know: Using their original bigram
conditional entropymeasure, Figure 1A, Fortranwould have shown a growth curve that
overlapped significantly with the linguistic systems, compromising the visual impact of
the plot. But I had no direct evidence for this, so rather than speculate in my piece (as I
have here), I preferred to omit discussion. Unlike Rao, I did not view their Figure 1B as
including crucial data that I was somehow hiding.

While we are on this topic though, the block entropy in their new Figure 1(b) still
leaves one wondering: Fortran is lower than their linguistic examples, but not much
lower. The same is true of the Figure 1B in their Science paper. How would one expect
the plot to look if they had included a larger range of languages and text types? I return
to this point subsequently.

In Figure 1(b) in their response, Rao includes music (a Beethoven piece), which,
like DNA and protein, is very close to the maximum entropy curve. They later criticize
me for ignoring “the fact that the results already include nonlinguistic systems: DNA
and protein sequences . . . as well as man-made sequences (Fortran code and music in

811



Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4

Figure 1[b]).” DNA, protein, and Fortran we have just discussed. It seems odd to accuse
me of ignoring the case of music, as that data did not appear at all in the Science paper;
indeed it did not appear in Rao (2010), where he first introduced the block entropy
calculations. It would have required unusual prescience on my part to discuss data that,
until now, have not appeared in print.

Finally, while we are on the topic of types of symbol systems, I note that Rao makes
a point of enumerating the list of properties that they deem relevant for considering
the linguistic status of the Indus symbols. This is of course related to the issue of how
to interpret the claims of their work, which we take up in Section 2.2. Rather than
enumerate the properties they describe, I will simply present the script-like properties
of another system, namely, the Mesopotamian deity symbols, a system we know was
not linguistic. I also made some of these points, but more briefly, in my piece: (1) Deity
symbols are frequently linearly written and in the cases where linearity is less clear, the
symbols are written around the top of a stone in an apparent concentric circle pattern
(see examples in Seidl [1989]). One sees such non-linear arrangements with scripts too:
The Etruscan Magliano disk, and many rune stones, have text wrapped around the
border of the stone. (2) There is clear evidence for the directionality of deity symbols: To
the extent that “more important” gods were depicted first, these occur at the left/top of
the text. (3) Deity symbols are often ligatured together: One symbol may be joined with
another. (4) The deity symbols obey a Zipfian distribution. (5) Deity symbols clearly
have language-like properties in that certain symbols display positional preference
(symbols for the more important gods coming earlier in the text), and certain glyphs
have an affinity for each other—for example, some glyphs such as the “horned crown”
seem to like to be joined together with the “symbol base.” (6) Deity symbols were used
largely on standing stones, but were also used in other contexts such as the “necklace”
depicted in the Aššurnas.irpal II bas relief shown in my piece. (7) Deity symbols are
pictographic, like many real scripts—Egyptian, Luwian, Mayan. This would seem like
a fairly compelling list of script-like properties: Contrary to what Rao suggests, it is
certainly possible to find very script-like nonlinguistic symbol systems.

2.2 Misunderstandings about Claims

Rao, in the response to my article, as well as elsewhere, makes the point that nowhere
do they claim that the conditional entropy measure(s) are sufficient by themselves
to demonstrate that the Indus symbols were linguistic. Indeed they do not. The last
sentence of the Science article reads: “Given the prior evidence for syntactic structure in
the Indus script, our results increase the probability that the script represents language,
complementing other arguments that have been made explicitly or implicitly in favor
of the linguistic hypothesis.”

It is worth stressing at the outset that in my piece I do not claim that Rao and
colleagues make the claim that conditional entropy settles the matter—though it is
surely true that this was the way many people interpreted their results. The question is,
how is one supposed to interpret their claim that their results “increase the probability
that the script represents language”? I can think of three possible interpretations. One
is as a loose general statement to the effect that there is already lots of evidence for the
script thesis, and this additional piece of evidence adds to that body.

The next two interpretations are more formal. A second interpretation is that they
are assuming some sort of “deductive” model whereby for a set of features Fi, one is
computing the probability of the linguistic hypothesis (HL), versus the nonlinguistic

812



Sproat Reply to Rao et al. and Lee et al.

hypothesis (HNL), given these features. Implicitly then, we are combining the features
into a classifier that computes P(HL|Fi) versus P(HNL|Fi) for each feature, and produces
an overall prediction. It is worth noting that Lee et al.’s paper does indeed use the
statistical measures Lee and colleagues develop in this deductive sense.

The third interpretation is the “inductive” one that Rao presents in his response,
which he claims is the “correct” way to interpret their work. In that interpretation, a
set of feature values are observed, and the task is to induce which of two underlying
models—HL orHNL—is the one likely to have generated the observation. The reader will
surely recognize that the second and third interpretations correspond pretty directly to
discriminative versus generative models. Both of these approaches are used in a variety
of classification tasks, and both are perfectly legitimate ways to view the problem.
The choice of the generative model as the correct interpretation of their work, and
its formalization as they have given it in their response to my piece, is the first time
this particular interpretation has been explicitly stated. At the very least, if they had
wanted people to understand this point, it would have been good to make it clear at
the outset by stating the model in the Science paper. One can hardly fault critics for
misunderstanding which of two equally viable interpretations was the one intended.

But nomatter: How aremy criticisms, and those of others Rao cites, relevant to what
they do claim, under the various interpretations? Do my criticisms, as Rao would claim,
miss the point? Am I building strawmen and destroying them? I do not think so. Under
the “deductive” interpretation my critiques would appear to be highly relevant. I argue,
for example, that a memoryless random process with a non-equiprobable unigram
distribution is classified as “linguistic” by the bigram conditional entropy feature from
the Science paper.1 This implies that there are distributions that are misclassified by the
feature. How many such misclassified systems are there among plausible nonlinguistic
symbol systems? We do not know, because Rao et al. did not do a fair comparison of a
wide range of linguistic and nonlinguistic systems, and demonstrate statistically how
well the classifier works. So we do not know whether in fact this feature “increases the
probability” of the Indus symbols being a linguistic script. Needless to say, this problem
with the deductive interpretation also implies the identical problemwith the looser first
interpretation I outlined above.

For the “inductive” generative interpretation, the argument is a bit trickier because
we need to consider the probability of observing a feature, given one of the two hy-
potheses. For some features, such as the feature of linear arrangements of symbols, it
seems plausible that one has a higher expectation of seeing linearly arranged symbols
on the hypothesis that something is a true script, compared with the hypothesis of a
nonlinguistic system. For bigram conditional entropy, again we really do not know.
Again, not enough examples of human-created nonlinguistic systems were presented
in the Science paper to be able to estimate the probabilities. And there is another issue:
None of Rao and colleagues’ work provides a statistical measure by which one can as-
sert that something is inside the “linguistic” range. Rather, they present plots and invite
the reader to eyeball them, hardly a rigorous demonstration. As I noted herein, Fortran
does not appear to have a conditional entropy that is much lower than the linguistic
examples. What would one expect the “linguistic range” to look like if a larger number
of languages were included and, equally importantly, a variety of genres ranging from

1 This was the “simple experiment involving randomly generated texts” that I was referring to in my
article, a phrase I was misinterpreted to be using to characterize their work.

813



Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4

prose, to poetry, to genealogies, to grafitti, to shopping lists? Again, we do not know, so
it is rather hard to evaluate the claim that for this feature P(Fi|HL) > P(Fi|HNL).

The bottom line is that if a proposal is to be taken seriously as a formal model, it
needs to meet certain criteria. When one proposes a new feature, one must demonstrate
that this feature adds information, and increases the discriminative power of one’s
model. I do not believe Rao et al.’s paper in Science does this. And as we have already
noted, given several plausible interpretations of what one is trying to demonstrate, it is
usually best if one makes it clear at the outset what one means.

There is more that can be said. Aswe noted, Rao lists a number of features according
to which the Indus symbols look linguistic. But one can surely add to their list: Suppose
one considered features like “is only used to write very short texts” or “occurs in a
culture where there are no archaeological markers of manuscript production” (Farmer,
Sproat, and Witzel 2004)? Then the script thesis would not fare so well. As for Rao’s
claim that the prior probability P(HL)—the a priori probability of the linguistic hypoth-
esis being true—is “higher than chance,” and the archaeological support for that claim,
I will have to pass over that point for lack of space. The interested reader may look at
Farmer, Sproat, and Witzel (2004), and the responses of our critics such as Vidale (2007),
and decide for themselves who makes the more convincing case.

2.3 Computational Linguistics, Decipherment, and the Wider World

Rao concludes by citing the impressive achievements of computational linguistics as a
field, and some of the important contributions to decipherment that work in the field has
afforded. They question my hypothesis that the editors of prominent science journals
may not “even know that there are people who spend their lives doing statistical and
computational analyses of text,” and claim that “[s]uch a statement fails to acknowledge
both the impressive achievements of the field of computational linguistics in recent
years and the wide coverage of these accomplishments in the popular press.”

I am of course aware of the impressive achievements of my field, and I even alluded
to them in the conclusion of my piece. I was trying to hypothesize why, apparently,
computational linguists were not asked to review the Science piece by Rao (or the Lee
et al. piece in Proceedings of the Royal Society). It is entirely possible my hypothesis here
is wrong and that the editors of, say, Science are well aware of computational linguistics
as a field. That just makes this apparent oversight all the more disturbing.

I am also well aware of a whole range of work on applying computational tech-
niques to ancient scripts. My point, clearly, was not to claim that such work in general
is a “misuse” of the methods of computational linguistics, as Rao seems to be implying
I do. I was rather focussing on two specific papers, the one published in Science, and the
one in the Proceedings of the Royal Society, to which I now turn.

3. Lee et al.’s Response

Lee et al.’s response (henceforth “Lee”) is much shorter than Rao et al.’s, and boils
down essentially to two points. The first point is that one can use randomizations of
a given corpus, compare the bigram conditional entropies of those randomized corpora
to the conditional entropies of the original, and see if the true conditional entropy is
uniformly smaller than any of the values computed from randomized corpora. For 80%
of script examples, and for the Pictish symbols, Lee found that this was the case. For sets
that were generated by random processes, the distribution of “true” entropy vis-à-vis

814



Sproat Reply to Rao et al. and Lee et al.

randomized entropy was more uniform. This method seems to make sense as a way
to spot memoryless non-equiprobable processes masquerading as structured systems,
such as the example of successive tosses of seven six-sided dice I discussed in my piece.
But this was not part of the methodology presented in the published paper by Lee,
which as I showed is fooled by such processes. Furthermore, it would still fail to spot
nonlinguistic systems that have structure, such as Mesopotamian deity symbols.

This leads directly into the second point, because Lee acknowledges my result
that texts from kudurrus look linguistic, noting that the values that I calculate “for the
kudurrus data set places them in a similar level of communication” to Pictish symbols.
For them this is an acceptable result, and comes down to a “difference in viewpoint
over terminology as to the definition of what constitutes ’writing’,” noting that I use
a “stricter definition of writing than some other researchers, such as Powell (2009).”
They quote Powell as stating that “writing is a system of markings with a conventional
reference that communicates information.” There is no doubt that some students of
writing systems have indeed adopted a broader definition of writing than that which
I assume. But these are by no means majority views. The problem with the broader
view expressed by the quoted sentence from Powell is that it would seem to classify
as writing any meaningful conventionalized symbol system. Mathematical equations,
dance notation, music, and (pace Lee et al.) European heraldry would all count as
writing from that standpoint. After all, all of these are systems of markings, with
conventional reference, that communicate information. It is hard to believe that Powell
himself really wants this broad a definition: The subtitle of his book is “Theory and His-
tory of the Technology of Civilization.” Although nonlinguistic notation systems such
as mathematics have been central in the history of the world, I submit that what makes
writing work as the “technology of civilization” is precisely that it allows us to record
language (see Sproat 2010b). In any event if that is the breadth that Lee wants, then
certainly Pictish symbols (and Mesopotamian deity symbols) are writing, because they
are conventional systems of marks that (presumably) communicated information. But
the broader definition is also highly misleading. When lay people think of writing they
will undoubtedly think of the script and standard orthography they learned in school,
which allows them to write anything from letters, to shopping lists, to poetry, to journal
articles. Calling Pictish symbols “writing” easily conjures up in the mind of the reader
the notion that such symbols could have been used by the Picts for writing treatises on
iron smelting techniques. No doubt Lee did not intend this interpretation, but once one
calls something “writing” or “language” this seems to be a natural consequence. In any
case the broad definition of writing Lee wants to assume reduces the claim that Pictish
symbols encode “language” to near vacuity: Nobody ever doubted that the symbols
conveyed information of some kind.

4. Conclusion

It has been a useful exercise to read Rao et al.’s and Lee et al.’s responses, because this
has forced me to think even deeper about the issues than I had already done. I believe
my basic criticisms are still valid.

I end by noting that Rao et al., in particular, might feel grateful that they were given
an opportunity to respond in this forum. My colleagues and I were not so lucky: When
we wrote a letter to Science outlining our objections to the original paper, the journal
refused to publish our letter, citing “space limitations.” Fortunately, Computational Lin-
guistics is still open for the exchange of critical discussion.

815



Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4

References
Allen, James. 2000.Middle Egyptian: An
Introduction to the Language and Culture of
Hieroglyphs. Cambridge University Press,
New York.

Farmer, Steve, Richard Sproat, and
Michael Witzel. 2004. The collapse of the
Indus-script thesis: The myth of a literate
Harappan civilization. Electronic Journal
of Vedic Studies, 11(2):19–57.

Johnson, Carolyn. 2010. Journal editor
questions Harvard researcher’s
data. Boston Globe, August 27.
http://www.boston.com/news/
local/breaking news/2010/08/
journal editor.html.

Lawler, Andrew. 2004. The Indus script:
Write or wrong? Science, 306:2026–2029.

Powell, Barry. 2009.Writing: Theory and
History of the Technology of Civilization.
Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester.

Rao, Rajesh. 2010. Probabilistic analysis
of an ancient undeciphered script. IEEE
Computer, 43(4):76–80.

Rao, Rajesh, Nisha Yadav, Mayank Vahia,
Hrishikesh Joglekar, R. Adhikari,
and Iravatham Mahadevan. 2009.
Entropic evidence for linguistic

structure in the Indus script. Science,
324(5931):1165.

Seidl, Ursula. 1989. Die babylonischen
Kudurru- Reliefs. Symbole mesopotamischer
Gottheiten. Universitätsverlag Freiburg,
Freiburg.

Slanski, Kathryn. 2003. The Babylonian
entitlement narûs (kudurrus): a study in
their form and function. American Schools
of Oriental Research, Boston.

Slater, Stephen. 2002. The Complete Book of
Heraldry. Lorenz Books, London.

Sproat, Richard. 2010a. Ancient symbols,
computational linguistics, and the
reviewing practices of the general
science journals. Computational
Linguistics, 36(3):585–594.

Sproat, Richard. 2010b. Language, Technology,
and Society. Oxford University Press,
Oxford.

Vidale, Massimo. 2007. The collapse melts
down: A reply to Farmer, Sproat and
Witzel. East and West, 57:333–366.

Winn, Shan. 1990. A Neolithic sign system
in southeastern Europe. In M. L. Foster
and L. J. Botscharow, editors, The Life of
Symbols. Westview Press, Boulder, CO,
pages 269–271.

816


