



































On Paraphrase and Coreference


Squibs

On Paraphrase and Coreference

Marta Recasens∗

University of Barcelona

Marta Vila∗∗

University of Barcelona

By providing a better understanding of paraphrase and coreference in terms of similarities and
differences in their linguistic nature, this article delimits what the focus of paraphrase extraction
and coreference resolution tasks should be, and to what extent they can help each other. We argue
for the relevance of this discussion to Natural Language Processing.

1. Introduction

Paraphrase extraction1 and coreference resolution have applications in Question An-
swering, Information Extraction, Machine Translation, and so forth. Paraphrase pairs
might be coreferential, and coreference relations are sometimes paraphrases. The two
overlap considerably (Hirst 1981), but their definitions make them significantly different
in essence: Paraphrasing concerns meaning, whereas coreference is about discourse
referents. Thus, they do not always coincide. In the following example, b and d are both
coreferent and paraphrastic, whereas a, c, e, f, and h are coreferent but not paraphrastic,
and g and i are paraphrastic but not coreferent.

(1) [Tony]a went to see [the ophthalmologist]b and got [his]c eyes checked. [The eye
doctor]d told [him]e that [his]f [cataracts]g were getting worse. [His]h mother also
suffered from [cloudy vision]i.

The discourse model built for Example (1) contains six entities (i.e., Tony, the eye doctor,
Tony’s eyes, Tony’s cataracts, Tony’s mother, cataracts). Because a, c, e, f, and h all point
to Tony, we say that they are coreferent. In contrast, in paraphrasing, we do not need to
build a discourse entity to state that g and i are paraphrase pairs; we restrict ourselves to
semantic content and this is why we check for sameness of meaning between cataracts
and cloudy vision alone, regardless of whether they are a referential unit in a discourse.
Despite the differences, it is possible for paraphrasing and coreference to co-occur, as in
the case of b and d.

NLP components dealing with paraphrasing and coreference seem to have great
potential to improve understanding and generation systems. As a result, they have been
the focus of a large amount of work in the past couple of decades (see the surveys by

∗ CLiC, Department of Linguistics, Gran Via 585, 08007 Barcelona, Spain. E-mail: mrecasens@ub.edu.
∗∗ CLiC, Department of Linguistics, Gran Via 585, 08007 Barcelona, Spain. E-mail: marta.vila@ub.edu.
1 Recognition, extraction, and generation are all paraphrase-related tasks. We will center ourselves on

paraphrase extraction, as this is the task in which paraphrase and coreference resolution mainly overlap.

Submission received: 3 March 2010; accepted for publication: 1 June 2010.

© 2010 Association for Computational Linguistics



Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4

Androutsopoulos and Malakasiotis [2010], Madnani and Dorr [2010], Ng [2010], and
Poesio and Versley [2009]). Before computational linguistics, coreference had not been
studied on its own from a purely linguistic perspective but was indirectly mentioned in
the study of pronouns. Although there have been some linguistic works that consider
paraphrasing, they do not fully respond to the needs of paraphrasing from a computa-
tional perspective.

This article discusses the similarities between paraphrase and coreference in order
to point out the distinguishing factors that make paraphrase extraction and coref-
erence resolution two separate yet related tasks. This is illustrated with examples
extracted/adapted from different sources (Dras 1999; Doddington et al. 2004; Dolan,
Brockett, and Quirk 2005; Recasens and Martı́ 2010; Vila et al. 2010) and our own. Apart
from providing a better understanding of these tasks, we point out ways in which they
can mutually benefit, which can shed light on future research.

2. Converging and Diverging Points

This section explores the overlapping relationship between paraphrase and coreference,
highlighting the most relevant aspects that they have in common as well as those that
distinguish them. They are both sameness relations (Section 2.2), but one is between
meanings and the other between referents (Section 2.1). In terms of linguistic units,
coreference is mainly restricted to noun phrases (NPs), whereas paraphrasing goes
beyond and includes word-, phrase- and sentence-level expressions (Section 2.3). One
final diverging point is the role they (might) play in discourse (Section 2.4).

2.1 Meaning and Reference

The two dimensions that are the focus of paraphrasing and coreference are meaning
and reference, respectively. Traditionally, paraphrase is defined as the relation between
two expressions that have the same meaning (i.e., they evoke the same mental concept),
whereas coreference is defined as the relation between two expressions that have the
same referent in the discourse (i.e., they point to the same entity). We follow Karttunen
(1976) and talk of “discourse referents” instead of “real-world referents.”

In Table 1, the italicized pairs in cells (1,1) and (2,1) are both paraphrastic but
they only corefer in (1,1). We cannot decide on (non-)coreference in (2,1) as we need a
discourse to first assign a referent. In contrast, we can make paraphrasing judgments

Table 1
Paraphrase–coreference matrix.

Paraphrase

" %

Coreference

"
(1,1)
Tony went to see the
ophthalmologist and got his
eyes checked. The eye doctor
told him . . .

(1,2)
Tony went to see the
ophthalmologist and got
his eyes checked.

%
(2,1)
ophthalmologist
eye doctor

(2,2)
His cataracts were getting
worse. His mother also
suffered from cloudy vision.

640



Recasens and Vila On Paraphrase and Coreference

without taking discourse into consideration. Pairs like the one in cell (1,2) are only
coreferent but not paraphrases because the proper noun Tony and the pronoun his have
reference but no meaning. Lastly, neither phenomenon is observed in cell (2,2).

2.2 Sameness

Paraphrasing and coreference are usually defined as sameness relations: Two expres-
sions that have the same meaning are paraphrastic, and two expressions that refer to
the same entity in a discourse are coreferent. The concept of sameness is usually taken
for granted and left unexplained, but establishing sameness is not straightforward.
A strict interpretation of the concept makes sameness relations only possible in logic
and mathematics, whereas a sloppy interpretation makes the definition too vague. In
paraphrasing, if the loss of at the city in Example (2b) is not considered to be relevant, Ex-
amples (2a) and (2b) are paraphrases; but if it is considered to be relevant, then they are
not. It depends on where we draw the boundaries of what is accepted as the “same”
meaning.

(2) a. The waterlogged conditions that ruled out play yesterday still prevailed at
the city this morning.

b. The waterlogged conditions that ruled out play yesterday still prevailed this
morning.

(3) On homecoming night Postville feels like Hometown, USA . . . For those who
prefer the old Postville, Mayor John Hyman has a simple answer.

Similarly, with respect to coreference (3), whether Postville and the old Postville in Ex-
ample 3 are or are not the same entity depends on the granularity of the discourse.
On a sloppy reading, one can assume that because Postville refers to the same spatial
coordinates, it is the same town. On a strict reading, in contrast, drawing a distinction
between the town as it was at two different moments in time results in two different
entities: the old Postville versus the present-day Postville. They are not the same in that
features have changed from the former to the latter.

The concept of sameness in paraphrasing has been questioned on many occasions.
If we understood “same meaning” in the strictest sense, a large number of paraphrases
would be ruled out. Thus, some authors argue for a looser definition of paraphrasing.
Bhagat (2009), for instance, talks about “quasi-paraphrases” as “sentences or phrases
that convey approximately the same meaning.” Milićević (2007) draws a distinction
between “exact” and “approximate” paraphrases. Finally, Fuchs (1994) prefers to use
the notion of “equivalence” to “identity” on the grounds that the former allows for the
existence of some semantic differences between the paraphrase pairs. The concept of
identity in coreference, however, has hardly been questioned, as prototypical examples
appear to be straightforward (e.g., Barack Obama andObama and he). Only recently have
Recasens, Hovy, and Martı́ (2010) pointed out the need for talking about “near-identity”
relations in order to account for cases such as Example (3), proposing a typology of such
relations.

2.3 Linguistic Units

Another axis of comparison between paraphrase and coreference concerns the types
of linguistic units involved in each relation. Paraphrase can hold between different

641



Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4

linguistic units, from morphemes to full texts, although the most attention has been paid
to word-level paraphrase (kid and child in Example (4)), phrase-level paraphrase (cried
and burst into tears in Example (4)), and sentence-level paraphrase (the two sentences
in Example (4)).

(4) a. The kid cried.

b. The child burst into tears.

In contrast, coreference is more restricted in that the majority of relations occur at the
phrasal level, especially between NPs. This explains why this has been the largest focus
so far, although prepositional and adverbial phrases are also possible yet less frequent,
as well as clauses or sentences. Coreference relations occur indistinctively between
pronouns, proper nouns, and full NPs that are referential, namely, that have discourse
referents. For this reason, pleonastic pronouns, nominal predicates, and appositives
cannot enter into coreference relations. The first do not refer to any entity but are
syntactically required; the last two express properties of an entity rather than introduce
a new one. But this is an issue ignored by the corpora annotated for the MUC and ACE
programs (Hirschman and Chinchor 1997; Doddington et al. 2004), hence the criticism
by van Deemter and Kibble (2000).

In the case of paraphrasing, it is linguistic expressions that lack meaning (i.e.,
pronouns and proper nouns) that should not be treated as members of a paraphrase pair
on their own (Example (5a)) because paraphrase is only possible between meaningful
units. This issue, however, takes on another dimension when seen at the sentence level.
The sentences in Example (5b) can be said to be paraphrases because they themselves
contain the antecedent of the pronouns I and he.

(5) a. (i) A. Jiménez
(ii) I

b. (i) The Atlético de Madrid goalkeeper, A. Jiménez, yesterday realized one
of his dreams by defeating Barcelona: “I had never beaten Barcelona.”

(ii) The Atlético de Madrid goalkeeper, A. Jiménez, yesterday realized one
of his dreams by defeating Barcelona, and said that he had never beaten
Barcelona.

In Example (5b), A. Jiménez and I/he continue not being paraphrastic. Polysemic, un-
derspecified, and metaphoric words show a slightly different behavior. It is not possible
to establish paraphrase between them when they are deprived of context (Callison-
Burch 2007, Chapter 4). In Example (6a), police officers could be patrol police officers,
and investigators could be university researchers. However, once they are embedded in a
disambiguating context that fills them semantically, as in Example (6b), then paraphrase
can be established between police officers and investigators.

(6) a. (i) Police officers
(ii) Investigators

b. (i) Police officers searched 11 stores in Barcelona.
(ii) The investigators conducted numerous interviews with the victim.

As a final remark, and in accordance with the approach by Fuchs (1994), we consider
Example (7)–like paraphrases that Fujita (2005) and Milićević (2007) call, respectively,

642



Recasens and Vila On Paraphrase and Coreference

“referential” and “cognitive” to be best treated as coreference rather than paraphrase,
because they only rely on referential identity in a discourse.

(7) a. They got married last year.

b. They got married in 2004.

2.4 Discourse Function

A further difference between paraphrasing and coreference concerns their degree of de-
pendency on discourse. Given that coreference establishes sameness relations between
the entities that populate a discourse (i.e., discourse referents), it is a linguistic phe-
nomenon whose dependency on discourse is much stronger than paraphrasing. Thus,
the latter can be approached from a discursive or a non-discursive perspective, which
in turn allows for a distinction between reformulative paraphrasing (Example (8)) and
non-reformulative paraphrasing (Example (9)).

(8) Speaker 1: Then they also diagnosed a hemolytic–uremic syndrome.
Speaker 2: What’s that?
Speaker 1: Renal insufficiency, in the kidneys.

(9) a. X wrote Y.

b. X is the author of Y.

Reformulative paraphrasing occurs in a reformulation context when a rewording of
a previously expressed content is added for discursive reasons, such as emphasis,
correction, or clarification. Non-reformulative paraphrasing does not consider the
role that paraphrasing plays in discourse. Reformulative paraphrase pairs have to be
extracted from a single piece of discourse; non-reformulative paraphrase pairs can
be extracted—each member of the pair on its own—from different discourse pieces. The
reformulation in the third utterance in Example (8) gives an explanation in a language
less technical than that in the first utterance; whereas Examples (9a) and (9b) are simply
two alternative ways of expressing an authorship relation.

The strong discourse dependency of coreference explains the major role it plays
in terms of cohesion. Being such a cohesive device, it follows that intra-document
coreference, which takes place within a single discourse unit (or across a collection of
documents linked by topic), is the most primary. Cross-document coreference, on the
other hand, constitutes a task on its own in NLP but falls beyond the scope of linguistic
coreference due to the lack of a common universe of discourse. The assumption behind
cross-document coreference is that there is an underlying global discourse that enables
various documents to be treated as a single macro-document.

Despite the differences, the discourse function of reformulative paraphrasing brings
it close to coreference in the sense that they both contribute to the cohesion and devel-
opment of discourse.

3. Mutual Benefits

Both paraphrase extraction and coreference resolution are complex tasks far from being
solved at present, and we believe that there could be improvements in performance

643



Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4

if researchers on each side paid attention to the others. The similarities (i.e., relations
of sameness, relations between NPs) allow for mutual collaboration, whereas the differ-
ences (i.e., focus on either meaning or reference) allow for resorting to either paraphrase
or coreference to solve the other. In general, the greatest benefits come for cases in which
either paraphrase or coreference are especially difficult to detect automatically. More
specifically, we see direct mutual benefits when both phenomena occur either in the
same expression or in neighboring expressions.

For pairs of linguistic expressions that show both relations, we can hypothesize
paraphrasing relationships between NPs for which coreference is easier to detect. For
instance, coreference between the two NPs in Example (10) is very likely given that they
have the same head, head match being one of the most successful features in coreference
resolution (Haghighi and Klein 2009). In contrast, deciding on paraphrase would be
hard due to the difficulty of matching the modifiers of the two NPs.

(10) a. The director of a multinational with huge profits.

b. The director of a solvent company with headquarters in many countries.

In the opposite direction, we can hypothesize coreference links between NPs for which
paraphrasing can be recognized with considerable ease (Example (11)). Light elements
(e.g., fact), for instance, are normally taken into account in paraphrasing—but not in
coreference resolution—as their addition or deletion does not involve a significant
change in meaning.

(11) a. The creation of a company.

b. The fact of creating a company.

By neighboring expressions, we mean two parallel structures each containing a coref-
erent mention of the same entity next to a member of the same paraphrase pair. Note
that the coreferent expressions in the following examples are printed in italics and the
paraphrase units are printed in bold. If a resolution module identifies the coreferent
pairs in Example (12), then these can function as two anchor points,X andY, to infer that
the text between them is paraphrastic: X complained today before Y, and X is formulating
the corresponding complaint to Y.

(12) a. ArgentinaX complained today before the British GovernmentY about the
violation of the air space of this South American country.

b. This ChancellorshipX is formulating the corresponding complaint to the
British GovernmentY for this violation of the Argentinian air space.

Some authors have already used coreference resolution in their paraphrasing systems
in a similar way to the examples herein. Shinyama and Sekine (2003) benefit from the
fact that a single event can be reported in more than one newspaper article in different
ways, keeping certain kinds of NPs such as names, dates, and numbers unchanged.
Thus, these can behave as anchor points for paraphrase extraction. Their system uses
coreference resolution to find anchors which refer to the same entity.

Conversely, knowing that a stretch of text next to an NP paraphrases another stretch
of text next to another NP helps to identify a coreference link between the two NPs,
as shown by Example (13), where two diction verbs are easily detected as a para-
phrase and thus their subjects can be hypothesized to corefer. If the paraphrase system

644



Recasens and Vila On Paraphrase and Coreference

identifies the mapping between the indirect speech in Example (13a) and the direct
speech in Example (13b), the coreference relation between the subjects is corroborated.
Another difficult coreference link that can be detected with the help of paraphrasing
is Example (14): If the predicates are recognized as paraphrases, then the subjects are
likely to corefer.

(13) a. The trainer of the Cuban athlete Sotomayor said that the world record holder
is in a fit state to win the Games in Sydney.

b. “The record holder is in a fit state to win the Olympic Games,” explained
De la Torre.

(14) a. Police officers searched 11 stores in Barcelona.

b. The investigators carried out 11 searches in stores in the center of
Barcelona.

Taking this idea one step further, new coreference resolution strategies can be developed
with the aid of shallow paraphrasing techniques. A two-step process for coreference
resolution might consist of hypothesizing first sentence-level paraphrases via n-gram
or named-entity overlapping, aligning phrases that are (possible) paraphrases, and
hypothesizing that they corefer. Second, a coreference module can act as a filter and
provide a second classification. Such a procedure could be successful for the cases
exemplified in Examples (12) to (14).

This strategy reverses the tacit assumption that coreference is solved before
sentence-level paraphrasing. Meaning alone does not make it possible to state that the
two pairs in Example (5b), repeated in Example (15), or the two pairs in Example (16)
are paraphrases without first solving the coreference relations.

(15) a. The Atlético de Madrid goalkeeper, A. Jiménez, yesterday realized one of his
dreams by defeating Barcelona: “I had never beaten Barcelona.”

b. The Atlético de Madrid goalkeeper, A. Jiménez, yesterday realized one of
his dreams by defeating Barcelona, and said that he had never beaten
Barcelona.

(16) a. Secretary of State Colin Powell last week ruled out a non-aggression treaty.

b. But Secretary of State Colin Powell brushed off this possibility.

However, cooperative work between paraphrasing and coreference is not always pos-
sible, and it is harder if neither of the two can be detected by means of widely used
strategies. In other cases, cooperation can even be misleading. In Example (17), the two
bold phrases are paraphrases, but their subjects do not corefer. The detection of words
like another (Example (17b)) gives a key to help to prevent this kind of error.

(17) a. A total of 26 Cuban citizens remain in the police station of the airport of
Barajas after requesting political asylum.

b. Another three Cubans requested political asylum.

On the basis of these various examples, we claim that a full understanding of both
the similarities and disparities will enable fruitful collaboration between researchers
working on paraphrasing and those working on coreference. Even more importantly,

645



Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4

our main claim is that such an understanding about the fundamental linguistic issues is
a prerequisite for building paraphrase and coreference systems not lacking in linguistic
rigor. In brief, we call for the return of linguistics to paraphrasing and coreference
automatic applications, as well as to NLP in general, adhering to the call by Wintner
(2009: 643), who cites examples that demonstrate “what computational linguistics can
achieve when it is backed up and informed by linguistic theory” (page 643).

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Eduard Hovy, M. Antònia
Martı́, Horacio Rodrı́guez, and Mariona
Taulé for their helpful advice as experienced
researchers. We would also like to express
our gratitude to the three anonymous
reviewers for their suggestions to improve
this article.
This work was partly supported by FPU
Grants AP2006-00994 and AP2008-02185
from the Spanish Ministry of Education,
and Project TEXT-MESS 2.0 (TIN2009-
13391-C04-04).

References
Androutsopoulos, Ion and Prodromos

Malakasiotis. 2010. A survey of
paraphrasing and textual entailment
methods. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
Research, 38:135–187.

Bhagat, Rahul. 2009. Learning
Paraphrases from Text. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA.

Callison-Burch, Chris. 2007. Paraphrasing and
Translation. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh.

Doddington, George, Alexis Mitchell, Mark
Przybocki, Lance Ramshaw, Stephanie
Strassel, and Ralph Weischedel. 2004.
The Automatic Content Extraction (ACE)
program—Tasks, data, and evaluation.
In Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2004), pages 837–840,
Lisbon.

Dolan, Bill, Chris Brockett, and Chris Quirk.
2005. README file included in the
Microsoft Research Paraphrase Corpus,
March, Redmond, WA.

Dras, Mark. 1999. Tree Adjoining Grammar
and the Reluctant Paraphrasing of Text. Ph.D.
thesis, Macquarie University, Sydney.

Fuchs, Catherine. 1994. Paraphrase et
énonciation. Modélisation de la paraphrase
langagière. Ophrys, Paris.

Fujita, Atsushi. 2005. Automatic Generation of
Syntactically Well-formed and Semantically

Appropriate Paraphrases. Ph.D. thesis, Nara
Institute of Science and Technology,
Ikoma, Nara.

Haghighi, Aria and Dan Klein. 2009.
Simple coreference resolution with rich
syntactic and semantic features. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP 2009), pages 1152–1161,
Singapore.

Hirschman, Lynette and Nancy Chinchor.
1997. MUC-7 Coreference task definition–
Version 3.0. In Proceedings of the Message
Understanding Conference-7 (MUC-7),
Washington, DC.

Hirst, Graeme J. 1981. Anaphora in Natural
Language Understanding: A Survey.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.

Karttunen, Lauri. 1976. Discourse referents.
In J. McCawley, editor, Syntax and
Semantics, volume 7. Academic Press,
New York, pages 363–385.

Madnani, Nitin and Bonnie J. Dorr. 2010.
Generating phrasal and sentential
paraphrases: A survey of data-driven
methods. Computational Linguistics, 36,
pages 341–387.

Milićević, Jasmina. 2007. La paraphrase.
Peter Lang, Berne.

Ng, Vincent. 2010. Supervised noun phrase
coreference research: The first fifteen
years. In Proceedings of the 48th Meeting
of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL 2010), Uppsala,
pages 1396–1411.

Poesio, Massimo and Yannick Versley. 2009.
Computational models for the
interpretation of anaphora: A survey.
Notes from the ACL-2009 Tutorial on
State-of-the-art NLP Approaches to
Coreference Resolution, Singapore.

Recasens, Marta, Eduard Hovy, and
M. Antònia Martı́. 2010. A typology of
near-identity relations for coreference
(NIDENT). In Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2010),
pages 149–156, Valletta.

Recasens, Marta and M. Antònia Martı́. 2010.
AnCora-CO: Coreferentially annotated

646



Recasens and Vila On Paraphrase and Coreference

corpora for Spanish and Catalan. Language
Resources and Evaluation, 44(4):315–345.
doi: 10.1007/s10579-009-9108-x.

Shinyama, Yusuke and Satoshi Sekine.
2003. Paraphrase acquisition for
information extraction. In Proceedings of
the ACL 2nd International Workshop on
Paraphrasing (IWP 2003), pages 65–71,
Sapporo.

van Deemter, Kees and Rodger Kibble. 2000.
On coreferring: Coreference in MUC and

related annotation schemes. Computational
Linguistics, 26(4):629–637.

Vila, Marta, Santiago González, M. Antònia
Martı́, Joaquim Llisterri, and M. Jesús
Machuca. 2010. ClInt: A bilingual
Spanish-Catalan spoken corpus of
clinical interviews. Procesamiento del
Lenguaje Natural, 45, 105–111.

Wintner, Shuly. 2009. What science
underlies Natural Language Engineering?
Computational Linguistics, 35(4):641–644.

647




