



































coi36307.dvi


Last Words

Ancient Symbols, Computational Linguistics,
and the Reviewing Practices of the General
Science Journals

Richard Sproat∗
Center for Spoken Language
Understanding

1. Introduction

Few archaeological finds are as evocative as artifacts inscribed with symbols. Whenever
an archaeologist finds a potsherd or a seal impression that seems to have symbols
scratched or impressed on the surface, it is natural to want to “read” the symbols. And
if the symbols come from an undeciphered or previously unknown symbol system it
is common to ask what language the symbols supposedly represent and whether the
system can be deciphered.

Of course the first question that really should be asked is whether the symbols are
in fact writing. A writing system, as linguists usually define it, is a symbol system that
is used to represent language. Familiar examples are alphabets such as the Latin, Greek,
Cyrillic, or Hangul alphabets, alphasyllabaries such as Devanagari or Tamil, syllabaries
such as Cherokee or Kana, and morphosyllabic systems like Chinese characters. But
symbol systems that do not encode language abound: European heraldry, mathematical
notation, labanotation (used to represent dance), and Boy Scout merit badges are all
examples of symbol systems that represent things, but do not function as part of a
system that represents language.

Whether an unknown system is writing or not is a difficult question to answer.
It can only be answered definitively in the affirmative if one can develop a verifiable
decipherment into some language or languages. Statistical techniques have been used in
decipherment for years, but these have always been used under the assumption that the
system one is dealing with is writing, and the techniques are used to uncover patterns or
regularities that might aid in the decipherment. Patterns of symbol distribution might
suggest that a symbol system is not linguistic: For example, odd repetition patterns
might make it seem that a symbol system is unlikely to be writing. But until recently
nobody had argued that statistical techniques could be used to determine that a system
is linguistic.1

It was therefore quite a surprise when, in April 2009, there appeared in Science
a short article by Rajesh Rao of the University of Washington and colleagues at two
research institutes in India that purported to provide such a measure (Rao et al. 2009a).
Rao et al.’s claim, which we will describe in more detail in the next section, was that

∗ Center for Spoken Language Understanding, Oregon Health & Science University, 20000 NW Walker Rd,
Beaverton, OR, 97006, USA. E-mail: rws@xoba.com.

1 People have used the existence of quasi-Zipfian distributions in symbol systems to argue for their status
as writing; such claims figure in the work of Rao and colleagues. But because it has been long known that
Zipfian distributions hold of many things besides language, such arguments are easy to dismiss.

© 2010 Association for Computational Linguistics



Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 3

one could use conditional entropy as evidence that the famous symbol system of the third
millenium BCE Indus Valley civilization was most probably writing, and not some other
kind of system.

That the Indus symbols were writing is hardly a novel claim. Indeed, ever since the
first seal impression was found at Harappa (1872–1873 CE), it has been the standard
assumption that the symbols were part of a writing system and that the Indus Valley
civilization was literate. Over the years there have been literally hundreds of claims
of decipherment, the most well-known of these being the work of Asko Parpola and
colleagues over the last four decades (Parpola 1994). Parpola, who argues that the Indus
Valley people spoke an early form of Dravidian, has produced interpretations of a small
set of symbols, but nothing that can be characterized as a decipherment.

The first serious arguments against the idea that the Indus symbols were part of
a writing system were presented in work that Steve Farmer, Michael Witzel, and I
published in Farmer, Sproat, and Witzel (2004), which reviews extensive support for that
view from archaeological evidence and comparisons with other ancient symbol systems.
Although our arguments were certainly not universally acknowledged—least of all
among people who had spent most of their careers trying to decipher the symbols—
they have been accepted by many archaeologists and linguists, and established a viable
alternative view to the traditional view of these symbols. It was against this backdrop
that the Rao et al. (2009a) paper appeared.

Taken at face value, Rao et al.’s (2009a) paper would appear to have reestablished
the traditional view of the Indus symbols as the correct one, and indeed that is how the
paper was received by many who read it. A number of articles appeared in the popular
science press, with Wired declaring “Artificial Intelligence Cracks Ancient Mystery”
(Keim 2009). The Indian press had a field day; they had studiously ignored the evidence
reported in our paper, presumably because it led to the unpalatable conclusion that
India’s earliest civilization was illiterate. But Rao et al.’s paper, which appeared to
demonstrate the opposite, was widely reported.

The work has also apparently attracted attention beyond the popular science press
and those with some sort of axe to grind on the Indus Valley issue, for in March 2010
there appeared in the Proceedings of the Royal Society, Series A, a paper that used similar
techniques to Rao et al.’s (2009a) in order to argue that ancient Pictish symbols, which
are found inscribed on about 300 standing stones in Scotland, are in fact a previously un-
recognized ancient writing system (Lee, Jonathan, and Ziman 2010). A trend, it seems,
has been established: We now have a set of statistical techniques that can distinguish
among ancient symbol systems and tell you which ones were writing and which ones
were not.

The only problem is that these techniques are in fact useless for this purpose, and
for reasons that are rather trivial and easy to demonstrate. The remainder of this article
will be devoted to two points. First, in Section 2, I review the techniques from the Rao
et al. (2009a) and Lee, Jonathan, and Ziman (2010) papers, and show why they don’t
work. The demonstration will seem rather obvious to any reader of this journal. And
this in turn brings us to the second point: How is it that papers that are so trivially and
demonstrably wrong get published in journals such as Science or the Proceedings of the
Royal Society? Both papers relate to statistical language modeling, which is surely one
of the core techniques in computational linguistics, yet (apparently) no computational
linguists were asked to review these papers. Would a paper that made some blatantly
wrong claim about genetics be published in such venues? What does this say about our
field and its standing in the world? And what can we do about that? Those questions
are the topic of Section 3.

586



Sproat Ancient Symbols and Computational Linguistics

2. The Fallacies

Rao et al.’s (2009a) paper is a typical short paper in Science consisting of a page of text
and figures, and a link to a longer description that details the techniques and data.
The main paper—which is presumably all that most people would read—contains a
convincing-looking plot, their Figure 1A, here reproduced as Figure 1. The plot purports
to show that bigram conditional entropy , defined as

H(Y|X) = −
∑

x∈X ,y∈Y
p(x, y)logp(y|x) (1)

can distinguish between non-linguistic symbol systems and linguistic symbol systems,
and that the Indus Valley symbols behave like linguistic symbol systems.

The plot looks very convincing indeed, but what does it mean?
Several aspects of the plot require explanation. First the horizontal axis, labeled

as “number of tokens,” represents the bigram conditional entropy of subsets of each
corpus starting with the subset consisting of the 20 most common symbols, the 40
most common symbols, the 60 most common symbols, and so forth. What we see for
each corpus is that the conditional entropy grows over these successive subsets until it
approaches the conditional entropy of the corpus as a whole.

Second, the corpora represent small samples of various languages including En-
glish (sampled both as words and letters), Sumerian (cuneiform symbols), Old Tamil
(largely consonant–vowel combinations in the Tamil alphasyllabary), the Indus Valley
corpus due to Mahadevan (1977), and two types of non-linguistic systems (though see
subsequent discussion). The sample sizes are small because the Indus corpus against
which all other symbol systems are compared is very small. The average length of an
Indus “inscription” (in Mahadevan’s corpus) is only about 4.5 symbols; the total size of

Figure 1
Conditional entropies for a variety of linguistic scripts and other symbol systems. From:
Rao, Rajesh, Nisha Yadav, Mayank Vahia, Hrishikesh Joglekar, R. Adhikari, and Iravatham
Mahadevan. 2009. Entropic evidence for linguistic structure in the Indus script. Science,
324(5931):1165. Figure 1A, page 1165. Reprinted with permission from AAAS. Poor quality
of the figure is due to poor quality in the original.

587

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showImage?doi=10.1162/coli_a_00011&iName=master.img-000.jpg&w=228&h=196


Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 3

the Mahadevan corpus is 7,000 tokens (and about 400 types). Though Rao et al. (2009a)
make a point of stressing that they use sophisticated smoothing techniques (a modified
version of Kneser-Ney), one must remember that with such small data sets, smoothing
can only do so much for you.

Third, the curves labeled as “Type 1” and “Type 2” non-linguistic systems are
explained as follows:

Two major types of nonlinguistic systems are those that do not exhibit much sequential
structure (‘Type 1’ systems) and those that follow rigid sequential order (‘Type 2’
systems). For example, the sequential order of signs in Vinča inscriptions appears to
have been unimportant. On the other hand, the sequences of deity signs in Near Eastern
inscriptions found on boundary stones (kudurrus) typically follow a rigid order that is
thought to reflect the hierarchical ordering of the deities. (Rao et al. 2009a, page 1165)

On the face of it, it is not too surprising, given these descriptions, that the Type 1 system
shows rapid growth in the conditional entropy, whereas Type 2 stays close to zero. The
problem is that there is little evidence that either of these types accurately characterized
any ancient symbol system. So for example, the Vinča symbols of Old Europe were
certainly not random in their distribution according to the most authoritative source on
the topic (Winn 1981).2 Indeed, Gimbutas (1989) and Haarmann (1996) even proposed
that they represented a pre-Sumerian European script; although that is highly unlikely,
it is also unlikely they would have proposed the idea in the first place if the distribution
of symbols seemed random. Similarly, it is apparently not the case that the deity symbols
in kudurrus were arranged in a rigid order (see subsequent discussion): Clearly it is not
only computational linguists who should be bothered by the claims of this paper. In fact,
as one learns only if one reads the supplementary material for the paper, the data for
Type 1 and Type 2 were artificially generated from a rigid model (Type 2) and a random
and equiprobable model (Type 1).

Various on-line discussions, starting with Farmer, Sproat, and Witzel (2009), crit-
icized Rao et al. (2009a) for their use of artificial data.3 So, in subsequent discussion,
including a recently published paper (Rao 2010) that largely rehashes the issues of
both the Science paper and another paper in PNAS (Rao et al. 2009b),4 Rao backs off
from these claims and talks about the Type 1 and Type 2 curves as the limits of the
distribution. The take-home message appears to be that in principle symbol systems
could vary as widely as being completely rigid or completely random and equiprobable.
It is therefore surprising, the story goes, that the Indus symbols seem to fall right in
that narrow band that includes unequivocal writing systems. The problem with this
argument is that it is highly unlikely that there were ever any functional symbol sys-
tems that had either of these properties, and one can argue this point on basic infor-
mation theoretic grounds. A symbol system that was completely rigid—had an entropy
of 0—would convey no information whatsoever. If whenever symbol x occurred, sym-

2 Rao et al. (2009a) mis-cite Winn to claim that the Vinča sequences were random.
3 We also summarized our criticisms of the paper in a letter to the editor of Science. This was rejected for

publication with the note “we receive many more letters than we can accommodate.” This seemed an
odd excuse given that the letter would presumably be published online rather than in print—so space
would not be an issue, and the letter pertained directly to flows in a paper published in the magazine,
which one would think would be of importance.

4 Rao et al. (2009b) has one advantage over Rao et al. (2009a) in that they actually do show something: They
use Markov models to show that there is structure, which they term “rich syntactic structure,” in the
Indus texts. That there is structure—the system is not random—has of course been known for decades;
see Farmer, Sproat, and Witzel (2004) for discussion of this point. And given the average length of the
Indus texts of around 4.5 glyphs, one wonders just how “rich” the syntax could have been.

588



Sproat Ancient Symbols and Computational Linguistics

bol y always followed, there would be little point in having more than just symbol x,
except perhaps for decorative purposes. Even in language one finds pockets of such
predictability: The word sequence Monty Python’s Flying will hardly ever be followed
by anything other than Circus. For a whole system to be so rigid would be unexpected.
The other extreme—random and equiprobable—seems equally unlikely in general, if
only because symbols represent things, and the things they represent typically do not
occur with equal probability. So although Rao is technically correct that his Types 1 and 2
do represent the logical extremes of the distribution, it is not likely that any meaningful
symbol systems were ever created that had either of these properties.

In particular it is important to remember that random is not the same thing as random
and equiprobable: at least some of the discussion of Rao et al.’s (2009a) paper (and the Lee,
Jonathan, and Ziman [2010] paper we examine subsequently) seems to depend upon
the confusion of these two quite distinct notions. If one allows that symbols have a
quasi-Zipfian distribution—something that is surely true of linguistic symbol systems,
but of many other things too—then one finds curves that look very similar to what
Rao et al. find for their “linguistic” systems in their Science paper. Thus, as I argued
in a contribution to Liberman (2009), one can “get a very good fit to [Rao et al.’s]
results for the Indus corpus with a model that has 400 elements with a perfect Zipf
distribution, with α = 1.5, and conditional independence for the bigrams.” Similarly in
my invited talk at EMNLP’09 (Sproat 2009), I showed that one could replicate their
results with an artificially generated corpus that only matched the unigram frequencies
from the Mahadevan corpus and again had conditional independence for the bigrams.
It is not hard to understand why the plot for a randomly generated corpus with a
roughly Zipfian distribution should “look like” language using Rao et al.’s methods.
There are no constraints on what symbols can follow others, so for the n most frequent
symbols there is a large amount of uncertainty. But as one’s sample grows to the 2n most
frequent, the 3n most frequent, and so forth, the gain in uncertainty decreases simply
because the next n symbols have a smaller overall probability and thus their incremental
contribution to the uncertainty is smaller. Furthermore at no point will the entropy be
maximal: because the distribution of symbols is not equiprobable.

In subsequent discussions Rao—for example, Rao (2010)—has defended his posi-
tion by arguing that conditional entropy and other such measures are not intended to be
definitive, but merely suggestive and, when combined with other evidence that points
in the same direction, supportive of the conclusion that the Indus system is writing:
Simply put, it is an issue of weight of evidence. The problem is that for that argument to
work there must at least be some weight: If conditional entropy measures of a particular
form correlate more with language than they do with non-linguistic systems, if even
weakly, then that might count as evidence for the conclusion. In other words, one
wants a measure that can tell one, with better than chance accuracy, that the system
in question is (or is not) linguistic. But this has not been demonstrated: Nobody has
done the legwork of putting together the needed corpora of ancient linguistic and non-
linguistic symbol systems, and demonstrated that one can in fact use such measures to
do a better than chance job of classifying systems. The simple experiments involving
randomly generated texts discussed earlier do not leave one with much optimism that
this will be the case. But one has to admit that it is an open question. But it is the question
that has to be asked, and the fact that none of the reviewers of the Science article thought
to ask it speaks to the reviewing practices of that journal, at least as it relates to our field.

We turn now to Pictish symbols. The Picts were an Iron Age people (or possibly
several peoples) of Scotland who, among other things, left a few hundred standing
stones inscribed with symbols, with “texts” ranging from one to a few symbols in

589



Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 3

length. Lee, Jonathan, and Ziman’s (2010) paper attempts to use measures derived
from entropy to ascertain whether these symbols are part of a linguistic writing system.
Similarly to Rao et al.’s (2009a) work, they compare the symbols to a variety of known
writing systems, as well as symbol systems like Morse code, and European heraldry, and
randomly generated texts—by which, again, is meant random and equiprobable. As their
title “Pictish symbols revealed as a written language through application of Shannon
entropy” suggests, they are much bolder than Rao et al. (2009a) in what they think they
have demonstrated.

As with Rao et al.’s (2009a) paper, there are a number of things in Lee, Jonathan, and
Ziman (2010) that should bother people other than computational linguists: They char-
acterize Egyptian hieroglyphs as a “syllabic” writing system (it was a consonantal and
thus essentially a segmental writing system); they linearize their corpus of European
heraldry by reading bottom to top, which follows no conventions that I am aware of;
and they refer credulously to the supposed “script” examples from Chinese Neolithic
pottery, which few Sinologists take seriously. But again, we focus here on the issues that
relate to computational linguistics.

Lee, Jonathan, and Ziman’s (2010) techniques are substantially more complicated
than Rao et al.’s (2009a), and we do not have space to describe them fully here. One
reason for the complication is that they recognize the problem imposed by the very
small sample sizes of the corpora (a few hundred symbols in the case of Pictish), and
seek a method that is robust to such small sizes. They develop two measures, Ur and
and Cr, defined as follows. First, Ur is defined as

Ur =
F2

log2(Nd/Nu)
(2)

where F2 is the bigram entropy, Nd is the number of bigram types, and Nu is the number
of unigram types.5 Cr is defined as

Cr =
Nd
Nu

+ a SdTd
(3)

where Nd and Nu are as before, a is a constant (for which, in their experiments, they
derive a value of 7, using cross-validation), Sd is the number of bigrams that occur once,
and Td is the total number of bigram tokens; this latter measure will be familiar as

n1
N ,

the Good-Turing estimate of the probability mass for unseen events. To illustrate the
components of Cr, Lee, Jonathan, and Ziman show a plot (their Figure 5.5), reproduced
here as Figure 2. According to their description this shows

[a p]lot of Sd/Td (degree of di-gram repetition) versus Nd/Nu (degree of di-gram lexicon
completeness). . . . Dashes, sematograms—heraldry; filled diamonds, letters—prose,
poetry and inscriptions; grey filled triangles, syllables—prose, poetry, inscriptions;
open squares, words—genealogical lists; crosses, code characters; open diamonds,
letters—genealogical lists; filled squares, words—prose, poetry and inscriptions. (Lee,
Jonathan, and Ziman 2010, page 8)

Note that the non-linguistic system of heraldry (given their assumptions of how to
“read” heraldic “texts”) seems to have a much lower number of singleton bigrams than
would be expected given the corpus size, clearly separating it from linguistic systems.

5 Unfortunately, a complication in Lee, Jonathan, and Ziman’s (2010) paper is that their formulation of
bigram entropy in their Equation (2.2) is apparently wrong.

590



Sproat Ancient Symbols and Computational Linguistics

Figure 2
Reproduction of Figure 5.5, page 8, from Lee, Rob, Philip Jonathan, and Pauline Ziman. “Pictish
symbols revealed as a written language through application of Shannon entropy.” Proceedings of
the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical & Engineering Sciences, pages 1–16, 31 March 2010. Used
with permission of the Royal Society. See text for explanation.

Lee, Jonathan, and Ziman (2010) use Cr and Ur to train a decision tree to classify
symbol systems. If Cr ≥ 4.89, the system is linguistic. Subsequent refinements use val-
ues of Ur to classify the system as segmental (Ur < 1.09), syllabic (Ur < 1.37), or else
logographic.

All very impressive looking, but does it really work? In order to put the Lee,
Jonathan, and Ziman (2010) theory to a serious test, I looked to another symbol system,
namely, Mesopotamian deity symbols from kudurrus (boundary stones) catalogued in
Seidl (1989). A small corpus was developed from the stones for which the depictions
in Seidl’s book were clear enough to read. The corpus contains only 545 tokens, with
59 types (the full set of types described by Seidl comprises 66). The Mesopotamian deity
symbols are pictographic, a property shared with many scripts, including Egyptian
and Luwian hieroglyphs and Mayan glyphs; and there are other script-like properties,
including the fact that the symbols are often arranged linearly (Figure 3), and some
symbols are “ligatured” together. Yet we know that these symbols were not part of a
writing system.

Unfortunately the corpus is far too small for a meaningful comparison with the
results of Rao et al. (2009a), though one point is clear from even a cursory examination

Figure 3
The linearly arranged symbols of the major deities of Aššurnas.irpal II. From http://upload.
wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/87/Ashurnasirpal II stela british museam.jpg,
released under the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2.

591

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showImage?doi=10.1162/coli_a_00011&iName=master.img-001.jpg&w=228&h=151
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showImage?doi=10.1162/coli_a_00011&iName=master.img-002.jpg&w=228&h=115


Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 3

of the texts: Rao et al.’s claim that kudurru texts are rigidly ordered is clearly false
(which we also showed in Farmer, Sproat, and Witzel [2004]); if nothing else, some
symbols repeat within the same text, with different symbols following each repetition.
Turning now to Lee, Jonathan, and Ziman’s (2010) method, I computed Cr and Ur for
the kudurrus, yielding values of Cr = 8.0 and Ur = 1.55. For the Pictish symbols, Lee,
Jonathan, and Ziman computed values for Cr and Ur under various assumptions of
what the symbol type set was, with the largest values being Cr = 6.16 and Ur = 1.45.
The values for the kudurru texts are different than what they calculate for the Pictish
stones, but crucially they are different in the direction that, given their decision tree,
suggests that kudurrus are writing. In particular, Cr ≥ 4.89 and Ur ≥ 1.37, yielding
classification of the system as a logographic writing system. It is worth noting also that
the values for Nd/Nu and Sd/Td are 5.58 and 0.35, respectively, which puts them firmly
in the “linguistic” range, as shown by the superimposed point in Figure 2.

More embarrassingly, a set of 75 “texts” consisting of “symbols” derived by succes-
sive tosses of seven six-sided dice, as suggested by Liberman (2010), with individual
text lengths ranging between 3 and 14, with a total of 638 “symbols,” is revealed by
the application of Shannon entropy to be a syllabic writing system. For this system
Cr = 12.64 and Ur = 1.18.

Lee, Jonathan, and Ziman’s method thus fails a crucial test: It misclassifies as
writing systems whose true classification—as a non-linguistic system, as a randomly
generated and meaningless sequence—is known. Again, the reasons for this failure
seem clear enough. First, the tiny sample sizes of many of the texts they use make it
unlikely that one can derive reliable statistics in the first place. And second, even if we
allow that Lee, Jonathan, and Ziman’s measures reveal something about the structures
of the systems they are examining, the source of the structure could in principle be
many things. Perhaps it would have been too much to expect that a reviewer would
have known about the Mesopotamian deity symbols and suggested that Lee, Jonathan,
and Ziman should check those with their methods. But it would have been reasonable
to expect that someone should have asked them whether they can detect a truly random
but non-equiprobable system.

In summary, what neither the Rao et al. work on the Indus symbols, nor the Lee,
Jonathan, and Ziman work on Pictish symbols have shown is that one can distinguish
structure that derives from linguistic constraints from structure that derives from some
other kind of constraints. Furthermore, they fail for rather trivial reasons—reasons that
should have been caught if competent reviewers had been assigned to these papers.

I must stress that I do not wish to argue that it is impossible that one could come up
with a sound statistical argument to show that a particular symbol system is not linguis-
tic. If one took a large sample of known linguistic and non-linguistic symbol systems,
and showed that a particular set of measures could reliably distinguish between them
with very high accuracy, then such measures could presumably be applied in the case of
unknown systems such as the Indus or Pictish systems. Then, and only then would one
have a clear and unequivocal demonstration of anything. But it is patently clear that the
papers we have critiqued here do not even come close to this.

3. What Can We Do about This?

The situation described in this article surely presents a problem for the field of computa-
tional linguistics. Although entropy and related concepts clearly predate computational
linguistics, they are central to statistical language processing and are used widely in
the field. Such measures certainly can tell us some things about a corpus of symbols,

592



Sproat Ancient Symbols and Computational Linguistics

but there is no evidence that they can tell us what Rao et al. (2009a) or Lee, Jonathan,
and Ziman (2010) think they can tell us. Yet, with the publication of these papers, and
their promotion by the all-too-eager popular science press, non-specialists might easily
believe that “artificial intelligence” methods can provide crucial evidence for a symbol
system’s status as writing. One can only expect that more such papers will appear.

Such work represents a misuse of the methods of the field of computational lin-
guistics, so in principle it should be of interest to practitioners in that field to try to
do something about this. At the very least, it would be useful if one could convince
general “peer” reviewed publications such as Science or the Proceedings of the Royal
Society to include qualified computational linguists among the peer reviewers of any
such publications in the future. This was essentially Pereira’s plea (Pereira 2009). Such
a situation would hardly be tolerated in other fields, yet in publications like Science it
seems to be common when it comes to issues having to do with language.

Part of the problem may be that computational linguistics has relatively low visi-
bility. It is not clear that the editors of publications like Science even know that there are
people who spend their lives doing statistical and computational analyses of text; or, if
they do, that computational linguists have knowledge that is relevant to judging papers
like the ones under discussion here. The time is ripe for changing that. As the results
of computational linguistic research, in the form of things like machine translation or
automatic speech recognition systems, become more widely known and used, compu-
tational linguists have an opportunity to educate the wider community—and we should
take every opportunity to do so. For example the fact that n-gram language models are
used with a high degree of success in speech recognition systems depends upon the fact
that such language models are typically built from data consisting of millions or even
billions of tokens. Such points need to be stressed more fully in dealings with the press
or the science magazines, so that people do not get the impression that one can derive
reliable results by such techniques from corpora consisting of only a few hundred or few
thousand symbols. Despite a famous XKCD cartoon6 that characterizes computational
linguistics as a field that is “so ill-defined” that people can “subscribe to any of dozens
of contradictory models and still be taken seriously,” there are core methods that are
backed up by solid empirical data. Yet, as with any science, there are good ways and
bad ways to apply such methods.

Ultimately we may be fighting a losing battle. It is more exciting to learn that
a statistical method can tell you that such-and-such an ancient symbol system was
writing, than to learn that in fact the proposed methods do not work. But at least one
has a duty to try to set the record straight.

Acknowledgments
I thank Steve Farmer, Brian Roark, Robert
Dale, and a reviewer for Computational
Linguistics for useful comments on earlier
versions of this article.

References
Farmer, Steve, Richard Sproat, and Michael

Witzel. 2004. The collapse of the
Indus-script thesis: The myth of a literate

Harappan civilization. Electronic Journal of
Vedic Studies, 11(2):19–57.

Farmer, Steve, Richard Sproat, and Michael
Witzel. 2009. A refutation of the claimed
refutation of the nonlinguistic nature
of Indus symbols: Invented data sets
in the statistical paper of Rao et al.
(Science, 2009). www.safarmer.com/
Refutation3.pdf.

Gimbutas, M. 1989. The Language of the
Goddess: Unearthing the Hidden Symbols of

6 http://xkcd.com/114/.

593



Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 3

Western Civilization. Thames and Hudson,
London.

Haarmann, Harald. 1996. Early Civilization
and Literacy in Europe: An Inquiry into
Cultural Continuity in the Ancient World.
Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin.

Keim, Brandon. 2009. Artificial intelligence
cracks 4,000-year-old mystery. Wired,
23 April. www.wired.com/wiredscience/
2009/04/indusscript/

Lee, Rob, Philip Jonathan, and Pauline
Ziman. 2010. Pictish symbols revealed as a
written language through application of
Shannon entropy. Proceedings of the Royal
Society A: Mathematical, Physical &
Engineering Sciences, pages 1–16,
31 March 2010.

Liberman, Mark. 2009. Conditional entropy
and the Indus script. Language Log,
26 April. http://languagelog.ldc.
upenn.edu/nll/?p=1374.

Liberman, Mark. 2010. Pictish writing?
Language Log, 2 April. http://
languagelog.ldc.upenn.edu/nll/
?p=2227.

Mahadevan, Iravatham. 1977. The Indus
Script: Texts, Concordance and Tables.
Archaeological Survey of India, Calcutta
and Delhi.

Parpola, Asko. 1994. Deciphering the Indus
Script. Cambridge University Press,
New York.

Pereira, Fernando. 2009. Falling for the
magic formula, April 26. http://
earningmyturns.blogspot.com/2009/04/
falling-for-magic-formula.html.

Rao, Rajesh. 2010. Probabilistic analysis of an
ancient undeciphered script. Computer,
April:76–80.

Rao, Rajesh, Nisha Yadav, Mayank Vahia,
Hrishikesh Joglekar, R. Adhikari, and
Iravatham Mahadevan. 2009a. Entropic
Evidence for Linguistic Structure in the
Indus Script. Science, 324(5931):1165.

Rao, Rajesh, Nisha Yadav, Mayank Vahia,
Hrishikesh Joglekar, R. Adhikari, and
Iravatham Mahadevan. 2009b. A Markov
model of the Indus script. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences,
106(33):13685–13690.

Seidl, Ursula. 1989. Die babylonischen
Kudurru-Reliefs. Symbole mesopotamischer
Gottheiten. Universitätsverlag Freiburg,
Freiburg.

Sproat, Richard. 2009. Symbols, meaning
and statistics. Invited talk at EMNLP,
Singapore. http://www.fask.uni-
mainz.de/lk/videoarchive/videos/
2009-08-06-emnlp-2009-richard-
sproat.html.

Winn, Shan M. M. 1981. Pre-writing in
Southeastern Europe: The Sign System of the
Vinča Culture, ca. 4000 B.C. Western
Publishers, Calgary.

594


