



































What Computational Linguists Can Learn from Psychologists (and Vice Versa)


Last Words

What Computational Linguists Can Learn
from Psychologists (and Vice Versa)

Emiel Krahmer∗

Tilburg University

1. Introduction

Sometimes I am amazed by how much the field of computational linguistics has
changed in the past 15 to 20 years. In the mid 1990s, I was working at a research institute
where language and speech technologists worked in relatively close quarters. Speech
technology seemed on the verge of a major breakthrough; this was around the time that
Bill Gates was quoted in Business Week as saying that speech was not just the future of
Windows, but the future of computing itself. At the same time, language technology
was, well, nowhere. Bill Gates certainly wasn’t championing language technology in
those days. And while the possible applications of speech technology seemed endless
(who would use a keyboard in 2010, when speech-driven user interfaces would have re-
placed traditional computers?), the language people were thinking hard about possible
applications for their admittedly somewhat immature technologies.

Predicting the future is a tricky thing. No major breakthrough came for speech
technology—I am still typing this. However, language technology did change almost
beyond recognition. Perhaps one of the main reasons for this has been the explosive
growth of the Internet, which helped language technology in two different ways. On
the one hand it instigated the development and refinement of techniques needed for
searching in document collections of unprecedented size, on the other it resulted in a
large increase of freely available text data. Recently, language technology has been par-
ticularly successful for tasks where huge amounts of textual data is available to which
statistical machine learning techniques can be applied (Halevy, Norvig, and Pereira
2009). As a result of these developments, mainstream computational linguistics is now
a successful, application-oriented discipline which is particularly good at extracting
information from sequences of words.

But there is more to language than that. For speakers, words are the result of a
complex speech production process; for listeners, they are what starts off the similarly
complex comprehension process. However, in many current applications no attention is
given to the processes by which words are produced nor to the processes by which they
can be understood. Language is treated as a product not as a process, in the terminology
of Clark (1996). In addition, we use language not only as a vehicle for factual infor-
mation exchange; speakers may realise all sorts of other intentions with their words:
They may want to convince others to do or buy something, they may want to induce
a particular emotion in the addressee, and so forth. These days, most of computational
linguistics (with a few notable exceptions, more about which subsequently) has little to

∗ Tilburg Centre for Creative Computing (TiCC), Communication and Cognition research group, Tilburg
University, The Netherlands. E-mail: e.j.krahmer@uvt.nl.

© 2010 Association for Computational Linguistics



Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 2

say about how people produce and comprehend language, nor about what the possible
effects of language could be.

It wasn’t always like this; early work in computational linguistics took a different
(and more ambitious) perspective. Winograd (1980), to give one more or less ran-
dom example, explicitly treated language understanding and production as cognitive
processes, which interacted with other cognitive modules such as visual perception;
Hovy (1990), to give another, presented a computational model that generated different
texts from the same underlying facts, depending on pragmatic, interpersonal con-
straints. It is interesting to observe thatWinograd andHovy built on both computational
and psychological research, something which is increasingly rare in the field of compu-
tational linguistics, a point made convincingly by Reiter (2007). By now, it is generally
accepted that the problems that Winograd, Hovy, and others tried to tackle are very
complex, and that the current emphasis on more well-delimited problems is probably
a good thing. However, it is not difficult to come up with computational applications
for which a better understanding would be required of language as a process and the
effects language may have on a user (interactive virtual agents which try to persuade a
user to do something, for example). To learn more about how speakers and addressees
manage to accurately produce and comprehend complex and potentially ambiguous
sentences in real time, and how theymay use these sentences for a whole range of inten-
tions, we have to turn to psycholinguistics and social psychology, respectively. So let us
sample some of the recent findings in these fields, and see if and how they might benefit
computational linguistics. Interestingly, we will find many places where more attention
to what goes on in computational linguistics would benefit psychologists as well.

2. Language Use and Its Social Impact

Social psychologists study persons and the relations they have with others and
with groups. Various social psychologists have concentrated on language (although
perhaps not as many as you would expect given the importance of language for
social interactions). A number of different approaches can be discerned, one of which
concentrates on the psychological functions of function words (Chung and Pennebaker
2007). Function words are understood here to include pronouns, prepositions, articles,
conjunctions, and auxiliary verbs.

2.1 On the Psychological Functions of Pronouns

One reliable finding of this perspective is that first person singular pronouns are associ-
ated with negative affective states. For example, in one study it was found that currently
depressed students used I and me more often than students who were not currently
depressed, and of the latter group those who had known periods of depression used
them more frequently than those who had never had such an episode (Rude, Gortner,
and Pennebaker 2004). Another study found that suicidal poets used first person sin-
gular pronouns in their poems more frequently than non-suicidal poets (Stirman and
Pennebaker 2001). Of course, whether a speaker tends to use I or we more frequently
is also indicative of self- versus other-centeredness. An analysis of blogs following the
events of September 11 revealed that bloggers’ use of I and me dropped in the hours
following the attack, while simultaneously their use ofwe and us increased (Cohn,Mehl,
and Pennebaker 2004); this switch is interpreted by the authors as indicating that people

286



Krahmer Last Words

were focusing less on themselves during this period, but instead focusing more on their
friends and families. In a completely different study of adult speakers (both male and
female) who underwent testosterone therapy, it was found that as testosterone levels
dropped, so did their use of I pronouns, while simultaneously the use of non-I pronouns
increased (Pennebaker et al. 2004).

Pennebaker and colleagues report comparable effects of age, gender, status, and cul-
ture on personal pronoun use (Chung and Pennebaker 2007). Their corpus (or “archive”,
as they call it) contains over 400,000 text files, frommany different authors and collected
over many years. It is interesting to observe that Pennebaker was an early adapter of
computers for his analyses, simply because performing them manually was too time-
consuming. The general approach in these analyses is to determine beforehand what
the “interesting” words are and then simply to count them in the relevant texts, without
taking the linguistic context into account. This obviously creates errors: The relative
frequency of first-person pronouns may be indicative of depression, as we have just
seen, but a sentence such as I love life seems a somewhat implausible cue for a depressed
state of mind. Chung and Pennebaker (2007, page 345) themselves give the example of
mad, which is counted as an anger and negative emotion word, and they point out that
this is wrong for I’m mad about my lover. Clearly, standard methods from computational
linguistics could be used to address this problem, for instance by looking at words in
context and n-grams. Another problem which Chung and Pennebaker mention, and
which will be familiar to many computational linguists, is the problem of deciding
which are the interesting words to count. Here techniques such as feature construction
and selection could be of help. As I will argue in what follows, the observations of
Pennebaker and colleagues are potentially interesting for computational linguistics as
well, but let us first look at another relevant set of psychological findings.

2.2 On the Psychological Functions of Interpersonal Language

A different strand of research on language and social psychology focuses on inter-
personal verbs (a subset of what computational linguists more commonly refer to as
transitive verbs): verbs which express relations between people (Semin 2009). In their
model of interpersonal language (the Linguistic Categorization Model), Semin and
Fiedler (1988) make a distinction between different kinds of verbs and their position
on the concrete–abstract dimension. Descriptive action verbs (Romeo kisses Juliet) are
assumed to be the most concrete, since they refer to a single, observable event. This is
different for state verbs (Romeo loves Juliet), which describe psychological states instead
of single perceptual events, and are therefore more abstract. Most abstract, according
to Semin and Fiedler, are adjectives (Romeo is romantic), because they generalize over
specific events and objects and only refer to characteristics of the subject.

The thing to note is that the same event can, in principle, be referred to in all these
different forms; a speaker has the choice of using a more concrete or a more abstract
way to refer to an event (e.g., John can be described as, from more to less concrete,
hitting a person, hating a person, or being aggressive). Interestingly, the abstractness
level a speaker opts for tells us something about that speaker. This has been found,
for instance, in the communication of ingroup (think of people with the same cul-
tural identity or supporting the same soccer team) and outgroup (different identity,
different team) behavior. There is considerable evidence that speakers describe negative
ingroup and positive outgroup behavior in more concrete terms (e.g., using action
verbs), thereby indicating that the behavior is more incidental, whereas positive ingroup

287



Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 2

and negative outgroup behaviors are described in relatively abstract ways (e.g., more
frequently using adjectives), suggesting a more enduring characteristic (see, e.g., Maass
et al. 1989). Maass and colleagues showed this phenomenon, which they dubbed the
Linguistic Intergroup Bias, for different Contrada (neighborhoods) participating in the
famous Palio di Siena horse races, reporting about their own performance and that of
the other neighborhoods. Moreover, Wigboldus, Semin, and Spears (2000) have shown
that addressees do indeed pick up these implications, and Douglas and Sutton (2006)
reveal that speakers who describe the behavior of others in relatively abstract terms are
perceived to have biased attitudes and motives as opposed to speakers who describe
this behavior in more concrete ways.

It has been argued that concrete versus abstract language is not only relevant for,
for example, the communication of stereotypes, but also has more fundamental effects,
for instance influencing the way people perceive the world (Stapel and Semin 2007).
In a typical experiment, Stapel and Semin first subtly prime participants with either
abstract or concrete language. This can be done using scrambled sentences, where
participants are given four words (romantic is lamp Romeo) with the instruction to form
a grammatical sentence from three of them, or by giving participants a word-search
puzzle where the words to search for are the primes. After this, participants perform a
seemingly unrelated task, where their perceptual focus (either on the global picture or
on the details) is measured. Stapel and Semin show that processing abstract language
(adjectives) results in a more global perception, whereas processing concrete language
(descriptive action verbs) leads to more perceptual attention to details.

At this point, a computational linguist (and probably other linguists as well) might
start to wonder about the comparison between verbs and adjectives, and by the claim
that adjectives are abstract. What about adjectives like blonde, young, and thin? These
seem to be much more concrete than adjectives such as aggressive or honest. And what
about nouns? There a distinction between concrete (office chair) and abstract (hypothesis)
seems to exist as well. This raises the question whether it is the differences in inter-
personal language use or the more general distinction between concrete and abstract
languagewhich causes the observed effects on perception; a recent series of experiments
suggests it is the latter (Krahmer and Stapel 2009).

2.3 What Can Computational Linguists Learn?

The social psychological findings briefly described here could have an impact on com-
putational linguistics, with potential applications for both text understanding and gen-
eration. So far, it seems fair to say that most computational linguists have concentrated
so much on trying to understand text or on generating coherent texts that the subtle
effects that language may have on the reader were virtually ignored. Function words
were originally not the words computational linguists found most interesting. They
were considered too frequent; early Information Retrieval applications listed function
words on “stop lists”—lists of words that should be ignored during processing—and
many IR applications still do. The work of Pennebaker and colleagues indicates that
pronouns (as well as other function words) do carry potentially relevant information,
for instance about the mental state of the author of a document. Interestingly, for com-
putational applications such as opinion mining and sentiment analysis (Pang and Lee
2008) as well as author attribution and stylometry (Holmes 1998), function words have
been argued to be relevant as well, but it seems that research on the social psychology
of language has made little or no impact on this field.

288



Krahmer Last Words

Consider sentiment analysis, for instance, which is the automatic extraction of
“opinion-oriented” information (e.g., whether an author feels positive or negative about
a certain product) from text. This is a prime example of an emerging research area in
computational linguistics which moves beyond factual information exchange (although
the preferred approach to this problem very much fits with the paradigm sketched by
Halevy et al. [2009]: take a large set of data and apply machine learning to it). Pang
and Lee (2008) offer an extensive overview of research related to sentiment analysis,
but do not discuss any of the psychological studies mentioned herein (in fact, of the
332 papers they cite, only one or two could conceivably be interpreted as psychological
in the broadest interpretation). What is especially interesting is that their discussion
of why sentiment analysis is difficult echoes the discussion of Chung and Pennebaker
(2007) on the problems of counting words (by sheer coincidence they even discuss
essentially the same example: madden).

These findings may also have ramifications for the generation of documents. If you
develop an application which automatically produces texts from non-textual data, you
might want to avoid excessive use of the first-person pronoun, lest your readers think
your computer is feeling down. If you want your readers to skim over the details of
what is proposed in a generated text, use abstract language. In addition, you may want
to use action verbs when describing your own accomplishments, and adjectives to refer
to those of others (but do it in a subtle way, because people might notice).

3. Language Comprehension and Production

While the link between computational linguistics and social psychology has seldom
been explored, there has been somewhat more interaction with psycholinguistics. Per-
haps most of this interaction has involved natural language understanding. Various
early parsing algorithms were inspired by human sentence processing, which is hardly
surprising: human listeners are remarkably efficient in processing and adequately re-
sponding to potentially highly ambiguous sentences. Later, when large data sets of
parsed sentences became available, the focus in computational linguistics shifted to
developing statistical models of language processing. Interestingly, recent psycholin-
guistic sentence processing models are inspired in turn by statistical techniques from
computational linguistics (Chater and Manning 2006; Crocker in press; Jurafsky 2003;
Pado, Crocker, and Keller 2009).

3.1 On Producing Referring Expressions

The situation is somewhat different for natural language generation, although superfi-
cially the same kind of interaction can be observed here (albeit with a few years delay).
The seminal work by Dale and Reiter (1995) on the generation of referring expressions
was explicitly inspired by psycholinguistic work. Dale and Reiter concentrated on the
generation of distinguishing descriptions, such as the large black dog, which single out
one target object by ruling out the distractors (typically a set of other domestic animals
of different sizes and colors). Given that the number of distractors may be quite large
and given that each target can be referred to in multiple ways, one of the main issues
in this area is how to keep the search manageable. Current algorithms for referring
expression generation, building on the foundations laid by Dale and Reiter, are good
at quickly computing which set of properties uniquely characterizes a target among a

289



Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 2

set of distractors. Some of these algorithms are capable of generating distinguishing
descriptions that human judges find more helpful and better formulated than human-
produced distinguishing descriptions for the same targets (Gatt, Belz, and Kow 2009).

To some this might suggest that the problem is solved. This conclusion, however,
would be too hasty. Most of the algorithms use some very unrealistic assumptions
which limit their applicability. Interestingly, these assumptions can be traced back
directly to classic psycholinguistic work on the production of referring expressions
(Olson 1970). Clark and Bangerter (2004) criticize a number of the unstated assumptions
in Olson’s approach: Reference is treated as a one-step process (a speaker plans and
produces a complete description, and nothing else, in one go) and during that process
the speaker does not take the prior interaction with the addressee into account. By
merely substituting computer for speaker these comments are directly applicable to most
current generation algorithms as well.

The problem, unfortunately, is that recent psycholinguistic research suggests that
these assumptions are wrong. Often this research looks at how speakers produce re-
ferring expressions while interacting with an addressee, and one thing that is often
found is that speakers adapt to their conversational partners while producing refer-
ring expressions (Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs 1986; Brennan and Clark 1996; Metzing and
Brennan 2003). This kind of “entrainment” or “alignment” (Pickering and Garrod 2004)
may apply at the level of lexical choice; if a speaker refers to a couch using the word
sofa instead of the more common couch, the addressee is more likely to use sofa instead
of couch as well later on in the dialogue (Branigan et al. in press). But the speaker and
addressee may also form a general “conceptual pact” on how to refer to some object,
deciding together, for instance, to refer to a tangram figure as the tall ice skater.

Although adaptation itself is uncontroversial, psycholinguists argue about the
extent to which speakers are capable of taking the perspective of the addressee into
account (Kronmüller and Barr 2007; Brennan and Hanna 2009; Brown-Schmidt 2009),
with some researchers presenting evidence that speakers may have considerable
difficulty doing this (Horton and Keysar 1996; Keysar, Lin, and Barr 2003). In Wardlow
Lane et al. (2006) people are instructed to refer to simple targets (geometrical figures that
may be small or larger) in the context of three distractor objects, two of which are visible
to both speaker and addressee (shared) whereas the other is visible to the speaker only
(privileged). If speakers would be able to take the addressees’ perspective into account
when referring, the privileged distractor should not play a role in determining which
properties to include in the distinguishing description. However, Wardlow Lane and
colleagues found that speakers do regularly take the privileged distractor into account
(for instance adding a modifier small when referring to the target, even though all the
shared objects are small and only the privileged one is large). Interestingly, speakers
do this more often when explicitly told that they should not leak information about
the privileged object, which Wardlow Lane et al. interpret as an ironic processing
effect of the kind observed by Dostoevsky (“Try to pose for yourself this task: not to
think of a polar bear, and you will see that the cursed thing will come to mind every
minute”).

Another interesting psycholinguistic finding is that speakers often include more
information in their referring expressions than is strictly needed for identification (Arts
2004; Engelhardt, Bailey, and Ferreira 2006), for instance referring to a dog as the large
black curly haired dog in a situation where there is only one large black dog. Again,
that speakers are not always “Gricean” (“be as informative as required, but not more
informative”) is generally agreed upon, but there is an ongoing debate about why and
how speakers overspecify, some arguing that it simplifies the search of the speaker

290



Krahmer Last Words

(Engelhardt, Bailey, and Ferreira 2006) whereas others suggest that overspecified refer-
ences are particularly beneficial for the addressee (Paraboni, van Deemter, andMasthoff
2007).

3.2 What Can Computational Linguists Learn?

Why are these psycholinguistic findings about the way human speakers refer relevant
for generation algorithms? First of all, human-likeness is an important evaluation crite-
rion, so algorithms that are good at emulating human referring expressions are likely to
outperform algorithms that are not. Moreover, it is interesting to observe that generating
overspecified expressions is computationally cheaper than producing minimal ones
(Dale and Reiter 1995). In a similar vein, it can be argued that alignment and adaptation
may reduce the search space of the generation algorithm, because they limit the number
of possibilities that have to be considered.

It is worth emphasizing that psycholinguistic theories have little to say about how
speakers quickly decide which properties, from the large set of potential ones, to use in
a referring expression. In addition, whereas notions such as adaptation, alignment, and
overspecification are intuitively appealing, it has turned out to be remarkably difficult
to specify how these processes operate exactly. In fact, a common criticism is that they
would greatly benefit from “explicit computational modeling” (Brown-Schmidt and
Tanenhaus 2004). Of course, solving choice problems and computational modeling are
precisely what computational linguistics has to offer. So although generation algorithms
may benefit a lot from incorporating insights from psycholinguistics, they in turn have
the potential to further research in psycholinguistics as well.

4. Discussion

In this brief, highly selective, and somewhat biased overview of work on language in
several areas of psychology, we have seen that words may give valuable information
about the person who produces them (but how to select and count them is tricky), that
abstract or concrete language may tell you something about the opinions and attitudes
a speaker has and may even influence how you perceive things (but the linguistic intu-
itions about what is abstract, andwhat concrete, need somework), and that speakers are
remarkably efficient when producing referring expressions, in part because they adapt
to their addressee and do not necessarily try to be as brief as possible (but making these
intuitive notions precise is difficult). Psychological findings such as these are not merely
intriguing, but could be of real use for computational linguistic applications related to
document understanding or generation (and, conversely, techniques and insights from
computational linguistics could be helpful for psychologists as well). Of course, some
computational linguists do extensively rely on psychological findings for building their
applications (you know who you are), just as some psychologists use sophisticated
computational and statistical models rather than human participants for their studies
(this is especially true in psycholinguistics). But these are exceptions, and certainly do
not belong to mainstream computational linguistics or psychology. Which raises one
obvious question: Why isn’t there more interaction between these two communities?

There seem to be at least three reasons for this. First, and most obvious, many
researchers are not aware of what happens outside their own specialized field. The
articles in psychology are fairly accessible (usually no complex statistical models or
overformalized algorithms there), but many computational linguists may feel that it

291



Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 2

would be a better investment of their limited time to read some more of the 17,000
(and counting) journal, conference, and workshop papers they have not yet read in the
invaluable ACL Anthology. For psychologists presumably similar considerations apply,
with the additional complication that many of the anthology papers require a substan-
tial amount of technical prior knowledge. In addition, it might be that the different
publication cultures are a limiting factor here as well: for psychologists, journals are the
main publication outlet; for them most non-journal publications have a low status and
hence might be perceived as not worth exploring.

Another perhaps more interesting reason is that psychologists and computational
linguists have subtly different general objectives. Psychologists want to get a better
understanding of people; how their social context determines their language behavior,
how they produce and comprehend sentences, and so on. Their models are evaluated
in terms of whether there is statistical evidence for their predictions in actual human
behavior. Computational linguists evaluate their models (“algorithms”) on large col-
lections of human-produced data; one model is better than another if it accounts for
more of the data. Of course, a model can perform well when evaluated on human data,
but be completely unrealistic from a psychological point of view. If a computational
linguist develops a referring expression generation algorithm (or a machine translation
system or an automatic summarizer) which accounts for the data in a way which is
psychologically unrealistic, the work will generally not be of interest to psychologists.
Conversely, if psychological insights are difficult to formalize or require complex algo-
rithms or data structures, computational linguists are likely not to be enthusiastic about
applying them. Obviously, this hinders cross-pollination of ideas as well.

Third, and somewhat related to the previous point, it sometimes seems that compu-
tational linguists see trees where psychologists see a forest. Psychologists appear to be
most interested in showing a general effect (and are particularly appreciative of clever
and elegant experimental designs which reveal these effects); if merely counting words
already gives you a statistically reliable effect, thenwhy bother with amore complicated
way of counting n-grams and worrying about back-off smoothing to deal with data
sparseness? Doing so would conceivably give you a better estimate of the significance
and size of your effect, but would probably not change your story in any fundamental
way. Computational linguists, by contrast, evaluate their models on (often shared) data-
sets (and tend to be more impressed by technical prowess—e.g., new statistical machine
learning models—or by smart ways of automatically collecting large quantities of data);
each data point that is processed incorrectly by their model offers a potential advantage
for someone else’s model.

In view of observations such as these, it is perhaps not surprising that compu-
tational linguists and psychologists have remained largely unaware of each other’s
work so far. Predicting the future is a tricky thing, but it seems not unlikely that most
computational linguists and psychologists will continue going their own way in the
future. Nevertheless, I hope to have shown here that both communities could benefit
from the occasional foray into the others’ territory. For psychologists, the tools and tech-
niques developed by computational linguists could further their research, by helping to
make their models and theories more explicit and hence easier to test and compare.
For computational linguists, insights from both the social psychology of language and
from psycholinguists could contribute to a range of applications, from opinion mining
to text understanding and generation. Obviously, this contribution could be on the
level of “words”, but a more substantial contribution is conceivable as well. As we
have seen, psychologists are particularly strong in explanatory theories (on affect, on
interaction, etc.) and perhaps taking these as starting points for our applications (e.g.,

292



Krahmer Last Words

on affective and interactive generation) could make them theoretically more interesting
and empirically more adequate.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Robert Dale for inviting me to
write a Last Words piece on this topic and
for his useful comments on an earlier
version. This piece grew out of discussions I
had over the years with both computational
linguists and psychologists, including
Martijn Balsters, Kees van Deemter, Albert
Gatt, Roger van Gompel, Erwin Marsi,
Diederik Stapel, Marc Swerts, Mariët
Theune, and Ad Vingerhoets. Needless
to say, I alone am responsible for the
simplifications and opinions in this work.
I received financial support from the
Netherlands Organization for Scientific
Research (NWO), via the Vici project
“Bridging the gap between computational
linguistics and psycholinguistics: The case
of referring expressions” (277-70-007),
which is gratefully acknowledged.

References
Arts, Anja. 2004. Overspecification in
Instructive Texts. Unpublished Ph.D.
thesis, Tilburg University.

Branigan, Holly P., Martin J. Pickering, Jamie
Pearson, and Janet F. McLean. (in press).
Linguistic alignment between humans
and computers. Journal of Pragmatics.

Brennan, Susan and Herbert H. Clark. 1996.
Conceptual pacts and lexical choice in
conversation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 22(6):1482–1493.

Brennan, Susan E. and Joy E. Hanna. 2009.
Partner-specific adaptation in dialog.
Topics in Cognitive Science, 1(2):274–291.

Brown-Schmidt, S. and M. Tanenhaus. 2004.
Priming and alignment: Mechanism or
consequence? commentary on Pickering
and Garrod 2004. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 27:193–194.

Brown-Schmidt, Sarah. 2009. Partner-specific
interpretation of maintained referential
precedents during interactive dialog.
Journal of Memory and Language,
61:171–190.

Chater, Nick and Christopher D. Manning.
2006. Probabilistic models of language
processing and acquisition. Trends in
Cognitive Science, 10:335–344.

Chung, C. K. and James W. Pennebaker. 2007.
The psychological function of function
words. In K. Fiedler, editor, Social
Communication: Frontiers of Social

Psychology. Psychology Press, New York,
pages 343–359.

Clark, Herbert H. 1996. Using Language.
Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.

Clark, Herbert H. and Adrian Bangerter.
2004. Changing ideas about reference. In
Ira A. Noveck and Dan Sperber, editors,
Experimental Pragmatics. Palgrave
Macmillan, Basingstoke, pages 25–49.

Clark, Herbert H. and Deanna Wilkes-Gibbs.
1986. Referring as a collaborative process.
Cognition, 22:1–39.

Cohn, M., M. Mehl, and James W.
Pennebaker. 2004. Linguistic markers
of psychological change surrounding
September 11, 2001. Psychological
Science, 15:687–693.

Crocker, Matthew W. (in press).
Computational psycholinguistics. In Alex
Clark, Chris Fox, and Shalom Lappin,
editors, Computational Linguistics and
Natural Language Processing Handbook.
Wiley Blackwell, London, UK.

Dale, Robert and Ehud Reiter. 1995.
Computational interpretations of the
Gricean maxims in the generation of
referring expressions. Cognitive Science,
18:233–263.

Douglas, Karen and Robbie Sutton.
2006. When what you say about others
says something about you: Language
abstraction and inferences about
describers’ attitudes and goals. Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 42:
500–508.

Engelhardt, Paul E., Karl G. D. Bailey, and
Fernanda Ferreira. 2006. Do speakers and
listeners observe the Gricean Maxim of
Quantity? Journal of Memory and Language,
54:554–573.

Gatt, Albert, Anja Belz, and Eric Kow. 2009.
The tuna-reg challenge 2009: Overview
and evaluation results. In Proceedings
of the 12th European Workshop on
Natural Language Generation (ENLG),
pages 174–182, Athens.

Halevy, Alon, Peter Norvig, and Fernando
Pereira. 2009. The unreasonable
effectiveness of data. IEEE Intelligent
Systems, 24:8–12.

Holmes, David I. 1998. The evolution of
stylometry in humanities scholarship.
Literary and Linguistic Computing,
13:111–117.

293



Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 2

Horton, W. S. and B. Keysar. 1996. When
do speakers take into account common
ground? Cognition, 59:91–117.

Hovy, Eduard H. 1990. Pragmatics and
natural language generation. Artificial
Intelligence, 43:153–197.

Jurafsky, Dan. 2003. Probabilistic
modeling in psycholinguistics: Linguistic
comprehension and production. In Rens
Bod, Jennifer Hay, and Stefanie Jannedy,
editors, Probabilistic Linguistics. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, pages 39–96.

Keysar, B., S. Lin, and D. J. Barr. 2003.
Limits on theory of mind use in adults.
Cognition, 89:25–41.

Krahmer, Emiel and Diederik Stapel. 2009.
Abstract language, global perception:
How language shapes what we see. In
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society, pages 286–291,
Amsterdam.

Kronmüller, E. and Dale Barr. 2007.
Perspective-free pragmatics: Broken
precedents and the recovery-from-
preemption hypothesis. Journal of
Memory and Language, 56:436–455.

Maass, A., D. Salvi, L. Arcuri, and G. Semin.
1989. Language use in intergroup contexts:
The linguistic intergroup bias. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology,
57:981–993.

Metzing, Charles A. and Susan E. Brennan.
2003. When conceptual pacts are broken:
Partner effects on the comprehension of
referring expressions. Journal of Memory
and Language, 49:201–213.

Olson, David R. 1970. Language and
thought: Aspects of a cognitive theory
of semantics. Psychological Review,
77:257–273.

Pado, Ulrike, Matthew W. Crocker, and
Frank Keller. 2009. A probabilistic model
of semantic plausibility in sentence
processing. Cognitive Science, 33:794–838.

Pang, B. and L. Lee. 2008. Opinion mining
and sentiment analysis. Foundations and
Trends in Information Retrieval, 2:1–135.

Paraboni, Ivandré, Kees van Deemter,
and Judith Masthoff. 2007. Generating
referring expressions: Making referents

easy to identity. Computational Linguistics,
33:229–254.

Pennebaker, James W., C. Groom, D. Loew,
and J. Dabbs. 2004. Testosterone as a social
inhibitor: Two case studies of the effect of
testosterone treatment on language. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 113:172–175.

Pickering, Martin and Simon Garrod. 2004.
Towards a mechanistic psychology of
dialogue. Behavioural and Brain Sciences,
27:169–226.

Reiter, Ehud. 2007. The shrinking horizons of
computational linguistics. Computational
Linguistics, 33:283–287.

Rude, S., E. Gortner, and James W.
Pennebaker. 2004. Language use of
depressed and depression-vulnerable
college students. Cognition and Emotion,
18:1121–1133.

Semin, Gün. 2009. Language and social
cognition. In F. Strack and J. Förster,
editors, Social Cognition: The Basis of Human
Interaction. Psychology Press, London,
pages 269–290.

Semin, Gün and Klaus Fiedler. 1988. The
cognitive functions of linguistic categories
in describing persons: Social cognition and
language. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 34:558–568.

Stapel, Diederik and Gün Semin. 2007.
The magic spell of language. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 93:23–33.

Stirman, Shannon and James W. Pennebaker.
2001. Word use in the poetry of suicidal
and nonsuicidal poets. Psychosomatic
Medicine, 63:517–522.

Wardlow Lane, Liane, Michelle Groisman,
and Victor S. Ferreira. 2006. Don’t talk
about pink elephants! : Speakers’ control
over leaking private information during
language production. Psychological Science,
17:273–277.

Wigboldus, Daniël, Gün Semin, and Russell
Spears. 2000. How do we communicate
stereotypes? linguistic bases and
inferential consequences. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 78:5–18.

Winograd, Terry. 1980. What does it mean to
understand language? Cognitive Science,
4:209–241.

294


