



































Empirical Methods for the Study of Denotation in Nominalizations in Spanish


Empirical Methods for the Study of
Denotation in Nominalizations
in Spanish

Aina Peris∗

University of Barcelona

Mariona Taulé∗

University of Barcelona

Horacio Rodrı́guez∗∗

Technical University of Catalonia

This article deals with deverbal nominalizations in Spanish; concretely, we focus on the deno-
tative distinction between event and result nominalizations. The goals of this work is twofold:
first, to detect the most relevant features for this denotative distinction; and, second, to build an
automatic classification system of deverbal nominalizations according to their denotation. We
have based our study on theoretical hypotheses dealing with this semantic distinction and
we have analyzed them empirically by means of Machine Learning techniques which are the
basis of the ADN-Classifier. This is the first tool that aims to automatically classify deverbal
nominalizations in event, result, or underspecified denotation types in Spanish. The ADN-
Classifier has helped us to quantitatively evaluate the validity of our claims regarding deverbal
nominalizations. We set up a series of experiments in order to test the ADN-Classifier with differ-
ent models and in different realistic scenarios depending on the knowledge resources and natural
language processors available. The ADN-Classifier achieved good results (87.20% accuracy).

1. Introduction

The last few years have seen an increasing amount of work in the semantic treatment
of unrestricted text, such as Minimal Recursive Semantics in Lingo/LKB (Copestake
2007), Frame Semantics in Shalmaneser (Erk and Padó 2006), Discourse Representation
Structures in Boxer (Bos 2008), and the automatic learning of Semantic Grammars
(Mooney 2007), but we are still a long way from representing the full meaning of texts
when not restricted to narrow domains. Many Natural Language Processing (NLP)
applications such as Question Answering, Information Extraction, Machine Reading
and high-quality Machine Translation or Summarization systems, and many NLP
intermediate level tasks such as Textual Entailment, Paraphrase Detection, or Word

∗ CLiC, Centre de Llenguatge i Computació/University of Barcelona, Gran Via de les Corts Catalanes 585,
08007 Barcelona. E-mail: aina.peris@ub.edu; mtaule@ub.edu.

∗∗ TALP Research Center - Technical University of Catalonia, Jordi Girona Salgado 1-3, 08034 Barcelona.
E-mail: horacio@lsi.upc.edu.

Submission received: 22 July 2011; revised submission received: 27 December 2011; accepted: 1 February 2012.

© 2012 Association for Computational Linguistics



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 4

Sense Disambiguation (WSD), have almost reached their practical upper bounds and
it is difficult to move forward without using a serious semantic representation of the
text under consideration. Given the limitations and the difficulties in obtaining an
in-depth semantic representation of texts as a whole, most efforts have been focused
on partial semantic representation using less expressive semantic formalisms, such as
those that come under the umbrella of Description Logic variants, or on discarding the
whole semantic interpretation task in order to focus on smaller (and easier) subtasks.
This is the case, for instance, in Semantic Role Labeling (SRL) systems, which indicate
the semantic relations that hold between a predicate and its associated participants
and properties, the relations of which are drawn from a pre-specified list of possible
semantic roles for that predicate or class of predicates. See Márquez et al. (2008) and
Palmer, Gildea, and Xue (2010) for recent surveys. Closely related to SRL is the task
of learning Selectional Restrictions for a predicate, for example, the kind of semantic
class each argument of the predicate must belong to (Mechura 2008). In this case
a predefined set of semantic classes must also be used to perform the classification
task. WordNet (Fellbaum 1998), VerbNet (Kipper et al. 2006), PropBank (Palmer,
Kingsbury, and Gildea 2005), FrameNet (Ruppenhofer et al. 2006), and OntoNotes
(Hovy et al. 2006) are resources frequently used for this purpose. Most of these efforts
are verb-centered and reduce role labeling to the roles played by entities around a
predicate instantiated as a verb. At a finer level, there is the task of WSD, for example,
assigning the most appropriate sense to each lexical unit of the text from a predefined
lexical-semantic resource. Once again a catalogue of classes has to be used as a range
for the assignment.1 In this case as well, despite its excessive finer granularity, WordNet
is the most widely used reference. See Navigli (2009) for a recent survey.

In this line of research, there has recently been a growing interest in going beyond
verb-centered hypotheses to tackle the computational treatment of deverbal nominal-
izations (nouns derived from verbs), in order to move forward to the full compre-
hension of texts. Deverbal nominalizations are lexical units that contain rich semantic
information equivalent to a clausal structure. Many recent studies have focused on
the detection of semantic relations between pairs of nominals that belong to different
Nominal Phrases (NPs), such as Task 4 of SemEval 2007 (Girju et al. 2009) and Task 8
of SemEval 2010 (Hendrickx et al. 2010), or between nominals taking part in noun
compound constructions. In the latter case, they take into account a predefined set
of semantic relations (Girju et al. 2005) or use verb paraphrases with prepositions
(Task 9 of SemEval 2010 [Butnariu et al. 2010a, 2010b]). Although these works include
nominalizations, they are not strictly focused on them but cover all type of nouns.
Actually, most of the work studying only deverbal nominalizations is focused on their
argument structure: Some authors focus on the detection of arguments within the NP
headed by the nominalization (Hull and Gomez 2000; Lapata 2002; Gurevich et al. 2006;
Padó, Pennacchiotti, and Sporleder 2008; Surdeanu et al. 2008; Gurevich and Waterman
2009), whereas others center their attention on detecting the implicit arguments of the
nominalizations which are outside the NP (Gerber and Chai 2010; Ruppenhofer et al.
2010). Among the former group, there are different approaches to the problem: Lapata
(2002) and Gurevich and Waterman (2009) use probabilistic models, Hull and Gomez
(2000) and Gurevich et al. (2006) develop heuristic rules, Padó, Pennacchiotti, and

1 Some approaches simply discriminate between different senses for a case without assigning it to a
predefined specific class, however. Clustering techniques rather than classification are used in these
approaches.

828



Peris, Taulé, and Rodrı́guez Empirical Methods for the Study of Denotation in Nominalizations

Sporleder (2008) work with an unsupervised SRL system, and in Surdeanu et al. (2008)
the work presented uses supervised SRL systems. The kind of argument annotated is
also different in these works: Although only two, more syntactic labels (subj [subject]
and obj [object]), are used to annotate the arguments in Lapata (2002), Gurevich et al.
(2006), and Gurevich and Waterman (2009), Padó, Pennacchiotti, and Sporleder (2008)
use FrameNet labels and Surdeanu et al. (2008) use NomBank (Meyers, Reeves, and
Macleod 2004)2 labels. The interpretation of nominalizations is crucial because they are
common in texts and an important amount of information is representedwithin them. In
the AnCora-ES corpus (Taulé, Martı́, and Recasens 2008), for instance, the semantic in-
formation is mostly coded in verbs (56,590 verbal occurrences) but a significant number
of deverbal nominalizations (23,431 occurrences) also encode rich semantic information.

Most of the work on this topic sets out from the denotative distinction between
nominalizations referring to an event, those that express an action or a process, and
nominalizations referring to a result, those expressing the outcome of an action or
process. From a theoretical point of view, it is stated that this denotative distinction
may have repercussions on the argument-taking capability of deverbal nominaliza-
tions. Despite being aware of this distinction, computational approaches focus on event
nominalizations, not taking into account the result ones or, more frequently, without
characterizing the difference. For instance, SRL systems are mostly applied to event
nominalizations (Pradhan et al. 2004; Erk and Padó 2006; Liu and Ng 2007). Result
nominalizations are more frequent than the event types, however, at least in Spanish
(1,845 event occurrences in contrast to 20,037 result occurrences in AnCora-ES). In the
present work, we hypothesize that result nominalizations, like event nominalizations,
can take arguments; therefore, discarding result nominalizations would imply a loss of
semantic information, equally relevant to text representation. In this article, we focus
our interest on this denotative distinction. Concretely, we aim to determine the relevant
linguistic information required to classify deverbal nominalizations as event or result
types in Spanish. In order to achieve this goal, we have built an automatic classifier of
deverbal nominalizations—the ADN-Classifier—for Spanish, aimed at identifying the
semantic denotation of these nominal predicates (Peris et al. 2010). The ADN-Classifier
is a tool that takes into account different levels of linguistic information depending on
its availability, such as senses, lemmas, or syntactic and semantic information coded
in the verbal and nominal lexicons (AnCora-Verb [Aparicio, Taulé, and Martı́ 2008]
and AnCora-Nom [Peris and Taulé 2011]) or in the AnCora-ES corpus.

Therefore, this article contributes to the semantic analysis of texts focusing on
Spanish deverbal nominalizations, although the proposal presented could be extended
to other Romance languages. We base our study on theoretical hypotheses that we
analyze empirically, and as a result we have developed three new resources: 1) the
ADN-Classifier, the first tool that allows for the automatic classification of deverbal
nouns as event or result nominalizations; 2) the AnCora-ES corpus enriched with
the annotation of deverbal nominalizations according to their semantic denotation,
the only Spanish corpus that incorporates this information; and 3) AnCora-Nom, a
lexicon of deverbal nominalizations containing information about denotation types
and argument structure.

The ADN-Classifier can be used independently in NLP tasks, such as Corefer-
ence Resolution and Paraphrase Detection (Recasens and Vila 2010). For Coreference

2 In the work of Hull and Gomez (2000) it is not stated explicitly which set of arguments are used, although
from their examples we infer that they are semantic roles such as those of VerbNet.

829



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 4

Resolution tasks it would be useful to have the nominalizations classified into denota-
tions in order to detect coreference types. For instance, if a nominalization has a verbal
antecedent (anchor) and its denotation is of the event type, an identity coreference rela-
tion could be established between them (Example (1)). If the nominalization is of the
result type, however, the relation established between verb and noun would be a bridg-
ing coreference relation (Example (2)) (Clark 1975; Recasens, Martı́, and Taulé 2007).

(1) En Francia los precios cayeron un 0,1% en septiembre. La caı́da<event> ha
provocado que la inflación quedara en el 2,2%.
‘In France prices fell by 0.1 % in September. The fall<event> caused
inflation to remain at 2.2 %.’

(2) La imprenta se inventó en 1440. El invento<result>permitió difundir las
ideas y conocimientos con eficacia.
‘The printing press was invented in 1440. This invention<result> allowed
for ideas and knowledge to be spread efficiently.’

As for Paraphrase Detection (Androutsopoulos and Malakasiotis 2010; Madnani and
Dorr 2010), event nouns (but not result nouns) are paraphrases for full sentences, so
this type of information can also be useful for this task. For instance, the sentence in
Example (3) and the NP headed by an event nominalization in Example (4) are typically
considered to be paraphrases.

(3) Se ha ampliado el capital de la empresa en un 20%.
‘The company’s capital has been increased by 20%.’

(4) La ampliación<event>del capital de la empresa en un 20%.
‘The increase<event> of company’s capital by 20%.’

(5) Se han vendido muchas traducciones<result>de su último libro.
‘Many translations<result> of his latest book have been sold.’

(6) Se han vendido muchos libros traducidos de su último tı́tulo.
‘Many translated editions of his latest book have been sold.’

If the nominalization, however, has a result interpretation as in Example (5)—
traducciones, ‘translations’ refers to the concrete object, that is, the book translated—
it is impossible to have a paraphrase with a clausal structure. This is due to the fact
that result nominalizations can denote an object whereas verbs cannot denote objects.
In fact, result nominalizations can only be paraphrases of other NPs denoting objects
(Example (6)).

The AnCora-ES corpus enriched with denotative information could be used as
training and test data for WSD systems. The work presented in this article also provides
an additional insight into the linguistic question underlying it: the characterization of
deverbal nominalizations according to their denotation and the identification of the
most useful criteria for distinguishing between these denotation types.

The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the
theoretical approaches to the semantic denotation with which we deal here. Section 3
describes the methodology used in this work. Section 4 presents the empirical linguistic
study in which the initial model is established; in Section 5 the different knowledge
resources used are presented, paying special attention to the nominal lexicon, AnCora-
Nom. In Section 6, the ADN-Classifier is presented and in Section 7 the different

830



Peris, Taulé, and Rodrı́guez Empirical Methods for the Study of Denotation in Nominalizations

experiments conducted are described and their results are reported. Section 8 reviews
related work and, finally, our conclusions are drawn in Section 9.

2. Theoretical Background

In the linguistics literature related to nominalizations, one of the most studied and
controversial topics is the denotative distinction between event and result nominaliza-
tions. By event nominalization we mean those nouns that denote an action or process
in the same way that a verb does. In other words, as their verbal counterparts, event
nominalizations have the aspectual property of dynamicity (Example (7)). In contrast, a
result nominalization refers to the state (Example (9)) or the concrete or abstract object
resulting from the event (Example (8)). Both types of result nominalizations (states and
objects) lack the aspectual property of dynamicity.

(7) El proyecto americano consiste en la adaptación<event>de la novela
Paper Boy.
‘The American project is the adaptation< event> of the Paper Boy novel.’

(8) Esta adaptación<result> cinematográfica ha recibido buenas crı́ticas.
‘This film adaptation<result> has received good reviews.’

(9) Reforzó la tendencia<result> al alza del Euro de los últimos dı́as.
‘The upward trend<result> of the euro has been reinforced in recent days.’

In Example (7), the noun adaptación (‘adaptation’) denotes an event because it expresses
an action in the same way that a verb does (it is equivalent to El proyecto americano con-
siste en adaptar la novela Paper Boy, ‘The American project consists of adapting the Paper
Boy novel’). The event interpretation is characterized as dynamic because it implies a
change from ‘not being adapted’ to ‘being adapted.’ In contrast, in Example (8) the same
nominalization is understood as a result because it denotes a specific object that is the
outcome of the action of adapting a creative work into a film. In Example (9), the result
interpretation is due to the fact that the verb base of tendencia, ‘trend,’ denotes a state,
so the noun inherits the property of stativity (non-dynamicity) and does not imply any
change.

In this sense, our notions of event and result are equivalent to the complex-event
and result nominalizations, respectively, in the terminology of Grimshaw (1990)3 or the
terms process and result used in Pustejovsky (1995)4 and Alexiadou (2001). Although
the event vs. result distinction we make is widespread, it is true that event and result
nominalizations can also be represented in a more fine-grained way. For instance,
Eberle, Faasz, and Heid (2009) distinguish between events (messung, ‘measurement’),
states (teilung, ‘division’), and objects (lieferung, ‘furnished material’) in German
nominalizations, and Balvet, Barque, and Marı́n (2010) propose a typology of French
nominalizations that contemplates four aspectual types: states (admiration, ‘admiration’),
durative events (opération, ‘operation’), punctual events (explosion, ‘explosion’), and objects
(bâtiment, ‘building’). For English, Levi (1978) identifies four types of nominalizations:
actions (parental refusal), which are equivalent to the event notion; agents ( financial

3 She distinguishes a third denotative type, simple event nouns like trip in That trip took two weeks, but we
discard them because, although expressing an event, they are not derived from verbs; in this research
we focus on deverbal nominalizations.

4 This author characterizes nominalizations as dot-objects that include both process and resultmeanings.

831



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 4

analyst), which denote the agent of an action and are characterized by using a different
set of suffixes; products (human error), which denote the result of an action; and patients
(student’s inventions), which denote the patient object of the action. Also for English,
Nunes (1993) defines five types of nominalizations: process nouns, that name the action
or process denoted by the base verb (The documents’ destruction by the North); result
nouns, that denote a new creation resulting from the base verb (The invention was put on
display); accumulated-action nouns, that name the sum total of a verb activity (The attack
was unexpected); experiential-state nouns, nominalized stative verbs or nominalizations of
a state brought about by a particular verb (Sam’s interest in maths); and experiential-state
results, the result counterpart of the previous class (Sam has many interests).

The authors working on this topic mainly differ on two issues. On the one
hand, they do not agree on how to consider (and therefore, how to represent) these
two denotations: as two senses of the same lexical unit (Pustejovsky 1995; Badia
2002; Alonso 2004) or as two different lexical units (Grimshaw 1990; Picallo 1999;
Alexiadou 2001). Regarding this denotative distinction, several linguistic criteria have
been proposed in order to identify each of these denotations, mostly for English,
although there are some proposals for Spanish (Picallo 1999), French, Greek, Russian,
and Polish (Alexiadou 2001) (see Table 2 in Section 4.1). On the other hand, authors
differ on the argument-taking capacity of deverbal nominalizations: Some linguists
maintain that only event deverbal nominalizations can take arguments (Zubizarreta
1987; Grimshaw 1990), whereas others consider that both event and result nominaliza-
tions can take arguments (Pustejovsky 1995; Picallo 1999; Alexiadou 2001).

Authors who conceptualize event and result nominalizations as different lexical
units justify this in different ways. Grimshaw (1990) considers that only complex-event
nominals legitimate an argument structure, and that constitutes the main difference
with respect to result nominalizations which, according to her, lack argument structure.
In Alexiadou (2001) and Picallo (1999), the idea that event and result nominalizations
are different lexical units is justified by the different functional projection of these two
types of nominalization and by word-formation at different levels of the language,5

respectively. In contrast to Grimshaw, however, they state that both types of nominal-
izations can select arguments. In the words of Alexiadou (2001, page 69): “Given that
there is no lexical difference between verbs and process nouns, and between result and
process nouns, apart from the functional domain, all can take arguments.” Picallo also
believes that complements of result nominalizations are arguments when argumental
relationships can be established between them and the nominal head.

In contrast, those who consider both denotations as senses of the same lexical unit
maintain that nominalizations are underspecified lexical units (Pustejovsky 1995), units
in which a disjunction of meaning is present (Alonso 2004), or simply lexical units with
different senses (Badia 2002). Specifically, Pustejovsky accounts for the event-result ambi-
guity in nominalizations bymeans of an underspecified lexical representation called dot-
object, arguing that event-result nominalizations are cases of complementary polysemy:
“both senses of a logically polysemous noun seem relevant for the interpretation of the
noun in the context, but one sense seems ‘focused’ for purposes of a particular context”
(Pustejovsky 1995, page 31). In relation to argument-taking capacity, both types of
nominalizations are argumental because the dot-object representation has an argument
structure in which the nominal arguments are specified.

5 In Picallo (1999) it is stated that event nominalizations are created in the syntax whereas result
nominalizations are created in the lexicon; therefore they have different derivation processes.

832



Peris, Taulé, and Rodrı́guez Empirical Methods for the Study of Denotation in Nominalizations

Alonso (2004) argues that these nominalizations present a disjunction of meaning
because they can update an event and a result reading in the same sentence without the
understanding of the sentence being affected. For instance, declaración (‘declaration’) in
Example (10)6 can be interpreted as an event and as a result at the same time: Only event
nominalizations can be said to have an initial moment and only result nominalizations
can be said to have five pages. These two senses both originate in the same lexical unit,
which includes both, and the context provides both meanings.

(10) La declaración<event/result> que el juez tomó al testigo, que comenzó a
las once, ocupa cinco folios.
‘The statement<event/result> that the judge took from the witness, which
began at eleven, takes up five pages.’

Regarding argument-taking capacity, Alonso maintains that all nominalizations taking
part in a support-verb construction can select arguments. So, if a result nominalization
is part of a support-verb construction, it will also have argument structure. Following
these authors, we also consider that result nominalizations can take arguments.

Within a computational framework, there are different models that represent nom-
inalizations; not all of them take into account the event and result distinction, however.
For instance, in NomBank (Meyers, Reeves, and Macleod 2004) this distinction is com-
pletely ignored and the authors focus on argument structure. In contrast, Spencer and
Zaretskaya (1999) label each nominal sense with one of the Grimshaw semantic cate-
gories (i.e., complex event, simple event, and result). Their database contains information
about 7,000 Russian verbs and their 5,000 corresponding nominalizations, distinguish-
ing between the verbal entries that nominalize the whole event while preserving the
verbal argument structure, and those that denote a concrete or abstract result of the
verb. The Nomage project (Balvet, Barque, and Marı́n 2010) annotates French deverbal
nominalizations in the French TreeBank (Abeillé, Clément, and Kinyon 2000) with one
of the four classes proposed in their work (i.e., states, durative events, punctual events, and
objects). In the middle ground between these two positions, we find the representation
models proposed in WordNet (Fellbaum 1998), FrameNet (Baker, Fillmore, and Lowe
1998; Ruppenhofer et al. 2006), and Ontonotes (Hovy et al. 2006). WordNet, possibly
due to its extremely fine granularity, usually includes among the senses corresponding
to deverbal nouns one paraphrased as “the acting of verb x” (our event nominalization)
and another paraphrased to something similar to “the thing X-verb+ed” (our result
nominalization). FrameNet distinguishes between deverbal nominalizations defined
as the action or process of X verb and nominalizations defined as entities. Concerning
nouns, Ontonotes is interested in the disambiguation of noun senses in order to create
an ontology. Within deverbal nouns the authors distinguish between nominalization
senses that truly inherit the verb meaning and deverbal noun senses whose denotation
is not directly related to the verb meaning.7 That is, they distinguish between two
different types of deverbal nouns but this distinction is not akin to the event-result one.
The distinctions established in WordNet and FrameNet are more similar to the one
proposed in OntoNotes.

To sum up, the event vs. result distinction in deverbal nominalizations has received
much attention in linguistics literature. It seems to be less relevant in the computational

6 This example is taken from Alonso (2004).
7 For instance, building in The building was made mostly of concrete and glass.

833



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 4

framework, in contrast, although some computational models do represent a semantic
distinction that is similar to the one we are analyzing (see Section 8).

3. Methodology

The aim of the current work is twofold: first, to detect the most relevant features for the
denotative distinction between event and result nominalizations; and, second, to build

Figure 1
Scheme of the methodology followed.

834



Peris, Taulé, and Rodrı́guez Empirical Methods for the Study of Denotation in Nominalizations

an automatic classification system for deverbal nominalizations according to their de-
notation. In Figure 1 the overall methodology for carrying out this work is schematized.

In order to determine the most relevant features, the first step was to carry out a
linguistic study of deverbal nominalizations (see Section 4). This study consisted of the
application of the linguistic criteria stated in the literature to a reduced set of nominal-
izations corresponding to the occurrences extracted from a 100,000 word (henceforth
100kw) subset of the AnCora-ES corpus. As an outcome, we manually obtained (see
step 1 in Figure 1) a lexicon for this deverbal nominalization set, AnCora-Nom-R1 (Peris,
Taulé, and Rodrı́guez 2009), which allowed us to annotate the corresponding deverbal
occurrences in the corpus subset. The nominalization classifying model (see step 2 in
Figure 1) underlying these two initial resources was tested by empirical methods. This
first model of classification is based on sense distinctions—that is, the extraction of
features was performed at sense level and the examples for learning (both positive and
negative) corresponded to different senses in the lexicon; thus, we will refer to it as the
sense-based model. We set up a series of experiments based on Machine Learning (ML)
techniques in order to evaluate the consistency of the data annotated in AnCora-Nom-
R1, to analyze the relevance of the attributes used in the lexical-semantic representation
and to infer new useful features to distinguish between event and result nominalizations.
As well as experimenting with AnCora-Nom-R1 simple features, we experimented with
the binarization8 and grouping9 of several of them to address sparseness problems.
Furthermore, with these experiments the foundations of the automatic classification
system, the ADN-Classifier-R1, were laid (see step 3 in Figure 1). See Section 6 for a
description of the ADN-Classifier.

Once the consistency of the annotated data was corroborated and the most relevant
features were established, we focused on the building of the ADN-Classifier, the second
goal of the research presented in this article. In order to develop the final version of
the ADN-Classifier (R3) we increased the corpus data used for learning. Therefore, we
needed to annotate the denotation types in the whole AnCora-ES. Because this involves
an increase in the number of nominalization occurrences to annotate (23,431 occurrences
in contrast to 3,077), we carried out this annotation automatically. To do so, wemodified
the (sense-based) model of classification underlying the ADN-Classifier-R1 (see step 2
in Figure 1) creating a new model able to carry out the more realistic task of classifying
the occurrences in the whole AnCora-ES corpus.

This new model (see step 5 in Figure 1) uses the following as knowledge resources:
1) the AnCora-Verb lexicon to obtain the features from the verbs related to nominaliza-
tions; 2) the complete AnCora-ES corpus (500kw); and 3) AnCora-Nom-R2, an extended
lexicon of nominalizations without denotation types obtained automatically (see step 4
in Figure 1). This lexicon contains a total of 1,655 lexical entries, corresponding to the
1,655 nominalization types in the whole AnCora-ES. Because we annotate the occur-
rences in the AnCora-ES corpus, however, we reduce our dependence on the lexical
source AnCora-Nom-R2 (see Section 5.3), removing the sense-specific information from
it and taking into account only the information shared by all the senses of one lemma,
while maintaining the features extracted from the corpus. In this sense, we adapted the
sense-based model developed in ADN-Classifier-R1 (see step 2 in Figure 1) to obtain
a new classification model that is based on lemmas (and not senses) (see step 5 in

8 Binarizing a k-value categorial feature means transforming it into k binary features.
9 Combining several simple features into a complex feature using a combination (for instance,
a logical OR).

835



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 4

Figure 1). This new model was used for the automatic annotation of the AnCora-ES
corpus with denotation information (see step 7 in Figure 1). Afterwards, in order to
evaluate the performance of the developed model, the corpus annotation was manually
validated (Peris, Taulé, and Rodrı́guez 2010) (see step 8 in Figure 1). Thismanual process
also guarantees the quality of the corpus annotation, leading to the final version of the
AnCora-Nom lexicon (R3) containing denotation type information.

At that moment, we were able to build the final version of the ADN-Classifier (R3)
(see step 10 in Figure 1). In order to do so, we set up a series of experiments leading to
the development of new sense- and lemma-based models using the resources already
built (AnCora-ES with denotation information and AnCora-Nom-R3), that is, models
learned with more instances. We also replicated the experiments at sense and lemma
level with the subset of 100kw from the already enriched AnCora-ES and the subset
of 817 lexical entries from the AnCora-Nom-R3. Specifically, we carried out a set of
new ML experiments using the simple and binarized features from the nominal and
verbal lexicons as well as additional features obtained from the AnCora-ES corpus (the
so-called contextual features). For the evaluation of the different sense- and lemma-
based models derived from this set of experiments (see step 9 in Figure 1), tenfold
cross-validation was used with the pre-created resources. These models give rise to the
final version of the ADN-Classifier (R3) (see step 10 in Figure 1). See Section 6 for a
description of the ADN-Classifier.

4. Previous Linguistic Study

The aim of the corpus-based linguistic study conducted was twofold. First, we wanted
to determine which of the criteria stated in the literature were the most relevant linguis-
tic features to establish the distinction between event and result denotations in Spanish.
Secondly, we wanted to find other features that could be used to reinforce the semantic
distinction we are dealing with.

In order to do this, we selected a sample of 817 Spanish deverbal nominalizations
corresponding to 3,077 occurrences. These nominalizations were obtained semiauto-
matically from a 100kw subset of the AnCora-ES corpus. In this selection we took into
account a predefined list of ten suffixes (-a, -aje, -ión/-ción/-sión/-ón, -da/-do, -dura/-ura, -e,
-ido, -miento/-mento, -ncia/-nza, -o/-eo– [Santiago and Bustos 1999]) that contribute to an
event or resultmeaning and which take verbs as a basis for the derivation process.

This sample corresponds to the original 3LB corpus (Civit and Martı́ 2004), that can
be considered to be a preliminary version of AnCora-ES. The set of 817 nominalizations
consists of those occurrences in this sub-corpus. Despite coming from different sources,
the 100kw corpus and the full 500kw corpus are comparable as is shown in Table 1.

In Table 1 we present some metrics for describing the whole AnCora-ES corpus
and its 100kw subset. We present the metrics we have used in three rows: degree

Table 1
Descriptive content of AnCora-ES and its 100Kw subset. In each cell the values corresponding to
the subset and the whole corpus are present.

Min Max Mean Standard Deviation

sense/lemma 1/1 13/13 2.19/1.86 1.54/1.31
examples/lemma 1/1 239/255 19.99/14.15 30.76/26.44
length sentences 4/4 149/149 39.14/39.51 10.69/12.08

836



Peris, Taulé, and Rodrı́guez Empirical Methods for the Study of Denotation in Nominalizations

of polysemy (number of senses per lemma), the number of examples (sentences) per
lemma in the corpus, and the average length of sentences per lemma. We depict the
minimum and maximum values, the mean and the standard deviation for each metric.
The values in the figure seem reasonable. The only anomalous figures correspond to
the extremely high values of the standard deviation of the number of examples metric.
It is due to the highly biased shape of the curve towards small values. In fact, most
of the lemmas have only one example (121 for the 100kw sample) and the number of
lemmas having values over the mean are very few. As can be seen in Table 1, there
are no notable differences in the values corresponding to the whole set and the subset.
Additionally we computed the ratio of lemmas containing only one example.

4.1 Analyzing Features from the Literature

In order to determine which criteria stated in the literature were the most relevant, we
selected seven criteria that satisfy two conditions: first, they are some of the most widely
used by other authors, and second, it is possible to search for them in the AnCora-ES
corpus without suffering data sparseness. These criteria and the authors who propose
them are shown schematically in Table 2.

The seven criteria were analyzed by contrasting them with the behavior of the 817
Spanish deverbal nominalizations in the AnCora-ES corpus. Concretely, two graduate
students in linguistics classified the 3,077 occurrences independently into event or result
class. After this first annotation, we discussed the results with them and reached an
agreement in those cases in which the denotation type assigned was not the same. It
should be noted that the aim of this analysis was to encourage reflection on the suit-
ability of these seven criteria and on finding new clues to interpret the nominalizations
semantically.

During the classification procedure, we observed that these two denotations did
not allow us to account for all the data in the corpus. On the one hand, it is not
always possible to distinguish between event and result, because the linguistic context
(the sentence) is not always informative enough. We label such cases underspecified
types, resulting finally in three possible denotation values. On the other hand, we
noticed that some nominalizations can take part in a lexicalized construction, thus,
we added the attribute <lexicalized>. In such cases, we distinguish between six types
of lexicalization according to their similarity to different word classes: nominal (e.g.,
sı́ndrome de abstinencia, ‘withdrawal symptoms’), verbal (e.g., estar de acuerdo, ‘to be in
agreement’), adjectival (e.g., al alza, ‘rising’), adverbial (e.g., con cuidado, ‘with care’),
prepositional (e.g., en busca de, ‘in search of’), and conjunctive (e.g., en la medida que,

Table 2
Linguistic criteria for distinguishing between result and event nominalizations from different
authors.

Criteria Grimshaw’90 Alexiadou’01 Picallo’99 Alonso’04 Badia’02

Verbal Class - + + - +
Pluralization + - - + -
Determiner Type + - + + -
Preposition+Agent - - + - +
Internal Argument + - + - -
External Arguments + - - - -
Verbal Predicates + - + - +

837



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 4

‘as far as’). One of the three denotation values—event, result, underspecified—is assigned
to the whole lexicalized construction only in the case of nominal lexicalizations. It is
important to recognize such lexicalized cases because if the nominalization takes part
in a lexicalized construction other than the nominal, it does not receive a denotation
(a semantic distinction that is only associated with nouns).

The 3,077 occurrences were classified into 1,121 senses considering that different
denotations associated with a lemma are different senses. Henceforth, we refer to them
as nominalization senses. Among these 1,121 senses, 807 were annotated as result (72%),
113 as event (10%), 131 as underspecified (12%), and 70 as non-nominal lexicalized noun
(6%). It is not surprising that result nominalizations are the most frequent because events
tend to be realized mostly by verbal clauses and nominalizations are more frequently
used for the result (non-dynamic) meaning, more typical of nouns.

The fact that AnCora-ES is annotated with different linguistic information levels
allowed for the evaluation of the seven morphosyntactic and semantic criteria se-
lected. Next, we briefly present each criterion, how they were applied, and the results
obtained.10

4.1.1 Verbal Class.One of the most commonly used criterion to determine the denotation
is the verbal class from which the nominalization is derived (Picallo 1999; Alexiadou
2001; Badia 2002). It is claimed that unergative and stative verbs give rise to result
nominalizations, and unaccusative verbs usually result in ambiguous, or what we call
underspecified, nominalizations. Regarding transitive verbs, they give rise to either event,
result, or underspecified nominalizations. To analyze this criterion, we set out from the
semantic verbal classification proposed in AnCora-Verb. In this verbal lexicon, each
predicate is associated with one or more semantic classes depending on the four basic
types of events (Vendler 1967) (accomplishments which correspond to transitive verbs;
achievements corresponding to unaccusative verbs; states corresponding to stative
verbs; and activities corresponding to unergative verbs) and on the diathesis alterna-
tions in which the verb can occur. We therefore looked up the verbal classes from which
the 817 nominalizations are derived in AnCora-Verb. This allowed us to determine
whether the claims about the relation between the nominalization denotation type and
the corresponding verbal classes are valid.

In the sample analyzed, most of the nominal senses were classified as results
(72%), thus, it should not surprise us that all the verbal classes have a wide per-
centage of result nominalizations. The most significant result, however, is that stative
and unergative verbs lead nearly exclusively to result nominalizations in Spanish,
97% and 100%, respectively. Regarding transitive and unaccusative verbs, they lead to
event, result, or underspecified nominalizations. It is also interesting to remark that event
nominalizations derive mostly from transitive verbs (15%, in contrast to the 1% derived
from achievement verbs) and underspecified nominalizations derive from unaccusative
verbs (28%, in contrast to the 11% and 3% derived from transitive and state verbs,
respectively), confirming the hypothesis stated by Picallo (1999), Alexiadou (2001), and
Badia (2002).

4.1.2 Pluralization. According to Grimshaw (1990) and Alonso (2004), one of the features
that clearly identifies result nominalizations is their pluralization capacity because it is

10 In the following criteria we do not consider lexicalized senses because the criteria do not apply to these
complex lexical units.

838



Peris, Taulé, and Rodrı́guez Empirical Methods for the Study of Denotation in Nominalizations

more usual to quantify objects than events. It is important to point out, however, that
it is also possible to make an event reading of a plural nominalization. For instance, in
Example (11) bombardeos (‘shelling’) refers to multiple actions of bombing, therefore, it
is open to an event reading.

(11) Los bombardeos<event>de Sarajevo por parte del ejército Bosnio.
‘The shelling<event> of Sarajevo by the Bosnian army.’

This criterion was measured taking into account whether the 817 nominalizations
appeared in the plural in some of their occurrences in the sample analyzed. The results
obtained (98% of the nominalizations in the plural were classified as result and the
remaining 2% as underspecified) confirmed plurality as one of the features able to detect
result nominalizations. In contrast, the singular feature is not informative enough to
discard any of the nominal denotations (69% of the nominalizations were classified as
results, 15% as events, and 16% as underspecified type). Therefore, in the sample analyzed
all event nominalizations and most of the underspecified nominalizations appeared only
in the singular.

4.1.3 Determiner Types. Authors such as Grimshaw (1990), Picallo (1999), and Alonso
(2004) claim that event nominalizations usually appear with definite articles whereas
result nominalizations may be specified by all types of determiners. For instance,
demonstrative determiners can only specify result nominalizations because this type
of determiner is used to refer to an entity in a frame of reference. In order to evaluate
this criterion we took into account the types of determiners combining with the nomi-
nalization and also whether the noun appeared without a determiner.

Because most of the nominal senses were classified as results (72%), it should not
surprise us that all types of determiners have a wide percentage of result nominaliza-
tions. A striking result observed in Table 3, however, is that indefinite articles (99%),
demonstratives (100%), and quantifiers (100%) nearly always appear with result senses.
In contrast, the definite article, the possessive, and the empty position can occur in all
nominalization classes. Seventy-two percent of definite articles appear with result, 13%
with event, and 15% with underspecified nominalizations; 82% of possessive determiners
appear with result, 10% with events, and 8% with underspecified nominalizations; and
88% of nominalizations without determiner are classified as result, 5% as events, and 7%
as underspecified nominalizations. The data therefore partially confirm the hypotheses
from the literature: Result nominalizations appear with a wider range of determiners.
Although event nominalizations are not always specified by a definite article, they can
also appear with possessive determiners or without any determiner.

4.1.4 Preposition Introducing the Agent. In Spanish nominalizations derived from tran-
sitive verbs are considered to be results if the agent complement is introduced by the
preposition de (‘of’) and events if the preposition used is por (‘by’) (Picallo 1999).11 We
took into consideration agent complements introduced by prepositions appearing in
the sample analyzed. As shown in Table 3, Prepositional Phrases (PPs) interpreted as
agents in the NPs analyzed are introduced by the following prepositions: de (‘of’), entre
(‘between’), por (‘by’), and por parte de (‘by’). We observed that the distribution of the
four PPs is complementary between event and result denotations: The agent nominal

11 A similar claim is stated by Badia (2002) for Catalan.

839



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 4

Table 3
Distribution of the denotation types according to the criteria evaluated.

Criteria Values Result (%) Event (%) Underspecified (%)

Verbal Class

Accomplishments 74 15 11
Achievements 71 1 28
States 97 – 3
Activities 100 – –

Pluralization
Plural 98 – 2
Singular 69 15 16

Determiners

Definite 72 13 15
Indefinite 99 – 1
Demonstrative 100 – –
Possessive 82 10 8
Quantifier 100 – –
No Determiner 88 5 7

Preposition-Agent

de ‘of’ 98 – 2
entre ‘between’ 100 – –
por ‘by’ – 100 –
por parte de ‘by’ – 100 –

Internal argument

Possessive 41 38 21
PPs 53 25 22
Relative Pronoun 71 29 –
Relational Adjectives 97 – 3

External argument
por ‘by’ PPs – 100 –
Relational Adjectives 100 – –
Possessive 95 – 5

Predicates
Attributive 75 6 18
Eventive 44 41 15

complement introduced by de or entre occurs with result nominalizations (98% and
100%, respectively) and the agent nominal complement introduced by por or por parte
de occurs with event nominalizations (100% both), corroborating the hypothesis put
forward by Picallo (1999).

4.1.5 Internal Argument. The internal argument criterion proposed by Grimshaw (1990)
and Picallo (1999) states that only event deverbal nominalizations require the presence
of an internal argument because they are more similar to verbs, whereas in result-
nominalized NPs the internal argument is not needed. Badia (2002) argues that the real-
ization of this argument is not always compulsory to obtain an event interpretation of the
nominalization. To analyze this criterion, we observed those nominalized NPs in which
the internal argument was explicit and the type of argument that realized it. As a result,
we observed that the majority of event nominalizations are complemented by an inter-
nal argument (98%). This is also the case for underspecified nominalizations in a fairly
high percentage (78%). The percentage decreases considerably in result nominalizations
(34%), however. Therefore, the data seem to confirm Picallo’s and Grimshaw’s hypoth-
esis. Table 3 shows that there are four constituents that realize an internal argument:
possessive determiners, PPs, genitive relative pronouns, and relational adjectives. The

840



Peris, Taulé, and Rodrı́guez Empirical Methods for the Study of Denotation in Nominalizations

first two constituents appear in the three nominal denotation types: 41% of possessive
determiners appear with result nominalizations, 38% with events nominalizations, and
21% with underspecified nominalizations; and 53% of PPs complement result, 25% events,
and 22% underspecified nominalizations. Relative pronouns only occur with event (29%)
and result (71%) denotation types, and, finally relational adjectives occur nearly exclu-
sively in result nominalizations (97%). This last fact constitutes an identification feature
for result nominalizations, as Picallo states (see next criterion).

Table 3 shows the results obtained for each criterion.

4.1.6 External Arguments vs. Possessors. Grimshaw (1990) states that PPs introduced
by the preposition ‘by’ (by-PPs), relational adjectives, and possessive determiners in
English would be interpreted as external arguments (subjects) in the case of event
nominalizedNPs. These constituents, however, would be interpreted as possessors (that
is, as non-argumental) in result nominalized NPs. Other authors, like Picallo (1999),
nevertheless, claim that possessive determiners may be argumental in result and event
nominalizations in Spanish. Regarding relational adjectives, Picallo argues that these
constituents can only be arguments of result nominalizations. As seen, there is no
consensus among authors; therefore, it seemed to us to be an interesting criterion to
contrast. We observed whether these constituents (by-PPs, relational adjectives, and
possessive determiners) were interpreted as external arguments in the nominalized NP
sample. If this was so, we also analyzed whether the fact of being external arguments
conditioned the denotation of the nominalization.12

The results obtained are very clear: PPs introduced by por (‘by’) with an agent
interpretation only occur in NPs headed by event nominalizations. Relational adjectives
are interpreted as external arguments only in NPs headed by result nominalizations.
Possessive determiners with an agent interpretation are mostly (95%) constituents of
NPs headed by result nominalizations though they can also be constituents (5%) of
NPs headed by underspecified nominalizations. Therefore, for Spanish, Grimshaw’s hy-
pothesis is only partially corroborated because only by-PPs guarantee the event read-
ing. Regarding relational adjectives, Picallo’s thesis is confirmed, because this type of
constituent mostly appears as an argument of result nominalizations. Moreover, we
observed a preference for possessive determiners to be external arguments of result
nominalizations, which is not stated in any of the theoretical proposals.

4.1.7 Verbal Predicates. The type of verbal predicate that can be combined with nominal-
izations may be an indicator for determining the denotation (Grimshaw 1990; Picallo
1999; Badia 2002). Result nominalizations tend to combine with attributive predicates,
whereas event nominalizations tend to be subjects of predicates such as tener lugar (‘to
take place’) or ocurrir (‘to happen’) because these predicates tend to select event type
subjects. In order to examine this criterion, we analyzed the types of predicates com-
bined with the 817 nominalization types. We observed whether the predicates belong
to the event-denoting class (tener lugar, ‘to take place’; ocurrir, ‘to happen’; comenzar,
‘to begin’; acabar, ‘to finish’; durar, ‘to last’; llevar a cabo, ‘to carry out’) or if they were
attributive predicates (ser, ‘to be’; estar, ‘to be’; parecer, ‘to seem’ ). Table 3 illustrates that

12 The way we decided whether these constituents were external arguments consisted of paraphrasing
the nominalized NPs into clause structures in order to see if they were semantically equivalent to
verbal subjects.

841



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 4

attributive predicates tend to choose result nominalizations (75%) as subjects whereas
eventive predicates do not show a clear preference for any type of nominal: Forty-
four percent of them combine with result, 41% with events, and 15% with underspecified
nominalizations. These results partially confirmedwhat is stated by these three authors:
result nominals combine preferentially with attributive predicates.

From the corpus-based study, we conclude that the semantic distinction between
event and result nominalizations is not always as clear as is stated in the literature. The
criteria proposed in the literature are well suited to constructed examples but when
they are applied to naturally occurring data they do not work so well: Some of them
cannot be applied and sometimes we found contradictory criteria in the same example.
That said, it is important to point out that these criteria are not irrefutable proofs for
making an event or a result reading, but rather indicators that can help us to strengthen
our semantic intuition. In fact, we propose the third denotation type underspecified for
those cases in which semantic intuition is insufficient and the criteria for reinforcing one
of the two main denotation types are not clear.

Regarding the criteria established in the literature, the main conclusion drawn
is that not all the criteria analyzed seem to hold for Spanish. Among the evaluated
criteria, those that appear to be most helpful for distinguishing between event and result
nominalizations are: 1) the semantic class of the verb from which the noun is derived;
2) the pluralization capacity; 3) the determiner types; 4) the preposition introducing an
agentive complement; and 5) the obligatory presence of an internal argument. These
features are represented as attributes in the nominal lexical entries of the AnCora-Nom
lexicon (see Section 5.3).

It is interesting to note that the number of criteria found that reinforce result read-
ings is significantly higher than the number of criteria found that strengthen event
readings. In every criterion we find features that support the identification of result
nominalizations but not event nominalizations. To support result nominalizations the
following features were found: nominalizations deriving from unergative and stative
verbs; nominalizations appearing in the plural; nominalizations specified by an indeter-
minate article, a demonstrative, or quantifier determiner; nominalizations with an agent
complement introduced by de (‘of’) or entre (‘between’); the nonrealization of the inter-
nal argument; and nominalizations having relational adjectives as arguments and the
attributive predicate combined with them. In order to underpin event nominalizations,
however, the only unambiguous criterion found was when the preposition introducing
a PP agent complement is por (‘by’) or por parte de (‘by’).13 If we take into account that
the agent complement is mostly optional in an NP configuration, it is very difficult to
find a criterion within the NP context to support event nominalizations.

We believe that there are more features to support result nominalizations because
they are closer to non-derived nouns and, like them, admit a wide variety of config-
urations: plural inflection, different types of determiners, the possibility of appearing
without complements, and so forth. In contrast, event nominalizations (since they are
not typical nouns because they denote an action), like verbs, do not admit this variety
of configurations: They rarely appear without complements, admit fewer types of deter-
miners, and appear in the plural less frequently. Most of the configurations they admit
are also admitted by result nominalizations; this explains why there are more criteria
to support result than event nominalizations.

13 Literally, ‘on the part of.’

842



Peris, Taulé, and Rodrı́guez Empirical Methods for the Study of Denotation in Nominalizations

In fact, the remaining criteria—the fact of deriving from transitive or unaccusative
verbs; the nominalization being in the singular; the co-occurrence with a definite ar-
ticle, a possessive determiner, or without any determiner; the presence of the internal
argument; and the combination with typically eventive predicates—do not support any
specific denotation. As a result, there are several cases where it is very difficult to assign
a denotation, especially when the context is not clear enough, and therefore, we need
to apply the underspecified tag.

In the next section, we present other indicators found in the empirical study that
provide us with clues for the differentiation between event and result nominalizations.
These indicators are data-driven and we can only guarantee that they work for Spanish.

4.2 Finding New Clues to Support Event and Result Denotations

The analysis of 3,077 nominalization occurrences, focusing on the semantic distinction
between those denoting an event, result, or underspecified type, has allowed us to find
new clues that strengthen these readings, especially the event reading.

One of the clearest clues for detecting the event nominalizations is the possibility of
paraphrasing the NP with a clausal structure, as we saw in Section 1, Examples (3)–
(6). Another valuable clue is to check whether the nominalization admits an agent
complement introduced by por (‘by’) or por parte de (‘by’). We use this criterion because
it is the most informative one to support event nominalizations but it is also a very
optional complement and is scarcely represented in the corpus. The annotators could
use these two tests to decide the denotation type. Therefore, they had two extra criteria
that the data did not provide.

Furthermore, we found other indicators that can help to select one denotation
type, the so-called selectors. We identified two types of selectors:

1. External selectors: Prepositions like durante (‘during’), nouns like proceso
(‘process’), adjectives like resultante (‘resulting’), verbs like empezar
(‘begin’), and adverbs en vı́a de (‘on the way to’), which are elements that
point to a specific denotation from outside the nominalized NP. For
instance, in Example (12) the preposition durante (‘during’) gives a clue to
interpret presentación (‘presentation’) as an event.

2. Internal selectors: Prefixes within the nominalization that indicate a
specific denotation type; for instance, a noun with the prefix re-with a
reiterative meaning such as reubicación (‘relocation’) in Example (13). This
is due to the fact that the reiterative meaning only applies to bases that
denote actions.

(12) Durante [la presentación<event>del libro], él abogó por la formación de
los investigadores en innovación tecnológica.
‘During [the presentation<event> of the book], he advocated the training
of researchers in technological innovation.’

(13) Hoy [la reubicación<event>del ex ministro] no resulta fácil.
‘Today, [the relocation<event> of the ex minister] does not seem easy.’

These new clues allow us to support our semantic classification independently from
the literature criteria under evaluation. The only inconvenience of these tests and the
selectors is that they cannot be implemented as features in the ADN-classifier.

843



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 4

5. Knowledge Resources

This section presents the linguistic resources used in building the final version of the
ADN-Classifier (R3). We briefly describe the AnCora-ES corpus and the AnCora-Verb
lexicon, and we focus in more detail on the description of the AnCora-Nom lexicon
from which we obtain most of the features for the building of the ADN-Classifier.

5.1 AnCora-ES Corpus

AnCora-ES is a 500,000 word (henceforth, 500kw) Spanish corpus14 consisting of news-
paper texts annotated at different linguistic levels: morphology (part of speech and
lemmas), syntax (constituents and functions), semantics (verbal argument structure,
thematic roles, semantic verb classes, named entities, and WordNet nominal senses),
and pragmatics (coreference).15 The corpus contains 10,678 fully parsed sentences. As
we explained in Section 3, nominalization occurrences (23,431) were automatically an-
notated with denotation types using an intermediate model of classification (see step 5
in Figure 1). This automatic annotation was then manually validated by three graduate
students in linguistics. These annotators were selected from a group of five, because
they achieved an observed agreement of over 80%, corresponding to a kappa of 65% in
an inter-annotator agreement test, whereas the average observed agreement was 75%
corresponding to a 60% kappa. For the purpose of annotation, the three annotators took
into account the semantic definition we provided, the criteria presented in Section 4.1,
and the semantic tests described in Section 4.2. The inter-annotator agreement was
carried out to ensure the consistency and quality of the AnCora-ESmanual annotation.16

Therefore, the AnCora-ES corpus enriched with denotation type annotation is used
for learning the different models of the ADN-Classifier-R3. From this resource we
obtained two kinds of features:

(a) The corpus versions of the features from the lexicon (see Section 5.3): the
type of determiner used in Section 4; the number (plural or singular) in
which the nominalization occurrences appear; and the constituent type of
the complements.

(b) The contextual features such as the tense and the semantic class of the verb
that dominates the nominalization in the sentence; the syntactic function
of the NP headed by a nominalization; and whether the noun appears in a
named entity.

We use the Tgrep217 tool for the feature extraction from the corpus; this allows us
to efficiently inspect the syntactic trees in a Treebank format.18

14 A similar version exists for Catalan, AnCora-CA.
15 AnCora-ES is the largest multilayer annotated corpus of Spanish freely available at:

http://clic.ub.edu/corpus/ancora.
16 For more details on the manual validation and the inter-annotator agreement test, see Peris, Taulé, and

Rodrı́guez (2010).
17 http://tedlab.mit.edu/ dr/TGrep2/. Tgrep2 is an improvement of Tgrep. Both tools are tree-based

counterparts of the widely used string searching Unix Grep tool.
18 In the following link the set of tgrep rules as well as some implemented examples are available:

http://clic.ub.edu/corpus/en/documentation.

844



Peris, Taulé, and Rodrı́guez Empirical Methods for the Study of Denotation in Nominalizations

5.2 AnCora-Verb

AnCora-Verb-ES is a verbal lexicon that contains 2,830 Spanish verbs.19 In this lex-
icon, each predicate is related to one or more semantic classes, depending on its
senses, basically differentiated according to the four event classes—accomplishments,
achievements, states, and activities (Vendler 1967; Dowty 1979)—and on the diathe-
ses alternations in which a verb can occur (Vázquez, Fernández, and Martı́ 2000).
The semantic class of the verb base of the nominalization is used as a feature in the
ADN-Classifier.

5.3 AnCora-Nom

This section presents AnCora-Nom,20 a Spanish lexicon of deverbal nominalizations
that has been iteratively used and improved as a result of the experiments reported
here. At present, it contains 1,655 lexical entries corresponding to 3,094 senses and
3,204 frames. These lexical entries represent the lemmas corresponding to the 23,431
deverbal nominalization occurrences appearing in the annotated AnCora-ES corpus.
For each of these lemmas we created a lexical entry using the information annotated in
the corpus.21 The features of each lexical entry are organized in three levels: lexical entry,
sense, and frame level. The lexical entry attributes are not extracted from the corpus but
added in order to document the lexical entry. Sense and frame attributes, in contrast,
were extracted from the AnCora-ES corpus. Each lexical entry is organized in different
senses, which were established taking into account the denotation type, the sense of the
base verb, and whether or not the nominalization is part of a lexicalized construction. In
turn, each sense can also contain one or more nominal frames, depending on the verbal
frame fromwhich the nominalization is derived. Next, we detail the attributes specified
in the three levels described above. Figure 2 shows the full information associated with
the lexical entry aceptación (‘acceptance’).

5.3.1 Lexical Entry Level Attributes. These are as follows:

(a) Lemma. In Figure 2, the value for this attribute is the noun aceptación
(lemma=“aceptación”).

(b) The attribute language (“lng”) codifies the language represented in the lexical
entry. AnCora resources work with Spanish and Catalan, so the values of this attribute
are “es” for Spanish (lng=“es”) and “ca” for Catalan (lng=“ca”). At present, AnCora-
Nom only deals with Spanish nominalizations.

(c) The attribute origin indicates the type of word from which the nouns are de-
rived. In Figure 2, the value for this attribute is “deverbal”, meaning that this lexical
entry concerns a noun derived from a verb. At present, AnCora-Nom only contains
deverbal nouns but in the future it will include other types of nominalizations such as
deadjectivals.

(d) The attribute type refers to the word class, “noun” in Figure 2.

19 A similar version exists for Catalan, AnCora-Verb-CA.
20 We describe here AnCora-Nom-R3, the final version of the lexicon.
21 For a detailed explanation of the automated extraction process see Peris and Taulé (2011).

845



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 4

Figure 2
Aceptación (‘acceptance’) lexical entry in AnCora-Nom.

846



Peris, Taulé, and Rodrı́guez Empirical Methods for the Study of Denotation in Nominalizations

5.3.2 Sense Level Attributes. These include:

(e) The attribute cousin marks whether the nominalization is morphologically de-
rived from a verb (cousin=“no”, in Figure 2) or is a cousin noun (cousin=“yes”). Cousin
nouns (Meyers, Reeves, andMacleod 2004) are nouns that give rise to verbs (e.g., relación
[‘relation’] >relacionar [‘to relate’]), or nouns semantically related to verbs (e.g., escarnio
[‘mockery’] is related to mofarse [‘to make fun’]).

(f) The denotation attribute indicates the semantic interpretation of the deverbal
noun. The possible values are: “event,” “result,” and “underspecified.” In Figure 2, there
are two senses, the first one being result (denotation=“result”) and the second one event
(denotation=“event”).

(g) Each sense contains an identifier (“id”) to indicate the sense number.

(h) The lexicalized attribute indicates whether or not the nominalization is part
of a lexicalized construction (idiomatic expression) (Figure 2: lexicalized=“no”). In the
first case, two additional attributes are added: (i) the alternative-lemma, specifying
the whole lexicalized construction of which the nominalization is part (for instance,
alternative-lemma=“golpe de estado,” [‘coup d’etat’]), and (ii) lexicalization-type, to
distinguish between the six types of lexicalizations: “nominal,” “verbal,” “adjectival,”
“adverbial,” “prepositional,” or “conjunctive” (see Section 4). We should bear in mind
that one of the three above-mentioned denotation values is assigned to the whole
lexicalized construction only in the case of nominal lexicalizations. For instance, the
lexicalized construction golpe de estado is a nominal lexicalization (lexicalization-type=
“nominal”), and therefore, it has a denotation value (denotation=“result”).

(i) The attribute originlemma specifies the verb lemma from which the noun is
derived. In Figure 2, the value for this attribute is “aceptar” in both senses (origin-
lemma=“aceptar”).

(j) Because verbs can have different senses, the attribute originlink indicates the
concrete verbal sense of the base verb. In Figure 2, the originlink attribute takes the
same value in both senses: “verb.aceptar.1” (oringinlink=“verb.aceptar.1”).

(k) Because nouns in the AnCora corpus are annotated with WordNet synsets,22 we
incorporate this information in the attribute wordnetsynset. In Figure 2, the first sense
of aceptación corresponds to two synsets (wordnetsynset=“16:00117820+16:10039397”),
whereas the second only corresponds to one (wordnetsynset=“16:00117820”). It should
be noted that senses in AnCora-Nom are coarser grained than in WordNet: a sense can
group together more than one WordNet synset.

5.3.3 Frame Level Attributes. These are detailed as follows:

(l) The attribute type indicates the verbal frame from which the nominalization is
derived. In AnCora-Verb, each verbal sense can be realized in more than one frame:
default, passive, anticausative, locative, and so forth. In the nominal entries, we mark
the corresponding verbal frames, which are the possible values for this attribute. In
most cases, its value is “default” as in Figure 2 (type=“default”). This feature is needed
to look for the corresponding verbal semantic class in AnCora-Verb.

22 We used WordNet 1.6 for Spanish and WordNet offsets for identifying synsets.

847



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 4

(m) Argument (Structure). In this complex attribute, the different arguments
(argument) and the corresponding thematic roles (thematicrole) are specified. To
represent the arguments we follow the same annotation scheme used in AnCora-
Verb. For instance, in Figure 2, the event sense has one argument (“arg1”) with a
patient thematic role (“pat”). This argument is realized twice (frequency=“2”) by
a prepositional phrase (constituent type =“sp”) introduced by the preposition de
(‘of’) (preposition=“de”) and once by a possessive determiner (type=“determiner,”
postype=“possessive”).

(n) The attribute referencemodifier represents the nominal complements that are
not arguments but which modify the reference of the nominalization. Frequency is
also taken into account. Strictly speaking, this attribute does not fit perfectly at the
frame level. We were interested in representing this information, however, and the
most suitable level was the frame level because it allows for a seamless comparison
of argumental and nonargumental nominal complements.

(o) The type of determiner has proved to be a useful criterion for distinguishing
between result and event readings, so we include this information in the attribute
specifier.23 The possible values are: “article,” “indefinite,” “demonstrative,” “exclama-
tive,” “numeral,” “interrogative,” “possessive,” “ordinal,” and “void” when there is
no determiner. In this attribute, we also take into account the frequency with which
the determiners are realized. In Figure 2, the event sense is specified twice (constituent
frequency=“2”) by an article determiner (type=“determiner,” postype=“article”).

(p) The attribute appearsinplural indicates whether or not an occurrence of a
nominalization in a particular frame appears in the plural. It is a boolean attribute. In
Figure 2, neither of the senses appear in the plural, thus, the value is “no.”

(q) Finally, each lexical entry also contains all the examples from which the infor-
mation has been extracted, specifying the corpus file, the node path, and the sentence
in which each is located.

6. ADN-Classifier

As stated previously, our goals for building the ADN-Classifier were twofold: On the
one hand, to have at our disposal a tool to help us to quantitatively evaluate the validity
of our claims regarding deverbal nominalizations as discussed in Section 4; and, on the
other hand, to provide a classification tool able to take advantage of all the available
information in a specific scenario in the automatic classification of a deverbal noun. The
aim of the task is to classify a deverbal nominalization candidate in an event, result, or
underspecified denotation type, as well as to identify whether the nominalization takes
part in a lexicalized construction (idiomatic expression). Therefore, we model the task
as a four-way classification problem. In order to achieve these goals, some functional
requirements on the software to be built were necessary. Regarding the first goal, we
required that a tool be able to:

1. Use all the properties discussed in Section 4 as features for classification.

23 The name of the attribute refers to the syntactic position that determiners occupy in the NP;
the determiners specify the nominalization.

848



Peris, Taulé, and Rodrı́guez Empirical Methods for the Study of Denotation in Nominalizations

2. Tune the features: binarization, grouping the possible values,
generalization, combination of features, and computation of
derived features.

3. Perform feature selection.

4. Facilitate the human interpretation of the model used by the classifier.

5. Analyze the accuracy of the individual features.

6. Use either senses or lemmas corresponding to deverbal nominalization
candidates as units for classifying.

In order to achieve the first aim, the first version of the ADN-Classifier (R1) (Peris,
Taulé, and Rodrı́guez 2009) was developed. This is the basis for the building of the
intermediate and final versions of the ADN-Classifier. The final version is presented in
detail next. Obviously, the second goal imposes heavier constraints on the design of the
tool (the ADN-Classifier-R3). As is usual in other lexical classification tasks, such as Part
Of Speech (POS) tagging or WSD, a word taken as an isolated unit is ambiguous but
can be disambiguated, or at least partially disambiguated, if enough context is taken
into account. An additional constraint is that the nominalization candidate has to be
tagged as a noun. For our classification task at least four processes are carried out: 1)
tokenization; 2) segmentation at sentence level; 3) POS tagging; and 4) localization of
a nominalization candidate by means of a set of regular expressions looking for verbal
nominalization endings.24

In this setting, a case for classifying consists of a nominalization candidate using
the POS-tagged sentence where it occurs as context, although this context is not always
sufficient for disambiguation. Additional processes could be carried out on the nomi-
nalization candidate and the sentence (WSD, chunking, full parsing, SRL, linking of the
nominalization candidate with the origin verb, etc.). Each of these processes increases
the number of possible features used for classifying but, because they are not error
free, they could involve a decrement in the global accuracy of the preprocess step.
Therefore, a careful examination of the processes, their accuracy, and the improvement
of classification accuracy is needed. For instance, performing WSD on the nominal-
ization candidate could allow for the use of sense-based features and, thus, a clear
improvement in classification accuracy. The inconvenience is that the state-of-the-art
accuracy rate of WSD is not very promising. In recent SemEval challenges, the accuracy
rate in All-Words tasks is between 60% and 70% for a baseline of 51.4% using the first
sense in WordNet, and 89% in Lexical-Sample tasks for a baseline of 78% (Chklovski
and Mihalcea 2002; Decadt et al. 2004; Pradhan et al. 2007).25 These figures depend
on the sense inventory used for disambiguation: The All-Words task uses fine-grained
senses (WordNet synsets) and the Lexical Sample task uses more coarse-grained sense
inventory (Ontonotes senses).

Therefore, we approach the problem of classification taking into account different
feature sets which come from different knowledge resources, and we examine and
evaluate the task performance when a decreasing number of knowledge resources
are used. Depending on the available knowledge resources and natural language

24 We used 10 suffixes such as -ción (see Section 4).
25 All these figures are for English. To have some idea of the relative difficulty of the task for Spanish

we have measured this baseline in Ancora-ES resulting in a value of 42%, that is, an 18% drop with
respect to English.

849



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 4

Table 4
Description of the scenarios used for evaluation.

Scenario Knowledge Resources Features level NL Pre-Process

1 AnCora-Nom+AnCora-Verb lemma POS
2 AnCora-Nom+AnCora-Verb sense POS+WSD
3 AnCora-Nom+AnCora-Verb lemma POS+Parsing
4 AnCora-Nom+AnCora-Verb sense POS+WSD+Parsing
5 AnCora-Nom lemma POS
6 AnCora-Nom sense POS+WSD
7 AnCora-Nom lemma POS+Parsing
8 AnCora-Nom sense POS+WSD+Parsing
9 – lemma POS+Parsing

10 – lemma POS+Parsing+SRL

(NL) processors, we designed the classification task in different scenarios, which are
presented in Table 4. The columns include the knowledge resources used in each
scenario (column 2), whether the features used are extracted at sense or lemma level
(column 3), and the NL processors that are necessary in each case.

Scenario 1 in Table 4 presents the case in which the nominal lexicon (AnCora-
Nom in our case) is available and the nominalization candidate is an entry in this
lexicon. The sentence where the nominalization candidate occurs is POS-tagged and
no other NL processes are carried out.26 In this case, we apply the ADN-Classifier with
a model learned using only features coming from the lexicon at the lemma level with
Acclemma;lex accuracy. Scenario 2 is the same as Scenario 1 but adds a WSD process to
the nominalization candidate with AccWSD accuracy. In this case, we apply the ADN-
Classifier with a model learned using only lexicon features at a sense level achiev-
ing Accsense;lex accuracy. Obviously, applying this model is only useful if Acclemma;lex−
Accsense;lex outperforms the expected WSD error (1 − AccWSD). Scenario 3 is the same as
Scenario 1 but adds constituent parsingwith Accparser accuracy. In this case, we apply the
ADN-Classifier with amodel learned using lexicon and corpus features27 at lemma level
with Acclemma;lex+corpus accuracy. Again, thismodel is only useful if the Acclemma;lex+corpus−
Acclemma;lex outperforms the expected parsing error (1 − Accparser). Scenario 4 consists of
a combination of Scenarios 2 and 3. Scenarios 5, 6, 7, and 8 reproduce Scenarios 1, 2, 3,
and 4, respectively, without using the features extracted from the AnCora-Verb lexicon,
so obtaining the origin verb of the candidate is not necessary. In Scenario 9, the nominal
lexicon is not available or the nominalization candidate is a noun that does not occur
in the nominal lexicon, and only the features extracted from the parsed tree at lemma
level are used. Finally, Scenario 10 is the same as Scenario 9 but adds an SRL process
in order to obtain argument structure information. Taking into account these two sets
of requirements the final version of the ADN-Classifier (R3) has been built.

We used ML techniques to build the ADN-Classifier. Specifically, we used the
J48.Part rule-based classifier, the rule version of the decision-tree classifier C4.5.Rules
(Quinlan 1993) as implemented in the Weka toolbox (Witten and Frank 2005). We chose
a rule-based classifier because it provides a natural representation of classification rules,
thus allowing for the inspection of the model without diminishing accuracy and it

26 POS-tagging implies previous tokenization and sentence segmentation steps.
27 The parse tree obtained can be inspected in the same way as AnCora-ES.

850



Peris, Taulé, and Rodrı́guez Empirical Methods for the Study of Denotation in Nominalizations

allows us to perform a ranking of the individualized rules and a definition of a thresh-
olding mechanism for performing a precision oriented classification. Because most of
the features are binary and the others are discrete with small range values, using more
complex rule-based classifiers such as Cohen’s Ripper supposes no real improvement
over our choice.28

The ADN-Classifier therefore consists of the J48.Part classifier within the Weka
toolbox, the appropriate learned model (from the set described in Section 7.2 and listed
in Table 5), and the list of features to be used. During the exploitation phase the input to
the system consists of a table. Each row in the table corresponds to a case for classifying
and each column to the values of the corresponding feature. The result of the process
is a column vector containing the result of classifying each instance.

7. Experiments and Evaluation

In this section we present and evaluate the experiments carried out with the ADN-
Classifier. First we present the settings of these experiments, then we focus on the
experiments themselves, and finally we evaluate the results.

7.1 Setting

In order to validate the performance of the ADN-Classifier, a sequence of experiments
was conducted. Concretely, two sets of experiments were carried out: we experimented
with different models of the classifier structured in five dimensions (see Section 7.2) and
we applied the appropriate models in the different scenarios set out in Table 4. We use
a tenfold cross-validation method29 for the evaluation of these two sets of experiments.
In order to evaluate the features selected and to carry out the classification task in each
scenario we used the models learned as described in Section 7.2. As noted earlier, using
the ADN-Classifier for classify involves using the J48.Part classifier within the Weka
toolbox and the appropriate learned model.

7.2 Experiments

The experiments carried out with the ADN-Classifier-R3 are presented here. Firstly,
we describe those experiments related to the different models of the classifier and
secondly, we focus on how some of these models are applied in different scenarios.
We apply the ADN-Classifier in different modes that correspond to the following five
dimensions.

28 J48.Part learns first a decision tree and then builds the rules traversing all the branches of the tree. Ripper,
instead, learns the rules one by one (increasing the learning cost). This can result in a more accurate and
smaller rule set just in the case of splitting numerical attributes; that is not our case.

29 In n-fold cross-validation, the original sample is randomly partitioned into n subsamples. Of the n
subsamples, a single subsample is retained as the validation data for testing the model, and the
remaining n − 1 subsamples are used as training data. The cross-validation process is then repeated n
times (the folds), with each of the n subsamples used exactly once as the validation data. The n results
from the folds can then be averaged (or otherwise combined) to produce a single estimation. The
advantage of this method over repeated random sub-sampling is that all observations are used for
both training and validation, and each observation is used for validation exactly once. n is commonly
set to 10 (McLachlan, Do, and Ambroise 2004).

851



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 4

Table 5
Experiments and evaluation of the models. Legend of the model name: 1st letter
(S = sense-based, L = lemma-based); 2nd letter (S = sense, L = lemma, E = corpus example);
3rd letter (L = lexicon features, C = corpus features, A = all features); 4th letter (R = reduced
vocabulary, F = full vocabulary) and 5th letter (R = reduced corpus, F = full corpus).

Model Inst. Att. Rules Baseline (%) Accu. (%) ∆error (%) Red∆error (%)

S
en

se
-b

as
ed

m
o
d
el

s

S
en

se
s SSLRR 609 937 51 71.75 76.84 5.09 18.02

E
xa

m
p
le

s

SSLRF 964 937 78 60.68 70.02 9.33 23.74
SSLFR 1,428 1,671 84 70.86 81.72 10.85 37.25
SSLFF 3,094 1,671 224 60.95 74.36 13.41 34.35

SELRR 1,840 937 42 85.32 93.80 8.47 57.77
SELRF 9,278 937 137 87.03 97.82 10.78 83.20
SELFR 3,994 1,671 117 83.92 93.69 9.76 60.74
SELFF 23,431 1,671 366 85.45 96.65 11.19 76.99

SECRR 1,840 197 35 85.32 83.96 −1.35 −9.25
SECRF 9,278 197 116 87.03 86.34 −0.68 −5.31
SECFR 3,994 197 81 83.92 82.72 −1.20 −7.47
SECFF 23,431 197 211 85.45 84.93 −0.52 −3.60

SEARR 1,840 1,133 76 85.32 91.57 6.25 42.59
SEARF 9,278 1,133 196 87.03 96.38 9.35 72.15
SEAFR 3,994 1,867 146 83.92 91.72 7.80 48.52
SEAFF 23,431 1,867 498 85.45 95.46 10.01 68.83

L
em

m
a-

b
as

ed
m

o
d
el

s

L
em

m
as LLLRR 242 852 6 90.90 88.84 −2.06 −22.72

E
xa

m
p
le

s

LLLRF 242 852 6 90.90 88.84 −2.06 −22.72
LLLFR 532 1,559 14 89.84 89.66 −0.18 −1.85
LLLFF 972 1,559 26 87.55 89.09 1.54 12.39

LELRR 1,840 852 50 85.32 83.96 −1.35 −9.25
LELRF 9,278 852 76 87.03 86.88 −0.15 −1.16
LELFR 3,994 1,559 162 83.92 83.50 −0.42 −2.64
LELFF 23,431 1,559 322 85.45 85.62 0.16 1.14

LECRR 1,840 197 35 85.32 84.02 −1.30 −8.88
LECRF 9,278 197 116 87.03 86.35 −0.67 −5.23
LECFR 3,994 197 81 83.92 82.57 −1.35 −8.41
LECFF 23,431 197 211 85.45 84.86 −0.58 −4.04

LEARR 1,840 1,048 109 85.32 85.05 −0.27 −1.85
LEARF 9,278 1,048 355 87.03 87.64 0.61 4.7
LEAFR 3,994 1,755 236 83.92 85.27 1.35 8.41
LEAFF 23,431 1,755 981 85.45 87.20 1.74 12.00

– Application level. We distinguish between sense-based and lemma-based mod-
els. Sense-based models use the information from the AnCora-Nom-R3 lexicon at sense
level, that is, the features for learning (and classification) are associated with the specific
senses. In contrast, in lemma-based models, when extracting features from the lexicon,
we use as features for learning and classification those attributes whose values are
shared by all senses of the same lemma. Therefore, at this second level of application
the features are not so informative but, at the same time, we reduce our dependence
on the lexicon, which was a step that had to be taken to move towards a more realistic
scenario.

– Unit of learning and classification (i.e., the instance to be classified). These
sense- or lemma-based models are in turn distinguished depending on whether the
unit of learning and classification comes from the lexicon (sense or lemma) or from the

852



Peris, Taulé, and Rodrı́guez Empirical Methods for the Study of Denotation in Nominalizations

AnCora-ES corpus (examples), that is, if they correspond to types or tokens. In the first
case all the features come from the lexicon, whereas in the latter contextual features,
extracted from the corpus, can also be used. Consequently, in sense-based models the
units used are senses (from the lexicon) or examples (from the corpus), and in lemma-
based models they are lemmas (from the lexicon) or examples (from the corpus). It has
to be taken into account that depending on this dimension, the number of instances
for learning varies: There are more senses than lemmas in the lexicon and there are
more nominalization occurrences (examples) in the corpus than nominalization senses
or lemmas in the lexicon.

– Features involved. The features used for both learning and classifying are ob-
tained from the lexicon (lexical features) or from the corpus (contextual features). The
different models are distinguished by using only lexical features, only contextual fea-
tures, or the combination of both types of features.

– Vocabulary size. The data sets taken into account correspond to a reduced set of
817 nominalization lemmas obtained from the 100kw subset of the corpus used for the
first version of the ADN-Classifier (R1) or to the full set of 1,655 nominalization lemmas
occurring in the whole AnCora-ES (500kw). Depending on this dimension, the number
of instances for learning also vary.

– Corpus size. Two corpus sets are used in the different models: a reduced subset
of 100kw used for the first version of the ADN-Classifier (R1) or the full 500kw corre-
sponding to the whole corpus.30 Depending on this dimension, the number of instances
for learning also vary.

In order to identify the models as presented in Table 5, we use five letters as
notation, each of which identifies one of these five dimensions. The first letter corre-
sponds to the application level: If the model is sense-based an S will be used for the
identification and an L in the case of lemma-based models. The second letter refers
to the unit of classification and is L for lemmas, S for senses, and E for examples. In
the third position the reference to the origin of the features involved in the model is
found: L (from the lexicon), C (from the corpus), A (from both resources, all features).
In fourth place, we refer to the vocabulary size: R (reduced) stands for the reduced
set of 817 nominalization lemmas and F (full) for the full set of 1,655 nominalization
lemmas. In last place, we also designate the corpus size by an R (reduced set of
100kw) or an F (full set of 500kw). Therefore a lemma-based model that uses examples
as units of classification, uses all the features, the whole vocabulary, and the whole
corpus is identified as the LEAFF model. In total we experimented with 32 different
models.31

For the different scenarios described in Section 6, we applied the appropriate
models so as not to use the noninformed features for each one.

7.3 Evaluation

The classifier performance of the different models was evaluated by a tenfold cross-
validation method. Next, we focus on the results of the 32 models resulting from the
five dimensions described in Section 7.2. Table 5 presents the overall results: the models

30 For obtaining the learning curve of some of our models intermediate sizes have been used.
31 Not all the combinations of values of the dimensions are allowed.

853



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 4

used (column 1), the number of instances used for learning (column 2), the number of
attributes used, and the number of rules built by the classifier (columns 3 and 4), and
finally, the baseline, the accuracy, the decrease error over the baseline (∆-error), and the
relative error-reduction ratio (Red-∆-error) obtained by each model (columns 5, 6, 7,
and 8). The rows correspond to the different models presented. Recall that the names
of the models are assigned according to the five dimensions presented in Section 7.2.
It should be borne in mind here that in column 2, the number of instances for learning
depends on the type of unit used for learning and classification (senses in sense-based
models, lemmas in lemma-based models, and examples) and on the vocabulary and
corpus size. The interaction between these three dimensions also explains why the
figures for the baseline change for each model. The baseline is a majority baseline
which assigns all the instances to the result class. In general, when the unit used is
from the lexicon, the lemma baseline increases relative to the sense baseline. This is
because in lemma-based models we group the senses that share all the features under
a lemma; because different senses do not normally share all the features, in the end,
only monosemic lemmas are in fact taken into account. This fact, therefore, shows that
there are more result type monosemic lemmas than event and underspecified monosemic
lemmas. Furthermore, it is worth noting that when the unit of learning and classifi-
cation used are the examples from the AnCora-ES corpus and not the senses from
the lexicon, the baseline also increases. Therefore, it seems that proportionally result
nominalizations are more highly represented in the corpus than event and underspecified
nominalizations. Regarding the number of features used for learning, the type of feature
involved and the vocabulary size (when features from the lexicon are used) are the two
relevant dimensions. Finally, it should be said that the accuracy and the other two cor-
related measures are obtained by evaluating the performance of the different models by
tenfold cross-validation.

As can be seen in Table 5, the sense-based models (the first 16 rows) outperform
the corresponding lemma-based models (the last 16 rows). This is explained by the fact
that there are features in the lexicon coded at the sense level that cannot be recovered
at the lemma level because in lemma-based models we only use as features for the
classification those attributes whose values are shared by all senses of the same lemma,
and this does not commonly happen. At the sense level, the best results are achieved
when the features used in the classification come exclusively from the lexicon, with
the unit of classification being senses from the lexicon (the first block of four rows)
or examples from the corpus (the second block of four rows). The contextual features
(those coming from the corpus) can only be applied to models using examples from the
corpus as the unit of classification. These features harm accuracy: When they are used
alone (the third block of rows) they yield accuracy values that are below the baseline
and when they are used in combination with features obtained from the lexicon (the
fourth block of rows) the accuracy decreases in relation to the models that use only
the lexicon as the source of the features (the second block of four rows). This shows
that there is crucial information in the lexicon that is not possible to recover from the
corpus. Furthermore, it should be mentioned that there is a generalized improvement
across sense-based models correlated to the vocabulary and especially corpus size: The
bigger the set of vocabulary and corpus, the better the result. This fact is also present
in lemma-based models.

The sense-based models represent the upper bounds for our task. In a realistic
scenario, however, given the state-of-the-art results in WSD, we would not have access
to sense labels, so we are much more interested in the performance of lemma-based
models. The best results are achieved when features from the lexicon and from the

854



Peris, Taulé, and Rodrı́guez Empirical Methods for the Study of Denotation in Nominalizations

corpus are combined (the last block of rows), showing that the sum of both types of
features gives rise to positive results, which are not achieved by lexical features or
contextual features on their own. When the features used in the classification come
exclusively from the lexicon, with the unit of classification being lemmas from the
lexicon (the fifth block of four rows) or the examples from the corpus (the sixth block
of four rows), the results are negative (below the baseline) except when the vocabulary
and corpus size are both the full sets (1.54% and 0.16% improvement, respectively).
In these cases, the information from the lexicon is not as accurate as in sense-based
models. The contextual features alone do not achieve positive results, not even with the
full vocabulary and the full corpus. Therefore, the combination of features is needed in
a realistic scenario in order to achieve good performance of the classifier. In these cases,
only when the reduced vocabulary and the reduced corpus are used are the results
slightly negative. From now on, we will focus on the last model (LEAFF) because even
if it has a lower accuracy than the corresponding sense-model, we expect it to exhibit a
more robust behavior when tackling unseen data.

An important point for the classifier to learn a model is whether or not the sample
size is large enough for accurate learning. We performed a learning curve analysis of
the LEAFF model for different sample sizes (from 1,000 examples to the whole set
of 23,431 examples). The results are depicted in Figure 3. We have also plotted the
confidence intervals at 95%. The results seem to imply that for sizes over 5,000 examples
the accuracy tends to stabilize; we are, therefore, highly confident of our results. As
expected, the confidence intervals consistently diminish as the corpus grows.

7.4 Precision Oriented Classifier: Threshold

All the experiments reported so far are based on a full coverage setting. Coverage
is 100% in all cases and, therefore, accuracy and precision have the same score.

Figure 3
Learning curve for the LEAFF model.

855

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showImage?doi=10.1162/COLI_a_00112&iName=master.img-000.png&w=323&h=223


Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 4

Figure 4
Precision/coverage plot for different rules thresholding of the SEAFR model.

Additionally, we performed a precision oriented experiment based on a classifier
aiming to achieve a high precision at the cost of a drop in coverage. In order to do this,
we scored each of the rules in the rule set from the LEAFF model of the ADN-Classifier
individually (not taking into account the order of such rules). We sorted the rules in the
rule set by their individual scores, provided by the Weka toolbox, and built a classifier
based on a thresholding mechanism: Only the rules over the threshold were applied.
This resulted in higher precision at the cost of lower coverage. The LEAFF model, as
presented in Table 5, consists of 981 rules obtaining an overall accuracy of 87.20%. The
results of the application of the n most accurate rules, for n from 981 to 1, are depicted
in Figure 4. Note that removing the 500 least accurate rules has a small effect on the
coverage and the overall precision has risen to 94%. An additional reduction of 200
rules results in an increase of the overall precision to 96.5% at a cost of a drop in the
coverage to 90%. Using only the 100 most accurate rules obtains a precision of 98.5%
for a still useful coverage of 80%.

7.5 Evaluation of Scenarios

The results of the experiments applying the scenarios described in Section 6 (see Table 4)
are presented in Table 6. The table shows the results of the ten scenarios set out in rows,
and in columns we provide the scenario identification (column 1); the model applied
out of the 32 generated, following the notation in Section 7.2 (column 2); the number of
features in the original model (column 3); the number of features in the model adapted
for that scenario after removing noninformed features, that is, the features used in the
original model that do not fit in the description of a concrete scenario (column 4);
and the accuracies of the original and final model (columns 5 and 6, respectively). In
each scenario we applied the best model of the 32 we generated taking into account

856

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showImage?doi=10.1162/COLI_a_00112&iName=master.img-001.png&w=323&h=232


Peris, Taulé, and Rodrı́guez Empirical Methods for the Study of Denotation in Nominalizations

Table 6
Experiment and evaluation of scenarios.

Scenario Model Initial Att. Final Att. Initial Acc. (%) Final Acc. (%)

1 LELFF 1,559 1,559 85.62 85.62
2 SELFF 1,671 1,671 96.65 96.65
3 LEAFF 1,755 1,755 87.20 87.20
4 SEAFF 1,867 1,867 95.46 95.46
5 LELFF 1,559 1,416 85.62 85.56
6 SELFF 1,671 1,613 96.65 96.17
7 LEAFF 1,755 1,611 87.20 87.12
8 SEAFF 1,867 1,808 95.46 95.41
9 LECFF 197 197 84.86 84.86
10 LEAFF 1,755 1,556 87.20 87.08

the features that each model uses and that fit the best in each scenario according to
the hypothesized available linguistic processors. When there is no concrete model to
project how the ADN-Classifier would perform in a concrete scenario, we selected the
model that fits approximately in that scenario and removed the noninformed features.
For instance, Scenario 10 describes the case where the nominal lexicon is not available
or the nominalization candidate is a noun that does not occur in the nominal lexicon,
and the features used are extracted from the parsed tree at lemma level and from the
SRL process in order to obtain argument structure information. Because we do not
have a model that perfectly fits in that scenario, we select the LEAFF (lemma based
model using examples from the corpus as the unit of classification and obtaining the
features from both lexicon and corpus, with full vocabulary and full corpus sets), and
we removed all the features from the lexicon except the ones related to the argument
structure, simulating an SRL process.32

These results show that the difference between lemma-based and sense-based mod-
els shown in Table 5 is also present here. There is a decrease in accuracy in all the cases
in which features are removed, although this decrease is not statistically significant.
This could be due to the large number of features available for rule learning and the
possibility of using alternate features when some of the original ones are removed.

7.6 Error Analysis

The analysis of errors focuses on the lemma-based model using lexicon and corpus
information with the full vocabulary and the full corpus (LEAFF). Table 7 presents the
confusion matrix of the model. Rows correspond to manually labeled data and columns
are predictions from the classifier. The correct predictions are in the diagonal (in bold-
face). The errors are marked in italics.

The rate of error is almost equally split between the three main classes: incorrectly
classified event nominalizations represent 31%, result nominalizations 34%, and under-
specified nominalizations 32%. Lexicalized instances,33 however, only display an error
rate of 3%. Among event nominalizations incorrectly classified by the ADN-Classifier,

32 In the same way, sense-based models simulate how the ADN-Classifier would perform with an ideal
WSD automatic process.

33 By lexicalized nominalizations we refer here to those lexicalized nominalizations where a denotation
type is not assigned, that is, non-nominal lexicalizations.

857



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 4

Table 7
Confusion matrix for the LEAFF model.

ADN Result Event Underspecified Lexicalized Total

Result 18,997 575 397 54 20,023
Manually Event 676 933 242 2 1,853
Validated Underspecified 643 309 453 7 1,412

Lexicalized 90 2 2 49 143
Total 20,406 1,819 1,094 112 23,431

73% (676 instances) were classified as result; 26% (242 instances) as underspecified, and a
marginal 3% (2 instances) as lexicalized nominalizations. These errors are attributable to
four main causes. Firstly, 27% of the errors are in fact human errors,34 which means that
the ADN-Classifier performed well. Secondly, the annotation guidelines contain criteria
that the ADN-Classifier cannot recognize: the paraphrase criterion, the agent criterion,
and the so-called selectors (see Section 4.2). These errors represent 51% of the wrongly
classified events. Therefore, there were cases (a total of 61) where manual annotators
had an extra criterion that the ADN-Classifier could not use. We thought that imple-
menting the selectors as features in the ADN-Classifier would be an excessively ad hoc
approach. Thirdly, an error of 21% in event classification is explained because there are a
number of criteria, implemented as features in the ADN-Classifier, that suffer from data
sparseness, and, therefore, the ADN-Classifier cannot learn them as being as relevant
as they are. For instance, a very conclusive clue for detecting event nominalizations is
that they are specified by a possessive determiner that is interpreted as an arg1-patient.
And, finally, the cases in which the ADN-Classifier annotated event nominalizations as
lexicalized constructions are explained by the ADN-Classifier confusing them with real
lexicalized constructions in which the lemma is shared (an error rate of 1%).

Among result nominalizations incorrectly classified by the ADN-Classifier, 56%
(575 instances) were classified as event, 39% (397 instances) as underspecified, and 5%
(54 instances) as lexicalized nominalizations. These errors are attributable to the same
four causes set out above. The rate of human errors is now 51%, however, meaning that
there are event and underspecified nominalizations that were incorrectly validated. The
rate of errors explained by the selectors is now just 10% because there are more selectors
for identifying event than for detecting result nominalizations. And finally, an error rate
of 37% is explained by those criteria that are implemented as features of the ADN-
Classifier, but which suffer from data sparseness, and, therefore, despite their relevance,
cannot be learned by the ADN-Classifier. In the case of result nominalizations, there
are more criteria of this type: nominalizations deriving from unergative and stative
verb classes, relational adjectives as arguments, and temporal arguments realized by
a PP introduced by de (‘of’). And finally, the cases in which the classifier annotated
result nominalizations as lexicalized constructions are explained by the ADN-Classifier
confusing them with real lexicalized constructions in which the lemma is shared (an
error rate of 2%).

34 When comparing automatic annotation with the manual validation, some cases were considered to be
doubtful. We discussed those cases with all the annotators and decided which annotation (automatic or
human) was the correct one. Therefore, by human errors we mean those incorrectly classified in the
manual validation process.

858



Peris, Taulé, and Rodrı́guez Empirical Methods for the Study of Denotation in Nominalizations

Among incorrectly classified underspecified nominalizations, 32% (309 instances)
were classified as events, 67% (643 instances) as results, and a marginal 1% (7 instances)
as lexicalized nominalizations. The difficulty in identifying underspecified nominaliza-
tions is to be expected, given that these are either cases with no clear contextual hints
or truly ambiguous examples. In this case, the rate of human error is 45%. Although
there are no selectors that identify underspecified nominalizations, in some cases an NP
containing a nominalization presents contradictory criteria. For instance, an indefinite
determiner is a criterion that points to a result denotation and the selector durante (‘dur-
ing’) typically selects an event denotation. In these cases, the annotators were instructed
to tag them as underspecified. The ADN-Classifier could not use the selectors in its
classification, however, and most of these cases therefore were annotated as results. This
type of error represents 19% of the incorrectly classified underspecified nominalizations.
The agent criterion explains an error rate of 20%. If both types of PPs (introduced by the
preposition por [‘by’] or introduced by the preposition de [‘of’]) are valid for the NP
the annotators were validating, they tagged the nominalization as underspecified type.
Again, human annotators had an extra criterion that the ADN-Classifier could not use.
The remaining 5% is explained by the failure of the ADN-Classifier to detect a pattern
that is typical of underspecified nominalizations: those derived from an achievement verb
with an arg1-patient. And finally, the cases in which the ADN-Classifier annotated
underspecified nominalizations as lexicalized constructions are explained by the ADN-
Classifier confusing them with real lexicalized constructions in which the lemma is
shared (an error rate of 1%).

Most incorrectly classified lexicalized constructions (96%, 90 instances) were clas-
sified as result nominalizations. This is probably due to the fact that most nominal
lexicalized nominalizations are of the result type. Therefore, the key failure of the
ADN-Classifier is basically in distinguishing between the different types of lexicalized
constructions.

8. Related Work

Although there are several works that contemplate the computational treatment of
nominalizations, most of them are basically interested in two issues: 1) automatically
classifying semantic relations between nominals (Task 4 of SemEval 2007 [Girju et al.
2009] and Task 8 of SemEval 2010 [Hendrickx et al. 2010]) or in noun compound
constructions (Girju et al. [2005] and Task 9 of SemEval 2010 [Butnariu et al. 2010a,
2010b]); and 2) taking advantage of verbal data to interpret, represent, and assign
semantic roles to complements of nominalizations (Hull and Gomez 2000; Lapata 2002;
Padó, Pennacchiotti, and Sporleder 2008; Gurevich andWaterman 2009). Althoughmost
of these works show a certain awareness of the linguistic distinction between event
and result nominalizations, none of them applies this distinction in their systems. The
notion of event appears in the work of Creswell et al. (2006), in which a classifier that
distinguishes between nominal mentions of events and non-events is presented. Their
distinction is not comparable to our event and result distinction for one main reason,
however: they do not focus on nominalizations but on nouns in general, and therefore
the difficulty in distinguishing events from non-events among all types of nouns is less
than distinguishing between event and result nominalizations, which, as has been seen,
are highly ambiguous. We state that it is easier because in a wide nominal domain there
are many nouns which under any circumstance can be understood as non-dynamic (in
fact, nouns tend to denote objects, non-events) and if Creswell et al. include as seed for

859



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 4

learning these types of nouns, such as airport or electronics, it will necessarily increase
the accuracy of the automatic distinction between their two denotation types.

As far as we know, the only work closely related to ours is that of Eberle, Faasz,
and Ulrich (2011) who are working on German –ung nominalizations, in which the
assignment of a denotation type is also carried out. In that paper they state that this
kind of nominalization can denote an event, a state, or an object. Specifically, they analyze
those –ung nominalizations derived from verbs of saying embedded in PPs introduced
by the preposition nach (‘to’). According to the authors, these nominalizations can
denote either an event or a proposition, which is a type of object. They present a semantic
analysis tool (Eberle et al. 2008) which disambiguates this type of nominalization on the
basis of nine criteria, which they call indicators. The tool extracts the indicators from
the semantic representation that it provides and computes the preferred denotation
according to a pre-established weighting schema. They apply this tool to a set of 100
sentences where the relevant material (the nine indicators) is completely familiar to the
system and the tool recognizes the preferred reading in 82% of cases.

Because the ADN-Classifier is based on ML techniques and does not restrict the
nominalizations to a specific suffix and to those derived from verbs of saying, their
work is not directly comparable to ours. We tried to replicate their experiment, however,
selecting only those nominalizations created with the suffix -ción (the most productive
Spanish suffix and the nearest equivalent to –ung in German) and which derive from
verbs of saying. The subset obtained includes 66 types of nominalizations, compared
with the 1,655 in our work. We applied the LEAFF model to the 719 tokens of these
66 nominalization types and we obtained an accuracy of 85.6%. This implies a 3.6
percentage point increase in accuracy with respect to the results of their work, despite
the fact that our model is not trained on this specific nominalization class and does not
dispose of specially designed indicators. We have to take this result with due caution
because we are dealing with two not closely related languages and considering a close
but not identical set of nominalizations.

9. Conclusions

This article contributes to the semantic analysis of texts focusing on Spanish deverbal
nominalizations. We base our study on theoretical hypotheses that we analyze empir-
ically, and as a result we have developed three new resources: the ADN-Classifier, the
first tool that allows for the automatic classification of deverbal nouns as event or result
types; the AnCora-ES corpus enriched with the annotation of deverbal nominalizations
according to their semantic denotation, being in fact the only Spanish corpus which
incorporates this information; and the AnCora-Nom lexicon, a resource containing
1,655 deverbal nominalizations linked to their occurrences in the AnCora-ES corpus.
These resources could be very useful for NLP applications. The work presented in this
article also provides an additional insight into the linguistic question underlying it:
The characterization of deverbal nominalizations according to their denotation and the
identification of the most useful criteria to distinguish between these denotation types.
We can classify our contributions in three directions:

1) The study of the relevant features for the classification of a nominalization
as being of event or result type. The set of features considered were selected from
the linguistics literature, mostly devoted to the English language, and its relevance
was established empirically for Spanish. From the corpus-based study, we concluded
that not all the criteria posited for English seem to port to Spanish. Among the

860



Peris, Taulé, and Rodrı́guez Empirical Methods for the Study of Denotation in Nominalizations

evaluated criteria, the most relevant for distinguishing between event and result nomi-
nalizations are: 1) the semantic class of the verb from which the noun is derived;
2) its pluralization capacity; 3) its determiner types; 4) the preposition introducing an
agentive complement; and 5) the obligatory presence of an internal argument. These
features are represented as attributes in the nominal lexical entries of the AnCora-Nom
lexicon. Models including features coming from the lexicon outperform those that only
take into account features from the corpus. As expected, models working at the sense
level outperform those working at the lemma level. When working at the lemma level
only the combination of features from both the lexicon and the corpus provides results
that outperform the baseline. It is interesting to note that the number of features used to
support result nominalizations is significantly superior to those used to strengthen event
nominalizations. In each criterion we find features for supporting result nominalizations
but not event nominalizations. As a result, the ADN-Classifier uses more features for
detecting result than event nominalizations, and therefore achieves a greater degree
of accuracy on the former than in the latter. Furthermore, the corpus base study has
allowed us to find new clues that support denotation types, especially the event reading.
The paraphrase and agent criteria, as well as the selectors, have proved very useful
to human annotators for distinguishing between an event and a result reading. These
criteria are difficult to implement automatically, however.

2) Lexical resources derived from this work. We have enriched the AnCora-ES
corpus with the annotation of 23,431 deverbal nominalization occurrences according to
their semantic denotation; and we have built AnCora-Nom from scratch, representing
the 1,655 nominalization types that correspond to these occurrences.

3) The ADN-Classifier. This classifier is the first tool that aims to automatically
classify deverbal nominalizations in event, result, or underspecified denotation types, and
to identify whether the nominalization takes part in a lexicalized construction in Spanish.
We set up a series of experiments in order to test the ADN-Classifier under different
models and in different realistic scenarios, achieving good results. The ADN-Classifier
has helped us to quantitatively evaluate the validity of our claims regarding deverbal
nominalizations. An error analysis was performed and its conclusions can be used to
pursue further lines of improvements.

Further work. Two of the main sources of error found in the performance of the
ADN-Classifier are data sparseness of some of the features (such as PP agent) and the
fact that there are criteria at the disposal of human annotators that the ADN-Classifier
is unable to detect. In order to reduce the problem of data sparseness it would be
interesting to look for some linguistic generalizations of the sparse features in order to
implement a backoff mechanism. Another line of future work is to analyze the criteria
used by human annotators and not currently implemented either in the lexicon or in the
corpus. Some additional features could be incorporated in the Classifier. Among them
are path-based syntactic patterns that have been applied with success to related tasks
(see Gildea and Palmer 2002).

We have also experimented with a meta-classifier working on the results of binary
classifiers (one for each class). The global accuracy of the meta-classifier was not greater
than that of the current ADN. We think, however, that a binary classifier for the
underspecified type (the most difficult one) could result in improvements. Most of the
considerations regarding the scenarios described in Table 4 are based on a crude global
evaluation of complementary NL processors such as a word sense disambiguator; for

861



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 4

example, a specific scenario can be followed when the global accuracy of the NL pro-
cessor crosses a given threshold. A more precise approach can also be adopted. Con-
sider, for instance, the WSD task instead of a simple classifier providing a global
accuracy—a regressor can provide individual scores of accuracy for each case (de-
gree of confidence, margin, probability of correct classification, etc.). This more precise
approach can lead to new scenarios incorporating hybrid models.

The last point of future work consists in analyzing to what extent the ADN-
Classifier and its models are applicable to other languages. Concretely, because we have
a similar corpus for Catalan (lacking deverbal nominalization information) we plan to
apply the models learned for Spanish to this closely related Romance language.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Maria Antònia Martı́ and
Marta Recasens for their helpful advice and
to David Bridgewater for the proofreading of
English. We would also like to express our
gratitude to the three anonymous reviewers
for their comments and suggestions to improve
this article. This work was partly supported
by the projects Araknion (FFI2010-114774-E),
Know2 (TIN2009-14715-C04-04), and TEXT-
MESS 2.0 (TIN2009-13391-C04-04) from the
Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation,
and by a FPU grant (AP2007-01028) from the
Spanish Ministry of Education.

References
Abeillé, Anne, Lionel Clément, and
Alexandra Kinyon. 2000. Building a
treebank for French. In Proceedings of the
Second International Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC’00), pages 87–94,
Athens.

Alexiadou, Artemis. 2001. The Functional
Structure in Nominals. Nominalizations
and Ergativity. John Benjamins,
Amsterdam/Philadelphia, PA.

Alonso, Margarita. 2004. Las construcciones
con verbos de apoyo. Visor Libros, Madrid.

Androutsopoulos, Ion and Prodromos
Malakasiotis. 2010. A survey of
paraphrasing and textual entailment
methods. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
Research, 38:135–187.

Aparicio, Juan, Mariona Taulé, and
M. Antònia Martı́. 2008. AnCora-Verb:
A lexical resource for the semantic
annotation of corpora. In Proceedings
of the Sixth International Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’08),
pages 797–802, Marrakech.

Badia, Toni. 2002. Els complements
nominals. In Joan Solà, editor, Gramàtica
del Català Contemporani, volume 3.
Empúries, Barcelona, pages 1591–1640.

Baker, Collin F., Charles J. Fillmore, and
John B. Lowe. 1998. The Berkeley
FrameNet Project. In Proceedings of the
36th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics and 17th
International Conference on Computational
Linguistics - Volume 1, ACL’98,
pages 86–90, Stroudsburg, PA.

Balvet, Antonio, Lucie Barque, and
Rafael Marı́n. 2010. Building a lexicon of
French deverbal nouns from a semantically
annotated corpus. In Proceedings of the
Seventh Conference on International Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’10),
pages 1408–1413, Valletta.

Bos, Johan. 2008. Wide-coverage semantic
analysis with Boxer. In Semantics in
Text Processing. STEP 2008 Conference
Proceedings, pages 277–286, Venice.

Butnariu, Cristina, Su Nam Kim,
Preslav Nakov, Diarmuid Ó Séaghdha,
Stan Szpakowicz, and Tony Veale.
2010a. SemEval-2010 Task 9: The
interpretation of noun compounds using
paraphrasing verbs and prepositions.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Semantic
Evaluations: Recent Achievements
and Future Directions (SEW-2010),
pages 100–105, Boulder, CO.

Butnariu, Cristina, Su Nam Kim, Preslav
Nakov, Diarmuid Ó Séaghdha, Stan
Szpakowicz, and Tony Veale. 2010b.
SemEval-2010 Task 9: The interpretation
of noun compounds using paraphrasing
verbs and prepositions. In Proceedings of
the 5th International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation, pages 39–44, Uppsala.

Chklovski, Timothy and Rada Mihalcea.
2002. Building a sense tagged corpus with
open mind word expert. In Proceedings
of the ACL-02 Workshop on Word Sense
Disambiguation: Recent Successes and
Future Directions - Volume 8, WSD ’02,
pages 116–122, Stroudsburg, PA.

Civit, Montserrat and Maria Antònia Martı́.
2004. Building Cast3LB: A Spanish

862



Peris, Taulé, and Rodrı́guez Empirical Methods for the Study of Denotation in Nominalizations

Treebank. Research on Language and
Computation, 2(4):549–574.

Clark, Herbert H. 1975. Bridging. In
Proceedings of the 1975 Workshop on
Theoretical Issues in Natural Language
Processing, TINLAP ’75, pages 169–174,
Stroudsburg, PA.

Copestake, Ann. 2007. Semantic composition
with (Robust) Minimal Recursion
Semantics. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Deep Linguistic Processing, DeepLP ’07,
pages 73–80, Prague.

Creswell, Cassandre, Matthew J. Beal,
John Chen, Thomas L. Cornell, Lars
Nilsson, and Rohini K. Srihari. 2006.
Automatically extracting nominal
mentions of events with a bootstrapped
probabilistic classifier. In Proceedings of
the Computational Linguistics/Association
for Computational Linguistics on Main
Conference Poster Sessions, COLING-ACL
’06, pages 168–175, Stroudsburg, PA.

Decadt, Bart, Véronique Hoste, Walter
Daelemans, and Antal Van Den Bosch.
2004. GAMBL, genetic algorithm
optimization of memory-based WSD.
In Proceedings of the Association of
Computational Linguistics/SIGLEX
Senseval-3, pages 108–112,
Stroudsburg, PA.

Dowty, David. 1979.Word Meaning and
Montague Grammar. Reidel, Dordrecht.

Eberle, Kurt, Gertrud Faasz, and Ulrich
Heid. 2009. Corpus-based identification
and disambiguation of reading indicators
in German nominalizations. In Online
Proceedings of the 5th Corpus Linguistics
Conference. Available at ucrel.lancs.
ac.uk/publications/cl2009/.

Eberle, Kurt, Gertrud Faasz, and Heid Ulrich.
2011. Approximating the disambiguation
of some German nominalizations by use
of weak structural, lexical, and corpus
information. Procesamiento del Lenguaje
Natural, 46:67–75.

Eberle, Kurt, Ulrich Heid, Manuel Kountz,
and Kerstin Eckart. 2008. A tool for corpus
analysis using partial disambiguation and
bootstrapping of the lexicon. In Text
Resources and Lexical Knowledge: Selected
Papers from the 9th Conference on Natural
Language Processing KONVENS 2008,
pages 145–158, Konvens.

Erk, Katrin and Sebastian Padó. 2006.
Shalmaneser: A flexible toolbox for
semantic role assignment. In Proceedings
of the Fifth International Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’06),
pages 527–532, Genoa.

Fellbaum, Christiane. 1998. An Electronic
Lexical Database. The MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.

Gerber, Matthew and Joyce Y. Chai. 2010.
Beyond NomBank: A study of implicit
argumentation for nominal predicates.
In Proceedings of the ACL Conference 2010,
pages 1583–1592, Uppsala.

Gildea, Daniel and Martha Palmer. 2002.
The necessity of parsing for predicate
argument recognition. In Proceedings
of the 40th Annual Meeting on Association
for Computational Linguistics, ACL ’02,
pages 239–246, Stroudsburg, PA.

Girju, Roxana, Dan Moldovan, Marta Tatu,
and Daniel Antohe. 2005. On the semantics
of noun compounds. Computer, Speech and
Language, 19(4):479–496.

Girju, Roxana, Preslav Nakov, Vivi Nastase,
Stan Szpakowicz, Peter D. Turney, and
Deniz Yuret. 2009. Classification of
semantic relations between nominals.
Language Resources and Evaluation,
43(2):105–121.

Grimshaw, Jane. 1990. Argument Structure.
The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Gurevich, Olga, Richard Crouch, Tracy
Holloway King, and Valeria De Paiva.
2006. Deverbal nouns in knowledge
representation. In Proceedings of Florida
Artificial Intelligence Research Society
Conference, pages 670–675, Florida.

Gurevich, Olga and Scott Waterman. 2009.
Mapping verbal argument preferences
to deverbals. In Proceedings of the 2009
IEEE International Conference on Semantic
Computing, pages 17–24, Washington, DC.

Hendrickx, Iris, Su Nam Kim, Zornitsa
Kozareva, Preslav Nakov, Diarmuid
Ó Séaghdha, Sebastian Padó, Marco
Pennacchiotti, Lorenza Romano, and
Stan Szpakowicz. 2010. SemEval-2010
Task 8: Multi-way classification of
semantic relations between pairs of
nominals. In Proceedings of the 5th
International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation, pages 33–38, Uppsala.

Hovy, Eduard, Mitchell Marcus, Martha
Palmer, Lance Ramshaw, and Ralph
Weischedel. 2006. OntoNotes: The 90%
solution. In Proceedings of Human Language
Technologies–North American Chapter of the
Association of Computational Linguistics
(HLT-NAACL’ 06), pages 57–60,
New York, NY.

Hull, Richard D. and Fernando Gomez.
2000. Semantic interpretation of deverbal
nominalizations. Natural Language
Engineering, 6(2):139–161.

863



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 4

Kipper, K., A. Korhonen, N. Ryant, and
M. Palmer. 2006. Extending VerbNet
with novel verb classes. In Proceedings of
the 5th International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation, pages 1027–1032,
Genova.

Lapata, Maria. 2002. The disambiguation of
nominalizations. Computational Linguistics,
28(3):357–388.

Levi, Judith N. 1978. The Syntax and Semantics
of Complex Nominals. Academic Press Inc.,
New York.

Liu, Chang and Hwee Tou Ng. 2007.
Learning predictive structures for
semantic role labeling of NomBank.
In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting
of the Association of Computational
Linguistics, pages 208–215, Prague.

Madnani, Nitin and Bonnie J. Dorr. 2010.
Generating phrasal and sentential
paraphrases: A survey of data-driven
methods. Computational Linguistics,
36(3):341–387.

Márquez, Lluı́s, Xavier Carreras, Kenneth C.
Litkowski, and Suzanne Stevenson. 2008.
Semantic role labeling: An introduction to
the special issue. Computational Linguistics,
34(2):145–159.

McLachlan, G. J., K. A. Do, and C. Ambroise.
2004. Analyzing Microarray Gene Expression
Data. Wiley, Hoboken, NJ.

Mechura, Michal. 2008. Selectional Preferences,
Corpora and Ontologies. Ph.D. thesis, Trinity
College, University of Dublin.

Meyers, Adam, Ruth Reeves, and Catherine
Macleod. 2004. NP-external arguments:
A study of argument sharing in English.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword
Expressions: Integrating Processing
(MWE’04), pages 96–103, Stroudsburg, PA.

Mooney, Raymond J. 2007. Learning for
semantic parsing. In Computational
Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing:
Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference (CICLing 2007) (invited
paper), pages 311–324, Berlin.

Navigli, Roberto. 2009. Word sense
disambiguation: A survey. ACM
Computing Surveys, 41(2):1–69.

Nunes, Mary L. 1993. Argument linking
in English derived nominals. In Robert
D. Van Valin, editor, Advances in Role
Reference Grammar. John Benjamins,
Amsterdam/Philadelphia, pages 375–432.

Padó, Sebastian, Marco Pennacchiotti,
and Caroline Sporleder. 2008. Semantic
role assignment for event nominalisations
by leveraging verbal data. In Proceedings
of the 22nd International Conference on

Computational Linguistics–Volume 1,
COLING ’08, pages 665–672,
Stroudsburg, PA.

Palmer, Martha, Daniel Gildea, and
Nianwen Xue. 2010. Semantic Role
Labeling. Synthesis on Human Languages
Technologies.Morgan & Claypool
Publishers, Toronto.

Palmer, Martha, Paul Kingsbury, and
Daniel Gildea. 2005. The proposition bank:
An annotated corpus of semantic roles.
Computational Linguistics, 31(1):76–105.

Peris, Aina and Mariona Taulé. 2011.
AnCora-Nom: A Spanish lexicon of
deverbal nominalizations. Procesamiento
del Lenguaje Natural, 46:11–19.

Peris, Aina, Mariona Taulé, Gemma
Boleda, and Horacio Rodrı́guez. 2010.
ADN-Classifier: Automatically assigning
denotation types to nominalizations. In
Proceedings of the Language Resources and
Evaluation Conference, pages 1422–1428,
Valleta.

Peris, Aina, Mariona Taulé, and Horacio
Rodrı́guez. 2009. Hacia un sistema de
clasificación automática de sustantivos
deverbales. Procesamiento del Lenguaje
Natural, 43:23–31.

Peris, Aina, Mariona Taulé, and Horacio
Rodrı́guez. 2010. Semantic annotation of
deverbal nominalizations in the Spanish
AnCora corpus. In Proceedings of the Ninth
International Workshop on Treebanks and
Linguistic Theories, pages 187–198, Tartu.

Picallo, Carme. 1999. La estructura del
Sintagma Nominal: las nominalizaciones
y otros sustantivos con complementos
argumentales. In Ignacio Bosque and
Violeta Demonte, editors, Gramática
Descriptiva de la Lengua Española,
volume 1. Espasa Calpe, Madrid,
pages 363–393.

Pradhan, Sameer, Honglin Sun, Wayne Ward,
James H. Martin, and Dan Jurafsky. 2004.
Parsing arguments of nominalizations
in English and Chinese. In Proceedings
of Human Language Technologies–
North American Chapter of the Association of
Computational Linguistics (HLT-NAACL’ 04,
pages 208–215, Boston, MA.

Pradhan, Sameer S., Edward Loper,
Dmitriy Dligach, and Martha Palmer.
2007. Semeval-2007 task 17: English lexical
sample, SRL and all words. In Proceedings
of the 4th International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluations, SemEval ’07, pages 87–92,
Stroudsburg, PA.

Pustejovsky, James. 1995. The Generative
Lexicon. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

864



Peris, Taulé, and Rodrı́guez Empirical Methods for the Study of Denotation in Nominalizations

Quinlan, J. Ross. 1993. C4.5: Programs for
Machine Learning. Morgan Kaufmann,
San Mateo, CA.

Recasens, Marta, M. Antònia Martı́, and
Mariona Taulé. 2007. Text as scene:
Discourse deixis and bridging relations.
Revista de la Asociación Española para el
Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural, 39,
pages 205–212.

Recasens, Marta and Marta Vila. 2010. On
paraphrase and coreference. Computational
Linguistics, 36(4):639–647.

Ruppenhofer, Josef, Michael Ellsworth,
Miriam R. L. Petruck, Christopher R.
Johnson, and Jan Scheffczyk. 2006.
FrameNet II: Extended theory
and practice. Technical report,
International Computer Science
Institute, Berkeley, CA. Available at
framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu/
book/book.pdf.

Ruppenhofer, Josef, Caroline Sporleder,
Roser Morante, Collin Baker, and
Martha Palmer. 2010. SemEval-2010
Task 10: Linking events and their
participants in discourse. In Proceedings
of the 5th International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation, pages 296–299,
Uppsala.

Santiago, Ramón and Enrique Bustos. 1999.
La derivación nominal. In Ignacio Bosque
and Violeta Demonte, editors, Gramática
Descriptiva de la Lengua Española, volume 3.
Espasa Calpe, Madrid, pages 4505–4594.

Spencer, Andrew and Marina Zaretskaya.
1999. The Essex database of Russian
verbs and their nominalizations.
Technical report, University of Essex,
Colchester.

Surdeanu, Mihai, Richard Johansson,
Adam Meyers, Lluı́s Màrquez, and
Joakim Nivre. 2008. The CoNLL-2008
shared task on joint parsing of syntactic
and semantic dependencies. In Proceedings
of the Twelfth Conference on Computational
Natural Language Learning, CoNLL ’08,
pages 159–177, Stroudsburg, PA.

Taulé, Mariona, M. Antónia Martı́, and
Marta Recasens. 2008. AnCora: Multilevel
annotated corpora for Catalan and
Spanish. In Proceedings of the Sixth
International Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC’08), pages 96 –101,
Marrakech.

Vázquez, Glòria, Ana Fernández, and
Maria Antònia Martı́. 2000. Clasificación
Verbal. Alternancias de Diátesis. Quaderns
de Sintagma, 3, Edicions de la Universitat
de Lleida, Lerida, Spain.

Vendler, Zeno. 1967. Linguistics in Philosophy.
Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY.

Witten, Ian H. and Eibe Frank. 2005. Data
Mining: Practical Machine Learning
Tools and Techniques. Morgan Kaufmann,
San Francisco, CA.

Zubizarreta, Maria Luisa. 1987. Levels of
Representation in the Lexicon and in the
Syntax. Foris, Dordrect.

865




