



































Did It Happen? The Pragmatic Complexity of Veridicality Assessment


Did It Happen? The Pragmatic Complexity of
Veridicality Assessment

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe∗

Stanford University

Christopher D. Manning∗∗

Stanford University

Christopher Potts†

Stanford University

Natural language understanding depends heavily on assessing veridicality—whether events
mentioned in a text are viewed as happening or not—but little consideration is given to this prop-
erty in current relation and event extraction systems. Furthermore, the work that has been done
has generally assumed that veridicality can be captured by lexical semantic properties whereas
we show that context and world knowledge play a significant role in shaping veridicality. We
extend the FactBank corpus, which contains semantically driven veridicality annotations, with
pragmatically informed ones. Our annotations are more complex than the lexical assumption
predicts but systematic enough to be included in computational work on textual understanding.
They also indicate that veridicality judgments are not always categorical, and should therefore
be modeled as distributions. We build a classifier to automatically assign event veridicality
distributions based on our new annotations. The classifier relies not only on lexical features
like hedges or negations, but also on structural features and approximations of world knowledge,
thereby providing a nuanced picture of the diverse factors that shape veridicality.

“All I know is what I read in the papers”
—Will Rogers

1. Introduction

A reader’s or listener’s understanding of an utterance depends heavily on assessing the
extent to which the speaker (author) intends to convey that the events described did
(or did not) happen. An unadorned declarative like The cancer has spread conveys firm
speaker commitment, whereas qualified variants such as There are strong indicators that
the cancer has spread or The cancer might have spread imbue the claim with uncertainty. We

∗ Linguistics Department, Margaret Jacks Hall Building 460, Stanford CA 94305, USA.
E-mail: mcdm@stanford.edu.

∗∗ Linguistics Department & Computer Science Department, Gates Building 1A, 353 Serra Mall, Stanford
CA 94305, USA. E-mail: manning@stanford.edu.

† Linguistics Department, Margaret Jacks Hall Building 460, Stanford CA 94305, USA.
E-mail: cgpotts@stanford.edu.

Submission received: 4 April 2011; revised submission received: 1 October 2011; accepted for publication:
30 November 2011.

© 2012 Association for Computational Linguistics



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 2

call this event veridicality, building on logical, linguistic, and computational insights
about the relationship between language and reader commitment (Montague 1969;
Barwise 1981; Giannakidou 1994, 1995, 1999, 2001; Zwarts 1995; Asher and Lascarides
2003; Karttunen and Zaenen 2005; Rubin, Liddy, and Kando 2005; Rubin 2007; Saurı́
2008). The central goal of this article is to begin to identify the linguistic and contextual
factors that shape readers’ veridicality judgments.1

There is a long tradition of tracing veridicality to fixed properties of lexical items
(Kiparsky and Kiparsky 1970; Karttunen 1973). On this view, a lexical item L is veridical
if the meaning of L applied to argument p entails the truth of p. For example, because
both true and false things can be believed, one should not infer directly from A believes
that S that S is true, making believe non-veridical. Conversely, realize appears to be veridi-
cal, because realizing S entails the truth of S. The prototypical anti-veridical operator is
negation, because not S entails the falsity of S, but anti-veridicality is a characteristic
of a wide range of words and constructions (e.g., have yet to, fail, without). These basic
veridicality judgments can be further subdivided using modal or probabilistic notions.
For example, althoughmay is non-veridical by the basic classifications, wemight classify
may S as possiblewith regard to S.2

Lexical theories of this sort provide a basis for characterizing readers’ veridicality
judgments, but they do not tell the whole story, because they neglect the pragmatic
enrichment that is pervasive in human communication. In the lexical view, say can only
be classified as non-veridical (both true and false things can be said), and yet, if aNew York
Times article contained the sentence United Widget said that its chairman resigned, readers
would reliably infer that United Widget’s chairman resigned—the sentence is, in this
context, veridical (at least to some degree) with respect to the event described by the
embedded clause, with United Widget said functioning to mark the source of evidence
(Simons 2007). Cognitive authority, as termed in information science (Rieh 2010), plays a
crucial role in how people judge the veridicality of events. Here, the provenance of the
document (theNew York Times) and the source (United Widget) combine to reliably lead
a reader to infer that the author intended to convey that the event really happened.
Conversely, allege is lexically non-veridical, and yet this only begins to address the
complex interplay of world knowledge and lexical meaning that will shape people’s
inferences about the sentence FBI agents alleged in court documents today that Zazi had ad-
mitted receiving weapons and explosives training from al Qaeda operatives in Pakistan last year.
We conclude from examples like this that veridicality judgments have an important

pragmatic component, and, in turn, that veridicality should be assessed using infor-
mation from the entire sentence as well as from the context. Lexical theories have a
significant role to play here, but we expect their classifications to be buffeted by other
communicative pressures. For example, the lexical theory can tell us that, as a narrowly
semantic fact, X alleges S is non-veridical with regard to S. Where X is a trustworthy
source for S-type information, however, we might fairly confidently conclude that S is
true. Where X is known to spread disinformation, we might tentatively conclude that
S is false. These pragmatic enrichments move us from uncertainty to some degree of

1 Our use of the term “veridicality” most closely matches that of Giannakidou (1999), where it is defined
so as to be (i) relativized to particular agents or perspectives, (ii) gradable, and (iii) general enough to
cover not only facts but also the commitments that arise from using certain referential expressions and
aspectual morphology. The more familiar term “factuality” seems at odds with all three of these criteria,
so we avoid it.
2 Lexical notions of veridicality must be relativized to specific argument positions, with the other
arguments existentially closed for the purposes of checking entailment. For example, believe is
non-veridical on its inner (sentential) argument because “∃x : x believes p” does not entail p.

302



de Marneffe, Manning, and Potts The Pragmatic Complexity of Veridicality Assessment

certainty. Such enrichments can be central to understanding how a listener (or a reader)
understands a speaker’s (or author’s) message.
Embracing pragmatic enrichment means embracing uncertainty. Although listeners

can feel reasonably confident about the core lexical semantics of the words of their lan-
guage, there is no such firm foundation when it comes to this kind of pragmatic enrich-
ment. The newspaper says, United Widget said that its profits were up in the fourth quarter,
but just how trustworthy is United Widget on such matters? Speakers are likely to vary
in what they intend in such cases, and listeners are thus forced to operate under uncer-
tainty when making the requisite inferences. Lexical theories allow us to abstract away
from these challenges, but a pragmatically informed approach must embrace them.
The FactBank corpus is a leading resource for research on veridicality (Saurı́ and

Pustejovsky 2009). Its annotations are “textual-based”: They seek to capture the ways
in which lexical meanings and local semantic interactions determine veridicality judg-
ments. In order to better understand the role of pragmatic enrichment, we had a large
group of linguistically naive annotators annotate a portion of the FactBank corpus,
given very loose guidelines. Whereas the FactBank annotators were explicitly told to
avoid bringing world knowledge to bear on the task, our annotators were encouraged
to choose labels that reflected their own natural reading of the texts. Each sentence was
annotated by 10 annotators, which increases our confidence in them and also highlights
the sort of vagueness and ambiguity that can affect veridicality. These new annotations
help confirm our hypothesis that veridicality judgments are shaped by a variety of other
linguistic and contextual factors beyond lexical meanings.
The nature of such cues is central to linguistic pragmatics and fundamental to

a range of natural language processing (NLP) tasks, including information extrac-
tion, opinion detection, and textual entailment. Veridicality is prominent in BioNLP,
where identifying negations (Chapman et al. 2001; Elkin et al. 2005; Huang and Lowe
2007; Pyysalo et al. 2007; Morante and Daelemans 2009) and hedges or “speculations”
(Szarvas et al. 2008; Kim et al. 2009) is crucial to proper textual understanding. Recently,
more attention has been devoted to veridicality within NLP, with the 2010 workshop
on negation and speculation in natural language processing (Morante and Sporleder
2010). Veridicality was also at the heart of the 2010 CoNLL shared task (Farkas et al.
2010), where the goal was to distinguish uncertain events from the rest. The centrality
of veridicality assessment to tasks like event and relation extraction is arguably still
not fully appreciated, however. At present the vast majority of information extraction
systems work at roughly the clause level and regard any relation they find as true. But
relations in actual text may not be facts for all sorts of reasons, such as being embedded
under an attitude verb like doubt, being the antecedent of a conditional, or being part of
the report by an untrustworthy source. To avoid wrong extractions in these cases, it is
essential for NLP systems to assess the veridicality of extracted facts.
In the present article, we argue for three main claims about veridicality. First and

foremost, we aim to show that pragmatically informed veridicality judgments are sys-
tematic enough to be included in computational work on textual understanding. Sec-
ond, we seek to justify FactBank’s seven-point categorization over simpler alternatives
(e.g., certain vs. uncertain, as in the CoNLL task). Finally, the inherent uncertainty of
pragmatic inference suggests to us that veridicality judgments are not always categori-
cal, and thus are better modeled as probability distributions over veridicality categories.
To substantiate these claims, we analyze in detail the annotations we collected, and
we report on experiments that treat veridicality as a distribution-prediction task. Our
feature set includes not only lexical items like hedges, modals, and negations, but
also complex structural features and approximations of world knowledge. Though the

303



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 2

resulting classifier has limited ability to assess veridicality in complex real world
contexts, it still does a quite good job of capturing human pragmatic judgments of
veridicality. We argue that the model yields insights into the complex pragmatic factors
that shape readers’ veridicality judgments.

2. Corpus Annotation

FactBank’s annotations are intended to isolate semantic effects from pragmatic ones in
the area of veridicality assessment. Our overarching goal is to examine how pragmatic
enrichment affects this picture. Thus, we use the FactBank sentences in our own inves-
tigation, to facilitate comparisons between the two kinds of information and to create a
supplement of FactBank itself. This section introduces FactBank in more detail and then
thoroughly reviews our own annotation project and its results.

2.1 FactBank Corpus

FactBank provides veridicality annotations on events relative to each participant in-
volved in the discourse. It consists of 208 documents from newswire and broadcast
news reports in which 9,472 event descriptions (verbs, nouns, and adjectives) were
manually identified. There is no fundamental difference in the way verbs, nouns, and
adjectives are annotated. Events are single words. The data come from TimeBank 1.2
and a fragment of AQUAINT TimeML (Pustejovsky et al. 2006). The documents in the
AQUAINT TimeML subset come from two topics: “NATO, Poland, Czech Republic,
Hungary” and “the Slepian abortion murder.”
The tags annotate 〈event, participant〉 pairs in sentences. The participant can be

anyone mentioned in the sentence as well as its author. In Example (1), the target event
identified by the word means is assigned a value with respect to both the source some
experts and the author of the sentence.

Example 1
Some experts now predict Anheuser’s entry into the fray means near-term earnings
trouble for all the industry players.

Veridicality(means, experts) = PR+

Veridicality(means, author) = Uu

The tags are summarized in Table 1. Each tag consists of a veridicality value (certain
[CT], probable [PR], possible [PS], underspecified [U]) and a polarity value (positive
[+], negative [−], unknown [u]). CT+ corresponds to the standard notion of veridicality,
CT− to anti-veridicality, and Uu to non-veridicality. The PR and PS categories add a
modal or probabilistic element to the scale, to capture finer-grained intuitions.
Examples (2) and (3) illustrate the annotations for a noun and an adjective.

Example 2
But an all-out bidding war between the world’s top auto giants for Britain’s leading
luxury-car maker seems unlikely.

Veridicality(war, author) = PR−

304



de Marneffe, Manning, and Potts The Pragmatic Complexity of Veridicality Assessment

Table 1
FactBank annotation scheme. CT = certain; PR = probable; PS = possible; U = underspecified;
+ = positive; − = negative; u = unknown.

Value Definition Count

CT+ According to the source, it is certainly the case that X 7,749 (57.6%)
PR+ According to the source, it is probably the case that X 363 (2.7%)
PS+ According to the source, it is possibly the case that X 226 (1.7%)

CT− According to the source, it is certainly not the case that X 433 (3.2%)
PR− According to the source it is probably not the case that X 56 (0.4%)
PS− According to the source it is possibly not the case that X 14 (0.1%)

CTu The source knows whether it is the case that X or that not X 12 (0.1%)
Uu The source does not know what the factual status of the event is, 4,607 (34.2%)

or does not commit to it
13,460

Example 3
Recently, analysts have said Sun also is vulnerable to competition from International
Business Machines Corp., which plans to introduce a group of workstations early next
year, and Next Inc.

Veridicality(vulnerable, analysts) = CT+

Veridicality(vulnerable, author) = Uu

The last column of Table 1 reports the value counts in the corpus. The data are
heavily skewed, with 62% of the events falling to the positive side and 57.6% in the CT+
category alone. The inter-annotator agreement for assigning veridicality tags was high
(κ = 0.81, a conservative figure given the partial ordering in the tags). A training/test
split is defined in FactBank: The documents from TimeBank 1.2 are used as the training
data and the ones from the subset of the AQUAINT TimeML corpus as the testbed.
As we noted earlier, FactBank annotations are supposed to be as purely semantic

as possible; the goal of the project was to “focus on identifying what are the judgments
that the relevant participants make about the factuality nature of events, independently
from their intentions and beliefs, and exclusively based on the linguistic expressions
employed in the text to express such judgments,” disregarding “external factors such as
source reliability or reader bias” (Saurı́ 2008, page 5). The annotation manual contains
an extensive set of discriminatory tests (Saurı́ 2008, pages 230–235) that are informed
by lexical theories of veridicality. The resulting annotations are “textual-based, that
is, reflecting only what is expressed in the text and avoiding any judgment based on
individual knowledge” (Saurı́ and Pustejovsky 2009, page 253). In addition, discourse
structure is not taken into account: “we decided to constrain our annotation to informa-
tion only present at the sentence level” (Saurı́ and Pustejovsky 2009, page 253).

2.2 Annotations from the Reader’s Perspective

In the terminology of Levinson (1995, 2000), FactBank seeks to capture aspects of sen-
tence meaning, whereas we aim to capture aspects of utterance meaning, which brings us

305



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 2

closer to characterizing the amount and kind of information that a reader can reliably
extract from an utterance. We thus extend the FactBank annotations by bringing world
knowledge into the picture. Whereas the FactBank annotators were explicitly told to
avoid any reader bias, to disregard the credibility of the source, and to focus only on the
linguistic terms used in the text to express veridicality, we are interested in capturing
how people judge the veridicality of events when reader bias, credibility of the source,
and what we know about the world is allowed to play a role.
To do this, we took a subset of the FactBank sentences annotated at the author

level and recruited annotators for them using Mechanical Turk. We restricted the task to
annotators located in the United States. Our subset consists of 642 sentences (466 verbs,
155 nouns, 21 adjectives); we use all the PR+, PS+, PR−, PS− items from the FactBank
training set plus some randomly chosen Uu, CT+, and CT− items. (We did not take
any CTu sentences into account, as there are not enough of them to support experi-
mentation.) The annotators were asked to decide whether they thought the boldfaced
event described in the sentence did (or will) happen. Thus the judgments are from the
reader’s perspective, and not from the author’s or participants’ perspective, as in the original
FactBank annotations. We used Saurı́’s seven-point annotation scheme (removing CTu).
To ensure that the workers understood the task, we first gave them four mandatory
training items—simple non-corpus examples designed to help them conceptualize the
annotation categories properly. The sentences were presented in blocks of 26 items,
three of which were “tests” very similar to the training items, included to ensure that
the workers were careful. We discarded data from two Turkers because they did not
correctly tag the three test sentences.3

Like Saurı́, we did not take the discourse structure into account: Turkers saw
only disconnected sentences and judged the event sentence by sentence. Subsequent
mentions of the same event in a discourse can, however, lead a listener to revise a
veridicality judgment already posed for that event. For instance in Example (4) from
Saurı́ (2008, page 56), a reader’s veridicality judgment about the tipped off event will
probably change when reading the second sentence.

Example 4
Yesterday, the police denied that drug dealers were tipped off before the operation.
However, it emerged last night that a reporter from London Weekend Television
unwittingly tipped off residents about the raid when he phoned contacts on the estate
to ask if there had been a raid—before it had actually happened.

Here, though, we concentrate on the sentence level, and leave the issue of discourse
structure for future work. In other words, we capture the reader’s judgment about the
veridicality of an event after each sentence, independent on whether the judgment will
be revised when later information is read. This is partly to facilitate comparisons with
FactBank and partly because we are presently unsure how to computationally model
the effects of context in this area.
Figure 1 shows how the items were displayed to the Turkers. We rephrased the

event under consideration (the bold sentence in Figure 1), because it is not always
straightforward to identify the intended rephrasing. Following Saurı́, we refer to this
rephrasing process as normalization. The normalization strips out any polarity and

3 The data are available at http://christopherpotts.net/ling/data/factbank/.

306



de Marneffe, Manning, and Potts The Pragmatic Complexity of Veridicality Assessment

Figure 1
Design of the Mechanical Turk experiment.

modality markers to focus only on the core event talked about. For example, in Police
gave no details, we needed to make sure that workers evaluated the positive form
(“Police gave details”), rather than the negative one (“Police gave no details”). Similarly,
in Hudson’s Bay Co. announced terms of a previously proposed rights issue that is expected to
raise about 396 million Canadian dollars (US$337 million) net of expenses, the normalization
will remove the modality marker is expected (“the proposed rights issue will raise
about 396 million Canadian dollars net of expenses”). We followed Saurı́’s extensive
guidelines for this rephrasing process (Saurı́ 2008, pages 218–222).
We collected 10 annotations for each of the 642 events. A total of 177 Turkers

participated in the annotations. Most Turkers did just one batch of 23 non-test examples;
themean number of annotations per Turker was 44, and they each annotated between 23
and 552 sentences. Table 2 reports Fleiss kappa scores (Fleiss 1971) using the full seven-
category scheme. These scores are conservative because they do not take into account
the fact that the scale is partially ordered, with CT+, PR+, and PS+ forming a “posi-
tive” category, CT−, PR−, and PS− forming a “negative” category, and Uu remaining
alone. The overall Fleiss kappa for this three-category version is much higher (0.66),
reflecting the fact that many of the disagreements were about degree of confidence (e.g.,
CT+ vs. PR+) rather than the basic veridicality judgment of “positive”, “negative”, or
“unknown”. At least 6 out of 10 Turkers agreed on the same tag for 500 of the

Table 2
Fleiss kappa scores with associated p-values.

κ p value

CT+ 0.63 < 0.001
CT− 0.80 < 0.001
PR+ 0.41 < 0.001
PR− 0.34 < 0.001
PS+ 0.40 < 0.001
PS− 0.12 < 0.001
Uu 0.25 < 0.001

Overall 0.53 < 0.001

307

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showImage?doi=10.1162/COLI_a_00097&iName=master.img-000.jpg&w=359&h=126


Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 2

642 sentences (78%). For 53% of the examples, at least 8 Turkers agreed with each other,
and total agreement is obtained for 26% of the data (165 sentences).

2.3 An Alternative Scale

One of our goals is to assess whether FactBank’s seven-category scheme is the right one
for the task. To this end, we also evaluated whether a five-tag version would increase
agreement and perhaps provide a better match with readers’ intuitions. Logically, PR−
is equivalent to PS+, and PS− to PR+, so it seemed natural to try to collapse them
into a two-way division between “probable” and “possible”. We thus ran the MTurk
experiment again with the five-point scheme in Table 3.
The five-point scheme led to lower agreement between Turkers. Globally, the PR−

items were generally mapped to “no”, and PS− to either “no” or “unknown”. Some
Turkers chose the expected mappings (PS− to “probable” and PR− to “possible”), but
only very rarely. This is explicable in terms of the pragmatics of veridicality judgments.
Though PR− may be logically equivalent to PS+, and PS− to PR+, there are important
pragmatic differences between giving a positive judgment and giving a negative one.
For example, in Example (5), speaker B will not infer that he can possibly get a further
discount, even if “Probably not” is consistent with “Possibly”. Conversely, had the
answer been “Possibly”, A would have remained hopeful.

Example 5

A: Is it possible to get further discount on the rate?

B: Probably not.

In sum, there seems to be a very intuitive notion of veridicality along the partially
ordered scale proposed by Saurı́. In their work on assessing the degree of event certainty
to which an author commits, Rubin, Liddy, and Kando (2005) used the following five-
point scale: absolute, high, moderate, low, and uncertain. They did not obtain very high
inter-annotator agreement (κ = 0.41). Saurı́ hypothesized that their low agreement is
due to a fuzzy approach and the lack of precise guidelines. Rubin, Liddy, and Kando
had no clear identification of certainty markers, and no explicit test for distinguishing
different degrees of certainty (unlike Saurı́). In our experiment, however, the guidelines
were similarly loose: Turkers were instructed only to “read 30 sentences and decide
whether the events described in these sentences did (or will) happen.” They were not
asked to limit their attention to just the information in the sentence, and they were not

Table 3
An alternative five-tag annotation scheme.

Category Original

yes CT+
probable PR+/PS−
possible PS+/PR−
no CT−
unknown Uu

308



de Marneffe, Manning, and Potts The Pragmatic Complexity of Veridicality Assessment

given any mappings between linguistic markers and veridicality values. Nonetheless,
Turkers reached good agreement levels in assessing event veridicality on a seven-point
scale. We conclude from this that Saurı́’s scale comes closer than its competitors to
capturing reader intuitions about veridicality. The good agreement mirrors the general
high inter-annotator agreement levels that have been found for the Recognizing Textual
Entailment task (Manning 2006), perhaps reflecting the fact that judging inference and
veridicality in context is a natural, everyday human task.
Diab et al. (2009) annotated a 10,000-word corpus for what they call “committed

beliefs”: whether the author of the sentence indicates with linguistic means that he
believes or disbelieves that the event described by the sentence is a fact. Thus, in essence,
the annotations assess the degree of event certainty to which an author commits, as in
Rubin’s work. They use a three-point scale: committed belief, non-committed belief, and
not applicable. An example of committed belief is GM has laid off workers. Affirmative
sentences in the future are also considered as committed belief (e.g., GM will lay off
workers). Sentences with modals and events embedded under reported verbs are an-
notated as non-committed belief. The third category, not applicable, consists of sentences
expressing desire (Some wish GM would lay of workers), questions (Many wonder if GM will
lay off workers), and requirements (Lay off workers!). The corpus covers different genres
(newswire, e-mail, blog, dialogue). The inter-annotator agreement was high (95%).
Prabhakaran, Rambow, and Diab (2010) used the corpus to automatically tag committed
beliefs according to that three-point scale. This, too, is an important resource, but it is
difficult to compare it with our own task, for two reasons. First, the annotators sought to
prevent world knowledge from influencing their annotations, which is concerned only
with linguistic markers. Second, the category non-committed belief conflates the possible,
probable, and unknown categories of our corpus (Saurı́’s). Though some work in the
biomedical domain (i.e., Hobby et al. 2000) suggests that the distinction between possi-
ble and probable is hard to make, we did not want to avoid it, because people routinely
make such fine-grained modal distinctions when assessing claims. What’s more, the
approach we develop allows us to quantify the degree to which such judgments are
in fact variable and uncertain.

3. Lessons from the New Annotations

This section presents two kinds of high-level analysis of our annotations. We first com-
pare them with FactBank annotations for veridicality according to the author, identify-
ing places where the annotations point to sharp divergences between sentence meaning
and utterance meaning. We then study the full distribution of annotations we received
(10 per sentence), using them to highlight the uncertainty of veridicality judgments.
Both of these discussions deeply inform the modeling work of Section 4.

3.1 The Impact of Pragmatic Enrichment

Although the MTurk annotations largely agree with those of FactBank, there are sys-
tematic differences between the two that are indicative of the ways in which pragmatic
enrichment plays a role in assessing veridicality. The goal of this section is to uncover
those differences. To sharpen the picture, we limit attention to the sentences for which
there is a majority-vote category, that is, at least 6 out of 10 Turkers agreed on the
annotation. This threshold was met for 500 of the 642 examples.

309



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 2

Table 4
Inter-annotator agreement comparing FactBank annotations with MTurk annotations. The data
are limited to the 500 examples in which at least 6 of the 10 Turkers agreed on the label, which is
then taken to be the true MTurk label. The very poor value for PS− derives from the fact, in this
subset, that label was chosen only once in FactBank and not at all by our annotators.

κ p value

CT+ 0.37 < 0.001
PR+ 0.79 < 0.001
PS+ 0.86 < 0.001
CT− 0.91 < 0.001
PR− 0.77 < 0.001
PS− −0.001 = 0.982
Uu 0.06 = 0.203

Overall 0.60 < 0.001

Table 4 uses kappa scores to measure the agreement between FactBank and our
annotations on this 500-sentence subset of the data. We treat FactBank as one annotator
and our collective Turkers as a second annotator, with the majority label the correct one
for that annotator. What we see is modest to very high agreement for all the categories
except Uu. The agreement level is also relatively low for CT+. The corresponding
confusion matrix in Table 5 helps explicate these numbers. The Uu category is used
much more often in FactBank than by Turkers, and the dominant alternative choice for
the Turkers was CT+. Thus, the low score for Uu also effectively drops the score for
CT+. The question is why this contrast exists. In other words, why do Turkers choose
CT+ where FactBank says Uu?
The divergence can be traced to the way in which lexicalist theories handle events

embedded under attitude predicates like say, report, and indicate: any such embedded
event is tagged Uu in FactBank. In our annotations, readers are not viewing the veridi-
cality of reported events as unknown. Instead they are sensitive to a wide range of
syntactic and contextual features, including markers in the embedded clause, expec-
tations about the subject as a source for the information conveyed by the embedded
clause, and lexical competition between the author’s choice of attitude predicate and
its alternatives. For example, even though the events in Example (6) are all embedded

Table 5
Confusion matrix comparing the FactBank annotations (rows) with our annotations (columns).

MTurk
CT+ PR+ PS+ CT− PR− PS− Uu Total

Fa
ct
B
an
k

CT+ 54 2 0 0 0 0 0 56
PR+ 4 63 2 0 0 0 0 69
PS+ 1 1 55 0 0 0 2 59
CT− 5 0 0 146 0 0 2 153
PR− 0 0 0 0 5 0 1 6
PS− 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1
Uu 94 18 9 12 2 0 21 156

Total 158 84 66 158 7 0 27 500

310



de Marneffe, Manning, and Potts The Pragmatic Complexity of Veridicality Assessment

under an attitude predicate (say), the events in Examples (6a) and (6b) are assessed as
certain (CT+), whereas the words highly confident in Example (6c) trigger PR+, and may
in Example (6d) leads to PS+.

Example 6

(a) Magna International Inc.’s chief financial officer, James McAlpine,
resigned and its chairman, Frank Stronach, is stepping in to help
turn the automotive-parts manufacturer around, the company said.

Normalization: James McAlpine resigned

Annotations: CT+: 10

(b) In the air, U.S. Air Force fliers say they have engaged in “a little cat and
mouse” with Iraqi warplanes.

Normalization: U.S. Air Force fliers have engaged in “a little cat and
mouse” with Iraqi warplanes

Annotations: CT+: 9, PS+: 1

(c) Merieux officials said last week that they are “highly confident” the offer
will be approved.

Normalization: the offer will be approved

Annotations: PR+: 10

(d) U.S. commanders said 5,500 Iraqi prisoners were taken in the first hours of
the ground war, though some military officials later said the total may
have climbed above 8,000.

Normalization: the total Iraqi prisoners climbed above 8,000

Annotations: PS+: 7, PR+: 3

In Example (6a), the company said is a parenthetical modifying the main clause
(Ross 1973). Asher (2000), Rooryck (2001), and Simons (2007) argue that such construc-
tions often mark the evidential source for the main-clause information, rather than
embedding it semantically. In terms of our annotations, this predicts that CT+ or CT−
judgments will be common for such constructions, because they become more like two-
part meanings: the main-clause and the evidential commentary.
To test this hypothesis, we took from the Turkers’ annotations the subset of sen-

tences tagged Uu in FactBank where the event is directly embedded under an attitude
verb or introduced by a parenthetical. We also removed examples where a modal aux-
iliary modified the event, because those are a prominent source of non-CT annotations
independently of attitude predication. This yielded a total of 78 sentences. Of these,
33 are parenthetical, and 31 (94%) of those are tagged CT+ or CT−. Of the remaining

311



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 2

45 non-parenthetical examples, 42 (93%) of those are tagged CT+ or CT−. Thus, both
parenthetical and non-parenthetical verbs are about equally likely to lead to a CT tag.4

This finding is consistent with the evidential analysis of such parentheticals,
but it suggests that standard embedding can function pragmatically as an evidential
as well. This result is expected under the analysis of Simons (2007) (see also Frazier
and Clifton 2005; Clifton and Frazier 2010). It is also anticipated by Karttunen (1973),
who focuses on the question of whether attitude verbs are plugs for presuppositions,
that is, whether presuppositions introduced in their complements are interpreted as
semantically embedded. He reviews evidence suggesting that these verbs can be veridi-
cal with respect to such content, but he tentatively concludes that these are purely
pragmatic effects, writing, “we do not seem to have any alternative except to classify
all propositional attitude verbs as plugs, although I am still not convinced that this is
the right approach” (page 190). The evidence of the present article leads us to agree with
Karttunen about this basic lexicalist classification, with the major caveat that the utter-
ance meanings involved are considerably more complex. (For additional discussion of
this point, see Zaenen, Karttunen, and Crouch [2005] and Manning [2006].)
There are also similarities between the FactBank annotations and our own in the

case of Uu. As in FactBank, antecedents of conditionals (7), generic sentences (8), and
clear cases of uncertainty with respect to the future (9) were tagged Uu by a majority of
Turkers.

Example 7

(a) If the heavy outflows continue, fund managers will face increasing
pressure to sell off some of their junk to pay departing investors in the
weeks ahead.

Normalization: the heavy outflows will continue

Annotations: Uu: 7, PS+: 2, CT+: 1

(b) A unit of DPC Acquisition Partners said it would seek to liquidate the
computer-printer maker “as soon as possible,” even if a merger isn’t
consummated.

Normalization: a merger will be consummated

Annotations: Uu: 8, PS+: 2

Example 8
When prices are tumbling, they must bewilling to buy shares from sellers when no one
else will.

Normalization: they are willing to buy shares

Annotations: Uu: 7, PR+: 2, PS+: 1

4 We do not regard this as evidence that there is no difference between parenthetical and non-parenthetical
uses when it comes to veridicality, but rather only that the categorical examples do not reveal one.
Indeed, if we consider the full distribution of annotations, then a linear model with Parenthetical and
Verb predicting the number of CT tags reveals Parenthetical to be positively correlated with CT+
(coefficient estimate = 1.36, p = 0.028).

312



de Marneffe, Manning, and Potts The Pragmatic Complexity of Veridicality Assessment

Example 9

(a) The program also calls for coordination of economic reforms and joint
improvement of social programs in the two countries.

Normalization: there will be coordination of economic reforms and
joint improvement of social programs in the two countries

Annotations: Uu: 7, PR+: 2, PS+: 1

(b) But weak car sales raise questions about future demand from the
auto sector.

Normalization: there will be demand from the auto sector

Annotations: Uu: 6, PS+: 2, CT+: 1, PR−: 1

Another difference between FactBank and the Turkers is the more nuanced cate-
gories for PS and PR events. In FactBank, markers of possibility or probability, such
as could or likely, uniquely determine the corresponding tag (Saurı́ 2008, page 233). In
contrast, the Turkers allow the bias created by these lexical items to be swayed by other
factors. For example, the auxiliary could can trigger a possible or an unknown event (10).
In FactBank, all such sentences are marked PS+.

Example 10

(a) They aren’t being allowed to leave and could become hostages.

Normalization: they will become hostages

Annotations: PS+: 10

(b) Iraq could start hostilitieswith Israel either through a direct attack
or by attacking Jordan.

Normalization: there will be hostilities

Annotations: Uu: 6, PS+: 3, PR+: 1

Similarly, expected and appeared are often markers of PR events. Whereas it is
uniquely so in FactBank, however, our annotations showmuch shifting to PS. Examples
(11) and (12) highlight the contrast: It seems likely that the annotators simply have
different overall expectations about the forecasting described in each example, a high-
level pragmatic influence that does not attach to any particular lexical item.

Example 11

(a) Big personal computer makers are developing 486-based machines, which
are expected to reach the market early next year.

Normalization: 486-based machines will reach the market early
next year

Annotations: PR+: 10

313



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 2

(b) Beneath the tepid news-release jargon lies a powerful threat from the
brewing giant, which last year accounted for about 41% of all U.S. beer
sales and is expected to see that grow to 42.5% in the current year.

Normalization: there will be growth to 42.5% in the current year

Annotations: PS+: 6, PR+: 3, CT+: 1

Example 12

(a) Despite the lack of any obvious successors, the Iraqi leader’s internal
power base appeared to be narrowing even before the war began.

Normalization: the Iraqi leader’s internal power base was narrowing
even before the war began

Annotations: PR+: 7, CT+: 1, PS+: 1, PS−: 1

(b) Saddam appeared to accept a border demarcation treaty he had rejected in
peace talks following the August 1988 cease-fire of the eight-year war with
Iran.

Normalization: Saddam accepted a border demarcation treaty

Annotations: PS+: 6, PR+: 2, CT+: 2

Another difference is that nouns appearing in a negative context were tagged as
CT+ by the Turkers but as CT− or PR− in FactBank.

Example 13

(a) However, its equity in the net income of National Steel declined to
$6.3 million from $10.9 million as a result of softer demand and lost
orders following prolonged labor talks and a threatened strike.

Normalization: there were orders

Annotations: CT+: 6, PR+: 1, PR−: 1, PS+: 1, Uu: 1

This seems to trace to uncertainty about what the annotation should be when
the event involves a change of state (from orders existing to not existing). Saurı́ and
Pustejovsky (2009, page 260) note that noun events were a frequent source of disagree-
ment between the two annotators because the annotation guidelines did not address at
all how to deal with them.

3.2 The Uncertainty of Pragmatic Enrichment

For the purpose of comparing our annotations with those of FactBank, it is useful to sin-
gle out the Turkers’ majority-choice category, as we did here. We have 10 annotations for
each event, however, which invites exploration of the full distribution of annotations,

314



de Marneffe, Manning, and Potts The Pragmatic Complexity of Veridicality Assessment

to see if the areas of stability and variation can teach us something about the nature
of speakers’ veridicality judgments. In this section, we undertake such an exploration,
arguing that the patterns reveal veridicality judgments to be importantly probabilistic,
as one would expect from a truly pragmatic phenomenon.
Figure 2 provides a high-level summary of the reaction distributions that our sen-

tences received. The labels on the y-axis characterize types of distribution. For example,
5/5 groups the sentences for which the annotators were evenly split between two
categories (e.g., a sentence for which 5 Turkers assigned PR+ and 5 assigned PS+, or
a sentence for which 5 Turkers chose PR+ and 5 chose Uu). The largest grouping, 10,
pools the examples on which all the annotators were in agreement.
We can safely assume that some of the variation seen in Figure 2 is due to the

noisiness of the crowd-sourced annotation process. Some annotators might have been
inattentive or confused, or simply lacked the expertise to make these judgments (Snow
et al. 2008). For example, the well-represented 1/9 and 1/1/8 groups probably rep-
resent examples for which veridicality assessment is straightforward but one or two
of the annotators did not do a good job. If all the distributions were this skewed,
we might feel secure in treating veridicality as categorical. There are many examples
for which it seems implausible to say that the variation is due to noise, however.
For example, 5/5 groups include sentences like Examples (14) and (15), for which the
judgments depend heavily on one’s prior assumptions about the entities and concepts
involved.

Figure 2
Reaction distributions by type.

315



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 2

Example 14
In a statement, the White House said it would do “whatever is necessary” to ensure
compliance with the sanctions.

Normalization: there will be compliance with the sanctions

Annotations: Uu: 5, PR+: 5

Example 15
Diplomacy appears to be making headway in resolving the United Nations’ standoff
with Iraq.

Normalization: diplomacy is resolving the United Nations’ standoff with Iraq

Annotations: PR+: 5, PS+: 5

The 4/6, 1/4/5, 4/4, and 3/3 groups contain many similarly difficult cases. Com-
bining all of the rows where two categories received at least 3 votes, we get 162 exam-
ples, which is 25% of the total data set. Thus, a non-negligible subset of our sentences
seem to involve examples where readers’ responses are divided, suggesting that there
is no unique correct label for them.
Finally, it seems likely that the long tail of very high-entropy distributions at the top

of the graph in Figure 2 is owed in large part to the fact that veridicality judgments
are often not reachable with confidence, because the utterance is inherently under-
specified or because additional contextual information is needed in order to be sure.
This, too, suggests to us that it would be foolhardy to assign a unique veridicality
label to every example. Of course, situating the sentences in context would reduce
some of this uncertainty, but no amount of background information could eliminate it
entirely.
When we look more closely at these distributions, we find additional evidence for

the idea that veridicality is graded and variable. One of the most striking patterns
concerns the question of whether the annotators enriched an example at all, in the
following sense. Consider an event that is semantically non-veridical. This could be
simply because it is embedded under a non-factive attitude predicate (say, allege), or
an evidential marker (according to sources, it seems). The semantic strategy for such
cases is to pick Uu. Depending on the amount and nature of the contextual infor-
mation brought to bear on the assessment, however, one might enrich this into one
of the positive or negative categories. A cautious positive enrichment would be PS+,
for example.
In light of this, it seems promising to look at the subset of 4/6 and 5/5 examples

in which one of the chosen categories is Uu, to see what the other choices are like. On
the enrichment hypothesis, the other choices should be uniformly positive or negative
(up to some noise). Figure 3 summarizes the sentences in our corpus that result in this
kind of split. The y-axis represents the percentage of non-Uu tags, with the positive
values (CT+, PR+, PS+) extending upwards and the negative ones extending down-
wards. For sentences 1–5 and 18–47 (74% of the total), all of the non-Uu tags were
uniform in their basic polarity. What’s more, the distributions within the positive and
negative portions are highly systematic. In the positive realm, the dominant choice is
PS+, the most tentative positive enrichment, followed by PR+, and then CT+. (In the
negative realm, CT− is the most represented, but we are unsure whether this supports
any definitive conclusions, given the small number of examples.) Our generalization

316



de Marneffe, Manning, and Potts The Pragmatic Complexity of Veridicality Assessment

Figure 3
The subset of 4/6 and 5/5 distributions in which one of the dominant categories was Uu. The
bars represent the distribution of non-Uu tags for each of these sentences. The top portion
depicts the positive tags, and the bottom portion depicts the negative tags.

about these patterns is that enrichment from a semantic Uu baseline is systematic and
common, though with interesting variation both in whether it occurs and, if it does,
how much.
The full distributions are also informative when it comes to understanding the

range of effects that specific lexical items can have on veridicality assessment. To illus-
trate, we focus on the modal auxiliary verbs can, could, may, might, must, will, would.5 In
keepingwith lexicalist theories, when they are clausemate to an event, that event is often
tagged with one of the PR and PS tags. The relationship is a loose one, however; the
modal seems to steer people into these weaker categories but does not determine their
final judgment. We illustrate in Example (16) with examples involving may in positive
contexts.

Example 16

(a) Last Friday’s announcement was the first official word that the project was
in trouble and that the company’s plans for a surge in market share may
have been overly optimistic.

Normalization: the company’s plans have been overly optimistic

Annotations: PS+: 5, PR+: 5

(b) In a letter, prosecutors told Mr. Antar’s lawyers that because of the recent
Supreme Court rulings, they could expect that any fees collected from Mr.
Antar may be seized.

Normalization: fees collected from Mr. Antar will be seized

Annotations: PS+: 4, PR+: 6

5 Other modals, such as should, ought, and have to, are either not well represented in our data or
simply absent.

317



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 2

(c) The prospectus didn’t include many details about the studio and theme
park, although conceptual drawings, released this month, show that it
may feature several “themed” areas similar to those found at parks built
by Walt Disney Co.

Normalization: the park features several “themed” areas similar to
those found at parks built by Walt Disney Co.

Annotations: PS+: 4, PR+: 4, CT+:1, Uu:1

Figure 4 summarizes the data for the set of modals on which we could focus. Here,
we restrict attention to event descriptions that are clausemate to a modal, effectively
taking each modal to be annotated with the distribution of annotations for its clause-
mate event. We also look only at the positive tags, because the negative ones were too
infrequent to provide reliable estimates.
Two types of modals have been recognized in the literature, weak and strongmodals

(Wierzbicka 1987; Sæbo 2001; von Fintel and Iatridou 2008; Finlay 2009). Each type has
different distribution profiles. As expected, the weak possibility modals can, could, may,
and might correlate strongly with PS. The other categories are also well-represented
for these modals, however, indicating that the contribution of these markers is heavily
influenced by other factors. The strong (or necessity) modals must, will, and would are
much more evenly distributed across the categories.
The mixed picture for modal auxiliaries seems to be typical of modal markers more

generally. We do not have enough data to present a quantitative picture for items like
potentially, apparently, and partly, but the following sentences suggest that they are every
bit as nuanced in their contributions to veridicality.

Figure 4
The contribution of modal auxiliaries to veridicality judgments.

318



de Marneffe, Manning, and Potts The Pragmatic Complexity of Veridicality Assessment

Example 17

(a) Anheuser-Busch Cos. said it plans to aggressively discount its major
beer brands, setting the stage for a potentially bruising price war as the
maturing industry’s growth continues to slow.

Normalization: there will be a bruising price war

Annotations: PS+: 5, PR+: 5

(b) The portfolio unit of the French bank group Credit Lyonnais told stock
market regulators that it bought 43,000 shares of Cie. de Navigation
Mixte, apparently to help fend off an unwelcome takeover bid for the
company.

Normalization: the 43,000 shares of Cie. de Navigation Mixte will
fend off an unwelcome takeover bid for the company

Annotations: PS+: 4, PR+: 4, CT:1, Uu:1

(c) Nonetheless, concern about the chip may have been responsible
for a decline of 87.5 cents in Intel’s stock to $32 a share yesterday in
over-the-counter trading, on volume of 3,609,800 shares, and partly
responsible for a drop in Compaq’s stock in New York Stock Exchange
composite trading on Wednesday

Normalization: concern about the chip is responsible for a drop in
Compaq’s stock

Annotations: PS+: 4, PR+: 4, CT+:1, PR−:1

The discussion in this section suggests to us that work on veridicality should
embrace variation and uncertainty as part of the characterization of veridicality, rather
than trying to approximate the problem as one of basic categorization. We now turn
to experiments with a system for veridicality assessment that acknowledges the multi-
valued nature of veridicality.

4. A System for Veridicality Assessment

In this section, we describe amaximum entropy classifier (Berger, Della Pietra, andDella
Pietra 1996) that we built to automatically assign veridicality. For classification tasks, the
dominant tradition within computational linguistics has been to adjudicate differing
human judgments and to assign a single class for each item in the training data. In
Section 3.2, however, we reviewed the evidence in our annotations that veridicality is
not necessarily categorical, by virtue of the uncertainty involved in making pragmatic
judgments of this sort. In order to alignwith our theoretical conception of the problem as
probabilistic, we treat each annotator judgment as a training item. Thus, each sentence
appears 10 times in our training data.

319



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 2

A maximum entropy model computes the probability of each class c given the data
d as follows:

p(c|d, λ) =
exp

∑
i λifi(c, d)∑

c′ exp
∑

i λifi(c
′, d)

where, for us, the features fi are indicator functions of a property Φ of the data d
and a particular class c: fi(c, d) ≡ Φ(d) ∧ c = ck. The weights λi of the features are the
parameters of the model chosen to maximize the conditional likelihood of the training
data according to the model. The maximum entropy model thus gives us a distribu-
tion over the veridicality classes, which will be our output. To assess how good the
output of the model is, we will give the log-likelihood of some data according to the
model. For comparison, we will also give the log-likelihood for the exact distribution
from the Turkers (which thus gives an upper-bound) as well as a log-likelihood for
a baseline model which uses only the overall distribution of classes in the training
data.
A maximum entropy classifier is an instance of a generalized linear model with a

logit link function. It is almost exactly equivalent to the standard multi-class (also called
polytomous or multinomial) logistic regression model from statistics, and readers more
familiar with this presentation can think of it as such. In all our experiments, we use the
Stanford Classifier (Manning and Klein 2003) with a Gaussian prior (also known as L2
regularization) set to N (0, 1).6

4.1 Features

The features were selected through 10-fold cross-validation on the training set.

Predicate classes. Saurı́ (2008) defines classes of predicates (nouns and verbs) that project
the same veridicality value onto the events they introduce. The classes also define
the grammatical relations that need to hold between the predicate and the event it
introduces, because grammatical contexts matter for veridicality. Different veridicality
values will indeed be assigned to X in He doesn’t know that X and in He doesn’t know if X.
The classes have names like ANNOUNCE, CONFIRM, CONJECTURE, and SAY. Like Saurı́,
we used dependency graphs produced by the Stanford parser (Klein andManning 2003;
de Marneffe, MacCartney, and Manning 2006) to follow the path from the target event
to the root of the sentence. If a predicate in the path was contained in one of the classes
and the grammatical relation matched, we added both the lemma of the predicate as a
feature and a feature marking the predicate class.

6 The maximum entropy formulation differs from the standard multi-class logistic regression model by
having a parameter value for each class giving logit terms for how a feature’s value affects the outcome
probability relative to a zero feature, whereas in the standard multi-class logistic regression model
there are no parameters for one distinguished reference class, and the parameters for other classes say
how the value of a feature affects the outcome probability differentially from the reference class. Without
regularization, the maximum entropy formulation is overparameterized, and the parameters are
unidentifiable; in a regularized setting, however, this is no longer a problem and the maximum entropy
formulation then has the advantage that all classes are treated symmetrically, with a simpler symmetric
form of model regularization.

320



de Marneffe, Manning, and Potts The Pragmatic Complexity of Veridicality Assessment

World knowledge. For each verb found in the path and contained in the predicate classes,
we also added the lemma of its subject, and whether or not the verb was negated.
Our rationale for including the subject is that, as we saw in Section 3, readers’ inter-
pretations differ for sentences such as The FBI said it received . . . and Bush said he re-
ceived . . . , presumably because of world knowledge they bring to bear on the judgment.
To approximate such world knowledge, we also obtained subject–verb bigram and sub-
ject counts from theNew York Times portion of GigaWord and then included log(subject–
verb-counts/subject-counts) as a feature. The intuition here is that some embedded
clauses carry the main point of the sentence (Frazier and Clifton 2005; Simons 2007;
Clifton and Frazier 2010), with the overall frequency of the elements introducing the
embedded clause contributing to readers’ veridicality assessments.

General features.We used the lemma of the event, the lemma of the root of the sentence,
the incoming grammatical relation to the event, and a general class feature.

Modality features. We used Saurı́’s list of modal words as features. We distinguished
between modality markers found as direct governors or children of the event under
consideration, andmodal words found elsewhere in the context of the sentence. Figure 4
provides some indication of how these will relate to our annotations.

Negation. A negation feature captures the presence of linguistic markers of negative
contexts. Events are considered negated if they have a negation dependency in the
graph or an explicit linguistic marker of negation as dependent (e.g., simple negation
(not), downward-monotone quantifiers (no, any), or restricting prepositions). Events are
also considered negated if embedded in a negative context (e.g., fail, cancel).

Conditional. Antecedents of conditionals and words clearly marking uncertainty are
reliable indicators of the Uu category. We therefore checked for events in an if -clause
or embedded under markers such as call for.

Quotation. Another reliable indicator of the Uu category is quotation. We generated a
quotation feature if the sentence opened and ended with quotation marks, or if the root
subject was we.

In summary, our feature set allows combinations of evidence from various sources
to determine veridicality. To be sure, lexical features are important, but they must be
allowed to interact with pragmatic ones. In addition, the model does not presume
that individual lexical items will contribute in only one way to veridicality judgments.
Rather, their contributions are affected by the rest of the feature set.

4.2 Test Data

As test set, we used 130 sentences from the test items in FactBank. We took all the
sentences with events annotated PR+ and PS+ at the author level (there are very few),
and we randomly chose sentences for the other values (CT+, CT−, and Uu, because the
FactBank test set does not contain any PR− and PS− items). Three colleagues provided
the normalizations of the sentences following Saurı́’s guidelines, and the data were then

321



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 2

annotated usingMechanical Turk, as described in Section 2. For 112 of the 130 sentences,
at least six Turkers agreed on the same value.

5. Results

Table 6 gives log-likelihood values of the classifier for the training and test sets, along
with the upper and lower bounds. The upper bound is the log-likelihood of the model
that uses the exact distribution from the Turkers. The lower bound is the log-likelihood
of a model that uses only the overall rate of each class in our annotations for the training
data.
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence provides a related way to assess the effectiveness

of the classifier. The KL divergence between two distributions is an asymmetric measure
of the difference between them. We use Example (6d) to illustrate. For that sentence, the
classifier assigns a probability of 0.64 to PS+ and 0.28 to PR+, with very low probabilities
for the remaining categories. It thus closely models the gold distribution (PS+: 7/10,
PR+: 3/10). The KL divergence is correspondingly low: 0.13. The KL divergence for a
classifier that assigned 0.94 probability to the most frequent category (i.e., CT+) and 0.01
to the remaining categories would be much higher: 5.76.
The mean KL divergence of our model is 0.95 (SD 1.13) for the training data and

0.81 (SD 0.91) for the test data. The mean KL divergence for the baseline model is 1.58
(SD 0.57) for the training data and 1.55 (SD 0.47) for the test data. To assess whether our
classifier is a statistically significant improvement over the baseline, we use a paired
two-sided t-test over the KL divergence values for the two models. The t-test requires
that both vectors of values in the comparison have normal distributions. This is not
true of the raw KL values, which have approximately gamma distributions, but it is
basically true of the log of the KL values: For the model’s KL divergences, the normality
assumption is very good, whereas for the baseline model there is some positive skew.
Nonetheless, the t-test provides a fair way to contextualize and compare the KL values
of the two models. By this test, our model improves significantly over the lower bound
(two-sided t = −11.1983, df = 129, p-value < 2.2e−16).
We can also compute precision and recall for the subsets of the data where there is

a majority vote, that is, where six out of ten annotators agreed on the same label. This
allows us to give results per veridicality tag. We take as the true veridicality value the
one on which the annotators agreed. The value assigned by the classifier is the one with
the highest probability. Table 7 reports precision, recall, and F1 scores on the training
and test sets, along with the number of instances in each category. None of the items in
our test data were tagged with PR− or PS− and these categories were very infrequent
in the training data, so we leave them out. The table also gives baseline results: We

Table 6
Log-likelihood values for the training and test data.

Train Test

lower-bound −10813.97 −1987.86
classifier −8021.85 −1324.41
upper-bound −3776.30 −590.75

322



de Marneffe, Manning, and Potts The Pragmatic Complexity of Veridicality Assessment

Table 7
Precision, recall, and F1 on the subsets of the training data (10-fold cross-validation) and test
data where there is majority vote, as well as F1 for the baseline.

Train Test

# P R F1 Baseline F1 # P R F1 Baseline F1

CT+ 158 74.3 84.2 78.9 32.6 61 86.9 86.9 86.9 31.8
CT− 158 89.4 91.1 90.2 34.1 31 96.6 90.3 93.3 29.4
PR+ 84 74.4 69.1 71.6 19.8 7 50.0 57.1 53.3 6.9
PS+ 66 75.4 69.7 72.4 16.7 7 62.5 71.4 66.7 0.0
Uu 27 57.1 44.4 50.0 10.7 6 50.0 50.0 50.0 0.0

Macro-avg 74.1 71.7 72.6 22.8 69.2 71.1 70.0 13.6
Micro-avg 78.6 78.6 78.6 27.0 83.0 83.0 83.0 22.3

used a weighted random guesser, as for the lower-bound given in Table 6. Our results
significantly exceed the baseline (McNemar’s test, p < 0.001).7

The classifier weights give insights about the interpretation of lexical markers. Some
markers behave as linguistic theories predict. For example, believe is often a marker of
probability whereas could and may are more likely to indicate possibility. But as seen in
Examples (10) and (16), world knowledge and other linguistic factors shape the veridi-
cality of these items. The greatest departure from theoretical predictions occurs with
the SAY category, which is logically non-veridical but correlates highly with certainty
(CT+) in our corpus.8 Conversely, the class KNOW, which includes know, acknowledge,
and learn, is traditionally analyzed as veridical (CT+), but in our data is sometimes a
marker of possibility, as we discuss in the Conclusion. Our model thus shows that to
account for how readers interpret sentences, the space of veridicality should be cut up
differently than the lexicalist theories propose.

6. Error Analysis

We focus on two kinds of errors. First, where there is a majority label (a label six or
more of the annotators agreed on) in the annotations, we can compare that label with
the one assigned the highest probability according to our model. Second, we can study
cases where the the annotation distribution diverges considerably from our model’s
distribution (i.e., cases with a very high KL divergence).
For the majority-label cases, errors of polarity are extremely rare; the classifier

wrongly assesses the polarity of only four events, shown in Example (18). Most of
the errors are thus in the degree of confidence (e.g., CT+ vs. PR+). The graphs next

7 McNemar’s test assesses whether the proportions of right and wrong predictions for two systems are
significantly different. We calculated the test exactly via the binomial distribution. We chose a random
guess baseline rather than a choose-most-frequent-class baseline hoping to illustrate a sensible baseline F1
performance for each class, but actually the baseline F1 remains zero for two classes on the test set (there
are few items in each class and the random guesser never guessed correctly). In sum, the performance
differences are significant for both the training and test sets compared to either of these baselines.
8 This might be due to the nature of our corpus, namely, newswire, where in the vast majority of the cases,
reports are considered true. The situation could be totally different in another genre (such as blogs, for
instance).

323



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 2

to the examples compare the gold annotation from the Turkers (the black bars) with
the distribution proposed by the classifier (the gray bars). The KL divergence value is
included to help convey how such values relate to these distributions.

Example 18

(a) Addressing a NATO flag-lowering ceremony at the Dutch embassy, Orban
said the occasion indicated the end of the embassy’smission of liaison
between Hungary and NATO.

Normalization: there is an embassy’s
mission of liaison between Hungary and
NATO

Annotations: CT+:7, CT−: 3

(b) But never before has NATO reached out to its former Eastern-bloc
enemies.

Normalization: NATO has reached out to its
former Eastern-bloc enemies in the past

Annotations: CT−: 9, Uu: 1

(c) Horsley was not a defendant in the suit, in which the Portland, Ore., jury
ruled that such sites constitute threats to abortion providers.

Normalization: Horsley was a defendant in
the suit

Annotations: CT−: 10

(d) A total of $650,000, meanwhile, is being offered for information leading to
the arrest of Kopp, who is charged with gunning down Dr. Barnett Slepian
last fall in his home in Buffalo.

Normalization: Kopp has been arrested

Annotations: CT−: 8, Uu: 2

When the system missed CT− events, it failed to find an explicit negative marker,
as in Example (18b), where (due to a parse error) never is treated as a dependent of the

324



de Marneffe, Manning, and Potts The Pragmatic Complexity of Veridicality Assessment

verb have and not of the reaching out event. Similarly, the system could not capture in-
stances in which the negation was merely implicit, as in Example (18d), where the non-
veridicality of the arresting event requires deeper interpretation that our feature-set can
manage.
In Example (19), we give examples of CT+ events that are incorrectly tagged PR+,

PS+, or Uu by the system because of the presence of a weak modal auxiliary or a verb
that lowers certainty, such as believe. As we saw in Section 3.2, these markers correlate
strongly with the PS categories.

Example 19

(a) The NATO summit, she said, would produce an initiative that “responds
to the grave threat posed by weapons of mass destruction and their means
of delivery.”

Normalization: there will be an initiative

Annotations: CT+: 7, PR+: 3

(b) Kopp, meanwhile, may have approached the border with Mexico, but it is
unknown whether he crossed into that country, said Freeh.

Normalization: it is unknown whether
Kopp crossed into Mexico

Annotations: CT+: 10

(c) They believe Kopp was driven to Mexico by a female friend after the
shooting, and have a trail of her credit card receipts leading to Mexico, the
federal officials have said.

Normalization: there was a shooting

Annotations: CT+: 10

In the case of PR+ and PS+ events, all the erroneous values assigned by the system
are CT+. Some explicit modality markers were not seen in the training data, such as
potential in Example (20a), and thus the classifier assigned them no weight. In other
cases, such as Example (20b), the system did not capture the modality implicit in the
conditional.

325



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 2

Example 20

(a) Albright also used her speech to articulate a forward-looking vision for
NATO, and to defend NATO’s potential involvement in Kosovo.

Normalization: NATO will be involved in
Kosovo

Annotations: PS+: 6, PR+: 2, CT+: 1, Uu: 1

(b) “And we must be resolute in spelling out the consequences of
intransigence,” she added, referring to the threat of NATO air strikes
against Milosevic if he does not agree to the deployment.

Normalization: there will be NATO air
strikes

Annotations: PS+: 8, PR+: 1, Uu: 1

(c) But the decision by District Attorney Frank C. Clark to begin presenting
evidence to a state grand jury suggests that he has amassed enough
material to support a criminal indictment for homicide.

Normalization: District Attorney Frank C.
Clark has amassed material to support a
criminal indictment for homicide

Annotations: PR+: 6, CT+: 3, PS+: 1

(d) The first round of DNA tests on the hair at the FBI Laboratory here
established a high probability it came from the same person as a hair
found in a New Jersey home where James C. Kopp, a 44-year-old
anti-abortion protester, lived last year, the official said.

Normalization: the hair came from the same
person

Annotations: PR+: 10

326



de Marneffe, Manning, and Potts The Pragmatic Complexity of Veridicality Assessment

The only Uu events that the system correctly retrieved were antecedents of a con-
ditional. For the other Uu events in Example (21), the system assigned CT+ or PR+.
The majority of Uu events proved to be very difficult to detect automatically since
complex pragmatic factors are at work, many of them only very indirectly reflected in
the texts.

Example 21

(a) Kopp’s stepmother, who married Kopp’s father when Kopp was in his
30s, said Thursday from her home in Irving, Texas: “I would like to
see him come forward and clear his name if he’s not guilty, and if he’s
guilty, to contact a priest and make his amends with society, face what
he did.”

Normalization: Kopp did something

Annotations: Uu: 7, PS+: 2, CT+: 1

(b) Indeed, one particularly virulent anti-abortion Web site lists the names
of doctors it says perform abortions, or “crimes against humanity,”
with a code indicating whether they are “working,” “wounded” or
a “fatality.”

Normalization: doctors are working

Annotations: Uu:7, CT+: 3

It is also instructive to look at the examples for which there is a large KL divergence
between our model’s predicted distribution and the annotation distribution. Very often,
this is simply the result of a divergence between the predicted and actual majority
label, as discussed earlier. Instances like Example (22) aremore interesting in this regard,
however: These are cases where there was no majority label, as in Example (22a), or
where the model guessed the correct majority label but failed to capture other aspects
of the distribution, as in Examples (22b) and (22c).

Example 22

(a) On Tuesday, the National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action
League plans to hold a news conference to screen a television
advertisement made last week, before Slepian died, featuring Emily

327



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 2

Lyons, a nurse who was badly wounded earlier this year in the
bombing of an abortion clinic in Alabama.

Normalization: there will be a news
conference to screen a television
advertisement

Annotations: CT+: 5, PR+: 5

(b) Vacco’s campaign manager, Matt Behrmann, said in a statement that
Spitzer had “sunk to a new and despicable low by attempting to
capitalize on the murder of a physician in order to garner votes.”

Normalization: Spitzer had attempted to
capitalize on the murder of a physician in
order to garner votes

Annotations: CT+: 5, PR+: 1, PS+: 3, Uu: 1

(c) Since there is no federal homicide statute as such, the federal officials said
Kopp could be charged under the recent Freedom of Access to Clinic
Entrances Act, which provides for a sentence of up to life imprisonment
for someone convicted of physical assaults or threats against abortion
providers.

Normalization: Kopp will be charged under
the recent Freedom of Access to Clinic
Entrances Act

Annotations: PS+: 8, Uu: 2

In Example (22a), the classifier is confused by an ambiguity: it treats hold as a
kind of negation, which leads the system to assign a 0.78 probability to CT−. In Ex-
ample (22b), there are no features indicating possibility, but a number of SAY-related
features are present, which leads to a very strong bias for CT+ (0.86) and a corre-
sponding failure to model the rest of the distribution properly. In Example (23c), the
classifier correctly assigns most probability to PS+, but the rest of the probability mass
is distributed between CT+ and PR+. This is another manifestation of the problem,
noted earlier, that we have very few strong indicators of Uu. The exception to that is
conditional antecedents. As a result, we do well with cases like Example (23a), where
the event is in a conditional; the classifier assigns 70% of the probability to Uu and 0.15
to PS+.

328



de Marneffe, Manning, and Potts The Pragmatic Complexity of Veridicality Assessment

Example 23

(a) On Monday, Spitzer called for Vacco to revive that unit immediately,
vowing that he would do so on his first day in office if elected.

Normalization: Spitzer will be elected

Annotations: Uu: 7, PS+: 3

Overall the system assigns incorrect veridicality distributions in part because it
misses explicit linguistic markers of veridicality, but also because contextual and prag-
matic factors cannot be captured. This is instructive, though, and serves to further
support our central thesis that veridicality judgments are not purely lexical, but rather
involve complex pragmatic reasoning.

7. Conclusion

Our central goal for this article was to explore veridicality judgments at the level of
utterance meaning. To do this, we extended FactBank (Saurı́ and Pustejovsky 2009)
with veridicality annotations that are informed by context and world knowledge (Sec-
tion 2). Although the two sets of annotations are similar in many ways, their differences
highlight areas in which pragmatic factors play a leading role in shaping readers’
judgments (Section 3.1). In addition, because each one of our sentences was judged by 10
annotators, we actually have annotation distributions for our sentences, which allows us
to identify areas of uncertainty in veridicality assessment (Section 3.2). This uncertainty
is so pervasive that the problem itself seems better modeled as one of predicting a
distribution over veridicality categories, rather than trying to predict a single label. The
predictive model we developed (Section 4) is true to this intuition, because it trains on
and predicts distributions. All the features of the model, even the basic lexical ones,
show the influence of interacting pragmatic factors (Section 5). Although automatically
assigning veridicality judgments that correspond to readers’ intuitions when pragmatic
factors are allowed to play a role is challenging, our classifier shows that it can be done
effectively using a relatively simple feature set, and we expect performance to improve
as we find ways to model richer contextual features.
These findings resonate with the notion of entailment used in the Recognizing

Textual Entailment challenges (Dagan, Glickman, and Magnini 2006), where the goal
is to determine, for each pair of sentences 〈T,H〉, whether T (the text) justifies H (the
hypothesis). The original task definition draws on “common-sense” understanding of
language (Chapman 2005), and focuses on how people interpret utterances naturalisti-
cally. Thus, these entailments are not calculated over just the information contained in
the sentence pairs, as amore classical logical approachwould have it, but rather over the
full utterance meaning. As a result, they are imbuedwith all the uncertainty of utterance
meanings (Zaenen, Karttunen, and Crouch 2005; Crouch, Karttunen, and Zaenen 2006;
Manning 2006). This is strongly reminiscent of our distinction between semantic and
pragmatic veridicality. For example, as a purely semantic fact, might(S) is non-veridical

329



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 2

with regard to S. Depending on the nature of S, however, the nature of the source, the
context, and countless other factors, one might nonetheless infer S. This is one of the
central lessons of our new annotations.
In an important sense, we have been conservative in bringing semantics and prag-

matics together, because we do not challenge the basic veridicality categorizations that
come from linguistic and logical work on this topic. Rather, we just showed that those
semantic judgments are often enriched pragmatically—for example, from uncertainty to
one of the positive or negative categories, or from PS to PR or even CT. The interaction
between lexical markers and pragmatic context is also crucial in the case of absolutism:
Too many lexical markers conveying certainty might in some cases undermine the
speaker’s credibility (e.g., in a car salesman pitch) and actually incite mistrust in
the hearer/reader. In such instances, lexical markers only are not good indicators of the
veridicality of the event, but the pragmatic context of the utterance needs to be taken
into account to fully appreciate the interpretation people assign to it. There is, however,
evidence suggesting that we should be even more radically pragmatic (Searle 1978;
Travis 1996), by dropping the notion that lexical items can be reliably classified once
and for all. For example, lexical theories generally agree that know is veridical with
respect to its sentential complement, and the vast majority of its uses seem to support
that claim. There are exceptions, though, as in Example (24) (see also Beaver 2010;
Hazlett 2010):

Example 24

(a) For the first time in history, the U.S. has gone to war with an Arab and
Muslim nation, and we know a peaceful solution was in reach.

(b) Let me tell you something, when it comes to finishing the fight, Rocky
and I have a lot in common. I never quit, I never give up, and I know
that we’re going tomake it together.
– Hillary Clinton, 1 September 2008.

(c) “That woman who knew I had dyslexia – I never interviewed her.”
– George W. Bush (New York Times, 16 September 2000. Quoted by
Miller [2001].)

All of these examples seem to use know to report emphatically held belief, a much
weaker sense than a factive lexical semantics would predict. Example (24c) is the
most striking of the group, because it seems to be pragmatically non-veridical: The
continuation is Bush’s evidence that the referent of that woman could not possibly be
in a position to determine whether he is dyslexic. Such examples further emphasize
the importance of a pragmatically informed perspective on veridicality in natural
language.
One key component of veridicality judgments that we left out in this study is the

text provenance. Our data did not allow us to examine its impact because we did not
have enough variation in the provenance. All FactBank sentences are from newspaper
and newswire text such as the Wall Street Journal, the Associated Press, and the New
York Times. The trustworthiness of the document provenance can affect veridicality
judgments, however: People might have different reactions reading a sentence in the
New York Times versus in a random blog on theWeb.We plan to examine and incorporate
the role of text provenance in future work.

330



de Marneffe, Manning, and Potts The Pragmatic Complexity of Veridicality Assessment

Acknowledgments
We thank our three anonymous referees for
their insights and advice. Thanks also to
Anastasia Giannakidou, Jesse Harris, Ed
Hovy, Lauri Karttunen, James Pustejovsky,
and Annie Zaenen for valuable comments
at various stages of the project. A special
thanks to Eric Acton, Alex Djalali, and Scott
Grimm for their help with the test data. This
research was supported in part by ONR
grant no. N00014-10-1-0109, ARO grant
no. W911NF-07-1-0216, and by a Stanford
Interdisciplinary Graduate Fellowship to
the first author.

References
Asher, Nicholas. 2000. Truth conditional
discourse semantics for parentheticals.
Journal of Semantics, 17(1):31–50.
Asher, Nicholas and Alex Lascarides.
2003. Logics of Conversation. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Barwise, Jon. 1981. Scenes and other
situations. The Journal of Philosophy,
78(7):369–397.
Beaver, David. 2010. Have you noticed that
your belly button lint colour is related to
the colour of your clothing? In Rainer
Bäuerle, Uwe Reyle, and Thomas Ede
Zimmermann, editors, Presuppositions
and Discourse: Essays Offered to Hans
Kamp. Elsevier, Philadelphia, PA,
pages 65–99.
Berger, Adam L., Stephen A. Della Pietra,
and Vincent J. Della Pietra. 1996. A
maximum entropy approach to natural
language processing. Computational
Linguistics, 22(1):39–71.
Chapman, Siobhan. 2005. Paul Grice:

Philosopher and Linguist. Palgrave
Macmillan, Houndmills, Basingstoke,
Hampshire.
Chapman, Wendy W., Will Bridewell,
Paul Hanbury, Gregory F. Cooper, and
Bruce G. Buchanan. 2001. A simple
algorithm for identifying negated
findings and diseases in discharge
summaries. Journal of Biomedical
Informatics, 34(5):301–310.
Clifton, Charles Jr. and Lyn Frazier. 2010.
Imperfect ellipsis: Antecedents beyond
syntax? Syntax, 13(4):279–297.
Crouch, Richard, Lauri Karttunen, and
Annie Zaenen. 2006. Circumscribing
is not excluding: A reply to Manning.
Ms., Palo Alto Research Center,
Palo Alto, CA.

Dagan, Ido, Oren Glickman, and
Bernardo Magnini. 2006. The PASCAL
recognising textual entailment challenge.
In J. Quinonero-Candela, I. Dagan,
B. Magnini, and F. d’Alché-Buc, editors,
Machine Learning Challenges, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, volume 3944.
Springer-Verlag, New York, pages 177–190.
de Marneffe, Marie-Catherine, Bill
MacCartney, and Christopher D. Manning.
2006. Generating typed dependency
parses from phrase structure parses.
In Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation, Genoa, Italy, pages 449–454.
Diab, Mona, Lori Levin, Teruko Mitamura,
Owen Rambow, Vinodkumar
Prabhakaran, and Weiwei Guo. 2009.
Committed belief annotation and tagging.
In Proceedings of the Third Linguistic
Annotation Workshop, Singapore,
pages 68–73.
Elkin, Peter L., Steven H. Brown, Brent A.
Bauer, Casey S. Husser, William Carruth,
Larry R. Bergstrom, and Dietlind L.
Wahner-Roedler. 2005. A controlled trial
of automated classification of negation
from clinical notes. BMC Medical
Informatics and Decision Making, 5(13).
Farkas, Richárd, Veronika Vincze, György
Móra, János Csirik, and György Szarvas.
2010. The CoNLL-2010 shared task:
Learning to detect hedges and their scope
in natural language text. In Proceedings of
the Fourteenth Conference on Computational
Natural Language Learning: Shared Task,
Uppsala, Sweden, pages 1–12.
Finlay, Stephen. 2009. Oughts and ends.

Philosophical Studies, 143(3):315–340.
Fleiss, Joseph I. 1971. Measuring nominal
scale agreement among many raters.
Psychological Bulletin, 76(5):378–382.
Frazier, Lyn and Charles Clifton, Jr. 2005. The
syntax-discourse divide: Processing
ellipsis. Syntax, 8(1):121–174.
Giannakidou, Anastasia. 1994. The semantic
licensing of NPIs and the Modern Greek
subjunctive. In Language and Cognition 4,
Yearbook of the Research Group for Theoretical
and Experimental Linguistics. University of
Groningen, The Netherlands, pages 55–68.
Giannakidou, Anastasia. 1995. Weak and
strong licensing: Evidence from Greek.
In Artemis Alexiadou, Geoffrey Horrocks,
andMelita Stavrou, editors, Studies in Greek
Syntax. Kluwer, Dordrecht, pages 113–133.
Giannakidou, Anastasia. 1999. Affective
dependencies. Linguistics and Philosophy,
22(4):367–421.

331



Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 2

Giannakidou, Anastasia. 2001. The meaning
of free choice. Linguistics and Philosophy,
24(6):659–735.
Hazlett, Allan. 2010. The myth of factive
verbs. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research, 80(3):497–522.
Hobby, Jonathan L., Brian D. M. Tom,
C. Todd, Philip W. P. Bearcroft, and
Adrian K. Dixon. 2000. Communication
of doubt and certainty in radiological
reports. The British Journal of Radiology,
73(873):999–1001.
Huang, Yang and Henry J. Lowe. 2007.
A novel hybrid approach to automated
negation detection in clinical radiology
reports. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 14(3):304–311.
Karttunen, Lauri. 1973. Presuppositions and
compound sentences. Linguistic Inquiry,
4(2):169–193.
Karttunen, Lauri and Annie Zaenen.
2005. Veridicity. In Graham Katz, James
Pustejovsky, and Frank Schilder, editors,
Annotating, Extracting and Reasoning about
Time and Events, number 05151 in Dagstuhl
Seminar Proceedings, Dagstuhl, Germany.
Internationales Begegnungs- und
Forschungszentrum für Informatik
(IBFI), Schloss Dagstuhl, Germany.
Kim, Jin-Dong, Tomoko Ohta, Sampo
Pyysalo, Yoshinobu Kano, and Jun’ichi
Tsujii. 2009. Overview of BioNLP’09
shared task on event extraction. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on BioNLP:
Shared Task, Boulder, Colorado, pages 1–9.
Kiparsky, Paul and Carol Kiparsky. 1970.
Facts. In M. Bierwisch and K. E. Heidolph,
editors, Progress in Linguistics. Mouton.
The Hague, Paris, pages 143–173.
Klein, Dan and Christopher D. Manning.
2003. Accurate unlexicalized parsing.
In Proceedings of the 41st Meeting of the
Association of Computational Linguistics,
Sapporo, Japan, pages 423–430.
Levinson, Stephen C. 1995. Three levels of
meaning: Essays in honor of Sir John
Lyons. In Frank R. Palmer, editor, Grammar
and Meaning. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pages 90–115.
Levinson, Stephen C. 2000. Presumptive

Meanings: The Theory of Generalized
Conversational Implicature. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Manning, Christopher D. 2006. Local textual
inference: it’s hard to circumscribe, but
you know it when you see it—and NLP
needs it. Ms., Stanford University.
Manning, Christopher D. and Dan Klein.
2003. Optimization, maxent models, and

conditional estimation without magic. In
Tutorial at HLT-NAACL 2003 and ACL 2003.
Available at http://nlp.stanford.edu/
software/classifier.shtml.
Miller, Mark Crispin. 2001. The Bush

Dyslexicon. W. W. Norton and Company,
New York, NY.
Montague, Richard. 1969. On the nature of
certain philosophical entities. The Monist,
volume 2, pages 159–194.
Morante, Roser and Walter Daelemans. 2009.
A metalearning approach to processing
the scope of negation. In Proceedings of the
Thirteenth Conference on Computational
Natural Language Learning, Boulder,
Colorado, pages 21–29.
Morante, Roser and Caroline Sporleder,
editors. 2010. Proceedings of the Workshop
on Negation and Speculation in Natural
Language Processing, Uppsala, Sweden.
Prabhakaran, Vinodkumar, Owen Rambow,
and Mona Diab. 2010. Automatic
committed belief tagging. In Proceedings
of COLING 2010: Poster Volume, Beijing,
China, pages 1014–1022.
Pustejovsky, James, Marc Verhagen, Roser
Saurı́, Jessica Littman, Robert Gaizauskas,
Graham Katz, Inderjeet Mani, Robert
Knippen, and Andrea Setzer. 2006.
Timebank 1.2. Linguistic Data
Consortium, Philadelphia, PA.
Pyysalo, Sampo, Filip Ginter, Juho
Heimonen, Jari Björne, Jorma Boberg,
Jouni Järvinen, and Tapio Salakoski.
2007. BioInfer: A corpus for information
extraction in the biomedical domain.
BMC Bioinformatics, 8(50). doi:10.1186/
1471-2105-8-50.
Rieh, Soo Young. 2010. Credibility and
cognitive authority of information.
In M. Bates and M. N. Maack, editors,
Encyclopedia of Library and Information
Sciences, 3rd ed., Taylor and Francis
Group, LLC, New York, pages 1337–1344.
Rooryck, Johan. 2001. Evidentiality, Part I.

Glot International, 5(4):3–11.
Ross, John Robert. 1973. Slifting. In Maurice
Gross, Morris Halle, and Marcel-Paul
Schützenberger, editors, The Formal
Analysis of Natural Languages. Mouton de
Gruyter, The Hague, pages 133–169.
Rubin, Victoria L. 2007. Stating with
certainty or stating with doubt: Intercoder
reliability results for manual annotation
of epistemically modalized statements.
In Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2007,
Rochester, NY, pages 141–144.
Rubin, Victoria L., Elizabeth D. Liddy,
and Noriko Kando. 2005. Certainty

332



de Marneffe, Manning, and Potts The Pragmatic Complexity of Veridicality Assessment

identification in texts: Categorization
model and manual tagging results.
In J. G. Shanahan, Y. Qu, and J. Wiebe,
editors, Computing Attitude and Affect
in Text: Theory and Applications (The
Information Retrieval Series), Springer-
Verlag, New York, pages 61–76.
Sæbo, Kjell Johan. 2001. Necessary
conditions in a natural language. In
Caroline Féry and Wolfgang Sternefeld,
editors, Audiatur Vox Sapientia. A Festschrift
for Arnim von Stechow. Akademie Verlag,
Berlin, pages 427–449.
Saurı́, Roser. 2008. A Factuality Profiler

for Eventualities in Text. Ph.D. thesis,
Computer Science Department,
Brandeis University.
Saurı́, Roser and James Pustejovsky. 2009.
FactBank: A corpus annotated with
event factuality. Language Resources
and Evaluation, 43(3):227–268.
Searle, John R. 1978. Literal meaning.

Erkenntnis, 13:207–224.
Simons, Mandy. 2007. Observations on
embedding verbs, evidentiality, and
presupposition. Lingua, 117(6):1034–1056.
Snow, Rion, Brendan O’Connor, Daniel
Jurafsky, and Andrew Y. Ng. 2008. Cheap
and fast—but is it good? Evaluating
non-expert annotations for natural

language tasks. In Proceedings of the 2008
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, Waikiki, Honolulu,
Hawaii, pages 254–263.
Szarvas, György, Veronika Vincze, Richárd
Farkas, and János Csirik. 2008. The
BioScope corpus: annotation for negation,
uncertainty and their scope in biomedical
texts. In BioNLP 2008: Current Trends in
Biomedical Natural Language Processing,
Columbus, OH, pages 38–45.
Travis, Charles. 1996. Meaning’s role in
truth.Mind, 105(419):451–466.
von Fintel, Kai and Sabine Iatridou.
2008. How to say ought in foreign: The
composition of weak necessity modals.
In Jacqueline Guéron and Jacqueline
Lecarme, editors, Studies in Natural
Language and Linguistic Theory, volume 75.
Springer, Berlin, pages 115–141.
Wierzbicka, Anna. 1987. The semantics of
modality. Folia Linguistica, 21(1):25–43.
Zaenen, Annie, Lauri Karttunen, and Richard
Crouch. 2005. Local textual inference: Can
it be defined or circumscribed? In ACL
Workshop on Empirical Modelling of Semantic
Equivalence and Entailment, pages 31–36,
Ann Arbor, MI.
Zwarts, Frans. 1995. Nonveridical contexts.

Linguistic Analysis, 25(3–4):286–312.

333


