











































Relational Features in Fine-Grained Opinion Analysis


Relational Features in Fine-Grained

Opinion Analysis

Richard Johansson∗

University of Gothenburg

Alessandro Moschitti∗∗

University of Trento

Fine-grained opinion analysis methods often make use of linguistic features but typically do

not take the interaction between opinions into account. This article describes a set of experiments

that demonstrate that relational features, mainly derived from dependency-syntactic and se-

mantic role structures, can significantly improve the performance of automatic systems for a

number of fine-grained opinion analysis tasks: marking up opinion expressions, finding opinion

holders, and determining the polarities of opinion expressions. These features make it possible

to model the way opinions expressed in natural-language discourse interact in a sentence over

arbitrary distances. The use of relations requires us to consider multiple opinions simultaneously,

which makes the search for the optimal analysis intractable. However, a reranker can be used as

a sufficiently accurate and efficient approximation.

A number of feature sets and machine learning approaches for the rerankers are evaluated.

For the task of opinion expression extraction, the best model shows a 10-point absolute improve-

ment in soft recall on the MPQA corpus over a conventional sequence labeler based on local

contextual features, while precision decreases only slightly. Significant improvements are also

seen for the extended tasks where holders and polarities are considered: 10 and 7 points in recall,

respectively. In addition, the systems outperform previously published results for unlabeled (6

F-measure points) and polarity-labeled (10–15 points) opinion expression extraction. Finally,

as an extrinsic evaluation, the extracted MPQA-style opinion expressions are used in practical

opinion mining tasks. In all scenarios considered, the machine learning features derived from the

opinion expressions lead to statistically significant improvements.

1. Introduction

Automatic methods for the analysis of opinions (textual expressions of emotions, be-
liefs, and evaluations) have attracted considerable attention in the natural language

∗ Språkbanken, Department of Swedish, University of Gothenburg, Box 100, SE-40530 Gothenburg,
Sweden. E-mail: richard.johansson@gu.se. The work described here was mainly carried out at the
University of Trento.

∗∗ DISI – Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of Trento,
Via Sommarive 14, 38123 Trento (TN), Italy. E-mail: moschitti@disi.unitn.it.

Submission received: 11 January 2012; revised version received: 11 May 2012; accepted for publication:
11 June 2012.

doi:10.1162/COLI a 00141

© 2013 Association for Computational Linguistics



Computational Linguistics Volume 39, Number 3

processing community in recent years (Pang and Lee 2008). Apart from their interest
from a linguistic and psychological point of view, the technologies emerging from this
research have obvious practical uses, either as stand-alone applications or supporting
other tools such as information retrieval or question answering systems.

The research community initially focused on high-level tasks such as retrieving doc-
uments or passages expressing opinion, or classifying the polarity of a given text, and
these coarse-grained problem formulations naturally led to the application of methods
derived from standard retrieval or text categorization techniques. The models under-
lying these approaches have used very simple feature representations such as purely
lexical (Pang, Lee, and Vaithyanathan 2002; Yu and Hatzivassiloglou 2003) or low-level
grammatical features such as part-of-speech tags and functional words (Wiebe, Bruce,
and O’Hara 1999). This is in line with the general consensus in the information retrieval
community that very little can be gained by complex linguistic processing for tasks such
as text categorization and search (Moschitti and Basili 2004). There are a few exceptions,
such as Karlgren et al. (2010), who showed that construction features added to a bag-of-
words representation resulted in improved performance on a number of coarse-grained
opinion analysis tasks. Similarly, Greene and Resnik (2009) argued that a speaker’s
attitude can be predicted from syntactic features such as the selection of a transitive
or intransitive verb frame.

In contrast to the early work, recent years have seen a shift towards more detailed
problem formulations where the task is not only to find a piece of opinionated text,
but also to extract a structured representation of the opinion. For instance, we may
determine the person holding the opinion (the holder) and towards which entity or fact
it is directed (the topic), whether it is positive or negative (the polarity), and the strength
of the opinion (the intensity). The increasing complexity of representation leads us
from retrieval and categorization deep into natural language processing territory; the
methods used here have been inspired by information extraction and semantic role
labeling, combinatorial optimization, and structured machine learning. For such tasks,
deeper representations of linguistic structure have seen more use than in the coarse-
grained case. Syntactic and shallow-semantic relations have repeatedly proven useful
for subtasks of opinion analysis that are relational in nature, above all for determining
the holder or topic of a given opinion, in which case there is considerable similarity to
tasks such as semantic role labeling (Kim and Hovy 2006; Ruppenhofer, Somasundaran,
and Wiebe 2008).

There has been no systematic research, however, on the role played by linguistic
structure in the relations between opinions expressed in text, despite the fact that the
opinion expressions in a sentence are not independent but organized rhetorically to
achieve a communicative effect intended by the speaker. We therefore expect that the
interplay between opinion expressions can be exploited to derive information useful for
the analysis of opinions expressed in text. In this article, we start from this intuition and
propose several novel features derived from the interdependencies between opinion
expressions on the syntactic and shallow-semantic levels.

Based on these features, we devised structured prediction models for (1) extraction
of opinion expressions, (2) joint expression extraction and holder extraction, and (3) joint
expression extraction and polarity labeling. The models were trained using a number
of discriminative machine learning methods. Because the interdependency features
required us to consider more than one opinion expression at a time, the inference steps
carried out at training and prediction time could not rely on commonly used opinion
expression mark-up methods based on Viterbi search, but we show that an approximate
search method using reranking suffices for this purpose: In a first step a base system

474



Johansson and Moschitti Relational Features in Fine-Grained Opinion Analysis

using local features and efficient search generates a small set of hypotheses, and in a
second step a classifier using the complex features selects the final output from the
hypothesis set. This approach allows us to make use of arbitrary features extracted from
the complete set of opinion expressions in a sentence, without having to impose any
restriction on the expressivity of the features. An additional advantage is that it is fairly
easy to implement as long as the underlying system is able to generate k-best output.

The interaction-based reranking systems were evaluated on a test set extracted
from the MPQA corpus, and compared to strong baselines consisting of stand-alone
systems for opinion expression mark-up, opinion holder extraction, and polarity classi-
fication. Our evaluations showed that (1) the best opinion expression mark-up system
we evaluated achieved a 10-point absolute improvement in soft recall, and a 5-point im-
provement in F-measure, over the baseline sequence labeler. Our system outper-
formed previously described opinion expression mark-up tools by six points in overlap
F-measure. (2) The recall was boosted by almost 10 points for the holder extraction task
(over three points in F-measure) by modeling the interaction of opinion expressions
with respect to holders. (3) We saw an improvement for the extraction of polarity-
labeled expression of four F-measure points. Our result for opinion extraction and po-
larity labeling is especially striking when compared with the best previously published
end-to-end system for this task: 10–15 points in F-measure improvement. In addition to
the performance evaluations, we studied the impact of features on the subtasks, and the
effect of the choice of the machine learning method for training the reranker.

As a final extrinsic evaluation of the system, we evaluated the usefulness of its
output in a number of applications. Although there have been several publications
detailing the extraction of MPQA-style opinion expressions, as far as we are aware there
has been no attempt to use them in an application. In contrast, we show that the opinion
expressions as defined by the MPQA corpus may be used to derive machine learning
features that are useful in two practical opinion mining tasks; the addition of these
features leads to statistically significant improvements in all scenarios we evaluated.
First, we develop a system for the extraction of evaluations of product attributes
from product reviews (Hu and Liu 2004a, 2004b; Popescu and Etzioni 2005; Titov and
McDonald 2008), and we show that the features derived from opinion expressions lead
to significant improvement. Secondly, we show that fine-grained opinion structural
information can even be used to build features that improve a coarse-grained sentiment
task: document polarity classification of reviews (Pang, Lee, and Vaithyanathan 2002;
Pang and Lee 2004).

After the present introduction, Section 2 gives a linguistic motivation and an
overview of the related work; Section 3 describes the MPQA opinion corpus and its
underlying representation; Section 4 illustrates the baseline systems: a sequence labeler
for the extraction of opinion expressions and classifiers for opinion holder extraction
and polarity labeling; Section 5 reports on the main contribution: the description of the
interaction models and their features; finally, Section 7 presents the experimental results
and Section 8 derives the conclusions.

2. Motivation and Related Work

Intuitively, interdependency features could be useful in the process of locating and
disambiguating expressions of opinion. These expressions tend to occur in patterns, and
the presence of one opinionated piece of text may influence our interpretation of another
as opinionated or not. Consider, for instance, the word said in sentences (a) and (b) in
Example (1), where the presence or non-presence of emotionally loaded words in the

475



Computational Linguistics Volume 39, Number 3

complement clause provides evidence for the interpretation as a subjective opinion or
an objective speech event. (In the example, opinionated expressions are marked S for
subjective and the non-opinionated speech event O for objective.)

Example (1)
(a) “We will identify the [culprits]S of these clashes and [punish]S them,” he [said]S.

(b) On Monday, 80 Libyan soldiers disembarked from an Antonov transport plane
carrying military equipment, an African diplomat [said]O.

Moreover, opinions expressed in a sentence are interdependent when it comes to the
resolution of their holders—the person or entity having the attitude expressed in the
opinion expression. Clearly, the structure of the sentence is also influential for this task
because certain linguistic constructions provide evidence for opinion holder correlation.
In the most obvious case, shown in the two sentences in Example (2), pejorative words
share the opinion holder with the communication and categorization verbs dominating
them. (Here, opinions are marked S and holders H.)

Example (2)
(a) [Domestic observers]H [tended to side with]S the MDC, [denouncing]S the election
as [fraud-tainted]S and [unfair]S.

(b) [Bush]H [labeled]S North Korea, Iran and Iraq an “[axis of evil]S.”

In addition, interaction is important when determining opinion polarity. Here, relations
that influence polarity interpretation include coordination, verb–complement, as well as
other types of discourse relations. In particular, the presence of a COMPARISON discourse
relation, such as contrast or concession (Prasad et al. 2008), may allow us to infer that
opinion expressions have different polarities. In Example (3), we see how contrastive
discourse connectives (underlined) are used when there are contrasting polarities in the
surrounding opinion expressions. (Positive opinions are tagged ‘+’, negative ‘-’.)

Example (3)
(a) “[This is no blind violence but rather targeted violence]-,” Annemie Neyts [said]-.
“However, the movement [is more than that]+.”

(b) “[Trade alone will not save the world]-,” Neyts [said]-, but it constitutes an
[important]+ factor for economic development.

The problems we focus on in this article—extracting opinion expressions with holders
and polarity labeling—have naturally been studied previously, especially since the
release of the MPQA corpus (Wiebe, Wilson, and Cardie 2005). For the first subtask,
because the MPQA corpus uses span-based annotation to represent opinions, it is
natural to apply straightforward sequence labeling techniques to extract them. This idea
has resulted in a number of publications (Choi, Breck, and Cardie 2006; Breck, Choi, and
Cardie 2007). Such systems do not use any features describing the interaction between
opinions, and it would not be possible to add interaction features because a Viterbi-
based sequence labeler by construction is restricted to using local features in a small
contextual window.

Works using syntactic features to extract topics and holders of opinions are numer-
ous (Bethard et al. 2005; Kobayashi, Inui, and Matsumoto 2007; Joshi and Penstein-Rosé

476



Johansson and Moschitti Relational Features in Fine-Grained Opinion Analysis

2009; Wu et al. 2009). Semantic role analysis has also proven useful: Kim and Hovy
(2006) used a FrameNet-based semantic role labeler to determine holder and topic of
opinions. Similarly, Choi, Breck, and Cardie (2006) successfully used a PropBank-based
role labeler for opinion holder extraction, and Wiegand and Klakow (2010) recently ap-
plied tree kernel learning methods on a combination of syntactic and semantic role trees
for extracting holders, but did not consider their relations to the opinion expressions.
Ruppenhofer, Somasundaran, and Wiebe (2008) argued that semantic role techniques
are useful but not completely sufficient for holder and topic identification, and that
other linguistic phenomena must be studied as well. Choi, Breck, and Cardie (2006)
built a joint model of opinion expression extraction and holder extraction and applied
integer linear programming to carry out the optimization step.

While the tasks of opinion expression detection and polarity classification of opin-
ion expressions (Wilson, Wiebe, and Hoffmann 2009) have mostly been studied in
isolation, Choi and Cardie (2010) developed a sequence labeler that simultaneously
extracted opinion expressions and assigned them polarity values and this is so far the
only published result on joint opinion segmentation and polarity classification. Their
experiment, however, lacked the obvious baseline: a standard pipeline consisting of an
expression tagger followed by a polarity classifier. In addition, although their model
is the first end-to-end system for opinion expression extraction and polarity classifica-
tion, it is still based on sequence labeling and thus by construction limited in feature
expressivity.

On a conceptual level, discourse-oriented approaches (Asher, Benamara, and
Mathieu 2009; Somasundaran et al. 2009; Zirn et al. 2011) applying interaction features
for polarity classification are arguably the most related because they are driven by
a vision similar to ours: Individual opinion expressions interplay in discourse and
thus provide information about each other. On a practical level there are obvious
differences, since our features are extracted from syntactic and shallow-semantic
linguistic representations, which we argue are reflections of discourse structure, while
they extract features directly from a discourse representation. It is doubtful whether
automatic discourse representation extraction in text is currently mature enough to
provide informative features, whereas syntactic parsing and shallow-semantic analysis
are today fairly reliable. Another related line of work is represented by Choi and Cardie
(2008), where interaction features based on compositional semantics were used in a joint
model for the assignment of polarity values to pre-segmented opinion expressions in a
sentence.

3. The MPQA Corpus and its Annotation of Opinion Expressions

The most detailed linguistic resource useful for developing automatic systems for opin-
ion analysis is the MPQA corpus (Wiebe, Wilson, and Cardie 2005). In this article, we use
the word opinion in its broadest sense, equivalent to the word private state used by the
MPQA annotators (page 2): “opinions, emotions, sentiments, speculations, evaluations,
and other private states (Quirk et al. 1985), i.e., internal states that cannot be directly
observed by others.”

The central building block in the MPQA annotation is the opinion expression
(or subjective expression): A text piece that expresses a private state, allowing us to
draw the conclusion that someone has a particular emotion or belief about some topic.
Identifying these units allows us to carry out further analysis, such as the determination
of opinion holder and the polarity of the opinion. The annotation scheme defines two
types of opinion expressions: direct subjective expressions (DSEs), which are explicit

477



Computational Linguistics Volume 39, Number 3

mentions of attitude or evaluation, and expressive subjective elements (ESEs), which
signal the attitude of the speaker by the choice of words. The prototypical example of
a DSE would be a verb of statement, feeling, or categorization such as praise or disgust.
ESEs, on the other hand, are less easy to categorize syntactically; prototypical examples
would include simple value-expressing adjectives such as beautiful and strongly charged
words like appeasement or big government. In addition to DSEs and ESEs, the corpus also
contains annotation for non-subjective statements, which are referred to as objective
speech events (OSEs). Some words such as say may appear as DSEs or OSEs depending
on the context, so for an automatic system there is a need for disambiguation.

Example (4) shows a number of sentences from the MPQA corpus where DSEs and
ESEs have been manually annotated.

Example (4)
(a) He [made such charges]DSE [despite the fact]ESE that women’s political, social, and
cultural participation is [not less than that]ESE of men.

(b) [However]ESE, it is becoming [rather fashionable]ESE to [exchange harsh words]DSE
with each other [like kids]ESE.

(c) For instance, he [denounced]DSE as a [human rights violation]ESE the banning and
seizure of satellite dishes in Iran.

(d) This [is viewed]DSE as the [main impediment]ESE to the establishment of political
order in the country.

Every expression in the corpus is connected to an opinion holder,1 an entity that
experiences the sentiment or utters the evaluation that appears textually in the opinion
expression. For DSEs, it is often fairly straightforward to find the opinion holders
because they tend to be realized as direct semantic arguments filling semantic roles
such as SPEAKER or EXPERIENCER—and the DSEs tend to be verbs or nominalizations.
For ESEs, the connection between the expression and the opinion holder is typically
less clear-cut than for DSEs; the holder is more frequently implicit or located outside
the sentence for ESEs than for DSEs.

The MPQA corpus does not annotate links directly from opinion expressions to
particular mentions of a holder entity. Instead, the opinions are connected to holder
coreference chains that may span the whole text. Some opinion expressions are linked
to entities that are not explicitly mentioned in the text. If this entity is the author of the
text, it is called the writer, otherwise implicit. Example (5) shows sentences annotated
with expressions and holders.

Example (5)
(a) For instance, [he]H1 [denounced]DSE/H1 as a [human rights violation]ESE/H1 the
banning and seizure of satellite dishes in Iran.

(b) [(writer)]H1: [He]H2 [made such charges]DSE/H2 [despite the fact]ESE/H1 that
women’s political, social, and cultural participation is [not less than that]ESE/H1 of men.

(c) [(implicit)]H1: This [is viewed]DSE/H1 as the [main impediment]ESE/H1 to the estab-
lishment of political order in the country.

1 The MPQA uses the term source but we prefer the term holder because it seems to be more common.

478



Johansson and Moschitti Relational Features in Fine-Grained Opinion Analysis

Finally, MPQA associates opinion expressions (DSEs and ESEs, but not OSEs) with
a polarity feature taking the values POSITIVE, NEGATIVE, NEUTRAL, and BOTH, and
with an intensity feature taking the values LOW, MEDIUM, HIGH, and EXTREME. The
two sentences in Example (6) from the MPQA corpus show opinion expressions with
polarities. Positive polarity is represented with a ‘+’ and negative with a ‘-’.

Example (6)
(a) We foresaw electoral [fraud]- but not [daylight robbery]-.

(b) Join in this [wonderful]+ event and help Jameson Camp continue to provide the
year-round support that gives kids a [chance to create dreams]+.

The corpus does not currently contain annotation of topics (evaluees) of opinions,
although there have been efforts to add this separately (Stoyanov and Cardie 2008).

4. Baseline Systems for Fine-Grained Opinion Analysis

The assessment of our reranking-based systems requires us to compare against strong
baselines. We developed (1) a sequence labeler for opinion expression extraction similar
to that by Breck, Choi, and Cardie (2007), (2) a set of classifiers to determine the
opinion holder, and (3) a multiclass classifier that assigns polarity to a given opinion
expression similar to that described by Wilson, Wiebe, and Hoffmann (2009). These
tools were also used to generate the hypothesis sets for the rerankers described in
Section 5.

4.1 Sequence Labeler for Opinion Expression Mark-up

To extract opinion expressions, we implemented a standard sequence labeler for sub-
jective expression mark-up similar to the approach by Breck, Choi, and Cardie (2007).
The sequence labeler extracted basic grammatical and lexical features (word, lemma,
and POS tag), as well as prior polarity and intensity features derived from the lexicon
created by Wilson, Wiebe, and Hoffmann (2005), which we refer to as subjectivity
clues. It is important to note that prior subjectivity does not always imply subjectivity
in a particular context; this is why contextual features are essential for this task. The
grammatical features and subjectivity clues were extracted in a window of size 3 around
the word in focus. We encoded the opinionated expression brackets by means of the
IOB2 scheme (Tjong Kim Sang and Veenstra 1999). When using this representation, we
are unable to handle overlapping opinion expressions, but they are fortunately rare.

To exemplify, Figure 1 shows an example of a sentence and how it is processed
by the sequence labeler. The ESE defenseless situation is encoded in IOB2 as two tags
B-ESE and I-ESE. There are four input columns (words, lemmas, POS tags, subjectivity
clues) and one output column (opinion expression tags in IOB2 encoding). The figure
also shows the sliding window from which the feature extraction function can extract
features when predicting an output tag (at the arrow).

We trained the model using the method by Collins (2002), with a Viterbi decoder
and the online Passive–Aggressive algorithm (Crammer et al. 2006) to estimate the
model weights. The learning algorithm parameters were tuned on a development set.
When searching for the best value of the C parameter, we varied it along a log scale from

479



Computational Linguistics Volume 39, Number 3

HRW
has
denounced
the

situation
of
these
prisoners

HRW
have
denounce
the
defenseless
situation
of
this
prisoner

defenseless

NNP
VBZ
VBN
DT
JJ
NN
IN
DT
NNS

−
−
−

−
−

−

str/neg
−

weak/neg

O

O
B−ESE
I−ESE

B−DSE
O

Figure 1
Sequence labeling example.

0.001 to 100, and the best value was 0.1. We used the max-loss version of the algorithm
and ten iterations through the training set.

4.2 Classifiers for Opinion Holder Extraction

The problem of extracting opinion holders for a given opinion expression is in many
ways similar to argument detection in semantic role labeling (Choi, Breck, and Cardie
2006; Ruppenhofer, Somasundaran, and Wiebe 2008). For instance, in the simplest
case when the opinion expression is a verb of evaluation or categorization, finding
the holder would entail finding a semantic argument such as an EXPERIENCER or
COMMUNICATOR. We therefore approached this problem using methods inspired by
semantic role labeling: Given an opinion expression in a sentence, we define binary
classifiers that decide whether each noun phrase of the sentence is its holder or not.
Separate classifiers were trained to extract holders for DSEs, ESEs, and OSEs.

Hereafter, we describe the feature set used by the classifiers. Our walkthrough
example is given by the sentence in Figure 1. Some features are derived from the
syntactic and shallow semantic analysis of the sentence, shown in Figure 2 (Section 6.1
gives more details on this).

SYNTACTIC PATH. Similarly to the path feature widely used in semantic role labeling
(SRL), we extract a feature representing the path in the dependency tree between
the expression and the holder (Johansson and Nugues 2008). For instance, the path
from denounced to HRW in the example is VC↑SBJ↓.

SHALLOW-SEMANTIC RELATION. If there is a direct shallow-semantic relation between
the expression and the holder, we use a feature representing its semantic role, such
as A0 between denounced and HRW.

EXPRESSION HEAD WORD, POS, AND LEMMA. denounced, VBD, denounce for de-
nounced; situation, NN, situation for defenseless situation.

HEAD WORD AND POS OF HOLDER CANDIDATE. HRW, NNP for HRW.

DOMINATING EXPRESSION TYPE. When locating the holder for the ESE defenseless
situation, we extract a feature representing the fact that it is syntactically dominated
by a DSE. At test time, the expression and its type were extracted automatically.

480



Johansson and Moschitti Relational Features in Fine-Grained Opinion Analysis

CONTEXT WORDS AND POS FOR HOLDER CANDIDATE. Words adjacent to the left
and right; for HRW we extract Right:has, Right:VBZ.

EXPRESSION VERB VOICE. Similar to the common voice feature used in SRL. Takes
the values Active, Passive, and None (for non-verbal opinion expressions). In the
example, we get Active for denounced and None for defenseless situation.

EXPRESSION DEPENDENCY RELATION TO PARENT. VC and OBJ, respectively.

There are also differences compared with typical argument extraction in SRL, however.
First, as outlined in Section 3, it is important to note that the MPQA corpus does not
annotate direct links from opinions to holders, but from opinions to holder coreference
chains. To handle this issue, we used the following approach when training the classi-
fier: We created a positive training instance for each member of the coreference chain
occurring in the same sentence as the opinion, and negative training instances for all
other noun phrases in the sentence. We do not use coreference information at test time,
in order for the system not to rely on automatic coreference resolution.

A second complication is that in addition to the explicit noun phrases in the same
sentence, an opinion may be linked to an implicit holder; a special case of implicit holder
is the writer of the text. To detect implicit and writer links, we trained two separate
classifiers that did not use the features requiring a holder phrase. We did not try to
link opinion expressions to explicitly expressed holders outside the sentence; this is
an interesting open problem with some connections to inter-sentential semantic role
labeling, a problem whose study is in its infancy (Gerber and Chai 2010).

We implemented the classifiers as linear support vector machines (SVMs; Boser,
Guyon, and Vapnik 1992) using the LIBLINEAR software (Fan et al. 2008). To handle
the restriction that every expression can have at most one holder, the classifier selects
only the highest-scoring opinion holder candidate at test time. We tuned the learning
parameters on a development set, and the best results were obtained with an L2-
regularized L2-loss SVM and a C value of 1.

4.3 Polarity Classifier

Given an expression, we use a classifier to assign a polarity value: POSITIVE, NEUTRAL,
or NEGATIVE. Following Choi and Cardie (2010), the polarity value BOTH was mapped
to NEUTRAL—the expressions having this value were in any case very few. In the cases
where the polarity value was empty or missing, we set the polarity to NEUTRAL. In
addition, the annotators of the MPQA corpus may use special uncertainty labels in the
case where the annotator was unsure of which polarity to assign, such as UNCERTAIN-
POSITIVE. In these cases, we just removed the uncertainty label.

We again trained SVMs to carry out this classification. The problem of polarity clas-
sification has been studied in detail by Wilson, Wiebe, and Hoffmann (2009), who used
a set of carefully devised linguistic features. Our classifier is simpler and is based on
fairly shallow features. Like the sequence labeler for opinion expressions, this classifier
made use of the lexicon of subjectivity clues.

The feature set used by the polarity classifier consisted of the following features.
The examples come from the opinion expression defenseless situation in Figure 1.

WORDS IN EXPRESSION: defenseless, situation.

POS TAGS IN EXPRESSION: JJ, NN

481



Computational Linguistics Volume 39, Number 3

SUBJECTIVITY CLUES OF WORDS IN EXPRESSION: None.

WORD BIGRAMS IN EXPRESSION: defenseless situation.

WORDS BEFORE AND AFTER EXPRESSION: B:the, A:of.

POS TAGS BEFORE AND AFTER EXPRESSION: B:DT, A:IN.

To train the support vector classifiers, we again used LIBLINEAR with the same param-
eters. The three-class classification problem was binarized using the one-versus-all
method.

5. Fine-Grained Opinion Analysis with Interaction Features

Because there is a combinatorial number of ways to segment a sentence into opin-
ion expressions, and label the opinion expressions with type labels (DSE, ESE, OSE)
as well as polarities and opinion holders, the tractability of the opinion expression
segmentation task will obviously depend on whether we impose restrictions on the
problem in a way that allows for efficient inference. Most previous work (Choi, Breck,
and Cardie 2006; Breck, Choi, and Cardie 2007; Choi and Cardie 2010) used Markov
factorizations and could thus apply standard sequence labeling techniques where the
arg max step was carried out using the Viterbi algorithm (as described in Section 4.1).
As we argued in the introduction, however, it makes linguistic sense that opinion
expression segmentation and other tasks could be improved if relations between possible
expressions were considered; these relations can be syntactic or semantic in nature,
for instance.

We will show that adding relational features causes the Markov assumption to
break down and the problem of finding the best analysis to become computationally
intractable. We thus have to turn to approximate inference methods based on reranking,
which can be trained efficiently.

5.1 Formalization of the Model

We formulate the problem of extracting the opinion structure (the set of opinion expres-
sions, and possibly also their holders or polarities) from a given sentence as a structured
prediction problem

ŷ = arg max
y

w · Φ(x, y) (1)

where w is a weight vector and Φ(x, y) a feature extraction function representing a sen-
tence x and an opinion structure y as a high-dimensional feature vector. We now further
decompose the feature representation Φ into a local part ΦL and a nonlocal part ΦNL:

Φ = ΦL +ΦNL (2)

where ΦL is a standard first-order Markov factorization, and ΦNL represents the non-
local interactions between pairs of opinion expressions:

ΦNL(x, y) =
∑

ei,ej∈y,ei 6=ej

φp(ei, ej, x) (3)

482



Johansson and Moschitti Relational Features in Fine-Grained Opinion Analysis

The feature function φp represents a pair of opinion expressions ei and ej and their
interaction in the sentence x, such as the syntactic and semantic relations connecting
them.

5.2 Approximate Inference with Interaction Features

It is easy to see that the inference step arg maxy w · Φ(x, y) is NP-hard for unrestricted
pairwise interaction feature representations φ: This class of models includes simpler
ones such as loopy Markov random fields, where inference is known to be NP-hard and
require the use of approximate approaches such as belief propagation. Although it is
possible that search algorithms for approximate inference in our model could be devised
along similar lines, we sidestepped this issue by using a reranking decomposition of the
problem:

r Apply a simple model based on local context features ΦL but no structural
interaction features. Generate a small hypothesis set of size k.

r Apply a complex model using interaction features ΦNL to pick the top
hypothesis from the hypothesis set.

The advantages of a reranking approach compared with more complex approaches re-
quiring advanced search techniques are mainly simplicity and efficiency: This approach
is conceptually simple and fairly easy to implement provided that k-best output can
be generated efficiently, which is certainly true for the Viterbi-based sequence labeler
described in Section 4.1. The features can then be arbitrarily complex because we do
not have to think about how the problem structure affects the algorithmic complexity of
the inference step. Reranking has been used in a wide range of applications, starting in
speech recognition (Schwartz and Austin 1991) and very commonly in syntactic parsing
of natural language (Collins 2000).

The hypothesis generation procedure becomes slightly more complex when polar-
ity values and opinion holders of the opinion expressions enter the picture. In that case,
we not only need hypotheses generated by a sequence labeler, but also the outputs
of a secondary classifier: the holder extractor (Section 4.2) or the polarity classifier
(Section 4.3). The hypothesis set generation thus proceeds as follows:

r For a given sentence, let the base sequence labeler generate up to k1
sequences of unlabeled opinion expressions;

r for every sequence, apply the secondary classifier to generate up to k2
outputs.

The hypothesis set size is thus at most k1 · k2.
To illustrate this process we give a hypothetical example, assuming k1 = k2 = 2

and the sentence The appeasement emboldened the terrorists. We first apply the opinion
expression extractor to generate a set of k1 possible segmentations of the sentence:

The [appeasement] emboldened the [terrorists]

The [appeasement] [emboldened] the [terrorists]

483



Computational Linguistics Volume 39, Number 3

In the second step, we add polarity values, up to k2 labelings for every segmentation
candidate:

The [appeasement]− emboldened the [terrorists]−

The [appeasement]− [emboldened]+ the [terrorists]−

The [appeasement]0 emboldened the [terrorists]−

The [appeasement]− [emboldened]0 the [terrorists]−

5.3 Training the Rerankers

In addition to the approximate inference method to carry out the maximization of Equa-
tion (1), we still need a machine learning method to assign weights to the vector w by
estimating on a training set. We investigated a number of machine learning approaches
to train the rerankers.

5.3.1 Structured SVM Learning. We first applied the method of large-margin estimation
for structured output spaces, also known as structured support vector machines. In
this method, we use quadratic optimization to find the smallest weight vector w that
satisfies the constraint that the difference in output score between the correct output y
and an incorrect output ŷ should be at least ∆(y, ŷ), where ∆ is a loss function based
on the degree of error in the output ŷ with respect to the gold standard y. This is a
generalization of the well-known support vector machine from binary classification to
prediction of structured objects.

Formally, for a given training set T = {〈xi, yi〉} where the output space for the
input xi is Yi, we state the learning problem as a constrained quadratic optimization
program:

minimizew ‖w‖2
subject to w · (Φ(xi, yi)− Φ(xi, yij)) ≥ ∆(yi, yij),

∀〈xi, yi〉 ∈ T , yij ∈ Yi
(4)

Because real-world data tend to be noisy, this optimization problem is usually also
regularized to reduce overfitting, which leads to the introduction of a parameter C as in
regular support vector machines (see Taskar, Guestrin, and Koller [2004] inter alia for
details).

The optimization problem (4) is usually not solved directly because the number of
constraints makes a direct solution of the optimization program intractable for most
realistic types of problems. Instead, an approximation has to be used in practice, and

we used the SVMstructsoftware package (Tsochantaridis et al. 2005; Joachims, Finley,
and Yu 2009), which finds a solution to the quadratic program by successively finding
its most violated constraints and adding them to a working set. We used the default
values for the learning parameters, except for the parameter C, which was determined
by optimizing on a development set. This resulted in a C value of 500.

We defined the loss function ∆ as 1 minus the intersection F-measure defined in
Section 7.1. When training rerankers for the complex extraction tasks (expressions +
holders or expressions + polarities), we used a weighted combination of F-measures
for the primary task (expressions) and the secondary task (holders or polarities, see
Sections 7.1.1 and 7.1.2, respectively).

484



Johansson and Moschitti Relational Features in Fine-Grained Opinion Analysis

5.3.2 On-line Learning. In addition to the structured SVM learning method, we trained
models using two variants of on-line learning. Such learning methods are a feasible
alternative for performance reasons. We investigated two on-line learning algorithms:
the popular structured perceptron (Collins 2002) and the Passive–Aggressive (PA)
algorithm (Crammer et al. 2006). To increase robustness, we used an averaged imple-
mentation (Freund and Schapire 1999) of both algorithms.

The difference between the two algorithms is the way the weight vector is incre-
mented in each step. In the perceptron, for a given input x, we compute an update to
the current weight vector by computing the difference between the correct output y and
the predicted output ŷ. Pseudocode is given in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 The structured perceptron algorithm.

function PERCEPTRON(T , N)
input Training set T = {(xi, yi)}Ti=1

Number of iterations N
w0 ← (0, . . . , 0)
repeat N times

for (x, y) in T
ŷ← arg maxh w · Φ(x, h)
wi+1 ← wi +Φ(x, y)− Φ(x, ŷ)
i← i + 1

return 1NT
∑NT

i=1 wi

The PA algorithm, with pseudocode in Algorithm 2, is based on the theory of large-
margin learning similar to the structured SVM. Here we instead base the update step
on the ŷ that violates the margin constraints maximally, also taking the loss function ∆
into account. The update step length τ is computed based on the margin; this update
is bounded by a regularization constant C, which we set to 0.005 after tuning on a
development set. The number N of iterations through the training set was 8 for both
on-line algorithms.

Algorithm 2 The on-line passive–aggressive algorithm.

function PASSIVE–AGGRESSIVE(T , N, C)
input Training set T = {(xi, yi)}Ti=1

Number of iterations N
Regularization parameter C

w0 ← (0, . . . , 0)
repeat N times

for (x, y) in T
ŷ← arg maxh w · (Φ(x, h)− Φ(x, y)) +

√

∆(y, h)

τ← min
(

C,
w·(Φ(x,ŷ)−Φ(x,y))+

√
∆(y,ŷ)

‖Φ(x,ŷ)−Φ(x,y)‖2

)

wi+1 ← wi + τ(Φ(x, y)− Φ(x, ŷ))
i← i + 1

return 1NT
∑NT

i=1 wi

485



Computational Linguistics Volume 39, Number 3

6. Overview of the Interaction Features

The feature extraction function ΦNL extracts three groups of interaction features: (1)
features considering the opinion expressions only; (2) features considering opinion
holders; and (3) features considering polarity values.

In addition to the interaction features ΦNL, the rerankers used features representing
the scores output by the base models (opinion expression sequence labeler and sec-
ondary classifiers); they did not directly use the local features ΦL. We normalized the
scores over the k candidates so that their exponentials summed to 1.

6.1 Syntactic and Shallow Semantic Analysis

The features used by the rerankers, as well as the opinion holder extractor in Section 4.2,
are to a large extent derived from syntactic and semantic role structures. To extract
them, we used the syntactic–semantic parser by Johansson and Nugues (2008), which
annotates the sentences with dependency syntax (Mel’čuk 1988) and shallow semantics
in the PropBank (Palmer, Gildea, and Kingsbury 2005) and NomBank (Meyers et al.
2004) frameworks, using the format of the CoNLL-2008 Shared Task (Surdeanu et al.
2008). The system includes a sense disambiguator that assigns PropBank or NomBank
senses to the predicate words.

Figure 2 shows an example of the structure of the annotation: The sentence HRW
denounced the defenseless situation of these prisoners, where denounced is a DSE and de-
fenseless situation is an ESE, has been annotated with dependency syntax (above the
text) and semantic role structure (below the text). The predicate denounced, which is an
instance of the PropBank frame denounce.01, has two semantic arguments: the Speaker
(A0, or Agent in VerbNet terminology) and the Subject (A1, or Theme), which are
realized on the surface-syntactic level as a subject and a direct object, respectively. Sim-
ilarly, situation has the NomBank frame situation.01 and an EXPERIENCER semantic
argument (A0).

6.2 Opinion Expression Interaction Features

The rerankers use two types of structural features: syntactic features extracted from
the dependency tree, and semantic features extracted from the predicate–argument
(semantic role) graph.

The syntactic features are based on paths through the dependency tree. This leads to
a minor complication for multiword opinion expressions; we select the shortest possible
path in such cases. For instance, in the sentence in Figure 2, the path will be computed
between denounced and situation.

HRW thehas [denounced] defenseless[ situation]ESE

denounce.01

A0

NMOD
NMOD

OBJ

SBJ VC

DSE of these prisoners

NMOD NMOD
PMOD

situation.01

A0A1

Figure 2
Example sentence and its syntactic and shallow-semantic analysis.

486



Johansson and Moschitti Relational Features in Fine-Grained Opinion Analysis

We used the following syntactic interaction features. All examples refer to Figure 2.

SYNTACTIC PATH. Given a pair of opinion expressions, we use a feature representing
the labels of the two expressions and the path between them through the syntactic
tree, following standard practice from dependency-based semantic role labeling
(Johansson and Nugues 2008). For instance, for the DSE denounced and the ESE
defenseless situation in Figure 2, we represent the syntactic configuration using the
feature DSE:OBJ↓:ESE, meaning that the syntactic relation between the DSE and the
ESE consists of a single link representing a grammatical object.

LEXICALIZED PATH. Same as above, but with lexical information attached: DSE/
denounced:OBJ↓:ESE/situation.

DOMINANCE. In addition to the features based on syntactic paths, we created a
more generic feature template describing dominance relations between expres-
sions. For instance, from the graph in Figure 2, we extract the feature DSE/
denounced→ESE/situation, meaning that a DSE with the word denounced domi-
nates an ESE with the word situation.

The features based on semantic roles were the following:

PREDICATE SENSE LABEL. For every predicate found inside an opinion expression, we
add a feature consisting of the expression label and the predicate sense identifier.
For instance, the verb denounced, which is also a DSE, is represented with the feature
DSE/denounce.01.

PREDICATE AND ARGUMENT LABEL. For every argument of a predicate inside an
opinion expression, we also create a feature representing the predicate–argument
pair: DSE/denounced.01:A0.

CONNECTING ARGUMENT LABEL. When a predicate inside some opinion expression
is connected to some argument inside another opinion expression, we use a feature
consisting of the two expression labels and the argument label. For instance, the
ESE defenseless situation is connected to the DSE denounced via an A1 label, and we
represent this using a feature DSE:A1:ESE.

6.3 Opinion Holder Interaction Features

In addition, we modeled the interaction between different opinions with respect to their
holders. We used the following two features to represent this interaction:

SHARED HOLDERS. A feature representing whether or not two opinion expressions
have the same holder. For instance, if a DSE dominates an ESE and they have the
same holder as in Figure 2, where the holder is HRW, we represent this by the
feature DSE:ESE:true.

HOLDER TYPES + PATH. A feature representing the types of the holders, combined with
the syntactic path between the expressions. The types take the following possible
values: explicit, implicit, writer. In Figure 2, we would thus extract the feature
DSE/Expl:OBJ↓:ESE/Expl.

487



Computational Linguistics Volume 39, Number 3

6.4 Polarity Interaction Features

The model used the following features that take the polarities of the expressions into
account. These features are extracted from DSEs and ESEs only, because the OSEs have
no polarity values. The examples of extracted features are given with respect to the two
opinion expressions (denounced and defenseless situation) in Figure 2, both of which have
a negative polarity value.

POLARITY PAIR. For every pair of opinion expressions in the sentence, we create a
feature consisting of the pair of polarity values, such as NEGATIVE:NEGATIVE.

POLARITY PAIR AND SYNTACTIC PATH. NEGATIVE:OBJ↓:NEGATIVE.
POLARITY PAIR AND SYNTACTIC DOMINANCE. NEGATIVE→NEGATIVE.
POLARITY PAIR AND WORD PAIR. NEGATIVE-denounced:NEGATIVE-situation.

POLARITY PAIR AND EXPRESSION TYPES. Adds the expression types (ESE or DSE) to
the polarity pair: DSE-NEGATIVE:ESE-NEGATIVE.

POLARITY PAIR AND TYPES AND SYNTACTIC PATH. Adds syntactic information to the
type and polarity combination: DSE-NEGATIVE:OBJ↓:ESE-NEGATIVE.

POLARITY PAIR AND SHALLOW-SEMANTIC RELATION. When two opinion expres-
sions are directly connected through a link in the shallow-semantic structure, we
create a feature based on the semantic role label of the connecting link: NEGA-
TIVE:A1:NEGATIVE.

POLARITY PAIR AND WORDS ALONG SYNTACTIC PATH. We follow the syntactic path
between the two expressions and create a feature for every word we pass on
the way. In the example, no such feature is extracted because the expressions are
directly connected.

7. Experiments

We trained and evaluated the rerankers on version 2.0 of the MPQA corpus,2 which
contains 692 documents. We discarded one document whose annotation was garbled
and we split the remaining 691 into a training set (541 documents) and a test set (150
documents). We also set aside a development set of 90 documents from the training set
that we used when developing features and tuning learning algorithm parameters; all
experiments described in this article, however, used models that were trained on the full
training set. Table 1 shows some statistics about the training and test sets: the number
of documents and sentences; the number of DSEs, ESEs, and OSEs; and the number of
expressions marked with the various polarity labels.

We considered three experimental settings: (1) opinion expression extraction;
(2) joint opinion expression and holder extraction; and (3) joint opinion expression and
polarity classification. Finally, the polarity-based opinion extraction system was used in
an extrinsic evaluation: document polarity classification of movie reviews.

To generate the training data for the rerankers, we carried out a 5-fold hold-out
procedure: We split the training set into five pieces, trained a sequence labeler and
secondary classifiers on pieces 1–4, applied them to piece 5, and so on.

2 http://www.cs.pitt.edu/mpqa/databaserelease/.

488



Johansson and Moschitti Relational Features in Fine-Grained Opinion Analysis

Table 1
Statistics for the training and test splits of the MPQA collection.

Training Test

Documents 541 150
Sentences 12,010 3,743

DSE 8,389 2,442
ESE 10,279 3,370
OSE 3,048 704

POSITIVE 3,192 1,049
NEGATIVE 6,093 1,675
NEUTRAL 9,105 3,007
BOTH 278 81

7.1 Evaluation Metrics

Because expression boundaries are hard to define rigorously (Wiebe, Wilson, and Cardie
2005), our evaluations mainly used intersection-based precision and recall measures to
score the quality of the system output. The idea is to assign values between 0 and 1, as
opposed to traditional precision and recall where a span is counted as either correctly
or incorrectly detected. We thus define the span coverage c of a span s (a set of token
indices) with respect to another span s′, which measures how well s′ is covered by s:

c(s, s′) =
|s ∩ s′|
|s′|

In this formula, |s|means the length of the span s, and the intersection ∩ gives the set of
token indices that two spans have in common. Because our evaluation takes span labels
(DSE, ESE, OSE) into account, we set c(s, s′) to zero if the labels associated with s and s′

are different.
Using the span coverage, we define the span set coverage C of a set of spans SSS with

respect to a set S′S′S′:

C(SSS,S′S′S′) =
∑

sj∈SSS

∑

s′k∈S
′S′S′

c(sj, s
′
k)

We now define the intersection-based precision P and recall R of a proposed set of spans

Ŝ̂ŜS with respect to a gold standard set SSS as follows:

P(SSS, Ŝ̂ŜS) =
C(SSS, Ŝ̂ŜS)

|ŜSS| R(S
SS, Ŝ̂ŜS) =

C(Ŝ̂ŜS,SSS)
|SSS|

Note that in this formula, |S|means the number of spans in a set S.
Conventionally, when measuring the quality of a system for an information extrac-

tion task, a predicted entity is counted as correct if it exactly matches the boundaries of
a corresponding entity in the gold standard; there is thus no reward for close matches.
Because the boundaries of the spans annotated in the MPQA corpus are not strictly

489



Computational Linguistics Volume 39, Number 3

defined in the annotation guidelines (Wiebe, Wilson, and Cardie 2005), however, mea-
suring precision and recall using exact boundary scoring will result in figures that are
too low to be indicative of the usefulness of the system. Therefore, most work using
this corpus instead use overlap-based precision and recall measures, where a span
is counted as correctly detected if it overlaps with a span in the gold standard (Choi,
Breck, and Cardie 2006; Breck, Choi, and Cardie 2007). As pointed out by Breck, Choi,
and Cardie (2007), this is problematic because it will tend to reward long spans—for
instance, a span covering the whole sentence will always be counted as correct if the
gold standard contains any span for that sentence. Conversely, the overlap metric does
not give higher credit to a span that is perfectly detected than to one that has a very low
overlap with the gold standard.

The precision and recall measures proposed here correct the problem with overlap-
based measures: If the system proposes a span covering the whole sentence, the span
coverage will be low and result in a low soft precision, and a low soft recall will be
assigned if only a small part of a gold standard span is covered. Note that our measures
are bounded below by the exact measures and above by the overlap-based measures.

7.1.1 Opinion Holders. To score the extraction of opinion holders, we started from the
same basic idea: Assign a score based on intersection. The evaluation of this task
is more complex, however, because (1) we only want to give credit for holders for
correctly extracted opinion expressions; (2) the gold standard links opinion expressions
to coreference chains rather than individual mentions of holders; and (3) the holder
entity may be the writer or implicit (see Section 4.2).

We therefore used the following method: If the system has proposed an opinion
expression e and its holder h, we first located the expression e′ in the gold standard that
most closely corresponds to e, that is e′ = arg maxx c(x, e), regardless of the span labels
of e and e′. To assign a score to the proposed holder entity, we then selected the most
closely corresponding gold standard holder entity h′ in the coreference chain H′ linked
to e′: h′ = arg maxx∈H′ c(x, h). Finally, we computed the precision and recall scores using
c(h′, h) and c(h, h′). We stress again that the gold standard coreference chains were used
for evaluation purposes only, and that our system did not make use of them at test time.

If the system guesses that the holder of some opinion is the writer entity, we score
it as perfectly detected (coverage 1) if the coreference chain H annotated in the gold
standard contains the writer, and a full error (coverage 0) otherwise, and similar if h is
implicit.

7.1.2 Polarity. In our experiments involving opinion expressions with polarities, we
report precision and recall values for polarity-labeled opinion expression segmentation:
In order to be assigned an intersection score above zero, a segment must be labeled with
the correct polarity. In the gold standard, all polarity labels were changed as described
in Section 4.3. In these evaluations, OSEs were ignored and DSEs and ESEs were not
distinguished.

7.2 Experiments in Opinion Expression Extraction

The first task we considered was the extraction of opinion expression (labeled with
expression types). We first studied the impact of the machine learning method and
hypothesis set size on the reranker performance. Then, we carried out an analysis of the
effectiveness of the features used by the reranker. We finally compared the performance
of the expression extraction system with previous work (Breck, Choi, and Cardie 2007).

490



Johansson and Moschitti Relational Features in Fine-Grained Opinion Analysis

Table 2
Evaluation of reranking learning methods.

Learning method P R F

Baseline 63.4 ± 1.5 46.8 ± 1.2 53.8 ± 1.1
Structured SVM 61.8 ± 1.5 52.5 ± 1.3 56.8 ± 1.1
Perceptron 62.8 ± 1.5 48.1 ± 1.3 54.5 ± 1.2
Passive–Aggressive 63.5 ± 1.5 51.8 ± 1.3 57.0 ± 1.1

Table 3
Oracle and reranker performance as a function of candidate set size.

Reranked Oracle

k P R F P R F

1 63.36 46.77 53.82 63.36 46.77 53.82
2 63.70 48.17 54.86 72.66 55.18 62.72
4 63.57 49.78 55.84 79.12 62.24 69.68
8 63.50 51.79 57.05 83.72 68.14 75.13
16 63.00 52.94 57.54 86.92 72.79 79.23
32 62.15 54.50 58.07 89.18 76.76 82.51
64 61.03 55.67 58.23 91.09 80.19 85.29
128 60.22 56.45 58.27 92.63 83.00 87.55
256 59.87 57.22 58.51 94.01 85.27 89.43

7.2.1 Evaluation of Machine Learning Methods. We compared the machine learning meth-
ods described in Section 5. In these experiments, we used a hypothesis set size k of 8. All
features from Section 6.2 were used. Table 2 shows the results of the evaluations using
the precision and recall measures described earlier.3 The baseline is the result of taking
the top-scoring labeling from the base sequence labeler.

We note that the margin-based methods—structured SVM and the on-line PA
algorithm—outperform the perceptron soundly, which shows the benefit of learning
methods that make use of the cost function ∆. Comparing the two best-performing
learning methods, we note that the reranker using the structured SVM is more recall-
oriented whereas the PA-based reranker more precision-oriented; the difference in
F-measure is not statistically significant. In the remainder of this article, all rerankers are
trained using the PA learning algorithm (with the same parameters) because its training
process is much faster than that of the structured SVM.

7.2.2 Candidate Set Size. In any method based on reranking, it is important to study the
influence of the hypothesis set size on the quality of the reranked output. In addition,
an interesting question is what the upper bound on reranker performance is—the
oracle performance. Table 3 shows the result of an experiment that investigates these
questions.

3 All confidence intervals in this article are at the 95% level and were estimated using a resampling method
(Hjorth 1993). The significance tests for differences were carried out using permutation tests.

491



Computational Linguistics Volume 39, Number 3

Table 4
Investigation of the contribution of syntactic features.

Feature set P R F

Baseline 63.4 ± 1.5 46.8 ± 1.2 53.8 ± 1.1
All syntactic features 62.5 ± 1.4 53.2 ± 1.2 57.5 ± 1.1
Removed SYNTACTIC PATH 64.4 ± 1.5 48.7 ± 1.2 55.5 ± 1.1
Removed LEXICAL PATH 62.6 ± 1.4 53.2 ± 1.2 57.5 ± 1.1
Removed DOMINANCE 62.3 ± 1.5 52.9 ± 1.2 57.2 ± 1.1

As is common in reranking tasks, the reranker can exploit only a fraction of the
potential improvement—the reduction of the F-measure error ranges between 10% and
15% of the oracle error reduction for all hypothesis set sizes.

The most visible effect of the reranker is that the recall is greatly improved. This
does not seem to have an adverse effect on the precision, however, until the candidate
set size goes above eight—in fact, the precision actually improves over the baseline for
small candidate set sizes. After the size goes above eight, the recall (and the F-measure)
still rises, but at the cost of decreased precision. In the remainder of this article, we used
a k value of 64, which we thought gave a good balance between processing time and
performance.

7.2.3 Feature Analysis. We studied the impact of syntactic and semantic structural fea-
tures on the performance of the reranker. Table 4 shows the result of an investigation
of the contribution of the syntactic features. Using all the syntactic features (and no
semantic features) gives an F-measure roughly four points above the baseline. We then
carried out an ablation test and measured the F-measure obtained when each one of
the three syntactic features has been removed. It is clear that the unlexicalized syntactic
path is the most important syntactic feature; this feature causes a two-point drop in
F-measure when removed, which is clearly statistically significant (p < 0.0001). The
effect of the two lexicalized features is smaller, with only DOMINANCE causing a sig-
nificant (p < 0.05) drop when removed.

A similar result was obtained when studying the semantic features (Table 5). Re-
moving the connecting label feature, which is unlexicalized, has a greater effect than
removing the other two semantic features, which are lexicalized. Only the connecting
label causes a statistically significant drop when removed (p < 0.0001).

Because our most effective structural features combine a pair of opinion expression
labels with a tree fragment, it is interesting to study whether the expression labels alone
would be enough. If this were the case, we could conclude that the improvement is

Table 5
Investigation of the contribution of semantic features.

Feature set P R F

Baseline 63.4 ± 1.5 46.8 ± 1.2 53.8 ± 1.1
All semantic features 61.3 ± 1.4 53.8 ± 1.3 57.3 ± 1.1
Removed PREDICATE SENSE LABEL 61.3 ± 1.4 53.8 ± 1.3 57.3 ± 1.1
Removed PREDICATE+ARGUMENT LABEL 61.0 ± 1.4 53.6 ± 1.3 57.0 ± 1.1
Removed CONNECTING ARGUMENT LABEL 60.7 ± 1.4 50.5 ± 1.2 55.1 ± 1.1

492



Johansson and Moschitti Relational Features in Fine-Grained Opinion Analysis

Table 6
Structural features compared to label pairs.

Feature set P R F

Baseline 63.4 ± 1.5 46.8 ± 1.2 53.8 ± 1.1
Label pairs 62.0 ± 1.5 52.7 ± 1.2 57.0 ± 1.1
All syntactic features 62.5 ± 1.4 53.2 ± 1.2 57.5 ± 1.1
All semantic features 61.3 ± 1.4 53.8 ± 1.3 57.3 ± 1.1
Syntactic + semantic 61.0 ± 1.4 55.7 ± 1.2 58.2 ± 1.1
Syntactic + semantic + label pairs 61.6 ± 1.4 54.8 ± 1.3 58.0 ± 1.1

caused not by the structural features, but just by learning which combinations of labels
are common in the training set, such as that DSE+ESE would be more common than
OSE+ESE. We thus carried out an experiment comparing a reranker using label pair
features against rerankers based on syntactic features only, semantic features only, and
the full feature set. Table 6 shows the results. We see that the reranker using label pairs
indeed achieves a performance well above the baseline. Its performance is below that of
any reranker using structural features, however. In addition, we see no improvement
when adding label pair features to the structural feature set; this is to be expected
because the label pair information is subsumed by the structural features.

7.2.4 Analysis of the Performance Depending on Expression Type. In order to better under-
stand the performance details of the expression extraction, we analyzed how well it
extracted the three different classes of expressions. Table 7 shows the results of this
evaluation. The DSE row in the table thus shows the results of the performance on DSEs,
without taking ESEs or OSEs into account.

Apart from evaluations of the three different types of expressions, we evaluated
the performance for a number of combined classes that we think may be interesting
for applications: DSE & ESE, finding all opinionated expressions and ignoring objective
speech events; DSE & OSE, finding opinionated and non-opinionated speech and cat-
egorization events and ignoring expressive elements; and unlabeled evaluation of all
types of MPQA expressions. The same extraction system was used in all experiments,
and it was not retrained to maximize the different measures of performance.

Again, the strongest overall tendency is that the reranker boosts the recall. Going
into the details, we see that the reranker gives very large improvements for DSEs and
OSEs, but a smaller improvement for the combined DSE & OSE class. This shows that

Table 7
Performance depending on the type of expression.

Baseline Reranked
P R F P R F

DSE 68.5 ± 2.1 57.8 ± 2.0 62.7 ± 1.7 67.0 ± 2.0 64.9 ± 1.9 66.0 ± 1.6
ESE 63.0 ± 2.1 36.9 ± 1.5 46.5 ± 1.4 58.2 ± 1.9 46.2 ± 1.6 51.5 ± 1.3
OSE 53.5 ± 3.5 62.3 ± 3.5 57.5 ± 3.0 57.0 ± 3.3 73.9 ± 3.2 64.3 ± 2.7

DSE & ESE 71.1 ± 1.6 48.1 ± 1.2 57.4 ± 1.1 68.0 ± 1.5 57.6 ± 1.3 62.4 ± 1.0
DSE & OSE 76.6 ± 1.8 70.3 ± 1.6 73.3 ± 1.3 72.6 ± 1.8 75.8 ± 1.5 74.2 ± 1.2
Unlabeled 75.6 ± 1.5 55.3 ± 1.2 63.9 ± 1.0 71.0 ± 1.4 63.7 ± 1.2 67.2 ± 1.0

493



Computational Linguistics Volume 39, Number 3

one of the most clear benefits of the complex features is to help disambiguate these
expressions. This also affects the performance for general opinionated expressions (DSE
& ESE).

7.2.5 Comparison with Breck, Choi, and Cardie (2007). Comparison of systems in opinion
expression detection is often nontrivial because evaluation settings have differed
widely. Since our problem setting—marking up and labeling opinion expressions in the
MPQA corpus—is most similar to that described by Breck, Choi, and Cardie (2007), we
carried out an evaluation using the setting from their experiment.

For compatibility with their experimental set-up, this experiment differed from the
ones described in the previous sections in the following ways:

r The results were measured using the overlap-based precision and recall,
although this is problematic as pointed out in Section 7.1.

r The system did not need to distinguish DSEs and ESEs and did not have to
detect the OSEs.

r Instead of the training/test split used in the previous evaluations, the
systems were evaluated using a 10-fold cross-validation over the same set
of 400 documents and the same cross-validation split as used in Breck,
Choi, and Cardie’s experiment. Each of the 10 rerankers was evaluated on
one fold and trained on data generated in a cross-validation over the
remaining nine folds.

Again, our reranker uses the PA learning method with the full feature set (Section 6.2)
and a hypothesis set size k of 64. Table 8 shows the performance of our baseline (Section
4.1) and reranked system, along with the best results reported by Breck, Choi, and
Cardie (2007).

We see that the performance of our system is clearly higher—in both precision and
recall—than all results reported by Breck, Choi, and Cardie (2007). Note that our system
was optimized for the intersection metric rather than the overlap metric and that we
did not retrain it for this evaluation.

7.3 Opinion Holder Extraction

Table 9 shows the performance of our holder extraction systems, evaluated using
the scoring method described in Section 7.1.1. We compared the performance of the
reranker using opinion holder interaction features (Section 6.3) to two baselines: The
first of them consisted of the opinion expression sequence labeler (ES, Section 4.1) and
the holder extraction classifier (HC, Section 4.2), without modeling any interactions
between opinions. The second and more challenging baseline was implemented by

Table 8
Results using the evaluation setting from Breck, Choi, and Cardie (2007).

System P R F

Breck, Choi, and Cardie (2007) 71.64 74.70 73.05
Baseline 86.1 ± 1.0 66.7 ± 0.8 75.1 ± 0.7
Reranked 83.4 ± 1.0 75.0 ± 0.8 79.0 ± 0.6

494



Johansson and Moschitti Relational Features in Fine-Grained Opinion Analysis

Table 9
Opinion holder extraction results.

System P R F

ES+HC 57.7 ± 1.7 45.3 ± 1.3 50.8 ± 1.3
ES+ER+HC 53.3 ± 1.5 52.0 ± 1.4 52.6 ± 1.3
ES+HC+EHR 53.2 ± 1.6 55.1 ± 1.5 54.2 ± 1.4

adding the opinion expression reranker (ER) without holder interaction features to
the pipeline. This results in a large performance boost simply as a consequence of
improved expression detection, because a correct expression is required to get credit
for a holder. However, both baselines are outperformed by the reranker using holder
interaction features, which we refer to as the expression/holder reranker (EHR); the
differences to the strong baseline in recall and F-measure are both statistically significant
(p < 0.0001).

We carried out an ablation test to gauge the impact of the two holder interaction
features; we see in Table 10 that both of them contribute to improving the recall, and the
effect on the precision is negligible. The statistical significance for the recall improve-
ment is highest for SHARED HOLDERS (p < 0.0001) and lower for HOLDER TYPES +
PATH (p < 0.02).

We omit a comparison with previous work in holder extraction because our formu-
lation of the opinion holder extraction problem is different from those used in previous
publications. Choi, Breck, and Cardie (2006) used the holders of a simplified set of
opinion expressions, whereas Wiegand and Klakow (2010) extracted every entity tagged
as “source” in MPQA regardless of whether it was connected to any opinion expression.
Neither of them extracted implicit or writer holders.

Table 11 shows a detailed breakdown of the holder extraction results based on
opinion expression type (DSE, OSE, and ESE), and whether the holder is internally or
externally located; that is, whether or not the holder is textually realized in the same
sentence as the opinion expression. In addition, Table 12 shows the performance for the
two types of externally located holders.

As we noted in previous evaluations, the most obvious change between the baseline
system and the reranker is that the recall and F-measure are improved; this is the case
in every single evaluation. As previously, a large share of the improvement is explained
simply by improved expression detection, which can be seen by comparing the reranked
system to the strong baseline (ES+ER+HC). For the most important situations, however,
we see improvement when using the reranker with holder interaction features. In
those cases it outperforms the strong baseline significantly: DSE internal: p < 0.001,
ESE internal p < 0.001, ESE external p < 0.05 (Table 11), writer p < 0.05 (Table 12).

Table 10
Opinion holder reranker feature ablation test.

Feature set P R F

Both features 53.2 ± 1.6 55.1 ± 1.5 54.2 ± 1.4
Removed HOLDER TYPES + PATH 53.1 ± 1.6 54.6 ± 1.5 53.8 ± 1.3
Removed SHARED HOLDERS 53.1 ± 1.5 53.6 ± 1.5 53.3 ± 1.3

495



Computational Linguistics Volume 39, Number 3

Table 11
Detailed opinion holder extraction results.

DSE Internal External
P R F P R F

ES+HC 57.4 ± 2.4 48.9 ± 2.2 52.8 ± 1.9 32.3 ± 6.8 25.8 ± 5.8 28.7 ± 5.8
ES+ER+HC 56.7 ± 2.2 54.2 ± 2.2 55.5 ± 1.9 33.3 ± 5.9 34.2 ± 6.1 33.7 ± 5.5
ES+HC+EHR 55.6 ± 2.2 58.8 ± 2.3 57.2 ± 1.9 35.2 ± 6.2 32.1 ± 6.0 33.6 ± 5.6

OSE Internal External
P R F P R F

ES+HC 46.2 ± 3.6 57.2 ± 3.9 51.1 ± 3.3 39.7 ± 12.0 35.2 ± 11.2 37.3 ± 10.5
ES+ER+HC 48.6 ± 3.4 66.8 ± 3.7 56.2 ± 3.1 36.8 ± 11.0 39.4 ± 11.4 38.1 ± 10.2
ES+HC+EHR 50.4 ± 3.6 65.9 ± 3.9 57.1 ± 3.2 35.9 ± 10.9 39.4 ± 11.4 37.6 ± 10.1

ESE Internal External
P R F P R F

ES+HC 50.5 ± 4.7 19.2 ± 2.1 27.8 ± 2.7 45.1 ± 3.0 41.2 ± 2.5 43.0 ± 2.4
ES+ER+HC 48.3 ± 3.9 29.3 ± 2.8 36.4 ± 2.9 40.7 ± 2.6 48.4 ± 2.7 44.2 ± 2.3
ES+HC+EHR 40.4 ± 3.4 36.5 ± 3.2 39.8 ± 3.0 43.2 ± 2.8 47.7 ± 2.9 45.3 ± 2.4

The only common case where the improvement is not statistically significant is OSE
internal.

The improvements are most notable for internally located holders, and especially
for the ESEs. Extracting the opinion holder for ESEs is often complex because the ex-
pression and the holder are typically not directly connected on the syntactic or shallow-
semantic level, as opposed to the typical situation for DSEs. When we use the reranker,
however, the interaction features may help us make use of the holders of other opinion
expressions in the same sentence; for instance, the interaction features make it easier
to distinguish cases like “the film was [awful]ESE” with an external (writer) holder from
cases such as “I [thought]DSE the film was [awful]ESE” with an internal holder directly
connected to a DSE.

Table 12
Opinion holder extraction results for external holders.

Writer P R F

ES+HC 44.8±3.0 42.8±2.6 43.8±2.4
ES+ER+HC 40.6±2.6 50.3±2.7 44.9±2.3
ES+HC+EHR 42.7±2.8 49.7±2.9 45.9±2.4

Implicit P R F

ES+HC 41.2±6.4 28.3±4.8 33.6±4.9
ES+ER+HC 38.7±5.4 34.4±5.1 36.4±4.7
ES+HC+EHR 43.1±5.9 32.9±5.0 37.4±4.8

496



Johansson and Moschitti Relational Features in Fine-Grained Opinion Analysis

Table 13
Overall evaluation of polarity-labeled opinion expression extraction.

System P R F

ES+PC 56.5 ± 1.7 38.4 ± 1.2 45.7 ± 1.2
ES+ER+PC 53.8 ± 1.6 44.5 ± 1.3 48.8 ± 1.2
ES+PC+EPR 54.7 ± 1.6 45.6 ± 1.3 49.7 ± 1.2

7.4 Polarity Classification

To evaluate the effect of the polarity-based reranker, we carried out experiments to
compare it with two baseline systems similarly to the evaluations of holder extraction
performance. Table 13 shows the precision, recall, and F-measures. The evaluation used
the polarity-based intersection metric (Section 7.1.2). The first baseline consisted of an
expression segmenter and a polarity classifier (ES+PC), and the second also included an
expression reranker (ER). The reranker using polarity interaction features is referred to
as the expression/polarity reranker (EPR).

The result shows that the polarity-based reranker gives a significant boost in recall,
which is in line with our previous results that also mainly improved the recall. The
precision shows a slight decrease from the ES+PC baseline but much lower than the
recall improvement. The differences between the polarity reranker and the strongest
baseline are all statistically significant (precision p < 0.02, recall and F-measure
p < 0.005).

In addition, we evaluated the performance for individual polarity values. The
figures are shown in Table 14. We see that the differences in performance when adding
the polarity reranker are concentrated to the more frequent polarity values (NEUTRAL
and NEGATIVE).

Table 14
Intersection-based evaluation for individual polarity values.

POSITIVE P R F

ES+PC 53.5 ± 3.7 37.3 ± 3.0 43.9 ± 2.8
ES+ER+PC 50.5 ± 3.4 41.8 ± 3.0 45.8 ± 2.6
ES+PC+EPR 51.0 ± 3.5 41.6 ± 3.1 45.8 ± 2.7

NEUTRAL P R F

ES+PC 56.4 ± 2.3 37.8 ± 1.7 45.3 ± 1.7
ES+ER+PC 54.0 ± 2.1 45.2 ± 1.8 49.2 ± 1.6
ES+PC+EPR 55.8 ± 2.1 46.1 ± 1.8 50.5 ± 1.6

NEGATIVE P R F

ES+PC 58.4 ± 2.8 40.1 ± 2.4 47.6 ± 2.2
ES+ER+PC 55.5 ± 2.7 45.0 ± 2.3 49.7 ± 2.0
ES+PC+EPR 54.9 ± 2.7 47.0 ± 2.4 50.6 ± 2.0

497



Computational Linguistics Volume 39, Number 3

Table 15
Overlap-based evaluation for individual polarity values, and comparison with the results
reported by Choi and Cardie (2010).

POSITIVE P R F

ES+PC 59.4 ± 2.6 46.1 ± 2.1 51.9 ± 2.0
ES+ER+PC 53.1 ± 2.3 50.9 ± 2.2 52.0 ± 1.9
ES+PC+EPR 58.2 ± 2.5 49.3 ± 2.2 53.4 ± 2.0
ES+PC+EPRp 63.6 ± 2.8 44.9 ± 2.2 52.7 ± 2.1
Choi and Cardie (2010) 67.1 31.8 43.1

NEUTRAL P R F

ES+PC 60.9 ± 1.4 49.2 ± 1.2 54.5 ± 1.0
ES+ER+PC 55.1 ± 1.2 57.7 ± 1.2 56.4 ± 1.0
ES+PC+EPR 60.3 ± 1.3 55.8 ± 1.2 58.0 ± 1.1
ES+PC+EPRp 68.3 ± 1.5 48.2 ± 1.2 56.5 ± 1.2
Choi and Cardie (2010) 66.6 31.9 43.1

NEGATIVE P R F

ES+PC 72.1 ± 1.8 52.0 ± 1.5 60.4 ± 1.4
ES+ER+PC 65.4 ± 1.7 58.2 ± 1.4 61.6 ± 1.3
ES+PC+EPR 67.6 ± 1.7 59.9 ± 1.5 63.5 ± 1.3
ES+PC+EPRp 75.4 ± 2.0 55.0 ± 1.5 63.6 ± 1.4
Choi and Cardie (2010) 76.2 40.4 52.8

Finally, we carried out an evaluation in the setting4 of Choi and Cardie (2010) and
the figures are shown in Table 15. The table shows our baseline and integrated systems
along with the figures5 from Choi and Cardie. Instead of a single value for all polarities,
we show the performance for every individual polarity value (POSITIVE, NEUTRAL,
NEGATIVE). This evaluation uses the overlap metric instead of the intersection-based
one. As we have pointed out, we use the overlap metric for compatibility although it is
problematic.

As can be seen from the table, the system by Choi and Cardie (2010) shows a large
precision bias despite being optimized with respect to the recall-promoting overlap met-
ric. In recall and F-measure, their system is significantly outperformed for all polarity
values by our baseline consisting of a pipeline of opinion expression extraction and
polarity classifier. In addition, our joint model clearly outperforms the pipeline. The
precision is slightly lower overall, but this is offset by large boosts in recall in all cases.

In order to rule out the hypothesis that our F-measure improvement compared with
the Choi and Cardie system could be caused just by rebalancing precision and recall, we
additionally trained a precision-biased reranker EPRp by changing the loss function ∆

(see Section 5.3) from 1− Fi to 1− 13 Fi − 23 Po, where Fi is the intersection F-measure and
Po the overlap precision. When we use this reranker, we achieve almost the same levels
of precision as reported by Choi and Cardie, even outperforming their precision for the

4 In addition to polarity, their system also assigned opinion intensity, which we do not consider here.
5 Confidence intervals for Choi and Cardie (2010) are omitted because we had no access to their output.

498



Johansson and Moschitti Relational Features in Fine-Grained Opinion Analysis

NEUTRAL polarity value, while the recall values are still massively higher. The precision
bias causes slight drops in F-measure for the POSITIVE and NEUTRAL polarities.

7.5 First Extrinsic Evaluation: Extraction of Evaluations of Product Attributes

As an extrinsic evaluation of the opinion expression extraction system, we evaluated
the impact of the expressions on a practical application: extraction of evaluations of
attributes from product reviews. We first describe the collection we used and then the
implementation of the extractor.

We used the annotated data set by Hu and Liu (2004a, 2004b)6 for the experiments
in extraction of attribute evaluations from product reviews. The collection contains
reviews of five products: one DVD player, two cameras, one MP3 player, and one
cellular phone. In this data set, every sentence is associated with a set of attribute eval-
uations. An evaluation consists of an attribute name and an evaluation value between
−3 and +3, where −3 means a strongly negative evaluation and +3 strongly positive.
For instance, the sentence this player boasts a decent size and weight, a relatively-intuitive
navigational system that categorizes based on id3 tags, and excellent sound is tagged with the
attribute evaluations size +2, weight +2, navigational system +2, sound +2. In this
work, we do not make use of the exact value of the evaluation but only its sign. We
removed the product attribute mentions in the form of anaphoric pronouns referring
to entities mentioned in previous sentences; these cases are directly marked in the
data set.

7.5.1 Implementation. We considered two problems: (1) extraction of attribute evaluations
without taking the polarity into account, and (2) extraction with polarity (positive or
negative). The former is modeled as a binary classifier that tags each word in the review
(except the punctuation) as an evaluation or not, and the latter requires the definition of
a three-class polarity classifier. For both tasks, we compared three feature sets: a baseline
using simple features, a stronger baseline using a lexicon, and finally a system using
features derived from opinion expressions.

Similarly to the opinion expression polarity classifier, we implemented the clas-
sifiers as SVMs that we trained using LIBLINEAR. For the extraction task without
polarities, the best results were obtained using an L2-regularized L2-loss SVM and a
C value of 0.1. For the polarity task, we used a multiclass SVM (Crammer and Singer
2001) with the same parameters. To handle the precision/recall tradeoff, we varied the
class weighting for the null class.

The baseline classifier used features based on lexical information (word, POS tag,
and lemma) in a window of size 3 around the word under consideration (the focus
word). In addition, it had two features representing the overall sentence polarities. To
compute the polarities, we trained bag-of-words classifiers following the implemen-
tation by Pang, Lee, and Vaithyanathan (2002). Two separate classifiers were used:
one for positive and one for negative polarity. Note that these classifiers detect the
presence of positive or negative polarity, which may thus occur in the same sentence. The
classifiers were trained on the MPQA corpus, where we counted a sentence as positive
if it contained a positive opinion expression with an intensity of at least MEDIUM, and
conversely for the negative polarity.

6 http://www.cs.uic.edu/∼liub/FBS/CustomerReviewData.zip.

499



Computational Linguistics Volume 39, Number 3

7.5.2 Features Using a Sentiment Lexicon. Many previous implementations for several
opinion-related tasks make use of sentiment lexicons, so the stronger baseline system
used features based on the subjectivity lexicon by Wilson, Wiebe, and Hoffmann (2005),
which we previously used for opinion expression segmentation in Section 4.1 and for
polarity classification in Section 4.3. We created a classifier using a number of features
based on this lexicon.

These features make use of the syntactic and semantic structure of the sentence.
In the following examples, we use the sentence The software itself was not so easy to use,
presented in Figure 3. In this sentence, consider the focus word software. One word is
listed in the lexicon as associated with positive sentiment: easy. The system then extracts
the following features:

SENTIMENT LEXICON POLARITIES. For every word in the sentence that is listed in
the lexicon, we add a feature. Given the example sentence, we will thus add a
feature lex pol:positive because of the word easy, which is listed as positive in
the sentiment lexicon.

CLOSEST PREVIOUS AND FOLLOWING SENTIMENT WORD. If there are sentiment
words before or after the focus word, we add the closest of them to the feature
vector. In this case, there is no previous sentiment word, so we only extract fol-
lowing word:easy.

SYNTACTIC PATHS TO SENTIMENT WORDS. For every sentiment word in the sentence,
we extract a syntactic path similar to our previous feature sets. This represents a
syntactic pattern describing the relation between the sentiment word and the focus
words. For instance, in the example we extract the path SBJ↑PRD↓, representing a
copula construction: The word software is connected to the sentiment word easy first
up through a subject link and then down through a predicative complement link.

SEMANTIC LINKS TO SENTIMENT WORDS. When there is a direct semantic role link
between a sentiment word and the focus word, we add a feature for the semantic
role label. No such features are extracted in the example sentence. The focus word
is an argument but no sentiment word is also a predicate.

7.5.3 Extended Feature Set Based on MPQA Opinion Expressions. We finally created an
extended feature set incorporating the following features derived from MPQA-style
opinion expressions, which we extracted automatically. The features are similar in
construction to those extracted by means of the sentiment lexicon. The following list
describes the new features exemplified with the same sentence above, which contains a
negative opinion expression not so easy.

softwareThe itself was not so easy

A1

NMOD APPO
SBJ PRD

ADV AMOD

[ ]
ESE

useto

IM

use.01

AMOD

Figure 3
Example sentence for product feature evaluation extraction.

500



Johansson and Moschitti Relational Features in Fine-Grained Opinion Analysis

Table 16
Product attribute evaluation extraction performance.

Feature representation Unlabeled Polarity-labeled

Baseline 49.8 ± 2.0 39.6 ± 2.0
Lexicon 53.8 ± 2.0 46.2 ± 2.0
Opinion expressions 54.8 ± 2.0 49.0 ± 2.0

OPINION EXPRESSION POLARITIES. For every opinion expression extracted by the
automatic system, we add a feature representing the polarity of the expression.
In the example, we get op expr:negative.

CLOSEST PREVIOUS AND FOLLOWING OPINION EXPRESSION WORD. We extract fea-
tures for the closest words before and after the focus word that are contained in
some opinion expression. In the example, there is an expression not so easy after the
focus word software, so we get a single feature following expr:not.

SYNTACTIC PATHS TO OPINION EXPRESSIONS. For every opinion expression in the
sentence, we extract a path from the expression to the focus word. Because opinion
expressions frequently consist of more than one word, we use the shortest path. In
this case, we will thus again get SBJ↑PRD↓.

SEMANTIC LINKS TO OPINION EXPRESSIONS. Finally, we extracted features in case
there were semantic role links. Again, we get no features based on the semantic
role structure in the example since the opinion expression contains no predicate or
argument.

7.5.4 Results. We evaluated the performance of the product attribute evaluation extrac-
tion using a 10-fold cross-validation procedure on the whole data set. We evaluated
three classifiers: a baseline that did not use the lexicon or the opinion expressions, a
classifier that adds the lexicon-based features, and finally the classifier that adds the
MPQA opinion expressions. The F-measures are shown in Table 16 for the extraction
task, and Figure 4 shows the precision/recall plots. There are clear improvements when
adding the lexicon features, but the highest performing system is the one that also
used the opinion expression features. The difference between the two top-performing

0.4

0.45

0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.4 0.45 0.5 0.55 0.6 0.65 0.7

R
ec

al
l

Precision

Unlabeled

Baseline
Lexicon

Opinion Expressions

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5 0.55 0.6 0.65

R
ec

al
l

Precision

Polarity-labeled

Baseline
Lexicon

Opinion Expressions

Figure 4
Precision / recall curves for extraction of product attribute evaluations.

501



Computational Linguistics Volume 39, Number 3

classifiers is statistically significant (p < 0.001). For the extraction task where we also
consider the polarities, the difference is even greater: almost three F-measure points.

7.6 Second Extrinsic Evaluation: Document Polarity Classification Experiment

In a second extrinsic evaluation of the opinion expression extractor, we investigated
how expression-based features affect the performance of a document-level polarity
classifier of reviews as positive or negative. We followed the same evaluation protocol
as in the first extrinsic evaluation, where we compare three classifiers of increasing
complexity: (1) a baseline using a pure word-based representation, (2) a stronger base-
line adding features derived from a sentiment lexicon, and (3) a classifier with features
extracted from opinion expressions.

The task of categorizing a full document as positive or negative can be viewed
as a document categorization task, and this has led to the application of standard
text categorization techniques (Pang, Lee, and Vaithyanathan 2002). We followed this
approach and implemented the document polarity classifier as a binary linear SVM;
this learning method has a long tradition of successful application in text categorization
(Joachims 2002).

For these experiments, we used six collections. The first one consisted of movie
reviews written in English extracted from the Web by Pang and Lee (2004).7 This data
set is an extension of a smaller set (Pang, Lee, and Vaithyanathan 2002) that has been
used in a large number of experiments. The remaining five sets consisted of product
reviews gathered by Blitzer, Dredze, and Pereira (2007).8 We used five of the largest
subsets: reviews of DVDs, software, books, music, and cameras. In all six collections,
1,000 documents were labeled by humans as positive and 1,000 as negative.

Following Pang and Lee (2004), the documents were represented as bag-of-word
feature vectors based on presence features for individual words. No weighting such as
IDF was used. The vectors were normalized to unit length. Again, we trained the SVMs
using LIBLINEAR, and the best results were obtained using an L2-regularized L2-loss
version of the SVM with a C value of 1.

7.6.1 Features Based on the Subjectivity Lexicon. We used features based on the subjectivity
lexicon by Wilson, Wiebe, and Hoffmann (2005) that we used for opinion expression
segmentation in Section 4.1 and for polarity classification in Section 4.3. For every word
whose lemma is listed in the lexicon, we added a feature consisting of the word and its
prior polarity and intensity to the bag-of-words feature vector.

The feature examples are taken from the sentence HRW has denounced the defenseless
situation of these prisoners, where denounce is listed in the lexicon as strong/negative
and prisoner as weak/negative.

LEXICON POLARITY. negative.

LEXICON POLARITY AND INTENSITY. strong/negative, weak/negative.

LEXICON POLARITY AND WORD. denounced/negative, prisoners/negative.

7 http://www.cs.cornell.edu/people/pabo/movie-review-data/.
8 http://www.cs.jhu.edu/∼mdredze/datasets/sentiment/unprocessed.tar.gz.

502



Johansson and Moschitti Relational Features in Fine-Grained Opinion Analysis

7.6.2 Features Extracted from Opinion Expressions. Finally, we created a feature set based
on the opinion expressions with polarities. We give examples from the same sentence;
here, denounced is a negative DSE and defenseless situation is a negative ESE.

EXPRESSION POLARITY. negative.

EXPRESSION POLARITY AND WORD. negative/denounced, negative/defenseless,
negative/situation.

EXPRESSION TYPE AND WORD. DSE/denounced, ESE/defenseless, ESE/situation.

7.6.3 Evaluation Results. To evaluate the performance of the document polarity classifiers,
we carried out a 10-fold cross-validation procedure for every review collection. We
evaluated three classifiers: one using only bag-of-words features (“Baseline”); one using
features extracted from the subjectivity lexicon (“Lexicon”); and finally one also using
the expression-based features (“Expressions”).

In order to abstract away from the tuning threshold, the performances were mea-
sured using AUC, the area under ROC curve. The AUC values are given in Table 17.

These evaluations show that the classifier adding features extracted from the opin-
ion expressions significantly outperforms the classifier using only a bag-of-words fea-
ture representation and also that using the lexicon-based features. This demonstrates
that the extraction and disambiguation of opinion expressions in their context is useful
for a coarse-grained task such as document polarity classification. The differences in
AUC values between the two best configurations are statistically significant (p < 0.005
for all six collections). In addition, we show the precision/recall plots in Figure 5; we
see that for all six collections, the expression-based set-up outperforms the other two
near the precision/recall breakeven point.

The collection where we can see the most significant difference is the movie review
set. The main difference of this collection compared with the other collections is that its
documents are larger: The average size of a document here is about four times larger
than in the other collections. In addition, its reviews often contain large sections that are
purely factual in nature, mainly plot descriptions. The opinion expression identification
may be seen as a way to process the document to highlight the interesting parts on
which the classifier should focus.

8. Conclusion

We have shown that features derived from grammatical and semantic role structure
can be used to improve three fundamental tasks in fine-grained opinion analysis: the
detection of opinionated expressions, the extraction of opinion holders, and finally the

Table 17
Document polarity classification evaluation (AUC values).

Feature set Movie DVD Software Books Music Cameras

Baseline 93.1 ± 1.0 85.1 ± 1.7 91.0 ± 1.3 85.7 ± 1.6 84.7 ± 1.7 91.9 ± 1.2
Lexicon 93.8 ± 1.0 86.6 ± 1.6 92.3 ± 1.2 87.4 ± 1.5 86.6 ± 1.5 92.9 ± 1.1
Expressions 94.7 ± 0.9 87.2 ± 1.5 92.9 ± 1.1 88.1 ± 1.5 87.5 ± 1.5 93.6 ± 1.1

503



Computational Linguistics Volume 39, Number 3

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95

1

0.6 0.65 0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1

R
ec

al
l

Precision

Movies

Baseline
Lexicon

Opinion Expressions

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95

1

0.6 0.65 0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1

R
ec

al
l

Precision

DVDs

Baseline
Lexicon

Opinion Expressions

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95

1

0.6 0.65 0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1

R
ec

al
l

Precision

Software

Baseline
Lexicon

Opinion Expressions

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95

1

0.6 0.65 0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1

R
ec

al
l

Precision

Books

Baseline
Lexicon

Opinion Expressions

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95

1

0.6 0.65 0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1

R
ec

al
l

Precision

Music

Baseline
Lexicon

Opinion Expressions

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95

1

0.6 0.65 0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1

R
ec

al
l

Precision

Cameras

Baseline
Lexicon

Opinion Expressions

Figure 5
Precision / recall curves for detection of positive reviews.

assignment of polarity labels to opinion expressions. The main idea is to use relational
features describing the interaction of opinion expressions through linguistic structures
such as syntax and semantics. This is not only interesting from a practical point of
view (improving performance) but also confirms our linguistic intuitions that surface-
linguistic structure phenomena such as syntax and shallow semantics are used in the
encoding of the rhetorical organization of the sentence, and that we can thus extract
useful information from those structures.

504



Johansson and Moschitti Relational Features in Fine-Grained Opinion Analysis

Because our feature sets are based on interaction between opinion expressions
that can appear anywhere in a sentence, exact inference in this model becomes in-
tractable. To overcome this issue, we used an approximate search strategy based on
reranking: In the first step, we used the baseline systems, which use only simple local
features, to generate a relatively small hypothesis set; we then applied a classifier using
interaction features to pick the final result. A common objection to reranking is that
the candidate set may not be diverse enough to allow for much improvement unless
it is very large; the candidates may be trivial variations that are all very similar to
the top-scoring candidate. Investigating inference methods that take a less brute-force
approach than plain reranking is thus another possible future direction. Interesting
examples of such inference methods include forest reranking (Huang 2008) and loopy
belief propagation (Smith and Eisner 2008). Nevertheless, although the development of
such algorithms is a fascinating research problem, it will not necessarily result in a more
usable system: Rerankers impose very few restrictions on feature expressivity and make
it easy to trade accuracy for efficiency.

We investigated the effect of machine learning features, as well as other design
parameters such as the choice of machine learning method and the size of the
hypothesis set. For the features, we analyzed the impact of using syntax and semantics
and saw that the best models are those making use of both. The most effective features
we have found are purely structural, based on tree fragments in a syntactic or semantic
tree. Features involving words generally did not seem to have the same impact. Sparsity
may certainly be an issue for features defined in terms of tree fragments. Possible future
extensions in this area could include bootstrapping methods to mine for meaningful
fragments unseen in the training set, or methods to group such features into clusters to
reduce the sparsity.

In addition to the core results on fine-grained opinion analysis, we have described
experiments demonstrating that features extracted from opinion expressions can be
used to improve practical applications: extraction of evaluations of product attributes,
and document polarity classification. Although for the first task it may be fairly obvious
that it is useful to carry out a fine-grained analysis of the sentence opinion structure,
the second result is more unexpected because the document polarity classification task
is a high-level and coarse-grained task. For both tasks, we saw statistically significant
increases in performance compared not only to simple baselines, but also compared
to strong baselines using a lexicon of sentiment words. Although the lexicon leads to
clear improvements, the best classifiers also used the features extracted from the opinion
expressions.

It is remarkable that the opinion expressions as defined by the MPQA corpus are
useful for practical applications on reviews from several domains, because this corpus
mainly consists of news documents related to political topics; this shows that the expres-
sion identifier has been able to generalize from the specific domains. It would still be
relevant, however, to apply domain adaptation techniques (Blitzer, Dredze, and Pereira
2007). It could also be interesting to see how domain-specific opinion word lexicons
could improve over the generic lexicon we used here; especially if such a lexicon were
automatically constructed (Jijkoun, de Rijke, and Weerkamp 2010).

There are multiple additional opportunities for future work in this area. An impor-
tant issue that we have left open is the coreference problem for holder extraction, which
has been studied by Stoyanov and Cardie (2006). Similarly, recent work has tried to
incorporate complex, high-level linguistic structure such as discourse representations
(Asher, Benamara, and Mathieu 2009; Somasundaran et al. 2009; Zirn et al. 2011); it is
clear that these structures are very relevant for explaining the way humans organize

505



Computational Linguistics Volume 39, Number 3

their expressions of opinions rhetorically. Theoretical depth does not necessarily guar-
antee practical applicability, however, and the challenge is as usual to find a middle
ground that balances our goals: explanatory power in theory, significant performance
gains in practice, computational tractability, and robustness in difficult circumstances.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Eric Breck and
Yejin Choi for clarifying their results and
experimental set-up, and for sharing their
cross-validation split. In addition, we are
grateful to the anonymous reviewers,
whose feedback has helped to improve
the clarity and readability of this article.
The research described here has received
funding from the European Community’s
Seventh Framework Programme
(FP7/2007-2013) under grant 231126:
LivingKnowledge—Facts, Opinions and Bias
in Time, and under grant 247758:
Trustworthy Eternal Systems via Evolving
Software, Data and Knowledge (EternalS).

References
Asher, Nicholas, Farah Benamara, and

Yannick Mathieu. 2009. Appraisal of
opinion expressions in discourse.
Lingvisticae Investigations, 31(2):279–292.

Bethard, Steven, Hong Yu, Ashley Thornton,
Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou, and
Dan Jurafsky. 2005. Extracting opinion
propositions and opinion holders
using syntactic and lexical cues.
In James G. Shanahan, Yan Qu, and
Janyce Wiebe, editors, Computing
Attitude and Affect in Text: Theory and
Applications. Springer, New York,
chapter 11, pages 125–140.

Blitzer, John, Mark Dredze, and Fernando
Pereira. 2007. Biographies, Bollywood,
boom-boxes and blenders: Domain
adaptation for sentiment classification. In
Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL-07), pages 440–447, Prague.

Boser, Bernhard, Isabelle Guyon, and
Vladimir Vapnik. 1992. A training
algorithm for optimal margin classifiers.
In Proceedings of the Fifth Annual Workshop
on Computational Learning Theory,
pages 144–152, Pittsburgh, PA.

Breck, Eric, Yejin Choi, and Claire Cardie.
2007. Identifying expressions of opinion
in context. In IJCAI 2007, Proceedings of
the 20th International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, pages 2,683–2,688,
Hyderabad.

Choi, Yejin, Eric Breck, and Claire Cardie.
2006. Joint extraction of entities and
relations for opinion recognition. In
Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 431–439, Sydney.

Choi, Yejin and Claire Cardie. 2008.
Learning with compositional semantics
as structural inference for subsentential
sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the
2008 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing,
pages 793–801, Honolulu, HI.

Choi, Yejin and Claire Cardie. 2010.
Hierarchical sequential learning for
extracting opinions and their attributes.
In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 269–274, Uppsala.

Collins, Michael. 2000. Discriminative
reranking for natural language
parsing. In Proceedings of the
Seventeenth International Conference on
Machine Learning, pages 175–182,
San Francisco, CA.

Collins, Michael. 2002. Discriminative
training methods for hidden Markov
models: Theory and experiments with
perceptron algorithms. In Proceedings of the
2002 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2002),
pages 1–8, Philadelphia, PA.

Crammer, Koby, Ofer Dekel, Joseph Keshet,
Shai Shalev-Schwartz, and Yoram Singer.
2006. Online passive-aggressive
algorithms. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 2006(7):551–585.

Crammer, Koby and Yoram Singer. 2001.
On the algorithmic implementation of
multiclass kernel-based vector machines.
Journal of Machine Learning Research,
2001(2):265–585.

Fan, Rong-En, Kai-Wei Chang, Cho-Jui
Hsieh, Xiang-Rui Wang, and Chih-Jen Lin.
2008. LIBLINEAR: A library for large linear
classification. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 9:1871–1874.

Freund, Yoav and Robert E. Schapire. 1999.
Large margin classification using the
perceptron algorithm. Machine Learning,
37(3):277–296.

Gerber, Matthew and Joyce Chai. 2010.
Beyond NomBank: A study of implicit

506



Johansson and Moschitti Relational Features in Fine-Grained Opinion Analysis

arguments for nominal predicates.
In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 1,583–1,592, Uppsala.

Greene, Stephan and Philip Resnik.
2009. More than words: Syntactic
packaging and implicit sentiment.
In Proceedings of Human Language
Technologies: The 2009 Annual Conference
of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 503–511, Boulder, CO.

Hjorth, J. S. Urban. 1993. Computer Intensive
Statistical Methods. Chapman and Hall,
London.

Hu, Minqing and Bing Liu. 2004a. Mining
and summarizing customer reviews.
In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining (KDD-04),
pages 168–177, Seattle, WA.

Hu, Minqing and Bing Liu. 2004b. Mining
opinion features in customer reviews.
In Proceedings of the Nineteeth National
Conference on Artificial Intellgience
(AAAI-2004), pages 755–760,
San Jose, CA.

Huang, Liang. 2008. Forest reranking:
Discriminative parsing with non-local
features. In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT,
pages 586–594, Columbus, OH.

Jijkoun, Valentin, Maarten de Rijke, and
Wouter Weerkamp. 2010. Generating
focused topic-specific sentiment lexicons.
In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 585–594, Uppsala.

Joachims, Thorsten. 2002. Learning to Classify
Text using Support Vector Machines.
Kluwer/Springer, Boston.

Joachims, Thorsten, Thomas Finley, and
Chun-Nam Yu. 2009. Cutting-plane
training of structural SVMs. Machine
Learning, 77(1):27–59.

Johansson, Richard and Pierre Nugues. 2008.
Dependency-based syntactic–semantic
analysis with PropBank and NomBank.
In CoNLL 2008: Proceedings of the Twelfth
Conference on Natural Language Learning,
pages 183–187, Manchester.

Joshi, Mahesh and Carolyn Penstein-Rosé.
2009. Generalizing dependency features
for opinion mining. In Proceedings of the
ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Papers,
pages 313–316, Singapore.

Karlgren, Jussi, Gunnar Eriksson, Magnus
Sahlgren, and Oscar Täckström. 2010.
Between bags and trees—Constructional
patterns in text used for attitude

identification. In Proceedings of ECIR 2010,
32nd European Conference on Information
Retrieval, pages 38–49, Milton Keynes.

Kim, Soo-Min and Eduard Hovy. 2006.
Extracting opinions, opinion holders, and
topics expressed in online news media
text. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Sentiment and Subjectivity in Text,
pages 1–8, Sydney.

Kobayashi, Nozomi, Kentaro Inui, and
Yuji Matsumoto. 2007. Extracting
aspect-evaluation and aspect-of relations
in opinion mining. In Proceedings of the
2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and
Computational Natural Language Learning
(EMNLP-CoNLL), pages 1,065–1,074,
Prague.

Mel’čuk, Igor A. 1988. Dependency Syntax:
Theory and Practice. State University Press
of New York, Albany.

Meyers, Adam, Ruth Reeves, Catherine
Macleod, Rachel Szekely, Veronika
Zielinska, Brian Young, and Ralph
Grishman. 2004. The NomBank project:
An interim report. In HLT-NAACL 2004
Workshop: Frontiers in Corpus Annotation,
pages 24–31, Boston, MA.

Moschitti, Alessandro and Roberto Basili.
2004. Complex linguistic features for
text classification: A comprehensive
study. In Proceedings of the 26th European
Conference on Information Retrieval
Research (ECIR 2004), pages 181–196,
Sunderland.

Palmer, Martha, Dan Gildea, and Paul
Kingsbury. 2005. The proposition bank:
An annotated corpus of semantic roles.
Computational Linguistics, 31(1):71–105.

Pang, Bo and Lillian Lee. 2004. A sentimental
education: Sentiment analysis using
subjectivity summarization based on
minimum cuts. In Proceedings of the 42nd
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL’04), Main Volume,
pages 271–278, Barcelona.

Pang, Bo and Lillian Lee. 2008. Opinion
mining and sentiment analysis.
Foundations and Trends in Information
Retrieval, 2(1–2):1–135.

Pang, Bo, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar
Vaithyanathan. 2002. Thumbs up?
Sentiment classification using machine
learning techniques. In Proceedings of the
2002 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 79–86,
Philadelphia, PA.

Popescu, Ana-Maria and Oren Etzioni. 2005.
Extracting product features and opinions

507



Computational Linguistics Volume 39, Number 3

from reviews. In Proceedings of Human
Language Technology Conference and
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 339–346,
Vancouver.

Prasad, Rashmi, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee,
Eleni Miltsakaki, Livio Robaldo,
Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie Webber.
2008. The Penn Discourse Treebank 2.0.
In Proceedings of the 6th International
Conference on Languages Resources
and Evaluations (LREC 2008),
pages 2,961–2,968, Marrakech.

Quirk, Randolph, Sidney Greenbaum,
Geoffrey Leech, and Jan Svartvik. 1985.
A Comprehensive Grammar of the English
Language. Longman, New York.

Ruppenhofer, Josef, Swapna Somasundaran,
and Janyce Wiebe. 2008. Finding the
sources and targets of subjective
expressions. In Proceedings of the Sixth
International Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC’08), pages 2,781–2,788,
Marrakech.

Schwartz, Richard and Steve Austin. 1991.
A comparison of several approximate
algorithms for finding multiple (n-best)
sentence hypotheses. In Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP),
pages 701–704, Toronto.

Smith, David and Jason Eisner. 2008.
Dependency parsing by belief
propagation. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
pages 145–156, Honolulu, HI.

Somasundaran, Swapna, Galileo Namata,
Janyce Wiebe, and Lise Getoor. 2009.
Supervised and unsupervised methods
in employing discourse relations for
improving opinion polarity classification.
In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 170–179, Singapore.

Stoyanov, Veselin and Claire Cardie.
2006. Partially supervised coreference
resolution for opinion summarization
through structured rule learning.
In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 336–344,
Sydney.

Stoyanov, Veselin and Claire Cardie.
2008. Annotating topics of opinions.
In Proceedings of the Sixth International
Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’08), pages 3,213–3,217,
Marrakech.

Surdeanu, Mihai, Richard Johansson,
Adam Meyers, Lluı́s Màrquez, and
Joakim Nivre. 2008. The CoNLL-2008
shared task on joint parsing of
syntactic and semantic dependencies.
In Proceedings of CoNLL 2008,
pages 159–177, Manchester.

Taskar, Ben, Carlos Guestrin, and Daphne
Koller. 2004. Max-margin Markov
networks. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 16, pages 25–32,
Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.

Titov, Ivan and Ryan McDonald. 2008.
A joint model of text and aspect
ratings for sentiment summarization.
In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT,
pages 308–316, Columbus, OH.

Tjong Kim Sang, Erik F., and Jorn Veenstra.
1999. Representing text chunks.
In Proceedings of the Ninth Conference
of the European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics,
pages 173–179, Bergen.

Tsochantaridis, Ioannis, Thorsten Joachims,
Thomas Hofmann, and Yasemin Altun.
2005. Large margin methods for
structured and interdependent
output variables. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 6(Sep):1453–1484.

Wiebe, Janyce, Rebecca Bruce, and Thomas
O’Hara. 1999. Development and use of a
gold standard data set for subjectivity
classifications. In Proceedings of the 37th
Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 246–253,
College Park, MD.

Wiebe, Janyce, Theresa Wilson, and Claire
Cardie. 2005. Annotating expressions of
opinions and emotions in language.
Language Resources and Evaluation,
39(2-3):165–210.

Wiegand, Michael and Dietrich Klakow.
2010. Convolution kernels for opinion
holder extraction. In Human Language
Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference
of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 795–803, Los Angeles, CA.

Wilson, Theresa, Janyce Wiebe, and
Paul Hoffmann. 2005. Recognizing
contextual polarity in phrase-level
sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of
Human Language Technology Conference
and Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing,
pages 347–354, Vancouver.

Wilson, Theresa, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul
Hoffmann. 2009. Recognizing contextual
polarity: An exploration of features

508



Johansson and Moschitti Relational Features in Fine-Grained Opinion Analysis

for phrase-level sentiment analysis.
Computational Linguistics, 35(3):399–433.

Wu, Yuanbin, Qi Zhang, Xuangjing
Huang, and Lide Wu. 2009. Phrase
dependency parsing for opinion
mining. In Proceedings of the 2009
Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing,
pages 1,533–1,541, Singapore.

Yu, Hong and Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou.
2003. Towards answering opinion
questions: Separating facts from opinions

and identifying the polarity of opinion
sentences. In Proceedings of the Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP-2003), pages 129–136,
Sapporo.

Zirn, Cäcilia, Mathias Niepert, Heiner
Stuckenschmidt, and Michael Strube. 2011.
Fine-grained sentiment analysis with
structural features. In Proceedings of 5th
International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing, pages 336–344,
Chiang Mai.

509




