



































coi00186.dvi


Book Reviews

Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining

Bing Liu
(University of Illinois at Chicago)

Morgan & Claypool (Synthesis Lectures on Human Language Technologies,
edited by Graeme Hirst, 5(1)), 2012, 167 pp; paperbound, ISBN 978-1-60845-884-4

Reviewed by
Claire Cardie
Cornell University

This 2012 book is written as a comprehensive introductory and survey text for sentiment
analysis and opinion mining, a field of study that investigates computational techniques
for analyzing text to uncover the opinions, sentiment, emotions, and evaluations ex-
pressed therein. As such, it aims to be accessible to a broad audience that includes stu-
dents, researchers, and practitioners, as well as to cover all important topics in the field.

With regard to the first aim, the book is very much a success: The writing is clear and
concise, informative examples motivate each new topic, terminology is clearly defined,
and descriptions of key algorithms are provided in the running text along with short
(usually one-line) descriptions of each piece of relevant related work. The latter, in
particular, makes the book an excellent platform from which to dive into the quickly
expanding body of literature on sentiment and opinion analysis. In addition, I believe
that the book should be easily accessible to anyone with a computer science background.

© 2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

With regard to Liu’s second aim of covering all important topics in the field, the de-
gree to which the book succeeds is a matter of, well, opinion. Let me explain. Liu’s early
research was in data mining and Web mining; not surprisingly then, the book is written
from this perspective. It is very much centered around the analysis of user-generated
opinions in social media. Liu’s particular expertise is in the area of product reviews;
hence, the bulk of the book’s examples are from this domain. Furthermore, the book
focuses on techniques that are first and foremost applicable to aspect-based sentiment
analysis—fine-grained analysis of opinions regarding specific aspects of products and
services. For the most part, investigations in this area have been restricted to reviews
of electronics products (e.g., cameras), hotels, and restaurants with their associated
entity-specific aspects (e.g., weight, photo quality, and ease of use for cameras; rooms,
front desk service, and cleanliness for hotels; and food, service, ambience, and cost for
restaurants).

In contrast, the similarly named survey of Pang and Lee (2008)—Opinion Mining and
Sentiment Analysis—is more even-handed in its selection of topics and techniques and is
written from the point of view of natural language processing (NLP) and computational
linguistics. Pang and Lee, for example, are aware of prior work in the field on fact and
event-based text analysis and, within that context, focus consciously on the description
of “new challenges1 raised by sentiment-aware applications” as well as the methods

1 Emphasis added.

doi:10.1162/COLI r 00186



Computational Linguistics Volume 40, Number 2

proposed to address them. As a result, the survey proves to be an easy, comfortable
(and entertaining) read for those with an NLP-centric ancestry.

Not so with the Liu survey, because the goals and assumptions that underlie aspect-
based sentiment analysis can be at odds with many of those at the core of computational
linguistics and NLP. But do not despair! This is a good thing! Precisely because of Liu’s
different tack on opinion and sentiment analysis, for many readers the book will be a
wonderful source of ideas for new problems to work on in the field. In particular, the
language of product reviews is quite different from that of other opinion-oriented text
(e.g., editorials, blogs, position papers, political arguments, and even movie reviews).
Product reviews tend to be quite short; they describe a single, known product; the
opinion expressions themselves tend to be product-specific. Other genres of opinion-
oriented text are generally longer; they can discuss virtually any topic or set of topics
and, hence, are likely to exhibit a greater variety of sentence and discourse structure,
including a virtually unlimited (and, out of context, ambiguous) opinion expression
vocabulary, the presence of opinion holders that are not the author, and implicit opinion
targets.

With this contrast in writing genres in mind, reading the book becomes a thought
experiment in determining whether the techniques it covers will perform well on
opinion-oriented texts beyond product reviews; if not, how and when will they fail; and
in what circumstances might more complex language understanding components like
parsing, semantic interpretation, or discourse analysis be helpful in analyzing product
reviews?

The book contains eleven chapters (with a short summary of the book in a final
twelfth chapter). Chapter 1 introduces the problem of sentiment analysis. It discusses
the differences in terminology that exist in industry vs. academia and briefly describes
approximately 20 recent2 applications-oriented sentiment analysis research efforts pub-
lished largely at venues outside of NLP. The latter is a nice entree into the applied
sentiment analysis literature beyond the standard NLP conferences.

Chapter 2 provides an abstraction of the opinion mining problem and formally
defines an opinion in terms of its components—the opinion holder, the entity and as-
pect of that entity that is the target of the opinion, the sentiment expressed, and the
time that the opinion was expressed. The remaining chapters are organized around
this definition and the sentiment-based applications that it enables. Thus, there are
chapters on document-level sentiment classification and rating prediction (Chapter 3),
sentence-level subjectivity and sentiment classification (Chapter 4), and aspect-based
sentiment analysis (Chapter 5, roughly one-quarter of the book). Following these are
shorter chapters on sentiment lexicon generation, opinion summarization, the analysis
of comparative opinions, opinion retrieval (vs. Web search), and determining review
quality (Chapters 6, 7, 8, 9, and 11, respectively).

Chapter 10 is a somewhat longer chapter devoted to opinion spam detection. Here
Liu describes techniques to identify fake product reviews—some that rely primarily on
the review content and available meta-data, and others based on identifying atypical
behaviors of the reviewer(s).

The chapter on aspect-based sentiment analysis is, by far, the most detailed, but
there are some nice surprises in other chapters including sections on handling sarcas-
tic sentences, learning a priori objective terms that imply an opinion, and analyzing

2 Most papers are from 2010 and 2011.

512



Book Reviews

opinions in contexts, as well as multiple sections that address cross-language and cross-
domain issues.

Overall, the book is a very valuable resource for those interested in understanding
the quickly expanding literature on sentiment and opinion analysis, especially tech-
niques for aspect-based sentiment analysis. For NLP researchers, it can also serve as a
source of new problems to tackle in the analysis of opinion-oriented text.

Reference
Pang, B. and Lee, L. (2008). Opinion mining

and sentiment analysis. Foundations and
Trends in Information Retrieval, 2:1–135.

This book review was edited by Pierre Isabelle.

Claire Cardie is a Professor in the Computer Science and Information Science departments at
Cornell University. She has served as an action editor for the Journal of Machine Learning Research
(JMLR), an associate editor for the Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research (JAIR), and an editorial
board member for Machine Learning and Computational Linguistics. She was Program Chair (with
Pierre Isabelle) of the joint ACL/COLING conference in 2006. E-mail: cardie@cs.cornell.edu.

513

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1561%2F1500000011
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1561%2F1500000011



