



































coi00180.dvi


Book Review

Natural Language Processing for Historical Texts

Michael Piotrowski
(Leibniz Institute of European History)

Morgan & Claypool (Synthesis Lectures on Human Language Technologies, edited by
Graeme Hirst, volume 17), 2012, ix+157 pp; paperbound, ISBN 978-1608459469

Reviewed by
Laurent Romary
Inria & Humboldt University, Berlin

The publication of a scholarly book is always the conjunction of an author’s desire (or
need) to disseminate their experience and knowledge and the interest or expectations
of a potential community of readers to gain benefit from the publication itself. Michael
Piotrowski has indeed managed to optimize this relation by bringing to the public a
compendium of information that I think has been heavily awaited by many scholars
having to deal with corpora of historical texts. The book covers most topics related to the
acquisition, encoding, and annotation of historical textual data, seen from the point of
view of their linguistic content. As such, it does not address issues related, for instance,
to scholarly editions of these texts, but conveys a wealth of information on the various
aspects where recent developments in language technology may help digital humanities
projects to be aware of the current state of the art in the field.

© 2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Still, the book is not an encyclopedic description of such technologies. It is based
on the experience acquired by the author within the corpus development projects he
has been involved in, and reflects in particular the specific topics on which he has made
more in-depth explorations. It is thus written more as a series of returns on experience
than a systematic resource to which one would want to return after its initial reading.

The book is organized as a series of nine short chapters.
In the first two (very short) chapters, the author presents the general scope of

the book and provides an overview of the reasons why natural language processing
(NLP) has such an entrenched position in digital humanities at large and the study of
historical text in particular. Citing several prominent projects and corpus initiatives that
have taken place in the last few decades, Piotrowski defends the thesis, which I share,
that a deep understanding of textual documents requires some basic knowledge of
language processing methods and techniques. Chapter 2 in particular (“NLP and Digital
Humanities”) could be read as an autonomous position paper, which, independently of
the following chapters, presents the current landscape of infrastructural initiatives and
scholarly projects that shape this convergence between the two fields.

Chapter 3 (“Spelling in Historical Texts,” pp. 11–23) describes the various issues re-
lated to spelling variations in historical text. It shows how difficult it may be to deal with
both diachronic (e.g., in comparison to modern standardized spellings) and synchronic
(degree of stabilization of historical spellings) variations, especially in the context of the
uncertainty brought about by the transcription process itself. This is particularly true
for historical manuscripts and Piotrowski goes deeply into this, showing some concrete

doi:10.1162/COLI r 00180



Computational Linguistics Volume 40, Number 1

examples of the kind of hurdles that a scholar may fall into. This is the kind of short
introduction I would recommend for anyone, in particular students, wanting to gain a
first understanding in the domain of historical spelling.

Chapter 4 is the longest chapter in the book (“Acquiring Historical Texts,” pp. 25–
52) and covers various aspects of the digitization workflow that needs to be set up to
create a corpus of historical texts. The chapter is quite difficult to read as a single unit
because of its intrinsic heterogeneity. Indeed, it covers quite a wide range of topics:
presentation of existing digitization projects worldwide, technical issues related to
scanning, comparison of various optical character recognition systems for various types
of scripts, the potential role of lexical resources, crowdsourcing for optical character
recognition (OCR) post-processing, and manual or semi-automatic keying. Getting an
overview of the various topics is even more difficult because of the way the author has
followed his own personal experience, and alternates between general considerations
and in-depth presentations of concrete results. Pages 34–40, for instance, is one single
subsection on the comparison of OCR outputs that goes into so much detail that it
breaks the continuity of the argument, although in itself this subsection could be really
interesting for a specialized reader. This chapter illustrates the point that the content of
this book would benefit from being published in a more modern and open setting.

Data representation aspects are covered in Chapter 5 (“Text Encoding and
Annotation Schemes,” pp. 53–68), which tackles two specific issues, namely, character
and document encoding. On these two, the author presents what could be considered
best practices. For character encoding, the book rightly focuses on the advantages
that the move towards ISO 10646/Unicode has brought to the community. The
corresponding sub-section actually covers three different aspects: It first makes an
extensive presentation of the history of character encoding standards (from ASCII/ISO
646 to Unicode/ISO 10646), it provides insights into the current coverage and encoding
principles (e.g., UTF-8 vs. UTF-16) of ISO 10646, and finally, it focuses on the specific
difficulties occurring in historical texts both from the point of view of legacy ASCII-
based transcription languages and the management of characters that are not present
in Unicode. Although well documented, these three topics should have been more
clearly separated so that readers interested in one or the other could directly refer to
it. This is a typical case where, given the great expertise of the author on the subject,
I can imagine the corresponding texts being published on-line as separate entries in a
blog. The second half of the chapter focuses on the role of the Text Encoding Initiative
(TEI) guidelines for the transcription and encoding of historical text. It covers the
various representation levels that may be concerned (metadata, text structure, surface
annotation) and insists on the current difficulty of linking current NLP tools to TEI
encoded documents. Although this is indeed still an issue in general, it might have
been interesting to refer to standards (ISO 24611– MAF) and initiatives (Textgrid core
encoding at the token level; the TXM platform for text mining) that have started to
provide concrete sustainable answers to the issue.

The following chapter (“Handling Spelling Variations,” pp. 69–84), provides a series
of short studies describing possible methods for dealing with OCR errors or spelling
variations as described in Chapter 3. Independent of the fact that I find it strange to
see the two chapters set quite far from one another, Chapter 6 distinguishes itself by its
profound heterogeneity. Whereas several sections do have the most appropriate level
of detail and topicality for historical texts (in particular those on canonicalization),
some sections seem to be completely off topic (Section 6.2, “Edit Distance,” describes
what I would consider as background knowledge for such a book). It is all the more
disappointing that the author shows here a very high level of expertise and, as in the

232



Book Review

case of Chapter 3, I would strongly recommend the reading of the relevant sections to
newcomers in the field.

In contrast with the previous chapter, Chapter 7 (“NLP Tools for Historical
Languages,” pp. 85–100) is more coherent and focused. It mainly addresses the morpho-
syntactic analysis of historical text and presents, through concrete deployment scenar-
ios, possible methods to constrain the appropriate parsers, in a context where hardly any
existing tools can be simply re-used. The chapter is very well documented and refers
to most of the relevant initiatives in the domain of morphology for historical text, at
least on the European scene. This focus may also be misleading because recent work on
named entity recognition on historical texts are not at all mentioned and are probably,
to my view, one of the most promising direction for enhanced digital scholarship.

The last chapter (“Historical Corpora,” pp. 101–116) is a compendium, sorted by
language, of the major historical corpora available worldwide. It shows the dynamic
that currently exists in the community and is an essential background resource to both
understanding who is active in maintaining historical corpora and discerning the most
relevant resources. The chapter as a whole provides an interesting “historical” per-
spective on the progress made by most text-based projects in using the TEI guidelines
as their reference standard. It seems quite difficult now to imagine an initiative which
would not take TEI for granted, and would not build inside the TEI framework. On
another issue, namely, copyright, Piotrowski also provides an interesting analysis on
the difficulty of re-using old editions which have been recently re-edited on paper, and
thus fall into some publisher’s copyright restrictions. The conclusion could have been a
little tougher here though, and probably should have recommended putting a hold on
any paper publication of historical sources by a private publisher unless it is guaranteed
that the electronic material can be used freely, under an appropriate open license.

As a whole, the book leaves the reader with a mixed feeling of enthusiasm and
disappointment. Enthusiasm, because the content is so rich that it should serve as back-
ground reference (and indeed be quoted) for any further work on the creation, manage-
ment, and curation of historical corpora. Still, I cannot help thinking that the editorial
setting as a book is not the most appropriate setting for such content. The variety of
topics that are addressed as well as the heterogeneous level of detail provided through
the different chapters would benefit from a more fragmented treatment. Indeed, this
would be the perfect content for a series of blog entries (for instance, in a scholarly
blog such as those on the hypotheses.org platform) which in turn would allow an
interested reader to discover exactly the topics they want information about and cite
the corresponding entries. With the bibliography in Zotero and relevant pointers to
the corresponding on-line corpora or tools, I could imagine the resulting content soon
becoming one of the most cited on-line resources. I am sure the author would gain more
visibility in doing so than having the material hidden on a library shelf or behind a
paywall. Not knowing the exact copyright transfer agreement associated with the book,
I cannot judge if it is too late for the author to think in these terms, but this could be a
lesson for scholars who are now planning to write such an introductory publication. Is
the book still the best medium?

This book review was edited by Pierre Isabelle.

Laurent Romary is director of research at Inria, France, and guest scientist at the Humboldt Uni-
versity in Berlin. He has been involved for many years in language resource modeling activities
and in particular in standardization initiatives in the TEI consortium and ISO committee TC
37/SC 4 (language resource management). He is the director of the European DARIAH digital
infrastructure in the humanities. e-mail: laurent.romary@inria.fr.

233




