



































coi00213.dvi


Recognizing Textual Entailment: Models and Applications

Ido Dagan1, Dan Roth2, Mark Sammons2, and Fabio Massimo Zanzotto3

(1Bar-Ilan University, Israel, 2University of Illinois, Urbana, IL, and
3University of Rome “Tor Vergata,” Italy)

Morgan & Claypool (Synthesis Lectures on Human Language Technologies, edited by
Graeme Hirst, volume 23), 2013, xx+200 pp; paperbound, ISBN 978-1-59829-834-5;
e-book, ISBN 978-1-59829-835-2

Reviewed by
Bernardo Magnini
Fondazione Bruno Kessler

Recognizing textual entailment (RTE) has been proposed as a task in computational
linguistics under a successful series of annual evaluation campaigns started in 2005 with
the Pascal RTE-1 shared task. RTE is defined as the capability of a system to recognize
that the meaning of a portion of text (usually one or few sentences) entails the meaning
of another portion of text. Subsequently, the task has also been extended to recognizing
specific cases of non-entailment, as when the meaning of the first text contradicts the
meaning of the second text. Although the study of entailment phenomena in natural
language was addressed much earlier, the novelty of the RTE evaluation was to propose
a simple text-to-text task to compare human and system judgments, making it possible
to build data sets and to experiment with a variety of approaches. Two main reasons
likely contributed to the success of the initiative: First, the possibility to address, for the
first time, the complexity of entailment phenomena under a data-driven perspective;
second, the text-to-text approach allows one to easily incorporate a textual entailment
engine into applications (e.g., question answering, summarization, information extrac-
tion) as a core inferential component.

© 2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Given the large interest in RTE, a book on the topic is very much welcome. The book
satisfies at least two needs in the community. On the one hand, it was time to collect
and organize a large amount of research and publications produced in the last decade
or so. Under this perspective a particular merit of the book is to set a homogeneous
and general descriptive framework under which different approaches can be reported
and compared with a uniform conceptual schema. On the other hand, after a decade
of research in the field, it is the right time to open the discussion both to the results
that have been achieved and to future challenges in RTE. With this perspective the
book targets not only people interested in textual entailment but people interested in
semantic inference and semantic processing at large, intended as a core capability of
natural language understanding. Researchers working in related areas such as textual
similarity, causality, and temporal reasoning, just to mention a few, may benefit from
this monograph.

The book is organized into six chapters, covering RTE motivations, task definitions,
approaches and data-driven methodologies, relevant case studies, knowledge acquisi-
tion for RTE and, finally, future research perspectives.

Chapter 1 provides the necessary context on textual entailment and RTE. Even a
reader not familiar with the field can find in this chapter motivations, definitions, many

doi:10.1162/COLI r 00213



Computational Linguistics Volume 41, Number 1

examples, a complete report on the RTE evaluations with their data sets, and pointers
to a large variety of applications. The chapter also tries to state both commonalities
and differences between the “textual” and the “logical” notion of entailment. I found
this part somehow less elaborated and less convincing, particularly because the authors
seem to consider logics only for deductive argumentation, where the conclusion from
one or more premises is true in every circumstance. Actually, logics have elaborated
theories of probabilistic argumentation where the conclusion has different degrees of
plausibility, as the textual entailment definition suggests.

Chapter 2 introduces architecture and approaches proposed for recognizing textual
entailment. The goal of the chapter is to show the complexity of the RTE task and to
provide the main options that have been investigated to date. Chapter 3 is really the
core of the book, as it provides a general conceptualization of the RTE task based on
alignments between the two texts at different levels (token, lexical, syntactic, etc.). The
chapter considers three steps in the process: first, candidate alignments are established
between the two portions of text; then, the more promising alignments are selected; and,
finally, an entailment decision is taken based on classification, possibly using a machine
learning algorithm. Very useful, this chapter provides enough background on machine
learning that even the non-familiar reader can get oriented in the technical description.

Chapter 4 presents several case studies about RTE systems. This is an interesting
and complete overview, which includes, among others, systems exploiting edit distance,
logical representation and inference, several kinds of transformations between the two
portions of text, alignment-focused approaches (where alignment is seen as a part of
the inference process), and, finally, ensemble systems (i.e., systems that combine other
entailment systems). Chapter 5 focuses on knowledge resources for textual entailment,
providing an exhaustive overview both on the use of existing lexical resources (e.g.,
WordNet) and on methodologies for the automatic acquisition of entailment rules,
including recent work based on distributional similarity methods and acquisition from
parallel and comparable corpora. The chapter does not avoid a final discussion on
problematic aspects of the use of knowledge resources for textual entailment, partic-
ularly considering that, despite the fact that a huge number of entailment rules has
been acquired and managed by different systems, their impact on performance is still
debated in the community. The last chapter of the book discusses research directions
in RTE, pointing out the fundamental role of high-quality pre-processing (e.g., parsing,
semantic role labeling) in natural language processing, as well as the need for a shared
software environment (e.g., an open-source platform for textual inferences) in order to
increase replicability and comparability of approaches.

Overall, the book provides a very good overview of research on textual entailment,
where state-of-the-art approaches and systems are clearly presented and compared with
the help of a common conceptual schema, with many examples and bibliographical ref-
erences and, when necessary, providing technical details. The book indubitably covers
a need of the RTE community, and will be a reference for students and researchers
approaching this field. Although the book addresses almost all of the RTE work so
far, there are a few aspects for which, stimulated by the book itself, the reader more
familiar with the topic would have expected more discussion. The first aspect concerns
the relation between text similarity and textual entailment, which is somehow latent
throughout the book (Chapter 3 presents similarity features for the task), although
not explicitly addressed. As semantic text similarity (STS) in the last years has been
quite successful, and as there are evident overlaps between RTE and STS systems, a
discussion about the potential interactions among these communities would have been
useful. There is a second aspect that might have required a deeper discussion. Although

158



Book Reviews

recognizing textual entailment, at least in the perspective suggested by the book, re-
quires the capability to establish meaningful alignments between two portions of text,
the book devotes little space to opposite phenomena, namely, discovering reasons for
non-entailment, or for strong dissimilarities. The impression is that contradiction detec-
tion is not yet completely integrated within the RTE data-driven conceptual framework
(not surprisingly, the topic is mentioned in the case study on natural logic in Chapter 4)
and that further investigation is necessary in the future.

It is evident that the main source of inspiration for the book is the activity around
RTE evaluations in the last ten years, yet this book goes well beyond being simply a
summary of what has happened. The reader interested in potential future research
directions in textual entailment will certainly appreciate the generic architecture
presented in Chapter 2, the alignment-based conceptualization of the RTE task
presented in Chapter 3, the open perspectives of Chapter 6, and, finally, the huge
bibliographical selection. Overall, this book is very well positioned to measure both
the maturity and the future ambitions of an important research area in computational
linguistics.

This book review was edited by Pierre Isabelle.

Bernardo Magnini is senior researcher at FBK in Trento, Italy, where he is Co-Responsible of
the Research Unit on Human Language Technology. His research interests include question
answering and textual entailment. He is currently the scientific coordinator of the EXCITE-
MENT project (EXploring Customer Interactions through Textual EntailMENT), funded by the
European Commission. Magnini’s address is FBK, Via Sommarive 18, 38123, Trento, Italy;
e-mail: magnini@fbk.eu.

159




