



































Jane J. Robinson


Obituary

Jane J. Robinson

Barbara J. Grosz∗

Harvard University

Eva Hajicova
Charles University in Prague

Aravind Joshi
University of Pennsylvania

Jane Robinson, a pioneering computational linguist, made major contributions to ma-
chine translation, natural language, and speech systems research programs at the
RAND Corporation, IBM, and in the AI Center at SRI International. She served as ACL
president in 1982.

Jane became a computational linguist accidentally. She had a Ph.D. in history
from UCLA, but could not obtain a faculty position in that field because those were
reserved for men. Instead, she took positions teaching English, first at UCLA and then
at California State College, Los Angeles. While at LA State, where she was tasked with
teaching engineers how to write, Jane noticed an announcement for a talk on Chomsky’s
transformational grammar. She went to the talk thinking this work on grammar might
help her teach better. Although its subject matter did not match her expectations, the
talk marked a turning point in her career.

In the late 1950s, Jane became a consultant to the RAND Corporation group working
on machine translation under Dave Hays (ACL president, 1964). From the beginning,
Jane was concerned with identifying connections between different traditions in for-
mal grammars and their corresponding detailed linguistic realizations. Her 1965 In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING) paper, “Endocentric
constructions and the Cocke parsing logic” (Robinson 1965), is a beautiful example of
connecting specific linguistic phenomena to parsing strategies in a way that preserves
the nature of the linguistic phenomena, endocentric constructions. While at RAND,
Jane became colleague and friend to many in the machine translation and emerging
computational linguistics world, including Susumo Kuno (ACL president 1967), Martin
Kay (ACL president, 1969), Joyce Friedman (ACL president, 1971), and Karen Sparck
Jones (ACL president, 1994).

In the late 1960s, Jane moved to the Automata Theory and Computability Group
at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center in Yorktown Heights, NY. She used
her knowledge of formal work on grammars and parsing to draw correspondences
between Dependency Grammars and Phrase Structure Grammars. Although Jane came

∗ E-mail: grosz@eecs.harvard.edu.

doi:10.1162/COLI a 00235

© 2015 Association for Computational Linguistics



Computational Linguistics Volume 41, Number 4

from the Dependency Grammar tradition, her balanced, careful analysis of tradeoffs
enabled others to bridge the approaches. Her 1967 COLING paper, “Methods for
obtaining corresponding phrase structure and dependency grammars” (Robinson 1967),
is a wonderful example of her understanding of the seminal issues underlying these
different systems. She subsequently published the classic paper connecting dependency
structure and transformational rules, “Dependency structures and transformational
rules” (Robinson 1970b). This paper exemplifies Jane’s scholarship and her deftness in
dealing with the formal and computational issues of language processing in a very fair
and informative manner. Her 1970 paper, “Case, category and configuration” (Robinson
1970a), demonstrated in a very convincing way the possibility of formally interpreting
Fillmore’s case grammar in terms of dependencies, in a more economic fashion and
without any loss of information.

In 1973, Don Walker (ACL secretary-treasurer, 1976–1993) recruited Jane to the
speech group in the AI Center (AIC) at SRI International. Jane remained a key member
of the AIC’s natural language group until she retired in the mid 1980s. She made major
contributions to a wide range of research, ranging from grammars for speech under-
standing systems and dialogues to such discourse issues as codes and clues in contexts.
For several of the NLP systems SRI developed in the 1970s and 1980s, the grammar
was the coordinating point for all knowledge about the language, so Jane interacted
with everyone developing any component of the system, from the architecture through
semantics and discourse. Speech processing was a bit “deaf” in those days, and Jane
frequently remarked that she had to write not only a grammar for English, but also its
dual (one for non-English to rule out bad parsings). During her time at SRI, Jane wrote
some of the most comprehensive grammars for NLP systems.

One of us (Barbara Grosz) notes that Jane’s contributions to the AIC’s natural
language group went far beyond her official grammar writing responsibilities. She
served as mentor (before that word was widely used in academia) for a large group of
“young Turks,” as she referred to those of us in the younger cohort involved in building
NLP systems; she was our in-house expert in linguistics; provided critiques of drafts of
papers, making them shorter, clearer, and more scholarly; debugged our ideas across
the full spectrum of system components; and introduced us to the most senior people
in linguistics and computational linguistics.

Another of us (Aravind Joshi, ACL president, 1975) recalls meeting Jane in Sep-
tember 1975 at an NLP workshop at the University of Michigan. At that time, he and his
students were working on two separate areas of computational linguistics. One of them
concerned the minimal formal machinery needed for representing structural aspects of
language and the other one dealt with some aspects of cooperation in natural language
interfaces to databases. After just a brief discussion with Jane, when she asked what
he was doing, it became clear to him, “that I was in the presence of someone who had
already worked on such diverse areas. From thereon, whenever I had an opportunity to
meet with Jane, I took advantage of her deep understanding.”

And the third of us (Eva Hajicova, ACL president, 1998) recalls the important ties
Jane formed with Praguian linguists interested in formal grammar starting in 1965,
when the founder of the Prague group, Petr Sgall, first visited the United States and
met Jane at RAND. Their common research interests in computational linguistics, par-
ticularly Dependency Grammar, forged deep personal relationships between Jane and
Sgall’s linguistics group in Prague. Jane visited Prague twice, once before and once after
the change of the communist regime. During difficult political times, Jane provided
the Prague group with linguistics literature published in the West, and she introduced
them to her colleagues and students, yielding additional important connections, which

724



Grosz, Hajicova, and Joshi Jane J. Robinson

have continued to this day. Eva notes that, “only those who have the same historical
experience as we in Prague have had can appreciate fully how important such activities
were for our research and for our students.”

Jane read broadly and her training as a historian made her a careful and deep
scholar. Throughout her life she would go to talks that seemed a bit far afield and come
back with new ideas. For those who worked with her she was an invaluable source
of out-of-the-box thinking as well as the go-to person for what to read in linguistics.
Jane often said that had she been born in a later generation, she would have become an
astronomer. Given her love of exploration, she might have been an astronaut. (You can
see this bent in the poem she wrote for her poetry class friend’s funeral, “Time To Go”
[Robinson 2008]). Lucky for all of us, she wound up in computational linguistics.

Jane was the mother of four children and the proud grandmother of two grandsons,
one now a lawyer, the other an actor. She extended her family to encompass her
colleagues, building camaraderie through dinners at her home—lamb stew, mostly—
and picnics at Foothills Park in Palo Alto, activities which drew the families of AIC
researchers together and yielded many lifelong friendships. Jane built such friendships
throughout her career. In responding to our questions about Jane’s time at RAND, Dave
Hays’s wife Rita noted that Jane remained close friends with her and Dave even after
Dave went to SUNY Buffalo and Jane to IBM Yorktown Heights and then SRI. Rita and
Jane were traveling and hiking companions into Jane’s nineties.

To celebrate her sixtieth birthday, Jane “got in shape” to hike in the Himalayas
around Annapurna. She came back with beautiful photos and the desire to join the
young Turks who went backpacking in Yosemite. (Although she had been a regular
visitor to Yosemite since her forties, she had not backpacked before.) She offered to
drive everyone in the huge Chrysler Imperial she had gotten to feel safe driving in New
York. Jane backpacked into her late seventies, then switched to the luxury of the High
Sierra Camp tent cabins and later to a small cabin with an inside shower. For those lucky
enough to visit Yosemite with her, she was as much a guide to the mountains as she had
been a guide to linguistics.

For people who worked with Jane at SRI, she was a towering figure in the field, a
wonderful colleague who imparted deep wisdom as well as linguistic facts, and a dear
friend. She was senior to most of the members of the AIC. Looking back on her arrival,
Peter Hart (a director of the AIC) noted that Jane’s presence changed the tone of the
early SRI AI Center. She brought not only a keen intellect and depth of knowledge, but
“also a gentleness, openness, and generosity of spirit.” Gary Hendrix (who led the NLP
group at SRI for several years) remembers that for many who worked with her at SRI,
“Jane was like a second mother, loving and giving and nurturing.” Jerry Hobbs (ACL
president, 1990) recalls that, “one of the things I learned from her, though imperfectly,
was how to be tough with grace.” Several remember Jane as one of a handful of elder
statesmen that their generation could look up to.

Jane was a colleague and friend of Ray Perrault (ACL president, 1983, and current
AIC director) from the time he was a Ph.D. student at the University of Michigan. In
the early 1970s, Jane frequently visited Joyce Friedman (ACL president, 1971), her old
friend and his advisor. Ray remembers Jane was a gentle but firm critic of his thesis,
and he fondly recalls her passing through in her huge Chrysler on her move from IBM
to SRI. Ray was ACL vice president when Jane was president, and she was delighted
when he decided to join the young Turks at SRI. Subsequently, she “even tolerated me
as her manager until her retirement and became doting godmother to my son.”

Jane made a difference in people’s lives, not just their research. Her death marks the
end of an era and the passing of an icon. We will miss her greatly.

725



Computational Linguistics Volume 41, Number 4

Acknowledgments
This remembrance was a composite of the
reminiscences of a number of people,
including Tom Garvey, Marguerite Hays,
Peter Hart, Gary Hendrix, Jerry Hobbs,
David Israel, Ray Perrault, Candy Sidner,
and Marty Tenenbaum.

References
Robinson, Jane J. 1965. Endocentric

constructions and the cocke parsing logic.
In Proceedings of the 1965 Conference on
Computational Linguistics, COLING ’65,
pages 1–23, Stroudsburg, PA.

Robinson, Jane J. 1967. Methods for
obtaining corresponding phrase structure
and dependency grammars. In Proceedings
of the 1967 Conference on Computational
Linguistics, COLING ’67, pages 1–25,
Stroudsburg, PA.

Robinson, Jane J. 1970a. Case, category, and
configuration. Journal of Linguistics,
6(1):57–80.

Robinson, Jane J. 1970b. Dependency
structures and transformational rules.
Language, 46(2):259–285.

Robinson, Jane J. 2008. Time to go.
http://poemsofjanerobinson.blogspot.
com/2008/06/time-to-go.html.

726

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?doi=10.1162%2FCOLI_a_00235&crossref=10.1017%2FS002222670000236X&citationId=p_3
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?doi=10.1162%2FCOLI_a_00235&crossref=10.2307%2F412278&citationId=p_4

