




































coi00258.dvi


Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

Dong Nguyen∗
University of Twente

A. Seza Doğruöz
Tilburg University/
Netherlands Institute for Advanced
Study in the Humanities and Social
Sciences (NIAS)

Carolyn P. Rosé
Carnegie Mellon University

Franciska de Jong
University of Twente/
Erasmus University Rotterdam

Language is a social phenomenon and variation is inherent to its social nature. Recently, there
has been a surge of interest within the computational linguistics (CL) community in the social
dimension of language. In this article we present a survey of the emerging field of ”computa-
tional sociolinguistics" that reflects this increased interest. We aim to provide a comprehensive
overview of CL research on sociolinguistic themes, featuring topics such as the relation between
language and social identity, language use in social interaction, and multilingual communi-
cation. Moreover, we demonstrate the potential for synergy between the research communities
involved, by showing how the large-scale data-driven methods that are widely used in CL can
complement existing sociolinguistic studies, and how sociolinguistics can inform and challenge
the methods and assumptions used in CL studies. We hope to convey the possible benefits of
a closer collaboration between the two communities and conclude with a discussion of open
challenges.

1. Introduction

Science has experienced a paradigm shift along with the increasing availability of large
amounts of digital research data (Hey, Tansley, and Tolle 2009). In addition to the
traditional focus on the description of natural phenomena, theory development, and

∗ Department EWI Researchgroup Human Media Interaction (HMI), PO Box 217, 7500 AE, Enschede, The
Netherlands. E-mail: dong.p.ng@gmail.com. A. Seza Doğruöz: a.s.dogruoz@gmail.com; Carolyn P.
Rosé: cprose@cs.cmu.edu; Franciska de Jong: f.m.g.dejong@utwente.nl.

Submission received: 25 August 2015; accepted for publication: 18 February 2016.

doi:10.1162/COLI_a_00258

© 2016 Association for Computational Linguistics



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

computational science, data-driven exploration and discovery have become a dominant
ingredient of many methodological frameworks. In line with these developments, the
field of computational linguistics (CL) has also evolved.

Human communication occurs in both verbal and nonverbal form. Research on
computational linguistics has primarily focused on capturing the informational di-
mension of language and the structure of verbal information transfer. In the words
of Krishnan and Eisenstein (2015), computational linguistics has made great progress
in modeling language’s informational dimension, but with a few notable exceptions,
computation has had little to contribute to our understanding of language’s social
dimension. The recent increase in interest of computational linguists to study language
in social contexts is partly driven by the ever increasing availability of social media data.
Data from social media platforms provide a strong incentive for innovation in the CL
research agenda and the surge in relevant data opens up methodological possibilities
for studying text as social data. Textual resources, like many other language resources,
can be seen as a data type that is signaling all kinds of social phenomena. This is
related to the fact that language is one of the instruments by which people construct
their online identity and manage their social network. Of course, there are challenges as
well. For example, social media language is more colloquial and contains more linguistic
variation, such as the use of slang and dialects, than the language in data sets that have
been commonly used in CL research (e.g., scientific articles, newswire text, and the Wall
Street Journal) (Eisenstein 2013b). However, an even greater challenge is that the relation
between social variables and language is typically fluid and tenuous, whereas the CL
field commonly focuses on the level of literal meaning and language structure, which is
more stable.

The tenuous connection between social variables and language arises because of
the symbolic nature of the relation between them. With the language chosen a social
identity is signaled, which may buy a speaker1 something in terms of footing within a
conversation; or, in other words, for speakers there is room for choice in how to use
their linguistic repertoire in order to achieve social goals. This freedom of choice is
often referred to as the agency of speakers and the linguistic symbols chosen can be
thought of as a form of social currency. Speakers may thus make use of specific words
or stylistic elements to represent themselves in a certain way. However, because of this
agency, social variables cease to have an essential connection with language use. It may
be the case, for example, that on average female speakers display certain characteristics
in their language more frequently than their male counterparts. Nevertheless, in spe-
cific circumstances, females may choose to de-emphasize their identity as females by
modulating their language usage to sound more male. Thus, although this exception
serves to highlight rather than challenge the commonly accepted symbolic association
between gender and language, it nevertheless means that it is less feasible to predict
how a woman will sound in a randomly selected context.

Speaker agency also enables creative violations of conventional language patterns.
Just as with any violation of expectations, these creative violations communicate in-
direct meanings. As these violations become conventionalized, they may be one ve-
hicle towards language change. Thus, agency plays a role in explaining the variation
in and dynamic nature of language practices, both within individual speakers and
across speakers. This variation is manifested at various levels of expression—the choice

1 We use the term “speaker” for an individual who has produced a message, either as spoken word or in
textual format. When discussing particular social media sites, we may refer to ”users” as well.

538



Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

of lexical elements, phonological variants, semantic alternatives, and grammatical
patterns—and plays a central role in the phenomenon of linguistic change. The audi-
ence, demographic variables (e.g., gender, age), and speaker goals are among the factors
that influence how variation is exhibited in specific contexts. Agency thus increases
the intricate complexity of language that must be captured in order to achieve a social
interpretation of language.

Sociolinguistics investigates the reciprocal influence of society and language on
each other. Sociolinguists traditionally work with spoken data using qualitative and
quantitative approaches. Surveys and ethnographic research have been the main meth-
ods of data collection (Weinreich, Labov, and Herzog 1968; Trudgill 1974; Milroy and
Milroy 1985; Eckert 1989; Milroy and Gordon 2003; Tagliamonte 2006). The data sets
used are often selected and/or constructed to facilitate controlled statistical analyses
and insightful observations. However, the resulting data sets are often small in size
compared with the standards adopted by the CL community. The massive volumes
of data that have become available from sources such as social media platforms have
provided the opportunity to investigate language variation more broadly. The opportu-
nity for the field of sociolinguistics is to identify questions that this massive but messy
data would enable them to answer. Sociolinguists must then also select an appropriate
methodology. However, typical methods used within sociolinguistics would require
sampling the data down. If they take up the challenge to instead analyze the data in
its massive form, they may find themselves open to partnerships in which they may
consider approaches more typical in the field of CL.

As more and more researchers in the field of CL seek to interpret language from a
social perspective, an increased awareness of insights from the field of sociolinguis-
tics could inspire modeling refinements and potentially lead to performance gains.
Recently, various studies (Volkova, Wilson, and Yarowsky 2013; Stoop and van den
Bosch 2014; Hovy 2015) have demonstrated that existing NLP tools can be improved
by accounting for linguistic variation due to social factors, and Hovy and Søgaard
(2015) have drawn attention to the fact that biases in frequently used corpora, such
as the Wall Street Journal, cause NLP tools to perform better on texts written by older
people. The rich repertoire of theory and practice developed by sociolinguists could
influence the field of CL also in more fundamental ways. The boundaries of commu-
nities are often not as clear-cut as they may seem and the impact of agency has not
been sufficiently taken into account in many computational studies. For example, an
understanding of linguistic agency can explain why and when there might be more
or less of a problem when making inferences about people based on their linguistic
choices. This issue is discussed in depth in some recent computational work related
to gender, specifically, Bamman, Eisenstein, and Schnoebelen (2014) and Nguyen et
al. (2014), who provide a critical reflection on the operationalization of gender in CL
studies.

The increasing interest in analyzing and modeling the social dimension of language
within CL encourages collaboration between sociolinguistics and CL in various ways.
However, the potential for synergy between the two fields has not been explored
systematically so far (Eisenstein 2013b) and to date there is no overview of the common
and complementary aspects of the two fields. This article aims to present an integrated
overview of research published in the two communities and to describe the state-of-
the-art in the emerging multidisciplinary field that could be labeled as “computational
sociolinguistics.” The envisaged audiences are CL researchers interested in sociolinguis-
tics and sociolinguists interested in computational approaches to study language use.
We hope to demonstrate that there is enough substance to warrant the recognition of

539



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

computational sociolinguistics as an autonomous yet multidisciplinary research area.
Furthermore, we hope to convey that this is the moment to develop a research agenda
for the scholarly community that maintains links with both sociolinguistics and compu-
tational linguistics.

In the remaining part of this section, we discuss the rationale and scope of our
survey in more detail as well as the potential impact of integrating the social dimensions
of language use in the development of practical NLP applications. In Section 2 we
discuss methods for computational sociolinguistics, in which we reflect on methods
used in sociolinguistics and computational linguistics. In Section 3, on language and
social identity construction, we discuss how speakers use language to shape perception
of their identity and focus on computational approaches to model language variation
based on gender, age and geographical location. In Section 4, on language and social
interaction, we move from individual speakers to pairs, groups, and communities and
discuss the role of language in shaping personal relationships, the use of style-shifting,
and the adoption of norms and language change in communities. In Section 5 we discuss
multilingualism and social interaction, in which we present an overview of tools for
processing multilingual communication, such as parsers and language identification
systems. We will also discuss approaches for analyzing patterns in multilingual commu-
nication from a computational perspective. In Section 6 we conclude with a summary
of major challenges within this emerging field.

1.1 Rationale for a Survey of Computational Sociolinguistics

The increased interest in studying a social phenomenon such as language use from a
data-driven or computational perspective exemplifies a more general trend in scholarly
agendas. The study of social phenomena through computational methods is commonly
referred to as “computational social science” (Lazer et al. 2009). The increasing inter-
est of social scientists in computational methods can be regarded as illustrating the
general increase of attention for cross-disciplinary research perspectives. “Multidisci-
plinary,” “interdisciplinary,” “cross-disciplinary,” and “transdisciplinary” are among
the labels used to mark the shift from monodisciplinary research formats to models
of collaboration that embrace diversity in the selection of data and methodological
frameworks. However, in spite of various attempts to harmonize terminology, the
adoption of such labels is often poorly supported by definitions and they tend to be
used interchangeably. The objectives of research rooted in multiple disciplines often
include the ambition to resolve real-world or complex problems, to provide different
perspectives on a problem, or to create cross-cutting research questions, to name a few
(Choi and Pak 2006).

The emergence of research agendas for (aspects of) computational sociolinguistics
fits in this trend. We will use the term computational sociolinguistics for the emerging
research field that integrates aspects of sociolinguistics and computer science in study-
ing the relation between language and society from a computational perspective. This
survey article aims to show the potential of leveraging massive amounts of data to study
social dynamics in language use by combining advances in computational linguistics
and machine learning with foundational concepts and insights from sociolinguistics.
Our goals for establishing computational sociolinguistics as an independent research
area include the development of tools to support sociolinguists, the establishment of
new statistical methods for the modeling and analysis of data that contains linguistic
content as well as information on the social context, and the development or refinement
of NLP tools based on sociolinguistic insights.

540



Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

1.2 Scope of the Discussion

Given the breadth of this field, we will limit the scope of this survey as follows. First
of all, the coverage of sociolinguistics topics will be selective and primarily determined
by the work within computational linguistics that touches on sociolinguistic topics. For
readers with a wish for a more complete overview of sociolinguistics, we recommend
the introductory readings by Bell (2013), Holmes (2013), and Meyerhoff (2011).

The availability of social media and other online language data in computer-
mediated formats is one of the primary driving factors for the emergence of
computational sociolinguistics. A relevant research area is therefore the study of
computer-mediated communication (Herring 1996). Considering the strong focus on
speech data within sociolinguistics, there is much potential for computational ap-
proaches to be applied to spoken language as well. Moreover, the increased availability
of recordings of spontaneous speech and transcribed speech has inspired a revival in
the study of the social dimensions of spoken language (Jain et al. 2012), as well as in the
analysis of the relation between the verbal and the nonverbal layers in spoken dialogues
(Truong et al. 2014). As online data increasingly becomes multimodal—for example,
with the popularity of vlogs (video blogs)—we expect the use of spoken word data
for computational sociolinguistics to increase. Furthermore, we expect that multimodal
analysis, a topic that has been the focus of attention in the field of human–computer
interaction for many years, will also receive attention in computational sociolinguistics.

In the study of communication in pairs and groups, the individual contributions are
often analyzed in context. Therefore, much of the work on language use in settings with
multiple speakers draws from foundations in discourse analysis (Hyland 2004; Martin
and White 2005; De Fina, Schiffrin, and Bamberg 2006; Schegloff 2007), pragmatics (such
as speech act theory [Searle 1969; Austin 1975]), rhetorical structure theory (Mann and
Thompson 1988; Taboada and Mann 2006), and social psychology (Giles and Coupland
1991; Postmes, Spears, and Lea 2000; Richards 2006). For studies within the scope of
computational sociolinguistics that build upon these fields the link with the founda-
tional frameworks will be indicated. Another relevant field is computational stylometry
(Holmes 1998; Stamatatos 2009; Daelemans 2013), which focuses on computational
models of writing style for various tasks such as plagiarism detection, author profiling,
and authorship attribution. Here we limit our discussion to publications on topics such
as the link between style and social variables.

1.3 NLP Applications

Besides yielding new insights into language use in social contexts, research in compu-
tational sociolinguistics could potentially also impact the development of applications
for the processing of textual social media and other content. For example, user profiling
tools might benefit from research on automatically detecting the gender (Burger et al.
2011), age (Nguyen et al. 2013), geographical location (Eisenstein et al. 2010), or affilia-
tions of users (Piergallini et al. 2014) based on an analysis of their linguistic choices. The
cases for which the interpretation of the language used could benefit most from using
variables such as age and gender are usually also the ones for which it is most difficult
to automatically detect those variables. Nevertheless, in spite of this kind of challenge,
there are some published proofs of concept that suggest potential value in advancing
past the typical assumption of homogeneity of language use embodied in current NLP
tools. For example, incorporating how language use varies across social groups has
improved word prediction systems (Stoop and van den Bosch 2014), algorithms for

541



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

cyberbullying detection (Dadvar et al. 2012), and sentiment-analysis tools (Volkova,
Wilson, and Yarowsky 2013; Hovy 2015). Hovy and Søgaard (2015) show that POS
taggers trained on well-known corpora such as the English Penn Treebank perform
better on texts written by older authors. They draw attention to the fact that texts
in various frequently used corpora are from a biased sample of authors in terms of
demographic factors. Furthermore, many NLP tools currently assume that the input
consists of monolingual text, but this assumption does not hold in all domains. For
example, social media users may use multiple language varieties, even within a single
message. To be able to automatically process these texts, NLP tools that are able to deal
with multilingual texts are needed (Solorio and Liu 2008b).

2. Methods for Computational Sociolinguistics

As discussed, one important goal of this article is to stimulate collaboration between
the fields of sociolinguistics in particular and social science research related to commu-
nication at large on the one hand, and computational linguistics on the other hand. By
addressing the relationship with methods from both sociolinguistics and the social sci-
ences in general we are able to underline two expectations. First of all, we are convinced
that sociolinguistics and related fields can help the field of computational linguistics to
build richer models that are more effective for the tasks they are or could be used for.
Second, the time seems right for the CL community to contribute to sociolinguistics
and the social sciences, not only by developing and adjusting tools for sociolinguists,
but also by refining the theoretical models within sociolinguistics using computational
approaches and contributing to the understanding of the social dynamics in natural
language. In this section, we highlight challenges that reflect the current state of the
field of computational linguistics. In part these challenges relate to the fact that in the
field of language technologies at large, the methodologies of social science research are
usually not valued, and therefore also not taught. There is a lack of familiarity with
methods that could easily be adopted if understood and accepted. However, there are
promising examples of bridge-building that are already occurring in related fields such
as learning analytics. More specifically, in the emerging area of discourse analytics there
are demonstrations of how these practices could eventually be observed within the
language technologies community as well (Rosé in press; Rosé and Tovares 2015; Rosé
et al. 2008).

At the outset of multidisciplinary collaboration, it is necessary to understand differ-
ences in goals and values between communities, as these differences strongly influence
what counts as a contribution within each field, which in turn influences what it would
mean for the fields to contribute to one another. Towards that end, we first discuss
the related but distinct notions of reliability and validity, as well as the differing roles
these notions have played in each field (Section 2.1). This will help lay a foundation for
exploring differences in values and perspectives between fields. Here, it will be most
convenient to begin with quantitative approaches in the social sciences as a frame of
reference. In Section 2.2 we discuss contrasting notions of theory and empiricism as well
as the relationship between the two, as that will play an important and complementary
role in addressing the concern over differing values. In Section 2.3 we broaden the scope
to the spectrum of research approaches within the social sciences, including strong
quantitative and strong qualitative approaches, and the relationship between CL and
the social disciplines involved. This will help to further specify the concrete challenges
that must be overcome in order for a meaningful exchange between communities to take
place. In Section 2.4 we illustrate how these issues come together in the role of data, as

542



Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

the collection, sampling, and preparation of data are of central importance to the work
in both fields.

2.1 Validation of Modeling Approaches

The core of much research in the field of computational linguistics, in the past decade
especially, is the development of new methods for computational modeling, such as
probabilistic graphical models and deep learning within a neural network approach.
These novel methods are valued both for the creativity that guided the specification
of novel model structures and the corresponding requirement for new methods of
inference as well as the achievement of predictive accuracy on tasks for which there is
some notion of a correct answer.

Development of new modeling frameworks is part of the research production cycle
both within sociolinguistics (and the social sciences in general) and the CL community,
and there is a lot of overlap with respect to the types of methods used. For example,
logistic regression is widely utilized by variationist sociolinguists using a program
called VARBRUL (Tagliamonte 2006). Similarly, logistic regression is widely used in the
CL community, especially in combination with regularization methods when dealing
with thousands of variables, for example for age prediction (Nguyen et al. 2013). As
another example, latent variable modeling approaches (Koller and Friedman 2009) have
grown in prominence within the CL community for dimensionality reduction, manag-
ing heterogeneity in terms of multiple domains or multiple tasks (Zhang, Ghahramani,
and Yang 2008), and approximation of semantics (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003; Griffiths
and Steyvers 2004). Similarly, it has grown in prominence within the quantitative
branches of the social sciences for modeling causality (Glymour et al. 1987), managing
heterogeneity in terms of group effects and subpopulations (Collins and Lanza 2010),
and time series modeling (Rabe-Hesketh, Skrondal, and Pickles 2004; Rabe-Hesketh and
Skrondal 2012).

The differences in reasons for the application of similar techniques are indicative of
differences in values. Whereas in CL there is a value placed on creativity and predictive
accuracy, within the social sciences the related notions of validity and reliability underline
the values placed on conceptual contributions to the field. Validity is primarily a mea-
sure of the extent to which a research design isolates a particular issue from confounds
so that questions can receive clear answers. This typically requires creativity, and fre-
quently research designs for isolating issues effectively are acknowledged for this cre-
ativity in much the same way that a novel graphical model would be acknowledged for
the elegance of its mathematical formulation. Reliability, on the other hand, is primarily
a measure of the reproducibility of a result and might seem to be a distinct notion from
predictive accuracy. However, the connection is apparent when one considers that a
common notion of reliability is the extent to which two human coders would arrive at
the same judgment on a set of data points, whereas predictive accuracy is the extent to
which a model would arrive at the same judgment on a set of data points as a set of
judgments decided ahead of time by one or more humans.

Although at some deep level there is much in common between the goals and
values of the two communities, the differences in values signified by the emphasis
on creativity and predictive accuracy on the one side and reliability and validity on
the other side nevertheless pose challenges for mutual exchange. Validity is a multi-
faceted notion, and it is important to properly distinguish it from the related notion of
reliability. If one considers shooting arrows at a target, one can consider reliability to
be a measure of how much convergence is achieved in location of impact of multiple

543



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

arrows. On the other hand, validity is the extent to which the point of convergence
centers on the target. Reproducibility of results is highly valued in both fields, which
requires reliability wherever human judgment is involved, such as in the production of
a gold standard (Carletta 1996; Di Eugenio and Glass 2004). However, before techniques
from CL will be adopted by social science researchers, standards of validation from the
social sciences will likely need to be addressed (Krippendorff 2013). We will see that this
notion requires more than the related notion of creativity as appreciated within the field
of CL.

One aspect that is germane to the notion of validity that goes beyond pure creativity
is the extent to which the essence that some construct actually captures corresponds
to the intended quantity. This aspect of validity is referred to as face validity. For
example, the face validity of a sentiment analysis tool could be tested as follows. First, an
automatic measure of sentiment would be applied to a text corpus. Then, texts would
be sorted by the resulting sentiment scores and the data points from the end points
and middle compared with one another. Are there consistent and clear distinctions in
sentiment between beginning, middle, and end? Is sentiment the main thing that is
captured in the contrast, or is something different really going on? Although the CL
community has frequently upheld high standards of reliability, it is rare to find work
that deeply questions whether the models are measuring the right thing. Nevertheless,
this deep questioning is core to high-quality work in the social sciences, and without it,
the work may appear weak.

Another important notion is construct validity, or the extent to which the exper-
imental design manages extraneous variance effectively. If the design fails to do so,
it affects the interpretability of the result. This notion applies when we interpret the
learned weights of features in our models to make statements about language use.
When not controlling for confounding variables, the feature weights are misleading and
valid interpretation is not possible. For example, many studies on gender prediction
(see Section 3) ignore extraneous variables such as age, whereas gender and age are
known to interact with each other highly. Where confounds may not have been properly
eliminated in an investigation, again, the results may appear weak regardless of the
numbers associated with the measure of predictive accuracy.

Another important methodological idea is triangulation. Simply put, it is the idea
that if you look at the same object through different lenses, each of which is designed
to accentuate and suppress different kinds of details, you get more information than if
you looked through just one—this is analogous to the value obtained through the use of
ensemble methods like bagging. Triangulation is thus an important way of strengthening
research findings in the social sciences by leveraging multiple views simultaneously
rather than just using one in addressing a question. Sentiment analysis can again
be used for illustration purposes. Consider a blog corpus for which the age of each
individual blogger is available. Let’s assume that a model for predicting age allocated
high weights to some sentiment-related words. This may be considered as evidence
that the model is consistent with previous findings that older people use more words
that express a positive sentiment. Another method could measure sentiment for each
blog individually. If the measured sentiment would correlate with the age of bloggers
across the corpus, the two methods for investigating the connection between age and
sentiment would tell the same story and the confidence in the validity of the story would
increase. This type of confirming evidence is referred to as an indication of convergent
validity.

Another form of triangulation is where distinctions known to exist are confirmed.
For this example, assume that a particular model for predicting political affiliation

544



Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

placed high weights on some sentiment-related words in a corpus related to issues for
which those affiliated with one political perspective would take a different stance than
those affiliated with another perspective, and this affiliation is known for all data points.
The experimenters may conclude that this evidence is consistent with previous findings
suggesting that voters express more positive sentiment towards political stances they
are in favor of. If this is true, then if the model is applied to a corpus where both
parties agree on a stance, the measure of sentiment should become irrelevant. Assuming
the difference in the role of sentiment between the corpora is consistent with what is
expected, the interpretation is strengthened. This is referred to as divergent validity
because an expected difference in relationship is confirmed. Seeking convergent and
divergent validity is a mark of high quality work in the social sciences, but it is rare
in evaluations in the field of CL, and without it, again, the results may appear weak
from a social science perspective. In order for methods from CL to be acceptable for
use within the social sciences, these perceived weaknesses must be addressed.

2.2 Theory versus Empiricism

In the previous section we discussed the importance placed on validity within the social
sciences that stems from the goal of isolating an issue in order to answer questions. In
order to clarify why that is important, it is necessary to discuss the value placed on
theory versus empiricism.

Within the CL community, a paradigm shift took place after the middle of the
1990s. Initially, approaches that combined symbolic and statistical methods were of
interest (Klavans and Resnik 1996). But with the focus on very large corpora and
new frameworks for large-scale statistical modeling, symbolic- and knowledge-driven
methods have been largely left aside, though the presence of linguistics as an active
force can still be seen in some areas of computational linguistics, such as tree banking.
Along with older symbolic methods that required carefully crafted grammars and
lexicons, the concept of knowledge source has become strongly associated with the
notion of theory, which is consistent with the philosophical notion of linguistic theory
advocated by Chomskyan linguistics and other formal linguistic theories (Green 1992;
Backofen and Smolka 1993; Wintner 2002; Schneider, Dowdall, and Rinaldi 2004). As
knowledge-based methods have to a large extent been replaced with statistical models,
a grounding in linguistic theory has become less and less valued. A desire to replace
theory with empiricism dominated the zeitgeist and drove progress within the field.
Currently, the term theory seems to be associated with old and outdated approaches.
It often has a negative connotation in contrast to the positive reception of empiricism,
and contemporary modeling approaches are believed to have a greater ability to offer
insights into language than symbolic modeling frameworks.

In contrast, in the social sciences the value of a contribution is measured in terms
of the extent to which it contributes towards theory. Theories may begin with human-
originated ideas. But these notions are only treated as valuable if they are confirmed
through empirical methods. As these methods are applied, theoretical models gain
empirical support. Findings are ratified and then accumulated. Therefore, theories
become storehouses for knowledge obtained through empirical methods. Atheoretical
empiricism is not attractive within the social sciences, where the primary value is on
building theory and engaging theory in the interpretation of models.

As CL seeks to contribute to sociolinguistics and the social sciences, this divide
of values must be addressed in order to avoid the fields talking at cross purposes.
To stimulate collaboration between fields, it is important not only to focus on task

545



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

performance, but also to integrate existing theories into the computational models and
use these models to refine or develop new theories.

2.3 Quantitative versus Qualitative Approaches

The social sciences have both strong qualitative and quantitative branches. Similarly,
sociolinguistics has branches in qualitative research (e.g., interactional sociolinguis-
tics) and quantitative research (variationist sociolinguistics). From a methodological
perspective, most computational sociolinguistics’ work has a strong resemblance with
quantitative and therefore variationist sociolinguistics, which has a strong focus on
statistical analysis to uncover the distribution of sociolinguistic variables (Tagliamonte
2006). So far, we have mostly reflected on methods used in CL and their commonality
with the methods used in the quantitative branches in sociolinguistics and the social
sciences, but the time is right for a greater focus on how qualitative methods may also be
of use. Some thoughts about what that might look like can be found in the work of Rosé
and Tovares (2015), who explore the productive tension between the two branches as it
relates to interaction analysis. The field of computational linguistics could benefit from
exploring this tension to a greater degree in its own work—for example, by taking a
deeper look at data through human eyes as part of the validation of constructed models.

The tension between qualitative and quantitative branches can be illustrated with
the extent to which the agency of speakers is taken into account. As explained in the
Introduction, linguistic agency refers to the freedom of speakers to make choices about
how they present themselves in interaction. A contrasting notion is the extent to which
social structures influence the linguistic choices speakers make. Regardless of research
tradition, it is acknowledged that speakers both have agency and are simultaneously
influenced by social structures. The question is which is emphasized in the research
approach. Quantitative researchers believe that the most important variance is captured
by representation of the social structure. They recognize that this is a simplification, but
the value placed on quantification for the purpose of identifying causal connections
between variables makes the sacrifice of accuracy worth it. In the field of CL, this
valuing is analogous to the well-known saying that all models are wrong, but some
are nevertheless useful. On the other side are researchers committed to the idea that
the most important and interesting aspects of language use are the ones that violate
norms in order for the speaker to achieve a goal. These researchers may doubt that the
bulk of choices made by speakers can be accounted for by social structures. We see the
balance and tension between the ideas of language reflecting established social struc-
tures and language arising from speaker agency within current trends in variationist
sociolinguistics. Much of that work focused on the ways in which language variation
can be accounted for by reference to social structures (Bell 2013). On the other hand,
more recently, the agency of speakers is playing a more central role as well in variationist
sociolinguistics (Eckert 2012).

Whereas in CL qualitative research is sometimes dismissed as being quantitative
work that lacks rigor, one could argue that high-quality qualitative research has a
separate notion of rigor and depth that is all its own (Morrow and Brown 1994). An im-
portant role for qualitative research is to challenge the operationalizations constructed
by quantitative researchers. To achieve the adoption of CL methods and models by
social science researchers, the challenges from the qualitative branches of the social
sciences will become something to consider carefully.

As computational linguistics shares more values with variationist sociolinguistics,
many studies within computational sociolinguistics also focus on the influence of social

546



Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

structures. For example, work on predicting social variables such as gender (Section 3)
is built on the idea that gender determines the language use of speakers. However,
such research ignores the agency of speakers: Speakers use language to construct their
identity and thus not everyone might write in a way that reflects their biological sex.
Moving forward, it would make sense for researchers in computational sociolinguistics
to reflect on the dominant role of social structures over agency. Some work in CL
has already begun to acknowledge the agency of speakers when interpreting findings
(Bamman, Eisenstein, and Schnoebelen 2014; Nguyen et al. 2014).

One way of conceptualizing the contrast between the usage of computational mod-
els in the two fields is to reconsider the trade-off between maximizing interpretability—
typical of the social sciences and sociolinguistics—and maximizing predictive accuracy,
typical of CL. Both fields place a premium on rigor in evaluation and generalization of
results across data sets. To maintain a certain standard of rigor, the CL community has
produced practices for standardization of metrics, sampling, and avoidance of overfit-
ting or overestimation of performance through careful separation of training and testing
data at all stages of model development. Within the social sciences, the striving for rigor
has also produced statistical machinery for analysis, but most of all it has resulted in an
elaborate process for validation of such modeling approaches and practices for careful
application and interpretation of the results.

One consequence of the focus on interpretability within the social sciences is that
models tend to be kept small and simple in terms of the number of parameters, fre-
quently no more than 10, or at least no more than 100. Because the models are kept
simple, they can be estimated on smaller data sets, as long as sampling is done carefully
and extraneous variance is controlled. In the CL community, it is more typical for
models to include tens of thousands of parameters or more. For such large models,
massive corpora are needed to prevent overfitting. As a result, research in the CL
community is frequently driven by the availability of large corpora, which explains the
large number of recent papers on data from the Web, such as Twitter and Wikipedia.
Because of this difference in scale, a major focus on parallelization and approximate
inference has been an important focus of work in CL (Heskes, Albers, and Kappen
2002), whereas interest in such methods has only recently grown within the social
sciences.

2.4 Spotlight on Corpora and Other Data

Data collection is a fundamental step in the research cycle for researchers in both
sociolinguistics and computational linguistics. Here we will reflect on the differences
in the practices and traditions within both fields and on the emerging use of online
data. In the subsequent sections of this survey, there will be dedicated subsections about
the data sources used in the specific studies relevant to the discussed themes (e.g., on
identity construction).

Traditionally, sociolinguists have been interested in data sets that capture informal
speech (also referred to as the vernacular), that is, the kind of language used when
speakers are not paying attention (Tagliamonte 2006). A variety of methods have been
used to collect data, including observation, surveys, and interviews (Tagliamonte 2006;
Mallinson, Childs, and Herk 2013). The sociolinguistic data sets are carefully prepared
to enable in-depth analyses of how a speech community operates, carefully observing
standards of reliability and validity as discussed previously. Inevitably, these data col-
lection methods are labor-intensive and time-consuming. The resulting data sets are
often small in comparison with the ones used within computational linguistics. The

547



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

small sizes of these data sets made the work in sociolinguistics of limited interest to the
field of CL.

The tide began to turn with the rise of computer mediated communication (CMC).
Herring (2007) defines CMC as “predominantly text-based human–human interaction
mediated by networked computers or mobile telephony.” The content generated in
CMC, and in particular when generated on social media platforms, is a rich and easy-to-
access source of large amounts of informal language coming together with information
about the context (e.g., the users, social network structure, the time or geolocation at
which it was generated) that can be used for the study of language in social contexts
on a large scale. Examples include microblogs (Kooti et al. 2012; Eisenstein et al. 2014),
Web forums (Nguyen and Rosé 2011; Garley and Hockenmaier 2012), and online review
sites (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al. 2013b; Hovy, Johannsen, and Søgaard 2015). For
example, based on data from Twitter (a popular microblogging site) dialectal variation
has been mapped using a fraction of the time, costs, and effort that was needed in
traditional studies (Doyle 2014). However, data from CMC are not always easy to
collect. As an example, although text messaging (SMS) is widely used, collecting SMS
data has been difficult due to both technical and privacy concerns. The SMS4science
project (Dürscheid and Stark 2011) aims to overcome these difficulties by asking people
to donate their messages, collaborating with the service providers for the collection of
the messages, and applying anonymization to ensure privacy.

A complicating issue in data collection in sociolinguistics is that participants might
adjust their language use towards the expectations of the data collector. This phe-
nomenon is known as the “observer’s paradox,” a term first coined by Labov (1972):
“the aim of linguistic research in the community must be to find out how people talk
when they are not being systematically observed; yet we can only obtain these data by
systematic observation." In social media, the observer’s paradox could potentially be
argued to have lost much of its strength, making it a promising resource to complement
traditional data collection methods. Although a convenient source of data, the use of
social media data does introduce new challenges that must be addressed regardless of
field, and this offers a convenient beginning to a potential exchange between fields.

First, social media users are usually not representative of the general population
(Mislove et al. 2011; Nguyen et al. 2013). A better understanding of the demographics
could aid the interpretation of findings, but often little is known about the users.
Collecting demographic information requires significant effort, or might not even be
possible in some cases because of ethical concerns. Furthermore, in many cases the
complete data are not fully accessible through an API, requiring researchers to apply
a sampling strategy (e.g., randomly, by topic, time, individuals/groups, phenomenon
[Herring 2004; Androutsopoulos 2013]). Sampling may introduce additional biases or
remove important contextual information. These problems are even more of a concern
when data sets are reused for secondary analysis by other researchers whose purposes
might be very different from those who performed the sampling.

Social media data also introduce new units of analysis (such as messages and
threads) that do not correspond entirely with traditional analysis units (such as sen-
tences and turns) (Androutsopoulos 2013). This raises the question about valid appli-
cation of findings from prior work. Another complicating factor is that in social media
the target audience of a message is often not explicitly indicated—namely, multiple au-
diences (e.g., friends, colleagues) are collapsed into a single context (Marwick and boyd
2011). Some studies have therefore treated the use of hashtags and user mentions as
proxies for the target audience (Nguyen, Trieschnigg, and Cornips 2015; Pavalanathan
and Eisenstein 2015a). Furthermore, although historically the field of sociolinguistics

548



Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

started with a major focus on phonological variation (e.g., Labov 1966), the use of
social media data has led to a higher focus on lexical variation in computational so-
ciolinguistics. However, there are concerns that a focus on lexical variation without
regard to other aspects may threaten the validity of conclusions. Phonology does impact
social media orthography at both the word level and structural level (Eisenstein 2013a),
suggesting that studies on phonological variation could inform studies based on social
media text data and vice versa. For example, Eisenstein (2013a) found that consonant
cluster reduction (e.g., just vs. jus) in Twitter is influenced by the phonological context,
in particular, reduction was less likely when the word was followed by a segment that
began with a vowel.

There are practical concerns as well. First, whereas both access and content have
often been conceptualized as either public or private, in reality this distinction is not
as absolute; for example, a user might discuss a private topic on a public social media
site. In view of the related privacy issues, Bolander and Locher (2014) argue for more
awareness regarding the ethical implications of research using social media data.

Automatically processing social media data is more difficult compared with various
other types of data that have been used within computational linguistics. Many devel-
oped tools (e.g., parsers, named entity recognizers) do not work well because of the
informal nature of many social media texts. Although the dominant response has been
to focus on text normalization and domain adaptation, Eisenstein (2013b) argues that
doing so is throwing away meaningful variation. For example, building on work on text
normalization, Gouws et al. (2011) showed how various transformations (e.g., dropping
the last character of a word) vary across different user groups on Twitter. As another
example, Brody and Diakopoulos (2011) find that lengthening of words (e.g., cooooll) is
often applied to subjective words. They build on this observation to detect sentiment-
bearing words. The tension between normalizing and preserving the variation in text
also arises in the processing and analysis of historical texts (see Piotrowski [2012] for an
overview), which also contain many spelling variations. In this domain, normalization
is often applied as well to facilitate the use of tools such as parsers. However, some
approaches first normalize the text, but then replace the modernized word forms with
the original word forms to retain the original text. Another issue with social media data
is that many social media studies have so far focused primarily on one data source. A
comparison of the online data sources in terms of language use has only been done in a
few studies (Baldwin et al. 2013; Hu, Talamadupula, and Kambhampati 2013).

Another up-and-coming promising resource for studying language from a social
perspective is crowdsourcing. So far, crowdsourcing is mostly used to obtain large
numbers of annotations (e.g., Snow et al. 2008). However, “crowds” can also be used
for large-scale perception studies (i.e., to study how non-linguists interpret messages
and identify social characteristics of speakers [Clopper 2013]), and for the collection of
linguistic data, such as the use of variants of linguistic variables. Within sociolinguistics,
surveys have been one of the instruments to collect data and crowdsourcing is an
emerging alternative to traditional methods for collecting survey data.

Crowdsourcing has already been used to obtain perception data for sociolinguistic
research—for example, to study how English utterances are perceived differently across
language communities (Makatchev and Simmons 2011) and to obtain native-likeness
ratings of speech samples (Wieling et al. 2014). For some studies, games have been
developed to collect data. Nguyen et al. (2014) studied how Twitter users are perceived
based on their tweets by asking players to guess the gender and age based on displayed
tweets. Leemann et al. (2016) developed a mobile app that predicted the user’s location
based on a 16-question survey. By also collecting user feedback on the predictions, the

549



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

authors compared their data with the Linguistic Atlas of German-speaking Switzerland,
which was collected about 70 years before the crowdsourcing study. The mismatches
between the Atlas data and self-reported data from the mobile app were seen to suggest
linguistic change in progress.

Crowdsourcing also introduces challenges. For example, the data collection method
is less controlled and additional effort for quality control is often needed. Even more
problematic is the fact that usually little is known about the workers, such as the com-
munities they are part of. For example, Wieling et al. (2014) recruited participants using
e-mail, social media, and blogs, which resulted in a sample that was likely to be biased
towards linguistically interested people. However, they did not expect that the possible
bias in the data influenced the findings much. Another concern is that participants
in crowdsourcing studies might modulate their answers towards what they think is
expected, especially when there is a monetary compensation. In the social sciences in
general, crowdsourcing is also increasingly used for survey research. Behrend et al.
(2011) compared the data collected using crowdsourcing with data collected from a tra-
ditional psychology participant pool (undergraduates) in the context of organizational
psychology research and concluded that crowdsourcing is a potentially viable resource
to collect data for this research area. Although promising, the number of studies so
far using crowdsourcing for sociolinguistic research is small and more research needs
to be done to study the strengths and weaknesses of this data collection method for
sociolinguistic research.

3. Language and Social Identity

We now turn to discussing computational approaches for modeling language varia-
tion related to social identity. Speakers use language to construct their social identity
(Bucholtz and Hall 2005). Being involved in communicative exchange can be functional
for the transfer of information, but at the same it functions as a staged performance
in which users select specific codes (e.g., language, dialect, style) that shape their
communication (Wardhaugh 2011). Consciously or unconsciously, speakers adjust their
performance to the specific social context and to the impression they intend to make
on their audience. Each speaker has a personal linguistic repertoire to draw linguistic
elements or codes from. Selecting from the repertoire is partially subject to “identity
work,” a term referring to the range of activities that individuals engage in to create,
present, and sustain personal identities that are congruent with and supportive of the
self-concept (Snow and Anderson 1987).

Language is one of the instruments that speakers use in shaping their identities,
but there are limitations (e.g., physical or genetic constraints) to the variation that
can be achieved. For example, somebody with a smoker’s voice may not be able to
speak with a smooth voice but many individual characteristics still leave room for
variation. Although traditionally attributed an absolute status, personal features (e.g.,
age and gender) are increasingly considered social rather than biological variables.
Within sociolinguistics, a major thrust of research is to uncover the relation between
social variables (e.g., gender, age, ethnicity, status) and language use (Eckert 1997;
Holmes and Meyerhoff 2003; Wagner 2012; Eckert and McConnell-Ginet 2013). The
concept of sociolects, or social dialects, is similar to the concept of regional dialects.
Where regional dialects are language varieties based on geography, sociolects are based
on social groups—for example, different groups according to social class (with labels
such as “working class” and “middle class”), or according to gender or age. A study
by Guy (2013) suggests that the cohesion between variables (e.g., nominal agreement,

550



Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

denasalization) to form sociolects is weaker than usually assumed. The unique use of
language by an individual is an idiolect, and this concept is in particular relevant for
authorship attribution (e.g., Grieve 2007).

Recognizing that language use can reveal social patterns, many studies in computa-
tional linguistics have focused on automatically inferring social variables from text. This
task can be seen as a form of automatic metadata detection that can provide information
on author features. The growing interest in trend analysis tools is one of the drivers for
the interest in the development and refinement of algorithms for this type of metadata
detection. However, tasks such as gender and age prediction do not only appeal to
researchers and developers of trend mining tools. Various public demos have been able
to attract the attention of the general public (e.g., TweetGenie2 [Nguyen, Trieschnigg,
and Meder 2014] and Gender Guesser3), which can be attributed to a widespread
interest in the entertaining dimension of the linguistic dimension of identity work. The
automatic prediction of individual features such as age and gender based on only text
is a nontrivial task. Studies that have compared the performance of humans with that
of automatic systems for gender and age prediction based on text alone found that
automatic systems perform better than humans (Burger et al. 2011; Nguyen et al. 2013).
A system based on aggregating guesses from a large number of people still predicted
gender incorrectly for 16% of the Twitter users (Nguyen et al. 2014). Although most
studies use a supervised learning approach, a recent study by Ardehaly and Culotta
(2015) explored a lightly supervised approach using soft constraints. They combined
unlabeled geotagged Twitter data with soft constraints, such as the proportion of people
younger or older than 25 years in a county according to Census data, to train their
classifiers.

Within computational linguistics, linguistic variation according to gender, age, and
geographical location have received the most attention, compared with other variables
such as ethnicity (Pennacchiotti and Popescu 2011; Rao et al. 2011; Ardehaly and Culotta
2015) and social class. Labels for variables like social class are more difficult to obtain
and use because they are rarely made explicit in online user profiles that are publically
available. Only recently has this direction been explored, with occupation as a proxy for
variables like social class. Occupation labels for Twitter users have been extracted from
their profile description (Preoţiuc-Pietro, Lampos, and Aletras 2015; Preoţiuc-Pietro
et al. 2015; Sloan et al. 2015). Preoţiuc-Pietro et al. (2015) then mapped the derived
occupations to income and Sloan et al. (2015) mapped the occupations to social class
categories. However, these studies were limited to users with self-reported occupations
in their profiles.

Many studies have focused on individual social variables, but these variables are
not independent. For example, there are indications that linguistic features that are used
more by men increase in frequency with age as well (Argamon et al. 2007). As another
example, some studies have suggested that language variation across gender tends to
be stronger among younger people and to fade away with older ages (Barbieri 2008).
Eckert (1997) notes that the age considered appropriate for cultural events often differs
for men and women (e.g., getting married), which influences the interaction between
gender and age. The interaction between these variables is further complicated by the
fact that in many uncontrolled settings the gender distribution may not be equal for
different age ranges (as observed in blogs [Burger and Henderson 2006] and Twitter

2 http://www.tweetgenie.nl.
3 http://www.hackerfactor.com/GenderGuesser.php.

551



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

[Nguyen et al. 2013]). Therefore, failing to control for gender while studying age (and
vice versa) can lead to misinterpretation of the findings.

In this section an overview will be presented of computational studies of language
variation related to social identity. This section will first focus on the data sets that
have been used to investigate social identity and language variation in computational
linguistics (Section 3.1). After surveying computational studies on language variation
according to gender (Section 3.2), age (Section 3.3), and location (Section 3.4), we con-
clude with a discussion of how various NLP tasks, such as sentiment detection, can be
improved by accounting for language variation related to the social identity of speakers
(Section 3.5).

3.1 Data Sources

Early computational studies on social identity and language use were based on for-
mal texts, such as the British National Corpus (Koppel, Argamon, and Shimoni 2002;
Argamon et al. 2003), or data sets collected from controlled settings, such as recorded
conversations (Singh 2001) and telephone conversations (Boulis and Ostendorf 2005;
Garera and Yarowsky 2009; Van Durme 2012), where protocols were used to coordinate
the conversations (such as the topic). With the advent of social media, a shift is observed
towards more informal texts collected from uncontrolled settings. Much of the initial
work in this domain focused on blogs. The Blog Authorship Corpus (Schler et al. 2006),
collected in 2004 from blogger.com, has been used in various studies on gender and age
(Argamon et al. 2007; Goswami, Sarkar, and Rustagi 2009; Gianfortoni, Adamson, and
Rosé 2011; Nguyen, Smith, and Rosé 2011; Sap et al. 2014). Others have created their
own blog corpus from various sources including LiveJournal and Xanga (Burger and
Henderson 2006; Nowson and Oberlander 2006; Yan and Yan 2006; Mukherjee and Liu
2010; Rosenthal and McKeown 2011; Sarawgi, Gajulapalli, and Choi 2011).

More recent studies are focusing on Twitter data, which contain richer interactions
than blogs. Burger et al. (2011) created a large corpus by following links to blogs that
contained author information provided by the authors themselves. The data set has
been used in various subsequent studies (Van Durme 2012; Bergsma and Van Durme
2013; Volkova, Wilson, and Yarowsky 2013). Others created their own Twitter data set
(Rao et al. 2010; Eisenstein, Smith, and Xing 2011; Zamal, Liu, and Ruths 2012; Kokkos
and Tzouramanis 2014; Liao et al. 2014). Whereas early studies focused on English, re-
cent studies have used Twitter data written in other languages as well, for example,
Dutch (Nguyen et al. 2013), Spanish and Russian (Volkova, Wilson, and Yarowsky 2013),
and Japanese, Indonesian, Turkish, and French (Ciot, Sonderegger, and Ruths 2013).
Besides blogs and Twitter, other Web sources have been explored, including LinkedIn
(Kokkos and Tzouramanis 2014), IMDb (Otterbacher 2010), YouTube (Filippova 2012),
e-mails (Corney et al. 2002), a Belgian social network site (Peersman, Daelemans, and
Vaerenbergh 2011), and Facebook (Rao et al. 2011; Sap et al. 2014; Schwartz et al. 2013).

Two aspects can be distinguished that are often involved in the process of creating
data sets to study the relation between social variables and language use.

Labeling. Data sets derived from uncontrolled settings such as social media often lack
explicit information regarding the identity of users, such as their gender, age, or loca-
tion. Researchers have used different strategies to acquire adequate labels:

� User-provided information. Many researchers utilize information provided
by the social media users themselves—for example, based on explicit

552



Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

fields in user profiles (Schler et al. 2006; Yan and Yan 2006; Burger et al.
2011)—or by searching for specific patterns such as birthday
announcements (Zamal, Liu, and Ruths 2012). Although this information
is probably highly accurate, such information is often only available for a
small set of users—for example, for age, 0.75% of the users in Twitter (Liao
et al. 2014) and 55% in blogs (Burger and Henderson 2006). Locations of
users have been derived based on geotagged messages (Eisenstein et al.
2010) or locations in user profiles (Mubarak and Darwish 2014).

� Manual annotation. Another option is manual annotation based on personal
information revealed in the text, profile information, and public
information on other social media sites (Ciot, Sonderegger, and Ruths
2013; Nguyen et al. 2013). In the manual annotation scenario, a random set
of authors is annotated. However, the required effort is much higher,
resulting in smaller data sets and biases of the annotators themselves
might influence the annotation process. Furthermore, for some users not
enough information may be available to even manually assign labels.

� Exploiting names. Some labels can be automatically extracted based on
the name of a person. For example, gender information for names
can be derived from census information from the US Social Security
Administration (Bamman, Eisenstein, and Schnoebelen 2014; Prabhakaran,
Reid, and Rambow 2014), or from Facebook data (Fink, Kopecky, and
Morawski 2012). However, people who use names that are more common
for a different gender will be incorrectly labeled in these cases. In some
languages, such as Russian, the morphology of the names can also be used
to predict the most likely gender labels (Volkova, Wilson, and Yarowsky
2013). However, people who do not provide their names, or have
uncommon names, will remain unlabeled. In addition, acquiring labels
this way has not been well studied yet for other languages and cultures
and for other types of labels (such as geographical location or age).

Sample selection. In many cases, it is necessary to limit the study to a sample of persons.
Sometimes the selected sample is directly related to the way labels are obtained, for
example, by only including people who explicitly list their gender or age in their social
media profile (Burger et al. 2011), who have a gender-specific first name (Bamman,
Eisenstein, and Schnoebelen 2014), or who have geotagged tweets (Eisenstein et al.
2010). Restricting the sample (e.g., by only including geotagged tweets) could poten-
tially lead to biased data sets. Pavalanathan and Eisenstein (2015b) compared geotagged
tweets with tweets written by users with self-reported locations in their profile. They
found that geotagged tweets are more often written by women and younger peo-
ple. Furthermore, geotagged tweets contain more geographically specific non-standard
words. Another approach is random sampling, or as random as possible due to restric-
tions of targeting a specific language (Nguyen et al. 2013). However, in these cases the
labels may not be readily available. This increases the annotation effort and in some
cases it may not even be possible to obtain reliable labels. Focused sampling is used
as well, for example, by starting with social media accounts related to gender-specific
behavior (e.g., male/female hygiene products, sororities) (Rao et al. 2010). However,
such an approach has the danger of creating biased data sets, which could influence the
prediction performance (Cohen and Ruths 2013).

553



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

3.2 Gender

The study of gender and language variation has received much attention in sociolin-
guistics (Holmes and Meyerhoff 2003; Eckert and McConnell-Ginet 2013). Various stud-
ies have highlighted gender differences. According to Tannen (1990), women engage
more in “rapport” talk, focusing on establishing connections, whereas men engage more
in “report” talk, focusing on exchanging information. Similarly, according to Holmes
(1995), in women’s communication the social function of language is more salient,
whereas in men’s communication the referential function (conveying information) tends
to be dominant. Argamon et al. (2003) make a distinction between involvedness (more
associated with women) and informational (more associated with men). However, with
the increasing view that speakers use language to construct their identity, such general-
izations have also been met with criticism. Many of these studies rely on small sample
sizes and ignore other variables (such as ethnicity, social class) and the many similarities
between genders. Such generalizations contribute to stereotypes and the view of gender
as an inherent property.

3.2.1 Modeling Gender. Within computational linguistics, researchers have focused
primarily on automatic gender classification based on text. Gender is then treated as a
binary variable based on biological characteristics, resulting in a binary classification
task. A variety of machine learning methods have been explored, including SVMs
(Corney et al. 2002; Boulis and Ostendorf 2005; Nowson and Oberlander 2006;
Mukherjee and Liu 2010; Rao et al. 2010; Gianfortoni, Adamson, and Rosé 2011;
Peersman, Daelemans, and Vaerenbergh 2011; Fink, Kopecky, and Morawski 2012;
Zamal, Liu, and Ruths 2012; Ciot, Sonderegger, and Ruths 2013), logistic regression
(Otterbacher 2010; Bergsma and Van Durme 2013), naive Bayes (Yan and Yan 2006;
Goswami, Sarkar, and Rustagi 2009; Mukherjee and Liu 2010), and the Winnow
algorithm (Schler et al. 2006; Burger et al. 2011). However, treating gender as a
binary variable based on biological characteristics assumes that gender is fixed and is
something people have, instead of something people do (Butler 1990), that is, such a set-
up neglects the agency of speakers. Many sociolinguists, together with scholars from the
social sciences in general, view gender as a social construct, emphasizing that gendered
behavior is a result of social conventions rather than inherent biological characteristics.

3.2.2 Features and Patterns. Rather than focusing on the underlying machine learning
models, most studies have focused on developing predictive features. Token-level
and character-level unigrams and n-grams have been explored in various studies (Yan
and Yan 2006; Burger et al. 2011; Sarawgi, Gajulapalli, and Choi 2011; Fink, Kopecky, and
Morawski 2012; Bamman, Eisenstein, and Schnoebelen 2014). Sarawgi, Gajulapalli, and
Choi (2011) found character-level language models to be more robust than token-level
language models. Grouping words by meaningful classes could improve the interpreta-
tion and possibly the performance of models. Linguistic inquiry and word count (LIWC;
Pennebaker, Francis, and Booth 2001) is a dictionary-based word counting program
originally developed for the English language. It also has versions for other languages,
such as Dutch (Zijlstra et al. 2005). LIWC has been used in experiments on Twitter
data (Fink, Kopecky, and Morawski 2012) and blogs (Nowson and Oberlander 2006;
Schler et al. 2006). However, models based on LIWC alone tend to perform worse than
unigram/n-gram models (Nowson and Oberlander 2006; Fink, Kopecky, and Morawski
2012). By analyzing the developed features, studies have shown that men tend to
use more numbers (Bamman, Eisenstein, and Schnoebelen 2014), technology words

554



Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

(Bamman, Eisenstein, and Schnoebelen 2014), and URLs (Schler et al. 2006; Nguyen
et al. 2013), whereas women use more terms referring to family and relationship issues
(Boulis and Ostendorf 2005). A discussion of the influence of genre and domain on
gender differences is provided later in this section.

Various features based on grammatical structure have been explored, including fea-
tures capturing individual POS frequencies (Argamon et al. 2003; Otterbacher 2010) as
well as POS patterns (Argamon et al. 2003; Schler et al. 2006; Argamon et al. 2009;
Bamman, Eisenstein, and Schnoebelen 2014). Men tend to use more prepositions (Schler
et al. 2006; Argamon et al. 2007, 2009; Otterbacher 2010) and more articles (Nowson and
Oberlander 2006; Schler et al. 2006; Argamon et al. 2007; Otterbacher 2010; Schwartz
et al. 2013), although Bamman, Eisenstein, and Schnoebelen (2014) did not find these
differences to be significant in their Twitter study. Women tend to use more pronouns
(Argamon et al. 2003; Schler et al. 2006; Argamon et al. 2007, 2009; Otterbacher 2010;
Schwartz et al. 2013; Bamman, Eisenstein, and Schnoebelen 2014), in particular first
person singular (Otterbacher 2010; Nguyen et al. 2013; Schwartz et al. 2013). A mea-
sure introduced by Heylighen and Dewaele (2002) to measure formality based on the
frequencies of different word classes has been used in experiments on blogs (Nowson,
Oberlander, and Gill 2005; Mukherjee and Liu 2010). Sarawgi, Gajulapalli, and Choi
(2011) experimented with probabilistic context-free grammars (PCFGs) by adopting
the approach proposed by Raghavan, Kovashka, and Mooney (2010) for authorship
attribution. They trained PCFG parsers for each gender and computed the likelihood of
test documents for each gender-specific PCFG parser to make the prediction. Bergsma,
Post, and Yarowsky (2012) experimented with three types of syntax features and found
features based on single-level context-free-grammar (CFG) rules (e.g., NP→ PRP) to be
the most effective. In some languages such as French, the gender of nouns (including
the speaker) is often marked in the syntax. For example, a man would write je suis
allé, whereas a woman would write je suis allée (‘I went’). By detecting such je suis
constructions, Ciot, Sonderegger, and Ruths (2013) improved performance of gender
classification in French.

Stylistic features have been widely explored as well. Studies have reported that
men tend to use longer words, sentences, and texts (Singh 2001; Goswami, Sarkar, and
Rustagi 2009; Otterbacher 2010), and more swear words (Boulis and Ostendorf 2005;
Schwartz et al. 2013). Women use more emotion words (Nowson and Oberlander 2006;
Schwartz et al. 2013; Bamman, Eisenstein, and Schnoebelen 2014), emoticons (Rao et
al. 2010; Gianfortoni, Adamson, and Rosé 2011; Bamman, Eisenstein, and Schnoebelen
2014; Volkova, Wilson, and Yarowsky 2013), and typical social media words such as omg
and lol (Schler et al. 2006; Bamman, Eisenstein, and Schnoebelen 2014).

Groups can be characterized by their attributes, for example, women tend to have
maiden names. Bergsma and Van Durme (2013) used such distinguishing attributes,
extracted from common nouns for men and women (e.g., granny, waitress), to improve
classification performance. Features based on first names have also been explored.
Although not revealing much about language use itself, they can improve prediction
performance (Burger et al. 2011; Rao et al. 2011; Bergsma and Van Durme 2013).

Genre. So far, not many studies have analyzed the influence of genre and domain (Lee
2001) on language use, but a better understanding will aid the interpretation of observed
language variation patterns. Using data from the British National Corpus, Argamon
et al. (2003) found a strong correlation between characteristics of male and nonfiction
writing and likewise, between female and fiction writing. Based on this observation,
they trained separate prediction models for fiction and nonfiction (Koppel, Argamon,

555



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

and Shimoni 2002). Building on these findings, Herring and Paolillo (2006) investigated
whether gender differences would still be observed when controlling for genre in blogs.
They did not find a significant relation between gender and linguistic features that were
identified to be associated with gender in previous literature, although the study was
based on a relatively small sample. Similarly, Gianfortoni, Adamson, and Rosé (2011)
revisited the task of gender prediction on the Blog Authorship Corpus. After controlling
for occupation, features that previously were found to be predictive for gender on that
corpus were no longer effective.

Studies focusing on gender prediction have tested the generalizability of gender
prediction models by training and testing on different data sets. Although models tend
to perform worse when tested on a different data set than the one used for training,
studies have shown that prediction performance is still higher than random, suggesting
that there are indeed gender-specific patterns of language variation that go beyond
genre and domain (Sarawgi, Gajulapalli, and Choi 2011; Sap et al. 2014). Gianfortoni,
Adamson, and Rosé (2011) proposed the use of “stretchy patterns,” flexible sequences of
categories, to model stylistic variation and to improve generalizability across domains.

Social Interaction. Most computational studies on gender-specific patterns in language
use have studied speakers in isolation. Because the conversational partner4 and social
network influence the language use of speakers, several studies have extended their
focus by also considering contextual factors. For example, this led to the finding that
speakers use more gender-specific language in same-gender conversations (Boulis and
Ostendorf 2005). On the Fisher and Switchboard corpus (telephone conversations),
classifiers dependent on the gender of the conversation partner improve performance
(Garera and Yarowsky 2009). However, exploiting the social network of speakers on
Twitter has been less effective so far. Features derived from the friends of Twitter
users did not improve gender classification (but it was effective for age) (Zamal, Liu,
and Ruths 2012). Likewise, Bamman, Eisenstein, and Schnoebelen (2014) found that
social network information of Twitter users did not improve gender classification when
enough text was available.

Not all computational studies on gender in interaction contexts have focused on
gender classification itself. Some have used gender as a variable when studying other
phenomena. In a study on language and power, Prabhakaran, Reid, and Rambow (2014)
showed how the gender composition of a group influenced how power is manifested
in the Enron corpus, a large collection of e-mails from Enron employees (described
in more detail in Section 4.1). In a study on language change in online communities,
Hemphill and Otterbacher (2012) found that women write more like men over time in
the IMDb community (a movie review site), which they explain by men receiving more
prestige in the community. Jurafsky, Ranganath, and McFarland (2009) automatically
classified speakers according to interactional style (awkward, friendly, or flirtatious)
using various types of features, including lexical features based on LIWC (Pennebaker,
Francis, and Booth 2001), prosodic, and discourse features. Differences, as well as
commonalities, were observed between genders, and incorporating features from both
speakers improved classification performance.

3.2.3 Interpretation of Findings. As mentioned before, most computational approaches
adopt a simplistic view of gender as an inherent property based on biological

4 An individual who participates in a conversation, sometimes also referred to as interlocutor or addressee.

556



Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

characteristics. Only recently has the computational linguistics community noticed the
limitations of this simplistic view by acknowledging the agency of speakers. Two of
these studies based their argumentation on an analysis of the social networks of the
users. Automatic gender predictions on YouTube data correlated more strongly with
the dominant gender in a user’s network than the user-reported gender (Filippova
2012). Likewise, in experiments by Bamman, Eisenstein, and Schnoebelen (2014),
incorrectly labeled Twitter users also had fewer same-gender connections. In addition,
they identified clusters of users who used linguistic markers that conflicted with
general population-level findings. Another study was based on data collected from an
online game (Nguyen et al. 2014). Thousands of players guessed the age and gender of
Twitter users based on their tweets, and the results revealed that many Twitter users
do not tweet in a gender-stereotypical way.

Thus, language is inherently social and while certain language features are on
average used more by men or women, individual speakers may diverge from the stereo-
typical images that tend to be highlighted by many studies. In addition, gender is
shaped differently depending on the culture and language, and thus presenting gender
as a universal social variable can be misleading. Furthermore, linguistic variation within
speakers of the same gender holds true as well.

3.3 Age

Aging is a universal phenomenon and understanding the relation between language
and age can provide interesting insights in many ways. An individual at a specific time
represents a place in history as well as a life stage (Eckert 1997), and thus observed
patterns can generate new insights into language change as well as how individuals
change their language use as they move through life. Within computational linguistics,
fewer studies have focused on language variation according to age than studies focusing
on gender, possibly because obtaining age labels requires more effort than gender labels
(e.g., the gender of people can often be derived from their names; cf. Section 3.1). Most
of these studies have focused on absolute chronological age, although age can also be
seen as a social variable like gender.

Sociolinguistic studies have found that adolescents use the most nonstandard
forms, because at a young age the group pressure to not conform to established societal
conventions is the largest (Eckert 1997; Holmes 2013). In contrast, adults are found to
use the most standard language, because for them social advancement matters and they
use standard language to be taken seriously (Eckert 1997; Bell 2013). These insights can
explain why predicting the ages of older people is harder (e.g., distinguishing between
a 15- and a 20-year-old person based on their language use is easier than distinguishing
between a 40- and a 45-year-old person [Nguyen et al. 2013; Nguyen et al. 2014]).
Thus, age is an important variable to consider, especially when we consider processes
relevant for language evolution, since the degree of language innovation varies by age
(Labov 2001).

3.3.1 Modeling Age. A fundamental question is how to model age, and so far researchers
have not yet reached a consensus. Eckert (1997) distinguishes between chronological
age (number of years since birth), biological age (physical maturity), and social age
(based on life events). Speakers are often grouped according to their age, because the
amount of data is in many cases not sufficient to make more fine-grained distinctions
(Eckert 1997). Most studies consider chronological age and group speakers based on
age spans (Labov 1966; Trudgill 1974; Barbieri 2008). However, chronological age can

557



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

be misleading because persons with the same chronological age may have had very
different life experiences. Another approach is to group speakers according to “shared
experiences of time,” such as high school students (Eckert 1997).

Within computational linguistics the most common approach is to model age-
specific language use based on the chronological age of speakers. An exception is
Nguyen et al. (2013), who explored classification into life stages. However, even when
focusing on chronological age, the task can be framed in different ways as well.
Chronological age prediction has mostly been approached as a classification problem, by
modeling the chronological age as a categorical variable. Based on this task formulation,
various classical machine learning models have been used, such as SVMs (Rao et al.
2010; Peersman, Daelemans, and Vaerenbergh 2011), logistic regression (Rosenthal and
McKeown 2011; Nguyen et al. 2013), and naive Bayes (Tam and Martell 2009).

The boundaries used for discretizing age have varied depending on the data set
and experimental set-up. Experiments on the blog authorship corpus (Schler et al. 2006)
used categories based on the following age spans: 13–17, 23–27, and 33–47, removing the
age ranges in between to simplify the task. Rangel et al. (2013) adopted this approach
in the Author Profiling task at PAN 2013. The following year, the difficulty of the task
at PAN 2014 was increased by considering the more fine-grained categories of 18–24,
25–34, 35–49, 50–64 and 65+ years (Rangel et al. 2014). Zamal, Liu, and Ruths (2012)
classified Twitter users into 18–23 and 25–30 years. Other studies explored boundaries
at 30 (Rao et al. 2010), at 20 and 40 (Nguyen et al. 2013), at 40 (Garera and Yarowsky
2009), and at 18 years (Burger and Henderson 2006).

In several studies experiments have been done by varying the classification bound-
aries. Peersman, Daelemans, and Vaerenbergh (2011) experimented with binary classi-
fication and boundaries at 16, 18, and 25 years. Tam and Martell (2009) experimented
with classifying teens versus 20s, 30s, 40s, 50s, and adults. Not surprisingly, in both
studies a higher performance was obtained when using larger age gaps (e.g., teens
versus 40s/50s) than when using smaller age gaps (e.g., teens versus 20s/30s) (Tam and
Martell 2009; Peersman, Daelemans, and Vaerenbergh 2011). Rosenthal and McKeown
(2011) explored a range of splits to study differences in performance when predicting
the birth year of blog authors. They related their findings to pre– and post–social media
generations.

For many applications, modeling age as a categorical variable might be sufficient.
However, it does have several limitations. First, selecting age boundaries has proven to
be difficult. It is not always clear which categories are meaningful. Secondly, researchers
have used different categories depending on the age distribution of their data set, which
makes it difficult to make comparisons across data sets.

Motivated by such limitations, recent studies have modeled age as a continuous
variable, removing the need to define age categories. Framing age prediction as a
regression task, a frequently used method has been linear regression (Nguyen, Smith,
and Rosé 2011; Nguyen et al. 2013; Schwartz et al. 2013; Sap et al. 2014). Liao et al. (2014)
experimented with a latent variable model that jointly models age and topics. In their
model, age-specific topics obtain low standard deviations of age, whereas more general
topics obtain high standard deviations. Another approach that would remove the need
to define age categories is the unsupervised induction of age categories. Analyzing the
discovered age groups could shed more light on the relation between language use and
age, but we are not aware of existing research in this area.

3.3.2 Features and Patterns. The majority of studies on age prediction have focused
on identifying predictive features. Although some features tend to be effective across

558



Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

domains, others are domain-specific (Nguyen, Smith, and Rosé 2011). Features that
characterize male speech have been found to also increase with age (Argamon et al.
2007), thus, simply said, men tend to sound older than they are.

Unigrams alone already perform well (Nguyen, Smith, and Rosé 2011; Peersman,
Daelemans, and Vaerenbergh 2011; Nguyen et al. 2013). Features based on part of speech
are effective as well. For example, younger people tend to use more first- and second-
person singular pronouns (e.g., I, you), while older people more often use first person
plural pronouns (e.g., we) (Barbieri 2008; Rosenthal and McKeown 2011; Nguyen et al.
2013). Older people also use more prepositions (Argamon et al. 2009; Nguyen et al.
2013), determiners (Argamon et al. 2009; Nguyen, Smith, and Rosé 2011), and articles
(Schwartz et al. 2013). Most of these studies focused on English and therefore some of
these findings might not be applicable to other languages. For example, the effectiveness
of pronoun-related features should also be studied in pro-drop languages (e.g., Turkish
and Spanish).

Various studies have found that younger people use less standard language. They
use more alphabetical lengthening (e.g., niiiice) (Rao et al. 2010; Nguyen et al. 2013),
more contractions without apostrophes (e.g., dont) (Argamon et al. 2009), more Inter-
net acronyms (e.g., lol) (Rosenthal and McKeown 2011), more slang (Barbieri 2008;
Rosenthal and McKeown 2011), more swear words (Barbieri 2008; Nguyen, Smith,
and Rosé 2011), and more capitalized words (e.g., HAHA) (Rosenthal and McKeown
2011; Nguyen et al. 2013). Specific words such as like are also highly associated with
younger ages (Barbieri 2008; Nguyen, Smith, and Rosé 2011). Younger people also
use more features that indicate stance and emotional involvement (Barbieri 2008),
such as intensifiers (Barbieri 2008; Nguyen et al. 2013) and emoticons (Rosenthal and
McKeown 2011). Younger people also use shorter words and sentences and write
shorter tweets (Burger and Henderson 2006; Rosenthal and McKeown 2011; Nguyen
et al. 2013).

3.3.3 Interpretation of Findings. Age prediction experiments are usually done on data sets
collected at a specific point in time. Based on such data sets, language use is modeled
and compared between users with different ages. Features that are found to be predic-
tive or that correlate highly with age are used to highlight how differently “younger”
and “older” people talk or write. However, the observed differences in language use
based on such data sets could be explained in multiple ways. Linguistic variation can
occur as an individual moves through life (age grading). In that case the same trend is
observed for individuals at different time periods. Linguistic variation can also be a re-
sult of changes in the community itself as it moves through time (generational change)
(Sankoff 2006; Bell 2013). For example, suppose we observe that younger Twitter users
include more smileys in their tweets. This could indicate that smiley usage is higher
at younger ages, but that when Twitter users grow older they decrease their usage
of smileys. Or, this could indicate a difference in smiley usage between generations
(i.e., the generation of the current younger Twitter users use more smileys compared
with the generation of the older Twitter users). This also points to the relation between
synchronic variation and diachronic change. Synchronic variation is variation across
different speakers or speech communities at a particular point in time, and diachronic
change is accumulation of synchronic variation in time and frequency. To have a better
understanding of change, we need to understand the spread of variation across time
and frequency. As is the case for gender, age can be considered a social variable and
thus when only modeling chronological age, we are ignoring the agency of speakers
and that speakers follow different trajectories in their lives.

559



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

3.4 Location

Regional variation has been extensively studied in sociolinguistics and related areas
such as dialectology (Chambers and Trudgill 1998) and dialectometry (Wieling
and Nerbonne 2015). The use of certain words, grammatical constructions, or the
pronunciation of a word can often reveal where a speaker is from. For example, yinz
(a form of the second-person pronoun) is mostly used around Pittsburgh, which can
be observed on Twitter as well (Eisenstein 2015). Dialectology traditionally focuses
on the geographical distribution of individual or small sets of linguistic variables
(Chambers and Trudgill 1998). A typical approach involves identifying and plotting
isoglosses, lines that divide maps into regions where specific values of the variable
predominate. The next step involves identifying bundles of isoglosses, often followed
by the identification of dialect regions. Although these steps have usually been done
manually, computational approaches have recently been explored as well. For example,
Grieve, Speelman, and Geeraerts (2011) demonstrated how methods from spatial
analysis can be used for automating such an analysis.

The study of regional variation has been heavily influenced by new statistical
approaches, such as from computational linguistics, machine learning, and spatial
analysis. A separate branch has also emerged, referred to as dialectometry (Wieling
and Nerbonne 2015). In contrast to dialectology, which focuses on individual linguistic
variables, dialectometry involves aggregating linguistic variables to examine linguis-
tic differences between regions. Nerbonne (2009) argues that studies that focus on
individual variables are sensitive to noise and that therefore aggregating linguistic
variables will result in more reliable signals. This aggregation step has led to the in-
troduction of various statistical methods, including clustering, dimensionality reduc-
tion techniques, and regression approaches (Wieling and Nerbonne 2010; Heeringa
and Nerbonne 2013; Nerbonne and Wieling 2015). Recently, researchers within dialec-
tometry have explored the automatic identification of characteristic features of dialect
regions (Wieling and Nerbonne 2010), a task that aligns more closely with the ap-
proaches taken by dialectologists.

Although the data sets typically used in dialectology and dialectometry studies are
still small compared to data sets used in computational linguistics, similar statistical
methods have been explored. This has created a promising starting point for closer
collaboration with computational linguistics.

3.4.1 Modeling Geographical Variation. Within CL, we find two lines of work on computa-
tionally modeling geographical variation.

Supervised. The first approach starts with documents labeled according to their dialect,
which can be seen as a supervised learning approach. Most studies taking this approach
focus on automatic dialect identification, which is a variation of automatic language
identification, a well-studied research topic within the field of computational linguistics
(Hughes et al. 2006; Baldwin and Lui 2010). Whereas some have considered automatic
language identification to be a solved problem (McNamee 2005), many outstanding
issues still exist (Hughes et al. 2006), including the identification of dialects and closely
related languages (Zampieri et al. 2014, 2015). In studies on automatic dialect identifi-
cation, various dialects have been explored, including Arabic (Elfardy and Diab 2013;
Zaidan and Callison-Burch 2013; Darwish, Sajjad, and Mubarak 2014; Huang 2015),
Turkish (Doğruöz and Nakov 2014), Swiss German (Scherrer and Rambow 2010), and
Dutch (Trieschnigg et al. 2012) dialects.

560



Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

Unsupervised. An alternative approach is to start with location-tagged data to auto-
matically identify dialect regions. Whereas the models are given labels indicating the
locations of speakers, the dialect labels themselves are not observed. In the context
of modeling dialects, we consider it an unsupervised approach (although it can be
considered a supervised approach when the task is framed as a location prediction
task). The majority of the work in this area has used Twitter data, because it contains
fine-grained location information in the form of GPS data for tweets or user-provided
locations in user profiles.

Much of the research that starts with location-tagged data is done with the aim
of automatically predicting the location of speakers. The set-up is thus similar to
the set-up for the other tasks that we have surveyed in this section (e.g., gender
and age prediction). Eisenstein et al. (2010) developed a topic model to identify ge-
ographically coherent linguistic regions and words that are highly associated with
these regions. The model was tested by predicting the locations of Twitter users based
on their tweets. Although the topic of text-based location prediction has received
increasing attention (Wing and Baldridge 2011; Han, Cook, and Baldwin 2012), us-
ing these models for the discovery of new sociolinguistic patterns is an option that
has not been fully explored yet, since most studies primarily focus on prediction
performance.

Various approaches have been explored to model the location of speakers, an aspect
that is essential in many of the studies that start with location-tagged data. In Wing
and Baldridge (2011), locations are modeled using geodesic grids, but these grids do
not always correspond to administrative or language boundaries. Users can also be
grouped based on cities (Han, Cook, and Baldwin 2012), but such an approach is not
suitable for users in rural areas or when the focus is on more fine-grained geographical
variation (e.g., within a city). Eisenstein et al. (2010) model regions using Gaussian
distributions, but only focus on the United States and thus more research is needed to
investigate the suitability of this approach when considering other countries or larger
regions.

3.4.2 Features and Patterns. Word and character n-gram models have been frequently
used in dialect identification (Trieschnigg et al. 2012; Zaidan and Callison-Burch 2013;
King, Radev, and Abney 2014). Similarly, many text-based location prediction systems
make use of unigram word features (Eisenstein et al. 2010; Wing and Baldridge 2011;
Han, Cook, and Baldwin 2012).

Features inspired by sociolinguistics could potentially improve performance.
Darwish, Sajjad, and Mubarak (2014) showed that for identifying Arabic dialects a better
classification performance could be obtained by incorporating known lexical, mor-
phological, and phonological differences in their model. Scherrer and Rambow (2010)
also found that using linguistic knowledge improves over an n-gram approach. Their
method is based on a linguistic atlas for the extraction of lexical, morphological, and
phonetic rules and the likelihood of these forms across German-speaking Switzerland.
Doğruöz and Nakov (2014) explored the use of light verb constructions to distinguish
between two Turkish dialects.

To support the discovery of new sociolinguistic patterns and to improve predic-
tion performance, several studies have focused on automatically identifying charac-
teristic features of dialects. Han, Cook, and Baldwin (2012) explored various feature
selection methods to improve location prediction. The selected features may reflect
dialectal variation but this was not the focus of the study. The method by Prokić,
Çöltekin, and Nerbonne (2012) was based on in-group and out-group comparisons

561



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

using data in which linguistic varieties were already grouped (e.g., based on clustering).
Peirsman, Geeraerts, and Speelman (2010) compared frequency-based measures, such
as chi-square and log-likelihood tests, with distributional methods. Automatic methods
may identify many features that vary geographically such as topic words and named
entities, and an open challenge is to separate this type of variation from the more
sociolinguistically interesting variations. For example, the observation that the word
beach is used more often near coastal areas or that Times Square is used more often in
New York is not interesting from the perspective of a sociolinguist.

Making use of location-tagged data, several studies have focused on analyzing
patterns of regional variation. Doyle (2014) analyzed the geographical distribution
of dialectal variants (e.g., the use of double modals like might could) based on Twit-
ter data, and compared it with traditional sociolinguistic data collection methods.
Starting with a query-based approach, he uses baseline queries (e.g., I) for estimat-
ing a conditional distribution of data given metadata. His approach achieved high
correlations with data from sociolinguistic studies. Jørgensen, Hovy, and Søgaard
(2015) studied the use of three phonological features of African American Vernacular
English using manually selected word pairs. The occurrence of the features was cor-
related with location data (longitude and latitude) as well as demographic informa-
tion obtained from the U.S. census bureau. Although these approaches start with
attested dialect variants, automatic discovery of unknown variation patterns could
potentially lead to even more interesting results. To study how a word’s mean-
ing varies geographically, Bamman, Dyer, and Smith (2014) extended the skip gram
model by Mikolov et al. (2013) by adding contextual variables that represent states
from the United States. The model then learns a global embedding matrix and ad-
ditional matrices for each context (e.g., state) to capture the variation of a word’s
meaning.

The increasing availability of longitudinal data has made it possible to study the
spreading of linguistic innovations geographically and over time on a large scale. A
study by Eisenstein et al. (2014) based on tweets in the United States indicates that
linguistic innovations spread through demographically similar areas, in particular with
regard to race.

3.4.3 Interpretation of Findings. Labeling texts by dialect presumes that there are clear
boundaries between dialects. However, it is not easy to make absolute distinctions
between language varieties (e.g., languages, dialects). Chambers and Trudgill (1998)
illustrate this with the example of traveling from village to village in a rural area.
Speakers from villages at larger distances have more difficulty understanding each
other compared with villages that are closer to each other, but there is no clear-cut
distance at which speakers are no longer mutually intelligible. A computational ap-
proach was taken by Heeringa and Nerbonne (2001) to shed more light on this puzzling
example. Besides linguistic differences, boundaries between language varieties are often
influenced by other factors such as political boundaries (Chambers and Trudgill 1998).
Therefore, deciding on the appropriate labels to describe linguistic communication
across different groups of speakers (in terms of language, dialect, minority language,
regional variety, etc.) is an ongoing issue of debate. The arbitrariness of the distinction
between a language and dialect is captured with the popular expression “A language
is a dialect with an army and navy” (Bright 1997). Methods that do not presume clear
dialect boundaries are therefore a promising alternative. However, such methods then
rely on location-tagged data, which are usually only available for a portion of the
data.

562



Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

3.5 Text Classification Informed by Identity Information

So far, we have focused on automatically predicting the variables themselves (e.g.,
gender, age, location) but linguistic variation related to the identity of speakers can
also be used to improve various other NLP tasks. Dadvar et al. (2012) trained gender-
specific classifiers to detect instances of cyberbullying, noticing that language used
by harassers varies by gender. To improve the prediction performance of detecting
the power direction between participants in e-mails, Prabhakaran, Reid, and Rambow
(2014) incorporated the gender of participants in e-mail conversations and the overall
“gender environment” as features in their model. Volkova, Wilson, and Yarowsky (2013)
studied gender differences in the use of subjective language on Twitter. Representing
gender as a binary feature was not effective, but the use of features based on gender-
dependent sentiment terms improved subjectivity and polarity classification. Hovy
(2015) found that training gender- or age-specific word embeddings improved tasks
such as sentiment analysis and topic classification.

4. Language and Social Interaction

The previous section explored computational approaches to the study of identity con-
struction through language. We discussed variables such as gender, age, and geograph-
ical location, thereby mostly focusing on the influence of social structures on language
use. However, as we also pointed out, speaker agency enables violations of conventional
language patterns. Speakers do not act in isolation, but they are part of pairs, groups,
and communities. Social interaction contexts produce the opportunity for variation due
to agency. In response to the particulars of these social settings and encounters (e.g.,
the addressee or audience, topic, and social goals of the speakers), there is thus much
variation within individual speakers. The variation that is related to the context of
interaction will be the focus of this section.

We start this section with a discussion of data sources for large-scale analyses of
language use in pairs, groups, and communities (Section 4.1). Next, we discuss compu-
tational approaches to studying how language reflects and shapes footing within social
relationships (Section 4.2). Much of this work has revolved around the role of language
in power dynamics by studying how speakers use language to maintain and change
power relations (Fairclough 1989). We continue with a discussion on style-shifting (i.e.,
the use of different styles by a single speaker) in Section 4.3. We discuss two prominent
frameworks within sociolinguistics, Audience Design (Bell 1984) and Communication
Accommodation Theory (Giles, Coupland, and Coupland 1991), and discuss how these
frameworks have been studied within the computational linguistics community. Finally,
we move our focus to the community level and discuss computational studies on how
members adapt their language to conform to or sometimes diverge from community
norms. One might speculate about how these micro-level processes might eventually
become conventional, and therefore consider how these processes may lead to language
change over time (Section 4.4).

4.1 Data Sources

Many of the types of data that are relevant for the investigation of concepts of social
identity are also relevant for work on communication dynamics in pairs, groups, and
communities. The availability of detailed interaction recordings in online data has

563



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

driven and enabled much of the work on this topic within computational linguistics.
A variety of online discussion forums have been analyzed, including online cancer
support communities (Nguyen and Rosé 2011; Wang, Reitter, and Yen 2014), a street
gang forum (Piergallini et al. 2014), and more recently discussion forums in Massive
Open Online Courses (Wen, Yang, and Rosé 2014a, 2014b). Review sites, such as
TripAdvisor (Michael and Otterbacher 2014), IMDb (Hemphill and Otterbacher 2012),
and beer review communities (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al. 2013b), have also been
used in studies on language in online communities.

The Enron e-mail corpus is another frequently used data source. The Enron corpus
is a large e-mail corpus with messages from Enron employees, which was made public
during the legal investigation of the Enron corporation. The corpus has been used in
various studies—for example, investigations related to e-mail classification (Klimt and
Yang 2004) and structure of communication networks (Diesner and Carley 2005). In
particular, in studies on language and social dynamics, the Enron e-mail corpus has
featured in analyses of power relationships (Diehl, Namata, and Getoor 2007; Gilbert
2012; Prabhakaran, Rambow, and Diab 2012b; Prabhakaran, Reid, and Rambow 2014),
since Enron’s organizational structure is known and can be integrated in studies on
hierarchical power structures connected with quantitative capacity theories of power.
Such theories treat power as a stable characteristic that inheres in a person. An example
theory within this space is Resource Dependency Theory (Pfeffer and Salancik 1978).

For studies that involve more dynamic notions of power (e.g., identifying indi-
viduals who are pursuing power), other resources have also been explored, includ-
ing Wikipedia Talk Pages (Bender et al. 2011; Bracewell, Tomlinson, and Wang 2012;
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al. 2012; Swayamdipta and Rambow 2012), transcripts of
political debates (Prabhakaran, John, and Seligmann 2013; Prabhakaran, Arora, and
Rambow 2014), and transcripts of Supreme Court arguments (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil
et al. 2012).

4.2 Shaping Social Relationships

Language is not only a means to exchange information but language also contributes
to the performance of action within interaction. Language serves simultaneously as a
reflection of the relative positioning of speakers to their conversation partners as well
as actions that accompany those positions (Ribeiro 2006). Sometimes distributions of
these actions can be considered to cohere to such a degree that they can be thought of
as defining conversational roles (Yang, Wen, and Rosé 2015). At a conceptual level, this
work draws heavily from a foundation in linguistic pragmatics (Grice 1975; Levinson
1983) as well as sociological theories of discourse (Tannen 1993; Gee 2011), which
each provide a complementary view. Concepts related to expectations or norms that
provide the foundation for claiming such positions may similarly be described either
from a philosophical perspective or a sociological one (Postmes, Spears, and Lea 2000).
In viewing interaction as providing a context in which information and action may
flow towards the accomplishment of social goals, speakers position themselves and
others as sources or recipients of such information and action (Martin and Rose 2003).
When performatives (i.e., speech acts used to perform an action) break norms related
to social positions, they have implications for relational constructs such as politeness
(Brown and Levinson 1987), which codifies rhetorical strategies for acknowledging and
managing relational expectations while seeking to accomplish extra-relational goals. In
the remaining part of this section, we focus on computational studies within this theme.

564



Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

We first discuss the general topic of automatic extraction of social relationships from
text, and then focus on power and politeness.

Automatic Extraction of Social Relationships. Recognizing that language use may reveal
cues about social relationships, studies within CL have explored the automatic extrac-
tion of different types of social relationships based on text. One distinction that has
been made is between weak ties (e.g., acquaintances) and strong ties (e.g., family and
close friends) (Granovetter 1973). Gilbert and Karahalios (2009) explored how different
types of information (including messages posted) can be used to predict tie strength on
Facebook. In this study, the predictions were done for ties within a selected sample. Bak,
Kim, and Oh (2012) studied differences in self-disclosure on Twitter between strong and
weak ties using automatically identified topics. Twitter users disclose more personal
information to strong ties, but they show more positive sentiment towards weak ties,
which may be explained by social norms regarding first-time acquaintances on Twitter.

Other studies have automatically extracted social relationships from more extensive
data sets, enabling analyses of the extracted network structures. These studies have
focused on extracting signed social networks, i.e., networks with positive and negative
edges, for example based on positive and negative affinity between individuals or
formal and informal relationships. Work within this area has drawn from Structural
Balance Theory (Heider 1946), which captures intuitions such as that when two indi-
viduals have a mutual friend, they are likely to be friends as well, and from Status
Theory (Leskovec, Huttenlocher, and Kleinberg 2010), which involves edges that are
directed and reflect status differences. Hassan, Abu-Jbara, and Radev (2012) developed
a machine learning classifier to extract signed social networks and found that the
extracted network structure mostly agreed with Structural Balance Theory. Krishnan
and Eisenstein (2015) proposed an unsupervised model for extracting signed social
networks, which they used to extract formal and informal relations in a movie-script
corpus. Furthermore, their model also induced the social function of address terms
(e.g., dude). To infer edge signs in a social network, West et al. (2014) formulated an
optimization problem that combined two objectives, capturing the extent to which
the inferred signs agreed with the predictions of a sentiment analysis model, and the
extent to which the resulting triangles corresponded with Status and Structural Balance
Theory.

Power. Work on power relations draws from social psychological concepts of relative
power in social situations (Guinote and Vescio 2010), in particular, aspects of relative
power that operate at the level of individuals in relation to specific others within groups
or communities. Relative power may be thought of as operating in terms of horizontal
positioning or vertical positioning: Horizontal positioning relates to closeness and re-
lated constructs such as positive regard, trust, and commitment, and vertical positioning
relates to authority and related constructs such as approval and respect among individ-
uals within communities. Within the areas of linguistics and computational linguistics,
investigations have focused on how speakers use language to maintain and change
power relations (Fairclough 1989). Operationalization and computational modeling
of these two dimensions has important applications in the field of learning sciences
(Howley, Mayfield, and Rosé 2013).

Within computational linguistics, much of the work related to analysis of power
as it is reflected through language has focused on automatically identifying power
relationships from text. Though some of the literature cited here is referenced in this
work, the engagement between communities has remained so far at a simple level.

565



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

Fine-grained distinctions between families of theories of power, and subtleties about
the relationship between power and language, are frequently glossed over. One way in
which this is visible is in the extent to which the locus of meaning is treated as though it
is in the text itself rather than an emergent property of the interaction between speakers.
Though some references to external power structures and transient power relationships
are mentioned, much room remains for deeper reflection on the connection between
power and language.

Research in the computational linguistics community related to these issues is
normally centered around classification tasks. Earlier studies have focused on hierar-
chical power relations based on the organizational structure, thereby frequently making
use of the Enron corpus. Bramsen et al. (2011) extracted messages between pairs of
participants and developed a machine learning classifier to automatically determine
whether the messages of an author were UpSpeak (directed towards a person of higher
status) or DownSpeak (directed towards a person of lower status). With a slightly
different formulation of the task, Gilbert (2012) used logistic regression to classify power
relationships in the Enron corpus and identified the most predictive phrases. Besides
formulating the task as a classification task, ranking approaches have been explored
as well (Diehl, Namata, and Getoor 2007; Prabhakaran, John, and Seligmann 2013;
Nguyen et al. 2014). For example, Prabhakaran, John, and Seligmann (2013) predicted
the ranking of participants in political debates according to their relative poll standings.

Studies based on external power structures, such as the organizational structure of
a company, treat power relations as static. Recent studies have adopted more dynamic
notions of power. For example, Prabhakaran, Rambow, and Diab (2012b) discuss a
setting with an employee in a Human Resources department who interacts with an
office manager. The HR employee has power over the office manager when the situation
is about enforcing an HR policy, but the power relation will be reversed when the topic
is allocation of new office space. In their study using the Enron corpus, they compared
manual annotations of situational power with the organization hierarchy and found
that these were not well aligned. Other studies have focused on a more dynamic view of
power as arising through asymmetries with respect to needed resources or other goals,
as characterized in consent-based theories of power such as exchange theory (Guinote
and Vescio 2010). This would include such investigations as identifying persons who are
pursuing power (Bracewell, Tomlinson, and Wang 2012; Swayamdipta and Rambow
2012) and detecting influencers (Huffaker 2010; Quercia et al. 2011; Biran et al. 2012;
Nguyen et al. 2014). This could also include studying how language use changes when
users change their status in online communities (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al. 2012).

Depending on the conceptualization of power and the used data set, labels for the
relations or roles of individuals have been collected in different ways, such as based on
the organizational structure of Enron (Bramsen et al. 2011; Gilbert 2012), the number
of followers in Twitter (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Gamon, and Dumais 2011), standings
in state and national polls to study power in political debates (Prabhakaran, John, and
Seligmann 2013), admins and non-admins in Wikipedia (Bender et al. 2011; Danescu-
Niculescu-Mizil et al. 2012), and manual annotation (Biran et al. 2012; Prabhakaran and
Rambow 2013; Nguyen et al. 2014).

Many computational approaches within this sphere build on a foundation from
pragmatics related to speech act theory (Searle 1969; Austin 1975), which has most
commonly been represented in what are typically referred to as conversation, dialog
or social acts (Bender et al. 2011; Ferschke, Gurevych, and Chebotar 2012). Such cat-
egories can also be combined into sequences (Bracewell, Tomlinson, and Wang 2012).
Other specialized representations are also used, such as features related to turn-taking

566



Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

style (Swayamdipta and Rambow 2012; Prabhakaran, John, and Seligmann 2013), topic
control (Strzalkowski et al. 2012; Nguyen et al. 2014; Prabhakaran, Arora, and Rambow
2014), and “overt displays of power,” which Prabhakaran, Rambow, and Diab (2012a)
define as utterances that constrain the addressee’s actions beyond what the underlying
dialog act imposes.

Politeness. Polite behavior contributes to maintaining social harmony and avoiding
social conflict (Holmes 2013). Automatic classifiers to detect politeness have been
developed to study politeness strategies on a large scale. According to a politeness
theory by Brown and Levinson (1987), three social factors influence linguistically polite
behavior: social distance, relative power, and ranking of the imposition (i.e., cost of
the request). Drawing from this theory, Peterson, Hohensee, and Xia (2011) performed
a study on the Enron corpus by training classifiers to automatically detect formality
and requests. E-mails that contained requests or that were sent to people of higher
ranks indeed tended to be more formal. According to politeness theory, speakers
with greater power than their addressees are expected to be less polite (Brown and
Levinson 1987). Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al. (2013a) developed a politeness classifier
and found that in Wikipedia polite editors were more likely to achieve higher status,
but once promoted, they indeed became less polite. In StackExchange, a site with an
explicit reputation system, users with a higher reputation were less polite than users
with a lower reputation. Their study also revealed new interactions between politeness
markings (e.g., please) and morphosyntactic context.

4.3 Style Shifting

According to Labov (1972), there are no single-style speakers because speakers may
switch between styles (style-shifting) depending on their communication partners (e.g.,
addressee’s age, gender, and social background). Besides the addressee, other factors
such as the topic (e.g., politics vs. religion) or the context (e.g., a courtroom vs. family
dinner) can contribute to style shifting. In early studies, Labov stated that "styles can
be arranged along a single dimension, measured by the amount of attention paid to
speech" (Labov 1972), which thus views style shifting as mainly something responsive.
The work by Labov on style has been highly influential, but not everyone agreed
with his explanation for different speech styles. We will discuss two theories (Com-
munication Accommodation Theory and Audience Design) that have received much
attention in both sociolinguistics and computational linguistics and that focus on the
role of audiences and addressees on style. Even more recent theories are emphasizing
the agency of speakers as they use different styles to represent themselves in a certain
way or initiate a change in the situation. Besides switching between styles, multilingual
speakers may also switch between languages or dialects. This is discussed in more
depth in Section 5.

Communication Accommodation Theory. Communication Accommodation Theory (CAT)
(Giles, Taylor, and Bourhis 1973; Giles, Coupland, and Coupland 1991; Soliz and Giles
2014) seeks to explain why speakers accommodate5 to each other during conversa-
tions. Speakers can shift their behavior to become more similar (convergence) or more

5 The phenomenon of adapting to the conversation partner has also been known as “alignment,”
“coordination,” and “entrainment.”

567



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

different (divergence) to their conversation partners. Convergence reduces the social
distance between speakers and converging speakers are often viewed as more favorable
and cooperative. CAT was developed in the 1970s and has its roots in the field of
social psychology. Although CAT has been studied extensively in controlled settings
(e.g., Gonzales, Hancock, and Pennebaker 2010), only recently studies have been per-
formed in uncontrolled settings such as Twitter conversations (Danescu-Niculescu-
Mizil, Gamon, and Dumais 2011), online forums (Jones et al. 2014), Wikipedia Talk pages
and Supreme Court arguments (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al. 2012), and even movie
scripts (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil and Lee 2011).

Speakers accommodate to each other on a variety of dimensions, ranging from
pitch and gestures, to the words that are used. Within computational linguistics, re-
searchers have focused on measuring linguistic accommodation. LIWC has frequently
been used in these studies to capture stylistic accommodation—for example, as re-
flected in the use of pronouns (Niederhoffer and Pennebaker 2002; Danescu-Niculescu-
Mizil and Lee 2011; Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Gamon, and Dumais 2011; Jones et al.
2014). Speakers do not necessarily converge on all dimensions (Giles, Coupland, and
Coupland 1991); this has also been observed on Twitter (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil,
Gamon, and Dumais 2011). Although earlier studies used correlations of specific fea-
tures between participants, on turn-level or overall conversation-level (Niederhoffer
and Pennebaker 2002; Scissors et al. 2009; Levitan, Gravano, and Hirschberg 2011),
these correlations fail to capture the temporal aspect of accommodation. The measure
developed by Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Gamon, and Dumais (2011) is based on the
increase in probability of a response containing a certain stylistic dimension given
that the original message contains that specific stylistic dimension. Wang, Reitter, and
Yen (2014) used a measure based on repetition of words (or syntactic structures) be-
tween target and prime posts. Jones et al. (2014) proposed a measure that takes into
account that speakers differ in their tendency to accommodate to others. Similarly,
Jain et al. (2012) used a Dynamic Bayesian Model to induce latent style states that
group related style choices together in a way that reflects relevant styles within a
corpus. They also introduce global accommodation states that provide more context
in identification of style shifts in interactions that extend for more than a couple of
turns.

Social roles and orientations taken up by speakers influence how conversations play
out over time and computational approaches to measure accommodation have been
used to study power dynamics (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Gamon, and Dumais 2011;
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al. 2012; Jones et al. 2014). In a study on power dynamics
in Wikipedia Talk pages and Supreme court debates, Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al.
(2012) found that people with a lower status accommodated more than people with
a higher status. In addition, users accommodated less once they became an admin
in Wikipedia. Using the same Wikipedia data, Noble and Fernández (2015) found
that users accommodated more towards users who occupied a more central position,
based on eigenvector and betweenness centrality, in the social network. Furthermore,
whether a user was an admin did not have a significant effect on the amount of
coordination that highly central users received. From a different angle, Gweon et al.
(2013) studied transactive exchange in debate contexts. Transactivity is a property of
an assertion that requires that it displays reasoning (e.g., a causal mechanism) and
refers to or integrates an idea expressed earlier in the discussion. In this context, high
concentrations of transactivity reflect a balance of power in a discussion. In their data,
higher levels of speech style accommodation were correlated with higher levels of
transactivity.

568



Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

Audience Design. In a classical study set in New Zealand, Allan Bell found that news-
readers used different styles depending on which radio station they were talking for,
even when they were reporting the same news on the same day. Bell’s audience design
framework (Bell 1984) explains style shifting as a response to audiences and shares
similarities with CAT. One of the differences with CAT is that different types of au-
diences are defined from the perspective of the speaker (ranging from addressee to
eavesdropper) and thus can also be applied to settings in which there is only a one-
way interaction (such as broadcasting). Social media provides an interesting setting to
study how audiences influence style. In many social media platforms, such as Twitter
or Facebook, multiple audiences (e.g., friends, colleagues) are collapsed into a single
context. Users of such platforms often imagine an audience when writing messages and
they may target messages to different audiences (Marwick and boyd 2011).

Twitter has been the focus of several recent large-scale studies on audience design.
In a study on how audiences influence the use of minority languages on Twitter,
Nguyen, Trieschnigg, and Cornips (2015) showed how characteristics of the audience
influence language choice on Twitter by analyzing tweets from multilingual users in
the Netherlands using automatic language identification. Tweets directed to larger
audiences were more often written in Dutch, whereas within conversations users often
switched to the minority language. In another study on audience on Twitter, Bamman
and Smith (2015) showed that incorporating features of the audience improved
sarcasm detection. Furthermore, their results suggested that users tend to use the
hashtag #sarcasm when they are less familiar with their audience. Pavalanathan and
Eisenstein (2015a) studied two types of non-standard lexical variables: those strongly
associated with specific geographical regions of the United States and variables that
were frequently used in Twitter but considered non-standard in other media. The
use of non-standard lexical variables was higher in messages with user mentions,
which are usually intended for smaller audiences, and lower in messages with
hashtags, which are usually intended for larger audiences. Furthermore, non-standard
lexical variables were more often used in tweets addressed to individuals from the
same metropolitan area. Using a different data source, Michael and Otterbacher (2014)
showed that reviewers on the TripAdvisor site adjust their style to the style of preceding
reviews. Moreover, the extent to which reviewers are influenced correlates with
attributes such as experience of the reviewer and their sentiment towards the reviewed
attraction.

4.4 Community Dynamics

As we just discussed, people adapt their language use towards their conversation
partner. Within communities, norms emerge over time through interaction between
members, such as the use of slang words and domain-specific jargon (Nguyen and Rosé
2011; Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al. 2013b), or conventions for indicating retweets in
Twitter (Kooti et al. 2012). Community members use such markers to signal their affili-
ation. In an online gangs forum, for example, graffiti style features were used to signal
group affiliation (Piergallini et al. 2014). To become a core member of a community,
members adopt such community norms. As a result, often a change in behavior can
be observed when someone joins a community. Multiple studies have reported that
members of online communities decrease their use of first person singular pronouns
(e.g., I) over time and increase their use of first person plural pronouns (e.g., we)
(Cassell and Tversky 2005; Nguyen and Rosé 2011; Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al.

569



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

2013b), suggesting a stronger focus on the community. Depending on the frequency
of use and social factors, local accommodation effects could influence how languages
change in the long term (Labov 1994, 2001). Fine-grained, large-scale analyses of lan-
guage change are difficult in offline settings, but the emergence of online commu-
nities has enabled computational approaches for analyzing language change within
communities.

Early investigations of this topic were based on data from non-public communities,
such as e-mail exchanges between students during a course (Postmes, Spears, and Lea
2000) and data from the Junior Summit ’98, an online community where children from
across the world discussed global issues (Cassell and Tversky 2005; Huffaker et al. 2006).
In these communities, members joined at the same time. Furthermore, the studies were
based on data spanning only several months.

More recent studies have used data from public, online communities, such as
online forums and review sites. Data from these communities typically span longer
time periods (e.g., multiple years). Members join these communities intermittently and
thus, when new users join, community norms have already been established. Nguyen
and Rosé (2011) analyzed an online breast cancer community, in which long-time
members used forum-specific jargon, highly informal style, and showed familiarity
and emotional involvement with other members. Time periods were represented by
the distribution of high frequency words and measures such as Kullback-Leibler diver-
gence were used to study how language changed over time. Members who joined the
community showed increasing conformity to community norms during the first year of
their participation. Based on these observations, a model was developed to determine
membership duration. Hemphill and Otterbacher (2012) also studied how members
adopt community norms over time but focused specifically on gender differences. They
studied changes in the use of various characteristics, such as hedging, word/sentence
complexity and vocabulary richness, on IMDb a community in which men tend to
receive higher prestige than women.

Not only do members change their behavior over time as they participate in a
community, communities themselves are also constantly evolving. Kershaw, Rowe, and
Stacey (2016) identified and analyzed word innovations in Twitter and Reddit based
on variation in frequency, form, and meaning. They performed their analyses on a
global level (i.e., the whole data set) and on a community level, based on applying a
community detection algorithm to the Reddit data and grouping the geotagged tweets
by geopolitical units.

Language change on both member-level and community-level was analyzed by
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al. (2013b) in two beer review communities. Language
models were created based on monthly snapshots to capture the linguistic state of
a community over time. Cross-entropy was then used to measure how much a cer-
tain post deviated from a language model. Members in these communities turned
out to follow a two-stage lifecycle: They first align with the language of the com-
munity (innovative learning phase), however at some point they stop adapting their
language (conservative phase). The point at which members enter the conservative
phase turned out to be dependent on how long a user would end up staying in the
community.

These studies illustrate the potential of using large amounts of online data to
study language change in communities in a quantitative manner. However, in such
analyses biases in the data should be considered carefully, especially when the dy-
namics and content of the data are not understood fully. For example, Pechenick,
Danforth, and Dodds (2015) call into question the findings on linguistic change based

570



Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

on the Google books corpus, because of its bias towards scientific publications. Further-
more, they point out that prolific authors in the data set can influence the findings as
well.

5. Multilingualism and Social Interaction

Languages evolve through the interaction of speakers within and outside their speech
communities. Within sociolinguistics, multilingual speakers and speech communities
have been studied widely with respect to the contexts and conditions of language
mixing and/or switching across languages. We use the term “multilingual speaker”
for someone who has a repertoire of various languages and/or dialects and who may
mix them depending on contextual factors like occasion (e.g., home vs. work) and
conversation partners (e.g., family vs. formal encounters). This section is dedicated to
computational approaches for analyzing multilingual communication in relation to the
social and linguistic contexts. We first start with a brief introduction to multilingual
communication from a sociolinguistic point of view. Later, we expand the discussion to
include the analysis of multilingual communication using computational approaches.

Human mobility is one of the main reasons for interaction among speakers of
different languages. Weinreich (1953) was one of the first to explain why and how
languages come into contact and evolve under each other’s influence in a systematic
manner. Sociolinguists (Auer 1988; Gumperz 1982; Poplack, Sankoff, and Miller 1988;
Myers-Scotton 2002) have studied various aspects of language contact and mixing
across different contact settings.

Language mixing and code-switching are used interchangeably and there is not
always a consensus on the terminology. According to Gumperz (1982), language mixing
refers to the mixing of languages within the same text or conversation. Wei (1998)
describes language alternations at or above the clause level and calls it code-mixing.
Romaine (1995) differentiates between inter-sentential (i.e., across sentences) and intra-
sentential (i.e., within the same sentence) switches. Poplack, Sankoff, and Miller (1988)
refer to complete languages shifts of individual users as code-switching.

Language mixing spans across a continuum ranging from occasional switches (e.g.,
words or fixed multi-word expressions) to more structural ones (e.g., morphological,
syntactic borrowings). The duration and intensity of interaction between speakers of
contact languages influence the types of switches. When the frequency of switched
words increases in use, they may get established in the speech community and become
borrowed/loan words (e.g., hip hop–related Anglicisms in a German hip hop forum
[Garley and Hockenmaier 2012]).

Earlier studies on language mixing were mostly based on multilingual spoken data
collected in controlled or naturalistic settings (Auer 1988; Myers-Scotton 1995). Nowa-
days, the wide-spread use of the Internet in multilingual populations provides ample
opportunities for large-scale and in-depth analyses of mixed language use in online
media (Paolillo 2001; Tsaliki 2003; Hinrichs 2006; Danet and Herring 2007; Hinnenkamp
2008). Still most of these studies focus on qualitative analyses of multilingual online
communication with limited data in terms of size and duration.

The rest of this section presents a discussion of data sources for studying multilin-
gual communication on a large scale (Section 5.1). Consequently, we discuss research on
adapting various NLP tools to process mixed-language texts (Section 5.2). We conclude
this section with a discussion of studies that analyze, or even try to predict, the use of
multiple languages in multilingual communication (Section 5.3).

571



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

5.1 Data Sources

In sociolinguistics, conversational data is usually collected by the researchers them-
selves, either among small groups of speakers at different times (Doğruöz and Backus
2007, 2009) or from the same group of speakers longitudinally (Milroy and Milroy
1978; Trudgill 2003). The manual transcription and annotation of data is time-intensive
and costly. Multilingual data from online environments is usually extracted in small
volumes and for short periods. Automatic analysis of this type of data has been difficult
for most languages, especially when resources or technical support are lacking.

Within computational linguistics, there is a growing interest in the automatic
processing of mixed-language texts. Lui, Lau, and Baldwin (2014) and Yamaguchi
and Tanaka-Ishii (2012) studied automatic language identification in mixed-language
documents from Wikipedia by artificially concatenating texts from monolingual
sources into multilingual documents. However, such approaches lead to artificial
language boundaries. More recently, social media (such as Facebook [Vyas et al. 2014],
Twitter [Jurgens, Dimitrov, and Ruths 2014; Peng, Wang, and Dredze 2014; Solorio
et al. 2014] and online forums [Nguyen and Doğruöz 2013]) provide large volumes
of data for analyzing multilingual communication in social interaction. Transcriptions
of conversations have been explored by Solorio and Liu (2008b), however their data
was limited to three speakers. Language pairs that have been studied for multilingual
communication include English–Hindi (Vyas et al. 2014), Spanish–English (Solorio and
Liu 2008a, 2008b; Peng, Wang, and Dredze 2014), Turkish–Dutch (Nguyen and Doğruöz
2013), Mandarin–English (Adel, Vu, and Schultz 2013; Peng, Wang, and Dredze 2014),
and French–English (Jurgens, Dimitrov, and Ruths 2014). Besides being a valuable
resource for studies on multilingual social interaction, multilingual texts in social
media have also been used to improve general purpose machine translation systems
(Ling et al. 2013; Huang and Yates 2014).

Processing and analyzing mixed-language data often requires identification of lan-
guages at the word level. Language identification is a well-researched problem in CL
and we discussed it in the context of dialect identification in Section 3.4.1. Here, we
discuss language identification for mixed-language texts. Several data sets are publicly
available to stimulate research on language identification in mixed-language texts,
including data from the shared task on Language Identification in Code-Switched
Data (Solorio et al. 2014) covering four different language pairs on Twitter, romanized
Algerian Arabic and French texts from the comments section of an online Algerian
newspaper (Cotterell et al. 2014), Turkish–Dutch forum posts (Nguyen and Doğruöz
2013) and Web documents in different languages (King and Abney 2013).

Annotation on a fine-grained level such as individual words has introduced new
challenges in the construction of data sets. More fine-grained annotations require more
effort and sometimes the segments are so short that they can no longer be clearly
attributed to a particular language. For example, annotating the language of named
entities remains a challenge in mixed-language texts. Named entities have been labeled
according to the context (King and Abney 2013), ignored in the evaluation (Elfardy and
Diab 2012b; Nguyen and Doğruöz 2013) or treated as a separate category (Elfardy and
Diab 2012a; Solorio et al. 2014). Annotation at the sentence-level is also challenging. For
example, Zaidan and Callison-Burch (2013) annotated a large corpus for Arabic dialect
identification using crowdsourcing. Their analysis indicated that many annotators over-
identify their native dialect (i.e., they were biased towards labeling texts as written
in their own dialect). Elfardy and Diab (2012a) presented guidelines to annotate texts
written in dialectal variants of Arabic and Modern Standard Arabic on a word level.

572



Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

5.2 NLP Tools for Multilingual Data

Most of the current NLP tools, such as parsers, are developed for texts written in a
single language. Therefore, such tools are not optimized for processing texts containing
multiple languages. In this section, we discuss the development of NLP tools that
specifically aim to support the processing of multilingual texts. We start with research
on automatic language identification, which is an important step in the preprocessing
pipeline of many language-specific analysis tasks. Mixed-language documents have
introduced new challenges to this task. We then continue with a discussion of work
on various other NLP tools (e.g., parsers, topic modeling).

Automatic Language Identification. Automatic language identification is often the first
step for systems that process mixed-language texts (Vyas et al. 2014). Furthermore,
it supports large-scale analyses of patterns in multilingual communication (Jurgens,
Dimitrov, and Ruths 2014; Kim et al. 2014; Papalexakis, Nguyen, and Doğruöz 2014).
Most of the earlier research on automatic language identification focused on document-
level identification of a single language (Baldwin and Lui 2010). To handle mixed-
language texts, more fine-grained approaches have been explored, ranging from
language identification at the sentence (Elfardy and Diab 2013; Zaidan and Callison-
Burch 2013; Zampieri et al. 2014) and word level (Elfardy and Diab 2012b; King and
Abney 2013; Nguyen and Doğruöz 2013; Solorio et al. 2014; Voss et al. 2014), approaches
for text segmentation (Yamaguchi and Tanaka-Ishii 2012), and estimating the proportion
of the various languages used within documents (Prager 1999; Lui, Lau, and Baldwin
2014). Depending on the application, different approaches may be suitable, but studies
that analyze patterns in multilingual communication have mostly focused on word-
level identification (Nguyen and Doğruöz 2013; Solorio et al. 2014). Off-the-shelf tools
developed for language identification at the document level (e.g., the TextCat program
[Cavnar and Trenkle 1994]) are not effective for word-level identification (Alex 2005;
Nguyen and Doğruöz 2013). Language models (Elfardy and Diab 2012b; Nguyen and
Doğruöz 2013) and dictionaries (Alex 2005; Elfardy and Diab 2012b; Nguyen and
Doğruöz 2013), which are also commonly used in automatic language identification at
the document level, have been explored. Furthermore, the context around the words has
been exploited using conditional random fields to improve performance on language
identification at the word level (King and Abney 2013; Nguyen and Doğruöz 2013).

Parsing. Early studies on language mixing within computational linguistics focused
on developing grammars to model language mixing (e.g., Joshi 1982). However, the
models developed in these early studies were not tested on empirical data. The more
recently developed systems have been validated on large, real-world data. Solorio and
Liu (2008b) explored various strategies to combine monolingual taggers to parse mixed-
language texts. The best performance was obtained by including the output of the
monolingual parsers as features in a machine learning algorithm. Vyas et al. (2014)
studied the impact of different preprocessing steps on POS tagging of English–Hindi
data collected from Facebook. Language identification and transliteration were the
major challenges that impacted POS performance.

Language and Topic Models. Language models have been developed to improve speech
recognition for mixed-language speech, by adding POS and language information to the
language models (Adel, Vu, and Schultz 2013) or by incorporating syntactic inversion
constraints (Li and Fung 2012). Peng, Wang, and Dredze (2014) developed a topic model

573



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

that infers language-specific topic distributions based on mixed-language text. The main
challenge for their model was aligning the inferred topics across languages.

5.3 Analysis and Prediction of Multilingual Communication

According to Thomason (2001), Gardner-Chloros and Edwards (2004), and Bhatt and
Bolonyai (2011), social factors (e.g., attitudes and motives of the speakers, social and
political context) are as important as linguistic factors in multilingual settings. Large-
scale analysis of social factors in multilingual communication has only recently been
possible with the availability of automatic language identification tools.

Twitter is frequently used as a resource for such studies. Focusing on language
choice at the user level, researchers have extracted network structures, based on follow-
ers and followees (Eleta and Golbeck 2014; Kim et al. 2014), or mentions and retweets
(Hale 2014), and analyzed the relation between the composition of such networks and
the language choices of users. Users tweeting in multiple languages are often found to
function as a bridge between communities tweeting in one language. Besides analyzing
language choice at the user level, there is also an interest in the language choices for
individual tweets. Jurgens, Dimitrov, and Ruths (2014) studied tweets written in one
language but containing hashtags in another language. Automatic language identifi-
cation was used to identify the languages of the tweets. However, as they note, some
tweets were written in another language because they were automatically generated by
applications rather than being a conscious choice of the user. Nguyen, Trieschnigg, and
Cornips (2015) studied users in the Netherlands who tweeted in a minority language
(Limburgish or Frisian) as well as in Dutch. Most tweets were written in Dutch, but
during conversations users often switched to the minority language. Mocanu et al.
(2013) analyzed the geographic distribution of languages in multilingual regions and
cities (such as New York and Montreal) using Twitter.

In addition to the analysis of patterns in multilingual communication, several
studies have explored the automatic prediction of language switches. The task may
seem similar to automatic language identification, yet there are differences between the
two tasks. Rather than determining the language of an utterance, it involves predicting
whether the language of the next utterance is the same without having access to the
next utterance itself. Solorio and Liu (2008a) were the first to predict whether a speaker
will switch to another language in English–Spanish bilingual spoken conversations
based on lexical and syntactic features. The approach was evaluated using standard ma-
chine learning metrics as well as human evaluators who rated the naturalness/human-
likeness of the sentences the system generated. Papalexakis, Nguyen, and Doğruöz
(2014) predicted when multilingual users switch between languages in a Turkish–Dutch
online forum using various features, including features based on multi-word units and
emoticons.

6. Research Agenda

Computational sociolinguistics is an emerging multidisciplinary field. Closer collab-
oration between sociolinguists and computational linguists could be beneficial to re-
searchers from both fields. In this article, we have outlined some challenges related
to differences in data and methods that must be addressed in order for synergy to
be effective. In this section, we summarize the main challenges for advancing the
field of computational sociolinguistics. These fall under three main headings, namely,

574



Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

expanding the scope of inquiry of the field, adapting methods to increase compatibility,
and offering tools.

6.1 Expanding the Scope of Inquiry

The field of computational linguistics has begun to investigate issues that overlap with
those of the field of sociolinguistics. The emerging availability of data that is of interest
to both communities is an important factor, but in order for real synergy to come out
of this, additional angles in the research agendas and tuning of the methodological
frameworks in the respective communities would be needed.

Going Beyond Lexical and Stylistic Variation. Many studies within CL focus on lexical
variation (e.g., Section 3 on social identity), possibly driven by the focus on prediction
tasks. Stylistic variation has also received attention. Several of the discussed studies
focus on variation in the usage of functional categories. For example, they zoom in
on the usage of determiners, prepositions, and pronouns for studying linguistic style
accommodation (in Section 4.3). Others use measures such as average word and sen-
tence length (e.g., in Section 3). Advances in the area of stylometry (Stamatatos 2009)
could inspire the exploration of more fine-grained features to capture style. Besides
lexical and stylistic variation, linguistic variation also occurs on many other levels. Some
computational studies have focused on phonological (Jain et al. 2012; Eisenstein 2013a;
Jørgensen, Hovy, and Søgaard 2015) and syntactic (Wiersma, Nerbonne, and Lauttamus
2010; Gianfortoni, Adamson, and Rosé 2011; Doyle 2014; Johannsen, Hovy, and Søgaard
2015) variation, but so far the number of studies is limited. In combination with the
surge in availability of relevant data, these examples suggest that there seems to be
ample opportunities for an extended scope.

Extending Focus to Other Social Variables. A large body of work exists on the model-
ing of gender, age, and regional variation (cf. Section 3). Other variables, like social
class (Labov 1966), have barely received any attention so far within computational
sociolinguistics. Although it is more difficult to obtain labels for some social variables,
they are essential for a richer understanding of language variation and more robust
analyses.

Going Beyond English and Monolingual Data. The world is multilingual and multicultural,
but English has received much more attention within computational sociolinguistics
than other languages. There is a need for research to validate the generalizability of find-
ings based on English data for other languages (Danet and Herring 2007). Furthermore,
most studies within computational linguistics generally assume that texts are written in
one language. However, these assumptions may not hold, especially in social media. A
single user may use multiple languages, sometimes even within a syntactic unit, while
most NLP tools are not optimized to process such texts. Tools that are able to process
mixed-language texts will support the analysis of such data and shed more light on the
social and linguistic factors involved in multilingual communication.

From Monomodal to Multimodal Data. Another recommendable shift in scope would
be a stronger focus on multimedia data. Video and audio recordings with a speech
track encapsulate a form of language in which the verbal and nonverbal dimensions
of human communication are available in an integrated manner and they represent a
rich source for the study of social behavior. Among the so-called paralinguistic aspects

575



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

for which detection models and evaluation frameworks exist are age, gender, and affect
(Schuller et al. 2010). The increasing volumes of recordings of spoken dialogue and
aligned transcriptions, for example, in oral history collections (Boyd 2013; De Jong et al.
2014), meeting recording archives (Janin et al. 2003), and video blogs (Biel et al. 2013),
can add new angles to the investigation of sociolinguistic variation. In particular, the
study of the interaction between (transcribed) speech, non-speech (laughter, sighs, etc.),
facial expression, and gestures is a promising area for capturing and predicting social
variables as well as the related affective layers.

6.2 Adapting Methodological Frameworks to Increase Compatibility

To make use of the rich repertoire of theory and practice from sociolinguistics and to
contribute to it, we have to appreciate the methodologies that underlie sociolinguistic
research, for example, the rules of engagement for joining in the ongoing scientific dis-
course. However, as we have highlighted in the methodology discussion (Section 2), the
differences in values between the communities can be perceived as a divide. Whereas
the CL community has experienced a history in which theory and empiricism are treated
as the extreme ends of a spectrum, in the social sciences there is no such dichotomy,
and empiricism contributes substantially to theory. Moving forward, research within
computational sociolinguistics should build on and seek to partner in extending ex-
isting sociolinguistic theories and insights. This requires placing a strong focus on the
interpretability of the developed models. The feasibility of such a shift in attention can
be seen when observing successes of applied computational sociolinguistics work that
has been adopted in other fields like health communication (Mayfield et al. 2014) and
education (Rosé et al. 2008).

Controlling for Multiple Variables. Sociolinguistic studies typically control for multiple
social variables (e.g., gender, age, social class, ethnicity). However, many studies in
computational sociolinguistics focus on individual variables (e.g., only gender, or only
age), which can be explained by the focus on social media data. The uncontrolled nature
of social media makes it challenging to obtain data about the social backgrounds of the
speakers and to understand the various biases that such data sets might have. The result
is that models are frequently confounded, which results in low interpretability as well
as limited justification for generalization to other domains.

On the other hand, much work in the CL community has focused on structured
modeling approaches that take a step towards addressing these issues (Joshi et al.
2012, 2013). These approaches are very similar to the hierarchical modeling approaches
used in sociolinguistic research to control for multiple sources of variation and thus
avoid misattributing weight to extraneous variables. A stronger partnership within
the field of CL between researchers interested in computational sociolinguistics and
researchers interested in multi-domain learning would be valuable for addressing some
of the limitations mentioned here. In this regard, inferring demographic variables au-
tomatically (see Section 3) may also help, because predicted demographic variables
could be used in structuring the models. Another approach is the use of census data
when location data is already available. For example, Eisenstein et al. (2014) studied
lexical change in social media by using census data to obtain demographic informa-
tion for the geographical locations. They justified their approach by assuming that
lexical change is influenced by the demographics of the population in these loca-
tions, and not necessarily by the demographics of the particular Twitter users in these
locations.

576



Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

Developing Models that Generalize Across Domains. Many of the studies within the area
of computational sociolinguistics have focused on a single domain. However, domain
effects can influence the findings, such as which features are predictive for gender (e.g.,
Herring and Paolillo 2006). Studies considering multiple domains enable distinguishing
variables that work differently in different contexts, and therefore improve the inter-
pretation of the findings. Recently, several studies within the area of computational
sociolinguistics have performed experiments across domains (Sarawgi, Gajulapalli, and
Choi 2011; Sap et al. 2014) and explored the effectiveness of domain adaptation ap-
proaches (Nguyen, Smith, and Rosé 2011; Piergallini et al. 2014). Another approach
involves reconsidering the features used in an attempt to include more features with
a deep connection with the predicted variable of interest. For example, Gianfortoni,
Adamson, and Rosé (2011) show that features such as n-grams, usually reported to be
predictive for gender classification, did not perform well after controlling for occupation
in a blog corpus, but pattern-based features inspired by findings related to gender-based
language practices did.

Using Sociolinguistics and the Social Sciences as a Source of Inspiration for Methodological
Reflection. Going forward, we need to appreciate where our work stands along an
important continuum that represents a fundamental tension in the social sciences:
qualitative approaches that seek to preserve the complexity of the phenomena of in-
terest, versus quantitative approaches that discretize (but thereby also simplify) the
phenomena to achieve more generalizability. For computational linguistics, a primarily
quantitative field, work from research areas with a less strong or less exclusive focus on
quantitative measures, such as sociolinguistics and the social sciences, could serve as a
source of inspiration for methodological reflection. In this survey, we have questioned
the operationalizations of the concepts of gender (Section 3.2), age (Section 3.3), and
language variety (Section 3.4) as discrete and static categories, based on insights from
sociolinguistics. More critical reflection on such operationalizations could lead to a
deeper insight into the limitations of the developed models and the incorrect predictions
that they sometimes make.

6.3 Tuning NLP Tools to Requirements of Sociolinguistics Research

As a final important direction, we should consider what would be required for NLP
tools to be supportive for sociolinguistic work.

Developing Models That Can Guide Users of Data Analysis Systems in Taking Next Steps.
Sociolinguists are primarily interested in new insights about language use. In contrast,
much of the work within CL is centered around highly specific analysis tasks that are
isolated from scenarios of use, and the focus on the obtained performance figures for
such tasks is fairly dominant. As Manning (2015) mentions: "there has been an over-
focus on numbers, on beating the state of the art." Only for few analysis methods,
validation of the outcomes has been pursued (e.g., have we measured the right thing?)
in view of the potential for integration of the models outside lab-like environments. Fur-
thermore many of the models developed within CL make use of thousands of features.
As a result, their value for practical data exploration tasks is therefore often limited.
Sparse models, such as used in Eisenstein, Smith, and Xing (2011), that identify small
sets of predictive features would be more suited for exploratory analysis. However,
when the focus is on interpretability of the models, we must consider that the resulting

577



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

average prediction performance of interpretable models may be lower (Piergallini et al.
2014).

Developing Pre-processing Tools to Support the Analysis of Language Variation. The perfor-
mance of many developed NLP tools is lower on informal text. For example, POS tag-
gers perform less well on texts written by certain user groups (e.g., younger people
[Hovy and Søgaard 2015]) or on texts in certain language varieties (e.g., African
American Vernacular English [Jørgensen, Hovy, and Søgaard 2015]). One of the ap-
proaches to improve the performance of tools has been to normalize the texts, but as
Eisenstein (2013b) argues, doing so is removing the variation that is central to the
study of sociolinguistics. To support deeper sociolinguistic analyses and to go beyond
shallow features, we thus need pre-processing tools, such as POS taggers that are able
to handle the variation found in informal texts and that are not biased towards certain
social groups.

7. Conclusion

Although the computational linguistics field has historically emphasized interpretation
and manipulation of the propositional content of language, another valid perspective
on language is that it is a dynamic, social entity. Some aspects of language viewed
from a social perspective are predictable, and thus behave much like other aspects more
commonly the target of inquiry in the field, but we must acknowledge that linguistic
agency is a big part of how language is used to construct social identities, to build
and maintain social relationships, and even to define the boundaries of communities.
The increasing research on social media data has contributed to the insight that text
can be considered as a data source that captures multiple aspects and layers of human
and social behavior. The recent focus on text as social data and the emergence of
computational social science are likely to increase the interest within the computational
linguistics community on sociolinguistic topics. In this article, we have defined and set
out a research agenda for the emerging field of “Computational Sociolinguistics.” We
have aimed to provide a comprehensive overview of studies published within the field
of CL that touch upon sociolinguistic themes in order to provide an overview of what
has been accomplished so far and where there is room for growth. In particular, we have
endeavored to illustrate how the large-scale data-driven methods of our community can
complement existing sociolinguistic studies, but also how sociolinguistics can inform
and challenge our methods and assumptions.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Mariët Theune, Dirk Hovy,
and Marcos Zampieri for helpful comments
on the draft. Thanks also to the anonymous
reviewers for their valuable and detailed
feedback. This work was funded in part
through NSF grant ACI-1443068 and ARL
grant W911NF-11-2-0042. The first author
was supported by the Netherlands
Organization for Scientific Research (NWO)
grant 640.005.002 (CATCH project FACT).
The second author was supported by the
Digital Humanities Research Grant from
Tilburg University and a fellowship from

the Netherlands Institute of Advanced Study
in Humanities and Social Sciences.

References
Adel, Heike, Ngoc Thang Vu, and Tanja

Schultz. 2013. Combination of recurrent
neural networks and factored language
models for code-switching language
modeling. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers),
pages 206–211, Sofia.

Alex, Beatrice. 2005. An unsupervised
system for identifying English inclusions

578



Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

in German text. In Proceedings of the ACL
Student Research Workshop, pages 133–138,
Ann Arbor, MI.

Androutsopoulos, Jannis. 2013. Online data
collection. In Christine Mallinson, Becky
Childs, and Gerard Van Herk, editors, Data
Collection in Sociolinguistics: Methods and
Applications, pages 236–249, Routledge.

Ardehaly, Ehsan Mohammady and Aron
Culotta. 2015. Inferring latent attributes of
Twitter users with label regularization.
In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, pages 185–195, Denver, CO.

Argamon, Shlomo, Moshe Koppel, Jonathan
Fine, and Anat Rachel Shimoni. 2003.
Gender, genre, and writing style in formal
written texts. Text, 23(3):321–346.

Argamon, Shlomo, Moshe Koppel, James W.
Pennebaker, and Jonathan Schler. 2007.
Mining the blogosphere: Age, gender and
the varieties of self-expression. First
Monday, 12(9). http://dx.doi.org/
10.5210/fm.v12i9.2003.

Argamon, Shlomo, Moshe Koppel, James W.
Pennebaker, and Jonathan Schler. 2009.
Automatically profiling the author of an
anonymous text. Communications of the
ACM, 52(2):119–123.

Auer, Peter. 1988. A conversation analytic
approach to code-switching and transfer.
In Monica Heller, editor, Codeswitching:
Anthropological and sociolinguistic
perspectives. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter,
pages 187–213.

Austin, John Langshaw. 1975. How to Do
Things with Words. Oxford University
Press.

Backofen, Rolf and Gert Smolka. 1993. A
complete and recursive feature theory.
In Proceedings of the 31st Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 193–200, Columbus, OH.

Bak, JinYeong, Suin Kim, and Alice Oh. 2012.
Self-disclosure and relationship strength in
Twitter conversations. In Proceedings of the
50th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 2:
Short Papers), pages 60–64, Jeju Island.

Baldwin, Timothy, Paul Cook, Marco Lui,
Andrew MacKinlay, and Li Wang. 2013.
How noisy social media text, how diffrnt
social media sources? In Proceedings of the
Sixth International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing,
pages 356–364, Nagoya.

Baldwin, Timothy and Marco Lui. 2010.
Language identification: The long and the

short of the matter. In Proceedings of the
2010 Annual Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 229–237,
Los Angeles, CA.

Bamman, David, Chris Dyer, and Noah A.
Smith. 2014. Distributed representations
of geographically situated language. In
Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 828–834,
Baltimore, MD.

Bamman, David, Jacob Eisenstein, and
Tyler Schnoebelen. 2014. Gender identity
and lexical variation in social media.
Journal of Sociolinguistics, 18(2):135–160.

Bamman, David and Noah A. Smith. 2015.
Contextualized sarcasm detection on
Twitter. In Proceedings of the Ninth
International AAAI Conference on Web and
Social Media, pages 574–577, Oxford.

Barbieri, Federica. 2008. Patterns of
age-based linguistic variation in American
English. Journal of Sociolinguistics,
12(1):58–88.

Behrend, Tara S., David J. Sharek, Adam W.
Meade, and Eric N. Wiebe. 2011. The
viability of crowdsourcing for survey
research. Behavior Research Methods,
43(3):800–813.

Bell, Allan. 1984. Language style as audience
design. Language in Society, 13(2):145–204.

Bell, Allan. 2013. The Guidebook to
Sociolinguistics. John Wiley & Sons.

Bender, Emily M., Jonathan T. Morgan,
Meghan Oxley, Mark Zachry, Brian
Hutchinson, Alex Marin, Bin Zhang,
and Mari Ostendorf. 2011. Annotating
social acts: Authority claims and
alignment moves in Wikipedia talk
pages. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Language in Social Media (LSM 2011),
pages 48–57, Portland, OR.

Bergsma, Shane, Matt Post, and David
Yarowsky. 2012. Stylometric analysis of
scientific articles. In Proceedings of the 2012
Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies,
pages 327–337, Montreal.

Bergsma, Shane and Benjamin Van Durme.
2013. Using conceptual class attributes
to characterize social media users. In
Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 710–720,
Sofia.

Bhatt, Rakesh M. and Agnes Bolonyai.
2011. Code-switching and the optimal

579

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1145%2F1461928.1461959
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1145%2F1461928.1461959
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1111%2Fjosl.12080
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1111%2Fj.1467-9841.2008.00353.x
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.3758%2Fs13428-011-0081-0
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1017%2FS004740450001037X


Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

grammar of bilingual language use.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition,
14(04):522–546.

Biel, Joan-Isaac, Vagia Tsiminaki, John Dines,
and Daniel Gatica-Perez. 2013. Hi youtube!:
Personality impressions and verbal
content in social video. In Proceedings of the
15th ACM on International Conference on
Multimodal Interaction, pages 119–126,
Sydney.

Biran, Or, Sara Rosenthal, Jacob Andreas,
Kathleen McKeown, and Owen Rambow.
2012. Detecting influencers in written
online conversations. In Proceedings
of the 2012 Workshop on Language in Social
Media (LSM 2012), pages 37–45, Montreal.

Blei, David M., Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I.
Jordan. 2003. Latent Dirichlet allocation.
Journal of Machine Learning Research,
3:993–1022.

Bolander, Brook and Miriam A. Locher.
2014. Doing sociolinguistic research
on computer-mediated data: A review
of four methodological issues.
Discourse, Context & Media, 3(0):14–26.

Boulis, Constantinos and Mari Ostendorf.
2005. A quantitative analysis of lexical
differences between genders in telephone
conversations. In Proceedings of the 43rd
Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL’05),
pages 435–442, Ann Arbor, MI.

Boyd, Doug. 2013. Special Issue: Oral History
in the Digital Age, volume 40. Oral History
Review.

Bracewell, David B., Marc Tomlinson, and
Hui Wang. 2012. A motif approach
for identifying pursuits of power in social
discourse. In 2012 IEEE Sixth International
Conference on Semantic Computing,
pages 1–8, Palermo.

Bramsen, Philip, Martha Escobar-Molano,
Ami Patel, and Rafael Alonso. 2011.
Extracting social power relationships
from natural language. In Proceedings of
the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, pages 773–782, Portland, OR.

Bright, William. 1997. Notes. Language in
Society, 26(03):469–470.

Brody, Samuel and Nicholas
Diakopoulos. 2011. Coooooooooooooool-
lllllllllllll!!!!!!!!!!!!!! Using word lengthening
to detect sentiment in microblogs.
In Proceedings of the 2011 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 562–570, Edinburgh.

Brown, Penelope and Stephen C. Levinson.
1987. Politeness: Some Universals in Language

Usage, volume 4 of Studies in Interactional
Sociolinguistics. Cambridge University
Press.

Bucholtz, Mary and Kira Hall. 2005. Identity
and interaction: A sociocultural linguistic
approach. Discourse Studies, 7(4-5):585–614.

Burger, John D., John Henderson,
George Kim, and Guido Zarrella.
2011. Discriminating gender on Twitter.
In Proceedings of the 2011 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 1301–1309, Edinburgh.

Burger, John D. and John C. Henderson. 2006.
An exploration of observable features
related to blogger age. In AAAI Spring
Symposium: Computational Approaches
to Analyzing Weblogs, pages 15–20,
Menlo Park, CA.

Butler, Judith. 1990. Gender Trouble: Feminism
and the Subversion of Identity. Routledge.

Carletta, Jean. 1996. Assessing agreement
on classification tasks: The Kappa statistic.
Computational Linguistics, 22(2):249–254.

Cassell, Justine and Dona Tversky. 2005.
The language of online intercultural
community formation. Journal of
Computer-Mediated Communication, 10(2).
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
10.1111/jcmc.2005.10.issue-2/issuetoc.

Cavnar, William B. and John M. Trenkle.
1994. N-gram-based text categorization.
In Proceedings of SDAIR-94, 3rd Annual
Symposium on Document Analysis and
Information Retrieval, pages 161–175,
Las Vegas, NV.

Chambers, Jack K. and Peter Trudgill. 1998.
Dialectology. Cambridge University Press.

Choi, Bernard C. K. and Anita W. P.
Pak. 2006. Multidisciplinarity,
interdisciplinarity and transdisciplinarity
in health research, services, education
and policy: 1. Definitions, objectives,
and evidence of effectiveness. Clinical
and Investigative Medicine, 29(6):351–364.

Ciot, Morgane, Morgan Sonderegger,
and Derek Ruths. 2013. Gender inference
of Twitter users in non-English contexts.
In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 1136–1145, Seattle, WA.

Clopper, Cynthia G. 2013. Experiments.
In Christine Mallinson, Becky
Childs, and Gerard Van Herk, editors,
Data Collection in Sociolinguistics: Methods
and Applications, pages 151–161, Routledge.

Cohen, Raviv and Derek Ruths. 2013.
Classifying political orientation on
Twitter: It’s not easy! In Proceedings of
the Seventh International AAAI

580

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1177%2F1461445605054407
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1017%2FS1366728910000295
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1017%2FS0047404500019679
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1017%2FS0047404500019679
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1162%2Fjmlr.2003.3.4-5.993
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1016%2Fj.dcm.2013.10.004


Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

Conference on Weblogs and Social
Media, pages 91–99, Cambridge, MA.

Collins, Linda M. and Stephanie T. Lanza.
2010. Latent Class and Latent Transition
Analysis: With Applications in the
Social, Behavioral, and Health Sciences.
John Wiley & Sons.

Corney, Malcolm, Olivier de Vel,
Alison Anderson, and George Mohay.
2002. Gender-preferential text mining
of e-mail discourse. In Proceedings of
the 18th Annual Computer Security
Applications Conference (ACSAC ’02),
pages 282–289, Las Vegas, NV.

Cotterell, Ryan, Adithya Renduchintala,
Naomi Saphra, and Chris Callison-Burch.
2014. An Algerian Arabic-French
code-switched corpus. In LREC-2014
Workshop on Free/Open-Source Arabic
Corpora and Corpora Processing Tools,
pages 34–37, Reykjavik.

Dadvar, Maral, Franciska M. G. de Jong,
Roeland Ordelman, and Dolf Trieschnigg.
2012. Improved cyberbullying detection
using gender information. In Proceedings of
the Twelfth Dutch-Belgian Information
Retrieval Workshop (DIR 2012), pages 23–25,
Ghent.

Daelemans, Walter. 2013. Explanation in
computational stylometry. In Proceedings
of the 14th international conference on
Computational Linguistics and Intelligent
Text Processing (CICLing’13) - Volume 2,
pages 451–462, Samos.

Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Cristian,
Michael Gamon, and Susan Dumais.
2011. Mark my words! Linguistic style
accommodation in social media. In
Proceedings of the 20th International
Conference on World Wide Web,
pages 745–754, Hyderabad.

Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Cristian
and Lillian Lee. 2011. Chameleons in
imagined conversations: A new approach
to understanding coordination of
linguistic style in dialogs. In Proceedings of
the 2nd Workshop on Cognitive Modeling
and Computational Linguistics, pages 76–87,
Portland, OR.

Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Cristian, Lillian
Lee, Bo Pang, and Jon Kleinberg. 2012.
Echoes of power: Language effects and
power differences in social interaction.
In Proceedings of the 21st International
Conference on World Wide Web,
pages 699–708, Lyon.

Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Cristian, Moritz
Sudhof, Dan Jurafsky, Jure Leskovec, and
Christopher Potts. 2013a. A computational

approach to politeness with application
to social factors. In Proceedings of the
51st Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 250–259, Sofia.

Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Cristian,
Robert West, Dan Jurafsky, Jure Leskovec,
and Christopher Potts. 2013b. No country
for old members: User lifecycle and
linguistic change in online communities.
In Proceedings of the 22nd International
Conference on World Wide Web (WWW ’13),
pages 307–318, Rio de Janeiro.

Danet, Brenda and Susan C. Herring,
editors. 2007. The Multilingual Internet:
Language, Culture, and Communication
Online. Oxford University Press.

Darwish, Kareem, Hassan Sajjad, and
Hamdy Mubarak. 2014. Verifiably effective
Arabic dialect identification. In Proceedings
of the 2014 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), pages 1465–1468, Doha.

De Fina, Anna, Deborah Schiffrin, and
Michael Bamberg, editors. 2006. Discourse
and Identity. Cambridge University Press.

De Jong, Franciska, Arjan van Hessen, Tanja
Petrovic, and Stef Scagliola. 2014. Croatian
memories: Speech, meaning and emotions
in a collection of interviews on experiences
of war and trauma. In Proceedings of the
Ninth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’14),
pages 26–31, Reykjavik.

Di Eugenio, Barbara and Michael Glass.
2004. The kappa statistic: A second look.
Computational Linguistics, 30(1):95–101.

Diehl, Christopher P., Galileo Namata,
and Lise Getoor. 2007. Relationship
identification for social network discovery.
In Proceedings of the Twenty-Second AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
pages 546–552, Vancouver.

Diesner, Jana and Kathleen M Carley.
2005. Exploration of communication
networks from the Enron email corpus.
In Proceedings of SIAM International
Conference on Data Mining: Workshop
on Link Analysis, Counterterrorism and
Security, pages 3–14, Newport Beach, CA.

Doğruöz, A. Seza and Ad Backus.
2007. Postverbal elements in immigrant
Turkish: Evidence of change? International
Journal of Bilingualism, 11(2):185–220.

Doğruöz, A. Seza and Ad Backus.
2009. Innovative constructions in
Dutch Turkish: An assessment of ongoing
contact-induced change. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 12(01):41–63.

581

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1177%2F13670069070110020301
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1177%2F13670069070110020301
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1017%2FS1366728908003441
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?system=10.1162%2F089120104773633402


Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

Doğruöz, A. Seza and Preslav Nakov. 2014.
Predicting dialect variation in immigrant
contexts using light verb constructions.
In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP), pages 1391–1395, Doha.

Doyle, Gabriel. 2014. Mapping dialectal
variation by querying social media. In
Proceedings of the 14th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 98–106,
Gothenburg.

Dürscheid, Christa and Elisabeth Stark, 2011.
Digital Discourse. Language in the New Media,
chapter sms4science: An International
Corpus-Based Texting Project and
the Specific Challenges for Multilingual
Switzerland. Oxford University Press.

Eckert, Penelope. 1989. Jocks and Burnouts:
Social Categories and Identity in the
High School. Teachers College Press.

Eckert, Penelope. 1997. Age as a
sociolinguistic variable. In Florian
Coulmas, editor, The Handbook of
Sociolinguistics, pages 151–167,
Blackwell Publishers.

Eckert, Penelope. 2012. Three waves of
variation study: The emergence of meaning
in the study of sociolinguistic variation.
Annual Review of Anthropology, 41:87–100.

Eckert, Penelope and Sally
McConnell-Ginet. 2013. Language
and gender. Cambridge University Press.

Eisenstein, Jacob. 2013a. Phonological factors
in social media writing. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Language Analysis in Social
Media (LASM 2013), pages 11–19, Atlanta,
GA.

Eisenstein, Jacob. 2013b. What to do
about bad language on the Internet.
In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, pages 359–369, Atlanta, GA.

Eisenstein, Jacob. 2015. Written dialect
variation in online social media. In Charles
Boberg, John Nerbonne, and Dom Watt,
editors, Handbook of Dialectology. Wiley.

Eisenstein, Jacob, Brendan O’Connor,
Noah A. Smith, and Eric P. Xing.
2010. A latent variable model for
geographic lexical variation. In Proceedings
of the 2010 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 1277–1287, Cambridge, MA.

Eisenstein, Jacob, Brendan O’Connor,
Noah A. Smith, and Eric P. Xing. 2014.
Diffusion of lexical change in social media.
PLoS ONE, 9(11):e113114, 11.

Eisenstein, Jacob, Noah A. Smith, and Eric P.
Xing. 2011. Discovering sociolinguistic
associations with structured sparsity.
In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies-Volume 1,
pages 1365–1374, Portland, OR.

Eleta, Irene and Jennifer Golbeck.
2014. Multilingual use of Twitter:
Social networks at the language frontier.
Computers in Human Behavior, 41:424–432.

Elfardy, Heba and Mona Diab. 2012a.
Simplified guidelines for the creation
of large scale dialectal Arabic annotations.
In Proceedings of the Eighth International
Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC-2012), Istanbul.

Elfardy, Heba and Mona Diab. 2012b.
Token level identification of linguistic
code switching. In Proceedings of COLING
2012: Posters, pages 287–296, Mumbai.

Elfardy, Heba and Mona Diab. 2013. Sentence
level dialect identification in Arabic. In
Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers),
pages 456–461, Sofia.

Fairclough, Norman. 1989. Language and
power. London: Longman.

Ferschke, Oliver, Iryna Gurevych, and
Yevgen Chebotar. 2012. Behind the article:
Recognizing dialog acts in Wikipedia
talk pages. In Proceedings of the 13th
Conference of the European Chapter of
the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 777–786, Avignon.

Filippova, Katja. 2012. User demographics
and language in an implicit social network.
In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and Computational Natural
Language Learning, pages 1478–1488,
Jeju Island.

Fink, Clay, Jonathon Kopecky, and
Maksym Morawski. 2012. Inferring
gender from the content of tweets: A region
specific example. In Proceedings of the
Sixth International AAAI Conference
on Weblogs and Social Media, pages 459–462,
Dublin.

Gardner-Chloros, Penelope and Malcolm
Edwards. 2004. Assumptions behind
grammatical approaches to
code-switching: When the blueprint is
a red herring. Transactions of the
Philological Society, 102(1):103–129.

Garera, Nikesh and David Yarowsky. 2009.
Modeling latent biographic attributes in
conversational genres. In Proceedings of the

582

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1146%2Fannurev-anthro-092611-145828
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1016%2Fj.chb.2014.05.005
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1111%2Fj.0079-1636.2004.00131.x
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1111%2Fj.0079-1636.2004.00131.x
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0113114


Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

Joint Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting
of the ACL and the 4th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing
of the AFNLP, pages 710–718, Suntec.

Garley, Matt and Julia Hockenmaier.
2012. Beefmoves: Dissemination, diversity,
and dynamics of English borrowings
in a German hip hop forum. In Proceedings
of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2:
Short Papers), pages 135–139, Jeju Island.

Gee, James Paul. 2011. An Introduction
to Discourse Analysis: Theory and Method.
New York: Routledge, third edition.

Gianfortoni, Philip, David Adamson,
and Carolyn P. Rosé. 2011. Modeling
of stylistic variation in social media
with stretchy patterns. In Proceedings of the
First Workshop on Algorithms and Resources
for Modelling of Dialects and Language
Varieties, pages 49–59, Edinburgh.

Gilbert, Eric. 2012. Phrases that signal
workplace hierarchy. In Proceedings of
the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work, CSCW ’12,
pages 1037–1046, Seattle, WA.

Gilbert, Eric and Karrie Karahalios.
2009. Predicting tie strength with
social media. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, pages 211–220, Boston, MA.

Giles, Howard and Nikolas Coupland. 1991.
Language: Contexts and consequences.
Mapping Social Psychology Series.
Brooks/Cole Publishing Company.

Giles, Howard, Nikolas Coupland, and
Justine Coupland. 1991. Accommodation
theory: Communication, context,
and consequence. In Howard Giles,
Justine Coupland, and Nikolas Coupland,
editors, Contexts of Accommodation.
Cambridge University Press, pages 1–68.

Giles, Howard, Donald M. Taylor,
and Richard Bourhis. 1973. Towards
a theory of interpersonal accommodation
through language: Some Canadian
data. Language in Society, 2(2):177–192.

Glymour, Clark, Richard Scheines,
Peter Spirtes, and Kevin Kelly. 1987.
Discovering causal structure: Artificial
intelligence, philosophy of science,
and statistical modeling. Academic Press.

Gonzales, Amy L., Jeffrey T. Hancock, and
James W. Pennebaker. 2010. Language
style matching as a predictor of
social dynamics in small groups.
Communication Research, 37(1):3–19.

Goswami, Sumit, Sudeshna Sarkar, and
Mayur Rustagi. 2009. Stylometric analysis

of bloggers’ age and gender. In Proceedings
of the Third International ICWSM
Conference, pages 214–217, San Jose, CA.

Gouws, Stephan, Donald Metzler, Congxing
Cai, and Eduard Hovy. 2011. Contextual
bearing on linguistic
variation in social media. In Proceedings
of the Workshop on Language in Social Media
(LSM 2011), pages 20–29, Portland, OR.

Granovetter, Mark S. 1973. The strength
of weak ties. American Journal of Sociology,
78(6):1360–1380.

Green, Neil. 1992. Meaning-text theory:
Linguistics, lexicography, and implications.
Machine Translation, 7(3):195–198.

Grice, H. Paul. 1975. Logic and Conversation,
Syntax and Semantics, volume 3. Academic
Press.

Grieve, Jack. 2007. Quantitative authorship
attribution: An evaluation of techniques.
Literary and Linguistic Computing,
22(3):251–270.

Grieve, Jack, Dirk Speelman, and Dirk
Geeraerts. 2011. A statistical method
for the identification and aggregation of
regional linguistic variation. Language
Variation and Change, 23:193–221.

Griffiths, Thomas L. and Mark Steyvers.
2004. Finding scientific topics. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences,
101(suppl 1):5228–5235.

Guinote, Ana and Theresa K. Vescio, editors.
2010. The Social Psychology of Power.
The Guilford Press.

Gumperz, John J. 1982. Discourse strategies.
Cambridge University Press.

Guy, Gregory R. 2013. The cognitive
coherence of sociolects: How do
speakers handle multiple sociolinguistic
variables? Journal of Pragmatics,
52:63–71.

Gweon, Gahgene, Mahaveer Jain,
John McDonough, Bhiksha Raj, and
Carolyn P. Rosé. 2013. Measuring
prevalence of other-oriented transactive
contributions using an automated
measure of speech style accommodation.
International Journal of Computer-Supported
Collaborative Learning, 8(2):245–265.

Hale, Scott A. 2014. Global connectivity
and multilinguals in the Twitter network.
In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM
Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, pages 833–842, Toronto.

Han, Bo, Paul Cook, and Timothy Baldwin.
2012. Geolocation prediction in social
media data by finding location indicative
words. In Proceedings of COLING 2012,
pages 1045–1062, Mumbai.

583

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1016%2Fj.pragma.2012.12.019
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1007%2FBF00402511
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1007%2Fs11412-013-9172-5
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1007%2Fs11412-013-9172-5
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1093%2Fllc%2Ffqm020
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1017%2FS095439451100007X
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1017%2FS095439451100007X
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1017%2FS0047404500000701
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1073%2Fpnas.0307752101
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1073%2Fpnas.0307752101
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1177%2F0093650209351468
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1086%2F225469


Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

Hassan, Ahmed, Amjad Abu-Jbara,
and Dragomir Radev. 2012. Detecting
subgroups in online discussions by
modeling positive and negative relations
among participants. In Proceedings
of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing
and Computational Natural Language
Learning, pages 59–70, Jeju Island.

Heeringa, Wilbert and John Nerbonne.
2001. Dialect areas and dialect continua.
Language Variation and Change,
13(03):375–400.

Heeringa, Wilbert and John Nerbonne,
2013. Language and Space. An International
Handbook of Linguistic Variation, Volume III:
Dutch, chapter Dialectometry. De Gruyter
Mouton.

Heider, Fritz. 1946. Attitudes and cognitive
organization. The Journal of Psychology:
Interdisciplinary and Applied, 21(1):107–112.

Hemphill, Libby and Jahna Otterbacher.
2012. Learning the lingo?: Gender, prestige
and linguistic adaptation in review
communities. In Proceedings of the ACM
2012 Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work, pages 305–314,
Seattle, WA.

Herring, Susan C., editor. 1996.
Computer-Mediated Communication:
Linguistic, Social, and Cross-Cultural
Perspectives, volume 39 of Pragmatics
& Beyond New Series. John Benjamins
Publishing.

Herring, Susan C. 2004. Computer-mediated
discourse analysis: An approach to
researching online behavior. In Sasha
Barab, Rob Kling, and James H. Gray,
editors, Designing for Virtual Communities
in the Service of Learning. New York:
Cambridge University Press,
pages 338–376.

Herring, Susan C. 2007. A faceted
classification scheme for computer-
mediated discourse. Language@Internet,
4(1). http://www.languageatinternet.
org/articles/2007/761.

Herring, Susan C. and John C. Paolillo. 2006.
Gender and genre variation in weblogs.
Journal of Sociolinguistics, 10(4):439–459.

Heskes, Tom, Kees Albers, and Bert Kappen.
2002. Approximate inference and con-
strained optimization. In Proceedings of the
Nineteenth Conference on Uncertainty in Arti-
ficial Intelligence, pages 313–320, Acapulco.

Hey, Tony, Stewart Tansley, and Kristin
Tolle, editors. 2009. The Fourth Paradigm:
Data-Intensive Scientific Discovery.
Microsoft Research.

Heylighen, Francis and Jean-Marc Dewaele.
2002. Variation in the contextuality
of language: An empirical measure.
Foundations of Science, 7(3):293–340.

Hinnenkamp, Volker. 2008. Deutsch, Doyc
or Doitsch? Chatters as languagers—The
case of a German–Turkish chat room.
International Journal of Multilingualism,
5(3):253–275.

Hinrichs, Lars. 2006. Codeswitching on the
Web: English and Jamaican Creole in E-mail
Communication. John Benjamins Publishing
Company.

Holmes, David I. 1998. The evolution of
stylometry in humanities scholarship.
Literary and Linguistic Computing,
13(3):111–117.

Holmes, Janet. 1995. Women, Men and
Politeness. Routledge.

Holmes, Janet. 2013. An Introduction to
Sociolinguistics. Routledge.

Holmes, Janet and Miriam Meyerhoff,
editors. 2003. The Handbook of Language
and Gender. Wiley-Blackwell.

Hovy, Dirk. 2015. Demographic factors
improve classification performance.
In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 7th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 752–762,
Beijing.

Hovy, Dirk, Anders Johannsen, and
Anders Søgaard. 2015. User review
sites as a resource for large-scale
sociolinguistic studies. In Proceedings of
the 24th International Conference on
World Wide Web (WWW ’15),
pages 452–461, Florence.

Hovy, Dirk and Anders Søgaard.
2015. Tagging performance correlates with
author age. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 7th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing
(Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 483–488,
Beijing.

Howley, Iris, Elijah Mayfield, and Carolyn P.
Rosé, 2013. The International Handbook of
Collaborative Learning, chapter Linguistic
Analysis Methods for Studying Small
Groups. Routledge.

Hu, Yuheng, Kartik Talamadupula, and
Subbarao Kambhampati. 2013. Dude,
srsly?: The surprisingly formal nature
of Twitter’s language. In Proceedings of the
Seventh International AAAI Conference on
Weblogs and Social Media, pages 244–253,
Boston, MA.

584

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1080%2F00223980.1946.9917275
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1080%2F00223980.1946.9917275
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1023%2FA%3A1019661126744
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1080%2F14790710802390228
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1093%2Fllc%2F13.3.111
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1111%2Fj.1467-9841.2006.00287.x
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1017%2FS0954394501133041


Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

Huang, Fei. 2015. Improved Arabic
dialect classification with social media
data. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 2118–2126, Lisbon.

Huang, Fei and Alexander Yates. 2014.
Improving word alignment using linguistic
code switching data. In Proceedings
of the 14th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 1–9, Gothenburg.

Huffaker, David. 2010. Dimensions of
leadership and social influence in
online communities. Human
Communication Research, 36(4):593–617.

Huffaker, David, Joseph Jorgensen, Francisco
Iacobelli, Paul Tepper, and Justine
Cassell. 2006. Computational measures
for language similarity across time in
online communities. In Proceedings of
the HLT-NAACL 2006 Workshop
on Analyzing Conversations in Text and
Speech, pages 15–22, New York, NY.

Hughes, Baden, Timothy Baldwin, Steven
Bird, Jeremy Nicholson, and Andrew
Mackinlay. 2006. Reconsidering language
identification for written language
resources. In Proceedings of the Fifth
International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’06),
pages 485–488, Genoa.

Hyland, Ken. 2004. Disciplinary Discourses:
Social Interactions in Academic Writing.
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Jain, Mahaveer, John McDonough, Gahgene
Gweon, Bhiksha Raj, and Carolyn P. Rosé.
2012. An unsupervised dynamic Bayesian
network approach to measuring speech
style accommodation. In Proceedings
of the 13th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 787–797, Avignon.

Janin, Adam, Don Baron, Jane Edwards,
Dan Ellis, David Gelbart, Nelson Morgan,
Barbara Peskin, Thilo Pfau, Elizabeth
Shriberg, Andreas Stolcke, and Chuck
Wooters. 2003. The ICSI meeting corpus.
In Proceedings of 2013 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and
Signal Processing (ICASSP ’03),
pages 364–367, Hong Kong.

Johannsen, Anders, Dirk Hovy, and
Anders Søgaard. 2015. Cross-lingual
syntactic variation over age and gender. In
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Conference on
Computational Natural Language Learning,
pages 103–112, Beijing.

Jones, Simon, Rachel Cotterill, Nigel
Dewdney, Kate Muir, and Adam Joinson.

2014. Finding Zelig in text: A measure
for normalising linguistic accommodation.
In Proceedings of COLING 2014, the 25th
International Conference on Computational
Linguistics: Technical Papers, pages 455–465,
Dublin.

Jørgensen, Anna, Dirk Hovy, and Anders
Søgaard. 2015. Challenges of studying
and processing dialects in social media.
In Proceedings of the ACL 2015 Workshop
on Noisy User-generated Text, pages 9–18,
Beijing.

Joshi, Aravind K. 1982. Processing of
sentences with intra-sentential
code-switching. In Coling 1982:
Proceedings of the Ninth International
Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 145–150, Prague.

Joshi, Mahesh, William W. Cohen,
Mark Dredze, and Carolyn P. Rosé.
2012. Multi-domain learning: When
do domains matter? In Proceedings
of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing
and Computational Natural Language
Learning, pages 1302–1312, Jeju Island.

Joshi, Mahesh, Mark Dredze, William W.
Cohen, and Carolyn P. Rosé. 2013.
What’s in a domain? Multi-domain
learning for multi-attribute data.
In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2013,
pages 685–690, Atlanta, GA.

Jurafsky, Dan, Rajesh Ranganath, and
Dan McFarland. 2009. Extracting social
meaning: Identifying interactional style
in spoken conversation. In Proceedings
of Human Language Technologies: The 2009
Annual Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 638–646, Boulder, CO.

Jurgens, David, Stefan Dimitrov, and Derek
Ruths. 2014. Twitter users #codeswitch
hashtags! #moltoimportante #wow.
In Proceedings of the First Workshop on
Computational Approaches to Code Switching,
pages 51–61, Doha.

Kershaw, Daniel, Matthew Rowe, and Patrick
Stacey. 2016. Towards modelling language
innovation acceptance in online social
networks. In Proceedings of the Ninth
ACM International Conference on Web
Search and Data Mining, pages 553–562,
San Francisco, CA.

Kim, Suin, Ingmar Weber, Li Wei, and
Alice Oh. 2014. Sociolinguistic analysis of
Twitter in multilingual societies. In
Proceedings of the 25th ACM Conference
on Hypertext and Social Media,
pages 243–248, Santiago.

585

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1111%2Fj.1468-2958.2010.01390.x
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1111%2Fj.1468-2958.2010.01390.x


Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

King, Ben and Steven Abney. 2013. Labeling
the languages of words in mixed-language
documents using weakly supervised
methods. In Proceedings of the 2013
Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies,
pages 1110–1119, Atlanta, GA.

King, Ben, Dragomir Radev, and Steven
Abney. 2014. Experiments in sentence
language identification with groups
of similar languages. In Proceedings
of the First Workshop on Applying NLP
Tools to Similar Languages, Varieties and
Dialects, pages 146–154, Dublin.

Klavans, Judith L. and Philip Resnik,
editors. 1996. The Balancing Act: Combining
Symbolic and Statistical Approaches
to Language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Klimt, Bryan and Yiming Yang. 2004.
The Enron corpus: A new dataset for
email classification research. In Proceedings
of the 15th European Conference on Machine
Learning (ECML 2004), pages 217–226, Pisa.

Kokkos, Athanasios and Theodoros
Tzouramanis. 2014. A robust gender
inference model for online social networks
and its application to LinkedIn and Twitter.
First Monday, 19(9). http://dx.doi.org/
10.5210/fm.v19i9.5216.

Koller, Daphne and Nir Friedman. 2009.
Probabilistic Graphical Models: Principles and
Techniques. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Kooti, Farshad, Haeryun Yang, Meeyoung
Cha, Krishna Gummadi, and Winter
Mason. 2012. The emergence of
conventions in online social networks.
In Proceedings of the Sixth International
AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social
Media, pages 194–201, Dublin.

Koppel, Moshe, Shlomo Argamon, and
Anat Rachel Shimoni. 2002. Automatically
categorizing written texts by author
gender. Literary and Linguistic Computing,
17(4):401–412.

Krippendorff, Klaus, 2013. Content Analysis:
An Introduction to Its Methodology,
chapter Validity. SAGE Publications.

Krishnan, Vinodh and Jacob Eisenstein.
2015. “You’re Mr. Lebowski, I’m the
dude”: Inducing address term formality in
signed social networks. In Proceedings of
the 2015 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 1616–1626, Denver, CO.

Labov, William. 1966. The Social Stratification
of English in New York City. Washington,
DC: Center for Applied Linguistics.

Labov, William. 1972. Sociolinguistic Patterns.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
Press.

Labov, William. 1994. Principles of Linguistic
Change, Volume I, Internal Factors.
Wiley-Blackwell.

Labov, William. 2001. Principles of Linguistic
Change, Volume II, Social Factors.
Wiley-Blackwell.

Lazer, David, Alex Sandy Pentland,
Lada Adamic, Sinan Aral, Albert Laszlo
Barabasi, Devon Brewer, Nicholas
Christakis, Noshir Contractor, James
Fowler, Myron Gutmann, Tony Jebara,
Gary King, Michael Macy, Deb Roy,
and Marshall Van Alstyne. 2009. Life in the
network: The coming age of computational
social science. Science, 323(5915):721–723.

Lee, David Y.W. 2001. Genres, registers, text
types, domains and styles: Clarifying the
concepts and navigating a path through
the BNC jungle. Language Learning &
Technology, 5(3):37–72.

Leemann, Adrian, Marie-José Kolly,
Ross Purves, David Britain, and
Elvira Glaser. 2016. Crowdsourcing
language change with smartphone
applications. PLoS One, 11(1):e0143060.
doi:10.1371./journal.pone.0143060.

Leskovec, Jure, Daniel Huttenlocher, and
Jon Kleinberg. 2010. Signed networks in
social media. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, pages 1361–1370, Atlanta, GA.

Levinson, Stephen C. 1983. Pragmatics.
Cambridge University Press.

Levitan, Rivka, Agustin Gravano, and
Julia Hirschberg. 2011. Entrainment
in speech preceding backchannels.
In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies,
pages 113–117, Portland, OR.

Li, Ying and Pascale Fung. 2012. Code-switch
language model with inversion constraints
for mixed language speech recognition.
In Proceedings of COLING 2012: Technical
Papers, pages 1671–1680, Mumbai.

Liao, Lizi, Jing Jiang, Ying Ding, Heyan
Huang, and Ee-Peng Lim. 2014.
Lifetime lexical variation in social media.
In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth AAAI
Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, pages 1643–1649, Québec City.

Ling, Wang, Guang Xiang, Chris Dyer,
Alan Black, and Isabel Trancoso. 2013.
Microblogs as parallel corpora. In
Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics

586

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1126%2Fscience.1167742
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1093%2Fllc%2F17.4.401
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0143060


Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 176–186,
Sofia.

Lui, Marco, Jey Han Lau, and Timothy
Baldwin. 2014. Automatic detection
and language identification of multilingual
documents. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2(1):27–40.

Makatchev, Maxim and Reid Simmons.
2011. Perception of personality and
naturalness through dialogues by native
speakers of American English and
Arabic. In Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2011
Conference, pages 286–293, Portland, OR.

Mallinson, Christine, Becky Childs, and
Gerard Van Herk, editors. 2013.
Data Collection in Sociolinguistics:
Methods and Applications. Routledge.

Mann, William C. and Sandra A.
Thompson. 1988. Rhetorical structure
theory: Toward a functional theory
of text organization. Text, 8(3):243–281.

Manning, Christopher D. 2015. Com-
putational linguistics and deep learning.
Computational Linguistics, 41(4):701–707.

Martin, James R. and David Rose. 2003.
Working with Discourse: Meaning Beyond
the Clause. Continuum.

Martin, James R. and Peter R. R. White.
2005. The Language of Evaluation:
Appraisal in English. Palgrave Macmillan.

Marwick, Alice E. and danah boyd. 2011.
I tweet honestly, I tweet passionately:
Twitter users, context collapse, and the
imagined audience. New Media &
Society, 13(1):114–133.

Mayfield, Elijah, M. Barton Laws,
Ira B. Wilson, and Carolyn P. Rosé. 2014.
Automating annotation of
information-giving for analysis of clinical
conversation. Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association,
21(1):122–128.

McNamee, Paul. 2005. Language
identification: A solved problem suitable
for undergraduate instruction. Journal of
Computing Sciences in Colleges, 20(3):94–101.

Meyerhoff, Miriam. 2011. Introducing
Sociolinguistics. Routledge.

Michael, Loizos and Jahna Otterbacher.
2014. Write like I write: Herding in the
language of online reviews. In Proceedings
of the Eighth International AAAI Conference
on Weblogs and Social Media, pages 356–365,
Ann Arbor, MI.

Mikolov, Tomas, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado,
and Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Efficient
estimation of word representations in
vector space. In Proceedings of ICLR
Workshop. https://sites.google.com/

site/representationlearning2013/
call-for-papers.

Milroy, James and Lesley Milroy, 1978.
Belfast: Change and Variation in an Urban
Vernacular. In Trudgill, Peter,
Sociolinguistic Patterns in British English,
pages 19–36, London: Edward Arnold.

Milroy, James and Lesley Milroy. 1985.
Linguistic change, social network and
speaker innovation. Journal of Linguistics,
21(2):339–384.

Milroy, Lesley and Matthew Gordon. 2003.
Sociolinguistics: Method and Interpretation.
Wiley-Blackwell.

Mislove, Alan, Sune Lehmann, Yong-Yeol
Ahn, Jukka-Pekka Onnela, and J. Niels
Rosenquist. 2011. Understanding the
demographics of Twitter users. In
Proceedings of the Fifth International AAAI
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media,
pages 554–557, Barcelona.

Mocanu, Delia, Andrea Baronchelli,
Nicola Perra, Bruno Gonçalves,
Qian Zhang, and Alessandro Vespignani.
2013. The Twitter of Babel: Mapping
world languages through microblogging
platforms. PLoS One, 8(4):e61981.

Morrow, Raymond A. and David D.
Brown, 1994. Contemporary Social Theory:
Critical Theory and Methodology, chapter
Deconstructing the Conventional
Discourse of Methodology: Quantitative
versus Qualitative Methods. SAGE
Publications.

Mubarak, Hamdy and Kareem Darwish.
2014. Using Twitter to collect a
multi-dialectal corpus of Arabic.
In Proceedings of the EMNLP 2014
Workshop on Arabic Natural Language
Processing (ANLP), pages 1–7, Doha.

Mukherjee, Arjun and Bing Liu. 2010.
Improving gender classification of blog
authors. In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 207–217, Cambridge, MA.

Myers-Scotton, Carol. 1995. Social
Motivations for Codeswitching: Evidence
from Africa. Oxford: Clarendon.

Myers-Scotton, Carol. 2002. Contact
Linguistics: Bilingual Encounters and
Grammatical Outcomes. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Nerbonne, John. 2009. Data-driven
dialectology. Language and Linguistics
Compass, 3(1):175–198.

Nerbonne, John and Martijn Wieling.
2015. Statistics for aggregate variationist
analyses. In Charles Boberg, John
Nerbonne, and Dominic Watt, editors,

587

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?system=10.1162%2FCOLI_a_00239
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1017%2FS0022226700010306
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1177%2F1461444810365313
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1177%2F1461444810365313
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1111%2Fj.1749-818X.2008.00114.x
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1111%2Fj.1749-818X.2008.00114.x
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1136%2Famiajnl-2013-001898
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1136%2Famiajnl-2013-001898
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0061981


Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

Handbook of Dialectology. Boston:
Wiley.

Nguyen, Dong and A. Seza Doğruöz.
2013. Word level language identification
in online multilingual communication.
In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 857–862, Seattle, WA.

Nguyen, Dong, Rilana Gravel, Dolf
Trieschnigg, and Theo Meder.
2013. “How old do you think I am?"
A study of language and age in Twitter.
In Proceedings of the Seventh International
AAAI Conference on Weblogs and
Social Media, pages 439–448, Boston, MA.

Nguyen, Dong and Carolyn P. Rosé. 2011.
Language use as a reflection of socialization
in online communities. In Proceedings
of the Workshop on Language in Social Media
(LSM 2011), pages 76–85, Portland, OR.

Nguyen, Dong, Noah A. Smith, and
Carolyn P. Rosé. 2011. Author age
prediction from text using linear
regression. In Proceedings of the 5th
ACL-HLT Workshop on Language Technology
for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and
Humanities, pages 115–123, Portland, OR.

Nguyen, Dong, Dolf Trieschnigg, and
Leonie Cornips. 2015. Audience and the
use of minority languages on Twitter. In
Proceedings of the Ninth International
AAAI Conference on Web
and Social Media, pages 666–669, Oxford.

Nguyen, Dong, Dolf Trieschnigg, A. Seza
Doğruöz, Rilana Gravel, Mariët Theune,
Theo Meder, and Franciska de Jong.
2014. Why gender and age prediction
from tweets is hard: Lessons from a
crowdsourcing experiment. In Proceedings
of COLING 2014, the 25th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics:
Technical Papers, pages 1950–1961, Dublin.

Nguyen, Dong, Dolf Trieschnigg, and Theo
Meder. 2014. Tweetgenie: Development,
evaluation, and lessons learned. In
Proceedings of COLING 2014, the 25th
International Conference on Computational
Linguistics: System Demonstrations,
pages 62–66, Dublin.

Nguyen, Viet-An, Jordan Boyd-Graber,
Philip Resnik, Deborah A. Cai, Jennifer E.
Midberry, and Yuanxin Wang. 2014.
Modeling topic control to detect influence
in conversations using nonparametric
topic models. Machine Learning,
95(3):381–421.

Niederhoffer, Kate G. and James W.
Pennebaker. 2002. Linguistic style
matching in social interaction.

Journal of Language and Social Psychology,
21(4):337–360.

Noble, Bill and Raquel Fernández.
2015. Centre stage: How social network
position shapes linguistic coordination.
In Proceedings of the 6th Workshop
on Cognitive Modeling and Computational
Linguistics, pages 29–38, Denver, CO.

Nowson, Scott and Jon Oberlander. 2006.
The identity of bloggers: Openness
and gender in personal weblogs.
In AAAI Spring Symposium:
Computational Approaches to Analyzing
Weblogs, pages 163–167, Palo Alto, CA.

Nowson, Scott, Jon Oberlander, and
Alastair J. Gill. 2005. Weblogs, genres
and individual differences. In Proceedings
of the 27th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, pages 1666–1671, Stresa.

Otterbacher, Jahna. 2010. Inferring
gender of movie reviewers: Exploiting
writing style, content and metadata.
In Proceedings of the 19th ACM International
Conference on Information and Knowledge
Management, pages 369–378, Toronto.

Paolillo, John C. 2001. Language variation on
Internet Relay Chat: A social network
approach. Journal of Sociolinguistics,
5(2):180–213.

Papalexakis, Evangelos E., Dong Nguyen,
and A. Seza Doğruöz. 2014. Predicting
code-switching in multilingual
communication for immigrant
communities. In Proceedings of the First
Workshop on Computational Approaches
to Code Switching, pages 42–50, Doha.

Pavalanathan, Umashanthi and Jacob
Eisenstein. 2015a. Audience-modulated
variation in online social media.
American Speech, 90(2):187–213.

Pavalanathan, Umashanthi and Jacob
Eisenstein. 2015b. Confounds
and consequences in geotagged Twitter
data. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 2138–2148, Lisbon.

Pechenick, Eitan Adam, Christopher M.
Danforth, and Peter Sheridan Dodds.
2015. Characterizing the Google books
corpus: Strong limits to inferences
of socio-cultural and linguistic evolution.
PLoS One, 10(10):1–24.

Peersman, Claudia, Walter Daelemans,
and Leona Van Vaerenbergh. 2011.
Predicting age and gender in online
social networks. In Proceedings
of the 3rd International Workshop on
Search and Mining User-Generated Contents
(SMUC ’11), pages 37–44, Glasgow.

588

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0137041
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1111%2F1467-9481.00147
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1007%2Fs10994-013-5417-9
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1215%2F00031283-3130324
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1177%2F026192702237953


Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

Peirsman, Yves, Dirk Geeraerts, and
Dirk Speelman. 2010. The automatic
identification of lexical variation
between language varieties. Natural
Language Engineering, 16(04):469–491.

Peng, Nanyun, Yiming Wang, and
Mark Dredze. 2014. Learning polylingual
topic models from code-switched
social media documents. In Proceedings
of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2:
Short Papers), pages 674–679, Baltimore,
MA.

Pennacchiotti, Marco and Ana-Maria
Popescu. 2011. A machine learning
approach to Twitter user classification.
In Proceedings of the Fifth International
AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social
Media, pages 281–288, Barcelona.

Pennebaker, James W., Martha E. Francis,
and Roger J. Booth. 2001. Linguistic Inquiry
and Word Count: LIWC 2001. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.

Peterson, Kelly, Matt Hohensee, and
Fei Xia. 2011. Email formality in the
workplace: A case study on the Enron
corpus. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Language in Social Media
(LSM 2011), pages 86–95, Portland, OR.

Pfeffer, Jeffrey and Gerald R. Salancik.
1978. The External Control of
Organizations: A Resource Dependence
Perspective. New York: Harper & Row.

Piergallini, Mario, Seza A. Doğruöz,
Phani Gadde, David Adamson,
and Carolyn P. Rosé. 2014. Modeling
the use of graffiti style features to signal
social relations within a multi-domain
learning paradigm. In Proceedings
of the 14th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 107–115, Gothenburg.

Piotrowski, Michael. 2012. Natural
language processing for historical texts.
Synthesis Lectures on Human Language
Technologies.

Poplack, Shana, David Sankoff, and
Christopher Miller. 1988. The social
correlates and linguistic processes of
lexical borrowing and assimilation.
Linguistics, 26(1):47–104.

Postmes, Tom, Russell Spears, and Martin
Lea. 2000. The formation of group norms
in computer-mediated communication.
Human Communication Research,
26(3):341–371.

Prabhakaran, Vinodkumar, Ashima Arora,
and Owen Rambow. 2014. Staying on
topic: An indicator of power in political

debates. In Proceedings of the 2014
Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
pages 1481–1486, Doha.

Prabhakaran, Vinodkumar, Ajita John,
and Dorée D. Seligmann. 2013. Who
had the upper hand? Ranking participants
of interactions based on their relative
power. In Proceedings of the Sixth
International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing, pages 365–373,
Nagoya.

Prabhakaran, Vinodkumar and Owen
Rambow. 2013. Written dialog and
social power: Manifestations of different
types of power in dialog behavior.
In Proceedings of the Sixth International
Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing, pages 216–224, Nagoya.

Prabhakaran, Vinodkumar, Owen Rambow,
and Mona Diab. 2012a. Predicting
overt display of power in written dialogs.
In Proceedings of the 2012 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, pages 518–522, Montréal.

Prabhakaran, Vinodkumar, Owen Rambow,
and Mona Diab. 2012b. Who’s (really)
the boss? Perception of situational power
in written interactions. In Proceedings
of COLING 2012, pages 2259–2274,
Mumbai.

Prabhakaran, Vinodkumar, Emily E.
Reid, and Owen Rambow. 2014. Gender
and power: How gender and gender
environment affect manifestations of
power. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 1965–1976,
Doha.

Prager, John M. 1999. Linguini: Language
identification for multilingual documents.
In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Hawaii
International Conference on Systems Sciences,
Maui, HI.

Preoţiuc-Pietro, Daniel, Vasileios Lampos,
and Nikolaos Aletras. 2015. An analysis
of the user occupational class through
Twitter content. In Proceedings of the 53rd
Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics and the
7th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 1754–1764, Beijing.

Preoţiuc-Pietro, Daniel, Svitlana Volkova,
Vasileios Lampos, Yoram Bachrach,
and Nikolaos Aletras. 2015. Studying
user income through language, behaviour
and affect in social media. PLoS One, 10(9).

589

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1017%2FS1351324910000161
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1017%2FS1351324910000161
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1515%2Fling.1988.26.1.47
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1111%2Fj.1468-2958.2000.tb00761.x


Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

Prokić, Jelena, Çağrı Çöltekin, and John
Nerbonne. 2012. Detecting shibboleths.
In Proceedings of the EACL 2012 Joint
Workshop of LINGVIS & UNCLH,
pages 72–80, Avignon.

Quercia, Daniele, Jonathan Ellis, Licia Capra,
and Jon Crowcroft. 2011. In the mood
for being influential on Twitter. In
Proceedings of the 3rd IEEE International
Conference on Social Computing,
pages 307–314, Boston, MA.

Rabe-Hesketh, Sophia and Anders Skrondal.
2012. Multilevel and Longitudinal Modeling
Using Stata. Stata Press.

Rabe-Hesketh, Sophia, Anders Skrondal, and
Andrew Pickles. 2004. GLLAMM manual.
U.C. Berkeley Division of Biostatistics
Working Paper Series, Paper 160.

Raghavan, Sindhu, Adriana Kovashka, and
Raymond Mooney. 2010. Authorship
attribution using probabilistic
context-free grammars. In Proceedings
of the ACL 2010 Conference Short Papers,
pages 38–42, Uppsala.

Rangel, Francisco, Paolo Rosso, Irina
Chugur, Martin Potthast, Martin
Trenkmann, Benno Stein, Ben Verhoeven,
and Walter Daelemans. 2014. Overview
of the 2nd author profiling task at PAN
2014. In CLEF 2014 Evaluation Labs and
Workshop—Working Notes Papers, Sheffield.

Rangel, Francisco, Paolo Rosso, Moshe
Koppel, Efstathios Stamatatos, and
Giacomo Inches. 2013. Overview of the
author profiling task at PAN 2013. CLEF
2013 Evaluation Labs and Workshop—
Working Notes Papers, Valencia.
https://www.clef-initiative.eu/
edition/clef2013/working-notes.

Rao, Delip, Michael J. Paul, Clayton Fink,
David Yarowsky, Timothy Oates, and
Glen Coppersmith. 2011. Hierarchical
bayesian models for latent attribute
detection in social media. In Proceedings
of the Fifth International AAAI Conference
on Weblogs and Social Media, pages 598–601,
Barcelona.

Rao, Delip, David Yarowsky, Abhishek
Shreevats, and Manaswi Gupta. 2010.
Classifying latent user attributes in Twitter.
In Proceedings of the 2nd international
workshop on search and mining user-generated
contents (SMUC ’10), pages 37–44, Toronto.

Ribeiro, Branca Telles. 2006. Footing,
positioning, voice. Are we talking about
the same things? In Anna De Fina,
Deborah Schiffrin, and Michael Bamberg,
editors, Discourse and Identity. Cambridge
University Press, pages 48–82.

Richards, Keith. 2006. Language and
Professional Identity: Aspects of Collaborative
Interaction. Palgrave Macmillan.

Romaine, Suzanne. 1995. Bilingualism
(2nd edition). Malden, MA:
Blackwell Publishers.

Rosé, Carolyn P., in press. International
Handbook of the Learning Sciences,
chapter Learning Analytics in the Learning
Sciences. Taylor & Francis.

Rosé, Carolyn P. and Alla Tovares, 2015.
Socializing Intelligence Through Academic
Talk and Dialogue, chapter ‘’What
sociolinguistics and machine learning have
to say to one another about interaction
analysis.” Washington, DC: American
Educational Research Association.

Rosé, Carolyn P., Yi-Chia Wang, Yue Cui,
Jaime Arguello, Karsten Stegmann,
Armin Weinberger, and Frank Fischer.
2008. Analyzing collaborative learning
processes automatically: Exploiting
the advances of computational
linguistics in computer-supported
collaborative learning. International
Journal of Computer-Supported
Collaborative Learning, 3(3):237–271.

Rosenthal, Sara and Kathleen McKeown.
2011. Age prediction in blogs: A study
of style, content, and online behavior
in pre- and post-social media generations.
In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 763–772, Portland, OR.

Sankoff, Gillian, 2006. Encyclopedia of
Language and Linguistics, chapter ‘’Age:
Apparent time and real time.” Amsterdam:
Elsevier.

Sap, Maarten, Gregory Park, Johannes
Eichstaedt, Margaret Kern, David
Stillwell, Michal Kosinski, Lyle Ungar,
and Andrew Hansen Schwartz. 2014.
Developing age and gender predictive
lexica over social media. In Proceedings
of the 2014 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), pages 1146–1151, Doha.

Sarawgi, Ruchita, Kailash Gajulapalli,
and Yejin Choi. 2011. Gender attribution:
Tracing stylometric evidence beyond topic
and genre. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth
Conference on Computational Natural
Language Learning, pages 78–86, Portland,
OR.

Schegloff, Emanuel A. 2007. Sequence
Organization in Interaction: A Primer
in Conversation Analysis, volume 1.
Cambridge University Press.

590

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1007%2Fs11412-007-9034-0
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1007%2Fs11412-007-9034-0
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1007%2Fs11412-007-9034-0


Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

Scherrer, Yves and Owen Rambow.
2010. Word-based dialect identification
with georeferenced rules. In Proceedings
of the 2010 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 1151–1161, Cambridge, MA.

Schler, Jonathan, Moshe Koppel, Shlomo
Argamon, and James W. Pennebaker. 2006.
Effects of age and gender on blogging.
In Proceedings of AAAI Spring Symposium
on Computational Approaches to Analyzing
Weblogs, pages 199–205, Menlo Park, CA.

Schneider, Gerold, James Dowdall, and
Fabio Rinaldi. 2004. A robust and
hybrid deep-linguistic theory applied
to large-scale parsing. In Proceedings
of the 3rd Workshop on Robust Methods
in Analysis of Natural Language Data
(ROMAND 2004), pages 14–23, Geneva.

Schuller, Björn, Stefan Steidl, Anton Batliner,
Felix Burkhardt, Laurence Devillers,
Christian Müller, and Shrikanth
Narayanan. 2010. The INTERSPEECH
2010 paralinguistic challenge. In
INTERSPEECH, pages 2794–2797,
Makuhari.

Schwartz, H. Andrew, Johannes C.
Eichstaedt, Margaret L. Kern, Lukasz
Dziurzynski, Stephanie M. Ramones,
Megha Agrawal, Achal Shah, Michal
Kosinski, David Stillwell, Martin
E. P. Seligman, and Lyle H. Ungar. 2013.
Personality, gender, and age in the
language of social media: The
open-vocabulary approach. PLoS One,
8(9):e73791.

Scissors, Lauren E., Alastair J. Gill, Kathleen
Geraghty, and Darren Gergle. 2009.
In CMC we trust: The role of similarity.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’09), pages 527–536, Boston, MA.

Searle, John R. 1969. Speech Acts: An Essay
in the Philosophy of Language. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Singh, Sameer. 2001. A pilot study on gender
differences in conversational speech
on lexical richness measures. Literary
and Linguistic Computing, 16(3):251–264.

Sloan, Luke, Jeffrey Morgan, Pete Burnap,
and Matthew Williams. 2015. Who tweets?
Deriving the demographic characteristics
of age, occupation and social class from
Twitter user meta-data. PLoS One, 10(3).

Snow, David A. and Leon Anderson. 1987.
Identity work among the homeless: The
verbal construction and avowal of
personal identities. American Journal
of Sociology, 92(6):1336–1371.

Snow, Rion, Brendan O’Connor, Daniel
Jurafsky, and Andrew Y. Ng. 2008. Cheap
and fast—but is it good?: Evaluating
non-expert annotations for natural
language tasks. In Proceedings of the
2008 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing,
pages 254–263, Honolulu, HI.

Soliz, Jordan and Howard Giles. 2014.
Relational and identity processes in
communication: A contextual and
meta-analytical review of Communication
Accommodation Theory. In Elisia L.
Cohen, editor, Communication Yearbook 38,
pages 107–144, Routledge.

Solorio, Thamar, Elizabeth Blair, Suraj
Maharjan, Steven Bethard, Mona Diab,
Mahmoud Ghoneim, Abdelati Hawwari,
Fahad AlGhamdi, Julia Hirschberg, Alison
Chang, and Pascale Fung. 2014. Overview
for the first shared task on language
identification in code-switched data.
In Proceedings of the First Workshop on
Computational Approaches to Code Switching,
pages 62–72, Doha.

Solorio, Thamar and Yang Liu. 2008a.
Learning to predict code-switching
points. In Proceedings of the 2008 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 973–981, Honolulu,
HI.

Solorio, Thamar and Yang Liu. 2008b.
Part-of-speech tagging for English–Spanish
code-switched text. In Proceedings of
the 2008 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing,
pages 1051–1060, Honolulu, HI.

Stamatatos, Efstathios. 2009. A survey of
modern authorship attribution methods.
Journal of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology, 60(3):538–556.

Stoop, Wessel and Antal van den Bosch.
2014. Using idiolects and sociolects
to improve word prediction. In Proceedings
of the 14th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 318–327, Gothenburg.

Strzalkowski, Tomek, Samira Shaikh,
Ting Liu, George Aaron Broadwell,
Jenny Stromer-Galley, Sarah Taylor,
Umit Boz, Veena Ravishankar, and
Xiaoai Ren. 2012. Modeling leadership
and influence in multi-party online
discourse. In Proceedings of COLING 2012,
pages 2535–2552, Mumbai.

Swayamdipta, Swabha and Owen Rambow.
2012. The pursuit of power and its
manifestation in written dialog. In
Proceedings of 2012 IEEE Sixth International

591

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1002%2Fasi.21001
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1002%2Fasi.21001
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1086%2F228668
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1086%2F228668
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0073791
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1093%2Fllc%2F16.3.251
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1093%2Fllc%2F16.3.251


Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 3

Conference on Semantic Computing (ICSC),
pages 22–29, Palermo.

Taboada, Maite and William C. Mann.
2006. Applications of Rhetorical Structure
Theory. Discourse Studies, 8(4):567–588.

Tagliamonte, Sali A. 2006. Analysing
Sociolinguistic Variation. Cambridge
University Press.

Tam, Jenny and Craig H. Martell. 2009.
Age detection in chat. In ICSC ’09.
IEEE International Conference on Semantic
Computing, pages 33–39, Berkeley, CA.

Tannen, Deborah. 1990. You Just Don’t
Understand: Women and Men in
Conversation. Ballantine Books.

Tannen, Deborah. 1993. Framing in
Discourse. Oxford University Press.

Thomason, Sarah G. 2001. Language Contact:
An Introduction. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.

Trieschnigg, Dolf, Djoerd Hiemstra,
Mariët Theune, Franciska Jong, and
Theo Meder. 2012. An exploration
of language identification techniques
for the Dutch folktale database. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Adaptation of
Language Resources and Tools for Processing
Cultural Heritage, pages 47–51, Istanbul.

Trudgill, Peter. 1974. The Social Differentiation
of English in Norwich. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Trudgill, Peter. 2003. The Norfolk Dialect.
Norfolk Origins 7. Poppyland Publishing.

Truong, Khiet P., Gerben J. Westerhof,
Sanne M. A. Lamers, and Franciska
de Jong. 2014. Towards modeling
expressed emotions in oral history
interviews: Using verbal and nonverbal
signals to track personal narratives. Literary
and Linguistic Computing, 29(4):621–636.

Tsaliki, Liza. 2003. Globalization and
hybridity: The construction of Greekness
on the Internet. In Karim Haiderali Karim,
editor, The Media of Diaspora. Routledge.

Van Durme, Benjamin. 2012. Streaming
analysis of discourse participants.
In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and Computational Natural
Language Learning, pages 48–58, Jeju Island.

Volkova, Svitlana, Theresa Wilson, and David
Yarowsky. 2013. Exploring demographic
language variations to improve
multilingual sentiment analysis in social
media. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 1815–1827, Seattle, WA.

Voss, Clare, Stephen Tratz, Jamal Laoudi,
and Douglas Briesch. 2014. Finding

romanized Arabic dialect in
code-mixed tweets. In Proceedings
of the Ninth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC-2014), pages 2249–2253, Reykjavik.

Vyas, Yogarshi, Spandana Gella, Jatin
Sharma, Kalika Bali, and Monojit
Choudhury. 2014. POS tagging of
English–Hindi code-mixed social media
content. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 974–979,
Doha.

Wagner, Suzanne E. 2012. Age grading in
sociolinguistic theory. Language and
Linguistics Compass, 6(6):371–382.

Wang, Yafei, David Reitter, and John Yen.
2014. Linguistic adaptation in
conversation threads: Analyzing
alignment in online health communities.
In Proceedings of the 2014 ACL Workshop
on Cognitive Modeling and Computational
Linguistics, pages 55–62, Baltimore, MD.

Wardhaugh, Ronald. 2011. An Introduction
to Sociolinguistics. Wiley-Blackwell.

Wei, Li. 1998. The ’why’ and ’how’ questions
in the analysis of conversational
codeswitching. In Peter Auer, editor,
Codeswitching in Conversation: Language,
Interaction and Identity, pages 156–176,
London: Routledge.

Weinreich, Uriel. 1953. Languages in contact.
findings and problems. New York, Linguistic
Circle of New York. The Hague: Mouton.

Weinreich, Uriel, William Labov, and
Marvin I. Herzog. 1968. Empirical
foundations for a theory of language
change. In Winfred P. Lehmann and
Yakov Malkiel, editors, Directions for
Historical Linguistics: A Symposium. Austin:
University of Texas Press, pages 95–188.

Wen, Miaomiao, Diyi Yang, and Carolyn P.
Rosé. 2014a. Linguistic reflections of
student engagement in massive open
online courses. In Proceedings of the Eighth
International AAAI Conference on Weblogs
and Social Media, pages 525–534,
Ann Arbor, MI.

Wen, Miaomiao, Diyi Yang, and
Carolyn P. Rosé. 2014b. Sentiment
analysis in MOOC discussion forums:
What does it tell us? In Proceedings of the
7th International Conference on Educational
Data Mining, pages 130–137, London.

West, Robert, Hristo S. Paskov, Jure
Leskovec, and Christopher Potts. 2014.
Exploiting social network structure for
person-to-person sentiment analysis.
Transactions of the Association of

592

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1177%2F1461445606064836
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1002%2Flnc3.343
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1002%2Flnc3.343
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1093%2Fllc%2Ffqu041
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1093%2Fllc%2Ffqu041


Nguyen et al. Computational Sociolinguistics: A Survey

Computational Linguistics – Volume 2,
Issue 1, pages 297–310.

Wieling, Martijn, Jelke Bloem, Kaitlin
Mignella, Mona Timmermeister, and
John Nerbonne. 2014. Measuring foreign
accent strength in English. Language
Dynamics and Change, 4(2):253–269.

Wieling, Martijn and John Nerbonne.
2010. Hierarchical spectral partitioning
of bipartite graphs to cluster dialects
and identify distinguishing features. In
Proceedings of TextGraphs-5 - 2010 Workshop
on Graph-based Methods for Natural
Language Processing, pages 33–41, Uppsala.

Wieling, Martijn and John Nerbonne.
2015. Advances in dialectometry.
Annual Review of Linguistics, 1(1):243–264.

Wiersma, Wybo, John Nerbonne, and
Timo Lauttamus. 2010. Automatically
extracting typical syntactic differences
from corpora. Literary and Linguistic
Computing, 26(1):107–124.

Wing, Benjamin P. and Jason Baldridge. 2011.
Simple supervised document geolocation
with geodesic grids. In Proceedings of
the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, pages 955–964, Portland, OR.

Wintner, Shuly. 2002. Formal language
theory for natural language processing.
In Proceedings of the ACL-02 Workshop on
Effective Tools and Methodologies for
Teaching Natural Language Processing and
Computational Linguistics, pages 71–76,
Philadelphia, PA.

Yamaguchi, Hiroshi and Kumiko
Tanaka-Ishii. 2012. Text segmentation by
language using minimum description
length. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 969–978, Jeju Island.

Yan, Xiang and Ling Yan. 2006. Gender
classification of weblog authors. In
AAAI Spring Symposium: Computational

Approaches to Analyzing Weblogs,
pages 228–230, Palo Alto, CA.

Yang, Diyi, Miaomiao Wen, and Carolyn P.
Rosé. 2015. Weakly supervised role
identification in teamwork interactions.
In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 7th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1671–1680,
Beijing.

Zaidan, Omar F. and Chris Callison-Burch.
2013. Arabic dialect identification.
Computational Linguistics, 40(1):171–202.

Zamal, Faiyaz Al, Wendy Liu, and Derek
Ruths. 2012. Homophily and latent
attribute inference: Inferring latent
attributes of Twitter users from neighbors.
In Proceedings of the Sixth International
AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social
Media, pages 387–390, Dublin.

Zampieri, Marcos, Liling Tan, Nikola
Ljubešić, and Jörg Tiedemann. 2014.
A report on the DSL shared task 2014.
In Proceedings of the First Workshop on
Applying NLP Tools to Similar Languages,
Varieties and Dialects, pages 58–67,
Dublin.

Zampieri, Marcos, Liling Tan, Nikola
Ljubešić, Jörg Tiedemann, and Preslav
Nakov. 2015. Overview of the DSL
shared task 2015. In Proceedings of
the Joint Workshop on Language
Technology for Closely Related Languages,
Varieties and Dialects, pages 1–9, Hissar.

Zhang, Jian, Zoubin Ghahramani,
and Yiming Yang. 2008. Flexible
latent variable models for multi-task
learning. Machine Learning, 73(3):221–242.

Zijlstra, Hanna, Henriët van Middendorp,
Tanja van Meerveld, and Rinie Geenen.
2005. Validiteit van de Nederlandse
versie van de Linguistic Inquiry
and Word Count (LIWC). Netherlands
Journal of Psychology, 60(3):55–63.

593

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?system=10.1162%2FCOLI_a_00169
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1146%2Fannurev-linguist-030514-124930
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1093%2Fllc%2Ffqq017
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1093%2Fllc%2Ffqq017
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1007%2Fs10994-008-5050-1
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1007%2FBF03062342
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1007%2FBF03062342
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1163%2F22105832-00402001
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1163%2F22105832-00402001















<<
  /ASCII85EncodePages false
  /AllowTransparency false
  /AutoPositionEPSFiles true
  /AutoRotatePages /All
  /Binding /Left
  /CalGrayProfile (Dot Gain 20%)
  /CalRGBProfile (sRGB IEC61966-2.1)
  /CalCMYKProfile (U.S. Web Coated \050SWOP\051 v2)
  /sRGBProfile (sRGB IEC61966-2.1)
  /CannotEmbedFontPolicy /Warning
  /CompatibilityLevel 1.4
  /CompressObjects /Tags
  /CompressPages true
  /ConvertImagesToIndexed true
  /PassThroughJPEGImages true
  /CreateJDFFile false
  /CreateJobTicket false
  /DefaultRenderingIntent /Default
  /DetectBlends true
  /DetectCurves 0.0000
  /ColorConversionStrategy /LeaveColorUnchanged
  /DoThumbnails false
  /EmbedAllFonts true
  /EmbedOpenType false
  /ParseICCProfilesInComments true
  /EmbedJobOptions true
  /DSCReportingLevel 0
  /EmitDSCWarnings false
  /EndPage -1
  /ImageMemory 1048576
  /LockDistillerParams false
  /MaxSubsetPct 100
  /Optimize true
  /OPM 1
  /ParseDSCComments true
  /ParseDSCCommentsForDocInfo true
  /PreserveCopyPage true
  /PreserveDICMYKValues true
  /PreserveEPSInfo true
  /PreserveFlatness true
  /PreserveHalftoneInfo false
  /PreserveOPIComments false
  /PreserveOverprintSettings true
  /StartPage 1
  /SubsetFonts true
  /TransferFunctionInfo /Apply
  /UCRandBGInfo /Preserve
  /UsePrologue false
  /ColorSettingsFile ()
  /AlwaysEmbed [ true
  ]
  /NeverEmbed [ true
  ]
  /AntiAliasColorImages false
  /CropColorImages true
  /ColorImageMinResolution 300
  /ColorImageMinResolutionPolicy /OK
  /DownsampleColorImages true
  /ColorImageDownsampleType /Bicubic
  /ColorImageResolution 300
  /ColorImageDepth -1
  /ColorImageMinDownsampleDepth 1
  /ColorImageDownsampleThreshold 1.50000
  /EncodeColorImages true
  /ColorImageFilter /DCTEncode
  /AutoFilterColorImages true
  /ColorImageAutoFilterStrategy /JPEG
  /ColorACSImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.15
    /HSamples [1 1 1 1] /VSamples [1 1 1 1]
  >>
  /ColorImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.15
    /HSamples [1 1 1 1] /VSamples [1 1 1 1]
  >>
  /JPEG2000ColorACSImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 30
  >>
  /JPEG2000ColorImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 30
  >>
  /AntiAliasGrayImages false
  /CropGrayImages true
  /GrayImageMinResolution 300
  /GrayImageMinResolutionPolicy /OK
  /DownsampleGrayImages true
  /GrayImageDownsampleType /Bicubic
  /GrayImageResolution 300
  /GrayImageDepth -1
  /GrayImageMinDownsampleDepth 2
  /GrayImageDownsampleThreshold 1.50000
  /EncodeGrayImages true
  /GrayImageFilter /DCTEncode
  /AutoFilterGrayImages true
  /GrayImageAutoFilterStrategy /JPEG
  /GrayACSImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.15
    /HSamples [1 1 1 1] /VSamples [1 1 1 1]
  >>
  /GrayImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.15
    /HSamples [1 1 1 1] /VSamples [1 1 1 1]
  >>
  /JPEG2000GrayACSImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 30
  >>
  /JPEG2000GrayImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 30
  >>
  /AntiAliasMonoImages false
  /CropMonoImages true
  /MonoImageMinResolution 1200
  /MonoImageMinResolutionPolicy /OK
  /DownsampleMonoImages true
  /MonoImageDownsampleType /Bicubic
  /MonoImageResolution 1200
  /MonoImageDepth -1
  /MonoImageDownsampleThreshold 1.50000
  /EncodeMonoImages true
  /MonoImageFilter /CCITTFaxEncode
  /MonoImageDict <<
    /K -1
  >>
  /AllowPSXObjects false
  /CheckCompliance [
    /None
  ]
  /PDFX1aCheck false
  /PDFX3Check false
  /PDFXCompliantPDFOnly false
  /PDFXNoTrimBoxError true
  /PDFXTrimBoxToMediaBoxOffset [
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
  ]
  /PDFXSetBleedBoxToMediaBox true
  /PDFXBleedBoxToTrimBoxOffset [
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
  ]
  /PDFXOutputIntentProfile ()
  /PDFXOutputConditionIdentifier ()
  /PDFXOutputCondition ()
  /PDFXRegistryName ()
  /PDFXTrapped /False

  /Description <<
    /CHS <FEFF4f7f75288fd94e9b8bbe5b9a521b5efa7684002000500044004600206587686353ef901a8fc7684c976262535370673a548c002000700072006f006f00660065007200208fdb884c9ad88d2891cf62535370300260a853ef4ee54f7f75280020004100630072006f0062006100740020548c002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e003000204ee553ca66f49ad87248672c676562535f00521b5efa768400200050004400460020658768633002>
    /CHT <FEFF4f7f752890194e9b8a2d7f6e5efa7acb7684002000410064006f006200650020005000440046002065874ef653ef5728684c9762537088686a5f548c002000700072006f006f00660065007200204e0a73725f979ad854c18cea7684521753706548679c300260a853ef4ee54f7f75280020004100630072006f0062006100740020548c002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e003000204ee553ca66f49ad87248672c4f86958b555f5df25efa7acb76840020005000440046002065874ef63002>
    /DAN <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>
    /DEU <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>
    /ESP <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>
    /FRA <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>
    /ITA <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>
    /JPN <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>
    /KOR <FEFFc7740020c124c815c7440020c0acc6a9d558c5ec0020b370c2a4d06cd0d10020d504b9b0d1300020bc0f0020ad50c815ae30c5d0c11c0020ace0d488c9c8b85c0020c778c1c4d560002000410064006f0062006500200050004400460020bb38c11cb97c0020c791c131d569b2c8b2e4002e0020c774b807ac8c0020c791c131b41c00200050004400460020bb38c11cb2940020004100630072006f0062006100740020bc0f002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e00300020c774c0c1c5d0c11c0020c5f40020c2180020c788c2b5b2c8b2e4002e>
    /NLD (Gebruik deze instellingen om Adobe PDF-documenten te maken voor kwaliteitsafdrukken op desktopprinters en proofers. De gemaakte PDF-documenten kunnen worden geopend met Acrobat en Adobe Reader 5.0 en hoger.)
    /NOR <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>
    /PTB <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>
    /SUO <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>
    /SVE <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>
    /ENU (Use these settings to create Adobe PDF documents for quality printing on desktop printers and proofers.  Created PDF documents can be opened with Acrobat and Adobe Reader 5.0 and later.)
  >>
  /Namespace [
    (Adobe)
    (Common)
    (1.0)
  ]
  /OtherNamespaces [
    <<
      /AsReaderSpreads false
      /CropImagesToFrames true
      /ErrorControl /WarnAndContinue
      /FlattenerIgnoreSpreadOverrides false
      /IncludeGuidesGrids false
      /IncludeNonPrinting false
      /IncludeSlug false
      /Namespace [
        (Adobe)
        (InDesign)
        (4.0)
      ]
      /OmitPlacedBitmaps false
      /OmitPlacedEPS false
      /OmitPlacedPDF false
      /SimulateOverprint /Legacy
    >>
    <<
      /AddBleedMarks false
      /AddColorBars false
      /AddCropMarks false
      /AddPageInfo false
      /AddRegMarks false
      /ConvertColors /NoConversion
      /DestinationProfileName ()
      /DestinationProfileSelector /NA
      /Downsample16BitImages true
      /FlattenerPreset <<
        /PresetSelector /MediumResolution
      >>
      /FormElements false
      /GenerateStructure true
      /IncludeBookmarks false
      /IncludeHyperlinks false
      /IncludeInteractive false
      /IncludeLayers false
      /IncludeProfiles true
      /MultimediaHandling /UseObjectSettings
      /Namespace [
        (Adobe)
        (CreativeSuite)
        (2.0)
      ]
      /PDFXOutputIntentProfileSelector /NA
      /PreserveEditing true
      /UntaggedCMYKHandling /LeaveUntagged
      /UntaggedRGBHandling /LeaveUntagged
      /UseDocumentBleed false
    >>
  ]
>> setdistillerparams
<<
  /HWResolution [2400 2400]
  /PageSize [612.000 792.000]
>> setpagedevice

