







































Formal Distributional Semantics: Introduction to the Special Issue


Formal Distributional Semantics:
Introduction to the Special Issue

Gemma Boleda∗
University of Trento

Aurélie Herbelot∗∗
University of Trento

Formal Semantics and Distributional Semantics are two very influential semantic frame-
works in Computational Linguistics. Formal Semantics is based on a symbolic tradition and
centered around the inferential properties of language. Distributional Semantics is statistical
and data-driven, and focuses on aspects of meaning related to descriptive content. The two
frameworks are complementary in their strengths, and this has motivated interest in com-
bining them into an overarching semantic framework: a “Formal Distributional Semantics.”
Given the fundamentally different natures of the two paradigms, however, building an integra-
tive framework poses significant theoretical and engineering challenges. The present issue of
Computational Linguistics advances the state of the art in Formal Distributional Semantics;
this introductory article explains the motivation behind it and summarizes the contributions of
previous work on the topic, providing the necessary background for the articles that follow.

1. Introduction

The 1960s and 1970s saw pioneering work in formal and computational semantics: On
the formal side, Montague was writing his seminal work on the treatment of quan-
tifiers (Montague 1974) and on the computational side, Spärck-Jones and colleagues
were developing vector-based representations of the lexicon (Spärck-Jones 1967). At the
same time, Cognitive Science and Artificial Intelligence were theorizing in which ways
natural language understanding—seen as a broad, all-encompassing task—might be
modeled and tested (Schank 1972; Winograd 1972). The experiments performed back
then, however, suffered from a lack of resources (both in terms of data and computing
capabilities) and thus only gave limited support to the developed theories.

Fifty years later, Formal Semantics (FS) and vectorial models of meaning—
commonly referred to as “Distributional Semantics” (DS)—have made substantial
progress. Large machine-readable corpora are available and computing power has
grown exponentially. These developments, together with the advent of improved

∗ CIMeC (Università di Trento), Palazzo Fedrigotti, C.so Bettini 31, 38068 Rovereto, Italy.
E-mail: gemma.boleda@unitn.it.

∗∗ CIMeC (Università di Trento), Palazzo Fedrigotti, C.so Bettini 31, 38068 Rovereto, Italy.
E-mail: aurelie.herbelot@unitn.it.

Submission received: 20 June 2016; revised version received: 10 September 2016; accepted for publication:
15 September 2016.

doi:10.1162/COLI a 00261

© 2017 Association for Computational Linguistics



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 4

machine learning techniques (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015), have brought back the
idea that Computational Linguistics should work on general language understanding,
that is, on theories and models that account both for language use as a whole, and for
the associated conceptual apparatus (Collobert and Weston 2008; Mikolov, Joulin, and
Baroni 2015; Goodman, Tenenbaum, and Gerstenberg 2015; Erk 2016).

This special issue looks at this goal from the point of view of developing a se-
mantic framework that, ideally, would encompass a wide range of the phenomena
we might subsume under the term “understanding.” This framework, Formal Dis-
tributional Semantics (FDS), takes up the challenge from a particular angle, which
involves integrating Formal Semantics and Distributional Semantics in a theoretically
and computationally sound fashion. To show why the integration is desirable, and,
more generally speaking, what we mean by general understanding, let us consider the
following discourse:

(1) The new postdoc doesn’t work for Kim: she writes papers on semantics. And...
uh... on those neural nets that have loops.

Processing the meaning of those sentences requires a number of complex linguistic
abilities. Hearers must be able to retrieve the descriptive content of words such as
postdoc or write (i.e., have knowledge of the properties of the involved individuals and
events). They must also correctly process function words and structural markers, such
as the, and, and bare singular/plural constructions to understand which entities are
involved in the discourse: (a) a unique postdoc, (b) a person named Kim, (c) a (probably
relatively small) number of entities that are papers, and (d) abstract concepts referred
to generically (semantics, neural nets). They must carry out some form of composition
over the constituents of each sentence, for example, shifting the meanings of write
and paper towards ‘authoring’ and ‘scientific article.’ Finally, they must be prepared
to perform a range of inferences, for instance: the new postdoc is knowledgeable about
semantics and what is probably Recurrent Neural Networks; she cannot be working
for Kim, who is a syntactician, but she perhaps works for Sandy, who does Machine
Learning.

To this day, no single semantic framework has been proposed that would naturally
cater to all of these phenomena. Instead, Formal and Distributional Semantics have
focused on—and been extremely successful in—modeling particular aspects of mean-
ing. Formal Semantics provides an account of the inferential properties of language
and of compositionality based on the formalization of the relations between the
distinct entities and events referred to in a linguistic expression (Montague 1974;
Partee 2008). The various strands of FS also offer philosophically grounded theo-
ries of meaning. However, the framework struggles with descriptive content, despite
the large amount of work done on lexical semantics and formal ontology (Dowty
1991; Pustejovsky 1995; Pinkal 1995; Guarino, Pribbenow, and Vieu 1996; Kennedy
and McNally 2005; Roßdeutscher and Kamp 2010; Asher 2011, among others).
This comes from the fact that, being focused on a particular type of logical en-
tailment, FS naturally limits the type of phenomena that it covers, especially at
the lexical level. This, in turn, affects its psychological plausibility. Distributional Se-
mantics, on the other hand, has made good progress in modeling the descriptive
content of linguistic expressions in a cognitively plausible way (Lund, Burgess, and
Atchley 1995; Landauer and Dumais 1997), but faces serious difficulties with many
of the phenomena that Formal Semantics excels at, such as quantification and logical
inference.

620



Boleda and Herbelot Formal Distributional Semantics

Because of the complementary strengths of the two approaches, it has been sug-
gested that much could be gained by developing an overarching framework (Coecke,
Sadrzadeh, and Clark 2011; Beltagy et al. 2013; Erk 2013; Garrette, Erk, and Mooney
2014; Grefenstette 2013; Lewis and Steedman 2013; Baroni, Bernardi, and Zamparelli
2015). A Formal Distributional Semantics thus holds the promise of developing a more
comprehensive model of meaning. However, given the fundamentally different natures
of FS and DS, building an integrative framework poses theoretical and engineering
challenges. This introductory article provides the necessary background to understand
those challenges and to situate the articles that follow in the broader research context.

2. Formal Semantics

Formal Semantics is a broad term that covers a range of approaches to the study of
meaning, from model-theoretic (Montague 1974; Partee 2008) to proof-theoretic seman-
tics (Gentzen 1935). Although a comprehensive overview of those different strands is
beyond the scope of this introduction, we will present here the various formal concepts
that have been discussed as being desirable in the FDS context.

Formal Semantics is so-called because it has adopted some of the tools standardly
used to describe formal languages: Notably, Montague proposed a way to express
semantic composition with respect to a model using intensional logic (Montague 1974).
Relying on a well-honed logical apparatus, FS has developed prominent models of
many linguistic phenomena, from quantification to modality (see Dowty, Wall, and
Peters 1981 and Cann 1993 for overviews). It caters to ontological matters (what there is
in the world), reference to entities (how we talk about things), meaning at the higher
constituent level (composition), interpretation at the sentential level (e.g., by giving
propositions a truth value), and—crucially—sophisticated accounts of the logical in-
ferences that can be drawn from a particular sentence.

One intuitive way to describe the world in a logic is via a model, usually provided
in terms of sets (Dowty, Wall, and Peters 1981). For instance, a world with three postdocs
will contain a set of three entities sharing the property of being a postdoc. This set
may be a subset of the larger set of humans. Generally, models are provided for mini-
worlds corresponding to a particular situation or “state-of-affairs,” as it would clearly
be impractical to describe the world in its entirety, even with a limited vocabulary.

With a model at our disposal, we must explain how words come to relate to its
elements. The two notions of extension and intension are key to this explanation. The
extension, or denotation, of a linguistic expression are the entities it refers to in the
model. For instance, the extension of postdoc is the set of all postdocs in the model
under consideration. This simple correspondence is complicated by the fact that there
is not a straightforward one-to-one relation between words of a language and sets of
a model. Some expressions may refer to the same entity but have different semantic
content. For instance, although the new postdoc and the author of the neural net paper may
refer to the same entity in a particular universe of discourse, they encapsulate different
properties (Frege 1892). Further, knowledge of the properties of a named entity does not
imply knowledge of its extension, and vice versa (Jones 1911): It is possible to know that
someone wrote a particular paper about neural networks and not be able to recognize
them at a conference. The logical notion of intension contributes to solving this issue by
providing a function mapping possible worlds to extensions. The availability of such
a function allows us to posit worlds where two linguistic expressions have the same
extension, and others where they do not, clearly separating extensions from linguistic
expressions.

621



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 4

Beyond providing reference, natural languages are compositional. The meaning
of a complex expression is derivable from the meaning of its parts in a systematic
and productive way. A compositional formal semantics framework provides semantic
representations of linguistic expressions in a logic, and rules for combining them. So
for any expression, it is possible to identify a number of potentially distinct individuals
(or sets thereof), and the relationships between them. For instance, the sentence The new
postdoc has written several articles can be transformed (simplifying somewhat) into the
following logical form:

(2) ∃x, y[new(postdoc(x)) ∧ article∗(y) ∧ write(x, y)]

showing that for this state of affairs, the extension of the relevant subsets of postdocs
and articles (x and y; the ∗ sign is used to indicate a plurality) are linked through a
writing relation.

A complete account of compositionality relies heavily on being able to interpret
function words in the sentence. FS gives a sophisticated formalization of quantifiers
(∃ in our example) that lets us select subsets of entities and assign them properties:
For example, some entities in the set of articles, denoted by the variable y, are written
by x. FS, in virtue of having access to a detailed model of a world, has generally been
very successful in formalizing the meaning of logical operators, particularly quantifiers
(including matters of plurality and genericity), negation, modals, and their application
to entities and events.

Beyond its descriptive power, FS also has tools to interpret the meaning of words and
sentences with respect to a particular world. In truth-theoretic semantics, the meaning
of a sentence is a function from possible worlds to truth values. Obtaining the truth
value of a proposition with respect to a given world relies on the notion of satisfaction (a
predicate can be truthfully applied to a term if the corresponding property in a world
applies to the referent of the term): In Tarski’s words, the proposition snow is white is true
if snow is white (Tarski 1944). In contrast to truth-theoretic approaches, probabilistic
logic approaches assume that a speaker assigns a probability distribution to a set of
possible worlds (Nilsson 1994; Pinkal 1995; van Benthem, Gerbrandy, and Kooi 2009;
van Eijck and Lappin 2012).

Being able to give an interpretation to a sentence with respect to either truth
or speaker belief is an essential part of explaining the implicit aspects of meaning,
in particular inference. Consider the following example. If the set of postdocs is
in the set of human beings, then the sentence a postdoc is writing, if true, will en-
tail the truth of the sentence a human is writing. Speakers of a language routinely
infer many facts from the explicit information that is given to them: This ability
is in fact crucial to achieving communication efficiency. By logically relating parts
of language to parts of a model, model theory ensures that inference is properly
subsumed by the theory: If the set of postdocs is fully included in the set of hu-
mans, it follows from the definition of extension that we can refer to a set of post-
docs as “humans.” In practice, though, inference in model-theoretic semantics is
intractable, as it often relies on a full search over the model. This is where proof
theory helps, by providing classes of inference that are algorithmically decidable. For
instance, whereas it is necessary to search through an entire model to find out what
it knows about the concept postdoc, proof theory has this information readily stored
in, for instance, a type (e.g., a postdoc may be cast as an individual entity which is
a human, holds a doctorate, etc.). This decomposition of content words into formal

622



Boleda and Herbelot Formal Distributional Semantics

type representations allows for a range of functions to be directly applied to those
types.

However, formal approaches fail to represent content words in all their richness
(and by extension, the kind of inferences that can be made over lexical information). A
formal ontology may tell us that the set of postdocs is fully included in the set of humans
(model theory), or that the type postdoc encapsulates a logical relation to the type human
in its definition (proof theory), but this falls short of giving us a full representation of
the concept. For instance, imagine formalizing, in such a system, the distinction between
near-synonyms such as man/gentleman/chap/lad/guy/dude/bloke (Edmonds and Hirst 2002;
Boleda and Erk 2015). Although all these words refer to male humans, they are clearly
not equivalent: For instance, man is a general, “neutral” word whereas chap, lad, and
others have an informal connotation as well as links to particular varieties of English
(e.g., British vs. American). This is not the type of information that can naturally be
represented in either a model- or proof-theoretic structure.

But a more fundamental problem is that, by being a logical system geared towards
explaining a particular type of inference, FS naturally limits what it encodes of human
linguistic experience. For instance, analogical reasoning is outside of its remit, despite it
being a core feature of the human predictive apparatus. Knowing a complex attribute of
postdoc (e.g., that a postdoc is more likely to answer an e-mail at midnight on a Sunday
than 8 am on a Monday) can warrant the belief that third-year Ph.D. students work on
Sunday evenings. This belief does not derive from a strict operation over truth values,
but is still a reasonable abductive inference to make.

In relation to this issue, it should also be clear that, at least in its simplest incar-
nation, model theory lacks cognitive plausibility: It is doubtful that speakers hold a
detailed, permanent model of the world “in their head.” It is similarly doubtful that they
all hold the same model of the world (see Labov [1978] on how two individuals might
disagree on the extension of cup vs. mug; or Herbelot and Vecchi [2016] on quantifica-
tional disagreements). Still, people are able to talk to each other about a wide variety
of topics, including some which they are not fully familiar with. In order to explain
this, we must account for the way humans deal with partial or vague knowledge,
inconsistencies, and uncertainties, and for the way that, in the first place, they acquire
their semantic knowledge. Although some progress has been done on the formalization
side—for instance, with tools such as supervaluation (Fine 1975), update semantics
(Veltman 1996), and probabilistic models (Nilsson 1994)—much work remains to be
done.

3. Distributional Semantics

Distributional Semantics (Turney and Pantel 2010; Clark 2012; Erk 2012) has a radically
different view of language, based on the hypothesis that the meaning of a linguistic
expression can be induced from the contexts in which it is used (Harris 1954; Firth 1957),
because related expressions, such as postdoc and student, are used in similar contexts
(a poor , the struggled through the deadline). In contrast with Formal Semantics, this
provides an operational learning procedure for semantic representations that has been
profitably used in computational semantics, and more broadly in Artificial Intelligence
(Mikolov, Yih, and Zweig 2013, for instance) and Cognitive Science (Lund, Burgess, and
Atchley 1995; Landauer and Dumais 1997, and subsequent work). The two key points
that underlie the success of Distributional Semantics are (1) the fact that DS is able to
acquire semantic representations directly from natural language data, and (2) the fact
that those representations suit the properties of lexical or conceptual aspects of meaning,

623



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 4

thus accounting well for descriptive content both at the word level and in composition
(as we will see next). Both aspects strengthen its cognitive plausibility.

In Distributional Semantics, the meaning representation for a given linguistic ex-
pression is a function of the contexts in which it occurs. Context can be defined in
various ways; the most usual one is the linguistic environment in which a word appears
(typically, simply the words surrounding the target word, but some approaches use
more sophisticated linguistic representations encoding, e.g., syntactic relations; Padó
and Lapata [2007]). Figure 1(a) shows an example. Recently, researchers have started ex-
ploring other modalities, using, for instance, visual and auditory information extracted
from images and sound files (Feng and Lapata 2010; Bruni et al. 2012; Roller and Schulte
Im Walde 2013; Kiela and Clark 2015; Lopopolo and van Miltenburg 2015).

Distributional representations are vectors (Figure 1(c)) or more complex algebraic
objects such as matrices and tensors, where numerical values are abstractions on the
contexts of use obtained from large amounts of natural language data (large corpora,
image data sets, and so forth). The figure only shows values for two dimensions, but
standard distributional representations range from a few dozen to hundreds of thou-
sands of dimensions (cf. the dots in the figure). The semantic information is distributed
across all the dimensions of the vector, and it is encoded in the form of continuous
values, which allows for very rich and nuanced information to be expressed (Landauer
and Dumais 1997; Baroni and Lenci 2010).

One of the key strengths of Distributional Semantics is its use of well-defined
algebraic techniques to manipulate semantic representations, which yield useful infor-
mation about the semantics of the involved expressions. For instance, the collection of
words in a lexicon forms a vector space or semantic space, in which semantic relations can
be modeled as geometric relations: In a typical semantic space, postdoc is near student,
and far from less related words such as wealth, as visualized in Figure 2. The words
(represented with two dimensions dim1 and dim2; see Figure 2, left) can be plotted as
vectors from the origin to their coordinates in the dimensions (Figure 2, right). The
visually clear vector relationships can be quantified with standard measures such as
cosine similarity, which ranges (for positive-valued vectors) between 0 and 1: The cosine
similarity between postdoc and student in our example is 0.99, and that of postdoc and
wealth is 0.37. The same techniques used for two dimensions work for any number
of dimensions, and thus we can interpret a cosine of 0.99 for two 300-dimensional
vectors as signalling that the vectors have very similar values along almost all the
dimensions. Also note that distributional representations are naturally graded: Two
vectors can be more or less similar, or similar in certain dimensions but not others. This

The postdoc shook her head.
Any grad student or postdoc he’d have would be a
clonal copy of himself.
That tattoo is actually a custom-made cartoon gen-
erated by the postdoc who led this work.
During that postdoc, I didn’t publish anything.

=⇒ 0.43679 1.93841 . . .

(a) (b) (c)

Figure 1
Distributional Semantics: The linguistic contexts in which an expression appears, for example,
the words in the postdoc sentences in (a), are mapped to an algebraic representation (see the
vector in (c)) through a function, represented by the arrow in (b). The resulting representations
(in the example, the vector for postdoc) are thus abstractions over contexts of use. Examples
adapted from the COCA corpus.

624



Boleda and Herbelot Formal Distributional Semantics

dim1 dim2
postdoc 0.43679 1.93841
student 0.71038 1.76058
wealth 1.77337 0.00012

0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5

0.
0

0.
5

1.
0

1.
5

2.
0

2.
5

dim1
di

m
2

student (0.71038,1.76058)

wealth (1.77337,0.00012)

postdoc (0.43679,1.93841)

Figure 2
Semantic distance as geometric distance: A toy lexicon (left) and its representation in semantic
space (right). The distance (see arcs) between the vectors for postdoc and student is smaller than
the distance between the vectors for postdoc and wealth. The converse is true for similarity as
opposed to distance.

is in accordance with what is known about conceptual knowledge and its interaction
with language (Murphy 2004).

How are distributional representations obtained? There are in fact many different
versions of the function that maps contexts into distributional representations (repre-
sented as an arrow in Figure 1(b)). Traditional distributional models are count-based
(Baroni, Dinu, and Kruszewski 2014): They are statistics over the observed contexts of
use, corresponding for instance to how many times words occur with other words (like
head, student, researcher, etc.) in a given sentence.1 More recent neural network–based
models involve predicting the contexts instead (Collobert and Weston 2008; Socher et al.
2012; Mikolov, Yih, and Zweig 2013). In this type of approach, semantic representations
are a by-product of solving a linguistic prediction task. Tasks that are general enough
lead to general-purpose semantic representations; for instance, Mikolov, Yih, and Zweig
(2013) used language modeling, the task of predicting words in a sentence (e.g., After
graduating, Barbara kept working in the same institute, this time as a ). In a predictive set-
up, word vectors (called embeddings in the neural network literature) are typically
initialized randomly, and iteratively refined as the model goes through the data and
improves its predictions. Because similar words appear in similar contexts, they end
up with similar embeddings; those are essentially part of the internal representation
of the model for the prediction of a particular word. Although predictive models can
outperform count models by a large margin (Baroni, Dinu, and Kruszewski 2014), those
improvements can be replicated with finely tuned count models (Levy, Goldberg, and
Dagan 2015).

Distributional models have been shown to reliably correlate with human judgments
on semantic similarity, as well as a broad range of other linguistic and psycholinguistic
phenomena (Lund, Burgess, and Atchley 1995; Landauer and Dumais 1997; Baroni
and Lenci 2010; Erk, Padó, and Padó 2010). For instance, Baroni and Lenci (2010) ex-
plore synonymy (puma–cougar), noun categorization (car IS-A vehicle; banana IS-A fruit),

1 Transformations are typically applied to counts; see Turney and Pantel (2010).

625



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 4

selectional preference (eat topinambur vs. * eat sympathy), analogy (mason is to stone like
carpenter is to wood), and relation classification (exam-anxiety: CAUSE-EFFECT), among
others. Also, it has been shown that, at least at the coarse-grained level, distributional
representations can model brain activation (Mitchell et al. 2008a). This success is par-
tially explained by the fact that vector values correspond to how people use language,
in the sense that they are abstractions over context of use.

Table 1 illustrates the kinds of meaning nuances that are captured in distributional
models, showing how they reflect the semantics of some of the near-synonyms dis-
cussed in Section 2. The table shows the nearest neighbors of (or, words that are closest
to) man/chap/lad/dude/guy in the distributional model of Baroni, Dinu, and Kruszewski
(2014). The representations clearly capture the fact that man is a more general, neutral
word whereas the others are more informal, as well as other aspects of their semantics,
such as the fact that lad is usually used for younger people.

In recent years, distributional models have been extended to handle the semantic
composition of words into phrases and longer constituents (Baroni and Zamparelli 2010;
Mitchell and Lapata 2010; Socher et al. 2012), building on work that the Cognitive Science
community had started earlier on (Foltz 1996; Kintsch 2001, among others). Although
these models still do not account for the full range of composition phenomena that have
been examined in Formal Semantics, they do encode relevant semantic information, as
shown by their success in demanding semantic tasks such as predicting sentence simi-
larity (Marelli et al. 2014). Compositional Distributional Semantics allows us to model
semantic phenomena that are very challenging for Formal Semantics and more generally
symbolic approaches, especially concerning content words. Consider polysemy: In the
first three sentences in Figure 1(a), postdoc refers to human beings, whereas in the fourth
it refers to an event. Composing postdoc with an adjective such as tall will highlight
the human-related information in the noun vector, bringing it closer to person, whereas
composing it with long will highlight its eventive dimensions, bringing it closer to
time (Baroni and Zamparelli 2010, Boleda et al. 2013 as well as Asher et al. and Weir
et al., this issue); crucially, in both cases, the information relating to research activities
will be preserved. Note that in this way DS can account for polysemy without sense
enumeration (Kilgarriff 1992; Pustejovsky 1995).

For all its successes at handling lexical semantics and composition of content words,
however, DS has a hard time accounting for the semantic contribution of function
words (despite efforts such as those in Grefenstette [2013], Hermann, Grefenstette,
and Blunsom [2013], and Herbelot and Vecchi [2015]). The problem is that the kind
of fuzzy, similarity-based representation that DS provides is very good at capturing
conceptual or generic knowledge (postdocs do research, are people, are not likely to

Table 1
Near-synonyms in semantic space: The words closest to man, chap, lad, dude, and guy in the
distributional model of Baroni, Dinu, and Kruszewski (2014), based on the UKWaC. Taken from
Baroni (2016).

man chap lad dude guy
woman bloke boy freakin’ bloke
gentleman guy bloke woah chap
gray-haired lad scouser dorky doofus
boy fella lass dumbass dude
person man youngster stoopid fella

626



Boleda and Herbelot Formal Distributional Semantics

be wealthy, and so on), but not at capturing episodic or referential information, such as
whether there are one or two postdocs in a given situation. This information is of course
crucial for humans—and for computational linguistic tasks. Applying distributional
models to entailment tasks such as Recognizing Textual Entailment, for instance, can
increase coverage, but it can lower precision (Beltagy et al. 2013). Entailment decisions
require predicting whether an expression applies to the same referent or not, and these
systems make trivial mistakes, such as deciding that tall postdoc and short postdoc, being
distributionally similar, should co-refer.

Given the respective strengths and weaknesses of FS and DS, a natural next step is
to work towards their integration. The next section describes the state of the research in
this area.

4. Formal Distributional Semantics

The task of integrating formal and distributional approaches into a new framework,
Formal Distributional Semantics (FDS), can be approached in various ways. Two major
strands have emerged in the literature, which differ in what they regard as their basic
meaning representation. One can be seen as Formal Semantics supplemented by rich
lexical information (in the form of distributions). We will call this approach “F-first”
FDS. The other puts distributional semantics center stage and attempts to reformulate
phenomena traditionally dealt with by Formal Semantics in vector spaces (e.g., quantifi-
cation, negation). We will refer to it as “D-first” FDS.

In the following, we provide an overview of both strands of FDS, and briefly
discuss how they contribute to building a full semantics.

4.1 F-first FDS

In a F-first FDS, a classical formal semantics is chosen to represent the meaning of
propositions. A popular choice is to posit a semantics expressible in first-order logic
with a link to some notion of model (Garrette, Erk, and Mooney 2011; Beltagy et al.
2013; Lewis and Steedman 2013; Erk 2016; Beltagy et al., this issue). The availability of
a model affords logical operations over individual entities, ranging from quantification
to inference. It also gives a handle on matters of reference, by providing a notion of
denotation—although what exactly words denote in a FDS is not entirely clear (see
Section 4.3). Finally, the use of an existing logic allows the semantics to rely on the stan-
dard formal apparatus for composition, supplemented by techniques for integrating
distributional information (Garrette, Erk, and Mooney 2011; Beltagy et al. 2013; see also
this issue: Asher et al., Beltagy et al., Rimell et al., Weir et al.).

In any FDS, the core of the distributional component is a set of content word rep-
resentations in a semantic space. The assumption is that those representations carry the
lexical meaning of the sentence or constituent under consideration—and by extension,
some useful world knowledge. In a F-first FDS specifically, the distributional component
acts as a layer over logical forms, expressed as, for example, lexical rules or meaning
postulates (Beltagy et al. 2013). This layer provides a way to compute similarity between
lexical terms and thereby propose inferences based on likely paraphrases. Garrette, Erk,
and Mooney (2011), for instance, use distributional similarity in inference rules to model
a range of implications such as the following (from the original paper):

(3) Ed has a convertible |= Ed owns a car.

627



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 4

One natural question F-first FDSs must solve is how exactly distributional vectors fit
into the traditional formal semantic apparatus (as described in Section 2). Erk (2013)
suggests that they might be seen as the intensional part of the semantics, and related
to the notion of “concept.” This, however, calls for an explanation of the interaction
between extension (modeled by the logic) and intension (modeled by the semantic
space). A more recent proposal (Erk 2016) is to use distributional data as observable
evidence for the likelihood of a given model, under the assumption that distributional
similarity overlap correlates with denotational overlap. One interesting aspect of this
work is that it addresses questions about the kind of semantic theory assumed by a par-
ticular framework (e.g., Erk [2016] that can be seen as a non-truth-theoretic, probabilistic
semantics). We discuss this issue in more detail in Section 4.3.

4.2 D-first FDS

In a D-first FDS, logical operators are directly expressed as functions over distributions,
bypassing existing logics. The solutions proposed for this task vary widely. Quantifiers,
for instance, may take the form of (a) operations over tensors in a truth-functional logic
(Grefenstette 2013); (b) a mapping function from a distributional semantics space to
some heavily underspecified form of a “model-theoretic” space (Herbelot and Vecchi
2015); (c) a function from sentences in a discourse to other sentences in the same
discourse (Capetola 2013) (i.e., for universal quantification, we map Every color is
good to Blue is good, Red is good. . . ). Other phenomena such as negation and relative
pronouns have started receiving treatment: In Hermann, Grefenstette, and Blunsom
(2013), negation is defined as the distributional complement of a term in a particular
domain; similarly, Kruszewski et al. (this issue) show that distributional representations
can model alternatives in “conversational” negation; a tensor-based interpretation of
relative pronouns has been proposed in Clark, Coecke, and Sadrzadeh (2013) and is
further explored in this issue (Rimell et al.). Some aspects of logical operators, in fact, can
even be directly derived from their vectors: Baroni et al. (2012) show that, to a reasonable
extent, entailment relations between a range of quantifiers can be learned from their
distributions. Defining distributional logical functions in a way that accounts for all
phenomena traditionally catered for by Formal Semantics is, however, a challenging
research program that is still in its first stages.

D-first FDS also has to define new composition operators that act over word repre-
sentations. Compositionality has been an area of active research in distributional seman-
tics, and many composition functions have been suggested, ranging from simple vector
addition (Kintsch 2001; Mitchell et al. 2008b) to matrix multiplication (where functional
content words such as adjectives must be learned via machine learning techniques;
Baroni and Zamparelli 2010, Paperno and Baroni 2016) to more complex operations
(Socher et al. 2012). Some approaches to composition can actually be seen as sitting
between the F-first and D-first approaches: In Coecke, Sadrzadeh, and Clark (2011) and
Grefenstette and Sadrzadeh (2011), a CCG grammar is converted into a tensor-based
logic relying on the direct composition of distributional representations.

In contrast with their F-first counterparts, D-first FDSs regard distributions as the
primary building blocks of the sentence, which must undergo composition rules to
get at the meaning of longer constituents (see above). This set-up does not clearly
distinguish the lexical from the logical level. This has advantages in cases where the
lexicon has a direct influence over the structure of a constituent: Boleda et al. (2013),
for instance, show that there is no fundamental difference in the difficulty of modeling
intersective vs. non-intersective adjectives in a D-first system.

628



Boleda and Herbelot Formal Distributional Semantics

At first glance, building sentences out of distributions seems to lead to a “concep-
tual” semantics (Erk 2013; McNally 2013) without a notion of entity (and therefore of
set or model). Seen from another angle, however, distributional information can play a
role in building entity representations that are richer than the set constituents of formal
semantics. In the way that the distribution of postdoc is arguably a better representation
of its meaning than the extension of postdoc (the set of postdocs in a world), there
are reasons for wanting to develop rich distributional models of instances, and relate
them back to a traditional idea of reference. Recent work has started focusing on this
question: Gupta et al. (2015) show that vectors of single entities (cities and countries)
can be linked to referential attributes, as expressed by a formal ontology; Herbelot
(2015) gives a model for constructing entity vectors from concept-level distributions;
Kruszewski, Paperno, and Baroni (2015) map distributions to “boolean” vectors in
which each dimension roughly corresponds to an individual (noting that in practice,
however, the induced dimensions cannot be so straightforwardly related to instances).
Notably, the approach of Lewis and Steedman (2013), although F-first in nature, also
relies on the distributional similarity of named entity vectors to build a type system.

4.3 The S in FDS

Although it is straightforward to highlight the complementary strengths of Formal and
Distributional Semantics, it is not so trivial to define the result of their combination,
either philosophically or linguistically. In fact, if semantics is synonymous with ‘theory
of meaning,’ it is safe to say that Formal Distributional Semantics has not yet reached the
status of a fully fledged semantics. Nor has, one should add, Distributional Semantics.
This has prompted publications such as Erk’s “Towards a semantics for distributional
representations” (Erk 2013), which query what aspect of meaning might be modeled
by points in a vector space. The solution proposed in that paper involves linking both
distributions and traditional intension to mental concepts, using an F-first FDS.

One problem faced by FDS is that not every strand of Formal Semantics is naturally
suited to a combination with Distributional Semantics. Truth-theoretic approaches, in
particular, come from a philosophical tradition that may be seen as incompatible with
DS. For instance, the Tarskian theory of truth (Tarski 1944), which is foundational to
Montagovian semantics, is ontologically neutral in that it does not specify what the
actual world is like, but still commits itself metaphysically to the fact that sentences can
be said to be true or false about a world. On the other hand, Distributional Semantics
can be seen as having emerged from a particular take on Wittgenstein’s Philosophical
Investigations (1953). The late Wittgenstein’s view of meaning is not anchored in meta-
physics, that is, it makes no commitment with regard to what there is in the world (or
any world, for that matter). This makes it non-trivial to define exactly what denotation
and reference stand for in FDS, and by extension, to give a complete account of the
notion of meaning.

Some recent approaches try to solve this issue by appealing to probabilistic seman-
tics and the notion of a speaker’s “information state” (Erk 2016). In such attempts,
denotation takes place over possible worlds: A speaker may not know the actual ex-
tension of a word such as alligator, but their information state allows them to assign
probabilities to worlds in a way that, for instance, a world where alligators are animals
is more likely than a world where this is not the case. The probabilities are derived from
distributional information. By moving from “global” truth to the information states of
specific speakers, the formalisms of model theory can be retained without committing

629



Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 4

oneself to truth. Overall, however, the relationships between world, perception, beliefs,
and language are still far from understood and call for further research in FDS.

5. Introduction to the Articles in this Special Issue

We started this introduction with an example that illustrated the many complex layers
of semantics that are necessary to understand a text fragment. This special issue contains
five articles that all tackle relevant phenomena, and demonstrate the complexity of the
task at hand, advancing the state of the art towards a fully-fledged Formal Distribu-
tional Semantics.

The first article, by Kruszewski et al., presents a model which explains the semantic
and inferential properties of not in “conversational” negations, for example, this is not
a dog (compare the new postdoc doesn’t work for Kim). It shows that such negations can
be re-written as alternatives, supporting inferences such as it is a wolf/fox/coyote (cf. the
new postdoc works for Sandy). Such alternatives seem to be well modeled by the nearest
neighbors of distributional vectors, indicating a strong relationship between semantic
relatedness and the notion of alternative. This work opens up a range of research topics
on modeling broad discourse context, implicit knowledge, and pragmatic knowledge
with Distributional Semantics.

Similarly focusing on a complex semantic phenomenon, Rimell et al. investigate
relative clauses, associating definitional NPs such as a person that a hotel accommodates
with concepts such as traveller (cf. a neural net that has loops vs. Recurrent Neural Network).
Experimenting on a challenging data set, the authors show promising results using
both simple vector addition and tensor calculus as composition methods, and provide
qualitative analyses of the results. Although addition is a strong performer in their
experiments given the data at their disposal, the authors discuss the need for more
sophisticated composition methods, including tensor-based approaches, in order to go
beyond current performance limits.

Weir et al. propose a general semantic composition mechanism that retains gram-
matical structure in distributional representations, testing their proposal empirically
on phrase similarity. The authors see composition as a contextualization process, and
pay particular consideration to the meaning shift of constituents in short phrases (e.g.,
paper in the context of postdoc and write). Having access to grammatical information in
word distributions allows them to define a composition framework in terms of formally
defined packed dependency trees that encapsulate lexical information. Their proposal
promises to open a way to distributional representations of entire sentences.

Asher et al. present a proposal for combining a formal semantic framework, Type
Composition Logic (Asher 2011), with Distributional Semantics. Specifically, types are
recast in algebraic terms, including the addition of coercive or co-compositional functors
that in the theory account for meaning shifts. Their system shows good performance on
adjective–noun composition, in particular, in modeling meaning shift (such as new in
the context of postdoc as opposed to other head nouns), subsectivity (vs. intersectivity),
entailment, and semantic coherence.

To finish the issue, Beltagy et al. offer a description and evaluation of a full F-first
FDS system, showing excellent results on a challenging entailment task. Their system
learns weighted lexical rules (e.g., if x is an ogre, x has a certain likelihood of being
grumpy), which can be used in complex entailment tasks (cf. if x writes papers about
semantics, x is probably knowledgeable about semantics). Their entire framework,
which involves not only a semantic parser and a distributional system, but also an

630



Boleda and Herbelot Formal Distributional Semantics

additional knowledge base containing WordNet entries, is a convincing example of the
general need for semantic tool integration.

6. Directions for Future Research

FDS promises to give us a much better coverage of natural language than either Formal
or Distributional Semantics. However, much remains to be done; here we address some
prominent limitations of current approaches and propose directions for future research.
The first is probably that little has been achieved so far in terms of accounting for
discourse and dialogue phenomena. So, although the sentence level is actively under
research, more needs to be done to integrate effects from larger text constituents as
well as from the use of language in conversation (see Bernardi et al. [2015] for more
discussion).

Secondly, FDS has so far primarily concentrated on modeling general conceptual
knowledge and (to some extent) entities, with less attention to instances of events and
situations. Future research should delve deeper into how distributional approaches can
contribute to this aspect of the semantics.

Finally, despite the fact that Distributional Semantics is by nature anchored in con-
text, the extent to which FDS treats phenomena at the semantics/pragmatics interface
is still limited (but see Kruszewski et al., this issue). The notion of “context” explored
so far includes the linguistic environment and specific aspects of perception (vision,
sound), but fails to integrate, for instance, meaning variations linked to speaker intent
or common ground. Generally speaking, if FDS wishes to retain a strong connection to
the philosophical theories of “meaning as use,” it will have to expand into what other
semantics might have left to the domain of pragmatics.

Acknowledgments
We thank Katrin Erk, Ann Copestake, Julian
Michael, Guy Emerson, the FLoSS group,
and two anonymous reviewers for fruitful
feedback on this article. And we most
heartily thank the authors and reviewers of
the Special Issue for their hard work, as well
as the journal editor, Paola Merlo, for her
guidance and support. This project has
received funding from the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme under the Marie
Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement no
655577 (LOVe) as well as the ERC 2011
Starting Independent Research Grant
no. 283554 (COMPOSES).

References
Asher, Nicholas. 2011. Lexical Meaning in

Context: A Web of Words. Cambridge
University Press.

Baroni, Marco. 2016. Composes: An
executive summary. Talk at the Composes
Workshop at ESSLLI 2016.

Baroni, Marco, Raffaella Bernardi,
Ngoc-Quynh Do, and Chung-chieh Shan.
2012. Entailment above the word level in
distributional semantics. In Proceedings of

the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 23–32, Avignon.

Baroni, Marco, Raffaella Bernardi, and
Roberto Zamparelli. 2015. Frege in
space: A program for compositional
distributional semantics. Linguistic Issues
in Language Technology, 9:5–110.

Baroni, Marco, Georgiana Dinu, and Germán
Kruszewski. 2014. Don’t count, predict! A
systematic comparison of context-counting
vs. context-predicting semantic vectors. In
Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL2014), pages 238–247, Baltimore,
MD.

Baroni, Marco and Alessandro Lenci.
2010. Distributional memory: A general
framework for corpus-based semantics.
Computational Linguistics, 36(4):673–721.

Baroni, Marco and Roberto Zamparelli.
2010. Nouns are vectors, adjectives are
matrices: Representing adjective-noun
constructions in semantic space. In
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP2010), pages 1183–1193,
MIT, MA.

631

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?system=10.1162%2Fcoli_a_00016


Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 4

Beltagy, Islam, Cuong Chau, Gemma Boleda,
Dan Garrette, Katrin Erk, and
Raymond Mooney. 2013. Montague
meets Markov: Deep semantics with
probabilistic logical form. In Second Joint
Conference on Lexical and Computational
Semantics (*SEM2013), pages 11–21,
Atlanta, GA.

Bernardi, Raffaella, Gemma Boleda,
Raquel Fernández, and Denis Paperno.
2015. Distributional semantics in use.
In Workshop on Linking Models of Lexical,
Sentential and Discourse-level Semantics
(LSDSem), page 95, Lisbon.

Boleda, Gemma, Marco Baroni, The Nghia
Pham, and Louise McNally. 2013.
Intensionality was only alleged: On
adjective-noun composition in
distributional semantics. In Proceedings of
the 10th International Conference on
Computational Semantics (IWCS 2013) –
Long Papers, pages 35–46, Potsdam.

Boleda, Gemma and Katrin Erk. 2015.
Distributional semantic features as
semantic primitives—or not. In AAAI
Spring Symposium on Knowledge
Representation and Reasoning, Stanford,
CA.

Bruni, Elia, Gemma Boleda, Marco Baroni,
and Nam-Khanh Tran. 2012. Distributional
semantics in technicolor. In Proceedings of
the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL2012),
pages 136–145, Jeju Island.

Cann, Ronnie. 1993. Formal Semantics.
Cambridge University Press.

Capetola, Matthew. 2013. Towards universal
quantification in distributional semantic
space. In Joint Symposium on Semantic
Processing (JSSP2013), pages 75–79,
Trento.

Clark, Stephen. 2012. Vector Space Models of
Lexical Meaning. In Shalom Lappin and
Chris Fox, editors, Handbook of
Contemporary Semantics – second edition,
pages 493–522, Wiley-Blackwell.

Clark, Stephen, Bob Coecke, and Mehrnoosh
Sadrzadeh. 2013. The Frobenius Anatomy
of Relative Pronouns. In The 13th Meeting
on the Mathematics of Language (MoL2013),
pages 41–51, Sofia.

Coecke, Bob, Mehrnoosh Sadrzadeh, and
Stephen Clark. 2011. Mathematical
foundations for a compositional
distributional model of meaning. Linguistic
Analysis: A Festschrift for Joachim Lambek,
36(1–4):345–384.

Collobert, Ronan and Jason Weston. 2008. A
unified architecture for natural language

processing: Deep neural networks with
multitask learning. In Proceedings of the
25th International Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 160–167, Helsinki.

Dowty, David. 1991. Thematic Proto-Roles
and Argument Selection. Language,
67(3):547–619.

Dowty, David R., Robert Wall, and
Stanley Peters. 1981. Introduction to
Montague Semantics. Springer.

Edmonds, Philip and Graeme Hirst.
2002. Near-Synonymy and Lexical
Choice. Computational Linguistics,
28(2):105–144.

Erk, Katrin. 2012. Vector space models of
word meaning and phrase meaning: A
survey. Language and Linguistics Compass,
6(10):635–653.

Erk, Katrin. 2013. Towards a semantics
for distributional representations. In
Proceedings of the Tenth International
Conference on Computational Semantics
(IWCS2013), pages 1–11, Potsdam.

Erk, Katrin. 2016. What do you know
about an alligator when you know the
company it keeps? Semantics and
Pragmatics, 9:17–1.

Erk, Katrin, Sebastian Padó, and Ulrike Padó.
2010. A flexible, corpus-driven model of
regular and inverse selectional preferences.
Computational Linguistics, 36(4):723–763.

Feng, Yansong and Mirella Lapata. 2010.
Visual information in semantic
representation. In Proceedings of the 2010
Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies
(NAACL-HLT2010), pages 91–99,
Los Angeles, CA.

Fine, Kit. 1975. Vagueness, truth and logic.
Synthese, 30(3):265–300.

Firth, John Rupert. 1957. A Synopsis of
Linguistic Theory, 1930–1955. Philological
Society, Oxford.

Foltz, Peter W. 1996. Latent semantic analysis
for text-based research. Behavior Research
Methods, Instruments, & Computers,
28(2):197–202.

Frege, Gottlob. 1892. Über Sinn und
Bedeutung. Zeitschrift für Philosophie und
philosophische Kritik, 100:25–50.

Garrette, Dan, Katrin Erk, and Raymond
Mooney. 2011. Integrating logical
representations with probabilistic
information using Markov logic. In
Proceedings of the Ninth International
Conference on Computational Semantics,
pages 105–114, Oxford.

Garrette, Dan, Katrin Erk, and
Raymond Mooney. 2014. A formal

632

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.3765%2Fsp.9.17
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.3765%2Fsp.9.17
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.2307%2F415037
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?system=10.1162%2F089120102760173625
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?system=10.1162%2Fcoli_a_00017
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1007%2FBF00485047
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.3758%2FBF03204765
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.3758%2FBF03204765
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1002%2Flnco.362


Boleda and Herbelot Formal Distributional Semantics

approach to linking logical form
and vector-space lexical semantics.
In Harry Bunt, Johan Bos, and
Stephen Pulman, editors, Computing
Meaning, volume 4, pages 27–48,
Springer.

Gentzen, Gerhard. 1935. Untersuchungen
über das logische schließen. i.
Mathematische zeitschrift, 39(1):176–210.

Goodman, Noah D., Joshua B. Tenenbaum,
and Tobias Gerstenberg. 2015. Concepts in
a probabilistic language of thought. In
Concepts: New directions, pages 623–653,
MIT Press.

Grefenstette, Edward. 2013. Towards a
formal distributional semantics:
Simulating logical calculi with
tensors. In Second Joint Conference on
Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM),
pages 1–10, Atlanta, GA.

Grefenstette, Edward and Mehrnoosh
Sadrzadeh. 2011. Experimental support for
a categorical compositional distributional
model of meaning. In Proceedings of
the Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing,
pages 1394–1404, Edinburgh.

Guarino, Nicola, Simone Pribbenow, and
Laure Vieu. 1996. Modeling parts and
wholes. Data & Knowledge Engineering,
20(3):257–258.

Gupta, Abhijeet, Gemma Boleda, Marco
Baroni, and Sebastian Padó. 2015.
Distributional vectors encode referential
attributes. In Proceedings of the Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP2015), pages 12–21,
Lisbon.

Harris, Zelig. 1954. Distributional structure.
Word, 10(2-3):146–162.

Herbelot, Aurélie. 2015. Mr. Darcy and
Mr. Toad, gentlemen: distributional names
and their kinds. In Proceedings of the 11th
International Conference on Computational
Semantics (IWCS2015), pages 151–161,
London.

Herbelot, Aurélie and Eva Maria Vecchi.
2015. Building a shared world: Mapping
distributional to model-theoretic semantic
spaces. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP2015), pages 22–32,
Lisbon.

Herbelot, Aurélie and Eva Maria Vecchi.
2016. Many speakers, many worlds:
Interannotator variations in the
quantification of feature norms. Linguistic
Issues in Language Technology, 13.

Hermann, Karl Moritz, Edward Grefenstette,
and Phil Blunsom. 2013. “Not not bad” is

not “bad”: A distributional account of
negation. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Continuous Vector Space Models and their
Compositionality, pages 74–82, Sofia.

Jones, Emily. 1911. A New Law of Thought and
Its Logical Bearings. Cambridge University
Press.

Kennedy, Christopher and Louise McNally.
2005. Scale structure, degree modification,
and the semantics of gradable predicates.
Language, pages 345–381.

Kiela, Douwe and Stephen Clark. 2015.
Multi-and cross-modal semantics beyond
vision: Grounding in auditory perception.
In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on
Emperical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP2015), pages 2461–2470,
Lisbon.

Kilgarriff, Adam. 1992. Dictionary word
sense distinctions: An enquiry into their
nature. Computers and the Humanities,
26(5-6):365–387.

Kintsch, W. 2001. Predication. Cognitive
Science, 25(2):173–202.

Kruszewski, German, Denis Paperno, and
Marco Baroni. 2015. Deriving Boolean
structures from distributional vectors.
Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 3:375–388.

Labov, William. 1978. Denotational structure.
In Donka Farkas, Wesley Jacobsen, and
Karol Todrys, editors, Parasession on the
Lexicon. Chicago Linguistics Society,
pages 220–260.

Landauer, Thomas K. and Susan T. Dumais.
1997. A solution to Plato’s problem:
The latent semantic analysis theory of
acquisition, induction, and representation
of knowledge. Psychological Review,
104:211–240.

LeCun, Yann, Yoshua Bengio, and
Geoffrey E. Hinton. 2015. Deep learning.
Nature, 521:436–444.

Levy, Omer, Yoav Goldberg, and Ido Dagan.
2015. Improving distributional similarity
with lessons learned from word
embeddings. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics,
3:211–225.

Lewis, Mike and Mark Steedman.
2013. Combined Distributional and
Logical Semantics. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics,
1:179–192.

Lopopolo, Alessandro and Emiel van
Miltenburg. 2015. Sound-based
distributional models. Proceedings of
the 11th International Conference on
Computational Semantics (IWCS2015),
pages 70–75, London.

633

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1007%2FBF00136981
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1037%2F0033-295X.104.2.211
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1016%2FS0169-023X%2896%2900009-2
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1080%2F00437956.1954.11659520
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1207%2Fs15516709cog2502_1
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1207%2Fs15516709cog2502_1
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1038%2Fnature14539


Computational Linguistics Volume 42, Number 4

Lund, Kevin, Curt Burgess, and
Ruth Ann Atchley. 1995. Semantic and
associative priming in high-dimensional
semantic space. In Proceedings of the
17th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, 17:660–665, Pittsburgh,
PA.

Marelli, Marco, Stefano Menini,
Marco Baroni, Luisa Bentivogli,
Raffaella Bernardi, and Roberto
Zamparelli. 2014. A sick cure
for the evaluation of compositional
distributional semantic models.
In Proceedings of the 9th Language
Resources and Evaluation Conference
(LREC2014), pages 216–223,
Reykjavik.

McNally, Louise. 2013. Formal and
distributional semantics: From romance
to relationship. In Invited talk at the
‘Towards a Formal Distributional
Semantics’ workshop (collocated with
IWCS2013)., Potsdam, Germany.

Mikolov, Tomas, Armand Joulin, and
Marco Baroni. 2015. A roadmap towards
machine intelligence. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.08130.

Mikolov, Tomas, Wen-tau Yih, and
Geoffrey Zweig. 2013. Linguistic
regularities in continuous space word
representations. In Proceedings of the
Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies
(HLT-NAACL2013), pages 746–751,
Atlanta, GA.

Mitchell, Jeff and Mirella Lapata. 2010.
Composition in Distributional Models
of Semantics. Cognitive Science,
34(8):1388–1429.

Mitchell, Tom M., Svetlana V. Shinkareva,
Andrew Carlson, Kai-Min Chang,
Vicente L. Malave, Robert A. Mason,
and Marcel Adam Just. 2008a. Predicting
human brain activity associated with
the meanings of nouns. Science,
320(5880):1191–1195.

Mitchell, Tom M., Svetlana V. Shinkareva,
Andrew Carlson, Kai-Min Chang,
Vicente L. Malave, Robert A. Mason, and
Marcel Adam Just. 2008b. Predicting
human brain activity associated with
the meanings of nouns. Science,
320(5880):1191–1195.

Montague, Richard. 1974. The proper
treatment of quantification in
ordinary English. In R. Thomason,
editor, Formal Philosophy. Yale
University Press, New Haven, CT,
pages 247–270.

Murphy, Gregory L. 2004. The Big Book of
Concepts. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
2nd edition.

Nilsson, Nils J. 1994. Probabilistic logic
revisited. Artificial Intelligence,
59(1-2):39–42.

Padó, Sebastian and Mirella Lapata. 2007.
Dependency-Based Construction of
Semantic Space Models. Computational
Linguistics, 33(2):161–199.

Paperno, Denis and Marco Baroni. 2016.
When the whole is less than the sum
of its parts: How composition affects
PMI values in distributional semantic
vectors. Computational Linguistics,
42(2):345–350.

Partee, Barbara H. 2008. Compositionality in
Formal Semantics: Selected Papers by
Barbara H. Partee. John Wiley & Sons.

Pinkal, Manfred. 1995. Logic and lexicon: The
semantics of the indefinite, volume 56.
Springer Science & Business Media.

Pustejovsky, James. 1995. The Generative
Lexicon. MIT Press.

Roller, Stephen and Sabine Schulte Im Walde.
2013. A multimodal LDA model
integrating textual, cognitive and visual
modalities. In Proceedings of the 2013
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP2013),
pages 1146–1157, Seattle, WA.

Roßdeutscher, Antje and Hans Kamp.
2010. Syntactic and semantic constraints
in the formation and interpretation
of ung-nouns. In A. Alexiadou and
M. Rathert, editors, The Semantics of
Nominalizations Across Languages
and Frameworks Interface Explorations 22,
pages 169–214, Mouton de Gruyter.

Schank, Roger C. 1972. Conceptual
dependency: A theory of natural language
understanding. Cognitive psychology,
3(4):552–631.

Socher, Richard, Brody Huval, Christopher
Manning, and Andrew Ng. 2012. Semantic
compositionality through recursive
matrix-vector spaces. In Proceedings of the
2012 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP2012),
pages 1201–1211, Jeju Island.

Spärck-Jones, Karen. 1967. A small
semantic classification experiment
using cooccurrence data. Technical Report
ML 196, Cambridge Language Research
Unit, Cambridge.

Tarski, Alfred. 1944. The semantic conception
of truth. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research, 4:341–375.

Turney, Peter D. and Patrick Pantel. 2010.
From frequency to meaning: Vector space

634

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?system=10.1162%2Fcoli.2007.33.2.161
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?system=10.1162%2Fcoli.2007.33.2.161
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1126%2Fscience.1152876
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1016%2F0004-3702%2893%2990167-A
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?system=10.1162%2FCOLI_a_00250
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1111%2Fj.1551-6709.2010.01106.x
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.2307%2F2102968
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.2307%2F2102968
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1126%2Fscience.1152876


Boleda and Herbelot Formal Distributional Semantics

models of semantics. Journal of Artificial
Intelligence Research, 37:141–188.

van Benthem, Johan, Jelle Gerbrandy,
and Barteld Kooi. 2009. Dynamic update
with probabilities. Studia Logica,
93(1):67–96.

van Eijck, Jan and Shalom Lappin. 2012.
Probabilistic semantics for natural

language. Logic and Interactive Rationality
(LIRA), 2:17–35.

Veltman, Frank. 1996. Defaults in update
semantics. Journal of Philosophical Logic,
25(3):221–261.

Winograd, Terry. 1972. Understanding
natural language. Cognitive Psychology,
3(1):1–191.

635

http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1007%2FBF00248150
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1016%2F0010-0285%2872%2990002-3
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/action/showLinks?crossref=10.1007%2Fs11225-009-9209-y

