



















































The Effect of Different Writing Tasks on Linguistic Style: A Case Study of the ROC Story Cloze Task


Proceedings of the 21st Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL 2017), pages 15–25,
Vancouver, Canada, August 3 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Effect of Different Writing Tasks on Linguistic Style:
A Case Study of the ROC Story Cloze Task

Roy Schwartz1,2, Maarten Sap1, Ioannis Konstas1,
Li Zilles1, Yejin Choi1 and Noah A. Smith1

1Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA

2Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Seattle, WA, USA
{roysch,msap,ikonstas,lzilles,yejin,nasmith}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract

A writer’s style depends not just on per-
sonal traits but also on her intent and
mental state. In this paper, we show
how variants of the same writing task can
lead to measurable differences in writing
style. We present a case study based on
the story cloze task (Mostafazadeh et al.,
2016a), where annotators were assigned
similar writing tasks with different con-
straints: (1) writing an entire story, (2)
adding a story ending for a given story
context, and (3) adding an incoherent end-
ing to a story. We show that a simple
linear classifier informed by stylistic fea-
tures is able to successfully distinguish
among the three cases, without even look-
ing at the story context. In addition, com-
bining our stylistic features with language
model predictions reaches state of the art
performance on the story cloze challenge.
Our results demonstrate that different task
framings can dramatically affect the way
people write.1

1 Introduction

Writing style is expressed through a range of lin-
guistic elements such as words, sentence structure,
and rhetorical devices. It is influenced by per-
sonal factors such as age and gender (Schler et al.,
2006), by personality traits such as agreeableness
and openness (Ireland and Mehl, 2014), as well as
by mental states such as sentiment (Davidov et al.,
2010), sarcasm (Tsur et al., 2010), and deception
(Feng et al., 2012). In this paper, we study the ex-
tent to which writing style is affected by the nature
of the writing task the writer was asked to perform,

1This paper extends our LSDSem 2017 shared task sub-
mission (Schwartz et al., 2017).

Story Prefix Ending
John liked a girl at his
work. He tried to get
her attention by acting
silly. She told him to
grow up. John con-
fesses he was trying
to make her like him
more.

She feels flattered
and asks John on a
date.
The girl found this
charming, and gave
him a second chance.

John was happy about
being rejected.

Table 1: Examples of stories from the story cloze
task. The table shows a story prefix with three con-
trastive endings: The original ending, a coherent
ending and a incoherent one.

since different tasks likely engage different cogni-
tive processes (Campbell and Pennebaker, 2003;
Banerjee et al., 2014).2

We show that similar writing tasks with dif-
ferent constraints on the author can lead to mea-
surable differences in her writing style. As a
case study, we present experiments based on
the recently introduced ROC story cloze task
(Mostafazadeh et al., 2016a). In this task, authors
were asked to write five-sentence self-contained
stories, henceforth original stories. Then, each
original story was given to a different author, who
was shown only the first four sentences as a story
context, and asked to write two contrasting story
endings: a right (coherent) ending, and a wrong
(incoherent) ending. Framed as a story cloze task,
the goal of this dataset is to serve as a common-
sense challenge for NLP and AI research. Table 1
shows an example of an original story, a coherent
story, and an incoherent story.

While the story cloze task was originally de-

2For the purposes of this paper, style is defined as content-
agnostic writing characteristics, such as the number of words
in a sentence.

15



signed to be a story understanding challenge, its
annotation process introduced three variants of the
same writing task: writing an original, right, or
wrong ending to a short story. In this paper, we
show that a linear classifier informed by stylistic
features can distinguish among the different end-
ings to a large degree, even without looking at the
story context (64.5–75.6% binary classification re-
sults).

Our results allow us to make a few key observa-
tions. First, people adopt a different writing style
when asked to write coherent vs. incoherent story
endings. Second, people change their writing style
when writing the entire story on their own com-
pared to writing only the final sentence for a given
story context written by someone else.

In order to further validate our method, we
also directly tackle the story cloze task. Adapt-
ing our classifier to the task, we obtain 72.4% ac-
curacy, only 2.3% below state of the art results.
We also show that the style differences captured
by our model can be combined with neural lan-
guage models to make a better use of the story
context. Our final model that combines context
with stylistic features achieves a new state of the
art—75.2%—an additional 2.8% gain.

The contributions of our study are threefold.
First, findings from our study can potentially shed
light on how different kinds of cognitive load
influence the style of written language. Sec-
ond, combined with recent similar findings of Cai
et al. (2017), our results indicate that when de-
signing new NLP tasks, special attention needs
to be paid to the instructions given to authors.
Third, we establish a new state of the art result
on the commonsense story cloze challenge. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
roys174/writing_style.

2 Background: The Story Cloze Task

To understand how different writing tasks affect
writing style, we focus on the story cloze task
(Mostafazadeh et al., 2016a). While this task was
developed to facilitate representation and learning
of commonsense story understanding, its design
included a few key choices which make it ideal
for our study. We describe the task below.

ROC stories. The ROC story corpus consists of
49,255 five-sentence stories, collected on Ama-

zon Mechanical Turk (AMT).3 Workers were in-
structed to write a coherent self-contained story,
which has a clear beginning and end. To col-
lect a broad spectrum of commonsense knowl-
edge, there was no imposed subject for the stories,
which resulted in a wide range of different topics.

Story cloze task. After compiling the story cor-
pus, the story cloze task—a task based on the
corpus—was introduced. A subset of the stories
was selected, and only the first four sentences
of each story were presented to AMT workers.
Workers were asked to write a pair of new story
endings for each story context: one right and one
wrong. Both endings were required to complete
the story using one of the characters in the story
context. Additionally, the endings were required
to be “realistic and sensible” (Mostafazadeh et al.,
2016a) when read out of context.

The resulting stories, both right and wrong,
were then individually rated for coherence and
meaningfulness by additional AMT workers. Only
stories rated as simultaneously coherent with a
right ending and neutral with a wrong ending were
selected for the task. It is worth noting that work-
ers rated the stories as a whole, not only the end-
ings.

Based on the new stories, Mostafazadeh et al.
(2016a) proposed the story cloze task. The task
is simple: given a pair of stories that differ only
in their endings, the system decides which ending
is right and which is wrong. The official train-
ing data contains only the original stories (without
alternative endings), while development and test
data consist of the revised stories with alternative
endings (for a different set of original stories that
are not included in the training set). The task was
suggested as an extensive evaluation framework:
as a commonsense story understanding task, as
the shared task for the Linking Models of Lexical,
Sentential and Discourse-level Semantics work-
shop (LSDSem 2017, Roth et al., 2017), and as a
testbed for vector-space evaluation (Mostafazadeh
et al., 2016b).

Interestingly, only very recently, one year after
the task was first introduced, the published bench-
mark on this task surpassed 60%. This comes
in contrast to other recent similar machine read-
ing tasks such as CNN/DailyMail (Hermann et al.,
2015), SNLI (Bowman et al., 2015), LAMBADA

3Recently, additional 53K stories were released, which re-
sults in roughly 100K stories.

16



(Paperno et al., 2016) and SQuAD (Rajpurkar
et al., 2016), for which results improved dramati-
cally over similar or much shorter periods of time.
This suggests that this task is challenging and that
high performance is hard to achieve.

In addition, Mostafazadeh et al. (2016a) made
substantial efforts to ensure the quality of this
dataset. First, each pair of endings was written by
the same author, which ensured that style differ-
ences between authors could not be used to solve
the task. Furthermore, Mostafazadeh et al. imple-
mented nine baselines for the task, using surface
level features as well as narrative-informed ones,
and showed that each of them reached roughly
chance-level. These results suggest that real un-
derstanding of text is required in order to solve the
task. In this paper, we show that this is not neces-
sarily the case, by demonstrating that a simple lin-
ear classifier informed with style features reaches
near state of the art results on the task—72.4%.

Different writing tasks in the story cloze task.
Several key design decisions make the task an
interesting testbed for the purpose of this study.
First, the training set for the task (ROC Stories
corpus) is not a training set in the usual sense,4

as it contains only positive (right) examples, and
not negative (wrong) ones.

On top of that, the original endings, which serve
as positive training examples, were generated dif-
ferently from the right endings, which serve as the
positive examples in the development and test sets.
While the former are part of a single coherent story
written by the same author, the latter were gener-
ated by letting an author read four sentences, and
then asking her to generate a fifth right ending.

Finally, although the right and wrong sentences
were generated by the same author, the tasks for
generating them were quite different: in one case,
the author was asked to write a right ending, which
would create a coherent five-sentence story along
with the other four sentences. In the other case, the
author was asked to write a wrong ending, which
would result in an incoherent five-sentence story.

3 Surface Analysis of the Story Cloze
Task

We begin by computing several characteristics of
the three types of endings: original endings (from

4I.e., the training instances are not drawn from a popu-
lation similar to the one that future testing instances will be
drawn from.

the ROC story corpus training set), right endings
and wrong endings (both from the story cloze task
development set). Our analysis reveals several
style differences between different groups. First,
original endings are on average longer (11 words
per sentence) than right endings (8.75 words),
which are in turn slightly longer than wrong ones
(8.47 words). The latter finding is consistent with
previous work, which has shown that sentence
length is also indicative of whether a text was de-
ceptive (Qin et al., 2004; Yancheva and Rudzicz,
2013). Although writing wrong sentences is not
the same as deceiving, it is not entirely surprising
to observe similar trends in both tasks.

Second, Figure 1a shows the distribution of five
frequent POS tags in all three groups. The fig-
ure shows that both original and right endings
use pronouns more frequently than wrong endings.
Once again, deceptive text is also characterized by
fewer pronouns compared to truthful text (New-
man et al., 2003).

Finally, Figure 1b presents the distribution of
five frequent words across the different groups.
The figure shows that original endings use co-
ordinations (“and”) more than right endings, and
substantially more than wrong ones. Furthermore,
original and right endings seem to prefer enthu-
siastic language (e.g., “!”), while wrong endings
tend to use more negative language (“hates”), sim-
ilar to deceptive text (Newman et al., 2003). Next
we show that these style differences are not anec-
dotal, but can be used to distinguish among the
different types of story endings.

4 Model

To what extent do different writing constraints
lead authors to adopt different writing styles? In
order to answer this question, we first use simple
methods that have been shown to be very effective
for recognizing style (see Section 8). We describe
our model below.

We train a logistic regression classifier to cate-
gorize an ending, either as right vs. wrong or as
original vs. new (right). Each feature vector is
computed using the words in one ending, without
considering earlier parts of the story. We use the
following style features.

• Length: the number of words in the sentence.
• Word n-grams: we use sequences of 1–5

words. Following Tsur et al. (2010) and

17



NN VBD PRP DT NNP

5

10

15
Fr

eq
ue

nc
y

in
C

or
pu

s
(%

)

(a) POS tags

to and I hates !
0

1

2

3

(b) Words

Figure 1: The distribution of five frequent POS tags (1a) and words (1b) across original endings (hori-
zontal lines) from the story cloze training set, and right (diagonal lines) and wrong (solid lines) endings,
both from the story cloze task development set.

Schwartz et al. (2013b), we distinguish be-
tween high frequency and low frequency
words. Specifically, we replace content
words (nouns, verbs, adjectives, and ad-
verbs), which are often low frequency, with
their part-of-speech tags.

• Character n-grams: character n-grams are
one of the most useful features in identifying
author style (Stamatatos, 2009). We use char-
acter 4-grams.5

5 Experiments

We design two experiments to answer our research
questions. The first is an attempt to distinguish
between right and wrong endings, the second be-
tween original endings and new (right) endings.
For completeness, we also run a third experiment,
which compares between original and wrong end-
ings.

Experiment 1: right/wrong endings. The goal
of this experiment is to measure the extent to
which style features capture differences between
the right and wrong endings. As the story cloze
task doesn’t have a training corpus for the right
and wrong endings (see Section 2), we use the de-
velopment set as our training set, holding out 10%
for development (3,366 training endings, 374 for
development). We keep the story cloze test set as
is (3,742 endings).

It is worth noting that our classification task is
slightly different from the story cloze task. In-
stead of classifying pairs of endings, one which
is right and another which is wrong, our classifier
decides about each ending individually, whether it

5Experiments with 5-grams on our development set
reached similar performance.

is right (positive instance) or wrong (negative in-
stance). By ignoring the coupling between right
and wrong pairs, we are able to decrease the im-
pact of author-specific style differences, and focus
on the difference between the styles accompanied
with right and wrong writings.

Experiment 2: original/new endings. Here the
goal is to measure whether writing the ending
as part of a story imposes different style com-
pared to writing a new (right) ending to an exist-
ing story. We use the endings of the ROC stories
as our original examples and right endings from
the story cloze task as new examples. As there
are far more original instances than new instances,
we randomly select five original sets, each with
the same number of instances as we have new in-
stances (3,366 training endings, 374 development
endings, and 3,742 test endings). We train five
classifiers, one with each of the original training
sets, and report the average classification result.

Experiment 3: original/wrong endings. For
completeness, we measure the extent to which our
classifier can discriminate between original and
wrong endings. We replicate Experiment 2, this
time replacing right endings with wrong ones.

Experimental setup. In all experiments, we add
a START symbol at the beginning of each sen-
tence.6 For computing our features, we keep n-
gram (character or word) features that occur at
least five times in the training set. All feature val-
ues are normalized to [0, 1]. For the POS features,
we tag all endings with the Spacy POS tagger.7

We use Python’s sklearn logistic regression imple-

699% of all sentences end with a period or an exclamation
mark, so we do not add a STOP symbol.

7http://spacy.io/

18



Experiment Accuracy
right vs. wrong 0.645
original vs. right 0.685
original vs. wrong 0.756

Table 2: Results of experiments 1 (right
vs. wrong), 2 (original vs. right (new)) and 3 (orig-
inal vs. wrong (new) endings). In all cases, our
setup implies a 50% random baseline.

mentation (Pedregosa et al., 2011) with L2 regu-
larization, performing grid search on the develop-
ment set to tune a single hyperparameter—the reg-
ularization parameter.

5.1 Results

Table 2 shows our results. In all experiments,
our model achieves performance well above what
would be expected under chance (50% by design).
Noting again that our model ignores the story con-
text (the preceding four sentences), our model is
unable to capture any notion of coherence. This
finding provides strong evidence that the authors’
style was affected by the writing task they were
given to perform.

5.2 Story Cloze Task

The results of Experiment 1 indicate that right
and wrong endings are characterized by different
styles. In order to further estimate the quality of
our classification results, we tackle the story cloze
task using our classifier. This classification task is
more constrained than Experiment 1, as two end-
ings are given and the question is which is right
and which is wrong. We apply the classifier from
Experiment 1 as follows: if it assigns different
labels to the two given endings, we keep them.
Otherwise, the label whose posterior probability
is lower is reversed.

Table 3 shows our results on the story cloze test
set. Our classifier obtains 72.4% accuracy, only
2.3% lower than state of the art results. Impor-
tantly, unlike previous approaches,8 our classifier
does not require the story corpus training data, and
in fact doesn’t even consider the first four sen-
tences of the story in question. These numbers
further support the claim that the styles of right
and wrong endings are indeed very different.

8One exception is the EndingsOnly system (Cai et al.,
2017), which was published in concurrence with this work,
and obtains roughly the same results.

Model Acc.
DSSM (Mostafazadeh et al., 2016a) 0.585
ukp (Mihaylov and Frank, 2017) 0.711
tbmihaylov (Mihaylov and Frank, 2017) 0.724
†EndingsOnly (Cai et al., 2017) 0.725
cogcomp 0.744
HIER,ENCPLOTEND,ATT (Cai et al., 2017) 0.747
RNN 0.677
†Ours 0.724
Combined (ours + RNN) 0.752
Human judgment 1.000

Table 3: Results on the test set of the story cloze
task. The middle block are our results. cogcomp
results and human judgement scores are taken
from Mostafazadeh et al. (2017). Methods marked
with (†) do not use the story context in order to
make a prediction.

Combination with a neural language model.
We investigate whether our model can benefit
from state of the art text comprehension models,
for which this task was designed. Specifically,
we experiment with an LSTM-based (Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber, 1997) recurrent neural network
language model (RNNLM; Mikolov et al., 2010).
Unlike the model in this paper, which only con-
siders the story endings, this language model fol-
lows the protocol suggested by the story cloze task
designers, and harnesses their ROC Stories train-
ing set, which consists of single-ending stories, as
well as the story context for each pair of endings.
We show that adding our features to this power-
ful language model gives improvements over our
classifier as well as the language model.

We train the RNNLM using a single-layer
LSTM of hidden dimension 512. We use the ROC
stories for training,9 setting aside 10% for val-
idation of the language model. We replace all
words occurring less than 3 times with an out-
of-vocabulary token, yielding a vocabulary size of
21,582. Only during training, we apply a dropout
rate of 60% while running the LSTM over all 5
sentences of the stories. Using the Adam opti-
mizer (Kingma and Ba, 2015) and a learning rate
of η = 0.001, we train to minimize cross-entropy.

To apply the language model to the classifica-
tion problem, we select as right the ending with
the higher value of

pθ(ending | story)
pθ(ending)

(1)

9We use the extended, 100K stories corpus (see Sec-
tion 2).

19



Feature Type Accuracy
Word n-grams 0.612
Character n-grams 0.639
Full model 0.645

Table 4: Results on Experiment 1 with different
subsets of features.

The intuition is that a right ending should be un-
surprising (to the model) given the four preceding
sentences of the story (the numerator), controlling
for the inherent surprisingness of the words in that
ending (the denominator).

On its own, our neural language model performs
moderately well on the story cloze test. Selecting
endings based on pθ(ending | story) (i.e., the nu-
merator of Equation 1), we obtained only 55% ac-
curacy. The ratio in Equation 1 achieves 67.7%
(see Table 3).10

We combine our linear model with the RNNLM
by adding three features to our classifier: the nu-
merator, denominator, and ratio in Equation 1, all
in log space. We retrain our linear model with the
new feature set, and gain 2.8% absolute, reaching
75.2%, a new state of the art result for the task.
These results indicate that context-ignorant style
features can be used to obtain high accuracy on the
task, adding value even when context and a large
training dataset are used.

6 Further Analysis

6.1 Most Discriminative Feature Types

A natural question that follows from this study is
which style features are most helpful in detecting
the underlying task an author was asked to per-
form. To answer this question, we re-ran Experi-
ment 1 with different sub-groups of features. Ta-
ble 4 shows our results. Results show that char-
acter n-grams are the most effective style predic-
tors, reaching within 0.6% of the full model, but
that word n-grams also capture much of the sig-
nal, yielding 61.2%, which is only 3.3% worse
than the full model. These findings are in line with
previous work that used character n-grams along
with other types of features to predict writing style
(Schwartz et al., 2013b).

10Note that taking the logarithm of the expression in Equa-
tion 1 gives the pointwise mutual information between the
story and the ending, under the language model.

6.2 Most Salient Features

A follow-up question is which individual features
contribute most to the classification process, as
these could shed light on the stylistic differences
imposed by each of the writing tasks.

In order to answer this question, we consider the
highest absolute positive and negative coefficients
in the logistic regression classifier in Experiments
1 and 2, an approach widely used as a method of
extracting the most salient features (Nguyen et al.,
2013; Burke et al., 2013; Brooks et al., 2013). It is
worth noting that its reliability is not entirely clear,
since linear models like logistic regression can as-
sign large coefficients to rare features (Yano et al.,
2012). To mitigate this concern, we consider only
features appearing in at least 5% of the endings in
our training set.

Experiment 1. Table 5a shows the most salient
features for right (coherent) and wrong (incoher-
ent) endings in Experiment 1, along with their cor-
pus frequency. The table shows a few interesting
trends. First, authors tend to structure their sen-
tences differently when writing coherent vs. inco-
herent endings. For instance, incoherent endings
are more likely to start with a proper noun and end
with a common noun, while coherent endings have
a greater tendency to end with a past tense verb.

Second, right endings make wider use of coor-
dination structures, as well as adjectives. The lat-
ter might indicate that writing coherent stories in-
spires the authors to write more descriptive text
compared to incoherent ones, as is the case in
truthful vs. deceptive text (Ott et al., 2011). Fi-
nally, we notice a few syntactic differences: right
endings more often use infinitive verb structure,
while wrong endings prefer gerunds (VBG).

Experiment 2. Table 5b shows the same analy-
sis for Experiment 2. As noted in Section 2, orig-
inal endings tend to be much longer, which is in-
deed the most salient feature for them. An inter-
esting observation is that exclamation marks are a
strong indication for an original ending. This sug-
gests that authors are more likely to show or evoke
enthusiasm when writing their own text compared
to ending an existing text.

Finally, when comparing the two groups of
salient features from both experiments, we find
an interesting trend. Several features, such as
“START NNP” and “NN .”, which indicate wrong
sentences in Experiment 1, are used to predict

20



Right Weight Freq. Wrong Weight Freq.
‘ed .’ 0.17 06.5% START NNP 0.21 54.8%
‘and ’ 0.15 13.6% NN . 0.17 47.5%

JJ 0.14 45.8% NN NN . 0.15 05.1%
to VB 0.13 20.1% VBG 0.11 10.1%
‘d th’ 0.12 10.9% START NNP VBD 0.11 41.9%

(a) Experiment 1

Right Weight Freq. Wrong Weight Freq.
length 0.81 .100.0% ‘.’ 0.74 93.0%

‘!’ 0.46 006.1% START NNP 0.40 39.2%
NN 0.35 078.9% START NNP VBD 0.23 29.0%
RB 0.34 044.7% NN . 0.20 42.3%
‘,’ 0.32 012.7% the NN . 0.20 10.6%

(b) Experiment 2

Table 5: The top 5 most heavily weighted features for predicting right vs. wrong endings (5a) and original
vs. new (right) endings (5b). length is the sentence length feature (see Section 4).

new (i.e., right) endings in Experiment 2. This
indicates that, for instance, incoherent endings
have a stronger tendency to begin with a proper
noun compared to coherent endings, which in
turn are more likely to do so than original end-
ings. This partially explains why distinguishing
between original and wrong endings is an easier
task compared to the other pairs (Section 5.1).

7 Discussion

The effect of writing tasks on mental states. In
this paper we have shown that different writing
tasks affect a writer’s writing style in easily de-
tected ways. Our results indicate that when au-
thors are asked to write the last sentence of a five-
sentence story, they will use different style to write
a right ending compared to a wrong ending. We
have also shown that writing the ending as part
of one’s own five-sentence story is very different
than reading four sentences and then writing the
fifth. Our findings hint that the nature of the writ-
ing task imposes a different mental state on the
author, which is expressed in ways that can be ob-
served using extremely simple automatic tools.

Previous work has shown that a writing task can
affect mental state. For instance, writing decep-
tive text leads to a significant cognitive burden ac-
companied by a writing style that is different from
truthful text (Newman et al., 2003; Banerjee et al.,
2014). Writing tasks can even have a long-term
effect, as writing emotional texts was observed
to benefit both physical and mental health (Lep-

ore and Smyth, 2002; Frattaroli, 2006). Campbell
and Pennebaker (2003) also showed that the health
benefits of writing emotional text are accompanied
by changes in writing style, mostly in the use of
pronouns.

Another line of work has shown that writing
style is affected by mental state. First, an author’s
personality traits (e.g., depression, neuroticism,
narcissism) affect her writing style (Schwartz
et al., 2013a; Ireland and Mehl, 2014). Sec-
ond, temporary changes, such as a romantic re-
lationship (Ireland et al., 2011; Bowen et al.,
2016), work collaboration (Tausczik, 2009; Gon-
zales et al., 2009), or negotiation (Ireland and Hen-
derson, 2014) may also affect writing style. Fi-
nally, writing style can also change from one sen-
tence to another, for instance between positive and
negative text (Davidov et al., 2010) or when writ-
ing sarcastic text (Tsur et al., 2010).

This large body of work indicates a tight con-
nection between writing tasks, mental states, and
variation in writing style. This connection hints
that the link discovered in this paper, between dif-
ferent writing tasks and resulting variation in writ-
ing style, involves differences in mental state. Ad-
ditional investigation is required in order to further
validate this hypothesis.

Design of NLP tasks. Our study also provides
important insights for the future design of NLP
tasks. The story cloze task was very carefully de-
signed. Many factors, such as topic diversity and

21



temporal and causal relation diversity, were con-
trolled for (Mostafazadeh et al., 2016a). The au-
thors also made sure each pair of endings was writ-
ten by the same author, partly in order to avoid
author-specific style effects. Nonetheless, despite
these efforts, several significant style differences
can be found between the story cloze training and
test set, as well as between the positive and nega-
tive labels.

Our findings suggest that careful attention must
be paid to instructions given to authors, especially
in unnatural tasks such as writing a wrong ending.
The COPA dataset (Roemmele et al., 2011), which
was also designed to test commonsense knowl-
edge, explicitly addressed potential style differ-
ences in their instructions. In this task, systems
are presented with premises like I put my plate in
the sink, and then decide between two alternatives,
e.g.: (a) I finished eating. and (b) I skipped dinner.
Importantly, when writing the alternatives, annota-
tors were asked to be as brief as possible and avoid
proper names, as well as slang.

Applying our story cloze classifier to this
dataset yields 53.2% classification accuracy—
close to a random baseline. While this could be
partially explained by the smaller data size of the
COPA dataset (1,000 examples compared to 3,742
in the story cloze task), this indicates that simple
instructions may help alleviate the effects of writ-
ing style found in this paper. Another way to avoid
such effects is to have people rate naturally occur-
ring sentences by parameters such as coherence
(or, conversely, the level of surprise), rather than
asking them to generate new text.

8 Related Work

Writing style. Writing style has been an active
topic of research for decades. The models used to
characterize style are often linear classifiers with
style features such as character and word n-grams
(Stamatatos, 2009; Koppel et al., 2009). Previ-
ous work has shown that different authors can be
grouped by their writing style, according to factors
such as age (Pennebaker and Stone, 2003; Arga-
mon et al., 2003; Schler et al., 2006; Rosenthal
and McKeown, 2011; Nguyen et al., 2011), gender
(Argamon et al., 2003; Schler et al., 2006; Bam-
man et al., 2014), and native language (Koppel
et al., 2005; Tsur and Rappoport, 2007; Bergsma
et al., 2012). At the extreme case, each individ-
ual author adopts a unique writing style (Mosteller

and Wallace, 1963; Pennebaker and King, 1999;
Schwartz et al., 2013b).

The line of work that most resembles our work
is the detection of deceptive text. Several re-
searchers have used stylometric features to predict
deception (Newman et al., 2003; Hancock et al.,
2007; Ott et al., 2011; Feng et al., 2012). Some
works even showed that gender affects a person’s
writing style when lying (Pérez-Rosas and Mihal-
cea, 2014a,b). In this work, we have shown that
an even more subtle writing task—writing coher-
ent and incoherent story endings—imposes differ-
ent styles on the author.

Machine reading. The story cloze task, which
is the focus of this paper, is part of a wide set of
machine reading/comprehension challenges pub-
lished in the last few years. These include datasets
like bAbI (Weston et al., 2016), SNLI (Bowman
et al., 2015), CNN/DailyMail (Hermann et al.,
2015), LAMBADA (Paperno et al., 2016) and
SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016). While these
works have presented resources for researchers,
it is often the case that these datasets suffer
from methodological problems caused by apply-
ing noisy automatic tools to generate them (Chen
et al., 2016).11 In this paper, we have pointed
to another methodological challenge in design-
ing machine reading tasks: different writing tasks
used to generated the data affect writing style, con-
founding classification problems.

9 Conclusion

Different writing tasks assigned to an author re-
sult in different writing styles for that author. We
experimented with the story cloze task, which in-
troduces two interesting comparison points: the
difference between writing a story on one’s own
and continuing someone else’s story, and the dif-
ference between writing a coherent and an inco-
herent story ending. In both cases, a simple lin-
ear model reveals measurable differences in writ-
ing styles, which in turn allows our final model to
achieve state of the art results on the story cloze
task.

The findings presented in this paper have cogni-
tive implications, as they motivate further research

11Similar problems have been shown in visual question an-
swering datasets, where simple models that rely mostly on
the question text perform competitively with state of the art
models by exploiting language biases (Zhou et al., 2015; Jabri
et al., 2016).

22



on the effects that a writing prompt has on an au-
thor’s mental state, and also her concrete response.
They also provide valuable lessons for designing
new NLP datasets.

10 Acknowledgments

The authors thank Chenhao Tan, Luke Zettle-
moyer, Rik Koncel-Kedziorski, Rowan Zellers,
Yangfeng Ji and several anonymous reviewers for
helpful feedback. This research was supported
in part by Darpa CwC program through ARO
(W911NF-15-1-0543), Samsung GRO, NSF IIS-
1524371, and gifts from Google and Facebook.

References
Shlomo Argamon, Moshe Koppel, Jonathan Fine, and

Anat Rachel Shimoni. 2003. Gender, genre, and
writing style in formal written texts. Text 23(3):321–
346.

David Bamman, Jacob Eisenstein, and Tyler Schnoe-
belen. 2014. Gender identity and lexical variation in
social media. Journal of Sociolinguistics 18(2):135–
160.

Ritwik Banerjee, Song Feng, Jun S. Kang, and Yejin
Choi. 2014. Keystroke patterns as prosody in digital
writings: A case study with deceptive reviews and
essays. In Proc. of EMNLP.

Shane Bergsma, Matt Post, and David Yarowsky. 2012.
Stylometric analysis of scientific articles. In Proc. of
NAACL.

Jeffrey D. Bowen, Lauren A. Winczewski, and
Nancy L. Collins. 2016. Language style matching
in romantic partners? conflict and support interac-
tions. Journal of Language and Social Psychology
pages 1–24.

Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts,
and Christopher D. Manning. 2015. A large anno-
tated corpus for learning natural language inference.
In Proc. of EMNLP.

Michael Brooks, Katie Kuksenok, Megan K. Torkild-
son, Daniel Perry, John J. Robinson, Taylor J. Scott,
Ona Anicello, Ariana Zukowski, Paul Harris, and
Cecilia R. Aragon. 2013. Statistical affect detection
in collaborative chat. In Proc. of CSCW.

Moira Burke, Lada A. Adamic, and Karyn Marciniak.
2013. Families on facebook. In Proc. of ICWSM.

Zheng Cai, Lifu Tu, and Kevin Gimpel. 2017. Pay at-
tention to the ending: Strong neural baselines for the
ROC story cloze task. In Proc. of ACL.

R. Sherlock Campbell and James W. Pennebaker. 2003.
The secret life of pronouns flexibility in writing

style and physical health. Psychological Science
14(1):60–65.

Danqi Chen, Jason Bolton, and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2016. A thorough examination of the
CNN/Daily Mail reading comprehension task. In
Proc. of ACL.

Dmitry Davidov, Oren Tsur, and Ari Rappoport. 2010.
Enhanced sentiment learning using Twitter hashtags
and smileys. In Proc. of COLING.

Song Feng, Ritwik Banerjee, and Yejin Choi. 2012.
Syntactic stylometry for deception detection. In
Proc. of ACL.

Joanne Frattaroli. 2006. Experimental disclosure and
its moderators: a meta-analysis. Psychological bul-
letin 132(6):823.

Amy L. Gonzales, Jeffrey T. Hancock, and James W.
Pennebaker. 2009. Language style matching as a
predictor of social dynamics in small groups. Com-
munication Research 37(1):3–19.

Jeffrey T. Hancock, Lauren E. Curry, Saurabh Goorha,
and Michael Woodworth. 2007. On lying and be-
ing lied to: A linguistic analysis of deception in
computer-mediated communication. Discourse Pro-
cesses 45(1):1–23.

Karl Moritz Hermann, Tomáš Kočiský, Edward
Grefenstette, Lasse Espeholt, Will Kay, Mustafa Su-
leyman, and Phil Blunsom. 2015. Teaching ma-
chines to read and comprehend. In Proc. of NIPS.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997.
Long short-term memory. Neural Computation
9(8):1735–1780.

Molly E. Ireland and Marlone D. Henderson. 2014.
Language style matching, engagement, and impasse
in negotiations. Negotiation and Conflict Manage-
ment Research 7(1):1–16.

Molly E. Ireland and Matthias R. Mehl. 2014. Natu-
ral language use as a marker of personality, Oxford
University Press, USA, pages 201–237. The Oxford
Handbook of Language and Social Psychology.

Molly E. Ireland, Richard B. Slatcher, Paul W. East-
wick, Lauren E. Scissors, Eli J. Finkel, and James W.
Pennebaker. 2011. Language style matching pre-
dicts relationship initiation and stability. Psycholog-
ical Science 22(1):39–44.

Allan Jabri, Armand Joulin, and Laurens van der
Maaten. 2016. Revisiting visual question answering
baselines. In Proc. of ECCV .

Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam: A
method for stochastic optimization. In Proc. of
ICLR.

Moshe Koppel, Jonathan Schler, and Shlomo Arga-
mon. 2009. Computational methods in authorship
attribution. Journal of the American Society for in-
formation Science and Technology 60(1):9–26.

23



Moshe Koppel, Jonathan Schler, and Kfir Zigdon.
2005. Determining an author’s native language by
mining a text for errors. In Proc. of KDD.

Stephen J. Lepore and Joshua M. Smyth. 2002. The
Writing Cure: How Expressive Writing Promotes
Health and Emotional Well-being. American Psy-
chological Association.

Todor Mihaylov and Anette Frank. 2017. Simple story
ending selection baselines. In Proc. of LSDSem.

Tomáš Mikolov, Martin Karafiát, Lukáš Burget, Jan
Černocký, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. 2010. Recur-
rent neural network based language model. In Proc.
of Interspeech.

Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Nathanael Chambers, Xiaodong
He, Devi Parikh, Dhruv Batra, Lucy Vanderwende,
Pushmeet Kohli, and James Allen. 2016a. A cor-
pus and cloze evaluation for deeper understanding
of commonsense stories. In Proc. of NAACL.

Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Michael Roth, Annie Louis,
Nathanael Chambers, and James F. Allen. 2017. LS-
DSem 2017 shared task: The story cloze test. In
Proc. of LSDSem.

Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Lucy Vanderwende, Wen-tau
Yih, Pushmeet Kohli, and James Allen. 2016b.
Story cloze evaluator: Vector space representation
evaluation by predicting what happens next. In
Proc. of RepEval.

Frederick Mosteller and David L. Wallace. 1963. Infer-
ence in an authorship problem. Journal of the Amer-
ican Statistical Association 58(302):275–309.

Matthew L. Newman, James W. Pennebaker, Diane S.
Berry, and Jane M. Richards. 2003. Lying words:
Predicting deception from linguistic styles. Person-
ality and Social Psychology Bulletin 29(5):665–675.

Dong Nguyen, Rilana Gravel, Dolf Trieschnigg, and
Theo Meder. 2013. “How old do you think i am?”
a study of language and age in Twitter. In Proc. of
ICWSM.

Dong Nguyen, Noah A. Smith, and Carolyn P. Rosé.
2011. Author age prediction from text using linear
regression. In Proc. of LaTeCH.

Myle Ott, Yejin Choi, Claire Cardie, and Jeffrey T.
Hancock. 2011. Finding deceptive opinion spam by
any stretch of the imagination. In Proc. of ACL.

Denis Paperno, Germán Kruszewski, Angeliki Lazari-
dou, Ngoc Quan Pham, Raffaella Bernardi, San-
dro Pezzelle, Marco Baroni, Gemma Boleda, and
Raquel Fernández. 2016. The LAMBADA dataset:
Word prediction requiring a broad discourse context.
In Proc. of ACL.

Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gram-
fort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier
Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron

Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, Jake Vanderplas, Alexan-
dre Passos, David Cournapeau, Matthieu Brucher,
Matthieu Perrot, and Édouard Duchesnay. 2011.
Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. JMLR
12:2825–2830.

James W. Pennebaker and Laura A. King. 1999. Lin-
guistic styles: language use as an individual differ-
ence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
77(6):1296–1312.

James W. Pennebaker and Lori D. Stone. 2003. Words
of wisdom: language use over the life span. Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology 85(2):291–
301.

Verónica Pérez-Rosas and Rada Mihalcea. 2014a.
Cross-cultural deception detection. In Proc. of ACL.

Verónica Pérez-Rosas and Rada Mihalcea. 2014b.
Gender differences in deceivers writing style. Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science 8856:163–174.

Tiantian Qin, Judee Burgoon, and Jay F. Nunamaker Jr.
2004. An exploratory study on promising cues in
deception detection and application of decision tree.
In Proc. of HICSS.

Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and
Percy Liang. 2016. SQuAD: 100,000+ questions
for machine comprehension of text. In Proc. of
EMNLP.

Melissa Roemmele, Cosmin Adrian Bejan, and An-
drew S. Gordon. 2011. Choice of plausible alter-
natives: An evaluation of commonsense causal rea-
soning. In AAAI Spring Symposium: Logical For-
malizations of Commonsense Reasoning.

Sara Rosenthal and Kathleen McKeown. 2011. Age
prediction in blogs: A study of style, content, and
online behavior in pre- and post-social media gener-
ations. In Proc. of ACL.

Michael Roth, Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Nathanael Cham-
bers, and Annie Louis, editors. 2017. Proceedings
of the 2nd Workshop on Linking Models of Lexical,
Sentential and Discourse-level Semantics. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Jonathan Schler, Moshe Koppel, Shlomo Argamon,
and James Pennebaker. 2006. Effects of age and
gender on blogging. In AAAI Spring Symposium:
Computational Approaches to Analyzing Weblogs.

Andrew H. Schwartz, Johannes C. Eichstaedt, Mar-
garet L. Kern, Lukasz Dziurzynski, Stephanie M.
Ramones, Megha Agrawal, Achal Shah, Michal
Kosinski, David Stillwell, Martin E.P. Seligman, and
Lyle H. Unger. 2013a. Personality, gender, and
age in the language of social media: The open-
vocabulary approach. PloS one 8(9):e73791.

Roy Schwartz, Maarten Sap, Ioannis Konstas, Leila
Zilles, Yejin Choi, and Noah A. Smith. 2017. Story
cloze task: UW NLP system. In Proc. of LSDSem.

24



Roy Schwartz, Oren Tsur, Ari Rappoport, and Moshe
Koppel. 2013b. Authorship attribution of micro-
messages. In Proc. of EMNLP.

Efstathios Stamatatos. 2009. A survey of modern au-
thorship attribution methods. Journal of the Ameri-
can Society for information Science and Technology
60(3):538–556.

Yla Rebecca Tausczik. 2009. Linguistic analysis
of workplace computer-mediated communication.
Master’s thesis, University of Texas.

Oren Tsur, Dmitry Davidov, and Ari Rappoport. 2010.
ICWSM—a great catchy name: Semi-supervised
recognition of sarcastic sentences in online product
reviews. In Proc. of ICWSM.

Oren Tsur and Ari Rappoport. 2007. Using classifier
features for studying the effect of native language
on the choice of written second language words. In
Proc. of CACLA.

Jason Weston, Antoine Bordes, Sumit Chopra, Alexan-
der M Rush, Bart van Merriënboer, Armand Joulin,
and Tomas Mikolov. 2016. Towards AI-complete
question answering: A set of prerequisite toy tasks.
In Proc. of ICLR.

Maria Yancheva and Frank Rudzicz. 2013. Automatic
detection of deception in child-produced speech us-
ing syntactic complexity features. In Proc. of ACL.

Tae Yano, Noah A. Smith, and John D. Wilkerson.
2012. Textual predictors of bill survival in congres-
sional committees. In Proc. of NAACL.

Bolei Zhou, Yuandong Tian, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar,
Arthur Szlam, and Rob Fergus. 2015. Sim-
ple baseline for visual question answering.
ArXiv:1512.02167.

25


