



















































Leveraging Eventive Information for Better Metaphor Detection and Classification


Proceedings of the 21st Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL 2017), pages 36–46,
Vancouver, Canada, August 3 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

 

Leveraging Eventive Information for  
Better Metaphor Detection and Classification 

I-Hsuan Chen1, Yunfei Long2, Qin Lu2, Chu-Ren Huang1 
1Department of Chinese & Bilingual Studies, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 

{ihsuan.chen, churen.huang}@polyu.edu.hk 
2Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 

{csylong, csluqin}@comp.polyu.edu.hk 
 

 
 

Abstract 

Metaphor detection has been both chal-
lenging and rewarding in natural language 
processing applications. This study offers a 
new approach based on eventive infor-
mation in detecting metaphors by leverag-
ing the Chinese writing system, which is a 
culturally bound ontological system orga-
nized according to the basic concepts rep-
resented by radicals. As such, the infor-
mation represented is available in all Chi-
nese text without pre-processing. Since 
metaphor detection is another culturally 
based conceptual representation, we hy-
pothesize that sub-textual information can 
facilitate the identification and classifica-
tion of the types of metaphoric events de-
noted in Chinese text. We propose a set of 
syntactic conditions crucial to event struc-
tures to improve the model based on the 
classification of radical groups. With the 
proposed syntactic conditions, the model 
achieves a performance of 0.8859 in terms 
of F-scores, making 1.7% of improvement 
than the same classifier with only Bag-of-
word features. Results show that eventive 
information can improve the effectiveness 
of metaphor detection. Event information 
is rooted in every language, and thus this 
approach has a high potential to be applied 
to metaphor detection in other languages. 

1 Introduction 

Metaphors are a cross linguistic phenomenon in 
everyday language as shown in a great amount of 
corpus linguistic and experimental studies. The 
Conceptual Metaphor Theory (Lakoff, 1989; 
Lakoff and Johnson, 1981) shows how linguistic 
expressions reflect the mapping of two conceptu-
al domains. For example, the expression I see 
what you mean instantiates the conceptual meta-
phor of KNOWING IS SEEING. The phrase is 

the result of mapping the source domain SEE-
ING, which is embodied daily experience onto 
the target domain, KNOWING, as exemplified in 
the examples of shed some light on this, an illu-
minating article, and take a close look. Due to the 
pervasive use of metaphors, there is an enormous 
amount of studies in the techniques of detecting 
metaphors. Relevant studies of detecting meta-
phors primarily rely on contextual information.  
This study provides a novel approach to detect 
and classify metaphors by analyzing eventive in-
formation. Concepts can be classified into a wide 
array of event types according to ontology, the 
organization of knowledge (Huang et al., 2007). 
Eventive information thus can be applied to the 
classification of metaphors, which concern map-
pings of conceptual structures from a source do-
main to a target domain. 

The classification of metaphoric and literal 
senses has been approached by different methods 
such as vector-space models with distributional 
statistics (Hovy et al., 2013; Tsvetkov et al., 
2014) and compositional distributional semantic 
models (CDSMs) (Kartsaklis and Sadrzadeh, 
2013a). Most of the studies regarding metaphoric 
detection have been done in English, while the 
task in Chinese is at the incipient stage. The rele-
vant studies such as clustering models and simi-
larity computation in context (Fu et al., 2016; 
Wang, 2010) mainly focus on the metaphoric 
sense of each individual noun or adjectival phrase 
because the analyses are highly dependent on 
contextual information. However, metaphoric 
senses of verbs are less touched because it is dif-
ficult to define regularities of their contextual in-
formation. This study deals with the challenge of 
the verb category by including eventive infor-
mation, which is the basis of the classification of 
metaphors.  

36



 

Chinese is featured by its semantic-based or-
thography in the writing system. Specifically, 
Chinese characters are composed of radicals and 
components, which are ideographic or phonetic 
symbols. Radicals, which represent core concep-
tual properties, encode eventive information of the 
literal senses of characters (Huang 2009, Huang 
and Hsieh, 2015). For instance, the verb 踢 ti 
‘kick’ contains the radical 足 ‘foot’; the verb 吃 
chi ‘eat’ has the radical 口 ‘mouth’. The radicals 
clearly identify the body parts executing the ac-
tions. Chinese radicals, in particular, evoke the 
whole event structure such as the initiation, the 
process, and the termination of a kicking or an eat-
ing action. Also, radicals are good indicators of 
different types of events. For instance, radicals can 
encode the information of tools in the concept of 
separation. The radical 刀 dao ‘knife’ of the char-
acter 切 qie ‘cut’ implies that the action results in 
two pieces, while the radical 石 shi ‘stone’ of the 
character 破 po ‘break’ emphasizing that the ac-
tion results into pieces. The radicals can thus pro-
vide detailed eventive information to identify the 
source domain in the task of metaphor detection.  

Event information characterizes detailed prop-
erties such as the volition of the subject and the 
resulted status of the object. The properties can be 
accessed by their corresponding syntactic con-
structions. We propose 17 syntactic conditions 
which are appropriate to differentiate different 
event types. First, we implement the algorithm of 
metaphor detection based on a Support Vector 
Machine (SVM) classifier. The syntactic condi-
tions serve as additional features using Bag-of-
word features as the baseline. Second, we apply 
the SVM classifier to predict the senses, either lit-
eral or metaphoric, of each verb in Baidu Baike 
corpus, which has 1,543,669 million entries and 
7.6 billion tokens.1 We then measure the semantic 
similarities among different radical groups by the 
vector representation according to each sense of 
each character. The similarity of vectors based on 
word representation and sense representation 
proves that radicals can predict semantic groups of 
the literal senses. We delimit the syntactic envi-
ronments where the literal senses tend to occur. 
When a sense does not occur in the defined set of 
syntactic conditions, it is highly possible to be 
metaphoric. 

                                                      
1 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baidu_Baike 

In this study, NLP technology is applied to two 
deeply culturally bound phenomena: (i) the Chi-
nese writing system and (ii) the classification of 
metaphors. The Chinese character orthography is 
an ontological system organized based on the 
primitive concepts represented by radicals (Chou 
and Huang, 2010). Thus, the information repre-
sented by radicals is not only cultural specific but 
also available in all Chinese text without the need 
for processing. Metaphor detection, as another 
culturally based conceptual representation, has 
been proven to be both challenging and extremely 
valuable in natural language processing. Based on 
their shared event information, we hypothesize 
that sub-textual information can leverage the ef-
fectiveness to identify and classify different types 
of metaphoric events hidden in the Chinese text. 
Our experiments prove the effectiveness of even-
tive information in detecting metaphors. The ap-
proach of leveraging event type information by 
radicals increases both the precision and the recall 
in metaphor detection. Although this approach is 
especially effective for Chinese because of the in-
formation embedded in radicals, broader implica-
tions include the possibility of leveraging eventive 
information from different sources in other lan-
guages. 

2 Related Work 

The task of metaphor detection has been handled 
in a wide variety of approaches including cluster-
ing models (Birke and Sarkar, 2006; Shutova et 
al., 2010; Li and Sporleder, 2010), semantic simi-
larity graphs (Sporleder and Li, 2009), topic mod-
eling (Li et al., 2010; Heintz et al., 2013), and 
compositional distributional semantic models 
(CDSMs) (Gutiérrez et al. 2016). Feature-based 
classification, in particular, attracts most attention 
since a wide array of contextual information is in-
cluded (Sporleder and Li, 2009; Dunn., 2013; 
Hovy et al., 2011; Mohler et al., 2013; Neuman et 
al., 2013; Tsvetkov et al., 2013; Tsvetkov et al., 
2014). Since the studies regarding metaphor iden-
tification have primarily focused on English, there 
are more available datasets in English in both 
manually-tagged linguistic resources (Gedigian et 
al., 2006; Krishnakumaran and Zhu, 2007; 
Broadwell et al., 2013) and corpus-based ap-
proach (Birke and Sarker, 2007; Shutova et al., 
2013; Neuman et al., 2013; Hovy et al., 2013). 
Metaphor detection in Chinese is at the incipient 
stage. Fu et al., (2016) uses hierarchical clustering 

37



 

for Chinese noun phrases according to their con-
textual information to recognize metaphoric 
phrases. Zhou et al. (2011) use the Maximum En-
trophy model to detect the metaphoric reading of 
verb phrases based on collocation with noun 
phrases, and point out that there is no mature syn-
tactic and semantic tool for metaphor analysis in 
Chinese. Our study will close the gap by building 
a model of metaphor detection based on syntactic 
conditions.  

Regarding metaphor detection, most papers 
emphasize on distinguishing metaphoric senses 
from literal senses in a polysemy network. Dis-
ambiguation of senses has been handled by DSMs 
based on the availability of contextual information 
(Baroni et al., 2014; Boleda et al., 2012; Erk and 
Padó, 2010; Kartsaklis and Sadrzadeh 2013). 
When more contextual information is incorpo-
rated, disambiguation would be more successful. 
It should be noted that the senses of one form 
have different degrees of transparency to be traced 
in semantics. The senses of a form which can be 
chained together via overlapping semantics, as in 
the case of polysemy (cut a new window in the 
wall vs. the ball broke a window), are more likely 
to be traced. On the contrary, when the senses of a 
linguistic form are discrete as in the case of ho-
monymy (e.g. piano keys vs. key point), they may 
be problematic to DSM (Baroni et al., 2014). 
Gutiérrez et al. (2016) point out that the challenge 
arises from the highly context-dependent property 
of homonymies since the relations of senses are 
not unsystematic. In contrast, the senses of a poly-
semy form a systematic system, and thus CDSM 
has a better chance to detect metaphoric senses 
(Gutiérrez et al. 2016). Nevertheless, how to 
group a variety of senses including metonymic 
and metaphoric senses as a polysemy has been a 
challenge in Chinese (Fu et al., 2016). In this pa-
per, the use of Chinese radicals for grouping sens-
es can avoid the confusion of polysemy and hom-
onym because Chinese radicals stand for semantic 
classification, reflecting the structure of our onto-
logical knowledge structure (Huang 2009).  

Contextual information has been regarded as an 
important determinant in identifying metaphors. 
Previous studies thus primarily focus on the adjec-
tives or nouns as in the studies of English meta-
phors due to the abundant contextual information 
from these categories. This study, instead, focuses 
on the verb category and shows the literal and 
metaphoric senses of a verb can be predicted by 

their syntactic conditions. The event structure 
evoked by a verb offers reliable information for 
metaphor detection. 

3 Methodology  

Our task is to define the syntactic environments 
where the metaphoric sense of a verb would be 
more likely to occur. Each verb corresponds to a 
type of event structure. Chinese radicals denote 
the most profiled element in an event structure. 
For example, the literal sense of 灌 guan ‘pour’, 
which has a water radical 氵, specifies the materi-
al of this action is water. Based on the properties 
of water, the verb emphasizes dynamic flows. 
Thus the verb tends to appear in non-passive con-
structions for expressing the dynamics. The literal 
meaning of 墊 dian ‘pad’, which has the mud rad-
ical 土, profiles mud as a loctum, and therefore it 
tends to appear with a locative phrase in order to 
specify the object to be padded. The literal sense 
of 切 qie ‘cut’, which has a knife radical 刀, spec-
ifies the instrument of the separation. The verb 
occurs mostly in the VO word order, as in 切蛋糕 
qie diangao ‘cut cakes’ to emphasize on transitivi-
ty. In summary, each verb has its own event struc-
ture, which can be observed in the syntactic envi-
ronments where the verb frequently occurs. Since 
a metaphoric sense describes a concept different 
from that of a literal sense, it should have a differ-
ent event structure from that of a literal sense. Ac-
cording to corpus data, it can be observed that the 
literal senses of a verb tend to occur under a set of 
syntactic conditions, while the metaphoric senses 
of the same verb tend to occur in the environments 
deviating from the standards. For instance, the 
metaphoric sense of 灌 guan ‘pour’frequently 
appears in passive constructions, while the literal 
sense generally occurs in non-passive construc-
tions. The metaphoric sense of 墊 dian ‘pad’ is 
more likely to occur without a locative phrase, 
whereas the literal senses normally occur with a 
locative phrase. The metaphoric sense of 切 qie 
‘cut’ as in ‘cannot cut the relationship’ occurs 
more frequently in the OV word order, while the 
literal sense tends to occur in the VO word order. 
The change of event types is expected since the 
source domain and the target domain refer to dif-
ferent settings although their underlying concep-
tual structures are organized in a similar way. For 
instance, both the literal and metaphoric senses of 

38



 

切 qie ‘cut’ refer to the concept of separation 
which results in two entities, but the separation is 
employed to describe different contexts. The lit-
eral one refers to the separation of an entity with a 
specific instrument, while the metaphoric one re-
fers to the discontinuation of a relationship. It is 
the change of event types that provides infor-
mation of predicting which sense is in use.  

3.1 Syntactic conditions and Radicals 
Radicals: The advantages of radical-based analy-
sis are the transparency and traceability of seman-
tic relations among different senses in a polysemy 
network. The current experiments include 14 
types of radicals as listed in Table 1. Each type of 
radicals has two to three verbs which have high 
frequency in Chinese Gigaword (Huang 2009) as 
the representatives. 

Syntactic conditions: We hypothesize that the 
literal senses of a verb tend to appear in a set of 
syntactic conditions whereas the metaphoric sens-
es tend to deviate from those conditions due to the 

change of event types. To test this hypothesis, we 
propose a variety of syntactic conditions to char-
acterize each sense and its relevant event struc-
ture. The conditions are selected based on the fre-
quency of where the literal senses of these verbs 
occur.  
(i) Word order (VO): If a verb can take an ob-

ject, the verb and its object may occur in ei-
ther VO or OV word order. 

(ii) Compounding (VV): The verb may form a 
compound with another verb in VV form. 
The target verb is the second one. 

(iii) Transitivity (Vt): The verb may be transitive 
or intransitive. 

(iv) Passivity (Pass): The verb may occur in a 
passive construction. The indicators are the 
occurrences of passive markers. 

(v) Disposal constructions (Disposal): The verb 
may occur with the disposal markers to 
foreground the semantic patient or the direct 
object.  

(vi) Aspectual markers (Asp): The verb may ap-
pear with aspectual markers to specify the 
status of the process. 

(vii) Double-object construction (DO): The verb 
may take both a direct object and an indirect 
object. 

(viii) Relative clauses (RC): The verbs may occur 
with a relative clause. This feature is indi-
cated by the markers of a relative clause. 

(ix) Numeral phrases (Num): Amounts relevant 
to the event are specified by numeral-
classifier phrases.  

(x) Locative phrases (Loc): Location of the 
event is specified. The locative phrase can 
occur either before or after the verb. 

(xi) Negation (Neg): Negative markers appear 
in the main clause which contains  

(xii) Postpositions (Post): The verb may take a 
postposition phrase. 

(xiii) Prepositions (Prep): The verb may occur 
with a preposition phrase. . The indicators 
are the occurrences of a variety of preposi-
tions. 

(xiv) Instrumental 用 yong ‘use’ (yong): The in-
struments are profiled.  

(xv) 對 dui ‘to/ toward’ (dui): The goal of the 
verb is profiled by this marker. 

(xvi) Beneficiary/ maleficent marker 給 gei (gei): 
The affectiveness of the event relevant to 
the target verb is specified. 

Radical Sample  Characters Radical Sample  Characters 
火 

huo 
‘fire’ 

熬 ao ‘simmer’

烤 kao ‘grill’ 
糸 
mi 

‘thread’ 
綁 bang ‘tight’ 
織 zhi ‘weave’ 

水 
shui 

‘water’ 

灌 guan ‘pour’ 

沖 chong ‘flush’ 
力 
li 

‘power’ 

動 dong ‘move’ 
加 jia‘add’ 

土 
tu 

‘mud’ 
墊 dian ‘pad’ 
塞 sai ‘pack’ 

扌 
shou 

‘hand’ 
抱 bao ‘hug’ 
推 tui ‘push’ 

金 
jin 

‘gold’ 
釘 ding ‘pin 
鑽 zuan ‘drill’ 

口 
kou 

‘mouth’ 
吃 chi ‘eat’ 
咬 yao ‘bite’ 

石 
shi 

‘stone’ 

砍 kan ‘chop’ 

破 po ‘break 
碰 peng ‘clash’ 

辵/辶 
chuo 

‘interval 
walk’ 

逃 tiao ‘escape’ 
追 zhui ‘chase’ 

刀 
dao 

‘knife’ 
刷 shua ‘brush’ 
切 qie ‘cut’ 

足 
zu 

‘foot’ 
跳 tiao ‘jump’ 
踢 ti ‘kick’ 

斤 
jin 

‘ax’ 
斬 zan ‘cut’ 
斷 duan ‘snap’ 

走 
zou 

‘walk’ 
走 zou ‘walk’ 
趕 gan ‘chase’ 

 

Table 1:  Types of radicals and sample characters 

39



 

(xvii) Postverbal adverbs (Vadv): The verb may 
be followed by an adverb which specifies 
degrees or durations of time. 

 

3.2 Design of classification model 
In order to evaluate the effectiveness of our pro-
posed syntactic conditions, we have to extract the 
syntactic features which are relevant to the literal 
and metaphoric senses. The task of detecting the 
metaphor/literal senses is modeled as a binary 
class classification. The proposed syntactic condi-
tions are implemented as additional features in 
this model.  

SVM are well performed in higher dimension, 
particularly when targeted instances only hold a 
small portion in a dataset. Since our design focus-
es on the effectiveness of syntactic conditions in 
metaphor detection rather than on a classifier, we 
choose SVM with linear kernel as our classifier 

for its linear binary classification and use LibSVM 
(Chang and Lin, 2011) as the SVM tool. 

3.3 Word embedding for word similarity 
Word embedding is known as a special form of 
word vectors which represents a word through a 
low dimensional dense vector and has been used 
in different lexical tasks, such as semantic similar-
ity, word analogy, word synonym detection, and 
concept categorization (Baroni, 2014), (Levy, 
2015). Our goal is to increase the precision of 
metaphor detection with the aid of the semantic 
classification of radicals. Thus we conduct word 
embedding to show how different concepts are 
categorized in terms of their semantic similarities. 
Based on the similarity from word embedding, we 
can infer semantic distance among verbs with dif-
ferent radicals and further quantify the differences 
between the metaphoric and literal senses of the 
same verb.  

Various models are proposed to learn the dense 
vector representation of words, which are all 
based on the distributional hypothesis that words 
occur in similar context have similar meanings 
(Harris, 1954). Among those models, the most 
widely used one is the Skip-Gram model with 
negative sampling (Mikolov, 2013). In our task, 
word embedding is trained through the Skip-Gram 
model with default parameters on the Baidu Baike 
corpus2 with word segmentation performed by the 
HIT LTP too13.  

Since Chinese radicals encode semantic catego-
rizations, verbs which belong to the same radical 
group are expected to be close semantically. In or-
der to capture the predictive power of radicals in 
semantics, we use multi-dimensional vector space 
to show the distribution of verbs when they are 
used in their literal senses and metaphoric senses 
respectively (Baroni, 2014, Levy, 2015). First, we 
use our proposed classifier to predict the senses of 
29 selected verbs, and treat metaphor /literal sense 
of each word as an individual word. And we cal-
culate the cosine similarity between different 
senses. Figure 1 shows that verbs having the same 
radical are relatively similar to each other com-
pared to verbs which belong to different radical 
groups. However, the grouping by radicals does 
not work well in the metaphoric senses, as shown 
in the lower graph. The sharp contrast supports the 
claim that the metaphoric senses of a verb have a 
                                                      
2 http://www.nlpcn.org/resource/7  
3 http://www.ltp-cloud.com/  

 

 
Figure 1:  Semantic closeness among different 
verbs [upper graph: literal sense; lower graph: 
metaphoric sense] 

熬烤灌沖墊塞砍破碰釘鑽刷切斬斷綁織動加抱推吃咬逃追跳踢趕走
A1 A2 B1 B2 C1 C2 D1 D2 D3 E1 E2 F1 F2 G1 G2 H1 H2 J1 J2 K1 K2 L1 L2 M1M2 N1 N2 O1 O2

走 O2
趕 O1
踢 N2
跳 N1
追 M2
逃 M1
咬 L2
吃 L1
推 K2
抱 K1
加 J2
動 J1
織 H2
綁 H1
斷 G2
斬 G1
切 F2
刷 F1
鑽 E2
釘 E1
碰 D3
破 D2
砍 D1
塞 C2
墊 C1
沖 B2
灌 B1
烤 A2
熬 A1

-0.2

Legend
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

熬烤灌沖墊塞砍破碰釘鑽刷切斬斷綁織動加抱推吃咬逃追跳踢趕走
A1 A2 B1 B2 C1 C2 D1 D2 D3 E1 E2 F1 F2 G1 G2 H1 H2 J1 J2 K1 K2 L1 L2 M1M2 N1 N2 O1 O2

走 O2
趕 O1
踢 N2
跳 N1
追 M2
逃 M1
咬 L2
吃 L1
推 K2
抱 K1
加 J2
動 J1
織 H2
綁 H1
斷 G2
斬 G1
切 F2
刷 F1
鑽 E2
釘 E1
碰 D3
破 D2
砍 D1
塞 C2
墊 C1
沖 B2
灌 B1
烤 A2
熬 A1

0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2

Legend
1.0
0.8
0.6

40



 

different event structure from that of the literal 
senses. 

4 Experiments 

Experiments of feature analysis are conducted to 
show whether our proposed syntactic conditions 
can improve the model of metaphor detection. 

4.1 Dataset 
The dataset is structured based on the 29 verbs 
from 14 radical groups introduced in Section 3.1. 
For each verb, a random sample of 200-300 sen-
tences are collected from the Chinese Gigaword 
corpus (Huang, 2009), a comprehensive archive of 
newswire text data. Two Chinese native speakers 
manually annotated the metaphoric and literal 
senses of each token based on Hantology (Chou 
and Huang, 2006), a character-based Chinese lan-
guage resource in which each character is sense-
tagged. In the 6,047 tokens, 1,738 of them are la-
beled as a metaphoric sense and 4,309 are labeled 
as a literal sense. Our annotation task has kappa 
statistics (Banerjee, 1999) over 0.81 indicating 
strong inter-annotator consistency. 

4.2 Model and analysis  
We evaluate the 17 syntactic conditions using the 
SVM classification model in the dataset intro-
duced in Section 4.1. In order to avoid overfitting, 
we perform 10-fold cross validation. To test the 
efficiency of our proposed syntactic conditions, 
the 17 conditions are divided into 3 feature 
groups. 

 

• Base group: Using Bag-of-word features only 
• Group1: transitivity (Vt), numeral phrases 

(Num), relative clauses (RC), compounding 
(VV), tense, word order (VO), and double-
object construction (DO). 

• Group 2: negation (Neg), prepositions (Prep), 
locative phrases (Loc), postverbal adverbial 
(Vadv), passivity (Pass), and aspectual markers 
(Asp). 

• Group 3: disposal constructions (Disposal), 
postpositions (Post), instrumental 用 yong ‘use’ 
(yong), 對 dui ‘to/ toward’ (dui), and benefi-
ciary/maleficient marker 給 gei (gei). 
 

The three groups are defined based on two princi-
ples: (i) the probability of the occurrence of the 
metaphoric senses in the syntactic condition in 
question; (ii) the clusters of the verbs. As shown in 
Figure 2, the metaphoric senses frequently occur 
in a few syntactic conditions, such as Vt, VO, and 
relative clauses. Regarding the principle of the 
clusters, the condition which has less overlapping 
data points is more effective in distinguishing dif-
ferent senses.  

The results of the experiment given in Table 2 
show that the proposed syntactic conditions have 
improved the performance of the model. The in-
corporation of all the 17 features does improve the 
classification model by 1.70% in F-score. Howev-
er, Group 1 has the best performance, outperform-
ing the result when all the 17 features are used. 
However, when Group 2 and Group 3 are used 
alone, they do not contribute to improving the 
model. In fact, Group 3 decreases the effective-
ness of the model. The decrease in performance is 
on both Precision and Recall. However, while the 
model incorporates Group 1, the precision is im-
proved at the expense of a slight decrease in re-
call. This increase in precision indicates that the 
features of Group 2 and Group 3 still provide use-
ful information in metaphor detection. 

 
Figure 2:  Probability of metaphoric senses in 
each syntactic condition  

Type Precision Recall F score 
Basic 0.8824 0.8559 0.8689 
All features 0.8952 0.8768 0.8859 
Feature group 1 0.8925 0.8821 0.8872 
Feature group 2 0.8752 0.8631 0.8691 
Feature group 3 0.8705 0.8521 0.8612 

 
Table 2:  Performance in different condition 
groups 

41



 

5 Discussion  

Our experimental result shows that the proposed 
syntactic conditions can predict where the literal 
and metaphoric senses of the same verb occur. 
This is because the two senses tend   to be used in 
different event structure. For example, the literal 
sense of the verb 灌 guan ‘pour’ as in 灌良田 
guan liang tian ‘irrigating good farms’ specifies 
the location right after the verb, while the meta-
phoric sense as in 灌水 guan shui pour water ‘arti-
ficially increasing the amount’ has water as the 

material without specifying the location. The lit-
eral sense of 走 zhou ‘walk’ appears as an intran-
sitive verb as in 他走了 ta zhou le he-walk-ASP 
‘he left’, while the metaphoric sense tends to have 
a noun phrase following it as in 走好運 zhou hao 
yun walk-luck ‘being lucky’. Since the metaphoric 
sense describes an event different from that of the 
literal sense, the syntactic properties of the meta-
phoric sense should differ from those of the literal 
sense. Among our proposed syntactic conditions, 
seven of them, transitivity, relative clauses, double 
objects, compounds, word order, aspectual mark-
ers, and numeral phrases, are the most effective 
conditions in detecting metaphors. Figure 3 shows 
examples from these syntactic conditions includ-
ing transitivity, word order, and relative clauses. 
The horizontal axis shows conditional probabili-
ties in metaphoric sense. The vertical axis shows 
the conditional probabilities in literal sense. A 
condition with a stronger predictive power has a 
bigger difference in the probability between the 
literal and metaphoric senses. For example, the 
literal sense and metaphoric sense of the verb 切 
qie ‘cut’ have saliently different probabilities in 
the feature of word order. The literal sense is fre-
quently found in the VO word order, while the 
metaphoric sense seldom occurs in the VO word 
order. It is the difference that can serve to predict 
which sense, literal or metaphoric, is in use.  

Each syntactic condition is regarded as a meas-
urement. The syntactic conditions then can be 
grouped to precisely identify the event types of the 
literal and metaphoric senses for each verb as 

 

 

 
Figure 3:  Distribution of example literal-
metaphoric pair of verbs under individual syntac-
tic conditions. 

 
Figure 4:  Examples of metaphoric and literal 
senses of verbs characterized by a core set of 
syntactic conditions.  

42



 

shown in the examples of Figure 4. The horizontal 
axis shows conditional probabilities in metaphoric 
sense. The vertical axis shows the conditional 
probabilities in literal sense. Each condition has 
different relevancy to a verb because each verb 
belongs to a different event type. For example, the 
condition of word order (labeled as VO) has high-
er effectiveness in the verb 吃 chi ‘eat’ than in the 
verb 斷 duan ‘snap’. In other words, the senses of 
each verb can be identified by the most relevant 
syntactic conditions. Therefore, the syntactic envi-
ronments of where a verb occurs can be used to 
predict whether it is metaphoric. 

Furthermore, grouping verbs by Chinese radi-
cals can offer generalizations of the event types 
associated with a particular semantic group. A 
group of relevant radicals denote a higher-level 
category in the ontological structure, which refers 
to the organization of knowledge structure and the 
representation of knowledge system in terms of 
relations between concepts (Prévot et al., 2010). 
For example, the radicals discussed in this paper 
can be classified into four larger semantic catego-
ries, which are instruments, body parts, materials, 
movements, as given in Table 3. 

The differences in the distribution of the literal 
and metaphoric senses of the four semantic groups 
can be characterized by the rankings of the syntac-
tic conditions. As shown in Figure 5, the group of 
the material radicals and the group of the move-
ment radicals have different arrangement of the 

conditions. In other words, the literal sense of a 
larger semantic group can also be identified by its 
syntactic distribution. When a verb belonging to a 
larger semantic group does not occur in the set of 
syntactic conditions where the literal senses gen-
erally occur, it is highly possible to be metaphoric. 
Our design shows that syntactic conditions can of-
fer informative clues in detecting metaphoric 
senses based on the fact that each sense of a verb 
has its own preferred syntactic environments.  

The syntactic conditions can be further classi-
fied based on their effectiveness. As discussed in 
Section 4.2, the syntactic conditions of Group 1 in 
our model, transitivity (Vt), numeral phrases 
(Num), relative clauses (RC), compounding (VV), 
word order (VO), double-object construction 
(DO), are proven to be more efficient. The effec-
tiveness of the conditions reflects three generaliza-
tions of where metaphoric senses tend to occur. 
First, a sense tends to be non-metaphoric when a 
numeral phrase is involved. The involvement of 
numeral phrases specifies the exact numbers of 
the object. Since the object has concrete details, 
the verb is more likely to be a literal. Second, a 
metaphoric sense is generally used to modify a 
concept. Due to this modification property, meta-

 
Figure 5:  Examples of the syntactic conditions 
characterizing a higher-level semantic category 

Category Radicals 

Materials 
火 huo ‘fire’ 
水 shui ‘water’ 
土 tu ‘mud’ 

Body parts 扌 shou ‘hand’ 
口 kou ‘mouth’ 

Instruments 
走 zou ‘walk’ 
辵/辶 chuo ‘interval walk’ 
足 zu ‘foot’ 
力 li ‘power’ 

Movements 
石 shi ‘stone’ 
刀 dao ‘knife’ 
斤 jin ‘ax’ 
糸 mi ‘thread’ 
金 jin ‘gold’ 

Table 3:  Higher-level Ontological Categories 
of Radicals 

43



 

phoric senses tend to occur when there is a pres-
ence of a relative clause a relative clause, which 
serves the purpose of modification. Third, due to 
the changes of event types, the inherent properties 
of a verb are likely to change. More specifically, 
the transitivity of a verb changes when the verb is 
used in its metaphoric sense. For example, when a 
transitive verb becomes intransitive, the verb is 
likely not to be in its literal sense. Regarding the 
occurrence of compounding, the addition of an-
other verb provides additional information and 
thus creates an event structure which differs from 
the original one. Similarly, when a verb which 
does not have two objects in its argument structure 
appears in the double-object construction, it is a 
sign of changing event types because the addition-
al object cannot be accommodated in the original 
event structure. As for word order, it is associated 
with the information structure, which is a key 
component of an event structure. The change of 
word order therefore indicates the change of an 
event structure. Since each of the syntactic condi-
tions links to a particular aspect of a conceptual 
event, its change is an informative indicator of 
which sense, literal or metaphoric, is in use. 

On the other hand, the conditions in Group 3 do 
not contribute much to detecting senses. Although 
they provide additional information, the infor-
mation is proven to be peripheral in indicating 
changes of event types. In brief, our experiments 
can successfully rank the relevancy of syntactic 
conditions with event types. The syntactic condi-
tions which are related to the core elements of an 
event structure can improve the model of detect-
ing metaphors. 

6 Conclusion 

This study offers an effective and precise way of 
detecting metaphoric and literal senses by includ-
ing eventive information encoded in radicals. A 
set of syntactic conditions core to the event struc-
ture of a verb can define where its literal senses 
tend to occur. When a verb appears in the envi-
ronments deviating from the defined set, it has a 
higher chance to be metaphoric. Instead of focus-
ing on individual lexemes, we offer larger general-
izations by event types encoded by radicals. Event 
types correspond to larger conceptual categories. 
Thus verbs of the same group have similar syntac-
tic distribution. The generalizations can increase 
the efficiency of the model for metaphor detec-
tion.  

Our study shows that other eventive infor-
mation parsed in the existing platforms such as 
WordNet, FrameNet, and Tongyici Cilin should 
also have a high potential to be leveraged in the 
detecting of metaphors. The tools relevant to 
eventive information such as aspectual markers 
and word order can be applied to determine event 
types. This new approach refocuses metaphor de-
tection in the inherent eventive information of 
metaphors instead of its contextual information, 
and thus it is more reliable. Our algorithm of 
modeling eventive information can provide a 
pathway to incorporate analysis of event types in 
deep learning as future studies. 

In summary, our study show that by leveraging 
the Chinese writing system, culturally bound 
eventive information can facilitate processing of 
metaphor.  This method is not only applicable to 
all Sinitic languages and a small sub-set of lan-
guages sharing Chinese orthography as their cul-
tural heritage, such as Japanese and Korean.  
Huang and Chou (2015) already showed that lexi-
cal processing in Japanese and others based on 
Chinese orthography can be automatically boot-
strapped. This study suggests the potential appli-
cations for the use of eventive information to con-
ceptual processing such as automatic classification 
of metaphor. Eventive information in many lan-
guages can be automatically or semi-automatically 
extracted through the OntoLex interface approach 
(Huang et al. 2010). Eventive information in turn 
will be a powerful tool in the extraction of event 
types for studies based on eventive structures such 
as sarcasm and sentiment detection. 

 
Acknowledgment 

The work is partially supported by the following 
research grants from Hong Kong Polytechnic 
University: 1-YW1V, 4-ZZFE and RTVU; as well 
as GRF grants (PolyU 15211/14E and PolyU 
152006/16E). 
  

44



 

References  

Marco Baroni, Raffaela Bernardi, and Roberto Zam-
parelli. 2014. Frege in space: A program of composi-
tional distributional semantics. Linguistic Issues in 
Language Technology, 9. 

Marco Baroni, Georgiana Dinu, and German´ 
Kruszewski. 2014. Don’t count, predict! A systemat-
ic comparison of context-counting vs. context-
predicting semantic vectors. In Proceedings of the 
52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. Association for Computational 
Linguistics, pages 238-247. 
https:doi.org/10.3115/v1/P14-1023 

George Aaron Broadwell, Umit Boz, Ignacio Cases, 
Tomek Strzalkowski, Laurie Feldman, Sarah Taylor, 
Samira Shaikh, Ting Liu, Kit Cho, and Nick Webb. 
2013. Using imageability and topic chaining to lo-
cate metaphors in linguistic corpora. In Social Com-
puting, Behavioral-Cultural Modeling and Predic-
tion. Springer, pages 102-110. 

Julia Birke and Anoop Sarkar. 2007. A clustering ap-
proach for nearly unsupervised recognition of non-
literal language. In Proceedings of the 11th Confer-
ence of the European Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics, pages 329-336. 

Gemma Boleda, Eva Maria Vecchi, Miquel Cornudella, 
and Louise McNally. 2012. First-order vs. higher or-
der modification in distributional semantics. In Pro-
ceedings of the Joint Conference on Empirical 
Methods in Natural Language Processing and Com-
putational Natural Language Learning. Association 
for Computational Linguistics, pages 1223-1233. 
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D12-1112  

Yaming Chou and Chu-ren Huang. 2006. Hantology - A 
linguistic resource for Chinese language processing 
and studying. Paper presented at the 5th Internation-
al Conference on Language Resources and Evalua-
tion, Genoa, Italy. 

Ya-Min Chou and Chu-Ren Huang. 2010. Hantology: 
conceptual system discovery based on orthographic 
convention. In Ontology and the Lexicon: A Natural 
Language Processing Perspective. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, page 122-143. 

Jonathan Dunn. 2013. Evaluating the premises and re-
sults of four metaphor identification systems. In 
Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Pro-
cessing. Springer, pages 471-486. 

Katrin Erk and Sebastian Padó. 2010. Exemplar-based 
models for word meaning in context. In Proceedings 
of the ACL 2010 Conference Short Papers. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 92-97. 

Jianhui Fu, Shi Wang, Ya Wang, Cungen Cao. 2016. A 
Practical Method of Identifying Chinese Metaphor 
Phrases from Corpus. In International Conference 

on Knowledge Science, Engineering and Manage-
ment. Springer, pages 43-54. 

Matt Gedigian, John Bryant, Srini Narayanan, and 
Branimir Ciric. 2006. Catching metaphors. In Pro-
ceedings of the Third Workshop on Scalable Natural 
Language Understanding. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 41-48. 

Gutiérrez Darıo, Ekaterina Shutova, Tyler Marghetis, 
and Benjamin Bergen. 2016. Literal and metaphori-
cal senses in compositional distributional semantic 
models. In Proceedings of the 54th Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 160-170.  

Harris, Zellig, 1954. Distributional structure. Word, 
10(23):146-162.  

Ilana Heintz, Ryan Gabbard, Mahesh Srinivasan, David 
Barner, Donald S Black, Marjorie Freedman, and 
Ralph Weischedel. 2013. Automatic extraction of 
linguistic metaphor with lda topic modeling. In Pro-
ceedings of the First Workshop on Metaphor in 
NLP, pages 58-66. 

Dirk Hovy, Shashank Srivastava, Sujay Kumar Jauhar, 
Mrinmaya Sachan, Kartik Goyal, Huiying Li, Whit-
ney Sanders, and Eduard Hovy. 2013. Identifying 
metaphorical word use with tree kernels. In Pro-
ceedings of the First Workshop on Metaphor in 
NLP, pages 5257. 

Chu-Ren Huang. 2009. Tagged Chinese Gigaword Ver-
sion 2.0, LDC2009T14. Linguistic Data Consorti-
um. 

Chu-Ren Huang. 2009. Semantics as an Orthography-
Relevant Level for Mandarin Chinese. In The 17th 
Annual Conference of the International Association 
of Chinese Linguistics.  

Chu-Ren Huang, Siaw-Fong Chung, and Kathleen 
Ahrens, 2007. An ontology-based exploration of 
knowledge systems for metaphor. In Ontologies 
Springer, page 489-517. 

Chu-Ren Huang, Nicoletta Calzolari, Aldo Gangemi, 
Alessandro Lenci, Alessandro Oltramari, and Lau-
rent Prévot. 2010 (Eds.) Ontology and the lexicon: A 
natural language processing perspective. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 

Chu-Ren Huang and Chou Ya-Min. 2015. Multilingual 
conceptual access to lexicon based on shared orthog-
raphy: an ontology-driven study of Chinese and Jap-
anese. In Language Production, Cognition, and the 
Lexicon, ed. Núria Gala, Reinhard Rapp, and Gem-
ma Bel-Enguix. Springer, pages 135-150.  

Chu-Ren Huang and Shu-Kai Hsieh. 2015. Chinese 
lexical semantics: from radicals to event structure. In 
The Oxford Handbook of Chinese Linguistics, ed. 
William S.-Y. Wang and Chao-Fen Sun. Oxford 
University Press, pages 290-305. 

45



 

Dimitri Kartsaklis and Mehrnoosh Sadrzadeh. 2013. 
Prior disambiguation of word tensors for construct-
ing sentence vectors. In Proceedings of the 2013 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 1590-1601. 

Dimitri Kartsaklis, Mehrnoosh Sadrzadeh, and Stephen 
Pulman. 2013. Separating disambiguation from 
composition in distributional semantics. In Proceed-
ings of the 2013 Conference on Computational Nat-
ural Language Learning, pages 114-123. 

Saisuresh Krishnakumaran and Xiaojin Zhu. 2007. 
Hunting elusive metaphors using lexical resources. 
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational 
approaches to Figurative Language. Association for 
Computational Linguistics, pages 13-20. 

George Lakoff and Mark Johnson. 1981. Metaphors we 
live by. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL. 

George Lakoff. 1989. Some empirical results about the 
nature of concepts. Mind & Language, 4(1-2): 103-
109. 

Prévot, Laurent, Chu-Ren Huang, Nicoletta Calzolari, 
Aldo Gangemi, Alessandro Lenci, and Alessandro 
Oltramari. 2010. Ontology and the lexicon: A multi-
disciplinary perspective. In Ontology and the lexi-
con: A natural language processing perspective, eds. 
Chu-Ren Huang, Nicoletta Calzolari, Aldo Gan-
gemi, Alessandro Lenci, Alessandro Oltramari, and 
Laurent Prévot. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, pages 3-24. 

Omer Levy, Yoav Goldberg, Ido Dagan, and Israel 
Ramat-Gan. 2015. Improving distributional similari-
ty with lessons learned from word embeddings. 
Transactions of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, 3.  

Linlin Li, Benjamin Roth, and Caroline Sporleder. 
2010. Topic models for word sense disambiguation 
and token-based idiom detection. In Proceedings of 
the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 1138-1147. 

Linlin Li and Caroline Sporleder. 2010. Using Gaussian 
mixture models to detect figurative language in con-
text. In Human Language Technologies: The 2010 
Annual Conference of the North American Chapter 
of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 
297-300. 

Michael Mohler, David Bracewell, David Hinote, and 
Marc Tomlinson. 2013. Semantic signatures for ex-
ample-based linguistic metaphor detection. In Pro-
ceedings of the First Workshop on Metaphor in 
NLP, pages 27–35. 

Yair Neuman, Dan Assaf, Yohai Cohen, Mark Last, 
Shlomo Argamon, Newton Howard, and Ophir 

Frieder. 2013. Metaphor identification in large texts 
corpora. PLoS ONE, 8:e62343. 

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositionali-
ty. In Proceedings of NIPS, pages 3111-3119. 

Yulia Tsvetkov, Leonid Boytsov, Anatole Gershman, 
Eric Nyberg, and Chris Dyer. 2014. Metaphor detec-
tion with cross-lingual model transfer. In Proceed-
ings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics. Association for 
Computational Linguistics, pages 248-258 

Ekaterina Shutova. 2010. Models of metaphor in NLP. 
In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 688-697. 

Ekaterina Shutova, Lin Sun, and Anna Korhonen. 2010. 
Metaphor identification using verb and noun cluster-
ing. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics. Association 
for Computational Linguistics, pages 1002-1010. 

Ekaterina Shutova, Simone Teufel, and Anna Korho-
nen. 2013. Statistical metaphor processing. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 39(2):301-353. 

Caroline Sporleder and Linlin Li. 2009. Unsupervised 
recognition of literal and non-literal use of idiomatic 
expressions. In Proceedings of the 12th Conference 
of the European Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics, pages 754-762.  

Tomek Strzalkowski, George A. Broadwell, Sarah Tay-
lor, Laurie Feldman, Boris Yamrom, Samira Shaikh, 
Ting Liu, Kit Cho, Umit Boz, Ignacio Cases, and 
Kyle Elliot. 2013. Robust extraction of metaphors 
from novel data. In Proceedings of the First Work-
shop on Metaphor in NLP. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 67-76. 

Yulia Tsvetkov, Elena Mukomel, and Anatole Gersh-
man. 2013. Cross-lingual metaphor detection using 
common semantic features. In Proceedings of the 
First Workshop on Metaphor in NLP. Association 
for Computational Linguistics, pages 45-51. 

Yulia Tsvetkov, Leonid Boytsov, Anatole Gershman, 
Eric Nyberg, and Chris Dyer. 2014. Metaphor detec-
tion with cross-lingual model transfer. In Proceed-
ings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics. Association for 
Computational Linguistics, page 248-258. 
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P14-1024  

Zhao Hongyan, Qu Weiguang, Zhang Fen, and Zhou 
Junsheng. 2011. Chinese verb metaphor recognition 
based on machine learning and semantic knowledge. 
Journal of Nanjing Normal University (Engineering 
and Technology) 11(3):59-64. 

46


