



















































An Automatic Approach for Document-level Topic Model Evaluation


Proceedings of the 21st Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL 2017), pages 206–215,
Vancouver, Canada, August 3 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

An Automatic Approach for Document-level Topic Model Evaluation

Shraey Bhatia1 Jey Han Lau1,2 Timothy Baldwin1

1 School of Computing and Information Systems,
The University of Melbourne

2 IBM Research

shraeybhatia@gmail.com, jeyhan.lau@gmail.com, tb@ldwin.net

Abstract

Topic models jointly learn topics and
document-level topic distribution. Extrin-
sic evaluation of topic models tends to fo-
cus exclusively on topic-level evaluation,
e.g. by assessing the coherence of topics.
We demonstrate that there can be large dis-
crepancies between topic- and document-
level model quality, and that basing model
evaluation on topic-level analysis can be
highly misleading. We propose a method
for automatically predicting topic model
quality based on analysis of document-
level topic allocations, and provide empiri-
cal evidence for its robustness.

1 Introduction

Topic models such as latent Dirichlet allocation
(Blei et al., 2003) jointly learn latent topics (in
the form of multinomial distributions over words)
and topic allocations to individual documents (in
the form of multinomial distributions over top-
ics), and provide a powerful means of document
collection navigation and visualisation (Newman
et al., 2010a; Chaney and Blei, 2012; Smith et al.,
2017). One property of LDA-style topic models
that has contributed to their popularity is that they
are highly configurable, and can be structured to
capture a myriad of statistical dependencies, such
as between topics (Blei and Lafferty, 2006), be-
tween documents associated with the same individ-
ual (Rosen-Zvi et al., 2004), or between documents
associated with individuals in different network
relations (Wang and Blei, 2011). This has led to
a wealth of topic models of different types, and
the need for methods to evaluate different styles of
topic model over the same document collections.
Test data perplexity is the obvious solution, but
it has been shown to correlate poorly with direct

human assessment of topic model quality (Chang
et al., 2009), motivating the need for automatic
topic model evaluation methods which emulate hu-
man assessment. Research in this vein has focused
primarily on evaluating the quality of individual
topics (Newman et al., 2010b; Mimno et al., 2011;
Aletras and Stevenson, 2013; Lau et al., 2014; Fang
et al., 2016) and largely ignored evaluation of topic
allocations to individual documents, and it has be-
come widely accepted that topic-level evaluation
is a reliable indicator of the intrinsic quality of the
overall topic model (Lau et al., 2014). We chal-
lenge this assumption, and demonstrate that topic
model evaluation should operate at both the topic
and document levels.

Our primary contributions are as follows: (1)
we empirically demonstrate that there can be large
discrepancies between topic- and document-level
topic model evaluation; (2) we demonstrate that
previously-proposed document-level evaluation ap-
proaches can be misleading, and propose an al-
ternative evaluation method; and (3) we propose
an automatic approach to topic model evaluation
based on analysis of document-level topic distri-
butions, which we show to correlate strongly with
manual annotations.

2 Related Work

Perplexity or held-out likelihood has long been
used as an intrinsic metric to evaluate topic models
(Wallach et al., 2009). Chang et al. (2009) pro-
posed two human judgement tasks, at the topic
and document levels, and showed that there is low
correlation between perplexity and direct human
evaluations of topic model quality. The two tasks
took the form of “intruder” tasks, whereby sub-
jects were tasked with identifying an intruder topic
word for a given topic, or an intruder topic for a
given document. Specifically, in the word intrusion

206



task, an intruder word was added to the top-5 topic
words, and annotators were asked to identify the
intruder word. Similarly in the topic intrusion task,
a document and 4 topics were presented — the
top-3 topics corresponding to the document and a
random intruder topic — and subjects were asked
to spot the intruder topic. The intuition behind both
methods is that the higher the quality of the topic
or topic allocation for a given document, the easier
it should be to detect the intruder.

Newman et al. (2010b) proposed to measure
topic coherence directly in the form of “observed
coherence”, in which human judges rated topics
directly on an ordinal 3-point scale. They experi-
mented with a range of different methods to auto-
mate the rating task, and reported the best results by
simply aggregating pointwise mutual information
(pmi) scores for different pairings of topic words,
based on a sliding window over English Wikipedia.

Building on the work of Chang et al. (2009), Lau
et al. (2014) proposed an improved method for es-
timating observed coherence based on normalised
pmi (npmi), and further automated the word in-
truder detection task based on a combination of
word association features (pmi, npmi, CP1, and
CP2) in a learn-to-rank model (Joachims, 2006).
Additionally, the authors showed a strong correla-
tion between word intrusion and observed coher-
ence, and suggested that it is possible to perform
topic model evaluation based on aggregation of
word intrusion or observed coherence scores across
all topics.

3 Datasets and Topic Models

We use two document collections for our experi-
ments: APNEWS and the British National Corpus
(“BNC”: Burnard (1995)). APNEWS is a collection
of Associated Press1 news articles from 2009 to
2016, while BNC is an amalgamation of extracts
from different sources such as books, journals, let-
ters, and pamphlets. We sample 50K and 15K
documents from APNEWS and BNC, respectively,
to create two datasets for our experiments.

In terms of preprocessing, we use Stanford
CoreNLP (Manning et al., 2014) to tokenise words
and sentences. We additionally remove stop
words,2 lower-case all word tokens, filter word
types which occur less than 10 times, and exclude

1https://www.ap.org/en-gb/
2We use Mallet’s stop word list: https://github.

com/mimno/Mallet/tree/master/stoplists

the top 0.1% most frequent word types. Statistics
for each of the preprocessed datasets are provided
in Table 1.

Similarly to Chang et al. (2009), we base our
analysis on a representative selection of topic mod-
els, each of which we train over APNEWS and BNC
to generate 100 topics:
• lda (Blei et al., 2003) uses a symmetric

Dirichlet prior to model both document-level
topic mixtures and topic-level word mixtures.
It is one of the most commonly used topic
model implementations and serve as a bench-
mark for comparison. We use Mallet’s imple-
mentation of lda for our experiments. Note
that Mallet implements various enhancements
to the basic LDA model, including the use of
an asymmetric–symmetric prior.
• ctm (Blei and Lafferty, 2006) is an extension

of lda that uses a logistic normal prior over
topic proportions instead of a Dirichlet prior
to model correlations between different topics
and reduce overlap in topic content.
• hca (Buntine and Mishra, 2014) is an exten-

sion to LDA to capture word burstiness (Doyle
and Elkan, 2009), based on the observation
that there tends to be higher likelihood of gen-
erating a word which has already been seen
recently. Word generation is modelled by a
Pitman–Yor process (Chen et al., 2011).
• ntm (Cao et al., 2015) is a neural topic

model, where topic–word multinomials are
modelled as a look-up layer of words, and
topic–document multinomials are modelled
as a look-up layer of documents. The output
layer of the network is given by the dot prod-
uct of the two vectors. There are 2 variants of
ntm: unsupervised and supervised. We use
only the unsupervised variant in our experi-
ments.
• cluster is a baseline topic model, specifi-

cally designed to produce highly coherent top-
ics but “bland” topic allocations. We represent
word types in the documents with pre-trained
word2vec vectors (Mikolov et al., 2013a,b),
pre-trained on Google News,3 and create word
clusters using k-means clustering (k = 100)
to generate the topics. We derive the multi-
nomial distribution for each topic based on
the cosine distance to the cluster centroid, and

3Available from: https://code.google.com/
archive/word2vec.

207



Dataset #Docs #Tokens

APNEWS 50K 15M
BNC 15K 18M

Table 1: Statistics for the two document collections
used in our experiments

Model APNEWS BNC

lda 0.16 0.14
ctm 0.07 0.09
hca 0.14 0.08
ntm 0.10 0.08

cluster 0.18 0.17

Table 2: Topic coherence scores (npmi)

linear normalisation across all words.
To generate the topic allocation for a given
document, we first calculate a document
representation based on the mean of the
word2vec vectors of its content words. For
each cluster, we represent them by calculat-
ing the mean word2vec vectors of its top-10
words. Given the document vector and clus-
ters/topics, we calculate the similarity of the
document to each cluster based on cosine sim-
ilarity, and finally (linearly) normalise the sim-
ilarities to generate a probability distribution.

4 Topic-level Evaluation: Topic
Coherence

Pointwise mutual information (and its normalised
variant npmi) is a common association measure to
estimate topic coherence (Newman et al., 2010b;
Mimno et al., 2011; Aletras and Stevenson, 2013;
Lau et al., 2014; Fang et al., 2016). Although the
method is successful in assessing topic quality, it
tells us little about the association between docu-
ments and topics. As we will see, a topic model
can produce topics that are coherent — in terms
of npmi association — but poor descriptor of the
overall concepts in the document collection.

We first compute topic coherence for all 5 topic
models over APNEWS and BNC using npmi (Lau
et al., 2014) and present the results in Table 2.4 We
see that lda and cluster perform consistently
well across both datasets. hca performs well over

4We use the following open source toolkit to com-
pute topic coherence: https://github.com/jhlau/
topic_interpretability.

APNEWS but poorly over BNC. Both ctm and ntm
topics appear to have low coherence over the two
datasets.

Based on these results, one would conclude that
cluster is a good topic model, as it produces
very coherent topics. To better understand the na-
ture and quality of the topics, we present a random
sample of lda and cluster topics in Table 3.

Looking at the topics, we see that cluster
tends to include different inflectional forms of the
same word (e.g. prohibited, probihiting) and near-
synonyms/sister words (e.g. river, lake, creeks) in
a single topic. This explains the strong npmi as-
sociation of the cluster topics. On the other
hand, lda discovers related words that collectively
describe concepts rather than just clustering (near)
synonyms. This suggests that the topic coherence
metric alone may not completely capture topic
model quality, leading us to also investigate the
topic distribution associated with documents from
our collections.

5 Human Evaluation of Document-level
Topic Allocations

In this section, we describe a series of manual evalu-
ations of document-level topic allocations, in order
to get a more holistic evaluation of the true qual-
ity of the different topic models (in line with the
original work of Chang et al. (2009)).

5.1 Topic Intrusion

The goal of the topic intrusion task is to exam-
ine whether the document–topic allocations from
a given topic model accord with manual judge-
ments. We formulate the task similarly to Chang
et al. (2009), in presenting the human judges with
a snippet from each document, along with four top-
ics. The four topics comprise the top-3 highest
probability topics related to document, and one in-
truder topic. Each annotator is required to pick the
topic that is least representative of the document,
with the expectation that the better the topic model,
the more readily they should be able to pick the
intruder topic. The intruder topic is sampled ran-
domly, subject to the following conditions: (1) it
should be a low probability topic for the target doc-
ument; and (2) it should be a high probability topic
for at least one other document. The first constraint
is intended to ensure that the intruder topic is un-
related to the target document, while the second
constraint is intended to select a topic that is highly

208



Model Topics

lda
oil gas drilling gulf spill natural pipeline wells industry energy
computer video screen program text disk windows electronic machine graphics
health care hospital services medical staff patients service child authority

cluster
river creek lake rivers dam tributary lakes reservoir tributaries creeks
prohibited forbid prohibiting prohibits violated prohibit contravened forbids violate barred
terrace courtyard staircase staircases courtyards walls pergola walkway stairways walkways

Table 3: Example lda and cluster topics.

Topic Model
Mean Model Precision

APNEWS BNC

lda 0.84 0.66
ctm 0.64 0.66
hca 0.60 0.44
ntm 0.26 0.17

cluster 0.39 0.48

Table 4: Mean model precision for human judge-
ments

associated with some documents, and hence likely
to be coherent and not a junk topic. Each topic is
represented by its top-10 most probable words, and
the target document is presented in the form of the
first three sentences, with an option to view more
of the document if further context is needed.

We used Amazon Mechanical Turk to collect
the human judgements, with five document–topic
combinations forming a single HIT, one of which
acts as a quality control. The control items were
sourced from an earlier annotation task where sub-
jects were asked to score the top-5 topics for a
target document on a scale of 0–3. The 50 top-
scoring documents from this annotation task, with
their top-3 topics, were chosen as controls. The
intruder topic for the control was generated by ran-
domly selecting 10 words from the corpus vocabu-
lary. In order to pass quality control, each worker
had to correctly select the intruder topic for the con-
trol document–topic item over 60% of time (across
all HITs they completed). Each document–topic
pair was rated by 10 annotators initially, and for
HITs where less than 3 annotations passed quality
control, we reposted them for a second round of
annotation.

For our annotation task, we randomly sampled
100 documents from each of our two datasets, for

Topic Model
Mean Topic Log Odds

APNEWS BNC

lda -0.78 -1.84
ctm -1.04 -1.60
hca -2.09 -3.61
ntm -7.16 -6.32

cluster -0.12 -0.10

Table 5: Mean topic log odds for human judge-
ments

each of which we generate document–topic items
based on the five different topic models. In total,
therefore, we annotated 1000 (100 documents × 2
collections× 5 topic models) document–topic com-
binations. After quality control, the final dataset
contains an average of 5.4 and 5.5 valid intruder
topic annotations for APNEWS and BNC, respec-
tively.

Chang et al. (2009) proposed topic log odds
(“TLO”) as a means of evaluating the topic intru-
sion task. The authors defined topic log odds for
a document–topic pair as the difference in the log-
probability assigned to the intruder and the log-
probability assigned to the topic chosen by a given
annotator, which they then averaged across anno-
tators to get a TLO score for a single document.
Separately, Chang et al. (2009) proposed model
precision as a means of evaluating the word in-
trusion task, whereby they simply calculated the
proportion of annotators who correctly selected
the intruder word for a given topic. In addition
to presenting results based on TLO, we apply the
model precision methodology in our evaluation
of the topic intrusion task, in calculating the pro-
portion of annotators who correctly selected the
intruder topic for a given document, which we then
average across documents to derive a model score.

209



(a) APNEWS (b) BNC

Figure 1: Boxplots of model precision

(a) APNEWS (b) BNC

Figure 2: Boxplots of topic log odds

The results of the human annotation task are
summarised in Tables 4 and 5. Looking at model
precision for APNEWS first, we see that lda out-
performs the other topic models. ctm and hca
perform credibly, whereas ntm and cluster
are quite poor. Moving on to BNC, we see a
drop in score for lda, to a level comparable with
ctm. cluster improves slightly higher than
BNC, whereas hca drops considerably (despite be-
ing designed specifically to deal with word bursti-
ness in the longer documents characteristic of BNC).
Figure 1 shows boxplots for topic-level model pre-
cision, and reflects a similar trend.

Looking next to TLO in Table 5, we see a totally
different picture, with cluster being rated as the
best topic model by a clear margin. This exposes a
flaw in the TLO formulation, in the case of adver-
sarial topic models such as clusterwhich assign
near-uniform probabilities across all topics. This
results in the difference in probability mass being

very close to the upper bound of zero in all cases,
meaning that even for random topic selection, TLO
is near perfect. We can also see this in Figure 2,
where the boxes for cluster have nearly zero
range. Indeed, if we combined the results for TLO
with those for topic coherence, we would (very
wrongly!) conclude that cluster performs best
over both document collections. More encourag-
ingly, for the other four topic models, the results for
TLO are much more consistent with those based
on model precision.

5.2 Direct Annotation of Topic Assignments

Newman et al. (2010b) proposed a more direct ap-
proach to topic coherence, by asking people to rate
topics directly based on the top-N words. Taking
inspiration from their methodology, we propose
to directly annotate each topic assigned to a tar-
get document. We present the human annotators
with the target document and the top-ranked (high-

210



Topic Model
Average rating

APNEWS BNC

lda 1.26 1.01
ctm 0.96 1.02
hca 0.95 0.90
ntm 0.36 0.46

cluster 0.41 0.66

Table 6: Top-1 document–topic rating for each
topic model

est probability) topic from each of the five topic
models, and ask them to rate each topic on an or-
dinal scale of 0–3. At the model level, we take the
mean rating over all document–topic pairings for
that topic model (based, once again, on 100 docu-
ments per collection).5 We summarise the findings
in Table 6.

We observe that, in the case of APNEWS,
lda does considerably better than ctm and hca,
whereas for BNC, lda and ctm are quite close,
with hca close behind. cluster and ntm do
poorly across both datasets. The overall trend for
APNEWS of lda > ctm > hca > cluster >
ntm is consistent with the model precision results
in Table 4. In the case of BNC, the observation of
ctm ≈ lda > hca > cluster > ntm is also
broadly the same, except that hca does not do as
well over the topic intrusion task. Here, we are
more interested in the relative performance of topic
models than absolute numbers, although the low
absolute scores are an indication that it is a difficult
annotation task.

Broadly combined across the two evaluation
methodologies, lda and ctm are top-performing,
hca gets mixed results, and cluster and ntm
are the lowest performers. These results generally
agree with the model precision findings, demon-
strating that model precision is a more robust met-
ric than TLO.

6 Automatic Evaluation

A limitation of the topic intrusion task is that it
requires manual annotation, making it ill-suited for
large-scale or automatic evaluation. We present
the first attempt to automate the prediction of the
intruder topic, with the aim of developing an ap-
proach to topic model evaluation which comple-

5The 100 documents used for this task were different to
the ones used in Section 5.1.

ments topic coherence (as motivated in Sections 4
and 5).

6.1 Methodology
We build a support vector regression (SVR) model
(Joachims, 2006) to rank topics given a document
to select the intruder topic. We first explain an
intuition of the features that are driving the SVR.

To rank topics for a document, we need to first
compute the probability of a topic t given document
d, i.e. P (t|d). We can invert the condition using
Bayes rule:

P (t|d) = P (d|t)P (t)
P (d)

∝ P (d|t)P (t)
We can omit P (d) as the probability of document
d is constant for the topics that we are ranking.

Next we represent topic t using its top-N highest
probability words, giving:

P (t|d) ∝ P (d|w1, ..., wN )P (w1, ..., wN )
∝ log P (d|w1, ..., wN )+

log P (w1, ..., wN )

The first term log P (d|w1, ..., wN ) can be inter-
preted from an information retrieval perspective,
where we are computing the relevance of docu-
ment d given query terms w1, w2, ..., wN . This
term constitutes the first feature for the SVR. We
use Indri6 to index the document collection, and
compute log P (d|w1, ..., wN ) given a set of query
words and a document.7

We estimate the second term, log P (w1, ..., wN ),
using the pairwise probability of the topic words:∑

0<i≤m

∑
i+1≤j≤m

log
#(wi, wj)

#(·)

where m denotes the number of topic words used,
#(wi, wj) is the number of documents where word
wi and wj co-occur, and #(·) is the total number
of documents. We explore using two values of m
here: 5 and 10.8 These two values constitute the
second and third features of the SVR.

To train the SVR, we sample 1700 random doc-
uments and split them into 1600/100 documents
for the training and test partitions, respectively.

6http://www.lemurproject.org
7N = 10.
8That is, if m = 5, we compute pairwise probabilities

using the top-5 topic words.

211



(a) APNEWS (b) BNC

Figure 3: Mean Model Precision Comparison

The test documents are the same 100 documents
that were previously used for intruder topics (Sec-
tion 5.1). As the intruder topics are artificially
generated, we can sample additional documents to
create a larger training set for the SVR; the ability
to generate arbitrary training data is a strength of
our method.

We pool together all 5 topic models when train-
ing the SVR, thereby generating 8000 training and
500 development and testing instances for each
dataset. For each document, the SVR is trained to
rank the topics in terms of their likelihood of being
an intruder topic.9 The top-ranking topic is selected
as the system-predicted intruder word, and model
precision is computed as before (Section 5.1).10

6.2 System results

In Figure 3, we present the human vs. system mean
model precision on the test partition for each of
the topic models. We see that the trend line for the
system model precision very closely tracks that of
human model precision. In general, the best sys-
tems — lda and ctm — and the worst systems
— ntm and cluster — are predicted correctly.
The correlation between the two is very high, at
r = 0.88 and 0.87 for APNEWS and BNC, respec-
tively. This suggests that the automated method
is a reliable means of evaluating document-level
topic model quality.

9We use the default hyper-parameter values for the SVR
(C = 0.01), and hence do no require a development set for
tuning.

10Note that the system model precision for each document–
topic combination is a binary value as there is only 1 system
— as opposed to multiple annotators — selecting an intruder
word.

7 Discussion

To better understand the differences between
human- and system-predicted intruder topics, we
present a number of documents and their associ-
ated topics in Table 7, focusing specifically on:
(a) intruder topics that humans struggle to identify
but our automatic method reliably detects; and (b)
conversely, intruder topics which humans readily
identify but our method struggles to detect.

Looking at the topics across the two types of
errors, we notice that there are often multiple “bad”
topics for these documents: occasionally the anno-
tators are able to single out the worst topic while
the system fails (1st and 2nd document), but some-
times the opposite happens (3rd and 4th document).
In the first case, the top-ranking topic (church, gay,
...) from the topic model is associated with the doc-
ument because of the service, but actually capturing
a very different aspect of religion to what is dis-
cussed in the document, which leads our method
astray. A similar effect is seen with the second
document. In the case of the third and fourth doc-
uments, there is actually content further down in
the document which is relevant to the topics the
human annotators select, but it is not apparent in
the document snippet presented to the annotators.
That is, the effect is caused by resource limitations
for the annotation task, that our automated method
does not suffer from.

When we aggregate the top-level model preci-
sion values for a topic model, these differences
are averaged out (hence the strong correlation in
Section 6.2), but these qualitative analyses reveal
that there are still slight disparities between human

212



Error Type:
High human MP
Low system MP

Document

more than 2,000 attendees are expected to attend public funeral services for former nevada gov.
kenny guinn . a catholic mass on tuesday morning will be followed by a memorial reception at
palace station . the two-term governor who served from 1999 to 2007 died thursday after falling
from the roof of his las vegas home while making repairs . he was 73 . guinn ’s former chief of staff
pete ernaut says attendance to the services will be limited only by the size of the venues . services
start at 10 a.m. at st. joseph , husband of mary roman catholic church ...

Topics

0: church gay marriage religious catholic same-sex couples pastor members bishop
1: died family funeral honor memorial father death wife cemetery son
2: casino las vegas nevada gambling casinos ford vehicles cars car
X: students college student campus education tuition universities colleges high degree

Document

the milwaukee art museum is exhibiting more than 70 works done by 19th century portrait painter
thomas sully . it ’s the first retrospective of the artist in 30 years and the first to present the artist ’s
portraits and subject pictures . sully was known for employing drama and theatricality to his works
. in some of his full-length portraits , he composed his figures as if they were onstage . some of
his subjects even seem to be trying to directly engage the viewer . milwaukee art museum director
daniel keegan says the exhibit provides a new look ...

Topics

0: china art chinese arts artist painting artists cuba world beijing
1: show music film movie won festival tickets game band play
2: online information internet book video media facebook phone computer technology
X: kelley family letter leave absence left united jay weeks director

Error Type:
Low human MP
High system MP

Document

( ap ) ? the west virginia lottery is celebrating its 28th birthday by doing what it does best : awarding
large sums of money . the lottery will mark the milestone on thursday by giving away prizes of $
1 million , $ 100,000 and $ 10,000 . the three finalists were selected out of thousands of entries
from the lottery ’s monopoly millionaire instant game . the finalists are josh schoolcraft of given ,
douglas schafer of wheeling and todd kingrey of charleston . all three are due at lottery headquarters
in charleston to collect their winnings ...

Topics

0: jackpot powerball mega lottery lotto jackpots prizes ticket megaplier tickets
1: mingo earl wheeling virginia ap charleston wvu huntington coalfields rockefeller
2: museum artifacts exhibit paintings artwork historical curator sculpture exhibition exhibits
X: abercrombie ridley solace daley enclosures hobbyists hawaiian seventeen secondhand probate

Document

a 75-year-old driver has died after a collision near o’neill in northern nebraska . the holt county
sheriff ’s office says the accident occurred wednesday afternoon , less than a mile east of o’neill .
the office says thomas schneider halted at a stop sign and then turned east onto nebraska highway
108 . but he apparently turned too wide and went into the oncoming lane . his vehicle struck a
westbound vehicle driven by 52-year-old gerald kemp , of niobrara . schneider was pronounced at
the scene . the sheriff ’s office says kemp suffered no visible injuries ...

Topics

0: officers shot car shooting officer sheriff woman died killed hospital
1: service weather area storm miles airport snow river bridge emergency
2: prison prosecutors charges guilty trial judge case charged murder pleaded
X: toll road rocky carpenter hogan indiana long harvey private director

Table 7: Document and topic examples for two types of errors. “MP” denotes model precision, “X” the
intruder topic, and the indices the ranking of the topics. Topics highlighted in pink (yellow) are those
incorrectly selected by the system (humans) as intruder topics.

annotators and the automated method in intruder
topic selection.

To further understand how the topics relate to the
documents in different topic models, we present
documents with the corresponding topics for differ-
ent topic models in Table 8.

In the human annotation task, we use the top-10
most probable words to represent a topic. We use
10 words as it is the standard approach to visualis-
ing topics, but this is an important hyper-parameter
which needs to be investigated further (Lau and
Baldwin, 2016), which we leave to future work.

8 Conclusion

We demonstrate empirically that there can be
large discrepancies between topic coherence and
document–topic associations. By way of designing
an artificial topic model, we showed that a topic
model can simultaneously produce topics that are
coherent but be largely undescriptive of the doc-
ument collection. We propose a method to auto-
matically predict document-level topic quality and
found encouraging correlation with manual evalua-
tion, suggesting that it can be used as an alternative
approach for extrinsic topic model evaluation.

213



lda
Document

more than 2,000 attendees are expected to attend public funeral services for former nevada gov.
kenny guinn . a catholic mass on tuesday morning will be followed by a memorial reception at
palace station . the two-term governor who served from 1999 to 2007 died thursday after falling
from the roof of his las vegas home while making repairs . he was 73 . guinn ’s former chief of staff
pete ernaut says attendance to the services will be limited only by the size of the venues . services
start at 10 a.m. at st. joseph , husband of mary roman catholic church ...

Topics 0: church gay marriage religious catholic same-sex couples pastor members bishop
1: died family funeral honor memorial father death wife cemetery son

hca

Document

usa today founder al neuharth has died in cocoa beach , florida . he was 89 . the news was announced
friday by usa today and by the newseum , which he also founded . neuharth changed american
newspapers by putting easy-to-read articles and bright graphics in his national daily publication ,
which he began in 1982 when he ran the gannett co. newspaper group . he wanted to create a bright
, breezy , fun newspaper that would catch people ’s attention and not take itself too seriously. its
annual revenues increased from 200 million to more than 3 billion ...

Topics
0: honorary commencement philanthropist journalism distinguished honored bachelor pulitzer
doctorate harvard
1: shortfall premiums budget reductions cuts shortfalls salaries pensions revenues budgets

ctm
Document

a teenage driver who survived a southeastern indiana crash that killed three other youths will spend
90 days in juvenile detention and surrender his driver ’s license until age 21 . the 17-year-old driver
admitted to charges of reckless homicide and reckless driving during a ripley county juvenile court
hearing thursday in versailles , indiana state police sgt. noel houze jr. told the associated press . the
teenager choked back sobs throughout the half-hour hearing . the teen will be sent to a juvenile
facility in muncie . he also must complete 350 hours of community service ..

Topics 0: officers shot car shooting officer sheriff woman died killed hospital
1: prison prosecutors charges guilty trial judge case charged murder pleaded

ntm

Document

a judge in will county has approved further testing on the coat an oswego man was wearing when
his wife and three children were found shot to death in 2007 . christopher vaughn is accused
of killing his family inside their suv , which was parked on a frontage road along interstate 55 .
authorities found kimberly vaughn shot to death , along with their children , 12-year-old abigayle ,
11-year-old cassandra and 8-year-old blake . assistant state ’s attorney mike fitzgerald on monday
said prosecutors asked for more dna testing on the coat ...

Topics
0: arraigned burglarizing arrested bigamy detectives motorcyclist arraignment coroner accomplice
fondled
1: quarterly pretax dividend profit annualized earnings profits stockholders writedown premarket

cluster

Document

a southwest idaho district court judge has been arrested on suspicion of misdemeanor driving under
the influence . the idaho press-tribune reports ( http://bit.ly/npiita ) that 3rd district court judge
renae hoff was taken into custody early saturday morning in meridian . meridian deputy police chief
tracy basterrechea says an officer pulled the 61-year-old hoff over after she failed to ” maintain the
lane of travel . ”

Topics
0: suppliers manufacturers companies importers supplier exporters distributors market wholesalers
export
1: deported deportation incarcerated prison detention jail parole imprisoned convicts incarceration

Table 8: Example documents and their corresponding topics for different topic models

Acknowledgements

This research was supported in part by the Aus-
tralian Research Council.

References

Nikos Aletras and Mark Stevenson. 2013. Evaluating
topic coherence using distributional semantics. In
Proceedings of the Tenth International Workshop on
Computational Semantics (IWCS-10). Potsdam, Ger-
many, pages 13–22.

David Blei and John Lafferty. 2006. Correlated topic

models. Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems 18.

David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan.
2003. Latent Dirichlet allocation. Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research 3:993–1022.

Wray L Buntine and Swapnil Mishra. 2014. Experi-
ments with non-parametric topic models. In Pro-
ceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Min-
ing. pages 881–890.

Lou Burnard. 1995. User guide for the British National
Corpus.

Ziqiang Cao, Sujian Li, Yang Liu, Wenjie Li, and Heng

214



Ji. 2015. A novel neural topic model and its su-
pervised extension. In Proceedings of AAAI 2015.
pages 2210–2216.

Allison June-Barlow Chaney and David M. Blei. 2012.
Visualizing topic models. In Proceedings of the 6th
International Conference on Weblogs and Social Me-
dia (ICWSM 2012). Dublin, Ireland.

Jonathan Chang, Sean Gerrish, Chong Wang, Jordan L.
Boyd-Graber, and David M. Blei. 2009. Reading
tea leaves: How humans interpret topic models. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
21 (NIPS-09). Vancouver, Canada, pages 288–296.

Changyou Chen, Lan Du, and Wray Buntine. 2011.
Sampling table configurations for the hierarchical
poisson-dirichlet process. Machine Learning and
Knowledge Discovery in Databases pages 296–311.

Gabriel Doyle and Charles Elkan. 2009. Accounting
for burstiness in topic models. In Proceedings of the
26th Annual International Conference on Machine
Learning. pages 281–288.

Anjie Fang, Craig Macdonald, Iadh Ounis, and Philip
Habel. 2016. Using word embedding to evaluate the
coherence of topics from Twitter data. In Proceed-
ings of the 39th International ACM SIGIR confer-
ence on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval. pages 1057–1060.

Thorsten Joachims. 2006. Training linear SVMs in lin-
ear time. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining. pages 217–226.

Jey Han Lau and Timothy Baldwin. 2016. The sensitiv-
ity of topic coherence evaluation to topic cardinality.
In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT . pages 483–487.

Jey Han Lau, David Newman, and Timothy Baldwin.
2014. Machine reading tea leaves: Automatically
evaluating topic coherence and topic model quality.
In Proceedings of EACL 2014. pages 530–539.

Christopher D. Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Finkel, Steven J. Bethard, and David Mc-
Closky. 2014. The Stanford CoreNLP natural lan-
guage processing toolkit. In Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL) System Demonstrations.
Baltimore, USA, pages 55–60.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey
Dean. 2013a. Efficient estimation of word represen-
tations in vector space. In Proceedings of Workshop
at the International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations, 2013. Scottsdale, USA.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013b. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems. pages 3111–3119.

David Mimno, Hanna Wallach, Edmund Talley,
Miriam Leenders, and Andrew McCallum. 2011.
Optimizing semantic coherence in topic models. In
Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP
2011). Edinburgh, UK, pages 262–272.

David Newman, Timothy Baldwin, Lawrence Cavedon,
Sarvnaz Karimi, David Martinez, and Justin Zobel.
2010a. Visualizing document collections and search
results using topic mapping. Journal of Web Seman-
tics 8(2–3):169–175.

David Newman, Jey Han Lau, Karl Grieser, and Timo-
thy Baldwin. 2010b. Automatic evaluation of topic
coherence. In Human Language Technologies: The
2010 Annual Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. pages 100–108.

Michal Rosen-Zvi, Thomas Griffiths, Mark Steyvers,
and Padhraic Smyth. 2004. The author-topic model
for authors and documents. In Proceedings of the
20th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelli-
gence. pages 487–494.

Alison Smith, Tak Yeon Lee, Forough Poursabzi-
Sangdeh, Jordan Boyd-Graber, Kevin Seppi, Niklas
Elmqvist, and Leah Findlater. 2017. Evaluating
visual representations for topic understanding and
their effects on manually generated labels. Transac-
tions of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics 5:1–15.

Hanna M Wallach, Iain Murray, Ruslan Salakhutdi-
nov, and David Mimno. 2009. Evaluation methods
for topic models. In Proceedings of the 26th Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML
2009). Montreal, Canada, pages 1105–1112.

Chong Wang and David M. Blei. 2011. Collabora-
tive topic modeling for recommending scientific ar-
ticles. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining. pages 448–456.

215


