



















































Corpus-Driven Thematic Hierarchy Induction


Proceedings of the 22nd Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL 2018), pages 54–64
Brussels, Belgium, October 31 - November 1, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

54

Corpus-driven Thematic Hierarchy Induction

Ilia Kuznetsov and Iryna Gurevych
Ubiquitous Knowledge Processing Lab (UKP-TUDA) and Research Training Group AIPHES

Department of Computer Science
Technische Universität Darmstadt

http://www.ukp.tu-darmstadt.de/

Abstract

Thematic role hierarchy is a linguistic tool
used to describe interactions between semantic
roles and their syntactic realizations. Despite
decades of dedicated research and numerous
thematic hierarchy suggestions in the litera-
ture, this concept has not been used in NLP so
far due to incompatibility and limited scope of
existing hierarchies. We introduce an empir-
ical framework for thematic hierarchy induc-
tion and evaluate several role ranking strate-
gies on English and German corpus data. We
hypothesize that inducing a thematic hierar-
chy is feasible, that a hierarchy can be induced
from small amounts of data and that resulting
hierarchies apply cross-lingually. We evaluate
these assumptions empirically.

1 Introduction

Semantic roles are one of the core concepts in
NLP, and automatic semantic role labeling (SRL)
is a major task with applications in question an-
swering (Shen and Lapata, 2007), machine trans-
lation (Liu and Gildea, 2010) and information ex-
traction (Christensen et al., 2010). The goal of
SRL is to label the semantic arguments of a pred-
icate (e.g. a verb) with roles from a pre-defined
role inventory. Conceptually, role assignment in
SRL can be split in two steps: local labeling es-
timates the likelihood of a certain semantic argu-
ment bearing a certain role; global optimization
takes context-dependent role interactions into ac-
count and enforces certain theoretically motivated
constraints (e.g. “each role must appear only once
per predication”).

State of the art in SRL is held by the systems
based on deep neural networks (Marcheggiani and
Titov, 2017; He et al., 2017). While achieving
remarkable quality on benchmark datasets, mod-
ern systems show a considerable ≈10-point per-
formance drop when applied out-of-domain. This

issue is aggravated by the fact that deep neural net-
works require significant amounts of training data,
and SRL annotations are expensive to produce.
While local role assignment can be augmented us-
ing unlabeled data (e.g. via pre-trained word and
character embeddings), context-dependent role in-
teraction is an SRL-specific phenomenon and can
only be learned from annotated SRL corpora.

Aiming to reduce the training data requirements
for SRL, we revisit the notion of thematic hierar-
chy (TH), a compact delexicalized way to model
context-dependent role interactions. Thematic hi-
erarchies assume that given a syntactic hierarchy
(e.g. subject ≺1 object ≺ oblique) semantic roles
can be ranked in a way that higher ranked roles
take higher ranked syntactic positions. One exam-
ple of phenomena captured by THs is the choice
of subject: given a thematic hierarchy Agent ≺
... ≺ Instrument, an Instrument can only
become subject if the Agent is not present, e.g.
“[John]Ag broke the window with a [hammer]In”
→ “A [hammer]In broke the window”.

THs have received considerable attention in lin-
guistic literature, but were so far impractical for
use in NLP and SRL due to incompatibility and
limited scope of the existing hierarchies. As a first
step towards including THs into the NLP tool in-
ventory we suggest an empirical framework for in-
ducing THs from role-annotated corpora. Since
VerbNet (Schuler, 2006) is the only SRL frame-
work that operates with thematic roles, we choose
it as our basis and perform experiments on the
PropBank corpus (Palmer et al., 2005) enriched
with VerbNet role labels via SemLink (Bonial
et al., 2013).

The contributions of this paper are as follows:

• We suggest a method for global thematic hi-
erarchy induction from corpus data;

1We use ≺ for rank precedence, and / for ties



55

• We propose several thematic and syntactic
ranking models and evaluate them on English
and German data;
• We show that thematic hierarchies can be in-

duced and applied cross-lingually while leav-
ing room for improvement; we further show
that thematic hierarchy induction is data-
efficient and can produce a high-quality hi-
erarchy using just a fraction of training data.

2 Related work

2.1 Semantic roles and the Lexicon
Semantic roles in the modern sense have been in-
troduced in 1960s as a way to account for variation
in syntactic behavior of verbs which can not be ex-
plained by purely syntactic means (Gruber, 1965;
Fillmore, 1968). A commonly used motivational
example contrasts the use of verbs hit and break:
while both are regular transitive verbs, hit does not
allow construction (4); and construction (5) is un-
grammatical in both cases.

(1) [John]X broke/hit the [window]Y with a
[stone]Z.

(2) [John]X broke/hit the [window]Y.
(3) A [stone]Z broke/hit the [window]Y.
(4) The [window]Y broke/*hit.
(5) The [window]Y *broke/*hit with a [stone]Z.

There exist several principled ways to describe
the syntactic behavior of arguments in the lexicon.
Available constructions can be defined individu-
ally on verb sense basis. This strategy is pre-
cise but highly redundant, since verbs show sub-
stantial similarities in syntactic behavior; besides,
it does not generalize to the out-of-vocabulary
(OOV) predicates.

A step towards a more general representation is
verb class grouping (Levin, 1993): verbs senses
can be grouped into verb classes with syntactic be-
havior shared among the members of the class. For
example, syntactically break behaves like crash,
shred and split, while hit behaves like bash and
whack in the corresponding verb senses. This sig-
nificantly reduces the lexicon redundancy and al-
lows treatment of the OOV verbs if the verb class
can be determined. A similar level of granularity
is used by the major SRL frameworks: FrameNet
SRL (Das et al., 2010) and, to some extent, Prop-
Bank SRL (Roth and Woodsend, 2014).

Semantic arguments share similarities across
verb classes, giving rise to the notion of gen-

eral semantic roles. While there exists no con-
sensus on the inventory of semantic roles, a sub-
set shared by the most theoretical approaches in-
cludes roles such as Agent (the active sentient
initiator of the event), Theme (the most affected
participant), Result (the outcome of the event),
Instrument (the instrument used) etc. Seman-
tic roles show similar behavior across languages
and can be thought of as grammatically relevant
universal categories humans use to conceptual-
ize real-world events. Following common ter-
minology, we further refer to general, predicate-
independent semantic roles as thematic roles.
This level of granularity is, for example, used by
VerbNet (Schuler, 2006).

Thematic roles’ syntactic behavior depends on
the presence of other thematic roles in the sen-
tence: as our example above demonstrates, an
Instrument can only take the subject posi-
tion if the Agent is not present (3); and Theme
can only become subject if both Agent and
Instrument are not expressed (4-5). A widely
used modeling tool to account for context de-
pendency is the thematic hierarchy (TH): given
a syntactic prominence scale (e.g. subject ≺
oblique... ≺ object), one can assume that there ex-
ists a universal ranking of thematic roles, which
is homomorphic to the syntactic ranking (e.g.
Agent ≺ Instrument ≺ Theme). The top-
ranking semantic argument gets assigned to the
highest available syntactic position, the second-
ranking gets the second-highest position, etc.

THs are a compact delexicalized way to de-
scribe semantic roles’ syntactic behavior at the
grammar level, which could reduce data require-
ments and improve generalization capability of
SRL systems. However, THs from the literature
come from varying theoretical backgrounds, are
based on different syntactic formalisms and oper-
ate with different role inventories. Most of these
THs are justified via basic (often synthetic) lan-
guage examples, aiming to verify a certain the-
ory cross-lingually rather than to describe the lan-
guage use in a compact way.

2.2 Major SRL Frameworks

The choice of linguistic theory in SRL is mostly
dictated by the availability of training data. Prop-
Bank SRL is based on the PropBank corpus
(Palmer et al., 2005) which utilizes a set of
predicate-specific core roles (A0-5) and a set



56

of general, predicate-independent adjunct roles
(AM-TMP, AM-LOC etc.). Core roles are defined
on verb sense level. An effort is made to en-
sure consistency in assigning A0 (Agent-like) and
A1 (Patient-like). The rest of the core arguments
(A2-5) are verb sense-specific; no finer-grained
distinctions between roles are made.

PropBank annotation is closely tied to syntax.
FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998) takes a different
stance and focuses on accurate and detailed rep-
resentation of event semantics. Verbs (as well as
lexemes from other categories) are grouped into
frames so that members of the same frame share
a set of fine-grained frame-specific semantic roles
(e.g. Impactee, Force, Buyer, Goods).

Both PropBank and FrameNet SRL operate
on the verb sense/verb class generalization level.
VerbNet (Schuler, 2006) groups verbs into Levin-
inspired verb classes and defines sets of general,
lexicon-level thematic roles and constructions for
each class. It is the only SRL formalism that
operates with a thematic role set. VerbNet role
sets and verb class information are mapped to the
PropBank corpus annotations via SemLink (Bo-
nial et al., 2013).

2.3 Thematic roles in SRL

So far only few studies have considered VerbNet-
level granularity in SRL and we are not aware
of SRL systems specifically designed to exploit
the thematic role generalizations. Zapirain et al.
(2008) compare PropBank and VerbNet perfor-
mance using a simple SRL system and conclude
that PropBank labels generally perform better;
however, they do not use any additional mod-
eling possibilities offered by VerbNet’s general,
predicate-independent role set. Loper et al. (2007)
show that replacing verb-specific PropBank roles
A2-5 with the corresponding VerbNet roles im-
proves the SRL performance. Merlo and van der
Plas (2009) report a statistical analysis of Prop-
Bank and VerbNet annotations and conclude that
while PropBank role inventory better correlates
with syntax and is therefore easier to learn, Verb-
Net thematic roles are more informative and bet-
ter generalize to new verb instances. Finally, a
recent comparison on German data by Hartmann
et al. (2017) positions VerbNet inventory above
FrameNet and below PropBank in terms of com-
plexity and generalization capabilities; however,
the experiment is again based on the mateplus sys-

tem (Roth and Woodsend, 2014) designed with
PropBank generalization level in mind.

2.4 Semantic Proto-Roles
A related line of work is Semantic Proto Role
Labeling (SPRL) (Reisinger et al., 2015; White
et al., 2017) which, following Dowty (1991), dis-
cards the notion of atomic semantic role inven-
tory and replaces it with Proto-Agent and
Proto-Patient property sets. While our
study utilizes traditional atomic role inventories,
we see SPRL as a compatible parallel line of work
and believe that additional benefits can be gained
by combining the two views on syntax-semantics
interface. In particular, Reisinger et al. (2015)
investigate the alignment between Dowty-style
role properties and VerbNet thematic roles and
show that VerbNet Agents tend to bear Dowty’s
instigated, awareness and volitional
properties, while Themes are more likely to
change posession, change state, etc.

2.5 Thematic hierarchies
Numerous THs have been proposed in the linguis-
tic literature, e.g. Agent ≺ Instrument ≺
Theme (Fillmore, 1968); see (Levin and Rappa-
port Hovav, 2005) for an overview. These hierar-
chies are rarely applicable for NLP since they orig-
inate from different theoretical backgrounds and
are usually focused on a narrow set of linguistic
phenomena (e.g. subject selection), aiming to pro-
vide a cross-linguistically valid hierarchy based on
a set of manually constructed examples. In con-
trast, our approach is data-driven and aims to de-
scribe the general syntactic behavior of thematic
roles. While an optimal TH that would success-
fully describe semantic roles’ behavior across lan-
guages might not exist (and would imply the exis-
tence of a universal role inventory and grammar),
our evidence suggests that this concept is at least
partially applicable.

To the best of our knowledge, there exists
no prior work explicitly aiming at discovering
thematic hierarchies in corpora. However, the
hierarchy-related effects are reported in some
studies. For example, White et al. (2017) observe
on a reduced role set that VerbNet roles dispre-
fer the violations of thematic/syntactic hierarchy
alignment. Sun et al. (2009) experiment on the-
matic rank prediction for PropBank A0 and A1,
but extend their analysis neither to VerbNet the-
matic roles, nor to the PropBank A2-5.



57

2.6 Syntactic formalisms

Cross-lingual applicability has traditionally been
a strong component in semantic role theory, and
universality is one of the common desiderata for a
thematic hierarchy. This, however, implies the ex-
istence of a universal syntactic prominence scale.

From the NLP perspective, the closest to uni-
versal syntactic representation for which auto-
matic parsers are available is the Universal De-
pendencies (UD) representation. Universal De-
pendencies (Nivre et al., 2016) is a recent initia-
tive aimed at creating a single dependency-based
formalism suited for describing syntactic structure
in a language-independent way. It encompasses
freely available treebanks for more than 60 lan-
guages, and universal dependency parsing is an ac-
tive research area (Zeman et al., 2017). Based on
that, we make an effort to ground our study in UD
syntax for English. Since neither gold UD anno-
tations, nor a deterministic converter are available,
for German we use the TIGER dependency syntax
representation (Dipper et al., 2001).

3 Hierarchical Linking model

3.1 Model

We suggest a simple model to describe the inter-
face between syntactic and thematic rankings. An
SRL corpus can be seen as a collection of sen-
tences with corresponding predications, where
each predication has a target (e.g. verb) and a set
of arguments labeled with semantic roles.

Let a1...an ∈ A be the set of arguments in the
predication p; r(ai) be the role label af the argu-
ment ai, and d(ai) be the path between the predi-
cate and the argument in the dependency parse tree
of the sentence. A syntactic ranker S provides a
syntactic rank si = S(d(ai)) for each argument ai
in A based on the path, and a thematic ranker T
provides a thematic rank ti = T (r(ai)) based on
the argument’s role. For each pair of arguments
(ai, aj) we expect their syntactic ranks to align
with their thematic ranks, i.e.

∀i 6= j : sign(ti − tj) = sign(si − sj)

The model per se does not imply the existence of
a global ranking and allows flexible ranker defini-
tion. It allows ties in both syntactic and thematic
rankings.

We use accuracy to assess how well a given
syntactic-semantic ranker pair reflects the actual

Ag In Pa Th Va

Ag
In

Pa
Th

Va

1.00 1.00 1.00 0.98

0.00 0.50 0.75

0.00 0.50

0.00 0.25 0.75

0.02 0.25

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Figure 1: Preference matrix

argument ranks found in data. Given a set of test
predications p1, p2...pk ∈ P with the argument
sets A1, A2...Ak, we measure the correspondence
between syntactic and semantic ranking over the
argument pairs (aki , a

k
j ) via accuracy defined as

#(sign(tki − tkj ) = sign(ski − skj ))
#total pairs

To avoid the majority class bias, we measure ac-
curacy for each role pair and use macro-averaged
accuracy over pairs as the final score. A straight-
forward alternative to our evaluation metric would
be the Kendall rank correlation coefficient, which,
based on our preliminary experiments, tends to
overemphasize the performance on most frequent
role pairs.

4 Thematic Hierarchy Induction

This paper investigates several thematic rank-
ing strategies. As a running example we use
a small role set: Agent (Ag), Patient (Pa),
Instrument (In), Theme (Th) and Value
(Va). For now we assume the following syntac-
tic hierarchy: subj ≺ iobj ≺ nmod ≺ obj ≺ other.

Local ranker The simplest way to model role
ranking is to extract the average syntactic rank for
each role based on the data, and then, given a test
pair, assign ranks based on average syntactic rank.

role Ag Pa In Th Va
mean(s) 1.01 2.58 1.72 3.95 3.74

Table 1: Mean syntactic rank per role (1-5)

Pairwise ranker Given that roles often strongly
prefer a certain syntactic position (also see (White



58

0.98

1.00

1.00

1.
00

0.
75

0.75

Va

Ag

Pa

Th

In

Figure 2: Preference graph

et al., 2016)), local ranking is a reasonable base-
line strategy. However, it fails to account for the
context dependency of thematic roles’ syntactic
realization. The next step is to construct a pair-
wise preference matrix: for each pair of roles
encountered in training data we calculate the pro-
portion of times role ri receives a higher syntactic
rank than role rj . For our role set this results in
the matrix shown on Fig. 1.

The preference matrix, for example, shows
that Agent clearly dominates all the roles,
Instrument ranks over Theme, and Value is
below Theme.

Global ranker The pairwise ranking approach
takes context into account. However, some role
pairs only co-occur rarely. In such cases no pair-
wise ranking information is available to the model.
Finding a global TH based on pairwise prefer-
ences is an example of a rank aggregation prob-
lem which can be solved via constrained ILP op-
timization on a preference graph (Conitzer et al.,
2006). We represent the pairwise preference ma-
trix as a graph G = (v, e) where each vertex v
represents a role, the edge weight is the preference
strength measured as #(ri ≺ rj)/#(ri, rj). The
edge direction is from higher- to lower-ranking
role. If we assume a global ordering of the roles,
we can induce the global ranking via transitivity
relations. For example (Fig. 2), Instrument
never appears with Value in our training data;
however, by transitivity via Themewe can assume
that Instrument ranks over Value.

Given the preference graph G = (v, e), let wij
be the weight of the edge between vi and vj . Let
xij ∈ 0, 1 denote that we rank vertice vi above vj .

The goal is then to maximize
∑

i,j xijwij subject
to two groups of constraints. First, we prohibit two
nodes to rank above each other, but allow ties, by
enforcing ∀i,j : xij+xji ≤ 1. Second, we enforce
transitivity, i.e. if ri is ranked above rj , and rj is
ranked above rk, then ri must be ranked above rk,
formally ∀i,j,k, i 6= j 6= k : xij + xjk − xik ≤ 1.
We solve the ILP problem using the off-the-shelf
pulp optimizer (Mitchell et al., 2011).

For our restricted example, optimization pro-
duces the following global hierarchy: Ag ≺ In ≺
Th≺ Va/Pa. This hierarchy ranks Instrument
above Value by transitivity, however, in case of
Patient and Value no preference can be in-
ferred from the graph, so they receive the same
thematic rank.

5 Experiments

5.1 Datasets and Restrictions

For our experiments on English, we use SemLink
(Bonial et al., 2013), a manually constructed re-
source that enriches PropBank’s (Palmer et al.,
2005) semantic role annotations with VerbNet’s
(Schuler, 2006) thematic role labels. We use the
Universal Dependencies converter (Schuster and
Manning, 2016) to transform original PropBank
syntactic annotation to UD. PropBank semantic
role annotation and the corresponding SemLink
reference are constituents-based. However, UD is
a dependency formalism, and we employ a number
of heuristics to align original PropBank annota-
tions with the CoNLL-2009 datasets (Hajič et al.,
2009) to recover the head node positions. We em-
ploy additional transformations, filtering out the
predications in which not all PropBank core roles
got aligned to the VerbNet thematic roles.

For German, we use the recently introduced
SR3de dataset (Mújdricza-Maydt et al., 2016;
Hartmann et al., 2017) which explicitly provides
VerbNet annotations on top of SALSA corpus
(Burchardt et al., 2006). There exist no gold UD
annotations for the SALSA corpus, and we use
the SALSA’s default TIGER syntactic formalism
(Dipper et al., 2001) in our experiments.

Following previous work, we employ certain re-
strictions on our data. Since thematic roles in both
VerbNet and SR3de are only defined for verbal
predicates, we restrict the scope of our study to
verbs. We only consider direct dependents of the
verbs in active voice, and since having access to
the full argument set is important to study con-



59

dataset #sent #tok #pred #arg
EN (PropBank→SemLink)

train 16 603 446 641 21 276 44 333
test 1 031 27 751 1 336 2 761
dev 550 15 157 684 1422

DE (SR3de VerbNet)
train 898 20 277 905 1 992
test 240 4 738 245 532
dev 117 2 429 119 266

Table 2: Dataset statistics

text dependency, we only consider the predica-
tions where all arguments are direct dependents
of the verb in the UD dependency tree. Since we
are interested in relative ranking, only predications
that contain more than one semantic argument are
considered in the study.

Dataset statistics for English and German (after
filtering) are summarized in Table 2. In all exper-
iments we induce a TH and related statistics from
the training data and evaluate it on the test data,
using the split from the CoNLL SRL shared tasks.

5.2 Syntactic ranker
For simplicity in this paper we only experiment
with two syntactic rankers per language. A com-
mon syntactic prominence scale assumed in lin-
guistic literature is subject ≺ object ≺ indirect ob-
ject ≺ oblique. This scale has to be adapted to
the UD and TIGER labeling schemes. For each
language we evaluate two syntactic rankings: one
that positions objects above indirect objects and
obliques, and one that positions objects below.

For English, we rank the UD syntactic relations
as follows (SE1): nsubj / csubj ≺ iobj ≺ nmod
≺ ccomp / dobj≺ other; where nmod corresponds
to oblique and other is used for any other syntac-
tic relation. An alternative ranking positions dobj
directly after the subject (SE2): nsubj / csubj ≺
ccomp / dobj ≺ iobj ≺ nmod ≺ other.

For German, the following ranking of TIGER
syntactic relations is employed (SD1): SB ≺ DA
≺ OP / MO / OG/ OC ≺ OA / OA2 / CVC ≺
other; where SB is the subject, DA is dative ob-
ject, OP / MO / OG / OC correspond to oblique
relations, and OA / OA2 / CVC to direct object re-
lations (see (Dipper et al., 2001) for detailed de-
scription). Similarly, we evaluate the performance
of the ranking that positions the direct object after
the subject (SD2): SB≺ OA / OA2 / CVC ≺ DA≺
OP / MO / OG / OC ≺ other.

synt glob pair loc RND UB
EN SE1 .869 .887 .867 .509 .927
EN SE2 .930 .929 .913 .500 .932
DE SD1 .655 .726 .637 .471 .818
DE SD2 .790 .820 .820 .456 .920

Table 3: Thematic ranker evaluation, incl. random
ranker (RND) and upper bound (UB); bold - best
result over syntactic rankers, underlined - best re-
sult over thematic rankers

5.3 Bounds
We construct the upper bound for the hierarchy
induction by evaluating a global ranker trained on
the test dataset. The upper bound reflects the data
properties, as well as the maximal alignment ac-
curacy that can be achieved with the selected syn-
tactic ranker. The lower bound is constructed
by evaluating 100 random thematic rankers which
rank roles according to a random (but consistent)
hierarchy, and averaging the result.

5.4 Data utilization setup
To evaluate how effective the proposed rankers use
the training data, we conduct a series of experi-
ments with reduced dataset sizes using the follow-
ing protocol. The training dataset is shuffled and
split into n = 100 slices. A ranker is consecutively
trained on the first m ∈ 1..n slices and evaluated
against the full test dataset. The procedure is re-
peated k = 100 times to eliminate the effect of
data order, and the results per slice are averaged.

6 Results

6.1 General Accuracy and Syntactic Ranker
To get an overall impression of the ranking qual-
ity, we first compare the performance of thematic
rankers with respect to syntactic rankers and avail-
able datasets. The results of this comparison are
summarized in Table 3 and show that syntactic
rankers positioning the object second in the hier-
archy (SE2 and SD2) lead to better alignment on
both datasets and have a higher upper bound. We
report the results on these rankers for the rest of
the paper.

For English the global hierarchy-based ranker
approaches the upper bound, closely followed by
the pairwise ranker. The accuracy on German data
is lower and the pairwise and local rankers outper-
form the global hierarchy-based ranker. We revisit
this observation in 6.5.



60

EN Agent ≺ Cause/Instrument/Experiencer ≺ Pivot ≺ Theme ≺ Patient ≺ Ma-
terial/Source/Asset ≺ Product ≺ Recipient/Beneficiary/Destination/Location ≺
Value/Stimulus/Topic/Result/Predicate/Goal/InitialLocation/Attribute/Extent

DE Agent ≺ Experiencer ≺ Stimulus/Pivot ≺ Cause ≺ Theme ≺ Patient ≺ Topic ≺ Instrument ≺
Beneficiary/InitialLocation ≺ Result ≺ Product/Goal ≺ Destination/Attribute ≺ Recipient ≺
Value/Time/CoAgent/Locus/Manner/Source/Trajectory/Location/Duration/Path/Extent

Table 4: Induced hierarchies

EN-test DE-test
UB .932 .920

EN-train .930 .787
DE-train .852 .790

RND .500 .456

Table 5: Cross-lingual evaluation, global ranker

6.2 Qualitative analysis

The result of hierarchy induction is a global rank-
ing of thematic roles. Table 4 shows full rank-
ings extracted for English and German data. While
some correspondence to the hierarchies proposed
in literature is evident (e.g. for English Agent
≺ Instrument ≺ Theme, similar to (Fillmore,
1968)), a direct comparison is impossible due to
the differences in role definitions and underlying
syntactic formalisms. Notice the high number of
ties: some roles never co-occur (either by chance
or by design) or occur on the same syntactic rank
(e.g. oblique) so there is no evidence for prefer-
ence even if we enforce transitivity.

6.3 Cross-lingual hierarchy induction

The induced hierarchies for English and German
bear certain similarities, which raises the question
on cross-lingual applicability of the hierarchies.
This analysis is only possible because the VerbNet
and SR3de role inventories are mostly compati-
ble with few exceptions (Mújdricza-Maydt et al.,
2016). Table 5 contrasts the performance of THs
induced from English and German training data,
and evaluated on German and English test data re-
spectively. While the cross-lingual performance
is expectedly lower than the monolingual perfor-
mance, it outperforms the random baseline by a
large margin, suggesting the potential for cross-
lingual hierarchy induction.

6.4 Data utilization

One can assume that constructing a global hierar-
chy should require less training data due to the ef-

Role pair score #(train)
Recipient - Topic 0.35 338
Source - Theme 0.46 246
Location - Theme 0.53 400
Material - Product 0.67 29
Result - Theme 0.67 30
Experiencer - Stimulus 0.74 922
Destination - Theme 0.86 401
Instrument - Theme 0.88 110
Recipient - Theme 0.89 419
Attribute - Experiencer 0.90 166

Table 6: Global ranker accuracy, English

fective utilisation of transitivity. We evaluate this
assumption empirically. Fig. 3 reports the perfor-
mance of rankers with access to different amounts
of training data for English and German. The re-
sults on English data show that global hierarchy-
based ranker effectively utilizes the training data
and can be trained using just fractions of the orig-
inal training dataset.

The accuracy measurements on German are less
conclusive: the local ranker generally performs
best and learns fastest. We attribute this to the
fact that filtered SR3de is an order of magnitude
smaller than the PropBank/SemLink dataset. For
pairwise and global rankers as many role pairs as
possible should be observed at least once to es-
tablish the pairwise preference. This holds for
PropBank/SemLink (all role pairs from test data
seen at least once after observing 20% of the train-
ing data, on average), however, for filtered SR3de,
even given the full training data, only 83% of role
pairs from the test set have been seen at least once.

6.5 Error analysis
Our evaluation procedure allows detailed insights
into the performance of the models. To illustrate,
we extract the role pairs from English and German
data with ranking accuracy below 1.0.

Table 6 lists the ranking inconsistencies pro-
duced by the global ranker for English. We can



61

0 20 40 60 80 100
data %

0.55

0.60

0.65

0.70

0.75

0.80

0.85

0.90

0.95

m
ea

n 
ac

c

0 20 40 60 80 100
data %

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

global
pairwise
local
upper

Figure 3: Data utilization for English (left) and German (right) along with max/min values

Role pair score #(train)
Attribute - Source 0.00 0
Beneficiary - Manner 0.00 0
Beneficiary - Value 0.00 1
Extent - Goal 0.00 2
Goal - Recipient 0.00 12
Instrument - Result 0.00 3
Locus - Topic 0.12 3
Recipient - Theme 0.40 26
Recipient - Topic 0.50 5
Pivot - Theme 0.67 57

Table 7: Global ranker accuracy, German

see that false ranking might be caused by the
lack of training examples (e.g. Material vs.
Product, Theme vs. Result). We also ob-
serve complications with positioning the Theme
on the hierarchy. In many cases the misalign-
ment is due to non-standard use of thematic roles,
e.g. Location as subject in wsj 2322:7 [the
delayLoc resulted from difficultiesTh]. Another
common reason for false alignments is the syn-
tactic ranker. For example, in wsj 2372:1
[the SenateAg voted 87-7Res to approveTh...] the
Result is connected to the predicate via an ad-
vmod relation, and Theme is xcomp, both ranked
equally (other) by our syntactic ranker.

Error analysis on the much smaller German
dataset (Table 7) reveals the sparsity-related is-
sues: most of the role pairs that tend to get mis-
aligned do not, or only rarely appear in the training
data, heavily influencing the score. As on English
data, many misalignments are due to simplicity of
the syntactic ranker.

7 Discussion

7.1 Importance of the syntactic ranker
The choice of syntactic ranking has a drastic ef-
fect on the resulting TH and the alignment quality,
even if only direct syntactic dependents and a lim-
ited set of relations are taken into account. Real-
istically there might exist an arbitrary set of paths
connecting arguments to predicates. UD as syn-
tactic formalism is also subject to rapid change.
Inducing a joint syntactic and thematic hierar-
chy that maximizes the overall alignment quality
is a crucial direction for future work with potential
benefits for SRL and syntactic parsing. Although
we show that THs can be induced with an arbitrary
dependency formalism, a cross-lingual UD-based
study would be another extension to our work.

7.2 SRL integration
To utilize and evaluate the potential of thematic
hierarchies for role interaction modeling, SRL in-
tegration is necessary. This, however, is not a
trivial task: the absolute majority of semantic role
labeling systems are designed with PropBank or
FrameNet SRL formalism in mind and are not
tailored to general VerbNet-style semantic roles
and verb class-level disambiguation. A dedicated
VerbNet SRL system would enable this assess-
ment, and applying THs to such a system is an
important future work direction.

7.3 Robustness to parsing errors
This paper focuses on TH induction using pre-
defined syntactic annotation: a corpus annotated
with semantic roles without an underlying syntac-
tic layer is a rare occurence. However, for prac-



62

tical applications and for the cases when an SRL
corpus is provided without syntactic annotations,
it would be important to evaluate how effectively
THs can be induced given parsing errors in train-
ing and in test data.

7.4 Data selection

We have demonstrated that THs can be induced
from small portions of training data. The large dis-
crepancy in the scores on the first data slices seen
on Fig. 3 suggests that some data instances are
more informative for TH induction. This raises
the question whether it is possible to automati-
cally select useful training instances, supported
by the evidence from previous work in SRL (Pe-
terson et al., 2014). One obvious strategy would
be to make sure that the hierarchy inducer is pre-
sented as many role pairs as early as possible. Ap-
proximating this objective in an unsupervised way
would reduce the amount of data needed to induce
a high-quality thematic hierarchy.

7.5 The need for a global hierarchy

Our results regarding the necessity of a global hi-
erarchy which ranks all the roles are inconclusive.
While global ranking reaches the best quality for
English, on the German data pairwise and local
ranking approaches perform best. Although we
attribute the latter to sparsity, more German data
would be needed to evaluate this hypothesis. In
particular, this can be achieved by relaxing some
of the constraints we impose on the data.

8 Conclusion

This paper has presented an empirical framework
for thematic hierarchy induction and evaluation.
We have suggested several syntactic and thematic
ranking strategies and a method to induce global
thematic hierarchies from corpus data. Analysis
on English and German data shows that hierarchy
induction is feasible, data-efficient and has poten-
tial for cross-lingual applications. Promising di-
rections for future work include joint modeling of
syntactic and thematic ranking, selecting informa-
tive training instances and evaluating the utility of
global hierarchies on extended language material.

Acknowledgements

This work has been supported by the German Re-
search Foundation as part of the Research Training

Group AIPHES (grant No. GRK 1994/1), QA-
EduInf project (grant GU 798/18-1 and grant RI
803/12-1) and FAZIT Stiftung.

References
Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe.

1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project. In Pro-
ceedings of the 17th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, volume 1, pages 86–90,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Claire Bonial, Kevin Stowe, and Martha Palmer. 2013.
Renewing and revising SemLink. In Proceedings
of the 2nd Workshop on Linked Data in Linguistics
(LDL-2013): Representing and linking lexicons, ter-
minologies and other language data, pages 9–17.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Aljoscha Burchardt, Katrin Erk, Anette Frank, An-
drea Kowalski, Sebastian Pado, and Manfred Pinkal.
2006. The SALSA corpus: A German corpus re-
source for lexical semantics. In Proceedings of
the Fifth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’06), pages 969–
974. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).

Janara Christensen, Mausam, Stephen Soderland, and
Oren Etzioni. 2010. Semantic role labeling for
open information extraction. In Proceedings of the
NAACL HLT 2010 First International Workshop on
Formalisms and Methodology for Learning by Read-
ing, FAM-LbR ’10, pages 52–60, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Vincent Conitzer, Andrew Davenport, and Jayant
Kalagnanam. 2006. Improved bounds for comput-
ing kemeny rankings. In Proceedings of the 21st Na-
tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence - Volume
1, AAAI’06, pages 620–626. AAAI Press.

Dipanjan Das, Nathan Schneider, Desai Chen, and
Noah A. Smith. 2010. Probabilistic frame-semantic
parsing. In Human Language Technologies: The
2010 Annual Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, HLT ’10, pages 948–956, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Stefanie Dipper, Thorsten Brants, Wolfgang Lezius,
Oliver Plaehn, and George Smith. 2001. The TIGER
treebank. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Tree-
banks and Linguistic Theories, pages 24–41.

David Dowty. 1991. Thematic proto-roles and argu-
ment selection. Language, 76(3):474–496.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1968. The Case for Case. In Em-
mon Bach and Robert T. Harms, editors, Universals
in Linguistic Theory, pages 1–88. Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, New York.



63

Jeffrey S. Gruber. 1965. Studies in Lexical Relations.
Ph.D. thesis, MIT, Cambridge, MA.

Jan Hajič, Massimiliano Ciaramita, Richard Johans-
son, Daisuke Kawahara, Maria Antònia Martı́, Lluı́s
Màrquez, Adam Meyers, Joakim Nivre, Sebastian
Padó, Jan Štěpánek, Pavel Straňák, Mihai Surdeanu,
Nianwen Xue, and Yi Zhang. 2009. The CoNLL-
2009 Shared Task: Syntactic and Semantic Depen-
dencies in Multiple Languages. In Proceedings of
the Thirteenth Conference on Computational Natu-
ral Language Learning: Shared Task, CoNLL ’09,
pages 1–18, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Silvana Hartmann, Éva Mújdricza-Maydt, Ilia
Kuznetsov, Iryna Gurevych, and Anette Frank.
2017. Assessing SRL frameworks with automatic
training data expansion. In Proceedings of the 11th
Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 115–121.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Luheng He, Kenton Lee, Mike Lewis, and Luke Zettle-
moyer. 2017. Deep semantic role labeling: What
works and what’s next. In Proceedings of the 55th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
473–483. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alterna-
tions: A Preliminary Investigation. University of
Chicago Press.

Beth Levin and Malka Rappaport Hovav. 2005. Argu-
ment Realization. Research Surveys in Linguistics.
Cambridge University Press.

Ding Liu and Daniel Gildea. 2010. Semantic role
features for machine translation. In Proceedings
of the 23rd International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (Coling 2010), pages 716–724.
Coling 2010 Organizing Committee.

Edward Loper, Szu ting Yi, and Martha Palmer. 2007.
Combining lexical resources: Mapping between
propbank and verbnet. In Proceedings of the 7th In-
ternational Workshop on Computational Linguistics,
Tilburg, the Netherlands.

Diego Marcheggiani and Ivan Titov. 2017. Encoding
sentences with graph convolutional networks for se-
mantic role labeling. In Proceedings of the 2017
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 1507–1516, Copenhagen,
Denmark. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Paola Merlo and Lonneke van der Plas. 2009. Abstrac-
tion and generalisation in semantic role labels: Prop-
bank, verbnet or both? In Proceedings of the Joint
Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL
and the 4th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing of the AFNLP, pages 288–
296. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Stuart Mitchell, Michael OSullivan, and Iain Dun-
ning. 2011. Pulp: a linear programming toolkit for
python.

Éva Mújdricza-Maydt, Silvana Hartmann, Iryna
Gurevych, and Anette Frank. 2016. Combining se-
mantic annotation of word sense & semantic roles:
A novel annotation scheme for VerbNet roles on
German language data. In Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC 2016). European Language
Resources Association (ELRA).

Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip
Ginter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajič, Christopher D.
Manning, Ryan T. McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo
Pyysalo, Natalia Silveira, Reut Tsarfaty, and Daniel
Zeman. 2016. Universal dependencies v1: A multi-
lingual treebank collection. In Proceedings of the
Tenth International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation LREC 2016. European Lan-
guage Resources Association (ELRA).

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The proposition bank: An annotated cor-
pus of semantic roles. Computational Linguistics,
31(1):71–106.

Daniel Peterson, Martha Palmer, and Shumin Wu.
2014. Focusing annotation for semantic role la-
beling. In Proceedings of the Ninth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’14), Reykjavik, Iceland. European Language
Resources Association (ELRA).

Drew Reisinger, Rachel Rudinger, Francis Ferraro,
Craig Harman, Kyle Rawlins, and Benjamin Van
Durme. 2015. Semantic Proto-Roles. Transactions
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
3:475–488.

Michael Roth and Kristian Woodsend. 2014. Composi-
tion of word representations improves semantic role
labelling. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), pages 407–413. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Karin Kipper Schuler. 2006. VerbNet: A Broad-
Coverage, Comprehensive Verb Lexicon. Ph.D. the-
sis, University of Pennsylvania.

Sebastian Schuster and Christopher D. Manning. 2016.
Enhanced English universal dependencies: An im-
proved representation for natural language under-
standing tasks. In Proceedings of the Tenth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC 2016). European Language Resources
Association (ELRA).

Dan Shen and Mirella Lapata. 2007. Using seman-
tic roles to improve question answering. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and Com-
putational Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-
CoNLL), pages 12–21, Prague, Czech Republic. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.



64

Weiwei Sun, Zhifang Sui, and Meng Wang. 2009. Pre-
diction of thematic rank for structured semantic role
labeling. In Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009
Conference Short Papers, pages 253–256. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Aaron Steven White, Kyle Rawlins, and Benjamin Van
Durme. 2017. The Semantic Proto-Role Linking
Model. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, volume 2, pages 92–98. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Aaron Steven White, Drew Reisinger, Rachel
Rudinger, Kyle Rawlins, and Benjamin Van Durme.
2016. Computational linking theory. arXiv,
abs/1610.02544.

Benat Zapirain, Eneko Agirre, and Lluı̀s Marquez.
2008. Robustness and generalization of role sets:
PropBank vs. VerbNet. In Proceedings of the 46th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, June, pages 550–558. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Daniel Zeman, Martin Popel, Milan Straka, Jan
Hajič, Joakim Nivre, Filip Ginter, Juhani Luotolahti,
Sampo Pyysalo, Slav Petrov, Martin Potthast, Fran-
cis Tyers, Elena Badmaeva, Memduh Gokirmak,
Anna Nedoluzhko, Silvie Cinkova, Jan Hajič jr.,
Jaroslava Hlavacova, Václava Kettnerová, Zdenka
Uresova, Jenna Kanerva, Stina Ojala, Anna Mis-
silä, Christopher D. Manning, Sebastian Schuster,
Siva Reddy, Dima Taji, Nizar Habash, Herman Le-
ung, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Manuela San-
guinetti, Maria Simi, Hiroshi Kanayama, Valeria de-
Paiva, Kira Droganova, Héctor Martı́nez Alonso,
Çağrı Çöltekin, Umut Sulubacak, Hans Uszkor-
eit, Vivien Macketanz, Aljoscha Burchardt, Kim
Harris, Katrin Marheinecke, Georg Rehm, Tolga
Kayadelen, Mohammed Attia, Ali Elkahky, Zhuoran
Yu, Emily Pitler, Saran Lertpradit, Michael Mandl,
Jesse Kirchner, Hector Fernandez Alcalde, Jana Str-
nadová, Esha Banerjee, Ruli Manurung, Antonio
Stella, Atsuko Shimada, Sookyoung Kwak, Gustavo
Mendonca, Tatiana Lando, Rattima Nitisaroj, and
Josie Li. 2017. Conll 2017 shared task: Multilingual
parsing from raw text to universal dependencies. In
Proceedings of the CoNLL 2017 Shared Task: Mul-
tilingual Parsing from Raw Text to Universal Depen-
dencies, pages 1–19. Association for Computational
Linguistics.


