










































An Exploration of Off Topic Conversation


Human Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 669–672,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

An Exploration of Off Topic Conversation

Whitney L. Cade
University of Memphis
365 Innovation Drive

Memphis, TN  38152-3115
wlcade@memphis.edu

Blair A. Lehman
University of Memphis
365 Innovation Drive

Memphis, TN  38152-3115
baleh-

man@memphis.edu

Andrew Olney
University of Memphis
365 Innovation Drive

Memphis, TN  38152-3115
aolney@memphis.edu

Abstract

In a corpus of expert tutoring dialogue, con-
versation that is considered to be “off topic” 
(non-pedagogical) according to a previous 
coding scheme is explored for its value in tu-
toring dynamics. Using the Linguistic Inquiry 
and Word Count (LIWC) tool, phases of tutor-
ing categorized as “off topic” were compared 
with interactive problem solving phases to ex-
plore how the two differ on the emotional, 
psychological, and topical dimensions ana-
lyzed by LIWC. The results suggest that con-
versation classified as “off topic” serves as 
motivation and broad pedagogy in tutoring. 
These findings can be used to orient future re-
search on “off topic” conversation, and help to 
make sense of both previous coding schemes 
and noisy data sets.

1 Introduction

Methods of investigating a large and noisy data set 
are of paramount importance in computational lin-
guistics. Quite often, qualitative coding schemes 
are used to capture snapshots of the data set, but 
these may gloss over finer details or miss the larger 
picture. Add to that the messy and unpredictable 
nature of naturalistic data, and analysis becomes 
even more complicated. Therefore, a multi-method 
approach to understanding pre-existing coding 
schemes and orienting future in-depth analyses of 
those schemes proves to be a useful means of ex-
ploring one’s data.

Dialogue, particularly tutorial dialogue, is one 
area where large, noisy data sets are common. 
Computer and human tutoring data have been 

parsed, coded, and tested by a number of research-
ers, and much effort has been put into making 
sense of the variability in the task-oriented dialo-
gue (e.g. Chi, Roy, and Hausmann, 2008; Graesser, 
Person, and Magliano, 1995; Person, Lehman, and
Ozbun, 2007). This work has all been in pursuit of 
a deep understanding of the complex interaction 
between the human tutor and student, which, if 
understood, could be used to boost the efficacy of 
artificially intelligent computer tutors. Expert hu-
man tutoring has been found to increase learning 
gains by as much as 2 sigmas (Bloom, 1984), 
which makes understanding their methods and mo-
tives the goal of any tutor research.

The corpus under examination here was col-
lected with the express purpose of understanding 
how truly expert tutors manage a tutoring session, 
with an emphasis on creating a corpus of naturalis-
tic dialogue data. The corpus has been investigated 
at two different grain sizes, a dialogue move level 
and a sustained phases level. Our study investi-
gates in detail an “other” category that these cod-
ing schemes, which emphasize the pedagogy of the 
tutors and the students reactions, classify as “off 
topic” conversation. Off topic conversation, by 
virtue of its name, does not address the tutoring 
task in which the tutor and student are engaged. 
However, given the prevalence of off topic conver-
sation in the corpus, it is perhaps more likely that 
the function or utility of off topic conversation in 
expert tutoring is indirect rather than non-existent, 
suggesting that the noisiest part of the tutoring di-
alogue corpus, off topic conversation, should be 
further explored.

Because any topic not pertaining to the topic at 
hand may be broached in off topic conversation 
and because the dialogue itself is full of false 

669



starts, interruptions, and fragmented sentences, it is 
reasonable to explore off topic conversation using 
a bag of words method that is applicable to a varie-
ty of formal and informal texts. One such method 
is the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) 
tool developed by Pennebaker et al., (2001), which 
looks for words that fall into specific, predeter-
mined categories such as COGNITIVE MECHANISMS
and POSITIVE EMOTIONS, then reports the percent 
of words in the document that fall into that catego-
ry. LIWC provides over 70 possible categories, 
and can help sketch a rough picture of the verbal 
dynamics of a text (Mairesse and Walker, 2006; 
Mihalcea and Strapparava, 2009). Using a readily 
available tool like LIWC allows an examination of 
the variability within off topic conversation based 
on predetermined LIWC features. We can also 
compare these results to a prominent pedagogical 
category, such as scaffolding, that a current coding 
scheme particularly emphasizes, and examine the 
differences between the two.

In this analysis, the task-orientation and utility 
of “off topic” conversation are investigated by 
comparing its outcome scores in certain dimen-
sions of LIWC to a classic pedagogical and inter-
active phase of tutoring: scaffolding (Rogoff and
Gardner, 1984). Scaffolding, previously identified 
in a tutorial dialogue coding scheme (Cade, Copel-
and, Person, and D’Mello, 2008), involves much of 
the conversational give-and-take expected in ca-
sual off topic conversation, but is considered to be 
a very focused, on task phase of tutoring. Knowing 
how off topic conversation differs from scaffolding
may help further exploration of this forgotten 
phase of tutoring. Likewise, it would give us direc-
tion in how to structure future coding schemes that 
would help bring clarity to the data set.

2 Methods

In this study, pedagogical and non-pedagogical 
phases of expert tutoring sessions were compared 
on linguistic dimensions to get at the diverse nature 
of off topic conversation within a naturalistic ex-
pert tutoring session.

The corpus under examination was collected in 
a previous study on expert human tutors. There-
fore, what follows is a brief synopsis of how this 
corpus was collected.

Ten expert math and science tutors (4 male and 
6 female) were recruited through local tutoring 

agencies and schools. Tutors were considered “ex-
pert” when they met the following criteria: they 
had to be licensed to teach at the secondary level, 
have five or more years of tutoring experience, be 
employed by a professional tutoring agency, and 
come highly recommended by school personnel 
who specialize in providing support to students 
who are struggling academically. Student partici-
pants were in grades 7 to 12, except for one who 
was obtaining a GED. All of the students were in 
academic trouble and actively sought out tutoring.

All sessions were unobtrusively videotaped at 
the location decided upon by the tutor and student. 
The researcher turned on the camera and left the 
room when the session began. Each student parti-
cipated in a maximum of two tutorial sessions, 
while each tutor participated in between two and 
eight tutoring sessions. These 50 1-hour tutoring 
sessions were then transcribed.

Two previously identified phases of tutoring (or 
“modes”), Off Topic and Scaffolding, were com-
pared to investigate their psychological, emotional, 
and topical differences. To do this, instances of 
each mode were extracted from 30 sessions (all 
sessions that contained at least one Off Topic and 
one Scaffolding mode). If a session had multiple 
occurrences of a single mode, those modes were 
compiled into a single document. Documents were 
capped at 1000 words each to prevent differences 
in word count between the modes from affecting 
the outcomes. These documents were also sepa-
rated by speaker (tutor or student); speakers may 
be differentially motivated to broach certain topics, 
and so separating out these effects leads to more 
specific identification of conversational dynamics.
Each session’s Scaffolding and Off Topic docu-
ment was then analyzed using LIWClite 7, which 
calculates the percentage of each document’s 
words that fall into specific, predefined categories. 
Though this version of LIWC offers over 70 lin-
guistic categories, only 15 were of interest in de-
termining the nature of off topic conversation: 
SOCIAL PROCESSES (ex: mate, talk, they), FAMILY
(daughter, husband, aunt), FRIENDS (buddy, neigh-
bor), AFFECTIVE PROCESSES (happy, cried), 
POSITIVE EMOTION (nice, sweet), NEGATIVE 
EMOTIONN (hurt, ugly, nasty) ANXIETY (worried, 
nervous), TENTATIVENESS (maybe, perhaps), 
CERTAINTY (always, never), WORK (majors, class), 
ACHIEVEMENT (earn, win), LEISURE (chat, movie), 
HOME (kitchen, family), NONFLUENCIES (umm, 

670



hm), and FUTURE (will, gonna). 
These categories are the most relevant in illu-

strating the emotional, topical, and psychological 
picture of conversation in tutoring when compared 
with the more on-task behavior of problem solving.

3 Discussion of Results

LIWC 
Category

T
/S

Off
Top
M

Scaff

M

Wil-
coxon
p-val

Paired
t-test
t-val

Co-
hen’s
d

Social 
Process

T 11.15 7.75 <0.01 <0.01 1.37
S 8.25 4.87 <0.01 <0.01 0.90

Positive 
Emotion

T 5.41 4.83 0.27 0.29
S 6.54 4.54 0.09 0.05 0.47

Tentative T 3.10 1.91 <0.01 <0.01 1.08
S 2.68 1.60 0.02 0.02 0.65

Work T 2.90 1.10 <0.01 <0.01 0.86
S 2.70 2.09 0.54 0.43

Achieve T 1.02 0.95 0.67 0.76
S 0.52 1.89 <0.01 <0.01 -0.92

Leisure T 0.78 0.23 0.60 0.27
S 0.50 0.15 0.05 0.07 0.50

Home T 0.30 0.04 0.02 0.05 0.53
S 0.24 0.01 0.03 0.17 0.37

Nonfluen. T 1.51 1.11 0.04 0.08 0.44
S 3.89 4.14 0.17 0.82

Future T 1.13 1.23 0.80 0.66
S 0.74 1.35 0.01 0.04 -0.49

Table 1. LIWC Dimensions with Significant Results

Since a normal distribution of scores cannot be 
assumed in this analysis, comparisons between Off 
Topic conversation and Scaffolding dialogue were 
made by comparing the LIWC scores of the modes 
using both Wilcoxon’s signed-rank test and a 
paired t-test, with similar outcomes. Effect sizes 
were also analyzed by calculating Cohen’s d. Table 
1 illustrates the significant results that emerged. In 
total, each category investigated occurs more in 
Off Topic than in Scaffolding, with the exception 
of a student’s discussion of ACHIEVEMENT and 
FUTURE.

From this analysis, an interesting pattern of re-
sults emerges. The Off Topic mode had previously 
been characterized as a conversation that had noth-
ing to do with the lesson at hand, which connoted 
that it is fairly irrelevant. However, Off Topic does 
not seem to be so wholly “off topic.” Tutors and 
students in the Off Topic mode talk about work
more often than they do in the Scaffolding mode, 
which is a mode where nothing but work is done. 
WORK words, according to the authors of LIWC, 
are mostly school-related. Off Topic may be a 
mode that allows the tutor to discuss test-taking 
skills, study strategies, and remind students what 

tasks need to be completed before the next tutoring 
session. For instance, one tutor divided up a study 
guide into manageable portions that needed to be 
completed every night so that the student would be 
prepared for an upcoming test. Previous to now, 
these conversations have only been qualitatively 
observed, but this supports a more in-depth analy-
sis of what type of work tutors are talking about 
when they are supposedly discussing non-
pedagogical topics.

This hypothesis is supported by the significant 
amount of conversation that takes place in Off 
Topic about the home; if FAMILY and FRIENDS
(which may crop up in casual conversation about 
HOME-related topics) are not discussed significant-
ly more in Off Topic, but HOME is, it may be that 
tutors are informing students of what sort of work 
needs to be done at home, and strategies to get 
work completed when on their own.

This may also explain why both students and 
tutors use more TENTATIVE words in Off Topic. 
Although it would seem that students should be 
more tentative and nonfluent when discussing dif-
ficult problem solving, they may be tentative in 
Off Topic when the tutor makes suggestions about 
studying and working. These suggestions of the 
tutor’s may be framed using language like “may-
be” and “perhaps” to make them more polite, and 
the student echoes this language in return. Thus, 
tentativeness may not come from uncertainty, but 
from suggestions couched in polite language.

It also appears that Off Topic conversation may 
not serve as a “pep talk” time; although it does 
contain more POSITIVE EMOTION words than Scaf-
folding, it does not expound upon the student’s 
achievements. ACHIEVEMENT words are more 
common in Scaffolding, where students are receiv-
ing praise for their problem solving efforts. Off 
Topic conversation may seek to motivate the stu-
dent in more subtle ways. By using more words 
that refer to SOCIAL PROCESSES (such as the third 
person plural and words like “talked”), the tutor 
and student may be building rapport with one 
another. This rapport may become important later 
on when the tutor gives the student blatantly nega-
tive feedback (Person et al., 2007), which can be 
motivationally damaging. Rapport may protect 
against flagging motivation in the student when the 
tutor uses “us” language and connects with the stu-
dent in a more casual conversation.

671



4 Conclusions and Future Work

Our goal in this work was to use a simple linguistic 
analysis tool to uncover the hidden depths of an 
existing dialogue coding scheme. The use of such 
tools can paint a rich picture of the psychological, 
emotional, and topical content of a corpus, and can 
be used in two ways: first, it may help determine if 
a deeper inquiry into a hypothesis is warranted, 
and second, it can immediately orient future re-
search towards key issues in a corpus without the 
less rigorous speculation and qualitative observa-
tions. The nature of broader coding schemes can 
come to be understood in a multifaceted manner 
using linguistic analysis, which may also inform 
future work.

Here, we have observed that off topic conversa-
tion in an expert tutoring dialogue corpus operates 
in a multidimensional way that is not irrelevant 
when studying the dynamics of an expert tutoring 
session. By using the LIWC tool developed by 
Pennebaker et al. (2001), themes concerning inter-
personal rapport and global pedagogy emerge. The 
purpose of “off topic” conversation in tutoring may 
therefore be linked more to building a relationship 
between the tutor and the student, which is neces-
sary for the trials of problem solving, and for the 
dispensation of “study strategies” that are more 
globally task-oriented, but are, nonetheless, impor-
tant in understanding the pedagogical strategies of 
expert tutors. Off topic conversation was also hy-
pothesized to function similarly in other tutorial 
work (Rosé, Kumar, Aleven, Robinson, and Wu, 
2006).

One way of adding validity to these claims 
would be to investigate the topics broached in Off 
Topic through a topics model. In this way, recur-
ring themes in off topic conversation can be re-
vealed, and these themes can be aligned with the 
LIWC findings to see if a pattern emerges. From 
there, a new coding scheme may be devised to cap-
ture the multiple types of off topic conversation, 
which, for now, seem to be divided between inter-
personal, rapport building and global pedagogy. 
This method of exploring a corpus has proven to 
be a useful approach when investigating possible 
avenues of improvement to coding schemes.

Acknowledgements
The research reported here was supported by the 
Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department 

of Education, through Grant R305A080594 to the 
University of Memphis. The opinions expressed 
are those of the authors and do not represent views 
of the Institute or the U.S. Department of Educa-
tion.

References
Benjamin Bloom. 1984. The 2 sigma problem: The 

search for methods of group instruction as effective 
as one-to-one tutoring. Educational Researcher, 
13:4-16.

Whitney Cade, Jessica Copeland, Natalie Person, and 
Sidney D’Mello. 2008. Dialogue modes in expert tu-
toring. Proceedings of the 9th International Confe-
rence on Intelligent Tutoring Systems, 470-479. 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany.

Michelene Chi, Marguerite Roy, and Robert Hausmann.
2008. Observing tutorial dialogues collaboratively: 
Insights about human tutoring effectiveness from vi-
carious learning. Cognitive Science, 32(2):301-341.

Art Graesser, Natalie Person, and Joseph Magliano. 
1995. Collaborative dialogue patterns in naturalistic 
one-on-one tutoring. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 
9:359-387.

François Mairesse and Marilyn Walker. 2006. Automat-
ic Recognition of Personality in Conversation. In 
Proceedings of the Human Language Technology 
Conference of the North American Chapter of the 
ACL, 85–88. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, New York.

Rada Mihalcea and Carlo Strapparava. 2009. The Lie 
Detector: Explorations in the Automatic Recognition 
of Deceptive Language. In Proceedings of the ACL-
IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Papers, 309-312. 
Association for Computational Linguistics, Suntec, 
Singapore.

James Pennebaker, Martha Francis, and Roger Booth. 
2001. Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC): 
LIWC2001. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, 
NJ.

Natalie Person, Blair Lehman, and Rachel Ozbun. 2007. 
Pedagogical and motivational dialogue moves used 
by expert tutors. Presented at the 17th Annual Meet-
ing of the Society for Text and Discourse. Glasgow, 
Scotland.

Barbara Rogoff and William Gardner. 1984. Adult 
guidance of cognitive development. Everyday cogni-
tion: Its development in social context, 95-116. Har-
vard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Carolyn Rosé, Rohit Kumar, Vincent Aleven, Allen 
Robinson, & Chih Wu. 2006. CycleTalk: Data dri-
ven design of support for simulation based learning. 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in 
Education, 16:195-223.

672


