










































Invited Talk: Music, Language, and Computational Modeling: Lessons from the Key-Finding Problem


Human Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, page 741,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Music, Language, and Computational Modeling: Lessons from  
the Key-Finding Problem 

 
David Temperley 

Eastman School of Music, University of Rochester 
26 Gibbs St. 

Rochester, NY 14604 
dtemperley@esm.rochester.edu 

 
 
 

Abstract 

Recent research in computational music research, including my own, has been greatly influenced by methods in 
computational linguistics. But I believe the influence could also go the other way: Music may offer some interesting 
lessons for language research, particularly with regard to the modeling of cognition. 
 
In this talk I will focus on an important problem in music cognition: the problem of key identification. I will argue 
that this problem is in some ways analogous to the problem of syntactic parsing in language. I will present a simple 
Bayesian model that performs well at the key-finding task. I will then consider some implications of the model for 
other issues. The model represents moment-to-moment changes in key over time and captures “reanalysis” effects in 
key perception. The model can be used to estimate the tonal ambiguity of a musical passage, and can also be used to 
estimate the probability of note patterns (just as a probabilistic grammar can be used to estimate the probability of 
word strings). An interesting question here concerns expectation: In forming expectations for the next surface ele-
ment (note or word), do we consider all possible structures (syntactic structures or keys) or just the most probable 
one? Finally, the model sheds light on the concept of “information flow.” It has been suggested that language re-
flects a tendency towards uniform density of information, in that less probable elements are spread out or elongated; 
I will suggest that the same may be true in music.  
 
Slides for the talk will be available at my website, <www.theory.esm.rochester.edu/temperley>. 
 

741


