










































Urdu Word Segmentation


Human Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 528–536,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Urdu Word Segmentation 

    
Nadir Durrani Sarmad Hussain 
Institute for NLP Center for Research in Urdu Language Processing 

Universität Stuttgart National University of Computer and Emerging Sciences 
durrani@ims.uni-stuttgart.de sarmad.hussain@nu.edu.pk 

  

  

Abstract 

Word Segmentation is the foremost obligatory task in 

almost all the NLP applications where the initial phase 

requires tokenization of input into words. Urdu is 

amongst the Asian languages that face word segmenta-

tion challenge. However, unlike other Asian languages, 

word segmentation in Urdu not only has space omission 

errors but also space insertion errors. This paper dis-

cusses how orthographic and linguistic features in Urdu 

trigger these two problems. It also discusses the work 

that has been done to tokenize input text. We employ a 

hybrid solution that performs an n-gram ranking on top 

of rule based maximum matching heuristic. Our best 

technique gives an error detection of 85.8% and over-

all accuracy of 95.8%.  Further issues and possible fu-

ture directions are also discussed. 

1 Introduction 

All language processing applications require input 

text to be tokenized into words for further 

processing.  Languages like English normally use 

white spaces or punctuation marks to identify word 

boundaries, though with some complications, e.g. 

the word “e.g.” uses a period in between and thus 

the period does not indicate a word boundary. 

However, many Asian languages like Thai, Khmer, 

Lao and Dzongkha do not have word boundaries 

and thus do not use white space to consistently 

mark word endings.  This makes the process of 

tokenization of input into words for such languages 

very challenging. 

 

Urdu is spoken by more than 100 million people, 

mostly in Pakistan and India
1
.  It is an Indo-Aryan 

language, written using Arabic script from right to 

left, and Nastalique writing style (Hussain, 2003).  

                                                           
1 Ethnologue.com 

http://www.ethnologue.com/14/show_language.asp?code=UR

D 

Nastalique is a cursive writing system, which also 

does not have a concept of space.  Thus, though 

space is used in typing the language, it serves other 

purposes, as discussed later in this paper.  This en-

tails that space cannot be used as a reliable delimi-

ter for words.  Therefore, Urdu shares the word 

segmentation challenge for language processing, 

like other Asian languages. 

 

This paper explains the problem of word segmen-

tation in Urdu.  It gives details of work done to 

investigate linguistic typology of words and moti-

vation of using space in Urdu.  The paper then 

presents an algorithm developed to automatically 

process the input to produce consistent word seg-

mentation, and finally discusses the results and 

future directions. 

2 Urdu Writing System 

Urdu is written in cursive Arabic script. Characters 

in general join with the neighbors within a word 

and in doing so acquire different shapes. Logically, 

a character can acquire up to four shapes, i.e. ini-

tial, medial, final position in a connected sequence 

or an isolated form.  The characters having this 

four-way shaping are known as joiners. However, 

another set of characters only join with characters 

before them but do not join with character after 

them, and are termed as non-joiners.  The non-

joiners only have final and isolated forms.  For 

example Arabic Letter Farsi Yeh ی is a joiner and 
has four shapes ی ,ي ,ی and ی respectively and 
Arabic letter Dal د is a non-joiner and has two 
forms د and د only. The shape that these characters 
acquire depends upon the context. 

 

Table 1 lists the orthographic rules that Urdu cha-

racters follow. For example, the table shows that in 

the middle of a word, if the character is a non-

joiner, it acquires final shape when following a 

528



joiner and isolated shape when following a non-

joiner.  This joining behavior results in formation 

of multiple connected portions within a word, each 

called a ligature.   
 

 

Table 1: Orthographic Rules for Urdu 

 

The concept of space as a word boundary marker is 

not present in Urdu writing. As an Urdu learner, a 

person is not taught to leave a space between 

words, but only to generate correct shaping while 

writing. Thus, the concept of space is only learnt 

later on when the person learns how to use a com-

puter.  However, space is introduced as a tool to 

control the correct letter shaping and not to consis-

tently separate words.  For example, the native 

speaker learns to insert a space within the word 

 needy”) to generate the correct shape“) ضرورت مند
of ت.  Without space it appears as ضرورتمند which 
is visually incorrect. On contrary, the user finds it 

unnecessary to insert a space between the two 

words اردومرکز (“Urdu Center”), because the cor-
rect shaping is produced automatically as the first 

word ends with a non-joiner. Therefore اردومرکز 
and اردو مرکز look identical. 
 

Though space character is not present in Urdu, 

with increasing usage of computer it is now being 

used, both to generate correct shaping (as dis-

cussed above) and also to separate words (a habit 

being carried over to Urdu from English literate 

computer users).  This makes space an unreliable 

cue for word boundary. The problem is further ob-

fuscated by the lack of a clear definition of a work 

in Urdu in some contexts.  The next section dis-

cusses these issues. 

3 Segmentation Issues in Urdu Text 

The segmentation challenges can be divided into 

two categories, challenges caused due to joiner and 

non-joiner characters.   

3.1 Space Omission 

As discussed, for words ending with non-joiners 

correct shaping is generated even when space is 

not typed and thus, many times a user omits the 

space.  Though there is no visible implication, 

from the perspective of computational processing 

not typing a space merges current word with the 

next word.  Figure 1 below illustrates an example, 

where the phrase has eight words (or tokens) each 

ending with a non-joiner and thus the whole 

phrase can be written without a space and is still 

visibly same and equally readable. 

 
 قافلے کے صدر احمد شير ڈوگر نے کہا

(a) 
 قافلےکےصدراحمدشيرڈوگرنےکہا

(b) 

Figure 1: All Words Ending with Non-Joiners (a) 

with Spaces, (b) without Spaces between Words 

(“Troop Leader Ahmed Sher Dogar Said”) 

 

Another frequent set of space omissions are caused 

due to variation in the definition of a word in Urdu.  

There are certain function words in Urdu which 

may be combined with other function words and 

content words by some writers but may be written 

separately by others.  Shape variation may also 

occur in some of these cases, but is overlooked by 

the writers.  Table 2 gives some examples of such 

cases.  Though the merged form is not considered 

correct diction, it is still frequently used and thus 

has to be handled.  It is not considered spelling 

error but a writing variation. 

 
POS Combined Separated Translation 

Pn+CM آپ کا آپکا Yours 
D+ NN اس وقت اسوقت at that time 

CM+ NN کی طرف کيطرف Towards 
V+TA کرے گی کریگی will do 

CM + P کے ليے کيليے For 
Pn  = Pronoun, D = Demonstrative, NN = Noun, CM 

= Case Marker, V=Verb, P = Particle 
 

Table 2: Multiple Words Written in Connected 

Form Causing Shaping Changes 

 

Due to reasonable frequency of such cases, these 

may be considered as acceptable alternatives, and 

thus Urdu word segmentation system would need 

to deal with both forms and consider them equiva-

lent.  This process is productively applicable and 

Word J-Shape Example NJ-Shape Example 

Start I مسجد Is دجال 
 

Middle 

M after J نمره F after J بندر 
I after NJ دمبا Is after J نادر 

 

End 

F after J عجم F after J بند 
Is after NJ کام Is after NJ رد 

J = Joiners, NJ = Non-Joiners 

I = Initial, Is = Isolated, M = Medial, F = Final 

Underlined = Shape in Consideration 

529



not limited to a few pre-determined cases. Addi-

tional complication in the process arises from the 

fact that in some cases (last two cases in Table 2) 

the spellings also change when two words are writ-

ten in combined form, due to the way these charac-

ters are encoded.  Urdu considers ی and ے both 
logically same characters at a certain level, though 

with different shapes to indicated different vowels 

(Hussain, 2004).  In combined form they render the 

same shape.  However, Unicode terms ے as a non-
joiner with no medial shape.  Thus, the Urdu writ-

ers use ی to generate the medial position of ے in 
combined form. 

3.2 Space Insertion 

When multiple morphemes are juxtaposed within a 

word, many of them tend to retain their shaping as 

separate ligatures.  If ending characters are joiners, 

space is usually inserted by writers to prevent them 

from joining and thus to retain the separate ligature 

identity.  This causes an extra space within a word.  

Though this creates the visually acceptable form, it 

creates two tokens from a single word in the con-

text of its processing.  If the writers do not type a 

space between these two morphemes within a word 

they would join and create a visually incorrect 

shape. Such examples are common in Urdu
2
.  Few 

of these cases are given in Table 3.   

 
Class A B Translation 

i شادیشده شادی شده Married 
ii مومبتی موم بتی Candle 
iii خواہمخواه خواه مخواه Unnecessarily 
iv ٹيليفون ٹيلی فون Telephone 
v پيایچڈی پی ایچ ڈی PhD 

i= Affixation, ii = Compounding ,  

iii = Reduplication, iv = Foreign Word,  

v = Abbreviations 
 

Table 3: (A) Separated Form (Correct Shaping, but 

Two Tokens), (B) Combined Form (Erroneous 

Shaping, with one Token) 

 

As categorized in Table 3, the space insertion 

problem is caused due to multiple reasons.  Data 

analyzed shows that space is inserted (i) to keep 

affixes separate from the stem, (ii) in some cases, 

                                                           
2 Though Unicode recommends using Zero Width Non-Joiner 

character in these context, this is not generally known by Urdu 

typists and thus not practiced; Further, this character is not 

available on most Urdu keyboards. 

to keep two words compounded together from vi-

sually merging, (iii) to keep reduplicated words 

from combining, (iv) to enhance readability of 

some foreign words written in Urdu, and (v) to 

keep English letters separate and readable when 

English abbreviations are transliterated. 

3.3 Extent of Segmentation Issues in Urdu 

In an earlier work on Urdu spell checking (Naseem 

and Hussain, 2007) report that a significant number 

of spelling errors
3
 are due to irregular use of space, 

as discussed above.  The study does a spelling 

check of an Urdu corpus.  The errors reported by 

the spelling checker are manually analyzed.  A to-

tal of 975 errors are found and of which 736 errors 

were due to irregular use of space (75.5%) and 239 

errors are non-space-related errors (24.5%). Of the 

space related errors, majority of errors (672 or 70% 

of total errors) are due to space omission and 53 

errors (5%) were due to space insertion. Thus irre-

gular use of space causes an extremely high per-

centage of all errors and has to be addressed for all 

language processing applications for Urdu.   

 

A study of Urdu words was also conducted as part 

of the current work. Text was used from popular 

Urdu online news sites (www.bbc.co.uk/urdu and 

http://search.jang.com.pk/). A data of 5,000 words 

from both corpora was observed and space inser-

tion and omission cases were counted. These 

counts are given in Table 4.  Counts for Space In-

sertion are sub-divided into the four categories 

identified earlier.   

 
Problem BBC Jang Total 

Space Omission 373 563 936 

Space Insertion  

 Affixation 298 467 765 

 Reduplication 52 76 128 

 Compounding 133 218 351 

 Abbreviation 263 199 462 

Total 1119 1523 2642 
 

Table 4: Space Omission and Insertion Counts 

from Online BBC and Jang Urdu News Websites 

 

The data shows that a significantly high percentage 

of errors related to space, with significant errors 

                                                           
3 Errors based on tokenization on space and punctuation mark-

ers 

530



related to both omission and insertion.  Within in-

sertion errors, affixation, compounding and ab-

breviation related errors are more significant 

(because reduplication is a less frequent phenome-

non).  

 

In summary, the space related errors are significant 

and must be addressed as a precursor to any signif-

icant language and speech processing of the lan-

guage 

3.4 Ambiguity in Defining Urdu Word 

Another confounding factor in this context it that 

there is no clear agreement on word boundaries of 

Urdu in some cases.  

 

Compound words are hard to categorize as single 

or multiple words.  Urdu forms compounds in 

three ways: (i) by placing two words together, e.g. 

 (parents”, literally “father mother”), (ii“) ماں باپ
by putting a combining mark between them

4
, e.g. 

 prime minister”), and (iii) by putting“) وزیر اعظم
the conjunction و between two words, e.g.  نظم و
  .(”Discipline“) ضبط
 

Similarly certain cases of reduplication are also 

considered a single word by a native speaker, e.g. 

 equal”), while others“) برابر fluently”) and“) فرفر
are not, e.g. آہستہ آہستہ (“slowly”).  There are also 
cases which are ambiguous, as there is no agree-

ment even within native speakers.   

 

Moreover, certain function words, normally case 

markers, postpositions and auxiliaries, may be 

written joined with other words in context or sepa-

rately.  The words like ليے کے  may also be written 
in joined form کيليے, and the different forms may 
be perceived as multiple or single words respec-

tively. 

 

This is demonstrated by the results of a study done 

with 30 native speakers of Urdu (including univer-

sity students, language researchers and language 

teachers).  The subjects were asked to mark wheth-

er they considered some text a single word or a 

sequence of two words.   Some relevant results are 

given in Table 5.  The table indicates that for the 

types of phenomena in Table 4, the native speakers 

                                                           
4 The diacritics (called zer-e-izafat or hamza-e-izafat) are op-

tional, and are not written in the example given. 

do not always agree on the word boundary, that 

certain cases are very ambiguous, and that writing 

with or without space also changes the perception 

of where the word boundary should lie.   

 
Word(s) # of Words Category 

1 2 

 Compounding with 6 24 وزیرمملکت
conjunctive diacritic 

 -do- 13 17 حکومِت پاکستان
 -do- 2 28 صورتِ حال
 -do- 2 28 صورتحال
 Compounding with 5 25 امن وامان

conjunctive character و 
 -do- 1 29 نشو ونما

 Suffixation 0 30 عقيدت مندی
 -do- 8 22 جرائم پيشہ
 Reduplication 27 3 جگہ جگہ
 -do- 27 3 ساتھ ساتھ

 Space omission between 15 15 ہوگی
two auxiliaries 

 Space omission between 12 18 جائيگا
verb and auxiliary 

 Same as above but 25 5 جائے گا
without space omission 

 

Table 5: Survey on Word Definition 

 

As the word boundary is ambiguously perceived, it 

is not always clear when to mark it.  To develop a 

more consistent solution, the current work tags the 

different levels of boundaries, and it is left up to 

the application provider using the output to decide 

which tags to translate to word level boundaries. 

Free morphemes are placed and identified at first 

level.  At second level we identify strings that are 

clearly lexicalized as a single word.  Compounds, 

reduplication and abbreviations are dealt at third 

level. 

4 Summary of Existing Techniques 

Rule based techniques have been extensively used 

for word segmentation.  Techniques including 

longest matching (Poowarawan, 1986; Rarunrom, 

1991) try to match longest possible dictionary 

look-up. If a match is found at n
th
 letter next look-

up is performed starting from n+1 index. Longest 

matching with word binding force is used for Chi-

nese word segmentation (Wong and Chang, 1997). 

However, the problem with this technique is that it 

consistently segments a letter sequence the same 

way, and does not take the context into account.  

531



Thus, shorter word sequences are never generated, 

even where they are intended. 

Maximum matching is another rule based tech-

nique that was proposed to solve the shortcomings 

of longest matching. It generates all possible seg-

mentations out of a given sequence of characters 

using dynamic programming. It then selects the 

best segmentation based on some heuristics.  Most 

popularly used heuristic selects the segmentation 

with minimum number of words. This heuristic 

fails when alternatives have same number of 

words. Some additional heuristics are then often 

applied, including longest match (Sornlertlamva-

nich, 1995). Many variants of maximum matching 

have been applied (Liang, 1986; Li et al., 1991; Gu 

and Mao, 1994; Nie et al., 1994). 

There is a third category of rule based techniques, 

which also use additional linguistic information for 

generating intermediate solutions which are then 

eventually mapped onto words.  For example, rule 

based techniques have also been applied to lan-

guages like Thai and Lao to determine syllables, 

before syllables are eventually mapped onto words, 

e.g. see (Phissamy et al., 2007).   

 

There has been an increasing application of statis-

tical methods, including n-grams, to solve word 

segmentation.  These techniques are based at let-

ters, syllables and words, and use contextual in-

formation to resolve segmentation ambiguities, e.g.  

(Aroonmanakul, 2002; Krawtrakul et al., 1997).   

The limitation of statistical methods is that they 

only use immediate context and long distance de-

pendencies cannot be directly handled. Also the 

performance is based on training corpus. Neverthe-

less, statistical methods are considered to be very 

effective to solve segmentation ambiguities.  

 

Finally, another class of segmentation techniques 

applies several types of features, e.g. Winnow and 

RIPPER algorithms (Meknavin et al., 1997; Blum 

1997). The idea is to learn several sources of fea-

tures that characterize the context in which each 

word tends to occur. Then these features are com-

bined to remove the segmentation ambiguities 

(Charoenpornsawat and Kijsirikul 1998). 

 

 

 

5 Segmentation Model for Urdu 

Although many other languages share the same 

problem of word boundary identification for lan-

guage processing, Urdu problem is unique due to 

its cursive script and its irregular use of space to 

create proper shaping.  Though other languages 

only have space omission challenge, Urdu has both 

omission and insertion problems further confound-

ing the issue.   

 

We employ a combination of techniques to inves-

tigate an effective algorithm to achieve Urdu seg-

mentation.  These techniques are incorporated 

based on knowledge of Urdu linguistic and writing 

system specific information for effective segmen-

tation.  For space omission problem a rule based 

maximum matching technique is used to generate 

all the possible segmentations. The resulting possi-

bilities are ranked using three different heuristics, 

namely min-word, unigram and bigram techniques.   

 

For space insertion, we first sub-classify the prob-

lem based on linguistic information, and then use 

different techniques for the different cases. Space 

insertion between affixes is done by extracting all 

possible affixes from Urdu corpus. Some affixes in 

Urdu are also free morphemes so it is important to 

identify in segmentation process whether or not 

they are part of preceding or following word. For 

example ناک is also a free morpheme (“nose”) and 
a suffix that makes adjective from noun, e.g. in 

word خطر ناک (“dangerous”).   This is done based 
on the part of speech information of the words in 

the context. 

 

Reduplication is handled using edit distance algo-

rithm. In Urdu the reduplicated morpheme is either 

the same or a single edit-distance from the base 

morpheme, e.g. فرفر has same string repeated, برابر 
has one insertion, and ٹھيک ٹھاک has one substitu-
tion.  Thus, if a string is less than two edits from its 

neighbor it is an instance of reduplication
5
. As the 

examples suggest, the reduplication may not only 

be limited to word initial position and may also 

occur word medially.  However, if the length of 

base word is less than four, it is further to avoid 

function words (case markers, postpositions, aux-

                                                           
5 Insertion, deletion and substitution are all considered contri-

buting a single edit distance here.  

532



iliaries, etc.) from being mistakenly identified as a 

case of reduplication, e.g. کيا گيا (“was done”) has 
two words with a single edit distance but is not a 

reduplicated sequence.  

 

Urdu does not abbreviate strings, but abbreviations 

from English are frequently transliterated into Ur-

du. This sequence can be effectively recognized by 

developing a simple finite automaton. The automa-

ton treats marks all such co-occurring morphemes 

because they are likely to be an English abbrevia-

tion transliterated into Urdu, e.g. پی ایچ ڈی 
(“PhD”). If such morphemes are preceding proper 

names then these are not combined as they are 

more likely to be the initials of an abbreviated 

name, e.g. ڈی شاکر این  (“N. D. Shakir”).  This ap-
proach confuses the morpheme کے (genitive case 
marker) of Urdu with the transliteration of English 

letter “k”.  If we write ڈی کے بعد پی ایچ  (“after 
PhD”), it is interpreted as “P H D K after”.  This 

has to be explicitly handled. 

 

As classification of compounds into one or two 

word sequences is unclear, unambiguous cases are 

explicitly handled via lexical look-up.  An initial 

lexicon of 1850 compound words has been devel-

oped for the system based on a corpus of Urdu. 

Common foreign words are also included in this 

list.   

5.1 Algorithm 

The segmentation process starts with pre-

processing, which involves removing diacritics (as 

they are optionally used in Urdu and not consi-

dered in the current algorithm because they are 

frequently incorrectly marked by users
6
) and nor-

malizing the input text to remove encoding ambi-

guities
7
.  Input is then tokenized based on space 

and punctuation characters in the input stream. As 

has been discussed, space does not necessarily in-

dicate word boundary.  However presence of space 

does imply word or morpheme boundary in many 

                                                           
6 The word  ٰاعلی is written with the super-script Alef placed 
on Lam and Yay characters.  The latter variation is correct but 

the former incorrect variation is also common in the corpus.   
7 Unicode provides multiple codes for a few letters, and both 

composed and decomposed forms for others.  These have to be 

mapped onto same underlying encoding sequence for further 

processing.  See 

http://www.crulp.org/software/langproc/urdunormalization.ht

m for details.   

cases, which can still be useful. The tokenization 

process gives what we call an Orthographic Word 

(OW).  OW is used instead of “word” because one 

OW may eventually give multiple words and mul-

tiple OWs may combine to give a single word.  

Keeping space related information also keeps the 

extent of problem to be solved within a reasonable 

computational complexity.  For example input 

string نادر خان درانی (the name of the first author) 
with spaces giving three OWs, creates 2 x 1 x 7 = 

14 possible segmentations when sent separately to 

the maximum matching module (space omission 

error removal - see Figure 2). However, if we re-

move the spaces from the input and send input as a 

single OW نادرخاندرانی to maximum matching 
process, we get 77 possible segmentations. This 

number grows exponentially with the length of 

input sentence. Throwing away space character 

means we are losing important information so we 

keep that intact to our use. 

 

After pre-processing a series of modules further 

process the input string and convert the OWs into a 

sequence of words.  This is summarized in Figure 

2 and explained below. 

 

Each OW is sent to a module which deals with 

space omission errors. This module extracts all 

possible morpheme segmentations out of an OW. 

Ten best segmentations of these are selected based 

on minimum-word heuristic.  This heuristic prefers 

segmentations with minimum number of mor-

phemes. Such a heuristic is important to prevent 

the search space to explode. We observed that us-

ing 10-best segmentations proved to be sufficient 

in most cases as OW normally encapsulates two or 

three Urdu words but as a heuristic we also added a 

feature which increases this number of 10-best 

segmentations to 15, 20, 25-best and so on depend-

ing upon number of characters in an OW. Ten best 

segmentations for each OW are merged with the 

extracted segmentations of other OWs. Up till here 

we have successfully resolved all space omission 

errors and the input sentence has been segmented 

into morphemes. The 10
n (

where ‘n’ is No. of 

OWs) segmentations are then passed on to space 

insertion error removal module. This module has 

several sub-modules that handle different linguistic 

phenomena like reduplication, affixation, abbrevia-

tions and compounding. 

 

533



The reduplication identification module employs 

single edit distance algorithm to see if adjacent 

morphemes are at single edit-distance of each oth-

er. If the edit distance is less than two, then the 

reduplication is identified and marked. 

 
 

Diacritic Removal / Tokenization 
 

Space Omission Error Removal 
 

Check for Reduplication within an OW 
 

Lexical Look-ups for Spelling Variations 
 

Maximum Matching Module 
 

Ranking-based on Min-Word Heuristic 
 

 

Space Insertion Error Removal 
 

Reduplication Handling 
 

English Abbreviation Handling 
 

Affixation Handling 
 

Compound Word Tagging 
 

 

N-Gram Based Ranking 
 

Figure 2: Urdu Word Segmentation Process 

 

 For example the module will correctly recognize 

consecutively occurring OWs Rبھو and Rبھا as a 
case of reduplication.  Reduplication is also ap-

plied earlier in space omission error module as 

there may also be a case of reduplication within a 

single OW. This module handles such cases, by 

dividing words in halves and identifying possible 

reduplications.  Thus, if the words are written 

without space, e.g. RبھاRبھو (innocent) they are 
still identified and tagged as reduplicated words 

Rبھو and Rبھا. 
 

This list of words is then fed into an automaton 

which recognizes the sequence of abbreviations 

generated by transliterating English letters.   

 

A complete affix list is compiled, and in the next 

stage the short listed word sequences are processed 

through a process which looks through this list to 

determine if any of the OWs may be combined.  

Part of speech information of stem is also used to 

confirm if OWs can be merged. 

Urdu compounds are finally identified.  This is 

done by using a compound list generated through 

the corpus.  As compounding is arbitrary, where 

speakers are not certain in many cases that a se-

quence of morphemes form a single compound or 

not, the segmentation process leaves this level to 

the discretion of the user.  Whichever compounds 

are listed in a compound lexicon are treated as a 

single compound word.  Those not listed are not 

tagged as compounds.  User may enhance this list 

arbitrarily.  The lexicon is initialized with a list of 

non-controversial compound, as verified from pub-

lished dictionaries.   

 

Eventually, all the segmentations are re-ranked. 

We used three different re-ranking methods name-

ly minimum-word heuristic, unigram and bi-gram 

based sequence probabilities, comparative analysis. 

 

Based on the segmentation process, the output se-

quence contains the following tagging.  As dis-

cussed earlier, the word segmentation may be 

defined based on this tagging by the individual 

application using this process. 

 
Phenomenon Tags Examples 

Word <W></W> <W>نSاع</W> 
Root <R></R> <W><R>ضرورت</R> 

<S>مند</S></W> 
Suffix <S></S> <W><R>حيرت</R> 

<S>انگيز</S></W> 
Prefix <P></P> <W><P>بد</P> 

<R>تہذیبی</R></W> 
XY Com-

pounds 

<C1></C1> <C1><W>انشاء</W> 
<W>هللا</W></C1> 

X-e-Y Com-

pounds 

<C2></C2> <C2><W>وزیر</W> 
<W> لیاع </W></C2> 

X-o-Y Com-

pounds 

<C3></C3> <C3><W>گرد</W> 
<W>و</W> 

<W>نواح</W></C3> 
Reduplication <Rd></Rd> <Rd><W>ٹھيک</W> 

<W>ٹھاک</W></Rd> 
Abbreviations <A></A> <A><W>پی</W> 

<W>سی</W> </A> 

Figure 3: Urdu Word Segmentation Tag Set 
 

A regular word is tagged using <w> …</w> pair.  

Roots, suffixes and prefixes are also tagged within 

a word. Reduplication, compounding and abbrevia-

tions are all considered to be multi-word tags and 

relevant words are grouped within these tags. 

Three different kind of compounding is separately 

tagged. 

534



6 Results 

The algorithm was tested on a very small, manual-

ly segmented corpus of 2367 words. The corpus 

we selected contained 404 segmentation errors 

with 221 cases of space omissions and 183 cases of 

space insertions. In space insertion category there 

were 66 cases of affixation, 63 cases of compound-

ing, 32 cases of reduplication and 22 cases of ab-

breviations. The results for all three techniques are 

shown below: 

 
 Categories Errors %ages 

 Affixation 59/66 89.39 
 Reduplication 27/32 84.37 

Abbreviations 19/22 86.36 

Compounds 28/63 44.44 

Total 133/183 72.67 
 

Table 6: Percentages of Number of Errors Detected 

in Different Categories of Space Insertion Error 

There were 221 cases of space omission errors 

where multiple words were written in a continuum. 

Given below is a table that shows how many of 

these were correctly identified by each of the used 

techniques. Clearly, statistical techniques outper-

form a simple minimum number of words heuris-

tic. Bigrams are likely to produce better results if 

the training corpus is improved. Our training cor-

pus contained manually segmented 70K words. 

The bigram probabilities are obtained using 

SRILM-Toolkit (Stolcke, 2002). 

 Categories Errors %ages 

Maximum Matching 186/221 84.16 

Unigram 214/221 96.83 

Bigram 209/221 94.5 
 

Table 7: %age of No. of Errors Detected in Space 

Omission with Different Ranking Techniques 

Following table gives cumulative results for cor-

rectly identified space omission and insertion er-

rors.  

 Categories Errors %ages 

Maximum Matching 323/404 79.95 

Unigram 347/404 85.8 

Bigram 339/404 83.9 
 

Table 8: %age of No. of Errors Detected Cumula-

tively 

 

Final table counts total number of words (redupli-

cation, compounds and abbreviations cases are in-

clusive) in test corpus and total number of 

correctly identified words after running the entire 

segmentation process. 

 

 Categories Detected %ages 

Maximum Matching 2209/2367 93.3 

Unigram 2269/2367 95.8 

Bigram 2266/2367 95.7 
 

Table 9: Percentage of Correctly Detected Words 

7 Future Work  

This work presents a preliminary effort on word 

segmentation problem in Urdu. It is a multi-

dimensional problem. Each dimension requires a 

deeper study and analysis. Each sub-problem has 

been touched in this work and a basic solution for 

all has been devised. However to improve on re-

sults each of these modules require a separate 

analysis and study. Statistics is only used in rank-

ing of segmentations. In future work bi-gram sta-

tistics can be used to merge morphemes. More data 

can be tagged to find out joining probabilities for 

the affixes that occur as free morpheme. Such 

analysis will reveal whether an affix is more in-

clined towards joining or occurs freely more fre-

quently. Similarly a corpus can be tagged on 

compounds. For each morpheme its probability to 

occur in compound can be calculated. If two or 

more morphemes with higher compounding proba-

bilities co-occur they can be joined together. Simi-

larly corpus can be tagged for abbreviations.  

 

Ranking of segmentations and affix merging can 

be improved if POS tags are also involved with 

bigram probabilities. Use of POS tags with n-gram 

technique is proven to be very helpful in solving 

unknown word problems. Our model does not ex-

plicitly handle unknown words. Currently the max-

imum matching module splits an unknown OW 

into smaller Urdu morphemes. For example 

 Kolesnikov) is erroneously split into) کوليسينکوف
 More serious problems occur in .کولی،سين،کو،ف
cases when OW is a mixture of known and un-

known words. For example in case فریزرکوجاناہے 
(“Fraser must go”). All these are to be addressed in 

future work. 

 

535



References 

Andreas, S. 2002. SRILM - an extensible language 

modeling toolkit. In Intl. Conf. Spoken Language 

Processing, Denver, Colorado.  
 
Aroonmanakul, W. 2002. Collocation and Thai 

Word Segmentation. In proceeding of SNLPOrien-

tal COCOSDA. 

 

Blum, A. 1997. Empirical Support for Winnow and 

Weighted-Majority Algorithm: Results on a Ca-

lendar Scheduling Domain, Machine Learning, 

26:5-23. 

 

Charoenpornsawat, P., Kijsirikul, B. 1998. Fea-

ture-Based Thai Unknown Word Boundary Identi-

fication Using Winnow. In Proceedings of the 

1998 IEEE Asia-Pacific Conference on Circuits 

and Systems (APCCAS’98). 

 

Gu, P. and Mao, Y. 1994. The adjacent matching 

algorithm of Chinese automatic word segmentation 

and its implementation in the QHFY Chinese-

English system. In International Conference on 

Chinese Computing, Singapore. 

 

Hussain, S. 2003. www. LICT4D . asia / Fonts / 

Nafees_Nastalique.  In the Proceedings of 12th 

AMIC Annual Conference on E-Worlds: Govern-

ments, Business and Civil Society, Asian Media 

Information Center, Singapore.  Also available at 

http://www.crulp.org/Publication/papers/2003/ww

w.LICT4D.asia.pdf.   
 

Hussain, S. 2004. Letter to Sound Rules for Urdu 

Text to Speech System.  In the Proceedings of 

Workshop on Computational Approaches to Arabic 

Script-based Languages, COLING 2004, Geneva, 

Switzerland, 2004. 
 

 

Krawtrakul, A., Thumkanon. C., Poovorawan. Y. 

and Suktarachan. M. 1997. Automatic Thai Un-

known Word Recognition. In Proceedings of the 

natural language Processing Pacific Rim Sympo-

sium. 

Li, B.Y., S. Lin, C.F. Sun, and M.S. Sun. 1991. A 

maximum-matching word segmentation algorithm 

using corpus tags for disambiguation. In 

ROCLING IV, pages: 135-146, Taipei. ROCLING 

 

Liang, N. 1986. A written Chinese automatic seg-

mentation system-CDWS. In Journal of Chinese 

Information Processing, 1(1):44-52. 
 

Meknavin. S., Charenpornsawat. P. and Kijsirikul. 

B. 1997. Feature-based Thai Words Segmentation. 

NLPRS, Incorporating SNLP. 
 

Naseem, T., Hussain, S. 2007.  Spelling Error 

Trends in Urdu.  In the Proceedings of Conference 

on Language Technology (CLT07), University of 

Peshawar, Pakistan. 
 

Nie, J., Jin W., and Hannan, M. 1994. A hybrid 

approach to unknown word detection and segmen-

tation of Chinese. In International Conference on 

Chinese Computing, Singapore. 

 

Phissamay, P., Dalolay,V., Chanhsililath, C., Sili-

masak, O. Hussain, S., and Durrani, N.  2007.  Syl-

labification of Lao Script for Line Breaking.  In 

PAN Localization Working Papers 2004-2007.  . 

 

Poowarawan, Y., 1986. Dictionary-based Thai Syl-

lable Separation. In Proceedings of the Ninth Elec-

tronics Engineering Conference 

 

Rarunrom, S., 1991. Dictionary-based Thai Word 

Separation. Senior Project Report. 

 

Sornlertlamvanich, V. 1995. Word Segmentation 

for Thai in a Machine Translation System (in 

Thai), Papers on Natural Language Processing, 

NECTEC, Thailand 

 

Wong, P., Chan, C. 1996. Chinese Word Segmen-

tation based on Maximum Matching and Word 

Binding Force. In Proceedings of COLING 96, pp. 

200-203. 

 

536


