










































Distinguishing Use and Mention in Natural Language


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Student Research Workshop, pages 29–33,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Distinguishing Use and Mention in Natural Language 

 

 

Shomir Wilson 
Computer Science 

University of Maryland 

College Park, MD 20742, USA 
shomir@umd.edu 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Abstract 

When humans communicate via natural lan-

guage, they frequently make use of metalan-

guage to clarify what they mean and promote 

a felicitous exchange of ideas. One key aspect 

of metalanguage is the mention of words and 

phrases, as distinguished from their use. This 

paper presents ongoing work on identifying 

and categorizing instances of language-

mention, with the goal of building a system 

capable of automatic recognition of the phe-

nomenon. A definition of language-mention 

and a corpus of instances gathered from Wiki-

pedia are discussed, and the future direction of 

the project is described. 

1 Introduction 

Costello: Well then who's on first? 

Abbott: Yes. 

Costello: I mean the fellow's name. 

Abbott: Who. 

Costello: The guy on first. 

Abbott: Who. 

 
 In Abbott and Costello’s famous routine 

“Who’s on First?”, Costello asks Abbott for the 

names of the players on a baseball team. In the 

above excerpt
1
, Abbott tries unsuccessfully to ex-

plain that the name of the first baseman is Who, but 

Costello interprets this as another question instead 

                                                           
1 Quoted from http://www.phoenix5.org/ 

humor/WhoOnFirst.html. 

of a response to his own. If Abbott had been more 

explicit and less terse (by responding with “The 

fellow’s name is the word ‘Who’”, for instance), 

he would have avoided the ambiguity in his an-

swers and might have succeeded in conveying to 

Costello the name of the first baseman. Instead, 

this misunderstanding is repeated throughout the 

routine with comic results, as the two become in-

creasingly agitated by their breakdown in commu-

nication. 

 As Abbott and Costello unwittingly demon-

strated, we sometimes must refer to the language 

that we speak and write in order to understand lan-

guage itself. Metalanguage is our facility for doing 

this, and its interpretation often implicitly relies on 

the use-mention distinction—that is, simply, the 

distinction between using elements of language 

and mentioning them. In both written and spoken 

communication, the mention of letters, sounds, 

words, phrases, or entire sentences (termed lan-

guage-mention in this paper for brevity) is essen-

tial for indicating titles, explaining meaning, 

introducing new words, attributing exact utterances 

to others, and other common functions of metalan-

guage (Saka 2005). There is evidence that human 

conversation makes frequent use of the use-

mention distinction, and that we would be severely 

handicapped without it (Perlis et al., 1998). More-

over, this distinction has close ties to the appear-

ance-reality distinction in cognitive science (Miller 

1993). 

 It is surprising, then, that the use-mention dis-

tinction has thus far received little attention in 

computational linguistics. The need for greater 

study is unmistakable, as human audiences gener-

29



ally navigate through this linguistic phenomenon 

with a natural ease that computers do not possess. 

The complexity behind this natural ease is apparent 

in our ability to understand simple sentences such 

as “Sky is spelled S K Y” and “The letters S, K, 

and Y make the word sky”, which mean essentially 

the same thing but are structured and worded very 

differently. To gain the benefits of understanding 

the use-mention distinction, natural language 

processing systems must detect the subtle cues that 

signal this phenomenon. 

This paper presents some preliminary results 

from a project on characterizing and identifying 

instances of language-mention in the English lan-

guage. The use-mention distinction is first ex-

plained in greater detail, and a working definition 

is proposed for the phenomenon of language-

mention. A corpus of instances of language-

mention from Wikipedia is then introduced, with 

analysis of the categories in which the phenome-

non appears to occur. The hypothesis of this con-

tinuing project is that lexical and syntactic cues 

will be sufficient to automatically identify at least a 

large subset of instances of mentioned language. 

2 The Use-Mention Distinction  

The use-mention distinction, as previously stated, 

is the distinction between using linguistic entities 

(such as letters, sounds, words, phrases, or entire 

sentences) and mentioning them. Since this expla-

nation is slightly opaque at best and possibly circu-

lar, some examples and a proposal for a definition 

are appropriate. Consider the following sentences: 

(1) The cat is on the mat. 
(2) The word “cat” is spelled with three letters. 

In (1), the reader’s attention to meaning does not 

focus on the words themselves, but instead upon 

the presumed cat on the mat. In (2), the reader un-

derstands that the word cat—a string of three let-

ters, as opposed to any particular cat or an abstract 

idea of a cat—is in the focus of the sentence. Quo-

tation marks around cat in (2) are a convention to 

further reinforce that the word is being mentioned, 

and in some contexts (such as this sentence) italics 

may serve the same purpose. 

 The other linguistic entities listed above can also 

be mentioned, and the reader may easily conjure 

appropriate examples. Of particular note is quota-

tion, a form of language-mention in which lan-

guage from another source is reproduced as part of 

a statement, as in (3) below: 

(3) Eric said, “We should meet for lunch.” 
In (3), the phrase between quote marks is men-

tioned as what Eric has said. However, the reader 

is likely to treat the quoted text in (3) as a string 

with semantic depth, indicating that the use half of 

the use-mention distinction is present as well. Ex-

amples such as this illustrate that use and mention 

are not mutually exclusive (Maier 2007). 

 If writers always and consistently used cues 

such as quotation marks and italics, and if speakers 

followed a convention for delimiting mentioned 

utterances
2
, recognizing language-mention would 

be an easier task. However, it frequently falls upon 

the intuition of the audience to determine when, 

where, and how it occurs (Anderson et al. 2002). 

Sentences (2) and (3) above, if typed less formally 

(sans quotation marks) or transcribed from speech, 

would still be easily understood by a human read-

er. Moreover, cues such as italics and quotation 

marks are also used for other purposes, such as 

distancing (“scare quotes”) and emphasis, meaning 

that they are uncertain indicators of language-

mention. It seems that subtler cues are responsible 

for our ability to distinguish use and mention. 

 In spite of the ubiquity of the phrase use-

mention distinction, it is difficult to find an explicit 

definition for either the distinction itself or its two 

halves. The effort here will be to define language-

mention, since this will aid in identifying where 

and how it occurs. What follows is a working defi-

nition, in the sense that it is a “rough draft”; sug-

gestions for improvement are invited. For the 

moment, it restricts the scope of this work to sen-

tential language-mention, where the mentioned 

linguistic entity is referred to inside of the same 

sentence that it occurs. (An example of a sentence 

that fails this additional requirement is: “Disregard 

the last thing I said.”) This restriction is necessary 

to reduce the complexity of the identification and 

labeling problems, and it will be assumed for the 

rest of the paper. 

Definition: For T a token or a set of tokens in a 

sentence, if T refers to a property of the token T or 

the type of T, then T is an instance of language-

mention. 

                                                           
2 One might observe that spoken language sometimes contains 

nonverbal cues for language-mention. While worthy of study, 

these cues fall beyond the scope of this paper, which will fo-

cus on written or transcribed language. 

30



Here, a token can be any one of the linguistic enti-

ties listed at the beginning of this section—letters, 

sounds, words, phrases, or entire sentences.  A 

property might be its spelling, pronunciation, orig-

inal source (in the case of quotation), meaning (for 

a variety of interpretations of that term), or another 

aspect for which language is shown or demonstrat-

ed
3
. The type of T is relevant in some instances of 

language-mention (such as in (2)) and the token 

itself is relevant in others (including unusual cases 

such as “The is the first word in this sentence”). 

3 A Language-Mention Corpus 

The second task of this project has been to create a 

corpus of sentences that contain instances of lan-

guage-mention. The corpus will be valuable to 

move beyond laboratory examples and to begin 

mining for patterns in syntax and vocabulary that 

predict the occurrence of the phenomenon. 

 Wikipedia was chosen as a source of text for 

several reasons. Its text is freely available and cov-

ers a wide variety of subjects. Articles are written 

to be informative, which suggests that new names 

and terms are introduced frequently—a common 

function of language-mention. Contributors tend to 

highlight language-mention with italicization, bold 

text, or quotation marks. (This convention is men-

tioned in the Wikipedia Manual of Style, though it 

is unclear whether most contributors read it there 

or simply follow it out of habit.) While language-

mention can certainly occur outside of those stylis-

tic cues, the decision was made to concentrate on 

sentences that contained them, since this greatly 

accelerated the annotation process. 

 The annotation effort focused on the markup 

text of 1000 randomly chosen articles from English 

Wikipedia. Except for delimiters for bold and italic 

text, most of the markup was removed, and the 

remaining text was segmented into sentences using 

NLTK’s implementation of the Punkt sentence 

tokenizer (Kiss and Strunk, 2006). The sentences 

then were filtered for only those that contained 

bold text, italic text, or text between single or 

double quotation marks, yielding a set of 1339 sen-

tences that contained one or more of them. 

 Hand annotation required approximately three 

person-hours, with that time heavily skewed to-

ward approximately the first third of the sentences, 
                                                           
3 These properties are based upon the ostentions of language 

in Paul Saka’s treatment of the use-mention distinction (1998). 

as the set of categories for language-mention was 

also developed during this labeling process. Cate-

gories were formed with an informal "diagnostic 

test" of substitution of the category's theme (e.g., 

"this proper name", "this translation", "this sym-

bol", "this quotation") in the place of the candidate 

token or tokens. Only text highlighted by one of 

the cues mentioned above was considered for labe-

ling. Although only one researcher participated in 

the annotation, at the time of writing this paper an 

effort was in progress to build a much larger cor-

pus using multiple annotators via Amazon’s Me-

chanical Turk service. This service has shown 

promise in other natural language annotation tasks 

(Snow et al., 2008). 

 Out of the 1339 sentences inspected by hand, 

171 contained at least one instance of language-

mention. Many of those sentences contained sever-

al instances. Table 1 below lists the categories ob-

served and the frequencies of each one, and Table 

2 provides examples from each category. 
 

Language-Mention Category Frequency 

Proper name (PN) 

Translation or Transliteration (TR) 

Attributed Language (AT) 
Words/Phrases as Themselves (WD) 

Symbols/Nonliteral Marks (SY) 

Phonetic/Sound (PH) 

Spelling (SP) 

Abbreviation (AB) 

119 
61 

47 

46 

8 

2 

2 

1 

 

Table 1: Frequencies of the different categories of lan-

guage-mention found in the corpus. 

 

Cat. Example 

PN In 2005, Ashley Page created another short 

piece on Scottish Ballet, a strikingly mod-

ern piece called ''The Pump Room'', set to 

pulsating music by Aphex Twin. 

TR The Latin title translates as ''a method for 

finding curved lines enjoying properties of 

maximum or minimum, or solution of iso-

perimetric problems in the broadest ac-

cepted sense''. 

AT "It is still fresh in my memory that I read a 

chess book of Karpov by chance in 1985 

which I liked very much," the 21-year-old 

said. 

WD '''Submerged forest''' is a term used to de-

scribe the remains of trees (especially tree 

31



stumps) which have been submerged by 

marine transgression, i.e. sea level rise. 

SY He also introduced the modern notation 

for the trigonometric functions, the letter 

''e'' for the base of the natural logarithm 

(now also known as Euler's number) … 

PH The call of this species is a high pitched 

''ke-ke-ke'' like American Kestrel. 

SP '''James Breckenridge Speed''' (middle 

name sometimes spelled '''Breckinridge''') 

(1844-1912) was a successful businessman 

in Louisville, Kentucky and an important 

philanthropist. 

AB … ''Moskovskiy gosudarstvennyy univer-

sitet putej soobshcheniya'', often abbre-

viated '''MIIT''' for '''Moscow Institute of 

Transport Engineers''' … 
 

Table 2: Examples from the corpus of each category of 

language-mention. Triple quote marks indicate bold text 

in the original markup. The longer sentences for SY and 

AB have been truncated. The relevant instance of lan-

guage-mention in each example appears underlined. 

 

As shown, proper names were by far the most 

common category, with almost twice as many in-

stances as the next most frequent category.  This 

follows intuition, since Wikipedia articles often 

describe entities identified by proper names. In 

contrast, there were just a few instances of pronun-

ciation (phonetic/sound) or spelling. Either the pre-

filtering of sentences eliminated many instances of 

these before human annotation could find them, or 

Wikipedia is not a fertile source for them. 

Of particular note are the 46 instances of words 

or phrases as themselves, since these are examples 

of language being either introduced or clarified for 

the reader. While there exists a body of work on 

named entity recognition (Nadeau and Sekine, 

2007), very little exists on identifying when words 

serve a very similar function, essentially as rigid 

designators for their types.  One of the future goals 

of this project will be to fill that gap. 

4 Related Work 

A similar corpus-building project was undertaken 

by Anderson, et. al (2004) to study the occurrence 

of metalanguage in human dialogue. In addition to 

the difference in focus (metalanguage broadly ver-

sus language-mention in particular), their project 

concentrated on the classification of utterances 

from casual speech, as opposed to the structure of 

well-formed sentences. The automatic recognition 

of language-mention will require a specific focus 

on the phenomenon, since it differs from other 

forms of metalanguage in its unusual syntactic 

structure (as shown in the next section). 

 In applications, the use-mention distinction has 

also received some treatment within dialog man-

agement and commonsense reasoning, as imple-

mented in the ALFRED system (Josyula et al., 

2003). However, its ability to recognize language-

mention is limited to the task of learning new 

words from a limited set of sentence structures. 

The ongoing project described in this paper instead 

has the goal of recognizing and eventually inter-

preting language-mention in a wide variety of nat-

ural cases. 

5 Future Work 

The next step in this project will be to enlarge the 

language-mention corpus, using more data from 

Wikipedia and other promising sources. Language 

learning materials have also been considered for 

this purpose, as they necessarily contain a high 

frequency of metalanguage. The presence of stylis-

tic cues in the text will be useful but perhaps not 

essential, as it is anticipated that bootstrapping the 

annotation process will become possible once 

enough indicators in sentence structure and voca-

bulary have been identified. This identification will 

be accomplished through a combination of eyebal-

ling of patterns in parse trees and automated 

searching through the corpus using a tool such as 

Tregex (Levy and Andrew, 2006). 

 One eventual goal of this project is to detect 

language-mention without the presence of stylistic 

cues, with the intent of correcting egregious errors 

common in syntactic parsing of the phenomenon. 

Statistically-trained parsers have achieved great 

levels of accuracy at the macro level of examining 

large quantities of text, but this comes at a cost. 

Such accuracy tends not to include the phenome-

non of language-mention, which often has an un-

usual structure. Consider the following two 

sentences paired with the resulting output from the 

Stanford Parser (Klein and Manning 2003): 

(4a) Car is spelled c a r 

32



(4b) (ROOT (S (NP (NNP Car)) (VP (VBZ is) 

(VP (VBN spelled) (S (NP (SYM c)) (NP (DT 

a) (NN r))))))) 

(5a) The pronunciation of potato is pough tayh 

toe 

(5b) (ROOT (S (NP (NP (DT The) (NN pro-

nunciation)) (PP (IN of) (NP (NN potato)))) 

(VP (VBZ is) (NP (JJ pough) (NN tayh) (NN 

toe))))) 

Both of these sentences are easily interpretable 

by a human audience, but the parser garbles their 

structure where language-mention occurs. Such 

unusual structure and vocabulary are likely not to 

lend well to the methods used to train such a pars-

er. Because of this, the feasibility of a “hybrid” 

system is being investigated, which would com-

bine an existing high-performance parser with a 

rule-based system to modify and correct its output 

where appropriate. 

Preliminary work on a language-mention parser 

has shown the feasibility of this hybrid approach. 

A trial system has been built that uses parse trees 

produced by the Stanford Parser as input to five 

rules that detect common syntactic patterns indicat-

ing the phenomenon occurs in a sentence. In (4a), 

for instance, the presence of the verb spell and the 

sequence of two or more single-letter words indi-

cates that the sequence is likely an instance of lan-

guage-mention and falls into the category of 

spelling. Although language-mention exhibits sub-

stantial variety in its forms (and certainly will not 

be conquered by the five rules in the trial system), 

this approach should be able to take advantage of 

additional patterns mined from the corpus of the 

phenomenon currently being created.  It is hy-

pothesized that such a parser, using lexical and 

syntactic cues, will be sufficient to identify and 

categorize a large percentage of instances of lan-

guage-mention in the absence of any stylistic cues. 

References  

Anderson, Michael L., Andrew Fister, Bryant Lee, and 

Danny Wang. 2004. On the frequency and types of 

meta-language in conversation: a preliminary report.  

Paper presented at the 14th Annual Conference of the 

Society for Text and Discourse. 

Anderson, Michael L., Yoshi Okamoto, Darsana Josyu-

la, and Don Perlis. 2002. The use-mention distinction 

and its importance to HCI. In Proceedings of the 

Sixth Workshop on the Semantics and Pragmatics of 

Dialog. 

Josyula, Darsana, Mike Anderson, and Don Perlis. 

2003. Towards domain-independent, task-oriented, 

conversational adequacy. In Proceedings of IJCAI-

2003 Intelligent Systems Demonstrations. 

Kiss, Tibor and Jan Strunk. 2006. Unsupervised multi-

lingual sentence boundary detection. Computational 

Linguistics, 32(4): 485-525. 

Klein, Dan and Christopher Manning. 2003. Accurate 

Unlexicalized Parsing. In Proceedings of the 41st 

Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-

guistics.  

Levy, Roger and Galen Andrew. 2006. Tregex and 

Tsurgeon: tools for querying and manipulating tree 

data structures. In Proceedings of the 8th Interna-

tional Conference on Knowledge-Based Intelligent 

Information and Engineering Systems. 

Maier, Emar. 2007. Mixed quotation: between use and 

mention. In Proceedings of LENLS2007, Miyazaki, 

Japan. 

Miller, Michael. 1993. A view of one’s past and other 

aspects of reasoned change in belief. Ph.D. thesis, 

University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland. 

Nadeau, David and Satoshi Sekine. 2007. A survey of 

named entity recognition and classification. Linguis-

ticae Investigationes, 30(1):3–26. 

Perlis, Don, Khemdut Purang, and Carl Andersen. 1998. 

Conversational adequacy: mistakes are the essence. 

International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 

48:553-575. 

Saka, Paul. 1998. Quotation and the use-mention dis-

tinction. Mind, 107(425):113–135. 

Saka, Paul. 2005. Quotational constructions. Belgian 

Journal of Linguistics, 17(1):187–212. 

Snow, Rion, Brendan O’Connor, Daniel Jurafsky, and 

Andrew Y. Ng. Cheap and fast—but is it good? Eva-

luating non-expert annotations for natural language 

tasks. 2008. In Proceedings of the Conference on 

Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. 

Honolulu, Hawaii. 

33


