










































Visual Information in Semantic Representation


Human Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 91–99,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Visual Information in Semantic Representation

Yansong Feng and Mirella Lapata
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
10 Crichton Street, Edinburgh, EH8 9AB, UK

Y.Feng-4@sms.ed.ac.uk, mlap@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract

The question of how meaning might be ac-
quired by young children and represented by
adult speakers of a language is one of the most
debated topics in cognitive science. Existing
semantic representation models are primarily
amodal based on information provided by the
linguistic input despite ample evidence indi-
cating that the cognitive system is also sensi-
tive to perceptual information. In this work we
exploit the vast resource of images and associ-
ated documents available on the web and de-
velop a model of multimodal meaning repre-
sentation which is based on the linguistic and
visual context. Experimental results show that
a closer correspondence to human data can be
obtained by taking the visual modality into ac-
count.

1 Introduction

The representation and modeling of word mean-
ing has been a central problem in cognitive science
and natural language processing. Both disciplines
are concerned with how semantic knowledge is ac-
quired, organized, and ultimately used in language
processing and understanding. A popular tradition
of studying semantic representation has been driven
by the assumption that word meaning can be learned
from the linguistic environment. Words that are sim-
ilar in meaning tend to behave similarly in terms
of their distributions across different contexts. Se-
mantic space models, among which Latent Semantic
Analysis (LSA, Landauer and Dumais 1997) is per-
haps known best, operationalize this idea by captur-
ing word meaning quantitatively in terms of simple
co-occurrence statistics. Each word w is represented
by a k element vector reflecting the local distribu-
tional context of w relative to k context words. More
recently, topic models have been gaining ground as
a more structured representation of word meaning.

In contrast to more standard semantic space mod-
els where word senses are conflated into a single
representation, topic models assume that words ob-
served in a corpus manifest some latent structure —
word meaning is a probability distribution over a set
of topics (corresponding to coarse-grained senses).
Each topic is a probability distribution over words,
and the content of the topic is reflected in the words
to which it assigns high probability.

Semantic space (and topic) models are extracted
from real language corpora, and thus provide a direct
means of investigating the influence of the statistics
of language on semantic representation. They have
been successful in explaining a wide range of be-
havioral data — examples include lexical priming,
deep dyslexia, text comprehension, synonym selec-
tion, and human similarity judgments (see Landauer
and Dumais 1997 and the references therein). They
also underlie a large number of natural language
processing (NLP) tasks including lexicon acquisi-
tion, word sense discrimination, text segmentation
and notably information retrieval. Despite their pop-
ularity, these models offer a somewhat impoverished
representation of word meaning based solely on in-
formation provided by the linguistic input.

Many experimental studies in language acquisi-
tion suggest that word meaning arises not only from
exposure to the linguistic environment but also from
our interaction with the physical world. For ex-
ample, infants are from an early age able to form
perceptually-based category representations (Quinn
et al., 1993). Perhaps unsurprisingly, words that re-
fer to concrete entities and actions are among the
first words being learned as these are directly ob-
servable in the environment (Bornstein et al., 2004).
Experimental evidence also shows that children re-
spond to categories on the basis of visual features,
e.g., they generalize object names to new objects of-
ten on the basis of similarity in shape (Landau et al.,
1998) and texture (Jones et al., 1991).

In this paper we aim to develop a unified mod-

91



eling framework of word meaning that captures the
mutual dependence between the linguistic and visual
context. This is a challenging task for at least two
reasons. First, in order to emulate the environment
within which word meanings are acquired, we must
have recourse to a corpus of verbal descriptions and
their associated images. Such corpora are in short
supply compared to the large volumes of solely tex-
tual data. Secondly, our model should integrate lin-
guistic and visual information in a single representa-
tion. It is unlikely that we have separate representa-
tions for different aspects of word meaning (Rogers
et al., 2004).

We meet the first challenge by exploiting mul-
timodal corpora, namely collections of documents
that contain pictures. Although large scale corpora
with a one-to-one correspondence between words
and images are difficult to come by, datasets that
contain images and text are ubiquitous. For exam-
ple, online news documents are often accompanied
by pictures. Using this data, we develop a model
that combines textual and visual information to learn
semantic representations. We assume that images
and their surrounding text have been generated by
a shared set of latent variables or topics. Our model
follows the general rationale of topic models — it is
based upon the idea that documents are mixtures of
topics. Importantly, our topics are inferred from the
joint distribution of textual and visual words. Our
experimental results show that a closer correspon-
dence to human word similarity and association can
be obtained by taking the visual modality into ac-
count.

2 Related Work

The bulk of previous work has focused on models of
semantic representation that are based solely on tex-
tual data. Many of these models represent words as
vectors in a high-dimensional space (e.g., Landauer
and Dumais 1997), whereas probabilistic alterna-
tives view documents as mixtures of topics, where
words are represented according to their likelihood
in each topic (e.g., Steyvers and Griffiths 2007).
Both approaches allow for the estimation of similar-
ity between words. Spatial models compare words
using distance metrics (e.g., cosine), while proba-
bilistic models measure similarity between terms ac-
cording to the degree to which they share the same
topic distributions.

Within cognitive science, the problem of how

words are grounded in perceptual representations
has attracted some attention. Previous modeling ef-
forts have been relatively small-scale, using either
artificial images, or data gathered from a few sub-
jects in the lab. Furthermore, the proposed models
work well for the tasks at hand (e.g., either word
learning or object categorization) but are not de-
signed as a general-purpose meaning representation.
For example, Yu (2005) integrates visual informa-
tion in a computational model of lexical acquisi-
tion and object categorization. The model learns a
mapping between words and visual features from
data provided by (four) subjects reading a children’s
story. In a similar vein, Roy (2002) considers the
problem of learning which words or word sequences
refer to objects in a synthetic image consisting of ten
rectangles. Andrews et al. (2009) present a proba-
bilistic model that incorporates perceptual informa-
tion (indirectly) by combining distributional infor-
mation gathered from corpus data with speaker gen-
erated feature norms1 (which are also word-based).

Much work in computer vision attempts to learn
the underlying connections between visual features
and words from examples of images annotated with
description keywords. The aim here is to enhance
image-based applications (e.g., search or retrieval)
by developing models that can label images with
keywords automatically. Most methods discover
the correlations between visual features and words
by introducing latent variables. Standard latent se-
mantic analysis (LSA) and its probabilistic variant
(PLSA) have been applied to this task (Pan et al.,
2004; Hofmann, 2001; Monay and Gatica-Perez,
2007). More sophisticated approaches estimate the
joint distribution of words and regional image fea-
tures, whilst treating annotation as a problem of sta-
tistical inference in a graphical model (Blei and Jor-
dan, 2003; Barnard et al., 2002).

Our own work aims to develop a model of se-
mantic representation that takes visual context into
account. We do not model explicitly the correspon-
dence of words and visual features, or learn a map-
ping between words and visual features. Rather,
we develop a multimodal representation of meaning
which is based on visual information and distribu-
tional statistics. We hypothesize that visual features
are crucial in acquiring and representing meaning

1Participants are given a series of object names and for each
object they are asked to name all the properties they can think
of that are characteristic of the object.

92



Michelle Obama fever hits the UK

In the UK on her first
visit as first lady, Michelle
Obama seems to be mak-
ing just as big an im-
pact. She has attracted as
much interest and column
inches as her husband on
this London trip; creating
a buzz with her dazzling outfits, her own schedule
of events and her own fanbase. Outside Bucking-
ham Palace, as crowds gathered in anticipation of
the Obamas’ arrival, Mrs Obama’s star appeal was
apparent.

Table 1: Each article in the document collection contains
a document (the title is shown in boldface), and image
with related content.

and conversely, that linguistic information can be
useful in isolating salient visual features. Our model
extracts a semantic representation from large docu-
ment collections and their associated images without
any human involvement. Contrary to Andrews et al.
(2009) we use visual features directly without rely-
ing on speaker generated norms. Furthermore, un-
like most work in image annotation, we do not em-
ploy any goldstandard data where images have been
manually labeled with their description keywords.

3 Semantic Representation Model

Much like LSA and the related topic models our
model creates semantic representations from large
document collections. Importantly, we assume that
the documents are paired with images which in turn
describe some of the document’s content. Our ex-
periments make use of news articles which are of-
ten accompanied with images illustrating events, ob-
jects or people mentioned in the text. Other datasets
with similar properties include Wikipedia entries
and their accompanying pictures, illustrated stories,
and consumer photo collections. An example news
article and its associated image is shown in Table 1
(we provide more detail on the database we used in
our experiments in Section 4).

Our model exploits the redundancy inherent in
this multimodal collection. Specifically, we assume
that the images and their surrounding text have been
generated by a shared set of topics. A potential

stumbling block here is the fact that images and
documents represent distinct modalities: images are
commonly described by a continuous feature space
(e.g., color, shape, texture; Barnard et al. 2002; Blei
and Jordan 2003), whereas words are discrete. For-
tunately, we can convert the visual features from a
continuous onto a discrete space, thereby rendering
image features more like word units. In the follow-
ing we describe how we do this and then move on to
present an extension of Latent Dirichlet Allocation
(LDA, Blei and Jordan 2003), a topic model that can
be used to represent meaning as a probability distri-
bution over a set of multimodal topics. Finally, we
discuss how word similarity can be measured under
this model.

3.1 Image Processing
A large number of image processing techniques have
been developed in computer vision for extracting
meaningful features which are subsequently used
in a modeling task. For example, a common first
step to all automatic image annotation methods is
partitioning the image into regions, using either an
image segmentation algorithm (such as normalized
cuts; Shi and Malik 2000) or a fixed-grid layout
(Feng et al., 2004). In the first case the image is
represented by irregular regions (see Figure 1(a)),
whereas in the second case the image is partitioned
into smaller scale regions which are uniformly ex-
tracted from a fixed grid (see Figure 1(b)). The ob-
tained regions are further represented by a standard
set of features including color, shape, and texture.
These can be treated as continuous vectors (Blei and
Jordan, 2003) or in quantized form (Barnard et al.,
2002).

Despite much progress in image segmentation,
there is currently no automatic algorithm that can
reliably divide an image into meaningful parts. Ex-
tracting features from small local regions is thus
preferable, especially for image collections that are
diverse and have low resolution (this is often the case
for news images). In our work we identify local re-
gions using a difference-of-Gaussians point detector
(see Figure 1(c)). This representation is based on de-
scriptors computed over automatically detected im-
age regions. It provides a much richer (and hopefully
more informative) feature space compared to the
alternative image representations discussed above.
For example, an image segmentation algorithm,
would extract at most 20 regions from the image
in Figure 1; uniform grid segmentation yields 143

93



(a) (b) (c)

Figure 1: Image partitioned into regions of varying granularity using (a) the normalized cut image segmentation algo-
rithm, (b) uniform grid segmentation, and (c) the SIFT point detector.

(11 × 13) regions, whereas an average of 240 points
(depending on the image content) are detected. A
non-sparse feature representation is critical in our
case, since we usually do not have more than one
image per document.

We compute local image descriptors using the
the Scale Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) algo-
rithm (Lowe, 1999). Importantly, SIFT descriptors
are designed to be invariant to small shifts in posi-
tion, changes in illumination, noise, and viewpoint
and can be used to perform reliable matching be-
tween different views of an object or scene (Mikola-
jczyk and Schmid, 2003; Lowe, 1999). We further
quantize the SIFT descriptors using the K-means
clustering algorithm to obtain a discrete set of vi-
sual terms (visiterms) which form our visual vo-
cabulary VocV . Each entry in this vocabulary stands
for a group of image regions which are similar
in content or appearance and assumed to origi-
nate from similar objects. More formally, each im-
age I is expressed in a bag-of-words format vector,
[v1,v2, ...,vL], where vi = n only if I has n regions
labeled with vi. Since both images and documents
in our corpus are now represented as bags-of-words,
and since we assume that the visual and textual
modalities express the same content, we can go a
step further and represent the document and its as-
sociated image as a mixture of verbal and visual
words dMix. We will then learn a topic model on this
concatenated representation of visual and textual in-
formation.

3.2 Topic Model
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (Blei et al., 2003; Grif-
fiths et al., 2007) is a probabilistic model of text gen-

eration. LDA models each document using a mix-
ture over K topics, which are in turn characterized
as distributions over words. The words in the docu-
ment are generated by repeatedly sampling a topic
according to the topic distribution, and selecting a
word given the chosen topic. Under this framework,
the problem of meaning representation is expressed
as one of statistical inference: given some data —
textual and visual words — infer the latent structure
from which it was generated. Word meaning is thus
modeled as a probability distribution over a set of
latent multimodal topics.

LDA can be represented as a three level hierarchi-
cal Bayesian model. Given a corpus consisting of M
documents, the generative process for a document d
is as follows. We first draw the mixing proportion
over topics θd from a Dirichlet prior with parame-
ters α. Next, for each of the Nd words wdn in doc-
ument d, a topic zdn is first drawn from a multino-
mial distribution with parameters θdn. The probabil-
ity of a word token w taking on value i given that
topic z = j is parametrized using a matrix β with
bi j = p(w = i|z = j). Integrating out θd’s and zdn’s,
gives P(D|α,β), the probability of a corpus (or doc-
ument collection):

M

∏
d=1

Z
P(θd |α)

(
Nd

∏
n=1

∑
zdn

P(zdn|θd)P(wdn|zdn,β)

)
dθd

The central computational problem in topic
modeling is to compute the posterior distribu-
tion P(θ,z|w,α,β) of the hidden variables given
a document w = (w1,w2, . . . ,wN). Although this
distribution is intractable in general, a variety of ap-

94



proximate inference algorithms have been proposed
in the literature including variational inference
which our model adopts. Blei et al. (2003) introduce
a set of variational parameters, γ and φ, and show
that a tight lower bound on the log likelihood of
the probability can be found using the following
optimization procedure:

(γ∗,φ∗) = argmin
γ,φ

D(q(θ,z|γ,φ)||p(θ,z|w,α,β))

Here, D denotes the Kullback-Leibler (KL) diver-
gence between the true posterior and the variational
distribution q(θ,z|γ,φ) defined as: q(θ,z|γ,φ) =
q(θ|γ)∏Nn=1 q(zn|φn), where the Dirichlet parame-
ter γ and the multinomial parameters (φ1, . . . ,φN) are
the free variational parameters. Notice that the opti-
mization of parameters (γ∗(w),φ∗(w)) is document-
specific (whereas α is corpus specific).

Previous applications of LDA (e.g., to docu-
ment classification or information retrieval) typi-
cally make use of the posterior Dirichlet parame-
ters γ∗(w) associated with a given document. We are
not so much interested in γ as we wish to obtain a
semantic representation for a given word across doc-
uments. We therefore train the LDA model sketched
above on a corpus of multimodal documents {dMix}
consisting of both textual and visual words. We se-
lect the number of topics, K, and apply the LDA al-
gorithm to obtain the β parameters, where β repre-
sents the probability of a word wi given a topic z j,
p(wi|z j) = βi j. The meaning of wi is thus extracted
from β and is a K-element vector, whose compo-
nents correspond to the probability of wi given each
latent topic assumed to have generated the document
collection.

3.3 Similarity Measures
The ability to accurately measure the similarity or
association between two words is often used as a di-
agnostic for the psychological validity of semantic
representation models. In the topic model described
above, the similarity between two words w1 and w2
can be intuitively measured by the extent to which
they share the same topics (Griffiths et al., 2007).
For example, we may use the KL divergence to mea-
sure the difference between the distributions p and q:

D(p,q) =
K

∑
j=1

p j log2
p j
q j

where p and q are shorthand for P(w1|z j)
and P(w2|z j), respectively.

The KL divergence is asymmetric and in many ap-
plications, it is preferable to apply a symmetric mea-
sure such as the Jensen Shannon (JS) divergence.
The latter measures the “distance” between p and q
through (p+q)2 , the average of p and q:

JS(p,q) =
1
2

[
D(p,

(p+q)
2

)+D(q,
(p+q)

2
)
]

An alternative approach to expressing the similar-
ity between two words is proposed in Griffiths et al.
(2007). The underlying idea is that word association
can be expressed as a conditional distribution. If we
have seen word w1, then we can determine the prob-
ability that w2 will be also generated by comput-
ing P(w2|w1). Although the LDA generative model
allows documents to contain multiple topics, here it
is assumed that both w1 and w2 came from a single
topic:

P(w2|w1) =
K
∑

z=1
P(w2|z)P(z|w1)

P(z|w1) ∝ P(w1|z)P(z)

where p(z) is uniform, a single topic is sampled
from the distribution P(z|w1), and an overall esti-
mate is obtained by averaging over all topics K.

Griffiths et al. (2007) report results on mod-
eling human association norms using exclu-
sively P(w2|w1). We are not aware of any previous
work that empirically assesses which measure is best
at capturing semantic similarity. We undertake such
an empirical comparison as it is not a priory obvious
how similarity is best modeled under a multimodal
representation.

4 Experimental Setup

In this section we discuss our experimental design
for assessing the performance of the model pre-
sented above. We give details on our training proce-
dure and parameter estimation and present the base-
line method used for comparison with our model.

Data We trained the multimodal topic model on
the corpus created in Feng and Lapata (2008). It
contains 3,361 documents that have been down-
loaded from the BBC News website.2 Each doc-
ument comes with an image that depicts some of
its content. The images are usually 203 pixels wide

2http://news.bbc.co.uk/

95



and 152 pixels high. The average document length
is 133.85 words. The corpus has 542,414 words in
total. Our experiments used a vocabulary of 6,253
textual words. These were words that occurred at
least five times in the whole corpus, excluding
stopwords. The accompanying images were prepro-
cessed as follows. We first extracted SIFT features
from each image (150 on average) which we subse-
quently quantized into a discrete set of visual terms
using K-means. As we explain below, we deter-
mined an optimal value for K experimentally.

Evaluation Our evaluation experiments compared
the multimodal topic model against a standard text-
based topic model trained on the same corpus whilst
ignoring the images. Both models were assessed on
two related tasks, that have been previously used
to evaluate semantic representation models, namely
word association and word similarity.

In order to simulate word association, we used
the human norms collected by Nelson et al. (1999).3

These were established by presenting a large num-
ber of participants with a cue word (e.g., rice) and
asking them to name an associate word in response
(e.g., Chinese, wedding, food, white). For each word,
the norms provide a set of associates and the fre-
quencies with which they were named. We can thus
compute the probability distribution over associates
for each cue. Analogously, we can estimate the de-
gree of similarity between a cue and its associates
using our model (and any of the measures in Sec-
tion 3.3). And consequently examine (using corre-
lation analysis) the degree of linear relationship be-
tween the human cue-associate probabilities and the
automatically derived similarity values. We also re-
port how many times the word with the highest prob-
ability under the model was the first associate in the
norms. The norms contain 10,127 unique words in
total. Of these, we created semantic representations
for the 3,895 words that appeared in our corpus.

Our word similarity experiment used the Word-
Sim353 test collection (Finkelstein et al., 2002)
which consists of relatedness judgments for word
pairs. For each pair, a similarity judgment (on
a scale of 0 to 10) was elicited from human
subjects (e.g., tiger-cat are very similar, whereas
delay–racism are not). The average rating for each
pair represents an estimate of the perceived sim-
ilarity of the two words. The task varies slightly
from word association. Here, participants are asked

3http://www.usf.edu/Freeassociation.

Figure 2: Performance of multimodal topic model on pre-
dicting word association under varying topics and visual
terms (development set).

to rate perceived similarity rather than generate the
first word that came into their head in response to a
cue word. The collection contains similarity ratings
for 353 word pairs. Of these, we constructed seman-
tic representations for the 254 that appeared in our
corpus. We also evaluated how well model produced
similarities correlate with human ratings. Through-
out this paper we report correlation coefficients us-
ing Pearson’s r.

5 Experimental Results

Model Selection The multimodal topic model has
several parameters that must be instantiated. These
include the quantization of the image features, the
number of topics, the choice of similarity function,
and the values for α and β. We explored the pa-
rameter space on held-out data. Specifically, we fit
the parameters for the word association and similar-
ity models separately using a third of the associa-
tion norms and WordSim353 similarity judgments,
respectively. As mentioned in Section 3.1 we used
K-means to quantize the image features into a dis-
crete set of visual terms. We varied K from 250
to 2000. We also varied the number of topics from 25
to 750 for both the multimodal and text-based topic
models. The parameter α was set to 0.1 and β was
initialized randomly. The model was trained using
variational Bayes until convergence of its bound on
the likelihood objective. This took 1,000 iterations.

Figure 2 shows how word association perfor-
mance varies on the development set with different
numbers of topics (t) and visual terms (r) according

96



Figure 3: Performance of multimodal topic model on pre-
dicting word similarity under varying topics and visual
terms (development set).

to three similarity measures: KL divergence, JS di-
vergence, and P(w2|w1), the probability of word w2
given w1 (see Section 3.3). Figure 3 shows results on
the development set for the word similarity task. As
far as word association is concerned, we obtain best
results with P(w2|w1), 750 visual terms and 750 top-
ics (r = 0.188). On word similarity, JS performs best
with 500 visual terms and 25 topics (r = 0.374). It is
not surprising that P(w2|w1) works best for word as-
sociation. The measure expresses the associative re-
lations between words as a conditional distribution
over potential response words w2 for cue word w1.
A symmetric function is more appropriate for word
similarity as the task involves measuring the degree
to which to words share some meaning (expressed
as topics in our model) rather than whether a word is
likely to be generated as a response to another word.
These differences also lead to different parametriza-
tions of the semantic space. A rich visual term vo-
cabulary (750 terms) is needed for modeling associ-
ation as broader aspects of word meaning are taken
into account, whereas a sparser more focused repre-
sentation (with 500 visual terms and 25 overall top-
ics) is better at isolating the common semantic con-
tent between two words. We explored the parame-
ter space for the text-based topic model in a sim-
ilar fashion. On the word association task the best
correlation coefficient was achieved with 750 top-
ics and P(w2|w1) (r = 0.139). On word similarity,
the best results were obtained with 75 topics and the
JS divergence (r = 0.309).

Model Word Association Word Similarity
UpperBnd 0.400 0.545
MixLDA 0.123 0.318
TxtLDA 0.077 0.247

Table 2: Model performance on word association and
similarity (test set).

Model Comparison Table 2 summarizes our re-
sults on the test set using the optimal set of pa-
rameters as established on the development set. The
first row shows how well humans agree with each
other on the two tasks (UpperBnd). We estimated
the intersubject correlation using leave-one-out re-
sampling4 (Weiss and Kulikowski, 1991). As can
be seen, in all cases the topic model based on tex-
tual and visual modalities (MixLDA) outperforms
the model relying solely on textual information
(TxtLDA). The differences in performance are sta-
tistically significant (p < 0.05) using a t-test (Cohen
and Cohen, 1983).

Steyvers and Griffiths (2007) also predict word
association using Nelson’s norms and a state-of-the-
art LDA model. Although they do not report correla-
tions, they compute how many times the word with
the highest probability P(w2|w1) under the model
was the first associate in the human norms. Using
a considerably larger corpus (37,651 documents),
they reach an accuracy of 16.15%. Our corpus con-
tains 3,361 documents, the MixLDA model per-
forms at 14.15% and the LDA model at 13.16%. Us-
ing a vector-based model trained on the BNC corpus
(100M words), Washtell and Markert (2009) report a
correlation of 0.167 on the same association data set,
whereas our model achieves a correlation of 0.123.
With respect to word similarity, Marton et al. (2009)
report correlations within the range of 0.31–0.54 us-
ing different instantiations of a vector-based model
trained on the BNC with a vocabulary of 33,000
words. Our MixLDA model obtains a correlation
of 0.318 with a vocabulary five times smaller (6,253
words). Although these results are not strictly com-
parable due to the different nature and size of the
training data, they give some indication of the qual-
ity of our model in the context of other approaches
that exploit only the textual modality. Besides, our
intent is not to report the best performance possible,

4We correlated the data obtained from each participant with
the ratings obtained from all other participants and report the
average.

97



GAME, CONSOLE, XBOX, SECOND, SONY, WORLD,
TIME, JAPAN, JAPANESE, SCHUMACHER, LAP, MI-
CROSOFT, ALONSO, RACE, TITLE, WIN, GAMERS,
LAUNCH, RENAULT, MARKET
PARTY, MINISTER, BLAIR, LABOUR, PRIME, LEADER,
GOVERNMENT, TELL, BROW, MP, TONY, SIR, SECRE-
TARY, ELECTION, CONFERENCE, POLICY, NEW, WANT,
PUBLIC, SPEECH
SCHOOL, CHILD, EDUCATION, STUDENT, WORK,
PUPIL, PARENT, TEACHER, GOVERNMENT, YOUNG,
SKILL, AGE, NEED, UNIVERSITY, REPORT, LEVEL,
GOOD, HELL, NEW, SURVEY

Table 3: Most frequent words in three topics learnt from
a corpus of image-document pairs.

but to show that a model of meaning representation
is more accurate when taking visual information into
account.

Table 3 shows some examples of the topics
found by our model, which largely form coher-
ent blocks of semantically related words. In gen-
eral, we observe that the model using image fea-
tures tends to prefer words that visualize easily
(e.g., CONSOLE, XBOX). Furthermore, the visual
modality helps obtain crisper meaning distinctions.
Here, SCHUMACHER is a very probable world for
the “game” cluster. This is because the Formula One
driver appears as a character in several video games
discussed and depicted in our corpus. For com-
parison the “game” cluster for the text-based LDA
model contains the words: GAME, USE, INTERNET,
SITE, USE, SET, ONLINE, WEB, NETWORK, MUR-
RAY, PLAY, MATCH, GOOD, WAY, BREAK, TECH-
NOLOGY, WORK, NEW, TIME, SECOND.

We believe the model presented here works bet-
ter than a vanilla text-based topic model for at least
three reasons: (1) the visual information helps cre-
ate better clusters (i.e., conceptual representations)
which in turn are used to measure similarity or as-
sociation; these clusters themselves are amodal but
express commonalities across the visual and textual
modalities; (2) the model is also able to capture per-
ceptual correlations between words. For example,
RED is the most frequent associate for APPLE in Nel-
son’s norms. This association is captured in our vi-
sual features (pictures with apples cluster with pic-
tures showing red objects) even though RED does not
co-occur with APPLE in our data; (3) finally, even in
cases where two words are visually very different in
terms of shape or color (e.g., BANANA and APPLE),

they tend to appear in images with similar structure
(e.g., on tables, in bowls, as being held or eaten by
someone) and thus often share some common ele-
ment of meaning.

6 Conclusion

In this paper we developed a computational model
that unifies visual and linguistic representations of
word meaning. The model learns from natural lan-
guage corpora paired with images under the assump-
tion that visual terms and words are generated by
mixtures of latent topics. We have shown that a
closer correspondence to human data can be ob-
tained by explicitly taking the visual modality into
account in comparison to a model that estimates the
topic structure solely from the textual modality. Be-
yond word similarity and association, the approach
is promising for modeling word learning and cate-
gorization as well as a wide range of priming stud-
ies. Outwith cognitive science, we hope that some
of the work described here might be of relevance
to more applied tasks such as thesaurus acquisition,
word sense disambiguation, multimodal search, im-
age retrieval, and summarization.

Future improvements include developing a non-
parametric version that jointly learns how many vi-
sual terms and topics are optimal. Currently, the size
of the visual vocabulary and the number of topics
are parameters in the model, that must be tuned sep-
arately for different tasks and corpora. Another ex-
tension concerns the creation of visual terms. Our
model assumes that an image is a bag of words. The
assumption is convenient for modeling purposes, but
clearly false in the context of visual processing. Im-
age descriptors found closely to each other are likely
to represent the same object and should form one
term rather than several distinct ones (Wang and
Grimson, 2007). Taking the spatial structure among
visual words into account would yield better topics
and overall better semantic representations. Analo-
gously, we could represent documents by their syn-
tactic structure (Boyd-Graber and Blei, 2009).

References
Andrews, M., G. Vigliocco, and D. Vinson. 2009. In-

tegrating experiential and distributional data to learn
semantic representations. Psychological Review
116(3):463–498.

Barnard, K., P. Duygulu, D. Forsyth, N. de Freitas,
D. Blei, and M. Jordan. 2002. Matching words and pic-

98



tures. Journal of Machine Learning Research 3:1107–
1135.

Blei, D. and M. Jordan. 2003. Modeling annotated data.
In Proceedings of the 26th Annual International ACM
SIGIR Conference. Toronto, ON, pages 127–134.

Blei, D. M., A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan. 2003. Latent
Dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine Learning Re-
search 3:993–1022.

Bornstein, M. H., L. R. Cote, S. Maital, K. Painter, S.-
Y. Park, and L. Pascual. 2004. Cross-linguistic analy-
sis of vocabulary in young children: Spanish, Dutch,
French, Hebrew, Italian, Korean, and American En-
glish. Child Development 75(4):1115–1139.

Boyd-Graber, J. and D. Blei. 2009. Syntactic topic
models. In Proceedings of the 22nd Conference on
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
MIT, Press, Cambridge, MA, pages 185–192.

Cohen, J. and P. Cohen. 1983. Applied Multiple Regres-
sion/Correlation Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Feng, S., V. Lavrenko, and R. Manmatha. 2004. Mul-
tiple Bernoulli relevance models for image and video
annotation. In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
Washington, DC, pages 1002–1009.

Feng, Y. and M. Lapata. 2008. Automatic image annota-
tion using auxiliary text information. In Proceedings
of the ACL-08: HLT . Columbus, pages 272–280.

Finkelstein, L., E. Gabrilovich, Y. Matias, E. Rivlin,
Z. Solan, G. Wolfman, and E. Ruppin. 2002. Placing
search in context: The concept revisited. ACM Trans-
actions on Information Systems 20(1):116–131.

Griffiths, T. L., M. Steyvers, and J. B. Tenenbaum. 2007.
Topics in semantic representation. Psychological Re-
view 114(2):211–244.

Hofmann, T. 2001. Unsupervised learning by proba-
bilistic latent semantic analysis. Machine Learning
41(2):177–196.

Jones, S. S., L. B. Smith, and B. Landau. 1991. Ob-
ject properties and knowledge in early lexical learning.
Child Development (62):499–516.

Landau, B., L. Smith, and S. Jones. 1998. Object percep-
tion and object naming in early development. Trends
in Cognitive Science 27:19–24.

Landauer, T. and S. T. Dumais. 1997. A solution to
Plato’s problem: the latent semantic analysis theory
of acquisition, induction, and representation of knowl-
edge. Psychological Review 104(2):211–240.

Lowe, D. 1999. Object recognition from local scale-
invariant features. In Proceedings of International
Conference on Computer Vision. IEEE Computer So-
ciety, pages 1150–1157.

Marton, Y., S. Mohammad, and P. Resnik. 2009. Estimat-
ing semantic distance using soft semantic constraints
in knowledge-source – corpus hybrid models. In Pro-

ceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing. Singapore, pages
775–783.

Mikolajczyk, K. and C. Schmid. 2003. A performance
evaluation of local descriptors. In Proceedings of the
9th International Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition. Nice, France, volume 2, pages
257–263.

Monay, F. and D. Gatica-Perez. 2007. Modeling semantic
aspects for cross-media image indexing. IEEE Trans-
actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
29(10):1802–1817.

Nelson, D. L., C. L. McEvoy, and T.A. Schreiber. 1999.
The university of South Florida word association
norms.

Pan, J., H. Yang, P. Duygulu, and C. Faloutsos. 2004. Au-
tomatic image captioning. In Proceedings of the 2004
International Conference on Multimedia and Expo.
Taipei, pages 1987–1990.

Quinn, P., P. Eimas, and S. Rosenkrantz. 1993. Evidence
for representations of perceptually similar natural cate-
gories by 3-month and 4-month old infants. Perception
22:463–375.

Rogers, T. T., M. A. Lambon Ralph, P. Garrard,
S. Bozeat, J. L. McClelland, J. R. Hodges, and K. Pat-
terson. 2004. Structure and deterioration of semantic
memory: A neuropsychological and computational in-
vestigation. Psychological Review 111(1):205–235.

Roy, D. 2002. Learning words and syntax for a visual de-
scription task. Computer Speech and Language 16(3).

Shi, J. and J. Malik. 2000. Normalized cuts and image
segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence 22(8):888–905.

Steyvers, M. and T. Griffiths. 2007. Probabilistic topic
models. In T. Landauer, D. McNamara, S Dennis, and
W Kintsch, editors, A Handbook of Latent Semantic
Analysis, Psychology Press.

Wang, X. and E. Grimson. 2007. Spatial latent Dirichlet
allocation. In Proceedings of the 20th Conference on
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
MI Press, Cambridge, MA, pages 1577–1584.

Washtell, J. and K. Markert. 2009. A comparison of win-
dowless and window-based computational association
measures as predictors of syntagmatic human associa-
tions. In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Sin-
gapore, pages 628–637.

Weiss, S. M. and C. A. Kulikowski. 1991. Computer Sys-
tems that Learn: Classification and Prediction Meth-
ods from Statistics, Neural Nets, Machine Learning,
and Expert Systems. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo,
CA.

Yu, C. 2005. The emergence of links between lexical
acquisition and object categorization: A computational
study. Connection Science 17(3):381–397.

99


