










































Putting the User in the Loop: Interactive Maximal Marginal Relevance for Query-Focused Summarization


Human Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 305–308,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Putting the User in the Loop: Interactive Maximal Marginal Relevance for
Query-Focused Summarization

Jimmy Lin, Nitin Madnani, and Bonnie J. Dorr
University of Maryland

College Park, MD 20742, USA
jimmylin@umd.edu, {nmadnani,bonnie}@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract

This work represents an initial attempt to
move beyond “single-shot” summarization to
interactive summarization. We present an ex-
tension to the classic Maximal Marginal Rel-
evance (MMR) algorithm that places a user
“in the loop” to assist in candidate selec-
tion. Experiments in the complex interac-
tive Question Answering (ciQA) task at TREC
2007 show that interactively-constructed re-
sponses are significantly higher in quality than
automatically-generated ones. This novel al-
gorithm provides a starting point for future
work on interactive summarization.

1 Introduction

Document summarization, as captured in modern
comparative evaluations such as TAC and DUC, is
mostly conceived as a “one-shot” task. However, re-
searchers have long known that information seeking
is an iterative activity, which suggests that an inter-
active approach might be worth exploring.

This paper present a simple extension of a well-
known algorithm, Maximal Marginal Relevance
(MMR) (Goldstein et al., 2000), that places the user
in the loop. MMR is an iterative algorithm, where
at each step a candidate extract c (e.g., a sentence) is
assigned the following score:

λRel(q, c)− (1− λ) max
s∈S

Sim(s, c)

The score consists of two components: the rele-
vance of the candidate c with respect to the query
q (Rel) and the similarity of the candidate c to each

extract s in the current summary S (Sim). The maxi-
mum score from these similarity comparisons is sub-
tracted from the relevance score, subjected to a tun-
ing parameter that controls the emphasis on rele-
vance and anti-redundancy. Scores are recomputed
after each step and the algorithm iterates until a stop-
ping criterion has been met (e.g., length quota).

We propose a simple extension to MMR: at each
step, we interactively ask the user to select the best
sentence for inclusion in the summary. That is, in-
stead of the system automatically selecting the can-
didate with the highest score, it presents the user
with a ranked list of candidates for selection.

2 Complex, Interactive QA

One obstacle to assessing the effectiveness of in-
teractive summarization algorithms is the lack of a
suitable evaluation vehicle. Given the convergence
of complex QA and summarization (particularly the
query-focused variant) in recent years, we found an
appropriate evaluation vehicle in the ciQA (com-
plex, interactive Question Answering) task at TREC
2007 (Dang et al., 2007).

Information needs in the ciQA task, called top-
ics, consist of two parts: the question template and
the narrative. The question template is a stylized in-
formation need that has a fixed structure and free
slots whose instantiation varies across different top-
ics. The narrative is unstructured prose that elabo-
rates on the information need. For the evaluation,
NIST assessors developed 30 topics, grouped into
five templates. See Figure 1 for an example.

Participants in the task were able to deploy fully-
functional web-based QA systems, with which the

305



Template: What evidence is there for transport of
[drugs] from [Mexico] to [the U.S.]?
Narrative: The analyst would like to know of efforts
to curtail the transport of drugs from Mexico to the
U.S. Specifically, the analyst would like to know of
the success of the efforts by local or international au-
thorities.

Figure 1: Example topic from the TREC 2007 ciQA task.

NIST assessors interacted (serving as surrogates for
users). Upon receiving the topics, participants first
submitted an initial run. During a pre-arranged pe-
riod of time shortly thereafter, each assessor was
given five minutes to interact with the participant’s
system, live over the web. After this interaction pe-
riod, participants submitted a final run, which had
presumably gained the benefit of user interaction.
By comparing initial and final runs, it was possible
to quantify the effect of the interaction.

The target corpus was AQUAINT-2, which con-
sists of around 970k documents totaling 2.5 GB.
System responses consisted of multi-line answers
and were evaluated using the “nugget” methodol-
ogy with the “nugget pyramid” extension (Lin and
Demner-Fushman, 2006).

3 Experiment Design

This section describes our experiments for the
TREC 2007 ciQA task. In summary: the initial run
was generated automatically using standard MMR.
The web-based interactions consisted of iterations of
interactive MMR, where the user selected the best
candidate extract at each step. The final run con-
sisted of the output of interactive MMR padded with
automatically-generated output.

Sentence extracts were used as the basic re-
sponse unit. For each topic, the top 100 documents
were retrieved from the AQUAINT-2 collection with
Lucene, using the topic template verbatim as the
query. Neither the template structure nor the narra-
tive text were exploited. All documents were then
broken into individual sentences, which served as
the pool of candidates. The relevance of each sen-
tence was computed as the sum of the inverse doc-
ument frequencies of matching terms from the topic
template. Redundancy was computed as the cosine
similarity between the current answer (consisting of

Figure 2: Screenshot of the interface for interactive
MMR, which shows the current topic (A), the current an-
swer (B), and a ranked list of document extracts (C).

all previously-selected sentences) and the current
candidate. The relevance and redundancy scores
were then normalized and combined (λ = 0.8). For
the initial run, the MMR algorithm iterated until 25
candidates had been selected.

For interactive MMR, a screenshot of the web-
based system is shown in Figure 2. The interface
consists of three elements: at the top (label A) is the
current topic; in the middle (label B) is the current
answer, containing user selections from previous it-
erations; the bottom area (label C) shows a ranked
list of candidate sentences ordered by MMR score.
At each iteration, the user is asked to select one can-
didate by clicking the “Add to answer” button next
to that candidate. The selected candidate is then
added to the current answer. Ten answer candidates
are shown per page. Clicking on a button labeled
“Show more candidates” at the bottom of the page
(not shown in the screenshot) displays the next ten
candidates. In the ciQA 2007 evaluation, NIST as-
sessors engaged with this interface for the entire al-
lotted five minute interaction period. Note that this
simple interface was designed only to assess the ef-
fectiveness of interactive MMR, and not intended to
represent an actual interactive system.

To prevent users from seeing the same sentences
repeatedly once a candidate selection has been
recorded, we divide the scores of all candidates
ranked higher than the selected candidate by two (an

306



 0

 5

 10

 15

 20

 25

 30

 35

 40

 56  57  58  59  60  61  62  63  64  65  66  67  68  69  70  71  72  73  74  75  76  77  78  79  80  81  82  83  84  85

N
um

be
r o

f E
xt

ra
ct

s

Topic

Length of ciQA 2007 Final Answers: Number of Extracts

complete answer
interactive MMR

mean, interactive MMR

Figure 3: Per-topic lengths of final run in terms of num-
ber of extracts. Bars show contribution from interactive
MMR (darker) and “padding” (lighter).

arbitrary constant). For example, if the user clicked
on candidate five, scores for candidates one through
four are cut in half. Previous studies have shown
that users generally examine ranked lists in order, so
the lack of a selection can be interpreted as negative
feedback (Joachims et al., 2007).

The answers constructed interactively were sub-
mitted to NIST as the final (post-interaction) run.
However, since these answers were significantly
shorter than the initial run (given the short interac-
tion period), the responses were “padded” by run-
ning additional iterations of automatic MMR until a
length quota of 4000 characters had been achieved.

4 Results and Discussion

First, we present descriptive statistics of the final
run submitted to NIST. Lengths of the answers on
a per-topic basis are shown in Figure 3 in terms of
number of extracts: darker bars show the number of
manually-selected extracts for each topic during the
five-minute interaction period (i.e., the number of in-
teractive MMR iterations). The average across all
topics was 6.5 iterations, shown by the horizontal
line; the average length of answers (all user selec-
tions) was 1186 characters. The average rank of the
user selection was 4.9, and the user selected the top
ranking sentence 28% of the time. Note that the in-
teraction period included system processing as well
as delays caused by network traffic. The number of
extracts contained in the padding is shown by the
lighter gray portions of the bars. For topic 68, the
system did not record any user interactions (possi-
bly resulting from a network glitch).

 0

 0.05

 0.1

 0.15

 0.2

 0.25

 0.3

 0.35

 0.4

 0.45

 0  500  1000  1500  2000  2500  3000  3500  4000

W
ei

gh
te

d 
R

ec
al

l

Length of Answer (non-whitespace characters)

TREC 2007 ciQA: interactive vs. non-interactive MMR

non-interactive MMR
interactive MMR

sig., p<0.05

Figure 4: Weighted recall at different length increments,
comparing interactive and non-interactive MMR.

The official metric for the ciQA task was F-
measure, but a disadvantage of this single-point met-
ric is that it doesn’t account for answers of vary-
ing lengths. An alternative proposed by Lin (2007)
and used as the secondary metric in the evalua-
tion is recall-by-length plots, which characterize
weighted nugget recall at varying length incre-
ments. Weighted recall captures how much rele-
vant information is contained in the system response
(weighted by each nugget’s importance, with an up-
per bound of one). Responses that achieve higher
nugget recall at shorter length increments are desir-
able in providing concise, informative answers.

Recall-by-length plots for both the initial run
(non-interactive MMR) and final run (interactive
MMR with padding) are shown in Figure 4, in length
increments of 1000 characters. The vertical dotted
line denotes the average length of interactive MMR
answers (without padding). Taking length as a proxy
for time, one natural interpretation of this plot is how
quickly users are able to “learn” about the topic of
interest under the two conditions.

We see that interactive MMR yields higher
weighted recall at all length increments. The
Wilcoxon signed-rank test was applied to assess the
statistical significance of the differences in weighted
recall at each length increment. Solid circles in the
graph represent improvements that are statistically
significant (p < 0.05). Furthermore, in the 700–
1000 character range, weighted recall is significantly
higher for interactive MMR at the 99% level.

Viewing weighted recall as a proxy for answer
quality, interactive MMR yields responses that are
significantly better than non-interactive MMR at

307



a range of length increments. This is an impor-
tant finding, since effective interaction techniques
that require little training and work well in limited-
duration settings are quite elusive. Often, user in-
put actually makes answers worse. Results from
both ciQA 2006 and ciQA 2007 show that, overall,
F-measure improved little between initial and final
runs. Although it is widely accepted that user feed-
back can enhance interactive IR, effective interac-
tion techniques to exploit this feedback are by no
means obvious.

To better understand the characteristics of interac-
tive MMR, it is helpful to compare our experiments
with the ciQA task-wide baseline. As a reference
for all participants, the organizers of the task sub-
mitted a pair of runs to help calibrate effectiveness.
According to Dang et al. (2007), the first run was
prepared by submitting the question template ver-
batim as a query to Lucene to retrieve the top 20
documents. These documents were then tokenized
into individual sentences. Sentences that contained
at least one non-stopword from the question were re-
tained and returned as the initial run (up to a quota
of 5,000 characters). Sentence order within each
document and across the ranked list was preserved.
The interaction associated with this run asked the as-
sessor for relevance judgments on each of the sen-
tences. Three options were given: “relevant”, “not
relevant”, and “no opinion”. The final run was pre-
pared by removing sentences judged not relevant.

Other evidence suggests that the task-wide sen-
tence retrieval algorithm represents a strong base-
line. Similar algorithms performed well in other
complex QA tasks—in TREC 2003, a sentence re-
trieval variant beat all but one run on definition ques-
tions (Voorhees, 2003). The sentence retrieval base-
line also performed well in ciQA 2006.

The MMR runs are compared to the task-wide
reference runs in Figure 5: diamonds denote the
sentence retrieval baseline and triangles mark the
manual sentence selection final run. The manual
sentence selection run outperforms the sentence re-
trieval baseline (as expected), but its weighted recall
is still below that of interactive MMR across almost
all length increments. The weighted recall of inter-
active MMR is significantly better at 1000 characters
(at the 95% level), but nowhere else. So, the bottom
line is: for limited-duration interactions, interactive

 0

 0.05

 0.1

 0.15

 0.2

 0.25

 0.3

 0.35

 0.4

 0.45

 0  500  1000  1500  2000  2500  3000  3500  4000

W
ei

gh
te

d 
R

ec
al

l

Length of Answer (non-whitespace characters)

TREC 2007 ciQA: MMR vs. task-wide baseline

non-interactive MMR
interactive MMR

sentence retrieval baseline
manual sentence selection

Figure 5: Weighted recall at different length increments,
comparing MMR with the task-wide baseline.

MMR is more effective than simply asking for rele-
vance judgments, but not significantly so.

5 Conclusion

We present an interactive extension of the Maximal
Marginal Relevance algorithm for query-focused
summarization. Results from the TREC 2007 ciQA
task demonstrate it is a simple yet effective tech-
nique for involving users in interactively construct-
ing responses to complex information needs. These
results provide a starting point for future work in in-
teractive summarization.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by NLM/NIH. The
first author would like to thank Esther and Kiri for
their loving support.

References
H. Dang, J. Lin, and D. Kelly. 2007. Overview of the

TREC 2007 question answering track. TREC 2007.
J. Goldstein, V. Mittal, J. Carbonell, and J. Callan. 2000.

Creating and evaluating multi-document sentence ex-
tract summaries. CIKM 2000.

T. Joachims, L. Granka, B. Pan, H. Hembrooke,
F. Radlinski, and G. Gay. 2007. Evaluating the ac-
curacy of implicit feedback from clicks and query re-
formulations in Web search. TOIS, 25(2):1–27.

J. Lin and D. Demner-Fushman. 2006. Will pyramids
built of nuggets topple over? HLT/NAACL 2006.

J. Lin. 2007. Is question answering better than informa-
tion retrieval? Towards a task-based evaluation frame-
work for question series. HLT/NAACL 2007.

E. Voorhees. 2003. Overview of the TREC 2003 ques-
tion answering track. TREC 2003.

308


