










































Summarizing Textual Information about Locations In a Geo-Spatial Information Display System


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010: Demonstration Session, pages 5–8,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Summarizing Textual Information about Locations  

In a Geo-Spatial Information Display System

Congxing Cai Eduard Hovy
Information Sciences Institute Information Sciences Institute 

University of Southern California University of Southern California 

Marina del Rey, California, USA 90292 Marina del Rey, California, USA 90292 
ccai@isi.edu hovy@isi.edu 

Abstract 

This demo describes the summarization of 

textual material about locations in the context 

of a geo-spatial information display system. 

When the amount of associated textual data is 

large, it is organized and summarized before 

display. A hierarchical summarization frame-

work, conditioned on the small space availa-

ble for display, has been fully implemented. 

Snapshots of the system, with narrative de-

scriptions, demonstrate our results.  

1 Introduction 

Geospatial display systems are increasingly gain-

ing attention, given the large amounts of geospatial 

data and services available online. Although geos-

patial imagery and maps show geometric relations 

among entities, they cannot be used to present oth-

er kinds of knowledge about the temporal, topic, 

and other conceptual relations and entities. Given 

an entity on a map, a description of what happened 

there, in what order in time, when, and why, re-

quires additional types of information, typically 

contained in text, in order to support varied search 

and decision tasks.  

In this demo, we apply text summarization to a 

geo-spatial information display system with poten-

tially large amounts of textual data. By summariz-

ing the textual material linked to each location, we 

demonstrate the ways one can organize this ma-

terial for optimal display and search. 

Of the many different types of text-oriented re-

sources available, some are structured and others 

unstructured. This textual data can be linked to 

locations based on different reasons (containing 

place names, addresses, real objects with geo-

graphical features, etc.). Appropriately grouping 

and presenting the different aspects of the textual 

information in summarization is a challenging task. 

A second challenge stems from the huge amounts 

of web material related to some geographical ob-

jects. For example, one may find millions of pages 

for a famous place or event at a specific map loca-

tion. Given the common limitations of display 

space in most geospatial display systems, one must 

also design the interface to support dynamic 

browsing and search. 

All these challenges bring new problems to exist-

ing summarization techniques. In the following 

sections, we demonstrate a hierarchical summari-

zation framework that reduces displayed text and 

fully utilizes the small display space available for 

textual information.  

2 Related Work 

Associating each news page individually to its lo-

cation(s) may overwhelm the amount of informa-

tion displayable at any point and thereby limit the 

scalability of the system. Existing systems pre-

sented in (Teitler et al., 2008) and GeoTracker 

(Chen et al, 2007) organize material (at the area 

level) by time instead of somehow aggregating 

over larger numbers of related content. Since fre-

quently the associated news contents overlap at 

least in part, a natural solution is to aggregate the 

content somehow to remove duplication. Moreo-

ver, the aggregation of news provides a global 

view of the textual information about the specific 

5



location. Our system is the first available geo-

spatial text aggregation system to our knowledge.  

Within geospatial display systems, the space avail-

able to display textual information is often quite 

limited. We therefore need to summarize the most 

important and relevant information about each lo-

cation, drawing from all the web pages linked to it. 

However, directly applying a multi-document 

summarization (Lin and Hovy, 2001) to the web 

pages will generate poor results, due to unrelated 

titles, duplicate articles, and noisy contents con-

tained in web pages. When several different events 

have occurred at a location, more than one distinct 

summary may be needed. It is therefore important 

to deploy topic recognition (Lin and Hovy, 2000) 

and/or topic clustering (Osinski and Weiss, 2005) 

to identify and group relevant pieces of each text 

into single-topic ‘chunks’. We develop a novel 

hierarchical summarization system to improve the 

interactivity and browsability.   

3 Text Summarization 

3.1 Content Extraction and Summarization 

Multi-webpage summarization is different from 

traditional multi-doc summarization. First, most 

web pages are much more complex than pure text 

documents. Since the web contains a combination 

of types of information—static text, image, videos, 

dynamic layout, etc.—even a single page can be 

treated as multiple documents. Current linking 

functions are based on keywords, making the rele-

vant content of each relevant web page only a li-

mited block within the page. Second, our task is 

oriented to locations, and hence differs from gen-

eral content summarization. Hence, we need to 

identify and extract the essential part(s) of the 

webpage linked to the geospatial imagery for 

summarization and display. In our work, we utilize 

two important features, layout and semantics, to 

identify and extract the relevant content. 

By rendering each web page into a DOM tree, we 

segment the page into large blocks based on its 

layout, including header, footer, left bar, right bar, 

main block, etc. We implemented a rule-based ex-

tractor to extract the most relevant block from the 

web page based on the relevance to the location.  

3.2 Clustering 

Given a list of text blocks relevant to a local point 

of interest, one can employ traditional text summa-

rization techniques to produce a short summary for 

each one. This solution may not be helpful, how-

ever, since a long list of pages associated with each 

point of interest would be very hard for users to 

browse. Especially when the space allocated to text 

display by the geospatial system is also limited, a 

high compression ratio is typically required for the 

summarization system. 

The solution we adopt is to deploy cluster-based 

multi-document summarization. Clustering must 

observe two criteria: first, the location of interest, 

and second, the text topic. Different clustering me-

thods can be employed. To delimit topics, a simple 

heuristic is to introduce as additional criterion the 

event/article date: when the difference in document 

dates within a topical cluster is (far) larger than the 

actual duration of the topic event, we are probably 

dealing with multiple separate events at the same 

location. Better performance is obtained by using a 

topic detection module first, and then clustering 

documents based on the topics identified.  

Unfortunately, documents usually contain multiple 

locations and multiple topics. The problem of ‘top-

ic drift’ can cause confusion in a short summary. 

As in (Hearst, 1997), we segment each document 

into several ‘mini-documents’, each one devoted to 

a single topic, and then to perform location- and 

topic-based clustering over the (now larger) set of 

mini-documents.  

3.3 Hierarchical Summary Generation  

Whatever the clustering approach, the result is a 

potentially rather large set of individual topics as-

sociated with each location. Since screen space for 

the summaries may be very limited next to the 

maps / imagery, they have to be formatted and pre-

sented for maximal interpretability. To address this 

problem, we adopt a hierarchical structure to dis-

play incrementally longer summaries for each loca-

tion of interest. At present we have found three 

levels of incrementally longer summaries to be 

most useful. 

Thumbnail: a very short ‘topic’ that characte-

rizes the (clusters of) documents or segments asso-

ciated with each location. We present essentially 

one or two single keywords -- the most informative 

6



words for each cluster. We implemented a new 

version of our topic signature technology, one that 

uses tf.idf instead of the entropy ratio, as scoring 

measure to rank each cluster’s words. 

Title: a headline-length phrase or short sen-

tence (or two). The original titles of the web pages 

are often noisy or even unrelated to the current top-

ic cluster. Sometimes, the title may be meaningless 

(it might for example contain the website’s name 

“Pr Newswire”), or two different web pages may 

share the same title. We implemented a topic-

related headline generator based on our previous 

work (Lin and Hovy, 2000) by incorporating a top-

ic-based selector. 

Snippet: a paragraph-length excerpt characteriz-

ing the cluster. To produce paragraph-length sum-

maries, we implemented an extraction-based text 

summarizer. We built a new version of previously 

investigated technology (Lin and Hovy, 2001), 

implementing several sentence scoring techniques 

and a score combination function. 

4 Demonstration 

4.1 Geospatial Interaction  

The hierarchical summarization service is built 

upon the geo-spatial information display system, 

GeoXRAY1, a commercial product developed by 

Geosemble Technologies2. Figure 1 shows the sys-

tem’s display to support search and browsing of 

text content based on location of interest.  

Figure 1. Geospatial Information Display System 

                                                          
1
GeoXRAY: http://www.geosemble.com/products_geoxray.html

2
Geosemble Technologies: http://www.geosemble.com/

The user can enter an address in the top search 

box, or search by business name. The system then 

centers the imagery at that address or business. 

Clicking on “Get Features” invokes the web ser-

vices to get all features about the displayed image 

and displays the features in the “AREA: Features 

Found” list, and also draws them as points on the 

maps.  

The user can explore the map using the navigation 

controller. On clicking the marker of an identified 

building, an information window pops up contain-

ing the associated structured web information 

(building name, business type, website, online im-

ages, and so on), as shown in Figure 2. 

Figure 2. Navigating the Integrated Map 

Clicking on “Get News” retrieves all news related 

to the displayed features; features with associated 

news show a small newspaper icon (see next to 

“Sony Pictures Entertainment” in Figure 4). Click-

ing on the icon displays the news that was linked 

with the feature, sorted by date. 

The hierarchical summarization system, described 

in this paper extends the GeoXRAY system to 

show a summarized view of the news. The user can 

click on the “Cluster News” link. The results are 

displayed in a tree, showing the title of the cluster 

(thumbnail and title), under which appears a small 

summary of the cluster, under which appear links 

to all the news articles belonging to that cluster. 

4.2 Summarization Example  

We provide an example of our text summariza-

tion system performance in Figure 3. In this exam-

ple, we have selected the location of Sony Film 

Studios in Culver City by clicking on the map. 

Figure 3(a) shows the titles and dates of some of 

7



the 126 news articles that contain the words “Sony 

Pictures Entertainment”. As described above, these 

documents are clustered based on topics. Using our 

current parameter settings, 20 multi-result clusters 

are formed, leaving 34 results unclustered. (The 

size of clusters, or the number of clusters desired, 

can be varied by the user.) As mentioned above, 

each cluster is presented to the users by a minimal 

length thumbnail summary consisting of a few cha-

racteristic keywords; a partial list of these is shown 

in Figure 3(b). Figure 3(c) shows the result of se-

lecting the cluster labeled “solar electrical system” 

(second from the bottom in Figure 3(b)), which 

contains two results. The summary contains the 5 

top-ranked sentences from the two documents, pre-

sented in document order. In addition, the sum-

mary includes two hyperlinks to the two full texts 

for further inspection. 

(a) Partial list of the news articles linked to Sony Pictures 

Entertainment 

(b) Clustering results relevant to Sony Pictures Entertainment 

(c) Summarization from the news articles in cluster Solar 

electricity system 

Figure 3. Document clustering and summarization for news 

relevant to Sony Picture Entertainment 

The summary illustrates some of the strengths but 

also the shortcomings of the current system. It is 

clearly about a solar energy system installed in 

2007 on top of the Jimmy Stewart Building by EI 

Solutions. This is enough detail for a user to de-

termine whether or not to read the texts any fur-

ther. However, two of the extracted sentences are 

not satisfactory: sentence 2 is broken off and sen-

tence 3 should not be part of the news text at all. 

Premature sentence breaks result from inadequate 

punctuation and line break processing, which is 

still a research problem exacerbated by the com-

plexity of web pages. 

By showing the summary results, we merely dem-

onstrate the improvement on browsability of the 

search system. We are relatively satisfied with the 

results. While the summaries are not always very 

good, they are uniformly understandable and com-

pletely adequate to prove that one can combine 

geospatial information access and text summariza-

tion in a usable and coherent manner.  

Acknowledgments 

Thanks to Geosemble Technologies for providing 

support of the geospatial information system.   

References  

Yih-Farn Robin Chen, Giuseppe Di Fabbrizio, David 

Gibbon, Serban Jora,  Bernard Renger and Bin Wei. 

Geotracker: Geospatial and temporal rss navigation. 

In WWW ’07: Proceedings of the 16th International 

Conference on World Wide Web, 2007. 

Marti A. Hearst. TexTiling: Segmenting text into multi-

paragraph subtopic passages. Computational Linguis-

tics, 23(1):33–64, 1997. 

Chin-Yew Lin and Eduard Hovy. The automated acqui-

sition of topic signatures for text summarization. In

Proceedings of the 18th Conference on Computation-
al Linguistics, 2000. 

Chin-Yew Lin and Eduard Hovy. From single to multi-

document summarization: A prototype system and its 

evaluation. In ACL ’02: Proceedings of the 40th An-

nual Meeting on Association for Computational Lin-

guistics, 2001. 

Stanislaw Osinski and Dawid Weiss. Carrot2: Design of 

a flexible and efficient web information retrieval 

framework. In AWIC, 2005. 

Benjamin E. Teitler, Michael D. Lieberman, Daniele 

Panozzo, Jagan Sankaranarayanan, Hanan Samet and 

Jon Sperling. Newsstand: a new view on news. In

GIS ’08: Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIGSPATIAL 

international conference on Advances in geographic 
information systems, 2008. 

8


