










































An Overview of Microsoft Web N-gram Corpus and Applications


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010: Demonstration Session, pages 45–48,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

An Overview of Microsoft Web N-gram Corpus and Applications

Kuansan Wang        Christopher Thrasher       Evelyne Viegas 

Xiaolong Li        Bo-june (Paul) Hsu         
Microsoft Research 

One Microsoft Way 

Redmond, WA, 98052, USA 
webngram@microsoft.com 

  

 
 

Abstract 

This document describes the properties and 

some applications of the Microsoft Web N-

gram corpus. The corpus is designed to have 

the following characteristics. First, in contrast 

to static data distribution of previous corpus 

releases, this N-gram corpus is made publicly 

available as an XML Web Service so that it 

can be updated as deemed necessary by the 

user community to include new words and 

phrases constantly being added to the Web. 

Secondly, the corpus makes available various 

sections of a Web document, specifically, the 

body, title, and anchor text, as separates mod-

els as text contents in these sections are found 

to possess significantly different statistical 

properties and therefore are treated as distinct 

languages from the language modeling point 

of view. The usages of the corpus are demon-

strated here in two NLP tasks: phrase segmen-

tation and word breaking. 

1 Introduction 

Since Banko and Brill’s pioneering work almost a 

decade ago (Banko and Brill 2001), it has been 

widely observed that the effectiveness of statistical 

natural language processing (NLP) techniques is 

highly susceptible to the data size used to develop 

them. As empirical studies have repeatedly shown 

that simple algorithms can often outperform their 

more complicated counterparts in wide varieties of 

NLP applications with large datasets, many have 

come to believe that it is the size of data, not the 

sophistication of the algorithms that ultimately 

play the central role in modern NLP (Norvig, 

2008). Towards this end, there have been consider-

able efforts in the NLP community to gather ever 

larger datasets, culminating the release of the Eng-

lish Giga-word corpus (Graff and Cieri, 2003) and 

the 1 Tera-word Google N-gram (Thorsten and 

Franz, 2006) created from arguably the largest text 

source available, the World Wide Web. 

Recent research, however, suggests that studies 

on the document body alone may no longer be suf-

ficient in understanding the language usages in our 

daily lives. A document, for example, is typically 

associated with multiple text streams. In addition 

to the document body that contains the bulk of the 

contents, there are also the title and the file-

name/URL the authors choose to name the docu-

ment. On the web, a document is often linked with 

anchor text or short messages from social network 

applications that other authors use to summarize 

the document, and from the search logs we learn 

the text queries formulated by the general public to 

specify the document. A large scale studies reveal 

that these text streams have significantly different 

properties and lead to varying degrees of perfor-

mance in many NLP applications (Wang et al, 
2010, Huang et al, 2010). Consequently from the 
statistical modeling point of view, these streams 

are better regarded as composed in distinctive lan-

guages and treated as such. 

This observation motivates the creation of Mi-

crosoft Web N-gram corpus in which the materials 

from the body, title and anchor text are made 

available separately. Another notable feature of the 

corpus is that Microsoft Web N-gram is available 

as a cross-platform XML Web service
1
 that can be 

freely and readily accessible by users through the 

Internet anytime and anywhere. The service archi-

tecture also makes it straightforward to perform on 

                                                           
1 Please visit http://research.microsoft.com/web-ngram for 

more information. 

45



demand updates of the corpus with the new con-

tents that can facilitate the research on the dynam-

ics of the Web.
2
 

2 General Model Information  

Like the Google N-gram, Microsoft Web N-gram 

corpus is based on the web documents indexed by 

a commercial web search engine in the EN-US 

market, which, in this case, is the Bing service 

from Microsoft. The URLs in this market visited 

by Bing are at the order of hundreds of billion, 

though the spam and other low quality web pages 

are actively excluded using Bing’s proprietary al-

gorithms. The various streams of the web docu-

ments are then downloaded, parsed and tokenized 

by Bing, in which process the text is lowercased 

with the punctuation marks removed. However, no 

stemming, spelling corrections or inflections are 

performed.  

Unlike the Google N-gram release which con-

tains raw N-gram counts, Microsoft Web N-gram 

provides open-vocabulary, smoothed back-off N-

gram models for the three text streams using the 

CALM algorithm (Wang and Li, 2009) that dy-

namically adapts the N-gram models as web doc-

uments are crawled. The design of CALM ensures 

that new N-grams are incorporated into the models 

as soon as they are encountered in the crawling and 

become statistically significant. The models are 

therefore kept up-to-date with the web contents. 

CALM is also designed to make sure that dupli-

cated contents will not have outsized impacts in 

biasing the N-gram statistics. This property is use-

ful as Bing’s crawler visits URLs in parallel and on 

the web many URLs are pointing to the same con-

tents. Currently, the maximum order of the N-gram 

available is 5, and the numbers of N-grams are 

shown in Table 1. 

 
Table 1: Numbers of N-grams for various streams 

 Body Title Anchor 

1-gram 1.2B 60M 150M 

2-gram 11.7B 464M 1.1B 

3-gram 60.1B 1.4B 3.2B 

4-gram 148.5B 2.3B 5.1B 

5-gram 237B 3.8B 8.9B 

                                                           
2 The WSDL for the web service is located at http://web-

ngram.research.microsoft.com/Lookup.svc/mex?wsdl. 

CALM algorithm adapts the model from a seed 

model based on the June 30, 2009 snapshot of the 

Web with the algorithm described and imple-

mented in the MSRLM toolkit (Nguyen et al, 

2007). The numbers of tokens in the body, title, 

and anchor text in the snapshot are of the order of 

1.4 trillion, 12.5 billion, and 357 billion, respec-

tively. 

3 Search Query Segmentation 

In this demonstration, we implement a straightfor-

ward algorithm that generates hypotheses of the 

segment boundaries at all possible placements in a 

query and rank their likelihoods using the N-gram 

service. In other words, a query of T terms will 
have 2T-1 segmentation hypotheses. Using the fam-
ous query “mike siwek lawyer mi” described in 

(Levy, 2010) as an example, the likelihoods and 

the segmented queries for the top 5 hypotheses are 

shown in Figure 1. 
Body: 

  
Title: 

 
Anchor: 

 
 

Figure 1: Top 5 segmentation hypotheses under 

body, title, and anchor language models. 

 

As can be seen, the distinctive styles of the lan-

guages used to compose the body, title, and the 

anchor text contribute to their respective models 

producing different outcomes on the segmentation 

46



task, many of which research issues have been ex-

plored in (Huang et al, 2010). It is hopeful that the 

release of Microsoft Web N-gram service can ena-

ble the community in general to accelerate the re-

search on this and related areas. 

4 Word Breaking Demonstration 

Word breaking is a challenging NLP task, yet the 

effectiveness of employing large amount of data to 

tackle word breaking problems has been demon-

strated in (Norvig, 2008). To demonstrate the ap-

plicability of the web N-gram service for the work 

breaking problem, we implement the rudimentary 

algorithm described in (Norvig, 2008) and extend 

it to use body N-gram for ranking the hypotheses. 

In essence, the word breaking task can be regarded 

as a segmentation task at the character level where 

the segment boundaries are delimitated by white 

spaces. By using a larger N-gram model, the demo 

can successfully tackle the challenging word 

breaking examples as mentioned in (Norvig, 2008). 

Figure 2 shows the top 5 hypotheses of the simple 

algorithm. We note that the word breaking algo-

rithm can fail to insert desired spaces into strings 

that are URL fragments and occurred in the docu-

ment body frequently enough. 

 

 
 

Figure 2: Norvig's word breaking examples (Norvig, 

2008) re-examined with Microsoft Web N-gram 

 

 

 

 

 

47



Two surprising side effects of creating the N-

gram models from the web in general are worth 

noting. First, as more and more documents contain 

multi-lingual contents, the Microsoft Web N-gram 

corpus inevitably include languages other than EN-

US, the intended language. Figure 3 shows exam-

ples in German, French and Chinese (Romanized) 

each.  

 
 

 
 

 
Figure 3: Word breaking examples for foreign lan-

guages: German (top), French and Romanized Chi-

nese 

 

Secondly, since the web documents contain many 

abbreviations that are popular in short messaging, 

the consequent N-gram model lends the simple 

word breaking algorithm to cope with the common 

short hands surprisingly well. An example that de-

codes the short hand for “wait for you” is shown in 

Figure 4. 

 

 
Figure 4: A word breaking example on SMS-style 

message. 

References  

Thorsten Brants and Alex Franz. 2006. Web 1T 5-gram 

Version 1. Linguistic Data Consortium, ISBN: 1-

58563-397-6, Philadelphia. 

Michel Banko and Eric Brill. 2001. Mitigating the pauc-

ity-of-data problem: exploring the effect of training 

corpus size on classifier performance for natural lan-

guage processing. Proc. 1st Internal Conference on 

human language technology research, 1-5, San Di-

ego, CA.  

David Graff and Christopher Cieri. 2003. English Gi-
gaword. Linguistic Data Consortium, ISBN: 1-

58563-260-0, Philadelphia. 

Jian Huang, Jianfeng Gao, Jiangbo Miao, Xiaolong Li, 

Kuansan Wang, and Fritz Behr. 2010. Exploring web 

scale language models for search query processing. 

In Proc. 19th International World Wide Web Confe-

rence (WWW-2010), Raleigh, NC. 

Steven Levy, 2010. How Google’s algorithm rules the 

web. Wired Magazine, February.  

Patrick Nguyen, Jianfeng Gao, and Milind Mahajan. 

2007. MSRLM: a scalable language modeling tool-

kit. Microsoft Research Technical Report MSR-TR-

2007-144. 

Peter Norvig. 2008. Statistical learning as the ultimate 

agile development tool. ACM 17th Conference on In-

formation and Knowledge Management Industry 

Event (CIKM-2008), Napa Valley, CA. 
Kuansan Wang, Jianfeng Gao, and Xiaolong Li. 2010. 

The multi-style language usages on the Web and 

their implications on information retrieval. In sub-

mission. 

Kuansan Wang, Xiaolong Li and Jianfeng Gao, 2010. 

Multi-style language model for web scale informa-

tion retrieval. In Proc. ACM 33rd Conference on Re-

search and Development in Information Retrieval 

(SIGIR-2010), Geneva, Switzerland. 

Kuansan Wang and Xiaolong Li, 2009. Efficacy of a 

constantly adaptive language modeling technique for 

web scale application. In Proc. IEEE International 

Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal 

Processing (ICASSP-2009), Taipei, Taiwan. 

48


