










































Multilingual Propbank Annotation Tools: Cornerstone and Jubilee


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010: Demonstration Session, pages 13–16,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Multilingual Propbank Annotation Tools:
Cornerstone and Jubilee

Jinho D. Choi, Claire Bonial, Martha Palmer

University of Colorado at Boulder, USA
{choijd;bonial;mpalmer}@colorado.edu

Abstract

This paper demonstrates two annotation
tools related to Propbank: Cornerstone
and Jubilee. Propbank is a corpus in
which the arguments of each verb pred-
icate are annotated with their semantic
roles. Propbank annotation also requires
the choice of a sense id for each predicate,
defined in the corresponding frameset file.
Jubilee expedites the annotation process
by displaying several resources of syntactic
and semantic information simultaneously;
easy access to each of these resources al-
lows the annotator to quickly absorb and
apply the necessary syntactic and semantic
information pertinent to each predicate for
consistent and efficient annotation. Cor-
nerstone is a user-friendly xml editor, cus-
tomized to allow frame authors to create
and edit frameset files. Both tools have
been successfully adapted to many Prop-
bank projects; they run platform indepen-
dently, are light enough to run as X11 ap-
plications and support multiple languages
such as Arabic, Chinese, English, Hindi
and Korean.

1 Introduction

Propbank is a corpus in which the arguments of
each verb predicate are annotated with their se-
mantic roles (Palmer et al., 2005). Propbank an-
notation also requires the choice of a sense id for
each predicate. Thus, for each predicate in the
Propbank, there exists a corresponding frame-
set file encompassing one or more senses of the
predicate. All frameset files are written in xml,
which is somewhat difficult to read and edit. Al-
though there already exist many xml editors,

most of them require some degree of knowledge
of xml, and none of them are specifically cus-
tomized for frameset files. This motivated the
development of our own frameset editor, Cor-
nerstone.

Jubilee is a Propbank instance editor. For
each verb predicate, we create a Propbank in-
stance that consists of the predicate’s sense id
and its arguments labeled with semantic roles.
Previously the allocation of tasks, the annota-
tion of argument labels and the frameset tagging
were all done as separate tasks. With Jubilee,
the entire annotation procedure can be done us-
ing one tool that simultaneously provides rich
syntactic information as well as comprehensive
semantic information.

Both Cornerstone and Jubilee are developed
in Java (Jdk 6.0), so they run on any plat-
form where the Java virtual machine is installed.
They are light enough to run as X11 applica-
tions. This aspect is important because Prop-
bank data are usually stored in a server, so
annotators need to update them remotely (via
ssh). One of the biggest advantages of using
these tools is that they accommodate several
languages; in fact, the tools have been used
for Propbank projects in Arabic (M.Diab et al.,
2008), Chinese (Xue and Palmer, 2009), En-
glish (Palmer et al., 2005) and Hindi, and have
been tested in Korean (Han et al., 2002).

This demo paper details how to create Prop-
bank framesets in Cornerstone, and how to an-
notate Propbank instances using Jubilee. There
are two modes in which to run Cornerstone:
multi-lemma and uni-lemma mode. In multi-
lemma mode, a predicate can have multiple lem-

13



mas, whereas a predicate can have only one
lemma in uni-lemma mode. Jubilee also has
two modes: normal and gold mode. In normal
mode, annotators are allowed to view and edit
only tasks that have been claimed by themselves
or by one other annotator. In gold mode, adju-
dicators are allowed to view and edit all tasks
that have undergone at least single-annotation.

2 How to obtain the tools

Cornerstone and Jubilee are available as an open
source project on Google code.1 The webpage
gives detailed instructions of how to download,
install and launch the tools (Choi et al., 2009a;
Choi et al., 2009b).

3 Description of Cornerstone

3.1 Multi-lemma mode

Languages such as English and Hindi are ex-
pected to run in multi-lemma mode, due to the
nature of their verb predicates. In multi-lemma
mode, a predicate can have multiple lemmas
(e.g., ‘run’, ‘run out’, ‘run up’). The xml struc-
ture of the frameset files for such langauges is
defined in a dtd file, frameset.dtd.

Figure 1 shows what appears when you open
a frameset file, run.xml, in multi-lemma mode.
The window consists of four panes: the frame-
set pane, predicate pane, roleset pane and roles
pane. The frameset pane contains a frameset
note reserved for information that pertains to all
predicate lemmas and rolesets within the frame-
set file. The predicate pane contains one or more
tabs titled by predicate lemmas that may in-
clude verb particle constructions. The roleset
pane contains tabs titled by roleset ids (e.g.,
run.01, run.02, corresponding to different senses
of the predicate) for the currently selected predi-
cate lemma (e.g., ‘run’). The roles pane includes
one or more roles, which represent arguments
that the predicate requires or commonly takes
in usage.

3.2 Uni-lemma mode

Languages such as Arabic and Chinese are ex-
pected to run in uni-lemma mode. Unlike multi-

1http://code.google.com/p/propbank/

Figure 1: Open run.xml in multi-lemma mode

lemma mode, which allows a predicate to have
multiple lemmas, uni-lemma mode allows only
one lemma for a predicate. The xml structure
of the frameset files for such langauges is defined
in a dtd file, verb.dtd.

Figure 2: Open HAfaZ.xml in uni-lemma mode

Figure 2 shows what appears when you open a
frameset file, HAfaZ.xml, in uni-lemma mode.
The window consists of four panes: the verb
pane, frameset pane, frame pane and roles pane.
The verb pane contains a verb comment field
for information helpful to annotators about the
verb, as well as the attribute field, ID, which in-
dicates the predicate lemma of the verb, repre-
sented either in the Roman alphabet or charac-
ters in other languages. The frameset pane con-
tains several tabs titled by frameset ids (corre-
sponding to verb senses) for the predicate. The
frame pane contains a frame comment for op-

14



tional information about the frame and the map-
ping pane, which includes mappings between
syntactic constituents and semantic arguments.
The roles pane consists of a set of arguments
that the predicate requires or commonly takes.

4 Description of Jubilee

4.1 Normal mode

Annotators are expected to run Jubilee in
normal mode. In normal mode, annotators
are allowed to view and edit only tasks claimed
by themselves or one other annotator when
the max-number of annotators allowed is two.
Jubilee gives the option of assigning a different
max-number of annotators as well.

When you run Jubilee in normal mode, you
will see an open-dialog (Figure 3). There are
three components in the open-dialog. The
combo-box at the top shows a list of all Prop-
bank projects. Once you select a project (e.g.,
english.sample), both [New Tasks] and [My
Tasks] will be updated. [New Task] shows a
list of tasks that have either not been claimed,
or claimed by only one other annotator. [My
Tasks] shows a list of tasks that have been
claimed by the current annotator.

Figure 3: Open-dialog

Once you choose a task and click the [Enter]
button, Jubilee’s main window will be prompted
(Figure 4). There are three views available in
the main window: the treebank view, frame-
set view and argument view. By default, the
treebank view shows the first tree (in the Penn
Treebank format (Marcus et al., 1993)) in the
selected task. The frameset view displays role-
sets and allows the annotator to choose the sense
of the predicate with respect to the current tree.
The argument view contains buttons represent-
ing each of the Propbank argument labels.

Figure 4: Jubilee’s main window

4.2 Gold mode

Adjudicators are expected to run Jubilee in gold
mode. In gold mode, adjudicators are allowed to
view and edit all tasks that have undergone at
least single-annotation. When you run Jubilee
in gold mode, you will see the same open-dialog
as you saw in Figure. 3. The [New Tasks] shows
a list of tasks that have not been adjudicated,
and the [My Tasks] shows a list of tasks that
have been adjudicated. Gold mode does not al-
low adjudicators to open tasks that have not
been at least single-annotated.

5 Demonstrations

5.1 Cornerstone

We will begin by demonstrating how to view
frameset files in both multi-lemma and uni-
lemma mode. In each mode, we will open an
existing frameset file, compare its interface with
the actual xml file, and show how intuitive it is
to interact with the tool. Next, we will demon-
strate how to create and edit a new frameset file
either from scratch or using an existing frameset
file. This demonstration will reflect several ad-
vantages of using the tool. First, the xml struc-
ture is completely transparent to the frame au-
thors, so that no knowledge of xml is required to
manage the frameset files. Second, the tool au-
tomates some of the routine work for the frame
authors (e.g., assigning a new roleset/frameset
id) and gives lists of options to be chosen (e.g.,

15



a list of function tags) so that frameset creation,
and the entire annotation procedure in turn, be-
come much faster. Third, the tool checks for the
completion of required fields and formatting er-
rors so that frame authors do not have to check
them manually. Finally, the tool automatically
saves the changes so the work is never lost.

5.2 Jubilee

For the treebank view, we will compare Jubilee’s
graphical representation of the trees with the
parenthetical representation of former tools: the
clear visual representation of the phrase struc-
ture helps the annotator to better understand
the syntax of the instance and to annotate the
appropriate node within the correct span. For
the frameset view, we will detail what kind of
semantic information it provides as you choose
different rolesets. This will highlight how Ju-
bilee’s support of roleset id annotation not only
speeds up the annotation process, but also en-
sures consistent annotation because the roleset
information provides a guideline for the correct
annotation of a particular verb sense. For the
argument view, we will illustrate how to anno-
tate Propbank arguments and use the opera-
tors for concatenations and links; thereby also
demonstrating that having each of these labels
clearly visible helps the annotator to remember
and evaluate the appropriateness of each possi-
ble argument label. Finally, we will show how
intuitive it is to adjudicate the annotations in
gold mode.

6 Future work

Both Cornerstone and Jubilee have been suc-
cessfully adapted to Propbank projects in sev-
eral universities such as Brandeis University, the
University of Colorado at Boulder, and the Uni-
versity of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. We
will continuously develop the tools by improv-
ing their functionalities through user-testing and
feedback, and also by applying them to more
languages.

Acknowledgments

Special thanks are due to Prof. Nianwen Xue of
Brandeis University for his very helpful insights

as well as Scott Cotton, the developer of RATS
and Tom Morton, the developer of WordFreak,
both previously used for PropBank annotation.
We gratefully acknowledge the support of the
National Science Foundation Grants CISE-CRI-
0551615, Towards a Comprehensive Linguistic
Annotation and CISE-CRI 0709167, Collabo-
rative: A Multi-Representational and Multi-
Layered Treebank for Hindi/Urdu, and a grant
from the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA/IPTO) under the GALE pro-
gram, DARPA/CMO Contract No. HR0011-06-
C-0022, subcontract from BBN, Inc. Any opin-
ions, findings, and conclusions or recommenda-
tions expressed in this material are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Science Foundation.

References

Jinho D. Choi, Claire Bonial, and Martha Palmer.
2009a. Cornerstone: Propbank frameset editor
guideline (version 1.3). Technical report, Institute
of Cognitive Science, the University of Colorado at
Boulder.

Jinho D. Choi, Claire Bonial, and Martha Palmer.
2009b. Jubilee: Propbank instance editor guide-
line (version 2.1). Technical report, Institute of
Cognitive Science, the University of Colorado at
Boulder.

C. Han, N. Han, E. Ko, and M. Palmer. 2002. Ko-
rean treebank: Development and evaluation. In
Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation.

Mitchell P. Marcus, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz, and
Beatrice Santorini. 1993. Building a large anno-
tated corpus of english: The penn treebank. Com-
putational Linguistics, 19(2):313–330.

M.Diab, A.Mansouri, M.Palmer, O.Babko-Malaya,
W Zaghouani, A.Bies, and M.Maamouri. 2008.
A pilot arabic propbank. In Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The proposition bank: An annotated cor-
pus of semantic roles. Computational Linguistics,
31(1):71–106.

Nianwen Xue and Martha Palmer. 2009. Adding
semantic roles to the chinese treebank. Natural
Language Engineering, 15(1):143–172.

16


