










































Generating Expository Dialogue from Monologue: Motivation, Corpus and Preliminary Rules


Human Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 333–336,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Generating Expository Dialogue from Monologue:
Motivation, Corpus and Preliminary Rules

Paul Piwek
Centre for Research in Computing

The Open University
Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, UK

p.piwek@open.ac.uk

Svetlana Stoyanchev
Centre for Research in Computing

The Open University
Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, UK
s.stoyanchev@open.ac.uk

Abstract
Generating expository dialogue from mono-
logue is a task that poses an interesting and re-
warding challenge for Natural Language Pro-
cessing. This short paper has three aims:
firstly, to motivate the importance of this
task, both in terms of the benefits of ex-
pository dialogue as a way to present in-
formation and in terms of potential applica-
tions; secondly, to introduce a parallel cor-
pus of monologues and dialogues which en-
ables a data-driven approach to this challenge;
and, finally, to describe work-in-progress on
semi-automatic construction of Monologue-
to-Dialogue (M2D) generation rules.

1 Introduction

The tasks of text generation – e.g., Reiter et al.
(2005) and Demir et al. (2008) – and generation
in dialogue – e.g., Stent (2002) and DeVault et al.
(2008) – are central topics in Natural Language Gen-
eration (NLG). What sets the two tasks apart is the
interactive nature of dialogue, where participants
need to adapt their contributions to each other.

This paper introduces an NLG task, the genera-
tion of expository dialogue, to the Computational
Linguistics community which occupies the middle
ground between these two tasks. An expository di-
alogue is an authored conversation between two fic-
tive characters. It can be presented as text, audio or
film. Although there is no real-time interactivity, in
expository dialogue the contributions of the charac-
ters do need to mesh with each other. The main pur-
pose of expository dialogue is to present informa-
tion (a description, explanation or definition) to the

reader, hearer or viewer, in contrast with dramatic
dialogue, which tells a story.

The use of expository dialogue goes back as far as
Plato (c. 470-399 BC), who expressed his ideas as
dialogues between Socrates and his contemporaries.
Recently, a number of empirical studies show that
for some purposes expository dialogue has advan-
tages over monologue: for learners, dialogue can be
more memorable, stimulate them to formulate their
own questions (Craig et al., 2000), and get them to
talk with each other (Lee et al., 1998). Expository
dialogue has also been found to be more effective
for persuasion (Suzuki and Yamada, 2004).

Additionally, dialogue lends itself very well
for multimedia presentations by computer-animated
agents (André et al., 2000; van Deemter et al.,
2008). Potential application domains include ed-
ucation, (serious) games and E-Health. In educa-
tion, information from textbooks could be presented
in dialogue form, possibly using virtual reality plat-
forms such as Second Life. Automatically gener-
ating dialogue from text for non-player characters
could have a tremendous impact on the gaming in-
dustry; e.g., (IGDA Game Writers SIG, 2003) state
that the amount of dialogue script for a character-
driven computer game is usually many times that
for the average film. In connection with E-health,
consider patient information leaflets, which are of-
ten left unread; presenting them as movies between
a virtual pharmacist and client may help address this.
Thus instead of being presented with

(1) a. You can take aspirin,

b. if you have a headache.

333



c. Though aspirin does have side effects:
d. it can harm circulation.

the patient could watch a movie on their mobile de-
vice of an exchange between a virtual client (lay-
man, L) and pharmacist (expert, E):

(2) L: What if I have a headache?
E: You can take aspirin
L: But does it have side effects?
E: Yes, it can harm circulation.

So far, research on generating expository dialogue
has been firmly rooted in classical AI approaches.
Work in this area starts from knowledge represen-
tations or databases (André et al., 2000), and even
research that does take text as input – e.g., Piwek
et al. (2007) describe a system for generating di-
alogues such as Example 2 – relies on handcrafted
rules. Two challenges present themselves for NLP
research: 1) generation of expository dialogue from
text, and 2) use of data-driven, rather than manually
authored, generation rules.

Apart from the cost of manually authoring gener-
ation rules, previous research has found that human-
authored rules can result in ‘too much information
[being] given too quickly’ (Williams et al., 2007),
which can be addressed by conversational padding.
We argue that rather than trying to invent padding
rules, the best strategy is to learn rules automatically
from professionally authored dialogues.

2 The CODA Corpus

To make inroads into data-driven dialogue genera-
tion, we first need to have the necessary resources.
We propose to view Monologue-to-Dialogue (M2D)
generation as analogous to machine translation; con-
sequently we need a parallel corpus for learning
mappings from the source (monologue) to the tar-
get (dialogue) texts. In the ongoing CODA1 project
we have created such a corpus. It consists of profes-
sionally authored dialogues2 that have been aligned
with monologues (written by ourselves) expressing
the same information. Since our ultimate aim is to
generate dialogues that resemble those written by

1COherent Dialogue Automatically generated from text
2Most dialogues are from the Gutenberg library to facilitate

our planned release of the corpus to the research community.

Sp Dialog act Dialogue Turn Monologue
E: Complex

Question
When you have
a pain in your
foot, how do
you know it?

When you
have a pain in
your foot (i)
you know it
because you

L: Explain I feel it. can feel it. (ii)
E: Explain-

Contradict
But you do not
feel it until a
nerve reports
the hurt to the
brain.

But you do not
feel it until a
nerve reports
the hurt to the
brain. (iii)

E: YN-
Question

Yet the brain is
the seat of the
mind , is it not?

Yet the brain is
the seat of the
mind. (iv)

Table 1: Parallel Monologue and Dialogue Example from
Mark Twain’s “What is Man?”

acclaimed authors, we started with professionally
authored dialogues and created the corresponding
monologues. From a practical point of view, it was
more feasible to use existing dialogue by acclaimed
authors than to hire professional authors to write di-
alogue based on monologues.

We have annotated both dialogues and mono-
logues: dialogue with dialogue acts and monologue
with discourse relations.3 We achieved 91% agree-
ment on segmentation and kappa=.82 for dialogue
act annotation on 11 dialogue act tags. We devel-
oped a D2MTranslation tool for monologue author-
ing, segmentation and dialogue annotation.

In January 2010, the corpus included 500 turns
from “What is man?”, a dialogue by Mark Twain,
and 88 turns from “Evolving Algebras”, an aca-
demic paper in the form of dialogue by Yuri Gure-
vich.4 Both of these expository dialogues present
conversation between an expert (Old Man in Twain
and Author in Gurevich) and a layman (Young Man
in Twain and Quisani in Gurevich). Table 1 shows
an example of a dialogue fragment, aligned mono-
logue and dialogue act annotations. The discourse
structure of the monologue is depicted in Figure 1.

Table 2 shows the distribution of the dialogue acts
between expert and layman. In both dialogues, the

3See (Stoyanchev and Piwek, 2010) for details.
4In addition to these dialogues we are working on a dialogue

by Berkeley (Three Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous)
and a selection of shorter fragments (for copyrights reasons) by
authors such as Douglas Hofstadter and Paul Feyerabend.

334



Figure 1: Discourse structure of the monologue in Table 1

most frequent dialogue act is Explain, where a char-
acter presents information (as a new idea or as a re-
sponse to another utterance). Also, in both dialogues
the layman asks more often for clarification than
the expert. The distribution over information re-
quests (yes/no, factoid, and complex questions) and
responses (yes, no, factoid) differs between the two
dialogues: in Twain’s dialogue, the expert mostly
requests information and the layman responds to re-
quests, whereas in Gurevich’s dialogue it is the other
way around.

The differences in style suggests that the M2D
mapping rules will be author or style-specific. By
applying M2D rules obtained from two different au-
thors (e.g., Twain and Gurevich) to the same text
(e.g., the aspirin example) we can generate two dif-
ferent dialogues. This will enable us to vary the pre-
sentation style of automatically generated dialogues.

Twain Gurevich
Tag Expert Layman Expert Layman

Explain 69 55 49 24
Clarify 1 15 0 6
Request 60 26 2 29

Response 14 43 9 0

Table 2: Dialogue act tag frequencies for expert and lay-
man in a sample of 250 turns from Twain and 88 turns
from Gurevich dialogues.

3 Rules

We automatically derive M2D rules from the aligned
discourse relations and dialogue acts in our parallel
corpus of monologues and dialogues. Table 3 shows
three rules generated from the parallel dialogue–
monologue fragment in Table 1. The first rule, R1,
is based on the complete discourse structure of the
monologue (i–iv), whereas R2 and R3 are based on
only a part of it: R2 is based on i–iii, whereas R3 is
based on i and ii. By generating rules from subtrees
of a discourse structure, we obtain several rules from

a single dialogue fragment in the corpus.

Condition Elaboration

b a dc

Contrast

Condition Elaboration

b a dc

Condition

b a

Contrast

c − d

(1)

(2)

Elaboration

dc

Contrast

a − b

(4)

(3)

Figure 2: Discourse structures of the monologue in Ex-
ample 1. a-b and c-d indicate a concatenation of two
clauses.

Let us illustrate the use of such rules by applying
them to Example 1 about aspirin. The relations be-
tween the clauses of the example are depicted in Fig-
ure 2 (1). To generate a dialogue, we apply a match-
ing M2D rule. Alternatively, we can first simplify
the discourse structure of the monologue by remov-
ing relation nodes as illustrated in Figure 2 (2–4).

The simplified structure in Figure 2 (2) matches
rule R2 from Table 3. By applying R2 we gener-
ate the dialogue in Table 4: the expert asks a com-
plex question composed of clauses a and b, which
the layman answers with an explanation generated
from the same set of clauses. Then the expert offers
a contradicting explanation generated from c and d.
To generate dialogue sentences for a corresponding
discourse structure we are adapting the approach to
paraphrasing of Barzilay and McKeown (2001).

4 Conclusion

This short paper presented three angles on the
Monologue-to-Dialogue (M2D) task. First, as an
opinion piece, it motivates the task of generating ex-
pository dialogue from monologue. We described
empirical research that provides evidence for the
effectiveness of expository dialogue and discussed
applications from education, gaming and E-health.
Second, we introduced the CODA corpus for ad-
dressing the task. Finally, we reported on work-
in-progress on semi-automatic construction of M2D
rules. Our implemented algorithm extracts several
M2D rules from the corpus that are applicable even
to a relatively simple input. Additionally, frequency
analysis of dialogue tags suggests that there is scope
for generating different dialogue styles.

The timeliness of this research is evidenced by the
emergence of a Question Generation (QG) commu-

335



ID Dialogue Structure Monologue Structure
R1 E: Complex Question (i-ii) Contrast (Contrast (Condition(i,ii), iii, iv))

L: Explain (i-ii)
E: Explain-Contradict (iii)
E: YNQuestion (iv)

R2 E: Complex Question (i-ii) Contrast (Condition(i,ii), iii)
L: Explain(i-ii)
E: Explain-Contradict (iii)

R3 E: Complex Question (i-ii) Condition (i,ii)
L: Explain (i-ii)

Table 3: Monologue-to-Dialogue rules extracted from the parallel example in Table 1

Sp Dialogue act Dialogue Turn
E: Complex Ques-

tion a-b
If you have a headache, what
do you do?

L: Explain a-b Take aspirin.
E: Explain-

Contradict
c-d

But aspirin does have side
effects: it can harm circula-
tion

Table 4: A dialogue generated from the monologue about
aspirin by applying the rule R2 (see Table 3)

nity. QG is a subtask of M2D. The first QG work-
shop was held at the end of 2008, resulting in pro-
posals for a Shared Task and Evaluation Campaign
(Rus and Graesser, 2009) for 2010. The CODA cor-
pus should prove to be a useful resource not only for
M2D researchers, but also for the QG community.

Acknowledgments

The research reported in this paper was funded by
the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research
Council under grant EP/G/020981/1.

References
E. André, T. Rist, S. van Mulken, M. Klesen, and

S. Baldes. 2000. The automated design of believable
dialogues for animated presentation teams. In Em-
bodied Conversational Agents, pages 220–255. MIT
Press, Cambridge, Mass.

R. Barzilay and K. McKeown. 2001. Extracting para-
phrases from a parallel corpus. In Proc. of ACL/EACL,
Toulouse.

S. Craig, B. Gholson, M. Ventura, A. Graesser, and the
Tutoring Research Group. 2000. Overhearing dia-
logues and monologues in virtual tutoring sessions.
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Ed-
ucation, 11:242–253.

S. Demir, S. Carberry, and K. McCoy. 2008. Generating
Textual Summaries of Bar Charts . In Procs of INLG
2008, Ohio, June.

D. DeVault, D. Traum, and R. Artstein. 2008. Making
Grammar-Based Generation Easier to Deploy in Dia-
logue Systems. In Procs SIGdial 2008, Ohio, June.

J. Lee, F. Dinneen, and J. McKendree. 1998. Supporting
student discussions: it isn’t just talk. Education and
Information Technologies, 3:217–229.

P. Piwek, H. Hernault, H. Prendinger, and M. Ishizuka.
2007. T2D: Generating Dialogues between Virtual
Agents Automatically from Text. In Intelligent Virtual
Agents, LNAI 4722, pages 161–174. Springer Verlag.

E. Reiter, S. Sripada, J. Hunter, J. Yu, and I. Davy. 2005.
Choosing Words in Computer-Generated Weather
Forecasts. Artificial Intelligence, 167:137–169.

V. Rus and A. Graesser, editors. 2009. The Ques-
tion Generation Shared Task and Evaluation Chal-
lenge. The University of Memphis. Available at:
http://www.questiongeneration.org/.

IGDA Game Writers SIG. 2003. International game
developers association’s (IGDA) guide to writing for
games. IGDA White Paper.

A. Stent. 2002. A conversation acts model for generating
spoken dialogue contributions. Computer Speech and
Language, 16(3-4):313–352.

S. Stoyanchev and P. Piwek. 2010. Constructing the
CODA corpus. In Procs of LREC 2010, Malta, May.

S. V. Suzuki and S. Yamada. 2004. Persuasion through
overheard communication by life-like agents. In Procs
of the 2004 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference
on Intelligent Agent Technology, Beijing, September.

K. van Deemter, B. Krenn, P. Piwek, M. Klesen,
M. Schröder, and S. Baumann. 2008. Fully gener-
ated scripted dialogue for embodied agents. Artificial
Intelligence Journal, 172(10):1219–1244.

S. Williams, P. Piwek, and R. Power. 2007. Generat-
ing Monologue and Dialogue to Present Personalised
Medical Information to Patients. In Procs ENLG
2007, pages 167–170, Schloss Dagstuhl, Germany.

336


