










































Creating Local Coherence: An Empirical Assessment


Human Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 313–316,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Creating Local Coherence: An Empirical Assessment

Annie Louis
University of Pennsylvania

Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
lannie@seas.upenn.edu

Ani Nenkova
University of Pennsylvania

Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
nenkova@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract

Two of the mechanisms for creating natural
transitions between adjacent sentences in a
text, resulting in local coherence, involve dis-
course relations and switches of focus of at-
tention between discourse entities. These two
aspects of local coherence have been tradi-
tionally discussed and studied separately. But
some empirical studies have given strong evi-
dence for the necessity of understanding how
the two types of coherence-creating devices
interact. Here we present a joint corpus study
of discourse relations and entity coherence ex-
hibited in news texts from the Wall Street Jour-
nal and test several hypotheses expressed in
earlier work about their interaction.

1 Introduction

Coherent discourse is characterized by local prop-
erties that are crucial for comprehension. In fact, a
long line of linguistics and computational linguistics
tradition has proposed that several levels of struc-
ture contribute to the creation of coherent discourse.
Among these, the attentional structure (Grosz et
al., 1995) and the relational structure (Mann and
Thompson, 1988) of text, are the most widely dis-
cussed in the literature.

Centering theory (Grosz et al., 1995) is the dom-
inant approach for describing and analyzing atten-
tional structure. It assumes that readers of the text
focus (center) their attention on a small number of
salient discourse entities at a time and that there are
preferred patterns for switching attention between
entities mentioned in adjacent sentences. Relational

This work was partially supported by NSF Grant IIS -07-
05671.

structure theories, on the other hand, describe how
certain discourse (also called rhetorical or coher-
ence) relations such as CONTRAST and CAUSE are
inferred by the reader between adjacent units of text.
The existence of richly annotated corpora and the
development of automatic applications based on the
theories have allowed empirical assessments of the
validity and generality of these theories individually.

Such work has also provided increasingly strong
evidence that attentional and relational structures
need to be taken into account simultaneously. The
motivation behind such proposals have been the em-
pirical findings that “weak” discourse relations such
as ELABORATION are the most common type of re-
lations, and that a large percentage of adjacent sen-
tences in fact do not have any entities in common.

In particular, a corpus based evaluation of Center-
ing theory found that only 42% of pairs of adjacent
sentences have at least one entity in common and
hypothesized that discourse relations are responsible
for creating local coherence in the remaining cases
(Poesio et al., 2004). At the same time, the work
of Knott et al. (2001) has discussed several theo-
retical complications arising from the existence of
the very common and semantically weak ELABO-
RATION relation. These researchers propose that re-
placing ELABORATION by an account of entity co-
herence such as Centering will be most beneficial.
But work in information ordering (Karamanis, 2007)
has not been able to confirm such claims that better
results can be obtained by combining entity coher-
ence with discourse relations.

Till recently, the absence of large corpora anno-
tated for both discourse relations and coreference in-
formation has prohibited a detailed joint analysis of
attentional and relational structure. We combine two

313



recently released corpora: discourse relations from
the Penn Discourse Treebank and coreference an-
notations from the OntoNotes corpus, to assess the
prevalence and interplay between factors that create
local coherence in newspaper text.

Specifically, in our study we examine how three
hypotheses formulated in prior work play out in the
Wall Street Journal texts in our corpus:
Hypothesis 1 Adjacent sentences that do not share
entities are related by non-elaboration discourse re-
lations [Poesio et al. (2004) Sec. 5.2.2 Pg. 354].
Hypothesis 2 Adjacent sentences joined by non-
elaboration discourse relation have lower entity co-
herence: such pairs are less likely to mention the
same entities [Knott et al. (2001) Sec. 7 Pg. 10].
Hypothesis 3 Almost all pairs of sentences in a co-
herent text either share entities or participate in non-
elaboration discourse relation (Knott et al., 2001;
Poesio et al., 2004).

None of these hypotheses are validated. We find
that only 38.65% of pairs that do not share enti-
ties participate in “core” relations such as tempo-
ral, contingency or comparison; the rate of coref-
erence in these “core” relations is similar to that in
weaker elaboration relations; about 30% of all sen-
tence pairs neither share entities nor participate in a
“core” discourse relation.

2 Data

In order to jointly analyze both discourse relations
and noun phrase coreference between adjacent sen-
tences, we combine annotations from two corpora,
OntoNotes and the Penn Discourse Treebank. The
two individual corpora are larger, but a smaller sub-
set of 590 Wall Street Journal articles appear in both.
All our analysis is for adjacent sentences within
paragraphs in this subset of texts.

Penn Discourse Treebank The Penn Discourse
Treebank (PDTB) (Prasad et al., 2008) is the largest
available corpus of annotations for discourse rela-
tions, covering one million words of the Wall Street
Journal (WSJ). In the PDTB, two kinds of discourse
relations are annotated. In explicit relations, a dis-
course connective such as “because”, “but” or “so”
is present, as in the example below.

[Ex. 1] There is an incredible pressure on school systems

and teachers to raise test scores. So efforts to beat the tests are

also on the rise.

On the other hand, relations can also exist without
an explicit signal. In Ex. 2, it is clear that the second
sentence is the result of the event mentioned in the
first.

[Ex. 2] In July, the Environmental Protection Agency im-

posed a gradual ban on virtually all uses of asbestos. By 1997,

almost all remaining uses of cancer-causing asbestos will be

outlawed.

Such relations are called implicit relations. In the
PDTB, they are annotated between all adjacent sen-
tences within a paragraph which do not already par-
ticipate in an explicit discourse relation.

For both implicit and explicit relations, the se-
mantic sense of the discourse relation is assigned
from a hierarchy of senses. There are four classes
of discourse relations at the topmost general level.
The second level senses are shown within paran-
theses: Comparison (Concession, Contrast, Pragmatic
Concession/Contrast), Contingency (Cause, Condition,
Pragmatic Cause/Condition), Temporal (Asynchronous,
Synchronous) and Expansion (Alternative, Conjunction,
Exception, Instantiation, List, Restatement).

Some of the adjacent sentences in the texts, how-
ever, were found not to have a discourse relation be-
tween the events or propositions mentioned in them.
Instead, they were related because both sentences
mention the same entity, directly or indirectly, and
the second sentence provides some further descrip-
tion of that entity. An Entity Relation (EntRel) was
annotated for such sentence pairs as below.

[Ex. 3] Pierre Vinken, 61 years old, will join the board as

a nonexecutive director Nov. 29. Mr. Vinken is chairman of

Elsevier N.V., the Dutch publishing group.

OntoNotes For coreference information, we use
the WSJ portion of the OntoNotes corpus version 2.9
(Hovy et al., 2006) which contains 590 documents.
For these documents, we also have the PDTB anno-
tations available. In OntoNotes, all noun phrases–
pronouns, names and nominals are marked for coref-
erence without any limitation to specific semantic
categories.

3 Corpus study findings

For ease of presentation in the following analy-
sis, we will call the Expansion and Entity relations
“weak” and Temporal, Contingency and Compari-

314



0 to 100 0.41 500 to 1000 0.50
100 to 200 0.37 above 1000 0.51
200 to 500 0.48

Table 1: Proportion of sentence pairs that don’t share any
entities for different document lengths (in words)

Type Relation No shared entities

Core
Temporal 122 (2.98)
Contingency 752 (18.40)
Comparison 706 (17.27)

Weak
Expansion 1870 (45.74)
EntRel 638 (15.61)

Table 2: Distribution of the 4088 non-entity sharing sen-
tence pairs. The proportions are shown in brackets.

son relations “core”, following the intuition that the
semantics of the latter class is much more clearly
defined. Implicit and explicit relations were not dis-
tinguished in the analysis.1

Hypothesis 1 The first hypothesis is that adja-
cent sentences that do not share entities participate
in core relations and so remain locally coherent.

Pairs of adjacent sentences that do not share any
entities are common. In prior work, Poesio et al.
(2004) found that 58% of adjacent sentence pairs in
their corpus of museum object descriptions did not
have overlapping mentions of any entity. The distri-
bution in the WSJ texts is similar, as seen in Table 1.
Depending on the length of the article, 37% to 51%
of sentence pairs do not have any entity in common.2

Table 2 shows the distribution of discourse rela-
tions for the 4088 sentence pairs in the corpus that
do not share any entities. Contrary to expectation,
the majority of such pairs, 61%, are related by a
weak discourse relation. Especially unexpected is
the high percentage of entity relations (EntRel) that
don’t have actual entity overlap:

[Ex. 4] All four demonstrators were arrested. The law,
which Bush allowed to take effect without his signature, went
into force Friday.

[Ex. 5] Authorities in Hawaii said the wreckage of a missing

commuter plane with 20 people aboard was spotted in a remote

valley on the island of Molokai. There wasn’t any evidence of

survivors.

1For brevity we present combined results for both implicit
and explicit relations. However, most of our conclusions remain
the same when the two types are distinguished.

2There are around 100 documents in each length range.

Type Relation Total Share entities

Core
Temporal 365 243 (66.57)
Contingency 1570 818 (52.10)
Comparison 1477 771 (52.20)

Weak
Expansion 3569 1699 (47.60)
EntRel 1424 786 (55.20)

Table 3: Rate of entity sharing

Share entities No sharing
core relations 1832 (21.80) 1580 (18.80)
weak relations 2485 (29.56) 2508 (29.84)

Table 4: Total number (proportion) of sentence pairs in
the corpus in the given categories

Hypothesis 2 The second hypothesis states that
adjacent sentences joined by a core discourse rela-
tion are less likely to mention the same entities in
comparison to weak relations. But as Table 3 re-
veals, this is generally not the case.

Adjacent sentences in Temporal relation are very
likely to share entities—almost 70% of them do.
Over half of all Contingency and Comparison rela-
tions also share entities. But, the rates of sharing in
Comparison and Contingency relations are signifi-
cantly lower compared to Entity relations (under a
two-sided binomial test). Ex. 6 shows a Contin-
gency relation without entity sharing.

[Ex. 6] Without machines, good farms can’t get bigger. So

the potato crop, once 47 million tons, is down to 35.

However, adjacent sentences with Expansion rela-
tion turn out least likely to share entities. The entity
sharing rates of all the other relations were found to
be significantly higher than Expansion.

Hypothesis 3 Finally, we test the hypothesis that
the majority of adjacent sentences exhibit coherence
because they either share entities or form the argu-
ments of a core discourse relation.

This hypothesis is not supported in the WSJ data
(see Table 4): 30% of all sentence pairs are in a weak
discourse relation—Expansion or EntRel—and do
not have any entities in common. In a sense, nei-
ther of the theories of entity or relational coherence
can explain what mechanisms create the local coher-
ence for these pairs. In order to glean some insights
of how coherence is created there, we examine the
behavior of different types of Elaboration relations
(Table 5). There is a wide variation between the dif-

315



Alternative 67 (0.63) Instantiation 490 (0.34)
Restatement 960 (0.56) List 165 (0.28)
Conjunction 1021 (0.48) EntRel 1424 (0.55)

Table 5: Total number of different Expansion relations
and their coreference probability (in brackets)

ferent types of Expansions.
When the function of an expansion sentence is to

provide an alternative explanation or restate an ut-
terance, the probability of entity overlap is very high
and patterns similarily with entity relations (around
60%). Below is an example restatement sentence.

[Ex. 7] {Researchers in Belgium}r said {they}r have de-

veloped a genetic engineering technique for creating hybrid

plants for a number of crops, such as cotton, soybeans and

rice. {The scientists at Plant Genetic Systems N.V.}r isolated

a gene that could lead to a generation of plants possessing a

high-production trait.

However, the two classes–Instantiation and List
largely appear with very little entity overlap, 37%
and 29% respectively. An Instantiation relation is
used to provide an example and hence has little over-
lap with the previous sentence (Ex. 8 and 9).

[Ex. 8] There may be a few cases where the law breaking is

well pinpointed and so completely non-invasive of the rights of

others that it is difficult to criticize it. The case of Rosa Parks,

the black woman who refused to sit at the back of the bus, comes

to mind as an illustration.

[Ex. 9] The economy is showing signs of weakness, partic-

ularly among manufacturers. Exports, which played a key role

in fueling growth over the last two years, seem to have stalled.

List relations, on the other hand, connect sen-
tences where each of them elaborates on a common
proposition mentioned earlier in the discourse. Here
is an example five sentence paragraph with list rela-
tions but no entity repetition at all.

[Ex. 10] Designs call for a L-shaped structure with

a playground in the center. [Implicit List] There

will be recreation and movie rooms. [Implicit List]

Teens will be able to listen to music with head-

sets. [Implicit List] Study halls, complete with ref-

erence materials will be available. [Explicit List]

And there will be a nurse’s station and rooms for

children to meet with the social workers.

In Ex. 10, as well as some others, a broad no-
tion of entity coherence–bridging anaphora can be
applied. Poesio et al. (2004) also note this fact, but

also say that such instances are very difficult to an-
notate reliably. Our work is based on coreference
annotations which can be marked with considerably
high inter-annotator agreement.

4 Conclusions

The recent release of corpora annotated for corefer-
ence and discourse relations for the same texts have
made possible to empirically assess claims about the
interaction between two types of local coherence:
relational and entity. We find that about half of the
pairs of adjacent sentences do not share any entities
at all, and about 60% are related by weak discourse
relations. We test the hypothesis from prior work
that these two types of coherence are complemen-
tary to each other and taken together explain most
local coherence. We find that the two types of co-
herence mechanisms are neither mutually exclusive
nor do they explain all the data. Future work in dis-
course analysis will need to develop better under-
standing of how the two types of coherence interact.

References

B. Grosz, A. Joshi, and S. Weinstein. 1995. Centering:
a framework for modelling the local coherence of dis-
course. Computational Linguistics, 21(2):203–226.

E. Hovy, M. Marcus, M. Palmer, L. Ramshaw, and
R. Weischedel. 2006. Ontonotes: the 90% solution.
In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT, pages 57–60.

N. Karamanis. 2007. Supplementing entity coherence
with local rhetorical relations for information order-
ing. Journal of Logic, Language and Information,
16(4):445–464.

A. Knott, J. Oberlander, M. O’Donnell, and C. Mellish.
2001. Beyond elaboration: the interaction of rela-
tions and focus in coherent text. In Text Representa-
tion: Linguistic and Psycholinguistic Aspects, chapter
7, pages 181–196.

W.C. Mann and S.A. Thompson. 1988. Rhetorical struc-
ture theory: Towards a functional theory of text orga-
nization. Text, 8.

M. Poesio, R. Stevenson, B. Di Eugenio, and J. Hitze-
man. 2004. Centering: A parametric theory and its
instantiations. Computational Linguistics, pages 309–
363.

R. Prasad, N. Dinesh, A. Lee, E. Miltsakaki, L. Robaldo,
A. Joshi, and B. Webber. 2008. The penn discourse
treebank 2.0. In Proceedings of LREC’08.

316


