










































SIMPLIFICA: a tool for authoring simplified texts in Brazilian Portuguese guided by readability assessments


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010: Demonstration Session, pages 41–44,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

SIMPLIFICA: a tool for authoring simplified texts in  

Brazilian Portuguese guided by readability assessments 

 

 

Carolina  Scarton, Matheus de Oliveira,  Arnaldo Candido Jr.,  

Caroline Gasperin and Sandra Maria Aluísio  
Department of Computer Sciences, University of São Paulo 

Av. Trabalhador São-Carlense, 400. 13560-970 - São Carlos/SP, Brazil 
{carolina@grad,matheusol@grad,arnaldoc@,cgasperin@,sandra@}icmc.usp.br 

 

  

 
 

Abstract 

SIMPLIFICA is an authoring tool for produc-

ing simplified texts in Portuguese. It provides 
functionalities for lexical and syntactic simpli-

fication and for readability assessment. This 

tool is the first of its kind for Portuguese; it 

brings innovative aspects for simplification 

tools in general, since the authoring process is 

guided by readability assessment based on the 

levels of literacy of the Brazilian population. 

1 Introduction 

In order to promote digital inclusion and accessi-

bility for people with low levels of literacy, partic-

ularly access to documents available on the web, it 
is important to provide textual information in a 

simple and easy way. Indeed, the Web Content 

Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0
1
 establishes 

a set of guidelines that discuss accessibility issues 

and provide accessibility design solutions. WCAG 

requirements address not only structure and tech-
nological aspects, but also how the content should 

be made available to users. However, Web devel-

opers are not always responsible for content prepa-
ration and authoring in a Website. Moreover, in the 

context of Web 2.0 it becomes extremely difficult 

to develop completely WCAG conformant Web-
sites, since users without any prior knowledge 

about the guidelines directly participate on the con-

tent authoring process of Web applications.  
                                                        
1 http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/ 

In Brazil, since 2001, the INAF index (National 

Indicator of Functional Literacy) has been com-

puted annually to measure the levels of literacy of 
the Brazilian population. The 2009 report pre-

sented a still worrying scenario: 7% of the individ-

uals were classified as illiterate; 21% as literate at 
the rudimentary level; 47% as literate at the basic 

level; and only 25% as literate at the advanced lev-

el (INAF, 2009). These literacy levels are defined 
as: (1) Illiterate: individuals who cannot perform 

simple tasks such as reading words and phrases; 

(2) Rudimentary: individuals who can find expli-
cit information in short and familiar texts (such as 

an advertisement or a short letter); (3) Basic: indi-

viduals who can read and understand texts of aver-
age length, and find information even when it is 

necessary to make some inference; and (4) Ad-

vanced/Fully: individuals who can read longer 
texts, relating their parts, comparing and interpret-

ing information, distinguish fact from opinion, 

make inferences and synthesize. 
We present in this paper the current version of 

an authoring tool named SIMPLIFICA. It helps 

authors to create simple texts targeted at poor lite-
rate readers. It extends the previous version pre-

sented in Candido et al. (2009) with two new mod-
ules: lexical simplification and the assessment of 

the level of complexity of the input texts. The 

study is part of the PorSimples project
2
 (Simplifi-

cation of Portuguese Text for Digital Inclusion and 

Accessibility) (Aluisio et al., 2008).  

This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 

                                                        
2 http://caravelas.icmc.usp.br/wiki/index.php/Principal 

41



we describe SIMPLIFICA and the underlying 

technology for lexical and syntactic simplification, 
and for readability assessment. In Section 3 we 

summarize the interaction steps that we propose to 

show in the demonstration session targeting texts 
for low-literate readers of Portuguese. Section 4 

presents final remarks with emphasis on why de-

monstrating this system is relevant.  

2 SIMPLIFICA authoring tool  

SIMLIFICA is a web-based WYSIWYG editor, 

based on TinyMCE web editor
3
. The user inputs a 

text in the editor and customizes the simplification 

settings, where he/she can choose: (i) strong sim-

plification, where all the complex syntactic phe-
nomena (see details in Section 2.2) are treated for 

each sentence, or customized simplification, where 

the user chooses one or more syntactic simplifica-
tion phenomena to be treated for each sentence, 

and (ii) one or more thesauri to be used in the syn-

tactic and lexical simplification processes. Then 
the user activates the readability assessment mod-

ule to predict the complexity level of a text. This 

module maps the text to one of the three levels of 
literacy defined by INAF: rudimentary, basic or 

advanced. According to the resulting readability 

level the user can trigger the lexical and/or syntac-
tic simplifications modules, revise the automatic 

simplification and restart the cycle by checking the 

readability level of the current version of the text.  
Figure 1 summarizes how the three modules are 

integrated and below we describe in more detail 

the SIMPLIFICA modules. 

 
Figure 1. Steps of the authoring process. 

 

                                                        
3 http://tinymce.moxiecode.com/ 

2.1 Lexical Simplification  

Basically, the first part of the lexical simplification 

process consists of tokenizing the original text and 

marking the words that are considered complex. In 
order to judge a word as complex or not, we use 3 

dictionaries created for the PorSimples project: one 

containing words common to youngsters, a second 
one composed by frequent words extracted from 

news texts for children and nationwide newspa-

pers, and a third one containing concrete words.  
The lexical simplification module also uses the 

Unitex-PB dictionary
4
 for finding the lemma of the 

words in the text, so that it is possible to look for it 
in the simple words dictionaries. The problem of 

looking for a lemma directly in a dictionary is that 

there are ambiguous words and we are not able to 
deal with different word senses. For dealing with 

part-of-speech (POS) ambiguity, we use the 

MXPOST POS tagger
5
 trained over NILC tagset

6
. 

After the text is tagged, the words that are not 

proper nouns, prepositions and numerals are se-

lected, and their POS tags are used to look for their 
lemmas in the dictionaries. As the tagger has not a 

100% precision and some words may not be in the 

dictionary, we look for the lemma only (without 
the tag) when we are not able to find the lemma-

tag combination in the dictionary. Still, if we are 

not able to find the word, the lexical simplification 
module assumes that the word is complex and 

marks it for simplification. 

The last step of the process consists in providing 
simpler synonyms for the marked words. For this 

task, we use the thesauri for Portuguese TeP 2.0
7
 

and the lexical ontology for Portuguese PAPEL
8
. 

This task is carried out when the user clicks on a 

marked word, which triggers a search in the the-

sauri for synonyms that are also present in the 
common words dictionary. If simpler words are 

found, they are listed in order, from the simpler to 
the more complex ones. To determine this order, 

we used Google API to search each word in the 

web: we assume that the higher a word frequency, 
the simpler it is. Automatic word sense disambigu-

ation is left for future work. 

                                                        
4 http://www.nilc.icmc.usp.br/nilc/projects/unitex-pb/web 
/dicionarios.html 
5 http://sites.google.com/site/adwaitratnaparkhi/home 
6 www.nilc.icmc.usp.br/nilc/TagSet/ManualEtiquetagem.htm  
7 http://www.nilc.icmc.usp.br/tep2/ 
8 http://www.linguateca.pt/PAPEL/ 

42



2.2 Syntactic Simplification 

Syntactic simplification is accomplished by a rule-

based system, which comprises seven operations 

that are applied sentence-by-sentence to a text in 
order to make its syntactic structure simpler.  

Our rule-based text simplification system is 

based on a manual for Brazilian Portuguese syntac-
tic simplification (Specia et al., 2008). According 

to this manual, simplification operations should be 

applied when any of the 22 linguistic phenomena 
covered by our system (see Candido et al. (2009) 

for details) is detected. Our system treats apposi-

tive, relative, coordinate and subordinate clauses, 
which had already been addressed by previous 

work on text simplification (Siddharthan, 2003). 

Additionally, we treat passive voice, sentences in 
an order other than Subject-Verb-Object (SVO), 

and long adverbial phrases. The simplification op-

erations available to treat these phenomena are: 
split sentence, change particular discourse markers 

by simpler ones, change passive to active voice, 

invert the order of clauses, convert to subject-verb-
object ordering, and move long adverbial phrases. 

Each sentence is parsed in order to identify syn-

tactic phenomena for simplification and to segment 
the sentence into portions that will be handled by 

the operations. We use the parser PALAVRAS 

(Bick, 2000) for Portuguese. Gasperin et al. (2010) 
present the evaluation of the performance of our 

syntactic simplification system.  

Since our syntactic simplifications are conserva-
tive, the simplified texts become longer than the 

original ones due to sentence splitting. We ac-

knowledge that low-literacy readers prefer short 
texts, and in the future we aim to provide summa-

rization within SIMPLIFICA (see (Watanabe et al., 

2009)). Here, the shortening of the text is a respon-
sibility of the author. 

2.3 Readability assessment 

With our readability assessment module, we can 
predict the readability level of a text, which cor-

responds to the literacy level expected from the 

target reader: rudimentary, basic or advanced.  
We have adopted a machine-learning classifier 

to identify the level of the input text; we use the 

Support Vector Machines implementation from 
Weka

9
 toolkit (SMO). We have used 7 corpora 

                                                        
9 http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/ 

within 2 different genres (general news and popu-

lar science articles) to train the classifier. Three of 
these corpora contain original texts published in 

online newspapers and magazines. The other cor-

pora contain manually simplified versions of most 
of the original texts. These were simplified by a 

linguist, specialized in text simplification, accord-

ing to the two levels of simplification proposed in 
our project, natural and strong, which result in 

texts adequate for the basic and rudimentary litera-

cy levels, respectively. 
Our feature set is composed by cognitively-

motivated features derived from the Coh-Metrix-

PORT tool
10

, which is an adaptation for Brazilian 
Portuguese of Coh-Metrix 2.0 (free version of 

Coh-Metrix (Graesser et al, 2003)) also developed 

in the context of the PorSimples project. Coh-
Metrix-PORT implements the metrics in Table 1. 

 
Categories Subcategories Metrics 

Shallow 

Readabili-

ty metric 

- Flesch Reading Ease index 
for Portuguese. 

Words and 

textual 

informa-

tion 

Basic counts Number of words, sen-

tences, paragraphs, words 
per sentence, sentences per 
paragraph, syllables per 
word, incidence of verbs, 
nouns, adjectives and ad-
verbs. 

Frequencies Raw frequencies of content 

words and minimum fre-
quency of content words. 

Hyperonymy Average number of hyper-
nyms of verbs. 

Syntactic 

informa-

tion 

Constituents Incidence of nominal 
phrases, modifiers per noun 
phrase and words preced-

ing main verbs. 

Pronouns, 
Types and 

Tokens 

Incidence of personal pro-
nouns, number of pronouns 
per noun phrase, types and 
tokens. 

Connectives Number of connectives, 
number of positive and 

negative additive connec-
tives, causal / temporal / 
logical positive and nega-
tive connectives. 

Logical 

operators 

- Incidence of the particles 
“e” (and), “ou” (or), “se” 
(if), incidence of negation 

and logical operators. 

Table 1. Metrics of Coh-Metrix-PORT. 

 

                                                        
10 http://caravelas.icmc.usp.br:3000/ 

43



We also included seven new metrics to Coh-

Metrix-PORT: average verb, noun, adjective and 
adverb ambiguity, incidence of high-level constitu-

ents, content words and functional words.  

We measured the performance of the classifier 
on identifying the levels of the input texts by a 

cross-validation experiment. We trained the clas-

sifier on our 7 corpora and reached 90% F-measure 
on identifying texts at advanced level, 48% at basic 

level, and 73% at rudimentary level. 
 

3. A working session at SIMPLIFICA  
 

In the NAACL demonstration section we aim to 
present all functionalities of the tool for authoring 

simple texts, SIMPLIFICA. We will run all steps 

of the authoring process – readability assessment, 
lexical simplification and syntactic simplification – 

in order to demonstrate the use of the tool in pro-

ducing a text for basic and rudimentary readers of 
Portuguese, regarding the lexical and the syntactic 

complexity of an original text.  

We outline a script of our demonstration at 
http://www.nilc.icmc.usp.br/porsimples/demo/dem

o_script.htm. In order to help the understanding by 

non-speakers of Portuguese we provide the transla-
tions of the example texts shown. 

 

4. Final Remarks 
 

A tool for authoring simple texts in Portuguese is 
an innovative software, as are all the modules that 

form the tool. Such tool is extremely important in 

the construction of texts understandable by the ma-
jority of the Brazilian population. SIMPLIFICA’s 

target audience is varied and includes: teachers that 

use online text for reading practices; publishers; 
journalists aiming to reach poor literate readers; 

content providers for distance learning programs; 

government agencies that aim to communicate to 
the population as a whole; companies that produce 

technical manuals and medicine instructions; users 

of legal language, in order to facilitate the under-
standing of legal documents by lay people; and 

experts in language studies and computational lin-

guistics for future research. 
Future versions of SIMPLIFICA will also pro-

vide natural simplification, where the target sen-

tences for simplifications are chosen by a machine 
learning classifier (Gasperin et al., 2009). 
 

Acknowledgments 

We thank FAPESP and Microsoft Research for 

supporting the PorSimples project 

References  

Sandra Aluísio, Lucia Specia, Thiago Pardo, Erick Ma-

ziero and Renata Fortes. 2008. Towards Brazilian 

Portuguese Automatic Text Simplification Systems. In 

Proceedings of The Eight ACM Symposium on Doc-

ument Engineering (DocEng 2008),  240-248, São 

Paulo, Brasil. 
Eckhard Bick. 2000. The Parsing System "Palavras": 

Automatic Grammatical Analysis of Portuguese in a 

Constraint Grammar Framework. PhD thesis. Aa-

rhus University. 

Arnaldo Candido Junior, Erick Maziero, Caroline Gas-

perin, Thiago Pardo, Lucia Specia and Sandra M. A-

luisio. 2009. Supporting the Adaptation of Texts for 

Poor Literacy Readers: a Text Simplification Editor 
for Brazilian Portuguese. In the Proceedings of the 

NAACL HLT Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP 

for Building Educational Applications, pages 34–42, 

Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. 

Caroline Gasperin; Lucia Specia; Tiago Pereira and  

Sandra Aluísio. 2009. Learning When to Simplify 

Sentences for Natural Text Simplification. In: Pro-

ceedings of ENIA 2009,  809-818. 
Caroline Gasperin, Erick Masiero and Sandra M. Alui-

sio. 2010. Challenging choices for text simplifica-

tion. Accepted for publication in Propor 2010 

(http://www.inf.pucrs.br/~propor2010/). 

Arthur Graesser, Danielle McNamara, Max  Louwerse 

and Zhiqiang Cai. 2004. Coh-Metrix: Analysis of 

text on cohesion and language. In: Behavioral Re-

search Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 36, 
páginas 193-202. 

INAF. 2009. Instituto P. Montenegro and Ação Educa-

tiva. INAF Brasil - Indicador de Alfabetismo Funcio-

nal - 2009. Online available at http://www.ibope. 

com.br/ipm/relatorios/relatorio_inaf_2009.pdf  

Advaith Siddharthan. 2003. Syntactic Simplification and 

Text Cohesion. PhD Thesis. University of 

Cambridge. 
Lucia Specia, Sandra Aluisio and Tiago Pardo. 2008. 

Manual de Simplificação Sintática para o Português. 

Technical Report NILC-TR-08-06, 27 p. Junho 2008, 

São Carlos-SP. 

Willian Watanabe, Arnaldo Candido Junior, Vinícius 

Uzêda, Renata Fortes, Tiago Pardo and Sandra Aluí-

sio. 2009. Facilita: reading assistance for low-

literacy readers. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM In-
ternational Conference on Design of Communication. 

SIGDOC '09. ACM, New York, NY, 29-36.  

44


