










































Testing a Grammar Customization System with Sahaptin


Human Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 254–262,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Testing a Grammar Customization System with Sahaptin

Scott Drellishak
University of Washington

Seattle, WA, USA
sfd@u.washington.edu

Abstract

I briefly describe a system for automatically
creating an implemented grammar of a natu-
ral language based on answers to a web-based
questionnaire, then present a grammar of Sa-
haptin, a language of the Pacific Northwest
with complex argument-marking and agree-
ment patterns, that was developed to test the
system. The development of this grammar
has proved useful in three ways: (1) verifying
the correct functioning of the grammar cus-
tomization system, (2) motivating the addition
of a new pattern of agreement to the system,
and (3) making detailed predictions that un-
covered gaps in the linguistic descriptions of
Sahaptin.

1 Introduction

The LinGO Grammar Matrix
(Bender et al., 2002) is a resource for building im-
plemented precision HPSG (Pollard and Sag, 1994)
grammars of natural languages. Grammars based
on the Matrix are expressed in the Type Description
Language (TDL) (Krieger and Schäfer, 1994), are
interpretable by the Linguistic Knowledge Building
system (LKB) (Copestake, 2002) (a software tool
for developing constraint-based grammars), and
have semantic representations that are compat-
ible with Minimal Recursion Semantics (MRS)
(Copestake et al., 2005). The Grammar Matrix
project, in particular the customization system
described below, has drawn on the linguistics and
linguistic typology literature during its develop-
ment; the system is now complex enough that it is
capable making contributions back to linguistics.

1.1 Matrix Customization System

In its earliest form, the Matrix provided a set of pre-
defined types intended to give grammar engineers
a head start, allowing them to avoid duplicating
the effort required to develop analyses of linguistic
structures thought to occur in all languages. How-
ever, there exist many linguistic phenomena that are
widespread, but not universal. If the Matrix were
restricted to supporting only what is truly univer-
sal, it would be a much less useful resource for
grammar-writers working on languages containing
such non-universal phenomena. Our solution has
been to provide the Matrix customization system,
which presents a linguist with a web-based typologi-
cal questionnaire designed to elicit a description of a
target language and, based on it, automatically pro-
duce a grammar that parses and generates the target
language.1 The grammars produced are not encum-
bered by phenomena that do not occur in the target
language; rather, they contain just enough complex-
ity to model it as described. Although the grammars
produced by the customization system are intended
as a starting point for further grammar engineering,
that starting point is now far enough along that even
without enhancement the grammars can be used for
interesting linguistic work.

The customization system is conceived of as con-
sisting of a set of libraries, each of which sup-
ports a particular linguistic phenomenon, and in-
cludes a section of the questionnaire and a syntac-
tic analysis of the target phenomenon that can be

1A frozen version of the customization sys-
tem as described here can be found on the Web at
depts.washington.edu/uwcl/matrix/sfddiss/.

254



customized and included in output grammars. Re-
cently, I have added three new libraries to the sys-
tem (Drellishak, 2009). A library for case-marking
supports a variety of patterns for the marking of up
to two mandatory verbal arguments, including the
nominative-accusative, ergative-absolutive, and tri-
partite patterns, as well as various split-ergative sys-
tems and Austronesian alignment (see Blake (2001)
for definitions of these terms). A library for agree-
ment supports agreement in syntactic and seman-
tic features between verbs and their arguments. Fi-
nally, a library for so-called direct-inverse argument
marking supports languages in which the mark-
ing of verbs and verbal arguments is conditioned
on a grammatical scale—for example, languages
in which clauses with a first person subject and a
second person object are marked differently than
clauses with a second person subject and a first per-
son object. Languages can contain none, some, or all
of these phenomena, and the customization system
must produce consistent grammars for every combi-
nation.

1.2 Testing the Customization System

Work to add new libraries to the customization sys-
tem is ongoing. Since the grammatical analyses
of different phenomena can interact in unexpected
ways, we utilize a system of regression testing to
verify that the implementation new libraries does not
break older libraries.

A customization system regression test consists
of three parts. First, each test includes a stored
set of answers to the questionnaire describing a lan-
guage that illustrates one or more linguistic phenom-
ena; this can be fed into the customization system
to create a grammar. Second, each test has a list
of strings, some grammatical and some ungrammat-
ical in the test’s language, that probe the behavior
of the grammar with respect to the phenomena in
question. Third, each test has the expected results,
including semantic representations in the format of
Oepen (2001), that are produced by the grammar
when it parses the test sentences.

At the time of this writing, the regression test suite
includes 112 tests that fall roughly into two cate-
gories. The first category contains small artificial
languages that illustrate a single phenomenon (e.g.
nominative-accusative case marking or a particular

word order). The second category contains larger
grammars based on natural languages that illustrate
a wider range of phenomena, and therefore test the
interaction of the associated libraries. The largest
and most complex test in the latter category is the
regression test for Sahaptin.

2 Sahaptin

Sahaptin [uma] (Penutian) is a family of closely re-
lated dialects spoken in Washington, Idaho, and Ore-
gon. The details of Sahaptin grammar are drawn
primarily from a description of the language by
Rigsby and Rude (1996) (henceforth R&R). It hap-
pens that Sahaptin contains extremely complex ar-
gument marking and agreement patterns that illus-
trate, in a single grammar, a number of phenom-
ena covered by my recently-implemented Matrix li-
braries, including:

• Case marking on verbal arguments.
• Argument marking sensitive to a grammatical

scale, including patterns analyzed here as prox-
imate and obviative marking on third-person
nominals.

• Two loci of agreement (a verbal prefix and a
second-position enclitic) with both the subject
and the object.

• A distinction in number between singular, dual,
and plural on nominals, but only between sin-
gular and plural on agreement morphology.

• An inclusive/exclusive distinction in person re-
flected only in the second-position enclitic.

2.1 Sahaptin Grammar

This section contains a brief sketch of the structure
of Sahaptin sentences. Consider the following sim-
ple sentence:

(1) ín=aš á-tux
˙

nana yáamaš-na
I=1SG 3ABS-shot mule.deer-OBJ
‘I shot the mule deer.’ [uma]
(Rigsby and Rude, 1996, 676)

In (1) the first word consists of the first person sin-
gular pronoun in its unmarked form, the nominative,
followed by a second-position enclitic that agrees
with the pronoun. The second word is the verb, con-
sisting of a verbal prefix appropriate to the person
and number of the subject and object (glossed by

255



R&R as 3ABS, but see §3.6 below for a different
analysis) and the verb stem. The third word consists
of the noun stem meaning ‘mule deer’ and a suffix
marking the objective case.

R&R describe several cases in Sahaptin, includ-
ing an unmarked “nominative” case, a marked “ob-
jective” case, an “inverse ergative” case, and an “ob-
viative ergative” case. In spite of their use of the
term “ergative”, R&R make it clear that the sub-
ject generally appears in the nominative case in both
transitive and intransitive clauses, and that the object
consistently appears in the objective case in transi-
tive clauses. The “inverse ergative” and “obviative
ergative” forms only occur with third person singu-
lar nominals, both nouns and pronouns, in addition
to the subject and object forms, and they are used to
distinguish the subject from the object in transitive
clauses.

In addition to case marking on nominals, Sahap-
tin has two ways to cross-reference the arguments of
verbs: a verbal prefix and a second-position enclitic
that attaches to whichever word comes first in the
sentence. R&R characterize the prefixes and encl-
itics in two ways: first, they provide a general de-
scription of the distribution of each; second, they
provide detailed paradigms of intransitive and tran-
sitive sentence patterns that cover most, but not all,
of the logical combinations.

Enclitic Description
=naš ∼ =aš ∼ =š “first-person singular”
=na “first-person plural

inclusive”
=nataš ∼ =ataš ∼ =taš “first-person plural

exclusive”
=nam ∼ =am ∼ =m “second-person singular”
=pam “second-person plural”
=maš “second-person object

with first-person subject
(both singular)”

=mataš “second-person object
with first-person subject
(one or both plural)”

Table 1: Sahaptin enclitics (Rigsby and Rude, 1996, 675)

R&R describe Sahaptin’s second-position encli-
tics as shown in Table 1. Notice in particular that
several of the enclitics are associated with a per-

son and number, but R&R do not mention whether
those values are associated with the subject or the
object. The reason for this becomes clear when we
examine the full paradigm of clauses. The enclitic
=nataš, for example, occurs with first person plural
exclusive subjects in intransitive clauses; in transi-
tive clauses, however, it occurs when one argument
is first person plural exclusive and the other is third
person, regardless of which is the subject and which
is the object. A similar pattern can be observed for
=na and =naš. This variant of scale-sensitive ar-
gument marking motivated an enhancement to the
customization system described in §5 below.

Prefix Description
i- “third-person nominative”
pa- “third-person plural nominative”
á- ∼ áw- “third-person absolutive”
pá- “inverse”
patá- ∼ patáw- “third-person plural subject with

third-person object”

Table 2: Sahaptin prefixes (Rigsby and Rude, 1996, 675)

As for Sahaptin’s verbal prefixes, R&R describe
them as shown in Table 2.2 These descriptions are
less straightforward than those for the enclitics. In
particular, the description of á- ∼ áw- as “absolu-
tive” is misleading. Regarding that prefix, R&R
write, “...this pronominal marks subjects in intran-
sitive clauses when they are possessors, and objects
in transitive clauses when the subject is first or sec-
ond person.” (675) In other words, it does not occur
in all transitive clauses, and only in those intransi-
tive clauses where the subject is possessive. Fur-
thermore, all the prefixes above appear on the verb,
not the nominal arguments, as one might expect for
an “absolutive” affix. In spite of the use of the term
“absolutive”, the distribution of the prefix á- ∼ áw-
does not give evidence of ergative alignment in Sa-
haptin. Similarly, although there is evidence of argu-
ment marking sensitive to a grammatical scale, the
description of pá- as “inverse” is misleading, since
that prefix does not appear if and only if the object
outranks the subject.

2There are three further verbal prefixes in Sahaptin that mark
reflexives and reciprocals, but there is currently no support for
these phenomena in the customization system.

256



3 Sahaptin Test Case

The phenomena described above make Sahaptin an
excellent test case for demonstrating the flexibility
and expressive power of the customization system.
In this section, I will show how a significant frag-
ment of Sahaptin can be described in the customiza-
tion system questionnaire, producing a grammar that
correctly models some of the complexity of Sahap-
tin morphosyntax.

It should be noted that some aspects of Sahap-
tin are beyond the current capabilities of the cus-
tomization system, so some simplifying assump-
tions were necessary. For instance, the customiza-
tion system models complex morphosyntax but not
complex morphophonology. In effect, the grammars
it outputs expect a morpheme-by-morpheme gloss as
input rather than orthography, leaving the problem
of morphological analysis to other systems.3 The
Sahaptin test grammar therefore uses only a single
spelling for each stem and morpheme, and the mor-
phemes are separated by ‘-’ or ‘=’ characters. The
facts of Sahaptin word order are also too complex
for the customization system; in particular, it can-
not model truly free word order (i.e., discontinuous
noun phrases), and the attachment behavior of the
second-position enclitic is similarly beyond its ca-
pability. However, given these simplifying assump-
tions, the customization system is capable of model-
ing all the agreement and marking patterns of Sa-
haptin intransitive and transitive clauses shown in
Tables 7 and 8 in R&R (1996, 676).

After the design and implementation of the li-
braries for case, direct-inverse languages, and agree-
ment were completed, the construction of the Sa-
haptin test case took only about 80 hours of work,
including the creation of test sentences (described
in more detail in §4 below), a linguistic analysis of
Sahaptin, filling out the questionnaire to reflect that
analysis, and debugging the answers to the question-
naire.

3.1 Word Order

In the test grammar, I treat Sahaptin as a VSO lan-
guage, and the enclitic as a suffix on verbs. This

3The construction of such systems is well-understood
(Beesley and Karttunen, 2003), as is the method for hooking up
such a system to the LKB.

means that the sentences recognized and generated
by the grammar are in a legal word order—VSO sen-
tences with the verb followed by the second-position
enclitic are grammatical in Sahaptin—but there are
other legal word orders that the test grammar will not
accept. The analysis of the enclitic is therefore lim-
ited by the current capabilities of the customization
system’s word order library; however, if that library
is enhanced in the future to support second-position
clitics, the analysis presented below should transfer
straightforwardly.

3.2 Number

I analyze Sahaptin as having three values of number:
singular (sg), dual (du), and plural (pl). All three
values are distinguished on pronouns, as shown in
Table 3; however, agreement with enclitics and ver-
bal prefixes only shows a singular/plural distinction
(with dual pronouns agreeing with the plural mor-
pheme). It will be necessary in several places for the
grammar to refer to a non-singular category cover-
ing du and pl. The questionnaire allows the explicit
description of such a category; however, it also al-
lows the user to select multiple values for a feature,
and from those values infers the existence of cate-
gories like non-singular. I have made use of the lat-
ter mechanism in this grammar.

Table 3 shows the Sahaptin pronoun forms that
distinguish singular, dual, and plural; in the ques-
tionnaire, therefore, I specified a number value on
each. So-called plural agreement morphemes, on the
other hand, do not distinguish between the dual and
plural so are simply specified as covering both val-
ues.

3.3 Person

Sahaptin distinguishes three values of person: first,
second, and third. The enclitics (but, interestingly,
not the pronouns) further distinguish a first person
inclusive and first person exclusive. I filled out the
person section of the questionnaire with answers re-
flecting the presence of an inclusive/exclusive dis-
tinction.

3.4 Case

As described above, Sahaptin has a nominative case
that marks intransitive and transitive subjects and an
objective case that marks transitive objects. This

257



Singular Dual Plural
Subject Object Subject Object Subject Object

1 ín ináy napiiní napiinamanáy náma naamanáy
2 ím imanáy imiiní imiinamanáy imáy imaamanáy
3 p(́n paanáy piiní piinamanáy pmáy paamanáy
3 obv erg piiní
3 inv erg pn(́m

Table 3: Umatilla Sahaptin Pronouns (Rigsby and Rude, 1996, 682–683)

is the common nominative-accusative pattern, so in
the case section of the questionnaire I describe it as
such. Note that I do not analyze the inverse ergative
and obviative ergative as case; see §3.6 for details.

3.5 Direct-Inverse

I analyze Sahaptin as a direct-inverse language—
that is, a language whose argument marking is sen-
sitive to a grammatical scale—though one that lacks
clear direct or inverse forms of the verb, with the ex-
ception of the pá- prefix. The scale I propose for
Sahaptin is:

(2) 1P > 2P > 3P topic > 3P non-topic

The customization system interprets this scale,
creating a series of rules that constrain the value of
a feature DIRECTION on verbs. This feature takes
the values direct and inverse and can be used to con-
strain the form either of verbs themselves or of their
arguments.

3.6 Other Features

I use two additional features in my analysis of Sa-
haptin: a semantic TOPICALITY feature and a syn-
tactic PROXIMITY feature, both on nominals.

Marking of Sahaptin transitive clauses distin-
guishes between topical and non-topical third person
arguments. There is no overt marking of topicality
on nominals, but clausal marking is conditioned on
pragmatic distinctions that influence the felicity of
the sentence in different discourse contexts. In order
to systematically test this aspect of Sahaptin gram-
mar in terms of string grammaticality, I introduced
an artificial mark on topical noun phrases, the suffix
-TOP. This suffix constrains the value of the TOPI-
CALITY feature on nominal indices.

I use the syntactic PROXIMITY feature to model
the “inverse ergative” and “obviative ergative” forms

of nominals. In Sahaptin transitive clauses, the in-
verse ergative occurs precisely when the subject is
third person singular and the clause is inverse (that
is, the object is higher on the scale). The obviative
ergative occurs in exactly one case: when the sub-
ject is third person singular and the object is a top-
ical third person singular. These “ergative” forms
function very much like the so-called proximate and
obviative forms in Algonquian languages. However,
in contrast to those languages, I analyze Sahaptin as
having three values of the PROXIMITY feature rather
than two: proximate, corresponding to the inverse
ergative -n(́m, which promotes the marked nominal
up the scale; obviative, corresponding to the obvia-
tive ergative -in, which demotes the marked nomi-
nal down the scale; and neutral, the unmarked form,
which does not affect the nominal’s position on the
scale.4

3.7 Lexicon

Having defined the necessary features and values,
we can now describe the lexicon of the Sahaptin
grammar, which includes lexical types and inflec-
tional morphemes. In the questionnaire, inflectional
morphology is described as a series of slots, each at-
taching to one or more lexical types or other slots,
and each containing one or more morphemes, each
of which in turn specifies features. In order to pre-
vent spurious ambiguity, the features on each set of
morphemes are specified in such a way that no mor-
pheme overlaps another, but also so that no legal
combination of features goes unexpressed.

The simplest grammars are those that do not re-
sort to homophony—that is, they do not have mul-
tiple lexical items or morphemes with the same

4Note that, for consistency with R&R’s description, I
nonetheless continue to refer to the marked forms as the “in-
verse ergative” and “obviative ergative”.

258



spelling but different semantics or features. It is of-
ten possible to avoid homophony by adding com-
plexity to feature hierarchies, but overly complex
hierarchies can be as difficult to manage as exten-
sive homophony. In the Sahaptin grammar, I have
attempted to strike a balance between homophony
and hierarchy complexity. For example, to make the
grammar easier for users to understand, I segregated
verbal prefixes and enclitics each into two classes:
those attaching to intransitive stems and those at-
taching to transitive stems. This produced two ho-
mophonous variants of the prefixes i- and pa-, and of
the enclitics =naš, =na, =nataš, =nam, and =pam.
Furthermore, the distributions of two transitive pre-
fixes (pá- and the null variant) and of three transi-
tive enclitics (=nam, =pam, and =mataš) were eas-
ier to model using homophonous variants. Finally,
the third person singular obviative pronoun and the
third person dual subject pronoun are both piiní (as
shown in Table 3) and it seemed simplest to repre-
sent these using two separate lexical entries. The
grammar, then, contains 22 lexical items, of which
only two are homophonous, and 24 non-null inflec-
tional morphemes representing 12 distinctly spelled
prefixes and enclitics.

A full description of the morphosyntactic details
of the Sahaptin test grammar would be too long for
this paper; instead, I will provide a summary.5 The
lexicon of the test grammar contains six inflectional
slots: a slot for the topic morpheme described above
that attaches to nominals; a slot for verbal prefixes
that attach to intransitive verbs; a slot for verbal pre-
fixes that attach to transitive verbs; a slot for encl-
itics that attach to intransitive verbs; a slot for en-
clitics that attach to transitive verbs; and a slot that
contains no overt morphemes, but is used to produce
lexical rules that constrain the appearance of topic,
proximate, and obviative on a verb’s nominal argu-
ments. Each of these slots contains morphemes, on
which are specified values for one or more features.
To give an idea of what this looks like, Table 4 shows

5The full details of the Sahaptin grammar can be found
in my dissertation (Drellishak, 2009). How the ques-
tionnaire can be filled out to model Sahaptin can be
seen by visiting the customization system web site at
depts.washington.edu/uwcl/matrix/sfddiss/
and clicking the Umatilla Sahaptin link at the bottom of the
main page, which fills out the questionnaire automatically.

the features that are defined for the most complex of
these slots, the one that contains transitive prefixes.

4 Testing the Sahaptin Grammar

In order to test the correctness of the Sahaptin gram-
mar, it was necessary to create a suite of test sen-
tences, some grammatical and some not, that probe
its expected lexical and grammatical coverage. I
started with the sentence patterns in R&R’s Tables
7 and 8 (Rigsby and Rude, 1996, 676); from each, I
created a sentence with the appropriate prefix, verb,
enclitic, subject, and object. In every case where
a plural argument was called for, I actually cre-
ated two sentences, one with a dual argument—and
in cases with two plural arguments, I created four:
du/du, du/pl, pl/du, and pl/pl.

All these sentences were expected to be gram-
matical based on the descriptions in R&R. To gen-
erate ungrammatical sentences, I initially permuted
the grammatical sentences in the following ways:

1. For each grammatical sentence with a prefix, I
created an ungrammatical variant with the pre-
fix missing.

2. For each grammatical sentence with an enclitic,
I created an ungrammatical variant with the en-
clitic missing.

3. For each grammatical sentence, I created vari-
ants that contained every incorrect prefix and
variants that contained every incorrect enclitic.

After duplicates were removed, this produced a
list of 89 grammatical and 220 ungrammatical sen-
tences, for a total of 309.

The permutation of the grammatical sentences as
described above was sufficient to test the phenom-
ena of interest for intransitive sentences, producing
ungrammatical sentences consisting of correctly-
formed words in the correct basic word order but
with an ungrammatical agreement pattern, and this
permutation was a small enough job to perform by
hand. For transitive sentences, though, there is a
much larger space of sentences with the right word
order but wrong agreement, so in order to test the
grammar thoroughly, I decided to supplement the
ungrammatical sentences I created by hand by writ-
ing a small program to generate every sentence con-
taining the verb q’ínun ‘see’ that followed the pattern:

259



Transitive Subject Subject Object Object
prefix PERNUM TOPICALITY PERNUM TOPICALITY
i- 3sg non-topic
pa- 3du, 3pl non-topic
á- 1st, 2nd 3rd
pá- 2sg 1sg
pá- 3sg non-topic 3sg topic
patá- 3du, 3pl non-topic 3sg topic
∅ 1st 2nd
∅ 2du, 2pl 1st
∅ 2sg 1du, 1pl

Table 4: Morphemes appearing in the transitive prefix slot

(3) prefix-q’ínun=enclitic subject object

The possible fillers for each position in (3) are
shown in Table 5:

prefix i-, pa-, á-, pá-, patá-, and ∅
enclitic =naš, =na, =nataš, =nam, =pam,

=maš, =mataš, and ∅
subject subject forms in Table 3
object object forms in Table 3

Table 5: Fillers for positions in (3)

As mentioned above, the lexicon of the Sahaptin
grammar, and consequently the test sentences, uses
the various forms of the personal pronoun to rep-
resent the possible person, number, case, and prox-
imity values of subject and object noun phrases. In
addition to plain case-marked pronouns, the subject
and object positions may also contain third person
pronouns marked as the topic with -TOP.

Generating every sentence that followed the pat-
tern in (3) produced 6048 sentences, but some ad-
ditional filtering was required. First, since it ap-
pears that topic marking is only relevant when dis-
ambiguating third person arguments, I removed all
sentences where the -TOP suffix appeared with a
first or second person pronoun. Second, 192 of the
permutations of (3) are actually duplicates of the
ungrammatical transitive test sentences created by
hand above, so I removed those as well. After fil-
tering, a total of 5856 programmatically-generated
sentences remained. Added to the aforementioned
309 examples, this made 6165 unique test sentences.

After using the customization system to generate

a grammar of Sahaptin, I used that grammar to at-
tempt to parse every test sentence. All 89 sentences
corresponding to R&R’s grammatical transitive and
intransitive patterns parsed and were assigned ex-
actly one analysis.6 Among the ungrammatical sen-
tences, 5848 out of 5856 failed to parse, as expected.
To my surprise, however, eight of the sentences did
parse. These sentences were:

(4) a. i-q’ínun p(́n-TOP piinamanáy
3SG-see 3SG.NOM-TOP 3DU.OBJ
‘He saw them (DU).’

b. i-q’ínun p(́n-TOP paamanáy
3SG-see 3SG.NOM-TOP 3PL.OBJ
‘He saw them.’

c. pa-q’ínun piiní paanáy
3NONSG-see 3DU.NOM 3SG.OBJ
‘They (DU) saw him.’

d. pa-q’ínun pmáy paanáy
3NONSG-see 3PL.NOM 3SG.OBJ
‘They saw him.’

e. pa-q’ínun piiní-TOP piinamanáy
3NONSG-see 3DU.NOM-TOP 3DU.OBJ
‘They (DU) saw them (DU).’

f. pa-q’ínun piiní-TOP paamanáy
3NONSG-see 3DU.NOM-TOP 3PL.OBJ
‘They (DU) saw them.’

g. pa-q’ínun pmáy-TOP piinamanáy
3NONSG-see 3PL.NOM-TOP 3DU.OBJ
‘They saw them (DU).’

h. pa-q’ínun pmáy-TOP paamanáy
3NONSG-see 3PL-TOP.NOM 3PL.OBJ
‘They saw them.’

6Multiple analyses would not necessarily have been
wrong—some sentences in some languages are structurally
ambiguous—but the grammatical Sahaptin sentences in the test
suite are marked explicitly enough for agreement that none was
ambiguous.

260



Notice that the eight sentences fall into three pat-
terns. The first two sentences have a third person sin-
gular topical subject and a third person non-singular
non-topical object, the next two have a third person
non-singular non-topical subject and a third person
singular non-topical object, and the last four have a
third person non-singular topical subject and a third
person non-topical object. These are precisely the
patterns that are absent from R&R’s Table 8; corre-
sponding sentences were therefore not included in
the list of 89 grammatical sentences. In develop-
ing the Sahaptin grammar, I had, without consider-
ing these eight patterns, defined the prefixes in such
a way that the grammar expected i- to appear in the
first two sentences and pa- in the last six.

In order to determine whether this analysis was
correct, Sharon Hargus presented the Yakima Sahap-
tin equivalents of the sentences in (4) by telephone
to Virginia Beavert, a native speaker of that dialect,
who accepted all eight of them with the readings
shown in (4). Note that, in order for these sentences
to be acceptable, they had to be cast in the past tense,
a feature not modeled in my Sahaptin grammar frag-
ment. Note also that Dr. Beavert considered sen-
tence (4c) somewhat less acceptable, saying that it
is “[a] little awkward, but has meaning.”

The Sahaptin grammar, then, which was created
using the customization system and based on its sup-
port for case, direct-inverse languages, and agree-
ment, correctly analysed all 6165 of the test sen-
tences, including eight that fell outside of the pat-
terns described in the linguistic literature.

5 Summary and Discussion

Based on these results, I conclude that even Sahap-
tin, a language with extremely complex argument
marking morphology, can be modeled using the cus-
tomization system. Note that the system was not de-
signed with the facts of Sahaptin in mind, and with
two exceptions, the system did not need to be modi-
fied to enable it to handle Sahaptin.

One of the exceptions was trivial: formerly, gram-
mars produced by the system treated ‘=’ as punctua-
tion, stripping it out and breaking words containing
it. The other exception concerns an unusual agree-
ment pattern I first encountered in Sahaptin: mor-
phemes that agree, not with the subject or the object

of a verb, but with the nominal argument that is more
highly ranked on the direct-inverse scale. Support-
ing this agreement pattern proved worthwhile later,
when it was used again in a test grammar for Plains
Cree [crk] (Algonquian), another direct-inverse lan-
guage. Although this latter change was a substan-
tive one that allows grammars to be described more
compactly, it did not increase the descriptive power
of the system—languages showing that pattern of
agreement could still be modeled using duplicated,
homophonous morphemes. Such an enhancement to
the system is an example of the feedback loop be-
tween grammar engineering and customization sys-
tem development, where new languages with new
phenomena (or new variations of old phenomena)
inform the design and, in some cases, the descrip-
tive power of the system.

After constructing the Sahaptin grammar and test
suite described here, it was natural to include it in
two places in the customization system. First, it
is now one of the regression tests that is regularly
run to ensure that future enhancement of the system
does not break earlier features. Second, Sahaptin
has been added to the list of sample grammars ac-
cessible from the main page of the questionnaire—
by clicking on links in this list, users can see detailed
examples of how the questionnaire can be filled out
to model a target language.

The Sahaptin grammar, developed using the cus-
tomization system, has proved itself useful—not
only to the Grammar Matrix project, where it in-
spired the addition of support for scale-sensitive
agreement and serves as a regression test of the cor-
rect functioning of the system, but also to the field
of linguistics. By analyzing Sahaptin in the precise
detail required by the customization system, I found
unnoticed gaps in linguistic descriptions of the lan-
guage, and in collaboration with linguists studying
the language was able to help resolve those gaps.

Acknowledgments

My thanks go to Emily Bender and the Matrix team,
Sharon Hargus, and Virginia Beavert. This work
was supported by a gift to the Turing Center from
the Utilika Foundation, by the Max Planck Institute
for Evolutionary Anthropology, and by the National
Science Foundation under Grant No. 0644097.

261



References

[Beesley and Karttunen2003] Kenneth R. Beesley and
Lauri Karttunen. 2003. Finite State Morphology.
CSLI, Stanford.

[Bender et al.2002] Emily M. Bender, Dan Flickinger,
and Stephan Oepen. 2002. The grammar matrix. In
Proceedings of COLING 2002 Workshop on Grammar
Engineering and Evaluation, Taipei, Taiwan.

[Blake2001] Barry J. Blake. 2001. Case, Second Edition.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

[Copestake et al.2005] Ann Copestake, Dan Flickinger,
Carl Pollard, and Ivan A. Sag. 2005. Minimal re-
cursion semantics: An introduction. Research on Lan-
guage & Computation, 3(2–3):281–332.

[Copestake2002] Ann Copestake. 2002. Implementing
Typed Feature Structure Grammars. CSLI, Stanford.

[Drellishak2009] Scott Drellishak. 2009. Widespread,
but Not Universal: Improving the Typological Cover-
age of the Grammar Matrix. Ph.D. thesis, University
of Washington.

[Krieger and Schäfer1994] Hans-Ulrich Krieger and Ul-
rich Schäfer. 1994. Tdl – a type description language
for constraint-based grammars. In Proceedings of the
15th International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 893–899, Kyoto, Japan.

[Oepen2001] Stephan Oepen. 2001. [incr tsdb()] —
Competence and performance laboratory. User man-
ual. Technical report, Saarbrücken, Germany.

[Pollard and Sag1994] Carl Pollard and Ivan A. Sag.
1994. Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar.
CSLI, Stanford.

[Rigsby and Rude1996] Bruce Rigsby and Noel Rude.
1996. Sketch of sahaptin, a sahaptian language.
In Ives Goddard, editor, Languages, pages 666–92.
Smithsonian Institution, Washington DC.

262


