










































Evaluating a Morphological Analyser of Inuktitut


2012 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 372–376,
Montréal, Canada, June 3-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Evaluating a Morphological Analyser of Inuktitut

Jeremy Nicholson†, Trevor Cohn‡ and Timothy Baldwin†
†Department of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Australia

‡Department of Computer Science, The University of Sheffield, UK
jeremymn@csse.unimelb.edu.au, tcohn@dcs.shef.ac.uk, tb@ldwin.net

Abstract

We evaluate the performance of an morpho-
logical analyser for Inuktitut across a medium-
sized corpus, where it produces a useful anal-
ysis for two out of every three types. We
then compare its segmentation to that of sim-
pler approaches to morphology, and use these
as a pre-processing step to a word alignment
task. Our observations show that the richer ap-
proaches provide little as compared to simply
finding the head, which is more in line with
the particularities of the task.

1 Introduction

In this work, we evaluate a morphological analyser
of Inuktitut, whose polysynthetic morphosyntax can
cause particular problems for natural language pro-
cessing; but our observations are also relevant to
other languages with rich morphological systems.
The existing NLP task for Inuktitut is that of word
alignment (Martin et al., 2005), where Inuktitut to-
kens align to entire English clauses. While Langlais
et al. (2005) theorises that a morphological analyser
could aid in this task, we observed little to no im-
provement over a baseline model by making use of
its segmentation. Nonetheless, morphological anal-
ysis does provide a great deal of information, but the
task structure tends to disprefer its contribution.

2 Background

2.1 Inuktitut
Inuktitut is a macrolanguage of many more-or-less
mutually intelligible dialects (Gordon, 2005). The

morphosyntax of Inuktitut is particularly marked by
a rich polysynthetic suffixing morphology, including
incorporation of arguments into verbal tokens, as in
natsiviniqtulauqsimavilli in (1). This phenomenon
causes an individual token in Inuktitut to be approx-
imately equivalent to an entire clause in English.

(1) natsiq-
seal

-viniq-
meat

-tuq-
eat

-lauq-
before

-sima-
ever

-vit
INT-2s

-li
but

“But have you ever eaten seal meat before?”

Lowe (1996) analyses the morphology as a four-
place relationship: one head morpheme, zero or
more lexical morphemes, one or more grammatical
morphemes, and an optional enclitic. The morpho-
tactics causes, amongst other phenomena, the final
consonant of a morpheme to assimilate the manner
of the initial consonant of the following morpheme
(as in -villi), or to be dropped (as in natsiviniq-).
Consequently, morphemes are not readily accessible
from the realised surface form, thereby motivating
the use of a morphological analyser.

2.2 Morphological analysis
For many languages with a less rich morphol-
ogy than Inuktitut, an inflectional lexicon is of-
ten adequate for morphological analysis (for exam-
ple, CELEX for English (Burnage, 1990), Lefff for
French (Sagot et al., 2006) or Adolphs (2008) for
German). Another typical approach is to perform
morphological analysis at the same time as POS tag-
ging (as in Hajič and Hladká (1998) for the fusional
morphology in Czech), as it is often the case that

372



determining the part-of-speech and choosing the ap-
propriate inflectional paradigm are closely linked.

For highly inflecting languages more generally,
morphological analysis is often treated as a segment-
and-normalise problem, amenable to analysis by
weighted finite state transducer (wFST), for exam-
ple, Creutz and Lagus (2002) for Finnish.

3 Resources

3.1 A morphological analyser for Inuktitut
The main resource that we are evaluating in this
work is a morphological analyser of Inuktitut called
Uqa·Ila·Ut.1 It is a rule-based system based on reg-
ular morphological variations of about 3200 head,
350 lexical, and 1500 grammatical morphemes, with
heuristics for ranking the various readings. The head
and lexical morphemes are collated with glosses in
both English and French.

3.2 Word alignment
The training corpus we use in our experiments is a
sentence-aligned segment of the Nunavut Hansards
(Martin et al., 2003). The corpus consists of about
340K sentences, which comprise about 4.0M En-
glish tokens, and 2.2M Inuktitut. The challenge of
the morphology becomes apparent when we contrast
these figures with the types: about 416K for Inukti-
tut, but only 27K for English. On average, there are
only 5 token instances per Inuktitut type; some 338K
types (81%) are singletons.

Inuktitut formed part of one of the shared tasks
in the ACL 2005 workshop on building and us-
ing parallel texts (Martin et al., 2005); for this, the
above corpus was simplistically tokenised, and used
as unsupervised training data. 100 sentences from
this corpus were phrasally aligned by Inuit anno-
tators. These were then extended into word align-
ments, where phrasal alignments of one token in
both the source and target were (generally) called
sure alignments, and one-to-many or many-to-many
mappings were extended to their cartesian product,
and called probable. The test set was composed of
75 of these sentences (about 2K English tokens, 800
Inuktitut tokens, 293 gold-standard sure alignments,

1http://inuktitutcomputing.ca/Uqailaut/
en/IMA.html

and 1679 probable), which we use to evaluate word
alignments.

Our treatment of the alignment problem is most
similar to Schafer and Drábek (2005) who examine
four systems: GIZA++ models (Och and Ney, 2000)
for each source-target direction, another where the
Inuktitut input has been syllabised, and a wFST
model. They observe that aggregating these results
through voting can create a very competitive system
for Inuktitut word alignment.

4 Experimental approach

We used an out-of-the-box implementation of the
Berkeley Aligner (DeNero and Klein, 2007), a com-
petitive word alignment system, to construct an un-
supervised alignment over the 75 test sentences,
based on the larger training corpus. The default
implementation of the system involves two jointly-
trained HMMs (one for each source-target direc-
tion) over five iterations,2 with so-called compet-
itive thresholding in the decoding step; these are
more fully described in DeNero and Klein (2007)
and Liang et al. (2006).

Our approach examines morphological pre-
processing of the Inuktitut training and test sets,
with the idea of leveraging the morphological in-
formation into a corpus which is more amenable to
alignment. The raw corpus appears to be under-
segmented, where data sparseness from the many
singletons would prevent reliable alignments. Seg-
mentation might aid in this process by making sub-
lexical units with semantic overlap transparent to the
alignment system, so that types appear to have a
greater frequency through the data. Through this,
we attempt to examine the hypothesis that one-to-
one alignments between English and Inuktitut would
hold with the right segmentation. On the other hand,
oversegmentation (for example, down to the charac-
ter level) can leave the resulting sub-lexical items se-
mantically meaningless and cause spurious matches.

We consider five different ways of tackling Inuk-
titut morphology:

1. None: simply treat each Inuktitut token as a
monolithic entity. This is our baseline ap-
proach.

2Better performance was observed with three iterations, but
we preferred to maintain the default parameters of the system.

373



2. Head: attempt to separate the head morpheme
from the non-head periphery. Our hypothesis
is that we will be able to align the clausal head
more reliably, as it tends to correspond to a sin-
gle English token more reliably than the other
morphemes, which may not be realised in the
same manner in English. Head morphs in Inuk-
titut correspond to the first one or two syllables
of a token; we treated them uniformly as two
syllables, as other values caused a substantial
degredation in performance.

3. Syllabification: treat the text as if Inuktitut
had isolating morphology, and transform each
token into a series of single-syllable pseudo-
morphs. This effectively turns the task on its
head, from a primarily one Inukitut-to-many
English token problem to that of one English-
to-many Inuktitut. Despite the overzealousness
of this approach (as most Inuktitut morphemes
are polysyllabic, and consequently there will be
many plausible but spurious matches between
tokens that share a syllable but no semantics),
Schafer and Drábek (2005) observed it to be
quite competitive.

4. Morphs: segment each word into morphs,
thereby treating the morphology problem as
pure segmentation. This uses the top output of
the morphological analyser as the oracle seg-
mentation of each Inuktitut token.

5. Morphemes: as previous, except include the
normalisation of each morph to a morpheme,
as provided by the morphological analyser, as
a sort of “lemmatisation” step. The major ad-
vantage over the morph approach is due to the
regular morphophonemic effects in Inuktitut,
which cause equivalent morphemes to have dif-
ferent surface realisations.

5 Results

5.1 Analyser
In our analysis, the morphological analyser finds at
least one reading for about 218K (= about 65%) of
the Inuktitut types. Of the 120K types without read-

ings, resource contraints account for about 11K. 3

Another 6K types caused difficulties due to punctu-
ation, numerical characters or encoding issues, all of
which could be handled through more sophisticated
tokenisation.

A more interesting cause of gaps for
the analyser was typographical errors (e.g.
*kiinaujaqtaaruasirnirmut for kiinaujaqtaarusiar-
nirmut “requests for proposals”). This was often
due to consonant gemination, where it was either
missing (e.g. nunavummut “in Nunavut” appeared
in the corpus as *nunavumut) or added (e.g.
*tamakkununnga instead of tamakkununga “at
these ones here”). While one might expect these
kinds of error to be rare, because Inuktitut has an
orthography that closely reflects pronunciation,
they instead are common, which means that the
morphological analyser should probably accept
incorrect gemination with a lower weighting.

More difficult to analyse directly is the impact
of foreign words (particularly names) — these are
typically subjectively transliterated based on Inukti-
tut morphophonology. Schafer and Drábek (2005)
use these as motivation for an approach based on
a wFST, but found few instances to analyse its ac-
curacy. Finally, there are certainly missing roots,
and possibly some missing affixes as well, for ex-
ample pirru- “accident” (cf. pirruaqi- “to have an
accident”). Finding these automatically remains as
future work.

As for tokens, we briefly analysed the 768 tokens
in the test set, of which 228 (30%) were not given
a reading. Punctuation (typically commas and peri-
ods) account for 117 of these, and numbers another
7. Consonant gemination and foreign words cause
gaps for at least 16 and 6 tokens, respectively (that
we could readily identify).

5.2 Word Alignment
Following Och and Ney (2000), we assess using
alignment error rate (AER) and define precision with
respect to the probable set, and recall with respect to

3We only attempted to parse tokens of 30 characters or
shorter; longer tokens tended to cause exceptions — this could
presumably be improved with a more efficient analyser. While
the number of analyses will continue to grow with the token
length, which has implications in agglutinative languages, here
there are only about 300 tokens of length greater than 40.

374



Approach Prec Rec AER
None 0.783 0.863 0.195
Head 0.797 0.922 0.176
Syllabification 0.789 0.881 0.192
Morphs 0.777 0.860 0.207
Morphemes 0.777 0.863 0.206
S&D E-I 0.646 0.829 0.327
S&D Syll 0.849 0.826 0.156

Table 1: Precision, recall, and alignment error rate for
various approaches to morphology, with Schafer and
Drábek (2005) for comparison

the sure set.
We present word alignment results of the vari-

ous methods — contrasted with Schafer and Drábek
(2005) — in Table 1. The striking result is in
terms of statistical significance: according to χ2,
most of the various approaches to morphology fail
to give a significantly (P < 0.05) different result
to the baseline system of using entire tokens. For
comparison, whereas our baseline system is signifi-
cantly better than the baseline system of Schafer and
Drábek (2005) — which demonstrates the value that
the Berkeley Aligner provides by training in both
source-target directions — their syllablised model
is significantly superior in precision (P < 0.001),
while their recall is still worse than our model (P <
0.05). Intuitively, this seems to indicate that their
model is making fewer judgments, but actually the
opposite is true. It seems that their model achieves
better performance than ours because it leverages
many candidate probable alignments into high qual-
ity aggregates using a most-likely heuristic on the
mapping of Inuktitut syllables to English words,
whereas the Berkeley Aligner culls the candidate set
in joint training.

Of the approaches toward morphology that we
consider, only the recall of the head–based sys-
tem improves upon the baseline (P < 0.025).
This squares with our intuitions, where segment-
ing the root morpheme from the larger token al-
lows for more effective alignment of the semanti-
cally straightforward sure alignments.

The three systems that involve a finer segmenta-

tion over the tokens are equivalent in performance to
the baseline system. The oversegmentation seemed
to caused the alignment system to abandon an im-
plicit preference for monotonicity of the order of
tokens between the source and target (which holds
pretty well for the baseline system over the test data,
thanks partly to the fidelity-focused structure of a
Hansard corpus): presumably because the aligner
perceives lexical similarity between disparate tokens
due to them sharing a sublexical unit. This relax-
ing of monotonicity is most apparent for punctua-
tion, where a comma with a correct alignment in the
baseline becomes incorrectly aligned to a different
comma in the sentence for the segmented system.

6 Conclusion

The only improvement toward the task that we ob-
served using morphological approaches is that of
head segmentation, where using two syllables as a
head-surrogate allowed us to capture more of the
sure (one-to-one) alignments in the test set. One
possible extension would be to take the head mor-
pheme as given the analyser, rather than the some-
what arbitrary syllabic approach. For other lan-
guages with rich morphology, it may be similarly
valuable to target substantives for segmentation to
improve alignment.

All in all, it appears that the lexical encoding of
morphology of Inuktitut is so strikingly different
than English, that the assumption of Inuktitut mor-
phemes aligning to English words is untrue or at
least unfindable within the current framework. Nu-
merous common morphemes have no English equiv-
alent, for example, -liaq- “to go to” which seems to
act as a light verb, or -niq-, a (re-)nominaliser for
abstract nominals. While the output of the morpho-
logical analyser could probably be used more effec-
tively in other tasks, there are still important impacts
in word alignment and machine translation, includ-
ing leveraging a dictionary (which is based on mor-
phemes, not tokens, and as such requires segmenta-
tion and normalisation) or considering grammatical
forms for syntactic approaches.

References
Peter Adolphs. 2008. Acquiring a poor man’s inflec-

tional lexicon for German. In Proc. of the 6th LREC,

375



Marrakech, Morocco.
Gavin Burnage. 1990. CELEX: A guide for users. Tech-

nical report, University of Nijmegen.
Mathias Creutz and Krista Lagus. 2002. Unsupervised

discovery of morphemes. In Proc. of the 6th Workshop
of ACL SIGPHON, pages 21–30, Philadelphia, USA.

John DeNero and Dan Klein. 2007. Tailoring word
alignments to syntactic machine translation. In Proc.
of the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 17–24,
Prague, Czech Republic.

Raymund G. Gordon, Jr, editor. 2005. Ethnologue: Lan-
guages of the World, Fifteenth Edition. SIL Interna-
tional.

Jan Hajič and Barbora Hladká. 1998. Tagging inflective
languages: Prediction of morphological categories for
a rich, structured tagset. In Proc. of the 36th Annual
Meeting of the ACL and 17th International Conference
on COLING, pages 483–490, Montréal, Canada.

Philippe Langlais, Fabrizio Gotti, and Guihong Cao.
2005. NUKTI: English-Inuktitut word alignment sys-
tem description. In Proc. of the ACL Workshop on
Building and Using Parallel Texts, pages 75–78, Ann
Arbor, USA.

Percy Liang, Ben Taskar, and Dan Klein. 2006. Align-
ment by agreement. In Proc. of the HLT Conference
of the NAACL, pages 104–111, New York City, USA.

Ronald Lowe. 1996. Grammatical sketches: Inuktitut.
In Jacques Maurais, editor, Quebec’s Aboriginal Lan-
guages: History, Planning and Development, pages
204–232. Multilingual Matters.

Joel Martin, Howard Johnson, Benoit Farley, and Anna
Maclachlan. 2003. Aligning and using an English-
Inuktitut parallel corpus. In Proc. of the HLT-NAACL
2003 Workshop on Building and Using Parallel Texts,
pages 115–118, Edmonton, Canada.

Joel Martin, Rada Mihalcea, and Ted Pedersen. 2005.
Word alignment for languages with scarce resources.
In Proc. of the ACL Workshop on Building and Using
Parallel Texts, pages 65–74, Ann Arbor, USA.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2000. Improved sta-
tistical alignment models. In Proc. of the 38th Annual
Meeting of the ACL, pages 440–447, Saarbrücken,
Germany.

Benoı̂t Sagot, Lionel Clément, Eric Villemonte de La
Clergerie, and Pierre Boullier. 2006. The Lefff syntac-
tic lexicon for French: Architecture, acquisition, use.
In Proc. of the 5th LREC, pages 1348–1351, Genoa,
Italy.

Charles Schafer and Elliott Drábek. 2005. Models for
Inuktitut-English word alignment. In Proc. of the ACL
Workshop on Building and Using Parallel Texts, pages
79–82, Ann Arbor, USA.

376


