










































A Dependency Treebank of Classical Chinese Poems


2012 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 191–199,
Montréal, Canada, June 3-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Dependency Treebank of Classical Chinese Poems 

 
 

John Lee and Yin Hei Kong 
The Halliday Centre for Intelligent Applications of Language Studies  

Department of Chinese, Translation and Linguistics 

City University of Hong Kong 

{jsylee,yhkong}@cityu.edu.hk 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Abstract 

As interest grows in the use of linguistically 

annotated corpora in research and teaching of 

foreign languages and literature, treebanks of 

various historical texts have been developed.  

We introduce the first large-scale dependency 

treebank for Classical Chinese literature.  De-

rived from the Stanford dependency types, it 

consists of over 32K characters drawn from a 

collection of poems written in the 8
th

 century 

CE.  We report on the design of new depend-

ency relations, discuss aspects of the annota-

tion process and evaluation, and illustrate its 

use in a study of parallelism in Classical Chi-

nese poetry. 

1 Introduction 

Recent efforts in creating linguistically annotated 

text corpora have overwhelmingly focused on 

modern languages.  Among the earliest and most 

well-known are the part-of-speech (POS) tagged 

Brown Corpus (Francis & Kučera, 1982), and the 

syntactically analyzed Penn Treebank (Marcus et 

al., 1993). However, the first digital corpus, which 

emerged soon after the invention of computers, had 

as its subject matter a collection of 13
th
-century 

texts --- in 1949, Roberto Busa initiated the POS 

tagging of the complete works of Thomas Aquinas, 

written in Latin. 

In the past decade, Humanities scholars have 

begun to use digital corpora for the study of an-

cient languages and historical texts. They come in 

a variety of languages and genres, from Old Eng-

lish (Taylor et al., 2003) to Early New High Ger-

man (Demske et al., 2004) and Medieval Portu-

guese (Rocio et al. 2000); and from poetry 

(Pintzuk & Leendert, 2001) to religious texts such 

as the New Testament (Haug & Jøhndal, 2008) and 

the Quran (Dukes & Buckwalter, 2010).  They are 

increasingly being leveraged in teaching (Crane et 

al., 2009) and in research (Lancaster, 2010). 

This paper describes the first large-scale de-

pendency treebank for Classical Chinese.  The 

treebank consists of poems from the Tang Dynasty 

(618 – 907 CE), considered one of the crowning 

achievements in traditional Chinese literature.  The 

first half of the paper reviews related work (section 

2), then describes the design of the treebank (sec-

tion 3), its text and evaluation (section 4).  The 

second half shows the research potentials of this 

treebank with a study on parallelism in (section 5).  

2 Previous Work  

Existing linguistic resources for Chinese is pre-

dominantly for the modern language.  This section 

first describes the major Modern Chinese treebanks 

on which we based our work (section 2.1), then 

summarizes previous research in word segmenta-

tion and POS tagging, two pre-requisites for build-

ing a Classical Chinese treebank (section 2.2). 

2.1 Modern Chinese 

Most treebanks have been annotated under one of 

two grammatical theories, the phrase structure 

grammar, which is adopted by the Penn Treebank 

(Marcus et al., 1993), or dependency grammar, 

adopted by the Prague Dependency Treebank 

191



(Hajic, 1998).  The most widely used treebank for 

Modern Chinese, the Penn Chinese Treebank (Xue 

et al., 2005), belongs to the former kind. 

Rather than encoding constituency information, 

dependency grammars give information about 

grammatical relations between words.  Modern 

Chinese has been analyzed in this framework, for 

example at Stanford University (Chang et al., 

2009).  The dependency relations follow the design 

principles of those initially applied to English (de 

Marneffe and Manning, 2008), with a few added 

relations to accommodate Chinese-specific fea-

tures, such as the “ba”-construction.  Their POS 

tagset is borrowed from that of the Penn Chinese 

Treebank. 

2.2 Classical Chinese 

Like its modern counterpart, two pre-requisites for 

constructing a Classical Chinese treebank are word 

segmentation and part-of-speech tagging. In this 

section, we first summarize existing POS tagging 

frameworks, then describe the only current tree-

bank of Classical Chinese.  

Word boundaries and parts-of-speech tags have 

been added to the Academia Sinica Ancient Chi-

nese Corpus (Wei et al., 1997) and the Sheffield 

Corpus of Chinese (Hu et al., 2005). Since there is 

not yet a scholarly consensus on word segmenta-

tion in Chinese (Feng 1998), it is not surprising 

that there are wide-ranging levels of granularity of 

the POS tagsets.  They range from 21 tags in 

(Huang et al., 2002), 26 in the Peking University 

corpus (Yu et al., 2002), 46 in the Academia Sini-

ca Balanced Corpus (Chen et al., 1996), to 111 in 

the Sheffield Corpus of Chinese (Hu et al., 2005).   

This treebank uses a system of nested POS tags 

(Lee, 2012), which accommodates different poli-

cies for word segmentation and maximize interop-

erability between corpora. 

The only previous syntactic treebank for Classi-

cal Chinese is a constituent-based one (Huang et 

al., 2002), composed of 1000 sentences from pre-

Tsin Classical Chinese. No word segmentation was 

performed for this treebank. 

3 Treebank design  

Although Classical Chinese is not mutually intelli-

gible with Modern Chinese, the two share consid-

erable similarities in vocabulary and grammar.  

Given the seminal work already achieved for Mod-

ern Chinese, our principle is to borrow from exist-

ing annotation framework as much as possible. For 

example, our POS tagset is based on that of the 

Penn Chinese Treebank, after a slight revision of 

its 33 tags (Lee, 2012). This approach not only 

gives users a familiar point of reference, and also 

makes the treebank interoperable with existing 

Modern Chinese resources.  Interoperability allows 

the potential of bootstrapping with Modern Chi-

nese data, as well as contrastive studies for the two 

languages. 

 

 

 

Figure 1.  Dependency trees of two adjacent 5-character 

lines (forming a parallel couplet)
1
.  The POS tags are 

based on (Xue et al., 2005); the dependency relations on 

(Chang et al., 2009).  The two lines are perfectly paral-

lel both in terms of POS and dependencies. 

 

A dependency framework is chosen for two rea-

sons.  First, words in Classical Chinese poems, our 

target text (section 4), tend to have relatively free 

word order.  Dependency grammars can handle 

this phenomenon well.  Second, our treebank is 

expected to be used pedagogically, and we expect 

explicit grammatical relations between words to be 

helpful to students.  These relations also encode 

                                                           
1 From Wang Wei 《奉和聖制御春明樓臨右相園亭賦樂賢

詩應制》 

遙 聞 鳳 吹 喧 

‘far’ ‘hear’ ‘phoenix’ ‘call’ ‘make noise’ 

[I] hear from afar the call of the phoenix making noise. 

闇 識 龍 輿 度 

‘faint’ ‘sense’ ‘dragon’ ‘carriage’ ‘come’ 

[I] faintly sense the dragon-decorated carriage coming. 

192



semantic information, which lend themselves to 

meaning extraction applications. 

Our set of dependency relations is based on 

those developed at Stanford University for Modern 

Chinese (see section 2.2).  Our approach is to map 

their 44 dependency relations, as much as possible, 

to Classical Chinese.  Modern Chinese, a non-

inflectional language, does not mark many linguis-

tic features, including person, gender, and number, 

etc.  It uses a small number of function words to 

encode other features, such as tense, voice, and 

case. Many of these function words do not exist in 

Classical Chinese.  In particular, prepositions are 

rare
2
; instead, nouns expressing time, locations, 

instruments, indirect recipients, etc., modify the 

verb directly. This phenomenon prompted the in-

troduction of two new relations “locative modifi-

ers” (section 3.1) and “oblique objects” (section 

3.2); and the re-instatement of two relations, “noun 

phrases as adverbial modifiers” (section 3.3) and 

“indirect objects”, from the Stanford dependencies 

(de Marneffe and Manning, 2008) that are exclud-

ed from the Modern Chinese variant (Chang et al., 

2009) .  An overview is provided in Table 1. 

 
Table 1.  Comparison of our set of dependency relations 

with the Stanford dependencies for English (de Marnef-

fe and Manning, 2008) and for Modern Chinese (Chang 

et al., 2009). All other relations from Stanford Modern 

Chinese are retained and are not listed here.   

3.1 Locative modifiers 

To indicate time, English usually requires a prepo-

sition (e.g., ‘on Monday’), but sometimes does not 

                                                           
2 Classical Chinese has a category of verbs called “coverbs” 

which function like prepositions, but are less frequently used. 

(Pulleyblank, 1995). 

(e.g., ‘today’).  For the latter case, the bare noun 

phrase is considered a “temporal modifier” in a 

tmod relation with the verb in (de Marneffe and 

Manning, 2008). 

Similarly, to indicate locations, a preposition is 

normally required in English (e.g., ‘on the hill’).  

However, in Classical Chinese, the preposition is 

frequently omitted, with the bare locative noun 

phrase modifying the verb directly.  To mark these 

nouns, we created the “locative modifier” relation 

(lmod). Consider sentence (1) in Table 2.  Alt-

hough the word “hill” occupies the position nor-

mally reserved for the subject, it actually indicates 

a location, and is therefore assigned the lmod rela-

tion.  In sentence (2), the locative noun ‘alley’ is 

placed after the verb. 

3.2 Oblique objects 

Oblique objects are a well-known category in the 

analysis of ancient Indo-European languages, for 

example Latin and ancient Greek.  In the PROIEL 

treebank (Haug and Jøhndal, 2008), for example, 

the “oblique” (obl) relation marks arguments of 

the verb which are not subjects or non-accusative 

‘objects’.  These are most commonly nouns in the 

dative or ablative case, as well as prepositional 

phrases.  It is believed that oblique objects exist in 

Classical Chinese, but have been replaced by prep-

ositional phrases in Modern Chinese (Li and Li, 

1986). 

The obl relation is imported to our treebank to 

mark nouns that directly modify a verb to express 

means, instrument, and respect, similar to the func-

tions of datives and ablatives. They typically come 

after the verb.  In sentence (6) in Table 2, the noun 

‘cup’ is used in an instrumental sense to modify 

‘drunk’ in an obl relation. 

3.3 Noun phrase as adverbial modifier  

A temporal modifier such as “today” is an example 

where a noun phrase serves as an adverbial modifi-

er in English.  This usage is more general and ex-

tends to other categories such as floating reflexives 

(e.g., it is itself adequate), and other PP-like NPs 

(e.g., two times a day).  These noun phrases are 

marked with the relation npadvmod in (de Marn-

effe and Manning, 2008).   

Dependency Stanford 
English 

Stanford 

Modern 

Chinese 

This 

paper 

Direct object (dobj) √ √ √ 

Indirect object (iobj) √  √ 

Locative modifier (lmod)   √ 

Noun phrase as adverbial 

modifier (npadvmod) 
√  √ 

Oblique objects (obl)   √ 

Concessive, temporal, 

conditional, and causal 

modifier (conc, temp, 

cond, caus) 

  √ 

193



 

Table 2. Example sentences  illustrating the use of the 

dependency relations lmod (locative modifier), iobj 

(indirect object), npadvmod (noun phrase as adverbial 

modifier), and obl (oblique object)
3
. 

 

In Modern Chinese, this usage is less frequent
4
, 

perhaps leading to its exclusion in (Chang et al., 

2009).  In contrast, in Classical Chinese, nouns 

function much more frequently in this capacity, 

expressing metaphoric meaning, reasons, moods, 

                                                           
3 The verses are from Wang Wei 《送梓州李使君》, 《鄭果

州相過》; Meng Haoran 《同張明府清鏡歌》, 《宴包二融

宅》, 《與白明府游江》,《和賈主簿弁九日登峴山》.  
4 Mostly restricted to temporal and location modifiers. 

repetitions, etc., and typically preceding the verb 

(Li and Li, 1986).  Sentences (4) and (5) in Table 2 

provide examples of this kind, with the noun ‘self’ 

as a reflexive, and the noun ‘year’ indicating repe-

tition. 

3.4 Indirect objects  

The double object construction contains two ob-

jects in a verb phrase.  The direct object is the 

thing or person that is being transferred or moved 

(e.g., “he gave me a book”); the indirect object is 

the recipient (“he gave me a book”).  In inflected 

languages, the noun representing the indirect ob-

ject may be marked by case. Since Classical Chi-

nese does not have this linguistic device, the 

indirect object is unmarked; we distinguish it with 

the “indirect object” label (iobj). 

The iobj label exists in Stanford English de-

pendencies (de Marneffe and Manning, 2008), but 

was not included in the Modern Chinese version 

(Chang et al., 2009), likely due to its infrequent 

appearance in Modern Chinese. It is re-instated in 

our Classical Chinese treebank.  Sentence (3) in 

Table 2 provides an example, with ‘word’ as the 

direct object and ‘person’ as the indirect. 

3.5 Absence of copular verbs  

In a copular construction such as “A is B”, A is 

considered the “topic” (top) of the copular verb 

“is” (Chang et al., 2009).  The copular, however, is 

rarely used in Classical Chinese (Pulleyblank, 

1995). In some cases, it is replaced by an adverb 

that functions as a copular verb. If so, that adverb 

is POS-tagged as such (VC) in our treebank, and 

the dependency tree structure is otherwise normal.  

In other cases, the copular is absent altogether.  

Rather than inserting implicit nodes as in (Haug 

and Jøhndal, 2008), we expand the usage of the 

top relation.  It usually connects the subject (“A”) 

to the copular, but would in this case connect it 

with the noun predicate (“B”) instead.  In the ex-

ample sentence below, the relation top(‘capable’, 

‘general’) would be assigned. 

 

Locative modifier 

千 山 響 杜鵑 

‘thousand’ ‘hill’ ‘make sound’ ‘bird’ 

(1) Birds are singing on a thousand hills. 

lmod(‘make sound’, ‘hill’) 

五 馬 驚 窮 巷 

‘five’ ‘horse’ ‘scare’ ‘end’ ‘alley’ 

(2) Five horses are scared at the end of the alley. 

lmod(‘scare’, ‘alley’) 

Indirect Objects 

寄 語 邊 塞 人 

‘send’ ‘word’ ‘edge’ ‘region’ ‘person’ 

(3) [I] send a word to the person at the frontier. 

iobj(‘send’, ‘person’) 

Noun phrase as adverbial modifier 

風 物 自 瀟灑 

‘scene’ ‘thing’ ‘self’ ‘natural, unrestrained’ 

(4) The scenes are being natural and unrestrained in 

themselves. 

npadvmod(‘natural’, ‘self’) 

年 年 梁 甫 吟 

‘year’ ‘year’ ‘Liang’ ‘Fu’ ‘song’ 

(5) [He sings] the Liangfu Song year after year. 

npadvmod(‘song’, ‘year’) 

Oblique objects 

同 醉 菊 花 杯 

‘together’ ‘drunk’ ‘chrysan-

themus’ 

‘flower’ ‘cup’ 

(6) [We] get drunk together with the chrysanthemus 

cup. 

obl(‘drunk’, ‘cup’) 

將軍 武 庫 才 

‘general’ ‘weapon’ ‘warehouse’ ‘capable’ 

The general [is] a capable manager of the arsenal
5
. 

194



3.6 Discourse relations  

Two clauses may be connected by a discourse rela-

tion, such as causal or temporal.  In English, these 

relations may be explicitly realized, most common-

ly by discourse connectives, such as ‘because’ or 

‘when’.  Even in the absence of these connectives, 

however, two adjacent clauses can still hold an 

implicit discourse relation. A detailed study, which 

resulted in the Penn Discourse Treebank (Prasad et 

al., 2008), found that explicit relations outnumber 

implicit ones in English, but the latter is nonethe-

less quite common and can be annotated with high 

inter-annotator agreement.  

 

 
Table 3.  Example sentences illustrating the use of dis-

course labels for discourse relations
6
. 

 

In many ancient languages, explicit realization 

of discourse relations is less frequent.  In Latin and 

Ancient Greek, for instance, these connectives are 

often replaced by a participial clause.  The partici-

ple is marked only by the genitive or ablative case, 

leaving the reader to decide from context how it 

relates to the main clause.  As a non-inflectional 

language, Classical Chinese cannot use this device, 

and instead typically constructs a complex sen-

tence with a series of verbs without any marking 

(Pulleyblank, 1995). For example, sentence (2) in 

                                                                                           
5 From Meng Haoran 《與張折衝遊耆闍寺》 
6 From top to bottom, Meng Haoran 《登龍興寺閣》,《歲暮

歸南山》, and Du Fu  杜甫《八陣圖》 

Table 3 literally says ‘not capable, good ruler for-

sake’; the onus is put on the reader to interpret the 

first two characters to form a clause that provides 

the reason for the rest of the line. 

This condensed style of expression often erects a 

barrier for understanding.  Although the focus of 

the treebank is on syntax rather than discourse, we 

decided to annotate these relations. Implicit con-

nectives are more difficult to achieve inter-

annotator agreement (Prasad et al., 2008); since 

they are mostly implicit in Classical Chinese, we 

adopted a coarse-grained classification system, 

rather than the hierarchical system of sense tags in 

the Penn Discourse Treebank.  More precisely, it 

contains only the four categories posited by 

(Wang, 2003) --- causal, concessive, temporal, and 

conditional.  Table 3 gives some examples. 

When it is impossible to determine the discourse 

relation between two lines, the default “dependent” 

(dep) label is assigned.  This label is originally 

used when “the system is unable to determine a 

more precise dependency relation between two 

words” (de Marneffe and Manning, 2008). 

4 Data  

Among the various literary genres, poetry enjoys 

perhaps the most elevated status in the Classical 

Chinese tradition. The Tang Dynasty is considered 

the golden age of shi, one of the five subgenres of 

Chinese poetry
7
.  The Complete Shi Poetry of the 

Tang (Peng, 1960), originally compiled in 1705, 

consists of nearly 50,000 poems by more than two 

thousand poets. This book is treasured by scholars 

and the public alike.  Even today, Chinese people 

informally compose couplets (see section 5), in the 

style of shi poetry, to celebrate special occasions 

such as birthdays.  Indeed, NLP techniques have 

been applied to generate them automatically (Jiang 

and Zhou, 2008). 

4.1 Material  

This treebank contains the complete works, a total 

of over 32,000 characters in 521 poems, by two 

Chinese poets in the 8
th
 century CE, Wang Wei and 

Meng Haoran.  Wang, also known as the Poet-

Buddha (shifo 詩佛), is considered one of the three 
most prominent Tang poets.   Meng is often asso-

                                                           
7 The other four genres are ci, fu, qu, and sao. 

Temporal relation 

為 童 憶 聚 沙 
‘be’ ‘child’ ‘remember’ ‘gather’ ‘sand’ 

(1) [When I] was a child, [I] remember [playing] a 

game with sand. 

dep-temp(‘remember’, ‘be’) 

Causal relation 

不 才 明 主 棄 
‘not’ ‘capable’ ‘good’ ‘ruler’ ‘forsake’ 

(2) The good ruler does not appoint me [as an official], 

[because] I am not capable. 

dep-caus(‘forsake’, ‘capable’) 

Concessive relation 

國 破 山 河 在 
‘country’ ‘broken’ ‘mountain’ ‘river’ ‘exist’ 

(3) [Although] the country is broken, the mountains 

and the rivers still stay. 

dep-conc(‘exist’, ‘broken’)  

195



ciated with Wang due to the similarity of his po-

ems in style and content. 

Aside from the dependency relations, word 

boundaries and POS tags, the treebank contains a 

number of metadata.  For each character, the tone 

is noted as either level (ping平) or oblique (ze 仄).  
Each poem is also recorded for its title, author, and 

genre, which may be ‘recent-style’ (jintishi 近體詩

) or ‘ancient-style’ (gutishi 古體詩).    
This choice of our text stems from three motiva-

tions.  Classical Chinese is typically written in a 

compressed style, especially so with poetry, where 

the word order is relatively flexible, and grammati-

cal exceptions are frequent.  These characteristics 

pose a formidable challenge for students of Classi-

cal Chinese, for whom Tang poetry often forms 

part of the introductory material.  It is hoped that 

this treebank will serve a pedagogical purpose.  

Second, this challenging text makes it more likely 

that the resulting dependency framework can suc-

cessfully handle other Classical Chinese texts.  

Third, Tang poetry is an active area of research in 

Chinese philology, and we aspire to contribute to 

their endeavor. 

4.2 Inter-annotator agreement  

Two annotators, both university graduates with a 

degree in Chinese, created this treebank.  To meas-

ure inter-annotator agreement, we set apart a subset 

of about 1050 characters, on which both of them 

independently perform three tasks: POS tagging, 

head selection, and dependency labeling. 

Their agreement rate is 95.1%, 92.3%, and 

91.2% for the three respective tasks. For POS tag-

ging, the three main error categories are the confu-

sion between adverbs (AD) and verbs with an 

adverbial force, between measure words (M) and 

nouns (NN), and between adjectives (JJ) and 

nouns.  The interested reader is referred to (Lee, 

2012) for a detailed analysis.   

These differences in POS tags trickle down to 

head selection and dependency labeling. In fact, all 

words which received different POS tags also re-

ceived different dependency relations.  To illus-

trate with a disagreement between adverb and verb, 

consider the following sentence. The word 恐 
kong ‘afraid’ may be considered as an adverb, ex-

pressing the psychological state for the verb ‘at-

tract’; or, alternatively, as a verb in its own right.  

Depending on the decision, it bears either the rela-

tion advmod or root. 
 

恐 招 負 時 累 

‘afraid’ ‘attract’ ‘burden’ ‘fame’ ‘affect’ 

[I am] afraid [I] will attract and be burdened by fame
8
. 

 

Some differences are genuine alternative annota-

tions, resulting from a mixture of polysemy and 

flexible word order.  Consider the sentence 簞食伊

何 dan shi yi he, consisting of four characters 
meaning, in order, ‘bowl / blanket’, ‘food’, a copu-

lar or a particle, and ‘what’.  If the meaning ‘bowl’ 

and copular is taken, it means ‘What food is con-

tained in that bowl?’ In this case, the relation clf 

is required for 簞 dan, and 伊 yi is the root word. 
Alternatively, if the meaning ‘blanket’ and particle 

is taken, it is interpreted as ‘What food is placed on 

the blanket?’  Here, dan takes on the relation nn, 

and the root word would be 何 he instead. 
 

5 Application: Parallel Couplets  

We now demonstrate one use of this treebank by 

analyzing a well-known but understudied feature 

of Classical Chinese poetry: the parallel couplets. 

5.1 Introduction 

Parallelism in poetry refers to the correspondence 

of one line with another; the two lines may bear 

similar or opposite meaning, and have comparable 

grammatical constructions.  This phenomenon is 

perhaps most well known in classical Hebrew po-

etry, but it is also one of the defining features of 

Chinese poetry; “it pervades their poetry universal-

ly, forms its chief characteristic feature, and is the 

source of a great deal of its artificial beauty”, ob-

served Sir John Francis Davis, author of one of the 

earliest commentaries on Chinese poetry published 

in the West (Davis 1969).   

The lines in a Chinese poem almost always con-

tain the same number of characters, most common-

ly either five or seven characters.  This exact 

equality of the number of characters makes it espe-

cially suited for expressing parallelism, which be-

came a common feature ever since ‘recent-style’ 

poetry (section 4.1) was developed during the Tang 

                                                           
8 From Wang Wei 《贈從弟司庫員外絿弟》 

196



Dynasty.  Unlike those in ‘ancient-style’, poems of 

this style are tonally regulated and assume a high 

degree of parallelism within a couplet, i.e., two 

adjacent lines.  See Figure 1 for an example. 

5.2 Methodology 

The couplet in Figure 1 is undisputedly symmetric, 

both in terms of POS tags and dependency labels.  

The definition for parallelism is, however, quite 

loose; in general, the corresponding characters 

must ‘agree’ in part-of-speech and have related 

meaning.  These are unavoidably subjective no-

tions. 

While a vast amount of Tang poems have been 

digitized, they have not been POS-tagged or syn-

tactically analyzed in any significant amount.  It is 

not surprising, therefore, that no large-scale, em-

pirical study on how, and how often, the characters 

‘agree’.  There have been a study on 1,000 cou-

plets (Cao, 1998), and another on a small subset of 

the poems of Du Mu (Huang, 2006), but neither 

clarify the criteria for parallelism. We undertake a 

descriptive, rather than prescriptive, approach, us-

ing only the treebank data as the basis. 

Character-level parallelism.   Even given the 

POS tags, this study is not straightforward. The 

naive metric of requiring exactly matched POS 

tags yields a parallel rate of only 74% in the corpus 

as a whole.  This figure can be misleading, because 

it would vary according to the granularity of the 

POS tagset: the more fine-grained it is, the less 

agreement there would be.  As a metric for paral-

lelism, it has high precision but lower recall, and 

would only be appropriate for certain applications 

such as couplet generation (Jiang and Zhou, 2008). 
 

Equivalence POS tags and dependency links 

Noun modifier CD, OD, JJ, DT 

Verbs BA, <verb>, and P (head of pobj 

or plmod)  

Adverbials AD, CS, <verb> (head of mmod), 

<noun> (head of npadvmod) 

Adjectival <noun> (head of nn or assmod), 

<verb> (head of vmod), JJ (head 

of amod) 

Nouns <noun>, <verb> (head of csubj 

or csubjpass), M (except clf) 

 

Table 4. Equivalence sets of POS tags for the purpose of 

parallelism detection.  <noun> includes NN, NT, NR, 

PN; <verb> includes VA, VC, VE, VV. 

By examining portions of the regulated verse 

where parallelism is expected, we derived five 

‘equivalence sets’ of POS tags, shown in Table 4. 

Two tags in the same set are considered parallel, 

even though they do not match.  In many sets, a tag 

needs to be qualified with its dependency relations, 

since it is considered parallel to other members in 

the set only when it plays certain syntactic roles.   

When applying these equivalence sets as well as 

exact matching, the parallel rate increases to 87%. 

The algorithm is of course not perfect
9
.  It can-

not detect, for example, parallelism involving the 

use of a polysemous character with a ‘out-of-

context’ meaning (jieyi 借義).  For instance, the 

character 者 zhe, the fourth character in the second 

line in the couplet
10

 “欲就終焉志，恭聞智者名,” 
means ‘person’. On the surface, it does not match 

its counterpart, 焉 yan, the fourth character in the 
first line, since yan is a sentence particle and zhe is 

a noun. However, the poet apparently viewed them 

as parallel, because zhe can also function as a sen-

tence particle in other contexts. 

Phrase-level parallelism. The character-level 

metric, however, still rejects some couplets that 

would be deemed parallel by scholars.  Most of 

these couplets are parallel not at the character lev-

el, but at the phrase level. 

A line in a ‘recent-style’ poem is almost always 

segmented into two syntactic units (Cai, 1998). A 

pentasyllabic (5-character) line is composed of a 

disyllabic unit (the first two characters) followed 

by a trisyllabic unit (the last three characters)
11

.  

Consider two corresponding disyllabic units, 抱琴 

bao qin ‘hold’ ‘violin’, and 垂釣 sui diao ‘look 
down’ ‘fish’.  They are tagged as bao/VV qin/NN 

and sui/AD diao/VV, respectively.  There is a 

complete mismatch at the character level: bao is a 

verb but sui is an adverb; qin is a noun but diao is 

a verb.  Taken as a whole, however, both units are 

verb phrases describing an activity (‘to hold a vio-

lin’ and ‘to fish while looking down’), and so the 

poet likely considered them to be parallel at the 

unit, or phrase, level. 

                                                           
9 The quality of these equivalence sets were evaluated on 548 

characters.  The human expert agrees with the decision of the 

algorithm 96.4% of the time at the character level, and 94% of 

the time at the phrase level. 
10 From Meng Haoran 《陪張丞相祠紫蓋山，途經玉泉寺》 
11 Equivalently, the seven characters in the heptasyllabic regu-

lated verse are segmented in a 4+3 fashion. 

197



The dependencies provide a convenient way to 

gauge the level of parallelism at the phrase level.  

One can extract the head word in the correspond-

ing units in the couplet (bao/VV and diao/VV in the 

example above), then compare their POS tags, us-

ing the algorithm for character-level parallelism 

describe above. 

5.3 Results 

The results are shown in Table 5.  All couplets 

from an ‘ancient-style’ poem are considered “par-

allelism optional”.  A couplet from a ‘recent-style’ 

poem with eight or more lines
12

 is either “parallel-

ism not expected”, if it is the first or last couplet in 

the poem; or “parallelism expected”, if it is in the 

middle of the poem.  We first determine whether a 

character is parallel to its counterpart in the couplet 

at the character level; if not, then we back off to 

the phrase level. 

In the “parallelism expected” category, the cou-

plets of Wang are highly parallel, at both the char-

acter (91%) and phrase levels (95%).  This is 

hardly surprising, given that his poems are highly 

regarded.  It is notable, however, that the propor-

tion is still relatively high (57% at the character 

level) even among those couplets for which paral-

lelism is not expected, suggesting that the poet 

placed a high view on parallelism.  He also em-

ployed much parallelism (64% at the character lev-

el) in ‘ancient-style’ poems, perhaps to aim at a 

higher artistic effect. 

Among the couplets of Wang which are not par-

allel at the phrase level, the most frequent combi-

nation is a verb phrase matching a noun phrase.  

The verb, as the second character, is modified by 

an adverb; the noun, also as the second character, 

is modified by an adjective.  This implies that the 

“AD VV” vs. “JJ NN” combination may be con-

sidered to be parallel by poets at the time. 

The trends for Meng are similar, with a signifi-

cantly higher score for couplets expected to be par-

allel than those that are not (82% vs. 53% at the 

character level).  Compared to Wang, however, 

both percentages are lower. One wonders if this 

has any correlation with Meng being commonly 

considered a less accomplished poet.  Since the 

‘rules’ for parallelism have never been codified, 
                                                           
12 These are known as the ‘regulated verse’ (lushi 律詩) and 
are subject to definite patterns of parallelism.  Those with 

fewer lines are left out, since their patterns are less regular. 

Meng may also have simply espoused a more 

coarse-grained view of parts-of-speech.  This hy-

pothesis would be consistent with the fact that, at 

the phrase level, the proportion of parallelism for 

Meng is much closer to that for Wang. This sug-

gests that Meng was content with parallelism at the 

phrase level and emphasized less on matching 

character to character. 

  

 

Table 5. The proportion of characters that are parallel to 

their counterparts in the couplet (see section 5.2). The 

couplets are classified into three types, depending on the 

genre of poetry and their position in the poem (see sec-

tion 5.3). 

6 Conclusion  

We have presented the first large-scale dependency 

treebank of Classical Chinese literature, which en-

codes works by two poets in the Tang Dynasty.  

We have described how the dependency grammar 

framework has been derived from existing tree-

banks for Modern Chinese, and shown a high level 

of inter-annotator agreement.  Finally, we have 

illustrated the utility of the treebank with a study 

on parallelism in Classical Chinese poetry. 

Future work will focus on parsing Classical 

Chinese poems of other poets, and on enriching the 

corpus with semantic information, which would 

facilitate not only deeper study of parallelism but 

also other topics such as imagery and metaphorical 

coherence (Zhu and Cui, 2010). 
 

Acknowledgments 
 

We thank Tin Ho Chan and Cheuk Ho Wan for 

their assistance in annotating this treebank.  This 

work was supported by a Strategic Research Grant 

(#7002549) from City University of Hong Kong. 

Couplet type Metric Wang Meng 

Parallelism 

expected 

Char-level only 91% 82% 

+ Phrase-level 95% 91% 

Parallelism 

not expected 

Char-level only 57% 53% 

+ Phrase-level 71% 71% 

Parallelism 

optional 

Char-level only 64% 65% 

+ Phrase-level 78% 81% 

198



References  

Zong-Qi Cai.  2008.  How to Read Chinese Poetry.  

Columbia University Press, New York. 

Fengfu Cao 曹逢甫. 1998. A Linguistic Study of the 
Parallel Couplets in Tang Poetry. Technical Report, 

Linguistics Graduate Institute, National Tsing Hua 

University, Taiwan.  

Pi-Chuan Chang, Huihsin Tseng, Dan Jurafsky, and 

Christopher Manning. 2009.  Discriminative Reor-

dering with Chinese Grammatical Relations Features.  

Proc. 3rd Workshop on Syntax and Structure in Sta-

tistical Translation.Psychological Association. 

Gregory Crane, Brent Seales, and Melissa Terras. 2009. 

Cyberinfrastructure for Classical Philology. Digital 

Humanities Quarterly 3(1). 

John F. Davis. 1969. The Poetry of the Chinese.  Para-

gon Book, New York. 

Ulrike Demske, Nicola Frank, Stefanie Laufer and Hen-

drik Stiemer, 2004. Syntactic Interpretation of an 

Early New High German Corpus.  Proc. Workshop 

on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories (TLT). 

Kais Dukes and Tim Buckwalter, 2010.  A Dependency 

Treebank of the Quran using Traditional Arabic 

Grammar.  Proc. 7th International Conference on In-

formatics and Systems (INFOS), Cairo, Egypt. 

Shengli Feng. 1998.  Prosodic Structure and Com-

pound Words in Classical Chinese.  In New Ap-

proaches to Chinese Word Formation, Jerome Pack-

ard (ed.), Mouton de Gruyter. 

W. Nelson Francis and Henry Kučera. 1982.  Fre-

quency Analysis of English Usage: Lexicon and 

Grammar.  Houghton Mifflin. 

J. Hajic.  1998. Building a syntactically annotated cor-

pus: The Prague Dependency Treebank.  Issues of 

Valency and Meaning, Charles University Press. 

Dag Haug and Marius Jøhndal. 2008.  Creating a Paral-

lel Treebank of the Old Indo-European Bible Trans-

lations.  Proc. Language Resources and Evaluation 

Conference (LREC). 

X. Hu, N. Williamson, and J. McLaughlin. 2005.  Shef-

field Corpus of Chinese for Diachronic Linguistic 

Study.  Literary and Linguistic Computing 20(3). 

Li-min Huang. 2006.  The Study of Classical Poems of 

Tu-mu.  Master’s Thesis, National Sun Yat-sen Uni-

versity, Taiwan. 

Liang Huang, Yinan Peng, Huan Wang, and Zhengyu 

Wu. 2002.  PCFG Parsing for Restricted Classical 

Chinese Texts.  Proc. 1st SIGHAN Workshop on 

Chinese Language Processing. 

Long Jiang and Ming Zhou.  2008. Generating Chinese 

Couplets using a Statistical MT Approach.  Proc. 

COLING. 

Lewis Lancaster. 2010. Pattern Recognition and Analy-

sis in the Chinese Buddhist Canon: A Study of  

“Original Enlightenment”. Pacific World 3(60). 

Zuonan Li 李作南 and Renhou Li 李仁厚. 1986. A 
comparison of Classical Chinese and Modern Chi-

nese 古今漢語語法比較 (in Chinese). Nei Menggu 
Renmin Chubanshe, China. 

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Christopher D. Man-

ning. 2008. Stanford typed dependencies manual. 

California: Stanford University. 

Dingqiu Peng. 1960. Quan Tang Shi 全唐詩. Zhonghua 
Shuju, Beijing.  

Susan Pintzuk and Plug Leendert. 2001.  York-Helsinki 

Parsed Corpus of Old English Poetry. http://www-

users.york.ac.uk/~lang18/pcorpus.html 

Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Miltsa-

kaki, Livio Robaldo, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie 

Webber.  2008. The Penn Discourse Treebank 2.0.  

Proc. LREC. 

Edwin Pulleyblank. 1995.  Outline of Classical Chinese 

Grammar.  UBC Press, Vancouver, Canada. 

Vitor Rocio, Mário Amado Alves, J. Gabriel Lopes, 

Maria Francisca Xavier, and Graça Vicente. 2000.  

Automated Creation of a Medieval Portuguese Partial 

Treebank. In Anne Abeillé (ed.), Treebanks: Building 

and Using Parsed Corpora (Dordrecht: Kluwer Aca-

demic Publishers), pp. 211-227. 

Ann Taylor, Anthony Warner, Susan Pintzuk and Frank 

Beths. 2003. York-Toronto-Helsinki Parsed Corpus 

of Old English Prose. University of York. 

Pei-chuan Wei, P. M. Thompson, Cheng-hui Liu, Chu-

Ren Huang, and Chaofen Sun. 1997.  Historical Cor-

pora for Synchronic and Diachronic Linguistics Stud-

ies. Computational Linguistics and Chinese 

Language Processing 2(1):131—145. 

Li Wang 王力. 2004. A sketch of the history of Chinese 

language 漢語史稿 (in Chinese). Zhonghua Shuju, 
Beijing. 

Jiaolu Xu. 許嘉璐. 1992. Classical Chinese 古代漢語
(in Chinese). Higher Education Press, Beijing. 

Nianwen Xue, Fei Xia, Fu-Dong Chiou, and Martha 

Palmer, 2005.  The Penn Chinese TreeBank: Phrase 

Structure Annotation of a Large Corpus. Natural 

Language Engineering 11:pp.207—238. 

John Lee.  2012.  A Classical Chinese Corpus with 

Nested Part-of-Speech Tags.  Proc. EACL Workshop 

on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, So-

cial Sciences, and Humanities (LaTeCH). 

Chunshen Zhu and Ying Cui, 2010.  Imagery Focaliza-

tion and the Evocation of a Poetic World.  Chinese 

Translators Journal. 

  

199


