










































Structured Event Retrieval over Microblog Archives


2012 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 646–655,
Montréal, Canada, June 3-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Structured Event Retrieval over Microblog Archives

Donald Metzler, Congxing Cai, Eduard Hovy
Information Sciences Institute

University of Southern California
4676 Admiralty Way, Marina del Rey, CA 90292

Abstract

Microblog streams often contain a consider-
able amount of information about local, re-
gional, national, and global events. Most ex-
isting microblog search capabilities are fo-
cused on recent happenings and do not provide
the ability to search and explore past events.
This paper proposes the problem of structured
retrieval of historical event information over
microblog archives. Rather than retrieving in-
dividual microblog messages in response to an
event query, we propose retrieving a ranked
list of historical event summaries by distill-
ing high quality event representations using
a novel temporal query expansion technique.
The results of an exploratory study carried
out over a large archive of Twitter messages
demonstrates both the value of the microblog
event retrieval task and the effectiveness of our
proposed search methodologies.

1 Introduction

Real-time user generated content is one of the key
driving forces behind the growing popularity of so-
cial media-centric communication. The ability to in-
stantly share, often from your mobile phone, your
thoughts (via Twitter), your photos (via Facebook),
your location (via Foursquare), and a variety of other
information is changing the way that information is
created, communicated, and consumed.

There has been a substantial amount of research
effort devoted to user generated content-related
search tasks, including blog search, forum search,
and community-based question answering. How-
ever, there has been relatively little research on mi-

croblog search. Microblog services, such as Tumblr
and Twitter, provide users with the ability to broad-
cast short messages in real-time. This is in contrast
to traditional blogs that typically have considerably
more content that is updated less frequently. By
their very nature, microblog streams often contain
a considerable amount of information about local,
regional, national, and global news and events. A
recent study found that over 85% of trending topics
on Twitter are news-related (Kwak et al., 2010). An-
other recent study by Teevan et al. that investigated
the differences between microblog and Web search
reported similar findings (Teevan et al., 2011). The
study also found that microblog search queries are
used to find information related to news and events,
while Web search queries are more navigational in
nature and used to find a variety of information on a
specific topic.

It is likely that microblogs have not received much
attention because, unlike blog search, there is no
well-defined microblog search task. Existing mi-
croblog search services, such as those offered by
Twitter and Google, only provide the ability to re-
trieve individual microblog posts in response to a
query. Unfortunately, this task has limited utility
since very few real information needs can be satis-
fied by a single short piece of text (e.g., the max-
imum length of a message on Twitter is 140 char-
acters). Hence, novel search tasks defined over mi-
croblog streams that go beyond “message retrieval”
have the potential to add substantial value to users.

Given the somewhat limited utility of microblog
message search and the preponderance of news and
event-related material posted on microblogs, this pa-

646



July 16 2010 at 17 UTC, for 11 hours
Summary tweets:
i. Ok a 3.6 “rocks” nothing. But boarding a plane
there now, Woodward ho! RT @todayshow: 3.6 mag-
nitude #earthquake rocks Washington DC area.
ii. RT @fredthompson: 3.6-magnitude earthquake hit
DC. President Obama said it was due to 8 years of
Bush failing to regulate plate tectonic ...
iii. 3.6-magnitude earthquake wakes Md. residents:
Temblor centered in Gaithersburg felt by as many as
3 million people... http://bit.ly/9iMLEk

Figure 1: Example structured event representation re-
trieved for the query “earthquake”.

per proposes a novel search task that we call mi-
croblog event retrieval. Given a query that describes
an event, such as earthquake, terrorist bombing, or
bieber concert, the goal of the task is to retrieve a
ranked list of structured event representations, such
as the one shown in Figure 1, from a large archive of
historical microblog posts.

In this work, structured representations come in
the form of a list of timespans during which an in-
stance of the event occurred and was actively dis-
cussed within the microblog stream. Additionally,
for each timespan, a small set of relevant messages
are retrieved for the purpose of providing a high-
level summary of the event that occurred during the
timespan. This task leverages the large amount of
real-time, often first-hand information found in mi-
croblog archives to deliver a novel form of user gen-
erated content-based search results to users. Unlike
news search, which finds professionally written ar-
ticles on a news-related topic, and general-purpose
Web search, which is likely to find a large amount
of unrelated information, this task is designed to re-
trieve highly relevant news and event-related infor-
mation viewed through the lens of users who ex-
perienced or discussed the event while it happened
(or during its aftermath). Such search functional-
ity would not only be useful for everyday end-users,
but also social scientists, historians, journalists, and
emergency planners.

This paper has three primary contributions. First,
we introduce the microblog event retrieval task,
which retrieves a ranked list of structured event rep-
resentations in response to an event query. By going

beyond individual microblog message retrieval, the
task adds value to microblog archives and provides
users with the ability to find information that was
disseminated in real-time about past events, which
is not possible with news and Web search engines.
Second, we propose an unsupervised methodology
for distilling high quality event representations using
a novel temporal query expansion technique. The
technique synthesizes ideas from pseudo-relevance
feedback, term burstiness, and temporal aspects
of microblog streams. Third, we perform an ex-
ploratory evaluation of 50 event queries over a cor-
pus of 46 million Twitter messages. The results of
our evaluation demonstrate both the value of the mi-
croblog event retrieval task itself and the effective-
ness of our proposed search methodologies, which
show improvements of up to 42% compared to a
baseline approach.

2 Related Work

There are several directions of microblog research
that are related to our proposed work. First, there is
a growing body of literature that has focused on the
topical content of microblog posts. This research
has focused on microblog topic models (Hong and
Davison, 2010), event and topic detection and track-
ing (Sankaranarayanan et al., 2009; Cataldi et al.,
2010; Petrović et al., 2010; Lin et al., 2010), predict-
ing flu outbreaks using keyword tracking (Culotta,
2010), and using microblog streams as a source
of features for improving recency ranking in Web
search (Dong et al., 2010). Most of these approaches
analyze content as it arrives in the system. While
tracking a small number of topics or keywords is fea-
sible using online algorithms, the general problem
of topic detection and tracking (Allan et al., 1998) is
considerably more challenging given the large num-
ber of topics being discussed at any one point. Our
work differs in that it does not attempt to track or
model topics as they arrive in the system. Instead,
given an event query, our system retrospectively an-
alyzes the corpus of microblog messages for the pur-
pose of retrieving structured event representations.

There is no shortage of previous work on using
pseudo-relevance feedback approaches for query ex-
pansion. Relevant research includes classical vector-
space approaches (Rocchio, 1971), language mod-

647



eling approaches (Lavrenko and Croft, 2001; Zhai
and Lafferty, 2001; Li and Croft, 2003), among oth-
ers (Metzler and Croft, 2007; Cao et al., 2008; Lv
and Zhai, 2010). The novel aspect of our proposed
temporal query expansion approach is the fact that
expansion is done over a temporal stream of very
short, noisy messages.

There has also been recent work on summarizing
sets of microblog posts (Sharifi et al., 2010). We
chose to make use of a simple approach in favor of
a more sophisticated one because summarization is
only a minor aspect of our proposed framework.

Finally, there are two previous studies that are
the most relevant to our work. First, Massoudi et
al. propose a retrieval model that uses query ex-
pansion and microblog quality indicators to retrieve
individual microblog messages (Massoudi et al.,
2011). Their proposed query expansion approach
differs from ours in the sense that we utilize times-
pans from the (possibly distant) past when generat-
ing expanded queries and focus on event retrieval,
rather than individual message retrieval. The other
research that is closely related to ours is the work
done by Chieu and Lee (Chieu and Lee, 2004). The
authors propose an approach for automatically con-
structing timelines from news articles in response
to a query. The novelty of our proposed work de-
rives from our novel temporal query expansion ap-
proach, and the fact that our work focuses on mi-
croblog streams which are fundamentally different
in nature from news articles.

3 Microblog Event Retrieval

The primary goal of this paper is to introduce a new
microblog search paradigm that goes beyond retriev-
ing messages individually. We propose a novel task
called microblog event retrieval, which is defined as
follows. Given a query that specifies an event, re-
trieve a set of relevant structured event representa-
tions from a large archive of microblog messages.
This definition is purposefully general to allow for a
broad interpretation of the task.

There is nothing in our proposed retrieval frame-
work that precludes it from producing reasonable re-
sults for any type of query, not just those related to
events. However, we chose to primarily focus on
events in this paper because previous studies have

shown that a majority of trending topics within mi-
croblog streams are about news and events (Kwak et
al., 2010). The information found in microblogs is
difficult to find anywhere else, including news and
Web archives, thereby making it a valuable resource
for a wide variety of users.

3.1 Overview of Framework

Our microblog event retrieval framework takes a
query as input and returns a ranked list of struc-
tured event representations. To accomplish this, the
framework breaks the work into two steps – times-
pan retrieval and summarization. The timespan re-
trieval step identifies the timespans when the event
happened, while the summarization step retrieves
a small set of microblog messages for each times-
pan that are meant to act as a summary. Figure 1
shows an example result that is returned in response
to the query “earthquake”. The result consists of a
start time that indicates when the event began be-
ing discussed, a duration that specifies how long the
event was discussed, and a small number of mes-
sages posted during the time interval that are meant
to summarize what happened. This example corre-
sponds to an earthquake that struck the metropoli-
tan District of Colombia area in the United States.
The earthquake was heavily discussed for nearly 11
hours, because it hit a densely populated area that
does not typically experience earthquakes.

3.2 Temporal Query Expansion

We assume that queries issued to our retrieval frame-
work are simple keyword queries that consist of a
small number of terms. This sparse representation
of the user’s information need makes finding rel-
evant messages challenging, since microblog mes-
sages that are highly related to the query might not
contain any of the query keywords. It is common for
microblog messages about a given topic to express
the topic in a different, possibly shortened or slang,
manner. For example, rather than writing “earth-
quake”, users may instead use the word “quake” or
simply include a hashtag such as “#eq” in their mes-
sage. It is impractical to manually identify the full
set of related keywords and folksonomy tags (i.e.,
hashtags) for each query. In information retrieval,
this is known as the vocabulary mismatch problem.

To address this problem, we propose a novel unsu-

648



pervised temporal query expansion technique. The
approach is unsupervised in the sense that it makes
use of a pseudo-relevance feedback-like mechanism
when extracting expansion terms. Traditional query
expansion approaches typically find terms that com-
monly co-occur with the query terms in documents
(or passages). However, such approaches are not
suitable for expanding queries in the microblog set-
ting since microblog messages are very short, yield-
ing unreliable co-occurrence information. Further-
more, microblog messages have an important tem-
poral dimension that should be considered when
they are being used to generate expansion terms.

Our proposed approach generates expansion
terms based on the temporal co-occurrence of terms.
Given keyword query q, we first automatically re-
trieve a set of N timespans for which the query key-
words were most heavily discussed. To do so, we
rank timespans according to the proportion of mes-
sages posted during the timespan that contain one
or more of the query keywords. This is a simple,
but highly reliable way of identifying timespans dur-
ing which a specific topic is being heavily discussed.
These timespans are then considered to be pseudo-
relevant. In our experiments, the microblog stream
is divided into hours, with each hour corresponding
to an atomic timespan. Although it is possible to
define timespans in many different ways, we found
that this was a suitable level of granularity for most
events that was neither overly broad nor overly spe-
cific.

For each pseudo-relevant timespan, a burstiness
score is computed for all of the terms that occur in
messages posted during the timespan. The bursti-
ness score is meant to quantify how trending a term
is during the timespan. Thus, if the query is be-
ing heavily discussed during the timespan and some
term is also trending during the timespan, then the
term may be related to the query. For each of the top
N time intervals, the burstiness score of each term
is computed as follows:

burstiness(w, TSi) =
P (w|TSi)
P (w)

(1)

which is the ratio of the term’s likelihood of occur-
ring within timespan TSi versus the likelihood of
the term occurring during any timespan. Hence, if
a term that generally infrequently occurs within the

message stream suddenly occurs many times within
a single time interval, then the term will be assigned
a high burstiness score. This weighting is similar in
nature to that proposed by Ponte for query expansion
within the language modeling framework for infor-
mation retrieval (Ponte, 1998). The following prob-
ability estimates are used for the expressions within
the burstiness score:

P (w|TSi) =
tfw,TSi + µ

tfw
N

|TSi|+ µ
, P (w) =

tfw +K

N +K|V |

where tfw,TSi is the number of occurrences of w in
timespan TSi, tfw is the number of occurrences of
w in the entire microblog archive, |TSi| is the num-
ber of terms in timespan TSi, N is the total number
of terms in the microblog archive, V is the vocabu-
lary size, and µ and K are smoothing parameters.

While it is common practice to smooth P (w|TSi)
using Dirichlet (or Bayesian) smoothing (Zhai and
Lafferty, 2004), it is less common to smooth the gen-
eral English language model P (w). However, we
found that this was necessary since term distribu-
tions in microblog services exhibit unique character-
istics. By smoothing P (w), we dampen the effect of
overweighting very rare terms. In our experiments,
we set the value of µ to 500 and K to 10 after some
preliminary exploration. We found that the overall
system effectiveness is generally insensitive to the
choice of smoothing parameters.

The final step of the query expansion process
involves aggregating the burstiness scores across
all pseudo-relevant timespans to generate an over-
all score for each term. To do so, we compute
the geometric mean of the burstiness scores across
the pseudo-relevant timespans. Preliminary experi-
ments showed that the arithmetic mean was suscep-
tible to overweighting terms that had a very large
burstiness score in a single timespan. By utiliz-
ing the geometric average instead, we ensure that
the highest weighted terms are those that have large
weights in a large number of the timespans, thereby
eliminating spurious terms. Seo and Croft (2010)
observed similar results with traditional pseudo-
relevance feedback techniques.

The k highest weighted terms are then used as
expansion terms. Using this approach, terms that
commonly trend during the same timespans that

649



the query terms commonly occur (i.e., the pseudo-
relevant timespans) are assigned high weights.
Hence, the approach is capable of capturing sim-
ple temporal dependencies between terms and query
keywords, which is not possible with traditional ap-
proaches.

3.3 Timespan Ranking

The end result of the query expansion process just
described is an expanded query q′ that consists of a
set of k terms and their respective weights (denoted
as βw). Our framework uses the expanded query q′

to retrieve relevant timespans. We hypothesize that
using the expanded version of the query for timespan
retrieval will yield significantly better results than
using the keyword version.

To retrieve timespans, we first identify the 1000
highest scoring timespans (with respect to q′). We
then merge contiguous timespans into a single,
longer timespan, where the score of the merged
timespan is the maximum score of its component
timespans. The final ranked list consists of the
merged timespans. Therefore, although our times-
pans are defined as hour intervals, it is possible for
our system to return longer (merged) timespans.

We now describe two scoring functions that can
be used to compute the relevance of a timespan with
respect to an expanded query representation.

3.3.1 Coverage Scoring Function
The coverage scoring function measures rele-

vance as the (weighted) number of expansion terms
that are covered within the timespan. This measure
assumes that the expanded query is a faithful repre-
sentation of the information need and that the more
times the highly weighted expansion terms occur,
the more relevant the timespan is. Using this defi-
nition, the coverage score of a time interval is com-
puted as:

s(q′, TS) =
∑
w∈q′

βw · tfw,TS

where tfwi,TS is the term frequency of wi in times-
pan TS and βw is the expansion weight of term w.

3.3.2 Burstiness Scoring Function
Since multiple events may occur at the same time,

microblog streams can easily be dominated by the

larger of two events. However, less popular events
may also exhibit burstiness at the same time. There-
fore, another measure of relevance is the burstiness
of the event signature during the timespan. If all
of the expansion terms exhibit burstiness during the
time interval, it strongly suggests the timespan may
be relevant to the query.

Therefore, to measure the relevance of the times-
pan, we first compute the burstiness scores for all of
the terms within the time interval. This yields a vec-
tor βTS of burstiness scores. The cosine similarity
measure is used to compute the similarity between
the query burstiness scores and the timespan bursti-
ness scores. Hence, the burstiness scoring function
is computed as:

s(q′, TS) = cos(βq′ , βTS)

3.4 Timespan Summarization

The final step of the retrieval process is to produce
a short query-biased summary for each retrieved
time interval. The primary purpose for generating
this type of summary is to provide the user with
a quick overview of what happened during the re-
trieved timespans.

We utilize a simple, straightforward approach that
generates unexpectedly useful summaries. Given a
timespan, we use a relatively simple information re-
trieval model to retrieve a small set of microblog
messages posted during the timespan that are the
most relevant to the expanded representation of the
original query. These messages are then used as a
short summary of the timespan.

This is accomplished by scoring a microblog mes-
sageM with respect to an expanded query represen-
tation q′ using a weighted variant of the query like-
lihood scoring function (Ponte and Croft, 1998):

s(q′,M) =
∑
w∈q′

βw · logP (w|M)

where βw is the burstiness score for expansion term
w and P (w|M) is a Dirichlet smoothed language
modeling estimate for term w in message M . This
scoring function is also equivalent to the cross en-
tropy and KL-divergence scoring functions (Lafferty
and Zhai, 2001).

650



Category Events
Business layoffs, bankruptcy, acquisition,

merger, hostile takeover
Celebrity wedding, divorce

Crime shooting, robbery, assassination,
court decision, school shooting

Death death, suicide, drowned
Energy blackout, brownout

Entertainment awards, championship game,
world record

Health recall, pandemic, disease, flu,
poisoning

Natural Disaster hurricane, tornado, earthquake,
flood, tsunami, wildfire, fire

Politics election, riots, protests
Terrorism hostage, explosion, terrorism,

bombing, terrorist attack, suicide
bombing, hijacked

Transportation plane crash, traffic jam, sinks,
pileup, road rage, train crash, de-
railed, capsizes

Table 1: The 50 event types used as queries during our
evaluation, divided into categories.

4 Experiments

This section describes our empirical evaluation of
the proposed microblog event retrieval task.

4.1 Microblog Corpus

Our microblog message archive consists of data
that we collected from Twitter using their Stream-
ing API. The API delivers a continuous 1% ran-
dom sample of public Twitter messages (also called
“tweets”). Our evaluation makes use of data col-
lected between July 16, 2010 and Jan 1st, 2011. Af-
ter eliminating all non-English tweets, our corpus
consists of 46,611,766 English tweets, which corre-
sponds to roughly 10,000 tweets per hour. Although
this only represents a 1% sample of all tweets, we
believe that the corpus is sizable enough to demon-
strate the utility of our proposed approach.

4.2 Event Queries

To evaluate our system, we prepared a list of 50
event types that fall into 11 different categories.
The event types and their corresponding categories
are listed in Table 1. The different event types
can have substantially different characteristics, such

as the frequency of occurrence, geographic or de-
mographic interest, popularity, etc. For example,
there are more weddings than earthquakes. Pub-
lic events, such as federal elections involve people
across the country. However, a car pileup typically
only attracts local attention. Moreover, microblog-
gers show different amounts of interest to each type
of event. For example, Twitter users are more likely
to tweet about politics than a business acquisition.

4.3 Methodology

To evaluate the quality of a particular configuration
of our framework, we run the microblog event re-
trieval task for the 50 different event type queries de-
scribed in the previous section. For each query, the
top 10 timespans retrieved are manually judged to
be relevant or non-relevant. If the summary returned
clearly indicated a real event instance occurred, then
the timespan was marked as relevant. The primary
metric of interest is precision at 10.

In addition to the temporal query expansion
approach (denoted TQE), we also ran exper-
iments using relevance-based language models,
which is a state-of-the-art query expansion ap-
proach (Lavrenko and Croft, 2001). We ran two
variants of relevance-based language models. In
the first, query expansion was done using the Twit-
ter corpus itself (denoted TwitterRM). This allows
us to compare the effectiveness of the TQE ap-
proach against a more traditional query expansion
approach. In the other variant, query expansion was
done using the English Gigaword corpus (denoted
NewsRM), which is a rich source of event informa-
tion created by traditional news media.

For all three query expansion approaches (TQE,
TwitterRM, and NewsRM), the two scoring func-
tions, burstiness and coverage, are used to rank
timespans. Hence, we evaluate six specific instances
of our framework. As a baseline, we use a sim-
ple (unexpanded) keyword retrieval approach that
scores timespans according to the relative frequency
of event keywords that occur during the timespan.

4.4 Timespan Retrieval Results

Before delving into the details of our quantitative
evaluation of effectiveness, we provide an illustra-
tive example of the type of results our system is ca-
pable of producing. Table 2 shows the top four re-

651



July 16 2010 at 17 UTC, for 11 hours
Ok a 3.6 “rocks” nothing. But boarding a plane there
now, Woodward ho! RT @todayshow: 3.6 magnitude
#earthquake rocks Washington DC area.
September 28 2010 at 11 UTC, for 6 hours
RT @Quakeprediction: 2.6 earthquake
(possible foreshock) hits E of Los Ange-
les; http://earthquake.usgs.gov/
earthquakes/recenteqscanv/Fau ...
September 04 2010 at 01 UTC, for 3 hours
7.0 quake strikes New Zealand - A 7.0-magnitude
earthquake has struck near New Zealand’s second
largest city. Reside... http://ht.ly/18R2rw
October 27 2010 at 01 UTC, for 5 hours
RT @SURFER Magazine: Tsunami Strikes
Mentawais: Wave Spawned By A 7.5-Magnitude
Earthquake Off West Coast Of Indonesia
http://bit.ly/8Z9Lbv

Table 2: Top four timespans (with a single summary
tweet) retrieved for the query “earthquake”.

sults retrieved using temporal query expansion with
the burstiness scoring function for the query “earth-
quake”. Only a single summary tweet is displayed
for each timespan due to space restrictions. As we
can see from the tweets, all of the results are rele-
vant to the query, in that they all correspond to times
when an earthquake happened and was actively dis-
cussed on Twitter. Different from Web and news
search results, these types of ranked lists provide a
clear temporal picture of relevant events that were
actively discussed on Twitter.

The results of our microblog retrieval task are
shown in Table 3. The table reports the per-category
and overall precision at 10 for the baseline, and
the six configurations of our proposed framework.
Bolded values represent the best result per category.
As the results show, using temporal query expan-
sion with burstiness ranking yields a mean preci-
sion at 10 of 61%, making it the best overall sys-
tem configuration. The approach is 41.9% better
than the baseline, which is statistically significant
according to a one-sided paired t-test at the p < 0.01
level. Interestingly, the relevance model-based ex-
pansion techniques exhibit even worse performance,
on average, than our simple keyword baseline. For

example, the news-based expansion approach was
11.6% worse using the coverage scoring function
and 18.6% worse using the burstiness scoring func-
tion compared to the baseline. All of the traditional
query expansion results are statistically significantly
worse than the temporal query expansion-based ap-
proaches. Hence, the results suggest that capturing
temporal dependencies between terms yields bet-
ter expanded representations than simply capturing
term co-occurrences, as is done in traditional query
expansion approaches.

The results also indicate the burstiness scoring
function outperforms the coverage scoring function
for temporal query expansion. An analysis of the
results revealed that in many cases the timespans
returned using the coverage scoring function had a
small number of frequent terms that matched the ex-
panded query. This happened less often with the
burstiness scoring function, which is based on the
cosine similarity between the query and timespan’s
burstiness scores. The combination of burstiness
weighting and l2 normalization (when computing
the cosine similarity) appears to yield a more robust
scoring function.

4.5 Event Popularity Effects
It is also interesting to note that the retrieval perfor-
mance varies substantially across the different event
type categories. For example, the performance on
queries about “natural disasters” and “politics” is
consistently strong. Similar performance can also
be achieved for popular events related to celebri-
ties. However, energy-related event queries, such as
“blackout”, achieves very poor effectiveness. This
observation seems to suggest that the more popu-
lar an event is, the better the retrieval performance
that can be achieved. This is a reasonable hypothe-
sis since the more people tweet about the event, the
easier it is to identify the trend from the background.

To better understand this phenomenon, we com-
pute the correlation between timespan retrieval pre-
cision and event (query) popularity, where popular-
ity is measured according to:

Popularity(q) =
1

N

N∑
i=1

burstiness(q, TSi),

where q is the event query, burstiness(q, TSi) is
the burstiness score of the event during timespan

652



Event Category Baseline NewsRM TwitterRM TQEburst cover burst cover burst cover
Business 0.50 0.46 0.30 0.70 0.18 0.74 0.64
Celebrity 0.75 0.30 0.40 0.50 0.60 0.80 0.45
Crime 0.44 0.28 0.54 0.22 0.32 0.46 0.28
Death 0.43 0.20 0.33 0.30 0.30 0.47 0.47
Energy 0.05 0.10 0.05 0.20 0.05 0.15 0.00
Entertainment 0.47 0.53 0.67 0.30 0.53 0.70 0.70
Health 0.48 0.28 0.36 0.44 0.16 0.60 0.60
Nat. Disaster 0.50 0.53 0.59 0.66 0.46 0.87 0.66
Politics 0.67 0.70 0.53 0.63 0.30 0.87 0.60
Terrorism 0.41 0.44 0.39 0.39 0.17 0.69 0.51
Transportation 0.21 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.10 0.31 0.19
All 0.43 0.35 0.38 0.40 0.26 0.61 0.47

Table 3: Per-category and overall (All) precision at 10 for the keyword only approach (Baseline), traditional newswire
expansion (NewsRM), traditional pseudo relevance feedback using the Twitter corpus (TwitterRM), and tempo-
ral query expansion (TQE). For the expansion-based approaches, results for the burstiness scoring (burst) and the
coverage-based scoring (cover) are given. Bold values indicate the best result per category.

Correlation
Baseline 0.63 (p < 0.01)
NewsRM 0.53 (p < 0.01)
TwitterRM 0.61 (p < 0.01)
TQE 0.50 (p < 0.01)

Table 4: Spearman rank correlation between event re-
trieval precisions and event popularity. All methods use
the burstiness scoring function.

TSi, as defined in Equation 1, and the sum goes over
the topN timespans retrieved for the event using our
proposed retrieval approach.

Using this measure, we find that Twitter users are
more interested in events related to entertainment
and politics, and less interested in events related to
energy or transportation. Also, we notice that Twit-
ter users actively discuss dramatic crisis-related top-
ics, including natural disasters (e.g., earthquakes,
hurricanes, tornado, etc.) and terrorist attacks.

Table 4 shows the correlations between effec-
tiveness and event popularity across different ap-
proaches. The correlations indicate a strong cor-
relation with event popularity for the keyword ap-
proach. This is expected, since the approach is based
on the number of times the keywords are mentioned
within the timespan. The correlations are signif-
icantly reduced by incorporating query expansion
terms. The configurations that use temporal query

expansion tend to have lower correlation than the
other approaches. Although the correlation is still
significant, the lower correlation suggests that tem-
poral query expansion approaches are more robust to
popularity effects than simple keywords approaches.
Additional work is necessary to better understand
the role of popularity in retrieval tasks like this.

5 Conclusions

In this paper, we proposed a novel microblog search
task called microblog event retrieval. Unlike previ-
ous microblog search tasks that retrieve individual
microblog messages, our task involves the retrieval
of structured event representations during which an
event occurs and is discussed within the microblog
community. In this way, users are presented with a
ranked list or timeline of event instances in response
to a query.

To tackle the microblog search task, we proposed
a novel timespan retrieval framework that first con-
structs an expanded representation of the incoming
query, performs timespan retrieval, and then pro-
duces a short summary of the timespan. Our experi-
mental evaluation, carried out over a corpus of over
46 million microblog messages collected from Twit-
ter, showed that microblog event retrieval is a feasi-
ble, challenging task, and that our proposed times-
pan retrieval framework is both robust and effective.

653



References
James Allan, Jaime Carbonell, George Doddington,

Jonathan Yamron, and Yiming Yang. 1998. Topic De-
tection and Tracking Pilot Study. In In Proceedings of
the DARPA Broadcast News Transcription and Under-
standing Workshop, pages 194–218.

Guihong Cao, Jian-Yun Nie, Jianfeng Gao, and Stephen
Robertson. 2008. Selecting good expansion terms for
pseudo-relevance feedback. In Proc. 31st Ann. Intl.
ACM SIGIR Conf. on Research and Development in In-
formation Retrieval, SIGIR ’08, pages 243–250, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

Mario Cataldi, Luigi Di Caro, and Claudio Schifanella.
2010. Emerging topic detection on twitter based on
temporal and social terms evaluation. In Proceedings
of the Tenth International Workshop on Multimedia
Data Mining, MDMKDD ’10, pages 4:1–4:10, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

Hai Leong Chieu and Yoong Keok Lee. 2004. Query
based event extraction along a timeline. In Proceed-
ings of the 27th annual international ACM SIGIR con-
ference on Research and development in information
retrieval, SIGIR ’04, pages 425–432, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

Aron Culotta. 2010. Towards detecting influenza epi-
demics by analyzing twitter messages. In 1st Work-
shop on Social Media Analytics (SOMA’10), July.

Anlei Dong, Ruiqiang Zhang, Pranam Kolari, Jing
Bai, Fernando Diaz, Yi Chang, Zhaohui Zheng, and
Hongyuan Zha. 2010. Time is of the essence: im-
proving recency ranking using twitter data. In Pro-
ceedings of the 19th international conference on World
wide web, WWW ’10, pages 331–340, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

Liangjie Hong and Brian D. Davison. 2010. Empirical
study of topic modeling in twitter. In 1st Workshop on
Social Media Analytics (SOMA’10), July.

Haewoon Kwak, Changhyun Lee, Hosung Park, and Sue
Moon. 2010. What is twitter, a social network or
a news media? In Proceedings of the 19th inter-
national conference on World wide web, WWW ’10,
pages 591–600, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

J. Lafferty and C. Zhai. 2001. Document language mod-
els, query models, and risk minimization for informa-
tion retrieval. In Proc. 24th Ann. Intl. ACM SIGIR
Conf. on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, pages 111–119.

V. Lavrenko and W. B. Croft. 2001. Relevance-based
language models. In Proc. 24th Ann. Intl. ACM SI-
GIR Conf. on Research and Development in Informa-
tion Retrieval, pages 120–127.

Xiaoyan Li and W. Bruce Croft. 2003. Time-based lan-
guage models. In Proc. 12th Intl. Conf. on Information

and Knowledge Management, CIKM ’03, pages 469–
475, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Cindy Xide Lin, Bo Zhao, Qiaozhu Mei, and Jiawei Han.
2010. Pet: a statistical model for popular events track-
ing in social communities. In Proc. 16th Ann. Intl.
ACM SIGKDD Conf. on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, KDD ’10, pages 929–938, New York,
NY, USA. ACM.

Yuanhua Lv and ChengXiang Zhai. 2010. Positional rel-
evance model for pseudo-relevance feedback. In Proc.
33rd Ann. Intl. ACM SIGIR Conf. on Research and De-
velopment in Information Retrieval, SIGIR ’10, pages
579–586, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Kamran Massoudi, Manos Tsagkias, Maarten de Rijke,
and Wouter Weerkamp. 2011. Incorporating query ex-
pansion and quality indicators in searching microblog
posts. In Proc. 33rd European Conf. on Information
Retrieval, page To appear.

Donald Metzler and W. Bruce Croft. 2007. Latent con-
cept expansion using markov random fields. In Proc.
30th Ann. Intl. ACM SIGIR Conf. on Research and De-
velopment in Information Retrieval, SIGIR ’07, pages
311–318, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Saša Petrović, Miles Osborne, and Victor Lavrenko.
2010. Streaming first story detection with applica-
tion to twitter. In Human Language Technologies: The
2010 Annual Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
HLT ’10, pages 181–189, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

J. Ponte and W. Bruce Croft. 1998. A language modeling
approach to information retrieval. In Proc. 21st Ann.
Intl. ACM SIGIR Conf. on Research and Development
in Information Retrieval, pages 275–281.

Jay Ponte. 1998. A Language Modeling Approach to In-
formation Retrieval. Ph.D. thesis, University of Mas-
sachusetts, Amherst, MA.

J. J. Rocchio, 1971. Relevance Feedback in Information
Retrieval, pages 313–323. Prentice-Hall.

Jagan Sankaranarayanan, Hanan Samet, Benjamin E.
Teitler, Michael D. Lieberman, and Jon Sperling.
2009. Twitterstand: news in tweets. In Proceedings of
the 17th ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference
on Advances in Geographic Information Systems, GIS
’09, pages 42–51, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Jangwon Seo and W. Bruce Croft. 2010. Geometric rep-
resentations for multiple documents. In Proceeding of
the 33rd international ACM SIGIR conference on Re-
search and development in information retrieval, SI-
GIR ’10, pages 251–258, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Beaux Sharifi, Mark-Anthony Hutton, and Jugal K.
Kalita. 2010. Experiments in microblog summariza-
tion. Social Computing / IEEE International Confer-

654



ence on Privacy, Security, Risk and Trust, 2010 IEEE
International Conference on, 0:49–56.

Jaime Teevan, Daniel Ramage, and Meredith Ringel Mor-
ris. 2011. #twittersearch: A comparison of microblog
search and web search. In WSDM 2011: Fourth Inter-
national Conference on Web Search and Data Mining,
Feb.

ChengXiang Zhai and John Lafferty. 2001. Model-based
feedback in the language modeling approach to infor-
mation retrieval. In Proc. 10th Intl. Conf. on Informa-
tion and Knowledge Management, pages 403–410.

C. Zhai and J. Lafferty. 2004. A study of smoothing
methods for language models applied to information
retrieval. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., 22(2):179–214.

655


