










































AttitudeMiner: Mining Attitude from Online Discussions


Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2012: Demonstration Session, pages 33–36,
Montréal, Canada, June 3-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

AttitudeMiner: Mining Attitude from Online Discussions

Amjad Abu-Jbara
EECS Department

University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, USA

amjbara@umich.edu

Ahmed Hassan
Microsoft Research

Redmond, WA, USA
hassanam@microsoft.com

Dragomir Radev
EECS Department

University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, USA
radev@umich.edu

Abstract

This demonstration presents AttitudeMiner, a
system for mining attitude from online dis-
cussions. AttitudeMiner uses linguistic tech-
niques to analyze the text exchanged between
participants of online discussion threads at dif-
ferent levels of granularity: the word level, the
sentence level, the post level, and the thread
level. The goal of this analysis is to iden-
tify the polarity of the attitude the discussants
carry towards one another. Attitude predic-
tions are used to construct a signed network
representation of the discussion thread. In this
network, each discussant is represented by a
node. An edge connects two discussants if
they exchanged posts. The sign (positive or
negative) of the edge is set based on the po-
larity of the attitude identified in the text asso-
ciated with the edge. The system can be used
in different applications such as: word polar-
ity identification, identifying attitudinal sen-
tences and their signs, signed social network
extraction from text, subgroup detect in dis-
cussion. The system is publicly available for
download and has an online demonstration at
http://clair.eecs.umich.edu/AttitudeMiner/.

1 Introduction

The rapid growth of social media has encouraged
people to interact with each other and get involved
in discussions more than anytime before. The most
common form of interaction on the web uses text
as the main communication medium. When people
discuss a topic, especially when it is a controversial
one, it is normal to see situations of both agreement
and disagreement among the discussants. It is even
not uncommon that the big group of discussants split
into two or more smaller subgroups. The members
of each subgroup mostly agree and show positive
attitude toward each other, while they mostly dis-
agree with the members of opposing subgroups and
possibly show negative attitude toward them. These
forms of sentiment are expressed in text by using
certain language constructs (e.g. use insult or nega-
tive slang to express negative attitude).

In this demonstration, we present a system that
applies linguistic analysis techniques to the text of
online discussions to predict the polarity of relations
that develop between discussants. This analysis is
done on words to identify their polarities, then on
sentences to identify attitudinal sentences and the
sign of attitude, then on the post level to identify the
sign of an interaction, and finally on the entire thread
level to identify the overall polarity of the relation.
Once the polarity of the pairwise relations that de-
velop between interacting discussants is identified,
this information is then used to construct a signed
network representation of the discussion thread.

The system also implements two signed network
partitioning techniques that can be used to detect
how the discussants split into subgroups regarding
the discussion topic.

The functionality of the system is based on
our previous research on word polarity identifica-
tion (Hassan and Radev, 2010) and attitude identifi-
cation (Hassan et al., 2010). The system is publicly
available for download and has a web interface to try
online1.

This work is related to previous work in the areas
of sentiment analysis and online discussion mining.
Many previous systems studied the problem of iden-
tifying the polarity of individual words (Hatzivas-
siloglou and McKeown, 1997; Turney and Littman,
2003). Opinionfinder (Wilson et al., 2005a) is a sys-
tem for mining opinions from text. Another research
line focused on analyzing online discussions. For
example, Lin et al. (2009) proposed a sparse coding-
based model that simultaneously models the seman-
tics and the structure of threaded discussions and
Shen et al. (2006) proposed a method for exploit-
ing the temporal information in discussion streams
to identify the reply structure of the dialog. Many
systems addressed the problem of extracting social
networks from data (Elson et al., 2010; McCallum
et al., 2007), but none of them considered both pos-
itive and negative relations.

In the rest of the paper, we describe the system
architecture, implementation, usage, and its perfor-

1http://clair.eecs.umich.edu/AttitudeMiner/

33



Discussion 
Thread 

….……. 
….……. 
….……. 

Text Polarity 
Identification 

• Identify polarized words 
• Identify the contextual 

polarity of each word 

 
 

Attitude Identification 
• Identify Attitudinal 

Sentences 
• Predict the sign on 

attitude 
 
 

Post sign identification 
• Aggregate the signs of 

attitudinal sentences to 
assign a sign to the 
post. 
 

Relation Sign 
• Aggregate the signs of all 

the posts exchanged by 
interacting participants 
to assign a sign for their 
relation. 

Signed Network 
 

 
 
 
 

Subgroups 
 
 
 
 
 

Thread Parsing 
• Identify posts 
• Identify discussants 
• Identify the reply 

structure 
• Tokenize text 
• Split posts into sentences 
 

+ _ 

Figure 1: Overview of the system processing pipeline

mance evaluation.

2 System Overview

Figure 1 shows a block diagram of the system com-
ponents and the processing pipeline. The first com-
ponent in the system is the thread parsing com-
ponent which takes as input a discussion thread
and parses it to identify the posts, the participants,
and the reply structure of the thread. This compo-
nent uses a module from CLAIRLib (Abu-Jbara and
Radev, 2011) to tokenize the posts and split them
into sentences.

The second component in the pipeline processes
the text of the posts to identify polarized words and
tag them with their polarity. This component uses
the publicly available tool, opinionfinder (Wilson et
al., 2005a), as a framework for polarity identifica-
tion. This component uses an extended polarity lex-
icon created by applying a random walk model to
WordNet (Miller, 1995) and a set of seed polarized
words. This approach is described in detail in our
previous work (Hassan and Radev, 2010). The con-
text of words is taken into consideration by running
a contextual word classifier that determines whether
the word is used in a polarized sense given the con-
text (Wilson et al., 2005b). For example, a positive
word appearing in a negated scope is used in a neg-
ative, rather than a positive sense.

The next component is the attitude identification
component. Given a sentence, our model predicts
whether it carries an attitude from the text writer to-
ward the text recipient or not. As we are only in-
terested in attitudes between participants, we limit
our analysis to sentences that use mentions of a dis-
cussion participants (i.e. names or second person
pronouns). We also discard all sentences that do
not contain polarized expressions as detected by the
previous component. We extract several patterns at
different levels of generalization representing any
given sentence. We use words, part-of-speech tags,

and dependency relations. We use those patterns to
build two Markov models for every kind of patterns.
The first model characterizes the relation between
different tokens for all patterns that correspond to
sentences that have an attitude. The second model
is similar to the first one, but it uses all patterns that
correspond to sentences that do not have an attitude.
Given a new sentence, we extract the corresponding
patterns and estimate the likelihood of every pattern
being generated from the two corresponding mod-
els. We then compute the likelihood ratio of the sen-
tence under every pair of models. Notice that we
have a pair of models corresponding to every type of
patterns. The likelihood ratios are combined using a
linear model, the parameters of which are estimated
using a development dataset. Please refer to (Hassan
et al., 2010) for more details about this component.

The next component works on the post level. It
assigns a sign to each post based on the signs of the
sentences it contains. A post is classified as negative
if it has at least Ns negative sentences, otherwise it is
classified as positive. The value of Ns can be chosen
by the user or set to default which was estimated
using a small labeled development set. The default
value for Ns is 1 (i.e. if the post contains at least one
negative sentence, the whole post is considered to be
negative).

The next component in the pipeline uses the atti-
tude predictions from posts to construct a signed net-
work representation of the discussion thread. Each
participant is represented by a node. An edge is
created between two participants if they interacted
with each other. A sign (positive or negative) is as-
signed to an edge based on the signs of the posts
the two participants connected by the edge have ex-
changed. This is done by comparing the number of
positive and negative posts. A negative sign is given
if the two participants exchanged at least Np nega-
tive posts. The value of Np can be set using a devel-
opment set. The default value is 1.

The last component is the subgroup identifica-

34



Figure 2: The web interface for detecting subgroups in discussions

tion component. This component provides imple-
mentations for two signed network partitioning algo-
rithms. The first one is a greedy optimization algo-
rithm that is based on the principals of the structural
balance theory. The algorithm uses a criterion func-
tion for a local optimization partitioning such that
positive links are dense within groups and negative
links are dense between groups. The algorithm is de-
scribed in detail in (Doreian and Mrvar, 1996). The
second algorithm is FEC (Yang et al., 2007). FEC
is based on an agent-based random walk model. It
starts by finding a sink community, and then extract-
ing it from the entire network based on a graph cut
criteria that Yang et al. (2007) proposed. The same
process is then applied recursively to the extracted
community and the rest of the network.

3 Implementation Details

The system is implemented in Perl. Some of the
components in the processing pipeline use external
tools that are implemented in either Perl, Java, or
Python. All the external tools come bundled with the
system. The system is compatible with all the ma-
jor platforms including windows, Mac OS, and all
Linux distributions. The installation process is very
straightforward. There is a single installation script
that will install the system, install all the dependen-
cies, and do all the required configurations. The in-
stallation requires that Java JRE, Perl, and Python be
installed on the machine.

The system has a command-line interface that
provides full access to the system functionality. The
command-line interface can be used to run the whole
pipeline or any portion of it. It can also be used to ac-
cess any component directly. Each component has a
corresponding script that can be run separately. The
input and output specifications of each component
are described in the accompanying documentation.
All the parameters that control the performance of
the system can also be passed through the command-
line interface.

The system can process any discussion thread that
is input to it in a specific XML format. The fi-
nal output of the system is also in XML format.
The XML schema of the input/output is described
in the documentation. It is the user responsibil-
ity to write a parser that converts an online discus-
sion thread to the expected XML format. The sys-
tem package comes with three such parsers for three
different discussion sites: www.politicalforum.com,
groups.google.com, and www.createdebate.com.

The distribution also comes with three datasets
(from three different sources) comprising a total of
300 discussion threads. The datasets are annotated
with the subgroup labels of discussants. Included in
the distribution as well, a script for generating a vi-
sualization of the extracted signed network and the
identified subgroups.

AttitudeMiner also has a web interface that
demonstrates most of its functionality. The web in-

35



Figure 3: The web interface for identifying attitudinal
sentences and their polarity

terface is intended for demonstration purposes only.
No webservice is provided. Figure 2 and Figrue 3
show two screenshots for the web interface.

4 System Performance

In this section, we give a brief summary of the sys-
tem performance. The method that generates the
extended polarity lexicon that is used for word po-
larity identification achieves 88.8% accuracy as re-
ported in (Hassan and Radev, 2010). The attitude
identification component distinguishes between at-
titudinal and non-attitudinal sentences with 80.3%
accuracy, and predicts the signs of attitudinal sen-
tences with 97% accuracy as reported in (Hassan et
al., 2010). Our evaluation for the signed network
extraction component on a large annotated dataset
showed that it achieves 83.5% accuracy. Finally, our
experiments on an annotated discussion showed that
the system can detect subgroups with 77.8% purity.
The system was evaluated using a dataset with thou-
sands of posts labeled by human annotators.

5 Conclusion

We presented of a demonstration of a social me-
dia mining system that used linguistic analysis tech-
niques to understand the relations that develop be-
tween users in online communities. The system is
capable of analyzing the text exchanged during dis-
cussions and identifying positive and negative atti-
tudes. Positive attitude reflects a friendly relation
while negative attitude is a sign of an antagonistic
relation. The system can also use the attitude infor-
mation to identify subgroups with a homogeneous
and common focus among the discussants. The sys-
tem predicts attitudes and identifies subgroups with
high accuracy.

Acknowledgments

This research was funded by the Office of the Di-
rector of National Intelligence (ODNI), Intelligence

Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA),
through the U.S. Army Research Lab. All state-
ments of fact, opinion or conclusions contained
herein are those of the authors and should not be
construed as representing the official views or poli-
cies of IARPA, the ODNI or the U.S. Government.

References
Amjad Abu-Jbara and Dragomir Radev. 2011. Clairlib:

A toolkit for natural language processing, information
retrieval, and network analysis. In ACL-HLT 2011-
Demo, June.

Patrick Doreian and Andrej Mrvar. 1996. A partitioning
approach to structural balance. Social Networks.

David Elson, Nicholas Dames, and Kathleen McKeown.
2010. Extracting social networks from literary fiction.
In ACL 2010, pages 138–147, Uppsala, Sweden, July.

Ahmed Hassan and Dragomir R. Radev. 2010. Identify-
ing text polarity using random walks. In ACL 2010.

Ahmed Hassan, Vahed Qazvinian, and Dragomir Radev.
2010. What’s with the attitude? identifying sentences
with attitude in online discussions.

Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou and Kathleen R. McKeown.
1997. Predicting the semantic orientation of adjec-
tives. In EACL’97.

Chen Lin, Jiang-Ming Yang, Rui Cai, Xin-Jing Wang,
and Wei Wang. 2009. Simultaneously modeling se-
mantics and structure of threaded discussions: a sparse
coding approach and its applications. In SIGIR ’09.

Andrew McCallum, Xuerui Wang, and Andrés Corrada-
Emmanuel. 2007. Topic and role discovery in so-
cial networks with experiments on enron and academic
email. J. Artif. Int. Res.

George A. Miller. 1995. Wordnet: A lexical database for
english. Communications of the ACM.

Dou Shen, Qiang Yang, Jian-Tao Sun, and Zheng Chen.
2006. Thread detection in dynamic text message
streams. In SIGIR ’06, pages 35–42.

Peter Turney and Michael Littman. 2003. Measuring
praise and criticism: Inference of semantic orientation
from association. ACM Transactions on Information
Systems.

Theresa Wilson, Paul Hoffmann, Swapna Somasun-
daran, Jason Kessler, Janyce Wiebe, Yejin Choi,
Claire Cardie, Ellen Riloff, and Siddharth Patwardhan.
2005a. Opinionfinder: a system for subjectivity anal-
ysis. In HLT/EMNLP - Demo.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005b. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-
level sentiment analysis. In HLT/EMNLP’05.

Bo Yang, William Cheung, and Jiming Liu. 2007. Com-
munity mining from signed social networks. IEEE
Trans. on Knowl. and Data Eng.

36


