










































NOMIT: Automatic Titling by Nominalizing


2012 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 274–283,
Montréal, Canada, June 3-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

NOMIT: Automatic Titling by Nominalizing

Cédric Lopez, Violaine Prince, and Mathieu Roche
LIRMM, CNRS, Univ. Montpellier 2

161, rue Ada
Montpellier, France

{lopez,prince,mroche}@lirmm.fr

Abstract

The important mass of textual documents is
in perpetual growth and requires strong ap-
plications to automatically process informa-
tion. Automatic titling is an essential task for
several applications: ’No Subject’ e-mails ti-
tling, text generation, summarization, and so
forth. This study presents an original ap-
proach consisting in titling journalistic articles
by nominalizing. In particular, morphological
and semantic processing are employed to ob-
tain a nominalized form which has to respect
titles characteristics (in particular, relevance
and catchiness). The evaluation of the ap-
proach, described in the paper, indicates that
titles stemming from this method are informa-
tive and/or catchy.

1 Introduction

A title establishes a link between a reader and a
text. It has two main functions. First of all, a ti-
tle can be informative (it conveys relevant informa-
tion about the text content and aim), and second, it
can be catchy or incentive (Herrero Cecilia, 2007).
A heading is said to be catchy when it succeeds in
capturing the reader’s attention on an aspect of the
announced event, in a ingenious, metaphoric, enig-
matic, or shocking way. From a syntactic point of
view, a title can be a word, a phrase, an expression,
a sentence, that designates a paper or one of its parts,
by giving its subject.

Titles are used within applications such as auto-
matic generation of contents, or summarization. So,
it is interesting to automate the process that produces

relevant titles by extracting them from texts, and
supplying other applications with such data, while
avoiding any human intervention: Direct applica-
tions (as automatic titling of "no object" e-mails) are
thus possible.

The point is that several titles can be relevant for a
same text: This constitutes the main difficulty of au-
tomatic titling. Some writers prefer informative ti-
tles, whereas others prefer catchy ones. Others jug-
gle with both criteria according to the context and
the type of the publication. So, evaluation of au-
tomatic titling is a complex step requiring a human
intervention. Indeed, how can titles relevance be es-
timated ? How an automatic title can be compared
to a human-written ("real") title, knowing that both
can have a very different morphosyntactic structure?

Automatic titling is a full process, possessing its
own functions. It has to be sharply differentiated
from summarization and indexation tasks. Its pur-
pose is to propose title(s) that have to be short, infor-
mative and/or catchy, and keep a coherent syntactic
structure. NLP1 methods will be exploited in order
to abide by language morphosyntactic and semantic
constraints in titling.

In this paper, we describe an approach of auto-
matic titling relying on nominalization, i.e. rules
transforming a verb phrase into a noun phrase (e.g.
"the president left" is nominalized into " President’s
Departure"). This study raises two crucial questions:
(1) Determining sentences and phrases containing
relevant information (2) Nominalizing a chosen item
and using it as a title. Example: From the fol-
lowing pair of sentences "The disappointing perfor-

1Natural Language Processing

274



mance, on Sunday October 9th, of Ségolène Royal,
amazed the French citizens. For months, they de-
fended their candidate on the Web.", containing the
relevant information about an article in the French
press in 2007, the idea is to built the following title:
"Ségolène Royal: Surprise of the French citizens".
In fact, other titles could apply such as "Ségolène
Royal’s Disappointing Performance" or "Surprising
the French Citizens", but notice that both are less in-
formative, since they drop a part of the information.

This article is organized as such: The follow-
ing section briefly positions automatic titling in its
research environment and describes previous work
(section 2). The next one describes NOMIT, our ap-
proach of automatic titling by nominalization, which
consists in three successive steps: Extracting candi-
date headings from the document (section 3.1), pro-
cessing them linguistically (section 3.2), and last,
selecting one among the produced headings, which
will play the role of the system heading suggestion
(section 3.3). Finally, the results of NOMIT evalua-
tion are presented and discussed (section 4).

2 Previous Work

Automatic titling of textual documents is a subject
often confused with summarization and indexation
tasks. While a summary has to give an outline of the
text contents, the title has to indicate the subject of
the text without revealing all the contents. The pro-
cess of summarization can use titles, as in (Blais et
al., 2007) and (Amini et al., 2005), thus demonstrat-
ing their importance. Automatic summarization pro-
vides a set of relevant sentences extracted from the
text: The total number of sentences is diminished,
but sentences are not shortened by themselves. Ul-
timately reducing the number to one does not pro-
vide a title, since the latter is very rarely a sentence,
but needs to be grammatically consistent. It is also
necessary to differentiate automatic titling from text
compression: Text compression might shorten sen-
tences but keep the original number of sentences
(Yousfi-Monod and Prince, 2008). Mixing both ap-
proaches appears as a very costly process to under-
take, more adapted to a summarization task, when
titling might be obtained by less expansive tech-
niques.

Titling must also be differentiated from indexa-

tion because titles do not always contain the text
key-words: Headings can present a partial or total
reformulation of the text, not relevant for an index,
which role is to facilitate the user’s search and re-
trieval. Once again, the construction of an index can
use titles appearing in the document. So, if deter-
mining relevant titles is a successful task, the quality
of indexation will largely be improved.

An automatic titling approach, named POSTIT,
extracts relevant noun phrases to be used as titles
(Lopez et al., 2011b). One of its benefits is that long
titles, syntactically correct, can be proposed. The
main inconvenience is that it cannot provide orig-
inal titles, using a funny form for example, unless
this one already appears in the text (which can be
rather scarce, even in newspapers articles). In the
same environment, a variant of this approach, called
CATIT, constructing short titles, has been developed
by the same authors (Lopez et al., 2011a). It tries to
built titles which are relevant to the texts. It evalu-
ates their quality by browsing the Web (popular and
recognized expressions), as well as including those
titles dynamic context. Applied to a corpus of jour-
nalistic articles, CATIT was able to provide head-
ings both informative and catchy. However, syntac-
tical patterns used for titles building were short (two
terms) and experience showed that longer titles were
often preferred.

Another approach, presented by (Banko et al.,
2000), consists in generating coherent summaries
that are shorter than a single sentence. These sum-
maries are called "headlines". The main difficulty is
to adjust the threshold (i.e., the length of the head-
line), in order to obtain syntactically correct titles.
This is the main difference with our method NOMIT,
which ensures that its produced titles are always syn-
tactically correct.

If a system were to produce informative, catchy,
and variable-sized (in number of words) titles, the
nominalization of constituents seems to be an inter-
esting approach. Nominalization is a process trans-
forming an adjective or a verb into a noun or noun
phrase. In a nominalized constituent, the time of the
event is not in touch with the time of the speech of
the event (for example, "President’s departure" does
not infer that the president already left, contrary to
"The president left"). In some languages such as
German and French, nominalization answers an ac-

275



tivity of conceptualization and conciseness. In a ti-
tle, it allows to focus, according to the context of
the author, on the dimension of the event consid-
ered the most relevant. (Moirand, 1975) already no-
ticed that in French journalistic articles, numerous
titles appear with a nominalized form. This obser-
vation was recently confirmed by (Herrero Cecilia,
2007). It is thus interesting to study automatic ti-
tling by nominalization of constituents when dealing
with languages where it is often used. In English, the
method stays the same, but the pattern changes: En-
glish headings patterns incline towards progressive
present (e.g. "Tempest looming"), an infinitive form
with a past participle (e.g. "Conference to be held"),
and always with a deletion of articles. This paper fo-
cuses mostly on French because of its available data,
but a shift in languages and patterns is contemplated
in a further step.

3 NOMIT: Titling by Nominalizing

Since nominalization converts a sentence into a noun
or a noun phrase, it can always be described by a
transformation. Some transformations are easy-to-
do, in particular, transforming verb participles into
names or adjectives (such as defined by (Dubois and
Dubois-Charlier, 1970)). For example, "arrivé(e)"
(arrived is a French verbal participle which is equal
to its nominalized shape "arrivée" (arrival). Others
are more complex, for example the past participle
"parti" (gone) which nominalized form is "départ"
(departure). For these last ones, the use of a lexicon
is necessary.

The nominalization process embedded in NOMIT
develops three successive stages. The first one con-
cerns the extraction of candidates according to a
classical process in NLP: Data preparation, mor-
phosyntactic labeling, selection of the data to be
studied. The second phase consists in performing
a linguistic process, including morphosyntactic and
semantic aspects. Finally, the third phase focuses on
selecting a relevant title. Figure 1 presents the global
process, detailed in the following sub-sections.

We chose to focus our study on journalistic ar-
ticles stemming from Le Monde (year 1994), a fa-
mous French daily paper, since their electronic form
is available for scientific investigation. Note that the
method presented in this paper is applicable to all

Figure 1: Global process of NOMIT

types of texts (articles, news, blogs, and so forth).

3.1 Extracting Candidates

This first phase consists in extracting the candidates
(cf. section 3.2), which will be considered as poten-
tial titles after a linguistic treatment. It consists, in
turn, of four steps. The first step determines the ar-
ticle relevant data (i.e. fragments or reformulations
representing at best the main information emanating
from the text).

The described approach relies on the assumption
that good candidate phrases can be found in the first
two sentences of the article. Actually the best cov-
ering rate of the words of real titles is obtained with
these first sentences (see (Baxendale, 1958), (Vinet,
1993), (Jacques and Rebeyrolle, 2004), and (Lopez
et al., 2011b) regarding the POSTIT approach), jus-
tifying this choice. So, here, the selection of relevant
sentences (cf. Fig. 1, step 1.a) is limited to extract-
ing the first two sentences of the text.

Step 1.b (cf. Fig. 1) consists in labeling these
two sentences via SYGFRAN (Chauché and Prince,

276



2007), a morphosyntactic parser that tags words.
Thus, the presence of a "auxiliary + past partici-
ple" form syntactic pattern is tested2 (for example,
"a augmenté" meaning has increased). If such a pat-
tern is recognized in the sentence, then it is retained
and goes into the following stages. Otherwise, the
sentence is ignored. Then, sentences are pruned ac-
cording to two heuristics.

(Knight and Marcu, 2002) have studied sentence
compression by using a noisy-channel model which
consists in making the following hypothesis: The
sentence to be compressed was formerly short and
the author has extended it with additional informa-
tion (noise). Sentence compression, could, at a first
glance, appear as a possible clue, however, our ap-
proach does not aim at reducing at most the treated
sentence. Indeed, elements which can be pruned to
obtain a good summary do not always need to be
pruned to obtain a good title. So, the NOMIT sen-
tence pruning step (cf. Fig. 1, step 1.c) does not only
preserve the governors3. Here, the text is pruned
according to three heuristics, inspired from (Yousfi-
Monod and Prince, 2008), focusing on the function
and position of constituents in the syntactic tree:

1. Elimination of dates (for example "The disap-
pointing performance, on Sunday, October 9th,
of Ségolène Royal" becomes "The disappoint-
ing performance of Ségolène Royal "),

2. Elimination of phrases directly juxtaposed to a
past participle (for example "He chose, while
he was still hesitating, to help him" becomes
"He chose to help him"),

3. Elimination of the relative pronoun and the
proposition introduced by it ("Its presence,
which was not moreover wished, was noticed"
becomes "Its presence was noticed ").

These three heuristics are crucial to obtain a co-
herent title. In this step, grammaticality4 and conci-
sion5 must be respected.

2the pattern features are tuned to French, but the same struc-
ture globally applies to English too.

3governors of constituents considered as indispensable to
the grammatical and semantic coherence of the sentence

4The sentence must be well formed and must obey the lan-
guage grammar.

5a pruned sentence has to contain the relevant information
of the original sentence.

Finally, both sentences are segmented accord-
ing to punctuation (points, commas, colons, brack-
ets, interrogation marks, exclamation marks, and so
forth6) and only segments containing a "auxiliary +
past participle" pattern are preserved (cf. Fig. 1,
step 1.d). Also, segments containing pronouns are
not retained in the following steps to avoid problems
related to referents 7.

In the following example, each step is indicated
by a reference sending back to the global process
presented in Figure 1:

Original text:

• Yet they truly believed in it. The disappointing
performance, on Sunday, October 9th, of Sé-
golène Royal, amazed the French citizens. For
months, they defended their candidate on the
Web.

Treatments:

• (1.a) Yet they truly believed in it. The disap-
pointing performance, on Sunday, October 9th,
of Ségolène Royal, amazed the French citizens.

• (1.b) The disappointing performance, on Sun-
day, October 9th, of Ségolène Royal, amazed
the French citizens.

• (1.c) The disappointing performance of Sé-
golène Royal, amazed the French citizens.

• (1.d) amazed the French citizens8.

The following step enables to determine a relevant
title from the result obtained at step 1.d.

3.2 Linguistic Treatment
The linguistic treatment of segments, present in
those sentences retained in the previous section, is
constituted by two stages aiming at nominalizing the

6Points marking an abbreviation are not obviously taken into
account in this step.

7For example, the title "Disappointment of her partisans"
would not be very informative because of the presence of "her"
(unknown referent).

8We shall see in the section 3.2.2 how, in some cases, it is
possible to take into account the subject, i.e. Ségolène Royal in
this example.

277



"auxiliary + past participle" pattern. Here, the verbal
basis is transformed into an action noun.

The first step consists in obtaining the infinitive
of the verb to be nominalized from the past partici-
ple. Then, from the infinitive, possible nominalized
forms are returned. Even if several linguistic stud-
ies propose classifications by families of suffixes, it
is complex to process them automatically. The use
of a lexicon is a good solution allowing to ensure a
correct nominalized form.

3.2.1 Semantic Treatment
From past participle towards infinitive verb.
In step 1.b, segments of sentences containing the

"auxiliary + past participle" syntactic pattern were
extracted. For every past participle extracted, the
endings of conjugation are eliminated, and only
radicals are preserved (for example, "mangées"
(eaten) becomes "mang" (eat) (cf. Fig. 1, step
2.a). Afterwards, every radical is associated with its
infinitive verb using a lexicon9 built for that purpose
from the data established by the parser SYGFRAN
(cf. Fig. 1, step 2.b).

From infinitive verb towards the verb action.
JeuxDeMots10 is a French serious game enabling

the construction of a lexical network via a recre-
ational activity proposed on the Web. The prototype
was created in 2008 (Lafourcade and Zampa, 2007).
Today, more than 238,000 terms and more than
1,200,000 relations constitute the network. This
popular, evolutionary, and good quality network,
possesses a satisfactory knowledge coverage. All in
all, more than 40 types of relations were recorded
in the network. One of them interests us more par-
ticularly: The relation called "verb action". This
"action" is very interesting for obtaining a nominal-
ized form, in particular for verbs having their struc-
ture modified during their nominalization (addition
of suffix or prefix in particular). For example, we
obtain "départ" (departure) from the infinitive "par-
tir" (to leave)(cf. Fig. 1, step 2.c).

Let us note that several action names can exist for
the same verb. For example, "annonce" (announce-
ment) and "annonciation" (annunciation) are two ac-
tions of the verb "annoncer" (to announce). At this

9this lexicon contains 5,897 entries.
10http://www.jeuxdemots.org

stage, all action names are preserved and will be
considered in the next phase, consisting in nominal-
izing the candidates determined in the step before.

3.2.2 Morphosyntactic Treatment
The morphosyntactic processing aims at estab-

lishing rules that automatically transform a con-
stituent into its nominalized form. The purpose is
not to establish an exhaustive list of transformation
rules but to assure a correct transformation.

To transpose the agents of a verb into a nominal-
ized constituent, the French language makes a pro-
ficient use of prepositions. So when nominalizing
"auxiliary + past participle" in order to connect it
with its complement, the preposition "de" ("of") is
mandatory11. In English, although "X of Y" is an
accepted pattern, the genitive form "Y(’s) X" would
be preferred. If the complement does not exist, the
subject takes its place.

• Rule 1: Subject + Aux + PP + Complement =>
Verb action + (de) + Complement

– Original sentence: Il a annoncé les gag-
nants (He announced the winners)

– Radicalisation (2.a): Annonc
– Infinitive (2.b): Annoncer
– Actions associated to the infinitive (2.c):

Annonce ; annonciation
– Nominalization (2.d): Annonce des gag-

nants (Announcement of the winners or
Winners’ announcement ) ; annonciation
des gagnants (Annunciation of the winners
or Winners’ annunciation)

• Rule 2: Subject + Aux + PP => Action of the
verb + (de) + Subject

– Original sentence: Le président a démis-
sionné (The president resigned)

– Radicalisation (2.a): Démission
– Infinitive (2.b): Démissionner
– Actions associated to the infinitive (2.c):

Démission (Resignation)
– Nominalization (2.d): Démission du

président (Resignation of the president or
President’s resignation)

11The preposition can be contracted if needed ("de le" = "du",
"de les" = "des", and so forth.)

278



In section 3.1, relative subordinate pronoun and
subordinate clauses are eliminated because the in-
formation they convey is too secondary to be empha-
sized in a title. For example, "My cousin, who lives
in Paris, moved" becomes "My cousin moved". So,
according to the second rule, the nominalized form
will be "Moving of my cousin" and not "Moving of
my cousin who lives in Paris".

The third rule leads to titles with a very popular
form in French newspapers. It is about contextual-
izing the information via the use of a proper noun.
So, if in the treated constituent a single proper noun
appears (easily locatable by the presence of a capital
letter), the common noun can be put in connection
with the nominalized past participle (without con-
cluding that this common noun is an agent of the
nominalized verb). This new rule produces titles
with the following form: "Proper noun: verb action
+ Prep + Complement". For example, "Ségolène re-
turned to Strasburg" becomes "Ségolène: Strasburg
comeback".

• Rule 3: Subject + Aux + PP => Proper Noun:
Verb action + (de) + Complement (if it exists
only one proper noun in the subject)

– Original sentence: Bon nombre de par-
ticuliers se sont précipités (rushed)aux
guichets des banques pour souscrire à des
PEL (Several individuals rushed to bank
counters and subscribed to home-buying
savings plans)

– Radicalisation (2.a): Précipit
– Infinitive (2.b): Précipiter
– Action associated to the infinitive (2.c):

Précipitation
– Nominalization (2.d): PEL : précipitation

aux guichets des banques (Home Buying
Saving plans: Rush at Banks Counters)

Section 3.2.1, pointed that several nominalized
forms were possible for the same verb. So, the phase
of linguistic treatment enables to determine a list of
possible noun forms for every constituent. For ex-
ample, if in step 1 we had "The restaurant Gazza,
situated in a business area, announced a new price",
rule 1 would transform this sentence into two can-
didates: "Gazza: New price announcement" and

"Gazza: New price annunciation" (queer indeed!).
The following phase consists in selecting the most
relevant candidate.

3.3 Selecting a Title

The selection of the most relevant title relies on a
Web validation (cf. Fig. 1, stage 3). A segment that
frequently appears on the Web tends to be seen as:
(1) popular, (2) structurally sound. Thus, the fre-
quency of appearance of n-grams on the Web (via
the Google search engine) appears as a good indica-
tor of the n-gram popularity/soundness (Keller and
Lapata, 2003) . In our case, a n-gram is a segment of
the nominalized constituent, constituted by the nom-
inalized past participle (NPP) and by the preposition
followed by the short complement (i.e. reduced to
the common noun).

The benefit of this validation is double. On one
hand, it backs up the connection between the NPP
and the complement (or subject according to the rule
of used transformation). On the other hand, it helps
eliminating semantically incorrect or unpopular con-
stituents (for example, "Winners’ annunciation") to
prefer those which are more popular on the Web (for
example, "Winners’ announcement") 12.

3.4 Discussion

Our automatic titling approach (NOMIT) proposes
titles for journalistic articles containing a "auxiliary
+ past participle" form in at least one of its first two
sentences. The rationale for such a method is not
only conciseness, but also presentation: How to gen-
erate a heading inciting the reader to go further on.
Of course, transformation rules such as those pre-
sented here, can be numerous and various, and de-
pend on language, genre, and purpose. The basic
purpose of this work is to provide a sort of a "proof
of concept", in which relevant titles might be auto-
matically shaped.

12We do not here claim to select the most coherent con-
stituents regarding the text. Since the main hypothesis underly-
ing this study is that the first two sentences of the article contain
the necessary and sufficient information to determine a relevant
title, we consider implicitly obtaining nominalized constituents,
that are relevant to the text

279



4 Evaluation

Evaluation of titles is a difficult and boring task.
That is why we set up an online evaluation to share
the amount of work. A call for participation was
submitted in the French community of researchers
(informatics, linguistics). Even if we do not know
the information relative to every annotator (national-
ity, age, etc.), we think that a great majority of these
annotators have a rather good level in French, to
judge titles (this is confirmed by the well-writing of
the collected definitions for "relevance" and "catch-
iness").

NOMIT has been evaluated according to two pro-
tocols. The first one consisted in a quantitative
evaluation, stemming from an on-line user evalua-
tion13. 103 people have participated to this evalua-
tion. The second was an evaluation performed by 3
judges. This last one enables to compute the agree-
ment inter-judges on the various criteria of the eval-
uation process. In both cases, the French daily paper
Le Monde (1994) is used, thus avoiding any con-
nection to the subjectivity of recent news personal
analysis.

4.1 Quantitative Evaluation

4.1.1 Protocol Description
As previously seen, titles proposed by automatic

methods cannot be automatically evaluated. So, an
on-line evaluation was set up, opened to every per-
son. The interest of such an evaluation is to compare
the various methods of automatic titling (cf. section
2) according to several judgments. So, for every text
proposed to the human judges, four titles were pre-
sented, each resulting from different methods of ti-
tling:

• NOMIT: Automatic Titling by Nominalizing.

• POSTIT: Based on the extraction of noun
phrases to propose them as titles.

• CATIT: Based on the construction of short ti-
tles.

• Real Title (RT).
13http://www.lirmm.fr/~lopez/Titrage_

general/evaluation_web2/

For every title, the user had to attribute one of the
following labels: "relevant", "rather relevant", "irrel-
evant", "neutral". Also, the user had to estimate the
catchiness, by choosing one of the following labels:
"catchy", "not catchy", "neutral". Before beginning
the evaluation, the user is asked about his/her own
definition of a relevant title and of a catchy title
(all in all, 314 definitions were collected). Globally,
there is a popular consensus saying that a title is rel-
evant if it is syntactically correct while reflecting the
essential idea conveyed in the document. However,
definitions of catchiness were less consensual. Here
are some collected definitions:

1. A title is catchy if the words association is syn-
tactically correct but semantically "surprising".
However, a catchy title has to be close to the
contents of the text.

2. A catchy title is a title which tempts the reader
into going through the article.

3. A title which holds attention, a title which we
remember, a funny title for example.

4. A title which is going to catch my attention be-
cause it corresponds to my expectations or my
centers of personal interests.

5. A catchy title is a short and precise title.

The titled texts were distributed to the judges in a
random way. Every title was estimated by a number
of persons between 2 and 10. All in all, 103 persons
participated in the evaluation of NOMIT.

Let p1 be the number of titles considered relevant,
p2 the number of titles considered rather relevant,
and let p3 be the number of titles considered irrel-
evant. Within the framework of this evaluation, it
is considered that a title is relevant if p1 ≥ p3, and
rather relevant if p2 ≥ p3.

A title is considered "catchy" if at least two judges
considered it catchy.

4.1.2 Results
In spite of the weak number of titles estimated in

this first evaluation, the significant number of judges
helped obtaining representative results. In our ex-
periments, 53 titles generated by the NOMIT ap-
proach were evaluated representing a total of 360

280



evaluations. These results were compared with the
200 titles generated with POSTIT, 200 with CATIT,
and 200 RT (653 titles and 8354 evaluations). Re-
sults (cf. Table 1) show that 83% of the titles pro-
posed by NOMIT were seen as relevant or rather
relevant, against 70% for the titles stemming from
the POSTIT approach, and 37% for the titles stem-
ming from CATIT. Besides, NOMIT determines ti-
tles appreciably more catchy than both POSTIT
and CATIT. Concerning the real titles (RT), 87.8%
were judged relevant and 80.5% were catchy, mean-
ing that humans still perform better than automated
techniques, but only slightly for the relevance crite-
rion, and anyway, are not judged as perfect (refer-
ence is far from absolute!).

en % Relevant Weak relevant Irrelevant Catchy Not catchy
POSTIT 39.1 30.9 30 49.1 50.9
CATIT 15.7 21.3 63 47.2 52.8
NOMIT 60.3 22.4 17.2 53.4 46.6
RT 71.4 16.4 12.3 80.5 19.5

Table 1: Evaluation Results for POSTIT, CATIT,
NOMIT, and RT (Real Titles).

4.2 Agreement Inter-judges

4.2.1 Protocol Description
This evaluation is similar to the previous one

(same Web interface). The main difference is that
we retained the first 100 articles appeared in Le
Monde 1994 which enables our approach to return
a title. Three judges estimated the real title as well
as the NOMIT title for each of the texts, that is, a
total of 600 evaluations.

4.2.2 Results
Kappa coefficient (noted K) is a measure defined

by (Cohen, 1960) calculating the agreement between
several annotators. It is based on the rate of ob-
served concordances (Po) and on the rate of ran-
dom concordances (Pe). Here the Kappa coeffi-
cient estimates the agreement inter-judges about the
relevance and of catchiness of NOMIT titles (cf. Ta-
bles 2 - 4). Considering the results and according to
(Landis and Koch, 1977), judges seem to obtain an
average concordance for the relevance of NOMIT ti-
tles. This can be justified by the fact that there is a
consensus between the three judges about the defini-
tion of what is a relevant title (cf. Table 3). Approxi-

mately 71% of the titles were considered relevant by
three judges (cf. Table 2).

On the other hand, the three judges obtain a bad
concordance regarding catchiness; a catchy title for
the one, could not be catchy for the other one. This
is perfectly coherent with the definitions given by
the three judges:

1. A title is catchy if the association of the words
is syntactically correct but semantically "sur-
prising".

2. A catchy title is a title which drives you to read
the article.

3. A catchy title is a title which holds attention of
the reader and tempts him/her to read the con-
cerned text .

So, people have judged catchiness according to
syntax, the relation between semantics of the title
and semantic of the text, or have evaluated catchi-
ness according to personal interests. The notion of
catchiness is based on these three criteria. So, we
could not expect a strong agreement between the as-
sessors concerning the catchy character of a title (cf.
Table 3).

in % Relevant Irrelevant Neutral Total
Relevant 70.7 10.3 0.7 81.7
Irrelevant 6.0 10.3 0.7 17.0
Neutral 1.0 0.3 0.0 1.3
Total 77.7 21.0 0.7 100.0

Table 2: Contingency Matrix for NOMIT (relevance).

in % Catchy Not Catchy Neutral Total
Catchy 13.3 7.7 0.0 21.0
Not catchy 34.7 41.0 1.3 77.0
Neutral 0.7 1.3 0.0 2.0
Total 48.7 50.0 1.3 100.0

Table 3: Contingency Matrix for NOMIT (catchiness).

As a rough guide, short journalistic articles14 ob-
tain better results than long articles (93% are rele-
vant in that case and 69% are catchy). It thus seems

14We consider that an article is short when its number of
words is less than 100.

281



K avg. Po avg. Pe avg.
Relevance 0.42 0.81 0.67
Catchiness 0.10 0.54 0.49
Average 0.28 0.68 0.58

Table 4: Kappa average for relevance and catchiness of
titles obtained with NOMIT.

that our approach of automatic titling by nominaliza-
tion is more adapted to short texts. We are extremely
prudent concerning this interpretation because it is
based on only 29 articles.

5 Conclusion

Automatic titling is a complex task because titles
must be at once informative, catchy, and syntacti-
cally correct. Based on linguistic and semantic treat-
ments, our approach determines titles among which
approximately 80% were evaluated as relevant and
more than 60% were qualified as catchy. Experiment
and results discussion have pointed at the following
liability: The value of Kappa, the inter-judges agree-
ment coefficient, is very difficult to evaluate, mostly
when catchiness is at stake. The main cause is that it
depends on personal interests. It is thus necessary to
ask the following question: Do we have to consider
that a title is definitely catchy when at least one per-
son judges it so? Otherwise, how many people at
least? This is still an open question and needs to be
further investigated.

Also, some interesting extensions could be en-
visaged: The approach presented in this paper uses
three rules of transformation based on the presence
of an auxiliary followed by a past participle. The ad-
dition of new rules would enable a syntactic enrich-
ment of the titles. So, it might be profitable to set up
rules taking into account the presence of syntactical
patterns (others than "auxiliary + past participle") to
allow more texts to be titled by NOMIT.

Taking the punctuation of the end of sentences
into account might also be a promising track. For
example, "did it use an electric detonator?" would
become "Use of an electric detonator?". It is an in-
teresting point because the presence of a punctuation
at the end of a title (in particular the exclamation or
the interrogation) constitutes a catchy criterion.

Last, NOMIT is a method (easily reproducible in
other languages, English in particular) that stepped

out of preceding attempts in automatic headings
generation (POSTIT, CATIT). Exploring syntac-
tic patterns, as it does, means that increasing the
amount of linguistic information in the process
might lead to a reliable heading method. One of
the perspectives can be to track the optimum point
between the richness of involved information and
processes, and the cost of the method. The in-
cremental methodology followed from POSTIT to
NOMIT tends to enhance the belief that parameters
(i.e. length, shape, relevance, etc...) for an auto-
matic heading procedure have to be studied and well
defined, thus leading to a customized titling process.

References

Massih R. Amini, Nicolas Usunier, and Patrick Gallinari.
2005. Automatic text summarization based on word-
clusters and ranking algorithms. Advances in Informa-
tion Retrieval, pages 142–156.

Michele Banko, Vibhu O. Mittal, and Michael J. Wit-
brock. 2000. Headline generation based on statis-
tical translation. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual
Meeting on Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 318–325. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Phyllis B. Baxendale. 1958. Man-made index for tech-
nical literature - an experiment. IBM Journal of Re-
search and Development., pages 354–361.

Antoine Blais, Iana Atanassova, Jean-Pierre Desclés,
Mimi Zhang, and Leila Zighem. 2007. Discourse au-
tomatic annotation of texts: an application to summa-
rization. In Proceedings of the Twentieth International
Florida Artificial Intelligence Research Society Con-
ference, May, pages 7–9.

Jacques Chauché and Violaine Prince, Vp. 2007. Clas-
sifying texts through natural language parsing and
semantic filtering. In 3rd International Language
and Technology Conference, pages 012–020, Poznan,
Pologne, October.

Jacob Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for nom-
inal scales. Educational and psychological measure-
ment, 20(1):37–46.

Jean Dubois and Françoise Dubois-Charlier. 1970. Elé-
ments de linguistique française: syntaxe. Larousse.

Juan Herrero Cecilia. 2007. Syntaxe, sémantique
et pragmatique des titres des nouvelles de la presse
française construits en forme de phrase nominale ou
averbale: aspects cognitifs et communicatifs. In Lit-
térature, langages et arts: rencontres et création,
page 97. Servicio de Publicaciones.

282



Marie-Paule Jacques and Josette Rebeyrolle. 2004.
Titres et structuration des documents. In Actes In-
ternational Symposium: Discourse and Document.,
pages 125–152.

Franck Keller and Mirella Lapata. 2003. Using the web
to obtain frequencies for unseen bigrams. Computa-
tional linguistics, 29(3):459–484.

Kevin Knight and Daniel Marcu. 2002. Summariza-
tion beyond sentence extraction: A probabilistic ap-
proach to sentence compression. Artificial Intelli-
gence, 139(1):91–107.

Mathieu Lafourcade and Virginie Zampa. 2007. Making
people play for lexical acquisition. In SNLP 2007, 7th
Symposium on Natural Language Processing. Pattaya.

J. Richard Landis and Garry G. Koch. 1977. The mea-
surement of observer agreement for categorical data.
Biometrics, 33(1):159.

Cédric Lopez, Violaine Prince, and Mathieu Roche.
2011a. Automatic generation of short titles. In 5th
Language and Technology Conference, LTC’11, pages
461–465.

Cédric Lopez, Violaine Prince, and Mathieu Roche.
2011b. Automatic titling of articles using position
and statistical information. In RANLP’11: Recent Ad-
vances in Natural Language Processing, pages 727–
732, Hissar, Bulgarie, September.

Sophie Moirand. 1975. Le rôle anaphorique de la nom-
inalisation dans la presse écrite. Langue française,
28(1):60–78.

Marie-Thérèse Vinet. 1993. L’aspect et la copule vide
dans la grammaire des titres. Persee, 100:83–101.

Mehdi Yousfi-Monod and Violaine Prince. 2008. Sen-
tence compression as a step in summarization or an
alternative path in text shortening. In Coling’08: In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics,
Manchester, UK., pages 139–142.

283


