










































Intra-Speaker Topic Modeling for Improved Multi-Party Meeting Summarization with Integrated Random Walk


2012 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 377–381,
Montréal, Canada, June 3-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Intra-Speaker Topic Modeling for Improved Multi-Party Meeting
Summarization with Integrated Random Walk

Yun-Nung Chen and Florian Metze
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University

5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3891, USA
{yvchen,fmetze}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

This paper proposes an improved approach to extrac-
tive summarization of spoken multi-party interac-
tion, in which integrated random walk is performed
on a graph constructed on topical/ lexical relations.
Each utterance is represented as a node of the graph,
and the edges’ weights are computed from the topi-
cal similarity between the utterances, evaluated us-
ing probabilistic latent semantic analysis (PLSA),
and from word overlap. We model intra-speaker
topics by partially sharing the topics from the same
speaker in the graph. In this paper, we perform ex-
periments on automatically and manually generated
transcripts. For automatic transcripts, our results
show that intra-speaker topic sharing and integrating
topical/ lexical relations can help include the impor-
tant utterances.

1 Introduction
Speech summarization is an active and important topic of
research (Lee and Chen, 2005), because multimedia/ spo-
ken documents are more difficult to browse than text or
image content. While earlier work was focused primarily
on broadcast news content, recent effort has been increas-
ingly directed to new domains such as lectures (Glass
et al., 2007; Chen et al., 2011) and multi-party interac-
tion (Banerjee and Rudnicky, 2008; Liu and Liu, 2010).
We describe experiments on multi-party interaction found
in meeting recordings, performing extractive summariza-
tion (Liu et al., 2010) on transcripts generated by auto-
matic speech recognition (ASR) and human annotators.

Graph-based methods for computing lexical centrality
as importance to extract summaries (Erkan and Radev,
2004) have been investigated in the context of text sum-
marization. Some works focus on maximizing cover-
age of summaries using the objective function (Gillick,
2011). Speech summarization carries intrinsic difficul-
ties due to the presence of recognition errors, sponta-

neous speech effect, and lack of segmentation. A gen-
eral approach has been found very successful (Furui et
al., 2004), in which each utterance in the document d,
U = t1t2...ti...tn, represented as a sequence of terms ti,
is given an importance score:

I(U, d) =
1

n

n∑
i=1

[λ1s(ti, d) + λ2l(ti) (1)

+ λ3c(ti) + λ4g(ti)] + λ5b(U),

where s(ti, d), l(ti), c(ti), g(ti) are respectively some
statistical measure (such as TF-IDF), linguistic measure
(e.g., different part-of-speech tags are given different
weights), confidence score and N-gram score for the term
ti, and b(U) is calculated from the grammatical structure
of the utterance U , and λ1, λ2, λ3, λ4 and λ5 are weight-
ing parameters. For each document, the utterances to be
used in the summary are then selected based on this score.

In recent work, Chen (2011) proposed a graphical
structure to rescore I(U, d), which can model the topical
coherence between utterances using random walk within
documents. Similarly, we now use a graph-based ap-
proach to consider the importance of terms and the simi-
larity between utterances, where topical and lexical simi-
larity are integrated in the graph, so that utterances topi-
cally or lexically similar to more important utterances are
given higher scores. Using topical similarity can com-
pensate the negative effects of recognition errors on sim-
ilarity evaluated on word overlap to some extent. In addi-
tion, this paper proposes an approach of modeling intra-
speaker topics in the graph to improve meeting summa-
rization (Garg et al., 2009) using information from multi-
party interaction, which is not available in lectures or
broadcast news.

2 Proposed Approach
We apply word stemming and noise utterance filtering for
utterances in all meetings. Then we construct a graph to
compute the importance of all utterances.

377



U1 

U2 

U3 U4 

U5 

U6 

pt(4, 3) 

pt(3, 4) 

A4
t = {U3, U5, U6} 

B4
t= {U1, U3, U6} 

Figure 1: A simplified example of the graph considered.

We formulate the utterance selection problem as ran-
dom walk on a directed graph, in which each utterance
is a node and the edges between them are weighted by
topical and lexical similarity. The basic idea is that an
utterance similar to more important utterances should be
more important (Chen et al., 2011). We formulate two
types of directed edge, topical edges and lexical edges,
which are weighted by topical and lexical similarity re-
spectively. We then keep only the top N outgoing edges
with the highest weights from each node, while consider
incoming edges to each node for importance propagation
in the graph. A simplified example for such a graph with
topical edges is in Figure 1, in which Ati and B

t
i are the

sets of neighbors of the node Ui connected respectively
by outgoing and incoming topical edges.

2.1 Parameters from PLSA
Probabilistic latent semantic analysis (PLSA) (Hofmann,
1999) has been widely used to analyze the semantics
of documents based on a set of latent topics. Given
a set of documents {dj , j = 1, 2, ..., J} and all terms
{ti, i = 1, 2, ...,M} they include, PLSA uses a set of
latent topic variables, {Tk, k = 1, 2, ...,K}, to charac-
terize the “term-document” co-occurrence relationships.
The PLSA model can be optimized with EM algorithm
by maximizing a likelihood function. We utilize two pa-
rameters from PLSA, latent topic significance (LTS) and
latent topic entropy (LTE) (Kong and Lee, 2011) in the
paper.

Latent Topic Significance (LTS) for a given term ti
with respect to a topic Tk can be defined as

LTSti(Tk) =

∑
dj∈D n(ti, dj)P (Tk | dj)∑

dj∈D n(ti, dj)[1− P (Tk | dj)]
, (2)

where n(ti, dj) is the occurrence count of term ti in a
document dj . Thus, a higher LTSti(Tk) indicates the
term ti is more significant for the latent topic Tk.

Latent Topic Entropy (LTE), for a given term ti can be
calculated from the topic distribution P (Tk | ti):

LTE(ti) = −
K∑

k=1

P (Tk | ti) logP (Tk | ti), (3)

where the topic distribution P (Tk | ti) can be estimated
from PLSA. LTE(ti) is a measure of how the term ti is
focused on a few topics, so a lower latent topic entropy
implies the term carries more topical information.

2.2 Statistical Measures of a Term
The statistical measure of a term ti, s(ti, d) in (1) can be
defined in terms of LTE(ti) in (3) as

s(ti, d) =
γ · n(ti, d)
LTE(ti)

, (4)

where γ is a scaling factor such that 0 ≤ s(ti, d) ≤ 1; the
score s(ti, d) is inversely proportion to the latent topic
entropy LTE(ti). Some works (Kong and Lee, 2011)
showed that the use in (1) of s(ti, d) as defined in (4) out-
performed the very successful “significance score” (Furui
et al., 2004) in speech summarization; then, we use it as
the baseline.

2.3 Similarity between Utterances
Within a document d, we can first compute the probabil-
ity that the topic Tk is addressed by an utterance Ui:

P (Tk | Ui) =
∑

t∈Ui n(t, Ui)P (Tk | t)∑
t∈Ui n(t, Ui)

. (5)

Then an asymmetric topical similarity TopicSim(Ui, Uj)
for utterances Ui to Uj (with direction Ui → Uj) can
be defined by accumulating LTSt(Tk) in (2) weighted by
P (Tk | Ui) for all terms t in Uj over all latent topics:

TopicSim(Ui, Uj) =
∑
t∈Uj

K∑
k=1

LTSt(Tk)P (Tk | Ui),

(6)
where the idea is very similar to the generative probability
in IR. We call it generative significance of Ui given Uj .

Within a document d, the lexical similarity is the mea-
sure of word overlap between the utterance Ui and Uj .
We compute LexSim(Ui, Uj) as the cosine similarity be-
tween two TF-IDF vectors from Ui and Uj like well-
known LexRank (Erkan and Radev, 2004). Note that
LexSim(Ui, Uj) = LexSim(Uj , Ui)

2.4 Intra-Speaker Topic Modeling
We assume a single speaker usually focuses on similar
topics, so if an utterance is important, the scores of the
utterances from the same speaker should be increased.
Then we increase the similarity between the utterances
from the same speaker to share the topics:

TopicSim′k(Ui, Uj) =


TopicSim(Ui, Uj)

1+w

, if Ui ∈ Sk and Uj ∈ Sk
TopicSim(Ui, Uj)

1−w

, otherwise
(7)

378



where Sk is the set including all utterances from speaker
k, and w is a weighting parameter for modeling the
speaker relation, which means the level of coherence of
topics within a single speaker. Here the topics from the
same speaker can partially shared.

2.5 Integrated Random Walk
We modify random walk (Hsu and Kennedy, 2007; Chen
et al., 2011) to integrate two types of similarity over the
graph obtained above. v(i) is the new score for node Ui,
which is the interpolation of three scores, the normalized
initial importance r(i) for node Ui and the score con-
tributed by all neighboring nodes Uj of node Ui weighted
by pt(j, i) and pl(j, i),

v(i) = (1− α− β)r(i) (8)
+ α

∑
Uj∈Bti

pt(j, i)v(j) + β
∑

Uj∈Bli

pl(j, i)v(j),

where α and β are the interpolation weights, Bti is the set
of neighbors connected to node Ui via topical incoming
edges,Bli is the set of neighbors connected to node Ui via
lexical incoming edges, and

r(i) =
I(Ui, d)∑
Uj
I(Uj , d)

(9)

is normalized importance scores of utterance Ui, I(Ui, d)
in (1). We normalize topical similarity by the total sim-
ilarity summed over the set of outgoing edges, to pro-
duce the weight pt(j, i) for the edge from Uj to Ui on the
graph. Similarly, pl(j, i) is normalized in lexical edges.

(8) can be iteratively solved with the approach very
similar to that for the PageRank problem (Page et al.,
1998). Let v = [v(i), i = 1, 2, ..., L]T and r = [r(i), i =
1, 2, ..., L]T be the column vectors for v(i) and r(i) for all
utterances in the document, where L is the total number
of utterances in the document d and T represents trans-
pose. (8) then has a vector form below,

v = (1− α− β)r + αPtv + βPlv (10)
=

(
(1− α− β)reT + αPt + βPl

)
v = P′v,

where Pt and Pl areL×Lmatrices of pt(j, i) and pl(j, i)
respectively, and e = [1, 1, ..., 1]T. It has been shown
that the solution v of (10) is the dominant eigenvector
of P′ (Langville and Meyer, 2006), or the eigenvector
corresponding to the largest absolute eigenvalue of P′.
The solution v(i) can then be obtained.

3 Experiments
3.1 Corpus
The corpus used in this research consists of a sequence of
naturally occuring meetings, which featured largely over-
lapping participant sets and topics of discussion. For each

meeting, SmartNotes (Banerjee and Rudnicky, 2008) was
used to record both the audio from each participant as
well as his notes. The meetings were transcribed both
manually and using a speech recognizer; the word error
rate is around 44%. In this paper we use 10 meetings held
from April to June of 2006. On average each meeting had
about 28 minutes of speech. Across these 10 meetings
there were 6 unique participants; each meeting featured
between 2 and 4 of these participants (average: 3.7). The
total number of utterances is 9837 across 10 meetings. In
this paper, we separate dev set (2 meetings) and test set
(8 meetings). Dev set is used to tune the parameters such
as α, β, w.

The reference summaries are given by the set of “note-
worthy utterances”: two annotators manually labelled the
degree (three levels) of “noteworthiness” for each utter-
ance, and we extract the utterances with the top level of
“noteworthiness” to form the summary of each meeting.
In the following experiments, for each meeting, we ex-
tract the top 30% number of terms as the summary.

3.2 Evaluation Metrics

Automated evaluation utilizes the standard DUC eval-
uation metric ROUGE (Lin, 2004) which represents
recall over various n-grams statistics from a system-
generated summary against a set of human generated peer
summaries. F-measures for ROUGE-1 (unigram) and
ROUGE-L (longest common subsequence) can be eval-
uated in exactly the same way, which are used in the fol-
lowing results.

3.3 Results

Table 1 shows the performance achieved by all proposed
approaches. In these experiments, the damping factor,
(1 − α − β) in (8), is empirically set to 0.1. Row (a)
is the baseline, which use LTE-based statistical measure
to compute the importance of utterances I(U, d). Row
(b) is the result only considering lexical similarity; row
(c) only uses topical similarity. Row (d) are the re-
sults additionally including speaker information such as
TopicSim′(Ui, Uj). Row (e) is the result performed by
integrated random walk (with α 6= 0 and β 6= 0) using
parameters that have been optimized on the dev set.

3.3.1 Graph-Based Approach
We can see the performance after graph-based re-

computation, shown in rows (b) and (c), is significantly
better than the baseline, shown in row (a), for both ASR
and manual transcripts. For ASR transcripts, topical sim-
ilarity and lexical similarity give similar results. For man-
ual transcripts, topical similarity performs slightly worse
than lexical similarity, because manual transcripts don’t
contain the recognition errors, and therefore word overlap
can accurately measure the similarity between two utter-

379



F-measure ASR Transcripts Manual TranscriptsROUGE-1 ROUGE-L ROUGE-1 ROUGE-L
(a) Baseline: LTE 46.816 46.256 44.987 44.162
(b) LexSim (α = 0, β = 0.9) 48.940 48.504 46.540 45.858
(c) TopicSim (α = 0.9, β = 0) 49.058 48.436 46.199 45.392
(d) Intra-Speaker TopicSim 49.212 48.351 47.104 46.299
(e) Integrated Random Walk 49.792 49.156 46.714 46.064

MAX RI +6.357 +6.269 +4.706 +4.839

Table 1: Maximum relative improvement (RI) with respect to the baseline for all proposed approaches (%).

48

48.5

49

49.5

50

0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0

0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9

ROUGE-1

ROUGE-L

α 

β 

F-measure 

Figure 2: The performance from integrated random walk with
different combination weights, α and β (α + β = 0.9 in all
cases) for ASR transcripts.

ances. However, for ASR transcripts, although topical
similarity is not as accurate as lexical similarity, it can
compensate for recognition errors, so that the approaches
have similar performance. Thus, graph-based approaches
can significantly improve the baseline results.

3.3.2 Effectiveness of Intra-Speaker Modeling
We find that modeling intra-speaker topics can improve

the performance (row (c) and row (d)), which means
speaker information is useful to model the topical simi-
larity. The experiment shows intra-speaker modeling can
help us include the important utterances for both ASR
and manual transcripts.

3.3.3 Integration of Topical and Lexical Similarity
Row (e) shows the result of the proposed approach,

which integrates topical and lexical similarity into a sin-
gle graph, considering two types of relations together.
For ASR transcripts, row (e) is better than row (b) and
row (d), which means topical similarity and lexical sim-
ilarity can model different types of relations, because of
recognition errors. Figure 2 shows the sensitivity of the
combination weights for integrated random walk. We can
see topical similarity and lexical similarity are additive,
i.e. they can compensate each other, improving the per-
formance by integrating two types of edges in a single
graph. Note that the exact values of α and β do not mat-

ter so much for the performance.
For manual transcripts, row (e) cannot perform better

by combing two types of similarity, which means topical
similarity can dominate lexical similarity, since without
recognition errors topical similarity can model the rela-
tions accurately and additionally modeling intra-speaker
topics can effectively improve the performance.

In addition, Banerjee and Rudnicky (2008) used su-
pervised learning to detect noteworthy utterances on the
same corpus, and achieved ROGURE-1 scores of around
43% for ASR, and 47% for manual transcriptions. Our
unsupervised approach performs better, especially for
ASR transcripts.

Note that the performance on ASR is better than on
manual transcripts. Because a higher percentage of
recognition errors occurs on “unimportant” words, these
words tend to receive lower scores; we can then exclude
the utterances with more errors, and achieve better sum-
marization results. Other recent work has also demon-
strated better performance for ASR than manual tran-
scripts (Chen et al., 2011; Kong and Lee, 2011).

4 Conclusion and Future Work

Extensive experiments and evaluation with ROUGE met-
rics showed that intra-speaker topics can be modeled
in topical similarity and that integrated random walk
can combine the advantages from two types of edges
for imperfect ASR transcripts, where we achieved more
than 6% relative improvement. We plan to model inter-
speaker topics in the graph-based approach in the future.

Acknowledgements

The first author was supported by the Institute of Edu-
cation Science, U.S. Department of Education, through
Grants R305A080628 to Carnegie Mellon University.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommen-
dations expressed in this publication are those of the au-
thors and do not necessarily reflect the views or official
policies, either expressed or implied of the Institute or
the U.S. Department of Education.

380



References
Banerjee, S. and Rudnicky, A. I. 2008. An extractive-

summarizaion baseline for the automatic detection of note-
worthy utterances in multi-party human-human dialog. Proc.
of SLT.

Chen, Y.-N., Huang, Y., Yeh, C.-F., and Lee, L.-S. 2011. Spo-
ken lecture summarization by random walk over a graph con-
structed with automatically extracted key terms. Proc. of In-
terSpeech.

Erkan, G. and D. R. Radev., D. R. 2004. LexRank: Graph-
based lexical centrality as salience in text summarization.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, Vol. 22.

Furui, S., Kikuchi, T., Shinnaka, Y., and Hori, C. 2004.
Speech-to-text and speech-to-speech summarization of spon-
taneous speech. IEEE Trans. on Speech and Audio Process-
ing.

Garg, N., Favre, B., Reidhammer, K., and Hakkani-Tür 2009.
ClusterRank: A graph based method for meeting summariza-
tion. Proc. of InterSpeech.

Gillick, D. J. 2011. The elements of automatic summarization.
PhD thesis, EECS, UC Berkeley.

Glass J., Hazen, T. J., Cyphers, S., Malioutov, I., Huynh, D.,
and Barzilay, R. 2007. Recent progress in the MIT spoken
lecture processing project. Proc. of InterSpeech.

Hofmann, T. 1999. Probabilistic latent semantic indexing.
Proc. of SIGIR.

Hsu, W. and Kennedy, L. 2007. Video search reranking through
random walk over document-level context graph. Proc. of
MM.

Kong, S.-Y. and Lee, L.-S. 2011. Semantic analysis and orga-
nization of spoken documents based on parameters derived
from latent topics. IEEE Trans. on Audio, Speech and Lan-
guage Processing, 19(7): 1875-1889.

Langville, A. and Meyer, C. 2005. A survey of eigenvector
methods for web information retrieval. SIAM Review.

Lee, L.-S. and Chen, B. 2005. Spoken document understanding
and organization. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine.

Lin, C. 2004. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation
of summaries. Proc. of Workshop on Text Summarization
Branches Out.

Liu, F. and Liu, Y. 2010. Using spoken utterance compression
for meeting summarization: A pilot study. Proc. of SLT.

Liu Y., Xie, S., and Liu, F. 2010. Using N-best recognition
output for extractive summarization and keyword extraction
in meeting speech. Proc. of ICASSP.

Page, L., Brin, S., Motwani, R., Winograd, T. 1998. The pager-
ank citation ranking: bringing order to the web. Technical
Report, Stanford Digital Library Technologies Project.

381


