










































Automatic Humor Classification on Twitter


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2012 Student Research Workshop, pages 66–70,
Montréal, Canada, June 3-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Automatic Humor Classification on Twitter

Yishay Raz
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Department of Computer Science & Engineering
800 Dongchuan Road

Shanghai, 200024, China
yishayraz@yahoo.com

Abstract

Much has been written about humor and even
sarcasm automatic recognition on Twitter. The
task of classifying humorous tweets accord-
ing to the type of humor has not been con-
fronted so far, as far as we know. This re-
search is aimed at applying classification and
other NLP algorithms to the challenging task
of automatically identifying the type and topic
of humorous messages on Twitter. To achieve
this goal, we will extend the related work sur-
veyed hereinafter, adding different types of
humor and characteristics to distinguish be-
tween them, including stylistic, syntactic, se-
mantic and pragmatic ones. We will keep in
mind the complex nature of the task at hand,
which emanates from the informal language
applied in tweets and variety of humor types
and styles. These tend to be remarkably dif-
ferent from the type specific ones recognized
in related works. We will use semi-supervised
classifiers on a dataset of humorous tweets
driven from different Twitter humor groups or
funny tweet sites. Using a Mechanical Turk
we will create a gold standard in which each
tweet will be tagged by several annotators, in
order to achieve an agreement between them,
although the nature of the humor might allow
one tweet to be classified under more than one
class and topic of humor.

1 Introduction

The interaction between humans and machines has
long extended out of the usability aspect. Nowa-
days, computers are not merely a tool to extend
our lacking memory and manpower, but also serve

a larger role in communications, entertainment and
motivation. These may be found in such systems
as Chatterbots, gaming and decision making. Hu-
mor is extremely important in any communicative
form. It affects not only feelings but also influences
human beliefs. It has even shown to encourage cre-
ativity. Enabling a machine to classify humor types
(and topics) can have many practical applications,
such as automatic humor subscriptions that send us
only those messages that will make us laugh. It can
serve as a basis for further research on humor gen-
eration of witty and adequate replies by conversa-
tional agent applications. We tend to expose more
about ourselves in humor than in regular prose. In
the next section we will highlight several research
results from the fields of psychology and sociology
that show this, and explore the differences in humor
produced by different groups. This knowledge can
be used to identify the latent attributes of the tweet-
ers, e.g. gender, geographical location or origin and
personality features based on their tweets. Aggres-
siveness in humor can be viewed as a potential warn-
ing sign and teach us about the authors mental well-
being.

We will now look at some examples of funny
tweets from one of the sites, and then review the dif-
ferent types, topics and the way in which the human
brain operates to get the joke. We will also see how
computers can imitate this:

1. ”And he said unto his brethren, A man shall
not poketh another man on facebook for thine
is gayeth” #lostbibleverses

2. if life gives you lemons, make someone’s paper

66



cut really sting

3. Sitting at a coffee bean and watching someone
get arrested at the starbucks across the street.
True story.

4. One of Tigers mistresses got 10 million dollars
to keep quiet. I gotta admit I’m really proud of
that whore.

5. There is a new IPod app that translates Jay
Leno into funny.

6. May the 4th be with you...

Example (1) has a hashtag that could help us under-
stand the special stylistic suffixes some words in the
sentence bear. Googling the first part yields more
than 2 million hits, since this is a common bibli-
cal verse. This makes it a wordplay joke that para-
phrases a known phrase. But the main reason this is
funny is the observation that a very common Face-
book action is gay. Therefore, the type of this humor
would be classified as observational and the topic
Facebook. The latter could be observed by a com-
puter if we allow it to recognize the named entity
facebook, which in many cases would serve as the
topic. The type, which we recognize as gay, will ap-
pear in our lexicon. Since it appears after a copula,
we can infer that this is not a regular gay joke. If
it was an outing tweet it would not be funny. For
both processes, we require a part of speech tagger
and a NE recognizer. We can find these two tools at
tt http://www.cs.washington.edu/homes/aritter/, de-
veloped especially for Twitter by Alan Ritter. Ex-
ample (2) has no NE or any special lexicon word as-
sociated with it. A Google search of the first part of
the sentence, within the quotes, will yield 639,000
results. So we can infer it is of wordplay type. But
why is it funny? The topic is human weakness, as
described by Mihalcea (2006). We laugh at the man-
ifestation of human misanthropy and the satisfaction
in gloating. This relates to the relief theory of hu-
mor, as the joke is allowing us to speak about our
tabooed and unsocial feelings. How can the com-
puter understand this? It is a tricky and complex
task. We could parse the sentence to find out that
the reader is advised to make someones cut sting,
and we could use a semantic ontology or a lexicon

to teach the computer that sting is a negative expe-
rience, which will lead to drawing the correct con-
clusion. We believe a comprehensive understanding
of the sentence is not mandatory, but if necessary,
we can use the work of Taylor (2010) as reference.
Example (3) ends with the short sentence true story,
which tells us that this is an anecdote. The present
progressive tense of the verbs implies the same. To
understand this short sentence we need a semantic
effort, or a lexicon of such terms that confirm the
anecdotal nature of the tweet. The NE Starbucks
could be set as the viable topic. Example (4) has
a proper noun as NE, Tigers, recognized by its cap-
ital first letter. This is also the topic, and the type is
probably vulgarity, that can be recognized by the last
word in it. Example (5) is an insult, and the topic is
the proper name Jay Leno. This research will likely
conclude that we prefer the human NE over the non-
human one, when instructing the computer how to
choose our topic. To recognize that this is an insult
to Leno, we need to know he is a comedian, and that
the tweet suggests that he is not funny. An inter-
net search will discover the former. For the latter,
we must understand what translate something into
funny means. The semantics of the verb and its indi-
rect object that follows the preposition into should
clarify this. This can be achieved by parsing the
tweet, looking up the semantics of translate and co-
median in a semantic ontology, and concluding that
Leno is not funny. This is contradictory to his pro-
fession and can be viewed as an insult. Example (6)
is a pun, or a wordplay, in taxonomy of Hay (1995).
No topic. The pun is based on the phonologic re-
semblance of forth and force and the immortal quote
from Star Wars. According to Wikipedia, May 4th
is actually an official Star Wars day because of this
pun, and an internet search can teach our computer
what type of tweet this is. Alternatively, with more
original phonological puns, phonologic ontologies
(which have not been researched thoroughly) can be
a proper reference source.

The remainder of the paper is organized as fol-
lows: related work is reviewed in section 2 . Sec-
tion 3 briefly describes the data used in the experi-
ments and evaluates the results. Section 4 describes
the task and algorithm of humor classification and
section5 gives ideas for further research.

67



2 Related Work

We will survey the research work related to our the-
sis in 4 different points of reference.

2.1 Humor Recognition

While the classification of different data, identifying
whether tweets are humorous, sarcastic, or neither,
has been examined closely in recent years, I am un-
aware of any research that has been done on auto-
matic humor classification by type or topic. One of
the first studies on computational humor was done
by Binsted and Ritchie (1997), in which the authors
modeled puns based on semantics and syntax. This
work paved the way for humor generation research
works, such as LIBJOG (Raskin and Attardo 1994),
JAPE (Binsted and Ritchie 1994, 1997) and HA-
HAcronym (Stock and Strapparava, 2003). The two
former systems were criticized as pseudo-generative
because of the template nature of their synthesized
jokes. The latter is also very limited in its syntax.
Only in later studies was the recognition of humor
examined. Mihalcea and Strapparava (2005) used
content and stylistic features to automatically rec-
ognize humor. This was done, however, on a more
homogenous set of data, one-liners, that, unlike
tweets, are formal, grammatically correct and of-
ten exhibit stylistic features, such as alliteration and
antonyms, which seldom appear in tweets. Davi-
dov et al. (2010) recognized sarcastic sentences in
Twitter. They used a semi-supervised algorithm to
acquire features that could then be used by the clas-
sifier to decide which data item was sarcastic. In
addition to these lexical patterns, the classifier also
used punctuation-based features (i.e. number of !).
This procedure achieved an F-score of 0.83 on the
Twitter dataset and the algorithm will be carefully
examined in my research.

2.2 Humor Theories

There are three theories of humor mentioned in re-
lated works: the incongruity theory, the superiority
theory and the relief theory. The incongruity the-
ory suggests that the existence of two contradictory
interpretations to the same statement is a necessary
condition for humor. It was used as a basis for the
Semantic Script-based Theory of Humour (SSTH)
(Raskin 1985), and later on the General Theory of

Verbal Humour (GTVH) (Attardo and Raskin 1991).
Taylor (2010) found that the semantic recognition of
humor is based on this theory and on humor data that
support it. We can see that examples (1)-(5) in sec-
tion 1 do not comply with this theory. It appears that
some humorous statements can lack any incongruity.

The superiority theory claims that humor is trig-
gered by feelings of superiority with respect to our-
selves or others from a prior event (Hobbes 1840).

The relief theory views humor as a way out of
taboo and a license for banned thoughts. Through
humor the energy inhibited by social etiquette can be
released and bring relief to both the author and au-
dience. Freud, as early as 1905, supported this the-
ory and connected humor to the unconscious (Freud,
1960). Minsky (1980) embraces the theory and ob-
serves the faulty logic in humor as another steam-
releasing trait. Mihalcea (2006) enumerated the
most discriminative content-based features learned
by her humor classifier. The more substantial fea-
tures were found to be human-centric vocabulary,
professional communities and human weaknesses
that often appear in humorous data. We think these
features of humor, more than the three theories men-
tioned above, will be of greatest value to our task.

2.3 Humor Types
We will then explore what research has been per-
formed on the actual content and types of humor,
aside from the computer recognition point of view.
There are many taxonomies of humor (Hay, 1995),
and the one that best suits our data contains the fol-
lowing categories:

1. Anecdotes

2. Fantasy

3. Insult

4. Irony

5. Jokes

6. Observational

7. Quote

8. Role play

9. Self deprecation

68



10. Vulgarity

11. Wordplay

12. Other

We believe that most of our humorous tweets will
fall into one of the first 11 categories.

3 Data

Our task is to categorize the different humorous
tweets. A little about Twitter: Twitter is a popular
microblogging service with more than 200 million
messages (tweets) sent daily. The tweet length is
restricted to 140 characters. Users can subscribe to
get all the tweets of a certain user, and are hence
called followers of this user, but the tweets are pub-
lically available, and can be read by anyone. They
may be read on the Twitter website, on many other
sites, and through Twitter API, an interface that al-
lows access to a great amount of tweets and user at-
tributes. Aside from text, tweets often include url
addresses, references to other Twitter users (appear
as ¡user¿) or content tags (called hashtags and ap-
pear #¡tag¿ ). These tags are not taken from a set list
but can be invented by the tweeter. They tend to be
more generic since they are used in Twitters search
engine to find tweets containing the tag. Our humor-
ous tweet dataset is derived from websites such as
http://www.funny-tweets.com that pub-
lish funny tweets, and can be further expanded by
subscribing to all tweets by comedians who appear
on these sites. Another option is a thorough check of
tweets of Twitter Lists like ComedyWorld/ and fea-
tures comedians who send messages to all of their
followers.

3.1 Evaluation

To evaluate our results we must find out which type
and topic of humor every classified tweet belongs to.
We are spared from the challenging task of deciding
whether a tweet is funny or not, since all of our data
was already deemed funny by the publishing sites.
Categorizing humor is of course very complex, due
to the fuzzy nature of the taxonomy and the sub-
jectivity of this task. One tweet can be related to
more than one topic, and belong to more than one
humor type. Nevertheless, the only way to achieve

a gold standard for such classification is through hu-
man annotation, which can be accomplished through
the use of a mechanical Turk.

4 Humor Classification

We will use a semi-supervised algorithm with a seed
of labeled tweets as input. This will produce a set of
distinguishing features for the multi-class classifier.
A few feature types will be examined: syntactical,
pattern-based, lexical, morphological, phonological
and pragmatic. Here are some examples which re-
fer to the task of classifying the examples given in
section 1:

Syntactic Features

• transitiveness of the verb

• syntactic ambiguity

Pattern-based Features

• Patterns including high-frequency and content
words as described in the algorithm in Davidov
and Rappoport (2006)

Lexical Features

• Lexicon words like Gay

• Existence of NEs (like Facebook and Star-
bucks)

• Meaning of the verb and its objects(make
someones cut sting)

• Lexical ambiguity

Morphological Features

• The tense of the verbs in the tweet

• Special word morphology (like the biblical eth
suffix in our example (1))

Phonological Features

• existence of a word that appears on a homo-
phones list (which could help with pun recog-
nition)

Pragmatic Features

• Thee amount of results obtained from a search
engine query of the tweet of the verbs in the
tweet

69



Stylistic Features

• Existence of smiley characters

• Punctuation, like !

The topic of a tweet will also be retrieved from
automatically retrieved features when it does not ap-
pear as a NE in the tweet.

5 Future Work

Further research could be done to classify the tweet-
ers of the humorous tweets based on attributes of
gender, age, location, etc. This could be achieved
using the type and the topic of the tweets as addi-
tional features to semi-supervised classifiers. This
idea was inspired by related work that found a corre-
lation between humor and gender. In the Gender and
Humor chapter of her thesis, Hay (1995) surveyed
old research that claimed women are less inclined
towards humor than men. Freud (1905) claimed
women do not need a sense of humor because they
have fewer strong taboo feelings to repress. This
perception is slowly changing, with more contem-
poraneous work claiming that humor is different be-
tween genders. Hay concludes that:

• men are more likely to use vulgarity and quotes
than women

• women are more likely to use observational hu-
mor

To a lesser degree:

• men tend to use more role play and wordplay

• women are more likely to use jocular insults

We did not find any relevant correlation studies
between age, origin, and other attributes with humor,
but such research has likely been explored.

References
Attardo, S., Raskin, V. 1991. Script theory revisited:

Joke similarity and joke repre- sentation model. Hu-
mor: International Journal of Humor Research 4, 3-4.

Cheng, Z., Caverlee, J., Lee, K. 2010. You Are
Where You Tweet: A Content-Based Approach to Geo-
locating Twitter Usersl. Proceeding of the ACL con-
ference 2010

Davidov, D., and Tsur, O. 2010. Semi-Supervised Recog-
nition of Sarcastic Sentences in Twitter and Amazon
Computational Linguistics, July, 107-116.

Freud, S. 1905. Der Witz und seine Beziehung zum Un-
bewussten

Freud, S. 1960. Jokes and their relation to the uncon-
scious International Journal of Psychoanalysis 9

Hay, J. 1995. Gender and Humour: Beyond a Joke.
Master thesis.

Hobbes, T. 1840. Human Nature in English Works.
Molesworth.

Mihalcea, R. 2006. Learning to laugh automatically:
Computational models for humor recognition. Com-
putational Intelligence, 222.

Mihalcea, R. and Strapparava, C. 2005. Making Comput-
ers Laugh: Investigations in Automatic Humor Recog-
nition. roceedings of the Conference on Human Lan-
guage Technology and Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing

Minsky, M. 1980. Jokes and the logic of the cognitive
unconscious. Tech. rep., MIT Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory.

Pennacchiotti, M. and Popescu, A. 2011. Democrats ,
Republicans and Starbucks Afficionados: User Classi-
fication in Twitter. Statistics, 430-438.

Rao, D., Yarowsky, D., Shreevats, A. and Gupta, M.
2010. Classifying Latent User Attributes in Twitter.
Science, 37-44.

Raskin, V. 1985. Semantic Mechanisms of Humor.
Kluwer Academic Publications

Solomon, R. 2002. Ethics and Values in the Information
Age. Wadsworth.

Taylor, J. M. 2010. Ontology-based view of natural lan-
guage meaning: the case of humor detection. Journal
of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing,
13, 221-234.

Ziv A. 1988. National Styles of Humor. Greenwood
Press, Inc.

70


