










































Differences in User Responses to a Wizard-of-Oz versus Automated System


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2013, pages 796–801,
Atlanta, Georgia, 9–14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Differences in User Responses to a Wizard-of-Oz versus Automated System

Jesse Thomason
University of Pittsburgh

Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
jdt34@pitt.edu

Diane Litman
University of Pittsburgh

Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
litman@cs.pitt.edu

Abstract

Wizard-of-Oz experimental setup in a dia-
logue system is commonly used to gather data
for informing an automated version of that
system. Previous work has exposed depen-
dencies between user behavior towards sys-
tems and user belief about whether the sys-
tem is automated or human-controlled. This
work examines whether user behavior changes
when user belief is held constant and the sys-
tem’s operator is varied. We perform a post-
hoc experiment using generalizable prosodic
and lexical features of user responses to a dia-
logue system backed with and without a hu-
man wizard. Our results suggest that user
responses are different when communicating
with a wizarded and an automated system, in-
dicating that wizard data may be less reliable
for informing automated systems than gener-
ally assumed.

1 Introduction

In a Wizard-of-Oz (WOZ) experimental setup, some
or all of the automated portions of a dialogue sys-
tem are replaced with a hidden, human evaluator.
This setup is often used to gather data from users
who believe they are interacting with an automated
system (Wolska et al., 2004; Andrews et al., 2008;
Becker et al., 2011). This data can inform a down-
stream, real automated system. A WOZ experimen-
tal protocol calls for holding “all other input and out-
put . . . constant so that the only unknown variable
is who does the internal processing” (Paek, 2001).
Thus, hiding the human wizard’s input by layers of

system interface can render that system believably
automated.

An assumption of this WOZ data-gathering strat-
egy is that user behavior will not vary substantially
between the WOZ and automated (AUT) experimen-
tal setups. However, it was shown in a dialogue sys-
tem that training with a small set of data from an au-
tomated system gave rise to better performance than
training with a large set of data from an analogous
wizarded system (Drummond and Litman, 2011).
There, it was suggested that differences in system
automation may be responsible for the performance
gap. It is possible that user responses to these dia-
logue systems differed substantially.

This paper aims to investigate this possibility by
comparing data between a wizarded and automated
version of a tutoring dialogue system. We hypoth-
esize that what users say and how they say it will
differ when the only change is whether the system’s
speech recognition and correctness evaluation com-
ponents are wizarded or automated.

2 Dialogue System

The data for this study is provided by the baseline
conditions (one wizarded (WOZ) and one automated
(AUT)) of two prior experiments with a spoken tu-
torial dialogue system. Users of this system were
students recruited at our university, and each was
a native speaker of American English. Users were
novices and were tutored in basic Newtonian physics
by the system. Each was engaged by a set of di-
alogues that illustrated one or more basic physics
concepts. Those dialogues included remedial sub-
dialogues that were accessed when the users pro-

796



Tutor: So what are the forces acting on the
packet after it’s dropped from the plane?
Student: um gravity then well air resistance is
negligible just gravity
Tutor: Fine. So what’s the direction of the force
of gravity on the packet?
Student: vertically down

Figure 1: Tutor text is shown on a screen and read aloud
via text-to-speech. The user responds verbally to the tu-
tor’s queries.

vided incorrect or off-topic answers. These prior
experiments were examining the effects of system
adaptation in response to detected student uncer-
tainty (Forbes-Riley and Litman(a), 2011; Forbes-
Riley and Litman(b), 2011). However, in this study
we consider only the baseline, non-adaptive condi-
tions of those experiments. Figure 1 shows a sample
dialogue excerpt between the student and tutor.

In the baseline conditions of the WOZ and AUT
system past experiments, as shown in Figure 2, the
setups varied only by the system component respon-
sible for understanding and evaluating a user’s ver-
bal response. Each student participated in only one
of the two setups, and students were not informed
when the system was wizarded. In the WOZ setup a
human wizard marked student responses to prompts
as correct or incorrect. In the AUT setup, automatic
speech recognition was performed on student re-
sponses1, and (in)correctness of answers was deter-
mined using natural language understanding models
trained from the WOZ experiment’s data.

3 Post-Hoc Experiment

Using both lexical and prosodic features, we aimed
to determine whether there exist significant differ-
ences in users’ turn-level responses to the WOZ and
AUT systems.

It was suspected that the imperfect accuracy2

(87%) of the AUT system’s evaluations of the
(in)correctness of user responses may have led to
remedial sub-dialogues being accessed by the AUT
system more often, since false-negatives accounted

1The average word-error rate for these AUT responses was
19%.

2Agreement of κ = 0.7 between the system and human.

Figure 2: The workflow of the tutoring dialogue system
with the WOZ setup component shown in solid, blue and
the AUT setup component shown in dashed, red.

System #Users #Qu #Turns
WOZ 21 111 1542
AUT 25 111 2034

Table 1: Counts for users, unique questions, and user
turns in each data set.

for 72% of inaccurate evaluations. To correct for this
imbalance, rather than comparing user responses to
all questions, we compared the features of user re-
sponses (turns) to each question individually. We
omitted questions which were presented in only one
setup3 as well as turns for which a human transcriber
found no user speech. Table 1 gives the numbers of
users, number of unique questions asked, and total
number of user responses contained in the remain-
ing data and used in our investigations.

For prosodic features, we considered duration,
pitch, and energy (RMS), each extracted using
openSMILE (Eyben et al., 2010). From pitch and
energy, which contain many samples during a single
turn, we extracted features for maximum, minimum,
mean, and standard deviation of these readings. We
also considered speech duration and the length of
the pause before speech began. This gave us a total
of 10 prosodic features. To account for any differ-
ences in recording environment and users’ voices,
we normalized each prosodic feature by dividing its
value on each turn by its value in the first turn of the
current problem dialogue for that user. This normal-

3There were 3 such questions containing 6 user responses;
each question was a remedial sub-dialogue accessed in the AUT
but not WOZ setup.

797



ization scheme was chosen for our analysis because
it is used in the live system, though we note that al-
ternative methods considering more user responses
could be explored in the future.

For lexical features, we used the Linguistic In-
quiry and Word Count (LIWC). LIWC (Pennebaker
et al., 2001), a word-count dictionary, provides fea-
tures representing the percentage of words in an ut-
terance falling under particular categories. Though
still a counting strategy, these categories capture
higher-level concepts than would simple unigrams.
For example, one category is Tentative(T), which
includes words such as “maybe”, “perhaps”, and
“guess”. Less abstract categories, such as Prepo-
sitions(P), with words such as “to”, “with”, and
“above”, are also generated by LIWC. Using these
example categories, the utterance “Maybe above”
would receive feature vector:

〈0, . . . , 0, T = 50, 0, . . . , 0, P = 50, 0, . . . , 0〉 (1)

Human transcriptions of users’ speech were made
available post-hoc for both system versions. We ex-
tracted 69 LIWC categories as lexical features from
these human transcriptions of each user turn.

Between the WOZ and AUT setups, we looked
for user response feature differences in two ways.
First, a Welch’s two-tailed t-test was used to com-
pare the distributions of each feature’s values be-
tween WOZ and AUT user responses per question.
We noted the features found to be significantly dif-
ferent. Second, we built classification models to dis-
tinguish between user responses per question from
the WOZ and AUT experiments. For each question,
a J484 decision tree model was trained and tested
using 10-fold cross validation via the Weka5 toolkit.
Only questions with at least 10 responses between
both setups were considered. Each model was com-
pared against majority-class baseline for its respec-
tive question by checking for statistically significant
differences in the model’s accuracy.

4We tried Logistic Regression and Support Vector classifiers
but these were consistently outperformed by J48.

5http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka

4 Results

4.1 Statistical Comparison of Features

The number of questions for which at least one
feature differed statistically significantly was calcu-
lated. Since distinct sets of students were involved in
the WOZ and AUT setups, it is possible that some of
these differences are inherent between the students
and not resulting from the presence or absence of a
human wizard. To control for this possibility, we as-
signed students randomly into two new groups (pre-
serving the original class distribution in each new
group) and tested for feature differences between
these new groups. Table 2 summarizes the differ-
ences found by each feature set. We report only
questions for which at least one feature differed be-
tween WOZ and AUT but not between these two
random groups6. Table 2 also shows the percentage
of turns that those questions comprised in the cor-
pus. Prosodic and lexical features each differ for a
substantial portion of the corpus of turns, and when
both sets are considered about 67% of the corpus is
captured.

Feature set #Qu % Corpus by Turns
Prosodic 42 46.22%
Lexical 33 35.46%
Either 61 66.86%

Table 2: Number of questions for which at least one fea-
ture from the feature set was found to differ with signif-
icance p < 0.05 between WOZ and AUT responses and
the percentage the corpus represented by those questions,
weighted by the speech turns they comprise.

After controlling for possible between-student
differences, all 10 prosodic features and 29 out of
69 lexical features differed significantly (p < 0.05)
for at least one question. Table 3 gives the features
which were able to differentiate at least 10% of the
corpus by turns.

These t-tests show there exist features which dif-
fer for a substantial number of questions between
the two experimental setups. Examination of Table

6We repeated this random split procedure 10 times and
found, after omitting features found significant in any of the 10
splits, that 58.08% of the corpus was still captured. Less than
2% of the turns belonged to questions with at least one feature
different through all 10 splits.

798



Feature % CbT #Qu #W>A
Duration 22.15% 19 1
RMS Min 16.86% 15 14
Dictionary Words 15.13% 13 11
pronoun 12.56% 10 10
social 11.35% 9 8
funct 10.99% 9 9
Six Letter Words 10.91% 9 0

Table 3: Features shown to differ with significance p <
0.05 between WOZ and AUT responses in questions
comprising at least 10% of the corpus by turns (CbT).
The numbers of questions these turns comprised and of
questions with greater (W)OZ than (A)UT mean are also
given.

Tutor: So how do these two forces’ directions
compare?
Top two most common responses:
WOZ(9),AUT(2): they are opposite
WOZ(3),AUT(8): opposite
Longest responses per tutor setup:
WOZ Student: the relationship between the two
forces’ directions are towards each other since
the sun is pulling the gravitational force of the
earth
AUT Student: they are opposite directions

Figure 3: The tutor question and select user responses to
a question for which the Dictionary Words feature was
greater for WOZ responses.

3 in addition suggests that users used more words
with the wizarded system. For example, the fourth
row shows that all of the questions showing differ-
ences for the LIWC category pronoun (the words
“they”, “he”, and “it” are popular in this corpus) ex-
posed higher percentage of pronouns in the WOZ
utterances. The usual dominance of the third row,
Dictionary Words, by the WOZ utterances also re-
flects this trend. Figure 3 gives common and charac-
teristic student responses for each setup on a ques-
tion for which Dictionary Words differed signifi-
cantly. We next applied machine learning to clas-
sify the experiment-of-origin of responses based on
these features.

Figure 4: The J48 tree for the question “Would you like to
do another problem?”. Classification nodes are marked in
blue and red for WOZ and AUT, respectively, and specify
(#Instances:#Incorrect).

4.2 Response Classification Experiments

After removing questions with less than 10 re-
sponses between the two setups, there remained 97
questions totaling 2980 turns. Of the J48 models
built and tested on each question, 21 of 97 out-
performed the majority-class baseline accuracies for
those questions with significance p < 0.05. These
21 questions represented 32.79% of the corpus by
turns. We present in detail the two of these 21 ques-
tions with the most turns.

The question “Would you like to do another prob-
lem?” represented 6.11% of the corpus by turns and
the J48 model built for it, shown in Figure 4, out-
performed the baseline accuracy with p < 0.001.
While the Duration feature was the root node, a big-
ger decision was made by Word Count ≤ 1, for
which most responses were from AUT data. This
result is consistent with literature (Schechtman and
Horowitz, 2003; Rosé and Torrey, 2005) that sug-
gests that users interacting with automated systems
will be more curt.

The question “Now let’s find the forces exerted
on the car in the vertical direction during the colli-
sion. First, what vertical force is always exerted on
an object near the surface of the earth?” represented
1.54% of the corpus by turns and the J48 model built
for it, shown in Figure 5, outperformed the baseline
accuracy with p < 0.01. Again, Duration emerged
as the tree root, but here the biggest decision fell to
RMS mean. Student responses approximately louder
than the initial response to the tutor in this question
dialogue were marked, almost entirely accurately, as
AUT.

Since both trees were rooted at Duration, we sam-

799



Figure 5: The J48 tree for the question “Now let’s find the
forces exerted on the car in the vertical direction during
the collision. First, what vertical force is always exerted
on an object near the surface of the earth?”. Classification
nodes are marked in blue and red for WOZ and AUT,
respectively, and specify (#Instances:#Incorrect).

pled common responses from each experiment for
both problems. We noticed that hyper-articulation
(speaking slowly, loudly, and enunciating each syl-
lable) was more common in the AUT responses. For
example, one user answering “Would you like to do
another problem?” took almost 4 seconds to clearly
and slowly pronounce the word “yes”. We suspect
that these hyper-articulations may have contributed
to the classifiers’ ability to detect WOZ responses
based on their brevity.

The performance of the per-question J48 models
shows, for a non-trivial portion of the turns, that the
experiment-of-origin can be classified based on gen-
eralizable prosodic and lexical features alone. The
two trees discussed above demonstrate the simplic-
ity of the models needed to perform this separation.

5 Discussion and Future Work

We demonstrate that there exist significant differ-
ences between user responses to a wizarded and an
automatic dialogue system’s questions, even when
the contribution of the wizard is as atomic as speech
recognition and correctness evaluation. Our gen-
eralizable features are derived exclusively from the
recordings of the users’ responses and human tran-
scriptions of their speech.

Because the role of the wizard in the WOZ setup
was limited to evaluating users’ spoken response to a
prompt, our results suggest that user speech changes
as a result of user confidence in the system’s ac-
curacy. For example, Figure 3 demonstrates that
users in the WOZ setup used complete sentences

and gave long responses, where AUT users, possi-
bly anticipating system error, used shorter (some-
times one word) responses. This relationship be-
tween user confidence and user speech may be anal-
ogous to observed differences like users’ longer
speech and typed responses to systems when told
those systems are human-operated (Schechtman and
Horowitz, 2003; Rosé and Torrey, 2005). Our re-
sults suggest ways in which raw wizarded data may
fall short of ideal for training an automated system.

Having established that differences exist, our fu-
ture work will focus on deeper exploration of the na-
ture of these differences in users’ responses. We sus-
pect users become less confident in the automated
system over time, so one direction of study will be to
measure how the observed differences change over
the course of the dialogue. We expect that they are
minimal early on and become more pronounced in
the automated setup as users’ confidence is shaken.
Additionally, some technical aspects of our method-
ology may impact these and future results: using dif-
ferent methods of normalization for user speech val-
ues than the one from this paper may affect visibility
of observed differences between the setups.

Future work may also attempt to address these
differences directly. Intentional wizard error could
be introduced to frustrate the user into responding
as she would to a less accurate system, analogous
to intentional errors produced in user simulation in
spoken dialogue systems (Lee and Eskenazi, 2012).
This strategy would be further informed by stud-
ies of the relationship between the system’s eval-
uation accuracy and student responses’ deviation
from wizarded responses. Alternatively, post-hoc
domain adaptation could be used to adjust the WOZ
data. Generalizable statistical classification domain
adaptation (Daumé and Marcu, 2006) and adapta-
tion demonstrated to work well in NLP-specific do-
mains (Jiang and Zhai, 2007) both have the potential
to adjust WOZ data to better match that seen by au-
tomated systems.

Acknowledgments

This work is funded by NSF award 0914615. We
thank Scott Silliman for his support and Pamela Jor-
dan, Wenting Xiong, and the anonymous reviewers
for their helpful suggestions and commentary.

800



References
Pierre Andrews, Suresh Manandhar, and Marco De Boni.

2008. Argumentative Human Computer Dialogue for
Automated Persuasion. Proceedings of the 9th SIG-
DIAL Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, pages
138-147, Columbus, June 2008. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Lee Becker, Wayne Ward, Sarel van Vuuren, Martha
Palmer. 2011. DISCUSS: A dialogue move taxonomy
layered over semantic representations. International
Workshop on Computational Semantics (IWCS), Main
Conference. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Hal Daumé III and Daniel Marcu. 2006. Domain Adap-
tation for Statistical Classifiers. Journal of Artificial
Intelligence Research, 26:101-126. AI Access Foun-
dation.

Joanna Drummond and Diane Litman. 2011. Examining
the Impacts of Dialogue Content and System Automa-
tion on Affect Models in a Spoken Tutorial Dialogue
System. Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2011 Confer-
ence, Portland, Oregon, June. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Florian Eyben, Martin Wöllmer, and Björn Schuller.
2010. Opensmile: The Munich Versatile and Fast
Open-Source Audio Feature Extractor. MM ’10 Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Multime-
dia, 1459-1462.

Kate Forbes-Riley and Diane Litman. 2011. Designing
and Evaluating a Wizarded Uncertainty-Adaptive Spo-
ken Dialogue Tutoring System. Computer Speech and
Language, 25(1): 105-126.

Kate Forbes-Riley and Diane Litman. 2011. Benefits
and Challenges of Real-Time Uncertainty Detection
and Adaptation in a Spoken Dialogue Computer Tutor.
Speech Communication 2011, 53(9-10): 1115-1136.

Jing Jiang and ChengXiang Zhai. 2007. Instance
Weighting for Domain Adaptation in NLP. Proceed-
ings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association
of Computational Linguistics, pages 264-271, Prague,
Czech Republic, June 2007.

Sungjin Lee and Maxine Eskenazi. 2012. An Unsu-
pervised Approach to User Simulation: toward Self-
Improving Dialog Systems. Proceedings of the 13th
Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Dis-
course and Dialogue (SIGDIAL), pages 50-59, Seoul,
South Korea, 5-6 July 2012. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Tim Paek. 2001. Empirical Methods for Evaluating Dia-
log Systems. SIGDIAL ’01 Proceedings of the Second
SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, 16:1-9.

James Pennebaker, Martha Francis, and Roger Booth.
2001. Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC):

LIWC2001. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah,
NJ.

Carolyn P. Rosé and Cristen Torrey. 2005. Inter-
activity and Expectation: Eliciting Learning Ori-
ented Behavior with Tutorial Dialogue Systems.
Human-Computer Interaction-INTERACT 2005, 323-
336. Springer Berlin/Heidelberg.

Nicole Schechtman and Leonard M. Horowitz. 2003.
Media Inequality in Conversation: How People Be-
have Differently When Interacting with Computers
and People. CHI ’03 Proceedings of the SIGCHI con-
ference on Human factors in computing systems, 281-
288.

Magdalena Wolska, Ivana Kruijff-Korbayová, Helmut
Horacek. 2004. Lexical-Semantic Interpretation of
Language Input in Mathematical Dialogs. Proceed-
ings of the ACL 2nd Workshop on Text Meaning and
Interpretation, 81-88.

801


