










































Applying Pairwise Ranked Optimisation to Improve the Interpolation of Translation Models


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2013, pages 342–347,
Atlanta, Georgia, 9–14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Applying Pairwise Ranked Optimisation to Improve the Interpolation of
Translation Models

Barry Haddow
University of Edinburgh

Scotland
bhaddow@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract

In Statistical Machine Translation we often
have to combine different sources of parallel
training data to build a good system. One way
of doing this is to build separate translation
models from each data set and linearly inter-
polate them, and to date the main method for
optimising the interpolation weights is to min-
imise the model perplexity on a heldout set. In
this work, rather than optimising for this indi-
rect measure, we directly optimise for BLEU
on the tuning set and show improvements in
average performance over two data sets and 8
language pairs.

1 Introduction

Statistical Machine Translation (SMT) requires
large quantities of parallel training data in order to
produce high quality translation systems. This train-
ing data, however, is often scarce and must be drawn
from whatever sources are available. If these data
sources differ systematically from each other, and/or
from the test data, then the problem of combining
these disparate data sets to create the best possible
translation system is known as domain adaptation.

One approach to domain adaptation is to build
separate models for each training domain, then
weight them to create a system tuned to the test do-
main. In SMT, a successful approach to building do-
main specific language models is to build one from
each corpus, then linearly interpolate them, choos-
ing weights that minimise the perplexity on a suit-
able heldout set of in-domain data. This method
has been applied by many authors (e.g. (Koehn and

Schroeder, 2007)), and is implemented in popular
language modelling tools like IRSTLM (Federico et
al., 2008) and SRILM (Stolcke, 2002).

Similar interpolation techniques have been devel-
oped for translation model interpolation (Foster et
al., 2010; Sennrich, 2012) for phrase-based systems
but have not been as widely adopted, perhaps be-
cause the efficacy of the methods is not as clear-
cut. In this previous work, the authors used stan-
dard phrase extraction heuristics to extract phrases
from a heldout set of parallel sentences, then tuned
the translation model (i.e. the phrase table) inter-
polation weights to minimise the perplexity of the
interpolated model on this set of extracted phrases.

In this paper, we try to improve on this perplexity
optimisation of phrase table interpolation weights by
addressing two of its shortcomings. The first prob-
lem is that the perplexity is not well defined because
of the differing coverage of the phrase tables, and
their partial coverage of the phrases extracted from
the heldout set. Secondly, perplexity may not corre-
late with the performance of the final SMT system.

So, instead of optimising the interpolation
weights for the indirect goal of translation model
perplexity, we optimise them directly for transla-
tion performance. We do this by incorporating these
weights into SMT tuning using a modified version of
Pairwise Ranked Optimisation (PRO) (Hopkins and
May, 2011).

In experiments on two different domain adapta-
tion problems and 8 language pairs, we show that
our method achieves comparable or improved per-
formance, when compared to the perplexity minimi-
sation method. This is an encouraging result as it

342



shows that PRO can be adapted to optimise transla-
tion parameters other than those in the standard lin-
ear model.

2 Optimising Phrase Table Interpolation
Weights

2.1 Previous Approaches
In the work of Foster and Kuhn (2007), linear inter-
polation weights were derived from different mea-
sures of distance between the training corpora, but
this was not found to be successful. Optimising the
weights to minimise perplexity, as described in the
introduction, was found by later authors to be more
useful (Foster et al., 2010; Sennrich, 2012), gener-
ally showing small improvements over the default
approach of concatenating all training data.

An alternative approach is to use log-linear inter-
polation, so that the interpolation weights can be
easily optimised in tuning (Koehn and Schroeder,
2007; Bertoldi and Federico, 2009; Banerjee et al.,
2011). However, this effectively multiplies the prob-
abilities across phrase tables, which does not seem
appropriate, especially for phrases absent from 1 ta-
ble.

2.2 Tuning SMT Systems
The standard SMT model scores translation hy-
potheses as a linear combination of features. The
model score of a hypothesis e is then defined to
be w · h(e, f, a) where w is a weight vector, and
h(e, f, a) a vector of feature functions defined over
source sentences (f ), hypotheses, and their align-
ments (a). The weights are normally optimised
(tuned) to maximise BLEU on a heldout set (the tun-
ing set).

The most popular algorithm for this weight op-
timisation is the line-search based MERT (Och,
2003), but recently other algorithms that support
more features, such as PRO (Hopkins and May,
2011) or MIRA-based algorithms (Watanabe et al.,
2007; Chiang et al., 2008; Cherry and Foster, 2012),
have been introduced. All these algorithms assume
that the model score is a linear function of the pa-
rameters w. However since the phrase table prob-
abilities enter the score function in log form, if
these probabilities are a linear interpolation, then the
model score is not a linear function of the interpola-
tion weights. We will show that PRO can be used

to simultaneously optimise such non-linear parame-
ters.

2.3 Pairwise Ranked Optimisation
PRO is a batch tuning algorithm in the sense that
there is an outer loop which repeatedly decodes a
small (1000-2000 sentence) tuning set and passes
the n-best lists from this tuning set to the core al-
gorithm (also known as the inner loop). The core
algorithm samples pairs of hypotheses from the n-
best lists (according to a specific procedure), and
uses these samples to optimise the weight vector w.

The core algorithm in PRO will now be explained
in more detail. Suppose that the N sampled hypoth-
esis pairs (xαi , x

β
i ) are indexed by i and have corre-

sponding feature vectors pairs (hαi ,h
β
i ). If the gain

of a given hypothesis (we use smoothed sentence
BLEU) is given by the function g(x), then we define
yi by

yi ≡ sgn(g(xαi )− g(x
β
i )) (1)

For weights w, and hypothesis pair (xαi , x
β
i ), the

(model) score difference ∆swi is given by:

∆swi ≡ sw(xαi )− sw(x
β
i ) ≡ w ·

(
hαi − h

β
i

)
(2)

Then the core PRO algorithm updates the weight
vector to w∗ by solving the following optimisation
problem:

w∗ = arg max
w

N∑
i=1

log (σ (yi∆swi )) (3)

where σ(x) is the standard sigmoid function. The
derivative of the function can be computed easily,
and the optimisation problem can be solved with
standard numerical optimisation algorithms such as
L-BFGS (Byrd et al., 1995). PRO is normally im-
plemented by converting each sample to a training
example for a 2 class maximum entropy classifier,
with the feature values set to ∆hi and the responses
set to the yi, whereupon the log-likelihood is the ob-
jective given in Equation (3). As in maximum en-
tropy modeling, it is usual to add a Gaussian prior to
the objective (3) in PRO training.

2.4 Extending PRO for Mixture Models
We now show how to apply the PRO tuning algo-
rithm of the previous subsection to simultaneously

343



optimise the weights of the translation system, and
the interpolation weights.

In the standard phrase-based model, some of the
features are derived from logs of phrase translation
probabilities. If the phrase table is actually a linear
interpolation of two (or more) phrase tables, then
we can consider these features as also being func-
tions of the interpolation weights. The interpola-
tion weights then enter the score differences {∆swi }
via the phrase features, and we can jointly optimise
the objective in Equation (3) for translation model
weights and interpolation weights.

To make this more concrete, suppose that the fea-
ture vector consists of m phrase table features and
n−m other features1

h ≡ (log(p1), . . . , log(pm), hm+1, . . . hn) (4)

where each pj is an interpolation of two probability
distributions pjA and p

j
B . So, p

j ≡ λjpjA+(1−λj)p
j
B

with 0 ≤ λj ≤ 1. Defining λ ≡ (λ1 . . . λm), the
optimisation problem is then:

(w∗,λ∗) = arg max(w,λ)
∑N

i=1 log
(
σ
(
yi∆s

(w,λ)
i

))
(5)

where the sum is over the sampled hypothesis pairs
and the ∆ indicates the difference between the
model scores of the two hypotheses in the pair, as
before. The model score s(w,λ)i is given by

m∑
j=1

(
wj · log

(
λjpjAi + (1− λ

j)pjBi)
))

+
n∑

j=m+1

wjhji (6)

where w ≡ (wi . . . wn). A Gaussian regularisa-
tion term is added to the objective, as it was for
PRO. By replacing the core algorithm of PRO with
the optimisation above, the interpolation weights
can be trained simultaneously with the other model
weights.

Actually, the above explanation contains a simpli-
fication, in that it shows the phrase features interpo-
lated at sentence level. In reality the phrase features

1Since the phrase penalty feature is a constant across phrase
pairs it is not interpolated, and so is classed with the the “other”
features. The lexical scores, although not actually probabilities,
are interpolated.

are interpolated at the phrase level, then combined to
give the sentence level feature value. This makes the
definition of the objective more complex than that
shown above, but still optimisable using bounded L-
BFGS.

3 Experiments

3.1 Corpus and Baselines
We ran experiments with data from the WMT shared
tasks (Callison-Burch et al., 2007; Callison-Burch et
al., 2012), as well as OpenSubtitles data2 released by
the OPUS project (Tiedemann, 2009).

The experiments targeted both the news-
commentary (nc) and OpenSubtitles (st) domains,
with nc-devtest2007 and nc-test2007
for tuning and testing in the nc domain, respec-
tively, and corresponding 2000 sentence tuning
and test sets selected from the st data. The news-
commentary v7 corpus and a 200k sentence corpus
selected from the remaining st data were used as
in-domain training data for the respective domains,
with europarl v7 (ep) used as out-of-domain train-
ing data in both cases. The language pairs we tested
were the WMT language pairs for nc (English (en)
to and from Spanish (es), German (de), French (fr)
and Czech (cs)), with Dutch (nl) substituted for de
in the st experiments.

To build phrase-based translation systems, we
used the standard Moses (Koehn et al., 2007) train-
ing pipeline, in particular employing the usual 5
phrase features – forward and backward phrase
probabilities, forward and backward lexical scores
and a phrase penalty. The 5-gram Kneser-Ney
smoothed language models were trained by SRILM
(Stolcke, 2002), with KenLM (Heafield, 2011) used
at runtime. The language model is always a linear
interpolation of models estimated on the in- and out-
of-domain corpora, with weights tuned by SRILM’s
perplexity minimisation3. All experiments were run
three times with BLEU scores averaged, as recom-
mended by Clark et al. (2011). Performance was
evaluated using case-insensitive BLEU (Papineni et
al., 2002), as implemented in Moses.

The baseline systems were tuned using the Moses
version of PRO, a reimplementation of the original

2www.opensubtitles.org
3Our method could also be applied to language model inter-

polation but we chose to focus on phrase tables in this paper.

344



algorithm using the sampling scheme recommended
by Hopkins and May. We ran 15 iterations of PRO,
choosing the weights that maximised BLEU on the
tuning set. For the PRO training of the interpo-
lated models, we used the same sampling scheme,
with optimisation of the model weights and interpo-
lation weights implemented in Python using scipy4.
The implementation is available in Moses, in the
contrib/promix directory.

The phrase table interpolation and perplexity-
based minimisation of interpolation weights used
the code accompanying Sennrich (2012), also avail-
able in Moses.

3.2 Results
For each of the two test sets (nc and st), we com-
pare four different translation systems (three base-
line systems, and our new interpolation method):
in Phrase and reordering tables were built from just

the in-domain data.
joint Phrase and reordering tables were built from

the in- and out-of-domain data, concatenated.
perp Separate phrase tables built on in- and out-of-

domain data, interpolated using perplexity min-
imisation. The reordering table is as for joint.

pro-mix As perp, but interpolation weights opti-
mised using our modified PRO algorithm.

So the two interpolated models (perp and pro-mix)
are the same as joint except that their 4 non-constant
phrase features are interpolated across the two sep-
arate phrase tables. Note that the language models
are the same across all four systems.

The results of this comparison over the 8 language
pairs are shown in Figure 1, and summarised in Ta-
ble 1, which shows the mean BLEU change relative
to the in system. It can be seen that the pro-mix
method presented here is out-performing the per-
plexity optimisation on the nc data set, and perform-
ing similarly on the st data set.

joint perp pro-mix
nc +0.18 +0.44 +0.91
st -0.04 +0.55 +0.48

Table 1: Mean BLEU relative to in system for each
data set. System names as in Figure 1.

4www.scipy.org

4 Discussion and Conclusions

The results show that the pro-mix method is a vi-
able way of tuning systems built with interpolated
phrase tables, and performs better than the current
perplexity minimisation method on one of two data
sets used in experiments. On the other data set (st),
the out-of-domain data makes much less difference
to the system performance in general, most proba-
bly because the difference between the in and out-
of-domain data sets in much larger (Haddow and
Koehn, 2012). Whilst the differences between pro-
mix and perplexity minimisation are not large on the
nc test set (about +0.5 BLEU) the results have been
demonstrated to apply across many language pairs.

The advantage of the pro-mix method over other
approaches is that it directly optimises the mea-
sure that we are interested in, rather than optimising
an intermediate measure and hoping that translation
performance improves. In this work we optimise for
BLEU, but the same method could easily be used to
optimise for any sentence-level translation metric.

Acknowledgments
The research leading to these results has received
funding from the European Union Seventh Frame-
work Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant
agreement 288769 (ACCEPT).

References
Pratyush Banerjee, Sudip K. Naskar, Johann Roturier,

Andy Way, and Josef van Genabith. 2011. Domain
Adaptation in Statistical Machine Translation of User-
Forum Data using Component Level Mixture Mod-
elling. In Proceedings of MT Summit.

Nicola Bertoldi and Marcello Federico. 2009. Domain
Adaptation for Statistical Machine Translation from
Monolingual Resources. In Proceedings of WMT.

R. H. Byrd, P. Lu, and J. Nocedal. 1995. A limited
memory algorithm for bound constrained optimiza-
tion. SIAM Journal on Scientific and Statistical Com-
puting, 16(5):1190–1208.

Chris Callison-Burch, Cameron Fordyce, Philipp Koehn,
Christof Monz, and Josh Schroeder. 2007. (meta-)
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of
the Second Workshop on Statistical Machine Transla-
tion, pages 136–158, Prague, Czech Republic, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz,
Matt Post, Radu Soricut, and Lucia Specia. 2012.

345



Findings of the 2012 Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation. In Proceedings of the Seventh Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 10–
51, Montréal, Canada, June. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Colin Cherry and George Foster. 2012. Batch Tuning
Strategies for Statistical Machine Translation. In Pro-
ceedings of NAACL.

David Chiang, Yuval Marton, and Philip Resnik. 2008.
Online Large-Margin Training of Syntactic and Struc-
tural Translation Features. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Jonathan Clark, Chris Dyer, Alon Lavie, and Noah Smith.
2011. Better hypothesis testing for statistical machine
translation: Controlling for optimizer instability. In
Proceedings of ACL.

Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi, and Mauro Cettolo.
2008. IRSTLM: an Open Source Toolkit for Handling
Large Scale Language Models. In Proceedings of In-
terspeech, Brisbane, Australie.

George Foster and Roland Kuhn. 2007. Mixture-model
adaptation for SMT. In Proceedings of the Second
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages
128–135, Prague, Czech Republic, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

George Foster, Cyril Goutte, and Roland Kuhn. 2010.
Discriminative Instance Weighting for Domain Adap-
tation in Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 451–459, Cam-
bridge, MA, October. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Barry Haddow and Philipp Koehn. 2012. Analysing
the Effect of Out-of-Domain Data on SMT Systems.
In Proceedings of the Seventh Workshop on Statisti-
cal Machine Translation, pages 422–432, Montréal,
Canada, June. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Kenneth Heafield. 2011. KenLM: Faster and Smaller
Language Model Queries. In Proceedings of the Sixth
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages
187–197, Edinburgh, Scotland, July. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Mark Hopkins and Jonathan May. 2011. Tuning as
Ranking. In Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 1352–1362, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK., July. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Philipp Koehn and Josh Schroeder. 2007. Experiments
in Domain Adaptation for Statistical Machine Transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Sta-
tistical Machine Translation, pages 224–227, Prague,
Czech Republic, June. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard
Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra Con-
stantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open Source
Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL Demo Sessions, pages 177–180,
Prague, Czech Republic, June. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Franz J. Och. 2003. Minimum Error Rate Training
in Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of
ACL.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a Method for Automatic Eval-
uation of Machine Translation. In Proceedings of 40th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 311–318, Philadelphia, Pennsylva-
nia, USA, July. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Rico Sennrich. 2012. Perplexity Minimization for Trans-
lation Model Domain Adaptation in Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. In Proceedings of EACL.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM – An Extensible Lan-
guage Modeling Toolkit. In Proc. Intl. Conf. on Spo-
ken Language Processing, vol. 2, pages 901–904.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2009. News from OPUS - A Collection
of Multilingual Parallel Corpora with Tools and Inter-
faces. In N. Nicolov, K. Bontcheva, G. Angelova, and
R. Mitkov, editors, Recent Advances in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (vol V), pages 237–248. John Ben-
jamins, Amsterdam/Philadelphia.

Taro Watanabe, Jun Suzuki, Hajime Tsukada, and Hideki
Isozaki. 2007. Online Large-Margin Training for Sta-
tistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the
2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing and Computational Natu-
ral Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), pages 764–
773, Prague, Czech Republic, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

346



cs−en en−cs de−en en−de fr−en en−fr es−en en−es

in
joint

perp
pro−mix

News Commentary
B

le
u

0
10

20
30

cs−en en−cs nl−en en−nl fr−en en−fr es−en en−es

in
joint

perp
pro−mix

Open Subtitles

B
le

u

0
5

10
15

20
25

Figure 1: Comparison of the performance (BLEU) on in-domain data, of our pro-mix interpolation weight
tuning method with three baselines: in using just in-domain parallel training data training; joint also using
europarl data; and perp using perplexity minimisation to interpolate in-domain and europarl data.

347


