










































Identification of Temporal Event Relationships in Biographical Accounts


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2013, pages 529–533,
Atlanta, Georgia, 9–14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Identification of Temporal Event Relationships in Biographical Accounts 

Lucian Silcox 

University of Texas PanAm 

1201 W. University Dr. 

Edinburg, Tx 78539 

lucian.silcox@gmail.com 

 Emmett Tomai 

University of Texas PanAm 

1201 W. University Dr. 

Edinburg, Tx 78539 

tomaie@utpa.edu 

 

 

Abstract 

This paper examines the efficacy of the appli-

cation of a pre-existing technique in the area 

of event-event temporal relationship identifi-

cation. We attempt to both reproduce the re-

sults of said technique, as well as extend the 

previous work with application to a newly-

created domain of biographical data. We find 

that initially the simpler feature sets perform 

as expected, but that the final improvement to 

the feature set underperforms. In response, we 

provide an analysis of the individual features 

and identify differences existing between two 

corpora.  

1 Introduction 

As natural language systems continue to grow, 

so too does the importance of extracting temporal 

information from text. Narratives often contain a 

wealth of temporal information, linking specific 

events to each other and to individual named enti-

ties of importance, but such information is often 

implicitly conveyed, rather than explicitly stated. 

The continued interest in Question Answering and 

other data extraction systems has emphasized the 

need to better understand these relations to move 

past superficial understanding to a level of deeper 

comprehension. For native speakers, the temporal 

clues hidden in the text are relatively simple to 

comprehend. However, even for human annotators, 

the task of identifying and classifying the specific 

relationship between two events can be problemat-

ic. This complexity, of course, only exacerbates the 

problem of trying to automate the process for any 

information extraction system. 

The creation of the TimeBank Corpus 

(Pustejovsky et al, 2003a), a fully-annotated 

newswire domain, opened up the possibility of ap-

plying machine learning techniques to the task of 

automatically extracting temporal relations. We 

look to the standards of the TimeBank Corpus to 

create a corpus of biographical accounts, and apply 

techniques that have been shown to work on 

TimeBank to the new domain. 

2 Related Work 

Domain-independent approaches have often 

focused on events that can be bound to a global 

timeline (Mani et al, 2003). This includes dates and 

times, but often neglects phrases that indicate 

events occurring in relative time (e.g. “during 

school,” “before the crash,” or “recently”). Re-

search conducted on news articles attempted to 

identify the specific temporal relationships be-

tween two events, as seen in (Mani et al, 2006). 

Further work in that domain extended this start by 

identifying additional features that better predicted 

those temporal relations. (Lapata & Lascarides 

2007; Chambers et al, 2007). 

In this work, we are primarily interested in 

applying event ordering techniques to documents 

less structured than news articles, specifically bi-

ographies. It is the intention of our work to validate 

the efficacy of previous techniques in a different 

domain, and thus we attempt to extend the work 

completed by Chambers et al through application 

to a newly created corpus of biographical data. In 

the previous work, Chambers reports best results of 

59.43% accuracy with gold standard features on 

TimeBank. We attempt to reproduce these results, 

and also adopt the policy of including incremental 

results against features selected based on the work 

529



of Mani et al (2006), and Lapata & Lascarides 

(2007). 

3 Data 

For purposes of validation of our implementa-

tion, we adopt the use of the TimeBank corpus 

(v1.1), which consists of 186 newswire documents 

and 3,406 identified event pairs with temporal rela-

tionships. The number of identified event pairs 

differs slightly from the previous work, which re-

ports only 3,345. We cannot account for this dis-

crepancy. 

Furthermore, we oversee the creation of the  

Bio Corpus, consisting of 17 biographical accounts 

and annotated with 1,594 event pairs. Despite the 

small size of the corpus, we feel that the greatly 

increased event relationship density of our samples 

compared to a similar number of TimeBank docu-

ments offsets the disadvantage of the small docu-

ment count. 

The accounts are drawn from those available at 

Biography.com, and describe multiple aspects of 

the subject’s life. Because the style of the biog-

raphies tends to explore one aspect of life fully, 

before moving on to another, we frequently see 

references to events contained in previous sections. 

These relations, which are not only across sentence 

boundaries but often in entirely different para-

graphs, are one of the most striking differences 

between TimeBank documents and those of the 

new corpus. 

To prepare the corpus, each document was au-

tomatically event tagged through the adoption of 

EVITA, the Events in Text Analyzer (Sauri et al, 

2005). EVITA was previously found to perform 

with 80.12% accuracy, a result comparable to the 

accuracy of graduate student annotators with basic 

training. The temporal relations between event 

pairs were then hand-annotated according to the 

TimeML standard (Pustejovsky et al, 2003b). 

4 Methodology 

In an attempt to reproduce the event relation-

ship classification techniques of the previous work, 

we first implement the approach and test it on our 

version of the TimeBank corpus. We then demon-

strate that the validated techniques are applicable 

to the biographical domain, and that where dis-

crepancies do occur, the specific feature set can be 

modified to elicit improvements not seen in the 

TimeBank data. In all possible cases we utilize the 

same techniques and tools as the earlier work, ex-

cept where sufficient information is lacking, such 

as in the specific implementation of the machine 

learning techniques. In such situations, assump-

tions are made as deemed necessary. 

Chambers’ work attempts to identify the rela-

tionships between event pairs according to a previ-

ously defined set consisting of Before, iBefore, 

Includes, Begins, Ends, and Simultaneous. The set 

of event pairs are pre-selected and chosen for 

preexisting relationships, so a classification of No 

Relation is not required. In order to achieve classi-

fication, a support vector machine (SVM) is im-

plemented via the Library for Support Vector 

Machines (Chang & Lin, 2011) and is trained on 

an extensive set of thirty-five features, as detailed 

below. 

Table 1. Features of classification at each stage. 

 

The feature set was incrementally built by a 

number of previous experiments, as detailed in 

Table 1, above. Initially, five temporal attributes 

originally identified by TimeML as having tem-

poral significance, are adopted. These include the 

tense, aspect, and class of each event, as well as 

the modality and polarity of each. However, per 

the previous work, which demonstrated modality 

and polarity performing with high majority base-

lines, we exclude them from consideration. While 

Chambers et al include the task of automating the 

identification of these features, we report results 

versus the gold standards taken from TimeBank. 

Mani et al (2006) added features indicating an 

agreement between the two events in the case of 

tense and aspect, and Chambers extends this to 

include a class agreement variable. In addition to 

simple agreement, bigrams of tense, aspect, and 

class are first included by Chambers to more fully 

represent the relationship between the event attrib-

utes (e.g. "Past Present," "Perfect Prog"). 

Next to be included are the event strings them-

selves, extracted verbatim, and the corresponding

(1) Mani Tense, Aspect, Class, Tense_Agree, 

Aspect_Agree, Event Words 

(2) Lapata Subord., Before, Synsets, Lemmas 

(3) Chambers POS, Class_Agree, Temporal Bi-

grams, Dominance, Prepositions, 

Same_Sentence 

530



 Baseline Mani Lapata Chambers 

TimeBank – Chambers 37.22 50.97 52.29 60.45 

TimeBank – New 37.11 51.97 53.79 58.22 

Bio Corpus 45.67 53.14 52.89 56.65 

Table 2: Accuracy of SVM classification for Temporal Relationships. 
 

 

 Baseline – 

(Lapata) 

Part-of-Speech Prepositional 

Head 

Class 

Agreement 

Temporal 

Bigrams 

TimeBank 53.79 55.99 56.48 55.02 54.84 

Bio Corpus 55.40 54.77 57.34 55.71 55.49 

Table 3: Accuracy of feature subset analysis. Includes all features attributed to Mani and Lapata. 

 

Wordnet (Fellbaum, 1998) synsets and lemmas. 

Also included are the parts-of-speech for both 

event words, the two words immediately preceding 

each event, and that of the token immediately fol-

lowing the events. Bigrams for part-of-speech from 

each event and its preceding token are also includ-

ed, as well as a bigram for the part-of-speech of the 

two events as related to each other. 

Lapata and Lascarides (2006) first added a fea-

ture indicating whether or not two events were in a 

subordinate relationship, which Chambers' in-

cludes, and extends it with the addition of one in-

dicating a dominating relationship. This 

information is extracted by considering the parse 

tree as defined by an intermediate stage of the 

Stanford Parser. Similar to these two linguistic or-

dering features, we include another feature indicat-

ing the textual ordering of the two events (true if 

Event 1 is before Event 2, and false if not), and one 

indicating whether the two events are intra- or in-

ter- sentential (same sentence or different sentenc-

es). Finally, we adopt Chambers' use of a feature 

for identifying whether or not each event is a part 

of a prepositional phrase. 

All of these features are extracted from the text 

via regular expressions and application of the 

aforementioned third-party tools (such as WordNet 

and the Stanford Parser). With the features extract-

ed, the first experiment on TimeBank uses only 

those features identified by Mani et al. Experi-

ments two and three incrementally grow the fea-

ture set with those identified by Lapata & 

Lascarides and Chambers, respectively. The fea-

ture sets can be seen in Table 1, above. Results of 

this reproduction of the previous work are used as 

a point of comparison to the results of classifica-

tion on our own Bio Corpus, using the same in-

cremental growth classification scheme as before. 

Furthermore, we provide independent feature 

analysis of a selection of the new features added by 

Chambers over the Mani+Lapata set, leveraging 

the results to draw some conclusions as to the lin-

guistic differences existing between the two corpo-

ra. 

5 Results 

We first perform classification on TimeBank 

with the feature set attributed to Mani, the results 

of which can be seen in Table 2. Our system re-

turns an accuracy of 51.97%, outperforming 

Chambers’ reported result by one full point. This 

over-performance is extended to the Lapata feature 

set in a 1.82 point increase over our results for 

Mani’s features, versus the 1.32 increase seen in 

Chambers’ reported results, which at least main-

tains a similar magnitude of improvement. 

With the full set of features, including Cham-

bers’ additions, our system exhibits a reversal in 

the previous trend of over-performance. As seen in 

Table 2, when Chambers’ reported results of 

60.45%, our own system returns results of only 

58.22%. Not only does this leave a void of over 

two percent between the expected and actual accu-

racies, but it represents a much smaller increase in 

performance between Lapata’s and Chambers’ fea-

ture sets on Bio. In an effort to identify an under-

performing feature, although without point of 

comparison from previous work, we explore an 

independent analysis of the new features, and 

found all features to be performing with at least 

some measure of improvement, as can be seen in 

Table 3. 

Mani’s feature set, when applied to the Bio 

Corpus, returns similar results as on TimeBank, 

with slightly higher accuracy at 53.14%. This 

531



translates to a smaller improvement over the base-

line than we see in the newswire domain, but main-

tains approximately the same level of accuracy. 

Also following the same trend that is exhibited on 

TimeBank, the new features attributed to Lapata 

yield results with a small degree of improvement 

over the expected values at 55.4% versus Time-

Bank’s 53.79%. 

The application of the full feature set returns 

the expected reversal of trend, but underperforms 

by an even greater degree at 56.65%, leading us to 

suspect linguistic differences between the two cor-

pora. In an effort to confirm this, we perform the 

same independent feature analysis as we performed 

on TimeBank. Notable results of re-classification 

(seen in Table 3) came from the part-of-speech 

features, as well as from the prepositional phrase 

heads. Part-of-speech was found to degrade per-

formance and drop accuracy from 55.40% to 

54.77%. Omission of the part-of-speech from a full 

feature set classification does not, however, im-

prove performance over the initial classification. 

The prepositional phrase feature, on the other 

hand, returned the opposite result from part-of-

speech – an improvement over the full feature set 

accuracy at 57.34%, strongly suggesting the im-

portance of prepositional phrases in classification 

in the Bio Corpus. 

6 Discussion 

On TimeBank, results of temporal relationship 

classification return results similar to what was 

expected. In the simpler feature sets of Mani and 

Lapata, our own experiments over-perform by a 

small margin in each case, maintaining a similar 

magnitude of improvement at each step. This small 

but interesting variation is likely the result of the 

61 additional event pairs in our version of the 

TimeBank corpus. Given our lack of justification 

for the difference, this claim is merely speculative. 

On the final feature set, with the inclusion of all 

features set out by Chambers, we still see a small 

improvement over the prior feature sets, but a 

small magnitude of change, coming in at a high of 

58.22% compared to Chambers’ 60.45%. While 

still reasonable, a sudden underperformance com-

pared to the previous slight over-performances is 

unusual. Justification for this discrepancy could be 

attributed to the differences in the data set, but 

there is also a possibility that ambiguity in the de-

scription of the features led to improper extraction 

techniques. Our analysis of the individual feature 

fails to return what we can identify as an under-

performing feature, however. 

In the case of the Bio Corpus, we initially see a 

similar trend in performance, with the feature sets 

attributed to Mani and Lapata performing as ex-

pected, while the full Chambers set returns a less 

than impressive result. Additional analysis of the 

individual improvements from Chambers’ new 

features, however, identifies two outliers to per-

formance on Bio. The underperformance of part-

of-speech, and the surprising improvement based 

solely on the prepositional phrase feature, would 

suggest different linguistic trends between the two 

corpora. 

In future explorations of this topic, we would 

like to expand the size of the biographical corpus 

and reaffirm its correctness through the use of 

cross-validation between multiple annotators. This 

would help to ensure that no unintentional biases 

have skewed our results. In addition, we would like 

to further investigate feature selection to find a 

best-case subset for performance on the Bio cor-

pus. While we initially began such an analysis, the 

sheer number of potential combinations rendered it 

outside of the scope of this work. 

References 
Chang, C.,  Lin, C. (2001). LIBSVM : a library for sup-

port vector machines. Software available 

<http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvm>. 

 

Chambers, N., Wang, S., Jurafsky, D. (2007). Classify-

ing Temporal Relations Between Events. ACL-07, 

Prague. 

 

Fellbaum, C. (1998, ed.). WordNet: An Electronic Lexi-

cal Database. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 

 

Lapata, M., Lascarides, A. 2006. Learning sentence-

internal temporal relations. In Journal of AI Re-

search, volume 27, pages 85–117. 

 

Mani, I., Verhagen, M., Wellner, B., Lee, C. M., 

Pustejovsky, J. (2006).  Machine Learning of Tem-

poral Relations. Proceedings of the 21st International  

Conference on Computational Linguistics and 44th 

Annual Meeting of the ACL (2006): 753-60. 

TimeML Publications.  

 

 

 

532



Pustejovsky, J., Hanks, P., Saurí, R., See, A., Gaizaus-

kas, R., Setzer, A., Radev, D., Sundheim, B., Day, 

D., Ferrom L., Lazo, M. (2003). The TIMEBANK 

Corpus. Proceedings of Corpus Linguistics 2003: 

647-656. 

 

Pustejovsky, J., Castaño, J., Ingria, R., Saurí, R., Gai-

zauskas, R., Setzer, A., Katz, G. (2003). TimeML: 

Robust Specification of Event and Temporal Expres-

sions in Text. IWCS-5, Fifth International Workshop 

on Computational Semantics. 

 

Saurí, R., Knippen, R., Verhagen, M., Pustejovsky, J.     

    (2005). Evita: A Robust Event Recognizer for QA   

    Systems. Proceedings of HLT/EMNLP 2005: 700- 

    707. 

533


