



















































A Rule-based Approach for Karmina Generation


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2013 Student Research Workshop, pages 24–31,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

 

 

A Rule-based Approach for Karmina Generation 

 

Franky 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 

800 Dongchuan Rd., Shanghai, 200240, China 

 

Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics 

Malostranské náměstí 25, Prague 1, 11800, Czech Republic 
 

franky.id@gmail.com 

 

 

 

 
 

Abstract 

We present our work in generating Karmina, 

an old Malay poetic form for Indonesian lan-

guage. Karmina is a poem with two lines that 

consists of a hook (sampiran) on the first line 

and a message on the second line. One of the 

unique aspects of Karmina is in the absence of 

discourse relation between its hook and mes-

sage. We approached the problem by generat-

ing the hooks and the messages in separate 

processes using predefined schemas and a 

manually built knowledge base. The Karminas 

were produced by randomly pairing the mes-

sages with the hooks, subject to the con-

straints imposed on the rhymes and on the 

structure similarity. Syllabifications were per-

formed on the cue words of the hooks and 

messages to ensure the generated pairs have 

matching rhymes. We were able to generate a 

number of positive examples while still leav-

ing room for improvement, particularly in the 

generation of the messages, which currently 

are still limited, and in filtering the negative 

results. 

1 Introduction 

Computational creativity is an interesting area of 

research, since it deals with how a machine can 

actually produce something new and creative. Cre-

ative, in the sense that it is something that usually 

comes from human’s imagination, which is quite 

abstract, and unexpected from a machine. In this 

work, we investigated the matter of creativity in 

language. In particular, we focused our work in the 

generation of Karmina, an old Malay poetic form 

for Indonesian language. 

Karmina is a poem that consists of two lines 

with around 8-12 syllables on each line. The first 

line is called the hook, which acts as the opening 

line of the poem. The second line is called the 

message, which contains the meaning of the poem. 

The language used in Karmina is usually less for-

mal, i.e. closer to conversational language. Karmi-

na resembles Pantun, a more well-known form of 

Malay poetic form, but is different from Pantun in 

the number of lines it has. It can probably be com-

pared to a couplet in English, in terms of the num-

ber of lines and rhymes it must follows. Due to its 

short presentation, Karmina is also called a quick 

Pantun.  

One of the unique aspects of Karmina is in its 

hook and message relationship. The hook on the 

first line has no discourse relation with the mes-

sage on the second line. Take as an example Kar-

mina presented below in Indonesian:  

Gendang gendut tali kecapi 

Kenyang perut senanglah hati 

(Fat drum string of lute 

Full stomach makes a happy heart) 

and also our attempt to make one in English: 

Soft meatball is easy to chew 

Love them all but trust a few 

The hook in Karmina acts as the entrance of the 

poem and is used to engage interest or curiosity of 

the audience. It usually talks about something 

common in daily life, some unusual or less mean-

24



 

 

ingful information, or obvious facts, e.g. Buah pi-

sang warnanya kuning (Banana is yellow).  

The message of Karmina contains the real 

meaning that wants to be delivered by the author. It 

might contain ideas, jokes, mockeries, or even ad-

vices. The sentence used in the message does not 

need to be formal. It creates its poetic form by 

omitting some function words, changing the word 

order, or by using the base form of the word in-

stead of using a morphologically derived one. 

The rhyme scheme in Karmina is formally 

deemed to be a-a. But we found that most of the 

Karminas have the rhyme schemes of (a b)-(a b), 

with (a b) in the same line, as shown in the exam-

ples above. The position of the rhyme a in an (a b) 

line is usually located in the middle of the sentence 

and is determined by how to read the Karmina so 

that the rhymes on both lines match to each other.  

We chose to work with Karmina due to its sim-

ple and short presentation. It will be both challeng-

ing and interesting to answer the question of 

whether we can computationally generate a simple 

and short poem that contains a single idea (mean-

ing), while at the same time maintain its poetic 

characteristics. From a cultural point of view, we 

considered this as one of the ways to conserve this 

poem, as well as to introduce it to others. 

We centered our work in generating Karmina 

with rhyme schemes of (a b)-(a b). We considered 

Karmina in this form to be more poetic and have 

more interesting structure. We present our work by 

first mentioning some related works in the area of 

poetry generation in Section 2. In Section 3, we 

describe our approach for syllabification, hook and 

message generation, and the construction of the 

final Karmina. We present the results of our exper-

iments in Section 4. The discussions of findings, 

issues, and future works are presented in Section 5. 

2 Related Works 

Some recent works in poetry generation are in the 

area of English Haiku generation. In Netzer et al. 

(2009), the authors use word association infor-

mation to enrich user supplied seed words with 

their associated words. Candidate lines are pro-

duced from pre-extracted lines that match the seed 

words and their associated words, as well as the 

chosen syntactic patterns. The poems are generated 

by random line matching processes and by filtering 

the generated Haikus based on some constraints 

and internal associativity scores. The work by 

Wong and Chun (2008) uses a different approach. 

They represent the extracted line as a vector of 

words. The Haikus are produced by generating 

sentence pairs based on the selected seed words.  

They are then ranked based on the similarity scores 

of their lines. 

Other previous work in a more general area of 

poetry is by Manurung et al. (2000). In this work, 

they proposed a stochastic hill climbing search 

model that iteratively produces set of candidate 

solutions and evaluates them based on some de-

fined phonetic, linguistic, and semantic measures. 

Gervas (2001) and Díaz-agudo et al. (2002) focus 

their works in the area of Spanish poetry genera-

tion. They use prose description and rough specifi-

cation from user as their input. The appropriate 

strophic forms are selected based on this input. The 

process continues using a case based reasoning 

approach to produce the final poem. 

We consider our work to have different focus 

and pose different challenges. The first thing is that 

the meaning of a Karmina can be understood di-

rectly. This property might be different from other 

type of poetry which requires deeper interpretation. 

Hence, the problem usually lies in generating a 

poem with a deep embedded meaning. The second 

one is related to the property of the hook that 

should contain less important information (ignora-

ble) compared to the message. We believe that we 

could fulfill these two requirements by defining 

proper schemas and constraints, and by controlling 

the words used. The last thing to consider is about 

the absence of discourse relation between the hook 

and the message. Our current approach to the prob-

lem is by generating the hooks and the messages 

separately using different knowledge base and dif-

ferent constraints. By this treatment, we expect the 

generated hooks and messages to be independent 

of each other. 

3 Our Current Approach 

In his thesis, Manurung (2003) defines three prop-

erties that a poem should fulfill: meaningfulness, 

grammaticality, and poeticness. We think that the-

se three are inherent properties of Karmina and 

unquestionably should be fulfilled by the generated 

poem. Meaningfulness is handled by putting con-

straints on the proposed schemas which restrict the 

words used in the poem. It is also supported by 

25



 

 

ensuring the grammaticality of the poem, which is 

handled by positioning the words inside the sche-

ma properly. In terms of poeticness, we consider 

that Karmina obtains its poeticness through its 

rhyme structure, limitation on the number of words 

or syllables, and the forms of the words used. 

Hence, poeticness is handled by considering these 

three aspects in the generation of the poem. 

We will start this section with the description of 

the schemas used in generating the hooks and the 

messages. We will then continue with the explana-

tion of the syllabification algorithm and the gen-

eration of the Karmina. 

3.1 Generating the Hook 

The hook of Karmina can be recognized from its 

characteristic of somehow sounds like an ‘unim-

portant’ utterance, e.g. kelapa diparut enak 

rasanya (grated coconut tastes good) or ikan lele 

beli di pasar (catfish bought from the market). In 

our first attempt, we took text segments from the 

collections of news, blogs, and reviews websites. 

The segments were produced by splitting the sen-

tences using punctuations, such as comma, period, 

question mark, single and double quotes, and ex-

clamation mark. We were hoping to find segments 

that could be used as hooks. But, we found that this 

kind of utterance is quite rare. 

We looked deeper into some of the examples of 

Karmina and found something interesting. The ma-

jority of the hooks that we met have some similar 

syntactic and semantic patterns. We analyzed the 

examples and came out with a set of schemas to 

generate the hooks. One property of Karmina that 

we think makes the generation of the hook possible 

is that a sentence in Karmina usually consists of 

only 4-5 words. We defined around 19 schemas for 

the hook. Some of them differ only in their word 

order, e.g. a sentence with a word order of X Y Z 

and a sentence with a word order of X Z Y, where 

X, Y, Z can be noun, verb, adjective, etc. These 

schemas are not exhaustive. They cover some of 

the hooks that we found on our small examples. 

Other forms of hooks may also present.  

The knowledge base was built manually by find-

ing all suitable nouns, verbs, and other necessary 

information. We did some categorization on them, 

e.g. as fish, flower, tree, location, and specified 

their relations as required in the schemas. We de-

scribe in this section the first three schemas that we 

defined. We use “,” (comma) to denote a conjunc-

tion and “;” (semicolon) to denote a disjunction. 

Schema 1 

Dahulu X sekarang Y 

Constraints  

Noun(X), Noun(Y), ChangeTo(X,Y), 

Length(X,1), Length (Y,1) 

In Schema 1, the generated hook will have a 

meaning of before (dahulu) and after/now 

(sekarang). In this case, X and Y are usually re-

placed by nouns that have this kind of relationship. 

The replacement using other word classes is also 

possible. We restricted X and Y to noun since it is 

the most common class we saw on the examples. 

In order to check for this relationship, we defined a 

predicate ChangeTo that check for two things 

from the knowledge base: 

 Whether X can be made from Y and vice versa, 
e.g. knife is made from iron. 

 Whether X is better than Y and vice versa, e.g. 
gold is better than silver. 

Predicate Length checks for how many words the 

noun X and Y has, which we limit to 1, to maintain 

the poeticness of the generated hook. In our current 

work, we used the number of words instead of syl-

lables to simplify the word selection process, with 

the assumption that the number of syllables inside 

a word is around two to four syllables. 
 

Schema 2 

Sudah X Y pula 

Constraints 

Noun(X), Noun(Y), SameType(X,Y), 

Length(X,1), Length(Y,1), (Tree(X); 

Flower(X); Food(X))  

Schema 2 was made from one of the examples 

that we found. The X and Y come from the same 

category, i.e. both are the name of fish, bird, vege-

table, island, tree, etc. The meaning of the generat-

ed hook will be that Y is redundant because X is 

already present. We restricted X and Y to be in the 

same category to give an emphasis on this redun-

dancy. We used tree, flower, and food for the cate-

gories. This was based on our experiments that 

26



 

 

using other categories resulted in a sentence with 

odd meaning. 

Schema 3 

X Propnya Y 

Constraints 

Noun(X), Adjective(Y), Has(X, Prop, 

Y) Length(X,2), Length(Y,1) 

In Schema 3, the generated hook simply means 

X with a property Prop that has the value of Y. 

For example, X can be a banana (buah pisang) with 

a property of color (warna) and property’s value of 

yellow (kuning). Hence, the generated hook will be 

Buah pisang warnanya kuning (Banana has a yel-

low color). We found that this kind of hook is quite 

often used. 

3.2 Generating the Message  

The message of Karmina is more free in its mean-

ing and structure. Creating all possible schemas is 

not a feasible option. However, we managed to 

find messages that follow certain schemas. They 

have the same structures with the Schema 1 and 
Schema 2. Hence, in this work, the message was 

generated by using these two schemas only. These 

two schemas bind the hook and the message to 

have the same structure, i.e. both have the struc-

tures of Dahulu X sekarang Y or Sudah X Y pula. 

They differ in the types and constraints of the X 

and Y used. We experimented using a list of posi-

tive and negative sentiment words to replace X and 

Y.  

For Schema 1, X and Y were replaced by words 

that have different sentiment (positive-negative or 

negative-positive). These two words are antonym 

to each other. The generated message will have a 

meaning of a change from a positive (good) to 

negative (bad) condition, or vice versa, e.g. Dahulu 

kaya sekarang miskin (was rich but now poor).  

In Schema 2, X and Y were replaced by words 

that have the same sentiment. We expected the re-

sulting sentences to contain the repetition of two 

good or two bad expressions and hence, intensify-

ing the positive or negative condition. For exam-

ple, Sudah busuk bau pula (rotten and stink). 

To our knowledge, there are no subjectivity lex-

icons for Indonesian. Hence, we produced the list 

by translating English subjectivity lexicon (Hu and 

Liu, 2004), which originally has 2006 positive 

words and 4783 negative words, using Google 

Translate. The translation results were then filtered 

manually to remove untranslated words, bad trans-

lations, and words that do not contain positive or 

negative sentiment. The final lexicon contains 740 

positive words and 1500 negative words. 

3.3 Syllabification 

The syllabification is used in searching for the 

hooks that rhyme with the messages. We used a set 

of rules to cut syllables out of the word iteratively. 

The syllabification starts from the front and by 

looking into the pattern of the first 3-6 letters of the 

word. We defined rules for the possible patterns 

that determine how many letters from the front that 

will be taken as a syllable. The syllable is cut out 

from the word and the iteration continues with the 

truncated word. The iteration stops when only two 

or less letters are left. The patterns are the combi-

nations of vowel-consonant patterns and alphabet 

letters. The vowel-consonant pattern is simply a 

sequence of v (vowel) and c (consonant) marker. 

There are only five vowels in Indonesian 

(a,i,u,e,o). 

     kecapi (cvcvcv) (take first 2) 

      capi   (cvcv)   (take first 2) 

      pi     (cv)     (take all) 

 

Figure 1. Syllabification of kecapi to (ke, ca, pi) 

 

The example in Figure 1 shows the word kecapi 

matches the cvcv pattern, and the rule specifies to 

take the first two letters from the front (ke) as a 

syllable. The truncated word capi also falls into the 

same rule. In the last step, only two letters are left 

and we took them all as a syllable.  

3.4 Rhymes 

In our work, we used two types of rhymes, perfect 

and imperfect (half). In Indonesian, the pronuncia-

tion of a word can be determined from its syllables 

and hence, we can check whether two words 

rhyme with each other by matching their last sylla-

bles. For perfect rhyme, we considered two words 

as having perfect rhyme if they have the same last 

syllables. For imperfect rhyme, we divided the 

case into two. If the last letter of the last syllable is 

a vowel, we took this vowel to be compared. If the 

last letter is a consonant, we searched for the first 

27



 

 

vowel from the last after the consonant and took 

the vowel together with the following consonants 

to be compared. For diphthong (ai, au, oi), we took 

both of the vowels to be compared. 

3.5 Constructing the Karmina 

The Karmina was produced by first generating a 

list of hooks and a list of messages. The generation 

processes were done separately for the hook and 

the message. We selected one of the messages and 

we tried to find a proper hook for the message 

from the list of hooks. 

Syllabifications were performed on the cue 

words of the selected message and on the cue 

words of the hooks in the list. Cue words of hook 

or message are the middle word and the last word 

of the sentence. Given the schema, we can usually 

determine the second word as the middle word. 

We produced a list of possible hooks for the se-

lected message by selecting hooks that rhyme with 

the message, producing (a b)-(a b) rhyme scheme. 

It was done by comparing the last syllables of the 

cue words of the message and the hooks. We dif-

ferentiated the hooks which have perfect rhymes 

with the message and the hooks which have imper-

fect rhymes. We gave higher priority to the hooks 

that rhyme perfectly with the message. If no such 

hooks exist, we took the hook from the later. 

Message generated using Schema 1 or Schema 

2 could only take the hook that has the same struc-

ture. Hence, in this work, the generated Karmina 

could only have the structure of Schema 1 or 

Schema 2 on both of its lines. 

The final Karmina was produced by pairing the 

selected message with one of the possible hooks 

which was selected randomly from the list. 

4 Experiments 

We implemented our work for syllabification and 

Karmina construction in Perl, and generation of the 

hooks and the messages in Prolog. We evaluated 

the syllabification on a small list of 258 unique 

words taken from two news articles. We found that 

16 words were incorrectly syllabified. The main 

causes are due to incomplete rules, foreign words 

or abbreviations, and ambiguous words. Examples 

of ambiguous words are beribu that can be read as 

ber-ibu or be-ribu, and words that contain diph-

thong-like string such as baikan and bagaikan. In 

the first word, the ai is not a diphthong. Both cases 

might require context disambiguation and lemma-

tization which are not covered in the current rule-

based syllabification. 

For Karmina evaluation, first we generated lists 

of all possible hooks and messages from Schema 

1 and Schema 2. Next, we generated all possible 

Karminas from these lists. However, we found that 

all generated Karminas were in the form of Sche-

ma 2. We failed to generate Karmina for Schema 

1 since there were no hooks and messages that 

rhyme with each other due to small number of 

hooks and messages that we have for Schema 1. 

Table 1 shows the evaluation results. 

Table 1. Karmina Evaluation 

Hook Message Total 

Proper Proper 10 

Proper Not Proper 30 

Not Proper Proper 1 

Not Proper Not Proper 59 

  100 

The evaluation was performed on 100 randomly 

selected Karminas. The proper and improper anno-

tations were done through discussions by two na-

tive speakers. We managed to get 10 Karminas 

with acceptable hooks and messages. We found 

that the improper hook was mainly caused by the 

use of uncommon names e.g. holdi, hamboi. The 

other cause was that X and Y in Schema 2 may 

sometimes not be able to be placed side by side, 

e.g. Sudah tomat srikaya pula (tomato and sugar-

apple). Although both of the objects are fruits, the 

more common perception of tomato is as vegeta-

bles and hence, the sentence sounds strange. 

a)  Sudah leci menteng pula   (lychees and menteng) 

     Sudah ahli tampan pula    (skilled and handsome) 

 

b)  Sudah kiwi ceri pula             (cherry and kiwi) 

     Sudah ahli kejujuran pula    (skilled and honesty) 

 
Figure 2. (a) Positive example (b) Negative example 

For the message, the main cause was as shown 

in Figure 2 (b). The sentence sounds unusual be-

cause it combines adjective skilled with noun hon-

esty. This happened because of the incomplete 

constraints on the schema, i.e. no restriction in the 

part of speech of X and Y. Other reason was be-

cause of words that do not fit to be put together, 

e.g. Sudah agung bagus pula (majestic and smart). 

28



 

 

5 Discussion and Future Works 

In this section, we discuss several findings and is-

sues that we found, and our future plans for the 

work. 

Incomplete Constraints. The constraints in the 

schema are the most crucial parts of the generation 

process. The grammaticality, meaning, and poet-

icness of the generated sentence depend on the 

constraints used. Hence, some of the problems as 

the one shown in Figure 2 were caused by incom-

plete specification of the constraints. 

Manual Intervention. The main issue in utiliz-

ing knowledge base and schemas is in the amount 

of manual work that needs to be performed in cre-

ating them. One of the problems is in the infor-

mation collection, such as collecting property of 

nouns (e.g. skin as property of a fish and the skin 

of a fish is slippery), antonyms, and what kind of 

verb that can match certain noun (e.g. coconut can 

be grated). Currently, the information was built 

manually and hence slowly.  

One of the options to automate the knowledge 

creation such as ‘what object has what kind of 

property with what value’ is by first generating all 

possible combinations of nouns and properties, and 

finding a way to validate this knowledge efficient-

ly. Data that contains this information might be 

needed for validation. Another option might be to 

query a search engine. Using collocation infor-

mation in the results, we may somehow validate 

the knowledge. However, the policy of automated 

query of current search engine might be a hurdle. 

The other issue is if we want to automate the 

creation of the schema. Using extracted sentences 

and part of speech information may be useful. But 

this approach might not be enough, since we also 

need to capture the dependency between items. 

Without deeper constraints, the extracted schema 

will be just a shallow representation. 

Filtering the Knowledge. We found that having 

too much knowledge about certain things can actu-

ally result in a less or non-poetic sentence, e.g. a 

hook kod pasifik kulitnya licin (pacific cod has 

slippery skin). Grammatically and semantically, 

there is nothing wrong with the sentence. The 

problem lies in the use of kod pasifik (pacific cod) 

that is rarely mentioned in a normal daily life. 

Since the hook is usually about something com-

mon to the majority of the audience, using a rare 

term like this might cause it to lose its poeticness.  

Corpus Based Approach for Message Gener-

ation. We are considering the corpus-based ap-

proach that utilizes the segments extracted from 

the corpus for message generation. Contrary to the 

hook, we found that the use of segments for the 

message is more promising. We experimented with 

blog corpus, since we considered it as the most 

proper corpus, because of its informal and conver-

sational style language. We picked segments that 

have length (number of words) greater than two, 

and for poeticness reason, do not start with certain 

function words. The chosen segments were further 

processed by normalizing slang words, e.g. gw to 

saya. Further removal of unpoetic function words 

(yang, adalah, untuk) was performed. The final 

segments that have length more than three were 

stored. The Karmina generation was performed 

using the same procedure. We determined the mid-

dle word of the message by taking the word where 

the fourth syllable is located. Figure 3 shows the 

positive examples that we were able to generate. 

One important aspect that we still need to consider 

is about the characteristics of the segments that can 

be considered as good messages.  

Ikan cakalang di danau emas   (tuna in lake emas) 

Selamat ulang tahun ya mas     (happy birthday) 

 

Sungai bengkulu sungai bilah (bengkulu and bilah river) 

Aku malu kepada allah            (i am ashamed of god) 

Figure 3. Positive examples of Karmina using corpus 

based approach for message part 

6 Conclusions  

We described our work in Karmina generation that 

utilized a rule-based approach in generating the 

hooks and the messages. We considered the notion 

of grammaticality, meaningfulness, and poeticness 

by defining proper schemas and constraints. We 

also discussed some of the problems and future 

improvements in section 5. We concluded that the 

rule-based approach is able to produce some posi-

tive examples. Some limitations still exist, espe-

cially in the message generation, and a lot of 

improvements are still needed to produce more of 

proper Karmina. We are considering the corpus-

based approach in our future work for the message 

generation and a more automated approach in 

knowledge collection. 

29



 

 

References  

B. Díaz-agudo , P. Gervás, and P.A. González-calero. 

2002. Poetry Generation in COLIBRI. Advances in 

Case-Based Reasoning (2002): 157-159. 

H.M. Manurung, G. Ritchie, and H. Thompson. 2000. 

Towards a computational model of poetry genera-

tion.In Proc. of the AISB’00. 

H.M. Manurung. 2003. An evolutionary algorithm ap-

proach to poetry generation. Ph.D. thesis, University 

of Edinburgh.  

J. M. Toivanen, H.Toivonen, A.Valitutti, and O. Gross 

2012. Corpus-based generation of content and form in 

poetry. In International Conference on Computational 

Creativity, Dublin, Ireland (pp. 175-179). 

M. Hu and B. Liu. 2004. Mining and Summarizing Cus-

tomer Reviews. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD 

International Conference on Knowledge Discovery 

and Data Mining (KDD-2004). 

M. Tsan Wong and A. Hon Wai Chun. 2008. Automatic 

Haiku generation using VSM. In Proc. of 

ACACOS’08, April. 

N. Tosa, H. Obara, and M. Minoh. 2008. Hitch haiku: 

An interactive supporting system for composing haiku 

poem. In Proc. of the 7th International Conference on 

Entertainment Computing. 

P. Gervas. 2001. An expert system for the composition 

of formal Spanish poetry. Journal of Knowledge-

Based Systems, 14. 

P. Gervas. 2002. Exploring quantitative evaluations of 

the creativity of automatic poets. In Proc. of the 2nd 

Workshop on Creative Systems, Approaches to Crea-

tivity in Artificial Intelligence and Cognitive Science, 

the 15th European Conf. on Artificial Intelligence 

(ECAI 2002).  

Y. Netzer, D.Gabay, Y.Goldberg, and M.Elhadad. 2009. 

Gaiku: generating Haiku with word associations 

norms. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Computa-

tional Approaches to Linguistic Creativity. 

Appendix A.  Schemas for Hook Generation 

The rest of the schemas used for generating the 

hooks are provided below as references. Some ad-

ditional relations that might need to be explained 

are: 

 Location(X): X is a location, e.g. name of a 
mountain, name of a river, etc.  

 LocationType(X): location type of X, e.g. X is 
a river, a mountain, or other abstract types 

such as on the top of an object (on a table), in-

side an object, etc. 

 Has(X,Y,A,B): Y is performed on X, resulting 

in X with property A and property value of B, 

e.g. Has(fish, fried, taste, good). 

We use Prolog notations such as “,” (comma) to 

denote a conjunction, “;” (semicolon) to denote a 

disjunction, and “_” (underscore) to denote any 

matching term. 

Schema 4 

Sudah ke X ke Y pula 

Constraints  

Location(X), Location(Y), Location-

Type(X)==LocationType(Y), 

Length(X,1), Length (Y,1) 

Schema 5 

X Y Propnya 

Constraints  

Noun(X), Adjective(Y), Has(X,Prop,Y) 

Length(X,2), Length(Y,1) 

Schema 6 

X diZ Y Propnya 

Constraints 

Noun(X), Verb(Z), Adjective(Y), 

Has(X,Z,Prop,Y) 

Schema 7 

X diZ Propnya Y  

Constraints 

Noun(X), Verb(Z), Adjective(Y), 

Has(X,Z,Prop,Y) 

Schema 8 

X Z di Y 

Constraints 

Noun(X), Verb(Z), Location(Y), 

not(Location(X)), Has(X,Z,_,_), 

Length(X,1) 

Schema 9 

X di Y 

Constraints 

Noun(X), Location(Y), 

not(Location(X)), Length(X,2), 

Length(Y,2) 

30



 

 

Schema 10 

X Y 

Constraints 

Noun(X), Noun(Y), SameType(X,Y), 

Length(X,2), Length(Y,2) 

Schema 11 

X X Y Y 

Constraints 

Noun(X), Noun(Y), SameType(X,Y), 

Length(X,1), Length(Y,1) 

Schema 12 

X Y Y 

Constraints 

Noun(X), Noun(Y), SameType(X,Y), 

Length(X,2), Length(Y,1) 

Schema 13 

X X Y 

Constraints 

Noun(X), Noun(Y), SameType(X,Y), 

Length(X,1), Length(Y,2) 

Schema 14 

X Y A A 

Constraints 

Noun(X), Adjective(Y), Noun(A), 

Has(X,_,Y), SameType(X,A), 

Length(X,1), Length(A,1) 

Schema 15 

X Y A B 

Constraints 

Noun(X), Adjective(Y), Noun(A), Ad-

jective(B), Has(X,_,Y), Has(A,_,B), 

Length(X,1), Length(A,1) 

Schema 16 

X Y A 

Constraints 

Noun(X), Adjective(Y), Noun(A), 

Has(X,_,Y), SameType(X,A), 

Length(X,1), Length(A,2) 

Schema 17 

X A B 

Constraints 

Noun(X), Noun(A), Adjective(B), 

Has(A,_,B), SameType(X,A), 

Length(X,2), Length(A,1) 

Schema 18 

X Z Y Propnya 

Constraints 

Noun(X), Verb(Z), Adjective(Y), 

Has(X,Z,Prop,Y) 

Schema 19 

X Z Propnya Y 

Constraints 

Noun(X), Verb(Z), Adjective(Y), 

Has(X,Z,Prop,Y) 

 

31


