










































Down-stream effects of tree-to-dependency conversions


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2013, pages 617–626,
Atlanta, Georgia, 9–14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Down-stream effects of tree-to-dependency conversions

Jakob Elming, Anders Johannsen, Sigrid Klerke, Emanuele Lapponi†,
Hector Martinez, Anders Søgaard

Center for Language Technology, University of Copenhagen
†Institute for Informatics, University of Oslo

Abstract

Dependency analysis relies on morphosyntac-
tic evidence, as well as semantic evidence.
In some cases, however, morphosyntactic ev-
idence seems to be in conflict with seman-
tic evidence. For this reason dependency
grammar theories, annotation guidelines and
tree-to-dependency conversion schemes often
differ in how they analyze various syntactic
constructions. Most experiments for which
constituent-based treebanks such as the Penn
Treebank are converted into dependency tree-
banks rely blindly on one of four-five widely
used tree-to-dependency conversion schemes.
This paper evaluates the down-stream effect of
choice of conversion scheme, showing that it
has dramatic impact on end results.

1 Introduction

Annotation guidelines used in modern depen-
dency treebanks and tree-to-dependency conversion
schemes for converting constituent-based treebanks
into dependency treebanks are typically based on
a specific dependency grammar theory, such as the
Prague School’s Functional Generative Description,
Meaning-Text Theory, or Hudson’s Word Grammar.
In practice most parsers constrain dependency struc-
tures to be tree-like structures such that each word
has a single syntactic head, limiting diversity be-
tween annotation a bit; but while many dependency
treebanks taking this format agree on how to an-
alyze many syntactic constructions, there are still
many constructions these treebanks analyze differ-
ently. See Figure 1 for a standard overview of clear
and more difficult cases.

The difficult cases in Figure 1 are difficult for
the following reason. In the easy cases morphosyn-
tactic and semantic evidence cohere. Verbs gov-
ern subjects morpho-syntactically and seem seman-
tically more important. In the difficult cases, how-
ever, morpho-syntactic evidence is in conflict with
the semantic evidence. While auxiliary verbs have
the same distribution as finite verbs in head position
and share morpho-syntactic properties with them,
and govern the infinite main verbs, main verbs seem
semantically superior, expressing the main predi-
cate. There may be distributional evidence that com-
plementizers head verbs syntactically, but the verbs
seem more important from a semantic point of view.

Tree-to-dependency conversion schemes used
to convert constituent-based treebanks into
dependency-based ones also take different stands on
the difficult cases. In this paper we consider four dif-
ferent conversion schemes: the Yamada-Matsumoto
conversion scheme yamada,1 the CoNLL 2007
format conll07,2 the conversion scheme ewt used in
the English Web Treebank (Petrov and McDonald,
2012),3 and the lth conversion scheme (Johansson

1The Yamada-Matsumoto scheme can be
replicated by running penn2malt.jar available at
http://w3.msi.vxu.se/∼nivre/research/Penn2Malt.html. We
used Malt dependency labels (see website). The Yamada-
Matsumoto scheme is an elaboration of the Collins scheme
(Collins, 1999), which is not included in our experiments.

2The CoNLL 2007 conversion scheme can be
obtained by running pennconverter.jar available at
http://nlp.cs.lth.se/software/treebank converter/with the
’conll07’ flag set.

3The EWT conversion scheme can be repli-
cated using the Stanford converter available at
http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/stanford-dependencies.shtml

617



Clear cases Difficult cases
Head Dependent ? ?
Verb Subject Auxiliary Main verb
Verb Object Complementizer Verb
Noun Attribute Coordinator Conjuncts
Verb Adverbial Preposition Nominal

Punctuation

Figure 1: Clear and difficult cases in dependency annotation.

and Nugues, 2007).4 We list the differences in
Figure 2. An example of differences in analysis is
presented in Figure 3.

In order to access the impact of these conversion
schemes on down-stream performance, we need ex-
trinsic rather than intrinsic evaluation. In general
it is important to remember that while researchers
developing learning algorithms for part-of-speech
(POS) tagging and dependency parsing seem ob-
sessed with accuracies, POS sequences or depen-
dency structures have no interest on their own. The
accuracies reported in the literature are only inter-
esting insofar they correlate with the usefulness of
the structures predicted by our systems. Fortunately,
POS sequences and dependency structures are use-
ful in many applications. When we consider tree-to-
dependency conversion schemes, down-stream eval-
uation becomes particularly important since some
schemes are more fine-grained than others, leading
to lower performance as measured by intrinsic eval-
uation metrics.

Approach in this work

In our experiments below we apply a state-of-the-art
parser to five different natural language processing
(NLP) tasks where syntactic features are known to
be effective: negation resolution, semantic role la-
beling (SRL), statistical machine translation (SMT),
sentence compression and perspective classification.
In all five tasks we use the four tree-to-dependency
conversion schemes mentioned above and evaluate
them in terms of down-stream performance. We also
compare our systems to baseline systems not rely-

4The LTH conversion scheme can be ob-
tained by running pennconverter.jar available at
http://nlp.cs.lth.se/software/treebank converter/ with the
’oldLTH’ flag set.

ing on syntactic features, when possible, and to re-
sults in the literature, when comparable results exist.
Note that negation resolution and SRL are not end
applications. It is not easy to generalize across five
very different tasks, but the tasks will serve to show
that the choice of conversion scheme has significant
impact on down-stream performance.

We used the most recent release of the Mate parser
first described in Bohnet (2010),5 trained on Sec-
tions 2–21 of the Wall Street Journal section of the
English Treebank (Marcus et al., 1993). The graph-
based parser is similar to, except much faster, and
performs slightly better than the MSTParser (Mc-
Donald et al., 2005), which is known to perform
well on long-distance dependencies often important
for down-stream applications (McDonald and Nivre,
2007; Galley and Manning, 2009; Bender et al.,
2011). This choice may of course have an effect on
what conversion schemes seem superior (Johansson
and Nugues, 2007). Sentence splitting was done us-
ing splitta,6, and the sentences were then tokenized
using PTB-style tokenization7 and tagged using the
in-built Mate POS tagger.

Previous work

There has been considerable work on down-stream
evaluation of syntactic parsers in the literature, but
most previous work has focused on evaluating pars-
ing models rather than linguistic theories. No one
has, to the best of our knowledge, compared the
impact of choice of tree-to-dependency conversion
scheme across several NLP tasks.

Johansson and Nugues (2007) compare the im-
pact of yamada and lth on semantic role labeling

5http://code.google.com/p/mate-tools/
6http://code.google.com/p/splitta/
7http://www.cis.upenn.edu/∼treebank/tokenizer.sed

618



FORM1 FORM2 yamada conll07 ewt lth
Auxiliary Main verb 1 1 2 2
Complementizer Verb 1 2 2 2
Coordinator Conjuncts 2 1 2 2
Preposition Nominal 1 1 1 2

Figure 2: Head decisions in conversions. Note: yamada also differ from CoNLL 2007 in proper names.

Figure 3: CoNLL 2007 (blue) and LTH (red) dependency conversions.

performance, showing that lth leads to superior per-
formance.

Miyao et al. (2008) measure the impact of syntac-
tic parsers in an information extraction system iden-
tifying protein-protein interactions in biomedical re-
search articles. They evaluate dependency parsers,
constituent-based parsers and deep parsers.

Miwa et al. (2010) evaluate down-stream per-
formance of linguistic representations and parsing
models in biomedical event extraction, but do not
evaluate linguistic representations directly, evaluat-
ing representations and models jointly.

Bender et al. (2011) compare several parsers
across linguistic representations on a carefully de-
signed evaluation set of hard, but relatively frequent
syntactic constructions. They compare dependency
parsers, constituent-based parsers and deep parsers.
The authors argue in favor of evaluating parsers on
diverse and richly annotated data. Others have dis-
cussed various ways of evaluating across annotation
guidelines or translating structures to a common for-
mat (Schwartz et al., 2011; Tsarfaty et al., 2012).

Hall et al. (2011) discuss optimizing parsers for
specific down-stream applications, but consider only
a single annotation scheme.

Yuret et al. (2012) present an overview of the
SemEval-2010 Evaluation Exercises on Semantic

Evaluation track on recognition textual entailment
using dependency parsing. They also compare sev-
eral parsers using the heuristics of the winning sys-
tem for inference. While the shared task is an
example of down-stream evaluation of dependency
parsers, the evaluation examples only cover a subset
of the textual entailments relevant for practical ap-
plications, and the heuristics used in the experiments
assume a fixed set of dependency labels (ewt labels).

Finally, Schwartz et al. (2012) compare the
above conversion schemes and several combinations
thereof in terms of learnability. This is very different
from what is done here. While learnability may be
a theoretically motivated parameter, our results indi-
cate that learnability and downstream performance
do not correlate well.

2 Applications

Dependency parsing has proven useful for a wide
range of NLP applications, including statistical ma-
chine translation (Galley and Manning, 2009; Xu et
al., 2009; Elming and Haulrich, 2011) and sentiment
analysis (Joshi and Penstein-Rose, 2009; Johansson
and Moschitti, 2010). This section describes the ap-
plications and experimental set-ups included in this
study.

In the five applications considered below we

619



use syntactic features in slightly different ways.
While our statistical machine translation and sen-
tence compression systems use dependency rela-
tions as additional information about words and on
a par with POS, our negation resolution system uses
dependency paths, conditioning decisions on both
dependency arcs and labels. In perspective classifi-
cation, we use dependency triples (e.g. SUBJ(John,
snore)) as features, while the semantic role labeling
system conditions on a lot of information, including
the word form of the head, the dependent and the ar-
gument candidates, the concatenation of the depen-
dency labels of the predicate, and the labeled depen-
dency relations between predicate and its head, its
arguments, dependents or siblings.

2.1 Negation resolution

Negation resolution (NR) is the task of finding nega-
tion cues, e.g. the word not, and determining their
scope, i.e. the tokens they affect. NR has recently
seen considerable interest in the NLP community
(Morante and Sporleder, 2012; Velldal et al., 2012)
and was the topic of the 2012 *SEM shared task
(Morante and Blanco, 2012).

The data set used in this work, the Conan Doyle
corpus (CD),8 was released in conjunction with the
*SEM shared task. The annotations in CD extend
on cues and scopes by introducing annotations for
in-scope events that are negated in factual contexts.
The following is an example from the corpus show-
ing the annotations for cues (bold), scopes (under-
lined) and negated events (italicized):

(1) Since we have been so
unfortunate as to miss him [. . . ]

CD-style scopes can be discontinuous and overlap-
ping. Events are a portion of the scope that is se-
mantically negated, with its truth value reversed by
the negation cue.

The NR system used in this work (Lapponi et al.,
2012), one of the best performing systems in the
*SEM shared task, is a CRF model for scope resolu-
tion that relies heavily on features extracted from de-
pendency graphs. The feature model contains token
distance, direction, n-grams of word forms, lemmas,
POS and combinations thereof, as well as the syntac-
tic features presented in Figure 4. The results in our

8http://www.clips.ua.ac.be/sem2012-st-neg/data.html

Syntactic

constituent
dependency relation
parent head POS
grand parent head POS
word form+dependency relation
POS+dependency relation

Cue-dependent

directed dependency distance
bidirectional dependency distance
dependency path
lexicalized dependency path

Figure 4: Features used to train the conditional random
field models

experiments are obtained from configurations that
differ only in terms of tree-to-dependency conver-
sions, and are trained on the training set and tested
on the development set of CD. Since the negation
cue classification component of the system does not
rely on dependency features at all, the models are
tested using gold cues.

Table 1 shows F1 scores for scopes, events and
full negations, where a true positive correctly as-
signs both scope tokens and events to the rightful
cue. The scores are produced using the evaluation
script provided by the *SEM organizers.

2.2 Semantic role labeling

Semantic role labeling (SRL) is the attempt to de-
termine semantic predicates in running text and la-
bel their arguments with semantic roles. In our
experiments we have reproduced the second best-
performing system in the CoNLL 2008 shared task
in syntactic and semantic parsing (Johansson and
Nugues, 2008).9

The English training data for the CoNLL 2008
shared task were obtained from PropBank and
NomBank. For licensing reasons, we used
OntoNotes 4.0, which includes PropBank, but not
NomBank. This means that our system is only
trained to classify verbal predicates. We used
the Clearparser conversion tool10 to convert the
OntoNotes 4.0 and subsequently supplied syntac-
tic dependency trees using our different conversion
schemes. We rely on gold standard argument identi-
fication and focus solely on the performance metric
semantic labeled F1.

9http://nlp.cs.lth.se/software/semantic parsing: propbank
nombank frames

10http://code.google.com/p/clearparser/

620



2.3 Statistical machine translation

The effect of the different conversion schemes was
also evaluated on SMT. We used the reordering
by parsing framework described by Elming and
Haulrich (2011). This approach integrates a syn-
tactically informed reordering model into a phrase-
based SMT system. The model learns to predict the
word order of the translation based on source sen-
tence information such as syntactic dependency re-
lations. Syntax-informed SMT is known to be use-
ful for translating between languages with different
word orders (Galley and Manning, 2009; Xu et al.,
2009), e.g. English and German.

The baseline SMT system is created as described
in the guidelines from the original shared task.11

Only modifications are that we use truecasing in-
stead of lowercasing and recasing, and allow train-
ing sentences of up to 80 words. We used data
from the English-German restricted task: ∼3M par-
allel words of news, ∼46M parallel words of Eu-
roparl, and ∼309M words of monolingual Europarl
and news. We use newstest2008 for tuning, new-
stest2009 for development, and newstest2010 for
testing. Distortion limit was set to 10, which is
also where the baseline system performed best. The
phrase table and the lexical reordering model is
trained on the union of all parallel data with a max
phrase length of 7, and the 5-gram language model
is trained on the entire monolingual data set.

We test four different experimental systems that
only differ with the baseline in the addition of a syn-
tactically informed reordering model. The baseline
system was one of the tied best performing system
in the WMT 2011 shared task on this dataset. The
four experimental systems have reordering models
that are trained on the first 25,000 sentences of the
parallel news data that have been parsed with each
of the tree-to-dependency conversion schemes. The
reordering models condition reordering on the word
forms, POS, and syntactic dependency relations of
the words to be reordered, as described in Elming
and Haulrich (2011). The paper shows that while
reordering by parsing leads to significant improve-
ments in standard metrics such as BLEU (Papineni
et al., 2002) and METEOR (Lavie and Agarwal,
2007), improvements are more spelled out with hu-

11 http://www.statmt.org/wmt11/translation-task.html

man judgements. All SMT results reported below
are averages based on 5 MERT runs following Clark
et al. (2011).

2.4 Sentence compression

Sentence compression is a restricted form of sen-
tence simplification with numerous usages, includ-
ing text simplification, summarization and recogniz-
ing textual entailment. The most commonly used
dataset in the literature is the Ziff-Davis corpus.12 A
widely used baseline for sentence compression ex-
periments is Knight and Marcu (2002), who intro-
duce two models: the noisy-channel model and a de-
cision tree-based model. Both are tree-based meth-
ods that find the most likely compressed syntactic
tree and outputs the yield of this tree. McDonald et
al. (2006) instead use syntactic features to directly
find the most likely compressed sentence.

Here we learn a discriminative HMM model
(Collins, 2002) of sentence compression using
MIRA (Crammer and Singer, 2003), comparable to
previously explored models of noun phrase chunk-
ing. Our model is thus neither tree-based nor
sentence-based. Instead we think of sentence com-
pression as a sequence labeling problem. We com-
pare a model informed by word forms and predicted
POS with models also informed by predicted depen-
dency labels. The baseline feature model conditions
emission probabilities on word forms and POS us-
ing a ±2 window and combinations thereoff. The
augmented syntactic feature model simply adds de-
pendency labels within the same window.

2.5 Perspective classification

Finally, we include a document classification dataset
from Lin and Hauptmann (2006).13 The dataset con-
sists of blog posts posted at bitterlemons.org by Is-
raelis and Palestinians. The bitterlemons.org web-
site is set up to ”contribute to mutual understanding
through the open exchange of ideas.” In the dataset,
each blog post is labeled as either Israeli or Pales-
tinian. Our baseline model is just a standard bag-
of-words model, and the system adds dependency
triplets to the bag-of-words model in a way similar
to Joshi and Penstein-Rose (2009). We do not re-
move stop words, since perspective classification is

12LDC Catalog No.: LDC93T3A.
13https://sites.google.com/site/weihaolinatcmu/data

621



bl yamada conll07 ewt lth
DEPRELS - 12 21 47 41

PTB-23 (LAS) - 88.99 88.52 81.36∗ 87.52
PTB-23 (UAS) - 90.21 90.12 84.22∗ 90.29

Neg: scope F1 - 81.27 80.43 78.70 79.57
Neg: event F1 - 76.19 72.90 73.15 76.24
Neg: full negation F1 - 67.94 63.24 61.60 64.31
SentComp F1 68.47 72.07 64.29 71.56 71.56
SMT-dev-Meteor 35.80 36.06 36.06 36.16 36.08
SMT-test-Meteor 37.25 37.48 37.50 37.58 37.51
SMT-dev-BLEU 13.66 14.14 14.09 14.04 14.06
SMT-test-BLEU 14.67 15.04 15.04 14.96 15.11
SRL-22-gold - 81.35 83.22 84.72 84.01
SRL-23-gold - 79.09 80.85 80.39 82.01
SRL-22-pred - 74.41 76.22 78.29 66.32
SRL-23-pred - 73.42 74.34 75.80 64.06
bitterlemons.org 96.08 97.06 95.58 96.08 96.57

Table 1: Results. ∗: Low parsing results on PTB-23 using ewt are explained by changes between the PTB-III and the
Ontonotes 4.0 release of the English Treebank.

similar to authorship attribution, where stop words
are known to be informative. We evaluate perfor-
mance doing cross-validation over the official train-
ing data, setting the parameters of our learning algo-
rithm for each fold doing cross-validation over the
actual training data. We used soft-margin support
vector machine learning (Cortes and Vapnik, 1995),
tuning the kernel (linear or polynomial with degree
3) and C = {0.1, 1, 5, 10}.

3 Results and discussion

Our results are presented in Table 1. The parsing
results are obtained relying on predicted POS rather
than, as often done in the dependency parsing liter-
ature, relying on gold-standard POS. Note that they
comply with the result in Schwartz et al. (2012) that
Yamada-Matsumoto-style annotation is more easily
learnable.

The negation resolution results are significantly
better using syntactic features in yamada annota-
tion. It is not surprising that a syntactically ori-
ented conversion scheme performs well in this task.
Since Lapponi et al. (2012) used Maltparser (Nivre
et al., 2007) with the freely available pre-trained
parsing model for English,14 we decided to also
run that parser with the gold-standard cues, in ad-

14http://www.maltparser.org/mco/english parser/engmalt.html

dition to Mate. The pre-trained model was trained
on Sections 2–21 of the Wall Street Journal sec-
tion of the English Treebank (Marcus et al., 1993),
augmented with 4000 sentences from the Question-
Bank,15 which was converted using the Stanford
converter and thus similar to the ewt annotations
used here. The results were better than using ewt
with Mate trained on Sections 2–21 alone, but worse
than the results obtained here with yamada conver-
sion scheme. F1 score on full negation was 66.92%.

The case-sensitive BLEU evaluation of the
SMT systems indicates that choice of conversion
scheme has no significant impact on overall perfor-
mance. The difference to the baseline system is
significant (p < 0.01), showing that the reorder-
ing model leads to improvement using any of the
schemes. However, the conversion schemes lead to
very different translations. This can be seen, for
example, by the fact that the relative tree edit dis-
tance between translations of different syntactically
informed SMT systems is 12% higher than within
each system (across different MERT optimizations).

The reordering approach puts a lot of weight on
the syntactic dependency relations. As a conse-
quence, the number of relation types used in the
conversion schemes proves important. Consider the

15http://www.computing.dcu.ie/∼jjudge/qtreebank/

622



REFERENCE: Zum Glück kam ich beim Strassenbahnfahren an die richtige Stelle .
SOURCE: Luckily , on the way to the tram , I found the right place .
yamada: Glücklicherweise hat auf dem Weg zur S-Bahn , stellte ich fest , dass der richtige Ort .
conll07: Glücklicherweise hat auf dem Weg zur S-Bahn , stellte ich fest , dass der richtige Ort .
ewt: Zum Glück fand ich auf dem Weg zur S-Bahn , am richtigen Platz .
lth: Zum Glück fand ich auf dem Weg zur S-Bahn , am richtigen Platz .
BASELINE: Zum Glück hat auf dem Weg zur S-Bahn , ich fand den richtigen Platz .

Figure 5: Examples of SMT output.

ORIGINAL: * 68000 sweden ab of uppsala , sweden , introduced the teleserve , an integrated answering
machine and voice-message handler that links a macintosh to touch-tone phones .

BASELINE: 68000 sweden ab introduced the teleserve an integrated answering
machine and voice-message handler .

yamada 68000 sweden ab introduced the teleserve integrated answering
machine and voice-message handler .

conll07 68000 sweden ab sweden introduced the teleserve integrated answering
machine and voice-message handler .

ewt 68000 sweden ab introduced the teleserve integrated answering
machine and voice-message handler .

lth 68000 sweden ab introduced the teleserve an integrated answering
machine and voice-message handler .

HUMAN: 68000 sweden ab introduced the teleserve integrated answering
machine and voice-message handler .

Figure 6: Examples of sentence compression output.

example in Figure 5. German requires the verb in
second position, which is obeyed in the much bet-
ter translations produced by the ewt and lth sys-
tems. Interestingly, the four schemes produce virtu-
ally identical structures for the source sentence, but
they differ in their labeling. Where conll07 and ya-
mada use the same relation for the first two con-
stituents (ADV and vMOD, respectively), ewt and
lth distinguish between them (ADVMOD/PREP and
ADV/LOC). This distinction may be what enables
the better translation, since the model may learn to
move the verb after the sentence adverbial. In the
other schemes, sentence adverbials are not distin-
guished from locational adverbials. Generally, ewt
and lth have more than twice as many relation types
as the other schemes.

The schemes ewt and lth lead to better SRL
performance than conll07 and yamada when re-
lying on gold-standard syntactic dependency trees.
This supports the claims put forward in Johansson
and Nugues (2007). These annotations also hap-
pen to use a larger set of dependency labels, how-
ever, and syntactic structures may be harder to re-
construct, as reflected by labeled attachment scores

(LAS) in syntactic parsing. The biggest drop in
SRL performance going from gold-standard to pre-
dicted syntactic trees is clearly for the lth scheme,
at an average 17.8% absolute loss (yamada 5.8%;
conll07 6.8%; ewt 5.5%; lth 17.8%).

The ewt scheme resembles lth in most respects,
but in preposition-noun dependencies it marks the
preposition as the head rather than the noun. This
is an important difference for SRL, because seman-
tic arguments are often nouns embedded in preposi-
tional phrases, like agents in passive constructions.
It may also be that the difference in performance is
simply explained by the syntactic analysis of prepo-
sitional phrases being easier to reconstruct.

The sentence compression results are generally
much better than the models proposed in Knight and
Marcu (2002). Their noisy channel model obtains
an F1 compression score of 14.58%, whereas the
decision tree-based model obtains an F1 compres-
sion score of 31.71%. While F1 scores should be
complemented by human judgements, as there are
typically many good sentence compressions of any
source sentence, we believe that error reductions of
more than 50% indicate that the models used here

623



ADV AMOD CC COORDDEP EXP GAP IOBJ LGS NMOD OBJ P PMOD PRD PRN PRT ROOT SBJ VC VMOD
0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

0.30

0.35

0.40

La
b
e
ls

srl
neg

Figure 7: Distributions of dependency labels in the
Yamada-Matsumoto scheme

(though previously unexplored in the literature) are
fully competitive with state-of-the-art models.

We also see that the models using syntactic fea-
tures perform better than our baseline model, except
for the model using conll07 dependency annotation.
This may be surprising to some, since distributional
information is often considered important in sen-
tence compression (Knight and Marcu, 2002). Some
output examples are presented in Figure 6. Un-
surprisingly, it is seen that the baseline model pro-
duces grammatically incorrect output, and that most
of our syntactic models correct the error leading to
ungrammaticality. The model using ewt annotation
is an exception. We also see that conll07 introduces
another error. We believe that this is due to the way
the conll07 tree-to-dependency conversion scheme
handles coordination. While the word Sweden is not
coordinated, it occurs in a context, surrounded by
commas, that is very similar to coordinated items.

In perspective classification we see that syntactic
features based on yamada and lth annotations lead
to improvements, with yamada leading to slightly
better results than lth. The fact that a syntactically
oriented conversion scheme leads to the best results
may reflect that perspective classification, like au-
thorship attribution, is less about content than stylis-
tics.

While lth seems to lead to the overall best re-
sults, we stress the fact that the five tasks considered
here are incommensurable. What is more interest-
ing is that, task to task, results are so different. The
semantically oriented conversion schemes, ewt and
lth, lead to the best results in SRL, but with a signif-
icant drop for lth when relying on predicted parses,
while the yamada scheme is competitive in the other

four tasks. This may be because distributional infor-
mation is more important in these tasks than in SRL.

The distribution of dependency labels seems rel-
atively stable across applications, but differences in
data may of course also affect the usefulness of dif-
ferent annotations. Note that conll07 leads to very
good results for negation resolution, but bad results
for SRL. See Figure 7 for the distribution of labels
in the conll07 conversion scheme on the SRL and
negation scope resolution data. Many differences
relate to differences in sentence length. The nega-
tion resolution data is literary text with shorter sen-
tences, which therefore uses more punctuation and
has more root dependencies than newspaper articles.
On the other hand we do see very few predicate de-
pendencies in the SRL data. This may affect down-
stream results when classifying verbal predicates in
SRL. We also note that the number of dependency
labels have less impact on results in general than we
would have expected. The number of dependency
labels and the lack of support for some of them may
explain the drop with predicted syntactic parses in
our SRL results, but generally we obtain our best re-
sults with yamada and lth annotations, which have
12 and 41 dependency labels, respectively.

4 Conclusions

We evaluated four different tree-to-dependency con-
version schemes, putting more or less emphasis on
syntactic or semantic evidence, in five down-stream
applications, including SMT and negation resolu-
tion. Our results show why it is important to be
precise about exactly what tree-to-dependency con-
version scheme is used. Tools like pennconverter.jar
gives us a wide range of options when converting
constituent-based treebanks, and even small differ-
ences may have significant impact on down-stream
performance. The small differences are also impor-
tant for more linguistic comparisons that also tend to
gloss over exactly what conversion scheme is used,
e.g. Ivanova et al. (2012).

Acknowledgements

Hector Martinez is funded by the ERC grant
CLARA No. 238405, and Anders Søgaard is
funded by the ERC Starting Grant LOWLANDS
No. 313695.

624



References

Emily Bender, Dan Flickinger, Stephan Oepen, and
Yi Zhang. 2011. Parser evaluation over local and non-
local dependencies in a large corpus. In EMNLP.

Bernd Bohnet. 2010. Top accuracy and fast dependency
parsing is not a contradiction. In COLING.

Jonathan H. Clark, Chris Dyer, Alon Lavie, and Noah A.
Smith. 2011. Better hypothesis testing for statistical
machine translation: controlling for optimizer instabil-
ity. In ACL.

Mike Collins. 1999. Head-driven statistical models for
natural language parsing. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Pennsylvania.

Michael Collins. 2002. Discriminative training methods
for Hidden Markov Models. In EMNLP.

Corinna Cortes and Vladimir Vapnik. 1995. Support-
vector networks. Machine Learning, 20(3):273–297.

Koby Crammer and Yoram Singer. 2003. Ultraconserva-
tive algorithms for multiclass problems. In JMLR.

Jakob Elming and Martin Haulrich. 2011. Reordering
by parsing. In Proceedings of International Workshop
on Using Linguistic Information for Hybrid Machine
Translation (LIHMT-2011).

Michel Galley and Christopher Manning. 2009.
Quadratic-time dependency parsing for machine trans-
lation. In ACL.

Keith Hall, Ryan McDonald, Jason Katz-Brown, and
Michael Ringgaard. 2011. Training dependency
parsers by jointly optimizing multiple objectives. In
EMNLP.

Angelina Ivanova, Stephan Oepen, Lilja Øvrelid, and
Dan Flickinger. 2012. Who did what to whom? a con-
trastive study of syntactico-semantic dependencies. In
LAW.

Richard Johansson and Alessandro Moschitti. 2010.
Syntactic and semantic structure for opinion expres-
sion detection. In CoNLL.

Richard Johansson and Pierre Nugues. 2007. Extended
constituent-to-dependency conversion for English. In
NODALIDA.

Richard Johansson and Pierre Nugues. 2008.
Dependency-based syntactic-semantic analysis
with propbank and nombank. In CoNLL.

Mahesh Joshi and Carolyn Penstein-Rose. 2009. Gen-
eralizing dependency features for opinion mining. In
ACL.

Kevin Knight and Daniel Marcu. 2002. Summariza-
tion beyond sentence extraction: a probabilistic ap-
proach to sentence compression. Artificial Intelli-
gence, 139:91–107.

Emanuele Lapponi, Erik Velldal, Lilja Øvrelid, and
Jonathon Read. 2012. UiO2: Sequence-labeling nega-
tion using dependency features. In *SEM.

Alon Lavie and Abhaya Agarwal. 2007. Meteor: an au-
tomatic metric for mt evaluation with high levels of
correlation with human judgments. In WMT.

Wei-Hao Lin and Alexander Hauptmann. 2006. Are
these documents written from different perspectives?
In COLING-ACL.

Mitchell Marcus, Mary Marcinkiewicz, and Beatrice
Santorini. 1993. Building a large annotated corpus
of English: the Penn Treebank. Computational Lin-
guistics, 19(2):313–330.

Ryan McDonald and Joakim Nivre. 2007. Characteriz-
ing the errors of data-driven dependency parsers. In
EMNLP-CoNLL.

Ryan McDonald, Fernando Pereira, Kiril Ribarov, and
Jan Hajič. 2005. Non-projective dependency pars-
ing using spanning tree algorithms. In Proceedings of
the Conference on Human Language Technology and
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
2005, pages 523–530, Vancouver, British Columbia.

Ryan McDonald. 2006. Discriminative sentence com-
pression with soft syntactic evidence. In EACL.

Makoto Miwa, Sampo Pyysalo, Tadayoshi Hara, and
Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2010. Evaluating dependency repre-
sentation for event extraction. In COLING.

Yusuke Miyao, Rune Sæ tre, Kenji Sagae, Takuya Mat-
suzaki, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2008. Task-oriented eval-
uation of syntactic parsers and their representations. In
ACL.

Roser Morante and Eduardo Blanco. 2012. *sem 2012
shared task: Resolving the scope and focus of nega-
tion. In *SEM.

Roser Morante and Caroline Sporleder. 2012. Modal-
ity and negation: An introduction to the special issue.
Computational linguistics, 38(2):223–260.

Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Jens Nilsson, Atanas Chanev,
Gülsen Eryigit, Sandra Kübler, Svetoslav Marinov,
and Erwin Marsi. 2007. MaltParser: a language-
independent system for data-driven dependency pars-
ing. Natural Language Engineering, 13(2):95–135.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic evalua-
tion of machine translation. In ACL.

Slav Petrov and Ryan McDonald. 2012. Overview of
the 2012 Shared Task on Parsing the Web. In Notes
of the First Workshop on Syntactic Analysis of Non-
Canonical Language (SANCL).

Roy Schwartz, and Omri Abend, Roi Reichart, and Ari
Rappoport. 2011. Neutralizing linguistically prob-
lematic annotations in unsupervised dependency pars-
ing evaluation. In ACL.

Roy Schwartz, Omri Abend, and Ari Rappoport. 2012.
Learnability-based syntactic annotation design. In
COLING.

625



Reut Tsarfaty, Joakim Nivre, and Evelina Andersson.
2012. Cross-framework evaluation for statistical pars-
ing. In EACL.

Erik Velldal, Lilja Øvrelid, Jonathon Read, and Stephan
Oepen. 2012. Speculation and negation: Rules,
rankers, and the role of synta. Computational linguis-
tics, 38(2):369–410.

Peng Xu, Jaeho Kang, Michael Ringgaard, and Franz
Och. 2009. Using a dependency parser to improve
SMT for subject-object-verb languages. In NAACL-
HLT, Boulder, Colorado.

Deniz Yuret, Laura Rimell, and Aydin Han. 2012. Parser
evaluation using textual entailments. Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, Published online 31 October
2012.

626


