



















































Topic Models and Metadata for Visualizing Text Corpora


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2013 Demonstration Session, pages 5–9,
Atlanta, Georgia, 10-12 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Topic Models and Metadata for Visualizing Text Corpora

Justin Snyder, Rebecca Knowles, Mark Dredze, Matthew R. Gormley, Travis Wolfe
Human Language Technology Center of Excellence

Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21211

{jsnyde32,mdredze,mgormley,twolfe3}@jhu.edu, rknowles@haverford.edu

Abstract

Effectively exploring and analyzing large text
corpora requires visualizations that provide a
high level summary. Past work has relied on
faceted browsing of document metadata or on
natural language processing of document text.
In this paper, we present a new web-based tool
that integrates topics learned from an unsuper-
vised topic model in a faceted browsing expe-
rience. The user can manage topics, filter doc-
uments by topic and summarize views with
metadata and topic graphs. We report a user
study of the usefulness of topics in our tool.

1 Introduction

When analyzing text corpora, such as newspaper ar-
ticles, research papers, or historical archives, users
need an intuitive way to understand and summa-
rize numerous documents. Exploratory search (Mar-
chionini, 2006) is critical for large corpora that can
easily overwhelm users. Corpus visualization tools
can provide a high-level view of the data and help di-
rect subsequent exploration. Broadly speaking, such
systems can be divided into two groups: those that
rely on structured metadata, and those that use infor-
mation derived from document content.
Metadata Approaches based on metadata include
visualizing document metadata alongside a domain
ontology (Seeling and Becks, 2003), providing tools
to select passages based on annotated words (Cor-
rell et al., 2011), and using images and metadata for
visualizing related documents (Cataldi et al., 2011).

A natural solution for exploring via metadata is
faceted browsing (English et al., 2002; Hearst, 2006;

Smith et al., 2006; Yee et al., 2003), a paradigm
for filtering commonly used in e-commerce stores.
This consists of filtering based on metadata like
“brand” or “size”, which helps summarize the con-
tent of the current document set (Käki, 2005). Stud-
ies have shown improved user experiences by facil-
itating user interactions through facets (Oren et al.,
2006) and faceted browsing has been used for aid-
ing search (Fujimura et al., 2006) and exploration
(Collins et al., 2009) of text corpora.

However, facets require existing structured meta-
data fields, which may be limited or unavailable. An
alternative is to use NLP to show document content.

Content Topic modeling (Blei et al., 2003), has
become very popular for corpus and document un-
derstanding. Recent research has focused on aspects
highlighted by the topic model, such as topic distri-
butions across the corpus, topic distributions across
documents, related topics and words that make up
each topic (Chaney and Blei, 2012; Eisenstein et al.,
2012), or document relations through topic compo-
sitions (Chuang et al., 2012; Gardner et al., 2010).

Newer work has begun to visualize documents in
the context of their topics and their metadata, such as
topics incorporated with keywords and events (Cui
et al., 2011). Other examples include displaying
topic prevalence over time (Liu et al., 2009) or help-
ing users understand how real events shape textual
trends (Dou et al., 2011). While interfaces may be
customized for specific metadata types, e.g. the top-
ical map of National Institutes of Health funding
agencies (Talley et al., 2011), these interfaces do not
incorporate arbitrary metadata.

5



2 Combining Metadata and Topics

We present MetaToMATo (Metadata and Topic
Model Analysis Toolkit), a visualization tool that
combines both metadata and topic models in a single
faceted browsing paradigm for exploration and anal-
ysis of document collections. While previous work
has shown the value of metadata facets, we show that
topic model output complements metadata. Provid-
ing both in a single interface yields a flexible tool.

We illustrate MetaToMATo with an example
adapted from our user study. Consider Sarah, a
hypothetical intern in the New York Times archive
room who is presented with the following task.

Your boss explains that although the New
York Times metadata fields are fairly compre-
hensive, sometimes human error leads to over-
sights or missing entries. Today you’ve been
asked to keep an eye out for documents that
mention the New York Marathon but do not
include descriptors linking them to that event.

This is corpus exploration: a user is asked to dis-
cover relevant information by exploring the corpus.
We illustrate the tool with a walk-through.

Corpus Selection The corpus selection page (tool
home page) provides information about all available
corpora, and allows for corpora upload and deletion.

Sarah selects the New York Times corpus.

Corpus Overview After selecting a corpus, the
user sees the corpus overview and configuration
page. Across four tabs, the user is presented with
more detailed corpus statistics and can customize
her visualization experience. The first tab shows
general corpus information. The second allows for
editing the inferred type (date, quantity, or string)
for each metadata attribute to change filtering be-
havior, hide unhelpful attributes, and choose which
attributes to “quick display” in the document col-
lapsed view. On the remaining two tabs, the user can
customize date display formats and manage tags.

She selects attributes “Date” and “Byline” for
quick display, hides “Series Name”, and formats
“Date” to show only the date (no times).

Topics View Each topic is displayed in a box con-
taining its name (initially set to its top 3 words) and a
list of the top 10 words. Top words within a topic are
words with the highest probability of appearing in
the corpus. Each topic word is highlighted to show a

Figure 1: Topics Page A view of the first row of top-
ics, and the sorting selector at the top of the page. The
left topic is being renamed. The second topic has been
marked as junk.

normalized probability of that word within the topic.
(Figure 1) Clicking a topic box provides more infor-
mation. Users can rename topics, label unhelpful or
low-quality topics as JUNK, or sort them in terms of
frequency in the corpus,1 predicted quality,2 or junk.

Sarah renames several topics, including the topic
“{running, athletes, race}” as SPORTS and marks
the “{share, listed, bath}” topic as JUNK.
Documents View The document view provides a
faceted browsing interface of the corpus. (Figure 2)
The pane on the right side displays the set of docu-
ments returned by the current filters (search). Each
document is summarized by the first 100 words and
any quick view metadata. Users can expand doc-
uments to see all document metadata, a graph of
the distribution of the topics in this document, and
a graph of topics distinctive to this document com-
pared to corpus-wide averages.3

Sarah begins by looking at the types of documents
in the corpus, opening and closing a few documents
as she scrolls down the page.

The facets pane on the left side of the page dis-
plays the available facets given the current filters.
Topics in a drop-down menu can be used to filter
given a threshold.

Sarah selects the value “New York City” for the
Location attribute and a threshold of 5% for the
SPORTS topic, filtering on both facets.

Values next to each metadata facet show the num-
ber of documents in the current view with those at-
tribute values, which helps tell the user what to ex-

1Frequency is computed using topic assignments from a
Gibbs sampler (Griffiths and Steyvers, 2004).

2Topic quality is given by the entropy of its word distribu-
tion. Other options include Mimno and Blei (2011).

3The difference of the probability of a topic in the current
document and the topic overall, divided by value overall.

6



Figure 2: Left: Documents Page. The left pane shows the available facets (topics and metadata) and the right pane
shows the matching documents (collapsed view.) Right: Expanded Document. An expanded collapsed document is
replaced with this more detailed view, showing the entire document as well as metadata and topic graphs.

pect if she refines her query.
Sarah notices that the News Desk value of

“Sports” matches a large number of documents in
the current view. She adds this filter to the current
facet query, updating the document view.

At the top of the document pane are the cur-
rent view’s “Aggregate Statistics”, which shows how
many documents match the current query. An ex-
pandable box shows graphs for the current docu-
ments topic distribution and distinctive topics.4

Looking at the topic graph for the current query,
Sarah sees that another topic with sports related
words appears with high probability. She adds it to
the search and updates the document view.

Any document can be tagged with user-created
tags. Tags and their associated documents are dis-
played in the corpus overview on the configuration
page. If a user finds a search query of interest, she
can save and name the search to return to it later.

Sarah sees many documents relevant to the New
York City Marathon. She tags documents of interest
and saves the query for later reference.

2.1 Implementation Details

Our web based tool makes it easy for users to share
results, maintain the system, and make the tool
widely available. The application is built with a
JSP front-end, a Java back-end, and a MongoDB
database for storing the corpus and associated data.
To ensure a fast UI, filters use an in-memory meta-
data and topic index. Searches are cached so incre-
mental search queries are very fast. The UI uses

4Computed as above but with more topics displayed.

Ajax and JQuery UI for dynamic loading and inter-
active elements. We easily hosted more than a dozen
corpora on a single installation.

3 Evaluation

Our primary goal was to investigate whether incor-
porating topic model output along with document
metadata into a faceted browser provided an effec-
tive mechanism for filtering documents. Participants
were presented with four tasks consisting of a ques-
tion to answer using the tool and a paragraph provid-
ing context. The first three tasks tested exploration
(find documents) while the last tested analysis (learn
about article authors). At the end of each task, the
users were directed to a survey on the tool’s useful-
ness. We also logged user actions to further evaluate
how they used the tool.

3.1 Participants and Experimental Setup

Twelve participants (3 female, 9 male) volunteered
after receiving an email from a local mailing list.
They received no compensation for their participa-
tion and they were able to complete the experiment
in their preferred environment at a convenient time
by accessing the tool online. They were provided
with a tool guide and were encouraged to familiarize
themselves with the tool before beginning the tasks;
logs suggest 8 of 12 did exploration before starting.

The study required participants to find informa-
tion from a selection of 10,000 documents from
the New York Times Annotated Corpus (Sandhaus,
2008), which contains a range of metadata.5 All

5The full list of metadata fields that we allowed users to ac-

7



documents in the corpus were published in January
of 1995 and we made no effort at deduplication.
Topics were generated using the Latent Dirichlet Al-
location (LDA) (Blei et al., 2003) implementation
in MALLET (McCallum, 2002). We used 100 top-
ics trained with 1500 Gibbs iterations and hyper-
parameter optimization.

3.2 Quantitative Results
The length of time required to complete individual
tasks ranged from 1 minute and 3 seconds to 24 min-
utes and 54 seconds (average 9 minutes.) 6

Within the scope of each task, each user initi-
ated on average 5.75 searches. The time between
searches was on average 1 minute and 53 seconds.
Of all the searches, 21.4% were new searches and
78.6% built on previous searches when users chose
to expand or narrow the scope of the search. When
users initiated new search queries, they began with
queries on topics 59.3% of the time, with queries on
metadata 37.3% of the time, and queries that used
both topics and metadata 3.4% of the time. This
lends credence to the claim that the ability to access
both metadata and topics is crucial.

We asked users to rate features in terms of their
usefulness on a Likert scale from 1 (not helpful at
all) to 5 (extremely helpful). The most preferred fea-
tures were filtering on topics (mean 4.217, median 5)
and compacted documents (mean 3.848, median 5)
The least preferred were document graphs of topic
usage (mean 1.848, median 1) and aggregate statis-
tics (mean 1.891, median 1).7 The fact that filtering
on topics was the most preferred feature validates
our approach of including topics as a facet. Addi-
tionally, topic names were critical to this success.

3.3 Surveys
Users provided qualitative feedback8 by describing
their approaches to the task, and offering sugges-
cess in the study was: online section, organization, news desk,
date, locations, series name, byline (author), people, title, fea-
ture page, and descriptors.

6These times do not include the 3 instances in which a user
felt unable to complete a task. Also omitted are 11 tasks (from
4 users) for which log files could not provide accurate times.

7Ratings are likely influenced by the specific nature of the
sample user tasks. In tasks that required seeking out metadata,
expanded document views rated higher than their average.

8The survey results presented here consist of one survey per
participant per task, with two exceptions where two participants

tions, the most common of which was an increase
in allowed query complexity, a feature we intend to
enhance. In the current version, all search terms are
combined using AND; 7 of the 12 participants made
requests for a NOT option.

Some users (6 of 12) admitted to using their
browser’s search feature to help complete the tasks.
We chose to forgo a keyword search capability in the
study-ready version of the tool because we wanted
to test the ability of topic information to provide a
way to navigate the content. Given the heavy us-
age of topic searches and the ability of users to com-
plete tasks with or without browser search, we have
demonstrated the usefulness of the topics as a win-
dow into the content. In future versions, we envision
incorporating keyword search capabilities, including
suggested topic filters for searched queries.

As users completed the tasks, their comfort with
the tool increased. One user wrote, “After the last
task I knew exactly what to do to get my results. I
knew what information would help me find docu-
ments.” Users also began to suggest new ways that
they would like to see topics and metadata com-
bined. Task 4 led one user to say “It would be in-
teresting to see a page on each author and what top-
ics they mostly covered.” We could provide this in a
general way by showing a page for each metadata at-
tribute that contains relevant topics and other meta-
data. We intend to implement such features.

4 Conclusion

A user evaluation of MetaToMATo, our toolkit for
visualizing text corpora that incorporates both topic
models and metadata, confirms the validity of our
approach to use topic models and metadata in a sin-
gle faceted browser. Users searched with topics a
majority of the time, but also made use of metadata.
This clearly demonstrates a reliance on both, sug-
gesting that users went back and forth as needed.
Additionally, while metadata is traditionally used for
facets, users ranked filtering by topic more highly
than metadata. This suggests a new direction in
which advances in topic models can be used to aid
corpus exploration.

each failed to record one of their four surveys.

8



References
David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan.

2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. J. Mach. Learn.
Res., 3:993–1022, March.

M. Cataldi, L. Di Caro, and C. Schifanella. 2011. Im-
mex: Immersive text documents exploration system.
In Content-Based Multimedia Indexing (CBMI), 2011
9th International Workshop on, pages 1–6. IEEE.

A.J.B. Chaney and D.M. Blei. 2012. Visualizing topic
models. In AAAI.

J. Chuang, C.D. Manning, and J. Heer. 2012. Ter-
mite: visualization techniques for assessing textual
topic models. In Proceedings of the International
Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces,
pages 74–77. ACM.

Christopher Collins, Fernanda B. Viégas, and Martin
Wattenberg. 2009. Parallel tag clouds to explore and
analyze faceted text corpora. In Proc. of the IEEE
Symp. on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
(VAST).

M. Correll, M. Witmore, and M. Gleicher. 2011. Explor-
ing collections of tagged text for literary scholarship.
Computer Graphics Forum, 30(3):731–740.

W. Cui, S. Liu, L. Tan, C. Shi, Y. Song, Z. Gao, H. Qu,
and X. Tong. 2011. Textflow: Towards better un-
derstanding of evolving topics in text. Visualiza-
tion and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on,
17(12):2412–2421.

W. Dou, X. Wang, R. Chang, and W. Ribarsky. 2011.
Paralleltopics: A probabilistic approach to exploring
document collections. In Visual Analytics Science and
Technology (VAST), 2011 IEEE Conference on, pages
231–240. IEEE.

Jacob Eisenstein, Duen Horng ”Polo” Chau, Aniket Kit-
tur, and Eric P. Xing. 2012. Topicviz: Interactive topic
exploration in document collections. In CHI.

Jennifer English, Marti Hearst, Rashmi Sinha, Kirsten
Swearingen, and Ka-Ping Yee. 2002. Flexible search
and navigation using faceted metadata. In ACM SIGIR
Conference on Information Retrieval (SIGIR).

Ko Fujimura, Hiroyuki Toda, Takafumi Inoue, Nobuaki
Hiroshima, Ryoji Kataoka, and Masayuki Sugizaki.
2006. Blogranger - a multi-faceted blog search engine.
In World Wide Web (WWW).

Matthew J. Gardner, Joshua Lutes, Jeff Lund, Josh
Hansen, Dan Walker, Eric Ringger, and Kevin Seppi.
2010. The topic browser: An interactive tool for
browsing topic models. In NIPS Workshop on Chal-
lenges of Data Visualization.

T.L. Griffiths and M. Steyvers. 2004. Finding scien-
tific topics. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 101(Suppl
1):5228–5235.

Marti Hearst. 2006. Clustering versus faceted categories
for information exploration. Communications of the
ACM, 49(4).

Mika Käki. 2005. Findex: search result categories help
users when document ranking fails. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems, CHI ’05, pages 131–140, New York,
NY, USA. ACM.

S. Liu, M.X. Zhou, S. Pan, W. Qian, W. Cai, and X. Lian.
2009. Interactive, topic-based visual text summariza-
tion and analysis. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM
conference on Information and knowledge manage-
ment, pages 543–552. ACM.

G. Marchionini. 2006. Exploratory search: from find-
ing to understanding. Communications of the ACM,
49(4):41–46.

Andrew Kachites McCallum. 2002. Mal-
let: A machine learning for language toolkit.
http://mallet.cs.umass.edu.

D. Mimno and D. Blei. 2011. Bayesian checking for
topic models. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 227–237. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Eyal Oren, Renaud Delbru, and Stefan Decker. 2006.
Extending faceted navigation for rdf data. In Interna-
tional Semantic Web Conference (ISWC).

Evan Sandhaus. 2008. The new york times annotated
corpus.

Christian Seeling and Andreas Becks. 2003. Exploit-
ing metadata for ontology-based visual exploration of
weakly structured text documents. In Proceedings of
the 7th International Conference on Information Visu-
alisation (IV03, pages 0–7695. IEEE Press, ISBN.

Greg Smith, Mary Czerwinski, Brian Meyers, Daniel
Robbins, George Robertson, and Desney S. Tan. 2006.
FacetMap: A Scalable Search and Browse Visualiza-
tion. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Com-
puter Graphics, 12(5):797–804.

E.M. Talley, D. Newman, D. Mimno, B.W. Herr II,
H.M. Wallach, G.A.P.C. Burns, A.G.M. Leenders, and
A. McCallum. 2011. Database of nih grants using
machine-learned categories and graphical clustering.
Nature Methods, 8(6):443–444.

Ping Yee, Kirsten Swearingen, Kevin Li, and Marti
Hearst. 2003. Faceted metadata for image search and
browsing. In Computer-Human Interaction (CHI).

9


