










































Mining User Relations from Online Discussions using Sentiment Analysis and Probabilistic Matrix Factorization


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2013, pages 401–410,
Atlanta, Georgia, 9–14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Mining User Relations from Online Discussions using Sentiment Analysis
and Probabilistic Matrix Factorization

Minghui Qiu†, Liu Yang†,‡, Jing Jiang†
† School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore

‡ School of Software and Microelectronics, Peking University, China
{minghui.qiu.2010,jingjiang}@smu.edu.sg, yang.liu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Advances in sentiment analysis have enabled
extraction of user relations implied in online
textual exchanges such as forum posts. How-
ever, recent studies in this direction only con-
sider direct relation extraction from text. As
user interactions can be sparse in online dis-
cussions, we propose to apply collaborative
filtering through probabilistic matrix factor-
ization to generalize and improve the opinion
matrices extracted from forum posts. Exper-
iments with two tasks show that the learned
latent factor representation can give good per-
formance on a relation polarity prediction task
and improve the performance of a subgroup
detection task.

1 Introduction

The fast growth of the social Web has led to a large
amount of interest in online social network analysis.
Most existing work on social network analysis re-
lies on explicit links among users such as undirected
friendship relations (Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg,
2003), directed following relations (Hopcroft et al.,
2011) and trust/distrust relations (Leskovec et al.,
2010). However, besides these explicit social rela-
tions, the various kinds of interactions between on-
line users often suggest other implicit relations. In
particular, in online discussion forums, users inter-
act through textual posts and these exchanged texts
often reveal whether two users are friends or foes, or
whether two users share the same viewpoint towards
a given issue.

To uncover such implicit relations requires text
analysis and particularly sentiment analysis. Re-

cently, Hassan et al. (2012) studied predicting the
polarity of user interactions in online discussions
based on textual exchanges. They found that the au-
tomatically predicted signed relations had an accu-
racy above 80%. The extracted signed network was
further used to detect ideological subgroups. This is
a piece of pioneering work that extracts online social
relations based on text analysis.

In this paper, we further extend the idea of mining
social relations from online forum posts by incorpo-
rating collaborative filtering. Our work is motivated
by the observation that direct textual exchanges be-
tween users are sparse. For example, in the data set
we use, only around 13% of user-user pairs have di-
rect interactions. Collaborative filtering is a com-
monly used technique in recommender systems to
predict missing ratings. The key assumption is that
if two people have the same opinion on an item A,
they are likely to also have the same opinion on a
different item B. In online discussion forums, users
express their opinions about each other as well as
the various aspects of the topic under discussion, but
not every user comments on every aspect or every
other user. Collaborative filtering allows us to iden-
tify users with the same opinion even if they have not
directly interacted with each other or commented on
any common aspect.

Our method starts with extracting opinions on
users and topic aspects from online posts using sen-
timent analysis. The results are two matrices indi-
cating the sentiment polarity scores between pairs
of users and pairs of a user and an aspect. To in-
corporate collaborative filtering, we choose proba-
bilistic matrix factorization (PMF) (Salakhutdinov

401



and Mnih, 2008), a technique that has been success-
fully applied for collaborative filtering-based recom-
mendation problems. PMF automatically discovers
a low-rank representation for both users and items
based on observed rating data. In our problem, the
predicted sentiment polarity scores are treated as rat-
ing data, and the results of PMF are low-rank vectors
representing each user in online discussions.

We evaluate our method on two tasks. The first
is to predict the polarity of interactions between two
users not from their own textual exchanges but from
their interactions with other users or comments on
topic aspects. The second is to use the latent vectors
to group users based on viewpoints. We find that the
latent factor representation can produce good predic-
tion results for the first task and improve the cluster-
ing results of the second task compared with a num-
ber of baselines, showing the effectiveness of col-
laborative filtering for mining social relations from
online discussions.

2 Related Work

Our work is closely related to recent studies on
detecting subgroups from online discussions (Abu-
Jbara et al., 2012; Dasigi et al., 2012; Hassan et
al., 2012). Abu-Jbara et al. (2012) proposed to
build discussant attitude profiles (DAP) from on-
line posts and use these profiles to cluster users into
subgroups. A DAP is a vector that contains the
attitudes of a discussant towards other discussants
and a set of opinion targets. We also extract opin-
ions of users towards other users and opinion tar-
gets from posts, which are similar to DAPs. The
difference is that we further apply probabilistic ma-
trix factorization to derive a low-rank representation
from the raw opinion scores. Our comparison with
DAP-based clustering shows that probabilistic ma-
trix factorization can improve subgroup detection.
Hassan et al. (2012) proposed to predict the polar-
ity of interactions between users based on their tex-
tual exchanges. They defined a set of interaction
features using sentiment analysis and applied super-
vised learning for polarity prediction. In compari-
son, our work is unsupervised, that is, we do not use
any ground truth of interaction polarity for training.

Probabilistic matrix factorization was proposed
by Salakhutdinov and Mnih (2008) as a collabo-

rative filtering method for recommender systems.
It has attracted much attention and been extended
by Ma et al. (2008) and Wang and Blei (2011).
In particular, Ma et al. (2008) proposed a SocRec
model that combines social network information
with rating data using the PMF framework to per-
form social recommendation. Our model bears sim-
ilarity to SocRec in that we also consider two types
of interactions, i.e. user-user interactions and user-
aspect interactions. However, different from Ma et
al. (2008), we predict both the user-user and user-
aspect scores from textual posts using sentiment
analysis, and the user-user opinion polarity scores
are symmetric.

Part of our method uses sentiment analysis to ex-
tract opinions from text. This is built on top of a
large body of existing work on opinion extraction,
e.g. Choi et al. (2006) and Wu et al. (2009). As the
sentiment analysis component is not our main con-
tribution, we do not review existing work along this
direction in detail here. Interested readers can refer
to Pang and Lee (2008).

The idea of incorporating sentiment analysis into
collaborative filtering algorithms has been explored
by Kawamae (2011), Moshfeghi et al. (2011) and
Leung et al. (2011). While their work also com-
bines sentiment analysis with collaborative filtering,
the purpose is to improve the accuracy of item rec-
ommendation. In contrast, we borrow the idea and
technique of collaborative filtering to improve user
relation mining from online text.

3 Method Overview

In this section, we provide an overview of our
method. We first introduce some concepts.
User: We use user to refer to a discussant in an on-
line discussion. Each user has an online ID, which
can be used by other users to refer to him/her in a
post. Users are both opinion holders and opinion
targets. For example, User 1 below expresses a neg-
ative opinion towards another user in the following
snippet.

User 1: Actually, I have to disagree with you.

Aspect: We use topic aspect or aspect to refer to an
opinion target that is related to the topic under dis-
cussion. For example, when debating about whether
one should vote for Obama, people may express

402



opinions on targets such as “President Obama” and
“Republican party,” as shown in the following snip-
pets. These aspects are all related to Obama’s pres-
idential campaign. As we will explain later, the as-
pects we consider are named entities and frequent
noun phrases.

User 2: Americans should vote for President Obama be-
cause he picks good corporations as winners.

User 3: I simply point out how absolutely terrible the Re-
publican party is.

Polarity Score: A sentiment polarity score is a
real number between 0 and 1, where 0 indicates a
completely negative opinion and 1 indicates a com-
pletely positive opinion.
User-User Opinion Matrix: The opinions ex-
tracted from posts between users are represented by
a user-user opinion matrix S, where entry si,j is a
polarity score between the i-th user and the j-th user.
We assume that the polarity scores are symmetric.
User-Aspect Opinion Matrix: The opinions held
by different users on the various topic aspects are
represented by a user-aspect opinion matrix R,
where entry ri,k is a polarity score indicating the i-th
user’s opinion towards the k-th aspect.

Given the matrices S and R, we perform proba-
bilistic matrix factorization to derive a low-rank vec-
tor representation for users and aspects such that if
the polarity score between two users or a user and
an aspect is high, the dot product between the corre-
sponding two vectors is also high.

In Section 4, we will explain in detail how we
identify topic aspects from a discussion thread and
how we obtain polarity scores from posts. In Sec-
tion 5, we will present the details of our probabilistic
matrix factorization model.

4 Construction of Opinion Matrices

The opinion matrices are constructed from a single
forum thread discussing some controversial topic.

4.1 Aspect Identification

As we have pointed out, there are two kinds of opin-
ion targets, namely users and aspects. Users are
clearly defined and can often be identified in posts
by their IDs or second person pronouns. For aspects,
however, there is not a pre-defined set. We observe
that these topic aspects are usually named entities

or noun phrases frequently mentioned. We therefore
use the OpenNLP toolkit1 to perform chunking and
obtain noun phrases and the Standford NER tagger2

to identify named entities from the posts.
Some of the candidate aspect phrases identified

above actually refer to the same actual aspect, e.g.
“Obama voter,” “Obama voters” and “the Obama
voter.” We remove stop words from each candidate
phrase and use the WordNet by Miller (1995) to ob-
tain the lemma of each word such that we can nor-
malize the candidate aspect phases to some extent.

Finally, to select salient aspects for a given discus-
sion topic, we count the number of times each candi-
date aspect has been expressed a positive or negative
opinion on by all users, and select those candidate
aspects which have opinion expressions from at least
M users. We set M to 2 in our experiments. Fig-
ure 1 shows the top salient aspects for the thread on
“Will you vote for Obama?” We acknowledge there
are still duplicate aspects in the results like “Repub-
lican Party” and “GOP”. To normalize these aspects,
some additional information such as Wikipedia en-
tries and Google snippets may be considered. We
will study this problem in our future work.

4.2 Opinion Expression Identification
Our next step is to identify candidate opinion expres-
sions. This problem has been studied in Hu and Liu
(2004), Popescu and Etzioni (2005), and Hassan
and Radev (2010). Based on previous work, we do
the following. We first combine three popular sen-
timent lexicons to form a single sentiment lexicon:
the lexicon used in Hu and Liu (2004), MPQA Sub-
jectivity Lexicon by Wilson et al. (2005) and Senti-
WordNet by Baccianella et al. (2010). Our final sen-
timent lexicon contains 15,322 negative expressions
and 10,144 positive expressions. We then identify
candidate opinion expressions by searching for oc-
currences of words in this lexicon in the posts.

4.3 Opinion Relation Extraction
Given a post that contains an aspect and an opin-
ion expression, we still need to determine whether
the opinion expression is used to describe the as-
pect. This is a relation extraction problem. We use a
supervised learning approach based on dependency

1http://opennlp.apache.org/
2http://nlp.stanford.edu/ner/index.shtml

403



0

20

40

60

80

100

OB
AM

A

BU
SH

AM
ER

IC
A

PA
LI

N

RE
PU

BL
IC

AN

CO
NG

RE
SS

TA
X_

CU
T

AM
ER

IC
AN

CL
IN

TO
N

M
CC

AI
N

TE
A_

PA
RT

Y
IR

AQ

SA
RA

H_
PA

LI
N

PR
ES

ID
EN

T_
OB

AM
A

RE
AG

AN

RO
N_

PA
UL

EC
ON

OM
IC

_P
OL

IC
Y

AF
GH

AN
IS

TA
N

CA
RT

ER FO
X

HE
AL

TH
_C

AR
E

NA
TI

ON
AL

_D
EB

T

DE
M

OC
RA

T
GO

P

M
ID

DL
E_

CL
AS

S

OB
AM

A_
AD

M
IN

IS
TR

AT
IO

N

RE
PU

BL
IC

AN
_P

AR
TY

TA
X_

BR
EA

K

W
AS

HI
NG

TO
N

FE
DE

RA
L_

GO
VE

RN
M

EN
T

HE
AL

TH
_C

AR
E_

RE
FO

RM

HI
TL

ER

IR
AQ

_W
AR

W
AL

L_
ST

RE
ET

Figure 1: Salient aspects and number of users who express opinions on them in the thread “Will you vote for Obama?”

ID Dependency path rule Example

R1 ADJOP ← amod← NTR I simply point out how terrible REPUBLICAN PARTY is.
R2 ADJOP → nsubj → NTR BUSH is even more reasonable for tax hike than Obama.
R3 VOP → dobj → NTR I would never support OBAMA.
R4 VOP → prep ∗ → NTR I’ll vote for OBAMA.
R5 VOP → nsubjpass→ NTR DEMOCRATIC PARTY are ultimately corrupted by love of money.
R6 NOP ← dobj ← V → nsubj → NTR PAKISTAN is increasing terrorist threat.
R7 ADJOP ← amod← N → nsubj → NTR OBAMA was a top scorer for occidental college.
R8 ADVOP ← advmod← V → nsubj → NTR OBAMA is smarter than people.

Table 1: Examples of frequent dependency path rules in our training data. OP and TR refer to the opinion and the
target. The opinion words are in italic and the aspect words are in uppercase.

paths. Previous work by Mintz et al. (2009), and Qiu
et al. (2009) has shown that the shortest path be-
tween a candidate opinion aspect and a candidate
opinion expression in the dependency parse tree can
be effective in extracting opinion relations. We use
the Stanford Parser from Klein and Manning (2003)
to obtain the dependency parse trees for each sen-
tence in the posts and then get the dependency paths
between each pair of candidate aspect and opinion
expression. We use dependency relations and POS
tags of nodes along the path to represent a depen-
dency path. Given a set of training sentences (we
use the one from Wu et al. (2009)), we can get a set
of dependency path rules based on their frequencies
in the training data. Table 1 shows the frequent de-
pendency path rules in our training data.

When a pair of aspect and opinion expression is
identified to be related, we use the polarity of the
opinion expression to label the relation. Finally,
given a pair of users, we use the percentage of pos-
itive interactions between them over all subjective
interactions (i.e. interactions with either positive or
negative opinions) as extracted from their exchanged
posts as the sentiment polarity score between the

two users, regardless of the reply-to direction of
the posts. Similarly, given a user and an aspect,
we also use the percentage of positive opinion re-
lations extracted as the sentiment polarity score be-
tween them. Thus the user-user opinion matrix and
the user-aspect opinion matrix are constructed. If
there is no subjective interaction detected between
two users or between a user and an aspect, the cor-
responding entry in the matrix is left empty. We will
see later that empty entries in the matrices are not
used in the probabilistic matrix factorization step.

5 Probabilistic Matrix Factorization

As we have pointed out earlier, a problem with the
matrices extracted as described in Section 4 is that
the matrices are sparse, i.e. many entries are empty.
For the data set we use, we find that around 87% of
entries in the user-user opinion matrix and around
90% of entries in the user-aspect opinion matrix are
empty. In this section, we describe how we use
Probabilistic Matrix Factorization (PMF) to repre-
sent users and aspects in a latent factor space and
thus generalize the user preferences.

Our model is almost a direct application of proba-

404



bilistic matrix factorization from Salakhutdinov and
Mnih (2008), originally proposed for recommender
systems. The main difference is that the user-user
opinion polarity scores are symmetric. Our model is
also similar to the one used by Ma et al. (2008). We
describe our model as follows.

We assume that there are K latent factors with
which both users and aspects can be represented. Let
ui ∈ RK denote the vector in the latent factor space
for the i-th user, and ak the vector for the k-th aspect.

Recall that the opinions extracted from posts be-
tween users are represented by a user-user opinion
matrix S, and the opinions held by different users on
the various topic aspects are represented by a user-
aspect opinion matrix R. We assume that the polar-
ity scores si,j between the i-th and the j-th users and
ri,k between the i-th user and the k-th aspect in the
two matrices S and R are generated in the following
way:

p(si,j |ui, uj , σ21) = N (si,j |g(uTi uj), σ21),
p(ri,k|ui, ak, σ22) = N (ri,k|g(uTi ak), σ22),

where σ21 and σ
2
2 are variance parameters, g(·) the

logistic function, and N (·|µ, σ2) is the normal dis-
tribution with mean µ and variance σ2.

We can see that with this generative assumption,
if two users are similar in terms of their dot product
in the latent factor space, then they are more likely
to have positive interactions as extracted from their
textual exchanges. Similarly, if a user and an aspect
are similar, then the user is more likely to express a
positive opinion on the aspect in his/her posts. The
latent factors can therefore encode user preferences
and similarity between two users in the latent factor
space reflects whether they share similar viewpoints.

We also place the following prior over ui and ak:

p(ui|σ2U ) = N (ui|~0, σ2UI),
p(ak|σ2A) = N (ak|~0, σ2AI),

where σ2U and σ
2
A are two variance parameters for

users and aspects, respectively, and I is the identify
matrix.

Figure 2 shows the plate notation for the genera-
tive model.

Let U be aK×U matrix containing the vectors ui
for allU users, andA be anK×Amatrix containing

Figure 2: Probabilistic matrix factorization model on
opinion matrices.

the vectors ak for all A aspects. To automatically
learn U andA, we minimize the following objective
function:

L(U ,A,S,R)

=
1

2

U∑
i=1

A∑
k=1

I(ri,k)(ri,k − g(uTi ak))2

+
λ1
2

U∑
i=1

U∑
j=1

I(si,j)(si,j − g(uTi uj))2

+
λU
2
||U||2F +

λA
2
||A||2F , (1)

where λ = σ
2
1

σ22
, λU =

σ21
σ2U

, and λA =
σ21
σ2A

, I(s) is
an indicator function which equals 1 when s is not
empty and otherwise 0.

To optimize the objective function above, we can
perform gradient descent on U and A to find a local
optimum point. The derivation is similar to Ma et al.
(2008).

Degenerate Versions of the Model

We refer to the complete model described above
as PMF-UOM (PMF model based on User Opinion
Matrices). PMF-UOM has the following two degen-
erate versions by considering either only the user-
user opinion matrix or only the user-aspect opinion
matrix.
PMF-UU: In this degenerate version of the model,
we use only the user-user opinion matrix to learn the
latent factor representation. Specifically, the objec-
tive function is modified such that we drop the sum

405



of the square errors involving R and the regularizer
on A.
PMF-UA: In this degenerate version of the model,
we use only the user-aspect opinion matrix to learn
the latent factor representation. Specifically, the ob-
jective function is modified such that we drop the
sum of the square errors involving S.

6 Experiments

In this section, we present our experiments that eval-
uate our model.

6.1 Data Set and Experiment Settings
The data set we use comes from Abu-Jbara et al.
(2012) and Hassan et al. (2012). The data set
contains a set of discussion threads collected from
two political forums (Createdebate3 and Politicalfo-
rum4) and one Wikipedia discussion session. We
randomly select 6 threads from the original data set
to evaluate our model. Some details of the data we
use are listed in Table 2.

ID topic #sides #sentences #users

DS1 Vote for Obama 2 12492 197
DS2 Abortion Banned 6 3844 70
DS3 Profile Muslims 4 2167 69
DS4 England and USA 6 2030 62
DS5 Tax Cuts 2 1193 26
DS6 Political Spectrum 7 1130 50

Table 2: Some statistics of the data sets.

In our experiments, for the PMF-based methods,
we set the number of latent factors to be 10 as we
do not observe big difference when vary the latent
factor size from 10 to 50. For the other parame-
ters, we select the optimal setting for each thread
based on the average of 50 runs. λU is chosen
from {0.1, 0.01}, λA from {0.01, 0.001} and λ from
{1, 0.1}.

6.2 Relation Polarity Prediction
The first task we use to evaluate our model is to pre-
dict the polarity of interactions between two users.
Different from Hassan et al. (2012), however, we
are not using this task to evaluate the accuracy of
sentiment analysis from text. Our experimental set-
ting is completely different in that we do not make

3www.createdebate.com
4www.politicalforum.com

use of the text exchanges between the two users but
instead use their interactions with other users or as-
pects. The purpose is to test the effectiveness of col-
laborative filtering.

Experimental Setting: The experiments are set up
in the following way. Given a pair of users i and j
who have directly exchanged posts, i.e. si,j is not
empty, we first hide the value of si,j in the matrix S.
Let the altered matrix be S¬(i,j). We then use S¬(i,j)
instead of S in the learning process as described in
Section 5 to learn the latent factor representation.
Let ûi and ûj denote the learned latent vectors for
user i and user j. We predict the polarity of relation
between i and j as follows:

ŝi,j =

{
1 if g(ûTi ûj) > 0.5,
0 otherwise,

where g(·) is the logistic function to convert the dot
product into a value between 0 and 1.

To judge the quality of the predicted polarity ŝi,j ,
we could compare it with si,j . But since si,j itself is
predicted from the textual exchanges between i and
j, it is not the ground truth. Instead, we ask two hu-
man annotators to assign the true polarity label for
user i and user j by reading the textual exchanges
between them and judging whether they are friends
or foes in the discussion thread. The annotators are
asked to assign a score of 0 (indicating a negative
relation), 0.5 (indicating a neutral relation) or 1 (in-
dicating a positive relation). The lowest agreement
score based on Cohen’s kappa coefficient among the
6 threads we use is 0.56, showing fair to good agree-
ment. As ground truth, we set the final polarity score
to 1 if the average score of the two annotators is
larger than 0.5 and 0 otherwise.

We compare the PMF-based methods with two
majority baselines: MBL-0 always predicts negative
relations for all the user pairs (assuming most rela-
tions are negative) and MBL-1 always predicts posi-
tive relations (assuming most relations are positive).

We use MAE (mean absolute error) and RMSE
(root mean square error) as defined below as perfor-
mance metrics:

MAE =

∑
i,j |ŝi,j − li,j |

N
,

RMSE =

√∑
i,j(ŝi,j − li,j)2

N
,

406



0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

DS1 DS2 DS3 DS4 DS5 DS6

M
A

E
MB-1
MB-0

PMF-UU
PMF-UA

PMF-UOM

Figure 3: Comparing all the methods in terms of MAE.

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

DS1 DS2 DS3 DS4 DS5 DS6

R
M

S
E

MB-1
MB-0

PMF-UU
PMF-UA

PMF-UOM

Figure 4: Comparing all the methods in terms of RMSE.

where N is the total number of user pairs we test,
and li,j is the ground truth polarity score between
user i and user j.
Results: We show the results of our model and of
PMF-UU and PMF-UA in terms of MAE in Figure 3
and RMSE in Figure 4. The MAE values range be-
tween 0.31 and 0.44 except for DS5, which has a
higher error rate of 0.53. The results show that even
without knowing the textual exchanges between two
users, from their interactions with other users and/or
with topic aspects, we can still infer the polarity of
their relation with decent accuracy most of the time.

The results also show the comparison between our
model and the competing methods. We can see that
overall the complete model (PMF-UOM) performs
better than the two degenerate models (PMF-UU
and PMF-UA). The differences are statistically sig-
nificant at the 5% level without considering DS5, as
indicated by a 2-tailed paired t-test. Comparing to
the majority baselines, our model significantly out-
performs MBL-1 at 1% significance level while out-
performs MBL-0 on all the data sets except DS5. A
close examinations shows DS5 has very unbalanced
relations (around 83% of relations are negative). Ex-
cept for the unbalanced data set, our model has rea-
sonably good performance.

6.3 Subgroup Detection

The second task we study is the problem of detecting
ideological subgroups from discussion threads. The
original data set has been labeled with the ground
truth for this problem, that is, for each thread the

number of viewpoints is known and the viewpoint
held by each user is labeled. A subgroup is defined
as a set of users holding the same viewpoint.
Experimental Setting: Through this second exper-
iment, we would like to verify the hypothesis that
using the learned latent factor representation U for
users, we can better detect subgroups than directly
using the opinion matrices S and R. For all the
methods we compare, we first construct a feature
vector representation for each user. We then apply
K-means clustering to group users. The number of
clusters is set to be the true number of viewpoints
for each thread. The different methods are described
below:

• PMF-based methods: We simply use the
learned latent vectors ûi after optimizing the
objective function as the feature vectors to rep-
resent each user.

• BL-1: This is our own implementation to sim-
ulate the method by Abu-Jbara et al. (2012).
Here each user is represented by a (3 × (U +
A))-dimensional vector, where U is the num-
ber of users and A is the number of aspects,
i.e. (U +A) is the total number of opinion tar-
gets. For each opinion target, there are 3 di-
mensions in the feature vector, corresponding
to the number of positive, neutral and negative
opinion expressions towards the target from the
online posts.

• BL-2: BL-2 is similar to BL-1 except that we
only use a (U+A)-dimensional vector to repre-

407



sent each user. Here for each opinion target, we
directly use the corresponding sentiment polar-
ity score si,j or ri,j from the matrix S orR. For
empty entries in S andR, we use a score of 0.5.

We use Purity (the higher the better), Entropy (the
lower the better) and Rand Index (the higher the bet-
ter) to evaluate the performance of subgroup detec-
tion (Manning et al., 2008). We further use Accuracy
obtained by choosing the best alignment of clusters
with the ground truth class labels and computing the
percentage of users that are “classified” correctly.
Results: We first give an overview of the perfor-
mance of all the methods on the task. We show the
average performance of the methods on all the data
sets in Figure 5. Overall, our model has a better per-
formance than all the competing methods.

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Purity Entropy Accuracy RandIndex

BL-1
BL-2

PMF-UU
PMF-UA

PMF-UOM

Figure 5: An overview of the average performance of all
the methods on the 6 threads.

We present all the results in Table 3. We per-
form 2-tailed paired t-test on the results. We find
that PMF-UOM outperforms all the other methods
in terms of RandIndex at 5% significance level and
outperforms other methods in terms of Purity and
Entropy at 10% significance level. Furthermore,
the PMF-UOM model outperforms its degenerative
models PMF-UU and PMF-UA at 10% significance
level in terms of all the measures.

We observe that PMF-UOM achieves the best per-
formance in terms of all the measures for almost
all threads. In particular, comparison with BL-1
and BL-2 shows that collaborative filtering can gen-
eralize the user preferences and help better group
the users based on their viewpoints. The fact that

PMF-UOM outperforms both PMF-UU and PMF-
UA shows that it is important to consider both user-
user interactions and user-aspect interactions.
The Effects of Cluster Size: To test the effect of the
number of clusters on the experiment result, we vary
the number of clusters from 2 to 10 in all methods.
We find that all methods tend to achieve better re-
sults when the number of clusters equals the ground
truth cluster size. Overall, our method PMF-UOM
shows a better performance than the other four meth-
ods when the number of clusters changes, which in-
dicates the robustness of our method.

BL-1 BL-2 PMF-UU PMF-UA PMF-UOM

DS1

P 0.61 0.61 0.61 0.61 0.62
E 0.96 0.96 0.94 0.95 0.94
A 0.59 0.59 0.55 0.57 0.60
R 0.51 0.51 0.50 0.51 0.52

DS2

P 0.53 0.63 0.64 0.61 0.68
E 1.17 1.22 1.14 1.09 0.99
A 0.47 0.53 0.48 0.47 0.50
R 0.50 0.50 0.56 0.56 0.58

DS3

P 0.66 0.68 0.62 0.60 0.68
E 1.05 1.01 1.06 1.07 0.94
A 0.61 0.63 0.48 0.47 0.58
R 0.50 0.52 0.53 0.53 0.57

DS4

P 0.64 0.64 0.66 0.65 0.70
E 0.92 0.94 0.90 0.91 0.85
A 0.59 0.64 0.62 0.62 0.68
R 0.49 0.52 0.52 0.51 0.56

DS5

P 0.86 0.86 0.86 0.86 0.86
E 0.56 0.56 0.49 0.48 0.38
A 0.70 0.70 0.57 0.60 0.71
R 0.52 0.52 0.43 0.45 0.56

DS6

P 0.50 0.50 0.60 0.60 0.68
E 1.35 1.35 1.03 1.04 0.79
A 0.40 0.30 0.53 0.54 0.64
R 0.53 0.53 0.68 0.68 0.74

Table 3: Results on subgroup detection on all the 6
threads. P, E, A and R refer to Purity, Entropy, Accuracy
and RandIndex, respectively.

7 Conclusions

In this paper, we studied how to use probabilistic
matrix factorization, a common technique for col-
laborative filtering, to improve relation mining from
online discussion forums. We first applied senti-
ment analysis to extract user-user opinions and user-
aspect opinions from forum posts. The extracted
opinions form two opinion matrices. We then ap-
plied probabilistic matrix factorization using these

408



two matrices to discover a low-rank latent factor
space which aims to better generalize the users’ un-
derlying preferences and indicate user similarities
based on their viewpoints. Using a data set with 6
discussion threads, we showed that the learned la-
tent vectors can be used to predict the polarity of
user relations well without using the users’ direct
interaction data, demonstrating the effectiveness of
collaborative filtering. We further found that for the
task of subgroup detection, the latent vectors gave
better performance than using the directly extracted
opinion data, again showing that collaborative fil-
tering through probabilistic matrix factorization can
help address the sparseness problem in the extracted
opinion matrices and help improve relation mining.

Our current work mainly focuses on the user opin-
ion matrices. As future work, we would like to ex-
plore how to incorporate textual contents without
opinionated expressions. One possible way is to
consider the combination of matrix factorization and
topic modeling as studied by Wang and Blei (2011)
where we can use topic modeling to study textual
contents.

Acknowledgments

We thank the reviewers for their valuable comments
on this work.

References

Amjad Abu-Jbara, Pradeep Dasigi, Mona Diab, and
Dragomir R. Radev. 2012. Subgroup detection in
ideological discussions. In Proceedings of the 50th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 399–409.

Stefano Baccianella, Andrea Esuli, and Fabrizio Sebas-
tiani. 2010. Sentiwordnet 3.0: An enhanced lexical
resource for sentiment analysis and opinion mining. In
LREC.

Yejin Choi, Eric Breck, and Claire Cardie. 2006. Joint
extraction of entities and relations for opinion recog-
nition. In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
EMNLP ’06, pages 431–439, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Pradeep Dasigi, Weiwei Guo, and Mona T. Diab. 2012.
Genre independent subgroup detection in online dis-
cussion threads: A study of implicit attitude using
textual latent semantics. In Proceedings of the 50th

Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 65–69.

Ahmed Hassan and Dragomir Radev. 2010. Identify-
ing text polarity using random walks. In Proceed-
ings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, ACL ’10, pages 395–403,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Ahmed Hassan, Amjad Abu-Jbara, and Dragomir Radev.
2012. Detecting subgroups in online discussions by
modeling positive and negative relations among par-
ticipants. In Proceedings of the 2012 EMNLP, pages
59–70.

John Hopcroft, Tiancheng Lou, and Jie Tang. 2011. Who
will follow you back?: reciprocal relationship predic-
tion. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM international
conference on Information and knowledge manage-
ment, pages 1137–1146.

Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. 2004. Mining and summariz-
ing customer reviews. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM
SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge dis-
covery and data mining, pages 168–177.

Noriaki Kawamae. 2011. Predicting future reviews: sen-
timent analysis models for collaborative filtering. In
Proceedings of the fourth ACM international confer-
ence on Web search and data mining, WSDM ’11,
pages 605–614.

Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Accurate
unlexicalized parsing. In Proceedings of the 41st An-
nual Meeting on Association for Computational Lin-
guistics - Volume 1, ACL ’03, pages 423–430, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Jure Leskovec, Daniel Huttenlocher, and Jon Kleinberg.
2010. Predicting positive and negative links in online
social networks. In Proceedings of the 19th interna-
tional conference on World wide web, pages 641–650.

Cane Wing-Ki Leung, Stephen Chi-Fai Chan, Fu-Lai
Chung, and Grace Ngai. 2011. A probabilistic rat-
ing inference framework for mining user preferences
from reviews. World Wide Web, 14(2):187–215.

David Liben-Nowell and Jon Kleinberg. 2003. The link
prediction problem for social networks. In Proceed-
ings of the twelfth international conference on Infor-
mation and knowledge management.

Hao Ma, Haixuan Yang, Michael R. Lyu, and Irwin King.
2008. Sorec: Social recommendation using proba-
bilistic matrix factorization. In Proc. of ACM interna-
tional conference on Information and knowledge man-
agement.

Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Hin-
rich Schtze. 2008. Introduction to Information Re-
trieval. Cambridge University Press, July.

409



George A. Miller. 1995. Wordnet: A lexical database
for english. Communications of the ACM, Vol. 38, No.
11:39–41.

Mike Mintz, Steven Bills, Rion Snow, and Dan Jurafsky.
2009. Distant supervision for relation extraction with-
out labeled data. In Proceedings of the Joint Confer-
ence of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing of the AFNLP: Volume 2 - Volume 2, ACL
’09, pages 1003–1011, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Yashar Moshfeghi, Benjamin Piwowarski, and Joe-
mon M. Jose. 2011. Handling data sparsity in collabo-
rative filtering using emotion and semantic based fea-
tures. In Proceedings of the 34th international ACM
SIGIR conference on Research and development in In-
formation Retrieval, SIGIR ’11, pages 625–634.

Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2008. Opinion mining and
sentiment analysis. Found. Trends Inf. Retr., 2(1-2):1–
135, January.

Ana-Maria Popescu and Oren Etzioni. 2005. Extract-
ing product features and opinions from reviews. In
Proceedings of the conference on Human Language
Technology and Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, HLT ’05, pages 339–346, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Guang Qiu, Bing Liu, Jiajun Bu, and Chun Chen. 2009.
Expanding domain sentiment lexicon through double
propagation. In Proceedings of the 21st international
jont conference on Artifical intelligence, IJCAI’09,
pages 1199–1204, San Francisco, CA, USA. Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc.

Ruslan Salakhutdinov and Andriy Mnih. 2008. Prob-
abilistic matrix factorization. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, volume 20.

Chong Wang and David M. Blei. 2011. Collaborative
topic modeling for recommending scientific articles.
In Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGKDD interna-
tional conference on Knowledge discovery and data
mining, pages 448–456.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-level
sentiment analysis. In HLT/EMNLP.

Yuanbin Wu, Qi Zhang, Xuanjing Huang, and Lide Wu.
2009. Phrase dependency parsing for opinion mining.
In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing: Volume 3
- Volume 3, EMNLP ’09, pages 1533–1541, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

410


