










































Multi-faceted Event Recognition with Bootstrapped Dictionaries


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2013, pages 41–51,
Atlanta, Georgia, 9–14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Multi-faceted Event Recognition with Bootstrapped Dictionaries

Ruihong Huang and Ellen Riloff
School of Computing

University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112

{huangrh, riloff}@cs.utah.edu

Abstract

Identifying documents that describe a specific
type of event is challenging due to the high
complexity and variety of event descriptions.
We propose a multi-faceted event recognition
approach, which identifies documents about
an event using event phrases as well as defin-
ing characteristics of the event. Our research
focuses on civil unrest events and learns civil
unrest expressions as well as phrases cor-
responding to potential agents and reasons
for civil unrest. We present a bootstrapping
algorithm that automatically acquires event
phrases, agent terms, and purpose (reason)
phrases from unannotated texts. We use the
bootstrapped dictionaries to identify civil un-
rest documents and show that multi-faceted
event recognition can yield high accuracy.

1 Introduction

Many people are interested in following news re-
ports about events. Government agencies are keenly
interested in news about civil unrest, acts of terror-
ism, and disease outbreaks. Companies want to stay
on top of news about corporate acquisitions, high-
level management changes, and new joint ventures.
The general public is interested in articles about
crime, natural disasters, and plane crashes. We will
refer to the task of identifying documents that de-
scribe a specific type of event as event recognition.

It is tempting to assume that event keywords
are sufficient to identify documents that discuss in-
stances of an event. But event words are rarely reli-
able on their own. For example, consider the chal-
lenge of finding documents about civil unrest. The

words “strike”, “rally”, and “riot” refer to com-
mon types of civil unrest, but they frequently refer to
other things as well. A strike can refer to a military
event or a sporting event (e.g., “air strike”, “bowl-
ing strike”), a rally can be a race or a spirited ex-
change (e.g.,“car rally”, “tennis rally”), and a riot
can refer to something funny (e.g., “she’s a riot”).
Event keywords also appear in general discussions
that do not mention a specific event (e.g., “37 states
prohibit teacher strikes” or “The fine for inciting a
riot is $1,000”). Furthermore, many relevant docu-
ments are not easy to recognize because events can
be described with complex expressions that do not
include event keywords. For example, “took to the
streets”, “walked off their jobs” and “stormed par-
liament” often describe civil unrest.

The goal of our research is to recognize event de-
scriptions in text by identifying event expressions as
well as defining characteristics of the event. We pro-
pose that agents and purpose are characteristics of
an event that are essential to distinguish one type of
event from another. The agent responsible for an ac-
tion often determines how we categorize the action.
For example, natural disasters, military operations,
and terrorist attacks can all produce human casual-
ties and physical destruction. But the agent of a nat-
ural disaster must be a natural force, the agent of
a military incident must be military personnel, and
the agent of a terrorist attack is never a natural force
and rarely military personnel. There may be other
important factors as well, but the agent is often an
essential part of an event definition.

The purpose of an event is also a crucial factor
in distinguishing between event types. For exam-

41



ple, civil unrest events and sporting events both in-
volve large groups of people amassing at a specific
site. But the purpose of civil unrest gatherings is to
protest against socio-political problems, while sport-
ing events are intended as entertainment. As another
example, terrorist events and military incidents can
both cause casualties, but the purpose of terrorism is
to cause widespread fear, while the purpose of mili-
tary actions is to protect national security interests.

Our research explores the idea of multi-faceted
event recognition: using event expressions as well
as facets of the event (agents and purpose) to iden-
tify documents about a specific type of event. We
present a bootstrapping framework to automatically
create event phrase, agent, and purpose dictionaries.
The learning process uses unannotated texts, a few
event keywords, and seed terms for common agents
and purpose phrases associated with the event type.

Our bootstrapping algorithm exploits the obser-
vation that event expressions, agents, and purpose
phrases often appear together in sentences that in-
troduce an event. In the first step, we extract event
expressions based on dependency relations with an
agent and purpose phrase. The harvested event ex-
pressions are added to an event phrase dictionary. In
the second step, new agent terms are extracted from
sentences containing an event phrase and a purpose
phrase, and new purpose phrases are harvested from
sentences containing an event phrase and an agent.
These harvested terms are added to agent and pur-
pose dictionaries. The bootstrapping algorithm rico-
chets back and forth, alternately learning new event
phrases and learning new agent/purpose phrases, in
an iterative process.

We explore several ways of using these boot-
strapped dictionaries. We conclude that finding at
least two different types of event information pro-
duces high accuracy (88% precision) with good re-
call (71%) on documents that contain an event key-
word. We also present experiments with documents
that do not contain event keywords, and obtain 74%
accuracy when matching all three types of event in-
formation.

2 Related Work

Event recognition has been studied in several dif-
ferent contexts. There has been a lot of research

on event extraction, where the goal is to extract
facts about events from text (e.g., (ACE Evaluations,
2006; Appelt et al., 1993; Riloff, 1996; Yangar-
ber et al., 2000; Chieu and Ng, 2002; Califf and
Mooney, 2003; Sudo et al., 2003; Stevenson and
Greenwood, 2005; Sekine, 2006)). Although our re-
search does not involve extracting facts, event ex-
traction systems can also be used to identify sto-
ries about a specific type of event. For example, the
MUC-4 evaluation (MUC-4 Proceedings, 1992) in-
cluded “text filtering” results that measured the per-
formance of event extraction systems at identifying
event-relevant documents. The best text filtering re-
sults were high (about 90% F score), but relied on
hand-built event extraction systems. More recently,
some research has incorporated event region detec-
tors into event extraction systems to improve extrac-
tion performance (Gu and Cercone, 2006; Patward-
han and Riloff, 2007; Huang and Riloff, 2011).

There has been recent work on event detection
from social media sources (Becker et al., 2011;
Popescu et al., 2011). Some research identifies spe-
cific types of events in tweets, such as earthquakes
(Sakaki et al., 2010) and entertainment events (Ben-
son et al., 2011). There has also been work on event
trend detection (Lampos et al., 2010; Mathioudakis
and Koudas, 2010) and event prediction through so-
cial media, such as predicting elections (Tumasjan
et al., 2010; Conover et al., 2011) or stock mar-
ket indicators (Zhang et al., 2010). (Ritter et al.,
2012) generated a calendar of events mentioned on
twitter. (Metzler et al., 2012) proposed structured
retrieval of historical event information over mi-
croblog archives by distilling high quality event rep-
resentations using a novel temporal query expansion
technique.

Some text classification research has focused on
event categories. (Riloff and Lehnert, 1994) used
an information extraction system to generate rele-
vancy signatures that were indicative of different
event types. This work originally relied on man-
ually labeled patterns and a hand-crafted semantic
dictionary. Later work (Riloff and Lorenzen, 1999)
eliminated the need for the dictionary and labeled
patterns, but still assumed the availability of rele-
vant/irrelevant training texts.

Event recognition is also related to Topic Detec-
tion and Tracking (TDT) (Allan et al., 1998; Allan,

42



Figure 1: Bootstrapped Learning of Event Dictionaries

2002) which addresses event-based organization of a
stream of news stories. Event recognition is similar
to New Event Detection, also called First Story De-
tection, which is considered the most difficult TDT
task (Allan et al., 2000a). Typical approaches re-
duce documents to a set of features, either as a word
vector (Allan et al., 2000b) or a probability distri-
bution (Jin et al., 1999), and compare the incoming
stories to stories that appeared in the past by com-
puting similarities between their feature representa-
tions. Recently, event paraphrases (Petrovic et al.,
2012) have been explored to deal with the diversity
of event descriptions. However, the New Event De-
tection task differs from our event recognition task
because we want to find all stories describing a cer-
tain type of event, not just new events.

3 Bootstrapped Learning of Event
Dictionaries

Our bootstrapping approach consists of two stages
of learning as shown in Figure 1. The process be-
gins with a few agent seeds, purpose phrase patterns,
and unannotated articles selected from a broad-
coverage corpus using event keywords. In the first
stage, event expressions are harvested from the sen-
tences that have both an agent and a purpose phrase
in specific syntactic positions. In the second stage,
new purpose phrases are harvested from sentences
that contain both an event phrase and an agent, while
new agent terms are harvested from sentences that
contain both an event phrase and a purpose phrase.
The new terms are added to growing event dictionar-
ies, and the bootstrapping process repeats. Our work

focuses on civil unrest events.

3.1 Stage 1: Event Phrase Learning

We first extract potential civil unrest stories from the
English Gigaword corpus (Parker et al., 2011) using
six civil unrest keywords. As explained in Section 1,
event keywords are not sufficient to obtain relevant
documents with high precision, so the extracted sto-
ries are a mix of relevant and irrelevant articles. Our
algorithm first selects sentences to use for learning,
and then harvests event expressions from them.

3.1.1 Event Sentence Identification

The input in stage 1 consists of a few agent terms
and purpose patterns for seeding. The agent seeds
are single nouns, while the purpose patterns are
verbs in infinitive or present participle forms. Table
1 shows the agent terms and purpose phrases used in
our experiments. The agent terms were manually se-
lected by inspecting the most frequent nouns in the
documents with civil unrest keywords. The purpose
patterns are the most common verbs that describe the
reason for a civil unrest event. We identify probable
event sentences by extracting all sentences that con-
tain at least one agent term and one purpose phrase.

Agents protesters, activists, demonstrators,
students, groups, crowd, workers,
palestinians, supporters, women

Purpose demanding, to demand,
Phrases protesting, to protest

Table 1: Agent and Purpose Phrases Used for Seeding

43



3.1.2 Harvesting Event Expressions

To constrain the learning process, we require
event expressions and purpose phrases to match cer-
tain syntactic structures. We apply the Stanford de-
pendency parser (Marneffe et al., 2006) to the prob-
able event sentences to identify verb phrase candi-
dates and to enforce syntactic constraints between
the different types of event information.

Figure 2: Phrasal Structure of Event & Purpose Phrases

Figure 2 shows the two types of verb phrases
that we learn. One type consists of a verb paired
with the head noun of its direct object. For exam-
ple, event phrases can be “stopped work” or “oc-
cupied offices”, and purpose phrases can be “show
support” or “condemn war”. The second type con-
sists of a verb and an attached prepositional phrase,
retaining only the head noun of the embedded noun
phrase. For example, “took to street” and “scuffled
with police” can be event phrases, while “call for
resignation” and “press for wages” can be purpose
phrases. In both types of verb phrases, a particle can
optionally follow the verb.

Event expressions, agents, and purpose phrases
must appear in specific dependency relations, as il-
lustrated in Figure 3. An agent must be the syn-
tactic subject of the event phrase. A purpose phrase
must be a complement of the event phrase, specif-
ically, we require a particular dependency relation,
“xcomp”1, between the two verb phrases. For ex-
ample, in the sentence “Leftist activists took to
the streets in the Nepali capital Wednesday protest-
ing higher fuel prices.”, the dependency relation

1In the dependency parser, “xcomp” denotes a general rela-
tion between a VP or an ADJP and its open clausal complement.
For example, in the sentence “He says that you like to swim.”,
the “xcomp” relation will link “like” (head) and “swim” (de-
pendent). With our constraints on the verb phrase forms, the
dependent verb phrase in this construction tends to describe the
purpose of the verb phrase.

“xcomp” links “took to the streets” with “protest-
ing higher fuel prices”.

Figure 3: Syntactic Dependencies between Agents, Event
Phrases, and Purpose Phrases

Given the syntactic construction shown in Figure
3, with a known agent and purpose phrase, we ex-
tract the head verb phrase of the “xcomp” depen-
dency relation as an event phrase candidate. The
event phrases that co-occur with at least two unique
agent terms and two unique purposes phrases are
saved in our event phrase dictionary.

3.2 Stage 2: Learning Agent and Purpose
Phrases

In the second stage of bootstrapping, we learn new
agent terms and purpose phrases. Our rationale is
that if a sentence contains an event phrase and one
other important facet of the event (agent or pur-
pose), then the sentence probably describes a rele-
vant event. We can then look for additional facets
of the event in the same sentence. We learn both
agent and purpose phrases simultaneously in paral-
lel learning processes. As before, we first identify
probable event sentences and then harvest agent and
purpose phrases from these sentences.

3.2.1 Event Sentence Identification

We identify probable event sentences by extract-
ing sentences that contain at least one event phrase
(based on the dictionary produced in the first stage
of bootstrapping) and an agent term or a purpose
phrase. As before, the event information must oc-
cur in the sentential dependency structures shown in
Figure 3.

3.2.2 Harvesting Agent and Purpose Phrases

The sentences that contain an event phrase and
an agent are used to harvest more purpose phrases,
while the sentences that contain an event phrase
and a purpose phrase are used to harvest more
agent terms. Purpose phrases are extracted from the
phrasal structures shown in Figure 2. In the learn-
ing process for agents, if a sentence has an event

44



phrase as the head of the “xcomp” dependency re-
lation and a purpose phrase as the dependent clause
of the “xcomp” dependency relation, then the head
noun of the syntactic subject of the event phrase is
harvested as a candidate agent term. We also record
the modifiers appearing in all of the noun phrases
headed by an agent term. Agent candidates that co-
occur with at least two unique event phrases and at
least two different modifiers of known agent terms
are selected as new agent terms.

The learning process for purpose phrases is anal-
ogous. If the syntactic subject of an event phrase
is an agent and the event phrase is the head of
the “xcomp” dependency relation, then the depen-
dent clause of the “xcomp” dependency relation is
harvested as a candidate purpose phrase. Purpose
phrase candidates that co-occur with at least two dif-
ferent event phrases are selected as purpose phrases.

The bootstrapping process then repeats, ricochet-
ing back and forth between learning event phrases
and learning agent and purpose phrases.

3.3 Domain Relevance Criteria

To avoid domain drift during bootstrapping, we use
two additional criteria to discard phrases that are not
necessarily associated with the domain.

For each event phrase and purpose phrase, we es-
timate its domain-specificity as the ratio of its preva-
lence in domain-specific texts compared to broad-
coverage texts. The goal is to discard phrases that
are common across many types of documents, and
therefore not specific to the domain. We define the
domain-specificity of phrase p as:

domain-specificity(p) = frequency of p in domain-specific corpusfrequency of p in broad-coverage corpus

We randomly sampled 10% of the Gigaword texts
that contain a civil unrest event keyword to create
the “domain-specific” corpus, and randomly sam-
pled 10% of the remaining Gigaword texts to cre-
ate the “broad-coverage” corpus.2 Keyword-based
sampling is an approximation to domain-relevance,
but gives us a general idea about the prevalance of a
phrase in different types of texts.

For agent terms, our goal is to identify people who
participate as agents of civil unrest events. Other
types of people may be commonly mentioned in
civil unrest stories too, as peripheral characters. For

2The random sampling was simply for efficiency reasons.

example, police may provide security and reporters
may provide media coverage of an event, but they
are not the agents of the event. We estimate the
event-specificity of each agent term as the ratio of
the phrase’s prevalence in event sentences compared
to all the sentences in the domain-specific corpus.
We define an event sentence as one that contains
both a learned event phrase and a purpose phrase,
based on the dictionaries at that point in time. There-
fore, the number of event sentences increases as the
bootstrapped dictionaries grow. We define the event-
specificity of phrase p as:

event-specificity(p) = frequency of p in event sentencesfrequency of p in all sentences

In our experiments we required event and purpose
phrases to have domain-specificity ≥ .33 and agent
terms to have event-specificity ≥ .01.3

4 Evaluation

4.1 Data

We conducted experiments to evaluate the perfor-
mance of our bootstrapped event dictionaries for rec-
ognizing civil unrest events. Civil unrest is a broad
term typically used by the media or law enforce-
ment to describe a form of public disturbance that
involves a group of people, usually to protest or pro-
mote a cause. Civil unrest events include strikes,
protests, occupations, rallies, and similar forms of
obstructions or riots. We chose six event keywords to
identify potential civil unrest documents: “protest”,
“strike”, “march”, “rally”, “riot” and “occupy”. We
extracted documents from the English Gigaword
corpus (Parker et al., 2011) that contain at least one
of these event keywords, or a morphological variant
of a keyword.4 This process extracted nearly one
million documents, which we will refer to as our
event-keyword corpus.

We randomly sampled 400 documents5 from the
event-keyword corpus and asked two annotators to
determine whether each document mentioned a civil

3This value is so small because we simply want to filter
phrases that virtually never occur in the event sentences, and
we can recognize very few event sentences in the early stages
of bootstrapping.

4We used “marched” and “marching” as keywords but did
not use “march” because it often refers to a month.

5These 400 documents were excluded from the unannotated
data used for dictionary learning.

45



unrest event. We defined annotation guidelines and
conducted an inter-annotator agreement study on
100 of these documents. The annotators achieved a
κ score of .82. We used these 100 documents as our
tuning set. Then each annotator annotated 150 more
documents to create our test set of 300 documents.

4.2 Baselines

The first row of Table 2 shows event recognition ac-
curacy when only the event keywords are used. All
of our documents were obtained by searching for a
keyword, but only 101 of the 300 documents in our
test set were labeled as relevant by the annotators
(i.e., 101 describe a civil unrest event). This means
that using only the event keywords to identify civil
unrest documents yields about 34% precision. In a
second experiment, KeywordTitle, we required the
event keyword to be in the title (headline) of the doc-
ument. The KeywordTitle approach produced better
precision (66%), but only 33% of the relevant docu-
ments had a keyword in the title.

Method Recall Precision F
Keyword Accuracy

Keyword - 34 -
KeywordTitle 33 66 44

Supervised Learning
Unigrams 62 66 64
Unigrams+Bigrams 55 71 62

Bootstrapped Dictionary Lookup
Event Phrases (EV) 60 79 69
Agent Phrases (AG) 98 42 59
Purpose Phrases (PU) 59 67 63
All Pairs 71 88 79

Table 2: Experimental Results

The second section of Table 2 shows the re-
sults of two supervised classifiers based on 10-fold
cross validation with our test set. Both classifiers
were trained using support vector machines (SVMs)
(Joachims, 1999) with a linear kernel (Keerthi and
DeCoste, 2005). The first classifier used unigrams
as features, while the second classifier used both un-
igrams and bigrams. All the features are binary. The
evaluation results show that the unigram classifier
has an F-score of .64. Using both unigram and bi-
gram features increased precision to 71% but recall
fell by 7%, yielding a slightly lower F-score of .62.

4.3 Event Recognition with Bootstrapped
Dictionaries

Next, we used our bootstrapped dictionaries for
event recognition. The bootstrapping process ran
for 8 iterations and then stopped because no more
phrases could be learned. The quality of boot-
strapped data often degrades as bootstrapping pro-
gresses, so we used the tuning set to evaluate the
dictionaries after each iteration. The best perfor-
mance6 on the tuning set resulted from the dictionar-
ies produced after four iterations, so we used these
dictionaries for our experiments. Table 3 shows the

Event Agent Purpose
Phrases Terms Phrases

Iter #1 145 67 124
Iter #2 410 106 356
Iter #3 504 130 402
Iter #4 623 139 569

Table 3: Dictionary Sizes after Several Iterations

number of event phrases, agents and purpose phrases
learned after each iteration. All three lexicons were
significantly enriched after each iteration. The final
bootstrapped dictionaries contain 623 event phrases,
569 purpose phrases and 139 agent terms. Table 4
shows samples from each event dictionary.

Event Phrases: went on strike, took to street,
chanted slogans, gathered in capital, formed chain,
clashed with police, staged rally, held protest,
walked off job, burned flags, set fire, hit streets,
marched in city, blocked roads, carried placards
Agent Terms: employees, miners, muslims, unions,
protestors, journalists, refugees, prisoners, immigrants,
inmates, pilots, farmers, followers, teachers, drivers
Purpose Phrases: accusing government, voice anger,
press for wages, oppose plans, urging end, defying ban,
show solidarity, mark anniversary, calling for right,
condemning act, pressure government, mark death,
push for hike, call attention, celebrating withdrawal

Table 4: Examples of Dictionary Entries

The third section of Table 2 shows the results
when using the bootstrapped dictionaries for event
recognition. We used a simple dictionary look-up
approach that searched for dictionary entries in each
document. Our phrases were generated based on

6Based on the performance for the All Pairs approach.

46



syntactic analysis and only head words were re-
tained for generality. But we wanted to match dic-
tionary entries without requiring syntactic analysis
of new documents. So we used an approximate
matching scheme that required each word to appear
within 5 words of the previous word. For example,
“held protest” would match “held a large protest”
and “held a very large political protest”. In this way,
we avoid the need for syntactic analysis when using
the dictionaries for event recognition.

First, we labeled a document as relevant if it con-
tained any Event Phrase (EV) in our dictionary. The
event phrases achieved better performance than all
of the baselines, yielding an F-score of 69%. The
best baseline was the unigram classifier, which was
trained with supervised learning. The bootstrapped
event phrase dictionary produced much higher pre-
cision (79% vs. 66%) with only slightly lower recall
(60% vs. 62%), and did not require annotated texts
for training. Statistical significance testing shows
that the Event Phrase lookup approach works signif-
icantly better than the unigram classifier (p < 0.05,
paired bootstrap (Berg-Kirkpatrick et al., 2012)).

For the sake of completeness, we also evaluated
the performance of dictionary look-up using our
bootstrapped Agent (AG) and Purpose (PU) dictio-
naries, individually. The agents terms produced 42%
precision with 98% recall, demonstrating that the
learned agent list has extremely high coverage but
(unsurprisingly) does not achieve high precision on
its own. The purpose phrases achieved a better bal-
ance of recall and precision, producing an F-score
of 63%, which is nearly the same as the supervised
unigram classifier.

Our original hypothesis was that a single type of
event information is not sufficient to accurately iden-
tify event descriptions. Our goal was high-accuracy
event recognition by requiring that a document con-
tain multiple clues pertaining to different facets of an
event (multi-faceted event recognition). The last row
of Table 2 (All Pairs) shows the results when requir-
ing matches from at least two different bootstrapped
dictionaries. Specifically, we labeled a document
as relevant if it contained at least one phrase from
each of two different dictionaries and these phrases
occurred in the same sentence. Table 2 shows that
multi-faceted event recognition achieves 88% preci-
sion with reasonably good recall of 71%, yielding an

F-score of 79%. This multi-faceted approach with
simple dictionary look-up outperformed all of the
baselines, and each dictionary used by itself. Sta-
tistical significance testing shows that the All Pairs
approach works significantly better than the unigram
classifier (p < 0.001, paired bootstrap). The All
Pairs approach is significantly better than the Event
Phrase (EV) lookup approach at the p < 0.1 level.

Method Recall Precision F-score
EV + PU 14 100 24
EV + AG 47 94 62
AG + PU 50 85 63
All Pairs 71 88 79

Table 5: Analysis of Dictionary Combinations

Table 5 takes a closer look at how each pair of
dictionaries performed. The first row shows that re-
quiring a document to have an event phrase and a
purpose phrase produces the best precision (100%)
but with low recall (14%). The second row reveals
that requiring a document to have an event phrase
and an agent term yields better recall (47%) and high
precision (94%). The third row shows that requiring
a document to have a purpose phrase and an agent
term produces the best recall (50%) but with slightly
lower precision (85%). Finally, the last row of Ta-
ble 5 shows that taking the union of these results
(i.e., any combination of dictionary pairs is suffi-
cient) yields the best recall (71%) with high preci-
sion (88%), demonstrating that we get the best cov-
erage by recognizing multiple combinations of event
information.

Lexicon Recall Precision F-score
Seeds 13 87 22
Iter #1 50 88 63
Iter #2 63 89 74
Iter #3 68 88 77
Iter #4 71 88 79

Table 6: All Pairs Lookup Results using only Seeds and
the Lexicons Learned after each Iteration, on the Test Set

Table 6 shows the performance of the lexicon
lookup approach using the All Pairs criteria dur-
ing the bootstrapping process. The first row shows
the results using only 10 agent seeds and 4 purpose
seeds as shown in Table 1. The following four rows
in the table show the performance of All Pairs using

47



the lexicons learned after each bootstrapping itera-
tion. We can see that the recall increases steadily and
that precision is maintained at a high level through-
out the bootstrapping process.

Event recognition can be formulated as an infor-
mation retrieval (IR) problem. As another point of
comparison, we ran an existing IR system, Terrier
(Ounis et al., 2007), on our test set. We used Ter-
rier to rank these 300 documents given our set of
event keywords as the query 7, and then generated a
recall/precision curve (Figure 4) by computing the
precisions at different levels of recall, ranging from
0 to 1 in increments of .10. Terrier was run with the

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Recall

P
re

ci
si

o
n

Figure 4: Comparison with the Terrier IR system

parameter PL2 which refers to an advanced Diver-
gence From Randomness weighting model (Amati
and Van Rijsbergen, 2002). In addition, Terrier used
automatic query expansion. We can see that Terrier
identified the first 60 documents (20% recall) with
100% precision. But precision dropped sharply after
that. The circle in Figure 4 shows the performance
of our bootstrapped dictionaries using the All Pairs
approach. At comparable level of precision (88%),
Terrier achieved about 45% recall versus 71% recall
produced with the bootstrapped dictionaries.

4.4 Supervised Classifiers with Bootstrapped
Dictionaries

We also explored the idea of using the bootstrapped
dictionaries as features for a classifier to see if a su-
pervised learner could make better use of the dic-

7We gave Terrier one query with all of the event keywords.

tionaries. We created five SVM classifiers and per-
formed 10-fold cross validation on the test set.

Method Recall Precision F-score

TermLex 66 85 74
PairLex 10 91 18
TermSets 59 83 69
PairSets 68 84 75
AllSets 70 84 76

Table 7: Supervised classifiers using the dictionaries

Table 7 shows the results for the five classifiers.
TermLex encodes a binary feature for every phrase
in any of our dictionaries. PairLex encodes a binary
feature for each pair of phrases from two different
dictionaries and requires them to occur in the same
sentence. The TermLex classifier achieves good per-
formance (74% F-score), but is not as effective as
our All Pairs dictionary look-up approach (79% F-
score). The PairLex classifier yield higher precision
but very low recall, undoubtedly due to sparsity is-
sues in matching specific pairs of phrases.

One of the strengths of our bootstrapping method
is that it creates dictionaries from large volumes of
unannotated documents. A limitation of supervised
learning with lexical features is that the classifier can
not benefit from terms in the bootstrapped dictionar-
ies that do not appear in its training documents. To
address this issue, we also tried encoding the dic-
tionaries as set-based features. The TermSets clas-
sifier encodes three binary features, one for each
dictionary. A feature gets a value of 1 if a docu-
ment contains any word in the corresponding dictio-
nary. The PairSets classifier also encodes three bi-
nary features, but each feature represents a different
pair of dictionaries (EV+AG, EV+PU, or AG+PU).
A feature gets a value of 1 if a document contains at
least one term from each of the two dictionaries in
the same sentence. The AllSets classifier encodes 7
set-based features: the previous six features and one
additional feature that requires a sentence to contain
at least one entry from all three dictionaries.

The All Sets classifier yields the best performance
with an F-score of 76%. However, our straightfor-
ward dictionary look-up approach still performs bet-
ter (79% F-score), and does not require annotated
documents for training.

48



4.5 Finding Articles with no Event Keyword

The learned event dictionaries have the potential to
recognize event-relevant documents that do not con-
tain any human-selected event keywords. This can
happen in two ways. First, 378 of the 623 learned
event phrases do not contain any of the original event
keywords. Second, we expect that some event de-
scriptions will contain a known agent and purpose
phrase, even if the event phrase is unfamiliar.

We performed an additional set of experiments
with documents in the Gigaword corpus that contain
no human-selected civil unrest keyword. Following
our multi-faceted approach to event recognition, we
collected all documents that contain a sentence that
matches phrases in at least two of our bootstrapped
event dictionaries. This process retrieved 178,197
documents. The first column of Table 8 shows the
number of documents that had phrases found in two
different dictionaries (EV+AG, EV+PU, AG+PU) or
in all three dictionaries (EV+AG+PU).

Total Samples Accuracy
EV+AG 67,796 50 44%
EV+PU 2,375 50 54%
AG+PU 101,173 50 18%
EV+AG+PU 6,853 50 74%

Table 8: Evaluation of articles with no event keyword

We randomly sampled 50 documents from each
category and had them annotated. The accura-
cies are shown in the third column. Finding all
three types of phrases produced the best accuracy,
74%. Furthermore, we found over 6,800 documents
that had all three types of event information us-
ing our learned dictionaries. This result demon-
strates that the bootstrapped dictionaries can recog-
nize many event descriptions that would have been
missed by searching only with manually selected
keywords. This experiment also confirms that multi-
facted event recognition using all three learned dic-
tionaries achieves good accuracy even for docu-
ments that do not contain the civil unrest keywords.

5 Conclusions

We proposed a multi-faceted approach to event
recognition and presented a bootstrapping technique
to learn event phrases as well as agent terms and

purpose phrases associated with civil unrest events.
Our results showed that multi-faceted event recog-
nition using the learned dictionaries achieved high
accuracy and performed better than several other
methods. The bootstrapping approach can be eas-
ily trained for new domains since it requires only
a large collection of unannotated texts and a few
event keywords, agent terms, and purpose phrases
for the events of interest. Furthermore, although the
training phase requires syntactic parsing to learn the
event dictionaries, the dictionaries can then be used
for event recognition without needing to parse the
documents.

An open question for future work is to investigate
whether the same multi-faceted approach to event
recognition will work well for other types of events.
Our belief is that many different types of events have
characteristic agent terms, but additional types of
facets will need to be defined to cover a broad array
of event types. The syntactic constructions used to
harvest dictionary items may also vary depending on
the types of event information that must be learned.
In future research, we plan to explore these issues in
more depth to design a more general multi-faceted
event recognition system, and we plan to investigate
new ways to use these event dictionaries for event
extraction as well.

6 Acknowledgments

This research was supported by the Intelligence Ad-
vanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA) via De-
partment of Interior National Business Center (DoI /
NBC) contract number D12PC00285 and by the Na-
tional Science Foundation under grant IIS-1018314.
The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce
and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes
notwithstanding any copyright annotation thereon.
The views and conclusions contained herein are
those of the authors and should not be interpreted as
necessarily representing the official policies or en-
dorsements, either expressed or implied, of IARPA,
DoI/NBE, NSF, or the U.S. Government.

49



References

ACE Evaluations. 2006.
http://www.itl.nist.gov/iad/mig/tests/ace/.

J. Allan, J. Carbonell, G. Doddington, J. Yamron, and
Y. Yang. 1998. Topic Detection and Tracking Pilot
Study: Final Report. In Proceedings of DARPA Broad-
cast News Transcription and Understanding Work-
shop.

J. Allan, V. Lavrenko, and H. Jin. 2000a. First Story
Detection in TDT is Hard. In Proceedings of the 2000
ACM CIKM International Conference on Information
and Knowledge Management.

J. Allan, Victor Lavrenko, Daniella Malin, and Russell
Swan. 2000b. Detections, Bounds, and Timelines:
UMass and TDT-3. In Proceedings of Topic Detection
and Tracking Workshop.

J. Allan, 2002. Topic Detection and Tracking: Event
Based Information Organization. Kluwer Academic
Publishers.

G. Amati and C. J. Van Rijsbergen. 2002. Probabilistic
Models of Information Retrieval based on Measuring
Divergence from Randomness. ACM Transactions on
Information Systems, 20(4):357–389.

D. Appelt, J. Hobbs, J. Bear, D. Israel, and M. Tyson.
1993. FASTUS: a finite-state processor for informa-
tion extraction from real-world text. In Proceedings of
the Thirteenth International Joint Conference on Arti-
ficial Intelligence.

H. Becker, M. Naaman, and L. Gravano. 2011. Be-
yond trending topics: Real-world event identification
on twitter. In Proceedings of the Fifth International
AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media.

E. Benson, A. Haghighi, and R. Barzilay. 2011. Event
discovery in social media feeds.

T. Berg-Kirkpatrick, D. Burkett, and D. Klein. 2012. An
Empirical Investigation of Statistical Significance in
NLP. In Proceedings of the 2012 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.

M.E. Califf and R. Mooney. 2003. Bottom-up Relational
Learning of Pattern Matching rules for Information
Extraction. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
4:177–210.

H.L. Chieu and H.T. Ng. 2002. A Maximum En-
tropy Approach to Information Extraction from Semi-
Structured and Free Text. In Proceedings of the 18th
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence.

M. D. Conover, J. Ratkiewicz, M. Francisco,
B. Goncalves, A. Flammini, and F. Menczer. 2011.
Political Polarization on Twitter. In Proceedings of
the Fifth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs
and Social Media.

Z. Gu and N. Cercone. 2006. Segment-Based Hidden
Markov Models for Information Extraction. In Pro-
ceedings of the 21st International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
481–488, Sydney, Australia, July.

R. Huang and E. Riloff. 2011. Peeling Back the Layers:
Detecting Event Role Fillers in Secondary Contexts.

H. Jin, R. Schwartz, S. Sista, and F. Walls. 1999. Topic
Tracking for Radio, TV broadcast, and Newswire. In
EUROSPEECH.

T. Joachims. 1999. Making Large-Scale Support
Vector Machine Learning Practical. In A. Smola
B. Schölkopf, C. Burges, editor, Advances in Kernel
Methods: Support Vector Machines. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA.

S. Keerthi and D. DeCoste. 2005. A Modified Finite
Newton Method for Fast Solution of Large Scale Lin-
ear SVMs. Journal of Machine Learning Research.

V. Lampos, T. D. Bie, and N. Cristianini. 2010. Flu
Detector - Tracking Epidemics on Twitter. In ECML
PKDD.

M. d. Marneffe, B. MacCartney, and C. D. Manning.
2006. Generating Typed Dependency Parses from
Phrase Structure Parses. In Proceedings of the Fifth
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC-2006).

M. Mathioudakis and N. Koudas. 2010. TwitterMonitor:
trend detection over the twitter stream. In Proceedings
of the 2010 international conference on Management
of data, page 11551158. ACM.

D. Metzler, C. Cai, and E. Hovy. 2012. Structured Event
Retrieval over Microblog Archives. In Proceedings of
The 2012 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies.

MUC-4 Proceedings. 1992. Proceedings of the Fourth
Message Understanding Conference (MUC-4). Mor-
gan Kaufmann.

I. Ounis, C. Lioma, C. Macdonald, and V. Plachouras.
2007. Research Directions in Terrier. Novat-
ica/UPGRADE Special Issue on Web Information Ac-
cess, Ricardo Baeza-Yates et al. (Eds), Invited Paper.

R. Parker, D. Graff, J. Kong, K. Chen, and Kazuaki M.
2011. English Gigaword. In Linguistic Data Consor-
tium.

S. Patwardhan and E. Riloff. 2007. Effective Information
Extraction with Semantic Affinity Patterns and Rele-
vant Regions. In Proceedings of 2007 the Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP-2007).

S. Petrovic, M. Osborne, and V. Lavrenko. 2012. Us-
ing Paraphrases for Improving First Story Detection in

50



News and Twitter. In Proceedings of The 2012 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies.

A.-M. Popescu, M. Pennacchiotti, and D. A. Paranjpe.
2011. Extracting events and event descriptions from
twitter.

E. Riloff and W. Lehnert. 1994. Information Ex-
traction as a Basis for High-Precision Text Classifi-
cation. ACM Transactions on Information Systems,
12(3):296–333, July.

E. Riloff and J. Lorenzen. 1999. Extraction-based text
categorization: Generating domain-specific role rela-
tionships automatically. In Tomek Strzalkowski, edi-
tor, Natural Language Information Retrieval. Kluwer
Academic Publishers.

E. Riloff. 1996. Automatically Generating Extraction
Patterns from Untagged Text. In Proceedings of the
Thirteenth National Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence, pages 1044–1049. The AAAI Press/MIT Press.

A. Ritter, Mausam, O. Etzioni, and S. Clark. 2012. Open
domain event extraction from twitter. In The Proceed-
ings of The 18th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining.

T. Sakaki, M. Okazaki, and Y. Matsuo. 2010. Earth-
quake shakes twitter users: real-time event detection
by social sensors.

S. Sekine. 2006. On-demand Information Extrac-
tion. In Proceedings of Joint Conference of the In-
ternational Committee on Computational Linguistics
and the Association for Computational Linguistics
(COLING/ACL-06).

M. Stevenson and M. Greenwood. 2005. A Seman-
tic Approach to IE Pattern Induction. In Proceed-
ings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 379–386, Ann Ar-
bor, MI, June.

K. Sudo, S. Sekine, and R. Grishman. 2003. An Im-
proved Extraction Pattern Representation Model for
Automatic IE Pattern Acquisition. In Proceedings of
the 41st Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (ACL-03).

A. Tumasjan, T. O. Sprenger, P. G. Sandner, and I. M.
Welpe. 2010. Predicting Elections with Twitter: What
140 Characters Reveal about Political Sentiment. In
Proceedings of the 4th International AAAI Conference
on Weblogs and Social Media.

R. Yangarber, R. Grishman, P. Tapanainen, and S. Hut-
tunen. 2000. Automatic Acquisition of Domain
Knowledge for Information Extraction. In Proceed-
ings of the Eighteenth International Conference on
Computational Linguistics (COLING 2000).

X. Zhang, H. Fuehres, and P. A. Gloor. 2010. Predicting
Stock Market Indicators Through Twitter ”I hope it is
not as bad as I fear”. In COINs.

51


