



















































Argviz: Interactive Visualization of Topic Dynamics in Multi-party Conversations


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2013 Demonstration Session, pages 36–39,
Atlanta, Georgia, 10-12 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Argviz: Interactive Visualization of Topic Dynamics in Multi-party
Conversations

Viet-An Nguyen
Dept. of Comp. Science

and UMIACS
University of Maryland

College Park, MD
vietan@cs.umd.edu

Yuening Hu
Dept. of Comp. Science

and UMIACS
University of Maryland

College Park, MD
ynhu@cs.umd.edu

Jordan Boyd-Graber
iSchool and
UMIACS

University of Maryland
College Park, MD

jbg@umiacs.umd.edu

Philip Resnik
Department of Linguistics

and UMIACS
University of Maryland

College Park, MD
resnik@umd.edu

Abstract

We introduce an efficient, interactive
framework—Argviz—for experts to analyze
the dynamic topical structure of multi-party
conversations. Users inject their needs,
expertise, and insights into models via iterative
topic refinement. The refined topics feed into a
segmentation model, whose outputs are shown
to users via multiple coordinated views.

1 Introduction

Uncovering the structure of conversations often re-
quires close reading by a human expert to be effective.
Political debates are an interesting example: political
scientists carefully analyze what gets said in debates
to explore how candidates shape the debate’s agenda
and frame issues or how answers subtly (or not so
subtly) shift the conversation by dodging the question
that was asked (Rogers and Norton, 2011).

Computational methods can contribute to the
analysis of topical dynamics, for example through
topic segmentation, dividing a conversation into
smaller, topically coherent segments (Purver, 2011);
or through identifying and summarizing the topics
under discussion (Blei et al., 2003; Blei, 2012). How-
ever, the topics uncovered by such methods can be
difficult for people to interpret (Chang et al., 2009),
and previous visualization frameworks for topic
models—e.g., ParallelTopics (Dou et al., 2011), Top-
icViz (Eisenstein et al., 2012), the Topical Guide,1 or
topic model visualization (Chaney and Blei, 2012)—
are not particularly well suited for linearly structured
conversations.

This paper describes Argviz, an integrated, inter-
active system for analyzing the topical dynamics of

1http://tg.byu.edu/

multi-party conversations. We bring together previ-
ous work on Interactive Topic Modeling (ITM) (Hu
et al., 2011), which allows users to efficiently inject
their needs, expertise, and insights into model build-
ing via iterative topic refinement, with Speaker Iden-
tity for Topic Segmentation (SITS) (Nguyen et al.,
2012), a state-of-the-art model for topic segmenta-
tion and discovery of topic shifts in conversations.
Argviz’s interface allows users to quickly grasp the
topical flow of the conversation, discern when the
topic changes and by whom, and interactively visual-
ize the conversation’s details on demand.

2 System Overview

Our overall system consists of three steps: (1) data
preprocessing, (2) interactive topic modeling, and (3)
conversational topic segmentation and visualization.

Data preprocessing Preprocessing creates bags of
words that can be used by models. First, stopwords
and low frequency terms are removed from tokenized
text. This is then used as the data for topic modeling.

Interactive topic modeling The topic model-
ing process then discovers—through posterior
inference—the topics that best explain the conver-
sational turns. Each of the topics is a multinomial
distribution over words, which can be displayed to
users along with the association of turns (documents)
to these topics.

The result of topic modeling may be imperfect;
we give users an opportunity to refine and curate the
topics using Interactive Topic Modeling (ITM) (Hu
et al., 2011). The feedback from users is encoded
in the form of correlations: word types that should
co-occur in a topic or which should not. As these
correlations are incorporated into the model, the top-
ics learned by the model change and are presented

36



again to the user. The process repeats over multiple
iterations until the user is satisfied.

In addition, a simple but important part of the
interactive user experience is the ability for users to
label topics, i.e., to identify a “congress” topic that
includes “bill”, “vote”, “representative”, etc.

ITM is a web-based application with a HTML and
jQuery2 front end, connected via Ajax and JSON.

Topic segmentation After the user has built inter-
pretable topics, we use SITS—a hierarchical topic
model (Nguyen et al., 2012)—to jointly discover the
set of topics discussed in a given set of conversations
and how these topics change during each conversa-
tion. We use the output of ITM to initialize SITS3

with a high quality user-specific set of topics. The
outputs of SITS consist of (1) a set of topics, (2) a
distribution over topics for each turn, and (3) a proba-
bility associated with each turn indicating how likely
the topic of that turn has been shifted.

The outputs of SITS are displayed using Argviz
(Figure 2). Argviz is a web-based application, built
using Google Web Toolkit (GWT),4 which allows
users to visualize and manipulate SITS’s outputs en-
tirely in their browser after a single server request.

3 Argviz: Coordinated Conversational
Views

Given the limited screen of a web browser, Argviz
follows the multiple coordinated views approach
(Wang Baldonado et al., 2000; North and Shneider-
man, 2000) successfully used in Spotfire (Ahlberg,
1996), Improvise (Weaver, 2004), and SocialAc-
tion (Perer and Shneiderman, 2006). Argviz supports
three main coordinated views: transcript, overview
and topic.

Transcript occupies the prime real estate for a
close reading. It has a transcript panel and a speaker
panel. The transcript panel displays the original tran-
script. Each conversational turn is numbered and
color-coded by speaker. The color associated with
each speaker can be customized using the speaker
panel, which lists all the speakers.

2 http://jquery.com/
3Through per-word topic assignments
4 https://developers.google.com/web-toolkit/

Overview shows how topics gain and lose promi-
nence during the conversation. SITS’s outputs in-
clude a topic distribution and a topic shift probability
for each turn in the conversation. In Argviz, these are
represented using a heatmap and topic shift column.

In the heatmap, each turn-specific topic distribu-
tion is displayed by a heatmap row (Sopan et al.,
2013). There is a cell for each topic, and the color
intensity of each cell is proportional to the probability
of the corresponding topic of a particular turn. Thus,
users can see the topical flow of the conversation
through the vertical change in cells’ color intensities
as the conversation progresses. In addition, the topic
shift column shows the topic shift probability (in-
ferred by SITS) using color-coded bar charts, helping
users discern large topic changes in the conversation.
Each row is associated with a turn in the conversation;
clicking on one shifts the transcript view.

Topic displays the set of topics learned by SITS
(primed by ITM), with font-size proportional to the
words’ topic probabilities. The selected topic panel
goes into more detail, with bar charts showing the
topic-word distribution. For example, in Figure 2, the
Foreign Affairs topic in panel E has high probability
words “iraq”, “afghanistan”, “war”, etc. in panel F.

4 Demo: Detecting 2008 Debate Dodges

Visitors will have the opportunity to experiment with
the process of analyzing the topical dynamics of dif-
ferent multi-party conversations. Multiple datasets
will be preprocessed and set up for users to choose
and analyze. Examples of datasets that will be avail-
able include conversation transcripts from CNN’s
Crossfire program and debates from the 2008 and
2012 U.S. presidential campaigns. For this section,
we focus on examples from the 2008 campaign.

Interactive topic refinement After selecting a
dataset and a number of topics, the first thing a user
can do is to label topics. This will be used later in
Argviz and helps users build a mental model of what
the topics are. For instance, the user may rename the
second topic “Foreign Policy”.

After inspecting the “Foreign Policy” topic, the
user may notice the omission of Iran from the most
probable words in the topic. A user can remedy that
by adding the words “Iran” and “Iranians” into the

37



Figure 1: ITM user interface for refining a topic. Users can iteratively put words into different “bins”, label topics, and
add new words to the topic. Users can also click on the provided links to show related turns for each topic in context.

Figure 2: The Argviz user interface consists of speaker panel (A), transcript panel (B), heatmap (C), topic shift column
(D), topic cloud panel (E), selected topic panel (F).

38



important words bin (Figure 1). Other bins include
ignored words for words that should be removed (e.g.,
“thing” and “work” from this topic) from the topic
and trash (e.g., “don”, which is a stop word).

The user can commit these changes by pressing the
Save changes button. The back end relearns given
the user’s feedback. Once users are satisfied with
the topic quality, they can click on the Finish button
to stop updating topics and start running the SITS
model, initialized using the final set of refined topics.

Visual analytic of conversations After SITS fin-
ishes (which takes just a few moments), users see the
dataset’s conversations in the Argviz interface. Fig-
ure 2 shows Argviz displaying the 2008 vice presiden-
tial debate between Senator Joe Biden and Governor
Sarah Palin, moderated by Gwen Ifill.

Users can start exploring the interface from any
of the views described in Section 3 to gain insight
about the conversation. For example, a user may
be interested in seeing how the “Economy” is dis-
cussed in the debates. Clicking on a topic in the topic
cloud panel highlights that column in the heatmap.
The user can now see where the “Economy” topic
is discussed in the debate. Next to the heatmap, the
topic shift column when debate participants changed
the topic. The red bar in turn 48 shows an interac-
tion where Governor Palin dodged a question on the
“bankruptcy bill” to discuss her “record on energy”.
Clicking on this turn shows the interaction in the
transcript view, allowing a closer reading.

Users might also want to contrast the topics that
were discussed before and after the shift. This can
be easily done with the coordination between the
heatmap and the topic cloud panel. Clicking on a
cell in the heatmap will select the corresponding
topic to display in the selected topic panel. In our
example, the topic of the conversation was shifted
from “Economy” to “Energy” at turn 48.

5 Conclusion

Argviz is an efficient, interactive framework that al-
lows experts to analyze the dynamic topical structure
of multi-party conversations. We are engaged in col-
laborations with domain experts in political science
exploring the application of this framework to politi-
cal debates, and collaborators in social psychology

exploring the analysis of intra- and inter-cultural ne-
gotiation dialogues.

References
[Ahlberg, 1996] Ahlberg, C. (1996). Spotfire: an informa-

tion exploration environment. SIGMOD, 25(4):25–29.
[Blei, 2012] Blei, D. M. (2012). Probabilistic topic mod-

els. Communications of the ACM, 55(4):77–84.
[Blei et al., 2003] Blei, D. M., Ng, A., and Jordan, M.

(2003). Latent Dirichlet allocation. JMLR, 3.
[Chaney and Blei, 2012] Chaney, A. J.-B. and Blei, D. M.

(2012). Visualizing topic models. In ICWSM.
[Chang et al., 2009] Chang, J., Boyd-Graber, J., Wang, C.,

Gerrish, S., and Blei, D. M. (2009). Reading tea leaves:
How humans interpret topic models. In NIPS.

[Dou et al., 2011] Dou, W., Wang, X., Chang, R., and Rib-
arsky, W. (2011). ParallelTopics: A probabilistic ap-
proach to exploring document collections. In VAST.

[Eisenstein et al., 2012] Eisenstein, J., Chau, D. H., Kittur,
A., and Xing, E. (2012). TopicViz: interactive topic
exploration in document collections. In CHI.

[Hu et al., 2011] Hu, Y., Boyd-Graber, J., and Satinoff, B.
(2011). Interactive topic modeling. In ACL.

[Nguyen et al., 2012] Nguyen, V.-A., Boyd-Graber, J., and
Resnik, P. (2012). SITS: A hierarchical nonparametric
model using speaker identity for topic segmentation in
multiparty conversations. In ACL.

[North and Shneiderman, 2000] North, C. and Shneider-
man, B. (2000). Snap-together visualization: a user
interface for coordinating visualizations via relational
schemata. In AVI, pages 128–135.

[Perer and Shneiderman, 2006] Perer, A. and Shneider-
man, B. (2006). Balancing systematic and flexible
exploration of social networks. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 12(5):693–700.

[Purver, 2011] Purver, M. (2011). Topic segmentation. In
Spoken Language Understanding: Systems for Extract-
ing Semantic Information from Speech.

[Rogers and Norton, 2011] Rogers, T. and Norton, M. I.
(2011). The artful dodger: Answering the wrong ques-
tion the right way. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied, 17(2):139–147.

[Sopan et al., 2013] Sopan, A., Freier, M., Taieb-Maimon,
M., Plaisant, C., Golbeck, J., and Shneiderman, B.
(2013). Exploring data distributions: Visual design
and evaluation. JHCI, 29(2):77–95.

[Wang Baldonado et al., 2000] Wang Baldonado, M. Q.,
Woodruff, A., and Kuchinsky, A. (2000). Guidelines
for using multiple views in information visualization.
In AVI, pages 110–119.

[Weaver, 2004] Weaver, C. (2004). Building highly-
coordinated visualizations in Improvise. In INFOVIS.

39


