










































Classification of South African languages using text and acoustic based methods: A case of six selected languages


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2013, pages 280–287,
Atlanta, Georgia, 9–14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Classification of South African languages using text and acoustic based 

methods: A case of six selected languages 

 Peleira Nicholas Zulu 

University of KwaZulu-Natal 

Electrical, Electronic and 

Computer Engineering  

Durban, 4041, South Africa 

zulup1@ukzn.ac.za  

 

 

 

Abstract 

Language variations are generally known to 

have a severe impact on the performance of 

Human Language Technology Systems. In or-

der to predict or improve system performance, 

a thorough investigation into these variations, 

similarities and dissimilarities, is required. 

Distance measures have been used in several 

applications of speech processing to analyze 

different varying speech attributes. However, 

not much work has been done on language dis-

tance measures, and even less work has been 

done involving South African languages. This 

study explores two methods for measuring the 

linguistic distance of six South African lan-

guages. It concerns a text based method, (the 

Levenshtein Distance), and an acoustic ap-

proach using extracted mean pitch values. The 

Levenshtein distance uses parallel word tran-

scriptions from all six languages with as little 

as 144 words, whereas the pitch method is 

text-independent and compares mean language 

pitch differences. Cluster analysis resulting 

from the distance matrices from both methods 

correlates closely with human perceptual dis-

tances and existing literature about the six lan-

guages.     

1 Introduction 

The development of objective metrics to assess the 

distances between different languages is of great 

theoretical and practical importance. Currently, 

subjective measures have generally been employed 

to assess the degree of similarity or dissimilarity 

between different languages (Gooskens & 

Heeringa, 2004; Van-Bezooijen & Heeringa, 2006; 

Van-Hout & Münstermann, 1981), and those sub-

jective decisions are, for example, the basis for 

classifying separate languages, and certain groups 

of language variants as dialects of one another. It is 

well known that languages are complex; they differ 

in vocabulary, grammar, writing format, syntax 

and many other characteristics. This presents levels 

of difficulty in the construction of objective com-

parative measures between languages. Even if one 

intuitively knows, for example, that English is 

closer to French than it is to Chinese, what are the 

objective factors that allow one to assess the levels 

of distance? 

     This bears substantial similarities to the analo-

gous questions that have been asked about the rela-

tionships between different species in the science 

of cladistics. As in cladistics, the most satisfactory 

answer would be a direct measure of the amount of 

time that has elapsed since the languages’ first split 

from their most recent common ancestor. Also, as 

in cladistics, it is hard to measure this from the 

available evidence, and various approximate 

measures have to be employed instead. In the bio-

logical case, recent decades have seen tremendous 

improvements in the accuracy of biological meas-

urements as it has become possible to measure dif-

ferences between DNA sequences. In linguistics, 

the analogue of DNA measurements is historical 

information on the evolution of languages, and the 

more easily measured—though indirect measure-

ments (akin to the biological phenotype)—are ei-

ther the textual or acoustic representations of the 

languages in question. 

280



     In the current article, we focus on language dis-

tance measures derived from both text and acoustic 

formats; we apply two different techniques, name-

ly Levenshtein distance between orthographic 

word transcriptions, and distances between lan-

guage pitch means in order to obtain measures of 

dissimilarity amongst a set of languages. These 

methods are used to obtain language groupings 

which are represented graphically using multidi-

mensional scaling and dendrograms—two standard 

statistical techniques. This allows us to visualize 

and assess the methods relative to known linguistic 

facts in order to judge their relative 

reliability(Zulu, Botha, & Barnard, 2008). 

     Our evaluation is based on six of the eleven 

official languages of South Africa.
1
 The eleven 

official languages fall into two distinct groups, 

namely the Germanic group (represented by Eng-

lish and Afrikaans) and the South African Bantu 

languages, which belong to the South Eastern Ban-

tu group. The South African Bantu languages can 

further be classified in terms of different sub-

groupings: Nguni (consisting of Zulu, Xhosa, Nde-

bele and Swati), Sotho (consisting of Southern So-

tho, Northern Sotho and Tswana), and a pair that 

falls outside these sub-families (Tsonga and Ven-

da). The six languages chosen for our evaluation 

are English, Afrikaans, Zulu, Xhosa, Northern So-

tho (also known as Sepedi) and Tswana, which 

equally represent the three groups; Germanic, 

Nguni and Sotho.  

     We believe that an understanding of these lan-

guage distances is not only of inherent interest, but 

also of great practical importance. For purposes 

such as language learning, the selection of target 

languages for various resources and the develop-

ment of Human Language Technologies, reliable 

knowledge of language distances would be of great 

value. Consider, for example, the common situa-

tion of an organization that wishes to publish in-

formation relevant to all languages in a particular 

multi-lingual community, but has insufficient fund-

ing to do so. Such an organization can be guided 

by knowledge of language distances and mutual 

intelligibility between languages to make an ap-

propriate choice of publication languages. 

     The following sections describe the Levenshtein 

distance and pitch characteristics in detail. There-

                                                           
1 Data for all eleven languages is available on the Lwazi web-

site: (http://www.meraka.org.za/lwazi/index.php).  

after, the paper will present an evaluation on the 

six languages of South Africa, highlighting lan-

guage groupings and proximity patterns. In conclu-

sion, the paper discusses the results.   

2 Theoretical Background 

Orthographic transcriptions are one of the most 

basic types of annotation used for speech transcrip-

tion, and are particularly important in most fields 

of research concerned with spoken language. The 

orthography of a language refers to the set symbols 

used to write a language and includes its writing 

system. English, for example, has an alphabet of 

26 letters which includes both consonants and 

vowels. However, each English letter may repre-

sent more than one phoneme, and each phoneme 

may be represented by more than one letter. In the 

current research, we investigate the use of Le-

venshtein distance on orthographic transcriptions 

for the assessment of language similarities. 

     On the other hand, speech has been and still 

very much is the most natural form of communica-

tion. Prosodic characteristics such as rhythm, stress 

and intonation in speech convey important infor-

mation regarding the identity of a spoken language. 

Results of perception studies on spoken language 

identification confirm that prosodic information, 

specifically pitch and intensity—which represent 

intonation and stress respectively—are useful for 

language identification (Kometsu, Mori, Arai, & 

Murahara, 2001; Mori et al., 1999). This paper pre-

sents a preliminary investigation of pitch and its 

role in determining acoustic based language dis-

tances.    

2.1 Levenshtein Distance 

There are several ways in which phoneticians have 

tried to measure the distance between two linguis-

tic entities, most of which are based on the descrip-

tion of sounds via various representations. This 

section introduces the Levenshtein Distance Meas-

ure, one of the more popular sequence-based dis-

tance measures. In 1995 Kessler introduced the use 

of the Levenshtein Distance as a tool for measuring 

linguistic distances between dialects (Kessler, 

1995). The basic idea behind the Levenshtein Dis-

tance is to imagine that one is rewriting or trans-

forming one string into another. Kessler 

successfully applied the Levenshtein Distance 

281



measure to the comparison of Irish dialects. In his 

work, the strings were transcriptions of word pro-

nunciations. In general, rewriting is effected by 

basic operations, each of which is associated with a 

cost, as illustrated in Table 1 in the transformation 

of the string “mošemane” to the string “umfana”, 

which are both orthographic translations of the 

word boy in Northern Sotho and Zulu respectively. 
 

 Operation Cost 

mošemane 

ošemane 

oemane 

omane 

omfane 

umfane 

umfana 

delete m 

delete š 

delete e 

insert f 

substitute o/u 

substitute e/a 

1 

1 

1 

1 

2 

2 

 Total cost 8 

 

Table 1. Levenshtein Distance between two strings. 

 

The Levenshtein Distance between two strings can 

be defined as the least costly sum of costs needed 

to transform one string into another. In Table 1, the 

transformations shown are associated with costs 

derived from operations performed on the strings.  

The operations used are: (i) the deletion of a single 

symbol, (ii) the insertion of a single symbol, and 

(iii) the substitution of one symbol for another 

(Kruskal, 1999). The edit distance method was also 

taken up by (Nerbonne et al., 1996) who applied it 

to Dutch dialects. Whereas Kruskal (1999) and 

Nerbonne et al. (1996) applied this method to pho-

netic transcriptions in which the symbols repre-

sented sounds, here the symbols were associated 

with alphabetic letters. 

     Similarly, Gooskens and Heeringa (2004) cal-

culated Levenshtein Distances between 15 Norwe-

gian dialects and compared them to the distances 

as perceived by Norwegian listeners. This compar-

ison showed a high correlation between the Le-

venshtein distances and the perceptual distances.  

2.2 Language pitch distance 

Speech is primarily intended to convey some mes-

sage through a sequence of legal sound units in a 

language. However, speech cannot merely be char-

acterized as a sequence of sound units. There are 

some characteristics that lend naturalness to 

speech, such as the variation of pitch, which pro-

vides some recognizable melodic properties to 

spoken language. This controlled modulation of 

pitch is referred to as intonation. The sound units 

are shortened or lengthened in accordance to some 

underlying pattern giving rhythmic properties to 

speech. The information attained from these 

rhythmic patterns increases the intelligibility of 

spoken languages, enabling the listener to segment 

continuous speech into phrases and words with 

ease (Shriberg, Stolcke, Hakkani-Tur, & Tur, 

2000). The characteristics that make us perceive 

this and other information such as stress, accent 

and emotion are collectively referred to as prosody. 

Comparisons have shown that languages differ 

greatly in their prosodic features (Hirst & Cristo, 

1998), therefore providing a basis for objective 

comparison between languages. Further, pitch is a 

perceptual attribute of sound, the physical correlate 

of which is fundamental frequency (F0), which rep-

resents vibration of the vocal folds.  

     This paper extracts pitch contours from six dif-

ferent languages, and uses the mean fundamental 

frequency values for each language to calculate the 

differences in pitch amongst them. From this we 

derive a distance matrix of F0 dissimilarities (dif-

ferences) which in turn is used to obtain language 

groupings.     

2.3 Language Clustering 

In using the Levenshtein Distance measure, the 

distance between two languages is equal to the av-

erage of a sample of Levenshtein Distances of cor-

responding word pairs. With pitch, the distance 

between two languages is merely the difference 

between the mean fundamental frequencies of the 

two languages. When we have n languages, then 

these distances are calculated for each possible pair 

of languages. For n languages n x n distances can 

be calculated. The corresponding distances are ar-

ranged in an n x n matrix. The distance of each 

language with respect to itself is found in the dis-

tance matrix on the diagonal from the upper left to 

the lower right. As this is a dissimilarity matrix, 

these values are always zero and therefore give no 

real information, so that only n x (n - 1) distances 

are relevant. Furthermore, both the Levenshtein 

and pitch distances are symmetric, implying that 

the distance between language X and Y is equal to 

the distance between language Y and X. Therefore, 

the distance matrix is symmetric. We need to use 

only one half which contains (n x (n - 1))/2 dis-

282



tances. Given the distance matrix, groups of larger 

sizes are investigated. Hierarchical clustering 

methods are employed to classify the languages 

into related language groups using the distance 

matrix. 

     Data clustering is a common technique for sta-

tistical data analysis, which is used in many fields 

including machine learning, bioinformatics, image 

analysis, data mining and pattern recognition. 

Clustering is the classification of similar objects 

into different groups, or more precisely, the parti-

tioning of a data set into subsets, so that the data in 

each subset share some common trait according to 

a defined distance measure. The result of this 

grouping is usually illustrated as a dendrogram; a 

tree diagram used to illustrate the arrangement of 

the groups produced by a clustering algorithm 

(Heeringa & Gooskens, 2003), whereas multidi-

mensional scaling adds to illustrate the visualiza-

tion of the language proximities in a 2-dimensional 

space. 

3 Evaluation 

This evaluation aims to present language groups of 

the six chosen languages of South Africa generated 

from dissimilarity matrices of the languages. These 

matrices are the results of Levenshtein distance 

and average pitch distance measurements. The dia-

grams provide visual representations of the pattern 

of similarities and dissimilarities between the lan-

guages.  

3.1 Language grouping using Levenshtein 
distance 

Levenshtein distances were calculated using exist-

ing parallel orthographic word transcriptions of 

144 words from each of the six languages. The 

data was manually collected from various multilin-

gual dictionaries and online resources.  Initially, 

200 common English words, mostly common 

nouns easily translated into the other five lan-

guages, were chosen. From this set, those words 

having unique translations into each of the other 

five languages were selected, resulting in 144 

words that were used in the evaluations. Examples 

of four word translations in all six languages are 

shown in Table 2. 

 
 

Eng Afr Xho Zul N.Sot Tsw 

fish vis intlanzi inhlanzi hlapi tlhapi 

house huis indlu indlu ntlo ntlo 

mother ma uma umama mma mme 

school skool isikolo isikole sekolo sekole 

 

Table 2. Example translations of four common words.  

Distance matrix 

Table 3 represents the distance matrix, containing 

the distances, taken pair-wise, between the differ-

ent languages as calculated from the summed Le-

venshtein Distances between the 144 target words. 

The zero values along the diagonal axis of the ma-

trix indicate no dissimilarity, making it clear that 

higher values reveal high levels of dissimilarity 

between the paired languages. The distance matrix 

contains n x (n – 1)/2 independent elements in light 

of the symmetry of the distance measure.  
 

 Afr Eng Xho Zul N. Sot Tsw 

Afr 0 443 984 1014 829 887 

Eng 443 0 981 1002 820 881 

Xho 984 981 0 502 867 922 

Zul 1014 1002 502 0 881 945 

N. Sot 829 820 867 881 0 315 

Tsw 887 881 922 945 315 0 

 

Table 3. Distance matrices calculated from Levenshtein  

Distance between 144 words. 

 

Graphical representation  

The confusion matrices provide a clear indication 

of the ways the languages group into families. 

These relationships can be represented visually 

using graphical techniques. Multidimensional scal-

ing (MDS) is a technique used in data visualization 

for exploring the properties of data in high-

dimensional spaces. The algorithm uses a matrix of 

dissimilarities between items and then assigns each 

item a location in a low dimensional space to 

match those distances as closely as possible. The 

study used the dissimilarity matrix to serve as a 

measure between languages, and used the statisti-

cal package XLSTAT (XLSTAT, 2012). The dis-

similarity matrix was input into the 

multidimensional scaling algorithm which mapped 

the language dissimilarities in a 2-dimensional 

space. 

283



     Figure 1 shows the mapping that was created 

using the dissimilarity matrix in Table 3; we can 

see that the languages from the same subfamilies 

group together. The mapping using just 144 words 

shows a definite grouping of the families. In the 

mapping the Sotho languages are more closely re-

lated internally than both the Nguni and Germanic 

languages as expected — from the historical record 

(Heine & Nurse, 2000), it is clear that a tighter in-

ternal grouping of the Sotho and Nguni languages 

is accurate. 
 

 

Figure 1. Multidimensional scale to represent dissimi-

larities between languages calculated from the dissimi-

larity matrix in Table 3. 

 

In conjunction with multidimensional scaling, den-

drograms also provide a visual representation of 

the pattern of similarities or dissimilarities among 

a set of objects. We again used the dissimilarity 

matrix in Table 3 with the statistical package 

XLSTAT. 

     Figure 2 illustrates the dendrogram derived 

from clustering the dissimilarities between the lan-

guages as depicted by the dissimilarity matrix in 

Table 3. The dendrogram shows three classes rep-

resenting the previously defined language group-

ings, Nguni, Sotho and Germanic. This 

dendrogram closely relates to the language group-

ings described in (Heine & Nurse, 2000). 
 

 
 

Figure 2. Dendrogram calculated from the dissimilarity 

matrix of Table 3. 

 

3.2 Pitch Extraction and language grouping 

The extraction of pitch contours was carried out 

with Praat (Boersma & Weenink, 2011), a free 

scientific software program for the analysis of 

speech and phonetics. The use of Praat is advanta-

geous in that it is fairly easy to use, has high pro-

cessing speed, is accurate and allows scripting, 

which is very useful in processing large numbers 

of files (in our case, speech recordings).  

     A Praat script was written specifying two main 

parameters; the expected minimum and maximum 

pitch values in Hertz, which were selected to be 

75Hz and 600Hz respectively. The extraction of 

pitch contours is based on the detection of perio-

dicities. The Praat command To PointProcess (pe-

riodic, peaks)… analyses the selected speech file 

and creates a sequence of points in time. The 

acoustic periodicity detection is performed on the 

basis of an accurate short-term analysis of the fun-

damental frequency and the harmonics-to-noise 

ratio working in the autocorrelation domain as de-

scribed by Boersma (Boersma, 1993). This method 

was able to achieve more accurate and noise-

resistant results when compared to combs or 

cepstrum based methods (Pokorny, 2011). The ex-

tracted acoustic periodicity contour is interpreted 

as being the frequency of an underlying sequence 

of glottal closures in vocal fold vibrations. For 

each speech file—for every voiced interval—a 

AfrEng

Xho

Zul

N. SotTsw

-1

-0.8

-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

-1.2 -1 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2

D
im

2

Dim1

Multidimensional Scale

X
h

o

Z
u

l

N
. 

S
o

t

T
sw A

fr

E
n

g

0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

1600

D
is

si
m

il
a

ri
ty

Dendrogram

284



number of points representing glottal pulses are 

found and their points in time are saved, forming 

the pitch contour for that particular speech file 

(Pokorny, 2011). Pitch contours were extracted 

from 5000 speech files per language for each of the 

six languages, with each language having approx-

imately 200 different speakers (25 recordings per 

speaker) with a relatively equal distribution of 

males and females, all aged between 18 and 65 

years.  

     The extracted pitch frequency points for all 

5000 files were collected and placed in a single 

array for each language. Each array represents the 

pitch distribution for the specific language, and the 

mean frequency for each language was used to 

model the respective language. The dissimilarity 

matrix was then derived from the differences of 

these means for each pair of languages. Figure 3 

illustrates the distribution of pitch frequencies for 

the selected languages. It clearly shows the relative 

pitch content variations of the different languages, 

which is key to determining the dissimilarity 

amongst the languages. Also of note in Figure 3 

are the peak positions representing approximate 

positions of male and female fundamental frequen-

cies—in the range of 85 to 180Hz for males and 

165 to 255 Hz for females.   
 

 

Figure 3. Distribution of pitch frequencies extracted 

from 6 South African languages. 

Distance matrix 

Table 4 represents the distance matrix—containing 

the distances taken pair-wise—between the differ-

ent languages as calculated from the mean pitch 

frequencies of the six languages. Again, higher 

numbers in the matrix reflect high dissimilarity 

between the selected pair of languages.  
 

  Afr Eng Xho Zul N. Sot Tsw 

Afr 0 5.1 16.09 17.11 9.66 12.61 

Eng 5.1 0 10.99 12.01 4.56 7.51 

Xho 16.09 10.99 0 1.02 6.43 3.48 

Zul 17.11 12.01 1.02 0 7.45 4.5 

N. Sot 9.66 4.56 6.43 7.45 0 2.95 

Tsw 12.61 7.51 3.48 4.5 2.95 0 

 

Table 4. Distance matrix calculated from mean pitch 

frequencies of six South African languages. 

 

Graphical representation 

As with the Levenshtein Distance, the relationships 

between the languages are represented visually in 

Figures 4 and 5 using graphical techniques and 

multidimensional scaling. The language dissimilar-

ities are mapped on to a 2-dimensional space 

shown in Figure 4. Here also, the languages from 

the same sub-families are grouped together. The 

relative closeness within the three sub-families is 

not as clearly indicated in Figure 4 as in Figure 1, 

but the distinction is clearly visible.  
 

 
 

Figure 4. Multi-dimensional scale calculated from the 

pitch-based matrix of Table 4. 

 

Figure 5 shows the dendrogram generated from the 

dissimilarities matrix of Table 4. As in Figure 2, 

the dendrogram shows three classes representing 

Afr

Eng

Xho

Zul

N. Sot

Tsw

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

-8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10

D
im

2

Dim1

Multidimensional Scaling

285



the previously defined language sub-families. Fig-

ure 5 differs from Figure 2 in the branching of the 

three sub-families, where Figure 2 shows the Ger-

manic languages branching from the same parent 

as the Sotho sub-family. Figure 5 offers a more 

accurate account by separating the Germanic sub-

group from the Bantu languages. Thus, Figure 5 

depicts a more refined grouping of the languages 

than Figure 2. 
 

 
 

Figure 5. Dendrogram calculated from the pitch-based 

distance matrix of Table 4. 

 

 

Conclusion 

 
Both dissimilarity matrices resulting from the text-

based Levenshtein Distance and the acoustic mean 

pitch frequency differences can effectively be 

combined with multidimensional scaling and den-

drograms to epitomize language relationships. 

Both methods reflect the known family relation-

ships between the languages being studied. The 

main conclusion of this research is therefore that 

statistical methods, used with both text-based and 

acoustic-based methods and data, are able to pro-

vide useful objective measures of language similar-

ities or dissimilarities. It is clear that these methods 

can be refined further using other inputs such as 

phonetic transcriptions or further acoustic meas-

urements; such refinements are likely to be im-

portant when, for example, fine distinctions 

between dialects are required. 

     However, each approach has its advantages and 

disadvantages. Levenshtein Distance measures do 

not require much data to perform a reasonable 

classification of the data. With as few as 50 words 

per language, reasonable classification is possible. 

Also, the process of generating the distance matrix 

is not computationally taxing. However, this meth-

od is less discriminating in assessing languages 

with different writing styles, for example Chinese 

and English. Using pitch bares the advantage of 

using language data in its most natural form, but 

has its disadvantages in being computationally tax-

ing when dealing with large amounts of data—

which is generally required in order to produce 

good results.  

     It would be most interesting to see whether 

closer agreement between these methods can be 

achieved by measuring Levenshtein Distances be-

tween larger text collections—perhaps even paral-

lel corpora rather than translations of word lists. 

Comparing these distance measures with measures 

derived from different acoustic parameters, or a 

combination of parameters, is another pressing 

concern. Finally, it would be valuable to compare 

various distance measures against other criteria for 

language similarity (e.g. historical separation or 

mutual intelligibility) in a rigorous fashion. 
 

 

 

 

 

References 

 
Boersma, P. (1993). Accurate short-term analysis of the 

fundamental frequency and the harmonics-to-noise 

ratio of a sampled sound. Institute of Phonetic 

Sciences, vol 17, pp 97-110.  

Boersma, P, & Weenink, D. (2011). Praat Version 5.3 

2011. http://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/praat/ Date of 

last access: 27 July. 2012   

Gooskens, C, & Heeringa, W. (2004). Perceptive 

evaluation of Levenshtein dialect distance 

measurements using Norwegian dialect data. 

Language Variation and Change vol. 16, pp. 189-

207.  

Heeringa, W, & Gooskens, C. (2003). Norwegian 

dialects examined perceptually and acoustically. 

Computers and the Humanities, 37, pp. 293-315.  

Heine, B, & Nurse, D. (2000). African languages: An 

introduction. Cambridge University Press.  

A
fr

E
n

g

X
h

o

Z
u

l

N
. 

S
o

t

T
sw

0

5

10

15

20

25

D
is

si
m

il
a

ri
ty

Dendrogram

286



Hirst, D, & Cristo, A Di. (1998). Intonation systems: A 

survey of twenty languages. Cambridge University 

Press, Cambridge.  

Kessler, B. (1995). Computational dialectology in Irish 

Gaelic. The 7th Conference of the European Chapter 

of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 

60-67.  

Kometsu, M, Mori, K, Arai, T, & Murahara, Y. (2001). 

Human language identification with reduced 

segmental information: comparison between 

Monolinguals and Bilinguals. Paper presented at the 

EUROSPEECH, Scandanavia. pp 149-152. 

Kruskal, J B. (1999). An overview of sequence 

comparison. Stanford. .  

Mori, K, Toba, N, Harada, T, Arai, T, Kometsu, M, 

Aoyagi, M, & Murahara, Y. (1999). Human language 

identification with reduced spectral information. 

Paper presented at the EUROSPEECH, Budapest, 

Hungary. pp. 391-394. 

Nerbonne, J, Heeringa, W, Hout, E Van den, Kooi, P Van 

der, Otten, S, & Vis, W Van de. (1996). Phonetic 

distance between Dutch dialects. Sixth CLIN 

Meeting, pp. 185-202.  

Pokorny, F. (2011). Extraction of prosodic features from 

speech signals. Graz, Austria: Institute of Electronic 

Music and Acoustics, University of Music and 

Performing Arts. 

Shriberg, E, Stolcke, A, Hakkani-Tur, D, & Tur, G. (2000). 

Prosody-based automatic segmentation of speech 

into sentences and topics. Speech Communication. 

pp. 127-154(32).  

Van-Bezooijen, R, & Heeringa, W. (2006). Intuitions on 

linguistic distance: geographically or linguistically 

based? In: Tom Koole, Jacomine Northier and Bert 

Tahitu (eds). Artikelen van de Vijfde sociolinguistiche 

conferentie, pp. 77-87.  

Van-Hout, R, & Münstermann, H. (1981). Linguistic 

distance, dialect and attitude. Gramma 5, pp. 101-

123.  

XLSTAT. (2012). XLSTAT. 

http://www.xlstat.com/en/download/. Date of 

access: 27 July. 2012   

Zulu, P N, Botha, G, & Barnard, E. (2008). Orthographic 

measures of language distances between the official 

South African languages Literator: Journal of 

Literary Criticism, Comparative Linguistics and 

Literaty Studies  29(1), 185.  

 

  

287


