



















































Entrainment in Spoken Dialogue Systems: Adopting, Predicting and Influencing User Behavior


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2013 Student Research Workshop, pages 84–90,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Entrainment in Spoken Dialogue Systems: Adopting, Predicting and
Influencing User Behavior

Rivka Levitan
Department of Computer Science

Columbia University
New York, NY 10027, USA

rlevitan@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract

Entrainment is the phenomenon of the speech
of conversational partners becoming more
similar to each other. This thesis proposal
presents a comprehensive look at entrainment
in human conversations and how entrainment
may be incorporated into the design of spo-
ken dialogue systems in order to improve sys-
tem performance and user satisfaction. We
compare different kinds of entrainment in both
classic and novel dimensions, provide exper-
imental results on the utility of entrainment,
and show that entrainment can be used to im-
prove a system’s ASR performance and turn-
taking decisions.

1 Introduction
Entrainment is the phenomenon of interlocutors be-
coming more similar to each other in their speech
in the course of a conversation. Entrainment has
been observed in numerous domains and for mul-
tiple levels of communication. In addition, many
studies have shown associations between entrain-
ment and desirable dialogue characteristics. The
proposed work aims to improve spoken dialogue
system performance both qualitatively and quanti-
tatively by exploiting this prevalent and significant
phenomenon. Spoken dialogue systems can signifi-
cantly improve the quality of their user interactions
by incorporating entrainment into their design:

• A spoken dialogue system can entrain to its
users, adjusting its own output to align with
theirs. This should improve the dialogue qual-
ity as perceived by the user.

• It can exploit the concept of entrainment by
changing the parameters of its own output
when it wants the user to speak differently. For
example, when the user is speaking too quickly,
the system can slow down its own output, caus-
ing the user to do the same.

• It can use an entrainment model along with in-
formation about its own behavior to more accu-
rately predict how the user will behave.

Our proposed work explores the role of entrain-
ment in human conversations and looks at how it
can improve interactions with spoken dialogue sys-
tems. In addition to presenting an in-depth study
of the characteristics of human entrainment, we
will demonstrate that spoken dialogue systems can
use this information to predict characteristics of the
user’s speech, improve the user’s impression of the
dialogue quality and system persona by adopting the
user’s speech characteristics, and improve recogni-
tion accuracy by influencing the user to abandon
prosodic characteristics associated with ASR error.

This thesis proposal is organized as follows: Sec-
tion 2 discusses the literature related to the proposed
work. Section 3 describes the corpus used in these
studies. Section 4 addresses the question of how hu-
mans entrain and how this information can be used
to more accurately predict a user’s behavior. Sec-
tion 5 discusses how entrainment affects the per-
ceived quality of human and human-computer con-
versations, and Section 6 explores how entrainment
can be used to influence user behavior. Section 7
describes the main contributions of this work.

84



2 Related work

Entrainment has been shown to occur at almost ev-
ery level of human communication: lexical (Bren-
nan and Clark, 1992), syntactic (Reitter and Moore,
2007; Ward and Litman, 2007), stylistic (Niederhof-
fer and Pennebaker, 2002; Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil
et al., 2011), acoustic-prosodic (Natale, 1975; Coul-
ston et al., 2002; Ward and Litman, 2007) and pho-
netic (Pardo, 2006).

Entrainment in many of these dimensions has
also been associated with measures of dialogue suc-
cess. Chartrand and Bargh (1999), for example,
demonstrated that subjects who interacted with con-
federates who mimicked their posture and behav-
ior reported greater liking for the confederate and a
smoother interaction. Lee et al. (2010) found that
entrainment measures derived from pitch features
were significantly higher in positive interactions be-
tween married couples in therapy than in negative
interactions. Looking at more objective measures,
Nenkova et al. (2008) found that the degree of en-
trainment on high-frequency words was correlated
with task score and turn-taking features.

These studies have been motivated by theoreti-
cal models such as Giles’ Communication Accom-
modation Theory (Giles et al., 1987), which pro-
poses that speakers promote social approval or ef-
ficient communication by adapting to their inter-
locutors’ communicative behavior. Another theory
informing the association of entrainment and dia-
logue success is the coordination-rapport hypoth-
esis (Tickle-Degnen and Rosenthal, 1990), which
posits that the degree of liking between conversa-
tional partners should be correlated with the degree
of nonverbal coordination between them. In con-
trast, Chartrand and Bargh (1999) posit that entrain-
ment is a purely automatic process, a product of the
perception-behavior link, which predicts that the act
of observing a behavior makes the observer more
likely to engage in that behavior as well.

3 Columbia Games Corpus

Many of the studies in this work were conducted on
the Columbia Games Corpus (Gravano, 2009), a col-
lection of twelve dyadic conversations elicited from
native speakers of Standard American English. Dur-
ing the collection of the corpus, each pair of partic-

ipants played a set of computer games that required
them to verbally cooperate to achieve a mutual goal.
In the Cards games, one speaker described the cards
she saw on her screen, and her partner attempted to
match them to the cards on his own screen. In the
Objects games, one speaker described the location
of an object on her screen, and her partner attempted
to place the corresponding object in exactly the same
location on his own screen. For both games, the par-
ticipants received points based on how exact a match
was; they later were paid for each point.

The corpus consists of approximately nine hours
of recorded dialogue. It has been orthographically
transcribed and annotated with prosodic and turn-
taking labels. Thirteen subjects participated in the
collection of the corpus, and nine returned on an-
other day for a second session with a different part-
ner. This is useful for our study of entrainment, since
we can compare a single speaker’s behavior with
two different interlocutors. In addition, the corpus
is representative of the kind of speech we are inter-
ested in: task-oriented dialogue between strangers.

4 Entrainment in human conversations

We begin our study of entrainment by looking at en-
trainment in human conversations. Aside from the
interest inherent in advancing our understanding of
this human behavior, research in this area can inform
the design of spoken dialogue systems. A system
that entrains the way a human does will seem more
natural, and a system that knows how humans en-
train can use this information to better predict how a
user will behave, improving its own performance.

4.1 Acoustic-prosodic entrainment

This study, previously presented in (Levitan and
Hirschberg, 2011), creates a cohesive view of en-
trainment by directly comparing entrainment on a
set of acoustic-prosodic features, measured in five
different ways. By comparing these different mea-
sures of entrainment, we bring clarity to three as-
pects of entrainment:

• Is it global or local? Two speakers may fluc-
tuate around similar means, while diverging
widely at any specific point. Conversely, they
may be globally dissimilar, but locally they
may be relatively similar.

• Is it by value or by direction? If a speaker en-

85



trains to her partner’s actual value, if he low-
ers his voice, she may raise her own in order to
match his new intensity. If she matches the di-
rection of the change rather than the new value,
she will lower her voice as well, even if this
results in a value less similar to his.

• Is the degree of entrainment static, or does
it improve? Do speakers converge—become
more similar—as the conversation progresses?

The features we examine are intensity mean and
max, pitch mean and max, jitter, shimmer, noise-
to-harmonics ratio (NHR), and syllables per sec-
ond1. We look for evidence of global entrainment by
comparing the similarities in feature means between
partners with the similarities between speakers who
are not conversational partners.

We see an effect of entrainment for almost all the
features. In addition, the difference between part-
ners for several of the features is smaller in the sec-
ond half of the conversation, constituting evidence
of convergence. We also find a strong effect of lo-
cal entrainment: for every feature, adjacent turns are
significantly (p < 0.001) more similar to each other
than non-adjacent turns. We conclude that entrain-
ment is by value rather than by direction; that global
entrainment exists in addition to local matching for
several features, most notably intensity; and that en-
trainment is dynamic for some features, improving
as the conversation progresses.

4.2 Entrainment on outliers

Since entrainment is generally considered an uncon-
scious phenomenon, it is interesting to consider en-
trainment when a feature is particularly salient. The
theory that the perception-behavior link is the mech-
anism behind entrainment (Chartrand and Bargh,
1999) would predict that the effect of entrainment
would be stronger in this case, since such features
are more likely to be observed and therefore imi-
tated. We test this hypothesis by looking at cases
in which one speaker in a pair has a feature value in
the 90th or 10th percentile. This study was previ-
ously described in (Levitan et al., 2012).

1Intensity mean is an acoustic measure perceived as loud-
ness, and intensity max represents the range of loudness. Jitter,
shimmer and NHR are three measures of voice quality; jitter
and shimmer are perceived as harshness, and NHR as hoarse-
ness. Syllables per second measure speaking rate.

As in our tests for global entrainment (Section
4.1), we compute a partner and non-partner similar-
ity for each speaker. The partner similarity should be
lower for outlier pairs (pairs in which one speaker
has an outlier feature value), and the non-partner
similarity should be lower as well, since the outlier
speaker diverges from the norm. We therefore can
expect the difference between these two values to be
the same for outlier and typical pairs. If this dif-
ference is lower for outlier pairs, we can conclude
that the effect of entrainment is weaker in outlier
cases. We find, in fact, that this difference is greater
for outlier pairs for several features, indicating that
speakers entrain more to outlier values of these fea-
tures. This finding supports the perception-behavior
link. In addition, it has implications for cases in
which it is an objective to induce one’s interlocutor
to entrain, as we will discuss in Section 6.

4.3 Entrainment and backchannel-inviting cues

Backchannels are short, nondisruptive segments of
speech that a speaker utters to let his interlocutor
know that he is keeping up. They are extremely
prevalent in task-oriented conversation. Gravano
and Hirschberg (2009) identified six acoustic and
prosodic features that tend to be different be-
fore backchannels, hypothesizing that these features
serve as cues to one’s interlocutor that a backchan-
nel would be welcome. Individual speakers use dif-
ferent sets of cues, and can differ in their realiza-
tion of a cue. We look for evidence of entrainment
on backchannel-inviting cues. This work, previously
discussed in (Levitan et al., 2011), represents a first
look at entrainment in a pragmatic dimension.

We measure backchannel-inviting cues in three
ways. Firstly, we measure the similarity of the
speaker pairs’ cue sets by counting the number of
cues they have in common, and find that partners
have more cues in common than non-partners. Sec-
ondly, we measure the similarity of cue realization,
and show that feature values before backchannels
for pitch, intensity and voice quality are more sim-
ilar between partners. In addition, this measure
shows evidence of convergence for pitch and inten-
sity, which are more similar before backchannels in
the second half of a conversation. Finally, we mea-
sure the local effect of this entrainment by correlat-
ing feature values before consecutive backchannels

86



and find that pitch and intensity before backchannels
are moderately correlated.

4.4 Future work

We have shown that a speaker’s conversational be-
havior is influenced by that of her interlocutor. We
therefore propose to develop a framework for us-
ing entrainment information to label or predict a
speaker’s behavior. An example of such a task is
predicting backchannels. Based on the work of
Gravano and Hirschberg (2009), a system deciding
whether to produce a backchannel or take the floor
should compare the user’s most recent utterance to
a backchannel-preceding model and a turn-yielding
model. Since each speaker uses a different count
of backchannel-preceding cues, a model trained on
other speakers may not be useful. However, data
from the user may not be available and is likely to
be sparse at best.

Since interlocutors use similar backchannel-
inviting cues, we can use information from the in-
terlouctor – the system – to build the model. The
influence of this interlocutor information can be
weighted according to the probable strength of the
entrainment effect, which can depend, as we have
shown, on the feature being predicted, the respec-
tive genders of the participants, whether a feature
value is an outlier, and where in the conversation the
speech segment occurs.

5 Entrainment and dialogue quality

This section addresses two main research questions:
1. What kinds of entrainment are most important

to conversational quality?
2. Will the passive benefits of entrainment apply

when it is a computer that is entraining?
To answer the first question, we look at the entrain-
ment correlates of social and objective variables in
the Games Corpus (previously reported in Levitan
et al., 2012). We address the second question with a
Wizard of Oz study that looks at subjects’ reactions
to an entraining spoken dialogue system.

5.1 Entrainment correlates of dialogue charac-
teristics

Lexical entrainment has been associated with mea-
sures of smooth turn-taking and task success
(Nenkova et al., 2008). Here, we correlate en-

trainment on intensity mean and max, pitch mean
and max, jitter, shimmer, noise-to-harmonics ratio
(NHR), and syllables per second with four objective
measures of dialogue coordination: number of turns,
mean turn latency, percentage of overlaps, and per-
centage of interruptions. We interpret a high num-
ber of turns and percentage of overlaps (cases in
which one person begins speaking as her interlocu-
tor finishes his turn) as signs of a smoothly flowing,
well-coordinated conversation. We therefore expect
them to be positively associated with entrainment, in
line with previous work and the theory that entrain-
ment facilitates communication. In contrast, high
turn latency (the lag time between turns) and per-
centage of interruptions (cases in which one person
begins speaking before her interlocutor has finished
his turn) are signs of poor turn-taking behavior and
an awkward conversation. We therefore expect them
to be negatively correlated with entrainment mea-
sures.

To look at more perceptual measures of dialogue
quality, we used Amazon Mechanical Turk2 to an-
notate each task (the sub-units of each game) in the
Games Corpus for what we term social variables,
the perceived social characteristics of an interaction
and ints participants. Details on the annotation pro-
cess can be found in (Gravano et al., 2011). In this
study, we focus on four social variables: trying to
be liked, giving encouragement, trying to dominate,
and conversation awkward. Based on Communica-
tion Accommodation Theory (Giles et al., 1987), we
expect the first two social variables, which represent
the desire to minimize social distance, to be posi-
tively correlated with entrainment. Someone who is
trying to dominate, on the other hand, will try to in-
crease social distance, and we therefore expect this
variable to correlate negatively with entrainment, as
should conversation awkward.

We report separate results for female, male and
mixed-gender pairs. In general, we see correlations
in the expected directions: the number of turns, per-
centage of overlaps, and giving encouragement are
positively correlated with entrainment for all gen-
der groups, latency is negatively correlated with en-
trainment for male and female pairs, and trying to
be liked is positively correlated with entrainment for

2http://www.mturk.com

87



male and mixed-gender pairs. We see no correla-
tions for trying to dominate, possibly because an-
notators were confused between the socially weak
position of trying to dominate, and the socially pow-
erful position of actually dominating.

For objective variables, we see the strongest and
most numerous correlations for male pairs, while
for objective variables, this is true for mixed-gender
pairs, leading us to conclude that entrainment is
most important to the coordination of a conversa-
tion for male pairs and to the perceived quality of a
conversation for mixed-gender pairs. We identify in-
tensity as an important entrainment feature, as well
as shimmer for dialogue coordination for female or
mixed-gender pairs. In future work, we plan to cor-
relate these social and objective variables with mea-
sures of local entrainment and convergence (Section
4.1).

5.2 Entrainment and dialogue quality in spoken
dialogue systems

In this study (currently ongoing), we look at whether
subjects will attribute more positive qualities to an
interaction with a system whose voice is more simi-
lar to their own. To answer this question, we create
a Wizard of Oz setup in which a subject interacts
with an entrained voice and a disentrained voice.
We chose to employ a wizard instead of a fully func-
tional dialogue system in order to neutralize possible
intrusions from other components of a dialogue sys-
tem and isolate the entrainment effect.

The subjects are given three tasks modeled on rea-
sons for which someone might call 311, New York
City’s phone number for government information.
In the taxi scenario, for example, the subject is given
a description of an incident in which a taxi drove
unsafely, and is told to report the incident to the sys-
tem, using the given date, time and location. Using
this paradigm, we can collect spontaneous speech
while still being able to use prerecorded prompts:
the content is predetermined, but the sentence form
and word choice is up to the subject.

For the first task, alternate side parking, the ex-
perimenter prints prompts to the subject’s screen us-
ing a chat program, and the subject responds by
speaking into a headset that plays into the experi-
menter’s computer. The purpose of this first task is
to get a sample of the subject’s speech. The sub-

ject then fills out some demographic forms and the
NEO-FFI personality test, while the experimenter
calculates the vocal intensity and speaking rate of
the subject’s speech. A set of prerecorded prompts
is then scaled to match the subject’s vocal parame-
ters, forming an entrained set, and then scaled away
from the subject’s parameters, forming the disen-
trained set. The parameters for the disentrained set
were chosen empirically to result in a voice percepti-
bly different from the entrained set while remaining
undistorted and natural-sounding.

The subject then completes two more tasks, one
with the entrained voice and one with the disen-
trained voice. We vary the order and combination
of tasks and voices so we can test for effects of or-
der and task. After each task, the subject fills out
a survey containing questions like “I liked the sys-
tem’s personality” or “I found talking with the sys-
tem annoying.” We hypothesize that they will agree
more with positive statements about the entraining
version of the system.

We also crudely measure each subject’s percep-
tual sensitivity to vocal characteristics by asking
them to describe each voice by choosing from a list
of adjectives like “high-pitched,” ”fast,” or ”loud.”
We will look at how this sensitivity, as well as gen-
der and personality, interact with the subjects’ reac-
tions to the system’s entrainment.

6 Influencing user behavior
In human conversations, it is common for a speaker
to attempt to affect his interlocutor’s behavior by
modeling a desired change. For example, a speaker
may raise his own voice if he is having trouble hear-
ing and wishes his interlocutor to speak more loudly.
Since humans have been shown to entrain to com-
puters (Coulston et al., 2002; Stoyanchev and Stent,
2009; Bell et al., 2003), it is reasonable for a spoken
dialogue system to use this strategy to influence its
user to speak in a way that will optimize the perfor-
mance of its automatic speech recognition (ASR). A
previous study (Lopes et al., 2011) successfully in-
duced users to abandon words prone to ASR error
simply by removing those words from the system’s
prompts. In this work, we attempt to influence users
to abandon prosodic characteristics associated with
ASR failure by modeling the desired change in the
system’s prompts.

88



Hirschberg et al. (2004) found that utterances that
followed longer pauses or were louder, longer, or
pitched higher were less likely to be recognized
correctly. Our method looks for these undesirable
prosodic features in utterances with low ASR con-
fidence and attempts to induce the user to abandon
them. We hypothesize that abandoning prosody as-
sociated with ASR failure will result in improved
ASR performance.

Our approach is as follows. When the system’s
ASR returns a hypothesis with low confidence for
an utterance, it finds the utterance’s intensity, pitch
and duration. If any of these features fall within the
range of utterances that tend to be misrecognized,
the system employs one of four strategies. The ex-
plicit strategy is to ask the user to make the desired
change, e.g. “Please speak more quietly.” The en-
trainment strategy is to model the desired change,
e.g. lowering the intensity of the system’s out-
put. The explicit+entrainment strategy combines
the two, e.g. by saying “Please speak more quietly”
in a quieter system voice. We hypothesize that one
strategy may increase the efficacy of the other. We
will also try a no strategy condition as a baseline
for how often the user independently abandons the
undesirable prosody.

Each strategy will be embodied in a simple re-
quest for repetition. For each strategy, we will look
at how often the subsequent turn displays the desired
change in prosody. In addition, we will see how
often the ASR performance improves on the subse-
quent turn. A third measure of a strategy’s success
will be the durability of its effect—that is, how likely
the undesirable prosody is to recur later in the con-
versation.

Within the entrainment condition, we will test
how pronounced a change must be in order to in-
duce a corresponding change on the part of the user.
Our research on outlier entrainment suggests that a
more extreme change is more likely to be entrained
to. However, the most attractive feature of the en-
trainment condition is its nondisruptiveness, and this
quality will be lost if the change in the system’s
voice is too extreme. We will therefore begin with
a slight change, and test how much the degree of
change must be increased before the user will imi-
tate it.

Fandrianto and Eskenazi (2012) implemented a

similar approach, lowering the system’s vocal in-
tensity or increasing its speaking rate when its
classifiers detected the speaking styles of shouting
or hyperarticulation. By responding to individual
prosodic features instead of higher-level speaking
styles, we avoid the layer of error introduced by clas-
sifiers. Furthermore, our approach can account for
cases in which ASR error is caused by prosodic fea-
tures that do not comprise an identifiable speaking
style. Finally, our detailed analysis will give more
information about the advantages and limitations of
each strategy.

7 Contributions
The studies of human-human conversations in this
thesis will advance current understanding of how
people entrain. We provide a cohesive picture of en-
trainment by directly comparing different measures
on a single corpus, establishing that entrainment is
both a global and a local phenomenon, that people
entrain by value rather than by direction, and that it
is a dynamic process, improving with the course of
a dialogue. We show that speaker pairs entrain in
a novel dimension, backchannel-inviting cues, and
that this entrainment is associated with task success
and dialogue coordination. We also show that the ef-
fect of entrainment is stronger in outlier cases, lend-
ing experimental support to the perception-behavior
link.

This work provides experimental results on the
utility of entrainment in conversations with both hu-
mans and spoken dialogue systems. In human con-
versations, we show that entrainment is correlated
with positive social characteristics and turn-taking
features. In our Wizard of Oz experiments, we will
show how entrainment affects a user’s perception of
the quality of a spoken dialogue system.

Finally, this work shows how the principles of en-
trainment can be used to actively improve spoken
dialogue systems. We will build a framework for
implementing the results of our studies of entrain-
ment in human conversations into prediction mod-
els, which we hypothesize will improve their accu-
racy and can be used to improve a system’s perfor-
mance. In our influencing experiments, we will at-
tempt to influence a user to speak in a way that will
optimize ASR performance simply by changing the
system’s own voice.

89



References
Linda Bell, Joakim Gustafson, and Mattias Heldner. Prosodic

adaptation in human-computer interaction. In Proceedings
of ICPHS’03, pages 833–836, 2003.

Susan E. Brennan and Herbert H. Clark. Conceptual pacts
and lexical choice in conversation. Journal of Experimen-
tal Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 22(6):
1482–1493, 1992.

T. L. Chartrand and J. A. Bargh. The chameleon effect: The
perception-behavior link and social interaction. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 76(6):893–910, 1999.

Rachel Coulston, Sharon Oviatt, and Courtney Darves. Am-
plitude convergence in children’s conversational speech with
animated personas. In Proceedings of ICSLP’02, 2002.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Michael Gamon, and Susan
Dumais. Mark my words! linguistic style accommodation in
social media. In Proceedings of WWW, 2011.

Andrew Fandrianto and Maxine Eskenazi. Prosodic entrain-
ment in an information-driven dialog system. In Proceedings
of Interspeech, 2012.

H. Giles, A. Mulac, J.J. Bradac, and P. Johnson. Speech accom-
modation theory: the first decade and beyond. Sage, Beverly
Hills, CA, 1987.

Agustı́n Gravano. Turn-taking and affirmative cue words in
task-oriented dialogue. PhD thesis, Columbia University,
2009.

Agustı́n Gravano and Julia Hirschberg. Backchannel-inviting
cues in task-oriented dialogue. In Proceedings of Inter-
speech, 2009.

Agustı́n Gravano, Rivka Levitan, Laura Willson, Stefan Benus,
Julia Hirschberg, and Ani Nenkova. Acoustic and prosodic
correlates of social behavior. In Proceedings of Interspeech,
2011.

Julia Hirschberg, Diane Litman, and Marc Swerts. Prosodic and
other cues to speech recognition failures. Speech Communi-
cation, 43:155–175, 2004.

Chi-Chun Lee, Matthew Black, Athanasios Katsamanis, Adam
Lammert, Brian Baucom, Andrew Christensen, Panayio-
tis G. Georgiou, and Shrikanth Narayanan. Quantification
of prosodic entrainment in affective spontaneous spoken in-
teractions of married couples. In Proceedings of Interspeech,
2010.

Rivka Levitan and Julia Hirschberg. Measuring acoustic-
prosodic entrainment with respect to multiple levels and di-
mensions. In Proceedings of Interspeech, 2011.

Rivka Levitan, Agustı́n Gravano, and Julia Hirschberg. Entrain-
ment in speech preceding backchannels. In Proceedings of
the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 2011.

Rivka Levitan, Agustı́n Gravano, Laura Willson, Stefan Benus,
Julia Hirschberg, and Ani Nenkova. Acoustic-prosodic
entrainment and social behavior. In Proceedings of the
2012 Conference of the North American Chapter of the

Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, pages 11–19, Montréal, Canada, June
2012. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/N12-1002.

José Lopes, Maxine Eskenazi, and Isabel Trancoso. To-
wards choosing better primes for spoken dialog systems. In
ASRU’11, pages 306–311, 2011.

Michael Natale. Convergence of mean vocal intensity in dyadic
communication as a function of social desirability. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 32(5):790–804, 1975.

Ani Nenkova, Agustı́n Gravano, and Julia Hirschberg. High
frequency word entrainment in spoken dialogue. In Proceed-
ings of ACL/HLT, 2008.

Kate G. Niederhoffer and James W. Pennebaker. Linguistic
style matching in social interaction. Journal of Language
and Social Psychology, 21(4):337–360, 2002.

Jennifer S. Pardo. On phonetic convergence during conversa-
tional interaction. Journal of the Acoustic Society of Amer-
ica, 19(4), 2006.

David Reitter and Johanna D. Moore. Predicting success in di-
alogue. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the
Association of Computational Linguistics, pages 808–815,
2007.

Svetlana Stoyanchev and Amanda Stent. Lexical and syntactic
priming and their impact in deployed spoken dialog systems.
In Proceedings of NAACL HLT, 2009.

Linda Tickle-Degnen and Robert Rosenthal. The nature of rap-
port and its nonverbal correlates. Psychological Inquiry, 1
(4):285–293, 1990.

Arthur Ward and Diane Litman. Measuring convergence and
priming in tutorial dialog. Technical report, University of
Pittsburgh, 2007.

90


