



















































Helpfulness-Guided Review Summarization


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2013 Student Research Workshop, pages 77–83,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Helpfulness-Guided Review Summarization

Wenting Xiong
University of Pittsburgh

210 South Bouquet Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15260
wex12@cs.pitt.edu

Abstract

Review mining and summarization has been
a hot topic for the past decade. A lot of ef-
fort has been devoted to aspect detection and
sentiment analysis under the assumption that
every review has the same utility for related
tasks. However, reviews are not equally help-
ful as indicated by user-provided helpfulness
assessment associated with the reviews. In
this thesis, we propose a novel review sum-
marization framework which summarizes re-
view content under the supervision of auto-
mated assessment of review helpfulness. This
helpfulness-guided framework can be easily
adapted to traditional review summarization
tasks, for a wide range of domains.

1 Introduction

Nowadays, as reviews thrive on the web, more and
more people wade through these online resources
to inform their own decision making. Due to the
rapid growth of the review volume, the ability of
automatically summarizing online reviews becomes
critical to allowing people to make use of them.
This makes review mining and summarization an
increasingly hot topic over the past decade. Gen-
erally speaking, there are two main paradigms in
review summarization. One is aspect-based opin-
ion summarization, which aims to differentiate and
summarize opinions regarding specific subject as-
pects. It usually involves fine-grained analysis of
both review topics and review sentiment. The other
is more summarization-oriented, prior work under
this category either assumes a shared topic or aims to

produce general summaries. In this case, the focus
is the summarization, extracting salient information
from reviews and organizing them properly. Com-
pared with traditional text summarizers, sentiment-
informed summarizers generally perform better as
shown by human evaluation results (Carenini et al.,
2006; Lerman et al., 2009).

However, one implicit assumption shared by most
prior work is that all reviews are of the same util-
ity in review summarization tasks, while reviews
that comment on the same aspect and are associ-
ated with the same rating may have difference in-
fluence to users, as indicated by user-provided help-
fulness assessment (e.g. “helpful” votes on Ama-
zon.com). We believe that user-generated helpful-
ness votes/ratings suggest people’s point of interest
in review exploration. Intuitively, when users re-
fer to online reviews for guidance, reviews that are
considered helpful by more people naturally receive
more attention and credit, and thus should be given
more weight in review summarization. Following
this intuition, we hypothesize that introducing re-
view helpfulness information into review summa-
rization can yield more useful review summaries.

In addition, we are also motivated by the chal-
lenges that we faced when summarizing educational
peer reviews in which the review entity is also text.
In the peer-review domain, traditional algorithms
of identifying review aspects may suffer as reviews
contain both reviewers’ evaluations of a paper and
reviewers’ references to the paper. Such heteroge-
neous sources of review content bring challenges to
aspect identification, and the educational perspective
of peer review directly affects the characteristics of

77



desired summaries, which has not ye been taken into
consideration in any of the current summarization
techniques. We expect the helpfulness assessment
of peer reviews can identify important information
that should be captured in peer-review summaries.

2 Related work

The proposed work is grounded in the following
areas: review-helpfulness analysis, review summa-
rization and supervised topic modeling. In this sec-
tion, we will discuss existing work in the literature
and explain how the proposed work relates to them.

2.1 Review-helpfulness analysis

In the literature, most researchers take a supervised
approach in modeling review helpfulness. They ei-
ther aggregate binary helpfulness votes for each re-
view into a numerical score, or directly use numer-
ical helpfulness ratings. Kim et. al (2006) took the
first attempt, using regression to model review help-
fulness based on various linguistic features. They
reported that the combination of review length, re-
view unigrams and product rating statistics per-
formed best. Along this line, other studies showed
the perceived review helpfulness depends not only
on the review content, but also on some other fac-
tors. Ghose et. al (2008) found that the reviewer’s
reviewing history also matters. However, they ob-
served that review-subjectivity, review-readability
and other reviewer-related features are interchange-
able for predicting review helpfulness. In addition,
the empirical study on Amazon reviews conducted
by Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et. al (2009) revealed
that the perceived helpfulness is also affected by
how a review relates to the other reviews of the same
product. However, given our goal of using review
helpfulness assessment to guide summarization to-
wards generating more useful summaries rather than
to explain each individual helpfulness rating, we
will ignore the interaction of helpfulness assessment
among reviews of the same target.

Furthermore, the utility of features in modeling
review helpfulness may vary with the review do-
main. Mudambi et. al (2010) showed that for
product reviews, the product type moderates both
the product ratings and review length on the per-
ceived review helpfulness. For educational peer re-

views, in X (2011) we showed that cognitive con-
structs which predict feedback implementation can
further improve our helpfulness model upon general
linguistic features. These findings seem to suggest
that the review helpfulness model should be domain-
dependent, due to the specific semantics of “helpful-
ness” defined in context of the domain.

2.2 Review summarization

One major paradigm of review summarization is
aspect-based summarization, which is based on
identifying aspects and associating opinion senti-
ment with them. (Although this line of work is
closely related to sentiment analysis, it is not the
focus of this proposed work.) While initially peo-
ple use information retrieval techniques to recog-
nize aspect terms and opinion expressions (Hu and
Liu, 2004; Popescu and Etzioni, 2005), recent work
seems to favor generative statistical models more
(Mei et al., 2007; Lu and Zhai, 2008; Titov and Mc-
Donald, 2008b; Titov and McDonald, 2008a; Blei
and McAuliffe, 2010; Brody and Elhadad, 2010;
Mukherjee and Liu, 2012; Sauper and Barzilay,
2013). One typical problem with these models is
that many discovered aspects are not meaningful to
end-users. Some of these studies focus on distin-
guishing aspects in terms of sentiment variation by
modeling aspects together with sentiment (Titov and
McDonald, 2008a; Lu and Zhai, 2008; Mukherjee
and Liu, 2012; Sauper and Barzilay, 2013). How-
ever, little attention is given to differentiating review
content directly regarding their utilities in review
exploration. Mukherjee and Liu (2012) attempted
to address this issue by introducing user-provided
aspect terms as seeds for learning review aspects,
though this approach might not be easily generalized
to other domains, as users’ point of interest could
vary with the review domain.

Another paradigm of review summarization is
more summarization-oriented. In contrast, such ap-
proaches do not require the step of identifying as-
pects, instead, they either assume the input text share
the same aspect or aim to produce general sum-
maries. These studies are closely related to the tra-
ditional NLP task of text summarization. Generally
speaking, the goal of text summarization is to retain
the most important points of the input text within a
shorter length. Either extractively or abstractively,

78



one important task is to determine the informative-
ness of a text element. In addition to reducing in-
formation redundancy, different heuristics were pro-
posed within the context of opinion summarization.
Stoyanov and Cardie (2008) focused on identifying
opinion entities (opinion, source, target) and pre-
senting them in a structured way (templates or di-
agrams). Lerman et. al (2009) reported that users
preferred sentiment informed summaries based on
their analysis of human evaluation of various sum-
marization models, while Kim and Zhai (2009) fur-
ther considered an effective review summary as rep-
resentative contrastive opinion pairs. Different from
all above, Ganesan et. al (2010) represented text
input as token-based graphs based on the token or-
der in the string. They rank summary candidates by
scoring paths after removing redundant information
from the graph. For any summarization framework
discussed above, the helpfulness of the review ele-
ments (e.g. sentences, opinion entities, or words),
which can be derived from the review overall help-
fulness, captures informativeness from another di-
mension that has not been taken into account yet.

2.3 Supervised content modeling

As review summarization is meant to help users ac-
quire useful information effectively, what and how
to summarize may vary with user needs. To discover
user preferences, Ando and Ishizaki (2012) man-
ually analyzed travel reviews to identify the most
influential review sentences objectively and subjec-
tively, while Mukherjee and Liu (2012) extract and
categorize review aspects through semi-supervised
modeling using user-provided seeds (categories of
terms). In contrast, we are interested in using user-
provided helpfulness ratings for guidance. As these
helpfulness ratings are existing meta data of reviews,
we will need no additional input from users. Specif-
ically, we propose to use supervised LDA (Blei and
McAuliffe, 2010) to model review content under the
supervision of review helpfulness ratings. Similar
approach is widely adopted in sentiment analysis,
where review aspects are learned in the presence
of sentiment predictions (Blei and McAuliffe, 2010;
Titov and McDonald, 2008a). Furthermore, Brana-
van et. al (2009) showed that joint modeling of text
and user annotations benefits extractive summariza-
tion. Therefore, we hypothesize modeling review

content together with review helpfulness is benefi-
cial to review summarization as well.

3 Data

We plan to experiment on three representative re-
view domains: product reviews, book reviews and
peer reviews. The first one is mostly studied, while
the later two types are more complex, as the review
content consists of both reviewer’s evaluations of the
target and reviewer’s references to the target, which
is also text. This property makes review summariza-
tion more challenging.

For product reviews and book reviews, we plan
to use Amazon reviews provided by Jindal and Liu
(2008), which is a widely used data set in review
mining and sentiment analysis. We consider the
helpfulness assessment of an Amazon review as the
ratio of “helpful” votes over all votes (Kim et al.,
2006). For educational peer reviews, we plan to use
an annotated corpus (Nelson and Schunn, 2009) col-
lected from an online peer-review reciprocal system,
which we used in our prior work (Xiong and Litman,
2011). Two experts (a writing instructor and a con-
tent instructor) were asked to rate the helpfulness of
each peer review on a scale from one to five (Pearson
correlation r = 0.425, p ≤ 0.01). For our study, we
consider the average ratings given by the two experts
(which roughly follow a normal distribution) as the
gold standard of review helpfulness ratings. To be
consistent with the other review domains, we nor-
malize peer-review helpfulness ratings in the range
between 0 and 1.

4 Proposed work

The proposed thesis work consists of three parts:
1) review content analysis using user-provided help-
fulness ratings, 2) automatically predicting review
helpfulness and 3) a helpfulness-guided review sum-
marization framework.

4.1 Review content analysis

Before advocating the proposed idea, we would test
our two hypothesis: 1) user-provided review help-
fulness assessment reflects review content differ-
ence. 2) Considering review content in terms of in-
ternal content (e.g. reviewers’ opinions) vs. exter-
nal content (e.g. book content), the internal content

79



influences the perceived review helpfulness more
than the external content.

We propose to use two kind of instruments, one is
Linguistic Inquiry Word Count (LIWC)1, which is
a manually created dictionary of words; the other is
the set of review topics learned by Latent Dirich-
let Allocation (LDA) (Blei et al., 2003; Blei and
McAuliffe, 2010). LIWC analyzes text input based
on language usages both syntactically and semanti-
cally, which reveals review content patterns at a high
level; LDA can be used to model sentence-level re-
view topics which are domain specific.

For the LIWC-based analysis, we test whether
each category count has a significant effect on the
numerical helpfulness ratings using paired T-test.
For LDA-based analysis, we demonstrate the dif-
ference by show how the learned topics vary when
helpfulness information is introduced as supervi-
sion. Specifically, by comparing the topics learned
from the unsupervised LDA and those learned from
the supervised LDA (with helpfulness ratings), we
expect to show that the supervision of helpfulness
ratings can yield more meaningful aspect clusters.

It is important to note that in both approaches
a review is considered as a bag of words, which
might be problematic if the review has both internal
and external content. Considering this, we hypoth-
esize that the content difference captured by user-
provided helpfulness ratings is mainly in the review-
ers’ evaluation rather than in the content of external
sources (hypothesis 2). We plan to test this hypoth-
esis on both book reviews and peer reviews by ana-
lyzing review content in two conditions: in the first
condition (the control condition), all content is pre-
served; in the second condition, the external content
is excluded. If we observe more content variance
in the second condition than the first one, the sec-
ond hypothesis is true. Thus we will separate review
internal and external content in the later summariza-
tion step. For simplification, in the second condi-
tion, we only consider the topic words of the exter-
nal content; we plan to use a corpus-based approach
to identify these topic terms and filter them out to
reduce the impact of external content.

1Url: http://www.liwc.net. We are using LIWC2007.

4.2 Automated review helpfulness assessment

Considering how review usefulness would be inte-
grated in the proposed summarization framework,
we propose two models for predicting review help-
fulness at different levels of granularity.

A discriminative model to learn review global
helpfulness. Previously we (2011) built a discrim-
inative model for predicting the helpfulness of ed-
ucational peer reviews based on prior work of au-
tomatically predicting review helpfulness of prod-
uct reviews (Kim et al., 2006). We considered both
domain-general features and domain-specific fea-
tures. The domain-general features include structure
features (e.g. review length), semantic features, and
descriptive statistics of the product ratings (Kim et
al., 2006); the domain-specific features include the
percentage of external content in reviews and cog-
nitive and social science features that are specific
to the peer-review domain. To extend this idea to
other types of reviews: for product reviews, we con-
sider product aspect-related terms as the topic words
of the external content; for book reviews, we take
into account author’s profile information (number
of books, the mean average book ratings). As we
showed that replacing review unigrams with manu-
ally crafted keyword categories can further improve
the helpfulness model of peer reviews, we plan to
investigate whether review unigrams are generally
replaceable by review LIWC features for modeling
review helpfulness.

A generative model to learn review local help-
fulness. In order to utilize user-provided helpfulness
information in a decomposable fashion, we propose
to use sLDA (Blei and McAuliffe, 2010) to model
review content with review helpfulness information
at the review level, so that the learned latent topics
will be predictive of review helpfulness. In addition
to evaluating the model’s predictive power and the
quality of the learned topics, we will also investi-
gate the extent to which the model’s performance is
affected by the size of the training set, as we may
need to use automatically predicted review helpful-
ness instead, if user-provided helpfulness informa-
tion is not available.

80



4.3 Helpfulness-guided review summarization

In the proposed work, we plan to investigate various
methods of supervising an extractive review summa-
rizer using the proposed helpfulness models. The
simplest method (M1) is to control review helpful-
ness of the summarization input by removing re-
views that are predicted of low helpfulness. A sim-
ilar method (M2) is to use post-processing rather
than pre-processing – reorder the selected summary
candidates (e.g. sentences) based on their predicted
helpfulness. The helpfulness of a summary sentence
can be either inferred from the local-helpfulness
model (sLDA), or aggregated from review-level
helpfulness ratings of the review(s) from which the
sentence is extracted. The third one (M3) works
together with a specific summarization algorithm,
interpolating traditional informativeness assessment
with novel helpfulness metrics based on the pro-
posed helpfulness models.

For demonstration, we plan to prototype the pro-
posed framework based on MEAD* (Carenini et al.,
2006), which is an extension of MEAD (an open-
source framework for multi-document summariza-
tion (Radev et al., 2004)) for summarizing evalu-
ative text. MEAD* defines sentence informative-
ness based on features extracted through standard
aspect-based review mining (Hu and Liu, 2004). As
a human-centric design, we plan to evaluate the pro-
posed framework in a user study in terms of pair-
wise comparison of the reviews generated by differ-
ent summarizers (M1, M2, M3 and MEAD*). Al-
though fully automated summarization metrics are
available (e.g. Jensen-Shannon Divergence (Louis
and Nenkova, 2009)), they favor summaries that
have a similar word distribution to the input and thus
do not suit our task of review summarization.

To show the generality of the proposed ideas, we
plan to evaluate the utility of introducing review
helpfulness in aspect ranking as well, which is an
important sub-task of review opinion analysis. If
our hypothesis (1) is true, we would expect aspect
ranking based on helpfulness-involved metrics out-
performing the baseline which does not use review
helpfulness (Yu et al., 2011). This evaluation will
be done on product reviews and peer reviews, as the
previous work was based on product reviews, while
peer reviews tend to have an objective aspect rank-

ing (provided by domain experts).

5 Contributions

The proposed thesis mainly contributes to review
mining and summarization.

1. Investigate the impact of the source of review
content on review helpfulness. While a lot of
studies focus on product reviews, we based our
analysis on a wider range of domains, including
peer reviews, which have not been well studied
before.

2. Propose two models to automatically assess re-
view helpfulness at different levels of granu-
larity. While the review-level global helpful-
ness model takes into account domain-specific
semantics of helpfulness of reviews, the lo-
cal helpfulness model learns review helpfulness
jointly with review topics. This local helpful-
ness model allows us to decompose overall re-
view helpfulness into small elements, so that
review helpfulness can be easily combined with
metrics of other dimensions in assessing the
importance of summarization candidates.

3. Propose a user-centric review summarization
framework that utilizes user-provided helpful-
ness assessment as supervision. Compared
with previous work, we take a data driven ap-
proach in modeling review helpfulness as well
as helpfulness-related topics, which requires
no extra human input of user-preference and
can be adapted to typical review summarization
tasks such as aspect selection/ranking, sum-
mary sentence ordering, etc.

References
M. Ando and S. Ishizaki. 2012. Analysis of travel re-

view data from readers point of view. WASSA 2012,
page 47.

D.M. Blei and J.D. McAuliffe. 2010. Supervised topic
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1003.0783.

D.M. Blei, A.Y. Ng, and M.I. Jordan. 2003. Latent
dirichlet allocation. the Journal of machine Learning
research, 3:993–1022.

SRK Branavan, H. Chen, J. Eisenstein, and R. Barzilay.
2009. Learning document-level semantic properties

81



from free-text annotations. Journal of Artificial Intel-
ligence Research, 34(2):569.

S. Brody and N. Elhadad. 2010. An unsupervised aspect-
sentiment model for online reviews. In Human Lan-
guage Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 804–812. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

G. Carenini, R. Ng, and A. Pauls. 2006. Multi-document
summarization of evaluative text. In In Proceedings
of the 11st Conference of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics. Citeseer.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Gueorgi Kossinets,
Jon Kleinber g, and Lillian Lee. 2009. How opin-
ions are received by online communities: A case study
on Amazon .com helpfulness votes. In Proceedings of
WWW, pages 141–150.

Kavita Ganesan, ChengXiang Zhai, and Jiawei Han.
2010. Opinosis: a graph-based approach to abstrac-
tive summarization of highly redundant opinions. In
Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, COLING ’10, pages 340–
348, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Anindya Ghose and Panagiotis G. Ipeirotis. 2008. Esti-
mating the socio-economic impact of product reviews.
In NYU Stern Research Working Paper CeDER.

M. Hu and B. Liu. 2004. Mining and summarizing
customer reviews. In Proceedings of the tenth ACM
SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge dis-
covery and data mining, pages 168–177. ACM.

N. Jindal and B. Liu. 2008. Opinion spam and analysis.
In Proceedings of the international conference on Web
search and web data mining, pages 219–230.

H.D. Kim and C.X. Zhai. 2009. Generating comparative
summaries of contradictory opinions in text. In Pro-
ceedings of the 18th ACM conference on Information
and knowledge management, pages 385–394. ACM.

Soo-Min Kim, Patrick Pantel, Tim Chklovski, and Marco
Pennacchiotti. 2006. Automatically assessing review
helpfulness. In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP2006), pages 423–430, Sydney, Australia,
July.

K. Lerman, S. Blair-Goldensohn, and R. McDonald.
2009. Sentiment summarization: Evaluating and
learning user preferences. In Proceedings of the 12th
Conference of the European Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, pages 514–522.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Annie Louis and Ani Nenkova. 2009. Automatically
evaluating content selection in summarization without

human models. In Proceedings of the 2009 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing: Volume 1-Volume 1, pages 306–314. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Y. Lu and C. Zhai. 2008. Opinion integration through
semi-supervised topic modeling. In Proceedings of
the 17th international conference on World Wide Web,
pages 121–130. ACM.

Q. Mei, X. Ling, M. Wondra, H. Su, and C.X. Zhai. 2007.
Topic sentiment mixture: modeling facets and opin-
ions in weblogs. In Proceedings of the 16th interna-
tional conference on World Wide Web, pages 171–180.
ACM.

S.M. Mudambi and D. Schuff. 2010. What makes a
helpful online review? a study of customer reviews
on amazon. com. MIS quarterly, 34(1):185–200.

A. Mukherjee and B. Liu. 2012. aspect extraction
through semi-supervised modeling. In Proceedings of
50th anunal meeting of association for computational
Linguistics (acL-2012)(accepted for publication).

Melissa M. Nelson and Christian D. Schunn. 2009. The
nature of feedback: how different types of peer feed-
back affect writing performance. In Instructional Sci-
ence, volume 37, pages 375–401.

A.M. Popescu and O. Etzioni. 2005. Extracting product
features and opinions from reviews. In Proceedings of
the conference on Human Language Technology and
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 339–346. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

D. Radev, T. Allison, S. Blair-Goldensohn, J. Blitzer,
A. Celebi, S. Dimitrov, E. Drabek, A. Hakim, W. Lam,
D. Liu, et al. 2004. Mead-a platform for multidocu-
ment multilingual text summarization. In Proceedings
of LREC, volume 2004.

C. Sauper and R. Barzilay. 2013. Automatic aggregation
by joint modeling of aspects and values. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research, 46:89–127.

V. Stoyanov and C. Cardie. 2008. Topic identification
for fine-grained opinion analysis. In Proceedings of
the 22nd International Conference on Computational
Linguistics-Volume 1, pages 817–824. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

I. Titov and R. McDonald. 2008a. A joint model of text
and aspect ratings for sentiment summarization. Ur-
bana, 51:61801.

I. Titov and R. McDonald. 2008b. Modeling online re-
views with multi-grain topic models. In Proceedings
of the 17th international conference on World Wide
Web, pages 111–120. ACM.

Wenting Xiong and Diane Litman. 2011. Automatically
predicting peer-review helpfulness. In Proceedings of

82



the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies, pages 502–507.

J. Yu, Z.J. Zha, M. Wang, and T.S. Chua. 2011. Aspect
ranking: identifying important product aspects from
online consumer reviews. Computational Linguistics,
pages 1496–1505.

83


