



















































DALE: A Word Sense Disambiguation System for Biomedical Documents Trained using Automatically Labeled Examples


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2013 Demonstration Session, pages 1–4,
Atlanta, Georgia, 10-12 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

DALE: A Word Sense Disambiguation System for Biomedical Documents
Trained using Automatically Labeled Examples

Judita Preiss and Mark Stevenson
Department of Computer Science, University of Sheffield

Regent Court, 211 Portobello
Sheffield S1 4DP, United Kingdom

j.preiss,m.stevenson@dcs.shef.ac.uk

Abstract

Automatic interpretation of documents is
hampered by the fact that language contains
terms which have multiple meanings. These
ambiguities can still be found when language
is restricted to a particular domain, such as
biomedicine. Word Sense Disambiguation
(WSD) systems attempt to resolve these am-
biguities but are often only able to identify the
meanings for a small set of ambiguous terms.
DALE (Disambiguation using Automatically
Labeled Examples) is a supervised WSD sys-
tem that can disambiguate a wide range of
ambiguities found in biomedical documents.
DALE uses the UMLS Metathesaurus as both
a sense inventory and as a source of infor-
mation for automatically generating labeled
training examples. DALE is able to disam-
biguate biomedical documents with the cover-
age of unsupervised approaches and accuracy
of supervised methods.

1 Introduction

Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) is an impor-
tant challenge for any automatic text processing sys-
tem since language contains ambiguous terms which
can be difficult to interpret. Ambiguous terms that
are found in biomedical documents include words,
phrases and abbreviations (Schuemie et al., 2005).
Identifying the correct interpretation of ambiguous
terms is important to ensure that the text can be pro-
cessed appropriately.

Many WSD systems developed for biomedical
documents are based on supervised learning, for ex-
ample (McInnes et al., 2007; Martinez and Baldwin,

2011); these have the advantage of being more accu-
rate than unsupervised approaches. However, WSD
systems based on supervised learning rely on man-
ually labeled examples consisting of instances of an
ambiguous term marked with their correct interpre-
tations. Manually labeled examples are very expen-
sive to create and are consequently only available for
a few hundred terms, with each new domain (with
its specialist vocabulary) needing new examples la-
beled. The majority of supervised WSD systems are
limited to resolving a small number of ambiguous
terms and, despite their accuracy, are not suitable for
use within applications.

An alternative approach is to use automatically
labeled examples which can be generated without
manual annotation (Leacock et al., 1998). These
have been used to generate an all-words WSD sys-
tem that assigns senses from WordNet (Zhong and
Ng, 2010). For biomedical documents the UMLS
Metathesaurus (Humphreys et al., 1998b) is a more
suitable lexical resource than WordNet and tech-
niques have been developed to create automatically
labeled examples for this resource (Stevenson and
Guo, 2010). However, to date, automatically labeled
examples have only been used as substitutes for am-
biguous terms for which manually labeled examples
are not available, rather than using them to create a
WSD system that can resolve a wider range of am-
biguities in biomedical documents.

DALE (Disambiguation using Automatically La-
beled Examples) is an online WSD system for
biomedical documents that was developed by creat-
ing automatically labeled examples for all ambigu-
ous terms in the UMLS Metathesaurus. DALE is

1



able to identify a meaning for any term that is am-
biguous in the Metathesaurus and therefore has far
greater coverage of ambiguous terms than other su-
pervised WSD systems. Other all-words WSD sys-
tems for biomedical documents are unsupervised
and do not have as high accuracy as supervised ap-
proaches, e.g. (McInnes, 2008; Agirre et al., 2010).
An unsupervised WSD algorithm (Humphreys et al.,
1998a) is included in MetaMap (Aronson and Lang,
2010) but is unable to resolve all types of sense dis-
tinction.

2 The DALE System

2.1 Automatically Labeling Examples

DALE assigns Concept Unique Identifiers (CUIs)
from the UMLS Metathesaurus. The WSD algo-
rithm in DALE is based around a supervised algo-
rithm (Stevenson et al., 2008) trained using automat-
ically labeled examples. The examples are gener-
ated using two methods: Monosemous relatives and
Co-occurring concepts (Stevenson and Guo, 2010).
Both approaches take a single CUI, c, as input and
use information from the UMLS Metathesaurus to
search Medline and identify instances of c that can
be used as labeled examples. The difference be-
tween the two approaches is that they make use of
different information from the Metathesaurus.

Both approaches are provided with a set of
ambiguous CUIs from the UMLS Metathesaurus,
which represent the possible meanings of an am-
biguous term, and a target number of training ex-
amples to be generated for each CUI. The UMLS
Metathesaurus contains a number of data files which
are exploited within these techniques, including: 1.
AMBIGLUI: a list of cases where a LUI, a particular
lexical variant of a term, is linked to multiple CUIs;
2. MRCON: list of all strings and concept names in
the Metathesaurus; 3. MRCOC: co-occurring con-
cepts.

For the monosemous relatives approach, the
strings of monosemous LUIs of the target CUI and
its relatives are used to search Medline to retrieve
training examples. The monosemous LUIs related
to a CUI are defined as any LUIs associated with the
CUI in MRCON table and not listed in AMBIGLUI
table. For example, one of the LUIs associated with
CUI “C0028707” is L0875433 “Nutrition Science”

in MRCON table. It is not listed in AMBIGLUI ta-
ble and therefore considered to be a monosemous
LUI of CUI “C0028707”. The string “Nutrition
Science” can be used to identify examples of CUI
“C0028707”.

The co-occurring concept approach works differ-
ently: instead of using strings of monosemous LUIs
of the target CUI and its relatives, the strings associ-
ated with LUIs of a number of co-occurring CUIs
of the target CUI and its relatives found in MR-
COC table are used. For instance, “C0025520”,
“C1524024” and “C0079107” are the top three co-
occurring CUIs of CUI “C0015677” in MRCOC ta-
ble. The strings associated with LUIs of these
three CUIs can be used to retrieve examples of CUI
“C0015677” by searching for abstracts containing
all the LUIs of the co-occurring CUIs.

These approaches were used to create labeled
examples for ambiguous CUIs in the 2010AB,
2011AA, 2011AB and 2012AA versions of the
UMLS Metathesaurus. Examples could be gener-
ated for 95.2%, 96.2%, 96.2% and 98% of the CUIs
in each version of the Metathesaurus respectively.
Neither technique was able to generate examples for
the remaining CUIs, however none of these CUIs ap-
pear in the corresponding MetaMapped version of
the Medline Baseline Repository (http://mbr.
nlm.nih.gov), suggesting these CUIs do not tend
to be mentioned within documents. 100 examples
were generated for each CUI since using an equal
number of examples for each CUI produces the best
WSD performance in the absence of other informa-
tion about the likelihood of each CUI (Cheng et al.,
2012).

The labeled examples are converted into feature
vectors consisting of lemmas of all content words in
the same sentence as the ambiguous word and, in
addition, the lemmas of all content words in a ±4-
word window around it. A single feature vector is
created for each CUI by taking the centroid of the
feature vectors created from the labeled examples of
that CUI. These vectors are stored in the Centroid
Database for later use.

2.2 Word Sense Disambiguation
WSD of an ambiguous term is carried out by com-
piling a list of all its possible CUIs and comparing
their centroids against a feature vector created from

2



Figure 1: DALE system diagram showing the stages in
the WSD process

the sentence containing the ambiguous term. Pro-
cessing is carried out in multiple stages (see Fig.
1). MetaMap (Aronson and Lang, 2010) is applied
to the text to identify ambiguous terms (identify-
ing terms includes some level of multiword detec-
tion) and their possible CUIs (UMLS lookup of the
identified terms). The input text is also fed into a
pipeline to carry out sentence splitting, tokenization,
part-of-speech tagging and morphological analysis.
Information added by this pipeline is used to cre-
ate a feature vector for each ambiguous term identi-
fied by MetaMap. Finally, the Word Sense Disam-
biguation module uses cosine similarity to compare
the centroid of each possible CUI of the ambiguous
term (retrieved from the Centroid Database) with the
ambiguous term’s feature vector (Stevenson et al.,
2008). The most similar CUI is selected for each
ambiguous term.

2.3 Online System

DALE is available as a web service with multiple
interfaces:

The Interactive interface enables a user to submit
a piece of text to the system and view the result in an
intuitive way. Terms in the result are marked accord-
ing to their polysemy: blue denotes that it has only
one meaning in Metathesaurus (i.e. is not ambigu-
ous) while green means that it has multiple mean-
ings. Rolling the mouse over the highlighted items
provides access to additional information in a tooltip
style window, including the set of possible CUIs
and their preferred names. Clicking on one of these
CUIs links to the appropriate page from the UMLS

Terminology Services (http://uts.nlm.nih.
gov/). The CUI chosen by the WSD process is
shown underlined at the bottom of the window. The
result is also available in XML format which can be
downloaded by clicking a link in the result page.

The Batch interface is more suitable for disam-
biguating large amounts of texts. A user can upload
plain text files to be processed by DALE using the
batch interface. The results will be sent to user’s
email address in XML format as soon as the system
finishes processing the file. This interface is sup-
ported by a Job management interface. A job is cre-
ated every time a user uploads a file and each job as-
signed the status of being either “Waiting” or “Run-
ning”. The user is also emailed a pin code allowing
them to access this interface to check the status of
their jobs and cancel any waiting jobs.

3 Conclusion

This paper describes DALE, a WSD system for
the biomedical domain based on automatically la-
beled examples. The system is able to disambiguate
all ambiguous terms found in the UMLS Metathe-
saurus. A freely accessible web service is available
and offers a set of easy to use interfaces. We intend
to update DALE with new versions of the UMLS
Metathesaurus as they become available.

The DALE system is available at http://kta.
rcweb.dcs.shef.ac.uk/dale/

Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to Weiwei Cheng for his
work on the development of the original version of
the DALE system. The development of DALE was
funded by the UK Engineering and Physical Sci-
ences Research Council (grants EP/H500170/1 and
EP/J008427/1) and by a Google Research Award.
We would also like to thank the three reviewers
whose feedback has improved the clarity of this pa-
per.

References
E. Agirre, A. Sora, and M. Stevenson. 2010. Graph-

based word sense disambiguation of biomedical docu-
ments. Bioinformatics, 26(22):2889–2896.

A. Aronson and F. Lang. 2010. An overview
of MetaMap: historical perspective and recent ad-

3



Figure 2: Disambiguation results shown in DALE’s Interactive Interface with the ambiguous term ‘cold’ selected.
DALE shows the three possible CUIs for ‘cold’ identified by MetaMap with the selected CUI (C0009443) highlighted

vances. Journal of the American Medical Association,
17(3):229–236.

W. Cheng, J. Preiss, and M. Stevenson. 2012. Scal-
ing up WSD with Automatically Generated Examples.
In BioNLP: Proceedings of the 2012 Workshop on
Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages 231–
239, Montréal, Canada.

K. Humphreys, R. Gaizauskas, S. Azzam, C. Huyck,
B. Mitchell, H. Cunningham, and Y. Wilks. 1998a.
Description of the LaSIE-II System used in MUC-7.
In Proceedings of the Seventh Message Understanding
Conference (MUC-7).

L. Humphreys, D. Lindberg, H. Schoolman, and G. Bar-
nett. 1998b. The Unified Medical Language System:
An Informatics Research Collaboration. Journal of the
American Medical Informatics Association, 1(5):1–11.

C. Leacock, M. Chodorow, and G. Miller. 1998. Us-
ing Corpus Statistics and WordNet Relations for Sense
Identification. Computational Linguistics, 24(1):147–
165.

D. Martinez and T. Baldwin. 2011. Word sense
disambiguation for event trigger word detection in
biomedicine. BMC Bioinformatics, 12(Suppl 2):S4.

B. McInnes, T. Pedersen, and J. Carlis. 2007. Using
UMLS Concept Unique Identifiers (CUIs) for Word
Sense Disambiguation in the Biomedical Domain. In

Proceedings of the Annual Symposium of the Ameri-
can Medical Informatics Association, pages 533–537,
Chicago, IL.

Bridget McInnes. 2008. An unsupervised vector ap-
proach to biomedical term disambiguation: Integrat-
ing UMLS and Medline. In Proceedings of the ACL-
08: HLT Student Research Workshop, pages 49–54,
Columbus, Ohio, June. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

M. Schuemie, J. Kors, and B. Mons. 2005. Word Sense
Disambiguation in the Biomedical Domain. Journal
of Computational Biology, 12, 5:554–565.

M. Stevenson and Y. Guo. 2010. Disambiguation of Am-
biguous Biomedical Terms using Examples Generated
from the UMLS Metathesaurus. Journal of Biomedi-
cal Informatics, 43(5):762–773.

M. Stevenson, Y. Guo, R. Gaizauskas, and D. Martinez.
2008. Disambiguation of biomedical text using di-
verse sources of information. BMC Bioinformatics,
9(Suppl 11):S7.

Z. Zhong and H. Ng. 2010. It makes sense: A wide-
coverage word sense disambiguation system for free
text. In Proceedings of the ACL 2010 System Demon-
strations, pages 78–83, Uppsala, Sweden.

4


