










































Towards Topic Labeling with Phrase Entailment and Aggregation


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2013, pages 179–189,
Atlanta, Georgia, 9–14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Towards Topic Labeling with Phrase Entailment and Aggregation

Yashar Mehdad Giuseppe Carenini Raymond T. Ng Shafiq Joty
Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia

Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z4, Canada
{mehdad, carenini, rng, rjoty}@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract

We propose a novel framework for topic la-
beling that assigns the most representative
phrases for a given set of sentences cover-
ing the same topic. We build an entailment
graph over phrases that are extracted from the
sentences, and use the entailment relations to
identify and select the most relevant phrases.
We then aggregate those selected phrases by
means of phrase generalization and merging.
We motivate our approach by applying over
conversational data, and show that our frame-
work improves performance significantly over
baseline algorithms.

1 Introduction

Given text segments about the same topic written in
different ways (i.e., language variability), topic la-
beling deals with the problem of automatically gen-
erating semantically meaningful labels for those text
segments. The potential of integrating topic label-
ing as a prerequisite for higher-level analysis has
been reported in several areas, such as summariza-
tion (Harabagiu and Lacatusu, 2010; Kleinbauer et
al., 2007; Dias et al., 2007), information extraction
(Allan, 2002) and conversation visualization (Liu
et al., 2012). Moreover, the huge amount of tex-
tual data generated everyday specifically in conver-
sations (e.g., emails and blogs) calls for automated
methods to analyze and re-organize them into mean-
ingful coherent clusters.

Table 1 shows an example of two human written
topic labels for a topic cluster collected from a blog1,

1http://slashdot.org

Text: a: Where do you think the term “Horse laugh” comes
from?
b: And that rats also giggled when tickled.
c: My hypothesis- if an animal can play, it can “laugh” or at
least it is familiar with the concept of “laughing”.
Many animals play. There are various sorts of humour though.
Some involve you laughing because your brain suddenly made
a lots of unexpected connections.
Possible extracted phrases: animals play, rats have, laugh,
Horse laugh, rats also giggle, rats
Human-authored topic labels: animals which laugh, animal
laughter

Table 1: Topic labeling example.

and possible phrases that can be extracted from the
topic cluster using different approaches. This ex-
ample demonstrates that although most approaches
(Mei et al., 2007; Lau et al., 2011; Branavan et al.,
2007) advocate extracting phrase-level topic labels
from the text segments, topically related text seg-
ments do not always contain one keyword or key
phrase that can capture the meaning of the topic. As
shown in this example, such labels do not exist in the
original text and cannot be extracted using the exist-
ing probabilistic models (e.g., (Mei et al., 2007)).
The same problem can be observed with many other
examples. This suggests the idea of aggregating and
generating topic labels, instead of simply extracting
them, as a challenging scenario for this field of re-
search.

Moreover, to generate a label for a topic we have
to be able to capture the overall meaning of a topic.
However, most current methods disregard semantic
relations, in favor of statistical models of word dis-
tributions and frequencies. This calls for the integra-

179



tion of semantic models for topic labeling.
Towards the solution of the mentioned problems,

in this paper we focus on two novel contributions:
1. Phrase aggregation. We propose to generate
topic labels using the extracted information by pro-
ducing the most representative phrases for each text
segment. We perform this task in two steps. First,
we generalize some lexically diverse concepts in
the extracted phrases. Second, we aggregate and
generate new phrases that can semantically imply
more than one original extracted phrase. For ex-
ample, the phrase “rats also giggle” and “horse
laugh” should be merged into a new phrase “animals
laugh”. Although our method is still relying on ex-
tracting phrases, we move beyond current extractive
approaches, by generating new phrases through gen-
eralization and aggregation of the extracted ones.
2. Building a multidirectional entailment graph
over the extracted phrases to identify and select the
relevant information. We set such problem as an
application-oriented variant of the Textual Entail-
ment (TE) recognition task (Dagan and Glickman,
2004), to identify the information that are seman-
tically equivalent, novel, or more informative with
respect to the content of the others. In this way, we
prune the redundant and less informative text por-
tions (e.g., phrases), and produce semantically in-
formed phrases for the generation phase. In the case
of the example in Table 1, we eliminate phrases such
as “rats have”, “rats” and “laugh” while keeping
“animal play”, “Horse laugh” and “rats also gig-
gle”.

The experimental results over conversational data
sets show that, in all cases, our approach outper-
forms other models significantly. Although conver-
sational data are known to be challenging (Carenini
et al., 2011), we choose to test our method on con-
versations because this is a genre in which topic
modeling is critically needed, as conversations lack
the structure and organization of, for instance, edited
monologues. The results indicate that our frame-
work is sufficiently robust to deal with topic labeling
in less structured, informal genres (when compared
with edited monologues). As an additional result of
our experiments, we show that the identification and
selection phase using semantic relations (entailment
graph) is a necessary step to perform the final step
(i.e., the phrase aggregation).

2 Topic Labeling Framework

Each topic cluster contains the sentences that can
semantically represent a topic. The task of cluster-
ing the sentences into a set of coherent topic clus-
ters is called topic segmentation (Joty et al., 2011),
which is out of the scope of this paper. Our goal is to
generate an understandable label (i.e., a sequence of
words) that could capture the semantic of the topic,
and distinguish a topic from other topics (based on
definition of a good topic label by (Mei et al., 2007)),
given a set of topic clusters. Among possible choices
of word sequences as topic labels, in order to balance
the granularity, we set phrases as valid topic labels.

Extract all

Filter/select

Entailment

Identify

Phrase extraction Entailment Graph

Generalize

Merge

Phrase
aggregation? ? ?

- -

1Figure 1: Topic labeling framework.

As shown in Figure 1, our framework consists of
three main components that we describe in more de-
tails in the following sections.

2.1 Phrase extraction

We tokenize and preprocess each cluster in the col-
lection of topic clusters with lemmas, stems, part-of-
speech tags, sense tags and chunks. We also extract
n-grams up to length 5 which do not start or end with
a stop word. In this phase, we do not include any
frequency count feature in our candidate extraction
pipeline. Once we have built the candidates pool,
the next step is to identify a subset containing the
most significant of those candidates. Since most top
systems in key phrase extraction use supervised ap-
proaches, we follow the same method (Kim et al.,
2010b; Medelyan et al., 2008; Frank et al., 1999).

Initially, we consider a set of features used in the
other systems to determine whether a phrase is likely
to be a key phrase. However, since our dataset is
conversational (more details in Section 3), and the
text segments are not long, we aim for a classifier
with high recall. Thus, we only use TFxIDF (Salton
and McGill, 1986), position of the first occurrence
(Frank et al., 1999) and phrase length as our fea-
tures. We merge the training and test data released

180



for SemEval-2010 Task #5 (Kim et al., 2010b),
which consists of 244 scientific articles and 3705
key phrases, to train a Naive Bayes classifier in or-
der to learn a supervised model. We then apply our
model to extract the candidate phrases from the col-
lected candidates pool.

As a further step, to increase the coverage (re-
call) of our extracted phrases and to reduce the num-
ber of very short phrases (frequent keywords), we
choose the chunks containing any of the extracted
keywords. We add those chunks to our extracted
phrases and eliminate the associated keywords.

2.2 Entailment graph

So far, we have extracted a pool of key phrases from
each topic cluster. Many such phrases include re-
dundant information which are semantically equiv-
alent but vary in lexical choices. By identifying the
semantic relations between the phrases we can dis-
cover the information in one phrase that is seman-
tically equivalent, novel, or more/less informative
with respect to the content of the other phrase.

We set this problem as a variant of the Textual
Entailment (TE) recognition task (Mehdad et al.,
2010b; Adler et al., 2012; Berant et al., 2011). We
build an entailment graph for each topic cluster,
where nodes are the extracted phrases and edges are
the entailment relations between nodes. Given two
phrases (ph1 and ph2), we aim at identifying and
handling the following cases:
i) ph1 and ph2 express the same meaning (bidirec-
tional entailment). In such cases one of the phrases
should be eliminated;
ii) ph1 is more informative than ph2 (unidirectional
entailment). In such cases, the entailing phrase
should replace or complement the entailed one;
iii) ph1 contains facts that are not present in ph2,
and vice-versa (the “unknown” cases in TE par-
lance). In such cases, both phrases should remain.

Figure 2 shows how entailment relations can help
in selecting the phrases by removing the redun-
dant and less informative ones. For example, the
phrase “animals laugh” entails “rats giggle”, “Horse
laugh” and “Mice chuckle”,2 but not “Animals play”.

2Assuming that “animals laugh” is interpreted as “all ani-
mals laugh”.

rats
giggle

Horse
laugh

laugh

rats

Mice
chuckle

animals
laugh

Animals
playx

x

1

Figure 2: Building an entailment graph over phrases. Ar-
rows and “x” represent the entailment direction and un-
known cases respectively.

So we can keep “animals laugh” and “Animals play”
and eliminate others. In this way, TE-based phrase
identification method can be designed to distinguish
meaning-preserving variations from true divergence,
regardless of lexical choices and structures.

Similar to previous approaches in TE (e.g., (Be-
rant et al., 2011; Mehdad et al., 2010b; Mehdad et
al., 2010a)), we use supervised method. To train and
build the entailment graph, we perform the follow-
ing three steps.

2.2.1 Training set collection
In the last few years, TE corpora have been cre-

ated and distributed in the framework of several
evaluation campaigns, including the Recognizing
Textual Entailment (RTE) Challenge3 and Cross-
lingual textual entailment for content synchroniza-
tion4 (Negri et al., 2012). However, such datasets
cannot directly support our application. Specifi-
cally, our entailment graph is built over the extracted
phrases (with max. length of 5 tokens per phrase),
while the RTE datasets are composed of longer sen-
tences and paragraphs (Bentivogli et al., 2009; Negri
et al., 2011).

In order to collect a dataset which is more similar
to the goal of our entailment framework, we decide
to select a subset of the sixth and seventh RTE chal-
lenge main task (i.e., RTE within a Corpus). Our

3http://pascallin.ecs.soton.ac.uk/Challenges/RTE/
4http://www.cs.york.ac.uk/semeval-2013/task8/

181



dataset choice is based on the following reasons: i)
the length of sentence pairs in RTE6 and RTE7 is
shorter than the others, and ii) RTE6 and RTE7 main
task datasets are originally created for summariza-
tion purpose which is closer to our work. We sort
the RTE6 and RTE7 dataset pairs based on the sen-
tence length and choose the first 2000 samples with
a equal number of positive and negative examples.
The average length of words in our training data is
6.7 words. There are certainly some differences be-
tween our training set and our phrases. However, the
collected training samples was the closest available
dataset to our purpose.

2.2.2 Feature representation and training
Working at the phrase level imposes another con-

straint. Phrases are short and in terms of syntactic
structure, they are not as rich as sentences. This lim-
its our features to the lexical level. Lexical mod-
els, on the other hand, are less computationally ex-
pensive and easier to implement and often deliver a
strong performance for RTE (Sammons et al., 2011).

Our entailment decision criterion is based on
similarity scores calculated with a phrase-to-phrase
matching process. Each example pair of phrases
(ph1 and ph2) is represented by a feature vector,
where each feature is a specific similarity score esti-
mating whether ph1 entails ph2.

We compute 18 similarity scores for each pair of
phrases. In order to adapt the similarity scores to the
entailment score, we normalize the similarity scores
by the length of ph2 (in terms of lexical items), when
checking the entailment direction from ph1 to ph2.
In this way, we can check the portion of informa-
tion/facts in ph2 which is covered by ph1.

The first 5 scores are computed based on the exact
lexical overlap between the phrases: word overlap,
edit distance, ngram-overlap, longest common sub-
sequence and Lesk (Lesk, 1986). The other scores
were computed using lexical resources: Word-
Net (Fellbaum, 1998), VerbOcean (Chklovski and
Pantel, 2004), paraphrases (Denkowski and Lavie,
2010) and phrase matching (Mehdad et al., 2011).
We used WordNet to compute the word similarity
as the least common subsumer between two words
considering the synonymy-antonymy, hypernymy-
hyponymy, and meronymy relations. Then, we cal-
culated the sentence similarity as the sum of the sim-

ilarity scores of the word pairs in Text and Hypothe-
sis, normalized by the number of words in Hypothe-
sis. We also use phrase matching features described
in (Mehdad et al., 2011) which consists of phrasal
matching at the level on ngrams (1 to 5 grams). The
rationale behind using different entailment features
is that combining various scores will yield a better
model (Berant et al., 2011).

To combine the entailment scores and optimize
their relative weights, we train a Support Vector Ma-
chine binary classifier, SVMlight (Joachims, 1999),
over an equal number of positive and negative exam-
ples. This results in an entailment model with 95%
accuracy over 2-fold and 5-fold cross-validation,
which further proves the effectiveness of our fea-
ture set for this lexical entailment model. The reason
that we gained a very high accuracy is because our
selected sentences are a subset of RTE6 and RTE7
with a shorter length (less number of words) which
makes the entailment recognition task much easier
than recognizing entailment between paragraphs or
complex long sentences.

2.2.3 Graph edge labeling
We set the edge labeling problem as a two-way

classification task. Two-way classification casts
multidirectional entailment as a unidirectional prob-
lem, where each pair is analyzed checking for en-
tailment in both directions (Mehdad et al., 2012). In
this condition, each original test example is correctly
classified if both pairs originated from it are cor-
rectly judged (“YES-YES” for bidirectional,“YES-
NO” and “NO-YES” for unidirectional entailment
and “NO-NO” for unknown cases). Two-way clas-
sification represents an intuitive solution to capture
multidimensional entailment relations. Moreover,
since our training examples are labeled with binary
judgments, we are not able to train a three-way clas-
sifier.

2.2.4 Identification and selection
Assigning all entailment relations between the ex-

tracted phrase pairs, we are aiming at identifying
relevant phrases and eliminating the redundant (in
terms of meaning) and less informative ones. In or-
der to perform this task we follow a set of rules based
on the graph edge labels. Note that since entailment

182



# Merging patterns
1 merge ( cw11(CP OS=[N|V |J])

..w1n , cw21(CP OS=[N|V |J]) ..w2n ) = w11..w1n and w22..w2n
E.g. merge ( challenging situation , challenging problem ) = challenging situation and problem
2 merge ( w11..cw1n(CP OS=[N|V |J]) , w21..cw2n(CP OS=[N|V |J]) ) = w11..w1n−1 and w21..w2n
E.g. merge ( wet Mars , warm Mars ) = wet and warm Mars
3 merge ( w11..cw1n(CP OS=[N|V |J]) , cw21(CP OS=[N|V |J]) ..w2n ) = w11..w1n w22..w2n
E.g. merge ( interesting story , story continues ) = interesting story continues
4 merge ( cw11(CP OS=[N|V |J])

..w1n , w21..cw2n(CP OS=[N|V |J]) ) = w21..w2n w12..w1n
E.g. merge ( LHC shutting down , details about LHC ) = details about LHC shutting down
5 merge ( w11Cpos , cw12(CP OS=[N|V |J])

, w13Cpos , w21Cpos , cw22(CP OS=[N|V |J]) , w23Cpos ) = w11 and w21 w22 w23
and w13

E.g. merge ( technology grow fast , media grow exponentially ) = technology and media grow exponentially and fast

Table 2: Phrase merging patterns.

is a transitive relation, our entailment graph is transi-
tive i.e., if entail(ph1,ph2) and entail(ph2,ph3) then
entail(ph1,ph3) (Berant et al., 2011).
Rule 1) If there is a chain of entailing nodes, we
keep the one which is in the root of the chain and
eliminate others (e.g. “animals laugh” in Figure 2);
Rule 2) Among the nodes that are connected
with bidirectional entailment (semantically equiva-
lent nodes) we keep only the one with more outgoing
bidirectional and unidirectional entailment relations,
respectively;
Rule 3) Among the nodes that are connected with
unknown entailment (novel information with respect
to others) we keep the ones with no incoming entail-
ment relation (e.g., “Animals play” in Figure 2).

Although deleting might be harsh, in our current
framework, we only rely on the performance of an
entailment model which gives us a yes/no entailment
decision. In future, we are planning to improve our
entailment graph by weighting the edges. In this
way, we can take advantage of the weights to make
a more conservative decision in pruning the entail-
ment chains.

2.3 Phrase aggregation

Once we have identified and selected the informa-
tive phrases, the generation of topic labels can be
done in two steps. First, we generalize the phrases
containing the concepts that are lexically connected.
Second, we merge the phrases with a set of hand
written linguistically motivated patterns.

2.3.1 Phrase generalization
In this step, we generalize phrases that contain

concepts which are lexically connected. For this

purpose, we search in phrases for different words
with the same part-of-speech and sense tag. Then,
we find the link between those words in WordNet. If
they are connected and the shortest path connecting
them is less than 3 (estimated over the development
set), we replace both by their common parent in the
WordNet. In the case that they belong to the same
synset, we can replace one by another. Note that we
limit our search to nouns and verbs. For example,
“rat” and “horse” can be replaced by “animal”, or
“giggle” and “chuckle” can be replaced by “laugh”.
The motivation behind the generalization step is to
enrich the common terms between the phrases in fa-
vor of increasing the chance that they could merge
to a single phrase. This also helps to move beyond
the limitation of original lexical choices.

2.3.2 Phrase merging

The goal is to merge the phrases that are con-
nected, and to generate a human readable phrase that
contains more information than a single extracted
phrase. Several approaches have been proposed to
aggregate and merge sentences in Natural Language
Generation (NLG) (e.g. (Barzilay and Lapata, 2006;
Cheng and Mellish, 2000)), however most of them
use syntactic structure of the sentences. To merge
phrases at the lexical level, we set few common lin-
guistically motivated aggregation patterns such as:
simple conjunction, and conjunction via shared par-
ticipants (Reiter and Dale, 2000).

Table 2 demonstrates the merging patterns, where
wij is the jth word (or segment) in phrase i, cw
is the common word (or segment) in both phrases
and CPOS is the common part-of-speech tag of
the corresponding word. To illustrate, pattern 1

183



looks for the first segment of each phrase (wi1).
If they are same (cwi1) and share the same POS
tag (CPOS), then we aggregate the first phrase
(w11..w1n) and the second phrase removing the first
element (w22..w2n) by using the connective “and”.
For instance, the aggregation of “animals laugh” and
“animals play” results in “animals laugh and play”.
The rest of the patterns follow the same logic and for
the sake of brevity we avoid illustrating each pattern.
These patterns are among the most common domain
and application independent methods by which two
phrases/sentences can be aggregated, as described in
the NLG literature (Reiter and Dale, 2000).

In our aggregation pipeline, we group the phrases
based on their lexical overlap (number of common
words). The merging process is conducted over each
group in descending order (larger number of words
in common), in order to increase the chance of merg-
ing rules application. Then, we perform the merg-
ing over the resulting generated phrases from each
group. If our phrases cannot be merged (i.e., do not
match merging patterns), we select them as labels
for the topic cluster.

3 Datasets and Evaluation Metrics

3.1 Datasets

To verify the effectiveness of our approach, we ex-
periment with two different conversational datasets.
Our interest in dealing with conversational texts de-
rives from two reasons. First, the huge amount of
textual data generated everyday in these conversa-
tions validates the need of text analysis frameworks
to process such conversational texts effectively. Sec-
ond, conversational texts pose challenges to the tra-
ditional techniques, including redundancies, disflu-
encies, higher language variabilities and ill-formed
sentence structure (Liu et al., 2011).

Our conversational datasets are from two differ-
ent asynchronous media: email and blog. For email,
we use the dataset presented in (Joty et al., 2010),
where three individuals annotated the publicly avail-
able BC3 email corpus (Ulrich et al., 2008) with top-
ics. The corpus contains 40 email threads (or conver-
sations) at an average of 5 emails per thread. On av-
erage it has 26.3 sentences and 2.5 topics per thread.
A topic has an average length of 12.6 sentences. In
total, the three annotators found 269 topics in a cor-

pus of 1,024 sentences.
There are no publicly available blog corpora an-

notated with topics. For this study, we build our
own blog corpus containing 20 blog conversations of
various lengths from Slashdot, each annotated with
topics by three human annotators.5 The number of
comments per conversation varies from 30 to 101
with an average of 60.3 and the number of sentences
per conversation varies from 105 to 430 with an av-
erage of 220.6. The annotators first read a conversa-
tion and list the topics discussed in the conversation
by a short description (e.g., Game contents or size,
Bugs or faults) which provides a high-level overview
of the topic. Then, they assign the most appropriate
topic to each sentence in the conversation. The short
high-level descriptions of the topics serve as refer-
ence (or gold) topic labels in our experiments. The
target number of topics was not given in advance and
the annotators were instructed to find as many topics
as needed to convey the overall content structure of
the conversation. The annotators found 5 to 23 top-
ics per conversation with an average of 10.77. The
number of sentences per topic varies from 11.7 to
61.2 with an average of 27.16. In total, the three
annotators found 512 topics in our blog corpus con-
taining 4,411 sentences overall.

Note that our annotators performed topic segmen-
tation and labeling independently. In the email cor-
pus, the three annotators found 100, 77 and 92 top-
ics respectively (269 in total), and in the blog corpus,
they found 251, 119 and 192 topics respectively (562
in total). For the evaluation, there is a single gold
standard per topic written by each annotator. Table
1 shows a case in which two annotators selected the
same topical cluster and so we have two labels for
the same cluster.

3.2 Evaluation metrics

Traditionally, key phrase extraction is evaluated us-
ing precision, recall and f-measure based on exact
matches on all the extracted key phrases with gold
standards for a given text. However, as claimed
by (Kim et al., 2010a), this approach is not flexible
enough as it ignores the near-misses. Moreover, in
the case of topic labeling, most of the human written

5The new blog corpus annotated with topics will be made
publicly available for research purposes.

184



topic labels cannot be found in the text. Recently,
(Kim et al., 2010a) evaluated the utility of differ-
ent n-gram-based metrics for key phrase extraction
and showed that the metric R-precision correlates
most with human judgments. R-precision normal-
izes the approximate matching score by the maxi-
mum number of words in the reference and candi-
date phrases. Since this penalize our aggregation
phase, where the phrases tend to be longer than orig-
inal extracted phrase, we decide to use R-f1 as our
evaluation metric which considers length of both ref-
erence and candidate phrases.

R−precision = 1
k

k∑
i=1

overlap(candi, ref)

#words(candi)

R−recall = 1
k

k∑
i=1

overlap(candi, ref)

#words(ref)

R−f1 = 2 ∗R−precision ∗R−recall
(R−precision + R−recall)

The metric described above only considers word
overlap and ignores other semantic relations (e.g.,
synonymy, hypernymy) between words. However,
annotators write labels of their own and may use
words that are not directly from the conversation but
are semantically related. Therefore, we propose to
also use another variant of R-f1 that incorporates se-
mantic relation between words. To calculate the Se-
mantic R-f1, we count the number of overlaps not
only when they have the same form, but also when
they are connected in WordNet with a synonymy,
hypernymy, hyponymy and entailment relation.

Its worth noting that the generalizations phase and
the evaluation method are completely independent.
In the generalization step, we try to generalize the
phrases which are automatically extracted from the
text segments. While, in the evaluation, we compare
the human written gold standards with the system
output. Therefore, using WordNet in the generaliza-
tion step does not bias the results in the evaluation.

4 Experiments and Results

4.1 Experimental settings

We conduct our experiments over the blog and email
datasets described in Section 3.1, after eliminating
the development set from the test datasets. In our ex-

periments, the development set was used for the pat-
tern extraction and the shortest path threshold con-
necting the words in Wordnet in the generalization
phase. Our test dataset consists of 461 topics (i.e.,
clusters and their associated topic labels) from 20
blog conversations and 242 topics from 40 email
conversations.

For preprocessing our dataset we use OpenNLP6

for tokenization, part-of-speech tagging and chunck-
ing. For sense disambiguation, we use the extended
gloss overlap measure with the window size of 5,
developed by (Pedersen et al., 2005). We also apply
Snowball algorithm (Porter, 2001) for stemming.

We compare our approach with two strong base-
lines. The first baseline Freq-BL ranks the words
according to their frequencies and select the top 5
candidates applying Maximum Marginal Relevance
algorithm (Carbonell and Goldstein, 1998) using
the same pre- and post-processing as the work by
(Mihalcea and Tarau, 2004). The second baseline
Lead-BL, ranks the words based on their relevance
to the leading sentences.7 The ranking criteria is
log(tfw,Lt + 1)× log(tfw,t + 1), where tfw,Lt and
tfw,t are the number of times word w appears in a
set of leading sentences Lt and topic cluster t, re-
spectively (Allan, 2002). The log expressions, as the
ranking criterion, assign more weights to the words
in the topic segment, that also appear in the leading
sentences. This is because topics tend to be intro-
duced in the first few sentences of a topical cluster.
We also measure the performance of our framework
at each step in order to compare the effectiveness of
each phase independently or in combination.

4.2 Results

We evaluate the performance of different models us-
ing the metrics R-f1 and Semantic R-f1 (Sem-R-f1),
described in Section 3.2. Table 4 shows the results
in percentage for different models. The results show
that our framework outperforms the baselines signif-

6http://opennlp.sourceforge.net/
7The key intuitions for this baseline is the leading sentences

of a topic cluster carry the most informative clues for the topic
labels. Based on our development set, when we consider the
first three sentences, the coverage of content words that appear
in human labeled topics are 39% and 49% for blog and email,
respectively.

185



Blog Email
Human-authored system generated Human-authored system generated
Shutting down the LHC story about the LHC shutting down (#3) How it affects coding it screws my coding
typical shutdown and upgrade times typical and scheduled shutdown (#2) Opinions and preferences of tools opinion about what tools
MARS was warm and wet 3B years ago Mars was warm and wet early history (#3) white on black for disabled users white text on black background (#3)
Moon Treaty and outer space treaty Moon and Outer Space Treaty (#2) Contact with Steven email to Steven Pemberton (#3)

Table 3: Successful examples of human-authored and system generated labels for blog and email datasets. The number
near some examples refers to the aggregation patterns in Table 2.

Models
R-f1 Sem-R-f1

blog email blog email
Lead-BL 13.5 14.0 34.5 30.1
Freq-BL 15.3 13.1 34.7 29.1
Extraction-BL 13.9 16.0 31.6 33.2

Entailment 12.2 15.6 30.8 33.3
Extraction+Aggregation 15.1 18.5 35.5 37.6
Extraction+Entailment+
Aggregation 17.9 20.4 38.7 41.6

Table 4: Results for candidate topic labels on blog and
email corpora.

icantly8 in both datasets.
On the blog corpus, our key phrase extraction

method (Extraction-BL) fails to beat the other base-
lines (Lead-BL and Freq-BL) in majority of cases
(except R-f1 for Lead-BL). However, in the email
dataset, it improves the performance over both base-
lines in both evaluation metrics. This might be due
to the shorter topic clusters (in terms of number of
sentences) in email corpus which causes a smaller
number of phrases to be extracted.

We also observe the effectiveness of the aggre-
gation phase. In all cases, there is a significant
improvement (p < 0.05) after applying the ag-
gregation phase over the extracted phrases (Extrac-
tion+Aggregation).

Note that there is no improvement over the ex-
traction phase after the entailment (Entailment row).
This is mainly due to the fact that the entailment
phase filters the equivalent phrases. This affects the
results negatively when such filtered phrases share
many common words with our human-authored
phrases. However, the results improve more sig-
nificantly (p < 0.01) when the aggregation is con-
ducted after the entailment. This demonstrates that,
the combination of these two steps are beneficial for
topic labeling over conversational datasets.

In addition, the differences between the results us-
8The statistical significance tests was calculated by approx-

imate randomization described in (Yeh, 2000).

ing R-f1 and Sem-R-f1 metrics suggests the need for
more flexible automatic evaluation methods for this
task. Moreover, although the same trend of improve-
ment is observed in blog and email corpora, the dif-
ferences between their performance suggest the in-
vestigation of specialized methods for various con-
versational modalities.

0 100 200 300 400 500 600

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Blog

Se
m

-R
-f

1

Ext
Ext+Ent
Ext+Agg

Ext+Ent+Agg

1
Figure 3: Sem-R-f1 results distribution after each phase
of our pipeline for blog corpus. The x-axis represents the
examples sorted based on their Sem-R-f1 score.

To further analyze the performance, in Figure 3,
we show the Sem-R-f1 results distribution for our
blog dataset.9 We can observe that the aggrega-
tion after the entailment phase (bold curve) clearly
increase the number of correct labels, while such
improvement can be only achieved when the en-
tailment relations is used to identify the relevant
phrases. This further highlights the need of seman-
tics in this task. Comparing both datasets, this ef-
fect is more dominant in blogs. We believe that this
is due to the length of topic clusters. Presumably,
building an entailment graph over a greater pool of

9For brevity’s sake we do not show the email dataset graph.

186



original phrases is more effective to filter the redun-
dant information and identify the relevant phrases.

5 Discussion

After analyzing the results and through manual veri-
fication of some cases, we observe that our approach
led to some interestingly successful examples. Table
3 shows few generated labels and the human written
topics for such cases.

In general, given that the results are expressed in
percentage, it appears that the performance is still
far from satisfactory level. This leaves an interesting
challenge for the research community to tackle.
However, this is not always due to the weakness
of our proposed model. We have identified three
different system independent sources of error:10

Type 1: Abstractive human-authored labels: the
nature of our method is based on extraction (with
the exception of our simple generalization phase)
and in many cases the human-written labels cannot
be extracted from the text and require more complex
generalizations. In fact, only 9.81% of the labels
in blog and 12.74% of the labels in email appear
verbatim in their respective conversations. For
example:
Human-authored label: meeting schedule and location

Generated phrases: meeting, Boston area, mid October

Type 2: Evaluation methods: in this work, we
proposed a semantic method to evaluate our system.
However, the current evaluation methods fail to
capture the meaning. For example:
Human-authored label: Food choices

Generated phrase: I would ask what people want to eat

Type 3: Subjective topic labels: often is not easy
for human to agree on one label for a topic cluster.11

For example:
Human-authored label 1: Member introduction

Human-authored label 2: Bio of Len

Generated phrases: own intro, Len Kasday, chair

In light of this analysis, we conclude that a more
comprehensive evaluation method (e.g., human eval-
uation) could better reveal the potential of our sys-

10There are many examples of such cases, however for
brevity we just mention one example for each type.

11The mean R-precision agreements computed based on one-
to-one mappings of the topic clusters are 20.22 and 36.84 on
blog and email data sets, respectively.

tem in dealing with topic labeling, specially on con-
versational data.

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we study the problem of automatic
topic labeling, and propose a novel framework to la-
bel topic clusters with meaningful readable phrases.
Within such framework, this paper makes two main
contributions. First, in contrast with most current
methods based on fully extractive models, we pro-
pose to aggregate topic labels by means of gener-
alizing and merging techniques. Second, beyond
current approaches which disregard semantic infor-
mation, we integrate semantics by means of build-
ing textual entailment graphs over the topic clusters.
To achieve our objectives, we successfully applied
our framework over two challenging conversational
datasets. Coherent results on both datasets demon-
strate the potential of our approach in dealing with
topic labeling task.

Future work will address both the improvement of
our aggregation phase and ranking the output candi-
date phrases for each topic cluster. On one hand,
we plan to accommodate more sophisticated NLG
techniques for the aggregation and generation phase.
Incorporating a better source of prior knowledge in
the generalization phase (e.g., YAGO or DBpedia) is
also an interesting research direction towards a bet-
ter phrase aggregation step. On the other hand, we
plan to apply a ranking strategy to select the top can-
didate phrases generated by our framework.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers
and Frank Tompa for their valuable comments and
suggestions to improve the paper, and the NSERC
Business Intelligence Network for financial support.
Yashar Mehdad also would like to acknowledge the
early discussions on the related topics with Matteo
Negri.

References

Meni Adler, Jonathan Berant, and Ido Dagan. 2012.
Entailment-based text exploration with application to
the health-care domain. In Proceedings of the ACL
2012 System Demonstrations, ACL ’12, pages 79–84,

187



Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

James Allan. 2002. Topic detection and tracking: event-
based information organization.

Regina Barzilay and Mirella Lapata. 2006. Aggregation
via set partitioning for natural language generation. In
Proceedings of the main conference on Human Lan-
guage Technology Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association of Computational Linguis-
tics, HLT-NAACL ’06, pages 359–366, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Luisa Bentivogli, Ido Dagan, Hoa Trang Dang, Danilo
Giampiccolo, and Bernardo Magnini. 2009. The fifth
pascal recognizing textual entailment challenge. In In
Proc Text Analysis Conference (TAC09.

Jonathan Berant, Ido Dagan, and Jacob Goldberger.
2011. Global learning of typed entailment rules. In
Proceedings of ACL, Portland, OR.

SRK Branavan, Pawan Deshpande, and Regina Barzilay.
2007. Generating a table-of-contents. In ACL, vol-
ume 45, page 544.

Jaime Carbonell and Jade Goldstein. 1998. The use of
mmr, diversity-based reranking for reordering docu-
ments and producing summaries. In Proceedings of
the 21st annual international ACM SIGIR conference
on Research and development in information retrieval,
SIGIR ’98, pages 335–336, New York, NY, USA.
ACM.

Giuseppe Carenini, Gabriel Murray, and Raymond Ng.
2011. Methods for mining and summarizing text con-
versations.

Hua Cheng and Chris Mellish. 2000. Capturing the in-
teraction between aggregation and text planning in two
generation systems. In In Proceedings of the 1st In-
ternational Natural Language Generation Conference,
186193, Mitzpe.

Timothy Chklovski and Patrick Pantel. 2004. Verbocean:
Mining the web for fine-grained semantic verb rela-
tions. In Dekang Lin and Dekai Wu, editors, Proceed-
ings of EMNLP 2004, pages 33–40, Barcelona, Spain,
July. Association for Computational Linguistics.

I. Dagan and O. Glickman. 2004. Probabilistic tex-
tual entailment: Generic applied modeling of language
variability.

Michael Denkowski and Alon Lavie. 2010. Meteor-next
and the meteor paraphrase tables: improved evaluation
support for five target languages. In Proceedings of
the Joint Fifth Workshop on Statistical Machine Trans-
lation and MetricsMATR, WMT ’10, pages 339–342,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Gaël Dias, Elsa Alves, and José Gabriel Pereira Lopes.
2007. Topic segmentation algorithms for text summa-

rization and passage retrieval: an exhaustive evalua-
tion. In Proceedings of the 22nd national conference
on Artificial intelligence - Volume 2, AAAI’07, pages
1334–1339. AAAI Press.

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic
Lexical Database. Bradford Books.

Eibe Frank, Gordon W. Paynter, Ian H. Witten, Carl
Gutwin, and Craig G. Nevill-Manning. 1999.
Domain-specific keyphrase extraction. In Proceedings
of the Sixteenth International Joint Conference on Ar-
tificial Intelligence, IJCAI ’99, pages 668–673, San
Francisco, CA, USA. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers
Inc.

Sanda Harabagiu and Finley Lacatusu. 2010. Us-
ing topic themes for multi-document summarization.
ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., 28(3):13:1–13:47, July.

T. Joachims. 1999. Making large-scale svm learning
practical. LS8-Report 24, Universität Dortmund, LS
VIII-Report.

Shafiq Joty, Giuseppe Carenini, Gabriel Murray, and
Raymond T. Ng. 2010. Exploiting conversation struc-
ture in unsupervised topic segmentation for emails.
In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP
’10, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Shafiq Joty, Gabriel Murray, and Raymond T. Ng. 2011.
Supervised topic segmentation of email conversations.
In In ICWSM11. AAAI.

Su Nam Kim, Timothy Baldwin, and Min-Yen Kan.
2010a. Evaluating n-gram based evaluation metrics
for automatic keyphrase extraction. In Proceedings of
the 23rd International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, COLING ’10, pages 572–580, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Su Nam Kim, Olena Medelyan, Min-Yen Kan, and Timo-
thy Baldwin. 2010b. Semeval-2010 task 5: Automatic
keyphrase extraction from scientific articles. In Pro-
ceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Seman-
tic Evaluation, SemEval ’10, pages 21–26, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Thomas Kleinbauer, Stephanie Becker, and Tilman
Becker. 2007. Combining multiple information lay-
ers for the automatic generation of indicative meeting
abstracts. In Proceedings of the Eleventh European
Workshop on Natural Language Generation, ENLG
’07, pages 151–154, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Jey Han Lau, Karl Grieser, David Newman, and Timothy
Baldwin. 2011. Automatic labelling of topic models.
In ACL, pages 1536–1545.

188



Michael Lesk. 1986. Automatic sense disambiguation
using machine readable dictionaries: how to tell a pine
cone from an ice cream cone. In Proceedings of the
5th annual international conference on Systems docu-
mentation, SIGDOC ’86, pages 24–26, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

F. Liu, Y. Liu, C. Busso, S. Harabagiu, and V. Ng. 2011.
Identifying the Gist of Conversational Text: Automatic
Keyword Extraction and Summarization. Ph.D. thesis,
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT DALLAS.

Shixia Liu, Michelle X. Zhou, Shimei Pan, Yangqiu
Song, Weihong Qian, Weijia Cai, and Xiaoxiao Lian.
2012. Tiara: Interactive, topic-based visual text sum-
marization and analysis. ACM Trans. Intell. Syst.
Technol., 3(2):25:1–25:28, February.

O. Medelyan, I.H. Witten, and D. Milne. 2008. Topic
indexing with wikipedia. In Proceedings of the AAAI
WikiAI workshop.

Y. Mehdad, A. Moschitti, and F.M. Zanzotto. 2010a.
Syntactic semantic structures for textual entailment
recognition. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Yashar Mehdad, Matteo Negri, and Marcello Federico.
2010b. Towards cross-lingual textual entailment. In
Human Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, HLT ’10,
pages 321–324, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Yashar Mehdad, Matteo Negri, and Marcello Federico.
2011. Using bilingual parallel corpora for cross-
lingual textual entailment. In Proceedings of the 49th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies - Volume
1, HLT ’11, pages 1336–1345, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Yashar Mehdad, Matteo Negri, and Marcello Federico.
2012. Detecting semantic equivalence and informa-
tion disparity in cross-lingual documents. In Proceed-
ings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Short Papers - Volume 2,
ACL ’12, pages 120–124, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Qiaozhu Mei, Xuehua Shen, and ChengXiang Zhai.
2007. Automatic labeling of multinomial topic mod-
els. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM SIGKDD inter-
national conference on Knowledge discovery and data
mining, KDD ’07, pages 490–499, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

R. Mihalcea and P. Tarau. 2004. TextRank: Bringing
order into texts. In Proceedings of EMNLP-04and
the 2004 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, July.

Matteo Negri, Luisa Bentivogli, Yashar Mehdad, Danilo
Giampiccolo, and Alessandro Marchetti. 2011. Di-
vide and conquer: crowdsourcing the creation of cross-
lingual textual entailment corpora. In Proceedings
of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, EMNLP ’11, pages 670–679,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Matteo Negri, Alessandro Marchetti, Yashar Mehdad,
Luisa Bentivogli, and Danilo Giampiccolo. 2012.
Semeval-2012 task 8: cross-lingual textual entailment
for content synchronization. In Proceedings of the
First Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational
Semantics - Volume 1: Proceedings of the main con-
ference and the shared task, and Volume 2: Proceed-
ings of the Sixth International Workshop on Seman-
tic Evaluation, SemEval ’12, pages 399–407, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

T. Pedersen, S. Banerjee, and S. Patwardhan. 2005.
Maximizing Semantic Relatedness to Perform Word
Sense Disambiguation. Research Report UMSI
2005/25, University of Minnesota Supercomputing In-
stitute, March.

Martin F. Porter. 2001. Snowball: A language for stem-
ming algorithms.

Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. 2000. Building natural
language generation systems.

Gerard Salton and Michael J. McGill. 1986. Introduction
to modern information retrieval.

Mark Sammons, V.G.Vinod Vydiswaran, and Dan Roth.
2011. Recognizing Textual Entailment. In Daniel M.
Bikel and Imed Zitouni, editors, Multilingual Natu-
ral Language Applications: From Theory to Practice.
Prentice Hall, Jun.

Jan Ulrich, Gabriel Murray, and Giuseppe Carenini.
2008. A publicly available annotated corpus for su-
pervised email summarization.

Alexander Yeh. 2000. More accurate tests for the statis-
tical significance of result differences. In Proceedings
of the 18th conference on Computational linguistics -
Volume 2, COLING ’00, pages 947–953, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

189


