



















































Ontology Label Translation


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2013 Student Research Workshop, pages 40–46,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Ontology Label Translation

Mihael Arcan and Paul Buitelaar

Unit for Natural Language Processing,
Digital Enterprise Research Institute (DERI)

National University of Ireland Galway (NUIG)
Galway, Ireland

{mihael.arcan , paul.buitelaar}@deri.org

Abstract

Our research investigates the translation of on-
tology labels, which has applications in mul-
tilingual knowledge access. Ontologies are
often defined only in one language, mostly
English. To enable knowledge access across
languages, such monolingual ontologies need
to be translated into other languages. The
primary challenge in ontology label trans-
lation is the lack of context, which makes
this task rather different than document trans-
lation. The core objective therefore, is to
provide statistical machine translation (SMT)
systems with additional context information.
In our approach, we first extend standard SMT
by enhancing a translation model with context
information that keeps track of surrounding
words for each translation. We compute a se-
mantic similarity between the phrase pair con-
text vector from the parallel corpus and a vec-
tor of noun phrases that occur in surrounding
ontology labels. We applied our approach to
the translation of a financial ontology, translat-
ing from English to German, using Europarl as
parallel corpus. This experiment showed that
our approach can provide a slight improve-
ment over standard SMT for this task, with-
out exploiting any additional domain-specific
resources.

1 Introduction

The biggest barrier for EU-wide cross-lingual busi-
ness intelligence is the large number of various lan-
guages used by banks or investment firms for their
financial reports. In contrast to that, most of the
ontologies used for knowledge access are available

in English, e.g. the financial ontology FINREP1

(FINancial REPorting) or COREP2 (COmmon sol-
vency ratio REPorting). To make the targeted trans-
parency of financial information possible, these on-
tologies have to be translated first into another lan-
guage; see also (Declerck et al., 2010). The chal-
lenge here lies in translating domain-specific on-
tology vocabulary, e.g. Equity-equivalent partner
loans, Subordinated capital or Write-downs of long-
term financial assets and securities.

Since domain-specific parallel corpora for SMT
are hardly available, we used a large general parallel
corpus, whereby a translation model built by such
a resource will tend to translate a segment into the
most common word sense. This can be seen for in-
stance when we translate the financial ontology label
Equity-equivalent partner loans from the German
GAAP ontology (cf. Section 3.1). Using a baseline
SMT system we get the translation Gerechtigkeit-
gleichwertige Partner Darlehen. Although this la-
bel provides contextual information, equity is trans-
lated into its general meaning, i.e. Gerechtigkeit in
the meaning of justice, righteousness or fairness, al-
though Eigenkapital would be the preferred transla-
tion in the financial domain.

To achieve accurate disambiguation we developed
a method using context vectors. We extract semantic
information from the ontology, i.e. the vocabulary
and relations between labels and compare it with the
contextual information extracted from a parallel cor-
pus.

The remainder of the paper is organized as fol-

1http://eba.europa.eu/Supervisory-Reporting/FINER.aspx
2http://eba.europa.eu/Supervisory-Reporting/COREP.aspx

40



lows. Section 2 gives an overview of the related
work on including semantic information into SMT.
Section 3 describes the ontology and the parallel
corpus used in our experiment. Then we describe
the approach of enhancing the standard SMT model
with ontological knowledge for improving the trans-
lation of labels in Section 4. In Section 5 the results
of exploiting the ontological knowledge described in
the previous section are illustrated. Finally we con-
clude our findings and give an outlook for further
research.

2 Related Work

Word sense disambiguation (WSD) systems gener-
ally perform on the word level, for an input word
they generate the most probable meaning. On the
other hand, state of the art translation systems op-
erate on sequences of words. This discrepancy be-
tween unigrams versus n-grams was first described
in (Carpuat and Wu, 2005). Likewise, (Apidianaki
et al., 2012) use a WSD classifier to generate a prob-
ability distribution of phrase pairs and to build a lo-
cal language model. They show that the classifier
does not only improve the translation of ambiguous
words, but also the translation of neighbour words.
We investigate this discrepancy as part of our re-
search in enriching the ontology label translation
with ontological information. Similar to their work
we incorporate the idea of enriching the translation
model with neighbour words information, whereby
we extend the window to 5-grams.

(Mauser et al., 2009) generate a lexicon that pre-
dicts the bag of output words from the bag of input
words. In their research, no alignment between input
and output words is used, words are chosen based
on the input context. The word predictions of the in-
put sentences are considered as an additional feature
that is used in the decoding process. This feature de-
fines a new probability score that favours the trans-
lation hypothesis containing words, which were pre-
dicted by the lexicon model. Similarly, (Patry and
Langlais, 2011) train a model by translating a bag-
of-words. In contrast to their work, our approach
uses bag-of-word information to enrich the missing
contextual information that arises from translating
ontology labels in isolation.

(McCrae et al., 2011) exploit in their research

the ontology structure for translation of ontologies
and taxonomies. They compare the structure of
the monolingual ontology to the structure of already
translated multilingual ontologies, where the source
and target labels are used for the disambiguation
process of phrase pairs. We incorporated the idea of
using the ontology structure, but avoided the draw-
back of exploiting existing domain-specific multilin-
gual ontologies.

3 Data sets

For our experiment we used a general parallel cor-
pus to generate the mandatory SMT phrase table
and language model. Further, the corpus was used
to generate feature vectors on the basis of the con-
textual information provided by surrounding words.
Finally we calculate the semantic similarity between
the extracted information from the parallel corpus
and the ontology vocabulary.

3.1 Financial ontology

For our experiment we used the financial ontol-
ogy German GAAP (Generally Accepted Account-
ing Practice),3 which holds 2794 concepts with la-
bels in German and English.

Balance sheet

. . . Total equity and liabilities

Equity

Equity-equivalent partner loans Revenue reserves

Legal reserve

Legal reserve, of which transferred from prior year net retained profits

. . .

. . .

Figure 1: The financial label Equity-equivalent partner
loans and its neighbours in the German GAAP ontology

As seen in Figure 1 the financial labels do not cor-
respond to phrases from a linguistic point of view.
They are used in financial or accounting reports as
unique financial expressions or identifiers to organ-
ise and retrieve the reported information automati-
cally. Therefore it is important to translate these fi-
nancial labels with exact meaning preservation.

3http://www.xbrl.de/

41



3.2 Europarl
As a baseline approach we used the Europarl par-
allel corpus,4 which holds proceedings of the Euro-
pean Parliament in 21 European languages. We used
the English-German parallel corpus with around 1.9
million aligned sentences and 40 million English
and 43 million German tokens (Koehn, 2005).

Although previous research showed that a trans-
lation model built by using a general parallel cor-
pus cannot be used for domain-specific vocabulary
translation (Wu et al., 2008), we decided to train a
baseline translation model on this general corpus to
illustrate any improvement steps gained by enrich-
ing the standard approach with the semantic infor-
mation of the ontology vocabulary and structure.

4 Experiment

Since ontology labels (or label segments) translated
by the Moses toolkit (Section 4.1) do not have much
contextual information, we addressed this lack of
information and generated fromthe Europarl corpus
a new resource with contextual information of sur-
rounding words as feature vectors (Section 4.2). A
similar approach was done with the ontology struc-
ture and vocabulary (Section 4.3).

4.1 Moses toolkit
To translate the English financial labels into Ger-
man, we used the statistical translation toolkit Moses
(Koehn et al., 2007), where the word alignments
were built with the GIZA++ toolkit (Och and Ney,
2003). The SRILM toolkit (Stolcke, 2002) was used
to build the 5-gram language model.

4.2 Building the contextual-semantic resource
from the parallel corpus Europarl

To enhance the baseline approach with additional se-
mantic information, we built a new resource of con-
textual information from Europarl.

From the original phrase table, which was gen-
erated from the Europarl corpus, we used the sub-
phrase table, which was generated to translate the
German GAAP financial ontology in the baseline
approach. Although this sub-phrase table holds only
segments necessary to translate the financial labels,
it still contains 2,394,513 phrase pairs. Due to the

4http://www.statmt.org/europarl/, version 7

scalability issue, we reduced the number of phrase
pairs by filtering the sub-phrase table based on the
following criteria:

a) the direct phrase translation probability φ(e|f)
has to be larger than 0.0001

b) a phrase pair should not start or end with a
functional word, i.e. prepositions, conjunctions,
modal verbs, pronouns

c) a phrase pair should not start with punctuation

After applying these criteria to the sub-phrase ta-
ble, the new filtered phrase table holds 53,283 enti-
ties, where phrase pairs, e.g. tax rate ||| Steuersatz
or tax liabilities ||| Steuerschulden were preserved.

In the next step, the phrase pairs stored in the fil-
tered phrase table were used to find sentences in Eu-
roparl, where these phrase pairs appear. The goal
was to extract the surrounding words as the con-
textual information of these phrase pairs. If a seg-
ment from the filtered phrase table appeared in the
sentence we extracted the lemmatised contextual in-
formation of the phrase pair, whereby we consid-
ered 10 tokens to the left and 10 to the right of
the analysed phrase pair. To address the problem
of different inflected forms (financial asset vs. fi-
nancial assets) of the same lexical entity (financial
asset) we lemmatised the English part of the Eu-
roparl corpus with TreeTagger(Schmid, 1995). Sim-
ilar to the phrase table filtering approach, an n-gram
should not start with a functional word or punctua-
tion. The extracted surrounding words were stored
together with its phrase pairs, i.e. for the phrase
pairs Equity-Gerechtigkeit and Equity-Eigenkapital
different contextual vectors were generated.

Example 1.a) illustrates a sentence, which holds
the source segment Equity from the filtered phrase
table. Example 1.b) represents its translation into
German. This example illustrates the context in
which Equity is translated into the German expres-
sion Gerechtigkeit. The segment Equity is also
present in the second sentence, (example 2.a)), in
contrast to the first one, equity is translated into
Eigenkapital, (2.b)), since the sentence reports fi-
nancial information.

1. a) ... which could guarantee a high standard of ef-
ficiency, safety and equity for employees and
users alike, right away.

42



b) ... , der heute ein hohes Niveau an Leistung,
Qualität, Sicherheit und Gerechtigkeit für die
Bediensteten und die Nutzer garantieren könnte.

2. a) ... or organisations from making any finance,
such as loans or equity, available to named
Burmese state-owned enterprises.

b) ... bzw. Organisationen zu verbieten, bir-
manischen staatlichen Unternehmen jegliche Fi-
nanzmittel wie Darlehen oder Eigenkapital zur
Verfügung zu stellen.

Applying this methodology on all 1.9 million sen-
tences in Europarl, we generated a resource with
feature vectors for all phrase pairs of the filtered
phrase table. Table 1 illustrates the contextual differ-
ences between the vectors for Equity-Gerechtigkeit
and Equity-Eigenkapital phrase pairs.

4.3 Contextual-semantic resource generation
for the financial ontology German GAAP

To compare the contextual information extracted
from Europarl a similar approach was applied to the
vocabulary in the German GAAP ontology.

First, to avoid unnecessary segments, e.g. provi-
sions for or losses from executory, we parsed the fi-
nancial ontology with the Stanford parser (Klein and
Manning, 2003) and extracted meaningful segments
from the ontology labels. This step was done pri-
marily to avoid comparing all possible n-gram seg-
ments with the filtered segments extracted from the
Europarl corpus (cf. Subsection 4.2). With the syn-
tactical information given by the Stanford parser we
extracted a set of noun segments for the ontology la-
bels, which we defined by the rules shown in Table
2.

# Syntactic Patterns
1 (NN(S) w+)
2 (NP (NN(S) w+)+))
3 (NP (JJ w+)+ (NN(S) w+)+))
4 (NP (NN(S) w+)+ (CC w+) (NN(S) w+)+)
5 (NP (NN(S) w+)+ (PP (IN/.. w+) (NP (NN(S) w+)+))

Table 2: Syntactic patterns for extracting noun segments
from the parsed financial ontology labels

Applying these patterns to the ontology label Pro-
visions for expected losses from executory contracts
extracts the following noun segments: provisions,
losses and contracts (pattern 1), expected losses and

executory contracts (pattern 3), provisions for ex-
pected losses and expected losses from executory
contracts (pattern 5).

In the next step, for all 2794 labels from the finan-
cial ontology, a unique contextual vector was gen-
erated as follows: for the label Equity-equivalent
partner loans (cf. Figure 1), the vector holds the
extracted (lemmatised) noun segments of the direct
parent, Equity, and all its siblings in the ontology,
e.g. Revenue reserves . . . (Table 3).

targeted label: Equity-equivalent partner loans
contextual information: capital (6), reserve (3), loss
(3), balance sheet (2) . . . currency translation (1),
negative consolidation difference (1), profit (1)

Table 3: Contextual information for the financial label
Equity-equivalent partner loans

4.4 Calculating the Semantic Similarity
Using the resources described in the previous sec-
tions in a final step we apply the Cosine, Jaccard and
Dice similarity measures on these feature vectors.

For the first evaluation step we translated all finan-
cial labels with the general translation model. Ta-
ble 4 illustrates the translation of the financial ex-
pression equity as part of the label Equity-equivalent
partner loans.5

With the n-best (n=50) translations for each fi-
nancial label we calculated the semantic similarity
between the contextual information of the phrase
pairs (equity-Eigenkapital) extracted from the par-
allel corpus (cf. Table 1) with the semantic informa-
tion of the financial label Equity extracted from the
ontology (cf. Table 3).

After calculating a semantic similarity, we reorder
the translations based on this additional information,
which can be seen in Table 5.

5ger. Gerechtigkeit-gleichwertige Partner Darlehen

Source label Target label p(e|f)
equity Gerechtigkeit -10.6227
equity Gleichheit -11.5476
equity Eigenkapital -12.7612
equity Gleichbehandlung -13.0936
equity Fairness -13.6301

Table 4: Top five translations and its translation probabil-
ities generated by the Europarl translation model

43



Source label Target label Context (frequency)
equity Gerechtigkeit social (19), efficiency (18), efficiency and equity (14), justice (13), social eq-

uity (11), education (9), principle (8), transparency (7), training (7), great (7)
equity Eigenkapital capital (19), equity capital (15), venture (3), venture capital (3), rule (2), capital

and risk (2), equity capital and risk (2), bank (2), risk (2), debt (1)

Table 1: Contextual information for Equity with its target labels Gerechtigkeit and Eigenkapital extracted from the
Europarl corpus

Source label Target label Jaccard
equity Eigenkapital 0.0780169232
equity Equity 0.0358268041
equity Kapitalbeteiligung 0.0341965597
equity Gleichheit 0.0273327211
equity Gerechtigkeit 0.0266209669

Table 5: Top five re-ranked translations after calculating
the Jaccard similarity

5 Evaluation

Our evaluation was conducted on the translations
generated by the baseline approach, using only Eu-
roparl, and the ontology-enhanced translations of fi-
nancial labels.

We undertook an automatic evaluation using the
BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002), NIST (Dodding-
ton, 2002), TER (Snover et al., 2006), and Me-
teor6 (Denkowski and Lavie, 2011) algorithms.

5.1 Baseline Evaluation of general corpus

At the beginning of our experiment, we trans-
lated the financial labels with the Moses Toolkit,
where the translation model was generated from the
English-German Europarl aligned corpus. The re-
sults are shown in Table 7 as baseline.

5.2 Baseline Evaluation of filtered general
corpus

A second evaluation on translations was done on
a filtered Europarl corpus, depending if a sentence
holds the vocabulary of the ontology to be translated.
We generated five training sets, based on n-grams of
the ontology vocabulary (from unigram to 5-gram)
appearing in the sentence. From the set of aligned
sentences we generated new translation models and
translated again the financial ontology labels with
them. Table 6 illustrates the results of filtering the

6Meteor configuration: -l de, exact, stem, paraphrase

Europarl parallel corpus into smaller (n-gram) train-
ing sets, whereby no training set outperforms signif-
icantly the baseline approach.

model sentences BLEU-4 Meteor OOV
baseline 1920209 4.22 0.1138 37
unigram 1591520 4.25 0.1144 37
bigram 322607 4.22 0.1077 46
3-gram 76775 1.99 0.0932 92
4-gram 4380 2.45 0.0825 296
5-gram 259 0.69 0.0460 743

Table 6: Evaluation results for the filtered Europarl base-
line translation model (OOV - out of vocabulary)

5.3 Evaluation of the knowledge enhanced
general translation model

The final part of our research concentrated on trans-
lations where the general translation model was en-
hanced with ontological knowledge. Table 7 illus-
trates the results using the different similarity mea-
sures, i.e. Dice, Jaccard, Cosine similarity coeffi-
cient.

For the Cosine coefficient we performed two ap-
proaches. For the first step we used only binary val-
ues (bv) from the vector, where in the second ap-
proach we used the frequencies of the contextual in-
formation as real values (rv). The results show that
the Cosine measure using frequencies (rv) performs
best for the METEOR metric. On the other hand the
binary Cosine measure (bv) performs better than the
other metrics in BLEU-2 and NIST metrics.

The Jaccard and Dice similarity coefficient per-
form very similar. They both outperform the general
translation model in BLEU, NIST and TER metrics,
whereby the Jaccard coefficient performs slightly
better than the Dice coefficient. On the other hand
both measures perform worse on the METEOR met-
ric regarding the general model. Overall we observe
that the Jaccard coefficient outperforms the baseline

44



Bleu-2 Bleu-4 NIST Meteor TER
baseline 13.05 4.22 1.789 0.113 1.113
Dice 13.16 4.43 1.800 0.111 1.075
Jaccard 13.17 4.44 1.802 0.111 1.074
Cosine (rv) 12.91 4.20 1.783 0.117 1.108
Cosine (bv) 13.27 4.34 1.825 0.116 1.077

Table 7: Evaluation results for Europarl baseline transla-
tion model and the different similarity measures

approach by 0.22 BLEU points.

5.4 Comparison of translations provided by
the general model and Jaccard similarity

Table 7 illustrates the different approaches that were
performed in our research. As the automatic metrics
give just a slight intuition about the improvements of
the different approaches, we compared the transla-
tions of the general translation model manually with
the translations on which Jaccard similarity coeffi-
cient was performed.

As discussed, Equity can be translated into Ger-
man as Gerechtigkeit when translating it in a gen-
eral domain or into Eigenkapital when translat-
ing it in the financial domain. In the financial
ontology, the segment Equity appears 126 times.
The general translation model translates it wrongly
as Gerechtigkeit, whereby the Jaccard coefficient,
with the help of contextual information, favours
the preferred translation Eigenkapital. Further-
more Equit can be also part of a larger financial
label, e.g. Equity-equivalent partner loans, but
the general translation model still translates it into
Gerechtigkeit. This can be explained by the seg-
mentation during the decoding process, i.e. the SMT
system tokenises this label into separate tokens and
translates each token separately from each other. On
the contrary, the Jaccard similarity coefficient cor-
rects the unigram segment to Eigenkapital.

As part of the label Uncalled unpaid contributions
to subscribed capital (deducted from equity on the
face of the balance sheet), equity is again translated
by the general translation model as Gerechtigkeit. In
this case the Jaccard coefficient cannot correct the
translation, which is caused by the general model
itself, since in all n-best (n=50) translations equity is
translated as Gerechtigkeit. In this case the Jaccard
coefficient reordering does not have any affect.

The manual analysis further showed that the am-

biguous ontology label Securities, e.g. in Write-
downs of long-term financial assets and securities
was also often translated as Sicherheiten7 in the
meaning of certainties or safeties, but was corrected
by the Jaccard coefficient into Wertpapiere, which is
the correct translation in the financial domain.

Finally, the analysis showed that the segment Bal-
ance in Central bank balances was often trans-
lated by the baseline model into Gleichgewichte,8

i.e. Zentralbank Gleichgewichte, whereas the Jac-
card coefficient favoured the preferred translation
Guthaben, i.e. Zentralbank Bankguthaben.

Conclusion and Future Work

Our approach to re-using existing resources showed
slight improvements in the translation quality of the
financial vocabulary. Although the contextual infor-
mation favoured correct translations in the financial
domain, we see a need for more research on the con-
textual information stored in the parallel corpus and
also in the ontology. Also more work has to be done
on analysis of the overlap of the contextual informa-
tion and the ontology vocabulary, e.g. which con-
textual words should have more weight for the simi-
larity measure. Furthermore, dealing with the ontol-
ogy structure, the relations between the labels, i.e.
part-of and parent-child relations, have to be consid-
ered. Once these questions are answered, the next
step will be to compare the classical cosine mea-
sure against more sophisticated similarity measures,
i.e. Explicit Semantic Analysis (ESA) (Gabrilovich
and Markovitch, 2007). Instead of measuring simi-
larity between the vectors directly using cosine, we
will investigate the application of ESA to calculate
the similarities between short texts by taking their
linguistic variations into account (Aggarwal et al.,
2012).

Acknowledgments

This work is supported in part by the European
Union under Grant No. 248458 for the Monnet
project and Grant No. 296277 for the EuroSenti-
ment project as well as by the Science Foundation
Ireland under Grant No. SFI/08/CE/I1380 (Lion-2).

7ger. Abschreibungen der langfristigen finanziellen
Vermögenswerte und Sicherheiten

8en. equilibrium, equation, balance

45



References
Aggarwal, N., Asooja, K., and Buitelaar, P. (2012).

DERI&UPM: Pushing corpus based relatedness to
similarity: Shared task system description. In
SemEval-2012.

Apidianaki, M., Wisniewski, G., Sokolov, A., Max, A.,
and Yvon, F. (2012). Wsd for n-best reranking and
local language modeling in smt. In Proceedings of the
Sixth Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in
Statistical Translation, pages 1–9, Jeju, Republic of
Korea. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Carpuat, M. and Wu, D. (2005). Word sense disambigua-
tion vs. statistical machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 43rd Annual Meeting on Association for
Computational Linguistics, ACL ’05, pages 387–394,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Declerck, T., Krieger, H.-U., Thomas, S. M., Buitelaar,
P., O’Riain, S., Wunner, T., Maguet, G., McCrae, J.,
Spohr, D., and Montiel-Ponsoda, E. (2010). Ontology-
based multilingual access to financial reports for shar-
ing business knowledge across europe. In Internal
Financial Control Assessment Applying Multilingual
Ontology Framework.

Denkowski, M. and Lavie, A. (2011). Meteor 1.3: Au-
tomatic Metric for Reliable Optimization and Evalua-
tion of Machine Translation Systems. In Proceedings
of the Sixth Workshop on Statistical Machine Transla-
tion, pages 85–91, Edinburgh, Scotland. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Doddington, G. (2002). Automatic evaluation of ma-
chine translation quality using n-gram co-occurrence
statistics. In Proceedings of the second interna-
tional conference on Human Language Technology
Research, HLT ’02, pages 138–145.

Gabrilovich, E. and Markovitch, S. (2007). Computing
semantic relatedness using wikipedia-based explicit
semantic analysis. In Proceedings of The Twentieth In-
ternational Joint Conference for Artificial Intelligence,
pages 1606–1611, Hyderabad, India.

Klein, D. and Manning, C. D. (2003). Accurate unlex-
icalized parsing. In Proceeding of the 41st annual
meeting of the association for computational linguis-
tics, pages 423–430.

Koehn, P. (2005). Europarl: A Parallel Corpus for Sta-
tistical Machine Translation. In Conference Proceed-
ings: the tenth Machine Translation Summit, pages
79–86. AAMT.

Koehn, P., Hoang, H., Birch, A., Callison-Burch, C., Fed-
erico, M., Bertoldi, N., Cowan, B., Shen, W., Moran,
C., Zens, R., Dyer, C., Bojar, O., Constantin, A., and
Herbst, E. (2007). Moses: Open Source Toolkit for
Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the

45th Annual Meeting of the ACL, ACL ’07, pages 177–
180.

Mauser, A., Hasan, S., and Ney, H. (2009). Extend-
ing statistical machine translation with discriminative
and trigger-based lexicon models. In Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 210–217, Singapore.

McCrae, J., Espinoza, M., Montiel-Ponsoda, E., Aguado-
de Cea, G., and Cimiano, P. (2011). Combining sta-
tistical and semantic approaches to the translation of
ontologies and taxonomies. In Fifth workshop on Syn-
tax, Structure and Semantics in Statistical Translation
(SSST-5).

Och, F. J. and Ney, H. (2003). A systematic compari-
son of various statistical alignment models. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 29.

Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., and Zhu, W.-J.
(2002). BLEU: A Method for Automatic Evaluation
of Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the 40th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, ACL ’02, pages 311–318, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Patry, A. and Langlais, P. (2011). Going beyond word
cooccurrences in global lexical selection for statisti-
cal machine translation using a multilayer perceptron.
In 5th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (IJCNLP’11), pages 658–666, Chi-
ang Mai, Thailand.

Schmid, H. (1995). Improvements in part-of-speech tag-
ging with an application to german. In In Proceedings
of the ACL SIGDAT-Workshop, pages 47–50.

Snover, M., Dorr, B., Schwartz, R., Micciulla, L., and
Makhoul, J. (2006). A study of translation edit rate
with targeted human annotation. In In Proceedings of
Association for Machine Translation in the Americas,
pages 223–231.

Stolcke, A. (2002). Srilm-an extensible language model-
ing toolkit. In Proceedings International Conference
on Spoken Language Processing, pages 257–286.

Wu, H., Wang, H., and Zong, C. (2008). Domain adap-
tation for statistical machine translation with domain
dictionary and monolingual corpora. In Proceedings
of the 22nd International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics - Volume 1, COLING ’08, pages
993–1000.

46


