



















































Using Word Semantics To Assist English as a Second Language Learners


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2015, pages 116–120,
Denver, Colorado, May 31 – June 5, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Using Word Semantics To Assist English as a Second Language Learners

Mahmoud Azab
University of Michigan

mazab@umich.edu

Chris Hokamp
Dublin City University

chokamp@computing.dcu.ie

Rada Mihalcea
University of Michigan
mihalcea@umich.edu

Abstract
We introduce an interactive interface that
aims to help English as a Second Language
(ESL) students overcome language related
hindrances while reading a text. The interface
allows the user to find supplementary infor-
mation on selected difficult words. The inter-
face is empowered by our lexical substitution
engine that provides context-based synonyms
for difficult words. We also provide a prac-
tical solution for a real-world usage scenario.
We demonstrate using the lexical substitution
engine – as a browser extension that can anno-
tate and disambiguate difficult words on any
webpage.

1 Introduction

According to the U.S. Department of Education,
about 11% of all the students in public schools in
the United States receive or have received English
language learning services. The largest numbers of
ESL students are in California (26% of all the stu-
dents) and Texas (16%). About 70% of these stu-
dents are Spanish speakers (Dep, 2004). Moreover,
there is a large number of non-English speaking
countries that have programs for learning English,
with as many as 750 million English as a Foreign
Language students in the world (Crystal, 1997).

The goal of a number of computer-based language
learning tools developed to date is to provide as-
sistance to those with limited language abilities, in-
cluding students learning a second or a foreign lan-
guage or people suffering from disabilities such as
aphasia. These tools draw on research in educa-
tion, which found that text adaptation can improve

the reading comprehension skills for learners of En-
glish (Yano et al., 1994; Carlo et al., 2004). The lan-
guage learning technology often consists of methods
for text simplification and adaptation, which is per-
formed either at syntactic (Carroll et al., 1999; Sid-
dharthan et al., 2004) or lexical level (Carroll et al.,
1998; Devlin et al., 2000; Canning and Tait, 1999;
Burstein et al., 2007). Work has also been carried
out on the prediction and simplification of difficult
technical text (Elhadad, 2006a; Elhadad, 2006b) and
on the use of syntactic constraints for translations in
context (Grefenstette and Segond, 2003).

In this paper, we describe an interface developed
with the goal of assisting ESL students in their En-
glish reading activities. The interface builds upon a
lexical substitution system that we developed, which
provides synonyms and definitions for target words
in context. We first give a brief overview of the lex-
ical substitution task, and then present our system
SALSA (Sinha and Mihalcea, 2014) and (Sinha and
Mihalcea, 2012). We then describe the functionality
of the interface, and the interaction that a user can
have with this interface.

2 Lexical Substitution

Lexical substitution, also known as contextual syn-
onym expansion (McCarthy and Navigli, 2007), in-
volves replacing a certain word in a given con-
text with another, suitable word, such that the over-
all meaning of the word and the sentence are un-
changed. As an example, see the four sentences in
Table 1, drawn from the development data from the
SEMEVAL-2007 lexical substitution task. In the first
sentence, for instance, assuming we choose bright as

116



the target word, a suitable substitute could be bril-
liant, which would both maintain the meaning of the
target word and at the same time fit the context.

Sentence Target Synonym
The sun was bright. bright brilliant
He was bright and independent. bright intelligent
His feature film debut won awards. film movie
The market is tight right now. tight pressured

Table 1: Examples of synonym expansion in context

We perform contextual synonym expansion in two
steps: candidate synonym collection, followed by
context-based synonym fitness scoring.

Candidate synonym collection is the first step of
our system, and refers to the sub task of collecting a
set of potential synonym candidates for a given tar-
get word, starting with various resources. Note that
this step does not disambiguate the meaning of the
target word. Rather, all the possible synonyms are
selected, and these synonyms can be further refined
in the later step. For example, if we consider all
the possible meanings of the word bright, it can be
potentially replaced by brilliant, smart, intelligent,
vivid, luminous. SALSA uses five lexical resources,
as listed in Table 2, to ensure a good collection of
candidate synonyms.

The second step is context-based synonym fitness
scoring, which refers to picking the best candidates
out of the several potential ones obtained as a re-
sult of the previous step. There are several ways in
which fitness scoring can be performed, for example
by accounting for the semantic similarity between
the context and a candidate synonym, or for the sub-
stitutability of the synonym in the given context. We
experimented with several unsupervised and super-
vised methods, and the method that was found to
work best uses a set of features consisting of counts
obtained from Google N-grams (Brants and Franz,
2006) for several N-grams centered around the can-
didate synonym when replaced in context.

The synonym selection process inside SALSA
was evaluated under two different settings. The
first evaluation setting consists of the lexical sample
dataset made available during SEMEVAL 2007 (Mc-
Carthy and Navigli, 2007) - a set of 1,700 annotated
examples for 170 open-class words. On this dataset,
SALSA is able to find the synonym agreed upon by

several human annotators as its best guess in 21.3%
cases, and this synonym is in the top 10 candidates
returned by our system in 64.7% cases. These results
compare favorably with the best results reported dur-
ing SEMEVAL 2007 task on Lexical Substitution.

The second evaluation setting is a dataset consist-
ing of 550 open-class words in running text. On this
set of words, SALSA finds the best manually as-
signed synonym in 29.9% of the cases, and this syn-
onym is in our top ten candidates in 73.7% of the
cases.

Overall, we believe SALSA is able to identify
good candidate synonyms for a target word in con-
text, and therefore can form the basis for an interface
to assist English learners.

3 An Interface for English as a Second
Language Learners

Our goal is to leverage lexical substitution tech-
niques in an interface that can provide support to
ESL and EFL students in their reading activities. It
is often the case that students who are not proficient
in English have difficulty with understanding certain
words. This in turn has implications for their com-
prehension of the text, and consequently can neg-
atively impact their learning and knowledge acqui-
sition process. By having inline access to an ex-
planation of the words they have difficulty with, we
believe these students will have easier access to the
knowledge in the texts that they read.

In order to support various devices and platforms,
we implemented the prototype interface as a web ap-
plication. Given a text, the interface allows readers
to click on selected vocabulary words, and view sup-
plementary information in a side panel. This sup-
plementary information includes a list of in-context
synonyms, as provided by our system. In addition,
we also include example sentences obtained from
WordNet, corresponding to the target word meaning
dictated by the top synonym selected by SALSA.

The interface also includes the possibility for the
user to provide feedback by upvoting or downvoting
supplementary information. The goal of this com-
ponent is to allow the user to indicate whether they
found the information provided useful or not. In ad-
dition to providing direct feedback on the quality of
the interface, this user input will also indirectly con-

117



Table 2: Subsets of the candidates provided by different lexical resources for the adjective bright

Resource Candidates
Roget (RG) ablaze aglow alight argent auroral beaming blazing brilliant
WordNet (WN) burnished sunny shiny lustrous undimmed sunshiny brilliant
TransGraph (TG) nimble ringing fine aglow keen glad light picturesque
Lin (LN) red yellow orange pink blue brilliant green white dark
Encarta (EN) clear optimistic smart vivid dazzling brainy lively

tribute to the construction of a “gold standard” that
we can use to further improve the tool.

We evaluated an earlier static version of this inter-
face with ESL students who read two articles from
the BBC’s English learning website. We manually
selected difficult words from the text, and for these
words provided a list of in-context synonyms and
clear examples. After each reading, the students
took a post-reading quiz to evaluate their reading
comprehension. We then evaluated the extent to
which we could predict a student’s performance on
the post-quiz using features of their interaction with
the tool.

We also used this interface with English middle
school students whose primary language is English.
The students had to read short excerpts of a book
that was a part of their curriculum. Students were
allowed to click on only one highlighted word per
excerpt. In this experiment, supplementary informa-
tion was provided from WordNet. There was a post-
reading quiz to evaluate the students understanding
of the words. By training a regression model on the
interaction features collected during the reading ex-
ercises, we were able to accurately predict students’
performance on the post-quiz (Hokamp et al., 2014).

We have now enabled the SALSA interface to
provide feedback on arbitrary English content from
the web. By implementing the tool as a browser ex-
tension, we are able to show inline additional infor-
mation about text on any web page, even when the
content is dynamically generated.

The interface also collects both explicit and im-
plicit feedback. The explicit feedback is collected
via upvotes and downvotes on feedback items. The
implicit feedback is based on the user interactions
with the system while they are reading. Currently,
we collect several kinds of interactions. These in-
teractions include the clicked words, counts of user

clicks on a given word, the difficulty of the word as
measured by the inverse document frequency, and
the number of syllables it contains. In the future,
this data will help us to adapt the tool to individual
users.

4 Demonstration

During the demonstration, we will present the use
of the interface. We will allow participants to freely
browse the web with our tool enabled, to view feed-
back on lexical items, and to provide their own
feedback on the quality of the results. The system
will automatically identify and highlight the diffi-
cult words during browsing, and users can then click
these highlighted words to receive supplementary
information, consisting of synonyms and definitions,
which should assist them in reading and compre-
hending the content.

By hovering or clicking on an annotated word,
users can access a small popup window that includes
supplementary information. This supplementary in-
formation includes a list of in-context synonyms, as
provided by our system, and a clear example of the
word in-context. Figure 1 shows an example of the
current extension interface when a user hovers over
the word film.

Although the reading activity + quiz format de-
scribed above is necessary for the empirical evalua-
tion of our tool, it does not demonstrate a real-world
usage scenario. Therefore, we designed a browser
extension to show a realistic use case for the lexi-
cal substitution engine as the backend for a flexible
graphical component that can add additional infor-
mation to any content. We anticipate that the exten-
sion will prove useful to English language learners
as they navigate the Web, especially when they en-
counter difficult English content.

118



Figure 1: Example of supplementary information that the extension provides the user with when a user hovers over
the word film.

Acknowledgments

This work was partially funded by the National Sci-
ence Foundation (CAREER award #1361274) and
by DARPA (DEFT grant #12475008). Any opin-
ions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Na-
tional Science Foundation, DARPA, or the other
sources of support.

References

T. Brants and A. Franz. 2006. Web 1T 5-gram version 1.
Linguistic Data Consortium.

J. Burstein, J. Shore, J. Sabatini, and Y. Lee. 2007. De-
veloping a reading support tool for English language
learners. In Demo proceedings of the the annual con-
ference of the North American chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (NAACL-HLT
2007), Rochester, NY.

Y. Canning and J. Tait. 1999. Syntactic simplification of
newspaper text for aphasic readers. In Proceedings of
the ACM SIGIR’99 Workshop on Customised Informa-
tion Delivery, Berkeley, California.

M.S. Carlo, D. August, B. McLaughlin, C.E. Snow,
C. Dressler, D. Lippman, T. Lively, and C. White.
2004. Closing the gap: Addressing the vocabulary
needs of english language learners in bilingual and
mainstream classrooms. Reading Research Quarterly,
39(2).

J. Carroll, G. Minnen, Y. Canning, S. Devlin, and J. Tait.
1998. Practical simplification of English newspaper
text to assist aphasic readers. In Proceedings of the
AAAI-98 Workshop on Integrating Artificial Intelli-
gence and Assistive Technology, Madison, Wisconsin.

J. Carroll, G. Minnen, D. Pearce, Y. Canning, S. Devlin,
and J. Tait. 1999. Simplifying text for language-
impaired readers. In Proceedings of the Conference
of the European Chapter of the ACL (EACL 1999),
Bergen, Norway.

D. Crystal. 1997. English as a global language. Cam-
bridge University Press.

2004. http://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=96.
S. Devlin, J. Tait, J. Carroll, G. Minnen, and D. Pearce.

2000. Making accessible international communication
for people with language comprehension difficulties.
In Proceedings of the Conference of Computers Help-
ing People with Special Needs.

N. Elhadad. 2006a. Comprehending technical texts: Pre-
dicting and defining unfamiliar terms. In Proceedings
of the Annual Symposium of the American Medical In-
formatics Association, Washington.

N. Elhadad. 2006b. User-Sensitive Text Summariza-
tion: Application to the Medical Domain. Ph.D. the-
sis, Columbia University.

G. Grefenstette and F. Segond, 2003. Multilingual On-
Line Natural Language Processing, chapter 38.

C. Hokamp, R. Mihalcea, and P. Schuelke. 2014. Mod-
eling language proficiency using implicit feedback.
In Proceedings of the Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluations (LREC 2014), Reykjavik,
Iceland, May.

119



D. McCarthy and R. Navigli. 2007. The semeval English
lexical substitution task. In Proceedings of the ACL
Semeval workshop.

A. Siddharthan, A. Nenkova, and K. McKeown. 2004.
Syntactic simplification for improving content selec-
tion in multi-document summarization. In Proceed-
ings of the 20th international conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics.

R. Sinha and R. Mihalcea. 2012. Explorations in lexical-
sample and all-words lexical substitution. Journal of
Natural Language Engineering.

Ravi Som Sinha and Rada Mihalcea. 2014. Explorations
in lexical sample and all-words lexical substitution.
Natural Language Engineering, 20(1):99–129.

Y. Yano, M. Long, and S. Ross. 1994. The effects of sim-
plified and elaborated texts on foreign language tool’s
utility and effectiveness in terms of students’ reading
comprehension. Language Learning, 44.

120


