



















































Multilingual Open Relation Extraction Using Cross-lingual Projection


Human Language Technologies: The 2015 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 1351–1356,
Denver, Colorado, May 31 – June 5, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Multilingual Open Relation Extraction
Using Cross-lingual Projection

Manaal Faruqui
Carnegie Mellon University

Pittsburgh, PA 15213
mfaruqui@cs.cmu.edu

Shankar Kumar
Google Inc.

New York, NY 10011
shankarkumar@google.com

Abstract

Open domain relation extraction systems iden-
tify relation and argument phrases in a sen-
tence without relying on any underlying
schema. However, current state-of-the-art re-
lation extraction systems are available only
for English because of their heavy reliance
on linguistic tools such as part-of-speech tag-
gers and dependency parsers. We present a
cross-lingual annotation projection method for
language independent relation extraction. We
evaluate our method on a manually annotated
test set and present results on three typolog-
ically different languages. We release these
manual annotations and extracted relations in
ten languages from Wikipedia.

1 Introduction

Relation extraction (RE) is the task of assigning a
semantic relationship between a pair of arguments.
The two major types of RE are closed domain and
open domain RE. While closed-domain RE systems
(Bunescu and Mooney, 2005; Bunescu, 2007; Mintz
et al., 2009; Yao and Van Durme, 2014; Berant
and Liang, 2014) consider only a closed set of re-
lationships between two arguments, open domain
systems (Yates et al., 2007; Carlson et al., 2010;
Fader et al., 2011; Mausam et al., 2012) use an ar-
bitrary phrase to specify a relationship. In this pa-
per, we focus on open-domain RE for multiple lan-
guages. Although there are advantages to closed
domain RE (Banko and Etzioni, 2008), it is expen-
sive to construct a closed set of relation types which
would be meaningful across multiple languages.

Open RE systems extract patterns from sentences
in a given language to identify relations. For learn-

ing these patterns, the sentences are analyzed using a
part of speech tagger, a dependency parser and pos-
sibly a named-entity recognizer. In languages other
than English, these tools are either unavailable or not
accurate enough to be used. In comparison, it is eas-
ier to obtain parallel bilingual corpora which can be
used to build machine translation systems (Resnik
and Smith, 2003; Smith et al., 2013).

In this paper, we present a system that performs
RE on a sentence in a source language by first trans-
lating the sentence to English, performing RE in En-
glish, and finally projecting the relation phrase back
to the source language sentence. Our system as-
sumes the availability of a machine translation sys-
tem from a source language to English and an open
RE system in English but no any other analysis tool
in the source language. The main contributions of
this work are:

• A pipeline to develop relation extraction sys-
tem for any source language.

• Extracted open relations in ten languages based
on Wikipedia corpus.

• Manual judgements for the projected relations
in three languages.

We first describe our methodology for language
independent cross-lingual projection of extracted re-
lations (§2) followed by the relation annotation pro-
cedure and the results (§3). The manually anno-
tated relations in 3 languages and the automati-
cally extracted relations in 10 languages are avail-
able at: http://cs.cmu.edu/˜mfaruqui/
soft.html.

1351



Figure 1: RE in a Spanish sentence using the cross-
lingual relation extraction pipeline.

2 Multilingual Relation Extraction

Our method of RE for a sentence s = 〈s1, s2, . . . sN 〉
in a non-English language consists of three steps: (1)
Translation of s into English, that generates a sen-
tence t = 〈t1, t2, . . . tM 〉 with word alignments a
relative to s, (2) Open RE on t, and (3) Relation pro-
jection from t to s. Figure 1 shows an example of RE
in Spanish using our proposed pipeline. We employ
OLLIE1 (Mausam et al., 2012) for RE in English and
GOOGLE TRANSLATE2 API for translation from the
source language to English, although in principle,
we could use any translation system to translate the
language to English. We next describe each of these
components.

2.1 Relation Extraction in English

Suppose t = 〈t1, t2, . . . , tM 〉 is a tokenized English
sentence. Open relation extraction computes triples
of non-overlapping phrases (arg1; rel; arg2) from
the sentence t. The two arguments arg1 and arg2
are connected by the relation phrase rel.

We utilized OLLIE (Mausam et al., 2012) to ex-
tract the relation tuples for every English sentence.
We chose OLLIE because it has been shown to
give a higher yield at comparable precision rela-
tive to other open RE systems such as REVERB
and WOEparse (Mausam et al., 2012). OLLIE was
trained by extracting dependency path patterns on
annotated training data. This training data was boot-
strapped from a set of high precision seed tuples ex-
tracted from a simpler RE system REVERB (Fader
et al., 2011). In Godse killed Gandhi, the ex-

1http://knowitall.github.io/ollie/
2https://developers.google.com/

translate/

Data: s, t, a, pt
Result: ps
P ← PhraseExtract(s, t, a)
ps = ∅, score = −∞, overlap = 0
for (phrs, phrt) ∈ P do

if BLEU(phrt, pt) > score then
if phrt ∩ pt 6= ∅ then

pt ← phrt
score← BLEU(phrt, pt)
overlap← phrt ∩ pt

if overlap 6= 0 then
length =∞
for (phrs, pt) ∈ P do

if len(phrs) < length then
length← len(phrs)
ps ← phrs;

else
ps ←WordAlignmentProj(s, t, a, pt);

Algorithm 1: Cross-lingual projection of phrase pt
from a target sentence t to a source sentence s using
word alignments a and parallel phrases P .

tracted relation (Godse; killed; Gandhi) can be ex-
pressed by the dependency pattern: arg1 ↑ nsubj ↑
rel:postag=VBD ↓ dobj ↓ arg2.3 OLLIE also nor-
malizes the relation phrase for some of the phrases,
for example is president of is normalized to be pres-
ident of. 4

2.2 Cross-lingual Relation Projection

We next describe an algorithm to project the ex-
tracted relation tuples in English back to the source
language sentence. Given a source sentence, the
GOOGLE TRANSLATE API provides us its transla-
tion along with the word-to-word alignments rela-
tive to the source. If s = sN1 and t = tM1 denote
the source and its English translation, then the align-
ment a = {aij : 1 ≤ i ≤ N ; 1 ≤ j ≤ M} where,
aij = 1 if si is aligned to tj , and is 0 otherwise. A

3Example borrowed from Mausam et al. (2012)
4For sentences where the veracity of a relation depends on

a clause, OLLIE also outputs the clause. For example, in Early
astronomers believed that Earth is the center of the universe,
the relation (Earth; be center of; universe) is supplemented by
an (AttributedTo: believe; Early astronomers) clause. We ignore
this clausal information.

1352



naive word-alignment based projection would map
every word from a phrase extracted in English to the
source sentence. This algorithm has two drawbacks:
first, since the word alignments are many-to-many,
each English word can be possibly mapped to more
than one source word which leads to ambiguity in its
projection; second, a word level mapping can pro-
duce non-contiguous phrases in the source sentence,
which are hard to interpret semantically.

To tackle these problems, we introduce a novel
algorithm that incorporates a BLEU score (Papineni
et al., 2002) based phrase similarity metric to per-
form cross-lingual projection of relations. Given
a source sentence, its translation, and the word-
to-word alignment, we first extract phrase-pairs P
using the phrase-extract algorithm (Och and Ney,
2004). In each extracted phrase pair (phrs, phrt) ∈
P , phrs and phrt are contiguous word sequences in
s and t respectively. We next determine the trans-
lations of arg1, rel and arg2 from the extracted
phrase-pairs.

For each English phrase p ∈ {arg1, rel, arg2}, we
first obtain the phrase-pair (phrs, phrt) ∈ P such
that phrt has the highest BLEU score relative to
p subject to the condition that p ∩ phrt 6= ∅ i.e,
there is at least one word overlap between the two
phrases. This condition is necessary since we use
BLEU score with smoothing and may obtain a non-
zero BLEU score even with zero word overlap. If
there are multiple phrase-pairs in P that correspond
to the same target phrase phrt, we select the shortest
source phrase (phrs). However, if there is no word
overlap between the target phrase p and any of the
target phrases in P , we project the phrase using the
word-alignment based projection. The cross-lingual
projection method is presented in Algorithm 1.

3 Experiments

Evaluation for open relations is a difficult task with
no standard evaluation datasets. We first describe the
construction of our multilingual relation extraction
dataset and then present the experiments.

Annotation. The current approach to evaluation
for open relations (Fader et al., 2011; Mausam et
al., 2012) is to extract relations from a sentence
and manually annotate each relation as either valid
(1) or invalid (0) for the sentence. For exam-

ple, in the sentence: “Michelle Obama, wife of
Barack Obama was born in Chicago”, the follow-
ing are possible annotations: a) (Michelle Obama;
born in; Chicago): 1, b) (Barack Obama; born in;
Chicago): 0. Such binary annotations are not avail-
able for languages apart from English. Further-
more, a binary 1/0 label is a coarse annotation that
could unfairly penalize an extracted relation which
has the correct semantics but is slightly ungrammat-
ical. This could occur either when prepositions are
dropped from the relation phrase or when there is an
ambiguity in the boundary of the relation phrase.

Therefore to evaluate our multilingual relation ex-
traction framework, we obtained annotations from
professional linguists for three typologically differ-
ent languages: French, Hindi, and Russian. The an-
notation task is as follows: Given a sentence and
a pair of arguments (extracted automatically from
the sentence), the annotator identifies the most rel-
evant contiguous relation phrase from the sentence
that establishes a plausible connection between the
two arguments. If there is no meaningful contigu-
ous relation phrase between the two arguments, the
arguments are considered invalid and hence, the ex-
tracted relation tuple from the sentence is considered
incorrect.

Given the human annotated relation phrase and
the automatically extracted relation phrase, we can
measure the similarity between the two, thus alle-
viating the problem of coarse annotation in binary
judgments. For evaluation, we first report the per-
centage of valid arguments. Then for sentences with
valid arguments, we use smoothed sentence-level
BLEU score (max n-gram order = 3) to measure the
similarity of the automatically extracted relation rel-
ative to the human annotated relation.5

Results. We extracted relations from the entire
Wikipedia6 corpus in Russian, French and Hindi
from all sentences whose lengths are in the range
of 10 − 30 words. We randomly selected 1, 000
relations for each of these languages and annotated
them. The results are shown in table 1. The percent-
age of valid extractions is highest in French (81.6%)

5We obtained two annotations for≈ 300 Russian sentences.
Between the two annotations, the perfect agreement rate was
74.5% and the average BLEU score was 0.85.

6www.wikipedia.org

1353



Language Argument 1 Relation phrase Argument 2

French Il fut enrôlé de force au RAD
He was conscripted to RAD

Hindi bahut se log aaye cailifornia
Many people came to California

Russian Автокатастрофа произошла Черногории
Crash occured Montenegro

Table 3: Examples of extracted relations in different languages with English translations (Hindi is transliterated).

Language % valid BLEU Relation lengthGold Auto
French 81.6% 0.47 3.6 2.5
Hindi 64.9% 0.38 4.1 2.8
Russian 63.5% 0.62 1.8 1.7

Table 1: % of valid relations and BLEU score of the ex-
tracted relations across languages with the average rela-
tion phrase length (in words).

[0-
0.1

)

[0.
1-0

.2)

[0.
2-0

.4)

[0.
4-0

.6)

[0.
6-0

.8)

[0.
8-1

) [1]

Binned BLEU Score

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

N
u
m

b
e
r 

o
f 

R
e
la

ti
o
n
s

French
Hindi
Russian

Figure 2: Number of automatically extracted relations
binned by their BLEU scores computed relative to the
manually annotated relations.

followed by Hindi and Russian (64.0%). Surpris-
ingly, Russian obtains the lowest percentage of valid
relations but has the highest BLEU score between
the automatic and the human extracted relations.
This could be attributed to the fact that the average
relation length (in number of words) is the shortest
for Russian. From table 1, we observe that the length
of the relation phrase is inversely correlated with the
BLEU score.

Figure 2 shows the distribution of the number
of extracted relations across bins of similar BLEU
scores. Interestingly, the highest BLEU score bin
(1) contains the maximum number of relations in

Language Size Language Size
French 6,743 Georgian 497
Hindi 367 Latvian 491
Russian 7,532 Tagalog 102
Chinese 2,876 Swahili 114
Arabic 707 Indonesian 1,876

Table 2: Number of extracted relations (in thousands)
from Wikipedia in multiple languages.

all three languages. This is an encouraging result
since it implies that the majority of the extracted re-
lation phrases are identical to the manually anno-
tated relations. Table 2 lists the sizes of automat-
ically extracted relations on 10 different languages
from Wikipedia that we are going to make publicly
available. These were selected to include a mix-
ture of high-resource, low-resource, and typologi-
cally different languages. Table 3 shows examples
of randomly selected relations in different languages
along with their English translations.

4 Related Work

Cross-lingual projection has been used for transfer
of syntactic (Yarowsky and Ngai, 2001; Hwa et al.,
2005) and semantic information (Riloff et al., 2002;
Padó and Lapata, 2009). There has been a grow-
ing interest in RE for languages other than English.
Gamallo et al. (2012) present a dependency-parser
based open RE system for Spanish, Portuguese and
Galician. RE systems for Korean have been de-
veloped for both open-domain (Kim et al., 2011)
and closed-domain (Kim and Lee, 2012; Kim et
al., 2014) using annotation projection. These ap-
proaches use a Korean-English parallel corpus to
project relations extracted in English to Korean. Fol-
lowing projection, a Korean POS-tagger and a de-
pendency parser are employed to learn a RE system
for Korean.

1354



Tseng et al. (2014) describe an open RE for Chi-
nese that employs word segmentation, POS-tagging,
dependency parsing. Lewis and Steedman (2013)
learn clusters of semantically equivalent relations
across French and English by creating a semantic
signature of relations by entity-typing. These rela-
tions are extracted using CCG parsing in English
and dependency parsing in French. Blessing and
Schütze (2012) use inter-wiki links to map relations
from a relation database in a pivot language to the
target language and use these instances for learn-
ing in a distant supervision setting. Gerber and
Ngomo (2012) describe a multilingual pattern ex-
traction system for RDF predicates that uses pre-
existing knowledge bases for different languages.

5 Conclusion

We have presented a language independent open do-
main relation extraction pipeline and have evalu-
ated its performance on three typologically differ-
ent languages: French, Hindi and Russian. Our
cross-lingual projection method utilizes OLLIE and
GOOGLE TRANSLATE to extract relations in the
language of interest. Our approach does not rely
on the availability of linguistic resources such as
POS-taggers or dependency parsers in the target lan-
guage and can thus be extended to multiple lan-
guages supported by a machine translation system.
We are releasing the manually annotated judgements
for open relations in the three languages and the
open relations extracted over the entire Wikipedia
corpus in ten languages. The resources are avail-
able at: http://cs.cmu.edu/˜mfaruqui/
soft.html.

Acknowledgment

This work was performed when the first author was
an intern at Google. We thank Richard Sproat for
providing comments on an earlier draft of this pa-
per. We thank Hao Zhang for helping us with the re-
lation extraction framework, and Richard Zens and
Kishore Papineni for their feedback on this work.
We are grateful to Bruno Cartoni, Vitaly Nikolaev
and their teams for providing us annotations of mul-
tilingual relations.

References
Michele Banko and Oren Etzioni. 2008. The tradeoffs

between open and traditional relation extraction. In
Proceedings of ACL.

J. Berant and P. Liang. 2014. Semantic parsing via para-
phrasing. In Proceedings of ACL.

Andre Blessing and Hinrich Schütze. 2012. Crosslingual
distant supervision for extracting relations of different
complexity. In Proceedings of CIKM.

Razvan C. Bunescu and Raymond J. Mooney. 2005. A
shortest path dependency kernel for relation extrac-
tion. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Razvan C. Bunescu. 2007. Learning to extract relations
from the web using minimal supervision. In Proceed-
ings of ACL.

Andrew Carlson, Justin Betteridge, Bryan Kisiel, Burr
Settles, Estevam R. Hruschka Jr., and Tom M.
Mitchell. 2010. Toward an architecture for never-
ending language learning. In Proceedings of AAAI.

Anthony Fader, Stephen Soderland, and Oren Etzioni.
2011. Identifying relations for open information ex-
traction. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Pablo Gamallo, Marcos Garcia, and Santiago Fernández-
Lanza. 2012. Dependency-based open information
extraction. In Proceedings of ROBUS-UNSUP.

Daniel Gerber and Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo. 2012.
Extracting multilingual natural-language patterns for
rdf predicates. In Proceedings of the 18th Inter-
national Conference on Knowledge Engineering and
Knowledge Management.

Rebecca Hwa, Philip Resnik, Amy Weinberg, Clara
Cabezas, and Okan Kolak. 2005. Bootstrapping
parsers via syntactic projection across parallel texts.
Natural Language Engineering, 11:11–311.

Seokhwan Kim and Gary Geunbae Lee. 2012. A graph-
based cross-lingual projection approach for weakly su-
pervised relation extraction. In Proceedings of ACL.

Seokhwan Kim, Minwoo Jeong, Jonghoon Lee, and
Gary Geunbae Lee. 2011. A cross-lingual anno-
tation projection-based self-supervision approach for
open information extraction. In Proceedings of IJC-
NLP.

Seokhwan Kim, Minwoo Jeong, Jonghoon Lee, and
Gary Geunbae Lee. 2014. Cross-lingual annotation
projection for weakly-supervised relation extraction.
ACM Trans. Asian Lang. Inf. Process., pages 3–3.

Mike Lewis and Mark Steedman. 2013. Unsupervised
induction of cross-lingual semantic relations. In Pro-
ceedings of EMNLP.

Mausam, Michael Schmitz, Robert Bart, Stephen Soder-
land, and Oren Etzioni. 2012. Open language learning
for information extraction. In Proceedings of EMNLP-
CoNLL.

1355



Mike Mintz, Steven Bills, Rion Snow, and Dan Jurafsky.
2009. Distant supervision for relation extraction with-
out labeled data. In Proceedings of ACL.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2004. The align-
ment template approach to statistical machine transla-
tion. Comput. Linguist., pages 417–449.

Sebastian Padó and Mirella Lapata. 2009. Cross-lingual
annotation projection of semantic roles. Journal of Ar-
tificial Intelligence Research, 36:307–340.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: A method for automatic evalu-
ation of machine translation. In Proceedings of ACL.

Philip Resnik and Noah A. Smith. 2003. The web as a
parallel corpus. Computational Linguistics.

Ellen Riloff, Charles Schafer, and David Yarowsky.
2002. Inducing information extraction systems for
new languages via cross-language projection. In Pro-
ceedings of COLING.

Jason R. Smith, Herve Saint-Amand, Magdalena Pla-
mada, Philipp Koehn, Chris Callison-Burch, and
Adam Lopez. 2013. Dirt cheap web-scale parallel text
from the common crawl. In Proceedings of ACL.

Yuen-Hsien Tseng, Lung-Hao Lee, Shu-Yen Lin, Bo-
Shun Liao, Mei-Jun Liu, Hsin-Hsi Chen, Oren Etzioni,
and Anthony Fader. 2014. Chinese open relation ex-
traction for knowledge acquisition. In Proceedings of
EACL.

Xuchen Yao and Benjamin Van Durme. 2014. Informa-
tion extraction over structured data: Question answer-
ing with freebase. In Proceedings of ACL.

David Yarowsky and Grace Ngai. 2001. Inducing multi-
lingual pos taggers and np bracketers via robust pro-
jection across aligned corpora. In Proceedings of
NAACL.

Alexander Yates, Michael Cafarella, Michele Banko,
Oren Etzioni, Matthew Broadhead, and Stephen
Soderland. 2007. Textrunner: Open information
extraction on the web. In Proceedings of NAACL:
Demonstrations.

1356


