



















































Extracting Human Temporal Orientation from Facebook Language


Human Language Technologies: The 2015 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 409–419,
Denver, Colorado, May 31 – June 5, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Extracting Human Temporal Orientation from Facebook Language

H. Andrew Schwartz,1,4 Gregory J. Park,2 Maarten Sap,2 Evan Weingarten3, Johannes Eichstaedt,2

Margaret L. Kern,5 David Stillwell,6 Michal Kosinski,7 Jonah Berger,3 Martin Seligman,2 Lyle H. Ungar1
1Computer & Information Science, 2Psychology, 3Wharton, University of Pennsylvania

4Computer Science, Stony Brook University 5Graduate School of Education, University of Melbourne
6Psychometrics Centre, Cambridge University 7Graduate School of Business, Stanford University

hansens@seas.upenn.edu, gregpark@sas.upenn.edu

Abstract

People vary widely in their temporal
orientation—how often they emphasize the
past, present, and future—and this affects their
finances, health, and happiness. Traditionally,
temporal orientation has been assessed by
self-report questionnaires. In this paper, we
develop a novel behavior-based assessment
using human language on Facebook. We first
create a past, present, and future message
classifier, engineering features and evaluating
a variety of classification techniques. Our
message classifier achieves an accuracy of
71.8%, compared with 52.8% from the most
frequent class and 58.6% from a model based
entirely on time expression features. We
quantify a users’ overall temporal orientation
based on their distribution of messages and
validate it against known human correlates:
conscientiousness, age, and gender. We
then explore social scientific questions,
finding novel associations with the factors
openness to experience, satisfaction with life,
depression, IQ, and one’s number of friends.
Further, demonstrating how one can track
orientation over time, we find differences in
future orientation around birthdays.

1 Introduction

How much one emphasizes the past, present, or fu-
ture is predictive of many human factors such as oc-
cupational and educational success, engagement in
risky behavior, financial stability, depression, and
health (Boyd and Zimbardo, 2005; Zimbardo and
Boyd, 1999). However, studies on the human ex-
perience of time are filled with diverse measurement

methods (Strathman and Joireman, 2005), mostly in-
volving questionnaires which are expensive to ad-
minister multiple times or at scale and can be subject
to confounds when compared to other questionnaire
based assessments.

Text mining and language processing techniques
can provide a more objective and scalable measure-
ment of temporal orientation, one’s tendency to em-
phasize the past, present, or future. Whereas most
prior computational linguistics and text mining tem-
poral studies have focused on events, there has been
a lack of work looking at the temporal orientation
of people. Such measures, which were not practical
before the growth of social media, can open many
avenues of large-scale psychological discovery into
the consequences of temporal orientation and yield
applications such as targeted marketing, loan repay-
ment forecasting, understanding economic patterns,
or even quantified self-help tools to encourage more
future-mindedness.

In this paper, we develop a temporal orienta-
tion measure based on language in social media.
The measure uses a message-level classifier of past,
present, and future, aggregated over users to create
user-level assessments. We evaluate the message-
level classifier over hand annotated data and the de-
rived user-level model against known human cor-
relates of temporal orientation: conscientiousness,
age, and gender. To the best of our knowledge, this
represents the first paper to study a language-based
measure of user-level temporal-orientation.

Our contributions include: (a) the introduction of
the task of extracting human temporal orientation
from their language use, (b) methodological evalu-
ation and feature engineering for the task, and (c)
novel social scientific applications and findings. To-

409



ward (a) and (b), we find that achieving the task is
non-trivial as we build on and diverge from related
computational linguistics tasks (e.g. time expression
recognition) and utilize a classifier capturing non-
linear relationships and interactions. Towards (c),
we show how our measure usefully informs psycho-
logical theory by relating our human assessments to
other psychological variables at a scale not easily ex-
plored, and by tracking changes in temporal orienta-
tion over time.

2 Background

Researchers and philosophers have long been inter-
ested in the subjective experience of time: how in-
dividuals relate to their past, are mindful of their
present, and envision their futures (James, 1890;
Lewin, 1942). Similarly, computational studies
have a rich history on extracting temporal relation-
ships beginning decades ago (Allen, 1983). Here,
we provide some background on temporal orien-
tation’s broader relevance, on computational tech-
niques used to extract temporal information from
text, and on related user-level prediction tasks.

Temporal orientation and its correlates. Stud-
ies on the human subjective experience of time are
filled with diverse measurement methods, varying in
their emphasis on cognitive, affective, and/or moti-
vational aspects.1 Decisions are influenced by the
past, present, and mental simulations of possible fu-
tures (Seligman et al., 2013).

One widely studied aspect of subjective time is
temporal orientation, or an individual’s tendency to
habitually emphasize past, present, or future tem-
poral frames (Boyd and Zimbardo, 2005). Under-
standing how and why individuals differ in their
temporal orientation, can, for example suggest how
they can achieve favorable outcomes in areas of life
that require substantial long-term planning, includ-
ing education, higher status occupations, and phys-
ical health (Zimbardo and Boyd, 1999; Boyd and
Zimbardo, 2005; Steinberg et al., 2009).

Consistent links have been established between
temporal orientation and a psychological factor as-
sociated with planning, health, and risky behav-

1For a review, see Strathman et al., 2005.

iors: the personality trait of conscientiousness.
Conscientious individuals are characterized as self-
disciplined, orderly, planful, and reliable (Roberts et
al., 2013). Past research has established that highly
conscientious people exhibit more future- and less
present-oriented (Zimbardo and Boyd, 1999; Web-
ley and Nyhus, 2006; Adams and Nettle, 2009). We
use a measure of conscientiousness from the well-
established “Big-five” or Five Factor Model of per-
sonality (Goldberg, 1990; McCrae and John, 1992).
The other four factors, extraversion (e.g. active, out-
going, talkative), agreeableness (e.g. kind, trusting,
generous), neuroticism (e.g. touchy, anxious, de-
pressive), and openness (e.g. intellectual, artistic,
insightful), have been found to have little connec-
tion with temporal orientation (Zimbardo and Boyd,
1999).

Other studies have established consistent links be-
tween temporal orientation and demographic char-
acteristics. In particular, as one ages they think less
about the immediate present and more about the fu-
ture (Friedman, 2000; Nurmi, 2005; Steinberg et al.,
2009), and females tend to think a bit more about the
future than males (Keough et al., 1999). However,
detailed age trends are not well understood, with
studies mostly focusing on adolescents or college-
aged students.

For many other important outcomes, such as hap-
piness or well-being, past research leaves us un-
clear as to the relationship with temporal orienta-
tion. Some suggest future-oriented individuals are
happier as they engage in more provident behav-
iors such as saving money and establishing health-
ier habit (Desmyter and De Raedt, 2012; Diener et
al., 2013). This is supported by the connection be-
tween future orientation and less depression (Zim-
bardo and Boyd, 1999). However, others argue that
emphasis on the future inhibits ones ability to re-
flect wisely on the past and savor present experi-
ences (Boniwell et al., 2010). Our study explores
this relationship at an unprecedented scale, utilizing
the Satisfaction with Life Scale (Diener et al., 1985)
and the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depres-
sion Scale, the CES-D (Radloff, 1977). We also look
at previously unexplored variables, IQ and number
of friends, for which links with temporal orientation
seem plausible (e.g. one might suspect it is smart to
think about the future, or wonder if one’s reflection

410



on the past is related to their popularity as measure
by number of friends).

Related work. Studying temporal language is by
no means new to the field of computational linguis-
tics (or NLP). Most recently, time annotation has
gained greater interest with a successive sequence
of three SemEval tasks (TempEval-1, -2 and -3).

The SemEval competitions have provided data
sets that facilitate the comparison of different meth-
ods for evaluating time expressions, events, and tem-
poral relations (Verhagen et al., 2007; Verhagen et
al., 2010; UzZaman et al., 2013). Such research
on temporal text analysis generally focuses on de-
termining when events start and end or how they re-
late temporally to each other; specific goals include
information extraction of time-dependent facts from
news media (Ling and Weld, 2010; Talukdar et al.,
2012), or extracting personal histories in social me-
dia (Wen et al., 2013). In contrast, our goal is to find
the temporal orientation of people.

Of the numerous TempEval tasks, we build upon
those which identify time expressions and resolve
their expressed time and date relative to the time
of writing (e.g. the time expression ‘yesterday’ in a
document written on January 15, 2014 is resolved
as January 14, 2014). Many methods have been
used, ranging from hand-crafting rules to machine
learning models. Unlike other areas of natural lan-
guage processing where stochastic techniques dom-
inate, rule-based systems have been quite compet-
itive in time expressions recognition, especially in
less domain dependent settings or for relaxed match-
ing tasks (UzZaman et al., 2013).

A number of useful toolkits have been produced
for temporal text analysis (Verhagen et al., 2005;
Ling and Weld, 2010; Chang and Manning, 2012).
In this work, we use Stanford University’s rule-
based temporal tagger, SUTime, which geve accu-
racy in line with the state-of-the-art systems at iden-
tifying time expressions at TempEval (Chang and
Manning, 2012).2 SUTime, built on top of Stan-
ford’s part-of-speech and named entity taggers, la-

2Our goals differ slightly from the TempEval accuracy cri-
teria. For example, when SUTime fails to distinguish “one and
a half weeks” from “one week”, it does not affect our per-
formance. However, other errors, such as confusing the verb
‘march’ with the month March will harm our accuracy.

bels times, durations, intervals, and relative times
compared to the time at which the document was
written.

Our work fits a growing tradition of computa-
tional work to better understand people based on
their online behavior. Much of this type of work
uses human properties to better perform traditional
computational linguistics tasks, while others focus
particularly on predicting user attributes. User net-
work information has been used for tweet summa-
rization or filtering (Panigrahy et al., 2012; Chang et
al., 2013; Feng and Wang, 2013).

Others utilize psychological knowledge about
people, such as exploiting the human tendency to
report more positive extreme feelings than negative
in order to improve on sentiment analysis (Guerra
et al., 2014). Toward attribute prediction, a large
proportion of works have focused on demograph-
ics (Argamon et al., 2009; Goswami et al., 2009;
Burger et al., 2011; Al Zamal et al., 2012; Bergsma
et al., 2013; Sap et al., 2014). and personality pre-
diction (Mairesse et al., 2007; Iacobelli et al., 2011;
Schwartz et al., 2013; Park et al., 2015).

Human temporal orientation, as we study it here,
differs from previous studies of user attribute pre-
diction in that temporal orientation calls for consid-
eration of additional language features (some more
sophisticated, such as time expressions), and explo-
ration of classification techniques (e.g. that can cap-
ture non-linear relationships or interactions). We
also add multidisciplinary applications, showing not
just how accurately our models predict, but also
studying how temporal orientation relates to other
factors, for example, by weighing in on conflicting
literature as to whether people who are more future-
oriented are more satisfied with their life.

3 Method

We develop a methodology for measuring a given
social media user’s temporal orientation. First, we
build a classifier to label whether a message dis-
cusses the past, present, or future, and then we quan-
tify users’ temporal orientation as the percentage of
their messages in each category.

We train a variety of supervised classifiers and ex-
plore many features in order to label the temporal

411



class of a social media message. Because this task
is new, it is not clear what classification technique is
ideal (for example, it is possible that present orienta-
tion is best captured with non-linear relationships),
so we explore four techniques:

logR: (logistic regression). We use regularized lo-
gistic regression (equivalent to maximum entropy)
(Fan et al., 2008; Bishop, 2006). From cross-
validation over the training data, we chose L1 pe-
nalization (α||β||1).

lSVC, rSVC: (support vector classification).
Compared to logR, support vector machines offer
non-linear kernel functions (Cortes and Vapnik,
1995), and large-margin optimization for class split.
We consider both a linear kernel (lSVC) and a radial
basis function kernel (rSVC). From cross-validation
over the training data, we chose L1 penalization for
lSVC and L2 (α||β||2) for rSVC.

ERTs: (forest of extremely randomized trees).
This technique uses an ensemble of decision trees
in which both the feature and cut-point are chosen at
each node from a randomly generated set of possi-
ble options (Geurts et al., 2006). Such an approach
can handle both interactions and non-linear relation-
ships, at the expense of a larger search space. From
cross-validation over our training data, we set the
following algorithm parameters: we build 1,000 de-
cision trees, using the Gini impurity measure when
choosing splits (as opposed to entropy), and se-
lecting each node’s feature threshold from among
square-root of the total features.

All classifications algorithms were implemented
using the scikit-learn toolkit (Pedregosa et al.,
2011). Multi-classication over binary classifiers
(logR, lSVC, rSVC) was achieved using a series of
one-v-rest classifiers.

We explore five language-based features:

ngrams: 1 to 3 token sequences. Messages
are tokenized using the happierfuntokenizing tool3

which captures common social media tokens such
as emoticons, hashtags, and user handles. Features

3available here:
wwbp.org/public data/happierfuntokenizing.zip

are encoded simply as binary indicators for whether
the ngram appears in the message.

time exs: The mean difference between the re-
solved date-time of all time expressions and the
date-time in which the message was posted. Time
expressions are labeled via Stanford’s SUTime an-
notator (Chang and Manning, 2012), discussed pre-
viously. Specific features recorded include the tem-
poral difference itself (e.g. -2.5 for “two and half
days ago”), its base 2 log (log(1 + value)), its ab-
solute value, total number of time expressions, and
binary variables indicating if any past, present, or fu-
ture expressions appear in the text. We also include
binary features for each of the named-entity time
tags for the time expression provided by SUTime
(e.g. “future ref”, “present ref”, “next immediate”).

POS tags: The relative frequency of each part-of-
speech tag. Tagging is done via Stanford’s part-of-
speech tagger (Toutanova et al., 2003). Stanford’s
tagger does not have explicit social media tags, but
we are most interested in capturing tense which it
does well.4 Also, it is already being used as part
of SUTime. Each part-of-speech tag is encoded
as the frequency of tag usage (freq(tag,msg)) di-
vided by the total number of tokens in the message
(tokensmsg):

p(tag|msg) = freq(tag,msg)|tokensmsg|

lexica: The relative frequency of categories, based on
the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) dictionary
(Pennebaker et al., 2007). We use the 2007 version of
LIWC which includes 64 categories of psychologically-
relevant language, including past, present, and future
verb categories. The features are encoded as the fre-
quency with which a word from a category (cat) appeared
in the message (msg) divided by the total tokens in the
message (tokensmsg):

p(cat|msg) =

∑
token∈cat

freq(token,msg)

|tokensmsg|

4The Stanford Tagger has well documented errors on mi-
croblog text (Derczynski et al., 2013). However, we manually
evaluated 49 verbs across 20 randomly selected statuses, and
all verb tenses were correctly tagged while 4 non-verbs were
incorrectly tagged as base-form verbs.

412



Status R1 R2 R3 Maj
:) today was actually pretty good pa pa pa pa
is listening to The Sad Cafe by The Eagles! pr pr pr pr
considering checking out base jumping and parkour some time in the future XP fu fu fu fu
I just watched Oprah and am posting what it was about. pa pr pa pa
really wanted a snow day, but probably not going to get one tomorrow. now homework. pr fu fu fu
Another day of great restraint. pa pa pr pa

Table 1: Examples of statuses annotated for temporal classes: past (pa), present/none (pr), and future (fu). R1, R2, R3:
judgements from each rater; Maj: choice from majority voting. The bottom three examples illustrate difficult cases.

lengths: mean size of 1grams and number of tokens in
the post.

We found it useful to use a modest variety of feature
types and to build on existing work that labels time ex-
pressions. While one might expect time expression fea-
tures to be extremely valuable for this task, we found only
15% of Facebook messages contain them, even though
many more communicate a focus on the past or future
through other means (e.g. tense or semantic information).
All features were limited to those mentioned in at least
0.05% of messages.

At the user-level, we produce three categories
of temporal orientation, defined simply as the pro-
portion of a user’s total messages (msgs(user)all)
classified in the given temporal category (tc ∈
{past, present, future}):

orientationtc(user) =
|msgstc(user)|
|msgsall(user)|

We generate three separate variables (summing to one),
rather than a single variable temporal index, in order to
capture non-linear relationships (i.e., the potential for the
present to correlate in the opposite direction of both the
past and future). All of our user analyses are based on
100 randomly selected messages from each user.

4 Data collection and labeling
We use three social media datasets: the training set, test
set, and user set. The training set consists of 4,302 Twit-
ter and Facebook annotated messages. The test set is a
random subset of 500 annotated Facebook messages, rep-
resentative of messages we will apply our model. Finally,
the user set contains 531,893 messages from Facebook
users with known age, gender, personality, satisfaction
with life, depression, IQ and number of Facebook friends.
We derived the test set from the user set in order to estab-
lish accuracies of our model over the application domain.

Training set. Our training data consists of both Face-
book and Twitter messages. For Facebook, 3,000 status

updates, sent between March 2009 and October 2011,
were randomly sampled from users of the MyPersonal-
ity application (Kosinski and Stillwell, 2012; Quercia et
al., 2012), who also provided their age and gender. For
Twitter, 3,000 messages were sampled from the 1% ran-
dom stream provided by Twitter during September 2012.

Three annotators, undergraduate students at the Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania, independently labeled the tem-
poral orientation of each message. Messages were la-
beled in units of days past or future (adapted from Liber-
man et al. (2007)). For example, -7 would be a week ago,
−1/24 would be an hour ago, 0 would be now (present),
and 365 would be a year from now. Inter-annotator agree-
ment, as the intraclass correlation coefficient (Shrout and
Fleiss, 1979), was 0.85. Ratings were averaged into a
single “time from now” index. For the purposes of this
study we then discretized the data into past (mean rating
< 0), present (mean rating = 0), or future (mean rating
> 0). Annotation of the 6,000 messages took approxi-
mately 150 human hours.

When rating, messages were marked ‘NA’ when they
appeared to come from a bot or were composed of song
lyrics or quotations. (Removing unoriginal content was
desired for the consumer behavior research for which the
messages were first labeled.) For our purposes, in order
to maximize the training set size, we only removed mes-
sages when all three raters chose ‘NA’, such that there
was no average rating available for the message. The re-
sulting final training set consisted of 4,302 total messages
(2,009 tweets; 2,293 Facebook status updates). Since our
application of the data does not include a manual filtering
of messages, we created a separate message test set with
no filtering in order to accurately evaluate our classifier
in the application’s setting (below).

Test set. Evaluating our classifiers over our annotated
training set would not yield an accurate assessment of
the performance when applied to the user set (described
next). Therefore, we randomly selected 500 statuses from
the user set as our message test set.5 Statuses exclude

5While we desired a large training set, the test set only
needed to be large enough to evaluate differences in accuracy.

413



mfc logR lSVC rSVC ERTs msgs
Accuracy .528 .686 .708 .684 .718 500
past (p, r, f1) (.00, .00, .00) (.56, .68, .62) (.63, .67, .65) (.63, .56, .59) (.73, .67, .71) 131
present (p, r, f1) (.53, 1.0, .69) (.80, .74, .77) (.78, .78, .78) (.70, .85, .77) (.74, .84, .79) 264
future (p, r, f1) (.00, .00, .00) (.60, .56, .58) (.61, .56, .58) (.69, .43, .53) (.60, .47, .53) 105

Table 2: Accuracy (percentage classified correct) message classifiers based on different learning algorithms (identified
in section 3). Temporal class results are broken down by precision (p), recall (r), and f1 score for each of past (pa),
present (pr), and future (fu). Number of messages (msgs) are listed on the far right. The most frequent class baseline
(mfc) indicates accuracy if only predicting the present class.

reposts of others’ statuses and comments on other peo-
ple’s posts, and we found only 2 of the 500 random mes-
sages were made by apps (users still choose whether or
not to post these to their walls). Three annotators in-
dependently classified each status message as predom-
inantly talking about the past, present, or future. The
overall rating for each message was determined by a ma-
jority vote (when there was a tie: i.e., one of each class,
present was used). Agreement among these raters, cal-
culated as the intraclass correlation coefficient, was 0.83.
One might suggest some messages do not have a tempo-
ral class (e.g. does “I like Selena Gomez” have a predom-
inant temporal class?).6 Such messages would be marked
as ‘present’ in our annotation scheme. Thus, one might
consider our present class to encompass both a present
and “non-temporal” class.

User set. Human-level data is used to evaluate our
model toward understanding the relationship between hu-
man temporal orientation and individual characteristics
(e.g. demographics, personality). Thus, this data spans
both message and user levels, from consenting partic-
ipants, in the MyPersonality Facebook study (Kosinski
and Stillwell, 2012).

We used five subsets of the MyPersonality data in or-
der to capture various psychological and behavioral vari-
ables: user subset 1: gender, age, and personality; user
subset 2: satisfaction with life, user subset 3: depression,
user subset 4: IQ, and user subset 5: number of friends.
For our first subset, gender, age, and personality variables
are well represented in the dataset, so we created a strat-
ified sample over 1,520 users. We sampled equal propor-
tions of males and females across 4-year age bins from
13 to 60 (i.e., ages [13,16], [17,20], . . . ,[57, 60]), which
provides gender- and age-controlled correlations for each
personality factor (openness, conscientiousness, extraver-
sion, agreeableness, and neuroticism).

Other variables are more limited. Thus, instead of cre-

6We attempted to include a non-temporal class and found
disagreement. Some argue that every message has a temporal
class (e.g. “I like Selena Gomez” is truly signalling present).

ating stratified samples, these three subsets include users
for whom gender and age information is also available:
1,565 in the case of satisfaction with life, 268 for the
CES-D depression scale, 898 for IQ and, 1,000 in the
case of number of friends. The gender and age data is
then included as covariates in regression analyses to find
the relationship between these variables and temporal ori-
entation, controlled for demographics. In all five subsets
of the user set, we randomly sample 100 messages from
each user in order to determine their temporal orientation.

Table 1 shows example status updates along with rat-
ings. As evidenced from the rater agreement, most status
updates were fairly easy to determine. Some messages
have explicit temporal phrases (e.g. “in the future”) while
others are more subtle (e.g. relying on verb tense: “is lis-
tening ...”). Others, such as the bottom three examples,
might reference multiple temporal classes or not include
clear verb tense and thus rely on the raters’ judgements
for what is most dominant.

5 Evaluation
We evaluate our past, present, and future message classi-
fier as well as its features. All models were trained over
our training set and evaluated over the test set.

Table 2 compares accuracy of various types of clas-
sifiers: logistic regression (logR), linear support vector
classifier (lSVC), support vector classifier with rbf ker-
nel (rSVC), and a forest of extremely randomized trees
(ERTs). We saw best results from the ERTs classifier,
suggesting some of its benefits (capturing non-linear re-
lationships or interactions among features) may help this
problem. We also see, from the F1 scores, that all classi-
fiers found the future class most difficult to predict; this
was the smallest class and likely subject to the most bias
against. All classifiers performed significantly better than
the most frequent class baseline with an error reduction of
41% in the case of ERTs (p < 0.001 from paired t-test on
absolute errors). We selected the ERTs classifier for the
remaining experiments.7

7This trained classifier is available at: wwbp.org/data.html.

414



type feature type feature type feature

POS verb, past tense relativity
was POS verb, past tense
common present verbs relativity (in, on, at, …) POS verb, base form

lengths common present verbs tomorrow

had POS POS to

time exs numof timexs lexica
ngrams time exs numof timexs
lexica lexica

numof tokens lexica ngrams

ngrams verbs, 3rd pers singular

-

Past FuturePresent

Table 4: Top five most correlated features for each of the temporal classes. ‘-’ indicates negative correlations; positive
otherwise. Correlation absolute strengths ranged from Pearson r = 0.08 to 0.40.

Features Accuracy Features Accuracy
mfc baseline .528 all features .718
ngrams alone .688 w/o ngrams .672
time exs alone .586 w/o time exs .708
POS tags alone .614 w/o POS tags .712
lexica alone .684 w/o lexica .702
lengths alone .544 w/o lengths .718

Table 3: Accuracy of our full past, present, future mes-
sage classifier (top) and an ablation analysis of accuracies
when removing each feature type (bottom). The most fre-
quent class baseline (mfc) indicates accuracy if only pre-
dicting the present class. The full classifier significantly
out-performed using time expressions alone (p < 0.05;
bolded accuracy).

We did feature ablation analyses as shown in Table
3. Every feature type produced improvement over the
baseline and, with the exception of lengths, removing
any feature resulted in reduced performance (though none
strong enough to meet significance at p < 0.05). The lim-
ited reduction implies that while each feature type may
contain temporal information, there is also substantial re-
dundancy across the feature types.

Results when using time-expression alone can be con-
sidered another baseline, representing a model based en-
tirely on previous time expression work. A reason for the
large advantage of using additional features is that many
temporally indicative messages did not contain any time
expressions (instead expressing orientation through verb
tense or semantics). Indeed, we see from Table 4, which
lists the top features for each class, that time expression
features were very useful when then occurred. All feature
types made it into these top ten lists.

User-level temporal orientation is trivially defined:
percentage of a given user’s messages that are classi-
fied as past, present, or future oriented. Thus, accuracy
for each proportion is directly tied to message accuracy.
Still, we validate that our approach is in line with psy-
chological theory (discussed in Section 2) by correlat-
ing user-level temporal orientations with outcomes whose

associations have been previously established: conscien-
tiousness, age, and gender number of users; results con-
trolled for age and gender. In particular, future orienta-
tion should be positively correlated with conscientious-
ness, age, and being female, while present orientation
should be negatively correlated. Our results which which
are consistent with the literature, can be seen in the top
half of Table 5. Among users with personality scores,
we found positive correlations between future orienta-
tion and seemingly future-oriented questionnaire items:
“I make plans and stick to them” (r = .16) and “I fin-
ish what I start” (r = .12). To the best of our knowl-
edge, psychology literature has not established standard
correlates of past orientation, so the correlation with age
and past orientation, though not surprising, is somewhat
novel.

Correlations with questionnaire measures help to es-
tablish convergent validity — i.e. our measure is empiri-
cally related to other measures in a way that is consistent
with theory about the underlying constructs. However,
self report questionnaires are often used for convenience,
not necessarily because they are most valid (Paulhus and
Vazire, 2007). In fact, more objective or behavior-based
measures in social science have been called for (Baumeis-
ter et al., 2007).

6 Exploration
Here we use our language-based user measure to explore
behavioral and psychological correlates of temporal ori-
entation. Figure 1 illustrates the user-level distributions
of the message classes, broken down by gender, within
the stratified sample. All experiments in this section ap-
plied our measure over the user set. Within users, the
mean proportions of past, present, and future messages
were 0.24, 0.61, and 0.15 respectively. Among most
users, the majority of messages were classified as present,
while future-oriented messages were least frequent.

We compare these temporal orientations to user per-
sonality, satisfaction with life, IQ, and their number of
Facebook friends. We use both Pearson correlation and
linear regression (OLS) to estimate relationships between

415



Attribute N Past Present Future
validation

conscientiousness 1520 .02 -.08 .12
age 1520 .30 -.30 .15
gender 1520 .10 -.15 .14

exploration
openness 1520 .05 .04 -.12
extraversion 1520 -.04 .03 .00
agreeableness 1520 .00 -.02 .04
neuroticism 1520 -.01 -.01 .04
satisfaction w/ life 1565 .00 -.05 .08
depression 268 -.14 .21 -.17
IQ 898 .14 -.14 .05
# of friends 1000 -.15 .13 -.05

Table 5: Correlations between user temporal orientation
and human attributes. The attributes conscientiousness,
age, and gender are well-established in previous litera-
ture to be associated with temporal orientation. Gender
is coded as 0 = male, 1 = female. bold: p < .01 after
Benjamini-Hochberg multiple comparison correction; N:
number of users; results controlled for age and gender.

temporal orientation and other variables. In our age and
gender stratified sample (1520 users), we calculate Pear-
son correlations between temporal orientation and age,
gender, and measures of openness, conscientiousness,
extraversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism. Because
fewer users completed measures of satisfaction with life,
IQ, and number of friends, we were not able to produce
sufficient stratified samples, so we used ordinary least
squares linear regression to fit the standardized outcome
of interest to standardized temporal orientation also in-
cluding standardized age and gender as covariates to ad-
just for their effects. The coefficient, often denoted β, for
temporal orientation then represents the strength of the
relationship, controlled for age and gender.

Table 5 lists the correlation coefficients between tem-
poral orientation and user attributes. We found the
strongest effects for age, with patterns that are consistent
with the psychological literature (Steinberg et al., 2009).
Figure 2 illustrates trends from age 13 to 60. Most no-
tably, present orientation decreases steadily across age;
past orientation steadily increases, and future orienta-
tion increases quickly throughout adolescence, slows
in early adulthood, and finally levels off in late adult-
hood. Female users were significantly more future-
oriented, slightly more past-oriented, and significantly
less present-oriented than males.

For personality, we found the expected patterns of cor-
relations with conscientiousness, but more interestingly,

past

present

future

women

men

0.00

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0 .25 .50 .75 1
Proportions of users' messages

D
en

si
ty

Figure 1: Kernel density estimates of user-level propor-
tions of past, present, and future classified messages, bro-
ken down by gender. Vertical bars represent means.

openness to experience was correlated with lower future
orientation (beyond conscientiousness, there was no sup-
port in the literature for any of the five personality factors
to correlate with temporal orientation). This is surprising
when considering openness to experience is characterized
by creativity and intellect (McCrae and John, 1992), yet
IQ instead correlates with less present and more past ori-
entation, suggesting future orientation characterizes a dif-
ference between the two.8

We found a modest yet significant positive correlation
between future orientation and satisfaction with life, with
future orientation associated with higher life satisfaction.
On the other hand, we found a stronger negative corre-
lation between future orientation and depression as well
as a positive correlation between present orientation and
depression. As previously noted, past literature was con-
flicting on the relationship between these factors, so our
study weighs in with a behavior-based assessment in sup-
port of a future-oriented people being more satisfied in
life and less depressed.

Lastly, we consider whether the use of our language-
based measure of temporal orientation can track changes
over time. As a proof-of-concept, we focus on pat-
terns around birthdays; excluding messages containing
birthday terms and users turning 21, we calculated the
standardized proportion of messages which were future-

8One interpretation is that our classifier may be more ac-
curate on messages authored by those with higher IQ (i.e. more
grammatical sentences); however no significant difference in er-
ror was found when spitting messages by the authors’ IQ, age,
or gender.

416



past

present

future

−.50

−.25

0

.25

.50

13 20 30 40 50 60
User age

St
an

da
rd

ize
d 

Te
m

po
ra

l O
rie

nt
at

io
n

Figure 2: Standardized temporal orientation of users over
their age. Shaded area indicates±1 standard error around
loess smoothed estimates.

oriented over two weeks before and after one’s birthday.
We controlled for individual differences and date effects
(e.g. if more people happen to be born near a holiday) by
standardizing users’ future orientation over all their mes-
sages and standardizing daily future orientation scores
over all messages from each day. Figure 3 shows the pat-
terns for men < 23 and ≥ 23, suggesting that younger
men look forward to their birthdays while older men do
not (patterns were less pronounced for women).

7 Conclusions

This is, to our knowledge, the first study to automati-
cally assess individual temporal orientation through lan-
guage, and it constitutes one of the largest (perhaps the
largest) studies of temporal orientation. Our message-
level past, present, and future classifier achieved an ac-
curacy of 71.8%, well-above most frequent sense, pasts-
of-speech only, and time expression only baselines. The
associations we found between user-level temporal ori-
entation and conscientiousness, gender, and age vali-
dated our novel method against well-established corre-
lates. We then explored novel links with other personality
factors, satisfaction with life, depression, IQ, and number
of friends.

Our automatic labeling of temporal orientation yielded
strong accuracy. There are, however, several ways in
which our analysis might be improved or extended. We
used a coding scheme that did not allow a “no temporal
orientation” class. Separate handling of “non-temporal”

younger men
older men

−.2

−.1

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

−14 −12 −10 −8 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
days until birthday days after birthday

da
ily

 fu
tu

re
 o

rie
nt

at
io

n

Figure 3: Daily proportion of future-oriented messages
leading up to and following birthdays. Younger men: <
23, N = 423; Older men: ≥ 23, N = 402.

messages might provide more nuanced profiles of user
orientation. Another simplification was our binning of
temporal relations into past, present, and future. One
might want to instead use a continuous measure of tem-
poral distance, indicating how far into the past or future
a message is oriented, providing a more detailed profile
of individual orientations. Among the future-oriented,
for example, there may be important differences between
those who plan for tomorrow versus those who plan years
in advance. Assessing additional characteristics of mes-
sages, such as sentiment, may also allow further insight
and more nuanced characterizations (e.g. “I will be fine”
vs. “I will never be ok”).

Whereas prior computational linguistics work with
temporal relations has focused on classifying events, we
focus on people and open many avenues for social scien-
tific investigations that were previously not very feasible.
For instance, temporal orientation was generally treated
as a stable trait (with little change through the lifetime);
For men, we found age differences in temporal orienta-
tion leading up to one’s birthday. Learning how, why, and
when people become more future-oriented may inform
planning and risk assessment interventions, and lead to
better understanding of health and economic prosperity.

8 Acknowledgments

We thank George Wan for his assistance running proto-
type classifiers. This work was supported by the Temple-
ton Religion Trust under grant #TRT0048.

417



References
Jean Adams and Daniel Nettle. 2009. Time perspective, per-

sonality and smoking, body mass, and physical activity:
An empirical study. British Journal of Health Psychology,
14(1):83–105.

Faiyaz Al Zamal, Wendy Liu, and Derek Ruths. 2012. Ho-
mophily and latent attribute inference: Inferring latent at-
tributes of twitter users from neighbors. In ICWSM.

James F Allen. 1983. Maintaining knowledge about temporal
intervals. Communications of the ACM, 26(11):832–843.

Shlomo Argamon, Moshe Koppel, James W. Pennebaker, and
Jonathan Schler. 2009. Automatically profiling the author of
an anonymous text. Commun. ACM, 52(2):119–123, Febru-
ary.

Roy F Baumeister, Kathleen D Vohs, and David C Funder.
2007. Psychology as the science of self-reports and finger
movements: Whatever happened to actual behavior? Per-
spectives on Psychological Science, 2(4):396–403.

Shane Bergsma, Mark Dredze, Benjamin Van Durme, Theresa
Wilson, and David Yarowsky. 2013. Broadly improving
user classification via communication-based name and lo-
cation clustering on twitter. In Anuual Meeting of HLT-
NAACL, pages 1010–1019.

Christopher M Bishop. 2006. Pattern recognition and machine
learning, volume 4. Springer New York.

Ilona Boniwell, Evgeny Osin, P Alex Linley, and Galina V
Ivanchenko. 2010. A question of balance: Time perspective
and well-being in british and russian samples. The Journal
of Positive Psychology, 5(1):24–40.

John N Boyd and Philip G Zimbardo. 2005. Time perspective,
health, and risk taking. In Understanding behavior in the
context of time, pages 85–107. Lawrence Erlbaum, Mahwah.

John D Burger, John Henderson, George Kim, and Guido
Zarrella. 2011. Discriminating gender on twitter. In Pro-
ceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 1301–1309. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Angel X Chang and Christopher Manning. 2012. Sutime: A
library for recognizing and normalizing time expressions. In
LREC, pages 3735–3740.

Yi Chang, Xuanhui Wang, Qiaozhu Mei, and Yan Liu. 2013.
Towards twitter context summarization with user influence
models. In Proceedings of the sixth ACM international con-
ference on Web search and data mining, pages 527–536.
ACM.

Corinna Cortes and Vladimir Vapnik. 1995. Support-vector
networks. Machine learning, 20(3):273–297.

Leon Derczynski, Diana Maynard, Niraj Aswani, and Kalina
Bontcheva. 2013. Microblog-genre noise and impact on
semantic annotation accuracy. In Proceedings of the 24th
ACM Conference on Hypertext and Social Media, pages 21–
30. ACM.

Fien Desmyter and Rudi De Raedt. 2012. The relationship
between time perspective and subjective well-being of older
adults. Psychologica Belgica, 52(1):19–38.

ED Diener, Robert A Emmons, Randy J Larsen, and Sharon
Griffin. 1985. The satisfaction with life scale. Journal of
personality assessment, 49(1):71–75.

Ed Diener, Louis Tay, and Shigehiro Oishi. 2013. Rising in-
come and the subjective well-being of nations. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 104(2):267–276.

Rong-En Fan, Kai-Wei Chang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Xiang-Rui
Wang, and Chih-Jen Lin. 2008. LIBLINEAR: A library
for large linear classification. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 9:1871–1874.

Wei Feng and Jianyong Wang. 2013. Retweet or not?: person-
alized tweet re-ranking. In Proceedings of the sixth ACM
international conference on Web search and data mining,
pages 577–586. ACM.

William J Friedman. 2000. The development of children’s
knowledge of the times of future events. Child Development,
71(4):913–932.

Pierre Geurts, Damien Ernst, and Louis Wehenkel. 2006. Ex-
tremely randomized trees. Machine learning, 63(1):3–42.

Lewis R Goldberg. 1990. An alternative” description of per-
sonality”: the big-five factor structure. Journal of Personal-
ity and Social Ssychology, 59(6):1216–1229.

Sumit Goswami, Sudeshna Sarkar, and Mayur Rustagi. 2009.
Stylometric analysis of bloggers age and gender. In Third
International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Me-
dia.

Pedro Calais Guerra, Wagner Meira Jr, and Claire Cardie. 2014.
Sentiment analysis on evolving social streams: How self-
report imbalances can help. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM
international conference on Web search and data mining,
pages 443–452. ACM.

Francisco Iacobelli, Alastair J. Gill, Scott Nowson, and Jon
Oberlander. 2011. Large scale personality classification of
bloggers. In Proc of the 4th int conf on Affect comput and
intel interaction, pages 568–577. Springer-Verlag.

William James. 1890. The principles of psychology. Henry
Holt and Company.

Kelli A Keough, Philip G Zimbardo, and John N Boyd. 1999.
Who’s smoking, drinking, and using drugs? Time perspec-
tive as a predictor of substance use. Basic and Applied Social
Psychology, 21(2):149–164.

M Kosinski and D Stillwell. 2012. myPersonality research
wiki. http://www.mypersonality.org/wiki/.

Kurt Lewin. 1942. Time perspective and morale. In Resolving
social conflicts and Field theory in social science, pages 80–
93. APA, Washington, D. C.

Nira Liberman, Yaacov Trope, Sean M McCrea, and Steven J
Sherman. 2007. The effect of level of construal on the tem-
poral distance of activity enactment. Journal of Experimen-
tal Social Psychology, 43(1):143–149.

Xiao Ling and Daniel S Weld. 2010. Temporal information
extraction. In Proceedings of the 24th AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence.

F. Mairesse, M.A. Walker, M.R. Mehl, and R.K. Moore. 2007.
Using linguistic cues for the automatic recognition of per-
sonality in conversation and text. Journal of Artificial Intel-
ligence Research, 30(1):457–500.

Robert R McCrae and O P John. 1992. An introduction to the
five-factor model and its applications. Journal of Personal-
ity, 60(2):175–215.

Jari-Erik Nurmi. 2005. Thinking about and acting upon the fu-
ture: Development of future orientation across the life span.

418



In Alan Strathman and Jeff Joireman, editors, Understand-
ing behavior in the context of time, pages 31–57. Lawrence
Erlbaum, Mahwah.

Rina Panigrahy, Marc Najork, and Yinglian Xie. 2012. How
user behavior is related to social affinity. In Proceedings of
the fifth ACM international conference on Web search and
data mining, pages 713–722. ACM.

Greg Park, H Andrew Schwartz, Johannes C Eichstaedt, Mar-
garet L Kern, David J Stillwell, Michal Kosinski, Lyle H
Ungar, and Martin EP Seligman. 2015. Automatic person-
ality assessment through social media language. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology.

Delroy L Paulhus and Simine Vazire. 2007. The self-report
method. Handbook of research methods in personality psy-
chology, pages 224–239.

Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vin-
cent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier Grisel, Mathieu Blon-
del, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, et al.
2011. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. The Jour-
nal of Machine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830.

James W. Pennebaker, C.K. Chung, M. Ireland, A. Gonzales,
and R.J. Booth. 2007. The development and psychometric
properties of liwc2007. Austin, TX, LIWC. Net.

Daniele Quercia, Renaud Lambiotte, David Stillwell, Michal
Kosinski, and Jon Crowcroft. 2012. The personality of pop-
ular facebook users. In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 con-
ference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, pages
955–964. ACM.

Lenore Sawyer Radloff. 1977. The ces-d scale a self-report
depression scale for research in the general population. Ap-
plied psychological measurement, 1(3):385–401.

Brent W Roberts, Carl Lejuez, Robert F Krueger, Jessica M
Richards, and Patrick L Hill. 2013. What is conscientious-
ness and how can it be assessed? Developmental Psychol-
ogy, (online advance publication).

Maarten Sap, Gregory Park, Johannes C. Eichstaedt, Mar-
garet L. Kern, David J. Stillwell, Michal Kosinski, Lyle H.
Ungar, and H. Andrew Schwartz. 2014. Developing age
and gender predictive lexica over social media. In EMNLP
2014, pages 1146–1151. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

H Andrew Schwartz, Johannes C Eichstaedt, Margaret L
Kern, Lukasz Dziurzynski, Stephanie M Ramones, Megha
Agrawal, Achal Shah, Michal Kosinski, David Stillwell,
Martin EP Seligman, et al. 2013. Personality, gender, and
age in the language of social media: The open-vocabulary
approach. PloS one, 8(9):e73791.

Martin EP Seligman, Peter Railton, Roy F Baumeister, and
Chandra Sripada. 2013. Navigating into the future or
driven by the past. Perspectives on Psychological Science,
8(2):119–141.

Patrick E Shrout and Joseph L Fleiss. 1979. Intraclass cor-
relations: Uses in assessing rater reliability. Psychological
bulletin, 86(2):420–428.

Laurence Steinberg, Sandra Graham, Lia OBrien, Jennifer
Woolard, Elizabeth Cauffman, and Marie Banich. 2009.
Age differences in future orientation and delay discounting.
Child Development, 80(1):28–44.

Alan Strathman and Jeff Joireman, editors. 2005. Understand-
ing behavior in the context of time: Theory, research, and
application. Lawrence Erlbaum, Mahwah.

Partha Pratim Talukdar, Derry Wijaya, and Tom Mitchell. 2012.
Coupled temporal scoping of relational facts. In Proceed-
ings of the fifth ACM international conference on Web search
and data mining, pages 73–82. ACM.

Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, Christopher D Manning, and
Yoram Singer. 2003. Feature-rich part-of-speech tagging
with a cyclic dependency network. In Proceedings of the
2003 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics on Human Language
Technology-Volume 1, pages 173–180. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Naushad UzZaman, Hector Llorens, Leon Derczynski, Marc
Verhagen, James Allen, and James Pustejovsky. 2013.
SemEval-2013 task 1: TempEval-3: Evaluating time expres-
sions, events, and temporal relations. In Proceedings of the
7th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation.

Marc Verhagen, Inderjeet Mani, Roser Sauri, Robert Knip-
pen, Seok Bae Jang, Jessica Littman, Anna Rumshisky,
John Phillips, and James Pustejovsky. 2005. Automating
temporal annotation with TARSQI. In Proceedings of the
ACL 2005 on interactive poster and demonstration sessions,
pages 81–84. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Marc Verhagen, Robert Gaizauskas, Frank Schilder, Mark Hep-
ple, Graham Katz, and James Pustejovsky. 2007. Semeval-
2007 task 15: Tempeval temporal relation identification. In
Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Seman-
tic Evaluations, pages 75–80. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Marc Verhagen, Roser Sauri, Tommaso Caselli, and James
Pustejovsky. 2010. SemEval-2010 task 13: TempEval-2.
In Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Seman-
tic Evaluation, pages 57–62. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Paul Webley and Ellen K Nyhus. 2006. Parents influence on
childrens future orientation and saving. Journal of Economic
Psychology, 27(1):140–164.

Miaomiao Wen, Zeyu Zheng, Hyeju Jang, Guang Xiang, and
Carolyn Penstein Rosé. 2013. Extracting events with infor-
mal temporal references in personal histories in online com-
munities. In Proceedings of 51st annual meeting of the ACL,
pages 836–842.

Philip G Zimbardo and John N Boyd. 1999. Putting time in
perspective: A valid, reliable individual-differences metric.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77(6):1271–
1288.

419


