



















































Lachmannian Archetype Reconstruction for Ancient Manuscript Corpora


Human Language Technologies: The 2015 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 1209–1214,
Denver, Colorado, May 31 – June 5, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Lachmannian Archetype Reconstruction for Ancient Manuscript Corpora

Armin Hoenen
Goethe University

Robert- Mayer Strasse 10
60486 Frankfurt, Germany

hoenen@em.uni-frankfurt.de

Abstract

Two goals are targeted by computer philol-
ogy for ancient manuscript corpora: firstly,
making an edition, that is roughly speaking
one text version representing the whole cor-
pus, which contains variety induced through
copy errors and other processes and secondly,
producing a stemma. A stemma is a graph-
based visualization of the copy history with
manuscripts as nodes and copy events as
edges. Its root, the so-called archetype, is the
supposed original text or urtext from which all
subsequent copies are made. Our main con-
tribution is to present one of the first com-
putational approaches to automatic archetype
reconstruction and to introduce the first text-
based evaluation for automatically produced
archetypes. We compare a philologically gen-
erated archetype with one generated by bio-
informatic software.

1 Introduction

In philology, oftentimes more than one single
manuscript of the same tradition (that is, the same
text) has survived. These manuscripts often differ
in their wording in various places since copy errors,
corrections, and other processes have led to devia-
tion from the original text. This causes two prob-
lems: uncertainty about the original wording and
uncertainty about which manuscript has been copied
from which other.

The reconstruction of the copy history of
manuscript texts is largely similar to that of DNA,
which is why phylogenetic approaches have been
adopted (Robinson and O’Hara, 1996; Robinson et

al., 1998; van Reenen et al., 1996; van Reenen et
al., 2004; Spencer et al., 2004; Roos and Heikkilä,
2009; Roelli and Bachmann, 2010; Andrews and
Macé, 2013). However, the main goal of the philo-
logical work on ancient manuscripts is not the re-
construction of the copy history but compiling an
edition of a historical text. This entails reducing the
variation encountered so that one single main text
as the prototypical representation of the manuscript
corpus emerges. Ideally, this text is believed to be
the author’s original or closest possible to it. Two
model approaches to making an edition are most
widespread. The earlier one by Lachmann (see for
instance Lachmann (1853)) opts for reconstructing
an urtext actively, that is if needed by means of
emendation, which refers to inferring the original
(authorial) wording from the extant variants even
if the so-inferred form is not itself extant and thus
not attested in any of the manuscripts. The later ap-
proach after Bédier (see for instance Bédier (1928))
bases the edition directly on the text of the best avail-
able manuscript.

In this paper, we will present a first automatic im-
plementation of the earlier approach. Additionally,
an algorithm for evaluation of a so-reconstructed
text will be presented and applied to artificial bench-
mark data sets (gold standard). First, we will in-
troduce the data sets. Then, two methods, rule-
based (using philological principles) and statisti-
cal (likelihood-based using bio-informatic software)
will be explained in detail before the results are be-
ing presented, followed by a general discussion, a
field specific discussion, and a conclusion and out-
look.

1209



Text Lang MS Tok
Parzival English 21 957
Notre Besoin French 13 1029

Table 1: The artificial traditions. MS = number of
manuscripts, Tok = number of tokens, Lang = language

2 Artificial Traditions

An artificial tradition is a fully digitized set of
manuscripts which have been produced through
manual copying in recent times whilst recording the
true copy history/genealogical relationships. Three
of these corpora have been published to date, Parzi-
val by (Spencer et al., 2004), Notre Besoin by (Baret
et al., 2004), and Heinrichi by (Roos and Heikkilä,
2009). They are provided in a fully word-aligned
tabular version by the authors, so that collation must
not be performed anymore. We excluded the Hein-
richi tradition from computation as Old Finnish data
could not be interpreted by us. Table 1 displays the
composition of the artificial traditions we used.

3 Method

Contrasting a rule-based and a statistical approach,
we automatically reconstruct the archetype text for
the two aforementioned traditions. To the best of our
knowledge, this paper treats automatic archetype re-
construction in connection with evaluation for the
first time and applies suitable bio-informatic pro-
grams for the first time. While the transfer of bi-
ological software to philology, especially in stem-
matics, is done since the 1990ies, (O’Hara, 1996),
purely philological automatic reconstructions are a
recent development. As input for both reconstruc-
tion methods, we use the same tree, generated by
bio-informatic software. Corresponding to this tree,
we reconstruct the archetype using a) a philological
rule-based majority-vote bottom-up algorithm and
b) statistical bio-informatic software.

3.1 Philological Reconstruction

A lost manuscript text can be reconstructed in dif-
ferent ways given a precomputed stemma. The
key question is how to resolve variation. Depend-
ing on a concrete decision rule for disambiguation
of variation among the direct descendents of a lost
manuscript node, there are several possible recon-

structions, which means one stemma can correspond
to several possible archetype texts (depending on the
decision rule). We implement the majority-vote de-
cision rule as referred to frequently in philological
discourse, see for instance (West, 1973). The al-
gorithm simply assigns the most frequent variant of
all direct descendents. If more than one variant is
most frequent, our reconstruction retains all for later
disambiguation either through majority-vote in sub-
sequent recursion steps or for manual disambigua-
tion through the expert if more than one variants
end undisambiguated in the reconstructed archetype.
Lost text of leaf nodes should be pruned since their
texts are more corrupt than the one of their an-
cestors, thus unnecessarily corrupting the tradition.
This pruning roughly parallels the philological prac-
tice of recensio, the prior exclusion of uninformative
manuscripts.

In mathematical terms, let S be a rooted stem-
matic tree (directed acyclic) consisting of a set of
vertices V , a set of edges E, and one root node v0;
Each vertex has an indegree of 1, only v0 has no
incoming edges. Let each vertex vi be associated
with a text Ti ∈ Tall, which is its textual content,
|V | = |Tall|. While Tall is the set of all texts that
really existed in the tradition, T ′ initially is the set
of surviving texts, T ′ ⊆ Tall. The texts in Tall are
aligned, that is each text consists of a sequence of
tokens or reconstructed tokens {Tii , .., Tin} and all
Ti have the same length. A recontructed token can
be a set of to be disambiguated tokens. For each
Tj ∈ Tall \ T ′, we reconstruct the lost text in the
following way:

1. Collect all texts {Tk, .., Tm}, 1 ≤ (k,m) ≤
|Tall| − 1; k,m 6= j associated with the ver-
tices {vk, .., vm} which are direct descendents
of vertex vj , which is associated with Tj . If one
of the texts in {Tk, .., Tm} is itself not in T ′,
delay the actual reconstruction and start a new
reconstruction for the next unreconstructed text
until all texts {Tk, .., Tm} are reconstructed

2. Text reconstruction for each token Tji :
Tji = majority({Tki , .., Tmi}); in case
|majority({Tki , .., Tmi})| > 1 assign all
variants to Tj (using a separator), if one
of {Tki , .., Tmi} does already carry multi-
ple variants, treat each one as one variant

1210



α:A

m1:A

m5:A

β:A/C

m2:C m3:A

m4:D

γ:B

m6:B

Figure 1: A simple stemma of a one word tradition, Greek
letters denoting lost (hype)archetype(s). The Roman up-
per case letters refer to the observed variant (manuscripts
mi) or to the reconstructed variant ((hype)archetype(s))
inferred bottom-up.

m1 m2 m3 m4 Variants
this t’ it dis A-D
is is is is A
a an a A-C
text text text text A
AAAA BABA CAAA DACA PseudoDNA

Table 2: Conversion of a word-aligned example tradition
to a pseudo-DNA.

and compute the majority variant (exam-
ple: {T2i , T5i} = {this/tis, tis} then
majority({T2i , T5i}) = tis)

3. T ′ = T ′ ∪ Tj ; if T ′ = Tall end else start next
reconstruction

For an example see Figure 1.

3.2 Bio-informatic Reconstruction
In bio-informatics, reconstruction of ancestral
genomes has been undertaken. The most famous
case is presumably that of the mammoths, (Miller
et al., 2008). However, bacterial asexual reproduc-
tion is generally more similar to manuscript copy-
ing than mammalian sexual reproduction. There-
fore and for other methodological reasons, it is more
appropriate to transfer bacteriological reconstruc-
tion to philology. Bacteriologists sucessfully recon-
structed the predecessors of yeast, (Voordeckers et
al., 2012). Given a pregenerated tree, they used

Bayesian marginal and joint probabilities to gener-
ate the sequences best explaining the tree. A pro-
gram performing this is PAML, (Yang, 2007).

We converted the already word-aligned traditions
into sequences of letters for each manuscript, see
Table 2. Each letter encodes the variant the cur-
rent manuscript carries at the current position. For
the so-produced pseudo-DNA sequences, the PAML
software generates a stemmatic tree using the max-
imum likelihood (ML) criterion without resolving
variation at inferred internodes. This ML tree or any
other can be used as input to generate ancestral se-
quences at the internodes and the root node using an
optimization with a) marginal probabilities, for de-
tails see (Yang et al., 1995) and b) an optimization
with joint probabilities, for details see (Pupko et al.,
2000). Yang (2007) states that the results of a) and
b) differ only in borderline cases. Indeed we found,
that the respectively produced archetypes were iden-
tical in our case.

The ML tree is usually bifurcating, generating
many internodes and an extra-corporal root. Al-
though in our context, it challenges performance of
automatic reconstruction, bifurcations are not a cir-
cumstance necessarily paralleling philology closely,
(Howe et al., 2012).

4 Evaluation

For each position of the alignment, a produced
archetype (PA) is compared to the original archetype
present in the benchmark data sets. Whenever the
PA has at least one variant at the current position
corresponding to the archetype, an agreement score
is incremented by one divided through the number of
current variants in the PA. This assumes implicitly
that manual disambiguation is at random and rep-
resents therefore a baseline evaluation. The agree-
ment score is divided by the number of positions in
the alignment to give the total precision of the PA
text. This evaluation is called whole text evalua-
tion (WTE). It serves as an orientation point towards
the overall reliability of the reconstructed text as a
whole. A second evaluation concerns the proportion
of correctly disambiguated positions of variation.
That agreement score is produced in the same way
as described above, but only for positions where the
corpus had variation. This evaluation is called po-

1211



Tradition WTE PVE ASD
Parzival(PAML) 0.91 0.73

51.38
Parzival(MV) 0.96 0.88
Notre Besoin(PAML) 0.95 0.9

54.95
Notre Besoin(MV) 0.97 0.94

Table 3: Evaluation of the archetypes by PAML and
majority-vote (MV). ML trees evaluated with ASD.

sition of variation evaluation (PVE). Formally, both
WTE and PVE can be represented by∑n

i=0
1Ci (ai)
|Ci|

n
,1Ci(ai) =

{
1 if ai ∈ Ci
0 if ai /∈ Ci

(1)

where n is either the number of words in the align-
ment (WTE) or the number of positions of variation
(PVE), a is the archetype, ai the i-th token in the
archetype, and Ci the set of variants of the PA at the
i-th position.

5 Results

We evaluated the PAs (rule-based and statistical)
with WTE and PVE and additionally evaluated the
initial ML trees against the true stemma by means
of the graph-based Average Sign Distance (ASD),1

a measure of distance of genealogical trees using
vertex triple distances as described in (Roos and
Heikkilä, 2009). In order to achieve this, we con-
verted the stemmas automatically from the Newick
output format by PAML into the required format
of the ASD. Results are displayed in Table 3. The
philological reconstruction outperformed the PAML
one in both cases.

In order to assess the quality of these results,
we produced the majority archetype (MA), which
at each position carried the majority variant. Ad-
ditionally, we produced a random archetype (RA),
where a randomizer as implemented in the Java pro-
gramming language chose one variant at random for
every place of variation. The RA was then evalu-
ated. This procedure was repeated 1000 times and
then we averaged over the RA evaluation results. As
a point of orientation, we additionally provide the
evaluation score of the maximally wrong archetype

1For details, data sets and evaluation scripts, browse http:
//www.cs.helsinki.fi/u/ttonteri/casc.

α(P/NB) WTE PVE
MW(P) 0.68 0
RA(P) 0.8 0.38
MA(P) 0.96 0.87
MW(NB) 0.52 0
RA(NB) 0.76 0.49
MA(NB) 0.98 0.95

Table 4: Evaluation of archetypes. α as used in philol-
ogy denotes the archetype. We evaluated the majority
archetypes (MA), the averaged random archetypes (RA)
and the maximally wrong archetypes (MW) for the Parzi-
val (P) and Notre Besoin (NB) traditions.

(MW), which is the one archetype that has a non-
archetypical variant at each position where varia-
tion occurred. Note that none of these automatically
produced archetypes requires a stemma beforehand.
The results are displayed in Table 4. The RAs are
considerably better than the MWs, but are clearly
outperformed by both reconstructions and the MAs.

6 Discussion

The MA and MV archetypes are the most accu-
rate ones. Hence, the true distribution of variants
considering all manuscripts is such that the major-
ity variant in the majority of cases is the archetyp-
ical one. Whether this conclusion holds for his-
torical corpora remains to be shown. The PAML-
generated archetypes performed well and were con-
siderably better than the random condition. Note
that the ML tree’s ASD score was relatively low as
compared to other algorithms evaluated in (Roos and
Heikkilä, 2009). The limitation of the current recon-
struction is that at each position the reconstructed
text can only carry one of the variants of the extant
manuscripts. This makes any reconstruction with
many reconstructed internodes, such as the MVs or
the PAML reconstructions by definition quite simi-
lar to the MAs.

6.1 Comparing Stemma and Archetype
Production

From a bad stemma, disambiguation rules can nev-
ertheless produce an accurate archetype and vice
versa. One stemma can correspond to several pos-
sible archetypes and one archetype can be consis-
tent with several different stemmas. The two tasks

1212



and evaluations should therefore be considered sep-
arately. This is of utter importance as it points to an
imbalance of computational effort in the field.

6.2 Implications for Computer Philology
In biology the establishment of genealogical rela-
tions is in its own rights a primary goal, reconstruc-
tion of ancestral sequences being rather secondary.
On the contrary in philology, compiling an edition
is not only historically preceeding stemmatology,
but can be considered the main target of dealing
with manuscript corpora. Stemma construction is
rather a secondary goal.2 Despite this imbalance be-
tween the fields, the technological emphasis is on
genealogical trees in both. This may be seen as a
computer philological co-loan from bio-informatics.
On the other hand it might correspond to a more
Bédierian edition practise, where stemmatology is
emphasized because it can point to the most impor-
tant manuscript, which is however implicit and un-
likely. Another reason for a benefit resulting from a
shifting focus onto automatic archetype reconstruc-
tion is the problem of having two vorlages for one
copy called contamination. Whilst especially exces-
sive contamination is a bad problem for stemmatol-
ogy, (Maas, 1960), considering automatic archetype
reconstruction, on a word level it doesn’t increase
diversity and should therefore be a less severe prob-
lem.

For both traditions, the produced archetype was
reasonably accurate. The automatisation of this pro-
cess could thus accelerate the production of editions,
making them most dependent on the indispensable
digitization of corpora.

6.3 Implications for Bio-Informatics
In biology, reconstructive algorithms such as the one
by Yang (2007) have been developed alongside bio-
logical benchmark data sets enumerated by Linder et
al. (2010). However, in stemmatology, the probabil-
ity to have a manuscript and its copy in the corpus
at the same time is disproportionately higher than
in the biological case making archetype production
more transparent here. The resulting algorithmic
conclusions from philology could therefore enrich
the field of ancestral sequence reconstruction.

2For more details, consider for instance Pasquali (1988),
Timpanaro (2005), and Reynolds & Wilson (2013).

7 Conclusion and Outlook

We have presented an automated reconstruction of
an archetypical text through philological rules and
phylogenetic software. Additionally, we invented an
evaluation for the produced archetypes, where we
found the reconstruction to produce results consid-
erably above chance level.

The inversion of the process is implicit. From a
(manually or automatically) constructed archetype,
all possible corresponding stemmas on the given set
of manuscript digitizations can be computed and
evaluated, which would be a new approach to stem-
matology. Both tasks could thus profit from each
other provided they are understood as separate and
developed each in its own right.

Many issues remain unaddressed. The phenom-
ena encountered in manuscripts are much more var-
ied than word substitutions as modelled in this pa-
per; an enumeration of some of the phenomena will
corroborate this: word deletions, word separation er-
rors, whole passages missing, text on the margins,
unreadable or destructed text, crossing out of sec-
tions, oral variation, contamination. Trovato (2009)
claims that manuscript loss of far more than 90% is
realistic. In linguistics, historical-comparative stud-
ies have engaged in using bio-informatic software
for instance in connection with the recontruction of
language family trees. For automatic emendation
these studies as well as the reconstruction of unat-
tested word forms are a valuable source. Stemmatol-
ogy itself offers ever new algorithms, artificial tradi-
tions and tools for electronic editing.

In the light of these manifold possibilities for
elaboration and cooperation, the current study
presents but one entry point into automatic
archetype reconstruction.

Acknowledgments

We greatfully acknowledge the financial support of
the Goethe University, the Federal State of Hesse
and the Federal Ministry of Education and Research
BMBF. We express our gratitude to our colleagues
of the Texttechnology Lab for valuable comments,
help and advice.

1213



References

T. L. Andrews and C. Macé. 2013. Beyond the tree of
texts: Building an empirical model of scribal variation
through graph analysis of texts and stemmas. Literary
and Linguistic Computing, 28(4):504–521, December.

P. Baret, C. Macé, and P. Robinson (eds.). 2004. Test-
ing methods on an artificially created textual tradi-
tion. In Linguistica Computationale XXIV-XXV, vol-
ume XXIV-XXV, pages 255–281, Pisa-Roma. Instituti
Editoriali e Poligrafici Internationali.

Joseph Bédier. 1928. La tradition manuscrite du ’Lai
de l’Ombre’: Réflexions sur l’Art d’Éditer les Anciens
Textes. Romania, 394:161–196, 321–356.

C. Howe, R. Connoly, and H. Windram. 2012. Respond-
ing to criticism of phylogenetic methods in stemmatol-
ogy. SEL studies in English Literature, 52:51–67.

Karl Lachmann. 1853. In T. Lucretii Cari De rerum
natura libros commentarius: Index. Georg Reimer.

C. Randal Linder, Rahul Suri, Kevin Liu, and Tandy
Warnow. 2010. Benchmark datasets and software for
developing and testing methods for large-scale mul-
tiple sequence alignment and phylogenetic inference.
PLoS Currents, 2.

P. Maas. 1960. Textkritik. B. G. Teubner.
Webb Miller, Daniela I. Drautz, Aakrosh Ratan, Bar-

bara Pusey, Ji Qi, Arthur M. Lesk, Lynn P. Tomsho,
Michael D. Packard, Fangqing Zhao, Andrei Sher,
Alexei Tikhonov, Brian Raney, Nick Patterson, Kerstin
Lindblad-Toh, Eric S. Lander, James R. Knight, Ger-
ard P. Irzyk, Karin M. Fredrikson, Timothy T. Harkins,
Sharon Sheridan, Tom Pringle, and Stephan C. Schus-
ter. 2008. Sequencing the nuclear genome of the ex-
tinct woolly mammoth. Nature, 456(7220):387–390.

R. J. O’Hara. 1996. Trees of history in systematics and
philology. Memorie della Società Italiana di Scienze
Naturali e del Museo Civico di Storia Naturale di Mi-
lano, 27(1):81–88.

Giorgo Pasquali. 1988. Storia della tradizione e critica
del testo. Casa editrice Le lettere, Firenze.

Tal Pupko, Itsik Pe’er, Ron Shamir, and Dan Graur. 2000.
A fast algorithm for joint reconstruction of ancestral
amino acid sequences. Mol. Biol. Evol., 17(6):890–
896.

L.D. Reynolds and N.G. Wilson. 2013. Scribes and
Scholars, A Guide to the Transmission of Greek & Ro-
man literatures. Oxford University Press.

P. Robinson and R. J. O’Hara. 1996. Cladistic Analysis
of an Old Norse Manuscript Tradition. Research in
Humanities Computing (4).

P. Robinson, A. Barbrook, N. Blake, and C. Howe. 1998.
The Phylogeny of The Canterbury Tales. Nature,
394:839.

Philipp Roelli and Dieter Bachmann. 2010. Towards
Generating a Stemma of Complicated Manuscript Tra-
ditions: Petrus Alfonsis Dialogus. Revue dhistoire des
textes, 5(4):307–321.

Teemu Roos and Tuomas Heikkilä. 2009. Evaluating
methods for computer-assisted stemmatology using ar-
tificial benchmark data sets. Literary and Linguistic
Computing, 24:417–433.

M. Spencer, E. Davidson, A. Barbrook, and C. Howe.
2004. Phylogenetics of artificial manuscripts. Journal
of Theoretical Biology, 227:503–511.

Sebastiano Timpanaro. 2005. The Genesis of Lach-
mann’s Method. University of Chicago, Chicago.

Paolo Trovato. 2009. Everything You Always Wanted
to Know about Lachmann’s Method, A Non-Standard
Handbook of Genealogical Textual Criticism in the
Age of Post-Structuralism, Cladistics, and Copy-Text.
libreriauniversitaria.it.

P. T. van Reenen, M. van Mulken, and J. Dyk. 1996.
Studies in Stemmatology I. Studies in Stemmatology.
John Benjamins Publishing Company.

P. T. van Reenen, A. A. den Hollander, and M. van
Mulken. 2004. Studies in Stemmatology II. Studies in
Stemmatology. John Benjamins Publishing Company.

K. Voordeckers, C.A. Brown, K. Vanneste, E. van der
Zande, A. Voet, S. Maere, and K. J. Verstrepen. 2012.
Reconstruction of ancestral metabolic enzymes reveals
molecular mechanisms underlying evolutionary inno-
vation through gene duplication. PLoS Biol, 10(12).

Martin L. West. 1973. Textual Criticism and Editorial
Technique: Applicable to Greek and Latin texts. Teub-
ner, Stuttgart.

Ziheng Yang, Sudhir Kumar, and Masatoshi Nei. 1995.
A new method of inference of ancestral nucleotide and
amino acid sequences. Genetics, 141:1641–1650.

Ziheng Yang. 2007. PAML 4: phylogenetic analysis by
maximum likelihood. Mol. Biol. Evol., 24(8):1586–
1591.

1214


