



















































Controlling Politeness in Neural Machine Translation via Side Constraints


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2016, pages 35–40,
San Diego, California, June 12-17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Controlling Politeness in Neural Machine Translation via Side Constraints

Rico Sennrich and Barry Haddow and Alexandra Birch
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh

{rico.sennrich,a.birch}@ed.ac.uk, bhaddow@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract

Many languages use honorifics to express po-
liteness, social distance, or the relative so-
cial status between the speaker and their ad-
dressee(s). In machine translation from a lan-
guage without honorifics such as English, it
is difficult to predict the appropriate honorific,
but users may want to control the level of po-
liteness in the output. In this paper, we per-
form a pilot study to control honorifics in neu-
ral machine translation (NMT) via side con-
straints, focusing on English→German. We
show that by marking up the (English) source
side of the training data with a feature that en-
codes the use of honorifics on the (German)
target side, we can control the honorifics pro-
duced at test time. Experiments show that
the choice of honorifics has a big impact on
translation quality as measured by BLEU, and
oracle experiments show that substantial im-
provements are possible by constraining the
translation to the desired level of politeness.

1 Introduction

Many languages use honorifics to express polite-
ness, social distance, or the relative social status be-
tween the speaker and their addressee(s). A wide-
spread instance is the grammatical T-V distinction
(Brown and Gilman, 1960), distinguishing between
the familiar (Latin Tu) and the polite (Latin Vos)
second person pronoun. In machine translation from
a language without honorifics such as English, it
is difficult to predict the appropriate honorific, but
users may want to control the level of politeness in
the output.

The research presented in this publication was conducted in
cooperation with Samsung Electronics Polska sp. z o.o. - Sam-
sung R&D Institute Poland.

We propose a simple and effective method for in-
cluding target-side T-V annotation in the training of
a neural machine translation (NMT) system, which
allows us to control the level of politeness at test
time through what we call side constraints. It can be
applied for translation between languages where the
T-V distinction is missing from the source, or where
the distribution differs. For instance, both Swedish
and French make the T-V distinction, but reciprocal
use of T pronouns is more widespread in Swedish
than in French (Schüpbach et al., 2006). Hence, the
Swedish form is not a reliable signal for the appro-
priate form in the French translation (or vice-versa).

Our basic approach of using side constraints to
control target-side features that may be missing from
the source, or are unreliable because of a cate-
gory mismatch, is not limited to the T-V distinc-
tion, but could be applied to various linguistic fea-
tures. This includes grammatical features such as
tense and the number/gender of discourse partici-
pants, and more generally, features such as dialect
and register choice.

This paper has the following contributions:

• we describe rules to automatically annotate the
T-V distinction in German text.

• we describe how to use target-side T-V anno-
tation in NMT training to control the level of
politeness at test time via side constraints.

• we perform oracle experiments to demonstrate
the impact of controlling politeness in NMT.

2 Background: Neural Machine
Translation

Attentional neural machine translation (Bahdanau
et al., 2015) is the current state of the art for

35



English→German (Jean et al., 2015b; Luong and
Manning, 2015). We follow the neural machine
translation architecture by Bahdanau et al. (2015),
which we will briefly summarize here. However, our
approach is not specific to this architecture.

The neural machine translation system is imple-
mented as an attentional encoder-decoder network.
The encoder is a bidirectional neural network with
gated recurrent units (Cho et al., 2014) that reads
an input sequence x = (x1, ..., xm) and calculates
a forward sequence of hidden states (

−→
h1, ...,

−→
hm),

and a backward sequence (
←−
h1, ...,

←−
hm). The hidden

states
−→
hj and

←−
hj are concatenated to obtain the an-

notation vector hj .
The decoder is a recurrent neural network that

predicts a target sequence y = (y1, ..., yn). Each
word yi is predicted based on a recurrent hidden
state si, the previously predicted word yi−1, and a
context vector ci. ci is computed as a weighted sum
of the annotations hj . The weight of each annota-
tion hj is computed through an alignment model αij ,
which models the probability that yi is aligned to xj .
The alignment model is a single-layer feedforward
neural network that is learned jointly with the rest of
the network through backpropagation.

A detailed description can be found in (Bahdanau
et al., 2015). Training is performed on a parallel cor-
pus with stochastic gradient descent. For translation,
a beam search with small beam size is employed.

3 NMT with Side Constraints

We are interested in machine translation for lan-
guage pairs where politeness is not grammatically
marked in the source text, but should be predicted in
the target text. The basic idea is to provide the neu-
ral network with additional input features that mark
side constraints such as politeness.

At training time, the correct feature is extracted
from the sentence pair as described in the following
section. At test time, we assume that the side con-
straint is provided by a user who selects the desired
level of politeness of the translation.

We add side constraints as special tokens at the
end of the source text, for instance <T> or <V>.
The attentional encoder-decoder framework is then
able to learn to pay attention to the side constraints.
One could envision alternative architectures to in-

corporate side constraints, e.g. directly connecting
them to all decoder hidden states, bypassing the
attention model, or connecting them to the output
layer (Mikolov and Zweig, 2012). Our approach is
simple and applicable to a wide range of NMT ar-
chitectures and our experiments suggest that the in-
corporation of the side constraint as an extra source
token is very effective.

4 Automatic Training Set Annotation

Our approach relies on annotating politeness in the
training set to obtain the politeness feature which we
discussed previously. We choose a sentence-level
annotation because a target-side honorific may have
no word-level correspondence in the source. We will
discuss the annotation of German as an example,
but our method could be applied to other languages,
such as Japanese (Nariyama et al., 2005).

German has distinct pronoun forms for informal
and polite address, as shown in Table 1. A further
difference between informal and polite speech are
imperative verbs, and the original imperative forms
are considered informal. The polite alternative is to
use 3rd person plural forms with subject in position
2:

• Ruf mich zurück. (informal)
(Call me back.)

• Rufen Sie mich zurück. (polite)
(Call you me back.)

We automatically annotate politeness on a sen-
tence level with rules based on a morphosyntactic
annotation by ParZu (Sennrich et al., 2013). Sen-
tences containing imperative verbs are labelled in-
formal. Sentences containing an informal or polite
pronoun from Table 1 are labelled with the corre-
sponding class.

Some pronouns are ambiguous. Polite pronouns
are distinguished from (neutral) 3rd person plural
forms by their capitalization, and are ambiguous in
sentence-initial position. In sentence-initial posi-
tion, we consider them polite pronouns if the English
source side contains the pronoun you(r). For Ihr and
ihr, we use the morphological annotation by ParZu
to distinguish between the informal 2nd person plu-
ral nominative, the (neutral) 3rd person singular da-
tive, and the possessive; for possessive pronouns, we

36



category informal politesg. pl. sg./pl.
nominative du ihr Sie
genitive deiner euer Ihrer
dative dir euch Ihnen
accusative dich euch Sie
possessive (base form) dein euer Ihr

Table 1: German address pronouns.

distinguish between polite forms and (neutral) 3rd
person forms by their capitalization.

If a sentence matches rules for both classes, we
label it as informal – we found that our lowest-
precision rule is the annotation of sentence-initial
Sie. All sentences without a match are considered
neutral.

5 Evaluation

Our empirical research questions are as follows:

• can we control the production of honorifics in
neural machine translation via side constraints?

• how important is the T-V distinction for trans-
lation quality (as measured by BLEU)?

5.1 Data and Methods

We perform English→German experiments on
OpenSubtitles (Tiedemann, 2012)1, a parallel cor-
pus of movie subtitles. Machine translation is com-
monly used in the professional translation of movie
subtitles in a post-editing workflow, and politeness
is considered an open problem for subtitle transla-
tion (Etchegoyhen et al., 2014). We use OpenSub-
titles2012 as training corpus, and random samples
from OpenSubtitles2013 for testing. The training
corpus consists of of 5.58 million sentence pairs, out
of which we label 0.48 million sentence pairs as po-
lite, and 1.09 million as informal.

We train an attentional encoder-decoder NMT
system using Groundhog2 (Bahdanau et al., 2015;
Jean et al., 2015a). We follow the settings and train-
ing procedure described by Sennrich et al. (2015),
using BPE to represent the texts with a fixed vocab-
ulary of subword units (vocabulary size 90000).

1http://www.opensubtitles.org
2github.com/sebastien-j/LV_groundhog

The training set is annotated as described in sec-
tion 4, and the source side is marked with the po-
liteness feature as described in section 3. Note that
there are only two values for the politeness feature,
and neutral sentences are left unmarked. This is to
allow users to select a politeness level for the whole
document, without having to predict which transla-
tions should contain an address pronoun. Instead,
we want the NMT model to ignore side constraints
when they are irrelevant.

To ensure that the NMT model does not overly
rely on the side constraints, and that performance
does not degrade when no side constraint is provided
at test time, only a subset of the labelled training in-
stances are marked with a politeness feature at train-
ing time. We set the probability that a labelled train-
ing instance is marked, α, to 0.5 in our experiments.
To ensure that the NMT model learns to ignore side
constraints when they are irrelevant, and does not
overproduce address pronouns when side constraints
are active, we also mark neutral sentences with a
random politeness feature with probability α. Keep-
ing the mark-up probability α constant for all sen-
tences in the training set prevents the introduction
of unwanted biases. We re-mark the training set for
each epoch of training. In preliminary experiments,
we found no degradation in baseline performance
when politeness features were included in this way
during training.

The model is trained for approximately 9 epochs
(7 days). At test time, all results are obtained with
the same model, and the only variable is the side
constraint used to control the production of hon-
orifics. We test translation without side constraint,
and translations that are constrained to be polite or
informal. In an oracle experiment, we use the po-
liteness label of the reference to determine the side
constraint. This simulates a setting in which a user
controls the desired politeness.

5.2 Results

Our first test set is a random sample of 2000 sen-
tences from OpenSubtitles2013 where the English
source contains a 2nd person pronoun. Results are
shown in Table 2. Side constraints very effectively
control whether the NMT system produces polite
or informal output. Translations constrained to be
polite are overwhelmingly labelled polite or neutral

37



side constraint output label BLEUneutral polite informal
(reference) 429 524 1047 -
none 178 351 1471 20.7
polite 208 1728 64 17.9
informal 141 28 1831 20.2
oracle 161 567 1272 23.9

Table 2: Politeness and translation quality on test set of 2000
sentences from OpenSubtitles2013 that contain second person

pronoun you(r(s(elf))) in English source text.

source Give me the telephone!
reference Gib mir das Telefon! [T]
none Gib mir das Telefon! [T]
polite Geben Sie mir das Telefon! [V]
informal Gib mir das Telefon! [T]
source Are you kidding?
reference Das ist doch ein Witz! [N]

(this is a joke!)
none Machst du Witze? [T]
polite Machen Sie Witze? [V]
informal Machst du Witze? [T]
source You foolish boy.
reference Du dummer Junge. [T]
none Du dummer Junge. [T]
polite Du dummer Junge. [T]
informal Du dummer Junge. [T]

Table 3: Translation examples with different side constraints.
Translations marked as neutral [N], informal [T] or polite [V].

by our automatic target-side annotation (96%), and
analogously, translations constrained to be informal
are almost exclusively informal or neutral (98%).

We also see that BLEU is strongly affected by the
choice. An oracle experiment in which the side con-
straint of every sentence is informed by the reference
obtains an improvement of 3.2 BLEU over the base-
line (20.7→23.9).

We note that the reference has a higher propor-
tion of German sentences labelled neutral than the
NMT systems. A close inspection shows that this is
due to sentence alignment errors in OpenSubtitles,
free translations as shown in Table 3, and sentences
where you is generic and translated by the imper-
sonal pronoun man in the reference.

The side constraints are only soft constraints, and
are occasionally overridden by the NMT system.
These cases tend to be sentences where the source
text provides strong politeness clues, like the sen-

side constraint output label BLEUneutral polite informal
(reference) 1406 189 405 -
none 1385 125 490 22.6
polite 1386 576 38 21.7
informal 1365 11 624 22.5
oracle 1374 185 441 24.0

Table 4: Politeness and translation quality on test set of 2000
random sentences from OpenSubtitles2013.

tence You foolish boy. Neither the address boy nor
the attribute foolish are likely in polite speech, and
the sentence is translated with a T pronoun, regard-
less of the side constraint.

While Table 2 only contains sentences with an
address pronoun in the source text, Table 4 repre-
sents a random sample. There are fewer address
pronouns in the random sample, and thus more neu-
tral sentences, but side constraints remain effective.
This experiment also shows that we do not over-
produce address pronouns when side constraints are
provided, which validates our strategy of includ-
ing side constraints with a constant probability α at
training time.

The automatic evaluation with BLEU indicates
that the T-V distinction is relevant for translation.
We expect that the actual relevance for humans de-
pends on the task. For gisting, we expect the T-V
distinction to have little effect on comprehensibility.
For professional translation that uses MT with post-
editing, producing the desired honorifics is likely to
improve post-editing speed and satisfaction. In an
evaluation of MT for subtitle translation, Etchegoy-
hen et al. (2014) highlight the production of the ap-
propriate T-V form as “a limitation of MT technol-
ogy” that was “often frustrat[ing]” to post-editors.

6 Related Work

Faruqui and Pado (2012) have used a bilingual
English–German corpus to automatically annotate
the T-V distinction, and train a classifier to predict
the address from monolingual English text. Ap-
plying a source-side classifier is potential future
work, although we note that the baseline encoder–
decoder NMT system already has some disam-
biguating power. Our T-V classification is more
comprehensive, including more pronoun forms and
imperative verbs.

38



Previous research on neural language models has
proposed including various types of extra infor-
mation, such as topic, genre or document context
(Mikolov and Zweig, 2012; Aransa et al., 2015; Ji
et al., 2015; Wang and Cho, 2015). Our method
is somewhat similar, with the main novel idea be-
ing that we can target specific phenomena, such as
honorifics, via an automatic annotation of the target
side of a parallel corpus. On the modelling side, our
method is slightly different in that we pass the extra
information to the encoder of an encoder–decoder
network, rather than the (decoder) hidden layer or
output layer. We found this to be very effective,
but trying different architectures is potential future
work.

In rule-based machine translation, user options to
control the level of politeness have been proposed
in the 90s (Mima et al., 1997), and were adopted
by commercial systems (SYSTRAN, 2004, 26). To
our knowledge, controlling the level of politeness
has not been explicitly addressed in statistical ma-
chine translation. While one could use data selec-
tion or weighting to control the honorifics produced
by SMT, NMT allows us to very elegantly support
multiple levels of politeness with a single model.

7 Conclusion

Machine translation should not only produce seman-
tically accurate translations, but should also consider
pragmatic aspects, such as producing socially appro-
priate forms of address. We show that by annotating
the T-V distinction in the target text, and integrating
the annotation as an additional input during train-
ing of a neural translation model, we can apply side
constraints at test time to control the production of
honorifics in NMT.

We currently assume that the desired level of po-
liteness is specified by the user. Future work could
aim to automatically predict it from the English
source text based on textual features such as titles
and names, or meta-textual information about the
discourse participants.

While this paper focuses on controlling polite-
ness, side constraints could be applied to a wide
range of phenomena. It is a general problem in
translation that, depending on the language pair, the
translator needs to specify features in the target text

that cannot be predicted from the source text. Apart
from from the T-V distinction, this includes gram-
matical features such as clusivity, tense, and gender
and number of the discourse participants, and more
generally, features such as the desired dialect (e.g.
when translating into Arabic) and text register. Side
constraints can be applied to control these features.
All that is required is that the feature can be anno-
tated reliably, either using target-side information or
metatextual information, at training time.

Acknowledgments

The research presented in this publication was con-
ducted in cooperation with Samsung Electronics
Polska sp. z o.o. - Samsung R&D Institute Poland.
This project has received funding from the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation pro-
gramme under grant agreement 644402 (HimL).

References
Walid Aransa, Holger Schwenk, and Loïc Barrault. 2015.

Improving Continuous Space Language Models using
Auxiliary Features. In Proceedings of the 12th Inter-
national Workshop on Spoken Language Translation,
pages 151–158, Da Nang, Vietnam.

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2015. Neural Machine Translation by Jointly
Learning to Align and Translate. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions (ICLR).

Roger Brown and A. Gilman. 1960. The pronouns of
power and solidarity. In T. Sebeok, editor, Style in
Language. The M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, MA.

Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merrienboer, Caglar Gulcehre,
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Holger Schwenk,
and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Learning Phrase Repre-
sentations using RNN Encoder–Decoder for Statistical
Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the 2014 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 1724–1734, Doha, Qatar.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Thierry Etchegoyhen, Lindsay Bywood, Mark Fishel,
Panayota Georgakopoulou, Jie Jiang, Gerard Van
Loenhout, Arantza Del Pozo, Mirjam Sepesy Maucec,
Anja Turner, and Martin Volk. 2014. Machine Trans-
lation for Subtitling: A Large-Scale Evaluation. In
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’14),
Reykjavik, Iceland. European Language Resources
Association (ELRA).

39



Manaal Faruqui and Sebastian Pado. 2012. Towards a
model of formal and informal address in English. In
Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 623–633, Avignon, France. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Sébastien Jean, Kyunghyun Cho, Roland Memisevic, and
Yoshua Bengio. 2015a. On Using Very Large Target
Vocabulary for Neural Machine Translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics and the 7th Inter-
national Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1–10, Beijing,
China. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Sébastien Jean, Orhan Firat, Kyunghyun Cho, Roland
Memisevic, and Yoshua Bengio. 2015b. Montreal
Neural Machine Translation Systems for WMT’15 . In
Proceedings of the Tenth Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation, pages 134–140, Lisbon, Portugal.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Yangfeng Ji, Trevor Cohn, Lingpeng Kong, Chris Dyer,
and Jacob Eisenstein. 2015. Document Context Lan-
guage Models. ArXiv e-prints, November.

Minh-Thang Luong and Christopher D. Manning. 2015.
Stanford Neural Machine Translation Systems for
Spoken Language Domains. In Proceedings of the
International Workshop on Spoken Language Trans-
lation 2015, Da Nang, Vietnam.

Tomas Mikolov and Geoffrey Zweig. 2012. Context
dependent recurrent neural network language model.
In 2012 IEEE Spoken Language Technology Workshop
(SLT), pages 234–239, Miami, FL, USA.

Hideki Mima, Osamu Furuse, and Hitoshi Iida. 1997.
Improving Performance of Transfer-driven Machine
Translation with Extra-linguistic Information from
Context, Situation and Environment. In Proceedings
of the Fifteenth International Joint Conference on Ar-
tifical Intelligence - Volume 2, IJCAI’97, pages 983–
988, San Francisco, CA, USA. Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers Inc.

Shigeko Nariyama, Hiromi Nakaiwa, and Melanie Siegel.
2005. Annotating Honorifics Denoting Social Rank-
ing of Referents. In Proceedings of the 6th Interna-
tional Workshop on Linguistically Interpreted Corpora
(LINC-2005).

Doris Schüpbach, John Hajek, Jane Warren, Michael
Clyne, Heinz-L. Kretzenbacher, and Catrin Norrby.
2006. A cross-linguistic comparison of address pro-
noun use in four European languages: Intralingual and
interlingual dimensions . In Annual Meeting of the
Australian Linguistic Society, Brisbane, Australia.

Rico Sennrich, Martin Volk, and Gerold Schneider. 2013.
Exploiting Synergies Between Open Resources for

German Dependency Parsing, POS-tagging, and Mor-
phological Analysis. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference Recent Advances in Natural Lan-
guage Processing 2013, pages 601–609, Hissar, Bul-
garia.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2015. Neural Machine Translation of Rare Words with
Subword Units. CoRR, abs/1508.07909.

SYSTRAN, 2004. SYSTRAN 5.0 User Guide.
Jörg Tiedemann. 2012. Parallel Data, Tools and Inter-

faces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the Eight Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Evalu-
ation (LREC’12), Istanbul, Turkey.

Tian Wang and Kyunghyun Cho. 2015. Larger-Context
Language Modelling. ArXiv e-prints, November.

40


