



















































TransRead: Designing a Bilingual Reading Experience with Machine Translation Technologies


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2016 (Demonstrations), pages 27–31,
San Diego, California, June 12-17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

TRANSREAD: Designing a Bilingual Reading Experience with Machine
Translation Technologies

François Yvon and Yong Xu and Marianna Apidianaki
LIMSI, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay

91 403 Orsay
{yvon,yong,marianna}@limsi.fr

Clément Pillias and Pierre Cubaud
CEDRIC, CNAM

2 rue Conté, 75003 PARIS
{clement.pillias,cubaud}@cnam.fr

Abstract

In this paper, we use multilingual Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP) tools to improve the
reading experience of parallel texts on mobile
devices. Such enterprise poses multiple chal-
lenging issues both from the NLP and from the
Human Computer Interaction (HCI) perspec-
tives. We discuss these problems, and report
on our own solutions, now implemented in a
full-fledged bilingual reading device.

1 Introduction

Owing to 15 years of advances in Statistical Ma-
chine Translation (SMT), automatically translated
texts are nowadays of sufficiently high quality to
serve the general public and the translation industry.
Contrary to (S)MT which primarily targets readers
without any assumed literacy in the source language,
the TRANSREAD project studies applications target-
ing partially bilingual users, such as language learn-
ers, migrants settling in a new country, inhabitants of
multilingual states, editors in the publishing industry
and professional translators. Its main goal is to help
such users to read texts in the original (source) lan-
guage, even though a translation might be available
in their mother tongue. Bitext processing techniques
(Wu, 2010; Tiedemann, 2011) such as cross-lingual
alignments at different levels or cross-lingual dictio-
nary access, can facilitate and enrich the reading ex-
perience of texts in their original language. Such
endeavour poses difficult challenges: it first requires
to push existing MT technologies to the limit and to
revisit assumptions that are rarely questioned, such
as the need to deliver fully aligned bitexts, including

many-to-many sentence links, and to output high-
precision word and phrase alignments, even for rare
words or gappy multi-word units.

A second challenge is visualisation and interac-
tion design. In fact, most existing interfaces for
bilingual reading/writing have targeted specialists
of the MT industry, serving purposes such as man-
ual alignment input and visualisation (Smith and
Jahry, 2000; Germann, 2008; Gilmanov et al., 2014;
Steele and Specia, 2015), MT tracing and debug-
ging (DeNeefe et al., 2005; Weese and Callison-
Burch, 2010), MT quality assessment (Federmann,
2012; Chatzitheodorou, 2013; Girardi et al., 2014)
or MT post-edition (Aziz et al., 2012). By con-
trast, our aim is not just to visualize the transla-
tion or bilingual correspondences, but rather to en-
able a smooth and seamless reading experience for
the general public. Ebook reading applications typ-
ically allow the reader to select a word and to ac-
cess the corresponding dictionary entry, but appli-
cations that exploit the full translation context are
much rarer. In DoppelText1, DuoLir2 and Parallel
Text Reader on iOS, the selection is performed at
the sentence level, using alignments. Whatever level
is used, this kind of switch-on-demand interaction
interrupts the flow of reading and can be a source
of frustration. Another approach uses synchronized
views, where the bitext is shown to the reader along
with alignment links. In ParallelBooks3, the bitext
is synchronized by scrolling and the translation (at
the paragraph level) only appears when the user taps

1http://www.doppeltext.com/
2http://www.duolir.com/
3http://www.parallelbooks.com/

27



the screen. Synchronized views have the potential to
enable a seamless reading of the bitext (Pillias and
Cubaud, 2015), at the cost however of a larger screen
space. This paper discusses these various challenges
and reports on the state of development of our main
tool - the bilingual reader. Additional information,
including resources and demos, can be found on the
project website.4

2 Augmenting e-books with alignments

A major requirement of electronic reading devices is
their ability to seamlessly reformat and adapt their
typesetting, which does not only include the text it-
self but also other editorial (header, footer), typo-
graphic (bold, italic, font sizes and shapes) and dis-
positional information. An early design choice was
to include alignment information as auxiliary source
of information to the original electronic book(s).
Each side of the bitext is thus stored in the EPUB
format,5 a de facto standard for electronic books,
thereby enabling us to take advantage of its inher-
ent ability to encode arbitrary documents and media
files, as well as directives regarding their display.

Linguistic annotations are stored in an additional
file to the EPUB archive and use an XML-based rep-
resentation inspired by the XCES format,6 already
proposed in the early 2000s to represent alignment
information. References to actual textual units (in
the EPUB/html files) are maintained as the com-
plete path from the root of the document to the
node containing the unit. Our format for represent-
ing annotations is generic enough to represent align-
ment links at various levels of granularity, as well
as other arbitrary information. It relies on two types
of basic markups: <link> for binary relationships
(bilingual links or monolingual co-references), and
<mark> for unary information concerning one sin-
gle unit (be it a paragraph, a sentence, a fragment or
a word). In our sample file, these tags are used to en-
code part-of-speech as well as sense disambiguation
information. However, only the information related
to bilingual alignment links is currently displayed.

4http://transread.limsi.fr
5http://epubzone.org/epub-3-overview
6http://www.xces.org/

3 Challenges of bitext alignments

Our representation of alignment relationships ac-
commodates alignment links at various levels of
granularity. Our display currently exploits 5 such
levels, based on sentential, sub-sentential and word
alignments, which were computed for two short sto-
ries by S. Maugham.7

3.1 Sentence alignment

Sentence alignment in parallel texts (bitexts) is
a well established problem in multilingual NLP
(Brown et al., 1991; Gale and Church, 1991; Kay
and Röscheisen, 1993), for which a wide array of
methods exist (Tiedemann, 2011). The problem is
however far from being solved, especially for lit-
erary texts where parallelism is less strict than for
technical or legal documents (Yu et al., 2012). For
this demo, alignments have been produced semi-
automatically. The automatic part used techniques
presented by (Xu et al., 2015), which implement a
multi-pass, coarse-to-fine alignment strategy. The
first pass uses very reliable 1:1 alignment links com-
puted using the approach of (Moore, 2002), while
the next stages complete this initial partial alignment
by including additional correspondences, the prob-
abilities of which are evaluated using a large-scale
MaxEnt classifier embarking a very large number of
features. Automatic alignments were then manually
checked and fixed: for our simple bitexts they were
mostly correct, with a link level F-score ≈ 97%.
3.2 Word alignments

For this demo, gold word alignments were collected
as follows: automatic word alignments were first
computed by running the MGiza (Gao and Vogel,
2008) implementation of IBM Model 4 (Brown et
al., 1993) in both directions. Alignments in the in-
tersection were checked and corrected following the
recommandations of Och and Ney (2003). Even for
such simple texts, alignment errors were numerous,
with an AER close to 0.17 (‘The Promise’), and to
0.19 (‘The Verger’). This confirms the intuition that
computing high quality word alignments for liter-
ary texts might be significantly more difficult than
for other text genres. This also calls for improved

7‘The verger’ and ‘The promise’, totalling slightly more that
160 sentences each.

28



techniques for computing confidence measures for
word alignments (Huang, 2009): depending on the
intended reading context, it might be better to avoid
displaying erroneous alignment links.

3.3 Subsentential alignments

The task of designing sound and tractable align-
ment models is notoriously much harder for groups
of words than for words (Marcu and Wong, 2002;
DeNero and Klein, 2008). Two main strategies have
been explored in the literature: the most common,
employed in most SMT systems (Koehn et al., 2007)
starts with alignments for isolated words, which
are incrementally grown subject to consistency con-
straints. The alternative way is to start with senten-
tial alignments and adopt a divisive strategy, which
yields progressive refinements of an initially holis-
tic pairing; this can be performed exactly under ITG
constraints (Wu, 1997); heuristic approaches, capa-
ble of handling alignments for arbitrarily long seg-
ments have also been proposed in (Lardilleux et al.,
2012): both techniques require to evaluate the par-
allelism of arbitrary chunks. We follow the latter
here, also using punctuation marks to select segmen-
tation points. The resulting alignments are deliber-
ately pretty coarse and primarily meant to be used in
a contrastive condition for the human tests.

4 A Bilingual Reader

4.1 Design

The current version of the TRANSREAD bilingual
reader displays paginated versions of the bitext in
parallel views. In Figure 1, the source text is dis-
played on the right side of the screen and its transla-
tion on the left. The user has selected a word in the
source version. Touching a word highlights its con-
text on both sides, exploiting the alignment structure
in a hierarchical way. Highlighting can be triggered
from both versions of the text. The different lev-
els are depicted using bounding boxes, which are
pre-computed using the alignment and the HTML
graphs. Bounding boxes are not always rectangular,
because of word hyphenation for text justification.
We have tried to minimize visual overload by simpli-
fying the resulting geometry of the boxes and using
a colour scale as background. We use the “natural”
theme from (Krause, 2010).

The display size for the bitext can be modified dy-
namically. When the application starts, the text ver-
sions are given an equal space, but the translation on
the left can be shrunk so that the reader can concen-
trate on the original text. Structural highlighting is
still functional in this mode, but when the translated
text is shrunk to its minimum size, it can only be
used as a visual hint.

Our reader is targeted for use on a tablet device.
Interactions with the tactile screen of the tablet cause
the well-known problem of fingers occluding the
touched item. To avoid this issue, a pointer is dis-
played 1.3cm above the touch position sensed by
the system, and its position determines what ele-
ments are selected. This picking is done by recur-
sively searching the textual elements whose precom-
puted bounding boxes contain the pointer’s position.
When this process selects two sibling elements (e.g.
two sentences in a paragraph), the system only keeps
the one for which the distance from the pointer to the
closest bounding box border is greatest. The pointer
shape is an upward triangle. When a word is se-
lected, we also display a downward triangle above it
attached to the line of text, but following the pointer
horizontally. These two triangles enclose the se-
lected word without occluding it.

4.2 Implementation
As readers, we benefit from centuries of high quality
printed typesetting. A poor digital typesetting would
therefore lower the user experience of our bilingual
reader, no matter how rich the interaction may be.
But automated typesetting is a complex task, of-
ten under-estimated. For instance, justification on
small columns, as those produced by bitext presen-
tation, can exhibit “rivers” of white space that are
difficult to handle automatically. Our first goal for
the implementation was then to select a program-
ming framework that would help for these questions.
The Knuth-Plass algorithm8 was used for justifica-
tion, along with LATEX rules9 for hyphenation. An-
other important issue was to build a fully reconfig-
urable software in order to investigate a large de-
sign space of interaction for tablets. We have se-
lected the Kivy framework for Python, which en-

8As described in http://defoe.sourceforge.
net/folio/knuth-plass.html

9Provided by http://tug.org/tex-hyphen/

29



Figure 1: The TRANSREAD bilingual reader application running on tablet

ables cross-platform development for Android or
iOS, and GPU-based graphics with OpenGL ES.

5 Perspectives

As reflected in this paper, a top priority is to pur-
sue our efforts towards high-precision alignments,
an application where supervised learning techniques
could help (Moore, 2005). Additional functionali-
ties in reading are also envisioned, such as an en-
hanced and non-distracting access to dictionary in-
formation for difficult words. Currently, Web Read-
ers and mobile reading devices offer such function-
ality through a pop-up window presenting the com-
plete dictionary entry. No assistance is however of-
fered to access the right sense in context, which
would be especially helpful for polysemous words
or when language proficiency is low. In TRAN-
SREAD, we propose to perform this selection auto-
matically. Our word sense disambiguation (WSD)
method (Apidianaki and Gong, 2015) exploits word-
level alignments to annotate words on both sides
of the bitext with the correct senses extracted from
BabelNet (Navigli and Ponzetto, 2012). By in-
tegrating WSD information in the reader, we will
be able to propose definitions, usage examples and
Wikipedia entries, as well as synonymous words and
semantically correct translations. Our WSD system
embeds an alignment-based multi-word expression
(MWE) identification mechanism (Marie and Apid-
ianaki, 2015). Such information will serve as part

of a smart selection mechanism (Pantel et al., 2014),
enabling the system to select appropriate spans and
dictionary entries for MWEs found in texts.

An experimental evaluation of the interface gen-
eral design is currently being conducted. We study,
notably, the effect of the depth of the alignment
structure on human readers behavior. As short term
future work, we shall also investigate other inter-
action techniques for focus management, such as
distortion and 3D views for page turning (Cubaud,
2008). The graphic composition engine developed
for the current application already allows such ef-
fects. A research agenda should also include long
term experiments with real-life reading sessions for
a wide range of languages and text difficulties.

6 Conclusion

We have presented a first version of a bilingual
reader using NLP and HCI technologies to enhance
the reading experience. On our way, some tough
challenges had to be overcome, an unexpected issue
being the processing of typeset documents which is
hardly addressed in the NLP literature. This venture
has provided a context where such issues matter, il-
lustrating the benefits of cross-domain research.

Acknowledgments

This work was partly funded by the French “Na-
tional Research Agency” under project ANR-12-
CORD-0015.

30



References
M. Apidianaki and L. Gong. 2015. LIMSI: Translations

as Source of Indirect Supervision for Multilingual All-
Words Sense Disambiguation and Entity Linking. In
Proc. SemEval.

W. Aziz, S. C. M. De Sousa, and L. Specia. 2012. PET: a
tool for post-editing and assessing machine translation.
In Proc. LREC.

P. F. Brown, J. C. Lai, and R. L. Mercer. 1991. Aligning
sentences in parallel corpora. In Proc. ACL.

P. F. Brown, S. A. Della Pietra, V. J. Della Pietra, and
R. L. Mercer. 1993. The Mathematics of Statistical
Machine Translation: Parameter Estimation. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 19(2):263–311.

K. Chatzitheodorou. 2013. COSTA MT Evaluation Tool:
An open toolkit for human machine translation evalu-
ation. The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguis-
tics, 100.

P. Cubaud, 2008. Digital Libraries, chapter 3D interac-
tion for digital libraries.

S. DeNeefe, K. Knight, and H. H. Chan. 2005. Inter-
actively Exploring a Machine Translation Model. In
Proc. ACL.

J. DeNero and D. Klein. 2008. The Complexity of
Phrase Alignment Problems. In Proc. ACL-08:HLT.

C. Federmann. 2012. Appraise: an Open-Source Toolkit
for Manual Evaluation of MT output. The Prague Bul-
letin of Mathematical Linguistics, 98.

W. A. Gale and K. W. Church. 1991. A program for
aligning sentences in bilingual corpora. In Proc. ACL.

Q. Gao and S. Vogel. 2008. Parallel Implementations
of Word Alignment Tool. In Software Engineering,
Testing, and Quality Assurance for Natural Language
Processing.

U. Germann. 2008. Yawat: Yet Another Word Align-
ment Tool. In Proc. ACL-08:HLT (demo).

T. Gilmanov, O. Scrivner, and S. Kübler. 2014. SWIFT
Aligner, A Multifunctional Tool for Parallel Cor-
pora: Visualization, Word Alignment, and (Morpho)-
Syntactic Cross-Language Transfer. In Proc. LREC.

C. Girardi, L. Bentivogli, M. A. Farajian, and M. Fed-
erico. 2014. MT-EQuAl: a Toolkit for Human As-
sessment of Machine Translation Output. In Proc.
COLING.

F. Huang. 2009. Confidence Measure for Word Align-
ment. In Proc. ACL-AFNLP.

M. Kay and M. Röscheisen. 1993. Text-Translation
Alignement. Computational Linguistics, 19(1).

P. Koehn, H. Hoang, A. Birch, C. Callison-Burch,
M. Federico, N. Bertoldi, B. Cowan, W. Shen,
C. Moran, R. Zens, C. Dyer, O. Bojar, A. Constantin,
and E. Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open Source Toolkit for
Statistical Machine Translation. In Proc. ACL (demo).

J. Krause, 2010. Color Index - Revised Edition.
A. Lardilleux, F. Yvon, and Y. Lepage. 2012. Hierarchi-

cal sub-sentential alignment with Anymalign. In Proc.
EAMT.

D. Marcu and D. Wong. 2002. A Phrase-Based, Joint
Probability Model for Statistical Machine Translation.
In Proc. EMNLP.

B. Marie and M. Apidianaki. 2015. Alignment-based
sense selection in METEOR and the RATATOUILLE
recipe. In Proc. WMT.

R. C. Moore. 2002. Fast and Accurate Sentence Align-
ment of Bilingual Corpora. In Proc. of AMTA, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science 2499.

R. C. Moore. 2005. A discriminative framework for
bilingual word alignment. In Proc. EMNLP:HLT.

R. Navigli and S. P. Ponzetto. 2012. BabelNet: The Au-
tomatic Construction, Evaluation and Application of a
Wide-Coverage Multilingual Semantic Network. Ar-
tificial Intelligence, 193.

F. J. Och and H. Ney. 2003. A Systematic Comparison of
Various Statistical Alignment Models. Computational
Linguistics, 29(1).

P. Pantel, M. Gamon, and A. Fuxman. 2014. Smart Se-
lection. In Proc. ACL.

C. Pillias and P. Cubaud. 2015. Bilingual Reading Expe-
riences: What They Could Be and How To Design for
Them. In Proc. IFIP Interact.

N. A. Smith and M. E. Jahry. 2000. Cairo: An alignment
visualization tool. In Proc. LREC.

D. Steele and L. Specia. 2015. WA-Continuum: Visual-
ising Word Alignments across Multiple Parallel Sen-
tences Simultaneously. In Proc. ACL-IJCNLP.

J. Tiedemann. 2011. Bitext Alignment. Number 14
in Synthesis Lectures on Human Language Technolo-
gies. Morgan and Claypool publishers.

J. Weese and C. Callison-Burch. 2010. Visualizing Data
Structures in Parsing-Based Machine Translation. The
Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics, 93.

D. Wu. 1997. Stochastic Inversion Transduction Gram-
mar and Bilingual Parsing of Parallel Corpora. Com-
putational Linguistics, 23(3).

D. Wu. 2010. Alignment. In CRC Handbook of Natural
Language Processsing, number 16.

Y. Xu, A. Max, and F. Yvon. 2015. Sentence alignment
for literary texts. Linguistic Issues in Language Tech-
nology, 12(6).

Q. Yu, A. Max, and F. Yvon. 2012. Aligning Bilin-
gual Literary Works: a Pilot Study. In Proc. NAACL-
HLT Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Lit-
erature.

31


