



















































Patterns of Wisdom: Discourse-Level Style in Multi-Sentence Quotations


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2016, pages 1139–1144,
San Diego, California, June 12-17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Patterns of Wisdom: Discourse-Level Style in Multi-Sentence Quotations

Kyle Booten and Marti A. Hearst
UC Berkeley

Berkeley, CA 94720
kbooten@berkeley.edu, hearst@berkeley.edu

Abstract

Quotations are kernels not just of wisdom but
also of beautiful and striking language. While
recent studies have characterized the stylistic
features of quotations, we characterize the or-
der of stylistic information within quotations.
Analyzing a corpus of two-sentence quota-
tions collected from the social network Tum-
blr, we explore the ways that both low-level
features and high-level features tend to occur
in either the first or second sentence. Through
analysis of examples, we interpret these ten-
dencies as manifestations of rhetorical pat-
terns. Results from a prediction task suggest
that stylistic patterns are more prominent in
quotations than in a comparison corpus.

1 Introduction

The ancient arts of rhetoric described ways of wield-
ing language to make it particularly persuasive or
memorable. Central in this endeavor—a predecessor
to modern linguistics (Dolven, 2013)—was the de-
scription of rhetorical “tropes” or “figures,” patterns
of language from the level of the phoneme (as in the
case of rhyme or alliteration) to higher-level syntac-
tic and even logical structures (Peacham, 1954). In
the figure of epistrophe, successive clauses end with
the same words. In pysma, the speaker (or writer)
launches a series of sharp and vehement questions;
this and other rhetorical figures describe language at
the level of discourse—that is, the relationship be-
tween linguistic elements across sentences.

Recent studies of quotations have described what
makes certain fragments of text more memorable
than others (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al., 2012;

Guerini et al., 2015); this ongoing project can be
seen as a contemporary, empirical investigation of
the rhetorical arts. Inspired by the way that clas-
sical rhetoricians described complicated and high-
level linguistic patterns, the present study takes the
novel step of analyzing the way linguistic elements
are sequenced within quotations. After describing a
minimalistic set of stylistic features designed to cap-
ture common patterns in quotations, we demonstrate
that some features tend to occur in certain positions
within a quotation. We investigate whether quotes
are more predictable than other genres in a “Quote
Ordering Task” in which the goal is to distinguish
the correct version of a quotation from one whose
sentences have been reversed.

2 Related Work

2.1 Style of Memorable Language

Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al. (2012) used a vari-
ety of features to distinguish popular movie quota-
tions from unmemorable lines from the same movie.
By modeling word and part-of-speech sequences of
quotes and non-quotes, they found that quotations
tended to use less common words but that these
words were placed in more common syntactic pat-
terns. The researchers evocatively hint at some
“common syntactic scaffolding” that structures quo-
tations, and we build on this finding by characteriz-
ing these patterns. They also found that quotations
tend to contain linguistic features that make them
more “generalizable,” such as tendency toward in-
definite over definite articles.

Other researchers have attempted to analyze quo-
tations in ways that evoke the traditional figures

1139



of rhetoric. Exploring the same movie quotes cor-
pus as well as other corpora, Guerini et al. (2015)
found that memorable quotes were more euphonic,
with more instances of rhyme and alliteration than
their non-memorable counterparts. Kuznetsova et
al. (2013) developed several methods for quantify-
ing the creativity of word combinations like “dis-
advantageous peace,” and found that quotes were
more likely to contain creative combinations than
non-quotes. In terms of classical rhetoric, such un-
expected word combinations could embody figures
such as oxymoron.

2.2 High-Level Style

To investigate quotations in a new way, we are in-
spired by researchers who have analyzed text qual-
ity using what may be called “high-level” features
— i.e., moving beyond the specific lexical, syntac-
tic, or phonemic properties of sentences to explore
the overall structure of sentences or even the discur-
sive relationships between them.

Feng et al. (2012) engineered features from sen-
tences’ CFG parse trees to describe their overall
structure and classify them in terms of a priori
rhetorical categories, such as loose vs. periodic.
They found that these features were helpful for au-
thorship classification, and a later study used similar
features to predict the success of novels (Ashok et
al., 2013). Wible and Tsao (2010) and Gianfortoni et
al. (2011) designed n-gram based features to capture
local lexico-syntactic sequences within sentences.

Looking at the level of discourse, Louis and
Nenkova (2012) found that adjacent sentences “ex-
hibit stable patterns of syntactic co-occurence” —
i.e., certain types of sentences tend to follow certain
other types of sentences. Furthermore, they demon-
strated that sentences with similar communicative
purposes are syntactically similar, so syntax can be
taken as a proxy for communicative purpose. We
build on both of these observations.

3 Data-sets

Quotations 1. We gathered a data-set of quotations
from the social network Tumblr (Chang et al., 2014).
Like other social networks, Tumblr has become a
place where users frequently share quotations. In
fact, users have the option of using a “quote” data-

type, which provides separate text-entry fields for
the quotation and its source. We gathered quotes
via Tumblr’s API. Users sometimes use the “quote”
data-type to share messages that are not actually
quotations, most often brief personal musings. To
minimize such non-quotes in our corpus, we re-
tained only those quotes that users themselves had
described with the hashtag “#quote.” Since we were
interested primarily in discourse-level schemas of
quotations, we retained only quotations that were
exactly two sentences long. In the pre-processing
of this and other corpora we removed repeats within
and between corpora. We also removed quotations
containing quotations (i.e. reported speech), as they
were used in highly inconsistent ways in the Tumblr
data. (n=4237)

Quotations 2. A test set. We repeated the same
steps described above for Tumblr quotes gathered
with the “#quotation” hashtag. (n=1846)

Non-Quotes 1. As a comparison corpus, we gath-
ered two-sentence paragraphs from the Brown cor-
pus (Francis and Kucera, 1979). After the same pre-
processing steps, we were left with a collection of
such paragraphs. (n=1846)

Non-Quotes 2. Again mining the Brown Corpus,
we also gathered sequential pairs of sentences ran-
domly chosen from paragraphs longer than two sen-
tences. (n=1846)

4 Features

Take the following quotation from our data set, at-
tributed to Philip Roth: “You cannot observe peo-
ple through an ideology. Your ideology observes
for you.”1 In simple terms, this quotation is a nega-
tive statement (“cannot”) followed by a positive one.
Yet the opposite pattern can likewise appear in quo-
tations, as in this one attributed to William Blake:
“Great things are done when men and mountains
meet. This is not done by jostling in the street.”
Some quotations begin with questions; others end
with them. Some (like the one by Roth) begin with
a generic “you,” while others deploy this pronoun
in the second sentence. We describe each sentence
of each quotation in terms of the following features
meant to capture general lexical and syntactic pat-

1This quote also exemplifies antimetabole, in which words
in the first clause appear reversed in the second.

1140



Feature #S1 #S2 χ2 NQ2?

Highest χ2
It 60 175 56.3 x
But 18 93 50.7 x
it 266 436 41.2 x
And 33 93 28.6 x
They 7 44 26.8 x

Other Unigrams
People 21 2 15.7
? 120 66 15.7
simply 3 20 12.6
Do 38 13 12.3
Love 19 3 11.6
When 43 22 6.8
n’t 262 209 6.0
not 212 170 4.6
What 45 28 4.0

High-Level
CC + NP + VP . 11 68 41.1 x
WHNP + SQ + S + . 39 9 18.7
NP + VP + . 883 748 11.2
WHADVP + SQ + . 18 5 7.3
CC + PP + , + NP + VP + . 2 12 7.1
CC + SBAR + , + NP + VP + . 5 16 5.8
IN + NP + VP + . 2 10 5.3
S + , + S + CC + S + . 5 0 5.0
INTJ + , + NP + VP + . 7 1 4.5
CC + NP + ADVP + VP + . 2 9 4.5

Table 1: Features that preferentially occur in a sentence posi-
tion, sorted by χ2 value; dominant sentence position is in bold.

Highest χ2 represents the top five unigrams. Other Unigrams

represents other select examples. NQ2 is whether feature is also

ordered in the same way in the comparison corpus (“x” if this is

the case).

terns in quotations, regardless of what other more
classical rhetorical figures they may contain.

Unigrams. As a baseline feature, we note in
which sentence, 1 or 2, a unigram occurs.

High-Level Syntax. Feng et al. (2012) found that
the top level of syntactic parse trees (in the case
of Stanford PCFG Parser’s output, which we also
used (Klein and Manning, 2003), two levels beneath
ROOT) provided a useful feature for authorship iden-
tification. For instance, the sentence “Forgotten is
forgiven.” can be represented by the construction NP
+ VP + ., a noun phrase followed by a verb phrase
followed by punctuation. This feature, they argue,
provides an interpretable representation of the gen-
eral syntactic structure of a sentence. We directly
employ this feature.

General/Abstract Words. Through qualitative
analysis of our data, we noticed that many quota-
tion make pronouncements about nouns that might
be considered as generalizations or abstractions. For

instance: “Peace comes from within. Do not seek
it without.” In this case, the abstract noun “peace”
is the subject of the first sentence. To capture such
nouns, we first use the Stanford Dependency Parser
(Chen and Manning, 2014) to extract all words in
the head position of nominal subject dependencies
(excluding stopwords). Using WordNet, we check
whether the word’s most common synset is both
within the hyponym hierarchy of the synset “ab-
straction.n.06” and within a minimum distance (5)
of it2; if so, we consider this noun Abstract.3 The
most common such nouns in the Quotations 1 cor-
pus are not necessarily concept words like “peace”.
For instance, the word “men” appears in this list;
many quotations use the word to evoke a general-
ized (male) subject.4 We consider a nominal sub-
ject to be General if it is within a minimum distance
(6) of its root hypernym. As a feature, we observe
which (if either) sentence contains more such Ab-
stract or General nouns, normalized by the number
of nominal subject dependencies per sentence.

5 Differences Between Sentence Positions

5.1 Feature Comparison

Using balanced subsets of Quotations 1 and Non-
Quotes 1 (n=1846), we investigated which feature
was more likely to occur in either one of the two
sentences’ positions within a two-sentence text. For
each feature we used a χ2 test (α=.05) to compare
the number of times the feature occurred in first sen-
tences with the number of times the feature occurred
in second sentences. Table 1 presents features with
a statistically-significant tendency to appear in one
sentence or the other, limited to those features that
occur at least 5 times and are among the 300 most
common features of its type for that corpus. We sug-
gest that this type of analysis can shed light on some
of the overarching stylistic strategies of quotations:

Negative-to-Positive: As shown in Table 1, “n’t”

2We found this number by taking the whole number above
the mean of distances to the “abstraction.n.06” synset of a sam-
ple of nouns from Project Gutenberg text. For General words
we did the same but averaging distances to a noun’s root hyper-
nym.

3Kao and Jurafsky Kao and Jurafsky (2012) investigated ab-
stractions in poetry using a dictionary of abstract terms.

4“The mass of men lead lives of quiet desperation.” (H.D.
Thoreau)

1141



and “not” were ore likely to occur in the first sen-
tence position than the second sentence position.
This tendency suggests that quotations that begin
with a negative construction (like the earlier quote
by Roth) are more common than those ending with
one (like the earlier quote by Blake). Quotes that
contain “not” in the first sentence often use the first
sentence to make a negative claim about reality, fol-
lowed by a positive claim. Such quotations tend
to use repetitive structures or other types of paral-
lelism, such as antimetabole:

We are not human beings having a spiritual
experience. We are spiritual beings having a
human experience. (P. de Chardin)

In quotations, “Never” was also more likely to oc-
cur in the first sentence than the second sentence,
as was “Do”; studying examples revealed that “Do”
was very often followed by “not” or “n’t.” These sta-
tistical tendencies point to the ways that Negative-
to-Positive constructions also take the form of a neg-
ative commandment (e.g., “Never do X”) in the first
sentence, followed either by a positive command-
ment or an explanation of the reasoning for the com-
mandment:

Do not worry about your difficulties in mathe-
matics. I can assure you mine are still greater.
(A. Einstein)

Cross-Sentence Conjunction: For both Quota-
tions 1 and Non-Quotes 1, the high-level syntax fea-
ture with the highest χ2 value was CC + NP + VP +
.. This feature tended to occur in the second sen-
tence for both collections; likewise, for both sen-
tences “But” and “And” were more likely to appear
in the second sentence. This is not surprising, as co-
ordinating conjunctions mark the “conjunction” re-
lationship of cohesion (Halliday and Hasan, 2014)
(i.e. clauses that begin with conjunctions like “But”
implicitly refer back to a previous clause). How-
ever, for Quotations 1, this syntax pattern was over
six times as likely to occur in the second sentence,
compared to nearly two times for Non-Quotes 2, a
statistically-significant difference (χ2, p<.01). In
the Quotations 1 corpus, other high-level features
beginning with a coordinating conjunction were also
more likely to occur in sentence 1 than 2, including
CC + PP + , + NP + VP + . and CC + SBAR + , +
NP + VP + .. For instance:

Where a goat can go, a man can go. And
where a man can go, he can drag a gun.
(William Phillips)

Similarly, the high-level syntax pattern IN + NP +
VP + . was more likely to occur in the second sen-

tences of quotations than the first sentence; this pat-
tern also indicates cohesion:

One of the most adventurous things left us is
to go to bed. For no one can lay a hand on our
dreams. (E.V. Lucas)

We note that either of these quotations could be
rephrased as a single sentence, such as:

One of the most adventurous things left us is
to go to bed, for no one can lay a hand on our
dreams.

We speculate that there is something stylistically
powerful about such sentences in which the second
sentence begins with a coordinating or subordinating
conjunction. (Perhaps such quotations create a “dra-
matic” pause for the reader between the sentences.)

Questions: Table 1 shows that high-level syntax
patterns that indicate questions, WHNP + SQ + . and
WHADVP + SQ + . occurred more frequently in the
first sentence position than the second sentence po-
sition, as did the unigram “When.” Examining data
with the WHNP + SQ + . pattern revealed that many
of these quotations were actually jokes that take the
form of a question/answer dyad.

Sweeping Declarations: For Quotations 1, Ab-
stract Nouns and General Nouns as nominal subjects
were more prevalent in the first than in the second
sentence (χ2, p<.01). For Non-Quotes 1, General
Nouns were also significantly more likely to occur in
the first sentence (χ2, p<.01); this was not the case
for General Nouns. For quotations only, however,
“is” was more likely to occur in the first sentence;
likewise, the NP + VP + . pattern was also more
likely to occur in the first sentences of quotations.
Remaining open to other interpretations, we suggest
that these facts point to the tendency of quotations
to begin with sweeping declarations about “people,”
“life,” “truth,” and other broad concepts, kernels of
wisdom which the next sentence elaborates or illus-
trates:

Love is a trap. When it appears, we see only
its light, not its shadows. (P. Coelho)

“Simply”: Certain unigrams that tend to occur in
a particular sentence can also point to a very specific
rhetorical pattern. For instance, the word “simply”
was more likely to appear in the second sentence of a
quotation than the first. Quotations that manifest this
tendency often use this word to emphasize the sec-
ond sentence’s proposition with respect to the first
sentence:

1142



I used to dream about escaping my ordinary
life, but my life was never ordinary. I had sim-
ply failed to notice how extraordinary it was.
(R. Riggs)

6 Quote Order Task

We have analyzed stylistic patterns in quotations.
However, are these patterns characteristic of quo-
tations? To explore this question and to investigate
the overall robustness of our features, we define a
Quote Ordering Task, the goal of which is to dis-
tinguish between the original and reversed versions
of a quotation. This experiment is in the tradition
of tasks for evaluating models of text coherence,
such as the one used by Louis and Nenkova (2012).
During training, the classifier is shown either the
original or reversed version of a quote. At
test time, the classifier must identify each quote as
either original or reversed.

We conducted two experiments. First, using
Naive Bayes classifiers, we performed a 5-fold
cross-validation test on balanced subsets of three of
the four data-sets: Quotations 1, Non-Quotes 1, and
Non-Quotes 2 (n=1846 for each). Next we trained
on all of Quotations 1 (n=4237) and tested on a sep-
arate test set, Quotations 2 (n=1846). In this sec-
ond test, we trained on both the original and
reversed version of each quote. Table 2 reports
results for both tests under various conditions.

For these tests, “high-level features” refers to
high-level syntax (of the first sentence, of the sec-
ond sentence, and both in a sequence), which
if either sentence contains more Abstract Nouns,
and which if either sentence contain more Gen-
eral Nouns. Combined with unigrams (includ-
ing stopwords), these features offered slight but
not statistically-significant benefit for Non-Quotes
1 in the cross-validation test and slight but not
statistically-significant benefit in the second test
(testing on Quotations 2). It remains a challenge to
integrate such features for classification purposes.

In both tests, however, we were able to predict
the order of quotations upwards of 60% of the time.
This was not the case for the non-quotes corpora. In
cross-validation, the classifier achieved a high score
of 62.6% on Quotations 1, 56.0% on Non-Quotes 1,
and 52.9% on Non-Quotes 2. The mean top score for
Quotations 1 was higher than for the other two col-

Feature Set Q1 NQ1 NQ2 Q2
Unigrams 62.6 55.6 52.9 63.7
All High-Level Features 57.8 54.1 52.2 58.0
All Features 62.6 56.0 52.7 63.9

Table 2: Performance on Quote Ordering Task for Quotations
1, Non-Quotes 1, and Non-Quotes 2 (5-fold cross-validation,

baseline = 50%) and on a separate test set, Quotations 2 (base-

line = 52%).

lections (two-tailed t-test, p<.01). This is evidence
that quotations as a genre are more “formulaic” than
other textual sequences, their order more easily pre-
dicted. We suggest that adherence to latent stylis-
tic patterns is part of what makes quotations seem
quotable; as rhetoricians have observed since antiq-
uity, there is power in a pattern.

7 Conclusion

We have analyzed linguistic style not merely as the
presence of features but also the order of features
across sentences. In quotations, certain words as
well as categories of words and syntactic patterns
are more likely to appear in the first or second of
two-sentence texts. While other genres may also ex-
hibit regularities in the patterning of stylistic infor-
mation, our results indicate that this stylistic pattern-
ing may be especially strong in quotations. Further
research could compare a wider variety of genres.
Next steps include investigating the relationship to
rhetorical goals and running studies with users to de-
termine if they are consciously aware of these stylis-
tic elements when they post quotations. We would
like to a better understanding of why people chose
to share the quotations they do.

Analyzing discourse-level stylistic tendencies
may prove useful for various applications. Bender-
sky and Smith (2012) demonstrated a method for au-
tomatically culling quotations from textual corpora,
yet their method was limited to individual sentences.
Taking into account the stylistic schemas of quota-
tions could facilitate the gathering of multi-sentence
quotations and assist “creative text retrieval” (Veale,
2011) more generally. In the context of social media
platforms where quotes circulate, stylistic patterns
could also be used to recommend users stylistically-
similar quotations to read.

1143



References
Vikas Ganjigunte Ashok, Song Feng, and Yejin Choi.

2013. Success with style: Using writing style to pre-
dict the success of novels. Poetry, 580(9):70.

Michael Bendersky and David A Smith. 2012. A dictio-
nary of wisdom and wit: Learning to extract quotable
phrases. In Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2012
Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Litera-
ture, pages 69–77.

Yi Chang, Lei Tang, Yoshiyuki Inagaki, and Yan Liu.
2014. What is tumblr: A statistical overview and
comparison. ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter,
16(1):21–29.

Danqi Chen and Christopher D Manning. 2014. A
fast and accurate dependency parser using neural net-
works. In EMNLP, pages 740–750.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Justin Cheng, Jon
Kleinberg, and Lillian Lee. 2012. You had me at
hello: How phrasing affects memorability. In Pro-
ceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 892–901. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Jeff Dolven. 2013. Style. In Roland Greene, editor, The
New Princeton Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics,
pages 1369–1370. Princeton University Press, Prince-
ton.

Song Feng, Ritwik Banerjee, and Yejin Choi. 2012.
Characterizing stylistic elements in syntactic struc-
ture. In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing and Computational Natural Language Learning,
pages 1522–1533. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

W Nelson Francis and Henry Kucera. 1979. Brown cor-
pus manual. Brown University.

Philip Gianfortoni, David Adamson, and Carolyn P Rosé.
2011. Modeling of stylistic variation in social me-
dia with stretchy patterns. In Proceedings of the First
Workshop on Algorithms and Resources for Modelling
of Dialects and Language Varieties, pages 49–59. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Marco Guerini, Gözde Özbal, and Carlo Strapparava.
2015. Echoes of persuasion: The effect of euphony
in persuasive communication. In Human Language
Technologies: The 2015 Annual Conference of the
North American Chapter of the ACL (NAACL 2015),
pages 1483–1493.

Michael Alexander Kirkwood Halliday and Ruqaiya
Hasan. 2014. Cohesion in english. Routledge.

Justine Kao and Dan Jurafsky. 2012. A computational
analysis of style, affect, and imagery in contemporary
poetry. In NAACL Workshop on Computational Lin-
guistics for Literature, pages 8–17.

Dan Klein and Christopher D Manning. 2003. Ac-
curate unlexicalized parsing. In Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics-Volume 1, pages 423–430. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Polina Kuznetsova, Jianfu Chen, and Yejin Choi. 2013.
Understanding and quantifying creativity in lexical
composition. In EMNLP, pages 1246–1258.

Annie Louis and Ani Nenkova. 2012. A coherence
model based on syntactic patterns. In Proceedings
of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and Computational
Natural Language Learning, pages 1157–1168. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Henry Peacham. 1954. The garden of eloquence (1593):
a facsimile reproduction. Scholars’ Facsimiles &
Reprints.

Tony Veale. 2011. Creative language retrieval: A robust
hybrid of information retrieval and linguistic creativ-
ity. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies-Volume 1, pages 278–287. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

David Wible and Nai-Lung Tsao. 2010. Stringnet as
a computational resource for discovering and investi-
gating linguistic constructions. In Proceedings of the
NAACL HLT workshop on extracting and using con-
structions in computational linguistics, pages 25–31.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

1144


