



















































Emergent: a novel data-set for stance classification


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2016, pages 1163–1168,
San Diego, California, June 12-17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Emergent: a novel data-set for stance classification

William Ferreira
Department of Computer Science
University College London, UK

Andreas Vlachos
Department of Computer Science

University of Sheffield, UK

Abstract

We present Emergent, a novel data-set de-
rived from a digital journalism project for ru-
mour debunking. The data-set contains 300
rumoured claims and 2,595 associated news
articles, collected and labelled by journalists
with an estimation of their veracity (true, false
or unverified). Each associated article is sum-
marized into a headline and labelled to indi-
cate whether its stance is for, against, or ob-
serving the claim, where observing indicates
that the article merely repeats the claim. Thus,
Emergent provides a real-world data source
for a variety of natural language processing
tasks in the context of fact-checking. Fur-
ther to presenting the dataset, we address the
task of determining the article headline stance
with respect to the claim. For this purpose
we use a logistic regression classifier and de-
velop features that examine the headline and
its agreement with the claim. The accuracy
achieved was 73% which is 26% higher than
the one achieved by the Excitement Open Plat-
form (Magnini et al., 2014).

1 Introduction

The advent of New Media, such as Twitter, Face-
book, etc., enables news stories and rumours to
be published in real-time to a global audience, by-
passing the usual verification procedures used by
more traditional Old Media news outlets. However,
the line between Old and New Media is becoming
blurred as news aggregators lift stories from social
media and re-publish them without fact-checking.

This issue could be helped by developing meth-
ods for automated fact-checking of news stories, part

of the reporter’s black box envisioned in Cohen et
al. (2011) and one of the main objectives in com-
putational journalism. While this task is related
to a variety of natural language processing tasks
such as textual entailment and machine comprehen-
sion, it poses additional challenges due to its open-
domain, real-world nature. Previous work by Vla-
chos and Riedel (2014) proposed using data from
fact-checking websites such as Politifact1, but the la-
belling provided by the journalists is only the degree
of truthfulness of the claims, without any machine-
readable verdicts to supervise the various steps in
deciding it. Thus, the task defined by the dataset pro-
posed remains too challenging for the NLP methods
currently available.

In this paper we propose to use data from the
Emergent Project (Silverman, 2015), a rumour de-
bunking project carried out in collaboration with the
Tow Center for Digital Journalism at Columbia Jour-
nalism School2. Consisting of 300 claims and 2,595
associated news articles, the Emergent project con-
tains a rich source of labelled data that can be used
in a variety of NLP tasks, created by journalists as
part of their normal workflow, thus real-world and at
no annotation cost.

We leverage the Emergent dataset to investigate
the task of classifying the stance of a news article
headline with respect to its associated claim, i.e.
for each article headline we assign a stance label
which is one of for, against, or observing, indicat-
ing whether the article is supporting, refuting, or just
reporting the claim, respectively. The large number

1http://www.politifact.com/
2http://towcenter.org/

1163



of claims in the dataset allows us to assess the gen-
eralization of the method evaluation to new claims
more reliably than in previous work that either used
a small number of claims (e. g. seven in Lukasik et
al., 2015) or did not separate training claims from
testing claims (Qazvinian et al., 2011).

We develop a stance classification approach based
on multiclass logistic regression, using features ex-
tracted from the article headline and the claim,
achieving an accuracy of 73% on our test data-set,
also demonstrating that features relying on syntax,
word alignment and paraphrasing contribute to the
performance. Since the task bears similarities with
textual entailment, we compare it against the Excite-
ment Open Platform (Magnini et al., 2014) which
achieved a substantially lower accuracy of 47%.

2 The Emergent data

The claims in Emergent are collected by journalists
from a variety of sources such as rumour sites, e.g.
snopes.com, and Twitter accounts such as @Hoaxal-
izer. Their subjects include topics such as world and
national U.S. news and technology stories. Once a
claim is identified, the journalist searches for articles
that mention the claim and decides on the stance of
each such article:

• for: The article states that the claim is true,
without any kind of hedging.

• against: The article states that the claim is
false, without any kind of hedging.

• observing: The claim is reported in the article,
but without assessment of its veracity.

The journalist also summarises the article into a
headline. In parallel to the article-level stance de-
tection, a claim-level veracity judgement is reached
as more articles associated with the claim are exam-
ined. The veracity of each claim is initially unver-
ified, later becoming either true or false when the
journalist decides that adequate evidence from the
associated articles has been compiled. Finally, the
source and the number of times each associated ar-
ticle is shared are recorded. An example of a claim
verified on Emergent appears in Figure 1.

There are a number of tasks for which the Emer-
gent data can be useful for development and evalu-
ation. The article-level stance labels can be used to
develop a stance detection system between the claim

Claim: Robert Plant ripped up an $800 million
contract offer to reunite Led Zeppelin
Source: mirror.co.uk (shares: 39,140)
Headline: Led Zeppelin’s Robert Plant turns
down £500MILLION to reform supergroup
Stance: for
Source: usnews.com (shares: 850)
Headline: No, Robert Plant Didn’t Rip Up an $800
Million Contract
Stance: against
Source: forbes.com (shares: 3,360)
Headline: Robert Plant Reportedly Tears Up $800
Million Led Zeppelin Reunion Contract
Stance: observing
Veracity: False

Figure 1: Example verification taken from http://www.
emergent.info/led-zeppelin-contract. The full

text of the articles is omitted for brevity.

and an associated article. The claim-level verac-
ity labels would be straightforward to use for fact-
checking. Finally, the article headlines can be used
for focused summarization.

In this paper we focus on stance detection of an
article with respect to the claim using the head-
line provided by the journalist. For this purpose
we obtained a database dump from the developers
of Emergent and extracted all claims and associ-
ated article headlines. We made no attempt to ex-
clude a claim or article based on grammatical er-
rors or complex syntactic structure. Our final data-
set contains 300 claims, and 2,595 associated arti-
cle headlines, with an average ratio of 8.65 (7.31)
articles per claim; the minimum number of arti-
cles per claim is 1 and the maximum number is 50.
The class distribution of article stances is 47.7% for,
15.2% against and 37.1% observing. This dataset
was split into training and test set parts, containing
2,071 and 524 instances respectively, ensuring that
each claim appeared in only one of the parts. Both
the database dump and the extracted claim-article
headline dataset are available from https://
github.com/willferreira/mscproject.

3 Stance Classification

We treat stance classification as a 3-way classifica-
tion task using a logistic regression classifier with

1164



L1 regularization (Pedregosa et al., 2011)3 and we
explore two types of features: those extracted solely
from the article headline and those extracted by
combining the headline and the claim. The for-
mer are aimed at capturing the cases in which the
stance of headline can be determined without con-
sulting the claim, which is often the case with ob-
serving cases, as they often use hedging. The latter
are aimed at determining the entailment relation be-
tween them. All feature engineering was conducted
using 10-fold cross-validation on the training data.
Our implementation is available from https://
github.com/willferreira/mscproject.

Headline features The features extracted from the
headline are the commonly used bag of words rep-
resentation (BoW) and whether it ends in a ques-
tion mark (Q). In addition, we added two features
representing the minimum distance from the root of
the sentence to common refuting (e. g. deny) and
hedging/reporting (e.g. claim, presumably) words
(RootDist). As an example of the RootDist fea-
ture, consider the dependency parse in Figure 2. The
minimum number of edges from the root to a hedg-
ing/refuting word (“not” in the example) is three.
The dependency parses were obtained using Stan-
ford CoreNLP (Manning et al., 2014) and the word
lists were compiled using online resources.

Claim-headline features While the article head-
line often provides adequate features to classify its
stance, we also need to take into account its entail-
ment relation with the claim. Therefore, based on
the work by Rus and Lintean (2012) we compute
an alignment using the Paraphrase Database (PPDB)
(Pavlick et al., 2015) and the Kuhn-Munkres algo-
rithm (Kuhn, 1955; Munkres, 1957) as follows. For
each word pairing between the claim and the head-
line an edge is created and assigned a score by the
following scheme:

• if the stems of the words are identical, assign
maxScore

• else, if the words are paraphrases according to
PPDB, assign their maximum paraphrase score

• else, assign minScore
3Specifically, we used the sklearn

LogisticRegression classifier with the default pa-
rameters, and L1 penalization.

maxScore and minScore were set to +10 and -10 re-
spectively. Running the Kuhn-Munkres algorithm
on this graph finds the maximum scoring 1-to-1
word alignment and the score of this alignment,
normalized by the length of the claim or headline,
whichever is the shorter. An additional feature is
extracted to indicate if in an aligned pair of words,
one of them — either in the claim or or the arti-
cle headline — is negated according to the parser.
Furthermore, we extracted the subject-verb-object
(SVO) triples from the claim and the article head-
line (typically one in each) and matched them as
follows. For each component of the triples we ex-
tracted from PPDB the following labels: equiva-
lence, forwardEntailment, backwardEntailment, in-
dependence or noRelation. Thus the matching of an
SVO triple in the claim to one in the headline is rep-
resented by a concatenation of three labels, each cor-
responding to the relation between the subjects, the
verbs and the objects (SVO). Finally, we computed
the cosine similarity between the vector representa-
tions for the claim and the headline (word2vec). The
representations were calculated by multiplying the
word2vec vectors (Mikolov et al., 2013a) for each
word, which we found to perform better than ad-
dition. We utilised pre-trained vectors trained on
part of the Google News dataset, comprising 300-
dimensional vectors for 3 million words and phrases
(Mikolov et al., 2013b).

4 Results

Since none of the stance labels dominates the label
distribution, we evaluate the performance primar-
ily using accuracy, also reporting per-class Precision
and Recall. A majority baseline would achieve 47%,
but would always predict for. For a better baseline
we used the lexical overlap between the claim and
the article headline, which we defined as the per-
centage of the ratio of the number of lemmas in com-
mon between them to the number of lemmas in their
union. Using the training data we calculated the av-
erage overlap for each stance and found that for in-
stances exhibit higher overlap, followed by observ-
ing and then by against. Following this, we defined
two overlap thresholds, minFor and maxAgainst. If
the overlap of a claim-headline pair is higher than
minFor it is labeled for, if lower than maxAgainst it

1165



Iraq Says Arrested Woman Is Not The Wife of ISIS Leader al-Baghdadi

root

nsubj dep

nsubj

cop

neg

det

ccomp

nn

nn

prep of

Figure 2: Dependency structure for sentence containing a refuting word.

method acc. for against observing
overlap 32% 50%/42% 18%/52% 32%/9%

EOP 47% 52%/77% 100%/1% 34%/29%
classifier 73% 71%/89% 82%/70% 74%/54%

Table 1: Test set accuracy and per stance precision and recall.

is labeled against, otherwise observing.
The comparison between the baseline and the L1-

regularized logistic regression classifier with the fea-
tures described in the previous section appears in Ta-
ble 1. As it can be observed, the proposed classi-
fier performs much better in accuracy with substan-
tial gains in all stances. Both approaches are mostly
challenged by instances of the observing class, since
the article headlines with that stance are quite simi-
lar to the claim, which is also the case for the more
populous for class. We also compare our classifier
against the Excitement Open Platform (EOP) tex-
tual entailment classifier (Magnini et al., 2014). In
particular, we used the MaxEntClassificationEDA
classifier with the RTE-3 pre-trained model which
we found to be the best performing one among
those available achieving 33% accuracy. Finally, we
trained the same classifier on the Emergent training
data achieving 47%, which is 26% lower than the
proposed method.

In order to assess the contribution of the features
developed we conducted an ablation analysis and the
results appear in Table 2. The L1 regularization used
enforces sparsity which helps highlight the features
relevant for each stance. The RootDist feature has
a substantial contribution as it helps distinguish the
observing from the for class. We also evaluated a
model using only BoW, Q and word2vec features
and the performance was 3% lower than using the
complete feature set, thus highlighting the contribu-
tion of the features relying on alignment, syntax and

Feature 10-fold cv test chosen for stance
-BoW 1.66% 5.15% ALL

-Q 1.85% 0.19% observing
-RootDist 2.02% 2.48% for, observing

-PPDB 0.47% 0.76% for
-Neg 0.29% 0% for, against

-SVO 0.20% 0.19% for, observing
-word2vec 0.049% -0.19% against

Table 2: Ablation results: each row represents the drop in ac-
curacy caused by removing the corresponding feature(s). The

last column shows for which stance label(s) the feature(s) had

non-zero weight(s).

the PPDB. Finally, the fact that -word2vec did not
help, especially when compared to PPDB, can be
partly attributed to the inability of methods relying
solely on contexts to learn antonymy.

5 Related work

The task defined by the Emergent dataset differs
from recent work in stance classification (Qazvinian
et al., 2011; Lukasik et al., 2015; Zhao et al., 2015)
not only in the number of claims from which the arti-
cle headlines are derived, but also in that correct pre-
diction requires considering entailment relation be-
tween the claim and the headline. It also differs from
work on target-specific stance prediction in debates
(Walker et al., 2012; Hasan and Ng, 2013), since
the targets considered there are topic labels such as
abortion, instead of event claims as in this work.

Emergent, being derived from the workflow of
journalists is more realistic than data-sets designed
for textual entailment such as FraCas (Cooper et al.,
1996) and SICK (Marelli et al., 2014) that are con-
structed artificially. Compared to the crowdsourced
dataset of Bowman et al. (2015), it is smaller but
of a different nature, since the former assumes that

1166



all sentences are visual representations, while news
tend be more varied.

Stance detection in the context of Emergent is
one component in the process of fact-checking
claims appearing in the news which are usually
more complex than the entity-relation-entity or
entity-property-number triples considered in previ-
ous work (Nakashole and Mitchell, 2014; Vlachos
and Riedel, 2015). The choice of claims to fact-
check is a task in its own right, as shown by Hassan
et al. (2015). Finally, the only other use of data from
the Emergent project is by Liu et al. (2015); how-
ever their focus was not on the NLP aspects of the
task but on using Twitter data to assess the veracity
of the claim, ignoring the articles and their stances
curated by the journalists.

6 Conclusions - Future work

In this paper we proposed Emergent, a new real-
world dataset derived from the digital journalism
project Emergent which can be used for a variety
of NLP tasks in the context of fact-checking. We fo-
cus on stance detection, for which the large number
of claims in the dataset compared to previous work
allows for more reliable assessment of the general-
ization capabilities of the methods evaluated. We
proceed to develop a model for stance classification
using multiclass logistic regression and show how
features beyond the typically used bag of words can
be beneficial, achieving accuracy 26% better than an
RTE system trained on the same data. We make both
the datasets and our code available.

Despite its advantages, the dataset collected is
rather small to learn all the nuances of the task. Thus
in future work we will explore ways of incorporat-
ing large amounts of raw text in training stance clas-
sification models, possibly using a neural network
architecture. Finally, stance detection is one of the
tasks in the fact-checking process of Emergent. In
future work we will develop methods for the other
tasks involved, such as classifying the stance of a
whole article towards a claim and truth assessment.

Acknowledgments

Many thanks to Craig Silverman and the Tow Center
for Digital Journalism at Columbia University for al-
lowing us to use the data from the Emergent Project.

The research reported in this paper was conducted
while the first author was at University College Lon-
don.

References
Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts,

and Christopher D. Manning. 2015. A large anno-
tated corpus for learning natural language inference.
In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Sarah Cohen, Chengkai Li, Jun Yang, and Cong Yu.
2011. Computational Journalism: a call to arms to
database researchers. Proceedings of the 5th Bien-
nial Conference on Innovative Data Systems Research
(CIDR 2011) Asilomar, California, USA., pages 148–
151.

Robin Cooper, Dick Crouch, Jan Van Eijck, Chris Fox,
Josef Van Genabith, Jan Jaspars, Hans Kamp, David
Milward, Manfred Pinkal, Massimo Poesio, Steve Pul-
man, Ted Briscoe, Holger Maier, and Karsten Konrad.
1996. Using the framework. Technical report, The
FraCas Consortium.

Kazi Saidul Hasan and Vincent Ng. 2013. Stance Clas-
sification of Ideological Debates: Data, Models, Fea-
tures, and Constraints. In IJCNLP, pages 1348–1356.
Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing /
ACL.

Naeemul Hassan, Chengkai Li, and Mark Tremayne.
2015. Detecting check-worthy factual claims in presi-
dential debates. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM Inter-
national Conference on Information and Knowledge
Management.

Harold W. Kuhn. 1955. The Hungarian Method for the
assignment problem. Naval Research Logistics Quar-
terly, 2:83–97.

Xiaomo Liu, Armineh Nourbakhsh, Quanzhi Li, Rui
Fang, and Sameena Shah. 2015. Real-time rumor
debunking on twitter. In Proceedings of the 24th
ACM International on Conference on Information and
Knowledge Management, pages 1867–1870.

Michael Lukasik, Trevor Cohn, and Kalina Bontcheva.
2015. Classifying tweet level judgements of rumours
in social media. In Proceedings of the 2015 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 2590–2595, Lisbon, Portugal, Septem-
ber. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Bernardo Magnini, Roberto Zanoli, Ido Dagan, Kathrin
Eichler, Günter Neumann, Tae-Gil Noh, Sebastian
Pado, Asher Stern, and Omer Levy. 2014. The excite-
ment open platform for textual inferences. In Proceed-
ings of the ACL 2014 System Demonstrations. ACL, 6.

1167



Christopher D. Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Finkel, Steven J. Bethard, and David McClosky.
2014. The Stanford CoreNLP natural language pro-
cessing toolkit. In Proceedings of 52nd Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
System Demonstrations, pages 55–60.

Marco Marelli, Stefano Menini, Marco Baroni, Luisa
Bentivogli, Raffaella Bernardi, and Roberto Zampar-
elli. 2014. A sick cure for the evaluation of composi-
tional distributional semantic models. In Proceedings
of the Ninth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’14), Reykjavik, Ice-
land, may. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey
Dean. 2013a. Efficient estimation of word representa-
tions in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013b. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositionality.
In C. J. C. Burges, L. Bottou, M. Welling, Z. Ghahra-
mani, and K. Q. Weinberger, editors, Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems 26, pages 3111–
3119. Curran Associates, Inc.

James Munkres. 1957. Algorithms for the assignment
and transportation problems. Journal of the Society
for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 5(1):32–38.

Ndapandula Nakashole and Tom M Mitchell. 2014.
Language-Aware Truth Assessment of Fact Candi-
dates. Acl, pages 1009–1019.

Ellie Pavlick, Pushpendre Rastogi, Juri Ganitkevitch,
Benjamin Van Durme, and Chris Callison-Burch.
2015. Ppdb 2.0: Better paraphrase ranking, fine-
grained entailment relations, word embeddings, and
style classification. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics and the 7th International Joint Conference on Nat-
ural Language Processing (Volume 2: Short Papers),
pages 425–430, Beijing, China, July. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel,
B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer,
R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos,
D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duches-
nay. 2011. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12:2825–
2830.

Vahed Qazvinian, Emily Rosengren, Dragomir R. Radev,
and Qiaozhu Mei. 2011. Rumor has it: Identify-
ing misinformation in microblogs. In Proceedings of
the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 1589–1599.

Vasile Rus and Mihai Lintean. 2012. A comparison
of greedy and optimal assessment of natural language

student input using word-to-word similarity metrics.
In Proceedings of the Seventh Workshop on Building
Educational Applications Using NLP, pages 157–162,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Craig Silverman. 2015. Lies, Damn Lies and Viral Con-
tent. http://towcenter.org/research/
lies-damn-lies-and-viral-content/,
February.

Andreas Vlachos and Sebastian Riedel. 2014. Fact
Checking: Task definition and dataset construction.
Proceedings of the ACL 2014 Workshop on Lan-
guage Technologies and Computational Social Sci-
ence, pages 18–22.

Andreas Vlachos and Sebastian Riedel. 2015. Identifica-
tion and verification of simple claims about statistical
properties. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.

Marilyn Walker, Pranav Anand, Rob Abbott, and Ricky
Grant. 2012. Stance Classification using Dialogic
Properties of Persuasion. In Proceedings of the 2012
Conference of the North American Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, pages 592–596.

Zhe Zhao, Paul Resnick, and Qiaozhu Mei. 2015. En-
quiring minds: Early detection of rumors in social me-
dia from enquiry posts. In Proceedings of the 24th
International Conference on World Wide Web, pages
1395–1405.

1168


