



















































Cross-genre Event Extraction with Knowledge Enrichment


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2016, pages 1158–1162,
San Diego, California, June 12-17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Cross-genre Event Extraction with Knowledge Enrichment

Hao Li and Heng Ji
Computer Science Department

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
jih@rpi.edu

Abstract

The goal of Event extraction is to extract struc-
tured information of events that are of interest
from unstructured documents. Existing event
extractors for social media suffer from two
major problems: lack of context and informal
nature. In this paper, instead of conducting
event extraction solely on each social media
message, we incorporate cross-genre knowl-
edge to boost the event extractor performance.
Experiment results demonstrate that without
any additional annotations, our proposed ap-
proach is able to provide 15% absolute F-score
improvement over the state-of-the-art.

1 Introduction

The rapid development of social media and social
networks since 2000s has made it an important chan-
nel of information dissemination. Because of its
real-time nature, social media can be used as a sen-
sor to gather up-to-date information about the state
of the world. Effective automatic detection and ex-
traction of events from the media will be an ex-
tremely important contribution. Recently there has
been increasing interests in event extraction from so-
cial media (Yang et al., 1998; Kleinberg, 2003; He et
al., 2007; Weng and Lee, 2011; Benson et al., 2011;
Ritter et al., 2012).

Identifying and extracting events in social media
is more challenging than traditional event extraction
due to two major reasons: (1). Lack of Context:
compared with traditional genres (e.g., new articles),
social media context is usually short and incomplete
(e.g., each tweet has a length limitation of 140 char-

acters). Lacking of context, a single tweet itself usu-
ally cannot provide a complete picture of the corre-
sponding events. For example, for the tweet “Pray
for Mali - the situation is coming to light, and it isn’t
pretty.”, an event extraction/discovery system (e.g.
(Ji and Grishman, 2008)) fails to discover that it is
about the same war event in Mali as mentioned in
the news article “State military forces on Friday re-
took a key town in northern Mali after intense fight-
ing that included help from French military forces,
a defense ministry spokesman said.” (2). Informal
Nature: social media messages are written in an in-
formal style, which causes the poor performance of
event extractors designed for formal genres. For ex-
ample, the tweet “#AaronSwartz, Dead @ 26, #Car-
menOrtiz “pushed him to exhaustion” don’t let her
get away with this! #scandal.” includes an “Die”
event with Aaron Swartz as the Victim. However,
the person name “AaronSwartz” appears in the hash-
tag “#AaronSwartz” and “Dead at 26” is written as
“Dead @ 26”. Existing supervised name taggers
and event extractors fail to identify the same “Die”
event mentioned in the news article “Internet ac-
tivist Aaron Swartz dead at 26”.

Based on the intuition that news articles contain
more detailed and formal information than tweet
messages, we apply an unsupervised knowledge en-
richment algorithm to link each tweet to its most
relevant news article. By incorporating the cross-
genre knowledge to tweets, we are able to formulate
the task of event extraction on tweets as the task of
cross-genre extraction for tweets and news articles.
Thus we can alleviate the previous mentioned chal-
lenges in single-genre event extraction for tweets to

1158



t1: Crowds rally in Belfast for flag protest#thetruth
n1: Protesters march in Northern Ireland: Under a
gray, overcast sky, more than 1,000 protesters gath-
ered Saturday in the Northern Ireland city of Belfast
carrying large Union flags, some wrapped around
their shoulders.
te1: {EventPhrase = [rally, protest], EventArgument
= Belfast, Time = 2013-01-14}
ne1: {EventType = Conflict, EventPhrase = march,
EventArgument = [protesters, Northern Ireland,
Belfast]}
e1: {EventType = Conflict, EventPhrase = [rally,
protest, march], EventArgument = [protesters, North-
ern Ireland, Belfast], Time = 2013-01-14}.

Table 1: Cross-genre Event Extraction Example

some extent. To the best of our knowledge, it is
the first work to conduct cross-genre event extrac-
tion through unsupervised knowledge enrichment.

2 Problem Definition

Given a tweet ti, our cross-genre event extraction
framework first discovers its most relevant news arti-
cle ni, then identifies event tuples (event phrases and
event arguments) for the tweet (tei) and the news ar-
ticle (nei) respectively, and finally conducts merging
on the event extraction outputs from both genres to
produce the cross-genre event extraction result (ei).
For example in Table 1, given the following tweet t1,
n1 is retrieved as its most relevant news article. te1
and ne1 are the extracted event tuples for the tweet
and the news article respectively and e1 is the final
cross-genre event extraction output after merging.
To evaluate the performance of an event extractor,
the precision, recall and f-measure of the extracted
event phrases and event arguments will be measured
using the following criteria: an event phrase is cor-
rectly labeled if it matches a reference trigger; an ar-
gument is correctly labeled if it matches a reference
argument.

3 Approach

3.1 Baseline Event Extraction Systems

We use two state-of-the-art event extraction sys-
tems (Ritter et al., 2012; Li et al., 2013) to extract
events from tweets and news articles respectively.
The tweet event extractor TwiCal-Event (Ritter et
al., 2012) is able to extract open-domain significant

events from Twitter. It is a supervised system that
identifies event phrases and event participants with
tailored part-of-speech tagging and shallow parsing
for tweets. In addition, it is also able to discover
event categories and classify extracted events based
on latent variable models. It takes tweets as in-
put and outputs a four-tuple representation of events
which includes event participants, event phrase, cal-
endar date, and event type. The news event extrac-
tor (Li et al., 2013) is a joint framework based on
structured prediction which extracts triggers and ar-
guments simultaneously while incorporating diverse
lexical, syntactic, semantic and global features. It
takes raw documents as input, distinguish events
from non-events by classifying event triggers and
identifying and classifying argument roles.

3.2 Knowledge Enrichment Approach

To produce the latent vector representations for
the whole dataset, we follow the same procedure
in (Guo et al., 2013): represent the dataset in a ma-
trix X, where each cell stores the TF-IDF values of
words. Word vectors P and tweet vectors Q are op-
timized by minimizing the following objective func-
tion:

∑
i

∑
j

Wij (P·,i ·Q·,j −Xij)2 + λ||P ||22 + λ||Q||22

+δ · ( Q·,j1 ·Q·,j2|Q·,j1 ||Q·,j2 |
− 1)2

Wi,j =
{

1, if Xij 6= 0
wm, if Xij = 0

(1)

where λ is a regularization term, Q·,j1 and Q·,j2
are linked pairs connected by text-to-text relations,
|Q·,j | denotes the length of vector Q·,j and the co-
efficient δ denotes the importance of the text-to-text
links. we follow the same optimization procedure as
(Steck, 2010) by alternating Least Square [ALS] is
used for inference on P and Q.

After obtaining the vector representations for the
whole dataset, for each tweet, we retrieve its cross-
genre knowledge by finding the news article with the
highest cosine similarity.

1159



Experiment Setting 
Single Tweets Single News + System Linking + Perfect Linking

P
re

c
is

io
n

 (
%

)

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1
System Event Extractor
Perfect Event Extractor

Figure 1: Event extraction precision

Experiment Setting 
Single Tweets Single News + System Linking + Perfect Linking

R
e

c
a

ll 
(%

)

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

System Event Extractor
Perfect Event Extractor

Figure 2: Event extraction recall

4 Experiments

4.1 Data Description

We use the same dataset as (Guo et al., 2013) which
contains 34,888 tweets and 12,704 news articles.
For each tweet, we consider the url-referred news
article as its gold standard cross-genre knowledge
– the most relevant news document. As the news
event extractor is designed for a closed set of 33
event types (ace, 2005) while the tweet event extrac-
tor is for open domain, in this paper we only focus
on the tweet-news pairs that the news event extrac-
tion output is not empty. We randomly selected 50
tweet-news pairs for the cross-genre event extraction
annotation and evaluation.

4.2 Experiment Results

Figure 1, 2 and 3 present the Precision (P), Recall
(R) and F-measure (F) of the overall event extrac-
tion performance for different settings respectively.

Experiment Setting 
Single Tweets Single News + System Linking + Perfect Linking

F
-m

e
a

s
u

re
 (

%
)

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

System Event Extractor
Perfect Event Extractor

Figure 3: Event extraction f-measure

From these experiment results, we have the follow-
ing four observations:

1. Event Extraction solely on tweet messages
achieves the lowest precision, recall and f-measure.
It exactly confirms our motivation of conducting
knowledge enrichment for event extraction in tweet
messages. Because of the informal nature of tweet
messages, the event extractor misidentified 54.16%
of the events thus the precision is low. Take the
ill-formatted tweet in Section 1 as an example,
the named entity “AaronSwartz” is in the hashtag
“#AaronSwartz” and “Dead at 26” is written as
“Dead @ 26”. It makes the automatic event extrac-
tor extremely difficult to identify the “Die” event for
the person “Aaron Swartz”.

The low recall is mainly caused by the “lack of
context” problem. Due to the length limitation of
tweets, users tend to use recapitulate languages to
describe an event. For Example, the following tweet
“Well. That sucks. ‘Deepening Crisis for the Boe-
ing 787’” actually refers to an “emergency land-
ing” event made by “All Nippon Airways” in “west-
ern Japan”. The user only mentioned the summary
“Deepening Crisis for the Boeing 787” to refer to
the actual event. Therefore, the single-genre event
extractor missed the event trigger “landing” and the
event arguments “All Nippon Airways” and “west-
ern Japan”.

2. Both single-genre event extractors can con-
tribute to the cross-genre event extractor through the
cross-genre linking process. Even with the auto-
matic linking output, Figure 2 and Figure 3 show
29.9% recall and 14.0% f-measure improvement

1160



over single-genre event extractor for tweets. It is
because that in most cases, news articles cover more
information than tweets as they are produced by pro-
fessional news agencies while tweets are written by
individuals with a 140-character length limitation.
In the following example, although referring to the
same events, the news article covers more event in-
formation than the tweet, thus the cross-genre event
extractor can surpass the single-genre event extrac-
tor for tweets.
News: Deepening Crisis for the Dreamliner The two
largest Japanese airlines said they would ground their
fleets of Boeing 787 aircraft after one operated by All
Nippon Airways made an emergency landing in western
Japan.
Tweets: Well. That sucks. “Deepening Crisis for the
Boeing 787”

For some certain cases, the cross-genre event ex-
tractor is also able to benefit from single-genre event
extractor for tweets. For the following example,
the event extractor for news articles missed the “At-
tack” event as “Halt an ... Advance” is an un-
usual phrase to describe an “Attack” event. How-
ever, in the related tweet, “Battling” is a strong
indicator of an “Attack” event and the event ex-
tractor for tweets is able to catch it. As a re-
sult, we are able to extract the overall event tu-
ples {EventPhrase=[Advance,Battling], EventPatic-
ipant=[France,Islamist,Mali]}.
News: French Troops Help Mali Halt an Islamist Ad-
vance France answered an urgent plea from the govern-
ment of its former colony to help blunt an advance into
the center of the country by Islamist extremist militants.
Tweets: France Battling Islamists in Mali #rebels tarnish
W. African #Islam Western #intervention

3. Either improving single-genre event extractors
or achieving better cross-genre linking performance
is able to boost the overall event extraction perfor-
mance. From Figure 1, 2 and 3, we can observe
that higher quality of single-genre event extractors
will significantly enhance the precision while bet-
ter linking performance will mainly contribute to a
higher recall.

4. Compared with cross-genre linking accuracy,
the quality of single-genre event extractors is more
important. Figure 3 shows that “Gold Event Extrac-
tor + System Linking” achieved 26.3% higher F-
measure score than “System Event Extractor + Gold

Linking”. It is mainly because of two reasons: on
one hand, the errors of single-genre event extractors
will be propagated to the final event output; on the
other hand, the current linking system is able to pro-
vide reasonable linking results thus the use of per-
fect linking will not have too much gain.

5 Remaining Challenges

Linking Errors: mistakenly linking tweets to irrel-
evant news articles. For example, the tweet “The
lack of investigative movement - his return and his
flippant attitude is what is insulting. Not his new
placement.” is about a “Movement” event that As-
semblyman returns to Albany after scandal. How-
ever, the tweets express the event so implicitly that
the automatic linking system is not able to discover
its corresponding news article.

Extraction Errors: single-genre event extractors
failed on both the tweet side and the news arti-
cle side. For the following example, both single
genre event extractors missed the “Threaten” event
between the vice president Hugo Chvez and those
questioning the legitimacy of Chavez’s government.
Tweet: #Venezuela VP warns those questioning the
legitimacy of #Chavez’s government: “Watch your
words and your actions.”
News: The vice president threatened action against
any who question the legality of delaying the
swearing-in of President Hugo Chvez, who is still
in Cuba.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper we study the bottlenecks of event ex-
traction for tweets. We have two observations: (1).
Because of the “lack of context” and “informal na-
ture” characteristics of tweets, conducting event ex-
traction solely on tweet messages cannot produce
satisfactory results; (2) The events embedded in
tweets and news articles are often complementary.
Based on these observations, we proposed to link
each tweet to its most relevant news article, and
further incorporated this cross-genre knowledge to
conduct cross-genre event extraction. Experiment
results showed that without any additional annota-
tion, our proposed cross-genre event extractor is able
to outperform state-of-the-art tweet event extraction.
Our future research will focus on joint modeling

1161



of cross-genre event extraction in the training stage
through cross-genre knowledge enrichment.

Acknowledgment

This work was supported by the U.S. DARPA
DEFT Program No.FA8750-13-2-0041, ARL NS-
CTA No. W911NF-09-2-0053, NSF Award IIS-
1523198, AFRL DREAM project, and a gift award
from Bosch. The views and conclusions contained
in this document are those of the authors and should
not be interpreted as representing the official poli-
cies, either expressed or implied, of the U.S. Gov-
ernment. The U.S. Government is authorized to re-
produce and distribute reprints for Government pur-
poses notwithstanding any copyright notation here
on.

References

2005. ACE (automatic content extraction) english an-
notation guidelines for events, Jan. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.ldc.upenn.edu/collaborations/past-
projects/ace, (Date Last Accessed, Nov 4th, 2015).

Edward Benson, Aria Haghighi, and Regina Barzilay.
2011. Event discovery in social media feeds. In ACL,
pages 389–398.

Weiwei Guo, Hao Li, Heng Ji, and Mona T. Diab. 2013.
Linking tweets to news: A framework to enrich short
text data in social media. In Proc. Annu. Meeting of the
Assoc. for Comput. Linguist., pages 239–249, Sofia,
Bulgaria.

Qi He, Kuiyu Chang, and Ee-Peng Lim. 2007. Analyz-
ing feature trajectories for event detection. In Proc.
Int. ACM SIGIR Conf., pages 207–214, Amsterdam,
Netherland.

Heng Ji and Ralph Grishman. 2008. Refining event ex-
traction through cross-document inference. In Proc.
Annu. Meeting of the Assoc. for Comput. Linguist.,
pages 254–262, Columbus, OH.

Jon M. Kleinberg. 2003. Bursty and hierarchical struc-
ture in streams. Data Min. Knowl. Discov., 7(4):373–
397.

Qi Li, Heng Ji, and Liang Huang. 2013. Joint event ex-
traction via structured prediction with global features.
In Proc. Annu. Meeting of the Assoc. for Comput. Lin-
guist., pages 73–82, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Alan Ritter, Mausam, Oren Etzioni, and Sam Clark.
2012. Open domain event extraction from twitter. In
Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. on Knowl. Discovery and
Data Mining, pages 1104–1112, Beijing, China.

Harald Steck. 2010. Training and testing of recom-
mender systems on data missing not at random. In
Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. on Knowl. Discovery and
Data Mining, pages 713–722, Washington, DC.

Jianshu Weng and Bu-Sung Lee. 2011. Event detection
in twitter. In Proc. Int. AAAI Conf. on Web and Social
Media, pages 401–408, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

Yiming Yang, Thomas Pierce, and Jaime G. Carbonell.
1998. A study of retrospective and on-line event de-
tection. In SIGIR, pages 28–36.

1162


