



















































A Novel Approach to Dropped Pronoun Translation


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2016, pages 983–993,
San Diego, California, June 12-17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Novel Approach to Dropped Pronoun Translation

Longyue Wang† Zhaopeng Tu‡ Xiaojun Zhang† Hang Li‡ Andy Way† Qun Liu†
†ADAPT Centre, School of Computing, Dublin City University, Ireland
{lwang, xzhang, away, qliu}@computing.dcu.ie

‡Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies, China
{tu.zhaopeng, hangli.hl}@huawei.com

Abstract

Dropped Pronouns (DP) in which pronouns
are frequently dropped in the source language
but should be retained in the target language
are challenge in machine translation. In re-
sponse to this problem, we propose a semi-
supervised approach to recall possibly missing
pronouns in the translation. Firstly, we build
training data for DP generation in which the
DPs are automatically labelled according to
the alignment information from a parallel cor-
pus. Secondly, we build a deep learning-based
DP generator for input sentences in decoding
when no corresponding references exist. More
specifically, the generation is two-phase: (1)
DP position detection, which is modeled as a
sequential labelling task with recurrent neural
networks; and (2) DP prediction, which em-
ploys a multilayer perceptron with rich fea-
tures. Finally, we integrate the above outputs
into our translation system to recall missing
pronouns by both extracting rules from the
DP-labelled training data and translating the
DP-generated input sentences. Experimental
results show that our approach achieves a sig-
nificant improvement of 1.58 BLEU points in
translation performance with 66% F-score for
DP generation accuracy.

1 Introduction

In pro-drop languages, certain classes of pronouns
can be omitted to make the sentence compact yet
comprehensible when the identity of the pronouns
can be inferred from the context (Yang et al., 2015).
Figure 1 shows an example, in which Chinese is a
pro-drop language (Huang, 1984), while English is

Figure 1: Examples of dropped pronouns in a parallel dialogue
corpus. The Chinese pronouns in brackets are dropped.

not (Haspelmath, 2001). On the Chinese side, the
subject pronouns {你 (you), 我 (I)} and the object
pronouns {它 (it), 你 (you)} are omitted in the di-
alogue between Speakers A and B. These omis-
sions may not be problems for humans since peo-
ple can easily recall the missing pronouns from the
context. However, this poses difficulties for Sta-
tistical Machine Translation (SMT) from pro-drop
languages (e.g. Chinese) to non-pro-drop languages
(e.g. English), since translation of such missing pro-
nouns cannot be normally reproduced. Generally,
this phenomenon is more common in informal gen-
res such as dialogues and conversations than oth-
ers (Yang et al., 2015). We also validated this finding
by analysing a large Chinese–English dialogue cor-
pus which consists of 1M sentence pairs extracted
from movie and TV episode subtitles. We found that
there are 6.5M Chinese pronouns and 9.4M English
pronouns, which shows that more than 2.9 million
Chinese pronouns are missing.

In response to this problem, we propose to find
a general and replicable way to improve translation
quality. The main challenge of this research is that
training data for DP generation are scarce. Most

983



works either apply manual annotation (Yang et al.,
2015) or use existing but small-scale resources such
as the Penn Treebank (Chung and Gildea, 2010; Xi-
ang et al., 2013). In contrast, we employ an un-
supervised approach to automatically build a large-
scale training corpus for DP generation using align-
ment information from parallel corpora. The idea is
that parallel corpora available in SMT can be used
to project the missing pronouns from the target side
(i.e. non-pro-drop language) to the source side (i.e.
pro-drop language). To this end, we propose a sim-
ple but effective method: a bi-directional search al-
gorithm with Language Model (LM) scoring.

After building the training data for DP genera-
tion, we apply a supervised approach to build our
DP generator. We divide the DP generation task
into two phases: DP detection (from which position
a pronoun is dropped), and DP prediction (which
pronoun is dropped). Due to the powerful capac-
ity of feature learning and representation learning,
we model the DP detection problem as sequential
labelling with Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
and model the prediction problem as classification
with Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) using features
at various levels: from lexical, through contextual,
to syntax.

Finally, we try to improve the translation of
missing pronouns by explicitly recalling DPs for
both parallel data and monolingual input sentences.
More specifically, we extract an additional rule ta-
ble from the DP-inserted parallel corpus to produce
a “pronoun-complete” translation model. In addi-
tion, we pre-process the input sentences by insert-
ing possible DPs via the DP generation model. This
makes the input sentences more consistent with the
additional pronoun-complete rule table. To allevi-
ate the propagation of DP prediction errors, we feed
the translation system N -best prediction results via
confusion network decoding (Rosti et al., 2007).

To validate the effect of the proposed approach,
we carried out experiments on a Chinese–English
translation task. Experimental results on a large-
scale subtitle corpus show that our approach im-
proves translation performance by 0.61 BLEU
points (Papineni et al., 2002) using the additional
translation model trained on the DP-inserted cor-
pus. Working together with DP-generated input sen-
tences achieves a further improvement of nearly 1.0

BLEU point. Furthermore, translation performance
with N -best integration is much better than its 1-best
counterpart (i.e. +0.84 BLEU points).

Generally, the contributions of this paper include
the following:
• We propose an automatic method to build a

large-scale DP training corpus. Given that the
DPs are annotated in the parallel corpus, mod-
els trained on this data are more appropriate to
the translation task;

• Benefiting from representation learning, our
deep learning-based generation models are
able to avoid ignore the complex feature-
engineering work while still yielding encour-
aging results;

• To decrease the negative effects on translation
caused by inserting incorrect DPs, we force the
SMT system to arbitrate between multiple am-
biguous hypotheses from the DP predictions.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2, we describe our approaches to building
the DP corpus, DP generator and SMT integration.
Related work is described in Section 3. The exper-
imental results for both the DP generator and trans-
lation are reported in Section 4. Section 5 analyses
some real examples which is followed by our con-
clusion in Section 6.

2 Methodology

The architecture of our proposed method is shown
in Figure 2, which can be divided into three phases:
DP corpus annotation, DP generation, and SMT in-
tegration.

2.1 DP Training Corpus Annotation
We propose an approach to automatically annotate
DPs by utilizing alignment information. Given a
parallel corpus, we first use an unsupervised word
alignment method (Och and Ney, 2003; Tu et al.,
2012) to produce a word alignment. From observ-
ing of the alignment matrix, we found it is possi-
ble to detect DPs by projecting misaligned pronouns
from the non-pro-drop target side (English) to the
pro-drop source side (Chinese). In this work, we fo-
cus on nominative and accusative pronouns includ-
ing personal, possessive and reflexive instances, as
listed in Table 1.

984



Figure 2: Architecture of proposed method.

Category Pronouns

Subjective
Personal

我 (I),我们 (we), 你/你们 (you), 他
(he), 她 (she), 它 (it), 他们/她们/它
们 (they).

Objective
Personal

我 (me),我们 (us),你/你们 (you),他
(him),她 (her),它 (it),她们/他们/它
们 (them).

Possessive

我的 (my), 我们的 (our), 你的/你
们的 (your), 他的 (his), 她的 (her),
它的 (its), 他们的/她们的/它们的
(their).

Objective
Possessive

我的 (mine), 我们的 (ours), 你
的/你们的 (yours), 他的 (his), 她的
(hers),它的 (its),她们的/他们的/它
们的 (theirs).

Reflexive

我自己 (myself ), 我们自己 (our-
selves), 你自己 (yourself ), 你们自
己 (yourselves), 他自己 (himself ),
她自己 (herself ),它自己 (itself ),他
们自己/她们自己/它们自己 (them-
selves).

Table 1: Pronouns and their categories.

We use an example to illustrate our idea. Figure 3
features a dropped pronoun “我” (not shown) on the
source side, which is aligned to the second “I” (in
red) on the target side. For each pronoun on the tar-
get side (e.g. “I”, “you”), we first check whether
it has an aligned pronoun on the source side. We
find that the second “I” is not aligned to any source
word and possibly corresponds to a DPI (e.g. “我”).
To determine the possible positions of DPI on the
source side, we employ a diagonal heuristic based
on the observation that there exists a diagonal rule
in the local area of the alignment matrix. For ex-
ample, the alignment blocks in Figure 3 generally

Figure 3: Example of DP projection using alignment results
(i.e. blue blocks).

follow a diagonal line. Therefore, the pronoun ”I”
on the target side can be projected to the purple area
(i.e. “你说过想”) on the source side, according to
the preceding and following alignment blocks (i.e.
“you-你” and “want-想”).

However, there are still three possible positions to
insert DPI (i.e. the three gaps in the purple area).
To further determine the exact position of DPI , we
generate possible sentences by inserting the corre-
sponding Chinese DPs1 into every possible position.
Then we employ an n-gram language model (LM)
to score these candidates and select the one with the
lowest perplexity as final result. This LM-based pro-
jection is based on the observation that the amount
and type of DPs are very different in different gen-

1The Chinese DP can be determined by using its English
pronouns according to Table 1. Note that some English pro-
nouns may correspond to different Chinese pronouns, such as
“they -他们 /她们 /它们”. In such cases, we use all the corre-
sponding Chinese pronouns as the candidates.

985



res. We hypothesize that the DP position can be
determined by utilizing the inconsistency of DPs in
different domains. Therefore, the LM is trained on
a large amount of webpage data (detailed in Section
3.1). Considering the problem of incorrect DP in-
sertion caused by incorrect alignment, we add the
original sentence into the LM scoring to reduce im-
possible insertions (noise).

2.2 DP Generation
In light of the recent success of applying deep neu-
ral network technologies in natural language pro-
cessing (Raymond and Riccardi, 2007; Mesnil et al.,
2013), we propose a neural network-based DP gen-
erator via the DP-inserted corpus (Section 2.1). We
first employ an RNN to predict the DP position, and
then train a classifier using multilayer perceptrons to
generate our N -best DP results.

2.2.1 DP detection
The task of DP position detection is to la-

bel words if there are pronouns missing be-
fore the words, which can intuitively be re-
garded as a sequence labelling problem. We
expect the output to be a sequence of la-
bels y(1:n) = (y(1), y(2), · · · , y(t), · · · , y(n))
given a sentence consisting of words
w(1:n) = (w(1), w(2), · · · , w(t), · · · , w(n)), where
y(t) is the label of word w(t). In our task, there
are two labels L = {NA, DP} (corresponding to
non-pro-drop or pro-drop pronouns), thus y(t) ∈ L.

Word embeddings (Mikolov et al., 2013) are used
for our generation models: given a word w(t), we try
to produce an embedding representation v(t) ∈ Rd
where d is the dimension of the representation vec-
tors. In order to capture short-term temporal depen-
dencies, we feed the RNN unit a window of context,
as in Equation (1):

xd(t) = v(t−k) ⊕ · · · ⊕ v(t) ⊕ · · · ⊕ v(t+k) (1)
where k is the window size.

We employ an RNN (Mesnil et al., 2013) to learn
the dependency of sentences, which can be formu-
lated as Equation (2):

h(t) = f(Uxd(t) + Vh(t−1)) (2)

where f(x) is a sigmoid function at the hidden layer.
U is the weight matrix between the raw input and

ID. Description
Lexical Feature Set

1 S surrounding words around p
2 S surrounding POS tags around p
3 preceding pronoun in the same sentence
4 following pronoun in the same sentence

Context Feature Set
5 pronouns in preceding X sentences
6 pronouns in following X sentences
7 nouns in preceding Y sentences
8 nouns in following Y sentences

Syntax Feature Set
9 path from current word (p) to the root

10 path from preceding word (p− 1) to the root
Table 2: List of features.

the hidden nodes, and V is the weight matrix be-
tween the context nodes and the hidden nodes. At
the output layer, a softmax function is adopted for
labelling, as in Equation (3):

y(t) = g(Wdh(t)) (3)

where g(zm) = e
zm∑
k e

zk
, and Wd is the output

weight matrix.

2.2.2 DP prediction
Once the DP position is detected, the next step

is to determine which pronoun should be inserted
based on this result. Accordingly, we train a 22-
class classifier, where each class refers to a distinct
Chinese pronoun in Table 1. We select a number of
features based on previous work (Xiang et al., 2013;
Yang et al., 2015), including lexical, contextual, and
syntax features (as shown in Table 2). We set p as
the DP position, S as the window size surrounding
p, and X, Y as the window size surrounding cur-
rent sentence (the one contains p). For Features 1–
4, we extract words, POS tags and pronouns around
p. For Features 5–8, we also consider the pronouns
and nouns between X/Y surrounding sentences. For
Features 9 and 10, in order to model the syntactic
relation, we use a path feature, which is the com-
bined tags of the sub-tree nodes from p/(p − 1) to
the root. Note that Features 3–6 consider all pro-
nouns that were not dropped. Each unique feature is
treated as a word, and assigned a “word embedding”.
The embeddings of the features are then fed to the

986



neural network. We fix the number of features for
the variable-length features, where missing ones are
tagged as None. Accordingly, all training instances
share the same feature length. For the training data,
we sample all DP instances from the corpus (anno-
tated by the method in Section 2.1). During decod-
ing, p can be given by our DP detection model.

We employ a feed-forward neural network with
four layers. The input xp comprises the embeddings
of the set of all possible feature indicator names.
The middle two layers a(1), a(2) use Rectified Linear
function R as the activation function, as in Equation
(4)–(5):

a(1) = R(b(1) + Wp(1)xp) (4)

a(2) = R(b(2) + Wp(2)a(1)) (5)

where Wp(1) and b(1) are the weights and bias con-
necting the first hidden layer to second hidden layer;
and so on. The last layer yp adopts the softmax
function g, as in Equation (6):

yp = g(Wp(3)a(2)) (6)

2.3 Integration into Translation
The baseline SMT system uses the parallel cor-
pus and input sentences without inserting/generating
DPs. As shown in Figure 2, the integration into SMT
system is two fold: DP-inserted translation model
(DP-ins. TM) and DP-generated input (DP-gen. In-
put).

2.3.1 DP-inserted TM
We train an additional translation model on the

new parallel corpus, whose source side is inserted
with DPs derived from the target side via the align-
ment matrix (Section 2.1). We hypothesize that
DP insertion can help to obtain a better alignment,
which can benefit translation. Then the whole trans-
lation process is based on the boosted translation
model, i.e. with DPs inserted. As far as TM combi-
nation is concerned, we directly feed Moses the mul-
tiple phrase tables. The gain from the additional TM
is mainly from complementary information about
the recalled DPs from the annotated data.

2.3.2 DP-generated input
Another option is to pre-process the input sen-

tence by inserting possible DPs with the DP gen-
eration model (Section 2.2) so that the DP-inserted

input (Input ZH+DPs) is translated. The predicted
DPs would be explicitly translated into the target
language, so that the possibly missing pronouns in
the translation might be recalled. This makes the in-
put sentences and DP-inserted TM more consistent
in terms of recalling DPs.

2.3.3 N-best inputs
However, the above method suffers from a major

drawback: it only uses the 1-best prediction result
for decoding, which potentially introduces transla-
tion mistakes due to the propagation of prediction er-
rors. To alleviate this problem, an obvious solution
is to offer more alternatives. Recent studies have
shown that SMT systems can benefit from widening
the annotation pipeline (Liu et al., 2009; Tu et al.,
2010; Tu et al., 2011; Liu et al., 2013). In the same
direction, we propose to feed the decoder N -best
prediction results, which allows the system to arbi-
trate between multiple ambiguous hypotheses from
upstream processing so that the best translation can
be produced. The general method is to make the in-
put with N -best DPs into a confusion network. In
our experiment, each prediction result in the N-best
list is assigned a weight of 1/N .

3 Related Work

There is some work related to DP generation. One
is zero pronoun resolution (ZP), which is a sub-
direction of co-reference resolution (CR). The dif-
ference to our task is that ZP contains three steps
(namely ZP detection, anaphoricity determination
and co-reference link) whereas DP generation only
contains the first two steps. Some researchers (Zhao
and Ng, 2007; Kong and Zhou, 2010; Chen and
Ng, 2013) propose rich features based on different
machine-learning methods. For example, Chen and
Ng (2013) propose an SVM classifier using 32 fea-
tures including lexical, syntax and grammatical roles
etc., which are very useful in the ZP task. How-
ever, most of their experiments are conducted on
a small-scale corpus (i.e. OntoNotes)2 and perfor-
mance drops correspondingly when using a system-
parse tree compared to the gold standard one. No-
vak and Zabokrtsky (2014) explore cross-language

2It contains 144K coreference instances, but only 15% of
them are dropped subjects.

987



differences in pronoun behavior to affect the CR re-
sults. The experiment shows that bilingual feature
sets are helpful to CR. Another line related to DP
generation is using a wider range of empty cate-
gories (EC) (Yang and Xue, 2010; Cai et al., 2011;
Xue and Yang, 2013), which aims to recover long-
distance dependencies, discontinuous constituents
and certain dropped elements3 in phrase structure
treebanks (Xue et al., 2005). This work mainly focus
on sentence-internal characteristics as opposed to
contextual information at the discourse level. More
recently, Yang et al. (2015) explore DP recovery for
Chinese text messages based on both lines of work.

These methods can also be used for DP transla-
tion using SMT (Chung and Gildea, 2010; Le Na-
gard and Koehn, 2010; Taira et al., 2012; Xiang
et al., 2013). Taira et al. (2012) propose both sim-
ple rule-based and manual methods to add zero pro-
nouns in the source side for Japanese–English trans-
lation. However, the BLEU scores of both systems
are nearly identical, which indicates that only con-
sidering the source side and forcing the insertion of
pronouns may be less principled than tackling the
problem head on by integrating them into the SMT
system itself. Le Nagard and Koehn (2010) present
a method to aid English pronoun translation into
French for SMT by integrating CR. Unfortunately,
their results are not convincing due to the poor per-
formance of the CR method (Pradhan et al., 2012).
Chung and Gildea (2010) systematically examine
the effects of EC on MT with three methods: pat-
tern, CRF (which achieves best results) and parsing.
The results show that this work can really improve
the end translation even though the automatic pre-
diction of EC is not highly accurate.

4 Experiments

4.1 Setup

For dialogue domain training data, we extract
around 1M sentence pairs (movie or TV episode
subtitles) from two subtitle websites.4 We manually
create both development and test data with DP an-
notation. Note that all sentences maintain their con-

3EC includes trace markers, dropped pronoun, big PRO etc,
while we focus only on dropped pronoun.

4Avaliable at http://www.opensubtitles.org and
http://weisheshou.com.

textual information at the discourse level, which can
be used for feature extraction in Section 2.1. The de-
tailed statistics are listed in Table 3. As far as the DP
training corpus is concerned, we annotate the Chi-
nese side of the parallel data using the approach de-
scribed in Section 2.1. There are two different lan-
guage models for the DP annotation (Section 2.1)
and translation tasks, respectively: one is trained on
the 2.13TB Chinese Web Page Collection Corpus5

while the other one is trained on all extracted 7M
English subtitle data (Wang et al., 2016).

Corpus Lang. Sentents Pronouns
Ave.
Len.

Train
ZH 1,037,292 604,896 5.91
EN 1,037,292 816,610 7.87

Dev
ZH 1,086 756 6.13
EN 1,086 1,025 8.46

Test
ZH 1,154 762 5.81
EN 1,154 958 8.17

Table 3: Statistics of corpora.

We carry out our experiments using the phrase-
based SMT model in Moses (Koehn et al., 2007) on
a Chinese–English dialogue translation task. Fur-
thermore, we train 5-gram language models using
the SRI Language Toolkit (Stolcke, 2002). To ob-
tain a good word alignment, we run GIZA++ (Och
and Ney, 2003) on the training data together with an-
other larger parallel subtitle corpus that contains 6M
sentence pairs.6 We use minimum error rate train-
ing (Och, 2003) to optimize the feature weights.

The RNN models are implemented using the com-
mon Theano neural network toolkit (Bergstra et al.,
2010). We use a pre-trained word embedding via a
lookup table. We use the following settings: win-
dows = 5, the size of the single hidden layer = 200,
iterations = 10, embeddings = 200. The MLP classi-
fier use random initialized embeddings, with the fol-
lowing settings: the size of the single hidden layer =
200, embeddings = 100, iterations = 200.

For end-to-end evaluation, case-insensitive
BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) is used to measure

5Available at http://www.sogou.com/labs/dl/
t-e.html.

6Dual Subtitles – Mandarin-English Subtitles Parallel Cor-
pus, extracted by Zhang et al. (2014) without contextual infor-
mation at the discourse level.

988



DP Set P R F1

DP Detection
Dev 0.88 0.84 0.86
Test 0.88 0.87 0.88

DP Prediction
Dev 0.67 0.63 0.65
Test 0.67 0.65 0.66

Table 4: Evaluation of DP generation quality.

translation performance and micro-averaged F-score
is used to measure DP generation quality.

4.2 Evaluation of DP Generation

We first check whether our DP annotation strategy
is reasonable. To this end, we follow the strategy to
automatically and manually label the source sides of
the development and test data with their target sides.
The agreement between automatic labels and man-
ual labels on DP prediction are 94% and 95% on
development and test data and on DP generation are
92% and 92%, respectively. This indicates that the
automatic annotation strategy is relatively trustwor-
thy.

We then measure the accuracy (in terms of words)
of our generation models in two phases. “DP De-
tection” shows the performance of our sequence-
labelling model based on RNN. We only consider
the tag for each word (pro-drop or not pro-drop be-
fore the current word), without considering the exact
pronoun for DPs. “DP Prediction” shows the perfor-
mance of the MLP classifier in determining the ex-
act DP based on detection. Thus we consider both
the detected and predicted pronouns. Table 4 lists
the results of the above DP generation approaches.
The F1 score of “DP Detection” achieves 88% and
86% on the Dev and Test set, respectively. How-
ever, it has lower F1 scores of 66% and 65% for the
final pronoun generation (“DP Prediction”) on the
development and test data, respectively. This indi-
cates that predicting the exact DP in Chinese is a re-
ally difficult task. Even though the DP prediction is
not highly accurate, we still hypothesize that the DP
generation models are reliable enough to be used for
end-to-end machine translation. Note that we only
show the results of 1-best DP generation here, but in
the translation task, we use N -best generation can-
didates to recall more DPs.

Systems Dev Set Test set
Baseline 20.06 18.76
+DP-ins. TM 20.32 (+0.26) 19.37 (+0.61)
+DP-gen. Input

1-best 20.49 (+0.43) 19.50 (+0.74)
2-best 20.15 (+0.09) 18.89 (+0.13)
4-best 20.64 (+0.58) 19.68 (+0.92)
6-best 21.61 (+1.55) 20.34 (+1.58)
8-best 20.94 (+0.88) 19.83 (+1.07)

Manual Oracle 24.27 (+4.21) 22.98 (+4.22)
Auto Oracle 23.10 (+3.04) 21.93 (+3.17)

Table 5: Evaluation of DP translation quality.

4.3 Evaluation of DP Translation

In this section, we evaluate the end-to-end transla-
tion quality by integrating the DP generation results
(Section 3.3). Table 5 summaries the results of trans-
lation performance with different sources of DP in-
formation. “Baseline” uses the original input to feed
the SMT system. “+DP-ins. TM” denotes using
an additional translation model trained on the DP-
inserted training corpus, while “+DP-gen. Input N”
denotes further completing the input sentences with
the N -best pronouns generated from the DP gener-
ation model. “Oracle” uses the input with manual
(“Manual”) or automatic (“Auto”) insertion of DPs
by considering the target set. Taking “Auto Oracle”
for example, we annotate the DPs via alignment in-
formation (supposing the reference is available) us-
ing the technique described in Section 2.1.

The baseline system uses the parallel corpus and
input sentences without inserting/generating DPs. It
achieves 20.06 and 18.76 in BLEU score on the de-
velopment and test data, respectively. The BLEU
scores are relatively low because 1) we have only
one reference, and 2) dialogue machine translation
is still a challenge for the current SMT approaches.

By using an additional translation model trained
on the DP-inserted parallel corpus as described in
Section 2.1, we improve the performance consis-
tently on both development (+0.26) and test data
(+0.61). This indicates that the inserted DPs are
helpful for SMT. Thus, the gain in the “+DP-ins
TM” is mainly from the improved alignment qual-
ity.

We can further improve translation performance
by completing the input sentences with our DP gen-

989



eration model as described in Section 2.2. We test
N -best DP insertion to examine the performance,
where N ={1, 2, 4, 6, 8}. Working together
with “DP-ins. TM”, 1-best generated input already
achieves +0.43 and + 0.74 BLEU score improve-
ments on development and test set, respectively. The
consistency between the input sentences and the DP-
inserted parallel corpus contributes most to these
further improvements. As N increases, the BLEU
score grows, peaking at 21.61 and 20.34 BLEU
points when N=6. Thus we achieve a final improve-
ment of 1.55 and 1.58 BLEU points on the devel-
opment and test data, respectively. However, when
adding more DP candidates, the BLEU score de-
creases by 0.97 and 0.51. The reason for this may
be that more DP candidates add more noise, which
harms the translation quality.

The oracle system uses the input sentences with
manually annotated DPs rather than “DP-gen. In-
put”. The performance gap between “Oracle” and
“+DP-gen. Input” shows that there is still a large
space (+4.22 or +3.17) for further improvement for
the DP generation model.

5 Case Study

We select sample sentences from the test set to fur-
ther analyse the effects of DP generation on transla-
tion.

In Figure 4, we show an improved case (Case
A), an unchanged case (Case B), and a worse case
(Case C) of translation no-/using DP insertion (i.e.
“+DP-gen. Input 1-best”). In each case, we give
(a) the original Chinese sentence and its translation,
(b) the DP-inserted Chinese sentence and its transla-
tion, and (c) the reference English sentence. In Case
A, “Do you” in the translation output is compen-
sated by adding DP

〈
你

〉
(you) in (b), which gives

a better translation than in (a). In contrast, in case
C, our DP generator regards the simple sentence as
a compound sentence and insert a wrong pronoun〈
我

〉
(I) in (b), which causes an incorrect translation

output (worse than (a)). This indicates that we need
a highly accurate parse tree of the source sentences
for more correct completion of the antecedent of the
DPs. In Case B, the translation results are the same
in (a) and (b). This kind of unchanged case always
occurs in “fixed” linguistic chunks such as prepo-

Figure 4: Effects of DP generation for translation.

sition phrases (“on my way”), greetings (“see you
later” , “thank you”) and interjections (“My God”).
However, the alignment of (b) is better than that of
(a) in this case.

Figure 5 shows an example of “+DP-gen. Input
N-best” translation. Here, (a) is the original Chi-
nese sentence and its translation; (b) is the 1-best
DP-generated Chinese sentence and its MT output;
(c) stands for 2-best, 4-best and 6-best DP-generated
Chinese sentences and their MT outputs (which are
all the same); (d) is the 8-best DP-generated Chinese
sentence and its MT output; (e) is the reference. The
N -best DP candidate list is

〈
我

〉
(I),

〈
你

〉
(You),〈

他
〉

(He),
〈
我们

〉
(We),

〈
他们

〉
(They),

〈
你们

〉
(You),

〈
它

〉
(It) and

〈
她

〉
(She). In (b), when in-

tegrating an incorrect 1-best DP into MT, we obtain
the wrong translation. However, in (c), when con-
sidering more DPs (2-/4-/6-best), the SMT system

990



generates a perfect translation by weighting the DP
candidates during decoding. When further increas-
ing N (8-best), (d) shows a wrong translation again
due to increased noise.

Figure 5: Effects of N-best DP generation for translation.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

We have presented a novel approach to recall miss-
ing pronouns for machine translation from a pro-
drop language to a non-pro-drop language. Experi-
ments show that it is crucial to identify the DP to im-
prove the overall translation performance. Our anal-
ysis shows that insertion of DPs affects the transla-
tion in a large extent.

Our main findings in this paper are threefold:

• Bilingual information can help to build mono-
lingual models without any manually annotated
training data;

• Benefiting from representation learning, neural
network-based models work well without com-
plex feature engineering work;

• N -best DP integration works better than 1-best
insertion.

In future work, we plan to extend our work to dif-
ferent genres, languages and other kinds of dropped
words to validate the robustness of our approach.

Acknowledgments

This work is supported by the Science Foun-
dation of Ireland (SFI) ADAPT project (Grant
No.:13/RC/2106), and partly supported by the
DCU-Huawei Joint Project (Grant No.:201504032-
A (DCU), YB2015090061 (Huawei)). It is partly
supported by the Open Projects Program of Na-
tional Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (Grant
201407353) and the Open Projects Program of Cen-
tre of Translation of GDUFS (Grant CTS201501).

References

James Bergstra, Olivier Breuleux, Frederic Bastien, Pas-
cal Lamblin, Razvan Pascanu, Guillaume Desjardins,
Joseph Turian, David Warde-Farley, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2010. Theano: A cpu and gpu math expres-
sion compiler in python. In Proceedings of Python for
Scientific Computing Conference (SciPy), pages 3–10,
Austin,Texas, USA.

Shu Cai, David Chiang, and Yoav Goldberg. 2011.
Language-independent parsing with empty elements.
In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies: Short Papers - Volume 2, pages
212–216, Portland, Oregon.

Chen Chen and Vincent Ng. 2013. Chinese zero pronoun
resolution: Some recent advances. In Proceedings of
the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 1360–1365, Seattle,
Washington, USA.

Tagyoung Chung and Daniel Gildea. 2010. Effects of
empty categories on machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 636–645, Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts, USA.

Martin Haspelmath. 2001. The European linguistic area:
standard average European. In Language typology
and language universals. (Handbücher zur Sprach-
und Kommunikationswissenschaft), volume 2, pages
1492–1510. Berlin: de Gruyter.

C.-T. James Huang. 1984. On the distribution and
reference of empty pronouns. Linguistic Inquiry,
15(4):531–574.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard
Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondřej Bojar, Alexandra Con-
stantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open source
toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association for

991



Computational Linguistics Companion Volume Pro-
ceedings of the Demo and Poster Sessions, pages 177–
180, Prague, Czech Republic.

Fang Kong and Guodong Zhou. 2010. A tree kernel-
based unified framework for chinese zero anaphora
resolution. In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 882–891, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

Ronan Le Nagard and Philipp Koehn. 2010. Aiding pro-
noun translation with co-reference resolution. In Pro-
ceedings of the Joint 5th Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation and MetricsMATR, pages 252–261,
Uppsala, Sweden.

Yang Liu, Tian Xia, Xinyan Xiao, and Qun Liu. 2009.
Weighted alignment matrices for statistical machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
Volume 2 - Volume 2, pages 1017–1026, Singapore.

Qun Liu, Zhaopeng Tu, and Shouxun Lin. 2013. A novel
graph-based compact representation of word align-
ment. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 2: Short Papers), pages 358–363, Sofia, Bulgaria,
August. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Grégoire Mesnil, Xiaodong He, Li Deng, and Yoshua
Bengio. 2013. Investigation of recurrent-neural-
network architectures and learning methods for spo-
ken language understanding. In Proceedings of the
14th Annual Conference of the International Speech
Communication Association, pages 3771–3775, Lyon,
France.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 3111–
3119, Lake Tahoe, Nevada, USA.

Michal Novak and Zdenek Zabokrtsky. 2014. Cross-
lingual coreference resolution of pronouns. In Pro-
ceedings of the 25th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, pages 14–24, Dublin, Ire-
land.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A system-
atic comparison of various statistical alignment mod-
els. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training
in statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 41st Annual Meeting on Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics - Volume 1, pages 160–167, Sap-
poro, Japan.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: A method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of

the 40th Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 311–318, Philadelphia, Penn-
sylvania, USA.

Sameer Pradhan, Alessandro Moschitti, Nianwen Xue,
Olga Uryupina, and Yuchen Zhang. 2012. CoNLL-
2012 shared task: Modeling multilingual unrestricted
coreference in ontonotes. In Proceedings of the
15th Conference on Computational Natural Language
Learning: Shared Task, pages 1–27, Jeju Island, Ko-
rea.

Christian Raymond and Giuseppe Riccardi. 2007. Gen-
erative and discriminative algorithms for spoken lan-
guage understanding. In Proceedings of 8th Annual
Conference of the International Speech Communica-
tion Association, pages 1605–1608, Antwerp, Bel-
gium.

Antti-Veikko I Rosti, Necip Fazil Ayan, Bing Xiang,
Spyridon Matsoukas, Richard M Schwartz, and Bon-
nie J Dorr. 2007. Combining outputs from multi-
ple machine translation systems. In Proceedings of
the Human Language Technology and the 6th Meeting
of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 228–235, Rochester,
NY, USA.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. Srilm - an extensible language
modeling toolkit. In Proceedings of the 7th Interna-
tional Conference on Spoken Language Processing,
pages 901–904, Colorado, USA.

Hirotoshi Taira, Katsuhito Sudoh, and Masaaki Nagata.
2012. Zero pronoun resolution can improve the qual-
ity of j-e translation. In Proceedings of the 6th Work-
shop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Statistical
Translation, pages 111–118, Jeju, Republic of Korea.

Zhaopeng Tu, Yang Liu, Young-Sook Hwang, Qun Liu,
and Shouxun Lin. 2010. Dependency forest for statis-
tical machine translation. In Proceedings of the 23rd
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 1092–1100, Beijing, China.

Zhaopeng Tu, Yang Liu, Qun Liu, and Shouxun Lin.
2011. Extracting Hierarchical Rules from a Weighted
Alignment Matrix. In Proceedings of the 5th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 1294–1303, Chiang Mai, Thailand.

Zhaopeng Tu, Yang Liu, Yifan He, Josef van Genabith,
Qun Liu, and Shouxun Lin. 2012. Combining mul-
tiple alignments to improve machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 24rd International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, pages 1249–1260, Mum-
bai, India.

Longyue Wang, Xiaojun Zhang, Zhaopeng Tu, Andy
Way, and Qun Liu. 2016. The automatic construction
of discourse corpus for dialogue translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 10th Language Resources and Evalua-
tion Conference, Portorož, Slovenia. (To appear).

992



Bing Xiang, Xiaoqiang Luo, and Bowen Zhou. 2013.
Enlisting the ghost: Modeling empty categories for
machine translation. In Proceedings of the 51st An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 822–831,
Sofia, Bulgaria.

Nianwen Xue and Yaqin Yang. 2013. Dependency-
based empty category detection via phrase structure
trees. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies, pages 1051–1060, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

Naiwen Xue, Fei Xia, Fu-Dong Chiou, and Marta Palmer.
2005. The Penn Chinese Treebank: Phrase structure
annotation of a large corpus. Natural language engi-
neering, 11(02):207–238.

Yaqin Yang and Nianwen Xue. 2010. Chasing the ghost:
recovering empty categories in the Chinese treebank.
In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference
on Computational Linguistics: Posters, pages 1382–
1390, Beijing, China.

Yaqin Yang, Yalin Liu, and Nianwen Xu. 2015. Recov-
ering dropped pronouns from Chinese text messages.
In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics and the 7th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 309–313,
Beijing, China.

Shikun Zhang, Wang Ling, and Chris Dyer. 2014. Dual
subtitles as parallel corpora. In Proceedings of the
10th International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation, pages 1869–1874, Reykjavik, Ice-
land.

Shanheng Zhao and Hwee Tou Ng. 2007. Identification
and resolution of Chinese zero pronouns: A machine
learning approach. In Proceedings of the 2007 Joint
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing and Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning, pages 541–550, Prague, Czech Re-
public.

993


