



















































Deconstructing Complex Search Tasks: a Bayesian Nonparametric Approach for Extracting Sub-tasks


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2016, pages 599–605,
San Diego, California, June 12-17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Deconstructing Complex Search Tasks: A Bayesian Nonparametric
Approach for Extracting Sub-tasks

Rishabh Mehrotra
Dept. of Computer Science
University College London

London, UK
R.Mehrotra@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Prasanta Bhattacharya
Dept. of Information Systems

National University of Singapore
Singapore

prasanta@comp.nus.edu.sg

Emine Yilmaz
Dept. of Computer Science
University College London

London, UK
emine.yilmaz@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract

Search tasks, comprising a series of search
queries serving a common informational need,
have steadily emerged as accurate units for
developing the next generation of task-aware
web search systems. Most prior research in
this area has focused on segmenting chrono-
logically ordered search queries into higher
level tasks. A more naturalistic viewpoint
would involve treating query logs as convo-
luted structures of tasks-subtasks, with com-
plex search tasks being decomposed into more
focused sub-tasks. In this work, we focus
on extracting sub-tasks from a given collec-
tion of on-task search queries. We jointly
leverage insights from Bayesian nonparamet-
rics and word embeddings to identify and ex-
tract sub-tasks from a given collection of on-
task queries. Our proposed model can inform
the design of the next generation of task-based
search systems that leverage user’s task behav-
ior for better support and personalization.

1 Introduction

Search behavior, and information behavior more
generally, is often motivated by tasks that prompt
search processes that are often lengthy, iterative,
and intermittent, and are characterized by distinct
stages, shifting goals and multitasking (Kelly et al.,
2013; Mehrotra et al., 2016). Current search sys-
tems do not provide adequate support for users tack-
ling complex tasks, due to which the cognitive bur-
den of keeping track of such tasks is placed on the
searcher. Ideally, a search engine should be able to
understand the reason that caused the user to submit

a query (i.e., the actual task that caused the query
to be issued) and be able to guide users to achieve
their tasks by incorporating this information about
the actual informational need. Clearly, identifying
and analyzing search tasks is an extremely impor-
tant activity not only for search engine providers but
also other web based frameworks like spoken dia-
logue (Sun et al., 2015) and general recommenda-
tion systems (Mehrotra et al., 2014) in their effort to
improve user experience on their platforms.

Previous work in the area have proposed a num-
ber of methods for identifying and extracting task
knowledge from search query sessions (Mehrotra
and Yilmaz, 2015b; Wang et al., 2013; Lucchese
et al., 2011; Verma and Yilmaz, 2014; Mehrotra
and Yilmaz, 2015a). However, while some tasks
are fairly trivial and single-shot (e.g. ”latest Taylor
Swift album”), others are more complex and often
involve multiple steps or sub-tasks (e.g. ”planning a
wedding”).

Deciphering sub-tasks from search query logs be-
comes an important problem since users might ex-
hibit different search preferences as well as expend
different amounts of search effort while executing
the sub-tasks. For example, while planning a wed-
ding, users might choose to spend more time and ef-
fort on searching for a suitable venue, while spend-
ing considerably less on the choice of a wedding
cake. However, even before we can analyze the vari-
ance in search effort across sub-tasks, it becomes
imperative to successfully identify and extract sub-
tasks for a specific task from search query logs. This
turns out to be a complex problem for two reasons.
First, the number of sub-tasks in a given task is not a

599



parameter than can be explicitly defined, and is gen-
erally task dependent. Second, while similar sound-
ing queries like ”wedding planning checklist” and
”wedding dress” belong to the same task, they inher-
ently represent different sub-tasks. This necessitates
the use of advanced distancing techniques, beyond
the usual bag-of-words or TF-IDF approaches.

In our current study, we propose a method for
extracting search sub-tasks from a given collection
of queries constituting a complex search task, using
a non-parametric Bayes approach. Our generative
model is not restricted by a fixed number of sub-task
clusters, and assumes an infinite number of latent
groups, with each group described by a certain set of
parameters. We specify our non-parametric model
by defining a Distance-dependent Chinese Restau-
rant Process (dd-CRP) prior and a Dirichlet multino-
mial likelihood (Blei and Frazier, 2011). Further, we
draw on recent advancements that emphasize the su-
periority of embedding based distancing approaches
over others, especially when comparing documents
with less or no common words (Mikolov et al.,
2013). We enrich our non-parametric model by
working in the vector embedding space and propose
a word-embedding based distance measure (Kusner
et al., 2015) to encode query distances for efficient
sub-task extraction.

2 Related Work

Web search logs have been extensively studied to
generate insights and provide explicit cues about
the information seeking behavior of users, that
would improve their search experiences. There have
been attempts to extract in-session tasks (Jones and
Klinkner, 2008; Lucchese et al., 2011; Spink et al.,
2005), and cross-session tasks (Wang et al., 2013;
Kotov et al., 2011; Li et al., 2014) from query se-
quences based on classification and clustering meth-
ods. Hagen et al. (Hagen et al., 2013) have re-
cently presented a cascading method for logical ses-
sion detection that can also be applied to search mis-
sion detection. Kotov et al (Kotov et al., 2011) and
Agichtein et al (Agichtein et al., 2012) have stud-
ied the problem of cross-session task extraction via
binary same-task classification. Unfortunately, pair-
wise predictions alone cannot generate the partition
of tasks, and post-processing is needed to obtain the

final task partitions (Liao et al., 2012).
Some previous attempts have been made to sup-

port people engaged in complex tasks by allowing
them to take notes and record results that they al-
ready examined (Donato et al., 2010), or to provide
task continuation assistance (Morris et al., 2008).
Jones et al. (Jones and Klinkner, 2008) was the
first work to consider the notion that there may be
multiple sub-tasks associated with a user’s informa-
tional needs. However, they fall short of propos-
ing a method to identify a task from queries. Since
most of these task extraction methods are based on
relating a user’s current query to one of her previ-
ous tasks, these methods cannot be directly used in
finding and extracting sub-tasks. As a result, while
task extraction methods abound, very little has been
done to explicitly identify the sub-tasks from within
complex search tasks.

3 Extracting Sub-tasks

Consider a collection of queries (Q) issued by search
engine users, trying to accomplish certain search
tasks. Quite often, these search tasks (e.g. plan-
ing a trip) are complex and conceptually decompose
into a set of sub-tasks (e.g. booking flights, find-
ing places of interest etc), each of which warrants
the user to further issue multiple queries to solve. It
is important to note that while the queries are ob-
served, the inherent sub-tasks and their numbers are
latent. Given a collection of on-task queries, ex-
tracted using a standard task extraction algorithm,
our goal is to extract these sub-tasks from the on-
task query collection.

The distance dependent Chinese restaurant pro-
cess (dd-CRP) (Blei and Frazier, 2011) was re-
cently introduced to model random partitions of
non-exchangeable data. To extract sub-tasks, we
consider the dd-CRP model in an embedding-space
setting and place a dd-CRP prior over the search
tasks.

3.1 Nonparametric Priors for Sub-tasks

The Chinese restaurant process (CRP) is a distribu-
tion on all possible partitions of a set of objects (in
our case, queries). The generative process can be
described via a restaurant with an infinite number of
tables (in our case, sub-tasks). Customers (queries) i

600



enter the restaurant in sequence and select a table zi
to join. They pick an occupied table with a probabil-
ity proportional to the number of customers already
sitting there, or a new table with probability propor-
tional to a scaling parameter α. The dd-CRP alters
the CRP by modeling customer links not to tables,
but to other customers.

In our sub-task extraction problem, each task is
associated with a dd-CRP and its tables are embel-
lished with IID draws from a base distribution over
mixture component parameters. Let zi denote the
ith query assignment, the index of the query with
whom the ith query is linked. Let dij denote the
distance measurement between queries i and j, let D
denote the set of all distance measurements between
queries, and let f be a decay function. The distance
dependent CRP independently draws the query as-
signments to sub-tasks conditioned on the distance
measurements,

p(zi = j|D,α) ∝
{
f(dij) if j 6= i
α if j = i

Here, dij is an externally specified distance between
queries i and j, and α determines the probability
that a customer links to themselves rather than an-
other customer. The monotonically decreasing de-
cay function f(d) mediates how the distance be-
tween two queries affects their probability of con-
necting to each other. The overall link structure
specifies a partition: two queries are clustered to-
gether in the same sub-task if and only if one can
reach the other by traversing the link edges. R(q1:N )
maps query assignments to sub-task assignments.

Given a decay function f , distances between
queries D, scaling parameter α, and an exchange-
able Dirichlet distribution with parameter λ, N M-
word queries are drawn as follows,

1. For i ∈ [1, N ], draw zi ∼ dist −
CRP (α, f,D).

2. For i ∈ [1, N ],
(a) If zi /∈ R∗q1:N , set the parameter for the

ith query to θi = θqi . Otherwise draw the
parameter from the base distribution, θi ∼
Dirichlet(λ).

(b) Draw the ith query terms, wi ∼
Mult(M, θi).

We experimented with 3 different values of alpha
and reported the best performing results. We next
define the distance and decay functions which help
us find task-specific query distances.

3.2 Quantifying Task Based Query Distances
Word embeddings capture lexico-semantic regulari-
ties in language, such that words with similar syn-
tactic and semantic properties are found to be close
to each other in the embedding space. We leverage
this insight and propose a novel query-query dis-
tance metric based on such embeddings. We train
a skip-gram word embeddings model where a query
term is used as an input to a log-linear classifier
with continuous projection layer and words within
a certain window before and after the words are pre-
dicted. We next describe how we use these query
term embedding vectors to define query distances.

For a search task like ”planning a wedding”, fre-
quent queries include wedding checklist, wedding
planning and bridal dresses. Ideally, checklist and
planning related queries constitute a different sub-
task than bridal dresses. Given the overall context
of weddings, words like checklist and dresses are
more informative than generic words like weddings.
To this end, we classify each word as background
word or subtask-specific word using a simple fre-
quency based approach on the given collection of
on-task query terms and use a weighted combina-
tion of their embedding vectors to encode a query’s
vector:

Vq =
1

nterms

∑
i

nqti
Σqnq

Vti (1)

where ti is the i-th term in the query q, nqti is the
number of queries in the current task which contain
the term ti. We encode each query by its correspond-
ing embedding vector representation Vq and take the
cosine distance of these vectors while defining dij .
We consider a simple window decay f(d) = 1[d <
a] to only considers queries that are separated from
the current query for a given sub-task, by a distance
of, at most, a .

3.3 Posterior Inference
The posterior of the proposed dd-CRP model is in-
tractable to compute because the dd-CRP places a
prior over a combinatorial number of possible cus-
tomer configurations. We employ a Gibbs sampler,

601



Figure 1: Visual formulation of the proposed approach. The ta-
bles represent the different sub-tasks while each triangle represents the
search queries. Query assignment leads to sub-task assignments.

wherein we iteratively draw from the conditional
distribution of each latent variable, given the other
latent variables and observations.
The Gibbs sampler iteratively draws from

p(znewi |z−i, x) ∝ p(znewi |D,α)
p(x|t(z−i ∪ znewi ), G0)

(2)

The first term is the dd-CRP prior and the second
is the likelihood of observations (x) under the parti-
tion, and t(z) is the sub-task formed from the assign-
ments z. We employ a Dirichlet-Multinomial con-
jugate distribution to model the likelihood of query
terms.

Queries are assigned to sub-tasks by considering
sets of queries that are reachable from each other
through the query assignments. Notice that many
configurations of query assignments might lead to
the same sub-task assignment. Finally, query as-
signments can produce a cycle, e.g., query 1 linking
with 2 and query 2 linking with 1. This still deter-
mines a valid sub-task assignment: all queries linked
in a cycle are assigned to the same sub-task. Figure
1 provides a pictorial representation of the sub-task
assignment process.

4 Experimental Evaluation

In this section, we evaluate the robustness of the pro-
posed sub-task extraction framework. In addition
to qualitative analysis of the extracted sub-tasks, we
perform a user judgment study to evaluate the qual-
ity of the extracted sub-tasks.

4.1 Dataset & Baselines
We make use of the AOL log dataset which consists
of 20M web queries collected over three months
(Pass et al., 2006). The dataset comprises of
five fields viz. the search query string, the query
time stamp, the rank of the selected item (if any),
the domain of the selected items URL (if any),
and a unique user identifier. We augment on-task
queries extracted from the AOL logs with the re-
lated searches output from different search engines
by making use of their APIs.

To compare the performance of the proposed sub-
task extraction algorithm, we baseline against a
number of methods including state-of-the-art task
extraction systems, in addition to parametric and
non-parametric clustering approaches:

1 QC-HTC (Lucchese et al., 2011): a frequently
used search task identification method.

2 LDA (Blei et al., 2003): a topic model based
baseline which aggregates queries (similar to
tweet aggregation as proposed in (Mehrotra et
al., 2013)) in a session to form a document and
learns an LDA model on top of it.

3 vanilla-CRP: a vanilla non-parametric CRP
model (Wang and Blei, 2009).

4 Proposed Approach: the proposed embedding
based dd-CRP model.

4.2 Qualitative Evaluation
Table 1 shows some exemplar sub-tasks identified
by the proposed model and the baseline methods
using a CRP, QC-HTC and a LDA process. Each
task is visualized using four search queries that were
most frequently executed in relation to that sub-task,
but not in any specific order among themselves. The
task selected for this illustration was that of plan-
ning a wedding, and the three sub-tasks identified
using our proposed method, for this particular task
were wedding hairstyles, wedding dresses, and wed-
ding cards. In comparison, however, the baseline
methods failed to identify diagnostic clusters. For
instance, LDA grouped wedding insurance, wed-
ding planning books and wedding cards as a sin-
gle sub-task, while CRP grouped wedding planning
kits, wedding dresses and wedding decorations into

602



Proposed Approach LDA
sub-task 1 sub-task 2 sub-task 3 sub-task 1 sub-task 2 sub-task 3

wedding hairstyles used wedding dresses wedding card holders wedding insurance christian wedding vows make wedding invitations
wedding hair dos colorful bridal gowns indian wedding program destination wedding brides wedding cakes pictures

curly wedding hairstyles preowned wedding dresses wedding program wedding planning book cheap wedding dresses planners
pictures of wedding hair wedding attire regency wedding cards party supply stores tea length wedding dresses wedding colors

CRP QC-HTC
sub-task 1 sub-task 2 sub-task 3 sub-task 1 sub-task 2 sub-task 3

wedding planning kit wedding theme wedding insurance wedding insurance christian wedding vows cheap dresses
destination wedding wedding guide weddings in vegas destination wedding plus size bridesmaid wedding cakes pictures

wedding table decorations save the date ideas wedding cakes pictures financing wedding rings wedding colors pricing weddings
1930s wedding pictures wedding vacation planning a wedding party supply stores tea length wedding dresses wedding dresses discounts

Table 1: Qualitative Analysis of Sub-Tasks extracted by different approaches.

a single sub-task. Our proposed method, however,
demonstrated remarkably good discriminant valid-
ity, as is clear from Table 1.

4.3 User Study

Evaluation of tasks and sub-tasks is an open research
question. Owing to the absence of ground truth data
on sub-task classification, we resort to user judg-
ments in order to validate the quality of sub-tasks
extracted. We select a sub-task at random and then
choose a randomly selected pair of queries from that
sub-task. Next, we ask the judges, recruited via
AMT1, to affirm or deny if the two queries should
be assigned to the same sub-task category. We repeat
this process for a total of 100 iterations and compare
the results with the ones predicted by our proposed
approach, as well as with the ones predicted by the
baselines.

We report the proportion of correct matches (i.e.
proportion of times our predicted sub-task classifica-
tions matched the expert judgments) in Fig. 2. The
label agreement among the judges was 85.4% and
the performance differences were statistically sig-
nificant. It is clear that our proposed method out-
performs both, task extraction & topic model based
baselines in making correct sub-task classifications.

5 Results & Discussion

Web search tasks are often complex and comprise
several constituent sub-tasks. In this paper we of-
fer a non-parametric Bayesian approach to identi-
fying sub-tasks by grouping search queries using
an embedding based dd-CRP approach. The pro-
posed model combines insights from Bayesian non-
parametrics and distributional semantics to extract

1https://www.mturk.com/mturk/welcome

Figure 2: Judgments results for sub-task validity
across compared approaches.

sub-tasks which are not only meaningful but are
also coherent. We evaluate our proposed method
on the popular AOL search log dataset augmented
with related search queries and demonstrate supe-
riority over comparable approaches such as LDA
and CRP. Further, we contend that our proposed ap-
proach is significantly more useful in online environ-
ments where the number of sub-tasks is never known
apriori and impossible to ascertain or approximate.

In future work, we intend to consider hierarchi-
cal extensions for extracting hierarchies of tasks-
subtasks. Further, using an embedding based dis-
tancing scheme, we offer an improvement in em-
pirical performance over prior clustering approaches
that have used either a bag-of-words or TF-IDF
based solution. Our method offers search engine
providers with a novel method to identify and an-
alyze user task-behavior, and better support task de-
cisions on their platforms.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by a Google Faculty
Research Award.

603



References

[Agichtein et al.2012] Eugene Agichtein, Ryen W White,
Susan T Dumais, and Paul N Bennet. 2012. Search,
interrupted: understanding and predicting search task
continuation. In Proceedings of the 35th international
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development
in information retrieval, pages 315–324. ACM.

[Blei and Frazier2011] David M Blei and Peter I Frazier.
2011. Distance dependent chinese restaurant pro-
cesses. The Journal of Machine Learning Research,
12:2461–2488.

[Blei et al.2003] David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and
Michael I Jordan. 2003. Latent dirichlet allocation.
the Journal of machine Learning research, 3:993–
1022.

[Donato et al.2010] Debora Donato, Francesco Bonchi,
Tom Chi, and Yoelle Maarek. 2010. Do you want
to take notes?: identifying research missions in yahoo!
search pad. In Proceedings of the 19th international
conference on World wide web, pages 321–330. ACM.

[Hagen et al.2013] Matthias Hagen, Jakob Gomoll, Anna
Beyer, and Benno Stein. 2013. From search session
detection to search mission detection. In Proceedings
of the 10th Conference on Open Research Areas in In-
formation Retrieval, pages 85–92.

[Jones and Klinkner2008] Rosie Jones and Kristina Lisa
Klinkner. 2008. Beyond the session timeout: au-
tomatic hierarchical segmentation of search topics in
query logs. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM con-
ference on Information and knowledge management,
pages 699–708. ACM.

[Kelly et al.2013] Diane Kelly, Jaime Arguello, and
Robert Capra. 2013. Nsf workshop on task-based
information search systems. In ACM SIGIR Forum,
volume 47, pages 116–127. ACM.

[Kotov et al.2011] Alexander Kotov, Paul N Bennett,
Ryen W White, Susan T Dumais, and Jaime Teevan.
2011. Modeling and analysis of cross-session search
tasks. In Proceedings of the 34th international ACM
SIGIR conference on Research and development in In-
formation Retrieval, pages 5–14. ACM.

[Kusner et al.2015] M. J. Kusner, Y. Sun, N. I. Kolkin,
and K. Q. Weinberger. 2015. From word embeddings
to document distances. In ICML.

[Li et al.2014] Liangda Li, Hongbo Deng, Anlei Dong,
Yi Chang, and Hongyuan Zha. 2014. Identifying
and labeling search tasks via query-based hawkes pro-
cesses. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD in-
ternational conference on Knowledge discovery and
data mining, pages 731–740. ACM.

[Liao et al.2012] Zhen Liao, Yang Song, Li-wei He, and
Yalou Huang. 2012. Evaluating the effectiveness of

search task trails. In Proceedings of the 21st interna-
tional conference on World Wide Web, pages 489–498.
ACM.

[Lucchese et al.2011] Claudio Lucchese, Salvatore Or-
lando, Raffaele Perego, Fabrizio Silvestri, and
Gabriele Tolomei. 2011. Identifying task-based ses-
sions in search engine query logs. In Proceedings
of the fourth ACM international conference on Web
search and data mining, pages 277–286. ACM.

[Mehrotra and Yilmaz2015a] Rishabh Mehrotra and Em-
ine Yilmaz. 2015a. Terms, topics & tasks: Enhanced
user modelling for better personalization. In Proceed-
ings of the 2015 International Conference on The The-
ory of Information Retrieval, pages 131–140. ACM.

[Mehrotra and Yilmaz2015b] Rishabh Mehrotra and Em-
ine Yilmaz. 2015b. Towards hierarchies of search
tasks & subtasks. In Proceedings of the 24th Inter-
national Conference on World Wide Web Companion,
pages 73–74. International World Wide Web Confer-
ences Steering Committee.

[Mehrotra et al.2013] Rishabh Mehrotra, Scott Sanner,
Wray Buntine, and Lexing Xie. 2013. Improving
lda topic models for microblogs via tweet pooling and
automatic labeling. In Proceedings of the 36th in-
ternational ACM SIGIR conference on Research and
development in information retrieval, pages 889–892.
ACM.

[Mehrotra et al.2014] Rishabh Mehrotra, Emine Yilmaz,
and Manisha Verma. 2014. Task-based user mod-
elling for personalization via probabilistic matrix fac-
torization. In RecSys Posters.

[Mehrotra et al.2016] Rishabh Mehrotra, Prasanta Bhat-
tacharya, and Emine Yilmaz. 2016. Characteriz-
ing users’ multi-tasking behavior in web search. In
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM on Conference on Hu-
man Information Interaction and Retrieval, CHIIR
’16, pages 297–300, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

[Mikolov et al.2013] Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai
Chen, Greg S Corrado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Dis-
tributed representations of words and phrases and their
compositionality. In Advances in neural information
processing systems, pages 3111–3119.

[Morris et al.2008] Dan Morris, Meredith Ringel Morris,
and Gina Venolia. 2008. Searchbar: a search-centric
web history for task resumption and information re-
finding. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1207–
1216. ACM.

[Pass et al.2006] Greg Pass, Abdur Chowdhury, and Cay-
ley Torgeson. 2006. A picture of search. In InfoScale,
volume 152, page 1.

[Spink et al.2005] Amanda Spink, Sherry Koshman, Min-
soo Park, Chris Field, and Bernard J Jansen. 2005.

604



Multitasking web search on vivisimo. com. In In-
formation Technology: Coding and Computing, 2005.
ITCC 2005. International Conference on, volume 2,
pages 486–490. IEEE.

[Sun et al.2015] Ming Sun, Yun-Nung Chen, and Alexan-
der I Rudnicky. 2015. Understanding users cross-
domain intentions in spoken dialog systems. In NIPS
Workshop on Machine Learning for SLU and Interac-
tion.

[Verma and Yilmaz2014] Manisha Verma and Emine Yil-
maz. 2014. Entity oriented task extraction from query
logs. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM International
Conference on Conference on Information and Knowl-
edge Management, pages 1975–1978. ACM.

[Wang and Blei2009] Chong Wang and David M Blei.
2009. Variational inference for the nested chinese
restaurant process. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, pages 1990–1998.

[Wang et al.2013] Hongning Wang, Yang Song, Ming-
Wei Chang, Xiaodong He, Ryen W White, and Wei
Chu. 2013. Learning to extract cross-session search
tasks. In Proceedings of the 22nd international con-
ference on World Wide Web, pages 1353–1364. Inter-
national World Wide Web Conferences Steering Com-
mittee.

605


