



















































Sentiment Composition of Words with Opposing Polarities


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2016, pages 1102–1108,
San Diego, California, June 12-17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Sentiment Composition of Words with Opposing Polarities

Svetlana Kiritchenko and Saif M. Mohammad
National Research Council Canada

{svetlana.kiritchenko,saif.mohammad}@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca

Abstract

In this paper, we explore sentiment composi-
tion in phrases that have at least one positive
and at least one negative word—phrases like
happy accident and best winter break. We
compiled a dataset of such opposing polar-
ity phrases and manually annotated them with
real-valued scores of sentiment association.
Using this dataset, we analyze the linguistic
patterns present in opposing polarity phrases.
Finally, we apply several unsupervised and su-
pervised techniques of sentiment composition
to determine their efficacy on this dataset. Our
best system, which incorporates information
from the phrase’s constituents, their parts of
speech, their sentiment association scores, and
their embedding vectors, obtains an accuracy
of over 80% on the opposing polarity phrases.

1 Introduction

The Principle of Compositionality states that the
meaning of an expression is determined by the
meaning of its constituents and by its grammatical
structure (Montague, 1974). By extension, senti-
ment composition is the determining of sentiment
of a multi-word linguistic unit, such as a phrase or
a sentence, based on its constituents. In this work,
we study sentiment composition in phrases that in-
clude at least one positive and at least one nega-
tive word—for example, phrases such as happy ac-
cident, couldn’t stop smiling, and lazy sundays. We
refer to them as opposing polarity phrases. Such
phrases present a particular challenge for automatic
sentiment analysis systems that often rely on bag-of-
word features.

Word–sentiment associations are commonly cap-
tured in sentiment lexicons. However, most existing
manually created sentiment lexicons include only
single words. Lexicons that include sentiment asso-
ciations for multi-word phrases as well as their con-
stituent words can be very useful in studying sen-
timent composition. We refer to them as sentiment
composition lexicons (SCLs).

We created a sentiment composition lexicon for
opposing polarity phrases and their constituent
words (Kiritchenko and Mohammad, 2016c).1 Both
phrases and single words were manually annotated
with real-valued sentiment association scores using
an annotation scheme known as Best–Worst Scal-
ing.2 We refer to the created resource as the Sen-
timent Composition Lexicon for Opposing Polarity
Phrases (SCL-OPP). The lexicon includes entries
for 265 trigrams, 311 bigrams, and 602 unigrams.

In this paper, we use SCL-OPP to analyze regu-
larities present in different kinds of opposing polar-
ity phrases. We calculate the extent to which differ-
ent part-of-speech combinations result in phrases of
positive and negative polarity. We also show that for
most phrases, knowing the parts of speech and po-
larities of their constituents is not enough to reliably
predict the sentiment of the phrase.

We apply several unsupervised and supervised
techniques of sentiment composition to determine
their efficacy on predicting the sentiment of oppos-
ing polarity phrases. Our experiments indicate that

1www.saifmohammad.com/WebPages/SCL.html#OPP
2Best–Worst Scaling has been shown to produce reliable

real-valued sentiment association scores (Kiritchenko and Mo-
hammad, 2016a).

1102



the sentiment of the last unigram or the sentiment of
the most polar unigram in the phrase are not strong
predictors of the overall sentiment of the phrase.
Similarly, adjectives and verbs do not always domi-
nate the sentiment in such phrases. Finally, we show
that the constituent words, their parts of speech, their
sentiment association scores, and their embedding
vectors are all useful features—a supervised senti-
ment composition system that incorporates them ob-
tains accuracies over 80% on both bigram and tri-
gram opposing polarity phrases.

2 Related Work

A number of approaches have been proposed to ad-
dress sentiment composition, which include man-
ually derived syntactic rules (Moilanen and Pul-
man, 2007; Neviarouskaya et al., 2010), combina-
tion of hand-written rules and statistical learning
(Choi and Cardie, 2008), and machine learning ap-
proaches (Nakagawa et al., 2010; Yessenalina and
Cardie, 2011; Dong et al., 2015). Much work has
been devoted to model the impact of negators and
(to a lesser degree) intensifiers, words commonly
referred to as contextual valence shifters, on senti-
ment of words they modify (Polanyi and Zaenen,
2004; Kennedy and Inkpen, 2005; Liu and Seneff,
2009; Wiegand et al., 2010; Taboada et al., 2011;
Kiritchenko et al., 2014). Kiritchenko and Moham-
mad (2016b) created a sentiment composition lexi-
con for negators, modals, and adverbs (SCL-NMA)
through manual annotation and analyzed the effect
of these groups of modifiers on sentiment in short
phrases. Recently, recursive deep model approaches
have been proposed for handling sentiment of syn-
tactic phrases through sentiment composition over
parse trees (Socher et al., 2013; Zhu et al., 2014; Ir-
soy and Cardie, 2014; Tai et al., 2015). In this work,
we apply several unsupervised and supervised tech-
niques of sentiment composition for a specific type
of phrases—opposing polarity phrases.

3 Creating a Sentiment Lexicon for
Opposing Polarity Phrases

This section summarizes how we created a sen-
timent composition lexicon for opposing polarity
phrases using the Best–Worst Scaling annotation
technique. For more details we refer the reader

Term Sentiment
score

best winter break 0.844
breaking free 0.172
isn’t long enough -0.188
breaking -0.500
heart breaking moment -0.797

Table 1: Example entries in SCL-OPP.

to (Kiritchenko and Mohammad, 2016c). Table 1
shows a few example entries from the lexicon.
Term selection: We polled the Twitter API (from
2013 to 2015) to collect about 11 million tweets that
contain emoticons: ‘:)’ or ‘:(’. We will refer to this
corpus as the Emoticon Tweets Corpus. From this
corpus, we selected bigrams and trigrams that had
at least one positive word and at least one negative
word. The polarity labels (positive or negative) of
the words were determined by simple look-up in
existing sentiment lexicons: Hu and Liu lexicon (Hu
and Liu, 2004), NRC Emotion lexicon (Mohammad
and Turney, 2010; Mohammad and Turney, 2013),
MPQA lexicon (Wilson et al., 2005), and NRC’s
Twitter-specific lexicon (Kiritchenko et al., 2014;
Mohammad et al., 2013).3 In total, 576 opposing
polarity n-grams (bigrams and trigrams) were
selected. We also chose for annotation all unigrams
that appeared in the selected set of bigrams and
trigrams. There were 602 such unigrams. Note that
even though the multi-word phrases and single-word
terms were drawn from a corpus of tweets, most of
the terms are used in everyday English.

Best–Worst Scaling Method of Annotation: Best–
Worst Scaling (BWS), also sometimes referred to as
Maximum Difference Scaling (MaxDiff), is an an-
notation scheme that exploits the comparative ap-
proach to annotation (Louviere and Woodworth,
1990; Louviere et al., 2015). Annotators are given
four items (4-tuple) and asked which term is the Best
(highest in terms of the property of interest) and
which is the Worst (least in terms of the property
of interest). Responses to the BWS questions can
then be translated into real-valued scores through a
simple counting procedure: For each term, its score
is calculated as the percentage of times the term was

3If a word was marked with conflicting polarity in two lexi-
cons, then that word was not considered as positive or negative.

1103



SCP Occ. # phrases
5adj. +4adj. →4phrase 0.76 17
5adj. +4noun→5phrase 0.59 68
4adj. +5noun→5phrase 0.53 73
4adverb +5adj. →5phrase 0.89 18
4adverb +5verb→5phrase 0.91 11
5noun +4noun→4phrase 0.60 10
4noun +5noun→5phrase 0.52 25
5verb + det. +4noun→5phrase 0.65 17
5verb +4noun→5phrase 0.82 17

Table 2: Sentiment composition patterns (SCPs) in SCL-OPP.
4denotes a positive word or phrase,5denotes a negative word
or phrase. ‘Occ.’ stands for occurrence rate of an SCP.

chosen as the Best minus the percentage of times the
term was chosen as the Worst (Orme, 2009). The
scores range from -1 to 1.

We employ Best–Worst Scaling for sentiment an-
notation by providing four (single-word or multi-
word) terms at a time and asking which term is the
most positive (or least negative) and which is the
least positive (or most negative). Each question was
answered by eight annotators through a crowdsourc-
ing platform, CrowdFlower.4 We refer to the result-
ing lexicon as the Sentiment Composition Lexicon
for Opposing Polarity Phrases (SCL-OPP).

Portions of the created lexicon have been used as
development and evaluation sets in SemEval-2016
Task 7 ‘Determining Sentiment Intensity of English
and Arabic Phrases’ (Kiritchenko et al., 2016).5 The
objective of that task was to test different meth-
ods of automatically predicting sentiment associa-
tion scores for multi-word phrases.

4 Sentiment Composition Patterns

SCL-OPP allows us to explore sentiment composi-
tion patterns in opposing polarity phrases. We de-
fine a Sentiment Composition Pattern (SCP) as a
rule that includes on the left-hand side the parts of
speech (POS) and the sentiment associations of the
constituent unigrams (in the order they appear in the
phrase), and on the right-hand side the sentiment as-
sociation of the phrase. Table 2 shows examples.
SCPs that have a positive phrase on the right-hand
side will be called positive SCPs, whereas SCPs that

4Let majority answer refer to the option most chosen for a
question. 81% of the responses matched the majority answer.

5http://alt.qcri.org/semeval2016/task7/

have a negative phrase on the right-hand side will be
called negative SCPs. Below are some questions re-
garding SCPs and opposing polarity phrases that we
explore here:

• Which SCPs are common among opposing po-
larity phrases?

• With the same left-hand side of an SCP, how
often is the composed phrase positive and how
often is the composed phrase negative? For ex-
ample, when negative adjectives combine with
a positive noun, how often is the combined
phrase negative?

• Are some parts of speech (of constituent words)
more influential in determining the sentiment
of a phrase than others?

To answer these questions, each of the entries in
SCL-OPP is marked with the appropriate SCP. The
part-of-speech sequence of a phrase is determined
by looking up the most common part-of-speech se-
quence for that phrase in the Emoticon Tweets Cor-
pus.6 Next, for every left-hand side of an SCP, we
determine the ratio of ‘how often occurrences of
such combinations in SCL-OPP resulted in a posi-
tive phrase’ to ‘how often such combinations were
seen in total’. We will refer to these scores as the
occurrence rates (‘Occ.’) of positive SCPs. The oc-
currence rates of negative SCPs are calculated in a
similar manner.

Table 2 presents all SCPs with the left-hand side
combination appearing at least ten times in SCL-
OPP, and whose occurrence rate is equal to or greater
than 50%. For example, the second row tells us that
there are 68 bigrams in SCL-OPP such that the first
word is a negative adjective and the second word is
a positive noun. Out of these 68 bigrams, 59% are
negative, and the remaining 41% are positive, so the
occurrence rate of this pattern is 0.59.

The most common SCPs in our lexicon are “4adj.
+5noun→5phrase” (73) and “5adj. +4noun→
5phrase” (68). Observe that the occurrence rates of
the patterns are spread over the entire range from
52% to 91%. Only two patterns have very high
occurrence rates (around 90%): “4adverb + 5adj.
→5phrase” and “4adverb + 5verb→5phrase”.

6The corpus was automatically POS tagged using the CMU
Tweet NLP tool (Gimpel et al., 2011).

1104



Thus, for most opposing polarity phrases, their sen-
timent cannot be accurately determined based on the
POS and sentiment of the constituents alone.

Both SCPs with high occurrence rates include ad-
verbs that serve as intensifiers—words that increase
or decrease the degree of association of the follow-
ing word with positive (negative) sentiment (e.g., in-
credibly slow, dearly missed). Only the degree of as-
sociation for the next word is changed while its po-
larity (positive or negative) is often preserved. Some
adjectives can also play the role of an intensifier
when combined with another adjective (e.g., crazy
talented) or a noun (e.g., epic fail). For example,
the adjective great, often considered highly positive,
becomes an intensifier when combined with some
nouns (e.g., great loss, great capture). Other adjec-
tives determine the polarity of the entire phrase (e.g.,
happy tears, bad luck). Therefore, the occurrence
rates of patterns like “5adj. +4noun→5phrase”
are low. Overall, even though adjectives and verbs
are frequently the primary source of sentiment in the
phrase, some nouns can override their sentiment as
in new crisis or leave a smile. SCL-OPP includes
phrases corresponding to many different kinds of
sentiment composition patterns, and therefore, it is
a useful resource for studying linguistic underpin-
nings of sentiment composition as well as for eval-
uating sentiment composition algorithms for oppos-
ing polarity phrases.

5 Automatically Predicting Sentiment

We now investigate whether accurate models of sen-
timent composition for opposing polarity phrases
can be learned. We conduct experiments with sev-
eral baseline unsupervised classifiers as well super-
vised techniques using features, such as unigrams,
POS, sentiment scores, and word embeddings.

The problem of sentiment composition can be for-
mulated in two different ways: a binary classifi-
cation task where the system has to predict if the
phrase is positive or negative; and a regression task
where the system has to predict the real-valued sen-
timent association score of the phrase. We evalu-
ate binary classification with simple accuracy (acc.)
and the regression task with Pearson correlation co-
efficient (r). Learning and evaluation are performed
separately for bigrams and trigrams.

5.1 Baseline Classifiers

The oracle ‘majority label’ baseline assigns to all
instances the most frequent polarity label in the
dataset. The ‘last unigram’ baseline returns the sen-
timent score (or the polarity label) of the last un-
igram in the phrase. For the regression task, we
use the real-valued sentiment score of the unigram
whereas for the binary classification task we use the
polarity label (positive or negative). The ‘most po-
lar unigram’ baseline assigns to the phrase the sen-
timent score (or the polarity label) of the most polar
word in that phrase, i.e., the word with the high-
est absolute sentiment score. The ‘part-of-speech
(POS) rule’ baseline assigns sentiment as follows:

1. If the phrase has an adjective, return the senti-
ment score (polarity) of the last adjective;

2. Else, if the phrase has a verb, return the senti-
ment score (polarity) of the last verb;

3. Else, return the sentiment score (polarity) of the
most polar word.

5.2 Supervised Classifiers

We train a Support Vector Machines classifier with
RBF kernel for the binary classification task and a
Support Vector regression model with RBF kernel
for the regression task using the LibSVM package
(Chang and Lin, 2011). For both tasks, the mod-
els are trained using different combinations of the
following features obtained from the target phrase:
all unigrams, POS tag of each unigram, sentiment
label of each unigram, sentiment score of each uni-
gram, and the word embedding vector for each un-
igram. The word embeddings are obtained by run-
ning word2vec software (Mikolov et al., 2013) on
the Emoticon Tweets Corpus. We use the skip-gram
model with the default parameters and generate 200-
dimensional vectors for each unigram present in the
corpus. For each task, ten-fold cross-validation is
repeated ten times, and the results are averaged.

5.3 Results

The results for all baseline and supervised meth-
ods are presented in Table 3. The ‘majority label’,
‘last unigram’, ‘most polar unigram’, and ‘POS rule’
baselines are shown in rows a to d. Observe that the
sentiment association of the last unigram is not very

1105



Binary Regression
Features (Acc.) (Pearson r)

2-gr 3-gr 2-gr 3-gr
Baselines
a. majority label 56.6 60.8 - -
b. last unigram 57.2 59.3 0.394 0.376
c. most polar unigram 66.9 69.8 0.416 0.551
d. POS rule 65.6 63.8 0.531 0.515
Supervised classifiers
e. POS + sent. label 65.7 64.2 - -
f. POS + sent. score 74.9 74.8 0.662 0.578
g. row f + uni 82.0 81.3 0.764 0.711
h. row f + emb(avg) + emb(max) 78.2 79.5 0.763 0.710
i. row f + emb(conc) 80.2 76.5 0.790 0.719
j. row f + emb(conc) + uni 82.6 80.9 0.802 0.753
k. POS + emb(conc) + uni 76.3 80.2 0.735 0.744

Table 3: Performance of the automatic systems on SCL-OPP.
Features used: unigrams (uni), part-of-speech of a unigram

(POS), sentiment binary label of a unigram (sent. label), senti-

ment real-valued score of a unigram (sent. score), embeddings

(emb). ‘emb(conc)’ is the concatenation of the embedding vec-

tors of the constituent unigrams; ‘emb(avg)’ is the average vec-

tor of the unigram embeddings; ‘emb(max)’ is maximal vector

of the unigram embeddings.

predictive of the phrase’s sentiment (row b).7 Both
the ‘most polar unigram’ and the ‘POS rule’ classi-
fiers perform markedly better than the majority base-
line. Interestingly, the ‘most polar unigram’ clas-
sifier outperforms the slightly more sophisticated
‘POS rule’ approach on most tasks. Also, we found
that within bigram phrases that contain adjectives or
verbs, the adjective or verb constituents are the most
polar words in only about half of the instances (and
even less so in trigrams). This indicates that adjec-
tives and verbs do not always dominate the senti-
ment in a phrase.

The results obtained using supervised techniques
with various feature combinations are presented in
rows e to k (Table 3). Using only POS and bi-
nary sentiment labels of the constituent unigrams,
the supervised learning algorithm does not perform
much better than our ‘POS rule’ baseline (the ac-
curacies in row e are just slightly higher than those

7Note that the results for the ‘last unigram’ baseline are still
better than the results of random guessing (acc = 50, r = 0). For
the majority of n-grams in SCL-OPP, the polarity of the first
unigram is opposite to the polarity of the last unigram. Thus,
the results for a similar ‘first unigram’ baseline (not shown here)
are worse than those obtained by the ‘last unigram’ baseline.

in row d). With access to real-valued sentiment
scores of unigrams much more accurate models can
be learned (row f). Furthermore, the results show
that the sentiment of a phrase depends on its con-
stituent words and not only on the sentiment of the
constituents (row g shows markedly better perfor-
mance than row f; all the differences are statistically
significant, p < .01). Concatenating word embed-
dings was found to be more effective than averag-
ing. (Averaging is common when creating features
for sentences). Having access to both unigrams and
word embedding features produces the best results.
(The differences between the scores in row i and
row j are statistically significant, p < .01.) Row k
shows results of the model trained without the gold
sentiment scores of the unigrams. Observe that for
bigrams, there is a substantial drop in performance
compared to row j (6.3-point drop in accuracy on
the binary task, 6.7-point drop in Pearson correlation
on the regression task) whereas for trigrams the per-
formance is not affected as much (less than 1-point
change on both tasks). Thus, having access to senti-
ment scores of constituents is particularly useful for
determining sentiment of bigram phrases.

6 Conclusions

We created a real-valued sentiment composition lex-
icon for opposing polarity phrases and their con-
stituent words, through manual annotation. We
analyzed patterns of sentiment composition across
phrases formed with different POS combinations.
Further, we applied several unsupervised and super-
vised techniques of sentiment composition to deter-
mine their efficacy on opposing polarity phrases. We
showed that for most phrases the sentiment of the
phrase cannot be reliably predicted only from the
parts of speech and sentiment association of their
constituent words, and that the constituent words,
their parts of speech, their sentiment scores, and
their embedding vectors are all useful features in su-
pervised sentiment prediction on this dataset.

We intend to use SCL-OPP in the following appli-
cations: (1) to automatically create a large coverage
sentiment lexicon of multi-word phrases and apply
it in downstream applications such as sentence-level
sentiment classification, and (2) to investigate how
the human brain processes sentiment composition.

1106



References

Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin. 2011. LIBSVM:
A Library for Support Vector Machines. ACM Trans-
actions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 2:27:1–
27:27.

Yejin Choi and Claire Cardie. 2008. Learning with com-
positional semantics as structural inference for subsen-
tential sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 793–801.

Li Dong, Furu Wei, Shujie Liu, Ming Zhou, and Ke Xu.
2015. A statistical parsing framework for sentiment
classification. Computational Linguistics.

Kevin Gimpel, Nathan Schneider, Brendan O’Connor,
Dipanjan Das, Daniel Mills, Jacob Eisenstein, Michael
Heilman, Dani Yogatama, Jeffrey Flanigan, and
Noah A. Smith. 2011. Part-of-speech tagging for
Twitter: Annotation, features, and experiments. In
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL).

Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. 2004. Mining and summa-
rizing customer reviews. In Proceedings of the 10th
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD), pages 168–
177, New York, NY, USA.

Ozan Irsoy and Claire Cardie. 2014. Deep recursive
neural networks for compositionality in language. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
pages 2096–2104.

Alistair Kennedy and Diana Inkpen. 2005. Sentiment
classification of movie and product reviews using con-
textual valence shifters. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop on the Analysis of Informal and Formal Infor-
mation Exchange during Negotiations (FINEXIN), Ot-
tawa, Ontario, Canada.

Svetlana Kiritchenko and Saif M. Mohammad. 2016a.
Capturing reliable fine-grained sentiment associations
by crowdsourcing and best–worst scaling. In Pro-
ceedings of The 15th Annual Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies
(NAACL), San Diego, California.

Svetlana Kiritchenko and Saif M. Mohammad. 2016b.
The effect of negators, modals, and degree adverbs on
sentiment composition. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity,
Sentiment and Social Media Analysis (WASSA).

Svetlana Kiritchenko and Saif M. Mohammad. 2016c.
Happy accident: A sentiment composition lexicon for
opposing polarity phrases. In Proceedings of 10th edi-
tion of the the Language Resources and Evaluation
Conference (LREC), Portorož, Slovenia.

Svetlana Kiritchenko, Xiaodan Zhu, and Saif M. Mo-
hammad. 2014. Sentiment analysis of short infor-
mal texts. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
50:723–762.

Svetlana Kiritchenko, Saif M. Mohammad, and Moham-
mad Salameh. 2016. SemEval-2016 Task 7: De-
termining sentiment intensity of English and Arabic
phrases. In Proceedings of the International Work-
shop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval), San Diego,
California, June.

Jingjing Liu and Stephanie Seneff. 2009. Review senti-
ment scoring via a parse-and-paraphrase paradigm. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 161–169.

Jordan J. Louviere and George G. Woodworth. 1990.
Best-worst analysis. Working Paper. Department of
Marketing and Economic Analysis, University of Al-
berta.

Jordan J. Louviere, Terry N. Flynn, and A. A. J. Marley.
2015. Best-Worst Scaling: Theory, Methods and Ap-
plications. Cambridge University Press.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey
Dean. 2013. Efficient estimation of word represen-
tations in vector space. In Proceedings of Workshop at
ICLR.

Saif M. Mohammad and Peter D. Turney. 2010. Emo-
tions evoked by common words and phrases: Using
Mechanical Turk to create an emotion lexicon. In Pro-
ceedings of the NAACL-HLT Workshop on Computa-
tional Approaches to Analysis and Generation of Emo-
tion in Text, LA, California.

Saif M. Mohammad and Peter D. Turney. 2013. Crowd-
sourcing a word–emotion association lexicon. Com-
putational Intelligence, 29(3):436–465.

Saif M. Mohammad, Svetlana Kiritchenko, and Xiaodan
Zhu. 2013. NRC-Canada: Building the state-of-the-
art in sentiment analysis of tweets. In Proceedings of
the International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation,
Atlanta, Georgia.

Karo Moilanen and Stephen Pulman. 2007. Sentiment
composition. In Proceedings of Recent Advances in
Natural Language Processing (RANLP), volume 7,
pages 378–382.

Richard Montague. 1974. Formal Philosophy; Selected
papers of Richard Montague. Yale University Press.

Tetsuji Nakagawa, Kentaro Inui, and Sadao Kurohashi.
2010. Dependency tree-based sentiment classification
using CRFs with hidden variables. In Proceedings of
the Annual Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 786–794.

Alena Neviarouskaya, Helmut Prendinger, and Mitsuru
Ishizuka. 2010. Recognition of affect, judgment,

1107



and appreciation in text. In Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 806–814.

Bryan Orme. 2009. Maxdiff analysis: Simple counting,
individual-level logit, and HB. Sawtooth Software,
Inc.

Livia Polanyi and Annie Zaenen. 2004. Contextual va-
lence shifters. In Proceedings of the Exploring At-
titude and Affect in Text: Theories and Applications
(AAAI Spring Symposium Series).

Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Y. Wu, Jason
Chuang, Christopher D. Manning, Andrew Y. Ng, and
Christopher Potts. 2013. Recursive deep models for
semantic compositionality over a sentiment treebank.
In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), Seat-
tle, USA.

Maite Taboada, Julian Brooke, Milan Tofiloski, Kimberly
Voll, and Manfred Stede. 2011. Lexicon-based meth-
ods for sentiment analysis. Computational Linguis-
tics, 37(2):267–307.

Kai Sheng Tai, Richard Socher, and Christopher D Man-
ning. 2015. Improved semantic representations from
tree-structured long short-term memory networks. In
Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics and the 7th Inter-
national Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 1556–1566, Beijing, China.

Michael Wiegand, Alexandra Balahur, Benjamin Roth,
Dietrich Klakow, and Andrés Montoyo. 2010. A sur-
vey on the role of negation in sentiment analysis. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Negation and Spec-
ulation in Natural Language Processing (NeSp-NLP),
pages 60–68, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-level
sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the Joint Con-
ference on HLT and EMNLP, pages 347–354, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA.

Ainur Yessenalina and Claire Cardie. 2011. Compo-
sitional matrix-space models for sentiment analysis.
In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages
172–182.

Xiaodan Zhu, Hongyu Guo, Saif Mohammad, and Svet-
lana Kiritchenko. 2014. An empirical study on the
effect of negation words on sentiment. In Proceed-
ings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 304–313, Balti-
more, Maryland, June.

1108


