



















































Gender Bias in Coreference Resolution


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2018, pages 8–14
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 1 - 6, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

Gender Bias in Coreference Resolution

Rachel Rudinger, Jason Naradowsky, Brian Leonard, and Benjamin Van Durme
Johns Hopkins University

Abstract

We present an empirical study of gender bias
in coreference resolution systems. We first in-
troduce a novel, Winograd schema-style set of
minimal pair sentences that differ only by pro-
noun gender. With these Winogender schemas,
we evaluate and confirm systematic gender
bias in three publicly-available coreference
resolution systems, and correlate this bias with
real-world and textual gender statistics.

1 Introduction

There is a classic riddle: A man and his son get
into a terrible car crash. The father dies, and the
boy is badly injured. In the hospital, the surgeon
looks at the patient and exclaims, “I can’t operate
on this boy, he’s my son!” How can this be?

That a majority of people are reportedly unable
to solve this riddle1 is taken as evidence of un-
derlying implicit gender bias (Wapman and Belle,
2014): many first-time listeners have difficulty as-
signing both the role of “mother” and “surgeon” to
the same entity.

As the riddle reveals, the task of coreference
resolution in English is tightly bound with ques-
tions of gender, for humans and automated sys-
tems alike (see Figure 1). As awareness grows
of the ways in which data-driven AI technolo-
gies may acquire and amplify human-like biases
(Caliskan et al., 2017; Barocas and Selbst, 2016;
Hovy and Spruit, 2016), this work investigates
how gender biases manifest in coreference reso-
lution systems.

There are many ways one could approach this
question; here we focus on gender bias with re-
spect to occupations, for which we have corre-
sponding U.S. employment statistics. Our ap-
proach is to construct a challenge dataset in

1The surgeon is the boy’s mother.

Figure 1: Stanford CoreNLP rule-based coreference
system resolves a male and neutral pronoun as coref-
erent with “The surgeon,” but does not for the corre-
sponding female pronoun.

the style of Winograd schemas, wherein a pro-
noun must be resolved to one of two previously-
mentioned entities in a sentence designed to be
easy for humans to interpret, but challenging for
data-driven systems (Levesque et al., 2011). In
our setting, one of these mentions is a person
referred to by their occupation; by varying only
the pronoun’s gender, we are able to test the im-
pact of gender on resolution. With these “Wino-
gender schemas,” we demonstrate the presence
of systematic gender bias in multiple publicly-
available coreference resolution systems, and that
occupation-specific bias is correlated with em-
ployment statistics. We release these test sen-
tences to the public.2

In our experiments, we represent gender as a
categorical variable with either two or three possi-
ble values: female, male, and (in some cases) neu-
tral. These choices reflect limitations of the textual
and real-world datasets we use.

2 Coreference Systems

In this work, we evaluate three publicly-
available off-the-shelf coreference resolution sys-
tems, representing three different machine learn-
ing paradigms: rule-based systems, feature-driven

2https://github.com/rudinger/
winogender-schemas

8



statistical systems, and neural systems.

Rule-based In the absence of large-scale data
for training coreference models, early systems re-
lied heavily on expert knowledge. A frequently
used example of this is the Stanford multi-pass
sieve system (Lee et al., 2011). A deterministic
system, the sieve consists of multiple rule-based
models which are applied in succession, from
highest-precision to lowest. Gender is among the
set of mention attributes identified in the very first
stage of the sieve, making this information avail-
able throughout the system.

Statistical Statistical methods, often with mil-
lions of parameters, ultimately surpassed the per-
formance of rule-based systems on shared task
data (Durrett and Klein, 2013; Björkelund and
Kuhn, 2014). The system of Durrett and Klein
(2013) replaced hand-written rules with simple
feature templates. Combinations of these features
implicitly capture linguistic phenomena useful for
resolving antecedents, but they may also uninten-
tionally capture bias in the data. For instance, for
occupations which are not frequently found in the
data, an occupation+pronoun feature can be highly
informative, and the overly confident model can
exhibit strong bias when applied to a new domain.

Neural The move to deep neural models led to
more powerful antecedent scoring functions, and
the subsequent learned feature combinations re-
sulted in new state-of-the-art performance (Wise-
man et al., 2015; Clark and Manning, 2016b).
Global inference over these models further im-
proved performance (Wiseman et al., 2016; Clark
and Manning, 2016a), but from the perspective
of potential bias, the information available to the
model is largely the same as in the statistical mod-
els. A notable exception is in the case of sys-
tems which make use of pre-trained word embed-
dings (Clark and Manning, 2016b), which have
been shown to contain bias and have the potential
to introduce bias into the system.

Noun Gender and Number Many coreference
resolution systems, including those described
here, make use of a common resource released by
Bergsma and Lin (2006)3 (“B&L”): a large list of
English nouns and noun phrases with gender and

3This data was distributed in the CoNLL 2011 and 2012
shared tasks on coreference resolution. (Pradhan et al., 2011,
2012)

number counts over 85GB of web news. For ex-
ample, according to the resource, 9.2% of men-
tions of the noun “doctor” are female. The re-
source was compiled by bootstrapping coreference
information from the dependency paths between
pairs of pronouns. We employ this data in our
analysis.

3 Winogender Schemas

Our intent is to reveal cases where coreference
systems may be more or less likely to recognize a
pronoun as coreferent with a particular occupation
based on pronoun gender, as observed in Figure 1.
To this end, we create a specialized evaluation set
consisting of 120 hand-written sentence templates,
in the style of the Winograd Schemas (Levesque
et al., 2011). Each sentence contains three refer-
ring expressions of interest:

1. OCCUPATION , a person referred to by their
occupation and a definite article, e.g., “the
paramedic.”

2. PARTICIPANT , a secondary (human) partic-
ipant, e.g., “the passenger.”

3. PRONOUN , a pronoun that is coreferent with
either OCCUPATION or PARTICIPANT.

We use a list of 60 one-word occupations ob-
tained from Caliskan et al. (2017) (see supple-
ment), with corresponding gender percentages
available from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statis-
tics.4 For each occupation, we wrote two simi-
lar sentence templates: one in which PRONOUN is
coreferent with OCCUPATION, and one in which
it is coreferent with PARTICIPANT (see Figure 2).
For each sentence template, there are three PRO-
NOUN instantiations (female, male, or neutral),
and two PARTICIPANT instantiations (a specific
participant, e.g., “the passenger,” and a generic
paricipant, “someone.”) With the templates fully
instantiated, the evaluation set contains 720 sen-
tences: 60 occupations × 2 sentence templates per
occupation × 2 participants × 3 pronoun genders.

Validation Like Winograd schemas, each sen-
tence template is written with one intended cor-
rect answer (here, either OCCUPATION or PAR-

450 are from the supplement of Caliskan et al. (2017), an
additional 7 from personal communication with the authors,
and three that we added: doctor, firefighter, and secretary.

9



(1a) The paramedic performed CPR on the passenger
even though she/he/they knew it was too late.

(2a) The paramedic performed CPR on the passenger
even though she/he/they was/were already dead.

(1b) The paramedic performed CPR on someone
even though she/he/they knew it was too late.

(2b) The paramedic performed CPR on someone
even though she/he/they was/were already dead.

Figure 2: A “Winogender” schema for the occupation
paramedic. Correct answers in bold. In general, OC-
CUPATION and PARTICIPANT may appear in either or-
der in the sentence.

TICIPANT).5 We aimed to write sentences where
(1) pronoun resolution was as unambiguous for
humans as possible (in the absence of additional
context), and (2) the resolution would not be af-
fected by changing pronoun gender. (See Figure
2.) Nonetheless, to ensure that our own judgments
are shared by other English speakers, we vali-
dated all 720 sentences on Mechanical Turk, with
10-way redundancy. Each MTurk task included
5 sentences from our dataset, and 5 sentences
from the Winograd Schema Challenge (Levesque
et al., 2011)6, though this additional validation
step turned out to be unnecessary.7 Out of 7200
binary-choice worker annotations (720 sentences
× 10-way redundancy), 94.9% of responses agree
with our intended answers. With simple major-
ity voting on each sentence, worker responses
agree with our intended answers for 718 of 720
sentences (99.7%). The two sentences with low
agreement have neutral gender (“they”), and are
not reflected in any binary (female-male) analysis.

Correlation (r) RULE STAT NEURAL

B&L 0.87 0.46 0.35
BLS 0.55 0.31 0.31

Table 1: Correlation values for Figures 3 and 4.

5Unlike Winograd schemas, we are not primarily con-
cerned with whether these sentences are “hard” to solve, e.g.,
because they would require certain types of human knowl-
edge or could not be easily solved with word co-occurrence
statistics.

6We used the publicly-available examples from
https://cs.nyu.edu/faculty/davise/
papers/WinogradSchemas/WSCollection.html

7In the end, we did not use the Winograd schemas to fil-
ter annotators, as raw agreement on the Winogender schemas
was much higher to begin with (94.9% Winogender vs.
86.5% Winograd).

0 20 40 60 80 100
% Female by Occupation (Bureau of Labor Stats, 2015-16)

0

20

40

60

80

100

%
 F

em
al

e 
by

 O
cc

up
at

io
n 

in
 T

ex
t (

B
er

gs
m

a 
an

d 
Li

n,
 2

00
6)

Figure 3: Gender statistics from Bergsma and Lin
(2006) correlate with Bureau of Labor Statistics 2015.
However, the former has systematically lower female
percentages; most points lie well below the 45-degree
line (dotted). Regression line and 95% confidence in-
terval in blue. Pearson r = 0.67.

4 Results and Discussion

We evaluate examples of each of the three coref-
erence system architectures described in 2: the
Lee et al. (2011) sieve system from the rule-
based paradigm (referred to as RULE), Durrett
and Klein (2013) from the statistical paradigm
(STAT), and the Clark and Manning (2016a) deep
reinforcement system from the neural paradigm
(NEURAL).

By multiple measures, the Winogender schemas
reveal varying degrees of gender bias in all three
systems. First we observe that these systems do
not behave in a gender-neutral fashion. That is to
say, we have designed test sentences where cor-
rect pronoun resolution is not a function of gen-
der (as validated by human annotators), but system
predictions do exhibit sensitivity to pronoun gen-
der: 68% of male-female minimal pair test sen-
tences are resolved differently by the RULE sys-
tem; 28% for STAT; and 13% for NEURAL.

Overall, male pronouns are also more likely to
be resolved as OCCUPATION than female or neu-
tral pronouns across all systems: for RULE, 72%
male vs 29% female and 1% neutral; for STAT,
71% male vs 63% female and 50% neutral; and
for NEURAL, 87% male vs 80% female and 36%
neutral. Neutral pronouns are often resolved as
neither OCCUPATION nor PARTICIPANT, possibly
due to the number ambiguity of “they/their/them.”

10



0 20 40 60 80 100
% Female by Occupation (Bureau of Labor Stats, 2015-16)

100

75

50

25

0

25

50

75

100
G

en
de

re
d 

P
ro

no
un

 R
es

ol
ut

io
n 

by
 O

cc
up

at
io

ns
 (%

Fe
m

al
e 

- %
M

al
e)

System
STAT
RULE
NEURAL

0 20 40 60 80 100
% Female by Occupation in Text (Bergsma and Lin, 2006)

100

75

50

25

0

25

50

75

100

G
en

de
re

d 
P

ro
no

un
 R

es
ol

ut
io

n 
by

 O
cc

up
at

io
ns

 (%
Fe

m
al

e 
- %

M
al

e)

System
STAT
RULE
NEURAL

Figure 4: These two plots show how gender bias in coreference systems corresponds with occupational gender
statistics from the U.S Bureau of Labor Statistics (left) and from text as computed by Bergsma and Lin (2006)
(right); each point represents one occupation. The y-axes measure the extent to which a coref system prefers to
match female pronouns with a given occupation over male pronouns, as tested by our Winogender schemas. A
value of 100 (maximum female bias) means the system always resolved female pronouns to the given occupation
and never male pronouns (100% - 0%); a score of -100 (maximum male bias) is the reverse; and a value of 0
indicates no gender differential. Recall the Winogender evaluation set is gender-balanced for each occupation;
thus the horizontal dotted black line (y=0) in both plots represents a hypothetical system with 100% accuracy.
Regression lines with 95% confidence intervals are shown.

When these systems’ predictions diverge based
on pronoun gender, they do so in ways that rein-
force and magnify real-world occupational gender
disparities. Figure 4 shows that systems’ gender
preferences for occupations correlate with real-
world employment statistics (U.S. Bureau of La-
bor Statistics) and the gender statistics from text
(Bergsma and Lin, 2006) which these systems ac-
cess directly; correlation values are in Table 1.
We also identify so-called “gotcha” sentences in
which pronoun gender does not match the occu-
pation’s majority gender (BLS) if OCCUPATION is
the correct answer; all systems perform worse on
these “gotchas.”8 (See Table 2.)

Because coreference systems need to make dis-
crete choices about which mentions are coref-
erent, percentage-wise differences in real-world
statistics may translate into absolute differences
in system predictions. For example, the occupa-
tion “manager” is 38.5% female in the U.S. ac-
cording to real-world statistics (BLS); mentions of
“manager” in text are only 5.18% female (B&L
resource); and finally, as viewed through the be-
havior of the three coreference systems we tested,

8“ The librarian helped the child pick out a book be-
cause he liked to encourage reading.” is an example of a
“gotcha” sentence; librarians are > 50% female (BLS).

no managers are predicted to be female. This il-
lustrates two related phenomena: first, that data-
driven NLP pipelines are susceptible to sequential
amplification of bias throughout a pipeline, and
second, that although the gender statistics from
B&L correlate with BLS employment statistics,
they are systematically male-skewed (Figure 3).

System “Gotcha”? Female Male

RULE no 38.3 51.7yes 10.0 37.5

STAT no 50.8 61.7yes 45.8 40.0

NEURAL no 50.8 49.2yes 36.7 46.7

Table 2: System accuracy (%) bucketed by gender and
difficulty (so-called “gotchas,” shaded in purple). For
female pronouns, a “gotcha” sentence is one where ei-
ther (1) the correct answer is OCCUPATION but the oc-
cupation is < 50% female (according to BLS); or (2)
the occupation is ≥ 50% female but the correct answer
is PARTICIPANT; this is reversed for male pronouns.
Systems do uniformly worse on “gotchas.”

5 Related Work

Here we give a brief (and non-exhaustive)
overview of prior work on gender bias in NLP
systems and datasets. A number of papers ex-
plore (gender) bias in English word embeddings:

11



how they capture implicit human biases in mod-
ern (Caliskan et al., 2017) and historical (Garg
et al., 2018) text, and methods for debiasing them
(Bolukbasi et al., 2016). Further work on debias-
ing models with adversarial learning is explored
by Beutel et al. (2017) and Zhang et al. (2018).

Prior work also analyzes social and gender
stereotyping in existing NLP and vision datasets
(van Miltenburg, 2016; Rudinger et al., 2017). Tat-
man (2017) investigates the impact of gender and
dialect on deployed speech recognition systems,
while Zhao et al. (2017) introduce a method to re-
duce amplification effects on models trained with
gender-biased datasets. Koolen and van Cranen-
burgh (2017) examine the relationship between
author gender and text attributes, noting the po-
tential for researcher interpretation bias in such
studies. Both Larson (2017) and Koolen and van
Cranenburgh (2017) offer guidelines to NLP re-
searchers and computational social scientists who
wish to predict gender as a variable. Hovy and
Spruit (2016) introduce a helpful set of terminol-
ogy for identifying and categorizing types of bias
that manifest in AI systems, including overgener-
alization, which we observe in our work here.

Finally, we note independent but closely related
work by Zhao et al. (2018), published concur-
rently with this paper. In their work, Zhao et al.
(2018) also propose a Winograd schema-like test
for gender bias in coreference resolution systems
(called “WinoBias”). Though similar in appear-
ance, these two efforts have notable differences in
substance and emphasis. The contribution of this
work is focused primarily on schema construction
and validation, with extensive analysis of observed
system bias, revealing its correlation with biases
present in real-world and textual statistics; by con-
trast, Zhao et al. (2018) present methods of debi-
asing existing systems, showing that simple ap-
proaches such as augmenting training data with
gender-swapped examples or directly editing noun
phrase counts in the B&L resource are effective at
reducing system bias, as measured by the schemas.
Complementary differences exist between the two
schema formulations: Winogender schemas (this
work) include gender-neutral pronouns, are syn-
tactically diverse, and are human-validated; Wino-
Bias includes (and delineates) sentences resolv-
able from syntax alone; a Winogender schema has
one occupational mention and one “other partic-
ipant” mention; WinoBias has two occupational

mentions. Due to these differences, we encourage
future evaluations to make use of both datasets.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

We have introduced “Winogender schemas,” a
pronoun resolution task in the style of Winograd
schemas that enables us to uncover gender bias in
coreference resolution systems. We evaluate three
publicly-available, off-the-shelf systems and find
systematic gender bias in each: for many occupa-
tions, systems strongly prefer to resolve pronouns
of one gender over another. We demonstrate that
this preferential behavior correlates both with real-
world employment statistics and the text statistics
that these systems use. We posit that these sys-
tems overgeneralize the attribute of gender, lead-
ing them to make errors that humans do not make
on this evaluation. We hope that by drawing atten-
tion to this issue, future systems will be designed
in ways that mitigate gender-based overgeneral-
ization.

It is important to underscore the limitations of
Winogender schemas. As a diagnostic test of gen-
der bias, we view the schemas as having high pos-
itive predictive value and low negative predictive
value; that is, they may demonstrate the presence
of gender bias in a system, but not prove its ab-
sence. Here we have focused on examples of oc-
cupational gender bias, but Winogender schemas
may be extended broadly to probe for other man-
ifestations of gender bias. Though we have used
human-validated schemas to demonstrate that ex-
isting NLP systems are comparatively more prone
to gender-based overgeneralization, we do not pre-
sume that matching human judgment is the ulti-
mate objective of this line of research. Rather, hu-
man judgements, which carry their own implicit
biases, serve as a lower bound for equitability in
automated systems.

Acknowledgments

The authors thank Rebecca Knowles and Chan-
dler May for their valuable feedback on this work.
This research was supported by the JHU HLT-
COE, DARPA AIDA, and NSF-GRFP (1232825).
The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce
and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes.
The views and conclusions contained in this pub-
lication are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as representing official policies or en-
dorsements of DARPA or the U.S. Government.

12



References
Solon Barocas and Andrew D Selbst. 2016. Big data’s

disparate impact. California Law Review, pages
104(3):671–732.

Shane Bergsma and Dekang Lin. 2006. Bootstrapping
path-based pronoun resolution. In Proceedings of
the 21st International Conference on Computational
Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, pages 33–40,
Sydney, Australia. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Alex Beutel, Jilin Chen, Zhe Zhao, and Ed H. Chi.
2017. Data decisions and theoretical implica-
tions when adversarially learning fair representa-
tions. CoRR, abs/1707.00075.

Anders Björkelund and Jonas Kuhn. 2014. Learn-
ing structured perceptrons for coreference resolution
with latent antecedents and non-local features. In
Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 47–57, Baltimore, Maryland.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y Zou,
Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam T Kalai. 2016.
Man is to computer programmer as woman is to
homemaker? debiasing word embeddings. In D. D.
Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. V. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and
R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 29, pages 4349–4357. Curran
Associates, Inc.

Aylin Caliskan, Joanna J. Bryson, and Arvind
Narayanan. 2017. Semantics derived automatically
from language corpora contain human-like biases.
Science, 356(6334):183–186.

Kevin Clark and Christopher D. Manning. 2016a.
Deep reinforcement learning for mention-ranking
coreference models. In Empirical Methods on Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP).

Kevin Clark and Christopher D. Manning. 2016b. Im-
proving coreference resolution by learning entity-
level distributed representations. In Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL).

Greg Durrett and Dan Klein. 2013. Easy victories and
uphill battles in coreference resolution. In Proceed-
ings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing, Seattle, Washington. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Nikhil Garg, Londa Schiebinger, Dan Jurafsky, and
James Zou. 2018. Word embeddings quantify 100
years of gender and ethnic stereotypes. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences.

Dirk Hovy and Shannon L. Spruit. 2016. The social
impact of natural language processing. In Proceed-
ings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association

for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Pa-
pers), pages 591–598, Berlin, Germany. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Corina Koolen and Andreas van Cranenburgh. 2017.
These are not the stereotypes you are looking for:
Bias and fairness in authorial gender attribution. In
Proceedings of the First ACL Workshop on Ethics in
Natural Language Processing, pages 12–22, Valen-
cia, Spain. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Brian Larson. 2017. Gender as a variable in natural-
language processing: Ethical considerations. In
Proceedings of the First ACL Workshop on Ethics in
Natural Language Processing, pages 1–11, Valen-
cia, Spain. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Heeyoung Lee, Yves Peirsman, Angel Chang,
Nathanael Chambers, Mihai Surdeanu, and Dan Ju-
rafsky. 2011. Stanford’s multi-pass sieve coref-
erence resolution system at the conll-2011 shared
task. In Conference on Natural Language Learning
(CoNLL) Shared Task.

Hector J. Levesque, Ernest Davis, and Leora Morgen-
stern. 2011. The winograd schema challenge. In
KR.

Emiel van Miltenburg. 2016. Stereotyping and bias in
the flickr30k dataset. MMC.

Sameer Pradhan, Alessandro Moschitti, Nianwen Xue,
Olga Uryupina, and Yuchen Zhang. 2012. CoNLL-
2012 shared task: Modeling multilingual unre-
stricted coreference in OntoNotes. In Proceedings
of the Sixteenth Conference on Computational Natu-
ral Language Learning (CoNLL 2012), Jeju, Korea.

Sameer Pradhan, Lance Ramshaw, Mitchell Marcus,
Martha Palmer, Ralph Weischedel, and Nianwen
Xue. 2011. Conll-2011 shared task: Modeling un-
restricted coreference in ontonotes. In Proceedings
of the Fifteenth Conference on Computational Nat-
ural Language Learning (CoNLL 2011), Portland,
Oregon.

Rachel Rudinger, Chandler May, and Benjamin
Van Durme. 2017. Social bias in elicited natural lan-
guage inferences. In Proceedings of the First ACL
Workshop on Ethics in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 74–79, Valencia, Spain. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Rachael Tatman. 2017. Gender and dialect bias in
youtube’s automatic captions. In Proceedings of the
First ACL Workshop on Ethics in Natural Language
Processing, pages 53–59, Valencia, Spain. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Mikaela Wapman and Deborah Belle. 2014. Under-
graduate thesis. https://mikaelawapman.
com/category/gender-schemas/.

13



Sam Wiseman, Alexander M. Rush, Stuart Shieber, and
Jason Weston. 2015. Learning anaphoricity and an-
tecedent ranking features for coreference resolution.
In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics and the
7th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
1416–1426. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Sam Wiseman, Alexander M. Rush, and Stuart M.
Shieber. 2016. Learning global features for coref-
erence resolution. In Proceedings of the 2016 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, pages 994–1004, San Diego,
California. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Brian Hu Zhang, Blake Lemoine, and Margaret
Mitchell. 2018. Mitigating unwanted biases with
adversarial learning. In Proceedings of the First
AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society.

Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente Or-
donez, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2017. Men also like
shopping: Reducing gender bias amplification using
corpus-level constraints. In Proceedings of the 2017
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 2979–2989, Copenhagen,
Denmark. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente Or-
donez, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2018. Gender bias in
coreference resolution: Evaluation and debiasing
methods. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

14


