



















































Alignment, Acceptance, and Rejection of Group Identities in Online Political Discourse


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2018: Student Research Workshop, pages 1–8
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 2 - 4, 2018. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Alignment, Acceptance, and Rejection of Group Identities in Online
Political Discourse

Hagyeong Shin
Dept. of Linguistics

San Diego State University
San Diego, CA, USA, 92182

hshin@sdsu.edu

Gabriel Doyle
Dept. of Linguistics

San Diego State University
San Diego, CA, USA, 92182

gdoyle@sdsu.edu

Abstract

Conversation is a joint social process, with
participants cooperating to exchange informa-
tion. This process is helped along through
linguistic alignment: participants’ adoption of
each other’s word use. This alignment is ro-
bust, appearing many settings, and is nearly al-
ways positive. We create an alignment model
for examining alignment in Twitter conversa-
tions across antagonistic groups. This model
finds that some word categories, specifically
pronouns used to establish group identity and
common ground, are negatively aligned. This
negative alignment is observed despite other
categories, which are less related to the group
dynamics, showing the standard positive align-
ment. This suggests that alignment is strongly
biased toward cooperative alignment, but that
different linguistic features can show substan-
tially different behaviors.

1 Introduction

Conversation, whether friendly chit-chat or heated
debate, is a jointly negotiated social process, in
which interlocutors balance the assertion of one’s
own identity and ideas against a receptivity to the
others. Work in Communication Accommoda-
tion Theory has demonstrated that speakers tend to
converge their communicative behavior in order to
achieve social approval from their in-group mem-
bers, while they tend to diverge their behavior in a
conversation with out-group members, especially
when the group dynamics are strained (Giles et al.,
1991, 1973).

Linguistic alignment, the use of similar words
to one’s conversational partner, is one prominent
and robust form of this accommodation, and has
been detected in a variety of linguistic interac-
tions, ranging from speed dates to the Supreme
Court (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al., 2011; Guo
et al., 2015; Ireland et al., 2011; Niederhoffer and

Pennebaker, 2002). In particular, this alignment
is usually positive, reflecting a widespread will-
ingness to accept and build off of the linguistic
structure provided by one’s interlocutor; the differ-
ences in alignment have generally been of degree,
not direction, subtly reflecting group differences
in power and interest.

The present work proposes a new model of
alignment, SWAM, which adapts the WHAM
alignment model (Doyle and Frank, 2016). We ex-
amine alignment behaviors in a setting with clear
group identities and enmity between the groups
but with uncertainty on which group is majority or
minority: conversations between supporters of the
two major candidates in the 2016 U.S. Presidential
election. Unlike previous alignment work, we find
some cases of substantial negative alignment, es-
pecially on personal pronouns that play a key role
in assigning group identity and establishing com-
mon ground in the discourse. In addition, within-
versus cross-group conversations show divergent
patterns of both overall frequency and alignment
behaviors on pronouns even when the alignment is
positive. These differences contrast with the rel-
atively stable (though still occasionally negative)
alignment on word categories that reflect possible
rhetorical approaches within the discussions, sug-
gesting that group dynamics within the argument
are, in a sense, more contentious than the argu-
ment itself.

2 Previous Studies

2.1 Linguistic Alignment

Accommodation in communication happens at
many levels, from mimicking a conversation part-
ner’s paralinguistic features to choosing which
language to use in multilingual societies (Giles
et al., 1991). One established approach to as-
sess accommodation in linguistic representation

1



is to look at the usage of function word cate-
gories, such as pronouns, prepositions, and articles
(Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al., 2011; Niederhof-
fer and Pennebaker, 2002). This approach argues
that function words provide the syntactic struc-
ture, which can vary somewhat independently of
the content words being used. Speakers can ex-
press the same thought through different speech
styles and reflect their own personality, identity,
and emotions (Chung and Pennebaker, 2007).

In this context, we view limit our analysis to
convergence in lexical category choices, which
can be the consequence of both social and cogni-
tive processes. We call this specific quantification
of accommodation “linguistic alignment”, but it is
closely related to general concepts such as priming
and entrainment. This alignment behavior may be
the result of social or cognitive processes, or both,
though we focus on the social influences here.

2.2 Linguistic Alignment between Groups

Recent models of linguistic alignment have at-
tempted to separate homophily, an inherent sim-
ilarity in speakers’ language use, from adaptive
alignment in response to a partner’s recent word
use (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al., 2011; Doyle
et al., 2017). If homophily is not separated from
alignment, it is impossible to compare within-
and cross-group alignment, since the groups them-
selves are likely to have different overall word dis-
tributions. Both alignment and homophily can be
meaningful; Doyle et al. (2017) combine the two
to estimate employees’ level of inclusion in the
workplace.

Separating these factors opens the door to in-
vestigate alignment behaviors even in cases where
different groups speak in different ways; if ho-
mophily is not factored out, cross-group dif-
ferences will produce alignment underestimates.
Thus far, these models of alignment been applied
mostly in cases where there is a single salient
group that speakers wish to join (Doyle et al.,
2017), or where group identities are less salient
than dyadic social roles or relationships, such
as social power (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al.,
2012), engagement (Niederhoffer and Pennebaker,
2002), or attraction (Ireland et al., 2011).

There is some evidence and an intuition that
alignment can cross group boundaries, but it has
not been measured using such models of adap-
tive linguistic alignment. Niederhoffer and Pen-

nebaker (2002) pointed out that speakers with neg-
ative feelings are likely to coordinate their linguis-
tic style to each other, while speakers who are not
engaged to each other at all are less likely to align
their linguistic style. Speakers also might actively
coordinate their speech to their opponents’ in or-
der to persuade them more effectively (Burleson
and Fennelly, 1981; Duran and Fusaroli, 2017). If
two people with different opinions are talking to
each other, they may also align their speech style
as a good-faith effort to understand the other’s po-
sition (Pickering and Garrod, 2004).

However, it is also reasonable to expect that
speakers with enmity would diverge their speech
style as a way to express their disagreement to
each other, especially if they feel disrespected or
slighted (Giles et al., 1991). At the same time, if
the function word usage can reflect speakers’ psy-
chological state (Chung and Pennebaker, 2007),
then negative alignment to opponents would be
observed as a fair representation of the disagree-
ment between speakers. Supporting this idea,
Rosenthal and McKeown (2015) showed that ac-
commodation in word usage could be a feature to
improve their model detecting agreement and dis-
agreement between speakers.

In the present work, we consider cross-group
alignment on personal pronouns, which can ex-
press group identity, as well as on word cate-
gories that may indicate different rhetorical ap-
proaches to the argument (Pennebaker et al.,
2003). Van Swol and Carlson (2017) suggests
that the pronoun category can be useful markers of
group dynamics in a debate setting, and Schwartz
et al. (2013) suggests that it is reasonable to expect
the different word usage from different groups. In
fact, although we find mostly positive alignment,
we do see negative alignment in some cross-group
uses, suggesting strong group identities can over-
rule the general desire to align.

3 Data

3.1 Word categories

This study examines alignment and baseline word
use on 8 word categories from Linguistic In-
quiry and Word Count (LIWC; Pennebaker et al.
(2007)), a common categorization method in
alignment research. Details on word categories
and example words for each category can be found
in Table 1. For example, the first person singular
pronoun I category counted 12 different forms of

2



Category Example Size
1st singular (I) I, me, mine 12
2nd person (You) you, your, thou 20
1st plural (We) we, us, our 12
3rd plural (They) they, their, they’d 10
Social processes talk, they, child 455
Cognitive processes cause, know, ought 730
Positive emotion love, nice, sweet 406
Negative emotion hurt, ugly, nasty 499

Table 1: Word categories for linguistic alignment with
examples and the number of word tokens in the cate-
gory.

the I pronoun, such as I, me, mine, myself, I’m, and
I’d.

We choose four pronoun categories (I, you, we,
they) to investigate the relationship between group
dynamics and linguistic alignment. We expect
that in a conversation between in-group mem-
bers, I, we, they will be observed often. When
these pronouns are initially spoken by a speaker,
repliers can express their in-group membership
while aligning to their usage of the words at the
same time. In the conversation with out-group
members, you usage will be observed more of-
ten because it will allow repliers to refer to the
speaker while excluding themselves as a part of
the speaker’s group. In the cross-group conver-
sation, alignment on inclusive we indicates that
repliers acknowledged and expressed themselves
as a member of speakers’ in-group. However,
alignment on exclusive they in cross-group conver-
sation should be interpreted with much more atten-
tion. When a replier is aligning their usage of they
to their out-group member, it likely indicates that
both groups are referring to a shared referent, im-
plying enough cooperation to enter an object into
common ground (Clark, 1996).

Additionally, four rhetorical word categories are
considered. In LIWC, psychological processes are
categorized into social processes, cognitive pro-
cesses, and affective processes, the last of which
covers positive and negative emotions. Social and
affective process categories are, as their names in-
dicate, the markers of social behavior and emo-
tions. Cognitive process markers include words
that reflect causation (because, hence), discrep-
ancy (should, would), certainty (always, never),
and inclusion (and, with), to name a few. A
speaker’s baseline usage of rhetorical categories

will present the group-specific speech styles that
may be dependent on group identity, reflecting
preferred styles of argument. The degree of align-
ment on rhetorical categories indicates whether
speakers maintain their group’s discussion style or
adapt to the other group.

3.2 Twitter Conversation
The corpus data was built specifically for this re-
search. The population of the data was Twit-
ter conversations about the 2016 presidential elec-
tion dated from July 27th, 2016 (a day after both
parties announced their candidates) to November
7th, 2016 (a day before the election day). Twit-
ter users were divided into two different groups
according to their supporting candidates, based
on the assumption that all speakers included in
the data were partisans and had a single support-
ing candidate. When the users’ supporting can-
didate was not explicitly shown in their speech,
additional information was considered, including
previous Tweets, profile statements, and profile
pictures. Speakers’ political affiliation was first
coded by the researcher and the coder’s reliabil-
ity was tested. Two other coders agreed on the
researcher’s coding of 50 users (25 were coded
as Trump supporters and 25 were coded as Clin-
ton supporters) with Fleiss’ Kappa score 0.87 (κ =
0.86, p < 0.001) with average 94.4% confidence
in their answers.

3.3 Sampling Method
The corpus data was built by a snowball method
from seed accounts. Seed accounts spanned major
media channels (@cnnbrk; @FoxNews; @NBC-
News; @ABC) and the candidates’ Twitter ac-
counts (@realDonaldTrump; @HillaryClinton).
The original Twitter messages from the seed ac-
counts were not considered as a part of the data,
but replies and replies to replies were. The mini-
mal unit of the data was a paired conversation ex-
tracted from the comment section. An initial mes-
sage a (single Twitter message, known as a tweet)
and the following reply b created a pair of the con-
versation.

3.4 Datasets
In total, four sets of Twitter data were gath-
ered. The first two datasets (TT, CC) consisted
of conversations between members of the same
group (within-group conversation). The other
two datasets (TC, CT) consisted of conversations

3



Dataset Message Reply
TT I saw a poll where she was up by 8 here and

people say that they hate her so who knows
I’m not sure what’s going on with that, but
#Reality tells a different story. Someone’s
lying.

Dems spreading lies again. They are pro-
jecting Trump as stupid but voters knows
he is not!!

Dems running out of ways to get rid of
Trump, so now they will push this BS that
he is CRAZY and out of control!!

CC Jill Stein is more concerned about Hillary
than she is about Trump. That tells you all
you need to know about this loon. #Green-
TownHall

You make a lot of sense. I’m sick of Hillary
bashing.

TC
#Libtard you are in for the shock of your
life #TRUMPTRAIN

You are if you think he has a chance; have
you any idea what the Electoral U map
looks like?... Hillary!

Unbelievable that #TeamHillary thinks
America is so stupid we won’t notice that
moderator is a close Clinton pal

Not America. Just folks like you.
#Trumpsuneducated

CT Fight - not a fight - he was told Mexico
won’t pay for it. Why should they?

Never expected Mex 2 write us a check.
Other ways 2 make them pay for wall.
Trump knows how 2 negotiate.

Table 2: Examples of conversation pairs from each dataset (First letter indicates initiator’s group, second indicates
replier’s)

across the groups (cross-group conversation). In
the dataset references, Trump supporters’ mes-
sage is represented with T, and Clinton supporters’
message is represented with C. The first letter indi-
cates the initiator’s group; the second indicates the
replier’s group. There is an average of 266 unique
repliers in each group.

4 SWAM Model

This study adapts the Word-Based Hierarchical
Alignment Model (WHAM; Doyle and Frank
(2016)) to estimate alignment on different word
categories in the Twitter conversations. WHAM
defines two key quantities: baseline word use, the
rate at which someone uses a given word category
W when it has not been used in the preceding mes-
sage, and alignment, the relative increase in the
probability of words from W being used when the
preceding message used a word from W .

Both quantities have been argued to be psy-
chologically meaningful, with baseline usage re-
flecting internalization of in-group identity, ho-
mophily, and enculturation, and alignment reflect-
ing a willingness to adjust one’s own behavior
to fit another’s expectations and framing (Doyle
et al., 2017; Giles et al., 1991).

The WHAM framework uses a hierarchy of nor-

mal distributions to tie together observations from
related messages (e.g., multiple repliers with sim-
ilar demographics) to improve its robustness when
data is sparse or the sociological factors are sub-
tle. This requires the researcher to make statis-
tical assumptions about the structure’s effect on
alignment behaviors, but can improve signal de-
tection when group dynamics are subtle or group
membership is difficult to determine (Doyle et al.,
2016).

However, when the group identities are strong
and unambiguous, this inference can be exces-
sive, and may even lead to inaccurate estimates, as
the more complex optimization process may cre-
ate a non-convex learning problem. The Bayesian
hierarchy in WHAM also aggregates information
across groups to improve alignment estimates; in
cases where the groups are opposed, one group’s
behavior may not be predictive of the other’s.
We propose the Simplified Word-Based Align-
ment Model (SWAM) for such cases, where group
dynamics are expected to provide robust and pos-
sibly distinct signals.

WHAM infers two key parameters: ηalign and
ηbase, the logit-space alignment and baseline val-
ues, conditioned on a hierarchy of Gaussian priors.

4



ηalign µalign Calign

ηbase µbase Cbase
logit−1

Binom

logit−1

Binom

Nalign

N base

Figure 1: Generative schematic of the Simplified Word-
Based Alignment Model (SWAM) used in this study.
Hierarchical parameter chains from the WHAM model
are eliminated; alignment values are fit independently
by word category and conversation group.

SWAM estimates the two parameters directly as:

ηbase = log p(B|notA) (1)

ηalign = log
p(B|A)

p(B|notA) , (2)

where p(B|A) is the probability of a replier us-
ing a word category when the initial message con-
tained it, and p(B|notA) is the probability of the
replier using it when the initial message did not.

SWAM treats alignment as a change in the
log-odds of a given word in the reply belong-
ing to W , depending on whether W appeared in
the preceding message. SWAM can be thought
of as a midpoint between WHAM and the sub-
tractive alignment model of Danescu-Niculescu-
Mizil et al. (2011), with three main differences
from the latter model. First, SWAM’s baseline is
p(B|notA), as opposed to unconditioned p(B) for
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al. (2011). Second,
SWAM places alignment on log-odds rather than
probability, avoiding floor effects in alignment for
rare word categories. Third, SWAM calculates
by-word alignment rather than by-message, con-
trolling for the effect of varying message/reply
lengths. These three differences allow SWAM to
retain the improved fit of WHAM (Doyle et al.,
2016), while gaining the computational simplic-
ity and group-dynamic agnosticism of Danescu-
Niculescu-Mizil et al. (2011).

5 Results

5.1 Pronouns
The results of baseline frequency and alignment
values for the four conversation types are pre-
sented in Figure 2 and 3, respectively. We analyze
each pronoun set in turn.

First of all, baseline usage of you shows that you
was used more often among repliers in the cross-
group conversations. However, the alignment pat-
tern for you was much stronger in within-group
conversations. That is, repliers are generally more
likely to use you in cross-group settings to refer to
out-group members overall, but within the group,
one member using you encourages the other to use
it as well.

You alignment in within-group conversation
could reflect rapport-building, a sense that speak-
ers understand each other well enough to talk
about each other, and an acceptance of the other’s
common ground (as in the example for CC in
Table 2). On the other hand, you alignment
in between-group conversations should be inter-
preted as the result of disagreement to each other
(See examples for TC in Table 2). You alignment
in this case is the action of pointing fingers at each
other, which happens at an overall elevated level,
regardless of whether the other person has already
done so.

Baseline usage of they shows the opposite pat-
tern from you usage, with higher they usage in the
in-group conversations. This type of they usage
can be a reference to out-group members (see the
second example for TT in Table 2). By using they,
repliers can express their membership as a part of
the in-group and make assertions about the out-
group. It also can reflect acceptance of the inter-
locutor placing objects in common ground, which
can be referred to by pronouns.

They alignment patterns were comparable
across the conversation types, except that Trump
supporters showed divergence when responding to
Clinton supporters. The CT conversation in Table
2 reflects this divergence, with Mexico being re-
peated rather than being replaced by they, suggest-
ing Trump supporters reject the elements Clinton
supporters attempt to put into common ground.

Moving on to baseline usage of we, Trump sup-
porters were most likely to use this pronoun, espe-
cially in their in-group conversations, suggesting a
strong awareness of and desire for group identity.
Contrary to the alignment patterns of they, Clin-

5



pronouns
rhetorical

−5 −4 −3 −2 −1

they

we

you

i

negative
emotion

positive
emotion

cognitive
processes

social
processes

baseline (log−frequency)

TT
CC
TC
CT

Figure 2: Repliers’ baseline usage of category markers
is the probability of usage of the word when it has not
been said by the initial speaker.

ton supporters were actively diverging their usage
of we from Trump supporters. Meanwhile, Trump
supporters were not actively diverging on we as
they did for the they usage.

Claiming in-group membership by using in-
group identity marker can be one way of claim-
ing common ground, which indicates that speak-
ers belong to the group who shares specific goals
and values (Brown and Levinson, 1987). There-
fore, Trump supporters’ baseline use and align-
ment of we and they suggest that they were ac-
cepting and reinforcing common ground with in-
group members by using we, but rejecting com-
mon ground with out-group members by not align-
ing to they. Clinton supporters showed a different
way of reflecting their acceptance and rejection.
They chose to reject common ground by not align-
ing to their out-group members’ in-group marker
we, but seemed to accept the common ground
within the conversation built by out-group mem-
bers’ use of they.

Interestingly, I showed the least variability, both
in baseline and alignment, across the groups.
However, I is also the only one of these pronoun
groups that does not refer to someone else, and
thus should be least affected by group dynamics.
In fact, we see Chung and Pennebaker (2007)’s
general finding of solid I-alignment, even in cross-
group communication.

pronouns
rhetorical

−1 0 1

they

we

you

i

negative
emotion

positive
emotion

cognitive
processes

social
processes

alignment

TT
CC
TC
CT

Figure 3: Repliers’ alignment on category markers rep-
resents the probability of repliers’ usage of the word
when it has been said by the initial speaker.

Overall, we see effects both in the baseline and
alignment values that are consistent with a strong
group-identity construction process. Furthermore,
we see strong negative alignment in cross-group
communication on pronouns tied to group iden-
tity and grounding, showing that cross-group an-
imosity can overrule the general pattern of pos-
itive alignment in certain dimensions. However,
the overall alignment is still positive; even the re-
jection of certain aspects of the conversation do
not lead to across-the-board divergence.

5.2 Rhetorical Categories
Despite our hypothesis that the rhetorical cate-
gories of words could indicate different groups’
preferred style of argumentation, these categories
showed limited variation compared to the pro-
nouns. The baseline values only varied a small
amount between groups, with Clinton supporters
having slightly elevated baseline use of social and
cognitive words, and slightly less positive emo-
tion.

The alignment values were mostly small posi-
tive values, much as has been observed in stylis-
tic alignment in previous work. However, cross-
group Trump-Clinton conversations did have neg-
ative alignment on cognitive processes. This cate-
gory spans markers of certainty, discrepancy, and
inclusion, and has been argued to reflect argumen-
tation framing that appeals to rationality. This may

6



be a sign of rejecting or dismissing their interlocu-
tors’ argument framing. But overall, there is no
strong evidence of differences in alignment in ar-
gumentative style in this data, and the bulk of the
effect remains on group identification.

A possible reason for the lack of differences
in argumentation style may be uncertainty about
the setting of the cross-group communication. El-
evated causation word usage has been argued to
be employed by the minority position within a de-
bate, to provide convincing evidence against the
status quo (Pennebaker et al., 2003; Van Swol and
Carlson, 2017). The datasets consist of conversa-
tions from the middle of the election campaign,
when it was uncertain which group was in the ma-
jority or minority (as seen in the first TT conver-
sation in Table 2). This uncertainty may have led
both groups to adopt more similar argumentation
styles than if they believed themselves to occupy
different points in the power continuum.

6 Discussion

From our results, we see that social context af-
fected pronoun use and alignment, which fits into
the Communication Accommodation Theory ac-
count (Giles et al., 1991). Meanwhile, rhetorical
word use and alignment was independent of so-
cial context between speakers, though it is unclear
whether this reflects a perception of equal foot-
ing in their power dynamics or is driven primar-
ily by automatic alignment influences rather than
social factors (Pickering and Garrod, 2004). To
expand the scope of this argument, we can fur-
ther test if the negative alignment can be found
in other LIWC categories as well, which have no
clear group-dynamic predictions.

One thing to point out is that even though pro-
nouns and some rhetorical words are categorized
as function words, which have been hypothesized
to reflect structural rather than semantic alignment
(Chung and Pennebaker, 2007), these category
words are still somewhat context- and content-
oriented. That is, use and alignment of some func-
tion words is inevitable for speakers to stay within
the topic of conversation or to mention the entity
whose referential term is already set in the com-
mon ground. From Trump supporters’ negative
alignment on they, we could see that speakers were
in fact able to actively reject the reference method
by not using the content-oriented function words.
In the future work, it will be meaningful to sepa-

rate the alignment motivated by active acceptance
and agreement from the alignment that must have
occurred in order to stay within the conversation.

Testing our hypotheses in different settings can
help to resolve this issue. One possibility is to
separate the election debate into small sets of con-
versations with different topics, and then compare
the alignment patterns between sets. Because of
the lexical coherence that each topic of conver-
sations have, we will be able to better separate
the effect of context- and content-oriented words
from the linguistic alignment result. As a result,
we might be able to see negative alignment on
rhetorical category between subset of conversa-
tions. We can also test our hypotheses with dif-
ferent languages. Investigating alignment in lan-
guages that do not use pronouns heavily for refer-
ence can be useful to see how the group dynamics
are expressed through different word categories.
Particles in some languages, such as Japanese and
Korean, can mark specific argument roles, and this
linguistic structure can allow us to detect syntactic
alignment without looking much into the context-
and content-oriented function words. Lastly, the
SWAM model is an adaptation of the WHAM
model, and while the basic patterns look similar to
those found by WHAM, a more precise compari-
son of the models’ estimates with a larger dataset
is an important step to ensure that the SWAM es-
timates are accurate.

7 Conclusion

Pronoun usage and alignment reflect the group
dynamics between Trump supporters and Clin-
ton supporters, and observations of negative align-
ment are consistent with a battle over who defines
the groups and common ground. However, the
use and alignment of rhetorical words were not
substantially affected by the group dynamics but
rather reflected that there was an uncertainty about
who belongs to the majority or minority group.
In a political debate or conversation between op-
ponents, speakers are likely to project their group
identity with the usage of pronouns but are likely
to maintain their rhetorical style as a way to main-
tain their group identity.

References
Penelope Brown and Stephen C. Levinson. 1987. Po-

liteness: Some universals in language usage, vol-
ume 4. Cambridge university press.

7



Brant R. Burleson and Deborah A. Fennelly. 1981. The
effects of persuasive appeal form and cognitive com-
plexity on children’s sharing behavior. Child Study
Journal, 11:75–90.

Cindy Chung and James W Pennebaker. 2007. The
psychological functions of function words. Social
communication, 1:343–359.

Herbert H. Clark. 1996. Using Language. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Michael Gamon,
and Susan Dumais. 2011. Mark my words!: lin-
guistic style accommodation in social media. In
Proceedings of the 20th international conference on
World Wide Web, pages 745–754.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Lillian Lee,
Bo Pang, and Jon Kleinberg. 2012. Echoes of
power: Language effects and power differences
in social interaction. In Proceedings of the 21st
international conference on World Wide Web, pages
699–708.

Gabriel Doyle and Michael C. Frank. 2016. Investigat-
ing the sources of linguistic alignment in conversa-
tion. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers), volume 1, pages 526–536.

Gabriel Doyle, Amir Goldberg, Sameer Srivastava, and
Michael Frank. 2017. Alignment at work: Using
language to distinguish the internalization and self-
regulation components of cultural fit in organiza-
tions. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers), volume 1, pages 603–612.

Gabriel Doyle, Dan Yurovsky, and Michael C. Frank.
2016. A robust framework for estimating linguistic
alignment in Twitter conversations. In Proceedings
of the 25th international conference on World Wide
Web, pages 637–648.

Nicholas D. Duran and Riccardo Fusaroli. 2017. Con-
versing with a devils advocate: Interpersonal coor-
dination in deception and disagreement. PloS one,
12(6):e0178140.

Howard Giles, Nikolas Coupland, and Justine Coup-
land. 1991. Accommodation theory: Communica-
tion, context, and consequences. In Howard Giles,
Justine Coupland, and Nikolas Coupland, editors,
Contexts of accommodation: Developments in ap-
plied sociolinguistics, pages 1–68. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge.

Howard Giles, Donald M. Taylor, and Richard Bourhis.
1973. Towards a theory of interpersonal accommo-
dation through language: Some canadian data. Lan-
guage in society, 2(2):177–192.

Fangjian Guo, Charles Blundell, Hanna Wallach, and
Katherine Heller. 2015. The Bayesian Echo Cham-
ber: Modeling Social Influence via Linguistic Ac-
commodation. In Proceedings of the 18th Inter-
national Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
Statistics, pages 315–323.

Molly E. Ireland, Richard B. Slatcher, Paul W. East-
wick, Lauren E. Scissors, Eli J. Finkel, and James W.
Pennebaker. 2011. Language style matching pre-
dicts relationship initiation and stability. Psycholog-
ical Science, 22:39–44.

Kate G. Niederhoffer and James W. Pennebaker. 2002.
Linguistic style matching in social interaction. Jour-
nal of Language and Social Psychology, 21(4):337–
360.

James W. Pennebaker, Roger J. Booth, and Martha E.
Francis. 2007. Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count:
LIWC. Austin, TX: liwc.net.

James W. Pennebaker, Matthias R. Mehl, and Kate G.
Niederhoffer. 2003. Psychological aspects of nat-
ural language use: Our words, our selves. Annual
review of psychology, 54(1):547–577.

Martin J. Pickering and Simon Garrod. 2004. Toward
a mechanistic psychology of dialogue. Behavioral
and brain sciences, 27(2):169–190.

Sara Rosenthal and Kathy McKeown. 2015. I couldnt
agree more: The role of conversational structure in
agreement and disagreement detection in online dis-
cussions. In Proceedings of the 16th Annual Meet-
ing of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and
Dialogue, pages 168–177.

H. Andrew Schwartz, Johannes C. Eichstaedt, Mar-
garet L. Kern, Lukasz Dziurzynski, Stephanie M.
Ramones, Megha Agrawal, Achal Shah, Michal
Kosinski, David Stillwell, Martin E.P. Seligman, and
Lyle H. Ungar. 2013. Personality, gender, and age in
the language of social media: The open-vocabulary
approach. PloS one, 8(9):e73791.

Lyn M. Van Swol and Cassandra L. Carlson. 2017.
Language use and influence among minority, major-
ity, and homogeneous group members. Communi-
cation Research, 44(4):512–529.

8


