



















































Towards Generating Personalized Hospitalization Summaries


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2018: Student Research Workshop, pages 74–82
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 2 - 4, 2018. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Towards Generating Personalized Hospitalization Summaries

Sabita Acharya, Barbara Di Eugenio, Andrew Boyd, Richard Cameron, Karen Dunn Lopez,
Pamela Martyn-Nemeth, Carolyn Dickens, Amer Ardati

University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, Illinois

sachar4,bdieugen,boyda,rcameron,kdunnl2,pmartyn,
cdickens,aardati@uic.edu

Abstract

Most of the health documents, including pa-
tient education materials and discharge notes,
are usually flooded with medical jargons and
contain a lot of generic information about the
health issue. In addition, patients are only pro-
vided with the doctor’s perspective of what
happened to them in the hospital while the care
procedure performed by nurses during their
entire hospital stay is nowhere included. The
main focus of this research is to generate per-
sonalized hospital-stay summaries for patients
by combining information from physician dis-
charge notes and nursing plan of care. It uses
a metric to identify medical concepts that are
Complex, extracts definitions for the concept
from three external knowledge sources, and
provides the simplest definition to the patient.
It also takes various features of the patient
into account, like their concerns and strengths,
ability to understand basic health information,
level of engagement in taking care of their
health, and familiarity with the health issue
and personalizes the content of the summaries
accordingly. Our evaluation showed that the
summaries contain 80% of the medical con-
cepts that are considered as being important by
both doctor and nurses. Three patient advisors
(i.e individuals who are trained in understand-
ing patient experience extensively) verified the
usability of our summaries and mentioned that
they would like to get such summaries when
they are discharged from hospital.

1 Introduction

In the current hospital scenario, when a patient is
discharged, s/he is provided with a discharge note
along with the patient education materials, which
contain more information about the health issue as
well as the measures that need to be taken by the
patient or the care-taker to continue with the much
needed care. However, with statistics showing that

over a third of US adults have difficulty with com-
mon health tasks like adhering to medical instruc-
tions (Kutner et al., 2006), not many people will
be able to understand basic health information and
services needed to make appropriate health deci-
sions. More often, patients end up discarding the
health documents that are provided to them, either
because they get overwhelmed with a lot of infor-
mation, or because they find it hard to comprehend
the medical jargons that such documents are usu-
ally flooded with (Choudhry et al., 2016).

Our solution is to generate concise and compre-
hensible summaries of what happened to a patient
in the hospital. Since patients with chronic health
conditions such as heart failure (as is our case)
need to continue much of the care that is provided
by nurses in the hospital even after they are dis-
charged, we integrate the information from both
the physician and nursing documents into a sum-
mary. We also develop a metric for determining
whether a medical concept (a single word or muli-
word term) is Simple or Complex and provide def-
initions for Complex terms. Unlike the “one size
fits all” approach that is used for creating health
documents, we generate summaries that are per-
sonalized according to the patient’s preferences,
interests, motivation level, and ability to compre-
hend health information. In this proposal, we will
briefly explain our work on summarizing informa-
tion and simplifying medical concepts. We will
also describe our ongoing efforts on personalizing
content and our plans for future evaluations.

2 Related Work

Most of the existing approaches on using natural
language generation (NLG) for multi-document
summarization work only for homogeneous doc-
uments (Yang et al., 2015; Banerjee et al., 2015),
unlike our case where the physician and nursing

74



documentation contain different type of content
(free text vs concepts). As concerns identifying
terms that are Complex, some applications assume
that all the terms that appear in specific vocabu-
laries or corpora are difficult to understand (Ong
et al., 2007; Kandula et al., 2010). These methods
are unreliable because none of the currently avail-
able vocabularies are exhaustive. For providing
explanations to terms that are identified as diffi-
cult, Horn et al. (2014) and Biran et al. (2011) use
the replacement that was provided to terms from
Wikipedia in the Simple Wikipedia parallel cor-
pus. Elhadad (2006) supplements the selected ter-
minologies with definitions obtained from Google
“define”. In medical domain, some work has been
done in obtaining pairs of medical terms and ex-
planations: Elhadad and Sutaria (2007) prepare
pairs of complex medical terms by using a paral-
lel corpus of abstracts of clinical studies and cor-
responding news stories; Stilo et al. (2013) map
medical jargon and everyday language by search-
ing for their occurrence in Wikipedia and Google
snippets. Our simplification metric is similar to
that of (Shardlow, 2013) but we use five times as
many features and a different approach for dis-
tinguishing between Simple and Complex terms.
We provide definitions to terms similar to Ramesh
et al. (2013), but we are not restricted to single
word terms only. Unlike Klavans and Muresan
(2000), we refer to multiple knowledge sources for
definitions of medical concepts.

There are several existing systems that produce
personalized content in biomedical domain (Jimi-
son et al., 1992; DiMarco et al., 1995) as well
as in non-medical domains (Paris, 1988; Moraes
et al., 2014). However, only a few of the existing
biomedical systems generate personalized content
for the patients (Buchanan et al., 1995; Williams
et al., 2007). PERSIVAL system takes in a natu-
ral language query and provides customized sum-
maries of medical literature for patients or doc-
tors (Elhadad et al., 2005). BabyTalk system (Ma-
hamood and Reiter, 2011) generates customized
descriptions of patient status for people occupy-
ing different roles in Neonatal Intensive Care Unit.
However, this system relies on handcrafted ontolo-
gies, which are very time intensive to create. Our
approach to personalization uses several parame-
ters that determine the content to be included in
our summary, similarly to the PERSONAGE sys-
tem (Mairesse and Walker, 2011), a parameteriz-

Attending: Dr. PHYSICIAN.
Admission diagnosis: acute subcortical CVA.
Secondary diagnosis: hypertension.
Discharge diagnosis: Right sided weakness of unknown eti-
ology.
Consultations:. Physical Medicine Rehabilitation.
Physical Therapy.
Occupational Therapy.
General Medicine.
Nutrition.
HPI (per chart):. The patient is a AGE y/o AAF with H/o
HTN, DM, CVA in past transferred from MRH for evalua-
tion for possible stroke. per patient, she was ne until saturday
at around 700 pm, while attempting to go to bathroom, she
fell down as her body below chest suddenly gave away.[...]

Figure 1: Portion of the doctor’s discharge note for
Patient 149.

Figure 2: Part of HANDS POC for Patient 149.

able language generator that takes the user’s lin-
guistic style into account and generates restaurant
recommendations. To the best of our knowledge,
there are no existing systems that generate com-
prehensible and personalized hospital-stay sum-
maries for patients. Moreover, the combination
of the four different factors (patient health liter-
acy, motivation to self-care, strengths and con-
cerns, and the patient’s familiarity with the health
issue) that guide our personalization process has
not been explored before.

3 Dataset

Our dataset consists of the doctor’s discharge note
and shift-by-shift update of the nursing care plan
for 60 patients. Discharge note is an unstruc-
tured plain text document that usually contains
details about the patient, along with other infor-
mation like the diagnosis, findings, medications,
and follow-up information. However, no uniform
structure of discharge note is known to be fol-
lowed by all physicians (Doyle, 2011). Figure 1
shows around 5% of our discharge note for Pa-
tient 149. On the other hand, nurses record the
details in a standardized electric platform called

75



Figure 3: The inputs, output, and workflow of our
personalized summary generation system.

HANDS(Keenan et al., 2002), which uses struc-
tured nursing taxonomies: NANDA-I for nursing
diagnosis (Herdman, 2011), NIC for nursing inter-
vention (Butcher et al., 2013), and NOC for out-
comes (Strandell, 2000). Figure 2 shows 15% of a
HANDS plan of care (POC) for Patient 149.

4 Approach

The workflow of our presonalized summary gener-
ation system is shown in Figure 3. The Extraction
module is responsible for extracting concepts from
physician and nursing documentation and explor-
ing relationship between them. The functioning of
this module is explained in Section 4.1. Simplifi-
cation module distinguishes Complex terms from
Simple terms and provides simple explanations to
Complex terms. This module is explained in Sec-
tion 4.2. Most of the remaining components of
the workflow play a role in producing personal-
ized content and are explained in Section 4.3.

4.1 Exploring relationship between physician
and nursing terms

We use MedLEE (Friedman et al., 2004), a medi-
cal information extraction tool for extracting med-
ical concepts from the discharge notes and nurs-
ing POC. MedLEE maps the concepts to the Uni-
fied Medical Language System (UMLS) vocabu-
lary (NIH, 2011). UMLS is a resource that in-
cludes more than 3 million concepts from over 200
health and biomedical vocabularies. The knowl-
edge sources provided by UMLS allow us to query
about different concepts, their Concept Unique
Identifier (CUI), meaning, definitions, along with
the relationships between concepts. We begin with

Category Features
Lexical features Number of vowels, consonants, prefixes,

suffixes,letters, syllables per word
Counts of each Number of nouns, verbs, adjectives,
POS type prepositions, conjunctions, determiners,

adverbs, numerals (using Stanford parser)
Vocabulary based Normalized frequency of the term in

Google n-gram corpus, presence of the
term in Wordnet

UMLS derived Number of semantic types, synonyms,
features CUIs that are identified for the term;

if the term is present in CHV; if the entire
term has a CUI; if the semantic type of
the term is one of the 16 semantic types
from (Ramesh et al., 2013)

Table 1: Features that are extracted for modeling
complexity

the nursing concepts (because they are lesser in
number as compared to physician concepts) and
explore UMLS to identify the physician concepts
that are either directly related to the nursing con-
cept or are related through one intermediate node.
We restrict ourself to only one intermediate node
because going beyond that will lead to reaching up
to around 1 million terms in the UMLS graph (Pa-
tel et al., 2007), which is not useful for our study.
Hence, as shown in Figure 3, the input to this
module are all the medical concepts present in the
physician and nursing documentation and the out-
put is a list of medical concepts, which comprises
of all the concepts from the nursing POC, concepts
from the discharge note that are either directly re-
lated to a nursing concept or are related through
an intermediate concept, and the intermediate con-
cepts themselves. All the concepts that have been
explored in this step are candidates for inclusion in
our summary. These concepts are then sent to the
Simplification module, which is briefly described
in Section 4.2. For more details on the Extraction
module, please refer to (Di Eugenio et al., 2014).

4.2 Simplification

The Simplification module functions in two steps:
1) it determines whether a concept is Simple or
Complex, and 2) it provides the simplest available
definition to a Complex concept. Since the exist-
ing metrics for assessing health literacy (REALM,
TOFHLA, NAALS) and reading level (Felsch, Fry
Graph, SMOG) work only on sentences and not
on terms (that might consist of a single word or
multiple words like arrhythmia, heart failure), we
set out to develop a new metric for determin-
ing term complexity. Our training dataset con-
sists of 600 terms; 300 of which were randomly

76



Given: i) term T

ii) linear regression function LR from Section 4.2

1) Assign variable D=0

2) Extract all the features for T

3) Supply feature values to LR to obtain a score Z

4) If Z<0.4, D=0

If Z>0.66, D=1

If Z>=0.4 and Z<=0.66:

If semantic type of T falls in our shortlisted types, D=1

Else D=0

5) If D=1:

i) Obtain definitions for T from UMLS, Wikipedia, Google

ii) Extract the medical terms in each definition

iii) For each term, repeat step 1, 2, and 3 and get a score.

iv) Add scores of the terms in each definition

v) Append the definition with the least score to T

vi) Return T

Else return T with no definition attached

Figure 4: Algorithm for simplifying a term T .

selected from the Dale-Chall list1, while the re-
maining 300 terms were randomly chosen from
our database of 3164 terms that were explored in
Section 4.1. We labeled all the terms from the
Dale-Chall list as Simple and the terms from our
database were annotated as Simple or Complex
by two non-native English speaking undergradu-
ate students who have never had any medical con-
ditions (Cohen’s Kappa k=0.786). We assume that
non-native English speakers without medical con-
ditions are less familiar with any kind of medical
term as compared to native English speakers with-
out medical conditions. Disagreements between
the annotators were resolved via mutual consulta-
tion. The remaining 2564 terms from our database
were used as the testing data.

We extracted all the features enlisted in Table 1
for our terms in training and test dataset. We then
used a two step approach for developing our met-
ric. In the first step, we performed linear regres-
sion on the training dataset with Complexity as the
dependent variable. This helped us to identify the
features that do not contribute to the complexity of
a term. It also provided us with a linear regression
function (which we will call as LR) that includes
only the important features. In the second step,
we performed clustering on the test dataset, using

1This list consists of 3000 terms that are known to be
understood by 80% of 4th grade students

You were admitted for acute subcortical
cerebrovascular accident. During your hospitaliza-
tion, you were monitored for chances of ineffec-
tive cerebral tissue perfusion, risk for falls, problem
in verbal communication and walking. We treated
difficulty walking related to nervous system disorder
with body mechanics promotion. Mobility as a finding
has improved appreciably. We provided treatment
for risk for ineffective cerebral tissue perfusion with
medication management and medication administration. As
a result, risk related to cardio-vascular health has reduced
slightly. We worked to improve verbal impairment related to
communication impairment with speech therapy.[...] With
your nurse and doctors, you learned about disease process
and medication.

Follow-up: Can follow-up with General Neurology clinic and
Medicine clinic as outpatient if desired.

Figure 5: Part of the summary for Patient 149

the 600 terms from our training dataset as cluster
seeds. This process resulted in 3 clusters. Out of
the 600 cluster seeds, 70% of those in Cluster1 had
Simple label; 58% of those in Cluster2 had Sim-
ple label and 42% had Complex label; while 79%
of those in Cluster3 had Complex label. This in-
dicates the presence of three categories of terms:
some that can be identified as Simple (Cluster1),
some that are Complex (Cluster3), and the rest for
which there is no clear distinction between Simple
and Complex (Cluster2). For the terms in each of
these clusters, we further supplied feature values
to LR and analyzed the corresponding scores. We
found that across all clusters, 88% of the terms la-
beled as Simple have scores below 0.4 while 96%
of the terms whose score was above 0.66 were la-
beled Complex. For the terms whose score was
between 0.4 and 0.66, no clear majority of Simple
or Complex labeled terms was observed in any of
the clusters. These observations led to the devel-
opment of our metric, whose functioning is sum-
marized in Figure 4 and is explained in detail in
(Acharya et al., 2016). Hence, the Simplification
module takes a medical concept as input and de-
termines whether it is Simple or Complex. For the
concepts that are identified as being Complex, the
simplest definition is extracted from the knowl-
edge sources and is appended to the concept, while
the Simple concepts are directly sent to the lan-
guage generator.

4.3 Personalized summary generation

4.3.1 Summarizing hospital-stay information
We summarize the information from the discharge
note and HANDS POC by using a language gen-

77



eration approach. We use a Java based API called
SimpleNLG (Gatt and Reiter, 2009), which uses
the supplied constituents like the subject, verb,
object, tense, and produces a grammatically cor-
rect sentence. It can also compute inflected forms
of the content and can aggregate syntactic con-
stituents like phrases and sentences together. The
medical concepts with or without definitions ap-
pended to them (i.e the output of the Simplifica-
tion module), along with suitable verbs are our in-
put to SimpleNLG. The group of NANDA-I, NIC,
and NOC terms are explained in exactly the same
order as they are present in the HANDS note. For
each group, we begin by explaining the diagno-
sis (NANDA-I), followed by the treatment that was
provided (NIC term), and the outcome of the treat-
ment (NOC) i.e how effective the intervention was
in treating the problem. The NANDA-I term is
used as the subject of the sentence, followed by
the physician terms that are directly connected to
it or the intermediate concepts that were extracted
while exploring the relationship in Section 4.1.
The NIC intervention is supplied as the object for
the diagnosis and a verb ”treat” is used for this
purpose. We use the current and expected rating
values that are associated with each NOC concept
and use the percentage improvement to decide on
the adverb for the sentence. Some portion of the
summary generated for Patient 149 is shown in
Figure 5. The terms that are underlined in Fig-
ure 5 were determined as being Complex by our
metric and have a definition appended to them.
The definitions can be displayed in different forms
(like tool-tip text or footnote) depending upon the
medium in which the summary will be presented.

We also provide the follow-up information that
was mentioned by the physician in the discharge
note, if any. Since the patient follow-up informa-
tion may appear as a separate section or may be
spread across various other sections, we use 67
keywords and 15 regular expressions to algorith-
mically recognize such information. The last para-
graph in Figure 5 shows the follow-up information
that was obtained for Patient 149.

4.3.2 Personalizing the summary
So far, we have a reasonable summary that con-
tains the important content from both the physi-
cian and nursing documentations. However, our
summaries still do not include the patient’s per-
spective. Studies have shown that patients’ per-
spective is essential for patient education (Shapiro,

Dear Patient 149, we are sorry to know that you were
admitted for acute subcortical cerebrovascular accident.
Cerebrovascular accident is a medical condition in which
poor blood flow to the brain results in cell death. Dealing
with this issue must have been tough for you, we hope you
are feeling much better now.

During your hospitalization, we provided treatment for
difficulty walking related to nervous system disorder and
risk for ineffective cerebral tissue perfusion. We worked to
improve verbal impairment and risk for falls.

We can understand that you have to make changes in your
way of living, diet and physical activity as a result of your
health condition. You have said that you are concerned about
your family and friends. We are very glad to know that you
have sources to support you and it is really good that you are
working on this. Being committed to solving this problem is
so important.

Follow-up: Can follow-up with General Neurology clinic and
Medicine clinic as outpatient if desired.

Figure 6: Version of a summary for a patient with
low PAM score and low level of health literacy.

1993) and that engaging the patients in their own
care reduces hospitalizations and improves the
quality of life (Riegel et al., 2011). Our work
on personalizing patient summary is motivated by
these studies. We expect that including patient-
specific information such as social-emotional sta-
tus, preferences, and needs in a summary will en-
courage patients to read and understand its con-
tent, and will make them more informed and active
in understand and improving their health status.

There are four different factors that guide our
personalization process: health literacy, patient
engagement level, patient’s familiarity with the
health issue, and their strength/concerns. We also
introduce several parameters, whose values de-
pend upon the response given by the patient to
these four factors.
A) Health literacy: Health literacy is the mea-
sure of an individual’s ability to gain access to
and use information in ways that promote and
maintain good health (Nutbeam, 1998). We use
the Rapid Estimate of Adult Literacy (REALM)
(Davis et al., 1993) test for assessing the health
literacy of the patients. REALM consists of 66-
itemed word recognition and pronunciation test.
Depending upon how correctly a participant pro-
nounces the words in the list, a score is provided.
This score tells us whether the health literacy level
of the patient is of third grade or below, fourth
to sixth grade, seventh to eighth grade, or of high
school level.

78



Dear Patient 149, you were admitted for acute subcortical
cerebrovascular accident. Cerebrovascular accident is a
medical condition in which poor blood flow to the brain
results in cell death. During your hospitalization, you
were monitored for chances of ineffective cerebral tissue
perfusion, risk for falls, problem in verbal communication
and walking.

We treated difficulty walking related to nervous system
disorder with body mechanics promotion. We provided
treatment for risk for ineffective cerebral tissue perfusion
with medication management and medication administra-
tion. We worked to improve verbal impairment related to
communication impairment with speech therapy. We treated
risk for falls by managing environment to provide safety.

As a result of these interventions, mobility has improved
appreciably. Risk related to cardiovascular health has
reduced slightly. On the other hand, communication and fall
prevention behavior have improved slightly. With your nurse
and doctors, you learned about disease process, medication
and fall prevention.

We appreciate your efforts in making changes in your way of
living, diet and physical activity for maintaining your health.
Keep up the good work. We are very glad to know that you
have sources to support you. We hope that you feel better so
that you can spend time with your family and friends and
return back to your work.

Follow-up: Can follow-up with General Neurology clinic
and Medicine clinic as outpatient if desired.

For more information on cerebrovascular ac-
cident, please refer to the following website:
https://www.healthline.com/health/cerebrovascular-accident

Figure 7: Version of a summary for patient with
high PAM score and high level of health literacy.

B) Patient engagement level: In order to deter-
mine how motivated a patient is in taking care
of his/her health, we use a metric called Patient
Activation Measure (PAM) (Hibbard et al., 2005).
PAM consists of 13 questions that can be used to
determine the patient’s stage of activation. We
represent patients at stage 1 or 2 as having low
PAM and those at stage 3 or 4 as having high PAM.
C) Strengths/concerns of the patient: We are
also interested in identifying the patient’s sources
of strength and how the disease has affected their
lives. For this purpose, we have conducted in-
terviews of 21 patients with heart issues. These
interviews are open-ended and the patients are
asked to talk about their experiences since they
were first diagnosed. We used a pure induc-
tive, grounded theory method for coding the inter-
views of 9 patients. We found several categories
of strength/concern that most of the patients fre-
quently mention, such as: a) priorities in life, b)
changes in lifestyle because of the health issue, c)

means of support, and d) ability to cope up with
health issues. These topics as well as the possible
responses that were collected from the interviews
will be phrased as multiple choice questions and
will be used for eliciting the strengths and con-
cerns of the patients in real time.
D) Patient’s familiarity with the health issue:
We are also interested in capturing the patient’s
disease-specific knowledge. After thoroughly an-
alyzing all the patient interviews, we noticed that
patients who have either been having the health is-
sue for some time, or have a history of the health
issue in the family, use more disease-specific ter-
minologies during their conversation. Based on
this observation, we introduced two parameters:
number of years since first diagnosis, and history
of the health issue in the family.

Hence, before a patient gets discharged, s/he
will take the health literacy test and answer the
following: 1)13 questions from PAM, 2) ques-
tions regarding their strengths and concerns, and
3) questions that will assess the patient’s famil-
iarity with the health issue. We also introduce a
parameter called health proficiency, whose value
depends upon 4 other parameters: health literacy,
number of years since first diagnosis, history of the
health issue in the family, and self-efficacy score
(i.e. an average of the scores for questions 4, 8, 9
from PAM). Currently, these 4 constituent param-
eters are combined in such a way that health pro-
ficiency can have a value of 1, 2, or 3. We provide
maximum weightage to health literacy, while the
remaining three features are equally weighted. We
have developed several rules that take the scores
for all the four parameters into account and assign
a value to health proficiency. Based on the value of
health proficiency, we make decisions on whether
to include more or less details about the medical
procedures in the patient summary. Similarly, de-
pending upon whether a patient has high PAM or
low PAM, we decide on whether more or less em-
pathy should be included in the summary.

The phrases that have been used for expressing
empathy and encouragement, and the statements
for reinforcing patient participation have been de-
rived from the literature on physician-patient and
nurse-patient communication (Keller, 1989; Cas-
sell, 1985), as well as some online sources.2,3,4

2www.thedoctors.com/KnowledgeCenter/PatientSafety/
Appendix-2-Examples-Empathetic-Statements-to-Use

3myheartsisters.org/2013/02/ 24/empathy-101
4www.kevinmd.com/empathy-patient-interactions.html

79



We have also collected samples of statements from
working nursing professionals. Figure 6 shows
the personalized version of the summary in Fig-
ure 5 for a patient with low health literacy and low
PAM. Similarly, Figure 7 shows the high health
literacy and high PAM version of the same sum-
mary. As seen from the two samples, the low
health literacy version provides information about
the health issues of the patient (see second para-
graph in Figure 6) and does not include further de-
tails about the interventions, while the high liter-
acy version includes details of the health issues,
interventions that were done, and the outcomes
of the interventions (see second and third para-
graph in Figure 7). The patient’s response to the
questions on their strengths and concerns (as dis-
cussed in Section 4.3.2) are described in the third
and fourth paragraph of Figure 6 and Figure 7 re-
spectively. For patients with low PAM (see Fig-
ure 6), we include empathetic phrases like “we
are sorry to know that”, “we can understand that”
and highlight the importance of patient participa-
tion with sentences like “Being committed to solv-
ing this problem is so important”. For high PAM
patients, we appreciate their efforts in taking care
of themselves and include encouraging sentences
like “Keep up the good work”.

5 Evaluation and Results

We have performed two qualitative evaluations of
our summaries, where we measured the coverage
of medical terminologies, and obtained feedback
on the content and organization of information in
the personalized summaries.

5.1 Coverage of medical terminologies

In order to determine whether our summaries have
proper representation of the important informa-
tion from the physician and nursing notes, we
asked a nursing student to read both the physician
and nursing notes and generate hand-written sum-
maries for 35 patients. A doctor and a nurse high-
lighted the important contents from 5 out of the
35 handwritten summaries, which were then com-
pared with the corresponding computer generated
versions. This evaluation showed that on average,
our summaries contain 80% of the concepts that
were considered as important by both the doctor
and nurse. Similarly, 70% of the concepts from
the entire handwritten summary are present in our
automatically generated summaries.

5.2 Feedback on the personalized summaries

We asked three patient advisors for their feed-
back on our attempts for personalization. Patient
advisors are a good representative of the patient
views because their job role is to communicate
with patients first hand. The main aspect that were
evaluated are the appearance of our personalized
summaries in terms of their feasibility, readability,
consistency of style and formatting, and the clarity
of the language used.

All the patient advisors liked the personalized
summaries as compared to the original ones be-
cause they thought that it had a better flow of in-
formation. They were able to distinguish between
the low literacy and high literacy version of our
summaries. All of them said that they would like
to get such a summary when they are discharged
from the hospital. One interesting thing that we
observed is that even within such a small group of
evaluators that have almost similar medical knowl-
edge and experiences, we found that there was no
uniformity in the sample of summary they pre-
ferred, nor were their reasons behind choosing the
particular sample alike. This further demonstrates
the need for producing personalized summaries,
because the preferences and interests of individ-
uals vary from each other.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we described our efforts on sum-
marizing information from physician and nursing
documentation and simplifying medical terms. We
explored different factors that can guide a per-
sonalization system for producing adaptive health
content for patients. We also proposed a person-
alization system that can incorporate the beliefs,
interests, and preferences of different patients into
the same text.

Our next immediate goal is to further improve
our personalization algorithm by performing sev-
eral iterations of evaluations with nurses and pa-
tient advisors. We are also in the process of con-
ducting a more thorough analysis of our patient
interviews to identify other features that can be
useful for improving the content and quality of
our personalized summaries. We also plan to con-
duct an evaluation on a fairly large population so
that we can get insights into whether the decisions
taken by our algorithm on the kind of content to
include/exclude in different situations aligns with
that of a more general population.

80



References
Sabita Acharya, Barbara Di Eugenio, Andrew D Boyd,

Karen Dunn Lopez, Richard Cameron, and Gail M
Keenan. 2016. Generating summaries of hospital-
izations: A new metric to assess the complexity of
medical terms and their definitions. In The 9th Inter-
national Natural Language Generation conference,
page 26.

Siddhartha Banerjee, Prasenjit Mitra, and Kazunari
Sugiyama. 2015. Multi-document abstractive sum-
marization using ilp based multi-sentence compres-
sion. In IJCAI, pages 1208–1214.

Or Biran, Samuel Brody, and Noémie Elhadad. 2011.
Putting it simply: a context-aware approach to lex-
ical simplification. In Proceedings of the 49th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies: short
papers-Volume 2, pages 496–501. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Bruce G Buchanan, Johanna D Moore, Diana E
Forsythe, Giuseppe Carenini, Stellan Ohlsson, and
Gordon Banks. 1995. An intelligent interactive sys-
tem for delivering individualized information to pa-
tients. Artificial intelligence in medicine, 7(2):117–
154.

Howard K Butcher, Gloria M Bulechek, Joanne M Mc-
Closkey Dochterman, and Cheryl Wagner. 2013.
Nursing interventions classification (NIC). Elsevier
Health Sciences.

Eric J Cassell. 1985. Talking with patients: The theory
of doctor-patient communication.(vol. 1).

Asad J Choudhry, Yaser MK Baghdadi, Amy E Wagie,
Elizabeth B Habermann, Stephanie F Heller, Don-
ald H Jenkins, Daniel C Cullinane, and Martin D
Zielinski. 2016. Readability of discharge sum-
maries: with what level of information are we dis-
missing our patients? The American Journal of
Surgery, 211(3):631–636.

Terry C Davis, Sandra W Long, Robert H Jackson,
EJ Mayeaux, Ronald B George, Peggy W Murphy,
and Michael A Crouch. 1993. Rapid estimate of
adult literacy in medicine: a shortened screening in-
strument. Family medicine, 25(6):391–395.

Barbara Di Eugenio, Andrew D Boyd, Camillo
Lugaresi, Abhinaya Balasubramanian, Gail M
Keenan, Mike Burton, Tamara G Rezende Macieira,
Karen Dunn Lopez, Carol Friedman, Jianrong Li,
et al. 2014. Patientnarr: Towards generating patient-
centric summaries of hospital stays. INLG 2014,
page 6.

Chrysanne DiMarco, Graeme Hirst, Leo Wanner, and
John Wilkinson. 1995. Healthdoc: Customizing pa-
tient information and health education by medical
condition and personal characteristics. In Workshop
on Artificial Intelligence in Patient Education.

Edward Doyle. 2011. The wrong stuff: big gaps in
discharge communications.

Noémie Elhadad. 2006. Comprehending technical
texts: predicting and defining unfamiliar terms. In
AMIA.

Noemie Elhadad, M-Y Kan, Judith L Klavans, and
KR McKeown. 2005. Customization in a unified
framework for summarizing medical literature. Ar-
tificial intelligence in medicine, 33(2):179–198.

Noemie Elhadad and Komal Sutaria. 2007. Mining
a lexicon of technical terms and lay equivalents.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on BioNLP 2007:
Biological, Translational, and Clinical Language
Processing, pages 49–56. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Carol Friedman, Lyudmila Shagina, Yves Lussier, and
George Hripcsak. 2004. Automated encoding of
clinical documents based on natural language pro-
cessing. Journal of the American Medical Informat-
ics Association, 11(5):392–402.

Albert Gatt and Ehud Reiter. 2009. Simplenlg: A re-
alisation engine for practical applications. In Pro-
ceedings of the 12th European Workshop on Natural
Language Generation, pages 90–93. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

T Heather Herdman. 2011. Nursing Diagnoses 2012-
14: Definitions and Classification. John Wiley &
Sons.

Judith H Hibbard, Eldon R Mahoney, Jean Stockard,
and Martin Tusler. 2005. Development and testing
of a short form of the patient activation measure.
Health services research, 40(6p1):1918–1930.

Colby Horn, Cathryn Manduca, and David Kauchak.
2014. Learning a lexical simplifier using wikipedia.
In ACL (2), pages 458–463.

Holly B Jimison, Lawrence M Fagan, RD Shachter, and
Edward H Shortliffe. 1992. Patient-specific expla-
nation in models of chronic disease. Artificial Intel-
ligence in Medicine, 4(3):191–205.

Sasikiran Kandula, Dorothy Curtis, and Qing Zeng-
Treitler. 2010. A semantic and syntactic text sim-
plification tool for health content. In AMIA annual
symposium proceedings, volume 2010, page 366.
American Medical Informatics Association.

Gail M Keenan, Julia R Stocker, Annie T Geo-Thomas,
Nandit R Soparkar, Violet H Barkauskas, and Jan L
Lee. 2002. The hands project: studying and refining
the automated collection of a cross-setting clinical
data set. Computers Informatics Nursing, 20(3):89–
100.

Mary L Keller. 1989. Interpersonal relationships: Pro-
fessional communication skills for nurses.

81



Judith L Klavans and Smaranda Muresan. 2000.
Definder: Rule-based methods for the extraction of
medical terminology and their associated definitions
from on-line text. In Proceedings of the AMIA Sym-
posium, page 1049. American Medical Informatics
Association.

Mark Kutner, Elizabeth Greenburg, Ying Jin, and
Christine Paulsen. 2006. The health literacy of
america’s adults: Results from the 2003 national as-
sessment of adult literacy. nces 2006-483. National
Center for Education Statistics.

Saad Mahamood and Ehud Reiter. 2011. Generating
affective natural language for parents of neonatal in-
fants. In Proceedings of the 13th European Work-
shop on Natural Language Generation, pages 12–
21. Association for Computational Linguistics.

François Mairesse and Marilyn A Walker. 2011. Con-
trolling user perceptions of linguistic style: Train-
able generation of personality traits. Computational
Linguistics, 37(3):455–488.

Priscilla Moraes, Kathleen McCoy, and Sandra Car-
berry. 2014. Adapting graph summaries to the users
reading levels. INLG 2014, page 64.

NIH. 2011. Umls quick start guide.
Unified Medical Language System,
https://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/quickstart.html.
Last accessed on 10/10/2016.

D Nutbeam. 1998. Health promotion glossary1.
Health promotion international, 13(4):349–64.

Ethel Ong, Jerwin Damay, Gerard Lojico, Kimberly
Lu, and Dex Tarantan. 2007. Simplifying text in
medical literature. Journal of Research in Science,
Computing and Engineering, 4(1).

Cecile L Paris. 1988. Tailoring object descriptions to a
user’s level of expertise. Computational Linguistics,
14(3):64–78.

Chintan O Patel, James J Cimino, et al. 2007. A scale-
free network view of the umls to learn terminology
translations. In Medinfo 2007: Proceedings of the
12th World Congress on Health (Medical) Informat-
ics; Building Sustainable Health Systems, page 689.
IOS Press.

Balaji Polepalli Ramesh, Thomas K Houston, Cynthia
Brandt, Hua Fang, and Hong Yu. 2013. Improv-
ing patients’ electronic health record comprehension
with noteaid. In MedInfo, pages 714–718.

Barbara Riegel, Christopher S Lee, Nancy Albert,
Terry Lennie, Misook Chung, Eun Kyeung Song,
Brooke Bentley, Seongkum Heo, Linda Worrall-
Carter, and Debra K Moser. 2011. From novice
to expert: confidence and activity status determine
heart failure self-care performance. Nursing re-
search, 60(2):132–138.

Johanna Shapiro. 1993. The use of narrative in the
doctor-patient encounter. Family Systems Medicine,
11(1):47.

Matthew Shardlow. 2013. A comparison of techniques
to automatically identify complex words. In ACL
(Student Research Workshop), pages 103–109.

Giovanni Stilo, Moreno De Vincenzi, Alberto E Tozzi,
and Paola Velardi. 2013. Automated learning of ev-
eryday patients’ language for medical blogs analyt-
ics. In RANLP, pages 640–648.

Corrine Strandell. 2000. Nursing outcomes classifica-
tion. Rehabilitation Nursing, 25(6):236.

Sandra Williams, Paul Piwek, and Richard Power.
2007. Generating monologue and dialogue to
present personalised medical information to pa-
tients. In Proceedings of the Eleventh European
Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages
167–170. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Guangbing Yang, Dunwei Wen, Nian-Shing Chen,
Erkki Sutinen, et al. 2015. A novel contextual topic
model for multi-document summarization. Expert
Systems with Applications, 42(3):1340–1352.

82


