



















































Interpretable Charge Predictions for Criminal Cases: Learning to Generate Court Views from Fact Descriptions


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2018, pages 1854–1864
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 1 - 6, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

Interpretable Charge Predictions for Criminal Cases:
Learning to Generate Court Views from Fact Descriptions

1Hai Ye∗, 1Xin Jiang∗, 2Zhunchen Luo∗, 1Wenhan Chao†
1 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University

2 Information Research Center of Military Science
PLA Academy of Military Science

1,2 Beijing, China
1 {yehai, xinjiang, chaowenhan}@buaa.edu.cn

2 zhunchenluo@gmail.com

Abstract

In this paper, we propose to study the prob-
lem of COURT VIEW GENeration from the
fact description in a criminal case. The
task aims to improve the interpretability of
charge prediction systems and help auto-
matic legal document generation. We for-
mulate this task as a text-to-text natural lan-
guage generation (NLG) problem. Sequence-
to-sequence model has achieved cutting-edge
performances in many NLG tasks. However,
due to the non-distinctions of fact descrip-
tions, it is hard for Seq2Seq model to gen-
erate charge-discriminative court views. In
this work, we explore charge labels to tackle
this issue. We propose a label-conditioned
Seq2Seq model with attention for this prob-
lem, to decode court views conditioned on
encoded charge labels. Experimental results
show the effectiveness of our method.1

1 Introduction

Previous work has brought up multiple legal as-
sistant systems with various functions, such as
finding relevant cases given the query (Chen
et al., 2013), providing applicable law articles
for a given case (Liu and Liao, 2005) and etc.,
which have substantially improved the working ef-
ficiency. As legal assistant systems, charge predic-
tion systems aim to determine appropriate charges
such as homicide and assault for varied criminal
cases by analyzing textual fact descriptions from
cases (Luo et al., 2017), but ignore to give out the
interpretations for the charge determination.

Court view is the written explanation from
judges to interprete the charge decision for cer-
tain criminal case and is also the core part in a le-
gal document, which consists of rationales and a

∗ indicates equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

1Data and codes are available at https://github.
com/oceanypt/Court-View-Gen.

charge where the charge is supported by the ratio-
nales as shown in Fig. 1. In this work, we propose
to study the problem of COURT VIEW GENeration
from fact descriptions in cases, and we formu-
late it as a text-to-text natural language generation
(NLG) problem (Gatt and Krahmer, 2017). The
input is the fact description in a case and the out-
put is the corresponding court view. We only fo-
cus on generating rationales because charges can
be decided by judges or charge prediction systems
by also analyzing the fact descriptions (Luo et al.,
2017; Lin et al., 2012). COURT-VIEW-GEN has
beneficial functions, in that: (1) improve the inter-
pretability of charge prediction systems by gener-
ating rationales in court views to support the pre-
dicted charges. The justification for charge de-
cision is as important as deciding the charge it-
self (Hendricks et al., 2016; Lei et al., 2016). (2)
benefit the automatic legal document generation as
legal assistant systems, by automatically generat-
ing court views from fact descriptions, to release
much human labor especially for simple cases but
in large amount, where fact descriptions can be
obtained from legal professionals or techniques
such as information extraction (Cowie and Lehn-
ert, 1996).

COURT-VIEW-GEN is not a trivial task. High-
quality rationales in court views should contain the
important fact details such as the degree of injury
for charge of intentional injury, as they are im-
portant basis for charge determination. Fact de-
tails are like the summary for the fact description
similar to the task of DOCument SUMmarization
(Yao et al., 2017). However, rationales are not the
simple summary with only fact details, to support
charges, they should be charge-discriminative with
deduced information which does not appear in fact
descriptions. The fact descriptions for charge of
negligent homicide usually only describe some-
one being killed without direct statement about

1854



FACT DESCRIPTION
... 经审理查明, 2009年7月10日23时许,被告人陈某伙同八至九名男青年在徐闻县新寮镇建寮路口附近路上拦截住搭载着李某的摩托车,然后,
被告人陈某等人持钢管、刀对李某进行殴打。经法医鉴定,李某伤情为轻伤。... # ... After hearing, our court identified that at 23:00 on July 10,
2009, the defendant Chen together with other eight or nine young men stopped Lee who was riding a motorcycle on street near the road in Xinliao town
Xuwen County, after that the defendant Chen and the others beat Lee with steel pipe and knife. According to forensic identification, Lee suffered minor
wound. ...
COURT VIEW
本院认为, 被告人陈某无视国家法律,伙同他人,持器械故意伤害他人身体致一人轻伤 rationales, 其 行 为 已 构 成故意伤害罪 charge。#
Our court hold that the defendant Chen ignored the state law and caused others minor wound with equipment together with others rationales. His acts
constituted the crime of intentional assault charge. ...

Table 1: An example of fact description and court view from a legal document for a case.

task. Firstly, it is hard to maintain the discrimina-
tions of generated court views when input fact de-
scriptions are none-discriminative among charges
in subtle difference. For example, the charges
of intentional homicide and negligent homicide
are similar and the corresponding fact descrip-
tions will be expressed in similar way. Both of
the fact descriptions of the two charges will de-
scribe the defendant killing someone but will not
directly point out that the defendant is in intention
or in neglect, causing it hard to generate charge-
discriminative court views. Secondly, high-quality
court views should contain the fact details in the
fact descriptions such as the degree of injury for
intentional injury charge because fact details are
the important basis for charge determination.

Traditional natural language generation (NLG)
will need much human-labor to design rules
and templates. To overcome the difficulties
of COURT-VIEW-GEN mentioned above and the
shortcomings of traditional NLG methods, in
this work, we propose a novel label conditioned
sequence to sequence model with attention for
COURT-VIEW-GEN aiming to directly map fact
descriptions to court views. The architecture of
our model is shown in Figure 1. Fact descriptions
are encoded into context vectors by an encoder
then a decoder generates court views with these
vectors. To generate more class-discriminative
court views from none-discriminative fact descrip-
tions among charges with subtle difference, we in-
troduce to encode charges as the labels for the cor-
responding fact descriptions and decode the court
views conditioned on the charge labels by addi-
tionally encoding the charge information. The in-
tuition lies in that charge labels will provide ex-
tra information to classify the non-discriminative
fact descriptions and make the decoder learn to
select words related to the charges to decode.
To maintain the fact details from fact descrip-
tions like the degree of injury for charge of in-
tentional injury, we further apply the widely used

attention mechanism (?) into Seq2Seq model.
By applying attention technic, every time con-
text vectors will contain most important informa-
tion from the fact descriptions for decoder. Ex-
perimental results show that our model has strong
performance on COURT-VIEW-GEN and exploit-
ing charge labels will significantly improve the
class-discriminations of generated court views es-
pecially for charges with subtle differences.

Our contributions of this paper can be summa-
rized as follows:
•We propose the task of court view generation

which is meaningful but has bot been well studied
before.
• We introduce a novel label conditioned se-

quence to sequence model with attention for
COURT-VIEW-GEN.
• Experimental results demonstrate the ef-

fectiveness of our model and exploiting charge
labels will significantly improve the class-
discriminations of generated court views.

2 Related Work

Our work is firstly related to previous studies on
legal assistant systems. The task of charge predic-
tion is to determine appropriate charges such as
intentional homicide or intentional injury by ana-
lyzing the contents of fact descriptions. Previous
works regard the task of charge prediction as a text
classification problem (????). ? adopt KNN to
classify charges in Taiwan and recently, ? propose
an attention based deep learning model to scale
the charge classes to a large number. Besides, re-
searchers also introduce to identify applicable arti-
cles for a given case (???), answer legal questions
as a consult system (??) and search relevant cases
for a given query (??). As a legal assistant sys-
tem, COURT-VIEW-GEN can benefit automatic le-
gal document generation by generating the part of
court views from fact descriptions obtained from
the last phase if we generate legal document step
by step. The fact descriptions can be constructed

Figure 1: An example of fact description and court view from a legal document in a case.

the motive for killing, DOC-SUM will only sum-
marize the fact of someone being killed, but ratio-
nales have to further contain the killing intention,
aiming to be discriminative from those rationales
for other charges like intentional homicide. How-
ever, it is hard to generate charge-discriminative
rationales when input fact descriptions are not dis-
tinct among other facts with different charges. The
fact descriptions for charge of intentional homi-
cide are similar to those for charge of negligent
homicide and also describe someone being killed
but without clear motive, making it hard to gener-
ate charge-discriminative court views with accu-
rate killing motives among the two charges.

Recently, sequence-to-sequence model with
encoder-decoder paradigm (Sutskever et al., 2014)
has achieved cutting-edge results in many NLG
tasks, such as paraphrase (Mallinson et al., 2017),
code generation (Ling et al., 2016) and question
generation (Du et al., 2017). Seq2Seq model
has also exhibited state-of-the-art performances
on task of DOC-SUM (Chopra et al., 2016; Tan
et al., 2017). However, non-distinctions of fact
descriptions render Seq2Seq model hard to gen-
erate charge-discriminative rationales. In this pa-
per, we explore charge labels of the correspond-
ing fact descriptions, to benefit generating charge-
discriminative rationales, where charge labels can
be easily decided by human or charge predic-
tion systems. Charge labels will provide with ex-
tra information to classify the non-discriminative
fact descriptions. We propose a label-conditioned
Seq2Seq model with attention for our task, in
which fact descriptions are encoded into context
vectors by an encoder and a decoder generates ra-
tionales with these vectors. We further encode
charges as the labels and decode the rationales
conditioned on the labels, to entail the decoder
to learn to select gold-charge-related words to de-
code. Widely used attention mechanism (Luong
et al., 2015) is fused into the Seq2Seq model, to
learn to align target words to fact details in fact

descriptions. Similar to Luo et al. (2017), we eval-
uate our model on Chinese criminal cases by con-
structing dataset from Chinese government web-
site.

Our contributions in this paper can be summa-
rized as follows:
•We propose the task of court view generation

and release a real-world dataset for this task.
• We formulate the task as a text-to-text NLG

problem. We utilize charge labels to benefit
charge-discriminative court views generation, and
propose a label-conditioned sequence-to-sequence
model with attention for this task.
• Extensive experiments are conducted on a

real-world dataset. The results show the effi-
ciency of our model and exploiting charge labels
for charge-discriminations improvement.

2 Related Work

Our work is firstly related to previous studies on
legal assistant systems. Previous work considers
the task of charge prediction as a text classifica-
tion problem (Luo et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2004;
Liu and Hsieh, 2006; Lin et al., 2012). Recently,
Luo et al. (2017) investigate deep learning meth-
ods for this task. Besides, there are also works on
identifying applicable articles for a given case (Liu
and Liao, 2005; Liu and Hsieh, 2006; Liu et al.,
2015), answering legal questions as a consulting
system (Kim et al., 2014; Carvalho et al., 2015)
and searching relevant cases for a given query
(Raghav et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2013). As a le-
gal assistant system, COURT-VIEW-GEN can ben-
efit automatic legal document generation by gener-
ating court views from fact descriptions obtained
from the last phase, through legal professionals or
other technics like information extraction (Cowie
and Lehnert, 1996) from raw documents in a case,
if we generate legal documents step by step.

Our work is also related to recent studies on
model interpretation (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Lipton,
2016; Ling et al., 2017). Recently, much work has

1855



paid attention to giving textual explanations for
classifications. Hendricks et al. (2016) generate
visual explanations for image classification. Lei
et al. (2016) propose to learn to select most sup-
portive snippets from raw texts for text classifica-
tion. COURT-VIEW-GEN can improve the inter-
pretability of charge prediction systems by gener-
ating textual court views when predict the charges.

Our label-conditioned Seq2Seq model steams
from widely used encoder-decoder paradigm
(Sutskever et al., 2014) which has been widely
used in machine translation (Bahdanau et al.,
2014; Luong et al., 2015), summarization (Tan
et al., 2017; Nallapati et al., 2016; Chopra et al.,
2016; Cheng and Lapata, 2016), semantic pars-
ing (Dong and Lapata, 2016) and paraphrase
(Mallinson et al., 2017) or other NLG problems
such as product review generation (Dong et al.,
2017) and code generation (Yin and Neubig, 2017;
Ling et al., 2016). Hendricks et al. (2016) propose
to encode image labels for visual-language models
to generate justification texts for image classifica-
tion. We also introduce charge labels into Seq2Seq
model to improve the charge-discriminations of
generated rationales. Widely used attention mech-
anism (Luong et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2015) is ap-
plied to generate fact details more accurately.

3 COURT-VIEW-GEN Problem

Court View is the judicial explanation to interpret
the reasons for the court making such charge for
a case, consisting of the rationales and the charge
supported by the rationales as shown in Fig. 1. In
this work, we only focus on generating the part of
rationales in court views. Charge prediction can be
achieved by human or charge prediction systems
(Luo et al., 2017). Final court views can be easily
constructed by combining the generated rationales
and the pre-decided charges.
Fact Description is the identified facts in a case
(relevant events that have happened) such as the
criminal acts (e.g. degree of injury).

The input of our model is the word sequen-
tial fact description in a case and the out-
put is a word sequential court view (rationales
part). We define the fact description as x =
(x1, x2, · · · , x|x|) and the corresponding ratio-
nales as y = (y1, y2, · · · , y|y|). The charge
for the case is denoted as v and will be ex-
ploited for COURT-VIEW-GEN. The task of
COURT-VIEW-GEN is to find ŷ given x condi-

LSTM LSTMLSTM LSTM …

<E>

<S> y1 y2 y|Y|

V

…

…

…

…

Attention Layer

forward

backward

x1 x2 x3 x|X|

y1 y2 y3

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

Figure 2: Label-conditioned Seq2Seq model with at-
tention.

tioned on the charge label v:

ŷ = argmax
y

P (y|x, v) (1)

where P (y|x, v) is the likelihood of the predicted
rationales in the court view.

4 Our Model

4.1 Sequence-to-Sequence Model with
Attention

Similar to Luong et al. (2015), our Seq2Seq model
consists of an encoder and a decoder as shown in
Fig. 2. Given the pair of fact description and ra-
tionales in court view (x, y), the encoder reads the
word sequence of x and then the decoder will learn
to predict the rationales in court view y. The prob-
ability of predicted y is given as follows:

P (y) =

|y|∏

i=1

P (yi|y<i, x) (2)

where y<i = y1, y2, · · · , yi−1. We use a bidirec-
tional LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997)
as encoder and use another LSTM as decoder sim-
ilar to Du et al. (2017).
Decoder. From the decoder side, at time t, the
probability to predict yt is computed as follows:

P (yt|y<t, ct) = softmax(W1 tanh(W0[st; ct]))

where W0 and W1 are learnable parameters; st is
the hidden state of decoder at time t; ct is the con-
text vector generated from the encoder side con-
taining the information of x at time t; here the bias
of model is omitted for simplification. The hidden
state of st is computed as follows:

st = LSTMd(yt−1, st−1)

where yt−1 is the word embedding vector for pre-
state target word at time t− 1. The initial state for
decoder is initialized by the last state of encoder.

1856



Context vector of ct is computed by summing
up the hidden states of {hk}|x|k=1 generated by the
encoder with attention mechanism and we adopt
global attention (Luong et al., 2015) in our work.
Encoder with Attention. We adopt a one-layer
bidirectional LSTM to encoder the fact descrip-
tions. The hidden state hj at time j is computed
as follows:

hj = [
−→
hj ;
←−
hj ]

where hj is the concatenation of forward hidden
state

−→
hj and backward hidden state

←−
hj , specifi-

cally:

−→
hj =

−−−−→
LSTMe(xj ,

−→
h j−1)

←−
hj =

←−−−−
LSTMe(xj ,

←−
h j+1)

The hidden outputs {hk}|x|k=1 will be used to com-
pute the context vectors for decoder.

From the decoder side, by applying attention
mechanism at time i, the context vector of ci is
generated as follows:

ci =

|x|∑

j=1

αijhj (3)

where αij is the attention weight and is computed
as follows:

αij =
exp(sTi W2hj)∑|x|
k=1 exp(s

T
i W2hk)

(4)

where si is the hidden output state at time i in the
decoder side.

4.2 Label-conditioned Sequence-to-Sequence
Model with Attention

Given the tuple of fact description, rationales in
court view and charge label (x, y, v), the probabil-
ity to predict y is computed as follows:

P (y) =

|y|∏

i=1

P (yi|y<i, x, v) (5)

From this formula, encoding charge labels pro-
vides extra constrains comparing to Eq. (2), and
restricts the target word searching space from the
whole space to only gold-charge-related space
for rationales generation, so model can generate
more charge-distinct rationales. Charge labels are
trainable parameters denoted by Ev where every

charge will have a trainable vector from Ev, which
will be updated in the model training process.

As shown in Fig. 2, in the decoder side, at time
t, yt is predicted with the probability as follows:

P (yt|y<t, ct, v) =
softmax(W1 tanh(W0[st; ct;E

v
[v]])) (6)

where Ev[v] is the embedding vector of v obtained
from Ev. In this formula, we connect charge label
v to st and ct aiming to influence the word selec-
tion process. We hope that our model can learn the
latent connections between the charge label v and
the words of rationales in court views through this
way, to decode out charge-discriminative words.

As shown in Fig. 2, we further embed the
charge label v to highlight the computing of hid-
den state st at time t and st is merged as follows:

st = LSTMd(yt−1, s
v
t−1)

svt−1 = fv(st−1, v)

fv = tanh(W
v[st−1;Ev[v]] + b

v) (7)

where Wv and bv are learnable parameters. In
this way, the information of charge label can be
embedded into st. From Eq. (3) and Eq. (4), at-
tention weights ct are computed from st, so encod-
ing the charge label v to hidden states will make
the model concentrate more on charge-related in-
formation from fact descriptions to help generate
more accurate fact details.

4.3 Model Training and Inference
Suppose we are given the training data:
{x(i), y(i), v(i)}Ni=1, we aim to maximize the
log-likelihood of generated rationales in court
views given the fact descriptions and charge
labels, so the loss function is computed as
follows:

L(θ) = −
N∑

i=1

logP (y(i)|x(i), v(i); θ)

= −
N∑

i=1

|y(i)|∑

j=1

logP (y
(i)
j |y

(i)
<j , x

(i), v(i); θ)

We split the training data into multiple batches
with size of 64 and adopt adam learning (Kingma
and Ba, 2014) to update the parameters in ev-
ery batch data. At the inference time, we encode
the fact descriptions and charge labels into vec-
tors and use the decoder to generate rationales in

1857



# Training set 153706
# Dev set 9152
# Test set 9123
Avg. # tokens in fact desc. 219.9
Avg. # tokens in rationales 30.6
Num. of # charge labels 51
# Dict. size in fact desc. 222482
# Dict. size in rationales 21305

Table 1: Statistics of our dataset.

court views based on Eq. (1). We adopt the algo-
rithm of beam search to generate rationales. Beam
search size is set to 5. To make generation pro-
cess stoppable, an indicator tag “</s>” is added
to the end of the rationales sequences, and when
“</s>” is generated the inference process will be
terminated. The generated word sequential paths
will be ranked and the one with largest value is
selected as the final rationales in court view.

5 Experiments

5.1 Data Preparation

Following Luo et al. (2017), we construct dataset
from the published legal documents in China
Judgements Online2. We extract the fact descrip-
tions, rationales in court views and charge labels
using regular expressions. The paragraph started
with “经审理查明” (“our court identified that”)
is regarded as the fact description and the part be-
tween “本院认为” (“our court hold that”) and the
charge are regarded as the rationales. Nearly all
the samples in dataset match this extraction pat-
tern. Length threshold of 256 is set up, and fact
description longer than that will be stripped, leav-
ing too long facts for future study. We use the to-
kens of “<name>”, “<num>” and “<date>” to
replace the names, numbers and dates appearing
in the corpus. We tokenize the Chinese texts with
the open source tool of HanLP3. For charge labels,
we select the top 50 charge labels ranked by occur-
rences and leave the left charges as others. Details
about our dataset are shown in Table 1.

For cases with multiple charges and multiple
defendants, we can separate the fact descriptions
and the court views according to the charges or
the defendants. In this work, we only focus on
the cases with one defendant and one charge, leav-
ing the complex cases for future study, so we can
collect large enough data from the published legal

2http://wenshu.court.gov.cn
3https://github.com/hankcs/HanLP

documents without human to annotate the data.

5.2 Experimental Settings
Word embeddings are randomly initialized and
updated in the training process, with the size of
512 tuned from {256, 512, 1024}. Charge label
vectors are initialized randomly with size of 512.
Maximal vocabulary size of encoder is set to 100K
words and decoder is 50K by stripping words ex-
ceeding the bounds. Maximal source length is 256
and target is 50. The hidden size of LSTM is 1024
tuned from {256, 512, 1024}. We choose perplex-
ity as the update metric. Early stopping mech-
anism is applied to train the model. The initial
learning rate is set to 0.0003 and the reduce fac-
tor is 0.5. Model performance will be checked on
the validation set after every 1000 batches training
and keep the parameters with lowest perplexity.
Training process will be terminated if model per-
formance is not improved for successive 8 times.

5.3 Comparisons with Baselines
Evaluation Metrics. We adopt both automatic
evaluation and human judgement for model eval-
uation. BLEU-4 score (Papineni et al., 2002) and
variant Rouge scores (Lin, 2004) are adopted for
automatic evaluation which have been widely used
in many NLG tasks. We set up two evaluation di-
mensions for human judgement: 1) how fluent of
the rationales in court view is; 2) how accurate of
the rationales is, aiming to evaluate how many fact
details have been accurately expressed in the gen-
erated rationales. We adopt 5 scales for both fluent
and accurate evaluation (5 is for the best). We ask
three annotators who knows well about our task
to conduct the human judgement. We randomly
select 100 generated rationales in court views for
every evaluated method. The three raters are also
asked to judge whether rationales can be adopted
for use in comprehensive evaluation (adoptable)
and record the number of adoptable rationales for
every evaluated method.
Baselines.
• Rand is to randomly select rationales in court

views from the training set (method of Randall).
We also randomly choose rationales from pools
with same charge labels (Randcharge). Adopting
Rand method is to indicate the low bound perfor-
mance of COURT-VIEW-GEN.
• BM25 is a retrieval baseline to index the

fact description match to the input fact description
with highest BM25 score (Robertson and Walker,

1858



AUTOMATIC EVALUATION
MODEL (%) B-4 R-1 R-2 R-L
Randall 6.4 26.5 6.2 25.1
Randcharge 24.9 53.6 29.1 49.3
BM25f2f 40.1 63.5 43.7 60.3
BM25f2f+charge 42.8 67.1 47.4 63.8
MOSES+ 6.2 39.8 20.8 18.6
NN-S2S 38.4 65.5 45.1 62.2
RAS† 44.1∗∗ 69.1∗∗ 50.3∗∗ 65.9∗∗

Ours 45.8 70.9 52.5 67.7

HUMAN JUDGEMENT
MODEL FLUENT ACC. ADOPT.(%)
BM25f2f 4.95 3.66∗∗ 0.47∗∗

BM25f2f+charge 4.94 3.90∗∗ 0.50∗∗

MOSES+ 1.39∗∗ 1.31∗∗ 0∗∗

NN-S2S 4.97 4.07∗∗ 0.62∗

RAS† 4.96 4.25∗ 0.64∗

Ours 4.93 4.54 0.72

Table 2: Results of automatic evaluation and human
judgement with BLEU-4 and full length of F1 scores
of variant Rouges. Best results are labeled as boldface.
Statistical significance is indicated with ∗∗(p < 0.01)
and ∗ (p < 0.05) comparing to our full model.

1994) from the training set, and use its rationales
as the result (BM25f2f). Similar fact descriptions
may have the similar rationales. Fact descriptions
from pools with same charges are also retrieved
(BM25f2f+charge), to see how much improvement
that adding charge labels can gender.
• MOSES+ (Koehn et al., 2007) is a phrase-

based statistical machine translation system map-
ping fact descriptions to rationales. KenLM
(Heafield et al., 2013) is adopted to train a trigram
language model on the target corpus of training set
which is tuned on the validation set with MERT.
• NN-S2S is the basic Seq2Seq model without

attention from Sutskever et al. (2014) for machine
translation. We set one LSTM layer for encoding
and another one LSTM layer for decoding. We
adopt perplexity for training metric and select the
model with lowest perplexity on validation set.
• RAS† is an attention based abstract summa-

rization model from Chopra et al. (2016). To deal
with the much longer fact descriptions, we exploit
the more advanced bidirectional LSTM model for
the encoder instead of the simple convolutional
model. Another LSTM model is set as the decoder
coherent to Chopra et al. (2016).
Experimental Results. In automatic evaluation
from Table 2, the evaluation scores are relatively
high even for method of Randcharge, which indi-
cates that the expressions of the rationales with
same charge labels are similar with many over-

lapped n-grams, such that the rationales for crime
of theft usually begin with “以非法占有为目的”
(“in intention of illegal possession”). Accurately
generating fact details like degree of injury or time
of theft is more difficult. Retrieval method by
adding charge labels is the strong baseline even
better than basic Seq2Seq model. Adding atten-
tion mechanism will improve the performance in-
dicated by the method of RAS† which is supe-
rior to retrieval methods. By exploiting charge
labels, our full model achieves the best perfor-
mance. The performances of statistical machine
translation model are really poor, for it requiring
the lengths of parallel corpus to be similar.

In human evaluation, we can see that retrieval
methods can not accurately express fact details,
for that it is hard to retrieve rationales containing
details all matching the fact descriptions. How-
ever, our system can learn to generate fact details
by analyzing fact descriptions. Dropping attention
mechanism will have negative effects on model
performance. RAS† has worse performance in
ACC. whose main reason may lie in that RAS† can
not generate charge-discriminative rationales with
deduced information, which demonstrates that our
task is not the simple DOC-SUM task. For the flu-
ent evaluation, generation models are highly close
to retrieval methods whose rationales are writ-
ten by humans, which reflects that the generation
models can generate highly natural rationales.

5.4 Further Analysis

Impact of Exploiting Charge Labels.
• Charge2Charge Analysis. We first analyze

the effects of exploiting charge labels on model
performance charge to charge, by dropping to en-
code charges based on our full model. From the
results shown in Fig. 3, we can find that the re-
sults can be improved much by exploiting charge
labels among nearly all charges. This result also
indicates that the non-distinct fact descriptions are
common among nearly all charges and reflects the
difficulty of this task, but utilizing charge labels
can release the seriousness of the problem.
• Charge-discriminations Analysis. We fur-

ther evaluate the effects of charge labels for
charge-discriminations improvement on specific
charges with non-distinct fact descriptions: inten-
tional homicide, negligent homicide, duty embez-
zlement and corruption. For every charge, two
participants are asked to count the number of ra-

1859



0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50

charge label id

0.2

0.4

0.6
B

L
E

U
-4

with charge without charge

Figure 3: Results of impact of exploiting charge labels
evaluated charge to charge in the metric of BLEU-4
(similar results can gender in other three metrics but
are omitted for space saving).

intentional homicide

neglectful homicide

duty embezzlement

corruption

0

0.5

1

po
rt

io
n

with charge without charge

Figure 4: Portions of charge-discriminative rationales
in court views for every charge with 20 candidates.

tionales that are relevant to the charge on 20 ran-
domly selected candidates.

From Fig. 4, the number of charge discrimina-
tive rationales can be much improved among ev-
ery charge by utilizing charge information, which
demonstrates that charge labels can provide with
much extra charge-related information to deal with
latent information in fact descriptions. For crimes
of homicide, the motives for killing are latent in
the descriptions of killing without direct state-
ment, but our system can learn to align the mo-
tives in rationales to the charge labels which are
the strong distinct indicator for the two motives.
Ablation Study. We also ablate our full model
to reveal different components of encoding charge
labels for performance improvement. As shown in
Table 3, “ / softmax comp.” is to remove the part
in Eq. (6) and yields worse performance than our
full model, but better than “ / charge comp.” that
ignores to encode charge labels, which is same to
the situation of “ / hidden comp.” that removes the
part in Eq. (7). Our full model is still better than
the ablated models. This finding shows that both
of the methods of exploiting charge labels can im-
prove model performance and stacking them will
achieve better results.
Attention Mechanism Analysis. Heat map in
Fig. 5 is used to illustrate the attention mecha-
nism. The “slight injury” is aligned between the
source and target. “responsibility” and “run” are
well aligned to “away”, which demonstrate the

ABLATION STUDY
MODEL (%) B-4 R-1 R-2 R-L
Our System 45.8∗∗ 70.9∗∗ 52.5∗∗ 67.7∗∗

/ softmax comp. 45.7∗∗ 70.8∗∗ 52.3∗∗ 67.5∗∗

/ hidden comp. 45.7∗∗ 70.2∗ 51.9∗ 67.0∗

/ charge comp. 43.7 68.6 49.7 65.5

Table 3: Results of ablation study. Statistical signifi-
cance is indicated with ∗∗ (p < 0.01) and ∗ (p < 0.05)
comparing to the ablation of “ / charge comp.”.

(o
ne
)

(p
er
so
n)

(s
li
gh
t_
in
ju
ry
)

(a
ss
um
e)

(a
cc
id
en
t)

(a
ll
)

(r
es
po
ns
ib
il
it
y)

(i
n_
ad
di
ti
on
)

(h
it
)

(a
nd
)

(r
un
)

<name>

(get)

(slight_injury)

(two_cars)

(damaged)

('s)

(highway)

(traffic)

(accident)

(after_accident)

<name>

(drive)

(away)

(scene)
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Figure 5: Heat map for attention mechanism analysis.
The column is the source and the raw is the target.

efficiency of attention mechanism for generating
fact details by forcing context vectors to focus
more on fact details.
Performance by Reference Size. We further
investigate the model performance by rationales
length in court views. As shown in Fig. 6, not sur-
prisingly the model performance drops when the
length of reference rationales increases. Within
the size of 30, BLEU-4 score can maintain around
0.4 and F1 score keeps around 0.5. Exceeding the
length of 30, model performance decreases dra-
matically.
Human eval. vs. Automatic eval. Are BLEU
and Rouge suitable for COURT-VIEW-GEN eval-
uation? Following the work of (Papineni et al.,
2002; Liu et al., 2016), for the models evaluated
in human judgemnet, we draw the linear regres-
sions of their BLEU-4 and variant Rouge scores,
as the function of ACC. and ADOPT. from human
judgement respectively as shown in Fig. 7. From

10 20 30 40 50

Court View Length

0

0.4

0.8

pe
rf

or
m

ac
e BLEU-4 F1 of ROUGE-2

Figure 6: Model performance by rationales length with
BLEU-4 and full length of F1 of Rouge-2.

1860



1 6acc.
0

50

B
-4

1 6acc.
30

80

R
-1

1 6acc.
20

60

R
-2

1 6acc.
0

90

R
-L

0 1adopt.
0

50

B
-4

0 1adopt.
30

80

R
-1

0 1adopt.
20

60

R
-2

0 1adopt.
0

80

R
-L

coef.:0.983 coef.:0.995 coef.:0.993 coef.:0.990

coef.:0.975coef.:0.975coef.:0.952 coef.:0.965

Figure 7: ACC. and ADOPT. of human judgement pre-
dict automatic evaluation scores.

the results, we can find that automatic evaluations
track well with the human judgement with high
correlation coefficients. This finding demonstrates
that BLEU-4 and variant Rouges are adoptable for
COURT-VIEW-GEN evaluation and provides the
basis for future studies on this task.
Error Analysis. Our model has the drawback of
generating latent fact details, which appear in ra-
tionales but are not clearly expressed in fact de-
scriptions. For example, for the time of theft in
charge of larceny, the term of “多次” (“several
times”) appears in rationales but may not be ex-
pressed in fact descriptions directly, only with de-
scriptions of larceny but without exact term for
this detail, so it will be hard for attention mecha-
nism to learn to align “多次” in rationales to latent
information in fact descriptions. In the generated
rationales on test set, we find that only 42.4% sam-
ples can accurately extract out the term of “多次”.
It may need designed rules to deal with such de-
tails, like that count the time of theft from the de-
scriptions, and if the time exceeds 1 then the term
of “多次” can be generated in rationales.

5.5 Analysis through Cases
Fake Charge Label Conditioned Study. What
generated rationales in court views will be if they
are conditioned on fake charge labels? We se-
lect one fact description with gold charge of inten-
tional injury, then generate rationales conditioned
on fake charges of defiance and affray crime, in-
tentional homicide and neglectful homicide.

From Fig. 8, the rationales conditioned on fake
charges will be partly relevant to fake charge la-
bels and also maintain fact details from the input
fact description of gold charge. For the fake charge
of intentional homicide, its fact details should
be “caused someone dead”, but instead express
“causing someone slight injury” which is relevant
to charge of intentional injury. For charge pre-
diction systems, the discriminations between fact
details and charges will help to remind people that
the prediction results may be unreliable.

Case Study. Examples of generated rationales in
court views are shown in Fig. 8. Generally speak-
ing, our full label-conditioned model has high ac-
curacy on generating fact details better than base-
line models. For charges of traffic accident crime
and negligent homicide, all fact details are gen-
erated. The extra information from charge labels
helps the model to capture more important fact de-
tails, by forcing model to pay more attention to
charge-related information in fact descriptions.

As for the charge-discrimination analysis, from
the rationales of negligent homicide, we can infer
that its fact description may relate to a traffic ac-
cident, which is non-distinct from that for traffic
accident crime. Without encoding charge labels,
Ours / c wrongly generates the rationales coherent
to traffic accident crime, because traffic accidents
are the strong indicator for traffic crimes, but the
charge label will provide extra bias towards the
homicide crime, so our full model can generate
highly discriminative rationales. Utilizing charge
labels, retrieval method can easily retrieve charge-
related rationales, but hard to index rationales
with accurate fact details. For charge of larceny,
our full model extracts nearly all fact details but
misses the fact of “多次”(“several times”), reflect-
ing the shortcoming of dealing with latent details.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we propose a novel task of court
view generation and formulate it as a text-to-text
NLG problem. We utilize charge labels to benefit
the generation of charge-discriminative rationales
in court views and propose a label-conditioned
Seq2Seq model with attention for this task. Exten-
sive experiments show the efficiency of our model
and exploiting charge labels.

In the future: 1) More advanced technologies
like reinforcement learning (Sutton and Barto,
1998) can be introduced to generate latent fact de-
tails such as the time of theft more accurately; 2)
In this work, we only generate rationales in court
views omitting charge prediction, it is interesting
to see whether jointly generating the two parts will
benefit both of the tasks; 3) Studying verification
mechanism is meaningful to judge whether gener-
ated court views can really be adopted which is
important for COURT-VIEW-GEN in practice; 4)
More complex cases with multiple charges and
multiple defendants will be considered in the fu-
ture.

1861



MODEL [CHARGE] GENERATED COURT VIEWS CONDITIONED ON FAKE CHARGE LABEL
Gold [故意伤害罪] PP 故意伤害他人 身体，致一人轻伤 。# [intentional injury] PP intentionally injured others body , caused one people slight injury .

Ours

[寻衅滋事罪] PP 随意殴打他人 ，致一人轻伤 ，情节恶劣。# [defiance and affray crime] PP beat others at will , caused one people slight injury .
[故意杀人罪] PP 故意非法剥夺他人生命 ，致一人轻伤 。# [intentional homicide] PP intentionally illegally deprived someone of life , caused one people
slight injury .
[过失致人死亡罪] PP 过失 致一人轻伤 。# [neglectful homicide] PP neglectfully caused one people slight injury .

MODEL [CHARGE] GENERATED COURT VIEWS

Gold

[交通肇事罪] PP 违反交通运输管理法规，造成一人死亡 ，二人受伤 的交通事故，负事故的全部责任 。 # [traffic accident crime] PP violated traffic
transportation management regulations , caused one people dead , two people injured , take accident’s full responsibility .
[过失致人死亡罪] PP 在驾驶机动车过程中，疏忽大意 ，致使他人被碾压致死 。# [negligent homicide] PP when driving car , being neglectful , caused
people dead by rolling .
[盗窃罪] PP 以非法占有为目的，伙同他人 多次 秘密窃取公民财物，数额较大 。# [larceny] PP in intention of illegal possession , ganged up with others
and stole goods secretly in relatively large amount for several times .

Ours

PP 违反交通运输管理法规，发生交通事故，致一人死亡 ，二人受伤 ，负事故的全部责任 。 # PP violated traffic transportation management
regulations , caused traffic accident , caused one people dead , two people injured , take accident’s full responsibility . "
PP 因疏忽大意 致一人死亡 。 # PP neglectfully caused one people dead . "
PP 以非法占有为目的，结伙他人 秘密窃取他人财物，数额较大 。# PP in intention of illegal possession , ganged up with others and stole goods secretly
in relatively large amount . %

Ours / c

PP 违反交通运输管理法规，发生重大交通事故，致一人死亡 ，负事故的全部责任 。 # PP violated traffic transportation management regulations ,
caused severe traffic accident , caused one people dead , took accident’s full responsibility%
PP 违反交通运输管理法规，发生重大交通事故 ，致一人死亡，负事故的全部责任 。# PP violated traffic transportation management regulations ,
caused severe traffic accident , caused one people dead , took accident’s full responsibility . %
PP 以非法占有为目的，秘密窃取他人财物，数额较大 。# PP in intention of illegal possession , stole goods secretly in relatively large amount . %

BM25f2f+c

PP 违反道路交通运输管理法规，致一人死亡 且负事故主要责任 。# PP violated road traffic transportation management regulations , caused one people
dead , took accident’s main responsibility . %
PP 驾驶车辆过程中疏忽大意 ，过失 致一人死亡 。# PP when driving , neglectfully caused one people dead . "
PP 以非法占有为目的，秘密窃取公民财物。# PP in intention of possession , stole goods secretly . %

Table 5: Examples of generated court views and fake charge label conditioned generated court views.

times”) which is important in penalty measure-
ment. Actually, the time of larceny is not all di-
rectly expressed in fact description and only de-
scribes the fact of larceny, so it is hard for model
to learn to align the time of larceny in court view
to latent information in fact description.
Fake Charge Label Conditioned Study. What
generated court views will be if they are condi-
tioned on fake charge labels? We select one fact
description with gold charge label of intentional
injury then generate court views conditioned on
fake charge labels of defiance and affray crime, in-
tentional homicide and neglectful homicide. From
Table ??, the court views conditioned on fake
charges will be class-discriminative relevant to the
fake charge labels and also maintain fact details
from the input fact description of gold charge. For
the fake charge of intentional homicide, its cor-
responding fact will be “caused someone dead”,
but instead express “causing someone slight in-
jury” which is relevant to charge of intentional in-
jury. The discriminations between fact details and
charge will help to remind people that the predic-
tion for charge may be unreliable.

6 Conclusion and Future Works

In this paper, we propose a meaningful but not-
well studied task of court view generation. We
introduce a novel charge label conditioned se-
quence to sequence model for COURT-VIEW-GEN.
Experimental results show the effectiveness of
our model. Generating court views conditioned

on charge labels by encoding charge labels will
significantly improve the class-discriminations of
generated court views.

In the future: 1) We will apply the copy mech-
anism (??) to improve the diversities and charac-
teristics of generated court views which are im-
portant for generating high-quality court views;
2) More advanced technologies like reinforcement
learning (?) will be introduced to generate latent
fact details such as the time of theft more accu-
rately; 3) In this work, we only generate rationales
in court views omitting charge prediction, it is in-
teresting to see whether jointly generating the two
parts will benefit both of the tasks.

References
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua

Bengio. 2014. Neural machine translation by
jointly learning to align and translate. CoRR
abs/1409.0473.

Danilo S. Carvalho, Minh-Tien Nguyen, Chien-Xuan
Tran, and Minh-Le Nguyen. 2015. Lexical-
morphological modeling for legal text analysis. In
New Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence - JSAI-isAI
2015 Workshops, LENLS, JURISIN, AAA, HAT-
MASH, TSDAA, ASD-HR, and SKL, Kanagawa,
Japan, November 16-18, 2015, Revised Selected Pa-
pers. pages 295–311.

Yen-Liang Chen, Yi-Hung Liu, and Wu-Liang Ho.
2013. A text mining approach to assist the general
public in the retrieval of legal documents. JASIST
64(2):280–290.

Jianpeng Cheng and Mirella Lapata. 2016. Neural

Figure 8: Fake charge label conditioned generated rationales in court views and examples of generated rationales.

Acknowledgments

Firstly, we would like to thank Yansong Feng, Yu
Wu, Xiaojun Wan, Li Dong, Pengcheng Yin and
Zichao Yan for their insightful comments and sug-
gestions. We also very appreciate the comments
from anonymous reviewers which will help fur-
ther improve our work. This work is supported
by National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No. 61602490) and National Key R&D Plan (No.
2017YFB1402403). The work was done when Hai
Ye interned in Beihang University from August,
2017 to January, 2018.

References
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua

Bengio. 2014. Neural machine translation by
jointly learning to align and translate. CoRR
abs/1409.0473.

Danilo S. Carvalho, Minh-Tien Nguyen, Chien-Xuan
Tran, and Minh-Le Nguyen. 2015. Lexical-
morphological modeling for legal text analysis. In
New Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence - JSAI-isAI
2015 Workshops, LENLS, JURISIN, AAA, HAT-
MASH, TSDAA, ASD-HR, and SKL, Kanagawa,
Japan, November 16-18, 2015, Revised Selected Pa-
pers. pages 295–311.

Yen-Liang Chen, Yi-Hung Liu, and Wu-Liang Ho.
2013. A text mining approach to assist the general
public in the retrieval of legal documents. JASIST
64(2):280–290.

Jianpeng Cheng and Mirella Lapata. 2016. Neural
summarization by extracting sentences and words.
In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the

Association for Computational Linguistics, Volume
1: Long Papers.

Sumit Chopra, Michael Auli, and Alexander M. Rush.
2016. Abstractive sentence summarization with at-
tentive recurrent neural networks. In NAACL HLT
2016, The 2016 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies. pages 93–
98.

Jim Cowie and Wendy Lehnert. 1996. Information ex-
traction. Communications of the ACM 39(1):80–91.

Li Dong, Shaohan Huang, Furu Wei, Mirella Lapata,
Ming Zhou, and Ke Xu. 2017. Learning to gener-
ate product reviews from attributes. In Proceedings
of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Vol-
ume 1, Long Papers. Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 623–632.

Li Dong and Mirella Lapata. 2016. Language to logi-
cal form with neural attention. In Proceedings of the
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 33–43.

Xinya Du, Junru Shao, and Claire Cardie. 2017. Learn-
ing to ask: Neural question generation for reading
comprehension. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Volume 1: Long Papers. pages 1342–1352.

Albert Gatt and Emiel Krahmer. 2017. Survey of
the state of the art in natural language generation:
Core tasks, applications and evaluation. CoRR
abs/1703.09902.

Kenneth Heafield, Ivan Pouzyrevsky, Jonathan H.
Clark, and Philipp Koehn. 2013. Scalable modified

1862



kneser-ney language model estimation. In Proceed-
ings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2013, 4-9, Vol-
ume 2: Short Papers. pages 690–696.

Lisa Anne Hendricks, Zeynep Akata, Marcus
Rohrbach, Jeff Donahue, Bernt Schiele, and Trevor
Darrell. 2016. Generating visual explanations. In
Computer Vision - ECCV 2016 - 14th European
Conference, Proceedings, Part IV . pages 3–19.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997.
Long short-term memory. Neural Computation
9(8):1735–1780.

Mi-Young Kim, Ying Xu, and Randy Goebel. 2014.
Legal question answering using ranking SVM and
syntactic/semantic similarity. In New Frontiers
in Artificial Intelligence - JSAI-isAI 2014 Work-
shops, LENLS, JURISIN, and GABA, Kanagawa,
Japan, October 27-28, 2014, Revised Selected Pa-
pers. pages 244–258.

Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam:
A method for stochastic optimization. CoRR
abs/1412.6980.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open
source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In
ACL 2007, Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting
of the Association.

Tao Lei, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi S. Jaakkola.
2016. Rationalizing neural predictions. In Proceed-
ings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing. pages 107–117.

Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. Rouge: A package for automatic
evaluation of summaries. In Proceedings of the
ACL-04 Workshop. Association for Computational
Linguistics. pages 74–81.

Wan-Chen Lin, Tsung-Ting Kuo, Tung-Jia Chang,
Chueh-An Yen, Chao-Ju Chen, and Shou-de Lin.
2012. Exploiting machine learning models for chi-
nese legal documents labeling, case classification,
and sentencing prediction. IJCLCLP 17(4).

Wang Ling, Phil Blunsom, Edward Grefenstette,
Karl Moritz Hermann, Tomás Kociský, Fumin
Wang, and Andrew Senior. 2016. Latent predictor
networks for code generation. In Proceedings of the
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, Volume 1: Long Papers.

Wang Ling, Dani Yogatama, Chris Dyer, and Phil Blun-
som. 2017. Program induction by rationale genera-
tion: Learning to solve and explain algebraic word
problems. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Volume 1: Long Papers. pages 158–167.

Zachary Chase Lipton. 2016. The mythos of model
interpretability. CoRR abs/1606.03490.

Chao-Lin Liu, Cheng-Tsung Chang, and Jim-How Ho.
2004. Case instance generation and refinement for
case-based criminal summary judgments in chinese.
J. Inf. Sci. Eng. 20(4):783–800.

Chao-Lin Liu and Chwen-Dar Hsieh. 2006. Exploring
phrase-based classification of judicial documents for
criminal charges in chinese. In Foundations of In-
telligent Systems, 16th International Symposium, IS-
MIS 2006, Bari, Italy, September 27-29, 2006, Pro-
ceedings. pages 681–690.

Chao-Lin Liu and Ting-Ming Liao. 2005. Classifying
criminal charges in chinese for web-based legal ser-
vices. In Web Technologies Research and Develop-
ment - APWeb 2005, 7th Asia-Pacific Web Confer-
ence Proceedings. pages 64–75.

Chia-Wei Liu, Ryan Lowe, Iulian Serban, Michael
Noseworthy, Laurent Charlin, and Joelle Pineau.
2016. How NOT to evaluate your dialogue system:
An empirical study of unsupervised evaluation met-
rics for dialogue response generation. In Proceed-
ings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, 2016. pages 2122–
2132.

Yi-Hung Liu, Yen-Liang Chen, and Wu-Liang Ho.
2015. Predicting associated statutes for legal prob-
lems. Inf. Process. Manage. 51(1):194–211.

Bingfeng Luo, Yansong Feng, Jianbo Xu, Xiang
Zhang, and Dongyan Zhao. 2017. Learning to pre-
dict charges for criminal cases with legal basis. In
Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing. pages
2717–2726.

Thang Luong, Hieu Pham, and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2015. Effective approaches to attention-based
neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the
2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing. pages 1412–1421.

Jonathan Mallinson, Rico Sennrich, and Mirella Lap-
ata. 2017. Paraphrasing revisited with neural ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of the 15th Con-
ference of the European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, Volume 1: Long Pa-
pers. pages 881–893.

Ramesh Nallapati, Bowen Zhou, Cı́cero Nogueira dos
Santos, Çaglar Gülçehre, and Bing Xiang. 2016.
Abstractive text summarization using sequence-to-
sequence rnns and beyond. In Proceedings of the
20th SIGNLL Conference on Computational Natu-
ral Language Learning, CoNLL 2016, August 11-12,
2016. pages 280–290.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. pages 311–318.

1863



K. Raghav, P. K. Reddy, and V. B. Reddy. 2016. An-
alyzing the extraction of relevant legal judgments
using paragraph-level and citation information. In
AI4JArtificial Intelligence for Justice.

Marco Túlio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos
Guestrin. 2016. ”why should I trust you?”: Explain-
ing the predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings
of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. pages
1135–1144.

Stephen E. Robertson and Steve Walker. 1994. Some
simple effective approximations to the 2-poisson
model for probabilistic weighted retrieval. In Pro-
ceedings of the 17th Annual International ACM-
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval. (Special Issue of the SIGIR
Forum). pages 232–241.

Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V. Le. 2014.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural net-
works. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems 27: Annual Conference on Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems 2014. pages 3104–3112.

Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. 1998. Re-
inforcement learning: An introduction, volume 1.
MIT press Cambridge.

Jiwei Tan, Xiaojun Wan, and Jianguo Xiao. 2017.
Abstractive document summarization with a graph-
based attentional neural model. In Proceedings
of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, Volume 1: Long Papers.
pages 1171–1181.

Kelvin Xu, Jimmy Ba, Ryan Kiros, Kyunghyun
Cho, Aaron C. Courville, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
Richard S. Zemel, and Yoshua Bengio. 2015. Show,
attend and tell: Neural image caption genera-
tion with visual attention. In Proceedings of the
32nd International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, ICML. pages 2048–2057.

Jin-ge Yao, Xiaojun Wan, and Jianguo Xiao. 2017. Re-
cent advances in document summarization. Knowl.
Inf. Syst. 53(2):297–336.

Pengcheng Yin and Graham Neubig. 2017. A syntactic
neural model for general-purpose code generation.
In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, Volume
1: Long Papers. pages 440–450.

1864


