



















































Benchmarks and models for entity-oriented polarity detection


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2018, pages 129–136
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 1 - 6, 2018. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Benchmarks and models for entity-oriented polarity detection

Lidia Pivovarova, Arto Klami, Roman Yangarber
University of Helsinki, Finland
first.last@cs.helsinki.fi

Abstract
We address the problem of determining entity-
oriented polarity in business news. This can be
viewed as classifying the polarity of the senti-
ment expressed toward a given mention of a
company in a news article. We present a com-
plete, end-to-end approach to the problem. We
introduce a new dataset of over 17,000 manu-
ally labeled documents, which is substantially
larger than any currently available resources.
We propose a benchmark solution based on
convolutional neural networks for classifying
entity-oriented polarity. Although our dataset
is much larger than those currently available,
it is small on the scale of datasets commonly
used for training robust neural network mod-
els. To compensate for this, we use trans-
fer learning—pre-train the model on a much
larger dataset, annotated for a related but dif-
ferent classification task, in order to learn a
good representation for business text, and then
fine-tune it on the smaller polarity dataset.

1 Introduction

We report on research done in the context of
PULS—a project for monitoring business news
media (Du et al., 2016; Huttunen et al., 2013).1

The system gathers 8,000–10,000 documents daily;
each document is processed by a cascade of clas-
sifiers, including a named entity (NE) recognizer.
A key NE in business news type is company or
organization, which can be mentioned in a posi-
tive or negative context. For example, launching
a new product or signing a new contract is viewed
as a positive event; involvement in a product recall,
bankruptcy or fraud is considered negative.

We focus on determining the polarity of a men-
tion of a given company in news media. Polarity
classification is important, since if a company ap-
pears in negative contexts frequently, it may affect

1http://newsweb.cs.helsinki.fi or
http://puls.cs.helsinki.fi

its reputation, impact its stock price, etc. Polar-
ity prediction, as defined here, is similar to sen-
timent analysis (Liu and Zhang, 2012): both re-
quire the system to classify a span of text as posi-
tive or negative. However, there are crucial differ-
ences. Business news articles typically do not aim
to express emotion or subjectivity—positive and
negative events are usually described in a neutral
tone. Thus, vocabularies of affective terms—e.g.,
amazing or terrific—commonly used in sentiment
analysis, are not helpful for business polarity. Anal-
ysis should rather focus on affective events (Ding
and Riloff, 2016), i.e., stereotypically positive or
negative events. Further, business news employs
genre-specific word usage; words seen as negative
in “generic” contexts, may indicate a positive con-
text here, and vice versa.Negative terms in (Hu and
Liu, 2004), e.g., include “cancer”, which in busi-
ness often appears in positive contexts, as when a
pharmaceuticals unveil novel treatments.

While most work in sentiment analysis is done at
the document level, we aim to classify entity men-
tions in text. This requires changes to document-
based classification models. We explore two con-
volutional neural network (CNN) architectures, ini-
tially proposed for document-level classification,
and adapt them for entity-oriented classification.
The modified models have an additional input chan-
nel: the focus—the position(s) in text where a target
company is mentioned. Focus helps the model dis-
tinguish among different companies mentioned in
text and assign them polarity independently.

As far as we aware no suitable datasets exist for
training models for entity-oriented polarity classi-
fication. We annotated a dataset of over 17,000
business news articles, which we release for public
use, to provide a foundation for an eventual stan-
dard evaluation. Despite being much larger than
any existing datasets for business polarity detec-
tion, it is still small compared to what is typically

129



used when training CNNs for text classification.
We attempt to compensate for the small training

data by transferring knowledge from a different cor-
pus. The second corpus is large, but annotated for
a different task: each document has a set of event
labels; some of these may be mapped to polarity
labels. We explore two strategies for knowledge
transfer: i) manually mapping from event labels to
polarity labels, and ii) pre-training CNNs for the
event classification task, followed by unsupervised
transfer of high-level features from event classifica-
tion to polarity. We demonstrate that unsupervised
transfer improves performance.

2 Related work

Sentiment analysis: Deep learning for sentiment
analysis is an active area of research. Some
methods learn vector representations for entire
phrases (Dos Santos and Gatti, 2014; Socher et al.,
2011); others learn syntactic tree structures (Tai
et al., 2015; Socher et al., 2013). A simpler ap-
proach using CNNs (Kim, 2014) has demonstrated
state-of-the-art performance (Tai et al., 2015).

Interest in applying sentiment mining to the busi-
ness domain is spurred by important industry appli-
cations, such as analyzing the impact of news on fi-
nancial markets (Ahmad et al., 2016; Van de Kauter
et al., 2015; Loughran and McDonald, 2011). If
a company frequently appears in news in nega-
tive contexts it may affect its reputation, impact its
stock price, etc., (Saggion and Funk, 2009). Al-
though news reports usually have a time lag, events
reported in news have longer-term impact on in-
vestor sentiment and attitudes toward a given com-
pany (Boudoukh et al., 2013).

A major difficulty in training entity-oriented
polarity models is the lack of publicly available
datasets. In the corpus of 5,000 sentences published
by Takala et al. (2014), most instances (sentences)
contain no company name, and hence cannot be
used for predicting polarity for specific entities. A
dataset of 679 sentences in Dutch, annotated with
entity-oriented business sentiment, was published
by Van de Kauter et al. (2015). They demonstrate
that a. in financial news, not all sentiment expres-
sions within a sentence relate to the target company;
b. sentiment is often expressed implicitly.

A shared task on fine-grained sentiment analysis
of financial microblogs and news was held recently
as part of SemEval (Cortis et al., 2017), and pro-
vided a small dataset containing company names.

This dataset contains only 1,000 news headlines,
of which only 165 instances mention more than
one company name, of which only 20 instances
contain names with different polarities (positive
for one company but negative for another). Thus,
using entity-oriented methods on this dataset may
not lead to an advantage in performance. Of the
ten best-performing systems on the news sentiment
task, many used sentence-level classification with
no treatment of target company (Rotim et al., 2017;
Cabanski et al., 2017; Ghosal et al., 2017; Kumar
et al., 2017); others replace the target name with
a special token (Mansar et al., 2017; Moore and
Rayson, 2017; Jiang et al., 2017) or use company
name as a feature (Kar et al., 2017), though none of
the papers provide any evidence that special treat-
ment of the target yields a gain in performance. In
our experiments with the SemEval dataset (Pivo-
varova et al., 2017) a model with explicitly speci-
fied target worked slightly worse than a baseline.

The dataset that we release with this paper is 20
times larger and contains entire documents, where
a given entity may be mentioned multiple times,
with many different names mentioned in the same
document. This corpus is suitable for experiments
with entity-oriented polarity, and our experiments
explicitly contrast models that take focus as an
input against models that do not use the information
about the target company’s position.

Transfer learning: a.k.a. inductive transfer, is
a technique for applying knowledge accumulated
from solving one problem to improve the solution
for a different problem. We use feature transfer,
where the goal is to learn transferable representa-
tions for data, which are meaningful for multiple
tasks (Pan and Yang, 2010; Bengio et al., 2013;
Conneau et al., 2017), i.e., very general, low-level
representations. On the other hand, one might con-
sider two related tasks, and try to gain knowledge
from one to help with the other. In such cases,
one wishes to transfer representations at a much
higher level (Glorot et al., 2011). An analysis of
the trade-offs between generality and specificity of
learned features can be found at (Yosinski et al.,
2014). Deep learning with knowledge transfer has
been previously applied to sentiment analysis in the
context of domain adaptation (Glorot et al., 2011)
and cross-lingual applications (Zhou et al., 2016).
In our experiments, we apply knowledge transfer
from event classification to sentiment analysis.

130



3 The Model

We train a classifier for entity-oriented polarity,
which receives on input a text and a “focus” vector—
the positions of mentions of the target company in
text—and outputs the polarity for this company.
For this purpose we extend state-of-the-art models
in (Kim, 2014). The rationale for introducing focus
is that polarity is not a feature of the text as a whole,
but of each company mention; two company men-
tions in a text may have opposing polarities, and
the model needs be able to distinguish them.

The architecture of the model is shown in Fig-
ure 1. The inputs are fed into the network as sen-
tences of a fixed size, zero-padded; each word
is a fixed-dimensional embedding vector comple-
mented with a scalar indicating the focus. The
focus vector is shown in darker grey in Figure 1,
with the the company mention framed in red. This
provides an additional dimension to the word em-
bedding, and is crucial for distinguishing between
instances that differ only in focus and polarity.

The inputs are fed into a layer of convolutional
filters with multiple widths, optionally followed
by deeper convolutional layers. The results of the
last convolutional layer are max-pooled, produc-
ing a vector with one scalar per filter, which is
then fed into a fully-connected layer with dropout
regularization and a soft-max output layer. The
output is a 2-dimensional vector that is a proba-
bility distribution over the two possible outcomes:
positive and negative. In manual annotation we
use five values: “very negative” [1 0], “somewhat
negative” [.7 .3], “neutral” [.5 .5], “somewhat posi-
tive” [.3 .7] and “very positive” [0 1]. The model
may output any possible distribution. The loss is
cross-entropy between the network’s output and
the true distribution; the loss updates the weights
via back-propagation.

We represent words by embeddings, trained us-
ing the GloVe algorithm (Pennington et al., 2014)
on a corpus of 5 million news articles. Each arti-
cle was pre-processed using lemmatization and the
PULS NE recognition system. All NEs of the same
type are mapped to the same special token; i.e.,
all company names have the same embedding, all
person names another, etc. We continue to train the
embeddings during polarity training by updating
them at each iteration. This allows the model to
learn properties of words significant for polarity,
such as the difference between antonyms, which
may not be captured well by the initial embeddings.

Class # instances Class # instances
very positive 2709 very negative 2532
positive 4001 negative 4645
neutral 285 contradictory 146

Table 1: Class distribution in annotated data.

4 Data

The dataset contains 17,354 different documents
with 19,689 company names. PULS clusters news
into groups, each group containing documents de-
scribing the same story.2 Then we manually anno-
tate each group with business polarity of the most
salient company names.

In our experiments, each training instance is the
first five sentences in the document beginning from
the first mention of the focus company. This choice
was made because typically the beginning of an
article carries information about the principal event,
whereas later text contains background information
which may mention the company, but where the
polarity may be different. In case this processing
results in identical instances, we remove duplicates,
and keep only one copy.

The resulting dataset used in the experiments
contains 14,172 distinct instances. The distribution
of the data among the polarity classes is shown in
Table 1. Instances labeled “contradictory” are not
used for testing and training at present. The data
were split into five folds for cross-validation.

We also have a separate, large collection of news
articles (Pivovarova et al., 2013), which is anno-
tated for business events—for example, Merger,
Contract, Investment, Product launch, Product re-
call, Fraud, Bankruptcy—291 labels in all. An
article may have multiple event labels. Some of
these labels may imply (or strongly correlate with)
positive or negative polarity. We attempt to exploit
this large data to improve polarity prediction. To
this end, we attempt two approaches, with several
variations: manual mapping and high-level fea-
ture transfer.

For manual mapping, we manually selected
those labels which we believe most clearly imply
a polarity: e.g., Investment, Product launch and
Sponsorship are considered positive, while Fraud,
Layoff and Bankruptcy are negative; in all, we iden-
tified 26 “positive” and 12 “negative” labels. Using

2The grouping algorithm takes into account the semantic
similarity of the keywords, and the distributions of NEs within
the documents (Escoter et al., 2017)

131



  

A 

US 

appeals 

Court 

 revived 

a 

civil 

suit 

accusing 

Apple 

of 

creating 

a 

monopoly 

text representation
with word embeddings

focus 
vector

first convolutional layer
with multiple filter widths

feature maps feature mapssecond convolutional layer
with multiple filter widths

max-pooling fully-connected layer
with dropout and softmax or 

sigmoid output

Figure 1: A model architecture with focus vector and two convolution layers

only these 38 event labels, we constructed a train-
ing set, removing documents with labels that result
in no polarity, or conflicting polarities. Further,
since it is impossible to know to which company
the label refers, only documents whose headlines
and the first sentence contain exactly one com-
pany mention were kept. (For example, if one
company goes bankrupt and another acquires its
assets—such documents are not used.)

The resulting dataset is highly skewed with 90%
of the data positive. To assure that the positive and
negative subsets have similar size, we apply ran-
dom undersampling (Dendamrongvit and Kubat,
2010), i.e., we use a random subset of the positive
documents. Of more than two million documents
in the original event corpus, 100,000 have a non-
ambiguous negative label and mention exactly one
company. The resulting dataset consists of 200,000
documents; 10% is used as a development set to
decide when to stop training. We use this newly
generated 200K document event corpus in 2 ways:
Tuning: a two-stage learning procedure where the
model is first trained using the event corpus, and
then is tuned using the smaller polarity corpus.
Training on combined data: in this strategy, data
from both corpora are mixed together, and used for
training in random order.

In high-level feature transfer, we aim to reuse
relatively high-level, task-specific features. We ini-
tially train a model to predict event types—using
all event labels and all documents, irrespective of
how many companies they mention. This requires
a change in the models: because event labels are
not mutually exclusive, we use a sigmoid function

instead of soft-max in the topmost layer. After the
event model is fully trained on the event labels, we
strip off the last fully-connected layer of the net-
work, replace it with a two-class output layer for
polarity, and resume training using the smaller po-
larity dataset. We expect that the more task-specific
features—ones obtained closer to the output layer—
will be useful to determine polarity values, due to
the latent relatedness between the two tasks. Thus,
we keep almost the entire model, with the exception
of the very final layer.

From the large dataset labeled with events, we
use 10% as a development set, to determine when
to stop training, and to find the best model; another
10% is used as a test set. Results from representa-
tive runs are shown in Table 2.

The bigger model gives better performance—
with a much larger number of filters (1000 vs. 128).
It is not possible to use such large models for learn-
ing polarity without transfer, because these models
are trained on much smaller data and would quickly
overfit. Therefore, in subsequent experiments we
use two convolutional layers with filter sizes 3,4,5,
with 128 filters of each size. 3

5 Experiments

We present experiments with focus and knowledge
transfer variants. Table 3 shows the results for
each model variant, averaged across five-fold cross-
validation. We report accuracy and cosine similar-

3The overall accuracy of the method can likely be im-
proved further by careful tuning of hyper-parameters. Here
we focus on the comparison of architectures, and defer hyper-
parameters for future work.

132



Hyper-Parameters rec prec F1
conv 2; filters 128; sizes {3,4,5} 35.85 75.42 48.53
conv 1; filters 1000; sizes {3,7,11} 50.80 58.13 53.89

Table 2: Event classification results

Transfer Strategy Focus Accuracy Cosine
none – 81.22 71.51
none + 81.44 72.93
manual tuning + 82.07 73.98
manual combined data + 82.01 70.92
feature transfer – 83.94 71.17
feature transfer + 84.44 71.76
baseline (SVM) 52.02

Table 3: Experimental results (multiplied by 100, for readability.)

ity between the model output and the annotation.
To compute accuracy as follows. In annotation

we treat polarity detection as a three-way classifica-
tion task; values inside [−0.1, 0.1] are considered
neutral; values further from 0.0 are positive or neg-
ative. However, for reasons presented below, the
models do not do well on identifying neutral in-
stances. Thus, in the experiments presented here,
we evaluate prediction of binary polarity4: negative
vs. positive or neutral. Accuracy measures how of-
ten a model blunders, and predicts negative polarity
rather than positive or neutral, or vice versa.

Cosine similarity5 is computed by collecting all
of the model’s polarity probabilities into one vector
and one for the manually assigned polarities, and
measuring the cosine between the vectors; also, po-
larities are mapped into the interval [−1, 1]. This
gives a measure of closeness between model pre-
diction and the ground truth, including differences
between “positive” and “very positive” classes.

As the results show, accuracy and cosine similar-
ity do not produce consistent rankings, because
they measure different aspects of performance.
From a practical, user-oriented point of view, it
may be more important that a model avoid gross er-
rors, rather than capturing subtle shades of polarity.
In manual annotation we noticed that some dis-
tinctions (“positive” vs. “very positive”) is far from

4Due to the industry-level requirements: in business news
negative polarity has important implications; “neutral” cover-
age may even be viewed mildly positive, as the entity men-
tioned is receiving (non-negative) publicity, etc.

5This is the official measure of the SemEval business po-
larity classification task (Cortis et al., 2017); we include it
because it may be useful for indirect comparison of results.

clear for human annotators. Thus, we are interested
in the models that yield the best accuracy.

In addition, we used a SVM classifier as a base-
line. The baseline does not use any information
about the target company. We use a one-vs-all
strategy to obtain three-way classification. For the
baseline we report only the accuracy, since this
method does not directly produce probabilities.

6 Discussion

Knowledge transfer: Table 3 shows that high-
level feature transfer outperforms manual mapping.
The main reason might be that feature transfer can
benefit from a very large corpus of 2 million docu-
ments, while only 200,000 documents can be used
with the manual mapping approach, which prevents
us from training larger models due to over-fitting.
The mapped dataset may suffer from other prob-
lems, resulting from how it is created. First, it con-
tains no articles with neutral polarity—if an article
has no positive or negative label, we cannot as-
sume it to be neutral. For example, articles labeled
Corporate appointments may have positive or nega-
tive polarity. Second, although we choose only the
most “trusted” event labels for mapping to polarity,
the dataset still contains noise: e.g., a document
labeled as Merger and assumed to be positive may
in fact discuss a canceled merger. Third, since we
use only a small subset of the labels, the dataset is
highly skewed and incomplete—most event types
and data are not used. Most importantly, using man-
ually mapped data, a model is trained to perform
a task different from our target—it learns to dis-

133



Example Truth +Focus –Focus Comment
1 Valeant to sell Dendreon unit to Sanpower for $820

million. Canada’s Valeant Pharmaceuticals Inter-
national Inc. said its affiliate will sell its Dendreon
cancer business to Sanpower Group Co. Ltd. for
$819.9 million, as the drugmaker continues to shed
its non-core assets to repay debt.

-1.0 0.022 -0.322 The model without focus per-
forms better since the company
name is mentioned far away
from the polarity expression and
there is another name in be-
tween.

2 Samsung wins over Apple in $399 million patent
appeal.

-1.0 -0.333 0.004 Model without focus fails: two
companies with opposite polari-
ties involved in same event.

3 Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg and his wife are
dropping controversial suits they filed in December
to buy small plots of land that are part of a [...]
estate they own on the island of Kauai in Hawaii.

0.0 -0.743 -0.397 Text is about Facebook CEO,
not the company itself. None of
the models handle neutral com-
pany mentions well.

Table 4: Model comparison: CNN with/without focus using transfer. Company in focus is in bold

tinguish not positive vs. negative polarity, but one
(sub-)set of event labels from another. We cannot
assume that the model learns polarity patterns, only
that polarity correlates with certain event types.

Focus: The results indicate that focus further
improves performance.6 On some test instances,
models without focus outperforms models with
focus—this happens when polarity expressions lie
outside the filter window around the focus com-
pany, e.g., as in Example 1 in Table 4.

If two companies within the same text have oppo-
site polarities, a model without focus can assign the
correct polarity to at most one of them, as in exam-
ple 2 in Table 4. Such cases are rare in our dataset;
typically, when two companies are involved in the
same event, they have the same polarity, e.g., when
they strike a deal. Only 6% of instances in our
dataset have a paired instance that has identical text
but different focus and opposite polarity. Another
case when focus is useful is when a document con-
tains much background information, which may
contain opposite polarity statements. Estimating
the number of such cases is an arduous task. Since
in some cases a model with focus performs worse
than a model without focus, there is no clear gain in
that regard. However, the best-performing transfer
strategy works slightly better, as seen from Table 3.

Neutral polarity: Another observation is that
all of our models have difficulty in detecting neu-
tral polarities, as shown in Example 3 (which is
about Facebook’s CEO, rather than the company
itself). Neutral examples are rare in our dataset,
as shown in Table 1. This is probably the main
reason why the models are unable to distinguish
neutral polarity. This problem may be helped by
annotating more neutral instances.

6Results are statistically significant at p < 0.05 or lower.

7 Conclusion

We address the problem of entity-oriented business
polarity detection. The main contributions are: I. a
dataset of 17,000 annotated documents, which is an
order of magnitude larger than any previously avail-
able resources for this task;7 II. we propose bench-
mark solutions to this problem, based on CNN ar-
chitectures originally intended for document-level
polarity classification, modified for entity-oriented
polarity classification by explicitly incorporating
focus into the model; III. we demonstrate that per-
formance can be improved via transfer learning,
by training a network on a much larger corpus,
which is annotated for a different, distantly related
task—namely, classification of event types.

We compare manual label mapping with transfer-
ring high-level features, and demonstrate that the
latter approach performs better, and is less subjec-
tive; i.e., features relevant for finding event types
work better than a simplistic mapping between the
two tasks. The rationale behind this is that busi-
ness polarity is latently inherent in the event types
themselves: some event types carry a positive or
negative polarity, while others do not indicate an
unambiguous polarity. Therefore, attempting to
map event labels directly to polarity is problematic.

For manual mapping of event labels, we can use
only documents with exactly one company and “un-
ambiguous” event labels, while for transfer learn-
ing we can use the entire event dataset, which lets
us use much more data for training bigger models.

High-level feature transfer yields 15.8% error
reduction—81% to 84% accuracy—as compared
to using only the small polarity-annotated corpus.

7The corpus is available at puls.cs.helsinki.fi/
polarity

134



Acknowledgements

This work was supported in part by Tekes (the
Finnish Funding Agency for Technology and In-
novation) Project iMEDL: Digital Media Evo-
lution through Deep Learning, Grant number
5933/31/2017.

References

Khurshid Ahmad, JingGuang Han, Elaine Hutson,
Colm Kearney, and Sha Liu. 2016. Media-expressed
negative tone and firm-level stock returns. Journal
of Corporate Finance 37:152–172.

Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent.
2013. Representation learning: A review and new
perspectives. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
and machine intelligence 35(8):1798–1828.

Jacob Boudoukh, Ronen Feldman, Shimon Kogan, and
Matthew Richardson. 2013. Which news moves
stock prices? A textual analysis. Technical report,
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Tobias Cabanski, Julia Romberg, and Stefan Con-
rad. 2017. HHU at SemEval-2017 task 5: Fine-
grained sentiment analysis on financial data using
machine learning methods. In Proceedings of the
11th International Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
tion (SemEval-2017). pages 832–836.

Alexis Conneau, Douwe Kiela, Holger Schwenk, Loic
Barrault, and Antoine Bordes. 2017. Supervised
learning of universal sentence representations from
natural language inference data .

Keith Cortis, André Freitas, Tobias Dauert, Manuela
Huerlimann, Manel Zarrouk, Siegfried Handschuh,
and Brian Davis. 2017. Semeval-2017 task 5: Fine-
grained sentiment analysis on financial microblogs
and news. In Proceedings of the 11th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2017).
Association for Computational Linguistics, Vancou-
ver, Canada, pages 510–526.

Sareewan Dendamrongvit and Miroslav Kubat. 2010.
Undersampling approach for imbalanced train-
ing sets and induction from multi-label text-
categorization domains. In New Frontiers in Applied
Data Mining, Springer, pages 40–52.

Haibo Ding and Ellen Riloff. 2016. Acquiring knowl-
edge of affective events from blogs using label prop-
agation. In Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence.

Cícero Nogueira Dos Santos and Maira Gatti. 2014.
Deep convolutional neural networks for sentiment
analysis of short texts. In COLING. pages 69–78.

Mian Du, Lidia Pivovarova, and Roman Yangarber.
2016. PULS: natural language processing for busi-
ness intelligence. In Proceedings of the 2016 Work-
shop on Human Language Technology. Go to Print
Publisher, pages 1–8.

Llorenç Escoter, Lidia Pivovarova, Mian Du, Anisia
Katinskaia, and Roman Yangarber. 2017. Grouping
business news stories based on salience of named
entities. In 15th Conference of the European Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
Proceedings of Conference, Volume 1: Long Papers.

Deepanway Ghosal, Shobhit Bhatnagar, Md Shad
Akhtar, Asif Ekbal, and Pushpak Bhattacharyya.
2017. IITP at SemEval-2017 task 5: an ensemble
of deep learning and feature based models for fi-
nancial sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the
11th International Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
tion (SemEval-2017). pages 899–903.

Xavier Glorot, Antoine Bordes, and Yoshua Bengio.
2011. Domain adaptation for large-scale sentiment
classification: A deep learning approach. In Pro-
ceedings of the 28th international conference on ma-
chine learning (ICML-11). pages 513–520.

Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. 2004. Mining and summa-
rizing customer reviews. In Proceedings of the tenth
ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowl-
edge discovery and data mining.

Silja Huttunen, Arto Vihavainen, Mian Du, and Roman
Yangarber. 2013. Predicting relevance of event ex-
traction for the end user. In T. Poibeau, H. Saggion,
J. Piskorski, and R. Yangarber, editors, Multi-source,
Multilingual Information Extraction and Summa-
rization, Springer Berlin, Theory and Applications
of Natural Language Processing, pages 163–176.

Mengxiao Jiang, Man Lan, and Yuanbin Wu. 2017.
ECNU at SemEval-2017 task 5: An ensemble of re-
gression algorithms with effective features for fine-
grained sentiment analysis in financial domain. In
Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2017). pages 888–
893.

Sudipta Kar, Suraj Maharjan, and Thamar Solorio.
2017. RiTUAL-UH at SemEval-2017 task 5: Sen-
timent analysis on financial data using neural net-
works. In Proceedings of the 11th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2017).
pages 877–882.

Yoon Kim. 2014. Convolutional neural networks for
sentence classification. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP).

Abhishek Kumar, Abhishek Sethi, Md Shad Akhtar,
Asif Ekbal, Chris Biemann, and Pushpak Bhat-
tacharyya. 2017. IITPB at SemEval-2017 task 5:
Sentiment prediction in financial text. In Proceed-
ings of the 11th International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation (SemEval-2017). pages 894–898.

135



Bing Liu and Lei Zhang. 2012. A survey of opinion
mining and sentiment analysis. In Mining text data,
Springer, pages 415–463.

Tim Loughran and Bill McDonald. 2011. When is a
liability not a liability? textual analysis, dictionaries,
and 10-ks. The Journal of Finance 66(1):35–65.

Youness Mansar, Lorenzo Gatti, Sira Ferradans, Marco
Guerini, and Jacopo Staiano. 2017. Fortia-FBK at
SemEval-2017 task 5: Bullish or bearish? inferring
sentiment towards brands from financial news head-
lines. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.00939 .

Andrew Moore and Paul Rayson. 2017. Lancaster A
at SemEval-2017 task 5: Evaluation metrics matter:
predicting sentiment from financial news headlines.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.00571 .

Sinno Jialin Pan and Qiang Yang. 2010. A survey on
transfer learning. IEEE Transactions on knowledge
and data engineering 22(10):1345–1359.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D.
Manning. 2014. GloVe: Global vectors for word rep-
resentation. In Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP). pages 1532–1543.

Lidia Pivovarova, Llorenç Escoter, Arto Klami, and Ro-
man Yangarber. 2017. HCS at SemEval-2017 task
5: Polarity detection in business news using con-
volutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the
11th International Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
tion (SemEval-2017). pages 842–846.

Lidia Pivovarova, Silja Huttunen, and Roman Yangar-
ber. 2013. Event representation across genre. In
Proceedins of the 1st Workshop on Events: Defi-
nition, Detection, Coreference, and Representation.
NAACL HLT.

Leon Rotim, Martin Tutek, and Jan Šnajder. 2017.
TakeLab at SemEval-2017 task 5: Linear aggrega-
tion of word embeddings for fine-grained sentiment
analysis of financial news. In Proceedings of the
11th International Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
tion (SemEval-2017). pages 866–871.

Horacio Saggion and Adam Funk. 2009. Extracting
opinions and facts for business intelligence. RNTI
Journal, E (17) 119:146.

Richard Socher, Jeffrey Pennington, Eric H. Huang,
Andrew Y. Ng, and Christopher D. Manning. 2011.
Semi-supervised recursive autoencoders for pre-
dicting sentiment distributions. Association for
Computational Linguistics, Stroudsburg, PA, USA,
EMNLP ’11.

Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Y Wu, Jason
Chuang, Christopher D Manning, Andrew Y Ng,
and Christopher Potts. 2013. Recursive deep models
for semantic compositionality over a sentiment tree-
bank. In Proceedings of the conference on empirical
methods in natural language processing (EMNLP).
Citeseer, volume 1631, page 1642.

Kai Sheng Tai, Richard Socher, and Christopher D
Manning. 2015. Improved semantic representations
from tree-structured long short-term memory net-
works. In ACL.

Pyry Takala, Pekka Malo, Ankur Sinha, and Oskar
Ahlgren. 2014. Gold-standard for topic-specific sen-
timent analysis of economic texts. In LREC. pages
2152–2157.

Marjan Van de Kauter, Diane Breesch, and Véronique
Hoste. 2015. Fine-grained analysis of explicit and
implicit sentiment in financial news articles. Expert
Systems with Applications .

Jason Yosinski, Jeff Clune, Yoshua Bengio, and Hod
Lipson. 2014. How transferable are features in deep
neural networks? In Advances in neural information
processing systems. pages 3320–3328.

Guangyou Zhou, Zhao Zeng, Jimmy Xiangji Huang,
and Tingting He. 2016. Transfer learning for cross-
lingual sentiment classification with weakly shared
deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the 39th In-
ternational ACM SIGIR conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval.

136


