



















































Assessing Language Proficiency from Eye Movements in Reading


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2018, pages 1986–1996
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 1 - 6, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

Assessing Language Proficiency from Eye Movements in Reading

Yevgeni Berzak
MIT BCS

berzak@mit.edu

Boris Katz
MIT CSAIL

boris@mit.edu

Roger Levy
MIT BCS

rplevy@mit.edu

Abstract

We present a novel approach for determining
learners’ second language proficiency which
utilizes behavioral traces of eye movements
during reading. Our approach provides stand-
alone eyetracking based English proficiency
scores which reflect the extent to which the
learner’s gaze patterns in reading are similar to
those of native English speakers. We show that
our scores correlate strongly with standard-
ized English proficiency tests. We also demon-
strate that gaze information can be used to ac-
curately predict the outcomes of such tests.
Our approach yields the strongest performance
when the test taker is presented with a suite of
sentences for which we have eyetracking data
from other readers. However, it remains effec-
tive even using eyetracking with sentences for
which eye movement data have not been previ-
ously collected. By deriving proficiency as an
automatic byproduct of eye movements during
ordinary reading, our approach offers a poten-
tially valuable new tool for second language
proficiency assessment. More broadly, our re-
sults open the door to future methods for infer-
ring reader characteristics from the behavioral
traces of reading.

1 Introduction

It is currently estimated that over 1.5 billion peo-
ple are learning English as a Second Language
(ESL) worldwide. Their learning progress is com-
monly evaluated with classroom tests prepared by
language instructors, quizzes in language learn-
ing software such as Duolingo and Rosetta Stone,
and by official standardized language proficiency
tests such as TOEFL, IELTS, MET and others.
In “high stakes” scenarios, official language profi-
ciency tests are the de-facto standards for language
assessment; they are accepted by educational and
professional institutions, and are taken by millions
of language learners every year (for example, in

2016 over three million people took the IELTS test
(IELTS, 2017)). These tests probe language profi-
ciency based on performance on various linguistic
tasks, including grammar and vocabulary exams,
reading and listening comprehension questions, as
well as essay writing and speaking assignments.

Despite their ubiquity, traditional approaches to
language proficiency testing have several draw-
backs. First, such tests are typically prepared man-
ually and require extensive resources for test de-
velopment. Moreover, their validity can be un-
dermined by test specific training, prior knowl-
edge of the evaluation mechanisms (Powers et al.,
2002), as well as plain cheating via unauthorized
access to test materials. Further, the utilized test-
ing and evaluation methodologies vary across dif-
ferent tests, and test materials are in most cases
inaccessible to the research community. Perhaps
most crucially, the reliance of these tests on the
end products of linguistic tasks makes it challeng-
ing to study learners’ language processing patterns
and the difficulties they encounter in real time.

In this work we propose a novel methodol-
ogy for language proficiency assessment which
marks a significant departure from traditional lan-
guage proficiency tests and addresses many of
their drawbacks. In our approach, we determine
language proficiency from broad coverage analy-
sis of eye movements during reading of free-form
text in a foreign language, a special case of the
general problem of inferring comprehender char-
acteristics and cognitive state from the measur-
able traces of real-time language processing. Our
framework does not require the test taker to pre-
pare for the test or to perform any hand-crafted lin-
guistic tasks, but simply to attentively read an ar-
bitrary set of sentences. To the best of our knowl-
edge, this work is the first to propose and imple-
ment such an approach, yielding a novel language
proficiency evaluation scheme which relies solely

1986



on ordinary reading.

Our framework builds on previous research in
psycholinguistics demonstrating that the eyetrack-
ing record reflects how readers interact with the
text and how language processing unfolds over
time (Frazier and Rayner, 1982; Rayner, 1998;
Rayner et al., 2012). In particular, it has been
shown that key aspects of the reader’s character-
istics and cognitive state, such as mind wander-
ing during reading (Reichle et al., 2010), dyslexia
(Rello and Ballesteros, 2015) and native language
(Berzak et al., 2017) can be inferred from their
gaze record. Despite these advances, the poten-
tial of the rich and highly informative behavioral
signal obtainable from human reading for auto-
mated inference about readers, and specifically
about their linguistic proficiency has thus far been
largely unutilized.

Here, we first introduce EyeScore, an indepen-
dent measure of ESL proficiency which reflects
the extent to which a learner’s English reading pat-
terns resemble those of native speakers. Second,
we present a regression model which uses gaze
features to predict the learner’s scores on specific
external proficiency tests. We address each of our
tasks in two data regimes: Fixed Text, which re-
quires eyetracking training data for the specific
sentences presented to the test taker, as well as
the more general and challenging Any Text regime,
where the test taker is presented with arbitrary
sentences for which no previous eyetracking data
is available. To enable prediction mechanisms in
both regimes, we utilize previously proposed gaze
features, and develop new linguistically and psy-
chologically motivated feature sets which capture
the interaction between eye movements and lin-
guistic properties of the text.

We demonstrate the effectiveness of our ap-
proach via score comparison to standardized En-
glish proficiency tests. Our primary benchmark
test, taken in lab by 145 ESL participants, are
the grammar and listening sections of the Michi-
gan English Test (MET) whose scores range from
0 to 50. EyeScore yields 0.5 Pearson’s correla-
tion to MET in the Fixed Text regime, and 0.48
in the Any Text regime. Our regression model for
predicting MET scores from eye movement fea-
tures obtains a correlation of 0.7 and a Mean Ab-
solute Error (MAE) of 3.31 points in the Fixed
Text regime, and 0.49 correlation and 4.11 MAE
in the Any Text regime. Our results are sub-

stantially stronger compared to a baseline using
only raw reading speed, and are reasonably close
to correlations among traditional proficiency tests.
These outcomes confirm the promise of the pro-
posed methodology to reliably measure language
proficiency.

This paper is structured as follows. Section 2
describes the data and the experimental setup. In
section 3 we delineate our feature sets for charac-
tering eye movements in human reading. Section
4 introduces EyeScore, a second language profi-
ciency metric which is based on similarity of read-
ing patterns to native speakers. In section 5 we
use eyetracking patterns to predict scores on MET
and TOEFL. In section 6 we survey related work.
Finally, we conclude and discuss future work in
section 7.

2 Experimental Setup

Our study uses the dataset of eye movement
records and English proficiency scores introduced
in Berzak et al. (2017)1, which we describe here in
brief. The dataset contains gaze recordings of 37
native English speakers and 145 ESL speakers be-
longing to four native language backgrounds: 36
Chinese, 36 Japanese, 36 Portuguese and 37 Span-
ish. Participants were presented with free-form
English sentences appearing as one-liners. To en-
courage attentive reading each sentence was fol-
lowed by a yes/no comprehension question. Dur-
ing the experiment participants held a controller
with buttons for indicating sentence reading com-
pletion and answering the sentence comprehen-
sion questions. Participants’ eye movements were
recorded using a desktop mount EyeLink 1000
eyetracker (SR Research) at a sampling rate of
1000Hz.

2.1 Procedure and Reading Materials

An experimental trial for a sentence starts with a
presentation of a target circle at the center left of a
blank screen. A 300ms fixation on this circle trig-
gers a one-liner sentence on a new screen starting
at the same location. After completing reading the
sentence, participants are presented with the let-
ter Q on a blank screen. A 300ms fixation on this
letter triggers a question about the sentence on a
new screen. Participants provide a yes/no answer
to the question and are subsequently informed if

1The data was collected under IRB approval, and all the
participants provided written informed consent.

1987



they answered correctly. The first trial of the ex-
periment was presented to familiarize participants
with the experimental setup, and is discarded from
the analysis.

Each participant read a total of 156 English
sentences, randomly drawn from the Wall Street
Journal Penn Treebank (WSJ-PTB) (Marcus et al.,
1993). The maximal sentence length was set
to 100 characters, yielding an average sentence
length of 11.4 words. All the sentences include the
manual PTB annotations of POS tags (Santorini,
1990) and phrase structure trees, as well as Google
universal POS tags (Petrov et al., 2012) and depen-
dency trees obtained from the Universal Depen-
dency Treebank (UDT) (McDonald et al., 2013).

2.2 Experimental Regimes
Half of the 156 sentences presented to each par-
ticipant belong to the Fixed Text regime, and the
other half belong to the Any Text regime. Sen-
tences from the two regimes were interleaved ran-
domly and presented to all participants in the same
order.

Fixed Text In this regime, all the participants
read the same suite of 78 pre-selected sentences
(900 words). The Fixed Text regime supports
token-level comparisons of reading patterns for
specific words in the same contexts across read-
ers. It enables the construction of a proficiency test
which relies on a fixed battery of reading materials
for which previous eyetracking data was collected.

Any Text In the second, Any Text regime, dif-
ferent participants read different sets of 78 sen-
tences each (880 words on average). This regime
generalizes the Fixed Text scenario; predicting
reader characteristics in this regime requires for-
mulating type-level abstractions that would al-
low meaningful comparisons of reading patterns
across different sentences. It corresponds to a pro-
ficiency test in which the sentences presented to
the test taker are completely arbitrary, and no prior
eyetracking data is available for them.

2.3 Standardized English Tests
We use participants’ performance on the Michi-
gan English Test (MET) and TOEFL as external
benchmarks of their English proficiency.

Michigan English Test (MET) Our primary in-
dicator of English proficiency is the listening and
grammar sections of the MET (Form-B), which
were administered by Berzak et al. (2017) in-lab,
and taken by all the 145 non-native participants

upon completion of the reading experiment. The
test has a total of 50 multiple choice questions,
comprising 20 listening comprehension questions
and 30 written grammar questions. The test score
is computed as the number of correct answers for
these questions, with possible scores ranging from
0 to 50. The mean MET score in the dataset is
41.46 (std 6.27).

TOEFL Berzak et al. (2017) also collected self-
reported scores on the most recently taken offi-
cial English proficiency test, which we use here as
a secondary evaluation benchmark. We focus on
the most commonly reported test, the TOEFL-iBT
whose scores range from 0 to 120. We take into ac-
count only test results obtained less than four years
prior to the experiment, yielding 33 participants.
We sum the scores of the reading and listening sec-
tions of test, with a total possible score range of
0 to 60. In cases where participants reported only
the overall score, we divided that score by two. We
further augment this data with 20 participants who
took the TOEIC Listening and Reading test within
the same four years range, resulting in a total of
53 external proficiency scores. The TOEIC scores
were converted to the TOEFL scale by fitting a
third degree polynomial on an unofficial score
conversion table2 between the tests. The converted
scores were then divided by two. Henceforth we
refer to both TOEFL-iBT and TOEIC scores con-
verted to TOEFL-iBT scale as TOEFL scores. The
mean TOEFL score is 47.6 (std 9.55). The Pear-
son’s r correlation between the TOEFL and MET
scores in the dataset is 0.74.

2.4 Data Split

We divide the ESL speakers into train-
ing/development and test sets in the following
manner. For MET, we split our 145 ESL par-
ticipants into a training/development set of 88
participants and a test set of 57 participants.
The test set consists of an entire held out native
language – 36 speakers of Portuguese – as well
as 7 participants randomly sampled from each
of the remaining three native languages. Our
test set is thus particularly challenging due to
the large fraction of participants belonging to the
held out language, a design which emphasizes

2http://theedge.com.hk/conversion-table-for-toefl-ibt-
pbt-cbt-tests/ Although both TOEFL and TOEIC are
administered by the same company (ETS), to the best of our
knowledge there is no publicly available official conversion
table between the two tests.

1988



Figure 1: Illustration of the data split for MET into a
training/development set (88 participants) and a test set
(57 participants).

generalization to language learner populations
which are not part of the training set. Figure 1
presents a schematic overview of our MET split.
For TOEFL, due to the limited available data, in
Section 4 we report EyeScore correlations for all
the 53 test takers, and in Section 5 we perform
regression experiments using leave-one-out cross
validation.

3 Eye Movement Features

In order to capture behavioral psycholinguistic
traces of language proficiency we utilize several
linguistically and psychologically motivated fea-
ture representations of eye movements in read-
ing. We include features introduced in prior work
(see Words in Fixed Context and Syntactic Clus-
ters (Berzak et al., 2017)) as well as newly de-
veloped feature sets (see Word Property Coeffi-
cients and Transitions). All our features rely on
the well established division of gaze trajectories
into fixations (stops) and saccades (movements be-
tween fixations) that characterizes human reading
(Rayner, 1998).

Our fixation based features make use of several
standard metrics of fixation times, defined below.

• First Fixation duration (FF) Duration of the
first fixation on a word.

• First Pass duration (FP) Time spent from
first entering a word to first leaving it (includ-
ing re-fixations within the word).

• Total Fixation duration (TF) The sum of all
fixation times on a word.

• Regression Path duration (RP) Time from
first entering a word until proceeding to its
right.

Our feature sets are divided into two groups.
The first group consists of type-level features, ap-
plicable both in the Any Text and Fixed Text
regimes. The second group of feature sets is token-
based and can be extracted only in the Fixed Text
regime, because it presupposes the same textual
input for all participants.

3.1 Type-Level Features

Word Property Coefficients (WP-Coefficients)
This new feature set quantifies the influence of
three key word characteristics on reading times of
individual readers: word length, word frequency
and surprisal. The last measures the difficulty of
processing a word in a sentence (Hale, 2001; Levy,
2008), and is defined as its negative log probability
given a sentential context:

surprisal(wi|w1...i−1) = − log(wi|w1...i−1)
(1)

In the reading literature, these three characteris-
tics were suggested as the most prominent linguis-
tic factors influencing word reading times (e.g. In-
hoff and Rayner, 1986; Rayner and Well, 1996;
Pollatsek et al., 2008; Kliegl et al., 2004; Rayner
et al., 2004, 2011; Smith and Levy, 2013; Luke
and Christianson, 2016); whereby longer, less fre-
quent and contextually less predictable words are
fixated longer.

To derive this feature set, we measure length
as the number of characters in the word. Word
(log) frequencies are obtained from the BLLIP-
WSJ corpus (Charniak et al., 2000). Estimates
of surprisal are obtained from a trigram lan-
guage model with Chen and Goodman’s modified
Kneser-Ney smoothing trained on the BLLIP-WSJ
using SRILM (Stolcke et al., 2002). We then fit
for each participant four regression models that
use these three word characteristics to predict the
word’s raw FF, FP, TF and RP durations. The re-
gression models are fitted using Ordinary Least
Squares (OLS). We also train a logistic regres-
sion model for predicting word skips. Finally, we
extract the weights and intercepts of these mod-
els and encode them as features. As each of the
five models has three coefficients and one intercept
term, the resulting WP-Coefficients feature set has
20 features.

Syntactic Clusters (S-Clusters)
Following Berzak et al. (2017), we extract aver-
age word reading times clustered by POS tags and

1989



syntactic functions. We utilize three metrics of
reading times, FF, FP and TF durations. We then
cluster words according to three types of syntac-
tic criteria, Google Universal POS tags, PTB POS
tags, and the syntactic function label of the word
to its head word. To derive the feature set, we av-
erage the word fixation times of each cluster. An
example of an S-Cluster feature is the average TF
duration for words with the PTB POS tag DT. We
take into account only cluster labels that appear
at least once in the reading input of all the partici-
pants, yielding a total of 312 S-Clusters features in
the Fixed Text regime. In the Any Text regime we
obtain 156 S-Clusters features for MET and 165
S-Clusters features for TOEFL.

3.2 Token-Level Features

Transitions
Transitions is a new feature set which summarizes
the sequence of saccades between words in a sen-
tence. Given a sentence with n words, we con-
struct an n × n matrix T . A matrix entry ti,j
records the number of saccades whose launch site
falls within word i and landing site falls within
word j. With a total of 11,616 possible transitions
in the Fixed Text sentences, the resulting feature
set contains 9,077 features with a non-zero value
for at least one participant for MET, and 8,132
such features for TOEFL.

Words in Fixed Context (WFC)
This feature set was previously used in Berzak et
al. (2017) and consists of reading times for words
within fixed contexts. We extract FP and TF du-
rations for the 900 words in the Fixed Text sen-
tences, resulting in a total of 1,800 WFC features.

4 English Proficiency Scoring Based on
Eye Movements in Reading

We hypothesize that language proficiency influ-
ences the way that learners process a second lan-
guage, which in turn will be reflected in eye move-
ment patterns in reading. Specifically, we propose
to examine whether the more proficient is an ESL
learner, the more similar are their reading patterns
to those of native English speakers. We opera-
tionalize the notion of native-like reading in the
following manner. First, given a feature represen-
tation of choice and a dataset D comprising ESL
learners DL2 and native speakers DL1 we Z score
each feature in D using a Z scaler derived from

DL2. We then obtain a prototype feature vector of
native reading vL1 by averaging the feature vectors
of the native speakers.

vL1 =
1

|DL1|
∑

y∈DL1
vy (2)

Finally, we obtain an eyetracking based profi-
ciency score of an ESL learner by computing the
cosine similarity of their feature vector to the na-
tive reading prototype. Hereafter we refer to this
measure as EyeScore.

EyeScorey∈DL2 =
vy · vL1
‖vy‖‖vL1‖

(3)

Reading Speed Normalization To reduce bias
towards fast readers, the feature representations
used for Eyescore are normalized to be invariant to
the reading speed of the participant. Specifically,
for the S-Clusters and WFC feature sets we fol-
low the normalization procedure of Berzak et al.
(2017), where for a given participant, the reading
time of a wordwi according to a fixation metricM
is normalized by SM,C , the metric’s fixation time
per word in the linguistic context C:

SM,C =
1

|C|
∑

w∈C
Mw (4)

The linguistic context is defined as the surround-
ing sentence in the Fixed Text regime, and the en-
tire textual input in the Any Text regime. The nor-
malized fixation time is then obtained as:

Mnormwi =
Mwi
SM,C

(5)

For the WC-Coefficients features we take into ac-
count only the 15 model coefficients, and omit
the 5 intercept features which capture the reading
speed of the participant. Finally, we also normal-
ize the Transitions features matrix T by the to-
tal number of saccades in the sentence to obtain
Tnorm in which

∑
i,j tnormi,j = 1.

4.1 Correlation with MET and TOEFL
We evaluate the ability of EyeScore to capture
language proficiency by comparing it against our
two external proficiency tests, MET and TOEFL.
Table 1 presents the Pearson’s r correlation of
EyeScore with MET and TOEFL for the feature
sets described in section 3 using the MET train-
ing/development set and all the participants who
took TOEFL.

1990



MET TOEFL
Features Fixed Any Fixed Any
Reading Speed 0.28 0.27 0.15 0.13
WP-Coefficients 0.38 0.37 0.21 0.13
S-Clusters 0.45 0.48 0.50 0.45
Transitions 0.45 NA 0.44 NA
WFC 0.50 NA 0.54 NA

Table 1: Pearson’s r of EyeScore for different feature
sets with MET (training/development set, 88 partici-
pants) and TOEFL (all 53 participants). Fixed denotes
the Fixed Text regime in which all the participants read
the same sentences, and Any denotes the Any Text
regime where different readers read different sentences.

The strongest correlations, 0.5 for MET and
0.54 for TOEFL, are obtained in the Fixed Text
regime using the WFC features. This outcome
confirms the effectiveness reading time compar-
isons when the presented sentences are shared
across participants. To illustrate the quality of
this result, Figure 2 presents a comparison of
EyeScore and MET scores in the Fixed Text and
WFC features setup. We further note good per-
formance of the Transitions and S-Clusters fea-
tures in this regime across both proficiency tests.
The strongest performance in the Any Text regime
is obtained using the S-Clusters features, yielding
0.48 correlation with MET and 0.45 correlation
with TOEFL. These results are competitive with
the WFC feature set in the Fixed Text regime, sug-
gesting that reliable EyeScores can be obtained
even when no prior eyetracking data is available
for the sentences presented to the test taker.

In order to contextualize the correlations ob-
tained with the EyeScore approach, we first com-
pare our results to raw reading speed, an informa-
tive baseline which does not rely on eyetracking.
EyeScore substantially outperforms this baseline
for nearly all the feature sets on both MET and
TOEFL, clearly showing the benefit of eye move-
ment information for our task. Next, we consider
possible upper bounds for our correlations. While
obtaining such upper bounds is challenging, we
can use correlations between different traditional
standardized proficiency tests as informative refer-
ence points. First, as mentioned previously, in our
dataset the MET and reported TOEFL scores have
a Pearson’s r correlation of 0.74. We further note
an external study conducted by the testing com-
pany Education First (EF) which measured the
correlation of their flagship standardized English

20 25 30 35 40 45 50
Michigan

−0.2

−0.1

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

Co
sin

e 
wi
th
 E
ng

lis
h 
L1

pearsonr = 0.5; p = 7.5e-07

Figure 2: Comparison of MET (training/development
set, 88 participants) with EyeScore using Words in
Fixed Context (WFC) features in the Fixed Text
regime.

proficiency test EFSET-PLUS with TOEFL-iBT
(Luecht, 2015). Using 384 participants who took
both tests, the study found a Pearson’s r of 0.63 for
the reading comprehension and 0.69 for the listen-
ing comprehension sections of these tests. Despite
the radical difference of our testing methodology,
our strongest feature sets obtain rather competi-
tive results relative to these correlations, further
strengthening the evidence for the ability of our
approach to capture language proficiency.

5 Predicting Performance on MET and
TOEFL

In section 4 we introduced EyeScore as an inde-
pendent metric of language proficiency which is
based on eye movements during reading. Here, we
examine whether eye movements can also be used
to explicitly predict the performance of partici-
pants on specific external standardized language
proficiency tests. This task is of practical value
for development of predictive tools for standard-
ized proficiency tests, and constitutes an alterna-
tive framework for studying the relevance of eye
movement patterns in reading to language profi-
ciency.

To address this task, we use Ridge regression
to predict overall scores on an external proficiency
test from eye movement features in reading. The
model parameters θ are obtained by minimizing

1991



MET TOEFL
Fixed Any Fixed Any

Features r MAE r MAE r MAE r MAE
Reading Speed 0.27 4.58 0.24 4.62 0.09 7.92 0.06 7.96
WP-Coefficients 0.43 4.11 0.44 4.14 0.34 7.76 0.31 7.49
S-Clusters 0.56 3.87 0.49 4.11 0.55 7.45 0.50 7.76
Transitions 0.52 3.93 NA NA 0.38 7.11 NA NA
WFC 0.70 3.31 NA NA 0.50 6.68 NA NA

Table 2: Pearson’s r and Mean Absolute Error (MAE) for prediction of MET scores (test set, 57 participants) and
TOEFL scores (leave-one-out cross validation, all 53 participants) from eye movement patterns in reading. We
consider two baselines which do not use eyetracking information: (1) the average proficiency score in the training
set, which yields 4.82 MAE on MET and 8.29 MAE on TOEFL, and (2) the reading speed of the participant.

the following loss objective:
∑

i

(yi − θ · f(xi))2 + λ‖θ‖22 (6)

where yi is a participant’s test score, xi is their
eye movement record, and f(xi) are the extracted
eye movement features. To calibrate the model
with respect to native English speakers, we aug-
ment each training set DL2tr with the group of 37
native speakers DL1 whose proficiency scores are
assigned to the maximum grade of the respective
test (50 for MET and 60 for TOEFL)3. Based on
MET performance on the train/dev set, the features
used for predicting scores on both tests are not nor-
malized for speed4. As a preprocessing step, we
fit a Z scaler for each feature using the ESL par-
ticipants in the training set, and apply it to all the
participants in the training and test sets.

Results

We evaluate prediction accuracy using Pearson’s
r and Mean Absolute Error (MAE) from the true
proficiency test scores. The λ parameter for MET
is optimized for MAE on 10 fold cross validation
within the training/development set. For TOEFL,
which has a relatively small number of partici-
pants, we report results on leave-one-out cross val-
idation with λ set to 1.

Table 2 presents the results for both proficiency
tests. We consider two baselines; the first is as-
signing all test set participants with the average

3Our experiments on the training/development set indi-
cate that this training data augmentation step leads in most
cases to improved regression performance.

4We note that in line with the low correlation of reading
speed with TOEFL, speed normalized features tend to be bet-
ter predictors of TOEFL scores, obtaining r 0.59 and MAE
6.47 with WFC features in the Fixed Text regime, and r 0.58
and MAE 7.19 with S-Clusters in the Any Text regime.

20 30 40 50
True Michigan Score

30

35

40

45

50

Pr
ed

ict
ed

 M
ich

ig
an

 S
co

re

pearsonr = 0.7; p = 1e-09

Figure 3: Comparison of MET scores (test set, 57 par-
ticipants) with predicted MET scores using Words in
Fixed Context (WFC) eye movement features in the
Fixed Text regime.

score of the training participants. This baseline
yields an MAE of 4.82 on MET and 8.29 on
TOEFL. The second baseline uses reading speed
as the sole feature for prediction. In all cases, our
eyetracking based features outperform the average
score and reading speed baselines.

The performance of the different feature sets is
in most cases consistent across the two proficiency
tests and is largely in line with the correlations of
EyeScore reported in Table 1. Similarly to the
EyeScore outcomes, the best performance in the
Fixed Text regime is obtained using the WFC fea-
ture set, with a Pearson’s r of 0.7 and MAE of
3.31 for MET. This result is highly competitive
with correlations between different standardized
English proficiency tests. Figure 3 depicts a com-

1992



parison between MET scores and our MET predic-
tions in this setup. On TOEFL, WFC features ob-
tain the strongest MAE of 6.68, while S-Clusters
have a higher r coefficient of 0.55.

In the Any Text regime, differently from Eye-
Score, we obtain comparable results for the S-
Clusters and WP-Coefficients feature sets. Over-
all, the improvements of both feature sets over the
baselines in the Any Text regime further support
the ability of type-level features to generalize the
task of language proficiency prediction to arbitrary
sentences.

6 Related Work

Our work lies on the intersection of language
proficiency assessment, second language acquisi-
tion (SLA), the psychology of reading and NLP.
Automated language proficiency assessment from
free-form linguistic performance has been stud-
ied mainly in language production (Dikli, 2006;
Williamson, 2009; Shermis and Burstein, 2013).
Over the past several decades, multiple essay and
speech scoring systems have been developed for
learner language using a wide range of linguis-
tically motivated feature sets (e.g. Lonsdale and
Strong-Krause, 2003; Landauer, 2003; Xi et al.,
2008; Yannakoudakis et al., 2011). Some of these
systems have been deployed in official language
proficiency tests, for example the e-rater essay
scoring system (Attali and Burstein, 2004) used in
TOEFL (Ramineni et al., 2012). While this line of
work focuses on assessment of language produc-
tion, here we introduce and address for the first
time automated language assessment during on-
line language comprehension.

In SLA, there has been considerable interest in
eyetracking, where studies have mostly focused
on controlled experiments examining processing
of specific linguistic phenomena such as syntactic
ambiguities, cognates and idioms (Dussias, 2010;
Roberts and Siyanova-Chanturia, 2013). A no-
table exception is (Cop et al., 2015) who used free-
form reading to study differences in fixation times
and saccade lengths between native and non-native
readers. Our work also adopts broad coverage
analysis of reading patterns, which we use to for-
mulate predictive models of language proficiency.

Our study draws on a large body of work in the
psychology of reading (see Rayner, 1998; Rayner
et al., 2012, for overview) which has suggested
that eye movement patterns during reading are sys-

tematically influenced by a broad range of lin-
guistic characteristics of the text, and reflect how
readers mentally engage with the text (Frazier and
Rayner, 1982; Rayner and Frazier, 1989; Reichle
et al., 1998; Engbert et al., 2005; Demberg and
Keller, 2008; Reichle et al., 2009; Levy et al.,
2009, among many others). Prior work on read-
ing has also demonstrated that gaze provides valu-
able information about various characteristics of
the reader and their cognitive state. For example,
Reichle et at. (2010) have shown that eye move-
ment patterns are categorically different in atten-
tive versus mindless reading. In Rello and Balles-
teros (2015) eye movements were used to distin-
guish between readers with and without dyslexia.
Berzak et al. (2017) collected the dataset used in
our work and used it to predict the first language of
non-native English readers from gaze. We build on
these studies to motivate our task and design fea-
ture representations which encode linguistic fac-
tors known to affect the human reading process.

Related work in NLP developed predictive
models of reading times in reading of free-form
text (e.g. Nilsson and Nivre, 2009; Hara et al.,
2012; Hahn and Keller, 2016). In a complemen-
tary vein, eyetracking signal has been used for
linguistic annotation tasks such as POS tagging
(Barrett and Søgaard, 2015a; Barrett et al., 2016)
and prediction of syntactic functions (Barrett and
Søgaard, 2015b). Both lines of investigation pro-
vide further evidence for the tight interaction be-
tween eye movements and linguistic properties of
the text, which we leverage in our work for infer-
ence about the linguistic knowledge of the reader.

7 Conclusion and Discussion

We present a novel approach for automated assess-
ment of language proficiency which relies on eye
movements during reading of free-form text. Our
EyeScore test captures the similarity of language
learners’ gaze patterns to those of native speak-
ers, and correlates well with the standardized tests
MET and TOEFL. A second variant of our ap-
proach accurately predicts participants’ scores on
these two tests. To the best of our knowledge, the
proposed framework is the first proof-of-concept
for a system which utilizes eyetracking to measure
linguistic ability.

In future work, we plan to extend the analysis
of the validity and consistency of our approach,
and further explore its applications for language

1993



proficiency evaluation. In particular, we will ex-
amine the impact of factors that can undermine
the validity of language proficiency tests, such as
test specific training, familiarity with the evalua-
tion system’s features (Powers et al., 2002), and
cheating via unauthorized prior access to test ma-
terials. Since participants are less likely to be
able to manipulate their eye movements in an in-
formed and systematic manner—readers are gen-
erally not even aware that their eye movements
are saccadic—and since our test can be performed
on arbitrary sentences, we expect it to be robust
to prior exposure to the test materials and test-
ing methodology. We will further study the con-
sistency of our scores for repeated tests by the
same participants. A preliminary split-half analy-
sis indicates that eyetracking based scores are ex-
pected to be highly consistent across tests. Fi-
nally, our approach can be combined with tradi-
tional proficiency testing methodologies, whereby
gaze will be recorded while the participant is tak-
ing a standardized language proficiency test. This
will enable developing novel approaches to lan-
guage proficiency assessment which will integrate
task based performance with real time monitoring
of cognitive and linguistic processing.

Acknowledgments

This material is based upon work supported in
part by the Center for Brains, Minds, and Ma-
chines (CBMM), funded by NSF STC award CCF-
1231216.

References
Yigal Attali and Jill Burstein. 2004. Automated essay

scoring with e-rater R© v. 2.0. ETS Research Report
Series 2004(2).

Maria Barrett, Joachim Bingel, Frank Keller, and An-
ders Søgaard. 2016. Weakly supervised part-of-
speech tagging using eye-tracking data. In ACL. vol-
ume 2, pages 579–584.

Maria Barrett and Anders Søgaard. 2015a. Reading
behavior predicts syntactic categories. In CoNLL.
pages 345–349.

Maria Barrett and Anders Søgaard. 2015b. Using read-
ing behavior to predict grammatical functions. In
Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Cognitive As-
pects of Computational Language Learning. pages
1–5.

Yevgeni Berzak, Chie Nakamura, Suzanne Flynn, and
Boris Katz. 2017. Predicting native language from
gaze. In ACL. pages 541–551.

Eugene Charniak, Don Blaheta, Niyu Ge, Keith Hall,
John Hale, and Mark Johnson. 2000. BLLIP 1987-
89 WSJ corpus release 1. Linguistic Data Consor-
tium, Philadelphia 36.

Uschi Cop, Denis Drieghe, and Wouter Duyck. 2015.
Eye movement patterns in natural reading: A com-
parison of monolingual and bilingual reading of a
novel. PLOS ONE 10(8):1–38.

Vera Demberg and Frank Keller. 2008. Data from eye-
tracking corpora as evidence for theories of syntactic
processing complexity. Cognition 109(2):193–210.

Semire Dikli. 2006. An overview of automated scoring
of essays. The Journal of Technology, Learning and
Assessment 5(1).

Paola E Dussias. 2010. Uses of eye-tracking data in
second language sentence processing research. An-
nual Review of Applied Linguistics 30:149–166.

Ralf Engbert, Antje Nuthmann, Eike M Richter, and
Reinhold Kliegl. 2005. Swift: a dynamical model of
saccade generation during reading. Psychological
Review 112(4):777.

Lyn Frazier and Keith Rayner. 1982. Making and cor-
recting errors during sentence comprehension: Eye
movements in the analysis of structurally ambiguous
sentences. Cognitive Psychology 14(2):178–210.

Michael Hahn and Frank Keller. 2016. Modeling hu-
man reading with neural attention. In EMNLP.
pages 85–95.

John Hale. 2001. A probabilistic Earley parser as a
psycholinguistic model. In NAACL. Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 1–8.

Tadayoshi Hara, Daichi Mochihashi, Yoshinobu Kano,
and Akiko Aizawa. 2012. Predicting word fixations
in text with a CRF model for capturing general read-
ing strategies among readers. In Proceedings of
the 1st Workshop on Eye-tracking and Natural Lan-
guage Processing. pages 55–70.

IELTS. 2017. International English language testing
system — Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. On-
line; accessed November 2017. https://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/International_
English_Language_Testing_System.

Albrecht Werner Inhoff and Keith Rayner. 1986.
Parafoveal word processing during eye fixations in
reading: Effects of word frequency. Perception &
Psychophysics 40(6):431–439.

Reinhold Kliegl, Ellen Grabner, Martin Rolfs, and Ralf
Engbert. 2004. Length, frequency, and predictabil-
ity effects of words on eye movements in reading.
European Journal of Cognitive Psychology 16(1-
2):262–284.

1994



Thomas K Landauer. 2003. Automated scoring and an-
notation of essays with the Intelligent Essay Asses-
sor. Automated essay scoring: A crossdisciplinary
perspective .

Roger Levy. 2008. Expectation-based syntactic com-
prehension. Cognition 106(3):1126–1177.

Roger Levy, Klinton Bicknell, Tim Slattery, and Keith
Rayner. 2009. Eye movement evidence that readers
maintain and act on uncertainty about past linguis-
tic input. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 106(50):21086–21090.

Deryle Lonsdale and Diane Strong-Krause. 2003. Au-
tomated rating of ESL essays. In Proceedings of
the HLT-NAACL Workshop on Building Educational
Applications using Natural Language Processing -
Volume 2. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 61–67.

Richard M Luecht. 2015. EFSET PLUS
- TOEFL iBT correlation study report.
https://www.efset.org/research/
˜/media/centralefcom/efset/pdf/
EFSET_TOEFL_correlational_report_
Sep_v1.pdf.

Steven G Luke and Kiel Christianson. 2016. Limits
on lexical prediction during reading. Cognitive Psy-
chology 88:22–60.

Mitchell P Marcus, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz, and
Beatrice Santorini. 1993. Building a large annotated
corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. Computa-
tional Linguistics 19(2):313–330.

Ryan McDonald, Joakim Nivre, Yvonne Quirmbach-
Brundage, Yoav Goldberg, Dipanjan Das, Kuzman
Ganchev, Keith Hall, Slav Petrov, Hao Zhang, Os-
car Täckström, et al. 2013. Universal dependency
annotation for multilingual parsing. In ACL.

Mattias Nilsson and Joakim Nivre. 2009. Learning
where to look: Modeling eye movements in read-
ing. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth Conference on
Computational Natural Language Learning. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, pages 93–101.

Slav Petrov, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan McDonald. 2012.
A universal part-of-speech tagset. In LREC.

Alexander Pollatsek, Barbara J Juhasz, Erik D Reichle,
Debra Machacek, and Keith Rayner. 2008. Immedi-
ate and delayed effects of word frequency and word
length on eye movements in reading: a reversed de-
layed effect of word length. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance
34(3):726.

Donald E Powers, Jill C Burstein, Martin Chodorow,
Mary E Fowles, and Karen Kukich. 2002. Stumping
e-rater: challenging the validity of automated essay
scoring. Computers in Human Behavior 18(2):103–
134.

Chaitanya Ramineni, Catherine S Trapani, David M
Williamson, Tim Davey, and Brent Bridgeman.
2012. Evaluation of the e-rater R© scoring engine for
the TOEFL R© independent and integrated prompts.
ETS Research Report Series 2012(1).

Keith Rayner. 1998. Eye movements in reading and
information processing: 20 years of research. Psy-
chological Bulletin 124(3):372.

Keith Rayner, Jane Ashby, Alexander Pollatsek, and
Erik D Reichle. 2004. The effects of frequency and
predictability on eye fixations in reading: implica-
tions for the ez reader model. Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology: Human Perception and Perfor-
mance 30(4):720.

Keith Rayner and Lyn Frazier. 1989. Selection mech-
anisms in reading lexically ambiguous words. Jour-
nal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Mem-
ory, and Cognition 15(5):779.

Keith Rayner, Alexander Pollatsek, Jane Ashby, and
Charles Clifton Jr. 2012. Psychology of reading.
Psychology Press.

Keith Rayner, Timothy J Slattery, Denis Drieghe, and
Simon P Liversedge. 2011. Eye movements and
word skipping during reading: effects of word
length and predictability. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance
37(2):514.

Keith Rayner and Arnold D Well. 1996. Effects of con-
textual constraint on eye movements in reading: A
further examination. Psychonomic Bulletin & Re-
view 3(4):504–509.

Erik D Reichle, Alexander Pollatsek, Donald L Fisher,
and Keith Rayner. 1998. Toward a model of eye
movement control in reading. Psychological Review
105(1):125.

Erik D Reichle, Andrew E Reineberg, and Jonathan W
Schooler. 2010. Eye movements during mindless
reading. Psychological Science 21(9):1300–1310.

Erik D Reichle, Tessa Warren, and Kerry McConnell.
2009. Using ez reader to model the effects of higher
level language processing on eye movements during
reading. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 16(1):1–
21.

Luz Rello and Miguel Ballesteros. 2015. Detecting
readers with dyslexia using machine learning with
eye tracking measures. In Proceedings of the 12th
Web for All Conference. ACM, page 16.

Leah Roberts and Anna Siyanova-Chanturia. 2013.
Using eye-tracking to investigate topics in L2 acqui-
sition and L2 processing. Studies in Second Lan-
guage Acquisition 35(02):213–235.

Beatrice Santorini. 1990. Part-of-speech tagging
guidelines for the Penn Treebank project (3rd revi-
sion). Technical Reports (CIS) .

1995



Mark D Shermis and Jill Burstein. 2013. Handbook of
automated essay evaluation: Current applications
and new directions. Routledge.

Nathaniel J Smith and Roger Levy. 2013. The effect of
word predictability on reading time is logarithmic.
Cognition 128(3):302–319.

Andreas Stolcke et al. 2002. SRILM - an extensible
language modeling toolkit. In Interspeech. volume
2002, page 2002.

David M Williamson. 2009. A framework for imple-
menting automated scoring. In Annual Meeting of
the American Educational Research Association and
the National Council on Measurement in Education,
San Diego, CA.

Xiaoming Xi, Derrick Higgins, Klaus Zechner, and
David M Williamson. 2008. Automated scoring
of spontaneous speech using SpeechRaterSM v1. 0.
ETS Research Report Series 2008(2).

Helen Yannakoudakis, Ted Briscoe, and Ben Medlock.
2011. A new dataset and method for automatically
grading ESOL texts. In ACL. pages 180–189.

1996


