



















































The Word Analogy Testing Caveat


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2018, pages 242–246
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 1 - 6, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

The word analogy testing caveat

Natalie Schluter
Department of Computer Science

IT University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, Denmark

natschluter@itu.dk

Abstract

There are some important problems in the
evaluation of word embeddings using standard
word analogy tests. In particular, in virtue
of the assumptions made by systems generat-
ing the embeddings, these remain tests over
randomness. We show that even supposing
there were such word analogy regularities that
should be detected in the word embeddings ob-
tained via unsupervised means, standard word
analogy test implementation practices provide
distorted or contrived results. We raise con-
cerns regarding the use of Principal Compo-
nent Analysis to 2 or 3 dimensions as a pro-
vision of visual evidence for the existence of
word analogy relations in embeddings. Fi-
nally, we propose some solutions to these
problems.

1 Introduction

Continuous dense representations of words, or
word embeddings, are d-dimensional vectors ob-
tained from raw unannotated text. As weight vec-
tors, they provide, given some model, predictions
of either (1) some context of a word, or (2) a
word given its context. The word embeddings
are meant to reflect distributional structure as a
proxy to semantics and syntax à la Harris (Har-
ris, 1954). A natural and desirable effect of such
context driven learning of word embeddings is dis-
tributional similarity, whereby words that are sim-
ilar to each other will tend to group together in
the target hyperspace. Thus Frenchman, Spaniard,
and Dane should group together, as should loves,
likes, and admires, or French, Spanish and Danish,
as respectively “a set of words for humans from
specific countries”, “a set of present tense transi-
tive verbs denoting fondness”, and “a set of lan-
guages”.

By employing a transfer learning approach with
the use of word embeddings in the place of one-hot

word feature vectors, word embeddings obtained
in this way have been shown to both simplify and
improve the performance of systems across a wide
range of NLP tasks. Moreover, word embeddings
trained this way and used as initial word represen-
tations are now commonly understood to improve
the learning process in neural network based sys-
tems across the same array of NLP tasks.

There has been some progress in understand-
ing why these representations work so well and
a number of simple tasks developed to evaluate
them independently such as (1) word similarity
tests, (2) synonym selection tests, and (3) word
analogy tests, in addition to a variety of possible
downstream system tests. That the distributional
representations of words should reflect semantic
similarity (i.e., as tested by (1) and (2)) is inher-
ent in the definition of the word embedding learn-
ing task. However that similar relations between
words should be described by word embeddings
obtained this way is not straightforward. There
are also standard engineering practices in analogy
evaluations that would prevent accurate analogy
testing even if it were applicable.

In this paper, we hope to survey some main
problems concerning the word analogy test as it
is currently being calculated, in three separate di-
rections:

1. Theoretical assumption misalignment: A
purely distributional hypothesis misaligns
with testing for analogy relations.

2. Poor conventional engineering choices:

(a) Word embeddings are normalised and
therefore distorted before testing.

(b) Premise vectors are excluded before
prediction.

3. Problematic visual evidence: Visualisations

242



based on the output of Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) are misleading.

2 The word analogy tests and associated
benchmarking data

The word analogy assumption, introduced by
Mikolov et al. (2013b), elaborated with more pre-
cision by Levy and Goldberg (2014) and adapted
partially from Jurgens et al. (2012) goes as fol-
lows. Suppose we have representations for two
pairs of words

(a1,b1), (a2,b2) (1)

having an analogous syntactic or semantic rela-
tion: a1 is to b1 what a2 is to b2. By the
word analogy assumption, this analogous relation
should be represented in terms of some optimal
vector r:

r ≈ a1 − b1 ≈ a2 − b2 (2)
The typical example used is

r ≈ king − man ≈ queen − woman
and r approximately represents something like “is
a royal version of”. This can be rewritten as

king − man + woman ≈ queen. (3)
From this latter equation, the first standard word
analogy test arises.

The prediction test and its dataset. In the pre-
diction test, for the pairs of words in (1), evalua-
tion proceeds by using the word analogy assump-
tion

a1 − b1 + b2 ≈ a2 (4)
by means of showing that the left side of this equa-
tion (consisting of premise vectors) predicts–that
is, it is closer to–the word represented by a2 (the
gold vector) than to any other word in the vocab-
ulary, according to some distance metric, which
is generally accepted to be cosine similarity. The
micro-averaged accuracy is then reported.

The test data for the prediction test consists
of the MSR and GOOGLE datasets. The MSR
dataset has 8000 analogy questions of morpho-
syntactic nature and concerning adjectives, nouns
and verbs.1 The GOOGLE dataset consists of
19,544 analogy questions, across 14 relation
types, half of which are semantic relations and half
morpho-syntactic.

1http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/
um/people/gzweig/Pubs/myz_naacl13_test_
set.tgz

The ranking test and its dataset. In the rank-
ing test, a list of word pairs is given that hold the
same relation, but to differing degrees. The task is
to rank these pairs by order of strength of the re-
lation. Using the prediction test, this task requires
the system to calculate the prediction for each pair
of words (a,b) with respect the rest of the pairs on
the list, and average these scores for (a,b). Pairs
are ranked according to this average. The larger
the average, the more typical a pair is predicted to
be of the relation in question. Rankings are com-
pared with a gold ranking by computing the Spear-
man’s correlation rank coefficient.

The SEMEVAL 2012 Task 2 dataset is the stan-
dard word analogy ranking test test. It contains
lists of pairs for 79 semantic relations.2

Implementation considerations. In our test-
ing, out-of-vocabulary words were given the the
component-wise average word embedding. It is
important to note that in all test suites (also for
those developed within embedding learning sys-
tems), we have found two conventional engineer-
ing choices: (1) normalisation of all word embed-
dings before testing, and (2) exclusion of the pos-
sibility to predict any premise vectors. We discuss
these and other issues in the following section.

3 Problems with word analogy tests and
empirical results

We identify three types of causes for concern when
applying analogy testing, having to do with (1)
a misalignment of assumptions in generating and
testing word embeddings, (2) conventional engi-
neering choices, and (3) problematic visual evi-
dence derived from PCA for data projection to two
dimensions.

For reasons of reproducibility, we downloaded
and directly used all dimensionalities of GloVe
pretrained word embeddings generated over a
2014 Wikpedia dump and the Gigaword corpus,
combined for a 6 billion token corpus (Penning-
ton et al., 2014).3. In the tests, embeddings for
unknown words are replaced by the mean vectors.
All tests are made using a version of a freely avail-
able embedding benchmarking software that we
have extended for the purposes of this paper.4

2https://sites.google.com/site/
semeval2012task2/

3Available at http://nlp.stanford.edu/
projects/glove/

4https://github.com/natschluter/

243



3.1 Misalignment of assumptions

To date, methods for generating monolingual word
embeddings purely from raw text, which make no
use of hand-crafted or other lexical resources, nor
any system of enrichment of the text, like parsers,
POS-taggers or otherwise, have been based only
on the distributional hypothesis: that words can
be described sufficiently in terms of their distri-
bution in language. Systems generating word em-
beddings in this manner use their generated repre-
sentations to predict word contexts, or vice versa.
So it is plausible that words that share much con-
textual information, and therefore much distribu-
tional information, will share similar representa-
tions and naturally group together in their hyper-
space.

Supposing that such a word embedding gen-
eration system groups together words for hu-
mans from specific countries, like Frenchman,
Spaniard, and Dane. We assume the same for the
words French, Spanish, and Danish. While the
system has probably successfully represented the
distributional character of the words by grouping
each set together, there is no reason why within
each individual group, Danish and Dane’s rela-
tive positions should be similar to that of both
pairs (Spanish, Spain) and (French, Frenchman).
The assumption of distributional similarity does
not align with the word analogy assumption.

In the extreme, we could theoretically have the
pair (Danish, Dane)’s relative position most simi-
lar to that of the shuffled pairs (French, Spaniard)
and (Spanish, Frenchman) and maintain identical
word similarity scores on average. Indeed, one
could shuffle the vector representations of all the
words considered to be synonymous from the sim-
ilarity benchmarking dataset; this would maintain
precisely the same similarity score, using a cosine
similarity metric.5 Let π : V → V be a permuta-
tion of word vectors such that similar word remain
close in the space. In particular, let’s suppose that
π shuffles the vectors of all nationalities, like Dane
and Frenchman, but maintains the same language
vectors like Danish and French. The average of
similarities remains the same, as all terms appear-

word-analogy-caveat extended from
https://github.com/kudkudak/
word-embeddings-benchmarks.

5This also works for a euclidean distance similarity met-
ric.

ing in the sum in (5) also appear in (6):

1

n(n − 1)/2
∑

i<j
i,j∈[n]

cos(ai,aj) (5)

=
1

n(n − 1)/2
∑

i<j
i,j∈[n]

cos(π(ai), π(aj)) (6)

However, the word analogy assumption is now
most certainly broken: suppose that π permutes
only two vectors, a2 and a3 and leaves all other
vectors as is:

a1 − b1 + b2 = π(a2) = a3 ̸= a2.

3.2 Conventional engineering choices

There are two conventional practices in evaluat-
ing word embeddings that we aim to show are
problematic: normalisation and the exclusion of
premise vectors in prediction.

Distortion by normalisation. It is common
practice to normalise word embeddings before
they are used, and in the case of word analogies,
before they are tested. Unfortunately, this prac-
tice distorts the original spread of the word em-
beddings, which greatly effects testing for word
analogies. In Table 1 we list the mean and vari-
ance of the norms of GloVe word vectors. We no-
tice that on average the norm of the vectors is far
from length 1, and the variance is so small that a
large majority of vectors have length larger than 1.
The word embedding learner was originally free
to and would generally make use of a much larger
portion of the hyperspace to discriminate based on
word distribution.

d mean variance

50 4.475 0.744
100 3.977 0.847
300 4.966 1.471

Table 1: Spread of norms of GloVe word vectors across
dimensions d.

We observe in Table 2 that scores change (and in
fact drop) significantly when vectors are not nor-
malised, for the GOOGLE and MSR tests. This
suggests additionally that much of the success in
analogy testing was misleading, resulting gener-
ally from collapsing the vocabulary of vectors onto

244



the unit hypersphere. Any possible use of mean-
ingful collinearity by the word-embedding model
is lost after normalisation.

Exclusion of premise vectors from predictions.
Another conventional practice in evaluating word
embeddings by word analogy is the exclusion of
premise vectors from the possibility of being pre-
dicted. As we can see in the results in Table 2,
between 15-60% of the time, the system predicts
a premise vector on the GOOGLE analogy data,
for example. Upon closer analysis, we find that
99% of these latter prediction mis-hits are with the
premise in the gold vector’s own word pair; this
means that words a1,b1 in word pairs are often
so close together that they cancel each other out:
a1 − b1 ≈ 0. If the data truly scored high on the
word analogy test, it would not need to exclude
premise vectors from the possibility of prediction.

3.3 PCA to two dimensions from dimension d
can be misleading

Results of the word analogy test are often accom-
panied by a visualisation of projected word vec-
tors to the two dimensional plane using Princi-
pal Component Analysis (PCA) ((Mikolov et al.,
2013a; Sun et al., 2015) for example). Though
these are generally not claimed to be part of the
evaluation, the visualisations are included to con-
vince the reader of the quality of the word embed-
dings with respect to word analogies–the line con-
necting a1 and b1 being approximately parallel to
the line through a2 and b2 whenever word anal-
ogy recovery is optimal (as in Equation (2)).

PCA is an unsupervised approach for finding
the “core” features from the data, supposing a nor-
mal distribution feature-wise. For two dimensions,
the objective is to find the two directions e1, e2
along which the data has the highest variability,
and model the instances xk, k ∈ [N ] by the respec-
tive distances ak1, ak2 between the point xk and
lines through the mean vector, m = 1n

∑n
k=1 xk

in the respective directions e1 and e2.
There are two main problems with this sort of

evidence. Firstly, even if word analogies as de-
scribed by Equation (4) existed in the data, it
would only be a matter of chance that apply-
ing PCA to the entire dataset would recover even
slightly these parallel (analogous) word relations
visually. That is, there is no reason to believe that
the line through the words in a pair is not almost
perpendicular to the surface they are mapped to.

Secondly, if one is tempted to apply PCA only
to the set of vectors corresponding to the two word
groups in question, it is rather straightforward to
produce the desired visualisation, so long as the
two groups are clustered together. PCA should de-
rive a surface that cuts through these two groups.
So unless there is absolutely no clustering of sim-
ilarly behaving words, PCA will give the evidence
of word analogies one desires.

d GOOGLE MSR SEMEVAL

50 46.24 35.56 13.99
H 30.43 20.36 13.99
D 20.58 10.01 14.76

H,D 17.96 6.9 14.76

100 63.19 55.09 16.53
H 33.47 24.87 16.53
D 49.92 35.58 17.12

H,D 34.44 18.06 17.12

300 71.85 61.64 17.0
H 19.42 11.85 17.0
D 65.32 51.58 16.91

H,D 25.94 12.84 16.91

Table 2: Results of the word analogy tests, also with-
out distortion through normalisation (D), without re-
moving premise vectors from the set of possible gold
vectors (H), and without either (H,D).

4 Concluding remarks

We have shown that there are serious problems
with the appropriateness and informativeness of
word analogy tests in current distributional word
embedding evaluation. The first problem that
should be addressed is the appropriateness. If
word analogies are considered important enough,
then word embedding generation systems should
start to reflect this assumption. Until then, word
analogies, as they are defined here, happen by
rather chance. Once this assumption is built into
systems, we still should put into question various
details of the tests. Is a one-hit accuracy suffi-
ciently informing on success in word analogy, or
do we need a softer measure from for example the
ranking world? These questions remain open for
future work.

245



References
Zellig Harris. 1954. Distributional structure. Word

10:146–162.

David Jurgens, Saif Mohammad, Peter D. Turney, and
Keith J. Holyoak. 2012. Semeval-2012 task 2:
Measuring degrees of relational similarity. In Pro-
ceedings of the 6th International Workshop on Se-
mantic Evaluation, SemEval@NAACL-HLT 2012.
Montréal, Canada, pages 356–364.

Omer Levy and Yoav Goldberg. 2014. Linguistic reg-
ularities in sparse and explicit word representations.
In Proc of Coling. pages 171–180.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013a. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 26, pages 3111–3119.

Tomas Mikolov, Yih Wen-tau, and Geoffrey Zweig.
2013b. Linguistic regularities in continuous space
word representations. In Proc of NAACL-HLT . At-
lanta, Georgia, pages 746–751.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher
Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word
representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP). Doha, Qatar.

Fei Sun, Jiafeng Guo, Yanyan Lan, Jun Xu, and Xueqi
Cheng. 2015. Learning word representations by
jointly modeling syntagmatic and paradigmatic rela-
tions. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics and
the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing. Beijing, China, pages 136–
145.

246


