



















































Identifying Semantic Divergences in Parallel Text without Annotations


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2018, pages 1503–1515
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 1 - 6, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

Identifying Semantic Divergences in Parallel Text without Annotations

Yogarshi Vyas and Xing Niu and Marine Carpuat
Department of Computer Science

University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742, USA

yogarshi@cs.umd.edu, xingniu@cs.umd.edu, marine@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Recognizing that even correct translations are
not always semantically equivalent, we auto-
matically detect meaning divergences in par-
allel sentence pairs with a deep neural model
of bilingual semantic similarity which can be
trained for any parallel corpus without any
manual annotation. We show that our seman-
tic model detects divergences more accurately
than models based on surface features derived
from word alignments, and that these diver-
gences matter for neural machine translation.

1 Introduction

Parallel sentence pairs are sentences that are trans-
lations of each other, and are therefore often
assumed to convey the same meaning in the
source and target language. Occasional mis-
matches between source and target have been pri-
marily viewed as alignment noise (Goutte et al.,
2012) due to imperfect sentence alignment tools
in parallel corpora drawn from translated texts
(Tiedemann, 2011; Xu and Yvon, 2016), or the
noisy process of extracting parallel segments from
non-parallel corpora (Fung and Cheung, 2004;
Munteanu and Marcu, 2005).

In contrast, we view translation as a process that
inherently introduces meaning mismatches, so that
even correctly aligned sentence pairs are not nec-
essarily semantically equivalent. This can hap-
pen for many reasons: translation lexical choice
often involves selecting between near synonyms
that introduce language-specific nuances (Hirst,
1995), typological divergences lead to structural
mismatches (Dorr, 1994), differences in discourse
organization can make it impossible to find one-
to-one sentence alignments (Li et al., 2014).
Cross-linguistic variations in other discourse phe-
nomena such as coreference, discourse relation
and modality (Lapshinova-Koltunski, 2015) com-
pounded with translation effects that distinguish

“translationese” from original text (Koppel and
Ordan, 2011) might also lead to meaning mis-
matches between source and target.

In this paper, we aim to provide empirical ev-
idence that semantic divergences exist in paral-
lel corpora and matter for downstream applica-
tions. This requires an automatic method to distin-
guish semantically equivalent sentence pairs from
semantically divergent pairs, so that parallel cor-
pora can be used more judiciously in downstream
cross-lingual NLP applications. We propose a
semantic model to automatically detect whether
a sentence pair is semantically divergent (Sec-
tion 3). While prior work relied on surface cues
to detect mis-aligments, our approach focuses on
comparing the meaning of words and overlapping
text spans using bilingual word embeddings (Lu-
ong et al., 2015) and a deep convolutional neural
network (He and Lin, 2016). Crucially, training
this model requires no manual annotation. Noisy
supervision is obtained automatically borrowing
techniques developed for parallel sentence extrac-
tion (Munteanu and Marcu, 2005). Our model
can thus easily be trained to detect semantic di-
vergences in any parallel corpus.

We extensively evaluate our semantically-
motivated models on intrinsic and extrinsic tasks:
detection of divergent examples in two paral-
lel English-French data sets (Section 5), and
data selection for English-French and Vietnamese-
English machine translation (MT) (Section 6).The
semantic models significantly outperform other
methods on the intrinsic task, and help select data
to train neural machine translation faster with no
loss in translation quality. Taken together, these
results provide empirical evidence that sentence-
alignment does not necessarily imply semantic
equivalence, and that this distinction matters in
practice for a downstream NLP application.

1503



2 Background

Translation Divergences We use the term se-
mantic divergences to refer to bilingual sentence
pairs, including translations, that do not have the
same meaning. These differ from typological
divergences, which have been defined as struc-
tural differences between sentences that convey
the same meaning (Dorr, 1994; Habash and Dorr,
2002), and reflect the fact that languages do not
encode the same information in the same way.

Non-Parallel Corpora Mismatches in bilingual
sentence pairs have previously been studied to ex-
tract parallel segments from non-parallel corpora,
and augment MT training data (Fung and Cheung,
2004; Munteanu and Marcu, 2005, 2006; AbduI-
Rauf and Schwenk, 2009; Smith et al., 2010; Riesa
and Marcu, 2012, inter alia). Methods for parallel
sentence extraction rely primarily on surface fea-
tures based on translation lexicons and word align-
ment patterns (Munteanu and Marcu, 2005, 2006).
Similar features have proved to be useful for the
related task of translation quality estimation (Spe-
cia et al., 2010, 2016), which aims to detect diver-
gences introduced by MT errors, rather than hu-
man translation. Recently, sentence embeddings
have also been used to detect parallelism (España-
Bonet et al., 2017; Schwenk and Douze, 2017).
Although embeddings capture semantic general-
izations, these models are trained with neural MT
objectives, which do not distinguish semantically
equivalent segments from divergent parallel seg-
ments.

Cross-Lingual Sentence Semantics Cross-
lingual semantic textual similarity (Agirre et al.,
2016) and cross-lingual textual entailment (Negri
and Mehdad, 2010; Negri et al., 2012, 2013)
seek to characterize semantic relations between
sentences in two different languages beyond
translation equivalence, and are therefore directly
relevant to our goal. While the human judgments
obtained for each task differ, they all take inputs
of the same form (two segments in different
languages) and output a prediction that can be in-
terpreted as indicating whether they are equivalent
in meaning or not. Models share core intuitions,
relying either on MT to transfer the cross-lingual
task into its monolingual equivalent (Jimenez
et al., 2012; Zhao et al., 2013), or on features
derived from MT components such as translation
dictionaries and word alignments (Turchi and

Negri, 2013; Lo et al., 2016). Training requires
manually annotated examples, either bilingual,
or monolingual when using MT for language
transfer.

Impact of mismatched sentence pairs on MT
Prior MT work has focused on noise in sentence
alignment rather than semantic divergence. Goutte
et al. (2012) show that phrase-based systems are
remarkably robust to noise in parallel segments.
When introducing noise by permuting the target
side of parallel pairs, as many as 30% of training
examples had to be permuted to degrade BLEU
significantly. While such artificial noise does
not necessarily capture naturally occurring diver-
gences, there is evidence that data cleaning to re-
move real noise can benefit MT in low-resource
settings (Matthews et al., 2014).

Neural MT quality appears to be more sensi-
tive to the nature of training examples than phrase-
based systems. Chen et al. (2016) suggest that
neural MT systems are sensitive to sentence pair
permutations in domain adaptation settings. Be-
linkov and Bisk (2018) demonstrate the brittle-
ness of character-level neural MT when exposed
to synthetic noise (random permutations of words
and characters) as well as natural human errors.
Concurrently with our work, Hassan et al. (2018)
claim that even small amounts of noise can have
adverse effects on neural MT models, as they tend
to assign high probabilities to rare events. They
filter out noise and select relevant in-domain ex-
amples jointly, using similarities between sentence
embeddings obtained from the encoder of a bidi-
rectional neural MT system trained on clean in-
domain data. In contrast, we detect semantic di-
vergence with dedicated models that require only
5000 parallel examples (see Section 5).

This work builds on our initial study of seman-
tic divergences (Carpuat et al., 2017), where we
provide a framework for evaluating the impact of
meaning mismatches in parallel segments on MT
via data selection: we show that filtering out the
most divergent segments in a training corpus im-
proves translation quality. However, we previ-
ously detect mismatches using a cross-lingual en-
tailment classifier, which is based on surface fea-
tures only, and requires manually annotated train-
ing examples (Negri et al., 2012, 2013). In this
paper, we detect divergences using a semantically-
motivated model that can be trained given any ex-
isting parallel corpus without manual intervention.

1504



3 Approach

We introduce our approach to detecting divergence
in parallel sentences, with the goal of (1) detecting
differences ranging from large mismatches to sub-
tle nuances, (2) without manual annotation.

Cross-Lingual Semantic Similarity Model We
address the first requirement using a neural model
that compares the meaning of sentences using a
range of granularities. We repurpose the Very
Deep Pairwise Interaction (VDPWI) model, which
has been previously been used to detect semantic
textual similarity (STS) between English sentence
pairs (He and Lin, 2016). It achieved competitive
performance on data from the STS 2014 shared
task (Agirre et al., 2014), and outperformed pre-
vious approaches on sentence classification tasks
(He et al., 2015; Tai et al., 2015), with fewer pa-
rameters, faster training, and without requiring ex-
pensive external resources such as WordNet.

The VDPWI model was designed for compar-
ing the meaning of sentences in the same lan-
guage, based not only on word-to-word similar-
ity comparisons, but also on comparisons between
overlapping spans of the two sentences, as learned
by a deep convolutional neural network. We adapt
the model to our cross-lingual task by initializing
it with bilingual embeddings. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first time this model has
been used for cross-lingual tasks in such a way.
We give a brief overview of the resulting model
here and refer the reader to the original paper for
details. Given sentences e and f , VDPWI mod-
els the semantic similarity between them using a
pipeline consisting of five components:

1. Bilingual word embeddings: Each word in
e and f is represented as a vector using pre-
trained, bilingual embeddings.

2. BiLSTM for contextualizing words: Con-
textualized representations for words in e and
f are obtained by choosing the output vectors
at each time step obtained by running a bidi-
rectional LSTM (Schuster and Paliwal, 1997)
on each sentence.

3. Word similarity cube: The contextualized
representations are used to calculate various
similarity scores between each word in e with
each word in f. Each score thus forms a ma-
trix and all such matrices are stacked to form
a similarity cube tensor.

4. Similarity focus layer: The similarity cube
is fed to a similarity focus layer that re-
weights the similarities in the cube to focus
on highly similar word pairs, by decreasing
the weights of pairs which are less similar.
This output is called the focus cube.

5. Deep convolutional network: The focus
cube is treated as an “image” and passed to
a deep neural network, the likes of which
have been used to detect patterns in images.
The network consists of repeating convolu-
tion and pooling layers. Each repetition con-
sists of a spatial convolutional layer, a Rec-
tified Linear Unit (Nair and Hinton, 2010),
and a max pooling layer, followed by fully
connected layers, and a softmax to obtain the
final output.

The entire architecture is trained end-to-end to
minimize the Kullback-Leibler divergence (Kull-
back, 1959) between the output similarity score
and gold similarity score.

Noisy Synthetic Supervision How can we ob-
tain gold similarity scores as supervision for our
task? We automatically construct examples of se-
mantically divergent and equivalent sentences as
follows. Since a large number of parallel sentence
pairs are semantically equivalent, we use parallel
sentences as positive examples. Synthetic negative
examples are generated following the protocol in-
troduced by Munteanu and Marcu (2005) to distin-
guish parallel from non-parallel segments. Specif-
ically, candidate negative examples are generated
starting from the positive examples {(ei, fi) ∀i}
and taking the Cartesian product of the two sides
of the positive examples{(ei, fj)∀i, j s.t. i 6= j}.
This candidate set is filtered to ensure that nega-
tive examples are not too easy to identify: we only
retain pairs that are close to each other in length
(a length ratio of at most 1:2), and have enough
words (at least half) which have a translation in the
other sentence according to a bilingual dictionary
derived from automatic word alignments.

This process yields positive and negative exam-
ples that are a noisy source of supervision for our
task, as some of the positive examples might not
be fully equivalent in meaning. However, exper-
iments will show that, in aggregate, they provide
a useful signal for the VDPWI model to learn to
detect semantic distinctions (Section 5).

1505



Equivalent with High Agreement (n = 5)

subs en the epidemic took my wife, my stepson.
fr l’épidémie a touché ma femme, mon beau-fils.
gl the epidemic touched my wife, my stepson.

Equivalent with Low Agreement (n = 3)

cc en cancellation policy: if cancelled up to 28 days before date of arrival, no fee will be charged.
fr conditions d’annulation : en cas d’annulation jusqu’à 28 jours avant la date d’arrivée, l’hôtel ne prélève pas de

frais sur la carte de crédit fournie.
gl cancellation conditions: in case of cancellation up to 28 days before arrival date, the hotel does not charge fees

from the credit card given.

Divergent with Low Agreement (n = 3)

cc en what does it mean when food is “low in ash” or “low in magnesium”?
fr quels sont les avantages dune nourriture “réduite en cendres” et “faible en magnésium” ?
gl what are the advantages of a food “low in ash” or “low in magnesium”?

Divergent with High Agreement (n = 5)

subs en rabbit? if i told you it was a chicken, you wouldn’t know the difference.
fr vous croirez manger du poulet.
gl you think eat chicken

Table 1: Randomly selected sentence pairs (English (en), French (fr) and gloss of French (gl)) annotated as diver-
gent or equivalent, with high and low degrees of agreement between the 5 annotators. Examples are taken either
from the OpenSubtitles (subs) or Common Crawl (cc) corpus.

4 Crowdsourcing Divergence Judgments

We crowdsource annotations of English-French
sentence pairs to construct test beds for evaluat-
ing our models, and also to assess how frequent
semantic divergences are in parallel corpora.

Data Selection We draw examples for annota-
tion randomly from two English-French corpora,
using a resource-rich and well-studied language
pair, and for which bilingual annotators can eas-
ily be found. The OpenSubtitles corpus con-
tains 33M sentence pairs based on translations of
movie subtitles. The sentence pairs are expected
to not be completely parallel given the many con-
straints imposed on translations that should fit on
a screen and be synchronized with a movie (Tiede-
mann, 2007; Lison and Tiedemann, 2016), and
the use of more informal registers which might
require frequent non-literal translations of figu-
rative language. The Common Crawl corpus
contains sentence-aligned parallel documents au-
tomatically mined from the Internet. Parallel doc-
uments are discovered using e.g., URL contain-
ing language code patterns, and sentences are
automatically aligned after structural cleaning of
HTML. The resulting corpus of 3M sentence pairs
is noisy, yet extremely useful to improve transla-
tion quality for multiple language pairs and do-
mains (Smith et al., 2013).

Annotation Protocol Divergence annotations
are obtained via Crowdflower.1 Since this task
requires good command of both French and En-
glish, we rely on a combination of strategies to
obtain good quality annotations, including Crowd-
flower’s internal worker proficiency ratings, geo-
restriction, reference annotations by a bilingual
speaker in our lab, and instructions that alternate
between the two languages (Agirre et al., 2016).

Annotators are shown an English-French sen-
tence pair, and asked whether they agree or dis-
agree with the statement “the French and English
text convey the same information.” We do not use
the term “divergent”, and let the annotators’ intu-
itions about what constitutes the same take prece-
dence. We set up two distinct annotation tasks, one
for each corpus, so that workers only see examples
sampled from a given corpus in a given job. Each
example is shown to five distinct annotators.

Annotation Analysis Forcing an assignment of
divergent or equivalent labels by majority vote
yields 43.6% divergent examples in OpenSubti-
tles, and 38.4% in Common Crawl. Fleiss’ Kappa
indicates moderate agreement between annotators
(0.41 for OpenSubtitles and 0.49 for Common
Crawl). This suggests that the annotation pro-
tocol can be improved, perhaps by using graded
judgments as in Semantic Textual Similarity tasks
(Agirre et al., 2016), or for sentence alignment

1http://crowdflower.com

1506



confidence evaluation (Xu and Yvon, 2016). Cur-
rent annotations are nevertheless useful, and dif-
ferent degrees of agreement reveal nuances in the
nature of divergences (Table 1). Examples labeled
as divergent with high confidence (lowest block
of the table) are either unrelated or one language
misses significant information that is present in
the other. Examples labeled divergent with lower
confidence contain more subtle differences (e.g.,
“what does it mean” in English vs. “what are the
advantages” in French).

5 Divergence Detection Evaluation

Using the two test sets obtained above, we can
evaluate the accuracy of our cross-lingual seman-
tic divergence detector, and compare it against a
diverse set of baselines in controlled settings. We
test our hypothesis that semantic divergences are
more than alignment mismatches by comparing
the semantic divergence detector with models that
capture mis-alignment (Section 5.2) or translation
(Section 5.3). Then, we compare the deep con-
volutional architecture of the semantic divergence
model, with a much simpler model that directly
compares bilingual sentence embeddings (Section
5.4). Finally, we compare our model trained on
synthetic examples with a supervised classifier
used in prior work to predict finer-grained textual
entailment categories based on manually created
training examples (Section 5.5). Except for the en-
tailment classifier which uses external resources,
all models are trained on the exact same paral-
lel corpora (OpenSubtitles or CommonCrawl for
evaluating on the corresponding test bed.)

5.1 Neural Semantic Divergence Detection

Model and Training Settings We use the pub-
licly available implementation of the VDPWI
model.2 We initialize with 200 dimensional BiVec
French-English word embeddings (Luong et al.,
2015), trained on the parallel corpus from which
our test set is drawn. We use the default setting
for all other VDPWI parameters. The model is
trained for 25 epochs and the model that achieves
the best Pearson correlation coefficient on the val-
idation set is chosen. At test time, VDPWI outputs
a score ∈ [0, 1], where a higher value indicates less
divergence. We tune a threshold on development

2https://github.com/castorini/
VDPWI-NN-Torch

data to convert the real-valued score to binary pre-
dictions.

Synthetic Data Generation The synthetic train-
ing data is constructed using a random sample of
5000 sentences from the training parallel corpus
as positive examples. We generate negative exam-
ples automatically as described in Section 3, and
sample a subset to maintain a 1:5 ratio of positive
to negative examples.3

5.2 Parallel vs. Non-parallel Classifier
Are divergences observed in parallel corpora more
than alignment errors? To answer this question,
we reimplement the model proposed by Munteanu
and Marcu (2005). It discriminates parallel pairs
from non-parallel pairs in comparable corpora us-
ing a supervised linear classifier with the follow-
ing features for each sentence pair (e, f):

• Length features: |f |, |e|, |f ||e| , and
|e|
|f |

• Alignment features (for each of e and f ):4

– Count and ratio of unaligned words
– Top three largest fertilities
– Longest contiguous unaligned and

aligned sequence lengths
• Dictionary features:5 fraction of words in e

that have a translation in f and vice-versa.

Training uses the exact same synthetic exam-
ples as the semantic divergence model (Section 3).

5.3 Neural MT
If divergent examples are nothing more than bad
translations, a neural MT system should assign
lower scores to divergent segments pairs than to
those that are equivalent in meaning. We test this
empirically using neural MT systems trained for
a single epoch, and use the system to score each
of the sentence pairs in the test sets. We tune a
threshold on the development set to convert scores
to binary predictions. The system architecture
and training settings are described in details in the
later MT section (Section 6.2). Preliminary ex-
periments showed that training for more than one
epoch does not help divergence detection.

3We experimented with other ratios and found that the re-
sults only slightly degraded while using a more balanced ratio
(1:1, 1:2), but severely degraded with a skewed ratio (1:9).

4Alignments are obtained using IBM Model 2 trained in
each direction, combined with union, intersection,
and grow-diag-final-and heuristics.

5The bilingual dictionary used to extract features is con-
structed using word alignments from a random sample of a
million sentences from the training parallel corpus.

1507



5.4 Bilingual Sentence Embeddings
Our semantic divergence model introduces a large
number of parameters to combine the pairwise
word comparisons into a single sentence-level pre-
diction. This baseline tests whether a simpler
model would suffice. We detect semantic diver-
gence by computing the cosine similarity between
sentence embeddings in a bilingual space. The
sentence embeddings are bag-of-word representa-
tions, build by taking the mean of bilingual word
embeddings for each word in the sentence. This
approach has been shown to be effective, despite
ignoring fundamental linguistic information such
as word order and syntax (Mitchell and Lapata,
2010). We use the same 200 dimensional BiVec
word embeddings (Luong et al., 2015), trained on
OpenSubtitles and CommonCrawl respectively.

5.5 Textual Entailment Classifier
Our final baseline replicates our previous system
(Carpuat et al., 2017) where we repurposed anno-
tations and models designed for the task of Cross-
Lingual Textual Entailment (CLTE) to detect se-
mantic divergences. This baseline also helps us
understand how the synthetic training data com-
pares to training examples generated manually, for
a related cross-lingual task. Using CLTE datasets
from SemEval (Negri et al., 2012, 2013), we train
a supervised linear classifier that can distinguish
sentence pairs that entail each other, from pairs
where entailment does not hold in at least one di-
rection. The features of the classifier are based on
word alignments and sentence lengths.6

5.6 Intrinsic Evaluation Results
Table 2 shows that the semantic similarity model is
most successful at distinguishing equivalent from
divergent examples. The break down per class
shows that both equivalent and divergent examples
are better detected. The improvement is larger for
divergent examples with gains of about 10 points
for F-score for the divergent class, when compared
to the next-best scores.

Among the baseline methods, the non-
entailment model is the weakest. While it uses
manually constructed training examples, these
examples are drawn from distant domains, and the
categories annotated do not exactly match the task

6As in the prior work, alignments are trained on 2M sen-
tence pairs from Europarl (Koehn, 2005) using the Berkeley
aligner (Liang et al., 2006). The classifier is the linear SVM
from Scikit-Learn.

at hand. In contrast, the other models benefit from
training on examples drawn from the same corpus
as each test set.

Next, the machine translation based model and
the sentence embedding model, both of which are
unsupervised, are significantly weaker than the
two supervised models trained on synthetic data,
highlighting the benefits of the automatically con-
structed divergence examples. The strength of the
semantic similarity model compared to the sen-
tence embeddings model highlights the benefits
of the fine-grained representation of bilingual sen-
tence pairs as a similarity cube, as opposed to the
bag-of-words sentence embedding representation.

Finally, despite training on the same noisy syn-
thetic data as the parallel v/s non-parallel system,
the semantic similarity model is better able to de-
tect meaning divergences. This highlights the ben-
efits of (1) meaning comparison between words
in a shared embedding space, over the discrete
translation dictionary used by the baseline, and of
(2) the deep convolutional neural network which
enables the semantic comparison of overlapping
spans in sentence pairs, as opposed to more local
word alignment features.

5.7 Analysis

We manually examine the 13-15% of examples in
each test set that are correctly detected as diver-
gent by semantic similarity and mis-classified by
the non-parallel detector.

On OpenSubtitles, most of these examples are
true divergences rather than noisy alignments (i.e.
sentences that are not translation of each other.)
The non-parallel detector weighs length features
highly, and is fooled by sentence pairs of sim-
ilar length that share little content and therefore
have very sparse word alignments. The remaining
sentence pairs are plausible translations in some
context that still contain inherent divergences,
such as details missing or added in one language.
The non-parallel detector views these pairs as
non-divergent since most words can be aligned.
The semantic similarity model can identify subtle
meaning differences, and correctly classify them
as divergent. As a result, the non-parallel detec-
tor has a higher false positive rate (22%) than the
semantic similarity classifier (14%), while having
similar false negative rates (11% v/s 12%).

On the CommonCrawl test set, the examples
with disagreement are more diverse, ranging from

1508



Divergence Detection OpenSubtitles Common Crawl
Approach +P +R +F -P -R -F Overall F +P +R +F -P -R -F Overall F

Sentence Embeddings 65 60 62 56 61 58 60 78 58 66 52 74 61 64
MT Scores (1 epoch) 67 53 59 54 68 60 60 54 65 59 17 11 14 42
Non-entailment 58 78 66 53 30 38 54 73 49 58 48 72 57 58
Non-parallel 70 83 76 61 42 50 66 70 83 76 61 42 49 67
Semantic Dissimilarity 76 80 78 75 70 72 77 82 88 85 78 69 73 80

Table 2: Intrinsic evaluation on crowdsourced semantic equivalence vs. divergence testsets. We report overall F-
score, as well as precision (P), recall (R) and F-score (F) for the equivalent (+) and divergent (-) classes separately.
Semantic similarity yields better results across the board, with larger improvements on the divergent class.

noisy segments that should not be aligned to sen-
tences with subtle divergences.

6 Machine Translation Evaluation

Having established the effectiveness of the seman-
tic divergence detector, we now measure the im-
pact of divergences on a downstream task, ma-
chine translation. As in our prior work (Carpuat
et al., 2017), we take a data selection approach,
selecting the least divergent examples in a paral-
lel corpus based on a range of divergence detec-
tors, and comparing the translation quality of the
resulting neural MT systems.

6.1 Translation Tasks
English-French We evaluate on 4867 sentences
from the Microsoft Spoken Language Translation
dataset (Federmann and Lewis, 2016) as well as
on 1300 sentences from TED talks (Cettolo et al.,
2012), as in past work (Carpuat et al., 2017).
Training examples are drawn from OpenSubtitles,
which contains ~28M examples after deduplica-
tion. We discard 50% examples for data selection.

Vietnamese-English Since the SEMANTIC
SIMILARITY model was designed to be easily
portable to new language pairs, we also test
its impact on the IWSLT Vietnamese-English
TED task, which comes with ~120,000 and 1268
in-domain sentences for training and testing
respectively (Farajian et al., 2016). This is a more
challenging translation task as Vietnamese and
English are more distant languages, there is little
training data, and the sentence pairs are expected
to be cleaner and more parallel than those from
OpenSubtitles. In these lower resource settings,
we discard 10% of examples for data selection.

6.2 Neural MT System
We use the attentional encoder-decoder model
(Bahdanau et al., 2015) implemented in the Sock-
Eye toolkit (Hieber et al., 2017). Encoders and

decoders are single-layer GRUs (Cho et al., 2014)
with 1000 hidden units. Source and target word
embeddings have size 512. Using byte-pair en-
coding (Sennrich et al., 2016), the vocabulary size
is 50000. Maximum sequence length is set to 50.

We optimize the standard cross-entropy loss us-
ing Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014), until validation
perplexity does not decrease for 8 checkpoints.
The learning rate is set to 0.0003 and is halved
when the validation perplexity does not decrease
for 3 checkpoints. The batch size is set to 80. At
decoding time, we construct a new model by av-
eraging the parameters for the 8 checkpoints with
best validation perplexity, and decode with a beam
of 5. All experiments are run thrice with distinct
random seeds.

Note that the baseline in this work is much
stronger than in our prior work ( >5 BLEU). This
is due to multiple factors that have been recom-
mended as best practices for neural MT and have
been incorporated in the present baseline – dedu-
plication of the training data, ensemble decoding
using multiple random runs, use of Adam as the
optimizer instead of AdaDelta (Bahar et al., 2017;
Denkowski and Neubig, 2017), and checkpoint av-
eraging (Bahar et al., 2017) – as well as a more
recent neural modeling toolkit.

6.3 English-French Results
We train English-French neural MT systems by se-
lecting the least divergent half of the training cor-
pus with the following criteria:

• SEMANTIC SIMILARITY (Section 3)
• PARALLEL: the non-parallel sentence detec-

tor (Section 5.2)
• ENTAILMENT: the entailment classifier (Sec-

tion 5.5), as in Carpuat et al. (2017)
• RANDOM: Randomly downsampling the

training corpus

Learning curves (Figure 1) show that data se-
lected using SEMANTIC SIMILARITY yields better

1509



Figure 1: Learning curves on the validation set for English-French models (mean of 3 runs/model). The SEMANTIC
SIMILARITY model outperforms other models throughout training, including the one trained on all data.

Model MSLT BLEU TED BLEU
Avg. Ensemble Avg. Ensemble

RANDOM 43.49 45.64 36.05 38.20
PARALLEL 40.65 42.12 35.99 37.86
ENTAILMENT 39.64 41.86 33.30 35.40
SEMANTIC SIM. 45.53 47.23* 36.98 38.87

ALL 44.64 46.26 36.98 38.59

Table 3: English-French decoding results. BLEU
scores are either averaged across 3 runs (“Avg.”) or ob-
tained via ensemble decoding (“Ensemble”). SEMAN-
TIC SIMILARITY reaches BLEU scores on par with
ALL with only half of the training data. SEMANTIC
SIMILARITY scores marked with * are significanly bet-
ter (p < 0.05) than the corresponding ALL scores.

validation BLEU throughout training compared to
all other models. SEMANTIC SIMILARITY se-
lects more useful examples for MT than PAR-
ALLEL, even though both selection models are
trained on the same synthetic examples. This high-
lights the benefits of semantic modeling over sur-
face mis-alignment features. Furthermore, SE-
MANTIC SIMILARITY achieves the final validation
BLEU of the model that uses ALL data with only
30% of the updates. This suggests that semanti-
cally divergent examples are pervasive in the train-
ing corpus, confirming the findings from manual
annotation (Section 4), and that the presence of
such examples slows down neural MT training.

Decoding results on the blind test sets (Table 3)
show that SEMANTIC SIMILARITY outperforms
all other data selection criteria (with differences
being statistically significant (p < 0.05) (Koehn,
2004)), and performs as well or better than the
ALL model which has access to twice as many
training examples.

Model Avg. Test Set BLEU

RANDOM (90%) 22.71
SEMANTIC SIM. (90%) 23.38

ALL 23.30

Table 4: Vietnamese-English decoding results: drop-
ping 10% of the data based on SEMANTIC SIMILAR-
ITY does not hurt BLEU, and performs significantly (p
< 0.05) better than RANDOM selection.

The SEMANTIC SIMILARITY model also
achieves significantly better translation quality
than the ENTAILMENT model used in our prior
work. Surprisingly, the ENTAILMENT model per-
forms worse than the ALL baseline, unlike in our
prior work. We attribute this different behavior
to several factors: the strength of the new base-
line (Section 6.2), the use of Adam instead of
AdaDelta, which results in stronger BLEU scores
at the beginning of the learning curves for all mod-
els, and finally the deduplication of the training
data. In our prior systems, the training corpus
was not deduplicated. Data selection had a side-
effect of reducing the ratio of duplicated examples.
When the ENTAILMENT model was used, longer
sentence pairs with more balanced length were se-
lected, yielding longer translations with a better
BLEU brevity penalty than the baseline. With the
new systems, these advantages vanish. We further
analyze output lengths in Section 6.5.

6.4 Vietnamese-English Results

Trends from English-French carry over to Viet-
namese English, as the SEMANTIC SIMILARITY
model compares favorably to ALL while reducing
the number of training updates by 10%. SEMAN-

1510



TIC SIMILARITY also yields better BLEU than
RANDOM with the differences being statistically
significant. While differences in score here are
smaller, these result are encouraging since they
demonstrate that our semantic divergence models
port to more distant low-resource language pairs.

6.5 Analysis

We break down the results seen in Figure 1 and
Table 3, with a focus on the behavior of the EN-
TAILMENT and ALL models. We start by analyz-
ing the BLEU brevity penalty trends observed on
the validation set during training (Figure 2).

Figure 2: Brevity penalties on the validation set for
English-French models (single run).

We observe that both the ENTAILMENT and SE-
MANTIC SIMILARITY based models have simi-
lar brevity penalties despite having performances
that are at opposite ends of the spectrum in terms
of BLEU. This implies that translations gener-
ated by the SEMANTIC SIMILARITY model have
better n-gram overlap with the reference, but are
much shorter. Manual examination of the transla-
tions suggests that the ENTAILMENT model often
fails by under-translating sentences, either drop-
ping segments from the beginning or the end of
source sentences (Table 5).

The PARALLEL model consistently produces
translations that are longer than the reference. 7

This is partially due to the model’s propensity to
generate a sequence of garbage tokens in the be-
ginning of a sentence, especially while translating
shorter sentences. In our test set, almost 12% of
the translated sentences were found to begin with
the garbage text shown in Table 5. Only a small
fraction (< 0.02%) of the French sentences in our
training data begin with these tokens, but the ten-
dency of PARALLEL to promote divergent exam-
ples above non-divergent ones, seems to exagger-
ate the generation of this sequence.

7The brevity penalty does not penalize translations that
are longer than the reference.

ENTAILMENT is inadequate due to under-translation

Source he’s a very impressive man and still goes
out to do digs.

Reference c’est un homme très impressionnant et il
fait encore des fouilles.

ENTAILMENT c’est un homme très impressionnant.

Source when the Heat first won.
Reference lorsque les Heat ont gagné pour la

première fois.
ENTAILMENT quand le Heat a gagné.

PARALLEL produces garbage tokens

Source alright.
Reference d’accord.
ENTAILMENT { \ pos (192,210)} d’accord.

Table 5: Selected translation examples from the ensem-
ble systems of the various models.

7 Conclusion

We conducted an extensive empirical study of
semantic divergences in parallel corpora. Our
crowdsourced annotations confirms that correctly
aligned sentences are not necessarily meaning
equivalent. We introduced an approach based on
neural semantic similarity that detects such di-
vergences much more accurately than shallower
translation or alignment based models. Impor-
tantly, our model does not require manual an-
notation, and can be trained for any language
pair and domain with a parallel corpus. Finally,
we show that filtering out divergent examples
helps speed up the convergence of neural ma-
chine translation training without loss in transla-
tion quality, for two language pairs and data condi-
tions. New datasets and models introduced in this
work are available at http://github.com/
yogarshi/SemDiverge.

These findings open several avenues for future
work: How can we improve divergence detec-
tion further? Can we characterize the nature of
the divergences beyond binary predictions? How
do divergent examples impact other applications,
including cross-lingual NLP applications and se-
mantic models induced from parallel corpora, as
well as tools for human translators and second lan-
guage learners?

Acknowledgments

We thank the CLIP lab at the University of Maryland and the

anonymous reviewers from NAACL 2018 and WMT 2017

for their constructive feedback. This work was supported in

part by research awards from Amazon, Google, and the Clare

Boothe Luce Foundation.

1511



References
Sadaf AbduI-Rauf and Holger Schwenk. 2009. On the

Use of Comparable Corpora to Improve SMT Per-
formance. In Proceedings of the 12th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. Association for Computational
Linguistics, Athens, Greece, EACL ’09, pages 16–
23.

Eneko Agirre, Carmen Banea, Claire Cardie, Daniel
Cer, Mona Diab, Aitor Gonzalez-Agirre, Weiwei
Guo, Rada Mihalcea, German Rigau, and Janyce
Wiebe. 2014. Semeval-2014 task 10: Multilingual
semantic textual similarity. In Proceedings of the
8th International Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
tion (SemEval 2014). Association for Computational
Linguistics Dublin, Ireland, pages 81–91.

Eneko Agirre, Carmen Banea, Daniel Cer, Mona
Diab, Aitor Gonzalez-Agirre, Rada Mihalcea, Ger-
man Rigau, and Janyce Wiebe. 2016. SemEval-
2016 Task 1: Semantic Textual Similarity, Mono-
lingual and Cross-Lingual Evaluation. In Proceed-
ings of the 10th International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation (SemEval-2016). Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, San Diego, California, pages
497–511.

Parnia Bahar, Tamer Alkhouli, Jan-Thorsten Peter,
Christopher Jan-Steffen Brix, and Hermann Ney.
2017. Empirical investigation of optimization algo-
rithms in neural machine translation. The Prague
Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics 108(1):13–25.

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2015. Neural Machine Translation by Jointly
Learning to Align and Translate. In International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).

Yonatan Belinkov and Yonatan Bisk. 2018. Synthetic
and natural noise both break neural machine transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the 6th International Con-
ference on Learning Representations. Vancouver,
Canada.

Marine Carpuat, Yogarshi Vyas, and Xing Niu. 2017.
Detecting cross-lingual semantic divergence for
neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the
First Workshop on Neural Machine Translation.
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
69–79. http://aclweb.org/anthology/
W17-3209.

Mauro Cettolo, Christian Girardi, and Marcello Fed-
erico. 2012. Wit3: Web inventory of transcribed and
translated talks. In Proceedings of the 16th Con-
ference of the European Association for Machine
Translation (EAMT). volume 261, page 268.

Boxing Chen, Roland Kuhn, George Foster, Colin
Cherry, and Fei Huang. 2016. Bilingual Methods
for Adaptive Training Data Selection for Machine
Translation. Proceedings of the 12th Conference
of the Association for Machine Translation in the
Americas (AMTA) page 93.

Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merrienboer, Caglar Gul-
cehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Hol-
ger Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Learn-
ing Phrase Representations using RNN Encoder-
Decoder for Statistical Machine Translation. In
Proceedings of EMNLP 2014. ArXiv: 1406.1078.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1406.1078.

Michael Denkowski and Graham Neubig. 2017.
Stronger baselines for trustable results in neu-
ral machine translation. In Proceedings of the
First Workshop on Neural Machine Translation.
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
18–27. http://aclweb.org/anthology/
W17-3203.

Bonnie J. Dorr. 1994. Machine Translation Diver-
gences: A Formal Description and Proposed Solu-
tion. Computional Linguistics 20(4):597–633.

Cristina España-Bonet, Ádám Csaba Varga, Alberto
Barrón-Cedeño, and Josef van Genabith. 2017. An
Empirical Analysis of NMT-Derived Interlingual
Embeddings and their Use in Parallel Sentence Iden-
tification. arXiv:1704.05415 [cs] .

M. Amin Farajian, Rajen Chatterjee, Costanza Con-
forti, Shahab Jalalvand, Vevake Balaraman, Mat-
tia A. Di Gangi, Duygu Ataman, Marco Turchi, Mat-
teo Negri, and Marcello Federico. 2016. FBK’s
Neural Machine Translation Systems for IWSLT
2016. In Proceedings of the Ninth Interna-
tional Workshop on Spoken Language Translation
(IWSLT), Seattle, WA.

Christian Federmann and William D. Lewis. 2016. Mi-
crosoft speech language translation (MSLT) corpus:
The IWSLT 2016 release for English, French and
German. In International Workshop on Spoken Lan-
guage Translation (IWSLT). Seattle, USA.

Pascale Fung and Percy Cheung. 2004. Multi-level
Bootstrapping for Extracting Parallel Sentences
from a Quasi-comparable Corpus. In Proceedings of
the 20th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Geneva, Switzerland, COLING ’04. https:
//doi.org/10.3115/1220355.1220506.

Cyril Goutte, Marine Carpuat, and George Foster.
2012. The Impact of Sentence Alignment Errors
on Phrase-Based Machine Translation Performance.
In Proceedings of AMTA-2012: The Tenth Biennial
Conference of the Association for Machine Transla-
tion in the Americas.

Nizar Habash and Bonnie Dorr. 2002. Handling trans-
lation divergences: Combining statistical and sym-
bolic techniques in generation-heavy machine trans-
lation. In Conference of the Association for Machine
Translation in the Americas. Springer, pages 84–93.

Hany Hassan, Anthony Aue, Chang Chen, Vishal
Chowdhary, Jonathan Clark, Christian Feder-
mann, Xuedong Huang, Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt,

1512



William Lewis, Mu Li, Shujie Liu, Tie-Yan Liu,
Renqian Luo, Arul Menezes, Tao Qin, Frank Seide,
Xu Tan, Fei Tian, Lijun Wu, Shuangzhi Wu,
Yingce Xia, Dongdong Zhang, Zhirui Zhang, and
Ming Zhou. 2018. Achieving Human Parity on
Automatic Chinese to English News Translation.
arXiv:1803.05567 [cs] https://arxiv.org/
pdf/1803.05567.pdf.

Hua He, Kevin Gimpel, and Jimmy Lin. 2015. Multi-
Perspective Sentence Similarity Modeling with Con-
volutional Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the
2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, Lisbon, Portugal, pages 1576–
1586.

Hua He and Jimmy Lin. 2016. Pairwise word inter-
action modeling with deep neural networks for se-
mantic similarity measurement. In Proceedings of
NAACL-HLT . pages 937–948.

Felix Hieber, Tobias Domhan, Michael Denkowski,
David Vilar, Artem Sokolov, Ann Clifton, and Matt
Post. 2017. Sockeye: A Toolkit for Neural Machine
Translation. ArXiv e-prints https://arxiv.
org/abs/1712.05690.

Graeme Hirst. 1995. Near-synonymy and the structure
of lexical knowledge. In AAAI Symposium on Rep-
resentation and Acquisition of Lexical Knowledge:
Polysemy, Ambiguity, and Generativity. pages 51–
56.

Sergio Jimenez, Claudia Becerra, and Alexander Gel-
bukh. 2012. Soft Cardinality + ML: Learning Adap-
tive Similarity Functions for Cross-lingual Textual
Entailment. In Proceedings of the Sixth Interna-
tional Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval).
Association for Computational Linguistics, Mon-
treal, Canada, SemEval ’12, pages 684–688.

Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam:
A Method for Stochastic Optimization. ArXiv:
1412.6980. http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.
6980.

Philipp Koehn. 2004. Statistical significance tests
for machine translation evaluation. In Proceedings
of EMNLP 2004. http://www.aclweb.org/
anthology/W04-3250.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A Parallel Corpus for
Statistical Machine Translation. In Machine Trans-
lation Summit X. Phuket, Thailand.

Moshe Koppel and Noam Ordan. 2011. Transla-
tionese and its dialects. In Proceedings of the
49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies - Volume 1. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, HLT
’11, pages 1318–1326. http://dl.acm.org/
citation.cfm?id=2002472.2002636.

Solomon Kullback. 1959. Information theory and
statistics. Courier Corporation.

Ekaterina Lapshinova-Koltunski. 2015. Exploration
of inter-and intralingual variation of discourse phe-
nomena. In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on
Discourse in Machine Translation. pages 158–167.

Junyi Jessy Li, Marine Carpuat, and Ani Nenkova.
2014. Assessing the Discourse Factors that Influ-
ence the Quality of Machine Translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short
Papers). Association for Computational Linguistics,
Baltimore, Maryland, pages 283–288.

Percy Liang, Ben Taskar, and Dan Klein. 2006. Align-
ment by Agreement. In Proceedings of the Main
Conference on Human Language Technology Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the As-
sociation of Computational Linguistics. Association
for Computational Linguistics, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA, HLT-NAACL ’06, pages 104–111. https:
//doi.org/10.3115/1220835.1220849.

Pierre Lison and Jörg Tiedemann. 2016. Opensub-
titles2016: Extracting large parallel corpora from
movie and tv subtitles. In Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation.

Chi-kiu Lo, Cyril Goutte, and Michel Simard. 2016.
CNRC at SemEval-2016 Task 1: Experiments in
Crosslingual Semantic Textual Similarity. In Pro-
ceedings of the 10th International Workshop on Se-
mantic Evaluation (SemEval-2016). Association for
Computational Linguistics, San Diego, California,
pages 668–673.

Thang Luong, Hieu Pham, and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2015. Bilingual word representations with
monolingual quality in mind. In Proceedings of the
1st Workshop on Vector Space Modeling for Natural
Language Processing. pages 151–159.

Austin Matthews, Waleed Ammar, Archna Bhatia, We-
ston Feely, Greg Hanneman, Eva Schlinger, Swabha
Swayamdipta, Yulia Tsvetkov, Alon Lavie, and
Chris Dyer. 2014. The CMU Machine Translation
Systems at WMT 2014. In Proceedings of the Ninth
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA, pages 142–149.

Jeff Mitchell and Mirella Lapata. 2010. Composition
in distributional models of semantics. Cognitive sci-
ence 34(8):1388–1429.

Dragos Stefan Munteanu and Daniel Marcu. 2005. Im-
proving machine translation performance by exploit-
ing non-parallel corpora. Computational Linguistics
31(4):477–504.

Dragos Stefan Munteanu and Daniel Marcu. 2006.
Extracting Parallel Sub-sentential Fragments from

1513



Non-parallel Corpora. In Proceedings of the 21st In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics and the 44th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics. Association
for Computational Linguistics, Sydney, Australia,
ACL-44, pages 81–88. https://doi.org/10.
3115/1220175.1220186.

Vinod Nair and Geoffrey E. Hinton. 2010. Rectified
Linear Units Improve Restricted Boltzmann Ma-
chines. In Proceedings of the 27th International
Conference on International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning. Omnipress, USA, ICML’10, pages
807–814.

Matteo Negri, Alessandro Marchetti, Yashar Mehdad,
Luisa Bentivogli, and Danilo Giampiccolo. 2012.
Semeval-2012 Task 8: Cross-lingual Textual Entail-
ment for Content Synchronization. In Proceedings
of the First Joint Conference on Lexical and Com-
putational Semantics - Volume 1: Proceedings of the
Main Conference and the Shared Task, and Volume
2: Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop
on Semantic Evaluation. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Montr\?al, Canada, SemEval ’12,
pages 399–407.

Matteo Negri, Alessandro Marchetti, Yashar Mehdad,
Luisa Bentivogli, and Danilo Giampiccolo. 2013.
Semeval-2013 Task 8: Cross-lingual Textual Entail-
ment for Content Synchronization. In Second Joint
Conference on Lexical and Computational Seman-
tics (*SEM), Volume 2: Proceedings of the Sev-
enth International Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
tion (SemEval 2013). Association for Computational
Linguistics, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, pages 25–33.

Matteo Negri and Yashar Mehdad. 2010. Creating a
Bilingual Entailment Corpus Through Translations
with Mechanical Turk: $100 for a 10-day Rush. In
Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on
Creating Speech and Language Data with Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk. Association for Computational
Linguistics, Los Angeles, California, CSLDAMT
’10, pages 212–216.

Jason Riesa and Daniel Marcu. 2012. Automatic Par-
allel Fragment Extraction from Noisy Data. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2012 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Montréal,
Canada, pages 538–542.

Mike Schuster and Kuldip K Paliwal. 1997. Bidirec-
tional recurrent neural networks. IEEE Transactions
on Signal Processing 45(11):2673–2681.

Holger Schwenk and Matthijs Douze. 2017. Learn-
ing joint multilingual sentence representations with
neural machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 2nd Workshop on Representation Learning
for NLP. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 157–167. http://aclweb.org/
anthology/W17-2619.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2016. Neural Machine Translation of Rare Words
with Subword Units. Proceedings of the Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL) .

Jason R. Smith, Chris Quirk, and Kristina Toutanova.
2010. Extracting Parallel Sentences from Compara-
ble Corpora Using Document Level Alignment. In
Human Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, Los Angeles,
California, HLT ’10, pages 403–411.

Jason R. Smith, Herve Saint-Amand, Magdalena Pla-
mada, Philipp Koehn, Chris Callison-Burch, and
Adam Lopez. 2013. Dirt Cheap Web-Scale Paral-
lel Text from the Common Crawl. In Proceedings of
51st Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics. pages 1374–1383.

Lucia Specia, Varvara Logacheva, and Carolina Scar-
ton. 2016. WMT16 Quality Estimation Shared
Task Training and Development Data. LIN-
DAT/CLARIN digital library at Institute of For-
mal and Applied Linguistics, Charles University in
Prague.

Lucia Specia, Dhwaj Raj, and Marco Turchi.
2010. Machine translation evaluation ver-
sus quality estimation. Machine Translation
24(1):39–50. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10590-010-9077-2.

Kai Sheng Tai, Richard Socher, and Christopher D.
Manning. 2015. Improved semantic representations
from tree-structured long short-term memory net-
works. In Proceedings of ACL 2015. Beijing, China.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2007. Improved sentence alignment
for movie subtitles. In Recent Advances in Natural
Language Processing (RANLP). volume 7.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2011. Bitext Alignment, volume 4.

Marco Turchi and Matteo Negri. 2013. ALTN: Word
Alignment Features for Cross-lingual Textual En-
tailment. In Second Joint Conference on Lexical and
Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2: Sev-
enth International Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
tion (SemEval 2013).

Yong Xu and François Yvon. 2016. Novel elici-
tation and annotation schemes for sentential and
sub-sentential alignments of bitexts. In Nico-
letta Calzolari (Conference Chair), Khalid Choukri,
Thierry Declerck, Marko Grobelnik, Bente Mae-
gaard, Joseph Mariani, Asuncion Moreno, Jan
Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, editors, Proceedings
of the Ninth Language Resources and Evaluation
Conference (LREC 2016). European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA), Portorož, Slovenia,
page 10.

1514



Jiang Zhao, Man Lan, and Zheng-yu Niu. 2013. EC-
NUCS: Recognizing cross-lingual textual entail-
ment using multiple text similarity and text differ-
ence measures. In Proceedings of the International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval).

1515


