



















































Diachronic Usage Relatedness (DURel): A Framework for the Annotation of Lexical Semantic Change


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2018, pages 169–174
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 1 - 6, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

Diachronic Usage Relatedness (DURel):
A Framework for the Annotation of Lexical Semantic Change
∗Dominik Schlechtweg, ∗Sabine Schulte im Walde, †Stefanie Eckmann
∗Institute for Natural Language Processing, University of Stuttgart, Germany

†Historical and Indo-European Linguistics, LMU Munich, Germany
dominik.schlechtweg@ims.uni-stuttgart.de, schulte@ims.uni-stuttgart.de,

stefanie.eckmann@campus.lmu.de

Abstract

We propose a framework that extends syn-
chronic polysemy annotation to diachronic
changes in lexical meaning, to counter-
act the lack of resources for evaluating
computational models of lexical semantic
change. Our framework exploits an intu-
itive notion of semantic relatedness, and
distinguishes between innovative and re-
ductive meaning changes with high inter-
annotator agreement. The resulting test
set for German comprises ratings from five
annotators for the relatedness of 1,320 use
pairs across 22 target words.

1 Introduction

We see an increasing interest in the automatic de-
tection of semantic change in computational lin-
guistics (Hamilton et al., 2016; Frermann and La-
pata, 2016; Schlechtweg et al., 2017, i.a.), moti-
vated by expected performance improvements of
practical NLP applications, or theoretical inter-
est in language or cultural change. However, a
major obstacle in the computational modeling of
semantic change is evaluation (Lau et al., 2012;
Cook et al., 2014; Frermann and Lapata, 2016;
Dubossarsky et al., 2017). Most importantly,
there is no reliable test set of semantic change
for any language that goes beyond a small set
of hand-selected targets. We counteract this lack
of resources by extending a framework of syn-
chronic polysemy annotation to the annotation of
Diachronic Usage Relatedness (DURel). DURel
has a strong theoretical basis and at the same time
makes use of established synchronic procedures
that rely on the intuitive notion of semantic relat-
edness. The annotations distinguish between in-
novative and reductive meaning change with high
inter-annotator agreement. DURel is language-
independent and thus applicable across languages;

this paper introduces the first test set of lexical se-
mantic change for German.

2 Related Work

A large number of studies has been performed
on synchronic word sense annotation (see Ide and
Pustejovsky, 2017 for an overview). Within this
set, our paper is most related to work focusing on
graded polysemy annotation. Most prominently,
Soares da Silva (1992) is interested in the ques-
tion of whether the theoretical distinction between
polysemy and homonymy can be experimentally
verified; Brown (2008) wants to know how fine-
grained word senses are, and Erk et al. (2009,
2013) examine whether we should adopt a graded
notion of word meaning.

In contrast, there is little work on annota-
tion with a focus on semantic change, despite
the growing interest and modeling efforts in the
field of semantic change detection. Lau et al.
(2012) and Cook et al. (2014) aim at verifying
the semantic developments of their targets by a
quasi-annotation procedure of dictionary entries,
however without reporting inter-annotator agree-
ment or other measures of reliability. Gulor-
dava and Baroni (2011) ask annotators for their
intuitions about changes but without direct re-
lation to language data. Bamman and Crane
(2011) exploit aligned translated texts as source of
word senses and conduct a very limited annotation
study on Latin texts from different time periods.
Schlechtweg et al. (2017) propose a small-scale
annotation of metaphoric change, but altogether
there is no standard test set across languages that
goes beyond a few hand-selected examples.

3 Lexical Semantic Change

It is well-known that lexical semantic change and
polysemy are tightly connected. For example,
Blank (1997) develops an elaborate theory where
polysemy is the synchronic, observable result of

169



lexical semantic change. He distinguishes two
main types of lexical semantic change:

• innovative meaning change: emergence of
a full-fledged additional meaning of a word;
old and new meaning are related by polysemy

• reductive meaning change: loss of a full-
fledged meaning of a word

An example of innovative meaning change is
the emergence of polysemy in the German word
Donnerwetter around 1800 (Paul, 2002). Before
≈1800 Donnerwetter was only used in the mean-
ing of ‘thunderstorm’. After 1800 we still ob-
serve this meaning, and in addition we find a new,
clearly distinguished meaning as a swear word
‘Man alive!’. An example of reductive meaning
change is the German word Zufall. It had two
meanings ≈1850, ‘seizure’ and ‘coincidence’ (Os-
man, 1971). After 1850, the word occurs less and
less often in the former meaning, until it is exclu-
sively used in the meaning of ‘coincidence’. Zufall
lost the meaning ‘seizure’.

3.1 Semantic Proximity
Based on Prototype Theory (Rosch and Mervis,
1975), Blank develops criteria to decide whether
word uses are related by polysemy. He defines a
continuum of semantic proximity with polysemy
located between identity and homonymy, as de-
picted in Table 1.

x

Identity
Context Variance
Polysemy
Homonymy

Table 1: Continuum of semantic proximity (cf. Blank,
1997, p. 418).

While it is difficult to directly apply these cri-
teria to practical annotation tasks, we exploit the
scale of semantic proximity indirectly, as previ-
ously done by synchronic research on polysemy
applying similar scales (Soares da Silva, 1992;
Brown, 2008; Erk et al., 2013). Especially Erk
et al.’s in-depth study validates an annotation
framework relying on a scale of semantic proxim-
ity, revealing high inter-annotator agreement and
strong correlation with traditional single-sense an-
notation as well as annotation of multiple lexical
paraphrases. For our study, we decided to adopt

a relatedness scale similar to Brown’s, shown in
Table 2.

x

4: Identical
3: Closely Related
2: Distantly Related
1: Unrelated

0: Cannot decide

Table 2: Our 4-point scale of relatedness derived from
Brown (2008).

3.2 Diachronic Usage Relatedness (DURel)
We frame our interest in lexical semantic change
as judging the strength of semantic relatedness
across use pairs of a target word w within a spe-
cific time period ti. A high mean proximity
value indicates meaning identity or context vari-
ance, while a low value indicates polysemy or
homonymy, cf. Table 1. This strategy is applied
independently to two time periods t1 and t2, as
illustrated in Figure 1. Innovative vs. reductive
meaning change can then be measured by decrease
vs. increase in the mean relatedness value of w
from t1 to t2. To see why this is justified, consider
the different semantic constellations of w’s use
pairs in t1 and t2 in Figure 1. If w is monosemous
in t1 and undergoes innovative meaning change
between the two time periods, we expect to find
use pairs in the later period t2 combining the old
and new meaning which are less related (score: 2)
than the use pairs from the earlier period t1 (score:
3). According to this rationale, the mean related-
ness values across w’s use pairs should be lower
in t2 than in t1. The reverse applies to reductive
meaning change.

t1: EARLIER t2: LATER

3

2

Figure 1: Two-dimensional use spaces (Tuggy, 1993;
Zlatev, 2003) in two time periods with a target word w
undergoing innovative meaning change. Dots represent
uses of w. Spatial proximity of two uses means high
relatedness.

There are a number of other, more complex se-

170



mantic constellations. For example, if w not only
gains a new meaning, but rapidly loses the old
meaning, we cannot necessarily expect the mean
relatedness ofw’s use pairs to be higher in the later
than in the earlier time period. In order to cover
such cases, we will not only measure the mean
relatedness within the EARLIER and the LATER
groups of use pairs but also in a mixed COMPARE
group where each pair consists of a use from the
EARLIER and a use from the LATER group. By
this, old and new meaning are directly compared,
and we do not have to rely on the assumption that
the old meaning is still present.

By applying the above-described procedure to
all target words and sorting them according to
their mean relatedness scores, we obtain a ranked
list for each of the three groups EARLIER, LATER
and COMPARE. We then exploit two measures of
change: (i) ∆LATER measures changes in the de-
gree of mean relatedness of words, and is derived
by subtracting a target w’s mean in EARLIER from
its mean in LATER: ∆LATER(w) = Meanl(w) −
Meane(w). Positive vs. negative values on this
measure indicate innovative vs. reductive mean-
ing change. (ii) COMPARE directly measures the
relatedness between the EARLIER and the LATER
group and thus corresponds to w’s mean in the
COMPARE group: COMPARE(w) = Meanc(w).
High vs. low values on COMPARE indicate weak
vs. strong change, where the change includes both
innovative and reductive meaning changes.

4 Annotation Study

Five native speakers of German were asked to rate
1,320 use pairs on our 4-point scale of relatedness
in Table 2. All annotators were students of lin-
guistics. We explicitly chose two annotators with a
background in historical linguistics in order to see
whether knowledge about historical linguistics has
an effect on the annotation. Annotators were not
told that the study is related to semantic change.1

Target Words. The target words were selected
by manually checking a corpus for innovative and
reductive meaning changes, based on cases of
metaphoric, metonymic change and narrowing (in-
novative) as reported by Paul (2002), and cases
of reduction due to homonymy (reductive) as re-

1The guidelines (adapted from the synchronic study
by Erk et al., 2013) and the experiment data are
publicly available at www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/
data/durel/.

Figure 2: Use pair from annotation table (English adap-
tion).

ported by Osman (1971). The corpus we used is
DTA (Deutsches Textarchiv, 2017), a freely avail-
able diachronic corpus of German. By focusing
on a late time period (19th century), we tried to
reduce problems coming with historical language
data as much as possible. We still normalized spe-
cial characters to modern orthography.

We included only those words as targets for
which we found the change suggested by the
literature reflected in the corpus, either weakly
or strongly, because an annotation relying on a
random selection of words suggested to undergo
change is likely to produce a set with very sim-
ilar and rather low values representing small ef-
fects. We thus guaranteed to include both: words
for which we expected weak effects as well as
words for which we expected strong effects. We
ended up with 19 cases of innovation and 9 cases
of reduction. Three words, Anstalt, Anstellung
and Vorwort represent especially interesting cases
and were selected more than once for the test set
since they undergo both innovative and reductive
change between the investigated time periods.

Sampling. For each target word we randomly
sampled 20 use pairs from DTA (searching for the
respective lemma and POS) for each of the groups
EARLIER (1750-1800), LATER (1850-1900) and
COMPARE, yielding 60 use pairs per word and
1,320 use pairs for 22 target words in total.

A use of a word is defined as the sentence the
word occurs in. The annotators were provided
these sentences as well as the preceding and the
following sentence in the corpus, cf. Figure 2. We
double-checked that each use of a word was only
sampled once within each group. If the total num-
ber of uses in the group was less than needed, uses
were allowed twice across pairs. Before present-
ing the use pairs to the annotators in a spreadsheet,
uses within pairs were randomized, and pairs from
all groups were mixed and randomly ordered.

171



5 Results

Agreement. In line with Erk et al. (2013) we
measure inter-annotator agreement as the average
over pairwise Spearman’s ρ correlations (omit-
ting 0-judgments), cf. Table 3. The bottom line
provides the agreement of each annotator’s judg-
ments against the average judgment score across
the other annotators. The range of correlation co-
efficients is between 0.57 and 0.68, with an aver-
age correlation of 0.66. All the pairs are highly
significantly correlated (p < 0.01).

1 2 3 4 5
1 0.59 0.63 0.67 0.66
2 0.57 0.64 0.65
3 0.64 0.62
4 0.68

avg 0.71 0.68 0.68 0.75 0.74

Table 3: Correlation matrix for pairwise correlation
agreement; avg refers to agreement of the annotator in
the column against the average across the other anno-
tators.

The annotators with historical background are
annotators 4 and 5, who show the highest pairwise
agreement and also the highest agreement with the
average of the other annotators. This indicates that
historical knowledge makes a positive difference
when annotating DURel. Yet, the agreements of
the non-expert annotators only deviate slightly.

Overall, our correlations are comparable and
even moderately higher than the ones found in Erk
et al. (2013), who report average correlation scores
between 0.55 and 0.62. This difference is remark-
able, given that annotators had to judge histori-
cal data. Note, however, that the studies are not
exactly comparable, as Erk et al. used a more
fine-grained 5-point scale, and we presumably ex-
cluded a larger number of 0-judgments.

Qualitative Analysis. Figure 3 shows the tar-
get words ranked according to their values on
∆LATER. We can clearly identify three groups:
words with values >0, <0, and a majority with
values ≈0 difference in mean between the ear-
lier and the later time period. The three topmost
words have previously been classified as reductive,
the three lowermost words as innovative meaning
changes.

Figure 4 compares the distributions across re-

latedness scores for our two example words Zufall
and Donnerwetter from above. In EARLIER, Zu-
fall’s ratings (i.e., the number of times a specific
rating 0–4 was provided) vary much more than in
LATER where it has a high number of 4-judgments.
The contrary is the case for Donnerwetter. In ad-
dition, we find a clear difference between the two
words in the COMPARE group, because Donner-
wetter is used in a variety of new figurative ways
in LATER, while Zufall, besides losing the mean-
ing ‘seizure’, retains the prevalent meaning ‘coin-
cidence’ in both time periods.

Upon closer inspection, the words deviating
most from our predictions show either that the
change is already present before 1800 (e.g., Steck-
enpferd, ‘toy> toy; hobby’), that the new meaning
has a very low prevalence (e.g., Museum, ‘study
room; arts collection > arts collection’), or that
there are additional, previously not identified uses
in the later time period (e.g., Feine, ‘fineness;
grandeur > grandeur’). The mean value for re-
duction is 0.39, while it is -0.18 for innovation.

Overall, these findings confirm our predictions
and validate ∆LATER as a measure of lexical se-
mantic change. The case of Presse, ‘printing press
> printing press; print product/producer’, how-
ever, shows its shortcomings: ∆LATER wrongly
predicts no change for Presse, although it is
clearly present, because the new meaning has a
very high prevalence. ∆LATER cannot capture
such cases, while COMPARE can: it predicts strong
change for Presse.

Since COMPARE measures the degree of change
rather than distinguishing between types of
change, the highest values in its ranked list refer
to cases with values≈0 in ∆LATER, and the low-
est values refer to cases with extreme values of
∆LATER. A special case is Feder ‘bird feather >
bird feather; steel clip’, which reveals the need for
normalization of the COMPARE-measure: the word
is highly polysemous and has approximately the
same distribution in every group, because the new
meaning ‘steel clip’ has a very low prevalence.
For ∆LATER this correctly leads to a 0-prediction.
In contrast, COMPARE predicts strong change, be-
cause due to polysemy there is a high probability
to sample distantly related use pairs in the COM-
PARE group.

Discussion. While our measures enable us to
predict various semantic change constellations,
we also demonstrated that they collapse in cer-

172



Figure 3: ∆LATER: Rank of target words according to
increase in mean usage relatedness from EARLIER to
LATER.

Zufall (reductive) Donnerwetter (innovative)

Figure 4: Plots of judgment freq. for target words per
group.

tain semantic constellations: ∆LATER is accu-
rate when used for simple semantic constellations
(i.e., only one reductive or innovative meaning
change), where the old meaning roughly maintains
its prevalence, thus making ∆LATER be prone to
corpus effects such as changes in text genre. For
an optimal application of this measure we there-
fore recommend (i) to choose directly adjacent and
short time periods for annotation, as the number of
changes increases with the length of the time pe-
riod, and (ii) to use a well-balanced corpus for the
annotation, ideally across all periods.

Unlike ∆LATER, COMPARE has the advantage
to capture multiple changes over time, but it con-
fuses polysemy and meaning change. In future
work, we aim to solve this issue by normaliz-
ing COMPARE with a measure of polysemy: For
any target word w the values from the EAR-
LIER group determine its degree of polysemy in
the earlier time period. Hence, the normalized
∆COMPARE(w) = Meanc(w)−Meane(w) intu-
itively measures how much the values in the COM-
PARE group differ from what we would already
expect from w’s early polysemy, so it predicts no
change in the case of a stable polysemous word,

and it predicts change if the word gains or loses a
meaning.

6 Conclusion

This paper presented a general framework
DURel for language-independent annotation of
Diachronic Usage Relatedness, in order to develop
test sets for lexical semantic change. In addition
to a strong theoretical basis, DURel shows em-
pirical validity in our annotation study with high
inter-annotator agreement. It relies on an intuitive
notion of semantic relatedness and needs no defi-
nition of word senses.

Furthermore, we proposed two measures of lex-
ical semantic change that predict various seman-
tic change constellations. While one measure suc-
cessfully distinguishes between innovative and re-
ductive meaning change, we also demonstrated the
need to refine and normalize the measures in order
to capture more variants of constellations regard-
ing the interplay of polysemy and meaning reduc-
tion/innovation.

The annotated test set for German is publicly
available and can be used to compare computa-
tional models of semantic change, and more gen-
erally to evaluate models of lexical variation in
corpora across times, domains, etc. Further test
sets across languages can be obtained by applying
DURel to the respective language uses.

Acknowledgments

The research was supported by the DFG Collabo-
rative Research Centre SFB 732. We thank Katrin
Erk, Diana McCarthy and Susan Brown Windisch
for providing their expertise, experience and data;
Eleonore Brandner, Jun Chen, Fabian Bross and
Diego Frassinelli for helpful discussions and com-
ments; Delia Alf, Pavlos Musenidis, Cornelia van
Scherpenberg and Jennifer Schild for help with the
annotations; and the three reviewers for their con-
structive criticism.

References
D. Bamman and G. Crane. 2011. Measuring histori-

cal word sense variation. In Proceedings of the 11th
Annual International ACM/IEEE Joint Conference
on Digital Libraries. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
pages 1–10.

173



A. Blank. 1997. Prinzipien des lexikalischen Be-
deutungswandels am Beispiel der romanischen
Sprachen. Niemeyer, Tübingen.

S. W. Brown. 2008. Choosing sense distinctions for
WSD: Psycholinguistic evidence. In Proceedings of
the 46th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics on Human Language Tech-
nologies: Short Papers. Stroudsburg, PA, USA,
pages 249–252.

P. Cook, J. H. Lau, D. McCarthy, and T. Baldwin.
2014. Novel word-sense identification. In 25th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics, Proceedings of the Conference: Technical Pa-
pers, August 23-29, 2014, Dublin, Ireland. pages
1624–1635.

Deutsches Textarchiv. 2017. Grundlage für
ein Referenzkorpus der neuhochdeutschen
Sprache. Herausgegeben von der Berlin-
Brandenburgischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
http://www.deutschestextarchiv.de/.

Haim Dubossarsky, Daphna Weinshall, and Eitan
Grossman. 2017. Outta control: Laws of semantic
change and inherent biases in word representation
models. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing. Copenhagen, Denmark, pages 1147–1156.

K. Erk, D. McCarthy, and N. Gaylord. 2009. Investi-
gations on word senses and word usages. In Pro-
ceedings of the Joint Conference of the 47th Annual
Meeting of the ACL and the 4th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing of the
AFNLP: Volume 1. Stroudsburg, PA, USA, pages
10–18.

K. Erk, D. McCarthy, and N. Gaylord. 2013. Measur-
ing word meaning in context. Computational Lin-
guistics 39(3):511–554.

L. Frermann and M. Lapata. 2016. A Bayesian model
of diachronic meaning change. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics 4:31–45.

K. Gulordava and M. Baroni. 2011. A distributional
similarity approach to the detection of semantic
change in the Google Books Ngram corpus. In Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Geometrical Models
of Natural Language Semantics. Stroudsburg, PA,
USA, pages 67–71.

W. L. Hamilton, J. Leskovec, and D. Jurafsky. 2016.
Cultural shift or linguistic drift? Comparing two
computational measures of semantic change. In
Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing. Austin,
Texas, pages 2116–2121.

N. Ide and J. Pustejovsky, editors. 2017. Handbook of
Linguistic Annotation. Springer, Dordrecht.

J. H. Lau, P. Cook, D. McCarthy, D. Newman, and
T. Baldwin. 2012. Word sense induction for novel
sense detection. In Proceedings of the 13th Confer-
ence of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics. Stroudsburg, PA, USA,
pages 591–601.

N. Osman. 1971. Kleines Lexikon untergegangener
Wörter: Wortuntergang seit dem Ende des 18.
Jahrhunderts. Beck, München.

H. Paul. 2002. Deutsches Wörterbuch: Bedeu-
tungsgeschichte und Aufbau unseres Wortschatzes.
Niemeyer, Tübingen, 10. edition.

E. Rosch and C.B. Mervis. 1975. Family resem-
blances: Studies in the internal structure of cate-
gories. Cognitive Psychology 7:573–605.

D. Schlechtweg, S. Eckmann, E. Santus, S. Schulte im
Walde, and D. Hole. 2017. German in flux: Detect-
ing metaphoric change via word entropy. In Pro-
ceedings of the 21st Conference on Computational
Natural Language Learning. Vancouver, Canada,
pages 354–367.

A. Soares da Silva. 1992. Homonı́mia e polissemia:
Análise sémica e teoria do campoléxico. In Ac-
tas do XIX Congreso Internacional de Lingüı́stica
e Filoloxı́a Románicas. Fundación Pedro Barrié de
la Maza, La Coruña, volume 2 of Lexicoloxı́a e Met-
alexicografı́a, pages 257–287.

David Tuggy. 1993. Ambiguity, polysemy, and vague-
ness. Cognitive Linguistics 4(3):273–290.

J. Zlatev. 2003. Polysemy or generality? Mu, Mouton
de Gruyter, volume 23 of Cognitive Approaches to
Lexical Semantics, pages 447–494.

174


