



















































Author Commitment and Social Power: Automatic Belief Tagging to Infer the Social Context of Interactions


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2018, pages 1057–1068
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 1 - 6, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

Author Commitment and Social Power:
Automatic Belief Tagging to Infer the Social Context of Interactions

Vinodkumar Prabhakaran
Stanford University

vinod@cs.stanford.edu

Premkumar Ganeshkumar
Agolo, Inc.

prem@agolo.com

Owen Rambow
Elemental Cognition, Inc.

owenr@elementalcognition.com

Abstract

Understanding how social power structures af-
fect the way we interact with one another is
of great interest to social scientists who want
to answer fundamental questions about hu-
man behavior, as well as to computer scien-
tists who want to build automatic methods to
infer the social contexts of interactions. In
this paper, we employ advancements in extra-
propositional semantics extraction within NLP
to study how author commitment reflects the
social context of an interactions. Specifi-
cally, we investigate whether the level of com-
mitment expressed by individuals in an orga-
nizational interaction reflects the hierarchical
power structures they are part of. We find that
subordinates use significantly more instances
of non-commitment than superiors. More im-
portantly, we also find that subordinates at-
tribute propositions to other agents more of-
ten than superiors do — an aspect that has not
been studied before. Finally, we show that en-
riching lexical features with commitment la-
bels captures important distinctions in social
meanings.

1 Introduction

Social power is a difficult concept to define, but is
often manifested in how we interact with one an-
other. Understanding these manifestations is im-
portant not only to answer fundamental questions
in social sciences about power and social inter-
actions, but also to build computational models
that can automatically infer social power struc-
tures from interactions. The availability and ac-
cess to large digital repositories of naturally occur-
ring social interactions and the advancements in
natural language processing techniques in recent
years have enabled researchers to perform large
scale studies on linguistic correlates of power,
such as words and phrases (Bramsen et al., 2011;
Gilbert, 2012), linguistic coordination (Danescu-
Niculescu-Mizil et al., 2012), agenda control (Tay-

lor et al., 2012), and dialog structure (Prabhakaran
and Rambow, 2014).

Another area of research that has recently gar-
nered interest within the NLP community is the
modeling of author commitment in text. Ini-
tial studies in this area were done in process-
ing hedges, uncertainty and lack of commit-
ment, specifically focused on scientific text (Mer-
cer et al., 2004; Di Marco et al., 2006; Farkas
et al., 2010). More recently, researchers have also
looked into capturing author commitment in non-
scientific text, e.g., levels of factuality in newswire
(Saurı́ and Pustejovsky, 2009), types of commit-
ment of beliefs in a variety of genres including
conversational text (Diab et al., 2009; Prabhakaran
et al., 2015). These approaches are motivated from
an information extraction perspective, for instance
in aiding tasks such as knowledge base popula-
tion.1 However, it has not been studied whether
such sophisticated author commitment analysis
can go beyond what is expressed in language and
reveal the underlying social contexts in which lan-
guage is exchanged.

In this paper, we bring together these two lines
of research; we study how power relations corre-
late with the levels of commitment authors express
in interactions. We use the power analysis frame-
work built by Prabhakaran and Rambow (2014) to
perform this study, and measure author commit-
ment using the committed belief tagging frame-
work introduced by (Diab et al., 2009) that distin-
guishes different types of beliefs expressed in text.
Our contributions are two-fold — statistical anal-
ysis of author commitment in relation with power,
and enrichment of lexical features with commit-
ment labels to aid in computational prediction of
power relations. In the first part, we find that au-

1The BeSt track of the 2017 TAC-KBP evaluation aimed
at detecting the “belief and sentiment of an entity to-
ward another entity, relation, or event” (http://www.cs.
columbia.edu/˜rambow/best-eval-2017/).

1057



thor commitment is significantly correlated with
the social power relations between their partici-
pants — subordinates use more instances of non-
commitment, a finding that is in line with sociolin-
guistics studies in this area. We also find that sub-
ordinates use significantly more reported beliefs
(i.e., attributing beliefs to other agents) than su-
periors. This is a new finding; to our knowledge,
there has not been any sociolinguistics studies in-
vestigating this aspect of interaction in relation
with power. In the second part, we present novel
ways of incorporating the author commitment in-
formation into lexical features that can capture im-
portant distinctions in word meanings conveyed
through the belief contexts in which they occur;
distinctions that are lost in a model that conflates
all occurrences of a word into one unit.

We first describe the related work in computa-
tional power analysis and computational model-
ing of cognitive states in Section 2. In Section 3,
we describe the power analysis framework we use.
Section 4 formally defines the research questions
we are investigating, and describes how we obtain
the belief information. In Section 5, we present
the statistical analysis of author commitment and
power. Section 6 presents the utility of enriching
lexical features with belief labels in the context of
automatic power prediction. Section 7 concludes
the paper and summarizes the results.

2 Related Work

The notion of belief that we use in this paper (Diab
et al., 2009; Prabhakaran et al., 2015) is closely
related to the notion of factuality that is captured
in FactBank (Saurı́ and Pustejovsky, 2009). They
capture three levels of factuality, certain (CT),
probable (PB), and possible (PS), as well as the
underspecified factuality (Uu). They also record
the corresponding polarity values, and the source
of the factuality assertions to distinguish between
factuality assertions by the author and those by the
agents/sources introduced by the author. While
FactBank offers a finer granularity, they are an-
notated on newswire text. Hence, we use the
corpus of belief annotations (Prabhakaran et al.,
2015) that is obtained on online discussion fo-
rums, which is closer to our genre.

Automatic hedge/uncertainty detection is a very
closely related task to belief detection. The be-
lief tagging framework we use aims to capture the
cognitive states of authors, whereas hedges are lin-

guistic expressions that convey one of those cog-
nitive states — non-committed beliefs. Automatic
hedge/uncertainty detection has generated active
research in recent years within the NLP commu-
nity. Early work in this area focused on detect-
ing speculative language in scientific text (Mer-
cer et al., 2004; Di Marco et al., 2006; Kilicoglu
and Bergler, 2008). The open evaluation as part
of the CoNLL shared task in 2010 to detect uncer-
tainty and hedging in biomedical and Wikipedia
text (Farkas et al., 2010) triggered further research
on this problem in the general domain (Agarwal
and Yu, 2010; Morante et al., 2010; Velldal et al.,
2012; Choi et al., 2012). Most of this work was
aimed at formal scientific text in English. More
recent work has tried to extend this work to other
genres (Wei et al., 2013; Sanchez and Vogel, 2015)
and languages (Velupillai, 2012; Vincze, 2014),
as well as building general purpose hedge lexi-
cons (Prokofieva and Hirschberg, 2014). In our
work, we use the lexicons from (Prokofieva and
Hirschberg, 2014) to capture hedges in text.

Sociolinguists have long studied the association
between level of commitment and social contexts
(Lakoff, 1973; O’Barr and Atkins, 1980; Hyland,
1998). A majority of this work studies gender
differences in the use of hedges, triggered by the
influential work by Robin Lakoff (Lakoff, 1973).
She argued that women use linguistic strategies
such as hedging and hesitations in order to adopt
an unassertive communication style, which she
terms “women’s language”. While many studies
have found evidence to support Lakoff’s theory
(e.g., (Crosby and Nyquist, 1977; Preisler, 1986;
Carli, 1990)), there have also been contradictory
findings (e.g., (O’Barr and Atkins, 1980)) that link
the difference in the use of hedges to other social
factors (e.g., power). O’Barr and Atkins (1980)
argue that the use of hedges is linked more to the
social positions rather than gender, suggesting to
rename “women’s language” to “powerless lan-
guage”. In later work, O’Barr (1982) formalized
the notion of powerless language, which formed
the basis of many sociolinguistics studies on social
power and communication. O’Barr (1982) ana-
lyzed courtroom interactions and identified hedges
and hesitations as some of the linguistic markers of
“powerless” speech. However, there has not been
any computational work which has looked into
how power relations relate to the level of commit-
ment expressed in text. In this paper, we use com-

1058



putational power analysis to perform a large scale
data-oriented study on how author commitment in
text reveals the underlying power relations.

There is a large body of literature in the so-
cial sciences that studies power as a social con-
struct (e.g., (French and Raven, 1959; Dahl, 1957;
Emerson, 1962; Pfeffer, 1981; Wartenberg, 1990))
and how it relates to the ways people use lan-
guage in social situations (e.g., (Bales et al., 1951;
Bales, 1970; O’Barr, 1982; Van Dijk, 1989; Bour-
dieu and Thompson, 1991; Ng and Bradac, 1993;
Fairclough, 2001; Locher, 2004)). Recent years
have seen growing interest in computationally an-
alyzing and detecting power and influence from
interactions. Early work in computational power
analysis used social network analysis based ap-
proaches (Diesner and Carley, 2005; Shetty and
Adibi, 2005; Creamer et al., 2009) or email traffic
patterns (Namata et al., 2007). Using NLP to de-
duce social relations from online communication
is a relatively new area of active research.

Bramsen et al. (2011) and Gilbert (2012) first
applied NLP based techniques to predict power re-
lations in Enron emails, approaching this task as a
text classification problem using bag of words or
ngram features. More recently, our work has used
dialog structure features derived from deeper di-
alog act analysis for the task of power prediction
in Enron emails (Prabhakaran and Rambow, 2014;
Prabhakaran et al., 2012; Prabhakaran and Ram-
bow, 2013). In this paper, We use the framework
of (Prabhakaran and Rambow, 2014), but we ana-
lyze a novel aspect of interaction that has not been
studied before — what level of commitment do the
authors express in language.

There has also been work on analyzing power
in other genres of interactions. Strzalkowski et al.
(2010) and Taylor et al. (2012) concentrate on
lower-level constructs called Language Uses such
as agenda control to predict power in Wikipedia
talk pages. Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al. (2012)
study how social power and linguistic coordina-
tion are correlated in Wikipedia interactions as
well as Supreme Court hearings. Bracewell et al.
(2012) and Swayamdipta and Rambow (2012) try
to identify pursuit of power in discussion forums.
Biran et al. (2012) and Rosenthal (2014) study
the problem of predicting influence in Wikipedia
talk pages, blogs, and other online forums. Prab-
hakaran et al. (2013) study manifestations of
power of confidence in presidential debates.

3 Power in Workplace Email: Data and
Analysis Framework

The focus of our study is to investigate whether
the level of commitment participants express in
their contributions in an interaction is related to
the power relations they have with other partici-
pants, and how it can help in the problem of pre-
dicting social power. In this section, we introduce
the power analysis framework as well as the data
we use in this study.

3.1 Problem
In order to model manifestations of power rela-
tions in interactions, we use our interaction anal-
ysis framework from (Prabhakaran and Rambow,
2014), where we introduced the problem of pre-
dicting organizational power relations between
pairs of participants based on single email threads.
The problem is formally defined as follows: given
an email thread t , and a related interacting partic-
ipant pair (p1 , p2 ) in the thread, predict whether
p1 is the superior or subordinate of p2 . In this
formulation, a related interacting participant pair
(RIPP) is a pair of participants of the thread such
that there is at least one message exchanged within
the thread between them (in either direction) and
that they are hierarchically related with a supe-
rior/subordinate relation.

3.2 Data
We use the same dataset we used in (Prabhakaran
and Rambow, 2014), which is a version of the En-
ron email corpus in which the thread structure of
email messages is reconstructed (Yeh and Harnly,
2006), and enriched by Agarwal et al. (2012) with
gold organizational power relations, manually de-
termined using information from Enron organiza-
tional charts. The corpus captures dominance re-
lations between 13,724 pairs of Enron employees.
As in (Prabhakaran and Rambow, 2014), we use
these dominance relation tuples to obtain gold la-
bels for the superior or subordinate relationships
between pairs of participants. We use the same
train-test-dev split as in (Prabhakaran and Ram-
bow, 2014). We summarize the number of threads
and related interacting participant pairs in each
subset of the data in Table 1.

4 Research Hypotheses

Our first objective in this paper is to perform a
large scale computational analysis of author com-

1059



Description Train Dev Test

Email threads 18079 8973 9144
# of RIPPs 7510 3578 3920

Table 1: Data Statistics. Row 1: number of threads in
subsets of the corpus. Row 2: number of related inter-
acting participant pairs in those subsets. RIPP: Related
interacting participant pairs

mitment and power relations. Specifically, we
want to investigate whether the commitment au-
thors express towards their contributions in orga-
nizational interactions is correlated with the power
relations they have with other participants. So-
ciolinguistics studies have found some evidence
to suggest that lack of commitment expressed
through hedges and hesitations is associated with
lower power status (O’Barr, 1982). However, in
our study, we go beyond hedge word lists, and
analyze different cognitive belief states expressed
by authors using a belief tagging framework that
takes into account the syntactic contexts within
which propositions are expressed.

4.1 Obtaining Belief Labels

We use the committed belief analysis framework
introduced by (Diab et al., 2009; Prabhakaran
et al., 2015) to model different levels of beliefs
expressed in text. Specifically, in this paper, we
use the 4-way belief distinction — COMMITTED-
BELIEF, NONCOMMITTEDBELIEF, REPORTED-
BELIEF, and NONAPPLICABLE— introduced in
(Prabhakaran et al., 2015).2 (Prabhakaran et al.,
2015) presented a corpus of online discussion
forums with over 850K words, annotating each
propositional head in text with one of the four be-
lief labels. The paper also presented an automatic
belief tagger trained on this data, which we use to
obtain belief labels in our data. We describe each
belief label and our associated hypotheses below.

Committed belief (CB): the writer strongly be-
lieves that the proposition is true, and wants the
reader/hearer to believe that. E.g.:

(1) a. John will submit the report.
b. I know that John is capable.

2We also performed analysis and experiments using an
earlier 3-way belief distinction proposed by (Diab et al.,
2009), which also yielded similar findings. We do not report
the details of those analyses in this paper.

As discussed earlier, lack of commitment in one’s
writing/speech is identified as markers of power-
less language. We thus hypothesize:

H. 1. Superiors use more instances of committed
belief in their messages than subordinates.

Non-committed belief (NCB): the writer ex-
plicitly identifies the proposition as something
which he or she could believe, but he or she hap-
pens not to have a strong belief in, for example by
using an epistemic modal auxiliary. E.g.:

(2) a. John may submit the report.
b. I guess John is capable.

This class captures a more semantic notion of
non-commitment than hedges, since the belief an-
notation attempts to model the underlying mean-
ing rather than language uses, and hence cap-
tures other linguistic means of expressing non-
committedness. Following (O’Barr, 1982), we
formulate the below hypothesis:

H. 2. Subordinates use more instances of non
committed belief in their messages than superiors.

Reported belief (ROB): the writer attributes be-
lief (either committed or non-committed) to an-
other person or group. E.g.:

(3) a. Sara says John will submit the report.
b. Sara thinks John may be capable.

Note that this label is only applied when the
writer’s own belief in the proposition is unclear.
For instance, if the first example above was
Sara knows John will submit the report on-time,
the writer is expressing commitment toward the
proposition that John will submit the report and
it will be labeled as committed belief rather than
reported belief. Reported belief captures instances
where the writer is in effect limiting his/her com-
mitment towards what is stated by attributing the
belief to someone else. So, in line with our hy-
potheses for non-committed beliefs, we formulate
the following hypothesis:

H. 3. Subordinates use more instances of reported
beliefs in their messages than superiors.

Non-belief propositions (NA): – the writer ex-
presses some other cognitive attitude toward the
proposition, such as desire or intention (4a), or ex-
pressly states that he/she has no belief about the
proposition (e.g., asking a question (4b)). E.g.:

1060



(4) a. I need John to submit the report.
b. Will John be capable?

As per the above definition, requests for informa-
tion (i.e., questions) and requests for actions are
cases where the author is not expressing a belief
about the proposition, but rather expressing the de-
sire that some action be done. In the study corre-
lating power with dialog act tags (Prabhakaran and
Rambow, 2014), we found that superiors issue sig-
nificantly more requests than subordinates. Hence,
we expect the superiors to have significantly more
non belief expressions in their messages, and for-
mulate the following hypothesis:

H. 4. Superiors use more instances of non beliefs
in their messages than subordinates.

4.2 Testing Belief Tagger Bias
NLP tools are imperfect and may produce errors,
which poses a problem when using any NLP tool
for sociolinguistic analysis. More than the mag-
nitude of error, we believe that whether the error
is correlated with the social variable of interest
(i.e., power) is more important; e.g., is the belief-
tagger more likely to find ROB false-positives in
subordinates text? To test whether this is the case,
we performed manual belief annotation on around
500 propositional heads in our corpus. Logistic
regression test revealed that the belief-tagger is
equally likely to make errors (both false-positives
and false-negatives, for all four belief-labels) in
sentences written by subordinates as superiors (the
null hypothesis accepted at p > 0.05 for all eight
tests).

5 Statistical Analysis

Now that we have set up the analysis framework
and research hypotheses, we present the statistical
analysis of how superiors and subordinates differ
in their relative use of expressions of commitment.

5.1 Features
For each participant of each pair of related in-
teracting participants in our corpus, we aggregate
each of the four belief tags:

• CBCount: number of propositional heads
tagged as Committed Belief (CB)

• NCBCount: number of propositional heads
tagged as Non Committed Belief (NCB)

• ROBCount: number of propositional heads
tagged as Reported Belief (ROB)

• NACount: number of propositional heads
tagged as Non Belief (NA)

5.2 Hypotheses Testing
Our general hypothesis is that power relations do
correlate with the level of commitment people ex-
press in their messages; i.e., at least one of H.1 -
H.4 is true. In this analysis, each participant of the
pair (p1 , p2 ) is a data instance. We exclude the
instances for which a feature value is undefined.3

In order to test whether superiors and subordi-
nates use different types of beliefs, we used a lin-
ear regression based analysis. For each feature,
we built a linear regression model predicting the
feature value using power (i.e., superior vs. sub-
ordinate) as the independent variable. Since ver-
bosity of a participant can be highly correlated
with each of these feature values (we found it to be
highly correlated with subordinates (Prabhakaran
and Rambow, 2014)), we added token count as a
control variable to the linear regression.

Our linear regression test revealed significant
differences in NCB (b=-.095, t(-8.09), p<.001),
ROB (b=-.083, t(-7.162), p<.001) and NA
(b=.125, t(4.351), p<.001), and no significant dif-
ference in CB (b=.007, t(0.227), p=0.821). Fig-
ure 1 pictorially demonstrates these results by
plotting the difference between the mean values of
each commitment feature (here normalized by to-
ken count) of superiors vs. subordinates, as a per-
centage of mean feature value of the correspond-
ing commitment feature for superiors. Dark bars
denote statistically significant differences.

5.3 Interpretation of Findings
The results from our statistical analysis validate
our original hypothesis that power relations do
correlate with the level of commitment people ex-
press in their messages. This finding remains sta-
tistically significant (p < 0.001) even after apply-
ing the Bonferroni correction for multiple testing.

The results on NCB confirm our hypothesis that
subordinates use more non-committedness in their
language. Subordinates’ messages contain 48%
more instances of non-committed belief than su-
periors’ messages, even after normalizing for the
length of messages. This is in line with prior soci-
olinguistics literature suggesting that people with

3These are instances corresponding to participants who
did not send any messages in the thread (some of the pairs in
the set of related interacting participant pairs only had one-
way communication) or whose messages were empty (e.g.,
forwarding messages).

1061



2.60%

48.29%

65.34%

-8.23%
-25%

0%

25%

50%

75%

CBCount NCBCount ROBCount NACount

Re
la
tiv

e	
D
iff
er
en

ce

Figure 1: Relative difference (RD) between subordi-
nates and superiors in their use of different types of
commitment (counts normalized by word count of con-
tributions). Dark bars: statistical significance at p <
0.05. (RD = (Mean(Subordinates)−Mean(Superiors))∗100Mean(Superiors) ).

less power tend to use less commitment, previ-
ously measured in terms of hedges. However, in
our work, we go beyond hedge dictionaries and
use expressions of non-committedness that takes
into account the syntactic configurations in which
the words appear.

Another important finding is in terms of re-
ported belief (ROB). Our results strongly verify
the hypothesis H.3 that subordinates use signif-
icantly more reported beliefs than superiors. In
fact, it obtained the largest magnitude of relative
difference (65.3% more) of all features we ana-
lyzed. To our knowledge, ours is the first study
that analyzed the manifestation of power in au-
thors attributing beliefs to others. Our results are
in line with the finding in (Agarwal et al., 2014)
that “if many more people get mentioned to a per-
son then that person is the boss”, because as sub-
ordinates report other people’s beliefs to superiors,
they are also likely to mention them.

The finding that superiors use more NAs con-
firms our hypothesis H.4. As discussed earlier, this
is expected since superiors issue more requests (as
found by (Prabhakaran and Rambow, 2014)), the
propositional heads of which would be tagged as
NA by the belief tagger. However, our hypothesis
H.1 is proven false. Being a superior or subordi-
nate does not affect how often their messages con-
tain CB, which suggests that power differences are
manifested only in terms of lack of commitment.

6 Commitment in Power Prediction

Our next step is to explore whether we can uti-
lize the hedge and belief labels to improve the per-
formance of an automatic power prediction sys-
tem. For this purpose, we use our POWERPRE-

DICTOR system (Prabhakaran and Rambow, 2014)
that predicts the direction of power between a
pair of related interacting participants in an email
thread. It uses a variety of linguistic and dialog
structural features consisting of verbosity features
(message count, message ratio, token count, to-
ken ratio, and tokens per message), positional fea-
tures (initiator, first message position, last mes-
sage position), thread structure features (number
of all recipients and those in the To and CC fields
of the email, reply rate, binary features denoting
the adding and removing of other participants), di-
alog act features (request for action, request for
information, providing information, and conven-
tional), and overt displays of power, and lexical
features (lemma ngrams, part-of-speech ngrams,
and mixed ngrams, a version of lemma ngrams
with open class words replaced with their part-of-
speech tags). The feature sets are summarized in
Table 2 ((Prabhakaran and Rambow, 2014) has a
detailed description of these features).

Set Description

VRB Verbosity (e.g., message count)
PST Positional (e.g., thread initiator?)
THR Thread structure (e.g., reply rate)
DIA Dialog act tagging (e.g., request count)
ODP Overt displays of power
LEX Lexical ngrams (lemma, POS, mixed ngrams)

Table 2: POWERPREDICTOR system: Features used

None of the features used in POWERPREDIC-
TOR use information from the parse trees of sen-
tences in the text However, in order to accurately
obtain the belief labels, deep dependency parse
based features are critical (Prabhakaran et al.,
2010). We use the ClearTk wrapper for the Stan-
ford CoreNLP pipeline to obtain the dependency
parses of sentences in the email text. To en-
sure an unified analysis framework, we also use
the Stanford CoreNLP for tokenization, part-of-
speech tagging, and lemmatization steps, instead
of OpenNLP. This change affects our analysis in
two ways. First, the source of part-of-speech tags
and word lemmas is different from what was pre-
sented in the original system, which might affect
the performance of the dialog act tagger and overt
display of power tagger (DIA and ODP features).
Second, we had to exclude 117 threads (0.3%)
from the corpus for which the Stanford CoreNLP
failed to parse some sentences, resulting in the re-
moval of 11 data points (0.2%), only one of which

1062



was in the test set. On randomly checking, we
found that they contained non-parsable text such
as dumps of large tables, system logs, or unedited
dumps of large legal documents.

In order to better interpret how the commitment
features help in power prediction, we use a lin-
ear kernel SVM in our experiments. Linear ker-
nel SVMs are significantly faster than higher or-
der SVMs, and our preliminary experiments re-
vealed the performance gain by using a higher or-
der SVM to be only marginal. We use the best per-
forming feature set from (Prabhakaran and Ram-
bow, 2014) as a strong baseline for our experi-
ments. This baseline feature set is the combina-
tion of thread structure features (THR) and lexical
features (LEX). This baseline system obtained an
accuracy of 68.8% in the development set.

6.1 Belief Label Enriched Lexical Features

Adding the belief label counts into the SVM di-
rectly as features will not yield much performance
improvements, as signal in the aggregate counts
would be minimal given the effect sizes of dif-
ferences we find in Section 5. In this section,
we investigate a more sophisticated way of in-
corporating the belief tags into the power predic-
tion framework. Lexical features are very use-
ful for the task of power prediction. However, it
is often hard to capture deeper syntactic/semantic
contexts of words and phrases using ngram fea-
tures. We hypothesize that incorporating belief
tags into the ngrams will enrich the representa-
tion and will help disambiguate different usages
of same words/phrases. For example, let us con-
sider two sentences: I need the report by tomorrow
vs. If I need the report, I will let you know. The
former is likely coming from a person who has
power, whereas the latter does not give any such
indication. Applying the belief tagger to these two
sentences will result in I need(CB) the report ...
and If I need(NA) the report .... Capturing the dif-
ference between need(CB) vs. need(NA) will help
the machine learning system to make the distinc-
tion between these two usages and in turn improve
the power prediction performance.

In building the ngram features, whenever we en-
counter a token that is assigned a belief tag, we ap-
pend the belief tag to the corresponding lemma or
part-of-speech tag in the ngram. We call it the Ap-
pend version of corresponding ngram feature. We
summarize the different versions of each type of

Feature Configuration in LEXICAL Accuracy

LN +PN +MN (BaseLine) 68.8

LNCBApnd+PN +MN 69.3
LN +PNCBApnd+MN 68.6
LN +PN +MNCBApnd 69.0

LNCBApnd+ PN + MNCBApnd 69.2

Table 3: Power prediction results using different con-
figurations of LEX features. (The full feature set also
includes THR.)

ngram features below:
• LN: the original word lemma ngram; e.g.,

i need the.
• LNCBApnd: word lemma ngram with appended

belief tags; e.g., i need(CB) the.
• PN: the original part-of-speech ngram; e.g.,

PRP VB DT.
• PNCBApnd: part-of-speech ngram with ap-

pended belief tags; e.g., PRP VB(CB) DT.
• MN: the original mixed ngram; e.g., i VB the.
• MNCBApnd: mixed ngram with appended belief

tags; e.g., i VB(CB) the.
In Table 3, we show the results obtained by in-
corporating the belief tags in this manner to the
LEXICAL features of the original baseline feature
set. The first row indicates the baseline results
and the following rows show the impact of in-
corporating belief tags using the Append method.
While the Append version of both lemma ngrams
and mixed ngrams improved the results, the Ap-
pend version of part of speech ngrams reduced
the results. The combination of best performing
version of each type of ngram obtained slightly
lower result than using the Append version of
word ngram alone, which posted the overall best
performance of 69.3%, a significant improvement
(p<0.05) over not using any belief information.
We use the approximate randomization test (Yeh,
2000) for testing statistical significance of the im-
provement.

Finally, we verified that our best performing
feature sets obtain similar improvements in the un-
seen test set. The baseline system obtained 70.2%
accuracy in the test set. The best performing con-
figuration from Table 3 significantly improved this
accuracy to 70.8%. The second best performing
configuration of using the Append version of both
word and mixed ngrams obtained only a small im-
provement upon the baseline in the test set.

1063



Figure 2: Feature weights of different belief appended versions of 25 propositional heads whose lemma unigrams
had the highest standard deviation. Y-axis denotes the propositional heads in decreasing order of standard deviation
from bottom to top. X-axis denotes the feature weights.

6.2 Word NGram Feature Analysis

We inspect the feature weights assigned to the
LNCBApnd version of lemma ngrams in our best
performing model. Each lemma ngram that con-
tains a propositional head (e.g., need) has four
possible LNCBApnd ngram versions: need(CB),
need(NCB), need(ROB), and need(NA). For each
lemma ngram, we calculate the standard deviation
of weights assigned to different LNCBApnd versions
in the learned model as a measure of variation cap-
tured by incorporating belief tags into that ngram.4

Figure 2 shows the feature weights of differ-
ent LNCBApnd versions of twenty five propositional
heads whose lemma unigrams had the highest
standard deviation. The y-axis lists propositional
heads arranged in the decreasing order of standard
deviation from bottom to top, while the x-axis de-
notes the feature weights. The markers distinguish
the different LNCBApnd versions of each proposi-
tional head — square denotes COMMITTEDBE-

4Not all lemma ngrams have all four versions; we calcu-
lated standard deviation using the versions present.

LIEF, circle denotes NONCOMMITTEDBELIEF,
triangle denotes REPORTEDBELIEF, and diamond
denotes NONAPPLICABLE. The feature versions
with negative weights are associated more with
subordinates’ messages, whereas those with pos-
itive weights are associated more with superiors’
messages. Since NCB and ROB versions are rare,
they rarely get high weights in the model.

We find that by incorporating belief labels into
lexical features, we capture important distinctions
in social meanings expressed through words that
are lost in the regular lemma ngram formulation.
For example, propositional heads such as know,
need, hold, mean and want are indicators of power
when they occur in CB contexts (e.g., i need ...),
whereas their usages in NA contexts (e.g., do you
need?, if i need..., etc.) are indicators of lack of
power. In contrast, the CB version of attend, let,
plan, could, check, discuss, and feel (e.g., i will
attend/check/plan ...) are strongly associated with
lack of power, while their NA versions (e.g., can
you attend/check/plan?) are indicators of power.

1064



7 Conclusion

In this paper, we made two major contributions.
First, we presented a large-scale data oriented
analysis of how social power relations between
participants of an interaction correlate with differ-
ent types of author commitment in terms of their
relative usage of hedges and different levels of
beliefs — committed belief, non-committed be-
lief, reported belief, and non-belief. We found
evidence that subordinates use significantly more
propositional hedges than superiors, and that su-
periors and subordinates use significantly differ-
ent proportions of different types of beliefs in their
messages. In particular, subordinates use signif-
icantly more non-committed beliefs than superi-
ors. They also report others’ beliefs more often
than superiors. Second, we investigated different
ways of incorporating the belief tag information
into the machine learning system that automati-
cally detects the direction of power between pairs
of participants in an interaction. We devised a so-
phisticated way of incorporating this information
into the machine learning framework by append-
ing the heads of propositions in lexical features
with corresponding belief tags, demonstrating its
utility in distinguishing social meanings expressed
through the different belief contexts.

This study is based on emails from a single cor-
poration, at the beginning of the 21st century. Our
findings on the correlation between author com-
mitment and power may be reflective of the work
culture that prevailed in that organization at the
time when the emails were exchanged. It is im-
portant to replicate this study on emails from mul-
tiple organizations in order to assess whether these
results generalize across board. It is likely that be-
havior patterns are affected by factors such as eth-
nic culture (Cox et al., 1991) of the organization,
and the kinds of conversations interactants engage
in (for instance, co-operative vs. competitive be-
havior (Hill et al., 1992)). We intend to explore
this line of inquiry in future work.

Acknowledgments

This paper is partially based upon work supported
by the DARPA DEFT program under a grant to
Columbia University; all three co-authors were at
Columbia University when portions of this work
were performed. The views expressed here are
those of the author(s) and do not reflect the offi-
cial policy or position of the Department of De-

fense or the U.S. Government. We thank Dan Ju-
rafsky and the anonymous reviewers for their help-
ful feedback.

References
Apoorv Agarwal, Adinoyi Omuya, Aaron Harnly, and

Owen Rambow. 2012. A comprehensive gold stan-
dard for the Enron organizational hierarchy. In Pro-
ceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short
Papers). Association for Computational Linguistics,
Jeju Island, Korea, pages 161–165. http://www.
aclweb.org/anthology/P12-2032.

Apoorv Agarwal, Adinoyi Omuya, Jingwei Zhang, and
Owen Rambow. 2014. Enron corporation: You’re
the boss if people get mentioned to you. In Proceed-
ings of the 2014 International Conference on So-
cial Computing. ACM, New York, NY, USA, Social-
Com ’14, pages 2:1–2:4. https://doi.org/
10.1145/2639968.2640065.

Shashank Agarwal and Hong Yu. 2010. Detecting
hedge cues and their scope in biomedical text with
conditional random fields. Journal of biomedical in-
formatics 43(6):953–961.

Robert F. Bales. 1970. Personality and interpersonal
behavior. Holt, Rinehart, and Winston (New York).

Robert F. Bales, Fred L. Strodtbeck, Theodore M.
Mills, and Mary E. Roseborough. 1951. Channels
of communication in small groups. American Soci-
ological Review pages 16(4), 461–468.

Or Biran, Sara Rosenthal, Jacob Andreas, Kath-
leen McKeown, and Owen Rambow. 2012. De-
tecting influencers in written online conversations.
In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Lan-
guage in Social Media. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, Montréal, Canada, pages 37–
45. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
W12-2105.

Pierre Bourdieu and John B. Thompson. 1991. Lan-
guage and symbolic power. Harvard University
Press.

David B. Bracewell, Marc Tomlinson, and Hui Wang.
2012. A motif approach for identifying pursuits of
power in social discourse. In ICSC. IEEE Computer
Society, pages 1–8.

Philip Bramsen, Martha Escobar-Molano, Ami Patel,
and Rafael Alonso. 2011. Extracting Social Power
Relationships from Natural Language. In ACL. The
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
773–782.

Linda L. Carli. 1990. Gender, language, and influ-
ence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
59(5):941.

1065



Eunsol Choi, Chenhao Tan, Lillian Lee, Cristian
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, and Jennifer Spindel.
2012. Hedge detection as a lens on framing in the
gmo debates: A position paper. In Proceedings
of the Workshop on Extra-Propositional Aspects of
Meaning in Computational Linguistics. Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 70–79.

Taylor H. Cox, Sharon A. Lobel, and Poppy Lauretta
McLeod. 1991. Effects of ethnic group cultural dif-
ferences on cooperative and competitive behavior
on a group task. Academy of management journal
34(4):827–847.

Germán Creamer, Ryan Rowe, Shlomo Hershkop, and
Salvatore J. Stolfo. 2009. Segmentation and au-
tomated social hierarchy detection through email
network analysis. In Haizheng Zhang, Myra
Spiliopoulou, Bamshad Mobasher, C. Lee Giles,
Andrew Mccallum, Olfa Nasraoui, Jaideep Srivas-
tava, and John Yen, editors, Advances in Web Mining
and Web Usage Analysis, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
Heidelberg, pages 40–58.

Faye Crosby and Linda Nyquist. 1977. The female
register: An empirical study of lakoff’s hypotheses.
Language in Society 6(03):313–322.

Robert A. Dahl. 1957. The concept of power. Syst.
Res. 2(3):201–215. https://doi.org/10.
1002/bs.3830020303.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Lillian Lee,
Bo Pang, and Jon Kleinberg. 2012. Echoes of
Power: Language Effects and Power Differences
in Social Interaction. In Proceedings of the 21st
international conference on World Wide Web.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, WWW ’12. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2187836.2187931.

Chrysanne Di Marco, Frederick W. Kroon, and
Robert E. Mercer. 2006. Using hedges to classify
citations in scientific articles. In Computing attitude
and affect in text: theory and applications, Springer,
pages 247–263.

Mona Diab, Lori Levin, Teruko Mitamura, Owen Ram-
bow, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, and Weiwei Guo.
2009. Committed Belief Annotation and Tagging.
In Proceedings of the Third Linguistic Annotation
Workshop. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Suntec, Singapore, pages 68–73. http://
www.aclweb.org/anthology/W09-3012.

Jana Diesner and Kathleen M. Carley. 2005. Explo-
ration of communication networks from the Enron
email corpus. In In Proc. of Workshop on Link Anal-
ysis, Counterterrorism and Security, SIAM Interna-
tional Conference on Data Mining 2005. pages 21–
23.

Richard M. Emerson. 1962. Power-Dependence Rela-
tions. American Sociological Review 27(1):31–41.
https://doi.org/10.2307/2089716.

Norman Fairclough. 2001. Language and power.
Pearson Education.

Richárd Farkas, Veronika Vincze, György Móra, János
Csirik, and György Szarvas. 2010. The conll-2010
shared task: Learning to detect hedges and their
scope in natural language text. In Proceedings of
the Fourteenth Conference on Computational Nat-
ural Language Learning. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, Uppsala, Sweden, pages 1–
12. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
W10-3001.

John R. French and Bertram Raven. 1959. The Bases
of Social Power. In Dorwin Cartwright, editor, Stud-
ies in Social Power, University of Michigan Press,
pages 150–167+.

Eric Gilbert. 2012. Phrases that Signal Workplace
Hierarchy. In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 con-
ference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, CSCW ’12, pages
1037–1046.

Charles W.L. Hill, Michael A. Hitt, and Robert E.
Hoskisson. 1992. Cooperative versus competitive
structures in related and unrelated diversified firms.
Organization Science 3(4):501–521.

Ken Hyland. 1998. Hedging in scientific research arti-
cles, volume 54. John Benjamins Publishing.

Halil Kilicoglu and Sabine Bergler. 2008. Recogniz-
ing speculative language in biomedical research ar-
ticles: a linguistically motivated perspective. BMC
bioinformatics 9(Suppl 11):S10.

Robin Lakoff. 1973. Language and Woman’s Place.
Language in society 2(01):45–79.

Miriam A. Locher. 2004. Power and politeness
in action: disagreements in oral communica-
tion. Language, power, and social process. M.
de Gruyter. http://books.google.com/
books?id=Aa32A4gWb8sC.

Robert E. Mercer, Chrysanne Di Marco, and Freder-
ick W. Kroon. 2004. The frequency of hedging cues
in citation contexts in scientific writing. In Advances
in artificial intelligence, Springer, pages 75–88.

Roser Morante, Vincent Van Asch, and Walter Daele-
mans. 2010. Memory-based resolution of in-
sentence scopes of hedge cues. In Proceedings of
the Fourteenth Conference on Computational Nat-
ural Language Learning—Shared Task. Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 40–47.

Jr. Galileo Mark S. Namata, Lise Getoor, and Christo-
pher P. Diehl. 2007. Inferring organizational titles in
online communication. In Proceedings of the 2006
conference on Statistical network analysis. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, ICML’06, pages 179–
181. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?
id=1768341.1768359.

1066



Sik Hung Ng and James J. Bradac. 1993. Power in lan-
guage: Verbal communication and social influence..
Sage Publications, Inc.

William M. O’Barr. 1982. Linguistic evidence:
language, power, and strategy in the courtroom.
Studies on law and social control. Academic
Press. http://books.google.com/books?
id=bqO0PwAACAAJ.

William M. O’Barr and Bowman K. Atkins. 1980.
”women’s language” or ”powerless language”?
Women and Language in Literature and Society .

Jeffrey Pfeffer. 1981. Power in organizations. Pitman,
Marshfield, MA.

Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Tomas By, Julia Hirschberg,
Owen Rambow, Samira Shaikh, Tomek Strza-
lkowski, Jennifer Tracey, Michael Arrigo, Ru-
payan Basu, Micah Clark, Adam Dalton, Mona
Diab, Louise Guthrie, Anna Prokofieva, Stephanie
Strassel, Gregory Werner, Janyce Wiebe, and Yorick
Wilks. 2015. A New Dataset and Evaluation for Be-
lief/Factuality. In Proceedings of the Fourth Joint
Conference on Lexical and Computational Seman-
tics (*SEM 2015). Association for Computational
Linguistics, Denver, USA.

Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Ajita John, and Dorée D.
Seligmann. 2013. Who Had the Upper Hand?
Ranking Participants of Interactions Based on Their
Relative Power. In Proceedings of the IJCNLP.
Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing,
Nagoya, Japan, pages 365–373. http://www.
aclweb.org/anthology/I13-1042.

Vinodkumar Prabhakaran and Owen Rambow. 2013.
Written Dialog and Social Power: Manifestations
of Different Types of Power in Dialog Behavior.
In Proceedings of the IJCNLP. Asian Federation
of Natural Language Processing, Nagoya, Japan,
pages 216–224. http://www.aclweb.org/
anthology/I13-1025.

Vinodkumar Prabhakaran and Owen Rambow. 2014.
Predicting power relations between participants in
written dialog from a single thread. In Proceed-
ings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short
Papers). Association for Computational Linguistics,
Baltimore, Maryland, pages 339–344. http://
www.aclweb.org/anthology/P14-2056.

Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Owen Rambow, and Mona
Diab. 2010. Automatic Committed Belief Tagging.
In Coling 2010: Posters. Coling 2010 Organizing
Committee, Beijing, China, pages 1014–1022.
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
C10-2117.

Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Owen Rambow, and Mona
Diab. 2012. Who’s (Really) the Boss? Percep-
tion of Situational Power in Written Interactions.
In 24th International Conference on Computational

Linguistics (COLING). Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Mumbai, India.

Bent Preisler. 1986. Linguistic sex roles in conversa-
tion. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter .

Anna Prokofieva and Julia Hirschberg. 2014. Hedg-
ing and speaker commitment. In 5th International
Workshop on Emotion, Social Signals, Sentiment
and Linked Open Data. LREC.

Sara Rosenthal. 2014. Detecting Influencers in Social
Media Discussions. XRDS: Crossroads, The ACM
Magazine for Students 21(1):40–45.

Liliana Mamani Sanchez and Carl Vogel. 2015. A
hedging annotation scheme focused on epistemic
phrases for informal language. In Proceedings of
the IWCS Workshop on Models for Modality Anno-
tation. Association for Computational Linguistics,
London, UK.

Roser Saurı́ and James Pustejovsky. 2009. Fact-
Bank: a corpus annotated with event factuality.
Language Resources and Evaluation 43:227–268.
10.1007/s10579-009-9089-9. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s10579-009-9089-9.

Jitesh Shetty and Jafar Adibi. 2005. Discovering im-
portant nodes through graph entropy the case of
Enron email database. In Proceedings of the 3rd
international workshop on Link discovery. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, LinkKDD ’05, pages 74–
81. https://doi.org/http://doi.acm.
org/10.1145/1134271.1134282.

Tomek Strzalkowski, George Aaron Broadwell, Jen-
nifer Stromer-Galley, Samira Shaikh, Sarah Tay-
lor, and Nick Webb. 2010. Modeling socio-
cultural phenomena in discourse. In Proceed-
ings of the 23rd International Conference on COL-
ING 2010. Coling 2010 Organizing Committee,
Beijing, China. http://www.aclweb.org/
anthology/C10-1117.

Swabha Swayamdipta and Owen Rambow. 2012.
The Pursuit of Power and Its Manifestation
in Written Dialog. 2012 IEEE Sixth Inter-
national Conference on Semantic Comput-
ing 0:22–29. https://doi.org/http:
//doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.
1109/ICSC.2012.49.

Sarah M. Taylor, Ting Liu, Samira Shaikh, Tomek
Strzalkowski, George Aaron Broadwell, Jennifer
Stromer-Galley, Umit Boz, Xiaoai Ren, Jingsi Wu,
and Feifei Zhang. 2012. Chinese and American
Leadership Characteristics: Discovery and Compar-
ison in Multi-party On-Line Dialogues. In ICSC.
IEEE Computer Society, pages 17–21.

Teun A Van Dijk. 1989. Structures of discourse and
structures of power. Annals of the International
Communication Association 12(1):18–59.

1067



Erik Velldal, Lilja Øvrelid, Jonathon Read, and
Stephan Oepen. 2012. Speculation and negation:
Rules, rankers, and the role of syntax. Computa-
tional Linguistics 38(2):369–410.

Sumithra Velupillai. 2012. Shades of certainty: anno-
tation and classification of swedish medical records.
Ph.D. thesis, Department of Computer and Systems
Sciences, Stockholm University.

Veronika Vincze. 2014. Uncertainty Detection in Hun-
garian Texts. In Proceedings of COLING 2014,
the 25th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics: Technical Papers. Dublin City Univer-
sity and Association for Computational Linguistics,
Dublin, Ireland, pages 1844–1853. http://www.
aclweb.org/anthology/C14-1174.

Thomas E. Wartenberg. 1990. The forms of power:
from domination to transformation. Temple Uni-
versity Press. http://books.google.sh/
books?id=yK52QgAACAAJ.

Zhongyu Wei, Junwen Chen, Wei Gao, Binyang Li,
Lanjun Zhou, Yulan He, and Kam-Fai Wong. 2013.
An empirical study on uncertainty identification
in social media context. In Proceedings of the
51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers).
Association for Computational Linguistics, Sofia,
Bulgaria, pages 58–62. http://www.aclweb.
org/anthology/P13-2011.

Alexander Yeh. 2000. More accurate tests for
the statistical significance of result differ-
ences. In Proceedings of the 18th confer-
ence on Computational linguistics - Volume
2. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, COLING ’00,
pages 947–953. https://doi.org/http:
//dx.doi.org/10.3115/992730.992783.

Jen-Yuan Yeh and Aaron Harnly. 2006. Email Thread
Reassembly Using Similarity Matching. In CEAS
2006 - The Third Conference on Email and Anti-
Spam, July 27-28, 2006, Mountain View, California,
USA. Mountain View, California, USA.

1068


