



















































RiskFinder: A Sentence-level Risk Detector for Financial Reports


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2018: Demonstrations, pages 81–85
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 2 - 4, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

RiskFinder: A Sentence-level Risk Detector for Financial Reports

Yu-Wen Liu†, Liang-Chih Liu∗, Chuan-Ju Wang‡, Ming-Feng Tsai†∧
†Dept. of Computer Science, National Chengchi University

∗Dept. of Information and Finance Management, National Taipei University of Technology
‡Research Center of Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica
∧MOST Joint Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare

g10435@cs.nccu.edu.tw, lcliu@ntut.edu.tw,
cjwang@citi.sinica.edu.tw, mftsai@nccu.edu.tw

Abstract

This paper presents a web-based information
system, RiskFinder, for facilitating the analy-
ses of soft and hard information in financial
reports. In particular, the system broadens the
analyses from the word level to sentence level,
which makes the system useful for practitioner
communities and unprecedented among finan-
cial academics. The proposed system has
four main components: 1) a Form 10-K risk-
sentiment dataset, consisting of a set of risk-
labeled financial sentences and pre-trained sen-
tence embeddings; 2) metadata, including ba-
sic information on each company that pub-
lished the Form 10-K financial report as well
as several relevant financial measures; 3) an
interface that highlights risk-related sentences
in the financial reports based on the latest sen-
tence embedding techniques; 4) a visualization
of financial time-series data for a correspond-
ing company. This paper also conducts some
case studies to showcase that the system can
be of great help in capturing valuable insight
within large amounts of textual information.
The system is now online available at https:
//cfda.csie.org/RiskFinder/.

1 Introduction

A great deal of mass media outlets such as newspa-
pers and magazines, or financial reports required by
authorities such as the SEC1-mandated Form-10Q
and Form-10K, play an important role in dissemi-
nating information to participants in financial mar-
kets. The spread of this information may quickly
or slowly influence the sentiment of market partic-
ipants and thus reshape their perspectives on eco-
nomic numbers, such as stock prices and interest
rate levels. This information comes in two types:
soft information, usually referring to textual infor-
mation such as opinions and market commentary;

1Securities and Exchange Commission

and hard information, that is, numerical informa-
tion such as historical time series of stock prices.

Due to the strong relation between the textual in-
formation and numerical measures, there has been
a growing body of studies in the fields of finance
and data science that adopt the techniques of natu-
ral language processing (NLP) and machine learn-
ing to examine the interaction between these two
types of information (e.g., Kogan et al., 2009; Tsai
et al., 2016; Tsai and Wang, 2017; Rekabsaz et al.,
2017). For example, Loughran and McDonald
(2011) and Jegadeesh and Wu (2013) investigate
how the disclosures of finance sentiment or risk
keywords in SEC-mandated financial reports af-
fect investor expectations about a company’s future
stock prices. Moreover, Kogan et al. (2009) and
Tsai and Wang (2017) exploit sentiment analysis
of 10-K reports for financial risk analysis. Further-
more, in Liu et al. (2016), a web-based information
system, FIN10K, is proposed for financial report
analysis and visualization.

However, these studies and systems all focus on
word-level analyses, which likely yield biased re-
sults or explanations because the usage of words in
finance context, especially in financial reports, is
usually complicated and sometimes includes tricks
to hide original sentiment (Liu et al., 2016). One of
the prominent examples is the negations of positive
words to frame negative statements (Loughran and
McDonald, 2016); moreover, we also find that the
word “offset” is usually used to hide negative infor-
mation with positive sentiment words. Therefore,
to advance the understanding of financial textual
information, this paper further constructs an infor-
mation system based on sentence-level analysis
to assist practitioners to capture more precise and
meaningful insight within large amounts of textual
information in finance.

There have been several studies proposed to pro-
duce distributed representations of words, such as

81



word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013). In recent years,
there have also been several studies that extend the
proportion from word level to sentence, paragraph,
or even document level, such as doc2vec (Mikolov
et al., 2013), FastText (Bojanowski et al., 2017),
and Siamese-CBOW (Kenter et al., 2016). Fol-
lowing the fruitful progress of these techniques of
word and sentence embeddings, this paper presents
a web-based information system, RiskFinder, that
broadens the content analysis from the word level
to sentence level for financial reports.

The proposed system contains four main parts: 1)
a Form 10-K risk-sentiment dataset, consisting of
a set of risk-labeled financial sentences and pre-
trained sentence embeddings; 2) metadata that sum-
marizes the basic information about each financial
report; 3) an interface that highlights risk-related
sentences in the financial reports; 4) a visualiza-
tion of financial time-series data associated with
the corresponding financial reports. In the pro-
posed system, we use the 10-K Corpus (Liu et al.,
2016) which contains 40,708 financial reports from
year 1996 to 2013. In addition to the 10-K corpus,
we also construct a set of labeled financial sen-
tences with respect to financial risk by involving 8
financial specialists including accountants and fi-
nancial analysts to ensure the quality of the labeling.
With the labeled sentences and the large collection
of financial reports, we apply FastText (Bojanowski
et al., 2017) and Siamese-CBOW (Kenter et al.,
2016) to sentence-level textual analysis. Due to the
superior performance of FastText, the system high-
lights high risk sentences in those reports via using
FastText. For comparison purposes, the system
shows the numbers of these highlighted high-risk
sentences for the selected report, and we at the
same time display the time-aligned relevant quanti-
tative information such as the historical stock prices
of the selected company to visualize its financial
risk, which considerably facilitates case studies in
the field of finance and accounting. Finally, we pub-
lish the pre-trained sentence vectors trained on the
10-K corpus and our constructed labeled sentences.

2 System Description

Figure 1 illustrates the user interface of the pro-
posed RiskFinder system. In the system, there are 4
major components for risk detection, the details of
which are provided in the following subsections.

2.1 Form 10-K Risk-sentiment Dataset

The first component is the collection of the Form
10-K risk-sentiment dataset. This work provides
the financial risk-sentiment dataset that consists of
two types of data: a set of risk-labeled financial
sentences and the pre-trained sentence embeddings.
There are in total 432 labeled financial sentences in
the dataset, which were selected from the MD&A2

sections of the 10-K corpus. When selecting the
candidate sentences, we first used the six finan-
cial sentiment lexicons proposed by Loughran and
McDonald (2011) to filter sentences and randomly
chose 24 sentences per year for annotation, yielding
in total 432 sentences for 18 years (1996 to 2013).
To construct the risk-labeled dataset, eight financial
specialists including accountants, financial analysts
and consultants participated in the annotation task
to ensure the quality of the labeling. In the annota-
tion process, each of the candidate sentences was
labeled by three different annotators, and then the
rule of majority was used to determine the degree
of risk of the sentence. A total of 138 sentences out
of the 432 sentences are identified as high-risk sen-
tences, and Cronbach’s alpha, which is regarded as
an indicator to determine the internal consistency,
showed the reliability of 0.784. In addition, the
dataset also includes the pre-trained sentence vec-
tors, each of which is a 100-dimension real-valued
vector, trained by FastText and Siamese-CBOW on
the 10-K corpus.3

2.2 The Metadata

The second component of the proposed system is
the metadata of the companies in the Form 10-K
corpus. A user can first select the company in the
list (1) (e.g., AEP INDUSTRIES INC in Figure 1).
Following the selection, the MD&A section of the
report and all fiscal years of the chosen company
are then automatically loaded in the window (2)
and timeline (3), respectively. A user can select
their interesting fiscal year in timeline (3). Then,
our system simultaneously displays in table (4) the
following metadata which summarizes the basic
information of the corresponding company:

1. the company name;
2. the company’s CUSIP number, which facil-

itates the retrieval of information associated
2Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Con-

dition and Results of Operations
3The dataset is available at https://cfda.csie.

org/RiskFinder/ upon publication.

82



Figure 1: The user interface of the RiskFinder system

Siamese-CBOW FastText

Accuracy 0.656 0.813
Precision 0.776 0.774
Recall 0.438 0.621
F1-measure 0.558 0.684

Table 1: Performance for risk sentence classification

with this company from other widely used
databases (e.g., Compustat and CRSP4);

3. the report release date;
4. the annualized post-event return volatilities;5

5. the number and the percentage of highlighted
risk-related sentences in this report.

2.3 Risk-related Sentence Detection
To examine a company’s financial risk given the
textual information in its financial reports on
Form 10-K, the proposed system focuses on the
sentence-level investigation into the MD&A sec-
tion, which is considered a major part where the
firm managements are most likely to reveal in-
formation (Loughran and McDonald, 2011). To
obtain representative sentence representations, we
adopt two sentence embedding techniques to con-

4CRSP is the abbreviation for the Center for Research in
Security Prices.

5The postevent return volatility is the root-mean square
error from a Fama-French three-factor model (Loughran and
McDonald, 2011; Tsai et al., 2016).

duct sentence-level textual analyses: FastText, a
linear classifier that enables efficient sentence clas-
sification and yields performance on par with other
deep learning classifiers, and Siamese-CBOW, a
neural network architecture that obtains word em-
beddings, directly optimized for sentence repre-
sentations. Since Siamese-CBOW, the second ap-
proach, produces only sentence embedding (by sim-
ply averaging the word embedding of each word
in a sentence), we then employ a logistic regres-
sion to construct a binary classifier to detect high-
risk sentences. Table 1 tabulates the performance
tested on the 87 sentences in terms of accuracy,
precision, recall, and F1-measure with 4-fold cross-
validation. Note that the 432 sentences are split into
the training data and the testing data with 345 and
87 sentences, respectively, where the proportions
of high-risk sentences are kept the same in training
and testing sets. Due to the significant superior
performance of FastText, we adopt it to highlight
high-risk sentences in the reports in the proposed
system. Furthermore, the number and percentage
of highlighted high-risk sentences in each report
are summarized in table (4) of Figure 1.

2.4 Visualization for Financial Measures

Our system attempts to facilitate the analysis of
textual information and capture more insight into
the financial risk associated with the announcement

83



Figure 2: A positive word in a high-risk sentence

Figure 3: The tone transition word

of each financial report. Therefore, in addition to
highlight the high-risk sentences, our system also
displays time-aligned quantitative information for
comparison purposes, such as historical prices and
trading volumes of the selected company’s stock,
as shown in the chart (5) of Figure 1. In particular,
the release date of the report is highlighted through
a red vertical line in the chart; users can adjust
the window (6) to show the corresponding quanti-
tative information for a certain period. Note that
two types of historical stock prices are provided
in the proposed system: the original stock prices
and those adjusted due to stock splits and dividend
payouts; the mode can be altered through (7).

3 Case Study

Framing negative or high-risk information through
negations of positive financial sentiment words is
prevalent among the drafters of financial corpora.
Such type of expression could alleviate the adverse
effect on market participants’ sentiment, but that
makes the identification of high-risk statements far
more complicated than the discussions in extant
finance and accounting literature. From word-level
to sentence-level analysis, our proposed RiskFinder
system can effectively recognize high-risk informa-
tion padded with positive words. The positive word
“dividend” in stock markets is a notable example;
Figure 2 shows that Caliper Life Science Inc.’s
stock prices trend downward after the announce-
ment of its year 2004 financial report stating that
“we have never declared or paid any dividends on
our capital stock . . . .” In a more complex form
of the expressions with the positive words “favor-

able,” the system identifies the information “we
cannot assure you that these markets will continue
to grow or remain favorable to the life science in-
dustry . . . ” as a high-risk sentence. Moreover, our
system also detects the tendency that the drafters
of 10-K financial reports use the word “offset” to
hide high-risk information behind the low-risk one.
For instance, Figure 3 shows that AES CORP.’s
stock prices trend downward within 2 months after
the announcement of its year 2005 financial report
stating that “. . . an increase of million in revenues
at ipalco were partially offset by a million decline
in revenues . . . .” These examples show that our
system can greatly facilitate case studies and be of
great help for practitioners in capturing meaningful
insight within large amounts of textual information
in finance from the sentence-level point of view.

4 Conclusions

In this paper, we introduce RiskFinder to broaden
the textual analysis of financial reports from the
word level to sentence level. This extension is es-
sential for the analytics of financial reports because
the sentences are usually long and complicated,
and high-risk information is sometimes hided with
positive sentiment words. Built on financial reports
in the 10-K Corpus with a set of risk-labeled sen-
tences, this proposed system applies FastText to
automatically identify high-risk sentences in those
reports. For comparison purposes, the system even
displays the time-aligned relevant quantitative in-
formation to visualize the financial risk associated
with the announcement of each report.

This work is a preliminary study, the purpose of
which is to demonstrate the importance of sentence-
level analysis and the integration of soft and hard
information in finance. Therefore, in the future, we
will continue to extend the system, with an empha-
sis on incorporating more state-of-the-art learning
algorithms or developing new algorithms to better
detect risk-related sentences. In addition, one of
our future work is to obtain more labeled sentences
with respect to financial risk or even different fi-
nancial aspects, which should further enhance the
performance and usability of the proposed system.

Acknowledgments

This research was partially supported by the Min-
istry of Science and Technology of Taiwan under
the grants MOST 106-3114-E-009-011 and 107-
2634-F-002-011.

84



References
Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and

Tomas Mikolov. 2017. Enriching word vectors with
subword information. Transactions of the Associa-
tion of Computational Linguistics, 5(1):135–146.

Narasimhan Jegadeesh and Di Wu. 2013. Word power:
A new approach for content analysis. Journal of Fi-
nancial Economics, 110(3):712–729.

Tom Kenter, Alexey Borisov, and Maarten de Rijke.
2016. Siamese cbow: Optimizing word embeddings
for sentence representations. In Proceedings of the
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL
’16, pages 941–951.

Shimon Kogan, Dimitry Levin, Bryan R Routledge, Ja-
cob S Sagi, and Noah A Smith. 2009. Predicting risk
from financial reports with regression. In Proceed-
ings of the 2009 Annual Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, NAACL ’09, pages 272–280.

Yu-Wen Liu, Liang-Chih Liu, Chuan-Ju Wang, and
Ming-Feng Tsai. 2016. Fin10k: A web-based in-
formation system for financial report analysis and
visualization. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM Inter-
national on Conference on Information and Knowl-
edge Management, CIKM ’16, pages 2441–2444.

Tim Loughran and Bill McDonald. 2011. When is a
liability not a liability? textual analysis, dictionaries,
and 10-ks. Journal of Finance, 66(1):35–65.

Tim Loughran and Bill McDonald. 2016. Textual anal-
ysis in accounting and finance: A survey. Journal of
Accounting Research, 54(4):1187–1230.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg Cor-
rado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Distributed represen-
tations of words and phrases and their composition-
ality. In Proceedings of the 26th International Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
NIPS ’13, pages 3111–3119.

Navid Rekabsaz, Mihai Lupu, Artem Baklanov, Allan
Hanbury, Alexander Dür, and Linda Anderson. 2017.
Volatility prediction using financial disclosures sen-
timents with word embedding-based IR models. In
Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), ACL ’17, pages 1712–1721.

Ming-Feng Tsai and Chuan-Ju Wang. 2017. On the
risk prediction and analysis of soft information in
finance reports. European Journal of Operational
Research, 257(1):243–250.

Ming-Feng Tsai, Chuan-Ju Wang, and Po-Chuan
Chien. 2016. Discovering finance keywords
via continuous-space language models. ACM
Transactions on Management Information Systems,
7(3):7:1–7:17.

85


