



















































Know Who Your Friends Are: Understanding Social Connections from Unstructured Text


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2018: Demonstrations, pages 76–80
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 2 - 4, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

Know Who Your Friends Are:
Understanding Social Connections from Unstructured Text

Léa A. Deleris, Francesca Bonin, Elizabeth Daly, Stéphane Deparis,
Yufang Hou, Charles Jochim, Yassine Lassoued and Killian Levacher

IBM Research - Ireland
Dublin , Ireland

lea.deleris, fbonin, edaly, stephane.deparis
yhou, charlesj, ylassoued, killian.levacher @ie.ibm.com

Abstract

Having an understanding of interpersonal re-
lationships is helpful in many contexts. Our
system seeks to assist humans with that task,
using textual information (e.g., case notes,
speech transcripts, posts, books) as input.
Specifically, our system first extracts quali-
tative and quantitative information elements
(which we call signals) about interactions
among persons, aggregates those to provide a
condensed view of relationships and then en-
ables users to explore all facets of the resulting
social (multi-)graph through a visual interface.

1 Introduction

The social network of a person plays a vital role
in their well being providing access to assistance,
resources, support (Wellman and Wortley, 1990)
and even influencing health (Christakis and Fowler,
2007). Understanding the quality of the social rela-
tionships, beyond the simple existence of a relation-
ship or its demographic nature (family or not), pro-
vides a better perspective on the context and is es-
sential in a variety of situations that extends beyond
social media such as criminal investigations (iden-
tifying suspects and acolytes), sales (connecting
to the right persons in target companies), political
analysis (understanding the evolution of alliances)
and human resources (improving team dynamics).
For instance, Yose et al. (2018) analysed a medieval
text to get novel insights into the hostilities during
the battle of Clontarf of 1014.

The initial motivation for this work comes from
the domain of social care. One essential task for
care workers is to identify who plays a supportive
or disruptive role in a patient’s environment at a
given time. Problems emerge when details get lost
within notes of the multiple persons composing
the care team. Significant details may have been
recorded but are locked inside free-text narratives,

requiring other parties to invest a great deal of time
to gain a full understanding of the situation.

In this paper, we present a system designed to
assist humans with the understanding of interper-
sonal relationships. Specifically, the system takes
as input a collection of texts and automatically ex-
tracts a multigraph representation of the relation-
ships (and their quality). From that information, we
provide an interface to enable users to gain insights
into the relationships, from aggregated information
to fine-grained analysis of temporal patterns and
emotions.

2 Background

Our work builds upon two areas: social graph
identification and qualitative relationship analysis.
Most of the research within the former attempts
to build ontologies of relations between individu-
als based on information extracted from text (e.g.,
social networks, dialogues, novels) (Hauffa et al.,
2011). Mori et al. (2006) try to enhance social net-
work extraction from the web, considering a range
of entities beyond just persons. They identify the
nature of entities (e.g., person, firm, geopolitical
entity) and their relations (e.g., mayor of).

The second area instead explores how to con-
struct a qualitative representation of the relation-
ship between individuals. Bracewell et al. (2011)
for example determine the collegiality between two
persons, as exhibited in a text. Srivastava et al.
(2016) attempt to identify the polarity of relations
(cooperative or conflictual) between characters in
narrative summaries, using textual and structural
features. Iyyer et al. (2016) model how the fictional
relationship between two characters changes over
time using deep recurrent autoencoders.

Altogether, while the first field enables the ex-
traction of complex multi-party social graphs, links
representing interpersonal relationships within

76



these graphs often lack a more nuanced represen-
tation (Hauffa et al., 2011). On the other hand,
techniques from qualitative relationship analysis
lead to a more extensive understanding of relation-
ships yet they are typically applied to minimal set-
tings consisting of two or three individuals at most.
Our work brings both fields together by produc-
ing larger multi-party social graphs with qualitative
links identified between the individuals.

3 Modeling Relationships

We model interpersonal relationships, or simply
relationships between two entities by analyzing
a list of associated relationship signals (hereafter
signals) which are extracted by an NLP system. At
this point, we focus on four kinds of signals:

• Direct Speech - A person addressing another
one without mentioning him/her, e.g., Phoebe
(to Monica): “The weather is nice today”.

• Direct Reference - A person addressing an-
other one and mentioning him/her explicitly,
e.g., Phoebe (to Monica): “I hate you”.

• Indirect Reference - A person mentioning a
third party, i.e., someone who is not present,
e.g., Phoebe: “I like Rachel”.

• Third-Party Reference - The description, by
a third-party, of any kind of relation between
two entities, e.g., Phoebe: “Ross has been in
love with Rachel forever”.

While we focus in our examples on humans, enti-
ties could also include corporations, governmental
organizations, products, brands and animals (e.g.,

“Toyota allies with Intel in bid to overtake GM.”).
For each detected signal, our system seeks to

present a qualitative description including senti-
ment, emotion such as anger, disgust, joy, etc.,
other qualitative aspects such as intensity, formal-
ity, cooperative vs. adversarial along with in-
formation about the context such as geographi-
cal location, settings (one-on-one vs. group dis-
cussion), whether face-to-face or remote, whether
synchronous or asynchronous interactions.

In turn, through a model to aggregate those sig-
nals together and over time, this enables us to at-
tach qualitative metrics to relationships for instance
sentiment and emotions – so as to differentiate
between supportive relationships and negative re-
lationships – but also volatility of sentiment and

emotions, intensity/frequency 1 and recency.
The logic underneath the aggregation model can

vary by situation, but is typically based on weighted
counts of the various signals. For instance, in the
sentence “You, Frankie, you are a liar”, the sys-
tem would extract at the atomic level one direct
speech signal from the speaker towards Frankie
and three direct references as well. When aggre-
gating, it may be that the three direct references
are counted as one rather than three, being all from
the same utterance and that the direct reference
takes priority over the direct speech signal which
could be discarded. However, in some scenario, it
may be relevant to keep track at the level of each
atomic signal. Our system provides the flexibility
to design bespoke models of how signals map to
relationships. From an engineering perspective, we
rely on Solr2 to index each signal with all inferred
facets such as entities, sentiment and type.

4 NLP System

Our system combines NLP tools to perform en-
tity mention resolution and then extracts signals
between these entities.3 Our entity mention resolu-
tion borrows from named-entity recognition, men-
tion detection, coreference resolution, and entity
linking. We address more than just named entities
(i.e., we are interested in all (person) entity men-
tions), and look at not only coreferred ones. To get
a complete picture of the connection for a person,
we want to identify all possible references to them,
whether named entities (e.g., Ross Geller, Ross) or
not (e.g., him, you, that guy, his son, the professor).

Entity Mention Detection. We use named-
entity recognition and coreference resolution to
identify mentions of entities (people) in the text
and supplement that with tools for identifying com-
mon roles (e.g., professions), titles, or relations
(e.g., brother or neighbor).

Entity Linking and Resolution. We leverage
social graph information to resolve the detected en-
tity mentions. This involves, for example, making
use of family relationships to find or disambiguate
new mentions of entities in the text. When no
social graph is provided, this step includes build-
ing the graph from a knowledge source or to boot-
strap social graph creation using the output of the

1Granovetter observes that “the more frequently persons
interact with one another, the stronger their sentiments of
friendship for one another are apt to be” (Granovetter, 1973)

2http://lucene.apache.org/solr/
3As mentioned, we focus primarily on person entities.

77



entity mention detection. For those cases, fur-
ther named-entity disambiguation may be needed
(Pabico, 2014; Han and Zhao, 2009).

Relationship Signal Detection. Using the re-
solved entity mentions we detect relationship sig-
nals between entities and characterize the signal
type (Section 3). In addition, we perform targeted
sentiment and emotion analysis between entities.

Figure 1 illustrates how the different modules
are articulated. The dashed arrow going from the
graph-based mention resolution towards the text-
level mention detection module indicates that infor-
mation from the graph can further contribute in dis-
ambiguating and enriching the text-level mention
detection steps (for instance pronoun resolution).

The output of the NLP extraction pipeline com-
prises a list of entity mentions and a list of rela-
tionship signals between those entities. These con-
tribute to enrich our understanding of the social
graph among the entities (or create one if none
were provided as input). From this combined infor-
mation we draw the relationship graph.

5 Visual Interface Features

Our current system enables users to (i) Aggregate
information (over time, over sentiment categories),
(ii) Visualize temporal relations over time and (iii)
Scrutinize each atomic signal underneath each re-
lationship (with the possibility of editing or cor-
recting it). Another task that we are considering
enabling is the ability to reason over the graph
(knowledge propagation e.g., if A “admires” B and
B “admires” C, it is likely that A “admires” C).

Our current interface hinges on three primary
views. Network overview (Fig. 2) which pro-
vides a snapshot of the social relationships using
visual cues to summarise them graphically. The
average sentiment is indicated through the color
of the links, red for negative, green for positive
where thickness gives an indication of the strength,
the thicker the link, the more positive or negative
the sentiment. The UI supports visualising the net-
work as an overview or over specific time intervals.
Next version will include a representation of inten-
sity (through dashes) along with an indication of
volatility by replacing the line with a sinusoidal
curve. Recency will be captured through the place-
ment relative to the ego node, people who more
recently interacted with the person are closer.

The Personal network view (Fig. 3) supports
a view of the two-hop interpersonal relationships

of the individual along with a summary view of
the person in terms of general emotions expressed
(donut chart in the bottom right quadrant of the
screen). The view can show the overall sentiment
and intensity of how they interact with others.

Finally, the Relationship view (Fig. 4) consists
of a stream graph presenting the five primary emo-
tions, anger, disgust, joy, fear and sadness as they
change over time. It can be used to see the inten-
sity of the relationships either by type, sentiment
or emotions. Drill down support is provided where
the user may hover over peak areas of interest in
the graph to inspect the snippets of text from the in-
put corpus that support the inferred emotions. The
emotions are directional where the upper part of
the stream graph represents the signals from En-
tity X to Entity Y and the lower part of the graph
represents Entity Y towards Entity X.

6 Demo Flow

Ideally, we would have relied on anonymized care-
worker notes to demonstrate our system. However,
privacy restrictions made access to such notes chal-
lenging and for our proof of concept, we have used
the transcripts from the Friends TV series, whose
theme, i.e. the interactions among a core group
of friends is well aligned with our objective. We
specifically focus on the first two seasons and lever-
age the character identification corpus created by
Chen and Choi (2016), which includes entity anno-
tation of personal mentions4.

A natural starting page for an analysis is the
(messy) social graph for all characters over all
episodes of Season 1. Fig. 2 shows the overall
social network when narrowing down to Season 1
Episode 2. From this place, a user can further dive
into one specific character (selecting a node), or
rather explore a relationship (selecting a link).

Assuming the user selects to focus on Ross then
his personal network view (Fig. 3) would be dis-
played. The dominating emotion conveyed in this
episode is joy, both in quantity and in strength
(represented through length of the arc and radius
respectively), followed by sadness and fear. In this
episode, Ross learns from his now-lesbian ex-wife
Carol that she is pregnant with his child. In terms of
relationship, the graph shows mostly negative sen-
timents towards other characters, especially Barry,
though positive ones towards Rachel.

4https://github.com/emorynlp/
character-mining

78



Figure 1: Overview of the NLP Interaction Extraction System

Figure 2: Overview of Social Relationships [S1E2]

Figure 3: Personal Network for Ross [S1E2]

Selecting a relationship (eg. the one between
Ross and Rachel) the user will be shown a stream
graph as in Fig. 4. The graph shows the five primary
emotions as they change over time during the se-
ries. The x axis represents the progressive episodes’
numbers and the y axis the intensity of the emotion.
Above the x axis the relation Ross towards Rachel
is shown, below the relation Rachel towards Ross.
We can observe the distinctive asymmetry of the
relationship. For instance, in Episode 11, there
is no specific emotion from Rachel towards Ross
though quite a mix of emotions expressed by Ross
towards Rachel. In this episode, Ross is jealous of
Rachel’s boyfriend Paolo and confides his feelings
and love troubles towards Rachel to Chandler’s

Figure 4: Stream graph of Relationship over time be-
tween Ross and Rachel [Season 1]

mother. In Episode 16, sentiments of anger, fear
and disgust are present in Ross towards Rachel, but
not viceversa.

As part of the actual demonstration, we will chal-
lenge users with a short information retrieval task
aimed at illustrating the types of questions that our
approach supports. For fact-based questions, we
will give participants a set amount of time (i.e. 2
minutes) and will maintain a leaderboard of the
fastest information finders (with participants’ con-
sent). Sample questions would be “Whose mother
did Ross kiss during season 1?”, or “How long
did Rachel go out with Paolo?”. For questions
that require interpretation (e.g. ‘Does Chandler
like Frankie?”), we would let participants tell us
their opinion before and after using the tool and
ask them if the system was helpful in gaining con-
fidence about their final answer.

7 Conclusion

This paper presents a system to support the anal-
ysis and understanding of interpersonal relation-
ships. Relationships are described along multiple
quantitative and qualitative dimensions which are
automatically populated from relationship signals
extracted from text by a NLP system. The associ-
ated interface enables a user to quickly focus on a
specific person or pair of persons and to investigate
how the relationship evolves over time.

79



References

David B Bracewell, Marc Tomlinson, Ying Shi, Jeremy
Bensley, and Mary Draper. 2011. Who’s playing
well with others: Determining collegiality in text.
In Proceedings of the 5th IEEE International Con-
ference on Semantic Computing (ICSC 2011), pages
21–26. IEEE.

Yu-Hsin Chen and Jinho D. Choi. 2016. Character
identification on multiparty conversation: Identify-
ing mentions of characters in TV shows. In Proceed-
ings of the SIGDIAL 2016 Conference, The 17th An-
nual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Dis-
course and Dialogue, pages 90–100. The Associa-
tion for Computer Linguistics.

Nicholas A Christakis and James H Fowler. 2007.
The spread of obesity in a large social network
over 32 years. New England journal of medicine,
357(4):370–379.

Mark S Granovetter. 1973. The strength of weak ties.
American journal of sociology, pages 1360–1380.

Xianpei Han and Jun Zhao. 2009. Named entity disam-
biguation by leveraging wikipedia semantic knowl-
edge. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference
on Information and Knowledge Management, CIKM
’09, pages 215–224, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Jan Hauffa, Gottlieb Bossert, Nadja Richter, Florian
Wolf, Nora Liesenfeld, and Georg Groh. 2011. Be-
yond foaf: Challenges in characterizing social rela-
tions. In Privacy, Security, Risk and Trust (PASSAT)
and 2011 IEEE Third International Conference on
Social Computing (SocialCom), 2011 IEEE Third In-
ternational Conference on, pages 790–795. IEEE.

Mohit Iyyer, Anupam Guha, Snigdha Chaturvedi, Jor-
dan Boyd-Graber, and Hal Daumé III. 2016. Feud-
ing families and former friends: Unsupervised learn-
ing for dynamic fictional relationships. In Proceed-
ings of the 2016 Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages
1534–1544.

Junichiro Mori, Takumi Tsujishita, Yutaka Matsuo, and
Mitsuru Ishizuka. 2006. Extracting relations in so-
cial networks from the web using similarity between
collective contexts. The Semantic Web-ISWC 2006,
pages 487–500.

Jaderick P. Pabico. 2014. An analysis of named en-
tity disambiguation in social networks. Asia Pacific
Journal of Multidisciplinary Research, 2(4).

Shashank Srivastava, Snigdha Chaturvedi, and Tom M
Mitchell. 2016. Inferring interpersonal relations in
narrative summaries. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages
2807–2813.

Barry Wellman and Scot Wortley. 1990. Different
strokes from different folks: Community ties and so-
cial support. American journal of Sociology, pages
558–588.

Joseph Yose, Ralph Kenna, Máirín MacCarron, and
Pádraig MacCarron. 2018. Network analysis of
the viking age in ireland as portrayed in cogadh
gaedhel re gallaibh. Royal Society Open Science,
5(1):171024.

80


