



















































Verb Alternations and Their Impact on Frame Induction


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2018: Student Research Workshop, pages 17–24
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 2 - 4, 2018. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Verb Alternations and Their Impact on Frame Induction

Esther Seyffarth
Dept. of Computational Linguistics

Heinrich Heine University
Düsseldorf, Germany

Esther.Seyffarth@hhu.de

Abstract

Frame induction is the automatic creation of
frame-semantic resources similar to FrameNet
or PropBank, which map lexical units of a lan-
guage to frame representations of each lexical
unit’s semantics. For verbs, these representa-
tions usually include a specification of their ar-
gument slots and of the selectional restrictions
that apply to each slot. Verbs that participate
in diathesis alternations have different syntac-
tic realizations whose semantics are closely re-
lated, but not identical. We discuss the influ-
ence that such alternations have on frame in-
duction, compare several possible frame struc-
tures for verbs in the causative alternation, and
propose a systematic analysis of alternating
verbs that encodes their similarities as well as
their differences.

1 Introduction

One of the aims of natural language processing is
to access and process the meaning of texts auto-
matically. For tasks like question answering, auto-
matic summarization, or paraphrase detection, an-
notating the text with semantic representations is a
useful first step. A good annotation represents the
semantics of each element in the text as well as the
relations that exist between the elements, such as
the relations between a verb and its arguments and
adjuncts.

Frame semantics, founded on work by Fillmore
(1968), Minsky (1974), Barsalou (1992), and oth-
ers, provides a powerful method for the creation
of such representations. A frame-semantic repre-
sentation of a concept expresses the attributes that
contribute to its semantics as functional relations
in a recursive attribute-value structure. Frame-
semantic lexical resources, such as FrameNet
(Ruppenhofer et al., 2006) or PropBank (Palmer
et al., 2005), map lexical units of a language to

frames, which are described in terms of the frame
elements, or roles, that are central to the concept.

Since the manual compilation of such resources
is time-consuming, costly, and error-prone, much
can be gained from the use of semi-supervised or
unsupervised methods. The process of creating a
frame lexicon automatically is known as frame in-
duction.

Unsupervised frame induction draws on obser-
vations about each lexical item’s behavior in a cor-
pus to create a frame lexicon. If two different lex-
ical units can evoke the same frame, they share
certain semantic properties, and the frame inducer
has to determine the amount of semantic overlap
between them based on observable and latent fea-
tures of each of the lexical items. In this paper, we
discuss some of the problems that occur in frame
induction when lexical units have a relatively large
semantic overlap, but are not close enough to each
other to be treated as total synonyms.

While there are several types of frame-evoking
predicates, we focus here on verbs and the frames
they evoke. We assume that the meaning of a sen-
tence can be expressed using the frame represen-
tation of the sentence’s root verb. The semantic
contribution of all other elements in the sentence
is then specified with respect to their relation to
the root verb. Therefore, it is crucial to assign the
correct semantic frame to the root verb.

Diathesis alternations are a phenomenon that
is observed when verbs can occur with more
than one valency pattern. In some alternations,
the different uses of the participating verbs in-
troduce changes in the semantics as well (Levin,
1993). This is particularly relevant for alternations
that change the Aktionsart of the verb, such as
the causative-inchoative alternation (Levin, 1993,
Chapter 1.1.2). Verbs in this alternation can be
used either transitively or intransitively, where the
transitive use adds a causative meaning to the sen-

17



tence that is not present in the intransitive use, as
in the sentences in (1).

(1) a. Mary opened the door.
b. The door opened.

In this paper, we argue that sentence pairs like
this differ in their semantics to a degree that war-
rants their annotation with different frames, but in
a way that still expresses their semantic relation to
each other. We compare different possible frame
representations for verbs in the causative alterna-
tion and propose some guidelines for the way a
frame inducer should analyze alternating verbs.

2 The Causative Alternation

The causative alternation is characterized by a role
switch (McCarthy, 2001) between transitive and
intransitive uses of participating verbs, as shown
in the sentences in (2). The role switch determines
the position of the semantic THEME, the rent, as
syntactic object (in (2-a)) or subject (in (2-b)). An
AGENT is only present in the transitive sentence.

(2) a. They have increased my rent.
b. My rent has increased.

Both sentences describe a situation which results
in the rent being higher than before.

Transitive uses of verbs in the causative alter-
nation can be paraphrased as “cause to [verb]-
intransitive” (see Levin, 1993, p. 27). For in-
stance, sentence (2-a) can be paraphrased as “They
have caused my rent to increase.”

In some cases, this type of paraphrase is not
completely synonymous with the causative use of
the verb; for a discussion of such cases, see e.g.
Dowty (1991, pp. 96-99) and Cruse (1972). These
authors claim that a difference between scenarios
of direct and indirect causation renders some para-
phrases ungrammatical or different in meaning
from the original sentences with causative verbs.
However, for the purposes of this paper, we focus
on the regular cases, where the causative use and
the paraphrased form do express the same mean-
ing.

Dowty (1991) decomposes causative verbs as
[x CAUSE [BECOME y]], where an inchoative
event [BECOME y] is embedded in a causative
one. Thus, for verbs in the causative alternation,
the transitive sentence has a more complex seman-
tic structure. This is not the case for verbs outside
the alternation: Sentences (3-a) and (3-b) below

have the same semantic complexity, and one does
not describe something that causes the other.

(3) a. I’m eating an apple.
b. I’m eating.

If (3-a) is true, then (3-b) must necessarily also
be true, but there is no causation relationship be-
tween the sentences. Instead, (3-b) is a less spe-
cific description of the same situation that is also
described by (3-a).

Like Rappaport Hovav (2014), we assume that
a causative sentence entails its inchoative counter-
part. In both sentences in (2), the verb increase de-
scribes an event that affects the semantic THEME;
if it is true that a CAUSE is responsible for the
event that increases the rent, then a statement that
does not contain a CAUSE, but otherwise describes
the same event, is necessarily also true. In other
words, it is impossible for (2-a) to be true without
(2-b) also being true.

2.1 Possible Frame Representations

A frame representation of the sentences in (2) that
focuses on their shared semantics is given in Fig-
ure 1. A similar structure could also be used to
represent the sentences in (3).




increase
CAUSE they / ∅
THEME my rent




Figure 1: Frame representation that is agnostic towards
the question of causativity or inchoativity.

This analysis assigns an increase frame, inde-
pendent of the syntactic realization and observed
arguments. If a cause is given, it is included; oth-
erwise, it is not, and the CAUSE slot is unfilled.

A disadvantage of this choice is that the struc-
ture does not differentiate between causative and
inchoative uses of alternating verbs, except by the
presence and absence of the CAUSE slot. As dis-
cussed in the previous section, this is acceptable
for sentences like (3), but undesirable for sen-
tences like (2).

The representation in Figure 1 is similar to the
structure used in PropBank (see Palmer et al.,
2005, p. 77). There, both uses of an alternat-
ing verb are associated with one shared frameset.
The PropBank annotation makes no difference be-
tween the sentences in (2) and the sentences in (3).

18



The FrameNet frame hierarchy includes a
mechanism to connect frames with an “is causative
of” relation and its inverse, “is inchoative of”
(Ruppenhofer et al., 2006, p. 85). Different frames
for alternating verbs are stored in the database and
connected by these relations. Figure 2 gives the
FrameNet representations for the sentences in (2).
For a discussion of these representations, see Rup-
penhofer et al. (2006, p. 12 and pp. 15-16).



cause change position on a scale
CAUSE they
ITEM my rent




[
change position on a scale
ITEM my rent

]

Figure 2: FrameNet representations for the sentences
in (2).

These frames show a clear conceptual separa-
tion between the causative meaning of increase
and its inchoative counterpart. The two frames are
linked by the relations mentioned above, and their
names hint at the semantic connection that exists
between them.

However, it is not obvious from the separate
frames that the two sentences are connected by an
entailment relationship. If a sentence like (2-a) is
observed, the first representation will be chosen; if
a sentence like (2-b) is observed, the second repre-
sentation will be chosen. Without referring to the
FrameNet frame hierarchy, it will not be possible
to recognize that sentence (2-a) necessarily entails
sentence (2-b).

A frame representation that encodes this rela-
tionship more visibly is presented in Figure 3.
That representation is analogous to the decompo-
sition for causative verbs given by Dowty (1991),
which is [x CAUSE [BECOME y]]. The specific
sentence (2-a) is represented as [[they do some-
thing] CAUSE [BECOME [my rent is higher]]].

Figure 3 represents the event as a causation
frame. The EFFECT slot of that frame is linked
to the content of the [BECOME y] part of the de-
composition, which is an inchoation frame. The
RESULT of the inchoation is the formula’s y.

These representations are inspired by Osswald
and Van Valin Jr (2014). They visibly express the
relationship between the frames and are consistent
with the decompositional event structures used by
Rappaport Hovav and Levin (1998) in their dis-

cussion of alternating verbs. The frame in Fig-
ure 3 provides a slot for the result state of the in-
choation frame, here expressed as a frame of the
type higher. Osswald and Van Valin Jr (2014)
suggest that the semantics of verbs that express
a gradual change of state should be represented
in terms of the initial and final state and a spec-
ification of the relation between them. Thus, the
frame should state that the rent had an initial and
final amount, and the meaning of “They have in-
creased my rent” is that the states are connected
by a GREATER THAN relation.




causation

CAUSE

[
activity
AGENT they

]

EFFECT




inchoation

RESULT

[
increase
THEME my rent

]










inchoation

RESULT

[
increase
THEME my rent

]




[
increase
THEME my rent

]

Figure 3: Decompositional frame representation of the
sentences in (2), inspired by Osswald and Van Valin Jr
(2014).

While the decompositional approach has advan-
tages over the other representations shown above,
it is difficult to use in a computational setting,
where this level of detail in the expression of grad-
ual changes is often neither attainable nor desir-
able. Additionally, only a subset of the alternating
verbs specify a change of state that can be repre-
sented like this. Other verbs (roll, fly, . . . ) describe
movement or induced action, and we aim at a rep-
resentation that works universally for alternating
verbs.

This is why we prefer the frame representations
in Figure 4. They are related to the decomposi-
tional frames in Figure 3, but do not make use of
the innermost embedding layer.

19






causation

CAUSE

[
activity
AGENT they

]

EFFECT

[
increase
THEME my rent

]




Figure 4: Frame representation for (2-a)

Compared to the frames in Figure 3, this struc-
ture is more compact. Like them, it acknowledges
that the transitive use of increase adds not only
an additional argument slot, but also a causative
meaning that “wraps around” the increase frame.

This analysis is consistent with that of Rappa-
port Hovav (2014), who supports an analysis of
alternating verbs that assumes they are lexically
associated with their internal arguments only.

A question that is often discussed in research
on diathesis alternations is that of underlying and
derived forms; for an overview of perspectives on
this question that are discussed in the literature,
see e.g. Piñón (2001). The assumption is that
knowledge of the derivation processes involved
in diathesis alternations can inform the semantic
analysis. Here, we do not claim that one use of
alternating verbs is derived from the other. We
do however note that inchoative sentences spec-
ify fewer participants of the event they describe,
since they do not contain an argument slot for the
entity that has causative control over the situation
– unlike causative sentences, where these entities
are part of the frame.

3 Frame Induction

Verbs that participate in diathesis alternations are
likely to be observed in different syntactic config-
urations in a corpus. For a frame inducer, it is im-
portant to distinguish between these cases on the
one hand, and homographs whose semantics are
not (or less closely) related on the other hand. For
instance, the system should recognize that the verb
run in the sentences in (4) has two meanings that
are less closely related than the transitive and in-
transitive meanings of open or increase.

(4) a. I ran ten miles this morning.
b. I started the program two days ago,

but it’s still running.

A frame induction system that uses the observed
syntactic subjects and objects as indicators for the

correct frame will initially treat both run and in-
crease in the same way: It notices that the (syn-
tactic) slot fillers in the observed sentences are not
homogeneous enough to assign a single frame for
both uses, and therefore assumes different frames.
In the case of run, this is desirable, but in the case
of verbs that participate in diathesis alternations, it
results in an unnecessarily large number of frames
in the lexicon, and the relationship between the se-
mantics of transitive and intransitive uses of the
verbs would not be represented.

The architecture we propose is one that com-
bines existing probabilistic approaches to frame
induction with an additional level of analysis that
makes sure the learned frames are distinguished
with regard to their participation in the alternation.

Thus, the system will be able to make an in-
formed decision whether different uses of a verb
are due to non-obligatory arguments, as in the sen-
tences in (3); due to polysemy, as in the sentences
in (4); or due to a diathesis alternation, as in the
sentences in (2). In the first case, a single frame
must be assigned to all uses of the verb, with op-
tional arguments as observed in the data. In the
second case, different semantic frames need to be
assigned, because the meanings of the different
uses of the verb do not have a large enough over-
lap to be subsumed into the same frame. Finally, if
the frame inducer has correctly identified the verb
as one which does participate in a diathesis alter-
nation, the alternating frame structure of that alter-
nation can be used to create frames for the partic-
ular verb in a way that relates the meanings of the
different uses to each other.

In order to distinguish between alternating
verbs and non-alternating verbs, the frame inducer
can employ one of the methods for alternation
identification that have been proposed in the liter-
ature. Early approaches to this relied on WordNet
or similar resources to identify the slot overlap of
different subcategorization frames (McCarthy and
Korhonen, 1998; Schulte im Walde, 2000; Mc-
Carthy, 2001) or on the evaluation of latent seman-
tic properties of the slot fillers, approximated us-
ing manually-defined rules (Stevenson and Merlo,
1999). More recently, distributional representa-
tions of slot fillers have been used to create clusters
whose overlap can be used for the distinction (Ba-
roni and Lenci, 2009; Sun and Korhonen, 2009;
Sun et al., 2013). We propose that distributional
methods be used by the frame inducer, in order to

20



minimize the dependence on manually-created re-
sources.

The frame inducer can store the different frames
with cross-references between the alternating vari-
ants. This ensures that the core semantics that de-
scribes the event and its result state is stored in one
place only – the inchoative frame –, while the lex-
icon entry for the causative frame can access the
inchoative frame to build the causative semantics
around it.

Frame induction is notoriously difficult to eval-
uate quantitatively. Since the structure of seman-
tic frames depends on a number of factors, includ-
ing the perspective on the event, the desired level
of granularity of the description, and the applica-
tion context in which the frame representation is
to be used, there is no single, objectively correct
frame structure for a given event. However, to get
a general indicator for the performance of the sys-
tem, one can evaluate the induced frames against
resources like SemLink (Bonial et al., 2013) to
calculate the amount of overlap between the in-
duced frame hierarchy and manually-created hier-
archies. Note that among other data sources, Sem-
Link contains annotations from FrameNet, where
causative and inchoative uses of alternating verbs
are associated with different frames, but also an-
notations from PropBank, where no distinction is
being made. We leave a detailed specification of
an optimal evaluation setup to future work.

4 Discussion

The frame representation we propose has a num-
ber of advantages in the context of the semantic
tasks mentioned in the introduction.

First, it expresses overtly the fact that the main
difference between the semantics of the causative
and inchoative use of each verb is the added
causative meaning in the transitive form. This
helps because inferences about the result state of
the event should be consistent across both tran-
sitive and intransitive uses, and the structure we
propose that embeds the inchoative frame into the
causative one means that all relevant information
about the result state can be derived from the em-
bedded frame as needed.

A similar point applies to the question of en-
tailment. As mentioned in Section 2, a transitive
sentence with a verb in the causative alternation as
the root entails the intransitive version of that sen-
tence. With our frame structure, this entailment

is expressed in the frame already, since the truth
of the embedded frame contributes directly to the
truth of the whole frame.

We also look to frame-semantic parsing in
choosing this frame structure. The paraphrase of
sentence (2-a) as “They have caused my rent to
increase” is an illustration of the benefit of our
analysis: A frame-semantic annotation of the para-
phrased sentence should include a structure that is
like the one we propose for the causative use of
increase.

Contrast this with the way a parser that relies on
FrameNet frames (see Figure 2 above) would an-
alyze the paraphrase: FrameNet will assign a cau-
sation frame to the verb cause, with the increasing
of the rent being specified in the EFFECT slot of
the causation frame. The resulting mismatch does
not encode the fact that the paraphrase carries the
same meaning as the causative use of the verb.

4.1 Productivity of the Causative Alternation

We view the causative alternation as an open class.
Levin (1993) lists verbs that regularly participate
in the alternation and verbs that cannot alternate,
but we assume that there are also verbs that can
be used in an alternating way to produce a novel
causative construction. An example is given in (5).

(5) The bad weather decided him to take the
car.1

Sentences like this are indicative of a certain pro-
ductivity of the causative alternation. When a verb
that usually only occurs in intransitive forms is
used transitively, we can assume that this change
adds a causative dimension. Our frame structure
allows us to embed any verb frame into a causative
frame to create the frame in Figure 5 for sentence
(5). Note that the role of AGENT is being filled
by different entities in the subframes CAUSE and
EFFECT. This is different from the frame given in
Figure 4 because decide does not usually select a
THEME.

1This sentence is a heavily adapted version of a passage
from Chapter 4 of David Lodge’s novel The British Museum
is Falling Down (1965).

21






causation

CAUSE

[
activity
AGENT the bad weather

]

EFFECT




decide
AGENT he
DECISION to take the car







Figure 5: Frame representation for (5)

Separating the core semantics of each verb from
the alternating mechanism results in a frame lex-
icon that is more flexible and therefore better
equipped to deal with unseen constructions than
the alternative analyses we have discussed.

4.2 Extending the Analysis to Other
Alternations

So far, we have focussed on the causative alter-
nation, but similar analyses are also conceivable
for other alternations. In the conative alternation
(Levin, 1993, p. 41), one of the syntactic envi-
ronments in which the alternating verb can occur
describes an attempted action and lacks entailment
of success or completion of the action described.
A representation that uses embedded frames, anal-
ogous to the ones described above, may look like
the frame in Figure 6. The frame represents the
semantics of the sentence in (6).

(6) Mary cut at the rope.




attempt
AGENT Mary

ACTION




cut
AGENT Mary
THEME the rope







Figure 6: Frame representation for (6)

As in the causative alternation, a precondition
for such an analysis is knowledge of the alternata-
bility of a sentence’s root verb and access to rules
that control the creation of the embedding frames.
Having access to rules that govern the creation of
such complex frames allows the frame inducer to
represent the conative meaning by combining the
attempt part of the meaning with a reference to the
cut frame stored in the lexicon.

5 Future Work

We will employ the strategies outlined here to de-
velop a frame inducer that is sensitive to slight dif-
ferences in semantics, such as the ones observed in
diathesis alternations, and that is equipped to han-
dle these differences in a systematic way.

The resulting system will be semi-supervised,
since the productive rules for complex frames like
the ones presented above can be created manually.
The frame inducer then has the task of identifying
verbs that participate in the alternations to which
the pre-defined rules apply, and of storing the dif-
ferent uses of the alternating verbs in an appropri-
ate way. Using cross-references to link a causative
frame to the inchoative frame embedded in it will
ensure that the lexicon can be kept to a small size
while providing as much expressive power as nec-
essary for the semantic distinctions at hand.

While we are optimistic about the system sug-
gested here for the treatment of alternating verbs,
we are aware that frame induction is not a trivial
task. Particularly, we note that it is difficult, if not
impossible, to argue that one specific frame rep-
resentation of a concept is correct while another
is incorrect. The way frames are being formed to
represent semantics is highly subjective, and the
decisions one makes always have to depend on the
purpose for which the frame lexicon is being cre-
ated.

However, we find it important to identify ways
in which the induction of frames may be system-
atized. We are convinced that the idea of storing
complex frames in the lexicon that embed seman-
tically related frames is useful for the analysis of
diathesis alternations as well as similar phenom-
ena.

An important part of working on frame induc-
tion is the exploration of different ways to evaluate
the induced frame hierarchy. In addition to the ap-
proach mentioned in Section 3, where the overlap
of the new hierarchy and some manually-built re-
source is being determined, we are also interested
in the possibility of extrinsic evaluation. For in-
stance, a question-answering task may be set up
and tested using the output of versions of the frame
inducer with and without alternation-specific func-
tions, in order to enable a comparison of each sys-
tem’s success in this type of application context.

22



6 Conclusion

Diathesis alternations pose a challenge to the cre-
ation of frame-semantic resources, because they
license verb uses that are closely related, but not
similar enough to be treated as synonyms. In this
paper, we argued that alternating verbs should be
represented with frames that highlight this rela-
tionship while also specifying the differences be-
tween the alternating verb uses.

Unlike the frames defined in PropBank and
FrameNet for alternating verbs, our proposed anal-
ysis involves the embedding of one frame (the
“core meaning” of the verb) into another (the cau-
sation frame that “wraps around” the core mean-
ing in transitive uses). We find that this anal-
ysis is consistent with the appropriate analysis
when parsing a sentence like (5), where a verb
that may not be stored in the lexicon as having a
causative property (here, the verb decide) is used
exactly like verbs that participate in the alterna-
tion. We wish to minimize the difference between
such analyses that are conducted at parsing time
and the entries in the frame lexicon.

The successful induction of frames of the type
described here depends on the successful identi-
fication of the alternation. If the frame inducer
mistakes a verb that has several unrelated mean-
ings for a verb that participates in the alternation,
the system will create frames that are inappropri-
ate for that verb. For instance, the sentences in
(4) should not be analyzed with frames that em-
bed one another, since the meanings of their root
verbs are too dissimilar and there is no entailment
relation between the different uses of run.

A frame induction system that follows the sug-
gestions outlined in this paper will be able to rep-
resent the semantics of alternating verbs (and phe-
nomena that exhibit similar behaviors) in a way
that not only clarifies the semantic relations that
exist between the different uses of the verbs, but is
also consistent with annotations that are created in
the context of frame-semantic parsing.

Acknowledgments

The work presented in this paper was financed
by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG)
within the CRC 991 “The Structure of Represen-
tations in Language, Cognition, and Science”. I
would like to thank Laura Kallmeyer and all re-
viewers of this work for their valuable comments
and suggestions.

References
Marco Baroni and Alessandro Lenci. 2009. One Distri-

butional Memory, Many Semantic Spaces. In Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Geometrical Models
of Natural Language Semantics, pages 1–8, Athens,
Greece. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Lawrence W. Barsalou. 1992. Frames, concepts, and
conceptual fields. In A. Lehrer and E. Kittay, ed-
itors, Frames, Fields, and Contrasts: New Essays
in Semantic and Lexical Organization, pages 21–74.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, N.J.

Claire Bonial, Kevin Stowe, and Martha Palmer. 2013.
Renewing and Revising SemLink. In Proceedings
of the 2nd Workshop on Linked Data in Linguistics
(LDL-2013): Representing and linking lexicons, ter-
minologies and other language data, pages 9–17.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Donald A. Cruse. 1972. A Note on English Causatives.
Linguistic Inquiry, 3(4):520–528.

David R. Dowty. 1991. The semantics of aspectual
classes of verbs in English. In Word meaning and
Montague grammar, pages 37–132. Springer.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1968. The Case for Case. In
E. Bach and R. T. Harms, editors, Universals in Lin-
guistic Theory, pages 1–88. Holt, Rinehart and Win-
ston.

Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alterna-
tions: A Preliminary Investigation. University of
Chicago press.

Diana McCarthy. 2001. Lexical Acquisition at the
Syntax-Semantics Interface: Diathesis Alternations,
Subcategorization Frames and Selectional Prefer-
ences. Ph.D. thesis, University of Sussex, UK.

Diana McCarthy and Anna Korhonen. 1998. Detect-
ing Verbal Participation in Diathesis Alternations.
In COLING 1998 Volume 2: The 17th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics.

Marvin Minsky. 1974. A Framework for Representing
Knowledge. Technical report, Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Rainer Osswald and Robert D. Van Valin Jr. 2014.
FrameNet, Frame Structure, and the Syntax-
Semantics Interface. In Thomas Gamerschlag,
Doris Gerland, Rainer Osswald, and Wiebke Pe-
tersen, editors, Frames and Concept Types, pages
125–156. Springer.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The Proposition Bank: An Annotated Cor-
pus of Semantic Roles. Computational Linguistics,
31(1):71–106.

Christopher Piñón. 2001. A Finer Look at the
Causative-Inchoative Alternation. Semantics and
Linguistic Theory, 11:346–364.

23



Malka Rappaport Hovav. 2014. Lexical content and
context: The causative alternation in English revis-
ited. Lingua, 141:8–29.

Malka Rappaport Hovav and Beth Levin. 1998. Build-
ing Verb Meanings. In The projection of arguments:
Lexical and compositional factors, pages 97–134.
University of Chicago Press.

Josef Ruppenhofer, Michael Ellsworth, Miriam R.L.
Petruck, Christopher R. Johnson, and Jan Schef-
fczyk. 2006. FrameNet II: Extended Theory and
Practice. International Computer Science Institute,
Berkeley, California. Distributed with the FrameNet
data.

Suzanne Stevenson and Paola Merlo. 1999. Automatic
Verb Classification Using Distributions of Gram-
matical Features. In Ninth Conference of the Euro-
pean Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 45–52. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Lin Sun and Anna Korhonen. 2009. Improving Verb
Clustering with Automatically Acquired Selectional
Preferences. In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 638–647. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Lin Sun, Diana McCarthy, and Anna Korhonen. 2013.
Diathesis alternation approximation for verb cluster-
ing. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 2: Short Papers), pages 736–741. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Sabine Schulte im Walde. 2000. Clustering Verbs
Semantically According to their Alternation Be-
haviour. In COLING 2000 Volume 2: The 18th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 747–753. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

24


