



















































KBGAN: Adversarial Learning for Knowledge Graph Embeddings


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2018, pages 1470–1480
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 1 - 6, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

KBGAN: Adversarial Learning for Knowledge Graph Embeddings

Liwei Cai
Department of Electronic Engineering

Tsinghua University
Beijing 100084 China

cai.lw123@gmail.com

William Yang Wang
Department of Computer Science

University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA
william@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract

We introduce KBGAN, an adversarial learning
framework to improve the performances of a
wide range of existing knowledge graph em-
bedding models. Because knowledge graphs
typically only contain positive facts, sampling
useful negative training examples is a non-
trivial task. Replacing the head or tail entity
of a fact with a uniformly randomly selected
entity is a conventional method for generat-
ing negative facts, but the majority of the gen-
erated negative facts can be easily discrimi-
nated from positive facts, and will contribute
little towards the training. Inspired by genera-
tive adversarial networks (GANs), we use one
knowledge graph embedding model as a neg-
ative sample generator to assist the training
of our desired model, which acts as the dis-
criminator in GANs. This framework is inde-
pendent of the concrete form of generator and
discriminator, and therefore can utilize a wide
variety of knowledge graph embedding mod-
els as its building blocks. In experiments, we
adversarially train two translation-based mod-
els, TRANSE and TRANSD, each with assis-
tance from one of the two probability-based
models, DISTMULT and COMPLEX. We eval-
uate the performances of KBGAN on the link
prediction task, using three knowledge base
completion datasets: FB15k-237, WN18 and
WN18RR. Experimental results show that ad-
versarial training substantially improves the
performances of target embedding models un-
der various settings.

1 Introduction

Knowledge graph (Dong et al., 2014) is a pow-
erful graph structure that can provide direct ac-
cess of knowledge to users via various applica-
tions such as structured search, question answer-
ing, and intelligent virtual assistant. A common
representation of knowledge graph beliefs is in the

form of a discrete relational triple such as Locate-
dIn(NewOrleans,Louisiana).

A main challenge for using discrete represen-
tation of knowledge graph is the lack of capa-
bility of accessing the similarities among differ-
ent entities and relations. Knowledge graph em-
bedding (KGE) techniques (e.g., RESCAL (Nickel
et al., 2011), TRANSE (Bordes et al., 2013), DIST-
MULT (Yang et al., 2015), and COMPLEX (Trouil-
lon et al., 2016)) have been proposed in recent
years to deal with the issue. The main idea is
to represent the entities and relations in a vec-
tor space, and one can use machine learning tech-
nique to learn the continuous representation of the
knowledge graph in the latent space.

However, even steady progress has been made
in developing novel algorithms for knowledge
graph embedding, there is still a common chal-
lenge in this line of research. For space effi-
ciency, common knowledge graphs such as Free-
base (Bollacker et al., 2008), Yago (Suchanek
et al., 2007), and NELL (Mitchell et al., 2015) by
default only stores beliefs, rather than disbeliefs.
Therefore, when training the embedding models,
there is only the natural presence of the positive
examples. To use negative examples, a common
method is to remove the correct tail entity, and ran-
domly sample from a uniform distribution (Bordes
et al., 2013). Unfortunately, this approach is not
ideal, because the sampled entity could be com-
pletely unrelated to the head and the target re-
lation, and thus the quality of randomly gener-
ated negative examples is often poor (e.g, Locate-
dIn(NewOrleans,BarackObama)). Other approach
might leverage external ontological constraints
such as entity types (Krompaß et al., 2015) to gen-
erate negative examples, but such resource does
not always exist or accessible.

In this work, we provide a generic solution to
improve the training of a wide range of knowl-

1470



Model Score function f(h, r, t) Number of parameters
TRANSE ||h + r− t||1/2 k|E|+ k|R|
TRANSD ||(I + rphpT )h + r− (I + rptpT )t||1/2 2k|E|+ 2k|R|
DISTMULT < h, r, t > (=

∑k
i=1 hiriti) k|E|+ k|R|

COMPLEX < h, r, t̄ > (h, r, t ∈ Ck) 2k|E|+ 2k|R|
TRANSH ||(I− rprpT )h + r− (I + rprpT )t||1/2 k|E|+ 2k|R|
TRANSR ||Wrh + r−Wrt||1/2 k|E|+ (k2 + k)|R|
MANIFOLDE (hyperplane) |(h + rhead)T (t + rtail)−Dr| k|E|+ (2k + 1)|R|
RESCAL hTWrt k|E|+ k2|R|
HOLE rT (h ? t) (? is circular correlation) k|E|+ k|R|
CONVE f(vec(f([h̄; r̄] ∗ ω))W)t k|E|+ k|R|+ kcmn

Table 1: Some selected knowledge graph embedding models. The four models above the double line are
considered in this paper. Except for COMPLEX, all boldface lower case letters represent vectors in Rk,
and boldface upper case letters represent matrices in Rk×k. I is the identity matrix.

edge graph embedding models. Inspired by the
recent advances of generative adversarial deep
models (Goodfellow et al., 2014), we propose
a novel adversarial learning framework, namely,
KBGAN, for generating better negative exam-
ples to train knowledge graph embedding mod-
els. More specifically, we consider probability-
based, log-loss embedding models as the gener-
ator to supply better quality negative examples,
and use distance-based, margin-loss embedding
models as the discriminator to generate the final
knowledge graph embeddings. Since the genera-
tor has a discrete generation step, we cannot di-
rectly use the gradient-based approach to back-
propagate the errors. We then consider a one-
step reinforcement learning setting, and use a
variance-reduction REINFORCE method to achieve
this goal. Empirically, we perform experiments on
three common KGE datasets (FB15K-237, WN18
and WN18RR), and verify the adversarial learning
approach with a set of KGE models. Our exper-
iments show that across various settings, this ad-
versarial learning mechanism can significantly im-
prove the performance of some of the most com-
monly used translation based KGE methods. Our
contributions are three-fold:

• We are the first to consider adversarial learn-
ing to generate useful negative training exam-
ples to improve knowledge graph embedding.

• This adversarial learning framework applies
to a wide range of KGE models, without the
need of external ontologies constraints.

• Our method shows consistent performance
gains on three commonly used KGE datasets.

2 Related Work

2.1 Knowledge Graph Embeddings

A large number of knowledge graph embedding
models, which represent entities and relations in a
knowledge graph with vectors or matrices, have
been proposed in recent years. RESCAL (Nickel
et al., 2011) is one of the earliest studies on ma-
trix factorization based knowledge graph embed-
ding models, using a bilinear form as score func-
tion. TRANSE (Bordes et al., 2013) is the first
model to introduce translation-based embedding.
Later variants, such as TRANSH (Wang et al.,
2014), TRANSR (Lin et al., 2015) and TRANSD
(Ji et al., 2015), extend TRANSE by projecting the
embedding vectors of entities into various spaces.
DISTMULT (Yang et al., 2015) simplifies RESCAL
by only using a diagonal matrix, and COMPLEX
(Trouillon et al., 2016) extends DISTMULT into
the complex number field. (Nickel et al., 2015) is
a comprehensive survey on these models.

Some of the more recent models achieve strong
performances. MANIFOLDE (Xiao et al., 2016)
embeds a triple as a manifold rather than a point.
HOLE (Nickel et al., 2016) employs circular cor-
relation to combine the two entities in a triple.
CONVE (Dettmers et al., 2017) uses a convolu-
tional neural network as the score function. How-
ever, most of these studies use uniform sampling
to generate negative training examples (Bordes
et al., 2013). Because our framework is indepen-
dent of the concrete form of models, all these mod-
els can be potentially incorporated into our frame-
work, regardless of the complexity. As a proof of
principle, our work focuses on simpler models. Ta-
ble 1 summarizes the score functions and dimen-
sions of all models mentioned above.

1471



2.2 Generative Adversarial Networks and its
Variants

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Good-
fellow et al., 2014) was originally proposed for
generating samples in a continuous space such as
images. A GAN consists of two parts, the genera-
tor and the discriminator. The generator accepts a
noise input and outputs an image. The discrimina-
tor is a classifier which classifies images as “true”
(from the ground truth set) or “fake” (generated by
the generator). When training a GAN, the genera-
tor and the discriminator play a minimax game, in
which the generator tries to generate “real” images
to deceive the discriminator, and the discriminator
tries to tell them apart from ground truth images.
GANs are also capable of generating samples sat-
isfying certain requirements, such as conditional
GAN (Mirza and Osindero, 2014).

It is not possible to use GANs in its original form
for generating discrete samples like natural lan-
guage sentences or knowledge graph triples, be-
cause the discrete sampling step prevents gradi-
ents from propagating back to the generator. SE-
QGAN (Yu et al., 2017) is one of the first success-
ful solutions to this problem by using reinforce-
ment learning—It trains the generator using pol-
icy gradient and other tricks. IRGAN (Wang et al.,
2017) is a recent work which combines two cate-
gories of information retrieval models into a dis-
crete GAN framework. Likewise, our framework
relies on policy gradient to train the generator
which provides discrete negative triples.

The discriminator in a GAN is not necessarily
a classifier. Wasserstein GAN or WGAN (Arjovsky
et al., 2017) uses a regressor with clipped param-
eters as its discriminator, based on solid analysis
about the mathematical nature of GANs. GOGAN
(Juefei-Xu et al., 2017) further replaces the loss
function in WGAN with marginal loss. Although
originating from very different fields, the form of
loss function in our framework turns out to be
more closely related to the one in GOGAN.

3 Our Approaches

In this section, we first define two types of training
objectives in knowledge graph embedding mod-
els to show how KBGAN can be applied. Then,
we demonstrate a long overlooked problem about
negative sampling which motivates us to propose
KBGAN to address the problem. Finally, we dive
into the mathematical, and algorithmic details of

KBGAN.

3.1 Types of Training Objectives
For a given knowledge graph, let E be the set of
entities, R be the set of relations, and T be the
set of ground truth triples. In general, a knowledge
graph embedding (KGE) model can be formulated
as a score function f(h, r, t), h, t ∈ E , r ∈ R
which assigns a score to every possible triple in
the knowledge graph. The estimated likelihood of
a triple to be true depends only on its score given
by the score function.

Different models formulate their score function
based on different designs, and therefore interpret
scores differently, which further lead to various
training objectives. Two common forms of train-
ing objectives are particularly of our interest:
Marginal loss function is commonly used by
a large group of models called translation-based
models, whose score function models distance
between points or vectors, such as TRANSE,
TRANSH, TRANSR, TRANSD and so on. In these
models, smaller distance indicates a higher likeli-
hood of truth, but only qualitatively. The marginal
loss function takes the following form:

Lm =
∑

(h,r,t)∈T
[f(h, r, t)− f(h′, r, t′) + γ]+ (1)

where γ is the margin, [·]+ = max(0, ·) is the
hinge function, and (h′, r, t′) is a negative triple.
The negative triple is generated by replacing the
head entity or the tail entity of a positive triple
with a random entity in the knowledge graph,
or formally (h′, r, t′) ∈ {(h′, r, t)|h′ ∈ E} ∪
{(h, r, t′)|t′ ∈ E}.
Log-softmax loss function is commonly used by
models whose score function has probabilistic in-
terpretation. Some notable examples are RESCAL,
DISTMULT, COMPLEX. Applying the softmax
function on scores of a given set of triples gives
the probability of a triple to be the best one among
them: p(h, r, t) = exp f(h,r,t)∑

(h′,r,t′) exp f(h
′,r,t′) . The loss

function is the negative log-likelihood of this prob-
abilistic model:

Ll =
∑

(h,r,t)∈T
− log exp f(h, r, t)∑

exp f(h′, r, t′)

(h′, r, t′) ∈ {(h, r, t)} ∪Neg(h, r, t) (2)
where Neg(h, r, t) ⊂ {(h′, r, t)|h′ ∈ E} ∪
{(h, r, t′)|t′ ∈ E} is a set of sampled corrupted
triples.

1472



Figure 1: An overview of the KBGAN framework. The generator (G) calculates a probability distribution
over a set of candidate negative triples, then sample one triples from the distribution as the output. The
discriminator (D) receives the generated negative triple as well as the ground truth triple (in the hexag-
onal box), and calculates their scores. G minimizes the score of the generated negative triple by policy
gradient, and D minimizes the marginal loss between positive and negative triples by gradient descent.

Other forms of loss functions exist, for exam-
ple CONVE uses a triple-wise logistic function to
model how likely the triple is true, but by far the
two described above are the most common. Also,
softmax function gives an probabilistic distribu-
tion over a set of triples, which is necessary for
a generator to sample from them.

3.2 Weakness of Uniform Negative Sampling
Most previous KGE models use uniform negative
sampling for generating negative triples, that is, re-
placing the head or tail entity of a positive triple
with any of the entities in E , all with equal prob-
ability. Most of the negative triples generated in
this way contribute little to learning an effective
embedding, because they are too obviously false.

To demonstrate this issue, let us consider the
following example. Suppose we have a ground
truth triple LocatedIn(NewOrleans,Louisiana),
and corrupt it by replacing its tail entity.
First, we remove the tail entity, leaving Lo-
catedIn(NewOrleans,?). Because the relation Lo-
catedIn constraints types of its entities, “?”
must be a geographical region. If we fill “?”
with a random entity e ∈ E , the prob-
ability of e having a wrong type is very
high, resulting in ridiculous triples like Lo-
catedIn(NewOrleans,BarackObama) or Locate-
dIn(NewOrleans,StarTrek). Such triples are con-
sidered “too easy”, because they can be elim-
inated solely by types. In contrast, Locate-
dIn(NewOrleans,Florida) is a very useful negative
triple, because it satisfies type constraints, but it
cannot be proved wrong without detailed knowl-

edge of American geography. If a KGE model is
fed with mostly “too easy” negative examples, it
would probably only learn to represent types, not
the underlying semantics.

The problem is less severe to models using log-
softmax loss function, because they typically sam-
ples tens or hundreds of negative triples for one
positive triple in each iteration, and it is likely to
have a few useful negatives among them. For in-
stance, (Trouillon et al., 2016) found that a 100:1
negative-to-positive ratio results in the best per-
formance for COMPLEX. However, for marginal
loss function, whose negative-to-positive ratio is
always 1:1, the low quality of uniformly sampled
negatives can seriously damage their performance.

3.3 Generative Adversarial Training for
Knowledge Graph Embedding Models
Inspired by GANs, we propose an adversarial
training framework named KBGAN which uses a
KGE model with softmax probabilities to pro-
vide high-quality negative samples for the train-
ing of a KGE model whose training objective is
marginal loss function. This framework is inde-
pendent of the score functions of these two mod-
els, and therefore possesses some extent of univer-
sality. Figure 1 illustrates the overall structure of
KBGAN.

In parallel to terminologies used in GAN liter-
ature, we will simply call these two models gen-
erator and discriminator respectively in the rest
of this paper. We use softmax probabilistic mod-
els as the generator because they can adequately
model the “sampling from a probability distribu-

1473



Algorithm 1: The KBGAN algorithm
Data: training set of positive fact triples T = {(h, r, t)}
Input: Pre-trained generator G with parameters θG and score function fG(h, r, t), and pre-trained discriminator D with

parameters θD and score function fD(h, r, t)
Output: Adversarially trained discriminator

1 b←− 0; // baseline for policy gradient
2 repeat
3 Sample a mini-batch of data Tbatch from T ;
4 GG ←− 0, GD ←− 0; // gradients of parameters of G and D
5 rsum ←− 0; // for calculating the baseline
6 for (h, r, t) ∈ Tbatch do
7 Uniformly randomly sample Ns negative triples Neg(h, r, t) = {(h′i, r, t′i)}i=1...Ns ;
8 Obtain their probability of being generated: pi =

exp fG(h
′
i,r,t

′
i)∑Ns

j=1 exp fG(h
′
j ,r,t

′
j)

;

9 Sample one negative triple (h′s, r, t′s) from Neg(h, r, t) according to {pi}i=1...Ns . Assume its probability to be
ps;

10 GD ←− GD +∇θD [fD(h, r, t)− fD(h′s, r, t′s) + γ]+; // accumulate gradients for D
11 r ←− −fD(h′s, r, t′s), rsum ←− rsum + r; // r is the reward
12 GG ←− GG + (r − b)∇θG log ps; // accumulate gradients for G
13 end
14 θG ←− θG + ηGGG, θD ←− θD − ηDGD; // update parameters
15 b← rsum/|Tbatch|; // update baseline
16 until convergence;

tion” process of discrete GANs, and we aim at
improving discriminators based on marginal loss
because they can benefit more from high-quality
negative samples. Note that a major difference be-
tween GAN and our work is that, the ultimate goal
of our framework is to produce a good discrimi-
nator, whereas GANS are aimed at training a good
generator. In addition, the discriminator here is not
a classifier as it would be in most GANs.

Intuitively, the discriminator should assign a rel-
atively small distance to a high-quality negative
sample. In order to encourage the generator to gen-
erate useful negative samples, the objective of the
generator is to minimize the distance given by dis-
criminator for its generated triples. And just like
the ordinary training process, the objective of the
discriminator is to minimize the marginal loss be-
tween the positive triple and the generated nega-
tive triple. In an adversarial training setting, the
generator and the discriminator are alternatively
trained towards their respective objectives.

Suppose that the generator produces a
probability distribution on negative triples
pG(h

′, r, t′|h, r, t) given a positive triple (h, r, t),
and generates negative triples (h′, r, t′) by sam-
pling from this distribution. Let fD(h, r, t) be
the score function of the discriminator. The ob-
jective of the discriminator can be formulated as

minimizing the following marginal loss function:

LD =
∑

(h,r,t)∈T
[fD(h, r, t)− fD(h′, r, t′) + γ]+

(h′, r, t′) ∼ pG(h′, r, t′|h, r, t) (3)

The only difference between this loss function and
Equation 1 is that it uses negative samples from the
generator.

The objective of the generator can be formu-
lated as maximizing the following expectation of
negative distances:

RG =
∑

(h,r,t)∈T
E[−fD(h′, r, t′)]

(h′, r, t′) ∼ pG(h′, r, t′|h, r, t) (4)

RG involves a discrete sampling step, so we
cannot find its gradient with simple differentiation.
We use a simple special case of Policy Gradient
Theorem1 (Sutton et al., 2000) to obtain the gradi-
ent of RG with respect to parameters of the gener-
ator:

∇GRG =
∑

(h,r,t)∈T
E(h′,r,t′)∼pG(h′,r,t′|h,r,t)

[−fD(h′, r, t′)∇G log pG(h′, r, t′|h, r, t)]

'
∑

(h,r,t)∈T

1

N

∑

(h′i,r,t
′
i)∼pG(h′,r,t′|h,r,t),i=1...N

[−fD(h′, r, t′)∇G log pG(h′, r, t′|h, r, t)] (5)
1A proof can be found in the supplementary material

1474



Model Hyperparameters Constraints or Regularizations
TRANSE L1 distance, k = 50, γ = 3 ||e||2 ≤ 1, ||r||2 ≤ 1
TRANSD L1 distance, k = 50, γ = 3 ||e||2 ≤ 1, ||r||2 ≤ 1, ||ep||2 ≤ 1, ||rp||2 ≤ 1

DISTMULT k = 50, λ = 1/0.1 L2 regularization: Lreg = L+ λ||Θ||22
COMPLEX 2k = 50, λ = 1/0.1 L2 regularization: Lreg = L+ λ||Θ||22

Table 2: Hyperparameter settings of the 4 models we used. For DISTMULT and COMPLEX, λ = 1 is
used for FB15k-237 and λ = 0.1 is used for WN18 and WN18RR. All other hyperparameters are shared
among all datasets. L is the global loss defined in Equation (2). Θ represents all parameters in the model.

Dataset #r #ent. #train #val #test
FB15k-237 237 14,541 272,115 17,535 20,466
WN18 18 40,943 141,442 5,000 5,000
WN18RR 11 40,943 86,835 3,034 3,134

Table 3: Statistics of datasets we used in the exper-
iments. “r”: relations.

where the second approximate equality means
we approximate the expectation with sampling in
practice. Now we can calculate the gradient of RG
and optimize it with gradient-based algorithms.

Policy Gradient Theorem arises from reinforce-
ment learning (RL), so we would like to draw an
analogy between our model and an RL model. The
generator can be viewed as an agent which inter-
acts with the environment by performing actions
and improves itself by maximizing the reward re-
turned from the environment in response of its ac-
tions. Correspondingly, the discriminator can be
viewed as the environment. Using RL terminolo-
gies, (h, r, t) is the state (which determines what
actions the actor can take), pG(h′, r, t′|h, r, t) is
the policy (how the actor choose actions), (h′, r, t′)
is the action, and −fD(h′, r, t′) is the reward.
The method of optimizing RG described above
is called REINFORCE (Williams, 1992) algorithm
in RL. Our model is a simple special case of
RL, called one-step RL. In a typical RL setting,
each action performed by the agent will change
its state, and the agent will perform a series of
actions (called an epoch) until it reaches certain
states or the number of actions reaches a certain
limit. However, in the analogy above, actions does
not affect the state, and after each action we restart
with another unrelated state, so each epoch con-
sists of only one action.

To reduce the variance of REINFORCE al-
gorithm, it is common to subtract a base-
line from the reward, which is an arbitrary
number that only depends on the state, with-

out affecting the expectation of gradients.2

In our case, we replace −fD(h′, r, t′) with
−fD(h′, r, t′) − b(h, r, t) in the equation above
to introduce the baseline. To avoid introducing
new parameters, we simply let b be a constant,
the average reward of the whole training set: b =∑

(h,r,t)∈T E(h′,r,t′)∼pG(h′,r,t′|h,r,t)[−fD(h′, r, t′)].
In practice, b is approximated by the mean of
rewards of recently generated negative triples.

Let the generator’s score function to be
fG(h, r, t), given a set of candidate negative triples
Neg(h, r, t) ⊂ {(h′, r, t)|h′ ∈ E}∪{(h, r, t′)|t′ ∈
E}, the probability distribution pG is modeled as:

pG(h
′, r, t′|h, r, t) = exp fG(h

′, r, t′)∑
exp fG(h∗, r, t∗)

(h∗, r, t∗) ∈ Neg(h, r, t) (6)
Ideally, Neg(h, r, t) should contain all possible

negatives. However, knowledge graphs are usu-
ally highly incomplete, so the ”hardest” negative
triples are very likely to be false negatives (true
facts). To address this issue, we instead generate
Neg(h, r, t) by uniformly sampling of Ns entities
(a small number compared to the number of all
possible negatives) from E to replace h or t. Be-
cause in real-world knowledge graphs, true neg-
atives are usually far more than false negatives,
such set would be unlikely to contain any false
negative, and the negative selected by the gener-
ator would likely be a true negative. Using a small
Neg(h, r, t) can also significantly reduce compu-
tational complexity.

Besides, we adopt the “bern” sampling tech-
nique (Wang et al., 2014) which replaces the
“1” side in “1-to-N” and “N-to-1” relations with
higher probability to further reduce false nega-
tives.

Algorithm 1 summarizes the whole adversarial
training process. Both the generator and the dis-

2A proof of such fact can also be found in the supplemen-
tary material

1475



criminator require pre-training, which is the same
as conventionally training a single KBE model
with uniform negative sampling. Formally speak-
ing, one can pre-train the generator by minimiz-
ing the loss function defined in Equation (1), and
pre-train the discriminator by minimizing the loss
function defined in Equation (2). Line 14 in the
algorithm assumes that we are using the vanilla
gradient descent as the optimization method, but
obviously one can substitute it with any gradient-
based optimization algorithm.

4 Experiments

To evaluate our proposed framework, we test its
performance for the link prediction task with dif-
ferent generators and discriminators. For the gen-
erator, we choose two classical probability-based
KGE model, DISTMULT and COMPLEX, and
for the discriminator, we also choose two classi-
cal translation-based KGE model, TRANSE and
TRANSD, resulting in four possible combinations
of generator and discriminator in total. See Table
1 for a brief summary of these models.

4.1 Experimental Settings

4.1.1 Datasets
We use three common knowledge base com-
pletion datasets for our experiment: FB15k-237,
WN18 and WN18RR. FB15k-237 is a subset
of FB15k introduced by (Toutanova and Chen,
2015), which removed redundant relations in
FB15k and greatly reduced the number of rela-
tions. Likewise, WN18RR is a subset of WN18 in-
troduced by (Dettmers et al., 2017) which removes
reversing relations and dramatically increases the
difficulty of reasoning. Both FB15k and WN18
are first introduced by (Bordes et al., 2013) and
have been commonly used in knowledge graph re-
searches. Statistics of datasets we used are shown
in Table 3.

4.1.2 Evaluation Protocols
Following previous works like (Yang et al., 2015)
and (Trouillon et al., 2016), for each run, we re-
port two common metrics, mean reciprocal rank-
ing (MRR) and hits at 10 (H@10). We only re-
port scores under the filtered setting (Bordes et al.,
2013), which removes all triples appeared in train-
ing, validating, and testing sets from candidate
triples before obtaining the rank of the ground
truth triple.

4.1.3 Implementation Details
3 In the pre-training stage, we train every model
to convergence for 1000 epochs, and divide ev-
ery epoch into 100 mini-batches. To avoid overfit-
ting, we adopt early stopping by evaluating MRR
on the validation set every 50 epochs. We tried
γ = 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and L1, L2 distances for
TRANSE and TRANSD, and λ = 0.01, 0.1, 1, 10
for DISTMULT and COMPLEX, and determined
the best hyperparameters listed on table 2, based
on their performances on the validation set af-
ter pre-training. Due to limited computation re-
sources, we deliberately limit the dimensions of
embeddings to k = 50, similar to the one used
in earlier works, to save time. We also apply cer-
tain constraints or regularizations to these models,
which are mostly the same as those described in
their original publications, and also listed on table
2.

In the adversarial training stage, we keep all
the hyperparamters determined in the pre-training
stage unchanged. The number of candidate neg-
ative triples, Ns, is set to 20 in all cases, which
is proven to be optimal among the candidate set
of {5, 10, 20, 30, 50}. We train for 5000 epochs,
with 100 mini-batches for each epoch. We also use
early stopping in adversarial training by evaluating
MRR on the validation set every 100 epochs.

We use the self-adaptive optimization method
Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2015) for all trainings,
and always use the recommended default setting
α = 0.001, β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, � = 10

−8.

4.2 Results

Results of our experiments as well as baselines
are shown in Table 4. All settings of adversarial
training bring a pronounced improvement to the
model, which indicates that our method is con-
sistently effective in various cases. TRANSE per-
forms slightly worse than TRANSD on FB15k-237
and WN18, but better on WN18RR. Using DIST-
MULT or COMPLEX as the generator does not af-
fect performance greatly.

TRANSE and TRANSD enhanced by KBGAN
can significantly beat their corresponding baseline
implementations, and outperform stronger base-
lines in some cases. As a prototypical and proof-
of-principle experiment, we have never expected
state-of-the-art results. Being simple models pro-

3The KBGAN source code is available at https://
github.com/cai-lw/KBGAN

1476



FB15k-237 WN18 WN18RR
Method MRR H@10 MRR H@10 MRR H@10
TRANSE - 42.8† - 89.2 - 43.2†

TRANSD - 45.3† - 92.2 - 42.8†

DISTMULT 24.1‡ 41.9‡ 82.2 93.6 42.5‡ 49.1‡

COMPLEX 24.0‡ 41.9‡ 94.1 94.7 44.4‡ 50.7‡

TRANSE (pre-trained) 24.2 42.2 43.3 91.5 18.6 45.9
KBGAN (TRANSE + DISTMULT) 27.4 45.0 71.0 94.9 21.3 48.1
KBGAN (TRANSE + COMPLEX) 27.8 45.3 70.5 94.9 21.0 47.9
TRANSD (pre-trained) 24.5 42.7 49.4 92.8 19.2 46.5
KBGAN (TRANSD + DISTMULT) 27.8 45.8 77.2 94.8 21.4 47.2
KBGAN (TRANSD + COMPLEX) 27.7 45.8 77.9 94.8 21.5 46.9

Table 4: Experimental results. Results of KBGAN are results of its discriminator (on the left of the “+”
sign). Underlined results are the best ones among our implementations. Results marked with † are pro-
duced by running Fast-TransX (Lin et al., 2015) with its default parameters. Results marked with ‡ are
copied from (Dettmers et al., 2017). All other baseline results are copied from their original papers.

Figure 2: Learning curves of KBGAN. All metrics improve steadily as training proceeds.

posed several years ago, TRANSE and TRANSD
has their limitations in expressiveness that are un-
likely to be fully compensated by better training
technique. In future researches, people may try
employing more advanced models into KBGAN,
and we believe it has the potential to become state-
of-the-art.

To illustrate our training progress, we plot per-
formances of the discriminator on validation set
over epochs, which are displayed in Figure 2. As
all these graphs show, our performances are al-
ways in increasing trends, converging to its max-

imum as training proceeds, which indicates that
KBGAN is a robust GAN that can converge to good
results in various settings, although GANs are well-
known for difficulty in convergence. Fluctuations
in these graphs may seem more prominent than
other KGE models, but is considered normal for
an adversially trained model. Note that in some
cases the curve still tends to rise after 5000 epochs.
We do not have sufficient computation resource to
train for more epochs, but we believe that they will
also eventually converge.

1477



Positive fact Uniform random sample Trained generator
(condensation NN 2,
derivationally related form,
distill VB 4)

family arcidae NN 1
repast NN 1
beater NN 2
coverall NN 1
cash advance NN 1

revivification NN 1
mouthpiece NN 3
liquid body substance NN 1
stiffen VB 2
hot up VB 1

(colorado river NN 2,
instance hypernym,
river NN 1)

lunar calendar NN 1
umbellularia californica NN 1
tonality NN 1
creepy-crawly NN 1
moor VB 3

idaho NN 1
sayan mountains NN 1
lower saxony NN 1
order ciconiiformes NN 1
jab NN 3

(meeting NN 2,
hypernym,
social gathering NN 1)

cellular JJ 1
commercial activity NN 1
giant cane NN 1
streptomyces NN 1
tranquillize VB 1

attach VB 1
bond NN 6
heavy spar NN 1
satellite NN 1
peep VB 3

Table 5: Examples of negative samples in WN18 dataset. The first column is the positive fact, and the
term in bold is the one to be replaced by an entity in the next two columns. The second column consists
of random entities drawn from the whole dataset. The third column contains negative samples generated
by the generator in the last 5 epochs of training. Entities in italic are considered to have semantic relation
to the positive one

4.3 Case study

To demonstrate that our approach does generate
better negative samples, we list some examples of
them in Table 5, using the KBGAN (TRANSE +
DISTMULT) model and the WN18 dataset. All hy-
perparameters are the same as those described in
Section 4.1.3.

Compared to uniform random negatives which
are almost always totally unrelated, the genera-
tor generates more semantically related negative
samples, which is different from type relatedness
we used as example in Section 3.2, but also helps
training. In the first example, two of the five terms
are physically related to the process of distilling
liquids. In the second example, three of the five
entities are geographical objects. In the third ex-
ample, two of the five entities express the concept
of “gather”.

Because we deliberately limited the strength of
generated negatives by using a small Ns as de-
scribed in Section 3.3, the semantic relation is
pretty weak, and there are still many unrelated en-
tities. However, empirical results (when selecting
the optimal Ns) shows that such situation is more
beneficial for training the discriminator than gen-
erating even stronger negatives.

5 Conclusions

We propose a novel adversarial learning method
for improving a wide range of knowledge graph
embedding models—We designed a generator-
discriminator framework with dual KGE compo-
nents. Unlike random uniform sampling, the gen-
erator model generates higher quality negative ex-
amples, which allow the discriminator model to
learn better. To enable backpropagation of error,
we introduced a one-step REINFORCE method to
seamlessly integrate the two modules. Experimen-
tally, we tested the proposed ideas with four com-
monly used KGE models on three datasets, and the
results showed that the adversarial learning frame-
work brought consistent improvements to various
KGE models under different settings.

1478



References
Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Leon Bottou.

2017. Wasserstein gan. In International Confer-
rence on Machine Learning.

Kurt Bollacker, Colin Evans, Praveen Paritosh, Tim
Sturge, and Jamie Taylor. 2008. Freebase: a collab-
oratively created graph database for structuring hu-
man knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM
SIGMOD international conference on Management
of data. ACM, pages 1247–1250.

Antoine Bordes, Nicolas Usunier, Alberto Garcia-
Duran, Jason Weston, and Oksana Yakhnenko.
2013. Translating embeddings for modeling multi-
relational data. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems. pages 2787–2795.

Tim Dettmers, Pasquale Minervini, Pontus Stene-
torp, and Sebastian Riedel. 2017. Convolutional
2d knowledge graph embeddings. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.01476 .

Xin Dong, Evgeniy Gabrilovich, Geremy Heitz, Wilko
Horn, Ni Lao, Kevin Murphy, Thomas Strohmann,
Shaohua Sun, and Wei Zhang. 2014. Knowledge
vault: A web-scale approach to probabilistic knowl-
edge fusion. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM
SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge
discovery and data mining. ACM, pages 601–610.

Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza,
Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron
Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Generative ad-
versarial nets. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems. pages 2672–2680.

Guoliang Ji, Shizhu He, Liheng Xu, Kang Liu, and Jun
Zhao. 2015. Knowledge graph embedding via dy-
namic mapping matrix. In The 53rd Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics.

Felix Juefei-Xu, Vishnu Naresh Boddeti, and Marios
Savvides. 2017. Gang of gans: Generative adversar-
ial networks with maximum margin ranking. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1704.04865 .

Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Lei Ba. 2015. Adam:
A method for stochastic optimization. In The 3rd
International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions.

Denis Krompaß, Stephan Baier, and Volker Tresp.
2015. Type-constrained representation learning in
knowledge graphs. In International Semantic Web
Conference. Springer, pages 640–655.

Yankai Lin, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, Yang Liu, and
Xuan Zhu. 2015. Learning entity and relation em-
beddings for knowledge graph completion. In The
Twenty-ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence. pages 2181–2187.

Mehdi Mirza and Simon Osindero. 2014. Condi-
tional generative adversarial nets. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1411.01784 .

Tom M Mitchell, William Cohen, Estevam Hruschka,
Partha Talukdar, Justin Betteridge, Andrew Carlson,
Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, Matthew Gardner, Bryan
Kisiel, Jayant Krishnamurthy, et al. 2015. Never-
ending learning. In The Twenty-ninth AAAI Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence.

Maximilian Nickel, Kevin Murphy, Volker Tresp, and
Evgeniy Gabrilovich. 2015. A review of relational
machine learning for knowledge graphs. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1503.00759 .

Maximilian Nickel, Lorenzo Rosasco, and
Tomaso Poggio Poggio. 2016. Holographic
embeddings of knowledge graphs. In The Thirtieth
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. pages
1955–1961.

Maximilian Nickel, Volker Tresp, and Hans-Peter
Kriegel. 2011. A three-way model for collective
learning on multi-relational data. In Proceedings
of the 28th International Conference on Machine
Learning. pages 809–816.

Fabian M Suchanek, Gjergji Kasneci, and Gerhard
Weikum. 2007. Yago: a core of semantic knowl-
edge. In Proceedings of the 16th international con-
ference on World Wide Web. ACM, pages 697–706.

Richard S Sutton, David A McAllester, Satinder P
Singh, and Yishay Mansour. 2000. Policy gradi-
ent methods for reinforcement learning with func-
tion approximation. In Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems. pages 1057–1063.

Kristina Toutanova and Danqi Chen. 2015. Observed
versus latent features for knowledge base and text
inference. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on
Continuous Vector Space Models and their Compo-
sitionality. pages 57–66.

Théo Trouillon, Johannes Welbl, Sebastian Riedel, Éric
Gaussier, and Guillaume Bouchard. 2016. Com-
plex embeddings for simple link prediction. In In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning. pages
2071–2080.

Jun Wang, Lantao Yu, Weinan Zhang, Yu Gong,
Yinghui Xu, Benyou Wang, Peng Zhang, and Dell
Zhang. 2017. Irgan: A minimax game for unifying
generative and discriminative information retrieval
models. In The 40th International ACM SIGIR Con-
ference.

Zhen Wang, Jianwen Zhang, Jianlin Feng, and Zheng
Chen. 2014. Knowledge graph embedding by trans-
lating on hyperplanes. In The Twenty-eighth AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence. pages 1112–
1119.

Ronald J Williams. 1992. Simple statistical gradient-
following algorithms for connectionist reinforce-
ment learning. Machine learning 8(3-4):229–256.

1479



Han Xiao, Minlie Huang, and Xiaoyan Zhu. 2016.
From one point to a manifold: Knowledge graph em-
bedding for precise link prediction. In The Twenty-
Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial In-
telligence.

Bishan Yang, Wen-tau Yih, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng
Gao, and Li Deng. 2015. Embedding entities and
relations for learning and inference in knowledge
bases. The 3rd International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations .

Lantao Yu, Weinan Zhang, Jun Wang, and Yong Yu.
2017. Seqgan: Sequence generative adversarial nets
with policy gradient. In The Thirty-First AAAI Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence. pages 2852–2858.

1480


