




































Evaluating Style Transfer for Text


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2019, pages 495–504
Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2 - June 7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

495

Evaluating Style Transfer for Text

Remi Mir1, Bjarke Felbo2, Nick Obradovich2, Iyad Rahwan2
1Department of EECS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

2Media Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{rmir, bfelbo, nobradov, irahwan}@mit.edu

Abstract

Research in the area of style transfer for text
is currently bottlenecked by a lack of stan-
dard evaluation practices. This paper aims
to alleviate this issue by experimentally iden-
tifying best practices with a Yelp sentiment
dataset. We specify three aspects of interest
(style transfer intensity, content preservation,
and naturalness) and show how to obtain more
reliable measures of them from human eval-
uation than in previous work. We propose a
set of metrics for automated evaluation and
demonstrate that they are more strongly corre-
lated and in agreement with human judgment:
direction-corrected Earth Mover’s Distance,
Word Mover’s Distance on style-masked texts,
and adversarial classification for the respective
aspects. We also show that the three examined
models exhibit tradeoffs between aspects of in-
terest, demonstrating the importance of evalu-
ating style transfer models at specific points of
their tradeoff plots. We release software with
our evaluation metrics to facilitate research.

1 Introduction

Style transfer in text is the task of changing an
attribute (style) of an input, while retaining non-
attribute related content (referred to simply as con-
tent for brevity in this paper).1 For instance, pre-
vious work has modified text to make it more pos-
itive (Shen et al., 2017), romantic (Li et al., 2018),
or politically slanted (Prabhumoye et al., 2018).

Some style transfer models enable modifica-
tions by manipulating latent representations of the
text (Shen et al., 2017; Zhao et al., 2018; Fu et al.,
2018), while others identify and replace style-
related words directly (Li et al., 2018). Regardless
of approach, they are hard to compare as there is

1This definition of style transfer makes a simplifying as-
sumption that “style” words can be distinguished from “con-
tent” words, or words carrying relatively less or no stylistic
weight, such as “cafè” in “What a nice cafè.” The definition
is motivated by penalizing unnecessary changes to content
words, e.g. “What a nice cafè” to “This is an awful cafè.”

currently neither a standard set of evaluation prac-
tices, nor a clear definition of which exact aspects
to evaluate. In Section 2, we define three key as-
pects to consider. In Section 3, we summarize is-
sues with previously used metrics. Many rely on
human ratings, which can be expensive and time-
consuming to obtain.

To address these issues, in Section 4, we con-
sider how to obtain more reliable measures of
human judgment for aspects of interest, and au-
tomated methods more strongly correlated with
human judgment than previously used methods.
Lastly, in Section 5, we show that the three ex-
amined models exhibit aspect tradeoffs, highlight-
ing the importance of evaluating style transfer
models at specific points of their tradeoff plots.
We release software with our evaluation met-
rics at https://github.com/passeul/
style-transfer-model-evaluation.

2 Aspects of Evaluation

We consider three aspects of interest on which to
evaluate output text x′ of a style transfer model,
potentially with respect to input text x:

1. style transfer intensity STI(SC(x), SC(x′))
quantifies the difference in style, where
SC(·) maps an input to a style distribution

2. content preservation CP (x, x′) quantifies
the similarity in content between the input
and the output

3. naturalness NT (x′) quantifies the degree to
which the output appears as if it could have
been written by humans

Style transfer models should be compared
across all three aspects to properly characterize
differences. For instance, if a model transfers from
negative to positive sentiment, but alters content
such as place names, it preserves content poorly.



496

Style Transfer Content Preservation Naturalness
HRC(x′) HRD(x′) SC(x′) HRC(x,x′) HRR(x,{x′}) BLEU(x,x′) HRC(x′) PPL(x′)

CAAE x x x xF

ARAE x x x x x xF

DAR x x x x xG

Table 1: Summary of past evaluation techniques. HRC is human rating on a continuous scale (e.g. 1 to 5). HRD is
on discrete options (e.g. positive/negative). HRR is human ranking (most to least similar) of outputs, with respect
to given input x. {x′} is the set of x′ from models trained on different parameters. SC is a style classifier. PPL is
perplexity. Superscripts denote that evaluation is done for fluency (F) or grammar (G), which we consider subsets
of naturalness. Readers can see the original papers for details on methods falling under these techniques.

If it preserves content well, but sequentially re-
peats words such as “the”, the output is unnatu-
ral. Conversely, a model that overemphasizes text
reconstruction would yield high content preserva-
tion and possibly high naturalness, but little to no
style transfer. All three aspects are thus critical to
analyze in a system of style transfer evaluation.

3 Related Work

We review previously used approaches for eval-
uating the outputs of style transfer models. Due
to the high costs related to obtaining human eval-
uations, we focus on three models: the cross-
aligned autoencoder (CAAE), adversarially reg-
ularized autoencoder (ARAE), and delete-and-
retrieve (DAR) models (Shen et al., 2017; Zhao
et al., 2018; Li et al., 2018). Table 1 illustrates
the spread of evaluation practices in these papers
using our notation from Section 2, showing that
they all rely on a different combination of human
and automated evaluation. For human evaluation,
the papers use different instruction sets and scales,
making it difficult to compare scores. Below we
describe the automated metrics used for each as-
pect. Some rely on training external models on
the corpus of input texts, X , and/or the corpus of
output texts, X ′. We encourage readers seeking
details on how to compute the metrics to reference
the algorithms in the original papers.

Style Transfer Previous work has trained clas-
sifiers on X and corresponding style labels, and
measured the number of outputs classified as hav-
ing a target style (Shen et al., 2017; Zhao et al.,
2018; Li et al., 2018). Results from this target
style scoring approach may not be directly com-
parable across papers due to different classifiers
used in evaluations.

Content Preservation To evaluate content
preservation between x and x′, previous work has

used BLEU (Zhao et al., 2018; Li et al., 2018),
an n-gram based metric originally designed to
evaluate machine translation models (Papineni
et al., 2002). BLEU does not take into account
the aim of style transfer models, which is to alter
style by necessarily changing words. Intended
differences between x and x′ are thus penalized.

Naturalness Past evaluations of naturalness
have relied largely on human ratings on a vari-
ety of scales under different names: grammatical-
ity, fluency/readability, and naturalness itself (Ta-
ble 1). An issue with measuring grammaticality
is that text with proper syntax can still be seman-
tically nonsensical, e.g. “Colorless green ideas
sleep furiously” (Chomsky, 1957). Furthermore,
input texts may not demonstrate perfect grammat-
icality or readability, despite being written by hu-
mans and thus being natural by definition (Sec-
tion 2). This undermines the effectiveness of mea-
sures for such specific qualities of output texts.

Zhao et al. (2018) used perplexity to evaluate
fluency, which, like grammaticality, we consider a
subset of naturalness itself. Low perplexity signi-
fies less uncertainty over which words can be used
to continue a sequence, quantifying the ability of a
language model to predict gold or reference texts
(Brown et al., 1992; Young et al., 2006). However,
style transfer outputs are not necessarily gold stan-
dard, and the correlation between perplexity and
human judgments of those outputs is unknown in
the style transfer setting.

4 Methods

We describe how to construct a style lexicon for
use in human and automated evaluations. We also
describe best practices that we recommend for ob-
taining scores of those evaluations, as well as how
they can be used for evaluating other datasets.
Please refer to Section 5 for experimental results.



497

Negative Sentiment Positive Sentiment
ruined mouthwatering
worst delightfully
failure wonderfully

lackluster marvelous
horrible refreshing

Table 2: Sample of words in a sentiment style lexicon.

4.1 Construction of Style Lexicon

Because the process of style transfer may result
in the substitution or removal of more stylisti-
cally weighted words, it is ideal to have a lexicon
of style-related words to reference. Words in x
and/or x′ that also appear in the lexicon can be ig-
nored in evaluations of content preservation.

While building a new style lexicon or an exten-
sion of existing ones like WordNet-Affect (Strap-
parava and Valitutti, 2004) may be feasible with
binary sentiment as the style, it may not be scal-
able to manually do so for various other types of
styles. Static lexica also might not take context
into account. This is an issue for text with words
or phrases that are ambiguous in terms of stylistic
weight, e.g. “dog” in “That is a man with a dog”
vs. “That man is a dog.”

It is more appropriate to automate the construc-
tion of a style lexicon per dataset of interest. While
multiple options may exist for doing so, we em-
phasize the simplicity and replicability of train-
ing a logistic regression classifier on X and cor-
responding style labels. We populate the lexicon
with features having the highest absolute weights,
as those have the most impact on the outcome of
the style labels. (Table 2 shows sample words in
the lexicon constructed for the dataset used in our
experiments.) While sentiment datasets have been
widely used in the literature (Shen et al., 2017;
Zhao et al., 2018; Li et al., 2018), a lexicon can
be constructed for other datasets in the same man-
ner, as long as the dataset has style labels.

Given existing NLP techniques, it may not
be possible to correctly identify all style-related
words in a text. Consequently, there is a tradeoff
between identifying more style-related words and
incorrectly marking some other (content) words
as style-related. We opt for higher precision and
lower recall to minimize the risk of removing con-
tent words, which are essential to evaluations of
content preservation. This issue is not critical be-
cause researchers can compare their style transfer
methods using our lexicon.

4.2 Human Evaluation
As seen in Table 1, past evaluations of both style
transfer and naturalness consider only output text
x′. Existing work from other fields have, how-
ever, shown that asking human raters to evaluate
two relative comparisons provides more accurate
scores than asking them to provide a numerical
score for a single observation (Stewart et al., 2005;
Bijmolt and Wedel, 1995). With this knowledge,
we construct more reliable ways of obtaining hu-
man evaluations via relative scoring instead of ab-
solute scoring.

Style Transfer Intensity Past evaluations have
raters mark the degree to which x′ exhibits a tar-
get style (Li et al., 2018). We instead ask raters
to score the difference in style between x and x′,
on a scale of 1 (identical styles) to 5 (completely
different styles). This approach can also used for
non-binary cases. Consider text modeled as a dis-
tribution over multiple emotions (e.g. happy, sad,
scared, etc.), where each emotion can be thought
of as a style. One task could be to make a scared
text more happy. Presented with x and x′, raters
would still rate the degree to which they differ in
style.

Content Preservation We consider the diffi-
culty of asking raters to ignore style-related words
as done in (Shen et al., 2017). Because not all
raters may identify the same words as stylistic,
their evaluations may vary substantially from one
another. To account for this, we ask raters to eval-
uate content preservation on the same texts, but
where we have masked style words using our style
lexicon. Under this new “masking” approach,
raters have a simpler task, as they are no longer re-
sponsible for taking style into account when they
rate the similarity of two texts on a scale of 1 to 5.

Naturalness We ask raters to determine whether
x or x′ (they are not told which is which) is
more natural. An x′ marked as more natural indi-
cates some success on the part of the style transfer
model, as it is able to fool the rater. This is in con-
trast to previous work, where raters score the natu-
ralness of x′ on a continuous scale without taking
x into account at all, even though x serves as the
basis for comparison of what is considered natural.

4.3 Automated Evaluation
In this section, we describe our approaches to au-
tomating the evaluation of each aspect of interest.



498

No modification
Input: the girls up front incompetent .
Output: the girls up front are amazing .
Style removal
Input: the girls up front .
Output: the girls up front are .
Style masking
Input: the girls up front 〈customstyle〉.
Output: the girls up front are 〈customstyle〉.

Table 3: Text under different settings of style-based
modification, as used in evaluations of content preser-
vation. The sample output is from ARAE (λ = 1).

Style Transfer Intensity Rather than count how
many output texts achieve a target style, we can
capture more nuanced differences between the
style distributions of x and x′, using Earth Mover’s
Distance (Rubner et al., 1998; Pele and Werman,
2009). EMD(SC(x), SC(x′)) is the minimum
“cost” to turn one distribution into the other, or
how “intense” the transfer is. Distributions can
have any number of values (styles), so EMD han-
dles binary and non-binary datasets.

Note that even if argmax(SC(x′)) is not the
target style class,EMD still acknowledges move-
ment towards the target style with respect to
SC(x). However, we penalize (negate) the score
if SC(x′) displays a relative change of style in the
wrong direction, away from the target style.

Depending on x, not a lot of rewriting may be
necessary to achieve a different style. This is not
an issue, as STI relies on a style classifier to quan-
tify not the difference between the content of x and
x′, but their style distributions. For the style classi-
fier, we experiment with textcnn (Kim, 2014; Lee,
2018) and fastText (Joulin et al., 2017).

Content Preservation We first subject texts to
different settings of modification: style removal
and style masking. This is to address undesired pe-
nalization of metrics on texts expected to demon-
strate changes after style transfer (Section 3). For
style removal, we remove style words from x and
x′ using the style lexicon. For masking, we re-
place those words with a 〈customstyle〉 place-
holder. Table 3 exemplifies these modifications.

For measuring the degree of content preserva-
tion, in addition to the widely used BLEU, we
consider METEOR and embedding-based metrics.
METEOR is an n-gram based metric like BLEU,
but handles sentence-level scoring more robustly,
allowing it to be both a sentence-level and corpus-
level metric (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005).

For the embedding-based metrics, word em-
beddings can be obtained with methods like
Word2Vec (Mikolov et al., 2013) or GloVe (Pen-
nington et al., 2014). Sentence-level embeddings
can be comprised of the most extreme values of
word embeddings per dimension (vector extrema)
(Forgues et al., 2014), or word embedding aver-
ages (Sharma et al., 2017). Word Mover’s Dis-
tance (WMD), based on EMD, calculates the
minimum “distance” between word embeddings
of x and of x′, where smaller distances signify
higher similarity (Kusner et al., 2015). Greedy
matching greedily matches words in x and x′

based on their embeddings, calculates their simi-
larity (e.g. cosine similarity), and averages all the
similarities. It repeats the process in the reverse di-
rection and takes the average of those two scores
(Rus and Lintean, 2012).

We evaluate with all these metrics to identify
the one most strongly correlated with human judg-
ment of content preservation.

Naturalness For a baseline understanding of
what is considered “natural,” any method used
for automated evaluation of naturalness requires
the human-sourced input texts. We train unigram
and neural logistic regression classifiers (Bowman
et al., 2016) on samples of X and X ′ for each
transfer model. Via adversarial evaluation, these
classifiers must distinguish human-generated in-
puts from machine-generated outputs. The more
natural an output is, the likelier it is to fool a clas-
sifier (Jurafsky and Martin, 2018). We calculate
agreement between each type of human evaluation
(Section 4.2) and each classifier AC. Agreement
is the ratio of instances where humans andAC rate
a text as more natural than the other.

We also train LSTM language models (Hochre-
iter and Schmidhuber, 1997) on X and compute
sentence-level perplexities for each text in X ′ in
order to determine the relative effectiveness of ad-
versarial classification as a metric.

5 Experiments and Results

Due to high costs of human evaluation, we focus
on CAAE, ARAE, and DAR models with transfer
tasks based on samples from the Yelp binary senti-
ment dataset (Shen et al., 2017).2 Below we detail

2Like most literature, including the papers on CAAE,
ARAE and DAR, we focus on the binary case. Creating a
high-quality, multi-label style transfer dataset for evaluation
is a demanding task, which is out of scope for this paper.



499

Input would n’t recommend until management works on friendliness and communication with residents .
ARAE (λ = 1) highly recommend this place while living in tempe and management .
CAAE (ρ = 0.5) would highly recommend management on duty and staff on business .
DAR (γ = 500) until management works on friendliness and is a great place for communication with residents .

Table 4: Sample outputs of a negative to positive sentiment style transfer task. Italicized words are style-related,
according to a style lexicon. They can be masked or removed in evaluations of content preservation (Section 4.3).

the range of parameters each model is trained on in
order to compare evaluation practices and generate
aspect tradeoff plots. Each of three Amazon Turk
raters evaluated 244 texts per aspect, per model.
Of those texts, half are originally of positive senti-
ment transferred to negative, and vice versa.

For brevity, we reference average scores (cor-
relation, kappa, and agreement, each of which is
described below) from across all models in our
analysis of results. For detailed scores per model,
please refer to the corresponding tables.

5.1 Style Transfer Models

For each style transfer model, we choose a wide
range of training parameters to allow for variation
of content preservation, and indirectly, of style
transfer intensity, in X . We show sample outputs
from the models for a given input text in Table 4.

CAAE uses autoencoders (Vincent et al., 2008)
that are cross-aligned, assuming that texts already
share a latent content distribution (Shen et al.,
2017). It uses latent states of the RNN and mul-
tiple discriminators to align distributions of texts
in X ′ exhibiting one style with distributions of
texts in X exhibiting another. Adversarial compo-
nents help separate style information from the la-
tent space where inputs are represented. We train
CAAE on various values (0.01, 0.1, 0.5, 1, 5) of ρ,
a weight on the adversarial loss.

CAAE is a baseline for other style transfer mod-
els, such as ARAE, which trains a separate de-
coder per style class (Zhao et al., 2018). We train
ARAE on various values (1, 5, 10) of λ, which is
also a weight on adversarial loss.

The third model that we evaluate, which also
uses CAAE as a baseline, avoids adversarial meth-
ods in an approach called Delete-and-Retrieve
(DAR) (Li et al., 2018). It identifies and removes
style words from texts, searches for related words
pertaining to a new target style, and combines the
de-stylized text with the search results using a neu-
ral model. We train DAR on γ = 15, where γ is a
threshold parameter for the maximum number of
style words that can be removed from texts, with

Model Text Modification SettingUnmasked Style Masked
CAAE 0.158 0.289
ARAE 0.201 0.321
DAR 0.161 0.281
Average 0.173 0.297

Table 5: Fleiss’ kappas for human judgments of content
preservation of unmasked and style-masked texts.

Model Absolute Relative
τ = 3 τ = 2

CAAE 0.193 0.321 0.579
ARAE 0.215 0.415 0.741
DAR 0.103 0.201 0.259
Average 0.170 0.312 0.526

Table 6: Fleiss’ kappas for human judgments of abso-
lute naturalness and relative naturalness of texts.

respect to the size of the corpus vocabulary. For
this single training value, we experiment with a
range of γ values (0.1, 1, 15, 500) during test time
because, by design, the model does not need to be
retrained (Li et al., 2018).

5.2 Human Evaluation
We use Fleiss’ kappa κ of inter-rater reliability
(see formula in L. Fleiss and Cohen, 1973) to iden-
tify the more effective human scoring task for dif-
ferent aspects of interest. The kappa metric is of-
ten levied in a relative fashion, as there are no uni-
versally accepted thresholds for agreements that
are slight, fair, moderate, etc. For comprehen-
sive experimentation, we compare kappas over the
outputs of each style transfer model. The kappa
score for ratings of content preservation based on
style-masked texts is 0.297. Given the kappa score
of 0.173 for unmasked texts, style masking is a
more reliable approach towards human evaluation
for content preservation (Table 5).

For style transfer intensity, kappas for relative
scoring do not show improvement over the pre-
viously used approach of absolute scoring of x′.
However, we observe the opposite for the aspect of
naturalness. Kappas for relative naturalness scor-
ing tasks exceed those of the absolute scoring ones
(Table 6). Despite the two types of tasks having



500

Model fastText textcnnTarget Style Scores Earth Mover’s Distance Target Style Scores Earth Mover’s Distance
CAAE 0.566 ± 0.038 0.573 ± 0.038 0.587 ± 0.037 0.589 ± 0.037
ARAE 0.513 ± 0.053 0.516 ± 0.053 0.515 ± 0.053 0.519 ± 0.053
DAR 0.470 ± 0.049 0.539 ± 0.045 0.508 ± 0.047 0.566 ± 0.043
Average 0.516 ± 0.047 0.543 ± 0.045 0.537 ± 0.046 0.558 ± 0.044

Table 7: Correlations of automated style transfer intensity metrics with human scores.

Model BLEU METEOR Embed Average Greedy Match Vector Extrema WMD
CAAE 0.458 ± 0.044 0.498 ± 0.042 0.370 ± 0.048 0.489 ± 0.043 0.496 ± 0.042 0.496 ± 0.042
ARAE 0.337 ± 0.064 0.387 ± 0.062 0.313 ± 0.065 0.419 ± 0.060 0.423 ± 0.060 0.445 ± 0.058
DAR 0.440 ± 0.051 0.455 ± 0.050 0.379 ± 0.054 0.472 ± 0.049 0.472 ± 0.049 0.484 ± 0.048
Average 0.412 ± 0.053 0.447 ± 0.051 0.354 ± 0.056 0.460 ± 0.051 0.464 ± 0.050 0.475 ± 0.049

Table 8: Absolute correlations of content preservation metrics with human scores on texts with style removal.

Model BLEU METEOR Embed Average Greedy Match Vector Extrema WMD
CAAE 0.488 ± 0.043 0.517 ± 0.041 0.356 ± 0.049 0.490 ± 0.043 0.496 ± 0.042 0.517 ± 0.041
ARAE 0.356 ± 0.063 0.374 ± 0.062 0.302 ± 0.066 0.405 ± 0.061 0.422 ± 0.060 0.457 ± 0.057
DAR 0.444 ± 0.050 0.454 ± 0.050 0.370 ± 0.054 0.450 ± 0.050 0.473 ± 0.049 0.475 ± 0.049
Average 0.429 ± 0.052 0.448 ± 0.051 0.343 ± 0.056 0.448 ± 0.051 0.464 ± 0.050 0.483 ± 0.049

Table 9: Absolute correlations of content preservation metrics with human scores on texts with style masking.

different numbers of categories (2 vs 5), we can
compare them by using a threshold τ to bin the
absolute score for each text into a “natural” group
(x′ is considered to be more natural than x) or “un-
natural” one (vice versa), like in relative scoring.
For example, τ = 2 places texts with absolute
scores greater than or equal to 2 into the natural
group. Judgments for relative tasks yield greater
inter-rater reliability than those of absolute tasks
across multiple thresholds (τ ∈ {2, 3}). This sug-
gests that the relative scoring paradigm is prefer-
able in human evaluations of naturalness.

5.3 Automated Evaluation

Per aspect of interest, we compute Pearson cor-
relations between scores from the existing metric
and human judgments. (As there were three raters
for any given scoring task, we take the average of
their scores.) We do the same for our proposed
metrics to identify which metric is more reliable
for automated evaluation of a given aspect.

For style transfer intensity, across both the
fastText and textcnn classifiers, our proposed
direction-corrected Earth Mover’s Distance metric
has higher correlation with human scores than the
past approach of target style scoring (Table 7).

For content preservation, METEOR, shown to
have higher correlation with human judgments

Model
Unigram Adv. Clf. Neural Adv. Clf.
Absolute Relative Absolute Relative

CAAE 56.07 64.51 57.38 67.87
ARAE 49.45 66.67 50.68 67.90
DAR 65.16 65.57 61.07 62.30
Average 56.89 65.58 56.38 66.02

Table 10: Percent agreement between adversarial clas-
sifiers and human scores on the naturalness of texts.

than BLEU for machine translation (Banerjee and
Lavie, 2005), shows the same relationship for style
transfer. However, across various text modifica-
tion settings, WMD generally shows the strongest
correlation with human scores (Tables 8 and 9).
Because WMD is lower when texts are more sim-
ilar, it is anti-correlated with human scores. We
take absolute correlations to facilitate comparison
with other content preservation metrics. With re-
spect to text modification, style masking may be
more suitable as it, on average for WMD, exhibits
a higher correlation with human judgments.

For naturalness, both unigram and neural classi-
fiers exhibit greater agreement on which texts are
considered more natural with the humans given
relative scoring tasks than with those given abso-
lute scoring tasks (Table 10), although the neural
classifier achieves higher agreements on average.
We also confirm that sentence-level perplexity is



501

0 1

1

0 1

1

0 1

1

(a) (b) (c)

Figure 1: Extreme tradeoff plots, with style transfer intensity on the x-axis and content preservation on the y-axis.

(a) Content vs. Style Tradeoffs (b) Naturalness vs. Style Tradeoffs

Figure 2: Tradeoffs between aspects of evaluation, using metrics most strongly correlated with human scores.

not an appropriate metric. It exhibits no significant
correlation with human scores (α = 0.05). These
results suggest that adversarial classifiers can be
useful for automating measurement of naturalness.

5.4 Aspect Tradeoffs

Previous work has compared models with respect
to a single aspect of interest at a time, but has only,
to a limited degree, considered how relationships
between multiple aspects influence these compar-
isons. In particular, concurrent work by (Li et al.,
2018) examines tradeoff plots, but focuses primar-
ily on variants of its own model, while including
only a single point on the plots of style transfer
models from other papers. For a comprehensive
comparison, it is ideal to have plots for all models.

It is helpful to first understand the tradeoff
space. For example, we define extreme cases
for style transfer intensity and content preserva-
tion, where we assume measurement of the lat-
ter ignores stylistic content. Consider two classes
of suboptimal models. One class produces out-
puts with a wide range of style transfer intensity,
but poor content preservation (Figure 1a). The
other class of models produces outputs with low
style transfer intensity, but a wide range of content
preservation (Figure 1b).

This is in contrast to a model that yields a wide

range of style transfer intensity and consistently
high content preservation (Figure 1c). If we take
that to be an ideal model for a sentiment dataset,
we can interpret models with better performance
to be the ones whose tradeoff plots are closer to
that of the ideal model and farther from those of
the suboptimal ones. The plot for an ideal model
will likely vary by dataset, especially because the
tradeoff between content preservation and style
transfer intensity depends on the level of distinc-
tion between style words and content words of the
dataset.

With this interpretation of the tradeoff space,
we construct a plot for each style transfer model
(Figure 2), where each point represents a different
hyperparameter setting for training (Section 5.1).
We collect scores based on the automated metrics
most strongly correlated with human judgment:
direction-corrected EMD for style transfer inten-
sity, WMD for content preservation, and percent
of output texts marked by an adversarial classifier
as more natural than input texts. Because WMD
scores are lower when texts are more similar, we
instead take the normalized inverses of the scores
to represent the degree of content preservation.

Across all models, there is a trend of reduction
in content preservation and naturalness as style
transfer intensity increases. Without the plots, one



502

might conclude that ARAE and DAR perform sub-
stantially differently, especially if hyperparame-
ters are chosen such that ARAE achieves the left-
most point on its plot and DAR achieves the right-
most point on its plot. With the plots, at least for
the set of hyperparameters considered, it is evident
that they perform comparably (Figure 2a) and do
not exhibit the same level of decrease in natural-
ness as CAAE (Figure 2b).

6 Discussion

Previous work on style transfer models used a va-
riety of evaluation methods (Table 1), making it
difficult to meaningfully compare results across
papers. Moreover, it is not clear from existing re-
search how exactly to define particular aspects of
interest, or which methods (whether human or au-
tomated) are most suitable for evaluating and com-
paring different style transfer models.

To address these issues, we specified key as-
pects of interest (style transfer intensity, content
preservation, and naturalness) and showed how
to obtain more reliable measures of them from
human evaluation than in previous work. Our
proposed automated metrics (direction-corrected
EMD, WMD on style-masked texts, and adversar-
ial classification) exhibited stronger correlations
with human scores than existing automated met-
rics on a binary sentiment dataset. While human
evaluation may still be useful in future research,
automation facilitates evaluation when it is infea-
sible to collect human scores due to prohibitive
cost or limited time.

6.1 Human Evaluation

For style transfer intensity, the relative scoring
task (rating the degree of stylistic difference be-
tween x and x′) did not have greater rater reliabil-
ity than the previously used task of rating output
texts on an absolute scale. This is likely due to
task complexity or rater uncertainty, which moti-
vates the need for further exploration of task de-
sign for this particular aspect of interest.

For content preservation, our form of human
evaluation operates on texts whose style words
are masked out, unlike the previous approach (no
masking). Our approach addresses the uninten-
tional variable of rater-dependent style identifica-
tion that could lead to noisy, less reliable ratings.

Identification and masking of words was made
possible with a style lexicon. We automatically

constructed the lexicon in a way that can be done
for any style dataset, as long as style labels are
available (Section 4.1). We acknowledge a trade-
off between filling the lexicon with more style
words and being conservative in order to avoid
capturing content words. We justify taking a more
conservative approach as content words are natu-
rally critical to evaluations of content preservation.

For naturalness, we introduced a paradigm of
relative scoring that uses both the output and input
texts. This achieved a higher inter-rater reliability
than did absolute scoring, the previous approach.

6.2 Automated Evaluation

For style transfer intensity, we proposed using a
metric with EMD as the basis to acknowledge the
spectrum of styles that can appear in outputs and to
handle both binary and non-binary datasets. The
metric also accounts for direction by penalizing
scores in the cases where the style distribution of
the output text explicitly moves away from the tar-
get style. Previous work used external classifiers,
whose style distributions for x and x′ can be used
to calculate direction-corrected EMD, making it a
simple addition to the evaluation workflow.

For content preservation, WMD (based on
EMD) works in a similar fashion, but with word
embeddings of x and of x′. BLEU, used widely
in previous work, may yield weaker correlations
with human judgment in comparison as it was de-
signed to have multiple reference texts per candi-
date text (Papineni et al., 2002). Several reference
texts, which are more common in machine trans-
lation tasks, increase the chance of n-gram (such
as n ≥ 3) overlap with the candidate. In the style
transfer setting, however, the only reference text
for x′ is x. Having a single reference text reduces
the likelihood of overlap and the overall effective-
ness of BLEU.

For naturalness, strong agreement of adversarial
classifiers with relative scores assigned by humans
suggest that classifiers are suitable for automated
evaluation. One might assume input texts would
almost always be rated as more natural by both hu-
mans and classifiers, biasing the agreement. This
is not the case, as we justify our rating scheme
with evidence of outputs being rated as more natu-
ral across several models (Figure 2b). Output texts
classified as more natural indicate some success
for a style transfer model, as it can produce texts
with a quality like that of human-generated inputs,



503

which are, by definition, natural.
Finally, with aspect tradeoff plots constructed

using scores from the automated metrics, we can
directly compare models with respect to multi-
ple aspects simultaneously. Points of intersection,
or near intersection, for different models signify
that they, at the hyperparameters that yielded those
points, can achieve similar results for various as-
pects. These parameters can be useful for un-
derstanding the impact of decisions made during
model design and optimization phases.

6.3 Future Research
As we confirmed, sentence-level perplexity of out-
put x′ is not meaningful by itself for the automated
evaluation of naturalness. The idea of using both x
and x′, akin to how we train automated classifiers
of naturalness (Section 4.3), can be extended to
construct a perplexity-based metric that also takes
into account the perplexity of input x.

Another avenue for future work could be evalu-
ating on datasets with a different style or number
of style classes. It is worth studying the distinc-
tion between style words and content words in the
vocabulary of each such dataset. Given the defini-
tion of style transfer and its simplifying assump-
tion in Section 1, it would be reasonable to expect
naturally low content preservation scores for any
given style transfer model operating on datasets
with less distinction, such as those of formality.
This is not so much an issue as it is a dataset-
specific trend that can be visualized in correspond-
ing tradeoff plots, which would provide a holis-
tic evaluation of model performance. In any case,
results from inter-rater reliability and correlation
testing on these additional datasets would over-
all enable more consistent evaluation practices and
further progress in style transfer research.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Juncen Li, Tianxiao Shen,
and Junbo (Jake) Zhao for guidance in the use of
their respective style transfer models. These mod-
els serve as markers of major progress in the area
of style transfer research, without which this work
would not have been possible.

References
Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. Meteor:

An automatic metric for mt evaluation with im-
proved correlation with human judgments. In Pro-

ceedings of the ACL Workshop on Intrinsic and Ex-
trinsic Evaluation Measures for Machine Transla-
tion and/or Summarization, pages 65–72. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Tammo Bijmolt and Michel Wedel. 1995. The effects
of alternative methods of collecting similarity data
for multidimensional scaling. International Journal
of Research in Marketing, 12(4):363–371.

Samuel R. Bowman, Luke Vilnis, Oriol Vinyals, An-
drew Dai, Rafal Jozefowicz, and Samy Bengio.
2016. Generating sentences from a continuous
space. In Proceedings of the 20th SIGNLL Confer-
ence on Computational Natural Language Learning,
pages 10–21. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Peter F. Brown, Vincent J. Della Pietra, Robert L. Mer-
cer, Stephen A. Della Pietra, and Jennifer C. Lai.
1992. An estimate of an upper bound for the entropy
of english. Computational Linguistics, 18(1).

Noam Chomsky. 1957. Syntactic Structures. Mouton
and Co., The Hague.

Gabriel Forgues, Joelle Pineau, Jean-Marie
Larchevêque, and Réal Tremblay. 2014. Boot-
strapping dialog systems with word embeddings.

Zhenxin Fu, Xiaoye Tan, Nanyun Peng, Dongyan
Zhao, and Rui Yan. 2018. Style transfer in text:
Exploration and evaluation. In Thirty-Second AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997.
Long short-term memory. Neural computation,
9(8):1735–1780.

Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, Piotr Bojanowski, and
Tomas Mikolov. 2017. Bag of tricks for efficient
text classification. In Proceedings of the 15th Con-
ference of the European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Volume 2, Short Pa-
pers, pages 427–431. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Dan Jurafsky and James H Martin. 2018. Speech and
Language Processing, volume 3.

Yoon Kim. 2014. Convolutional neural networks for
sentence classification. In Proceedings of the 2014
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP), pages 1746–1751. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Matt J. Kusner, Yu Sun, Nicholas I. Kolkin, and Kil-
ian Q. Weinberger. 2015. From word embeddings to
document distances. In Proceedings of the 32nd In-
ternational Conference on International Conference
on Machine Learning - Volume 37, pages 957–966.

Joseph L. Fleiss and Jacob Cohen. 1973. The equiv-
alence of weighted kappa and the intraclass corre-
lation coefficient as measures of reliability. Edu-
cational and Psychological Measurement, 33:613–
619.



504

Dongjun Lee. 2018. text-cnn. https://github.
com/DongjunLee/text-cnn-tensorflow.

Juncen Li, Robin Jia, He He, and Percy Liang. 2018.
Delete, retrieve, generate: a simple approach to sen-
timent and style transfer. In Proceedings of the
2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Pa-
pers), pages 1865–1874. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg Cor-
rado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Distributed represen-
tations of words and phrases and their composition-
ality. In Proceedings of the 26th International Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems -
Volume 2, NIPS’13, pages 3111–3119, USA.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: A method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
40th Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 311–318. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Ofir Pele and Michael Werman. 2009. Fast and robust
earth mover’s distances. pages 460–467. IEEE.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher
Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word
representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 1532–1543. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yulia Tsvetkov, Ruslan
Salakhutdinov, and Alan W Black. 2018. Style
transfer through back-translation. In Proceedings of
the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 866–876. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Yossi Rubner, Carlo Tomasi, and Leonidas J. Guibas.
1998. A metric for distributions with applications to
image databases. In Sixth International Conference
on Computer Vision, pages 59–66. IEEE.

Vasile Rus and Mihai Lintean. 2012. A comparison of
greedy and optimal assessment of natural language
student input using word-to-word similarity metrics.
In Proceedings of the Seventh Workshop on Building
Educational Applications Using NLP, pages 157–
162. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Shikhar Sharma, Layla El Asri, Hannes Schulz, and
Jeremie Zumer. 2017. Relevance of unsupervised
metrics in task-oriented dialogue for evaluating nat-
ural language generation. CoRR, abs/1706.09799.

Tianxiao Shen, Tao Lei, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi
Jaakkola. 2017. Style transfer from non-parallel text
by cross-alignment. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems 30, pages 6830–6841.

Neil Stewart, Gordon DA Brown, and Nick Chater.
2005. Absolute identification by relative judgment.
Psychological review, 112(4):881–911.

Carlo Strapparava and Alessandro Valitutti. 2004.
Wordnet affect: an affective extension of word-
net. In Proceedings of the Fourth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’04). European Language Resources Associ-
ation (ELRA).

Pascal Vincent, Hugo Larochelle, Yoshua Bengio, and
Pierre-Antoine Manzagol. 2008. Extracting and
composing robust features with denoising autoen-
coders. In Proceedings of the 25th International
Conference on Machine Learning, ICML ’08, pages
1096–1103. ACM.

Steve J. Young, D. Kershaw, J. Odell, D. Ollason,
V. Valtchev, and P. Woodland. 2006. The HTK Book
Version 3.4. Cambridge University Press.

Junbo Zhao, Yoon Kim, Kelly Zhang, Alexander Rush,
and Yann LeCun. 2018. Adversarially regular-
ized autoencoders. In Proceedings of the 35th In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning, vol-
ume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
search, pages 5902–5911.


