




































Lost in Machine Translation: A Method to Reduce Meaning Loss


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2019, pages 437–441
Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2 - June 7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

437

Lost in Machine Translation: A Method to Reduce Meaning Loss

Reuben Cohn-Gordon
Stanford

Noah D. Goodman
Stanford

reubencg@stanford.edu ngoodman@stanford.edu

Abstract
A desideratum of high-quality translation sys-
tems is that they preserve meaning, in the
sense that two sentences with different mean-
ings should not translate to one and the same
sentence in another language. However, state-
of-the-art systems often fail in this regard, par-
ticularly in cases where the source and tar-
get languages partition the “meaning space” in
different ways. For instance, “I cut my finger.”
and “I cut my finger off.” describe different
states of the world but are translated to French
(by both Fairseq and Google Translate) as “Je
me suis coupé le doigt.”, which is ambiguous
as to whether the finger is detached. More gen-
erally, translation systems are typically many-
to-one (non-injective) functions from source to
target language, which in many cases results in
important distinctions in meaning being lost in
translation. Building on Bayesian models of
informative utterance production, we present
a method to define a less ambiguous trans-
lation system in terms of an underlying pre-
trained neural sequence-to-sequence model.
This method increases injectivity, resulting in
greater preservation of meaning as measured
by improvement in cycle-consistency, with-
out impeding translation quality (measured by
BLEU score).

1 Many-to-One Translations

Languages differ in what meaning distinctions
they must mark explicitly. As such, translations
risk mapping from a form in one language to a
more ambiguous form in another. For example,
the definite (1) and indefinite (2) both translate
(under Fairseq and Google Translate) to (3) in
French, which is ambiguous in definiteness.

The animals run fast. (1)

Animals run fast. (2)

Les animaux courent vite (3)

Figure 1: State-of-the-art neural image captioner SSNT0
loses a meaning distinction which informative model
SSNT-IP1 preserves.

Survey To evaluate the nature of this problem,
we explored a corpus1 of 500 pairs of distinct En-
glish sentences which map to a single German one
(the evaluation language in section 2.3). We iden-
tify a number of common causes for the many-
to-one maps. Two frequent types of verbal dis-
tinction lost when translating to German are tense
(54 pairs, e.g. “...others {were, have been} intro-
duced .”) and modality (16 pairs, e.g. “...prospects
for this year {could, might} be better.”), where
German “können” can express both epistemic and
ability modality, distinguished in English with
“might” and “could” respectively. Owing to En-
glish’s large vocabulary, lexical difference in verb
(31 pairs, e.g. “arise” vs. “emerge” ), noun (56
pairs, e.g. “mystery” vs. “secret”), adjective (47
pairs, e.g. “unaffected” vs. “untouched”) or deic-
tic/pronoun (32 pairs, usually “this” vs “that”) are
also common. A large number of the pairs differ
instead either orthographically, or in other ways
that do not correspond to a clear semantic distinc-

1Generated by selecting short sentences from the Brown
corpus (Kučera and Francis, 1967), translating them to Ger-
man, and taking the best two candidate translations back into
English, if these two themselves translate to a single Ger-
man sentence. Translation in both directions was done with
Fairseq.



438

A He is wearing glasses.
B He wears glasses.
SSNT0 (A) Er trägt eine Brille.
SSNT0 (B) Er trägt eine Brille .
SSNT-IP1 (A) Er trägt jetzt eine Brille.
SSNT-IP1 (B) Er hat eine Brille.

Figure 2: Similar to Figure 1, SSNT0 collapses two
English sentences into a single German one, whereas
SSNT-IP1 distinguishes the two in German.

tion (e.g. “She had {taken, made} a decision.”).

Our approach While languages differ in what
distinctions they are required to express, all are
usually capable of expressing any given distinc-
tion when desired. As such, meaning loss of the
kind discussed above is, in theory, avoidable. To
this end, we propose a method to reduce meaning
loss by applying the Rational Speech Acts (RSA)
model of an informative speaker to translation.
RSA has been used to model natural language
pragmatics (Goodman and Frank, 2016), and re-
cent work has shown its applicability to image
captioning (Andreas and Klein, 2016; Vedantam
et al., 2017; Mao et al., 2016), another sequence-
generation NLP task. Here we use RSA to de-
fine a translator which reduces many-to-one map-
pings and consequently meaning loss, in terms
of a pretrained neural translation model. We in-
troduce a strategy for performing inference effi-
ciently with this model in the setting of translation,
and show gains in cycle-consistency2 as a result.
Moreover, we obtain improvements in translation
quality (BLEU score), demonstrating that the goal
of meaning preservation directly yields improved
translations.

2 Meaning Preservation as Informativity

In the RSA framework, speakers and listeners,
modeled as Bayesian agents, reason about each
other in a nested fashion. We refer to listeners and
speakers which do not reason about another agent
as L0 and S0 respectively, and an agent which rea-
sons about another agent asL1 or S1. For instance,
an informative speaker model S1 is given a state

2Formally, say that a pair of functions f : A → B,
g : B → A is cycle-consistent if g · f = id, the identity
function. If f is not one-to-one, then (f, g) is not cycle-
consistent. (Note however that when A and B are infinite,
the converse does not hold: even if f and g are both one-to-
one, (f, g) need not be cycle-consistent, since many-to-one
maps between infinite sets are not necessarily bijective.)

w ∈ W , and chooses an utterance u ∈ U to con-
vey w to S1’s model of a listener. By contrast,
S0 chooses utterances without a listener model in
mind — its behavior might be determined by a
semantics, or in our case, by a pretrained neural
model.

For translation, the state space W is a set of
source language sentences (sequences of words
in the language), while U is a set of target lan-
guage sentences. S1’s goal is to choose a trans-
lation u which allows a listener to pick out the
source sentence w from among the set of dis-
tractors. This informative behavior discourages
many-to-one maps that a non-informative transla-
tion model S0 might allow.

S0 Model BiLSTMs with attention (Bahdanau
et al., 2014), and more recently CNNs (Gehring
et al., 2016) and entirely attention based models
(Vaswani et al., 2017) constitute the state-of-the-
art architectures in neural machine translation .
All of these systems, once trained end-to-end on
aligned data, can be viewed as a conditional distri-
bution3 SWD0 (wd |w, c), for a word wd in the target
language, a source language sentencew, and a par-
tial sentence c in the target language. SWD0 yields
a distribution SSNT0 over full sentences

4:

SSNT0 (u|w, c) =
∏
t

SWD0 (u[t]|w, c + u[: t]) (4)

SSNT0 returns a distribution over continuations of
c into full target language sentences5. To obtain
a sentence from SSNT0 given a source language
sentence s, one can greedily choose the highest
probability word from SWD0 at each timestep, or
explore a beam of possible candidates. We im-
plement SWD0 (in terms of which all our other
models are defined) using Fairseq’s publicly avail-
able6 pretrained Transformer models for English-
German, and for German-English train a CNN us-
ing Fairseq.

2.1 Explicit Distractors

We first describe a sentence level, globally prag-
matic model SSNT-GP1 for the simple case where

3We use SWD0/1 and S
SNT
0/1 respectively to distinguish word

and sentence level speaker models
4Python list indexing conventions are used, “+” means

concatenation of list to element or list
5In what follows, we omit c when it is empty, so that

SSNT0 (u|w) is the probability of sentence u given w
6https://github.com/pytorch/fairseq



439

a source language sentence needs to be distin-
guished from a presupplied distractor7 (as in the
pairs shown in figures (2) and (1)). We use this
model as a stepping stone to one which requires an
input sentence in the source language only, and no
distractors. We begin by defining a listener LSNT1 ,
which receives a target language sentence u and
infers which sentence w ∈ W (a presupplied set
such as the pair (1) and (2)) would have resulted
in the pretrained neural model SSNT0 producing u:

LSNT1 (w|u) ∝
SSNT0 (u|w)∑

w′∈W S
SNT
0 (u|w′)

(5)

This allows SSNT-GP1 to be defined in terms of
LSNT1 , where U is the set of all possible target lan-
guage sentences8:

SSNT-GP1 (u|w) =
SSNT0 (u|w)LSNT1 (w|u)α∑

u′∈U S
SNT
0 (u

′|w)LSNT1 (w|u′)α
(6)

The key property of this model is that, for
W = {A,B}, when translating A, SSNT-GP1
prefers translations of A that are unlikely to be
good translations of B. So for pairs like (1) and
(2), SSNT-GP1 is compelled to produce a translation
for the former that reflects its difference from the
latter, and vice versa.

Inference Since U is an infinite set, exactly
computing the most probable utterance under
SSNT-GP1 (·|w) is intractable. Andreas and Klein
(2016) and Mao et al. (2016) perform approximate
inference by sampling the subset ofU produced by
a beam search from SSNT0 . Vedantam et al. (2017)
and Cohn-Gordon et al. (2018) employ a different
method, using an incremental model SSNT-IP1 as an
approximation of SSNT-GP1 on which inference can
be tractably performed.
SSNT-IP1 considers informativity not over the

whole set of utterances, but instead at each deci-
sion of the next word in the target language sen-
tence. For this reason, the incremental method
avoids the problem of lack of beam diversity en-
countered when subsampling from SSNT0 , which

7Implementations for all models are available
to https://github.com/reubenharry/
pragmatic-translation

8α is a hyperparameter of SSNT-GP1 ; as it increases, the
model cares more about being informative and less about pro-
ducing a reasonable translation.

becomes especially bad when producing long se-
quences, as is often the case in translation. SSNT-IP1
is defined as the product of informative decisions,
specified by SWD1 (itself defined in terms of L

WD
1 ),

which are defined analogously to (6) and (5).

LWD1 (w|wd, c) ∝ SWD0 (wd|w, c) (7)

SWD1 (wd |w, c) ∝ (8)
SWD0 (wd|w, c) ∗ LWD1 (w|wd, c)α

SSNT-IP1 (u|w, c) =
∏
t

SWD1 (u[t]|w, c + u[: t])

(9)

Examples SSNT-IP1 is able to avoid many-to-one
mappings by choosing more informative transla-
tions. For instance, its translation of (1) is “Ces
animaux courent vite” (These animals run fast.).
See figures (1) and (2) for other examples of many-
to-one mappings under SSNT0 avoided by S

SNT-IP
1 .

2.2 Avoiding Explicit Distractors
While SSNT-IP1 can disambiguate between pairs of
sentences, it has two shortcomings. First, it re-
quires one (or more) distractors to be provided, so
translation is no longer fully automatic. Second,
because the distractor set W consists of only a
pair (or finite set) of sentences, SSNT-IP1 only cares
about being informative up to the goal of distin-
guishing between these sentences. Intuitively, to-
tal meaning preservation is achieved by a trans-
lation which distinguishes the source sentence w
from every other sentence in the source language
which differs in meaning.

Both of these problems can be addressed by
introducing a new “cyclic” globally pragmatic
model SSNT-CGP1 which reasons not about L

SNT
1 but

about a pretrained translation model from target
language to source language, which we termLSNT0 .

SSNT-CGP1 (u|w) ∝ SSNT0 (u|w)LSNT0 (w|u)α (10)

SSNT-CGP1 is like S
SNT-GP
1 , but its goal is to pro-

duce a translation which allows a listener model
(now LSNT0 ) to infer the original sentence, not
among a small set of presupplied possibilities, but
among all source language sentences. As such,
an optimal translation u of w under SSNT-CGP1 has
high probability of being generated by SSNT0 and



440

high probability of being back-translated to w by
LSNT0 . S

SNT-CGP
1 is very closely related to recon-

struction methods, e.g. (Tu et al., 2017).

Incremental Model Exact inference is again in-
tractable, though as with SSNT-GP1 , it is possible
to approximate by subsampling from SSNT0 . This
is very close to the approach taken by (Li et al.,
2016), who find that reranking a set of outputs by
probability of recovering input “dramatically de-
creases the rate of dull and generic responses.”
in a question-answering task. However, because
the subsample is small relative to U , they use this
method in conjunction with a diversity increasing
decoding algorithm.

As in the case with explicit distractors, we in-
stead opt for an incremental model, now SSNT-CIP1
which approximates SSNT-CGP1 . The definition of
SSNT-CIP1 (12) is more complex than the incremen-
tal model with explicit distractors (SSNT-IP1 ) since
LWD0 must receive complete sentences, rather than
partial ones like LWD1 . As such, we need to
marginalize over continuations k of partial sen-
tences in the target language:

SWD-C1 (wd |w, c) ∝ SWD0 (wd |w, c)∗∑
k

(LSNT0 (w|c+ wd + k)SSNT0 (k|w, c+ wd))

(11)

SSNT-CIP1 (u|w, c) =
∏
t

SWD-C1 (u[t]|w, c + u[: t])

(12)
Since the sum over continuations of c in (11) is

intractable to compute exactly, we approximate it
by a single continuation, obtained by greedily un-
rolling SSNT0 . The whole process of generating a
new word wd of the translation from a sequence
c and a source language sentence w is as follows:
first use SWD0 to generate a set of candidates for the
next word (in practice, we only consider two, for
efficiency). For each of these, use SSNT0 to greedily
unroll a full target language sentence from c+wd ,
namely c+wd+k, and rank each wd by the prob-
ability LSNT0 (w|c+ wd + k).

2.3 Evaluating the Informative Translator
Our objective is to improve meaning preserva-
tion without detracting from translation quality
in other regards (e.g. grammaticality). We
conduct our evaluations on English to German
translation, making use of publicly available

pre-trained English-German and German-English
Fairseq models. The pragmatic model we evaluate
is SSNT-CIP1 since, unlike S

SNT-IP
1 , it is not necessary

to hand-supply a distractor set of source language
sentences.

An example of the behavior of SSNT-CIP1 and
SSNT0 on of our test sentences is shown below;
SSNT0 is able to preserve the phrase “world’s eyes”,
which SSNT0 translates merely as “world”:

• Source sentence: Isolation keeps the world’s
eyes off Papua.

• Reference translation: Isolation hält die Au-
gen der Welt fern von Papua.

• SSNT0 : Die Isolation hält die Welt von Papua
fern.

• SSNT-CIP1 : Die Isolation hält die Augen der
Welt von Papua fern.

We use cycle-consistency as a measure of
meaning preservation, since the ability to recover
the original sentence requires meaning distinc-
tions not to be collapsed. In evaluating cycle-
consistency, it is important to use a separate target-
source translation mechanism than the one used
to define SSNT-CIP1 . Otherwise, the system has ac-
cess to the model which evaluates it and may im-
prove cycle-consistency without producing mean-
ingful target language sentences. For this rea-
son, we translate German sentences (produced by
SSNT0 or S

SNT-CIP
1 ) back to English with Google

Translate. To measure cycle-consistency, we use
the BLEU metric (implemented with sacreBLEU
(Post, 2018)), with the original sentence as the ref-
erence.

However, this improvement of cycle consis-
tency, especially with a high value of α, may come
at the cost of translation quality. Moreover, it is
unclear whether BLEU serves as a good metric for
evaluating sentences of a single language. To fur-
ther ensure that translation quality is not compro-
mised by SSNT-CIP1 , we evaluate BLEU scores of
the German sentences it produces. This requires
evaluation on a corpus of aligned sentences, unlike
the sentences collected from the Brown corpus in
section 19.

9While we find that SSNT-CIP1 improves cycle-consistency
for the Brown corpus over SSNT0 , we have no way to establish
whether this comes at the cost of translation quality.



441

Model Cycle Translate

SSNT0 43.35 37.42
SSNT-CIP1 47.34 38.29

Table 1: BLEU score on cycle-consistency and transla-
tion for WMT, across baseline and informative models.
Greedy unrolling and α = 0.1

We perform both evaluations (cycle-consistency
and translation) on 750 sentences10 of the 2018
English-German WMT News test-set.11 We use
greedy unrolling in all models (using beam search
is a goal for future work). For α (which represents
the trade-off between informativity and translation
quality) we use 0.1, obtained by tuning on valida-
tion data.

Results As shown in table (1), SSNT-CIP1 im-
proves over SSNT0 not only in cycle-consistency,
but in translation quality as well. This suggests
that the goal of preserving information, in the
sense defined by SSNT-CGP1 and approximated by
SSNT-CIP1 , is important for translation quality.

3 Conclusions

We identify a shortcoming of state-of-the-art
translation systems and show that a version of the
RSA framework’s informative speaker S1, adapted
to the domain of translation, alleviates this prob-
lem in a way which improves not only cycle-
consistency but translation quality as well. The
success of SSNT-CIP1 on two fairly similar languages
raises the question of whether improvements will
increase for more distant language pairs, in which
larger scale differences exist in what information
is obligatorily represented - this is a direction for
future work.

Acknowledgements

Thanks to the reviewers for their substantive com-
ments, and to Daniel Fried and Jacob Andreas for
many helpful discussions during the development
of this project.

10Our implementation of SSNT-CIP1 was not efficient, and we
could not evaluate on more sentences for reasons of time.

11http://www.statmt.org/wmt18/
translation-task.html

References
Jacob Andreas and Dan Klein. 2016. Reasoning about

pragmatics with neural listeners and speakers. In
Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
1173–1182. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2014. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.0473.

Reuben Cohn-Gordon, Noah Goodman, and Christo-
pher Potts. 2018. Pragmatically informative image
captioning with character-level inference. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Vol-
ume 2 (Short Papers), pages 439–443. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Jonas Gehring, Michael Auli, David Grangier, and
Yann N Dauphin. 2016. A convolutional encoder
model for neural machine translation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.02344.

Noah D Goodman and Michael C Frank. 2016. Prag-
matic language interpretation as probabilistic infer-
ence. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 20(11):818–
829.

Henry Kučera and Winthrop Nelson Francis. 1967.
Computational analysis of present-day American
English. Dartmouth Publishing Group.

Jiwei Li, Will Monroe, and Dan Jurafsky. 2016. A sim-
ple, fast diverse decoding algorithm for neural gen-
eration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.08562.

Junhua Mao, Jonathan Huang, Alexander Toshev, Oana
Camburu, Alan L Yuille, and Kevin Murphy. 2016.
Generation and comprehension of unambiguous ob-
ject descriptions. In Proceedings of the IEEE con-
ference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pages 11–20.

Matt Post. 2018. A call for clarity in reporting bleu
scores. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.08771.

Zhaopeng Tu, Yang Liu, Lifeng Shang, Xiaohua Liu,
and Hang Li. 2017. Neural machine translation with
reconstruction. In Thirty-First AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, pages 5998–6008.

Ramakrishna Vedantam, Samy Bengio, Kevin Murphy,
Devi Parikh, and Gal Chechik. 2017. Context-aware
captions from context-agnostic supervision. In
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
volume 3.


