



















































Lipstick on a Pig: Debiasing Methods Cover up Systematic Gender Biases in Word Embeddings But do not Remove Them


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2019, pages 609–614
Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2 - June 7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

609

Lipstick on a Pig:
Debiasing Methods Cover up Systematic Gender Biases

in Word Embeddings But do not Remove Them

Hila Gonen1 and Yoav Goldberg1,2
1Department of Computer Science, Bar-Ilan University

2Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
{hilagnn,yoav.goldberg}@gmail.com

Abstract
Word embeddings are widely used in NLP
for a vast range of tasks. It was shown that
word embeddings derived from text corpora
reflect gender biases in society. This phe-
nomenon is pervasive and consistent across
different word embedding models, causing se-
rious concern. Several recent works tackle
this problem, and propose methods for signifi-
cantly reducing this gender bias in word em-
beddings, demonstrating convincing results.
However, we argue that this removal is super-
ficial. While the bias is indeed substantially
reduced according to the provided bias defi-
nition, the actual effect is mostly hiding the
bias, not removing it. The gender bias infor-
mation is still reflected in the distances be-
tween “gender-neutralized” words in the debi-
ased embeddings, and can be recovered from
them. We present a series of experiments to
support this claim, for two debiasing meth-
ods. We conclude that existing bias removal
techniques are insufficient, and should not be
trusted for providing gender-neutral modeling.

1 Introduction

Word embeddings have become an important
component in many NLP models and are widely
used for a vast range of downstream tasks. How-
ever, these word representations have been proven
to reflect social biases (e.g. race and gender)
that naturally occur in the data used to train them
(Caliskan et al., 2017; Garg et al., 2018).

In this paper we focus on gender bias. Gender
bias was demonstrated to be consistent and per-
vasive across different word embeddings. Boluk-
basi et al. (2016b) show that using word em-
beddings for simple analogies surfaces many gen-
der stereotypes. For example, the word embed-
ding they use (word2vec embedding trained on the
Google News dataset1 (Mikolov et al., 2013)) an-

1
https://code.google.com/archive/p/word2vec/

swer the analogy “man is to computer program-
mer as woman is to x” with “x = homemaker”.
Caliskan et al. (2017) further demonstrate associ-
ation between female/male names and groups of
words stereotypically assigned to females/males
(e.g. arts vs. science). In addition, they demon-
strate that word embeddings reflect actual gender
gaps in reality by showing the correlation between
the gender association of occupation words and
labor-force participation data.

Recently, some work has been done to reduce
the gender bias in word embeddings, both as a
post-processing step (Bolukbasi et al., 2016b) and
as part of the training procedure (Zhao et al.,
2018). Both works substantially reduce the bias
with respect to the same definition: the projection
on the gender direction (i.e.

−→
he−−→she), introduced

in the former. They also show that performance on
word similarity tasks is not hurt.

We argue that current debiasing methods, which
lean on the above definition for gender bias and
directly target it, are mostly hiding the bias rather
than removing it. We show that even when dras-
tically reducing the gender bias according to this
definition, it is still reflected in the geometry of
the representation of “gender-neutral” words, and
a lot of the bias information can be recovered.2

2 Gender Bias in Word Embeddings

In what follows we refer to words and their vectors
interchangeably.

Definition and Existing Debiasing Methods
Bolukbasi et al. (2016b) define the gender bias
of a word w by its projection on the “gender di-
rection”: −→w · (−→he−−→she), assuming all vectors are
normalized. The larger a word’s projection is on

2The code for our experiments is available at
https://github.com/gonenhila/gender_
bias_lipstick.

https://code.google.com/archive/p/word2vec/
https://github.com/gonenhila/gender_bias_lipstick
https://github.com/gonenhila/gender_bias_lipstick


610

−→
he−−→she, the more biased it is. They also quantify
the bias in word embeddings using this definition
and show it aligns well with social stereotypes.

Both Bolukbasi et al. (2016b) and Zhao et al.
(2018) propose methods for debiasing word em-
beddings, substantially reducing the bias accord-
ing to the suggested definition.3

In a seminal work, Bolukbasi et al. (2016b)
use a post-processing debiasing method. Given
a word embedding matrix, they make changes to
the word vectors in order to reduce the gender bias
as much as possible for all words that are not in-
herently gendered (e.g. mother, brother, queen).
They do that by zeroing the gender projection of
each word on a predefined gender direction.4 In
addition, they also take dozens of inherently gen-
dered word pairs and explicitly make sure that all
neutral words (those that are not predefined as in-
herently gendered) are equally close to each of
the two words. This extensive, thoughtful, rigor-
ous and well executed work surfaced the problem
of bias in embeddings to the ML and NLP com-
munities, defined the concept of debiasing word
embeddings, and established the defacto metric of
measuring this bias (the gender direction). It also
provides a perfect solution to the problem of re-
moving the gender direction from non-gendered
words. However, as we show in this work, while
the gender-direction is a great indicator of bias, it
is only an indicator and not the complete manifes-
tation of this bias.

Zhao et al. (2018) take a different approach and
suggest to train debiased word embeddings from
scratch. Instead of debiasing existing word vec-
tors, they alter the loss of the GloVe model (Pen-
nington et al., 2014), aiming to concentrate most
of the gender information in the last coordinate of
each vector. This way, one can later use the word
representations excluding the gender coordinate.
They do that by using two groups of male/female
seed words, and encouraging words that belong
to different groups to differ in their last coordi-
nate. In addition, they encourage the representa-
tion of neutral-gender words (excluding the last
coordinate) to be orthogonal to the gender direc-

3Another work in this spirit is that of Zhang et al. (2018),
which uses an adversarial network to debias word embed-
dings. There, the authors rely on the same definition of gen-
der bias that considers the projection on the gender direction.
We expect similar results for this method as well, however,
we did not verify that.

4The gender direction is chosen to be the top principal
component (PC) of ten gender pair difference vectors.

tion.5 This work did a step forward by trying to
remove the bias during training rather than in post-
processing, which we believe to be the right ap-
proach. Unfortunately, it relies on the same defi-
nition that we show is insufficient.

These works implicitly define what is good gen-
der debiasing: according to Bolukbasi et al.
(2016b), there is no gender bias if each non-
explicitly gendered word in the vocabulary is in
equal distance to both elements of all explicitly
gendered pairs. In other words, if one cannot de-
termine the gender association of a word by look-
ing at its projection on any gendered pair. In Zhao
et al. (2018) the definition is similar, but restricted
to projections on the gender-direction.

Remaining bias after using debiasing methods
Both works provide very compelling results as evi-
dence of reducing the bias without hurting the per-
formance of the embeddings for standard tasks.

However, both methods and their results rely
on the specific bias definition. We claim that the
bias is much more profound and systematic, and
that simply reducing the projection of words on
a gender direction is insufficient: it merely hides
the bias, which is still reflected in similarities be-
tween “gender-neutral” words (i.e., words such
as “math” or “delicate” are in principle gender-
neutral, but in practice have strong stereotypical
gender associations, which reflect on, and are re-
flected by, neighbouring words).

Our key observation is that, almost by defi-
nition, most word pairs maintain their previous
similarity, despite their change in relation to the
gender direction. The implication of this is that
most words that had a specific bias before are still
grouped together, and apart from changes with re-
spect to specific gendered words, the word embed-
dings’ spatial geometry stays largely the same.6 In
what follows, we provide a series of experiments
that demonstrate the remaining bias in the debi-
ased embeddings.

5The gender direction is estimated during training by av-
eraging the differences between female words and their male
counterparts in a predefined set.

6We note that in the extended arxiv version, Bolukbasi
et al. (2016a) do mention this phenomenon and refer to it as
“indirect bias”. However, they do not quantify its extensive-
ness before and after debiasing, treat it mostly as a nuance,
and do not provide any methods to deal with it.



611

3 Experimental Setup

We refer to the word embeddings of the previ-
ous works as HARD-DEBIASED (Bolukbasi et al.,
2016b) and GN-GLOVE (gender-neutral GloVe)
(Zhao et al., 2018). For each debiased word em-
bedding we quantify the hidden bias with respect
to the biased version. For HARD-DEBIASED we
compare to the embeddings before applying the
debiasing procedure. For GN-GLOVE we com-
pare to embedding trained with standard GloVe on
the same corpus.7

Unless otherwise specified, we follow Boluk-
basi et al. (2016b) and use a reduced version of
the vocabulary for both word embeddings: we take
the most frequent 50,000 words and phrases and
remove words with upper-case letters, digits, or
punctuation, and words longer than 20 characters.
In addition, to avoid quantifying the bias of words
that are inherently gendered (e.g. mother, father,
queen), we remove from each vocabulary the re-
spective set of gendered words as pre-defined in
each work.8 This yeilds a vocabulary of 26,189
words for HARD-DEBIASED and of 47,698 words
for GN-GLOVE.

As explained in Section 2 and according to the
definition in previous works, we compute the bias
of a word by taking its projection on the gender
direction:

−→
he−−→she.

In order to quantify the association between sets
of words, we follow Caliskan et al. (2017) and use
their Word Embedding Association Test (WEAT):
consider two sets of target words (e.g., male and
female professions) and two sets of attribute words
(e.g., male and female names). A permutation test
estimates the probability that a random permuta-
tion of the target words would produce equal or
greater similarities to the attribute sets.

4 Experiments and Results

Male- and female-biased words cluster together
We take the most biased words in the vocab-
ulary according to the original bias (500 male-

7We use the embeddings provided by Bolukbasi et
al. (2016b) in https://github.com/tolga-b/
debiaswe and by Zhao et al. (2018) in https://
github.com/uclanlp/gn_glove.

8For HARD-DEBIASED we use first three lists from:
https://github.com/tolga-b/debiaswe/
tree/master/data and for GN-GLOVE we use the
two lists from: https://github.com/uclanlp/gn_
glove/tree/master/wordlist

(a) Clustering for HARD-DEBIASED embedding, before (left
hand-side) and after (right hand-side) debiasing.

(b) Clustering for GN-GLOVE embedding, before (left hand-
side) and after (right hand-side) debiasing.

Figure 1: Clustering the 1,000 most biased words, be-
fore and after debiasing, for both models.

biased and 500 female-biased9), and cluster them
into two clusters using k-means. For the HARD-
DEBIASED embedding, the clusters align with
gender with an accuracy of 92.5% (according to
the original bias of each word), compared to an ac-
curacy of 99.9% with the original biased version.
For the GN-GLOVE embedding, we get an accu-
racy of 85.6%, compared to an accuracy of 100%
with the biased version. These results suggest that
indeed much of the bias information is still embed-
ded in the representation after debiasing. Figure 1
shows the tSNE (Maaten and Hinton, 2008) pro-
jection of the vectors before and after debiasing,
for both models.

Bias-by-projection correlates to bias-by-
neighbours This clustering of gendered words
indicates that while we cannot directly “observe”
the bias (i.e. the word “nurse” will no longer
be closer to explicitly marked feminine words)
the bias is still manifested by the word being
close to socially-marked feminine words, for
example “nurse” being close to “receptionist”,
“caregiver” and “teacher”. This suggests a new
mechanism for measuring bias: the percentage of
male/female socially-biased words among the k
nearest neighbors of the target word.10

We measure the correlation of this new bias
9highest on the two lists for HARD-DEBIASED are ’pe-

tite’, ’mums’, ’bra’, ’breastfeeding’ and ’sassy’ for female
and ’rookie’, ’burly’, ’hero’, ’training camp’ and ’journey-
man’ for male. Lowest on the two lists are ’watchdogs’, ’wa-
tercolors’, ’sew’, ’burqa’, ’diets’ for female and ’teammates’,
’playable’, ’grinning’, ’knee surgery’, ’impersonation’ for
male.

10While the social bias associated with a word cannot be
observed directly in the new embeddings, we can approxi-
mate it using the gender-direction in non-debiased embed-
dings.

https://github.com/tolga-b/debiaswe
https://github.com/tolga-b/debiaswe
https://github.com/uclanlp/gn_glove
https://github.com/uclanlp/gn_glove
https://github.com/tolga-b/debiaswe/tree/master/data
https://github.com/tolga-b/debiaswe/tree/master/data
https://github.com/uclanlp/gn_glove/tree/master/wordlist
https://github.com/uclanlp/gn_glove/tree/master/wordlist


612

(a) The plots for HARD-DEBIASED embedding, before
(top) and after (bottom) debiasing.

(b) The plots for GN-GLOVE embedding, before (top)
and after (bottom) debiasing.

Figure 2: The number of male neighbors for each profession as a function of its original bias, before and after
debiasing. We show only a limited number of professions on the plot to make it readable.

measure with the original bias measure. For the
HARD-DEBIASED embedding we get a Pearson
correlation of 0.686 (compared to a correlation of
0.741 when checking neighbors according to the
biased version). For the GN-GLOVE embedding
we get a Pearson correlation of 0.736 (compared
to 0.773). All these correlations are statistically
significant with p-values of 0.

Professions We consider the list of professions
used in Bolukbasi et al. (2016b) and Zhao et al.
(2018)11 in light of the neighbours-based bias def-
inition. Figure 2 plots the professions, with axis X
being the original bias and axis Y being the num-
ber of male neighbors, before and after debiasing.
For both methods, there is a clear correlation be-
tween the two variables.

We observe a Pearson correlation of 0.606
(compared to a correlation of 0.747 when check-
ing neighbors according to the biased version) for
HARD-DEBIASED and 0.792 (compared to 0.820)
for GN-GLOVE. All these correlations are signif-
icant with p-values < 1× 10−30.

Association between female/male and
female/male-stereotyped words We replicate
the three gender-related association experiments
from Caliskan et al. (2017). For these experiments
we use the full vocabulary since some of the
words are not included in the reduced one.

11https://github.com/tolga-b/debiaswe/
tree/master/data/professions.json

The first experiment evaluates the association
between female/male names and family and ca-
reer words. The second one evaluates the associ-
ation between female/male concepts and arts and
mathematics words. Since the inherently gendered
words (e.g. girl, her, brother) in the second ex-
periment are handled well by the debiasing mod-
els we opt to use female and male names instead.
The third one evaluates the association between fe-
male/male concepts and arts and science words.
Again, we use female and male names instead.12

For the HARD-DEBIASED embedding, we get a
p-value of 0 for the first experiment, 0.00016 for
the second one, and 0.0467 for the third. For the
GN-GLOVE embedding, we get p-values of 7.7×
10−5, 0.00031 and 0.0064 for the first, second and
third experiments, respectively.

Classifying previously female- and male-biased
words Can a classifier learn to generalize from
some gendered words to others based only on their

12All word lists are taken from Caliskan et al. (2017): First
experiment: Female names: Amy, Joan, Lisa, Sarah, Di-
ana, Kate, Ann, Donna. Male names: John, Paul, Mike,
Kevin, Steve, Greg, Jeff, Bill. Family words: home, par-
ents, children, family, cousins, marriage, wedding, relatives.
Career words: executive, management, professional, corpo-
ration, salary, office, business, career. Second experiment:
Arts Words: poetry, art, dance, literature, novel, symphony,
drama, sculpture. Math words: math, algebra, geometry, cal-
culus, equations, computation, numbers, addition. Third ex-
periment: Arts words: poetry, art, Shakespeare, dance, lit-
erature, novel, symphony, drama. Science words: science,
technology, physics, chemistry, Einstein, NASA, experiment,
astronomy.

https://github.com/tolga-b/debiaswe/tree/master/data/professions.json
https://github.com/tolga-b/debiaswe/tree/master/data/professions.json


613

representations? We consider the 5,000 most bi-
ased words according to the original bias (2,500
from each gender), train an RBF-kernel SVM clas-
sifier on a random sample of 1,000 of them (500
from each gender) to predict the gender, and evalu-
ate its generalization on the remaining 4,000. For
the HARD-DEBIASED embedding, we get an ac-
curacy of 88.88%, compared to an accuracy of
98.25% with the non-debiased version. For the
GN-GLOVE embedding, we get an accuracy of
96.53%, compared to an accuracy of 98.65% with
the non-debiased version.

5 Discussion and Conclusion

The experiments described in the previous section
reveal a systematic bias found in the embeddings,
which is independent of the gender direction. We
observe that semantically related words still main-
tain gender bias both in their similarities, and in
their representation. Concretely, we find that:

1. Words with strong previous gender bias (with
the same direction) are easy to cluster to-
gether.

2. Words that receive implicit gender from so-
cial stereotypes (e.g. receptionist, hair-
dresser, captain) still tend to group with other
implicit-gender words of the same gender,
similar as for non-debiased word embed-
dings.

3. The implicit gender of words with prevalent
previous bias is easy to predict based on their
vectors alone.

The implications are alarming: while suggested
debiasing methods work well at removing the gen-
der direction, the debiasing is mostly superficial.
The bias stemming from world stereotypes and
learned from the corpus is ingrained much more
deeply in the embeddings space.

We note that the real concern from biased repre-
sentations is not the association of a concept with
words such as “he”, “she”, “boy”, “girl” nor being
able to perform gender-stereotypical word analo-
gies. While these are nice “party tricks”, algo-
rithmic discrimination is more likely to happen
by associating one implicitly gendered term with
other implicitly gendered terms, or picking up on
gender-specific regularities in the corpus by learn-
ing to condition on gender-biased words, and gen-
eralizing to other gender-biased words (i.e., a re-
sume classifier that will learn to favor male over

female candidates based on stereotypical cues in
an existing—and biased—resume dataset, despite
of being “oblivious” to gender). Our experiments
show that such classifiers would have ample op-
portunities to pick up on such cues also after debi-
asing w.r.t the gender-direction.

The crux of the issue is that the gender-direction
provides a way to measure the gender-association
of a word, but does not determine it. Debiasing
methods which directly target the gender-direction
are for the most part merely hiding the gender bias
and not removing it. The popular definitions used
for quantifying and removing bias are insufficient,
and other aspects of the bias should be taken into
consideration as well.

Acknowledgments

This work is supported by the Israeli Science
Foundation (grant number 1555/15), and by the Is-
raeli ministry of Science, Technology and Space
through the Israeli-French Maimonide Coopera-
tion program.

References

Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Zou,
Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam Kalai. 2016a.
Man is to computer programmer as woman is
to homemaker? debiasing word embeddings.
arXiv:1607.06520.

Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y Zou,
Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam T Kalai. 2016b.
Man is to computer programmer as woman is to
homemaker? debiasing word embeddings. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems.

Aylin Caliskan, Joanna J Bryson, and Arvind
Narayanan. 2017. Semantics derived automatically
from language corpora contain human-like biases.
Science, 356(6334):183–186.

Nikhil Garg, Londa Schiebinger, Dan Jurafsky, and
James Zou. 2018. Word embeddings quantify
100 years of gender and ethnic stereotypes. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
115(16):E3635–E3644.

Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. 2008.
Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine
learning research, 9(Nov):2579–2605.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jef-
frey Dean. 2013. Efficient estimation of word
representations in vector space. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1301.3781.



614

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D
Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word
representation. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Brian Hu Zhang, Blake Lemoine, and Margaret
Mitchell. 2018. Mitigating unwanted biases with
adversarial learning. In Proceedings of the 2018
AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society.

Jieyu Zhao, Yichao Zhou, Zeyu Li, Wei Wang, and Kai-
Wei Chang. 2018. Learning gender-neutral word
embeddings. In Proceedings of EMNLP, pages
4847–4853.


