




































"President Vows to Cut <Taxes> Hair": Dataset and Analysis of Creative Text Editing for Humorous Headlines


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2019, pages 133–142
Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2 - June 7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

133

“President Vows to Cut Taxes Hair”:
Dataset and Analysis of Creative Text Editing for Humorous Headlines

Nabil Hossain
Dept. Computer Science
University of Rochester

Rochester, NY
nhossain@cs.rochester.edu

John Krumm and Michael Gamon
Microsoft Research AI
Microsoft Corporation

Redmond, WA
{jckrumm,mgamon}@microsoft.com

Abstract

We introduce, release, and analyze a new
dataset, called Humicroedit, for research in
computational humor. Our publicly available
data consists of regular English news head-
lines paired with versions of the same head-
lines that contain simple replacement edits de-
signed to make them funny. We carefully
curated crowdsourced editors to create funny
headlines and judges to score a to a total of
15,095 edited headlines, with five judges per
headline. The simple edits, usually just a
single word replacement, mean we can apply
straightforward analysis techniques to deter-
mine what makes our edited headlines humor-
ous. We show how the data support classic the-
ories of humor, such as incongruity, superior-
ity, and setup/punchline. Finally, we develop
baseline classifiers that can predict whether or
not an edited headline is funny, which is a first
step toward automatically generating humor-
ous headlines as an approach to creating topi-
cal humor.

1 Introduction

Humor detection and generation continue to be
challenging AI problems. While there have been
some advances in automatic humor recognition
(Khodak et al., 2017; Davidov et al., 2010; Bar-
bieri and Saggion, 2014; Reyes et al., 2012; Cat-
tle and Ma, 2018; Bertero and Fung, 2016; Yang
et al., 2015), computerized humor generation has
seen less progress (Binsted et al., 1997; Stock and
Strapparava, 2003; Petrović and Matthews, 2013).
This is not surprising, given that humor involves
in-depth world-knowledge, common sense, and
the ability to perceive relationships across enti-
ties and objects at various levels of understanding.
Even humans often fail at being funny or recog-
nizing humor.

A big hindrance to progress on humor re-
search is the scarcity of public datasets. Further-

(a) The Headline Editing Task.

(b) The Headline Grading Task.

Figure 1: Snapshots of the headline editing and grading
interfaces. Only the underlined tokens are replaceable.

more, the existing datasets address specific hu-
mor templates, such as funny one-liners (Mihal-
cea and Strapparava, 2006) and filling in Mad
Libs R© (Hossain et al., 2017). Creating a humor
corpus is non-trivial, however, because it requires
(i) human annotation, and (ii) a clear definition of
humor to achieve good inter-annotator agreement.

We introduce Humicroedit, a novel dataset for
research in computational humor. First, we collect
original news headlines from news media posted
on Reddit (reddit.com). Then, we qualify ex-
pert annotators from Amazon Mechanical Turk
(mturk.com) to (i) generate humor by applying
small edits to these headlines, and to (ii) judge the
humor in these edits. Our resulting dataset con-
tains 15,095 edited news headlines and their nu-
merically assessed humor. Screenshots of our two
annotation tasks are shown in Figure 1, and Ta-
ble 1 shows some of these annotated headlines.

This new dataset enables various humor tasks,
such as: (i) understanding what makes an edited
headline funny, (ii) predicting whether an edited
headline is funny, (iii) ranking multiple edits of the
same headline on a funniness scale, (iv) generating
humorous news headlines, and (v) recommending
funny headlines personalized to a reader.

Our dataset presents several opportunities for
computational humor research since:



134

• Headlines do not have specific templates.
• Headlines contain very few words, but convey a

lot of information.
• A deeper understanding of world-knowledge

and common-sense is needed to completely un-
derstand what makes a headline funny.
• Humorous headlines are often generated using

several layers of cognition and reasoning.
• Despite us carefully qualifying annotators, their

knowledge, preferences, bias and stance to-
wards information presented in headlines influ-
ence whether they perceive a potentially funny
headline as humorous, offensive, confusing, etc.

The presence of these factors suggests that thor-
ough humor comprehension in our dataset requires
the development of NLP tools that are not only
robust at pattern recognition but also capable of
deeper semantic understanding and reasoning. As
an initial exploration of this proposition, we per-
form various data analysis against the background
of humor theories, and we train and examine clas-
sifiers to detect humorous edited headlines in our
data.

2 The Humor Dataset

In this section, we describe how we gathered our
set of original headlines, directed editors to make
them funny, employed graders to assess the level
of humor in the modified headlines, and created
the Humicroedit dataset.

2.1 Task Description
Our goal is to study how humor is generated by
applying short edits to headlines. News headlines
are ripe for humor, since they convey rich informa-
tion using only a few words. While the short form
may seem to limit context, readers have rich back-
ground information in the form of their existing
world knowledge, which helps them understand
the headline. Allowing only short edits means we
can apply focused analysis on the tipping point be-
tween regular and funny.

Therefore, our task is to edit a headline to make
it funny, where an edit is defined as the insertion of
a single-word noun or verb to replace an existing
entity or single-word noun or verb. Note that our
rules do not allow:

• Addition/removal of a whole noun/verb phrase,
except removal of noun phrases that are entities
(e.g., One World, Virtual Reality).

• Removal of sub-tokens within entities (e.g., re-
placing only “States” in “United States”).

The decision to strictly avoid edits of other parts-
of-speech (POS) words was motivated by the ob-
servation in our pilot experiments that those edits
did not provide enough variety of humor. For ex-
ample, when substituting adjectives and adverbs,
our editors mostly used antonyms or superlatives.
Switching nouns and verbs, on the other hand, en-
ables the introduction of diverse novel connections
between entities and actions.

To identify the replaceable entities, we apply
named entity recognition (NER) and POS tag-
ging using the Stanford CoreNLP toolkit (Man-
ning et al., 2014). We allow for replacement of
only those entities that are well-known, according
to the Microsoft Knowledge Base1. This improves
the likelihood that the terms are familiar to both
headline editors and humor judges. We allow a
noun (or verb) to be replaced if it is an unambigu-
ous noun (or verb) in WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998)
(i.e., has a single WordNet POS). Editors are only
allowed to replace one of the selected replaceable
words/entities in the headline.

We refer to a single-term substitution of this
type as a “micro-edit”, and we will use this term
interchangeably with “edit” in the remainder of
this paper. Micro-edits approach the smallest
change that can induce humor in text, letting us
focus intently on what causes humor.

2.2 Collecting Headlines

We build our dataset from popular news headlines
posted on the social media site Reddit. This strat-
egy steers us towards a set of headlines that is part
of general discourse, rather than being only of spe-
cialized interest, which would make editing them
for humor difficult.

We obtain all Reddit posts from the popular sub-
reddits r/worldnews and r/politics from
January 2017 to May 2018 using Google Big-
Query2. Each of these posts is a headline from a
news source. We remove duplicate headlines and
headlines that have fewer than 4 words or more
than 20 words. Finally, we keep only the headlines
from the 25 English news sources that contribute
the most headlines in the Reddit data, resulting in
a total of 287,076 news headlines.

1http://blogs.bing.com/search/2013/03/21/understand-
your-world-with-bing/

2https://cloud.google.com/bigquery



135

ID Original Headline Substitute Grade Prediction
1 Kushner to visit Mexico following latest Trump tirades therapist 2.8 8
2 Trump wants you to take his tweets seriously. His aides don’t hair 2.8 4
3 Essential Politics: California’s hottest congressional races, ranked mistresses 2.8 8
4 Hillary Clinton Staffers Considered Campaign Slogan ‘Because It’s Her Turn’ fault 2.8 8
5 Trump Vows North Korea Could be Met With ‘Fire and Fury’ marshmallows 2.6 4
6 Here’s how Wall Street is reacting to Trump’s tax plan sesame 2.4 4
7 Swedish prosecutor says truck attack suspect has not spoken mime 2.4 8
8 Steve Bannon questioned by special counsel kindergarteners 2.4 8
9 New survey shows majority of US troops has ‘unfavorable’ view of Obama’s years ears 2.2 8

10 The Latest: BBC cuts ties with Myanmar TV station pies 1.8 N/A (train)
11 Bill Maher: “I doubt that Trump will be president the full term” hope 0.2 8
12 Malawi arrests 140 in clampdown after ‘vampirism’ killings rumors 0.2 8
13 Rising Dem star announces engagement to same-sex partner gay 0.0 8
14 Taylor Swift claims Denver DJ sexually assaulted her back in 2013 hen 0.0 8
15 4 soldiers killed in Nagorno-Karabakh fighting: Officials rabbits 0.0 4

Table 1: Some headlines in our dataset and their edits, mean funniness grades, and accuracy of funniness prediction
by LSTM. We acknowledge that some of these are offensive, but we use them for analysis in Section 4.1.

2.3 Annotation

For our data annotation tasks, we use Mechanical
Turk workers who (i) are located in the U.S., (ii)
have a HIT approval rate greater than 97%, and
(iii) have more than 10,000 HITs approved. To en-
sure high data quality, we further qualify distinct
sets of (i) turker judges for recognizing humor in
an edited headline, and (ii) editors adept at editing
headlines to generate humor.

2.3.1 Qualifying Humor Judges
We manually collected a set of 20 original news
headlines and edited each of them such that some
edits are funny and some are not. We asked several
members of our research group to assess the fun-
niness of each edited headline using the following
integer scale developed by Hossain et al. (2017):

0 - Not funny 1 - Slightly funny
2 - Moderately funny 3 - Funny

We instructed internal and turker judges (i) to
grade objectively regardless of their own stance to-
wards issues, entities and information expressed in
the headline, and (ii) to grade an edited headline as
funny if they believed it would be funny to a large
audience. Further, we instructed judges to grade
an edited headline as funny if either the headline
was funny by itself regardless of the original head-
line, or the headline was only funny when consid-
ering how the original headline was changed.

We labeled the ground truth funniness of each
of these 20 edited qualifier headlines as its mean
internal judge grade. For the qualification task,
we classified as funny any edited headline with a
mean grade of 1.0 or above.

Next, we launched the same task on Mechanical

Turk until we found 150 qualified judges (60% of
the candidates). Turkers were qualified if (i) they
had 3 or fewer classification errors according to
our 1.0 threshold, and (ii) on average, their grades
were within 0.6 of the mean internal judge grades.

We calculated the inter-annotator agreement
for assigning headline funniness grades using the
Krippendorff’s α interval metric (Krippendorff,
1970) — a real number in the range [−1, 1],
with -1, 0 and 1, respectively, implying complete
disagreement, no consensus and full agreement.
The α for the internal judges and qualified turker
judges were, respectively, 0.57 and 0.64.

2.3.2 Qualifying Humor Editors
For editor qualification, we randomly sampled 60
headlines, split into 6 separate Mechanical Turk
tasks of 10 headlines each. Candidate editors were
asked to complete one of these tasks, which was to
make each headline as funny as possible to a gen-
eral audience using a micro-edit. Task participants
were instructed not to apply the following edits:

• Cheap humor generation techniques: add pro-
fanity, slang, bathroom/potty humor, crude sex-
ual references or informal language.
• Squeeze multiple words into one (e.g., House-

cat, JumpedOverWall).

Next, we used 7 qualified judges to assess the fun-
niness of each edited headline of each candidate.
We qualified all candidates whose mean funniness
of edited headlines was above 0.8 or the task’s av-
erage headline’s funniness grade, whichever was
higher. In total, we obtained 100 qualified editors
(57.5% of the candidates) who met our expecta-
tions in their ability to create funny headlines.



136

2.4 Data Collection and Quality Control

For our final dataset, we randomly sampled a total
of 5,170 news headlines from our Reddit dataset,
obtaining roughly an equal number of headlines
from each news source. We asked 3 editors to edit
each headline and 5 judges to grade each edited
headline. Multiple micro-edits of the same head-
line allow us to compare different edits in terms
of their effectiveness for generating humor, which
we leave for future work.

To avoid turker exhaustion and decision fatigue,
we performed the annotation task over a series of
mini-batches launched at least 24 hours apart. Af-
ter each round of editing, we applied tools to (i)
check the edits for spelling mistakes which we
manually corrected, and (ii) to find and eliminate
inserted tokens that were a concatenation of two or
more words (e.g., selftanner). To allow diversity
in annotations, we applied a maximum HIT limit
for annotators per batch. After each batch was
completed, we temporarily suspended those edi-
tors and judges who had done significantly more
HITs than the rest, until the others caught up.

Lastly, as we obtained more and more anno-
tated data, the editors started employing the same
humor generation strategies (e.g., inserting words
from a small vocabulary). Consequently, judges
saw repeated, identical edits, so the element of
surprise was gone, and the judges were grading
fewer humorous edited headlines as funny. We
addressed this by randomly sampling a set of edi-
tors and judges for each batch, obtaining new ed-
itors and judges over time, and removing those
editors who had done a majority of the HITs but
whose edits’ average funniness grade fell below a
threshold (=0.7) after they participated in a batch.
We also removed judges who repeatedly assigned
very low funniness grades compared to the 4 other
judges for the same edit. The judges’ agree-
ment score based on α was 0.20, showing modest
agreement considering the factors above and oth-
ers such as judges’ personal preferences, bias, po-
litical stance, etc. which make consensus difficult.

Our Humicroedit dataset includes 15,095
unique edited headlines graded for funniness. For
annotating a single headline, we paid 10 US cents
to editors and 2.5 US cents to judges. There were
also small costs for qualification. Our total cost
for obtaining the dataset is about USD 4,5003.

3Dataset: cs.rochester.edu/u/nhossain/humicroedit.html.
Total cost is USD 4,500, not USD 4, 5003 (joke!)

Figure 2: Histograms of humor potentials of headlines
and mean funniness of unique edited headlines. The
humor potential of a headline is the mean funniness
score over all edits, shown as the red curve. The blue
curve shows the histogram of the mean score of each
distinct edited headline.

3 Humor Analysis

In this section, we analyze what types of micro-
edits are effective at creating humor in our dataset,
and we discuss our findings against the back-
ground of humor theories.

Figure 2 shows the histogram of the mean rat-
ing of each edited headline. While the majority
of the headlines achieve slight to moderate lev-
els of humor, some of them appear inherently dif-
ficult to make humorous by micro-editing. We
noticed that editors encountered difficulty making
headlines funny when the headlines had very neg-
ative themes, such as shootings, death, etc., and
when they focused on information less likely to be
known by a general audience (e.g., relatively un-
known person, an insignificant political issue).

3.1 Humor Generation Strategies
By manual inspection, we can gain insights into
humor generation strategies employed by our edi-
tors, which we discuss with references to Table 1:

1. Using a word that forms a meaningful n-gram
with the adjacent words (e.g., ID 5: Fire and
Fury marshmallows; ID 6: Wall sesame street).

2. Connection between replaced word and the re-
placement: replacements that are semantically
distant from (e.g., ID 1: Mexico therapist) or
similar in pronunciation to (e.g., ID 10: ties
pies) to the replaced word.

3. Using a word that makes a strong connection
with an entity in the headline (e.g., ID 2: Trump
and hair; ID 9: Obama and ears).

4. Creating sarcasm (ID: 11).
5. Belittling an entity or noun in the headline

(e.g., ID 4: Hillary Clinton’s turn fault; ID 9:
Obama’s years ears).



137

6. Tension suppression4: making a serious head-
line silly (e.g., IDs 5 and 9).

7. Inserting words that generate incongruity
(common among most examples in Table 1).

8. Setup and punchline: let the headline build up
towards an expected ending, and then change
words towards the end to produce a coherent
but surprising ending (e.g., IDs 3, 4 and 5).

3.2 Clusters of Replacement Words

Each micro-edit used a new replacement word to
change the headline. We clustered these replace-
ment words using their GloVe word vectors (Pen-
nington et al., 2014) and k-means clustering, with
k = 20. Our manually-generated cluster names
are shown in Table 2, where the clusters are or-
dered by the mean funniness score of the edited
headlines whose replacement word is in the clus-
ter. For each cluster, we show the frequency with
which the cluster was used for replacement words
and frequent sample words from the cluster.

We can compare our automatically generated
clusters with those of Westbury and Hollis (2018).
They manually created six clusters from the 200
funniest, single words in Engelthaler and Hills
(2018) and then they added more words algorith-
mically. Four of their six manually curated classes
have direct correspondences to our automatically
curated classes: sex, insults, bodily functions, and
animals. We did not find an equivalent to their
profanity class, because we instructed our editors
to avoid profanity. There is also a party class that
we do not have. Overall, though, we find good
agreement between their manually curated classes
and some of our automatically generated clusters,
leading us to believe that our clusters are meaning-
fully representative of humor generation strategies
for our task.

3.3 Support for Theories of Humor

Our rated headlines give us an opportunity to ex-
plore theories of humor in a systematic way. We
find, in general, that these theories are supported
by our data.

3.3.1 Length of Joke
Although some linguists argue that jokes should
make economical use of words (Tomoioagă,
2015), Ritchie (2004) argues that jokes often have
extra information, which can make a joke funnier.

4This is also known as the relief theory of humor.

Figure 3: Short headlines did not lend themselves to
high humor scores, while longer headlines generally
had more potential for humor. The blue line shows the
raw distribution of headline lengths in our data, and the
red line shows the mean funniness score over different
lengths.

While humorous headlines form a special niche of
jokes, we observed that longer headlines generally
had higher humor potential.

Figure 3 shows that the population of our col-
lected headlines from Reddit has a length distri-
bution with a peak at 10 words and a long tail to
the right. The least funny edited headlines are the
shortest, and the most funny are the longest. This
makes sense since very short headlines (4-5 words
long) barely have enough contextual information
to exploit to make a humorous edit, whereas head-
lines that have very rich contexts generally allow
editors more flexibility to generate humor. We
note that Dunbar et al. (2016) also found that
longer jokes are funnier, but that some jokes could
be too complicated to be funny.

We can also examine the number and propor-
tion of replaceable words and how these num-
bers affect funniness. In our dataset, the number
of replaceable words ranged between 1 and 12,
and funniness grades of micro-edits were signifi-
cantly lower at the two extremes. Editors appar-
ently had difficulty generating humor when they
were severely constrained in choosing a word to
replace, or when they had too many choices for
replacement. However, edited headlines with a
higher proportion of replaceable words were gen-
erally funnier, as shown in Table 3. This suggests
that allowing editors more freedom in choosing
words from the headline to edit results in better
humor, or that high proportion of nouns, entities
and verbs in the headline increases the chance of
successful humor generation.

3.3.2 Incongruity for Humor
We see evidence for the incongruity theory of hu-
mor (Morreall, 2016). Jokes that use incongruity



138

Class Label Funniness Frequency % 5 Frequent Sample Words

clothes and fashion 1.213 5.77 hair, pants, haircut, fashion, underwear
sex 1.209 3.52 orgy, spank, mistress, porn, striptease
food (savory) 1.113 3.89 cheese, sandwich, chicken, potato, tacos
eating 1.048 4.18 food, pizza, dinner, restaurant, eat
fantasy characters 1.036 4.94 clown, aliens, penguin, robot, ghost
music and shows 1.023 3.85 dance, circus, music, sings, mime
bodily functions 1.021 3.11 diet, brain, odor, dandruff, pimple
food (snacks) 1.017 5.36 pumpkin, cake, vodka, cookies, candy
animals 1.000 9.22 dog, monkey, puppy, cats, duck
various nouns (1) 0.935 5.82 toupee, hoedown, jaywalking, barbers, seance
jobs and roles 0.890 4.95 children, wife, baby, mother, barber
insults 0.876 3.36 clowns, tantrum, trolls, racist, whining
emotional 0.868 7.74 love, hug, jokes, fights, cry
leisure 0.862 6.01 vacation, shopping, tanning, hotel, pool
sports 0.856 3.03 horse, game, bowling, golf, wrestling
various nouns (2) 0.850 4.90 water, nose, balloon, gas, smoke
human deficiencies 0.803 4.21 lies, ignorance, humor, boredom, stupidity
media 0.787 4.20 tweet, movie, book, video, television
aspirations 0.726 7.28 party, date, people, money, model
corrupted 0.712 4.48 president, bribes, politicians, destroy, prison

Table 2: Twenty clusters of replacement words with manually determined cluster labels.

Repl. Words Prop. 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Mean Funniness 0.87 0.92 0.95 0.94 1.0

Table 3: Edited headlines were judged funnier when
they had a larger proportion of replaceable words.

aim to violate an expectation, with the expectation
normally set up by the joke itself. We test in-
congruity by examining the relationship between
the replacement words chosen by our editors and
words in the original headline using cosine dis-
tances between their GloVe vectors. If incongruity
is important, we expect the replacement word to be
distant from the headline’s original words.

The results of this analysis are shown in Fig-
ure 4. Our approach involved computing the cor-
relations between mean funniness scores of edited
headlines and different GloVe distances between
their replacement words and the other words in the
headline serving as context. In order to sharpen
the analysis, we looked at subsets of headlines
with extreme funniness scores. For instance, the
left-most data points in Figure 4 pertain only to
those edited headlines that are in the top and bot-
tom 5% of mean scores, which filters out headlines
whose scores are in the middle.

The four curves higher on the plot show a
relatively high correlation between humor scores

Figure 4: Correlations of word vector based cosine dis-
tances with mean funniness at various dataset sizes. We
measure distance (and its absolute value) between the
replaced word(s) and the added word, and also their
minimum, maximum and average distances with the set
of other words in the headline.

and the cosine distance between the added word
(“add” in legend) and the replaced word (“repl” in
legend) or the other words in the headline (“cntx”
in legend). This suggests that incongruity leads
to humor. The three lower curves show there is
not a strong correlation between humor and the
distance between the original, replaced word the
other words in the headline. Finally, smaller, less
humor-ambiguous data leads to stronger positive
correlations, which suggests that higher incon-
gruity leads to more quality humor.



139

Figure 5: The joke profile graph for setup and punch-
line humor, showing that word substitutions toward the
end of the headline normally lead to better humor.

3.3.3 Setup and Punchline

We specifically studied whether the “setup and
punchline” (Rochmawati, 2017) approach is used
in funny headline generation, where the humor
comes toward the end of the joke after a setup
at the beginning. This has been verified numeri-
cally for funny cartoon captions by Shahaf et al.
(2015). For our analysis, we construct the joke
profile graph, shown in Figure 5. It shows the
proportion of time the editors substituted a word
at each relative word position bin compared to if
they randomly chose a word to substitute. Specif-
ically, the red curve in the plot shows the propor-
tion of replacement word locations if they were
chosen randomly from those available in the edit-
ing task. The green curve shows the proportion of
word locations actually chosen by our editors, and
the blue curve shows the difference. We see that
the blue line rises monotonically toward the end
of the headline, meaning that editors tend to pre-
fer replacing words later in the headline. The plot
also shows the average funniness grade as a dotted
line as a function of the position of the replace-
ment word. It rises dramatically toward the end,
showing that the funniest headlines were generally
those with a replacement word toward the end.

3.3.4 Superiority for Humor

Jokes often express our feelings of superiority over
someone else (Morreall, 2016). This can lead to
frequent use of negative sentiment in jokes, as
found by Mihalcea and Pulman (2007) in their
analysis of humorous texts. We find similar sup-
port in our clusters of replacement words in Ta-
ble 2, where the clusters labeled insults, human
deficiencies, and corrupted are all comprised of
words that tend to denigrate other people, account-
ing for about 12% of the substitute words inserted
by our editors.

4 Humorous Headline Detection

In this section, we develop baseline classifiers to
infer whether an edited headline is funny. Given
our dataset, there are three possible combinations
of information that we can use to detect humor:

1. Using only the edited headline to predict
whether it is funny or not.

2. Using only the original headline to predict its
potential for funniness.

3. Using both original and edited headlines to
jointly predict resulting funniness.

We address the first of these scenarios. A classi-
fier of this type could be used in a generate-and-
test setting to create humorous headlines by trying
different micro-edits.

To map the range of observed funniness grades
(see Figure 2) to the funny/not-funny classes, we
sort our full dataset in decreasing order of mean
funniness5 scores, and we take the top X% of the
data from each end, at size intervals of 10%. Note
that each train/test split has an equal number of
funny and not-funny headlines, establishing a 50%
majority class baseline for accuracy.

We first trained a number of non-neural clas-
sifiers (logistic regression, random forest, SVM),
using two feature sets: n-gram features (1, 2 and
3-grams combined) and features based on GloVe
embeddings6 as shown in Figure 4. We use 80% of
the data for training and 20% for testing. We op-
timized hyperparameters for accuracy on 10-fold
cross validation on the training set. The random
forest classifier consistently performed best, so we
only report its test set performance.

We also applied a neural baseline model us-
ing a single-layer bi-directional LSTM (Hochre-
iter and Schmidhuber, 1997) with 16 hidden units,
a dropout of 0.5, and GloVe pre-trained embed-
ding of the sequence of words in the edited head-
line. The training set was further split into 80%-
20% splits for training and validation. We used a
mini-batch size of 32 with up to 25 epochs to train
our model, optimizing for cross-entropy.

Table 5 shows the results obtained with our clas-
sifiers. LSTM performs better than random forest
with either n-gram (Rf-ngram) or GloVe features
(Rf-Glv), achieving our best accuracy of 68.54%

5We then sort by increasing standard deviations of grades
to further rank headlines which tie on funniness, as lower
standard deviation indicates stronger judge agreement.

6This is our only feature set that uses the replaced word.



140

Bin 0-.4 .4-.8 .8-1.2 1.2-1.6 1.6-2.0 2.0-2.4 2.4-3.0
Acc. 71.5 61.1 52.0 61.0 68.6 68.3 76.2

Table 4: LSTM accuracy for distinct grade bins (upper-
bounds are inclusive) on the test set for X = 40.

using X = 10. We suspect that the reason for the
LSTM’s superior performance is that it learns pre-
dictive interactions between the semantics of the
headline’s words (via the GloVe embeddings) that
trigger the humor7.

Table 5 also shows that accuracy generally de-
creases as X increases, which is expected since
higher X implies a smaller separation between
funny and not-funny classes, making classifica-
tion harder. This is further corroborated by the
observation that annotator-agreement scores (also
shown in Table 5) decrease similarly with increas-
ing X , indicating that funny and not-funny classes
are easier to distinguish at the extreme ends of the
dataset for both humans and machines alike.

4.1 LSTM Classification Analysis
We now investigate the test-set performance of
the LSTM trained on the dataset obtained using
X = 40, the largest of our experimental datasets
for which the class boundaries are distinct.

To analyze how well the classifier predicts the
extremes in the test set, we obtained classifica-
tion accuracy on distinct mean grade bins, pre-
sented in Table 4. The LSTM is able to distinguish
the far extremes (≤0.4 and >1.6) of the test set
much more convincingly than the headlines with
mean grades in the interval (0.4,1.6]. We found a
slightly negative correlation between classification
accuracy and standard deviation of grades. Using
additional judges for headlines with high standard
deviation of grades would possibly improve anno-
tator agreement and classification accuracy.

The LSTM achieved a significantly lower accu-
racy when an entity (61.8%) was replaced by the
micro-edit compared to when a noun (64.5%) or
a verb (65.5%) was replaced. For 5 of the 7 bins
in Table 4, the entity-replaced headline classifica-
tion accuracy was lower than when the other two
types were replaced, with the LSTM only achiev-
ing an accuracy of 47.9% on the (0.8,1.2] bin for
entity-replaced headlines. Although the classifier
is never shown what has been replaced, it is bet-

7Using only words in the original headline produced ac-
curacy in the mid-50% range, suggesting that the LSTM cap-
tures some humor impact of the replacement word as input
and that some headlines have high potential for funniness.

ter at assessing humor when the replaced word is
not an entity. Our judges did have access to the
replaced word, so we speculate this knowledge is
important when the replaced word is an entity, es-
pecially when the entity triggers the judge’s recol-
lection of their world knowledge surrounding the
entity, which the LSTM does not have. Another
potential reason is that the pretrained GloVe vec-
tors are trained on web data (840 billion tokens ob-
tained from Common Crawl) no more recent than
2014, which may not appropriately represent com-
mon entities in our 2017-2018 headline data.

Next, we qualitatively analyzed the LSTM’s
classification accuracy towards the two extremes
of the dataset, some of which are shown in Ta-
ble 1. Overall, the LSTM seems to suffer from a
relatively high level of brittleness (possibly arising
from the unusual writing style in headlines), where
correct predictions could be obtained by very little
modification to the text. For example, changing
“Trump→ Trump’s” in ID 1 and deleting “Essen-
tial Politics:” in ID 3 fix their classification errors.
Quotes in headlines also confused the LSTM (e.g.,
ID 4) since it is sometimes non-trivial to discern
the speaker of the quote in a headline.

The classifier often had difficulty figuring out
humorous replacements that involve common-
sense knowledge (e.g., IDs 7 and 8). Not sur-
prisingly, it also failed to detect offensive replace-
ments as in IDs 13 and 14, where the model prob-
ably recognized the incongruity and marked these
as funny. World knowledge and cultural refer-
ences were other challenges (e.g., IDs 4, 9 and 14).

The LSTM was able to figure out some of the
obvious negative sentiments which were common
in unfunny headlines (e.g., ID 15), and it detected
some humor patterns resulting from using words
that form a common (but funny in the context) n-
gram with the adjacent words (e.g., IDs 5 and 6).

Overall, our results show that there is a dis-
cernible signal separating funny and and not-funny
headlines, even when using relatively shallow fea-
tures that only take the content of the headline
into account (modulo GloVe embeddings which
are pretrained and hence contain semantic infor-
mation gleaned from a larger corpus). We expect
that further work, which could examine deeper
relationships to current events, historical context,
and common sense knowledge, will improve the
ability to distinguish funny from not-funny beyond
the baselines provided here.



141

X MaxUF MinF α Rf-Glv Rf-ngram Lstm-Glv
10 0.2 1.8 0.66 60.27 65.56 68.54
20 0.4 1.4 0.49 61.67 63.41 67.21
30 0.6 1.2 0.37 59.43 62.96 66.11
40 0.8 1.0 0.27 57.45 59.35 64.07
50 0.8 0.8 0.20 55.63 56.52 60.63

Table 5: Classification accuracy for various funniness-
sorted dataset proportions and classifiers/feature sets.
MaxUF is the highest score for the not-funny class,
MinF is the lowest score for the funny class, and we
also provide Krippendorff’s α for judge agreement.

5 Related Work

Previous research on automated humor can be di-
vided into work on datasets, analysis, detection,
and generation. We will give examples of each.

Datasets are important for automated under-
standing of humor and for training models. Start-
ing at the simplest linguistic level, Engelthaler
and Hills (2018) gathered almost 5,000 English
words with funniness ratings for each one. Fila-
tova (2012) found 1,905 Amazon product reviews
classified as either regular or ironic/sarcastic,
and Khodak et al. (2017) collected 1.3 million sar-
castic statements from Reddit and a much larger
set of non-sarcastic statements. Mihalcea and
Strapparava (2005) collected about 24,000 one-
liner jokes, Potash et al. (2017) shared a dataset to
rank funny tweets for certain hashtags, and Miller
et al. (2017) created a task for pun detection.

Humor analysis, as we have done, is aimed
at understanding what makes something funny.
Building on the word-level corpus of Engelthaler
and Hills (2018), Westbury and Hollis (2018) de-
veloped models to predict the funniness of 4,997
words. Looking at multi-word, but still short
text, Shahaf et al. (2015) analyzed cartoon cap-
tions in order to understand what made some fun-
nier than others. The work that is most similar to
ours is from West and Horvitz (2019), who looked
at pairs of funny and normal headlines. While we
employed editors to create funny headlines from
serious ones, they went the other way using a Web-
based game, producing and analyzing 2,801 mod-
ified versions of 1,191 satirical headlines.

Humor detection is characterized by determin-
ing if a given text is funny or not. Examples in-
clude Khodak et al. (2017), detecting sarcasm in
Reddit and Davidov et al. (2010) detecting sar-
casm in Amazon product reviews and Twitter. Bar-
bieri and Saggion (2014) and Reyes et al. (2012)
showed how to detect humorous tweets, and Kid-

don and Brun (2011) detected double entendres.
Generating humor is a difficult problem. Past

work includes Binsted et al. (1997) producing
punning riddles, funny acronyms from Stock and
Strapparava (2003), jokes of the type “I like my
coffee like I like my war, cold” by Petrović
and Matthews (2013), and filling in Mad Libs R©

by Hossain et al. (2017). Our headline work has
the potential to help in humor generation, moving
away from jokes with a strong template to more
free form.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

We have developed and released Humicroedit, a
carefully curated dataset of 15,095 headlines with
simple edits designed to make them funny. The
dataset specifies the edits and also comes with five
funniness scores for each edited headline. The
simple replacement edits facilitate focused analy-
sis on what causes the humor. We showed how our
data supports, in a quantitative way, humor theo-
ries about length of joke, incongruity, superiority,
and setup/punchline. Finally, we developed base-
line classifiers that show how well we can distin-
guish funny edits from non-funny edits using sim-
ple linguistic features.

We expect our dataset will facilitate research in
humor and natural language processing. Head-
lines present unique challenges and opportunities,
because their humor is largely topical, depending
on a knowledge of current events and prominent
people and entities.

Future work with this data could include deeper
features for assessing humor. We expect that hu-
mor detection would likely improve using fea-
tures that incorporate world knowledge and com-
mon sense. Likewise, there may be something
to learn by analyzing topical jokes from profes-
sional comedians. With our single-word edits, this
analysis becomes easier, because we are looking
at the minimal change in a headline to make it
funny. Additionally, if we can better understand
what makes a headline funny, we may be able to
automatically generate funny headlines and even
personalize them to particular readers.

Acknowledgments

We thank Daniel Gildea for carefully reviewing
our paper and for his advice on the machine learn-
ing experiments. We also thank the NAACL re-
viewers for their various helpful suggestions.



142

References
Francesco Barbieri and Horacio Saggion. 2014. Auto-

matic detection of irony and humour in twitter. In
ICCC.

Dario Bertero and Pascale Fung. 2016. A long short-
term memory framework for predicting humor in di-
alogues. In NAACL-HLT.

Kim Binsted, Helen Pain, and Graeme D Ritchie. 1997.
Children’s evaluation of computer-generated pun-
ning riddles. Pragmatics & Cognition, 5(2):305–54.

Andrew Cattle and Xiaojuan Ma. 2018. Recognizing
humour using word associations and humour anchor
extraction. In COLING.

Dmitry Davidov, Oren Tsur, and Ari Rappoport. 2010.
Semi-supervised recognition of sarcastic sentences
in twitter and amazon. In CoNLL.

R.I.M Dunbar, Jacques Launay, and Oliver Curry.
2016. The complexity of jokes is limited by cog-
nitive constraints on mentalizing. Human Nature,
27(2):130–140.

Tomas Engelthaler and Thomas T Hills. 2018. Humor
norms for 4,997 english words. Behavior research
methods, 50(3):1116–1124.

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet. Wiley Online
Library.

Elena Filatova. 2012. Irony and sarcasm: Corpus gen-
eration and analysis using crowdsourcing. In LREC.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997.
Long short-term memory. Neural Computation,
9(8):1735–1780.

Nabil Hossain, John Krumm, Lucy Vanderwende, Eric
Horvitz, and Henry Kautz. 2017. Filling the blanks
(hint: plural noun) for Mad Libs humor. In EMNLP.

Mikhail Khodak, Nikunj Saunshi, and Kiran Vodra-
halli. 2017. A large self-annotated corpus for sar-
casm. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.05579.

Chloe Kiddon and Yuriy Brun. 2011. That’s what she
said: double entendre identification. In ACL.

Klaus Krippendorff. 1970. Estimating the reliabil-
ity, systematic error and random error of interval
data. Educational and Psychological Measurement,
30(1):61–70.

Christopher D. Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Finkel, Steven J. Bethard, and David Mc-
Closky. 2014. The Stanford CoreNLP natural lan-
guage processing toolkit. In ACL.

Rada Mihalcea and Stephen Pulman. 2007. Character-
izing humour: An exploration of features in humor-
ous texts. In CICLing.

Rada Mihalcea and Carlo Strapparava. 2005. Making
computers laugh: Investigations in automatic humor
recognition. In EMNLP.

Rada Mihalcea and Carlo Strapparava. 2006. Learn-
ing to laugh (automatically): Computational models
for humor recognition. Computational Intelligence,
22(2):126–142.

Tristan Miller, Christian Hempelmann, and Iryna
Gurevych. 2017. Semeval-2017 task 7: Detection
and interpretation of english puns. In SemEval.

John Morreall. 2016. Philosophy of humor. In Ed-
ward N. Zalta, editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy, winter 2016 edition. Metaphysics Re-
search Lab, Stanford University.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher
Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word
representation. In EMNLP.

Saša Petrović and David Matthews. 2013. Unsuper-
vised joke generation from big data. In ACL.

Peter Potash, Alexey Romanov, and Anna Rumshisky.
2017. Semeval-2017 task 6: #hashtagwars: Learn-
ing a sense of humor. In SemEval.

Antonio Reyes, Paolo Rosso, and Davide Buscaldi.
2012. From humor recognition to irony detection:
The figurative language of social media. Data &
Knowledge Engineering, 74:1–12.

Graeme Ritchie. 2004. The linguistic analysis of jokes.
Routledge.

Dyah Rochmawati. 2017. Pragmatic and rhetorical
strategies in the english-written jokes. Indonesian
Journal of Applied Linguistics, 7(1):149–159.

Dafna Shahaf, Eric Horvitz, and Robert Mankoff.
2015. Inside jokes: Identifying humorous cartoon
captions. In KDD.

Oliviero Stock and Carlo Strapparava. 2003. Ha-
hacronym: Humorous agents for humorous
acronyms. Humor, 16(3):297–314.

Anca Tomoioagă. 2015. A linguistic analysis of jokes.
Discourse As A Form Of Multiculturalism In Liter-
ature And Communication, Section: Language And
Discourse Arhipelag Xxi Press, Tı̂rguMure.

Robert West and Eric Horvitz. 2019. Reverse-
engineering satire, or “paper on computational hu-
mor accepted despite making serious advances”. In
AAAI.

Chris Westbury and Geoff Hollis. 2018. Wriggly,
squiffy, lummox, and boobs: What makes some
words funny? Journal of experimental psychology.
General.

Diyi Yang, Alon Lavie, Chris Dyer, and Eduard Hovy.
2015. Humor recognition and humor anchor extrac-
tion. In EMNLP.


