



















































Adversarial Decomposition of Text Representation


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2019, pages 815–825
Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2 - June 7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

815

Adversarial Decomposition of Text Representation

Alexey Romanov, Anna Rumshisky, Anna Rogers and David Donahue
Department of Computer Science

University of Massachusetts Lowell
Lowell, MA 01854

{aromanov,arum,arogers}@cs.uml.edu
david donahue@student.uml.edu

Abstract

In this paper, we present a method for ad-
versarial decomposition of text representation.
This method can be used to decompose a rep-
resentation of an input sentence into several
independent vectors, each of them responsi-
ble for a specific aspect of the input sentence.
We evaluate the proposed method on two case
studies: the conversion between different so-
cial registers and diachronic language change.
We show that the proposed method is capable
of fine-grained controlled change of these as-
pects of the input sentence. It is also learn-
ing a continuous (rather than categorical) rep-
resentation of the style of the sentence, which
is more linguistically realistic. The model uses
adversarial-motivational training and includes
a special motivational loss, which acts oppo-
site to the discriminator and encourages a bet-
ter decomposition. Furthermore, we evaluate
the obtained meaning embeddings on a down-
stream task of paraphrase detection and show
that they significantly outperform the embed-
dings of a regular autoencoder.

1 Introduction

Despite the recent successes in using neural mod-
els for representation learning for natural language
text, learning a meaningful representation of input
sentences remains an open research problem. A
variety of approaches, from sequence-to-sequence
models that followed the work of Sutskever et al.
(2014) to the more recent proposals (Arora et al.,
2017; Nangia et al., 2017; Conneau et al., 2017;
Logeswaran and Lee, 2018; Subramanian et al.,
2018; Cer et al., 2018) share one common draw-
back. Namely, all of them encode the input sen-
tence into just one single vector of a fixed size.
One way to bypass the limitations of a single vec-
tor representation is to use an attention mecha-
nism (Bahdanau et al., 2014; Vaswani et al., 2017).
We propose to approach this problem differently

and design a method for adversarial decomposi-
tion of the learned input representation into mul-
tiple components. Our method encodes the input
sentence into several vectors, where each vector is
responsible for a specific aspect of the sentence.

In terms of learning different separable com-
ponents of input representation, our work most
closely relates to the style transfer work, which
has been applied to a variety of different as-
pects of language, from diachronic language dif-
ferences (Xu et al., 2012) to authors’ personali-
ties (Lipton et al., 2015) and even sentiment (Hu
et al., 2017; Fu et al., 2018). The style trans-
fer work effectively relies on the more classical
distinction between meaning and form (de Saus-
sure, 1959), which accounts for the fact that mul-
tiple surface realizations are possible for the same
meaning. For simplicity, we will use this termi-
nology throughout the rest of the paper.

Consider encoding an input sentence into a
meaning vector and a form vector. This enables a
controllable change of meaning or form by a sim-
ple change applied to these vectors. For exam-
ple, we can encode two sentences written in two
different styles, then swap the form vectors while
leaving the meaning vectors intact. We can then
generate new unique sentences with the original
meaning, but written in a different style.

We propose a novel model for this type of
decomposition based on adversarial-motivational
training, GAN architecture (Goodfellow et al.,
2014) and adversarial autoencoders (Makhzani
et al., 2015). In addition to the adversarial loss,
we use a special motivator (Albanie et al., 2017),
which, in contrast to the discriminator, is used to
provide a motivational loss to encourage better de-
composition of the meaning and the form. All the
code is available on GitHub 1.

1https://github.com/text-machine-lab/
adversarial_decomposition

https://github.com/text-machine-lab/adversarial_decomposition
https://github.com/text-machine-lab/adversarial_decomposition


816

We evaluate the proposed methods for learning
separate aspects of input representation in the fol-
lowing case studies:

1. Diachronic language change. Specifically,
we consider the Early Modern English (e.g.
What would she have?) and the contempo-
rary English ( What does she want?).

2. Social register (Halliday et al., 1968), i.e.
subsets of language appropriate in a given
context or characteristic of a certain group of
speakers. Social registers include formal vs
informal language, the language used in dif-
ferent genres (e.g., fiction vs. newspapers vs.
academic texts), different dialects, and liter-
ary idiostyles. We experiment with the titles
of scientific papers vs. newspaper articles.

2 Related work

As mentioned above, the most relevant previous
work comes from research on style transfer2. It
can be divided into two groups:

1. Approaches that aim to generate text in a
given form. For example, the task may be to
produce just any verse as long as it is in the
“style” of the target poet.

2. Approaches that aim to induce a change in ei-
ther the “form” or the “meaning” of an utter-
ance. For example, “Good bye, Mr. Ander-
son.” can be transformed to “Fare you well,
good Master Anderson” (Xu et al., 2012)).

An example of the first group is the work of
Potash et al. (2015), who trained several separate
networks on verses by different hip-hop artists. An
LSTM network successfully generated verses that
were stylistically similar to the verses of the tar-
get artist (as measured by cosine distance on tf-idf
vectors). More complicated approaches use lan-
guage models that are conditioned in some way.
For example, Lipton et al. (2015) produced prod-
uct reviews with a target rating by passing the rat-
ing as an additional input at each timestep of an
LSTM model. Tang et al. (2016) generated re-
views not only with a given rating but also for a
specific product. At each timestep a special con-
text vector was provided as input, gated so as to
enable the model to decide how much attention

2The term “style” is not entirely appropriate here, but in
NLP it is often used in work on any kind of form change while
preserving meaning, from translation to changing sentiment
polarity.

to pay to that vector and the current hidden state.
Li et al. (2016) used “speaker” vectors as an ad-
ditional input to a conversational model, improv-
ing consistency of dialog responses. Finally, Ficler
and Goldberg (2017) performed an extensive eval-
uation of conditioned language models based on
“content” (theme and sentiment) and “style” (pro-
fessional, personal, length, descriptiveness). Im-
portantly, they showed that it is possible to control
both “content” and “style” simultaneously.

Work from the second group can further be di-
vided into two clusters by the nature of the train-
ing data: parallel aligned corpora, or non-aligned
datasets. The aligned corpora enable approach-
ing the problem of form shift as a paraphrasing
or machine translation problem. Xu et al. (2012)
used statistical and dictionary-based systems on
a dataset of original plays by Shakespeare and
their contemporary translations. Carlson et al.
(2017) trained an LSTM network on 33 versions
of the Bible. Jhamtani et al. (2017) used a Pointer
Network (Vinyals et al., 2015), an architecture
that was successfully applied to a wide variety of
tasks (Merity et al., 2016; Gulcehre et al., 2016;
Potash et al., 2017), to enable direct copying of
the input tokens to the output. All these works use
BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) as the main, or even
the only evaluation measure. This is only possible
in cases where a parallel corpus is available.

Recently, new approaches that do not require a
parallel corpora were developed in both computer
vision (CV) (Zhu et al., 2017) and NLP. Hu et al.
(2017) succeeded in changing tense and sentiment
of sentences with a two steps procedure based
on a variational auto-encoder (VAE) (Kingma and
Welling, 2013). After training a VAE, a discrim-
inator and a generator are trained in an alternate
manner, where the discriminator tries to correctly
classify the target sentence attributes. A special
loss component forces the hidden representation
of the encoded sentence to not have any informa-
tion about the target sentence attributes. Mueller
et al. (2017) used a VAE to produce a hidden rep-
resentation of a sentence, and then modify it to
match the desired form. Unlike Hu et al. (2017),
they do not separate the form and meaning embed-
dings. Shen et al. (2017) applied a GAN to align
the hidden representation of sentences from two
corpora and forced them not to have any informa-
tion about the form an via adversarial loss. Dur-
ing the decoding, similarly to Lipton et al. (2015),



817

special “style” vectors are passed to the decoder
at every timestep to produce a sentence with the
desired properties. The model is trained using the
Professor-Forcing algorithm (Lamb et al., 2016).
Kim et al. (2017) worked directly on hidden space
vectors that are constrained with the same adver-
sarial loss instead of outputs of the generator, and
use two different generators for different “styles”.
Finally, Fu et al. (2018) generate sentences with
the target properties using an adversarial loss, sim-
ilarly to Shen et al. (2017) and Kim et al. (2017).

Comparison with previous work In contrast to
the proposals of Xu et al. (2012), Carlson et al.
(2017), Jhamtani et al. (2017), our solution does
not require a parallel corpus. Unlike the model
by Shen et al. (2017), our model works directly on
representations of sentences in the hidden space.

Most importantly, in contrast to the proposals
by Mueller et al. (2017), Hu et al. (2017), Kim
et al. (2017), Fu et al. (2018), our model produces
a representation for both meaning and form and
does not treat the form as a categorical (in the vast
majority of works, binary) variable3.

Treating meaning and form not as bi-
nary/categorical, but continuous variables is
more consistent with the reality of language
use, since there are different degrees of overlap
between the language used by different registers
or in different diachronic slices. Indeed, lan-
guage change is gradual, and the acceptability
of expressions in a given register also forms a
continuum, so one expects a substantial overlap
between the grammar and vocabulary used, for
example, on Twitter and by New York Times. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first model
that considers linguistic form in the task of text
generation as a continuous variable.

A significant consequence of learning a contin-
uous representation for form is that it allows the
model to work with a large, and potentially infi-
nite, number of forms. Note that in this case the
locations of areas of specific forms in the vector
form space would reflect the similarity between
these forms. For example, the proposed model
could be directly applied to the authorship attribu-
tion problem: each author would have their own
area in the form space, their proximity should mir-

3Although the form was represented as dense vectors in
previous work, it is still just a binary feature, as they use a
single pre-defined vector for each form, with all sentences of
the same form assigned the same form vector.

ror the similarity in writing style. Preliminary ex-
periments on this are reported in subsection 6.4.

3 Formulation

Let us formulate the problem of decomposition
of text representation on an example of con-
trolled change of linguistic form and conversion
of Shakespeare plays in the original Early Modern
to contemporary English. Let Xa be a corpus of
texts xai ∈ X a in Early Modern English f

a ∈ F ,
and Xb be a corpus of texts xbi ∈ X b in modern
English fb ∈ F . We assume that the texts in both
Xa and Xb have the same distribution of mean-
ing m ∈ M. The form f , however, is different
and generated from a mixture of two distributions:

f i = α
a
i p(f

a) + αbip(f
b)

where fa and f b are two different languages
(Early Modern and contemporary English). Intu-
itively, we say that a sample xi has the form fa if
αai > α

b
i , and it has the form f

b if αbi > α
a
i .

The goal of dissociation meaning and form is to
learn two encoders Em : X →M and Ef : X →
F for the meaning and form correspondingly, and
the generator G :M,F → X such that

∀j ∈ {a, b},∀k ∈ {a, b} : G(Em(xk), Ef (xj)) → X j

The form of a generated sample depends exclu-
sively on the provided f j and can be in the same
domain for two different mu and mv from two
samples from different domains X a and X b.

Note that, in contrast to the previous propos-
als, the form f is not a categorical variable but a
continuous vector. This enables fine-grained con-
trollable change of form: the original form f i is
changed to reflect the form of the specific target
sentence f j with its own unique αa and αb while
preserving the original meaning mi.

An important caveat concerns the core assump-
tion of the similar meaning distribution in the two
corpora, which is also made in all other works re-
viewed in Section 2. It limits the possible use of
this approach to cases where the distributions are
in fact similar (i.e. comparable corpora are avail-
able; note that they do not have to be parallel). It
does not apply to many cases that could be ana-
lyzed in terms of meaning and form. For example,
books for children and scholarly papers are both
registers, they have their own form (i.e. specific
subsets of linguistic means and structure conven-
tions) – but there is little overlap in the content.



818

Encoder Generator

Discriminator

Motivator

m

f

Ladv

Lmotiv

Figure 1: Overview of ADNet. Encoder encodes
the inputs sentences into two latent vectors m and
f . The Generator takes them as the input and pro-
duces the output sentence. During the training, the
Discriminator is used for an adversarial loss that
forces m to not carry any information about the form,
and the Motivator is used for a motivational loss that
encourages f to carry the information about the form.

This would make it hard even for a professional
writer to turn a research paper into a fairy tale.

4 Method description

Inspired by Makhzani et al. (2015), Kim et al.
(2017), and Albanie et al. (2017), we propose
ADNet, a new model for adversarial decomposi-
tion of text representation (Figure 1).

Our solution is based on a widely used
sequence-to-sequence framework (Sutskever
et al., 2014) and consists of four main parts. The
encoder E encodes the input sequence x into two
latent vectors m and f which capture the meaning
and the form of the sentence correspondingly. The
generator G then takes these two vectors as the
input and produces a reconstruction of the original
input sequence x̂.

The encoder and generator by themselves will
likely not achieve the dissociation of the mean-
ing and form. We encourage this behavior in a
way similar to Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), which had an
overwhelming success the past few years as a way
to enforce a specific distribution and characteris-
tics on the output of a model.

Inspired by the work of Albanie et al. (2017)
and the principle of “carrot and stick” (Safire,
1995), in contrast to the majority of work that
promotes purely adversarial approach (Goodfel-
low et al., 2014; Shen et al., 2017; Fu et al., 2018;
Zhu et al., 2017), we propose two additional com-
ponents, the discriminator D and the motivator
M to force the model to learn the dissociation of
the meaning and the form. Similarly to a regular

GAN model, the adversarial discriminator D tries
to classify the form f based on the latent meaning
vector m, and the encoder E is penalized to make
this task as hard as possible.

Opposed to such vicious behaviour, the motiva-
tor M tries to classify the form based on the latent
form vector f , as it should be done, and encour-
ages the encoder E to make this task as simple as
possible. We could apply the adversarial approach
here as well and force the distribution of the form
vectors to fit a mixture of Gaussians (in this par-
ticular case, a mixture of two Guassians) with
another discriminator, as it is done by Makhzani
et al. (2015), but we opted for the “dualistic” path
of two complimentary forces.

4.1 Encoder-Decoder
Both the encoderE and the generatorG are neural
networks. Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) (Chung
et al., 2014) is used for E to encode the input sen-
tence x into a hidden vector

h = GRU(x)

The vector h then passes through two different
fully connected layers to produce the latent vectors
of the form and the meaning of the input sentence:

m = tanh(Wmh+ bm)

f = tanh(Wfh+ bf )

We use θE to denote the parameters of the en-
coder E: Wm, bm, Wf , bf , and the parameters
of the GRU unit.

The generator G is also modelled with a GRU
unit. The generator takes as input the meaning
vector m and the form vector f , concatenates
them, and passes trough a fully-connected layer
to obtain a hidden vector z that represents both
meaning and form of the original input sentence:

z = tanh(Wz[m; f ] + bm)

After that, we use a GRU unit to generate the out-
put sentence as a probability distribution over the
vocabulary tokens:

p(x̂) =
T∏
t=1

p(x̂t|z, x̂1, . . . , x̂t−1)

We use θG to denote the parameters of the gen-
erator G: Wz , bm, and the parameters of the used
GRU. The encoder and generator are trained using
the standard reconstruction loss:

Lrec(θE ,θG) = Ex∼Xa [− log p(x̂|x)] + Ex∼Xb [− log p(x̂|x)]



819

4.2 Discriminator

The representation of the meaning m produced by
the encoder E should not contain any information
about the form f . We achieve this by using an ad-
versarial approach. First, we train a discrimina-
tor D, consisting of several fully connected layers
with ELU activation function (Clevert et al., 2015)
between them, to predict the form f of a sentence
by its meaning vector:

f̂D = D(m)

where f̂ is the score (logit) reflecting the probabil-
ity of the sentence x to belong to one of the form
domains.

Motivated by the Wasserstein GAN (Arjovsky
et al., 2017), we use the following loss function
instead of the standard cross-entropy:

LD(θD) = Ex∼Xa [D(Em(x))]− Ex∼Xb [D(Em(x))]

Thus, a successful discriminator will produce
negative scores f̂ for sentences fromXa and pos-
itive scores for sentences fromXb. This discrimi-
nator is then used in an adversarial manner to pro-
vide a learning signal for the encoder and force
dissociation of the meaning and form by maximiz-
ing LD:

Ladv(θE) = −λadvLD

where λadv is a hyperparameter reflecting the
strength of the adversarial loss. Note that this loss
applies to the parameters of the encoder.

4.3 Motivator

Our experiments showed that the discriminator D
and the adversarial loss Ladv by themselves are
sufficient to force the model to dissociate the form
and the meaning. However, in order to achieve a
better dissociation, we propose to use a motivator
M (Albanie et al., 2017) and the corresponding
motivational loss. Conceptually, this is the oppo-
site of the adversarial loss, hence the name. As the
discriminator D, the motivator M learns to clas-
sify the form f of the input sentence. However, its
input is not the meaning vector but the form vec-
tor:

f̂M =M(f)

The motivator has the same architecture as the dis-
criminator, and the same loss function. While the
adversarial loss forces the encoder E to produce a
meaning vector m with no information about the

form f , the motivational loss encourages E to en-
code this information in the form vector by mini-
mizing LM :

Lmotiv(θE) = λmotivLM

4.4 Training procedure

The overall training procedure follows the meth-
ods for training GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014;
Arjovsky et al., 2017) and consists of two stages:
training the discriminator D and the motivator M ,
and training the encoder E and the generator G.

In contrast to Arjovsky et al. (2017), we do not
train the D and M more than the E and the G.
In our experiments we found that simple training
in two stages is enough to achieve dissociation of
the meaning and the form. Encoder and generator
are trained with the following loss function that
combines reconstruction loss with the losses from
the discriminator and the motivator:

Ltotal(θE , θG) = Lrec + Ladv + Lmotiv

5 Experimental setup

5.1 Evaluation

Similarly to the evaluation of style transfer in
CV (Isola et al., 2017), evaluation of this task
is difficult. We follow the approach of Isola
et al. (2017); Shen et al. (2017) and recently pro-
posed by Fu et al. (2018) methods of evaluation
of “transfer strength” and “content preservation”.
The authors showed that the proposed automatic
metrics correlate with human judgment to a large
degree and can serve as a proxy. Below we give an
overview of these metrics.

Transfer Strength. The goal of this metric is to
capture whether the form has been changed suc-
cessfully. To do that, a classifier C is trained on
the two corpora, Xa and Xb to recognize the lin-
guistic “form” typical of each of them. After that
a sentence, for which the form/meaning has been
changed, is passed to the classifier. The overall ac-
curacy reflects the degree of success of changing
the form/meaning. This approach is widely used
in CV (Isola et al., 2017), and was applied in NLP
as well (Shen et al., 2017).

In our experiments we used a GRU unit fol-
lowed by four fully-connected layers with ELU ac-
tivation functions between them as the classifier.



820

0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 0.40 0.45
Transfer strength

0.800

0.825

0.850

0.875

0.900

0.925

0.950

Co
nt

en
t p

re
se

rv
at

io
n

256, 256
256, 64

64, 256

256, 256

256, 64

64, 256 64, 256

256, 64

256, 256

Fu et al
ADNet
ADNet + Motivator

(a) Shakespeare dataset

0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90
Transfer strength

0.78

0.80

0.82

0.84

0.86

0.88

Co
nt

en
t p

re
se

rv
at

io
n

256, 256
256, 64

64, 256
256, 256

256, 64

64, 256

256, 64
64, 256

256, 256

Fu et al
ADNet
ADNet + Motivator

(b) Headlines dataset

Figure 2: Transfer strength vs content preservation (see subsection 5.1) for different sizes of the meaning and form
vectors. Each point is labeled with “〈meaning vector size〉, 〈form vector size〉”.

Content preservation Note that the transfer
strength by itself does not capture the overall qual-
ity of a changed sentence. A extremely overfitted
model that produces the most characteristic sen-
tence of one corpus all the time would have a high
score according to this metric. Thus, we need to
measure how much of the meaning was preserved
while changing the form. To do that, Fu et al.
(2018) proposed to use a cosine similarity based
metric using pretrained word embeddings. First,
a sentence embedding is computed by concatena-
tion of max, mean, and average pooling over the
timesteps:

v = [max(v1, . . . ,vT );min(v1, . . . ,vT );mean(v1, . . . ,vT )]

Next, the cosine similarity score si between the
embedding vsi of the original source sentence and
the target sentence with the changed form vti is
computed, and the scores across the dataset are av-
eraged to obtain the total score s.

5.1.1 Continuous form
The metrics described above treat the form as a
categorical (in most cases, even binary) variable.
This was not a problem in previous work since the
change of form could be done by simply inverting
the form vector. Since we treat the form as a con-
tinuous variable, we cannot just use the proposed
metrics directly. To enable a fair comparison, we
propose the following procedure.

For each sentence sas in the test set from the cor-
pusXa we sample k = 10 random sentences from
the corpus Xb of the opposite form. After that,
we encode them into the meaningmi and form fi
vectors, and average the form vectors to obtain a

single form vector

favg =
1

k

k∑
i=1

fi

We then generate a new sentence with its original
meaning vector ms and the resulting form vec-
tor favg, and use it for evaluation. This process
enables a fair comparison with the previous ap-
proaches that treat form as a binary variable.

5.2 Datasets

We evaluated the proposed method on several
datasets that reflect different changes of meaning
and form.

Changing form: register. This experiment is
conducted with a dataset of titles of scientific
papers and news articles published by Fu et al.
(2018). This dataset (referred to as “Headlines”)
contains titles of scientific articles crawled from
online digital libraries, such as “ACM Digital Li-
brary” and “arXiv”. The titles of the news articles
are taken from the “News Aggregator Data Set”
from UCI Machine Learning Repository (Dheeru
and Karra Taniskidou, 2017)

Changing form: language diachrony. Di-
achronic language change is explored with the
dataset composed by Xu et al. (2012). It includes
the texts of 17 plays by William Shakespeare in
the original Early Modern English, and their trans-
lations into contemporary English. We randomly
permuted all sentences from all plays and sampled
the training, validation, and test sets. Note that this
dataset is much smaller than the Headlines dataset.



821

15 10 5 0 5 10 15

10

5

0

5

10

Meaning

20 10 0 10 20

15

10

5

0

5

10

15

Form

(a) Without motivator

7.5 5.0 2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5
8

6

4

2

0

2

4

6

8

Meaning

10 0 10 20

20

10

0

10

20

30
Form

(b) With motivator

Figure 3: t-SNE visualization of the form and meaning embeddings of 1000 random sentences. Green point
represent sentences form news headlines, and red points represent titles of scientific articles.

6 Results and discussion

The most recent and similar to our work is the
model proposed by Fu et al. (2018), in particular
the “style-embedding” model. We implemented
this model to provide a baseline for comparison.

The classifier used in the transfer strength met-
ric achieves high accuracy (0.832 and 0.99 for the
Shakespeare and Headlines datasets correspond-
ingly). These results concur with the results
of Shen et al. (2017) and Fu et al. (2018), and show
that the two corpora are significantly different.

Following Fu et al. (2018), we show the result
of different configuration of the size of the form
and meaning vectors on Figure 2. Namely, we re-
port combinations of 64 and 256-dimensional vec-
tors. Note that the sizes of the form vector are im-
portant. If the form vector is larger, the transfer
strength is gre,ta erbut the content preservation is
lessened. This is consistent with Fu et al. (2018),
where they observed a similar behaviour.

It is clear that the proposed method achieves
significantly better transfer strength than the pre-
viously proposed model. It also has a lower con-
tent preservation score, which means that it repeats
fewer exact words from the source sentence. Note
that a low transfer strength and very high (~0.9)
content preservation score means that the model
was not able to successfully learn to transfer the
form and the target sentence is almost identical
to the source sentence. The Shakespeare dataset
is the hardest for the model in terms of trans-
fer strength, probably because it is the smallest
dataset, but the proposed method performs consis-
tently well in transfer of both form and meaning
and, in contrast to the baseline.

Storing meaning in the form vector Note that,
theoretically, nothing is stopping the model from

storing the meaning in the form vector, except
from the size limitations, which would ensure that
storing non-form-related information elsewhere
would improve model performance. Figure 2
shows that as the meaning vectors get smaller,
and the form vectors larger, the higher is transfer
strength and the lower is content preservation. If
the model would store meaning in the form vector,
then the reduction in size of the meaning vector
would not have negative impact on content preser-
vation. This shows that the model tends to not
store the meaning in the form vector.

Nevertheless, to force this behaviour we exper-
imented with adding one more discriminator Df .
This discriminator works on the form vector f in
the same manner as the discriminator D works on
the meaning vector m. Namely, during the train-
ing it tries to predict the meaning of a sentence
from its form vector: u = Df (f). Note that the
vectors u and m are completely different. m is
the meaning of a sentence for the purpose of the
model, whereas u are pre-defined meaning of a
sentence for training of the discriminator. In the
simplest case, u can be a multi-hot representation
of the input sentence, with the exception of pre-
defined “style” words, which would always have
0 in the corresponding dimension, as it is done
by John et al. (2018).

We, however, take a different approach. First,
we find the “form” dimensions in the used word
embeddings by taking the argmax of the difference
between averaged word embeddings of the sen-
tences from two forms (i.e. Early Modern English
and contemporary English). Next, for a given sen-
tence we discard the top-k tokens with the max-
imum and minimum values in those dimensions.
Finally, we average word embeddings of the re-
maining tokens in the sentence to get the vector u.



822

Aye, sir. (EME) → Yes, sir. (CE)
Fare thee well, my lord (EME) → Fare you well, my lord (CE)
This guy will tell us everything. (CE) → This man will tell us everything. (EME)
I’ve done no more to caesar than you will do to me. (CE) → I have done no more to caesar than, you shall do to me. (EME)

Table 1: Decoding of the source sentence from Early Modern English (EME) into contemporary English (CE), and
vice versa.

A review: detection techniques for LTE system Crisis management: media practices in telecommunication management
Situation management knowledge from social media A review study against intelligence internet

Security flaw could not affect digital devices, experts say Semantic approach approach: current multimedia networks as modeling processes
Semantic approach to event processing Security flaw to verify leaks

Table 2: Flipping the meaning and the form embeddings of two sentence from different registers. Note the use of
colon in the first example, and the use of the “to”-constructions in the second example, consistent with the form of
the source sentences.

Such incorporation of the discriminatorDf helped
to mitigate this issue.

Fluency of generated sentences Note that there
is no guarantee that the generated sentences would
be coherent after switching the form vector. In
order to estimate how this switch affects the flu-
ency of generated sentences, we trained a lan-
guage model on the Shakespeare dataset and cal-
culated the perplexity of the generated sentences
using the original form vector and the average
of form vectors of k random sentences from the
opposite form (see subsubsection 5.1.1). While
the perplexity of such sentences does go up, this
change is not big (6.89 vs 9.74).

6.1 Impact of the motivational training

To investigate the impact of the motivator, we vi-
sualized form and meaning embeddings of 1000
random samples from the Headlines dataset using
t-SNE algorithm (Van Der Maaten, 2014) with the
Multicore-TSNE library (Ulyanov, 2016). The re-
sult is presented in Figure 3.

There are three important observations. First,
there is no clear separation in the meaning embed-
dings, which means that any accurate form trans-
fer is due to the form embeddings, and the disso-
ciation of form and meaning was successful.

Second, even without the motivator the model is
able to produce the form embeddings that are clus-
tered into two groups. Recall from section 4 that
without the motivational loss there are no forces
that influence the form embeddings, but neverthe-
less the model learns to separate them.

However, the separation effect is much more
pronounced in the presence of motivator. This
explains why the motivator consistently improved

transfer strength of ADNet, as shown in Figure 2.

6.2 Qualitative evaluation
Table 1 and Table 2 show several examples of suc-
cessful form/meaning transfer achieved by AD-
Net. Table 1 presents the results of an experiment
that to some extent replicates the approach taken
by the authors who treat linguistic form as a binary
variable (Shen et al., 2017; Fu et al., 2018). The
sentences the original Shakespeare plays were av-
eraged to get the “typical” Early Modern English
form vector. This averaged vector was used to de-
code a sentence from the modern English transla-
tion back into the original. The same was done in
the opposite direction.

Table 2 illustrates the possibilities of ADNet on
fine-grained transfer applied to the change of reg-
ister. We encoded two sentences in different reg-
isters from the Headlines dataset to produce form
and meaning embeddings, and then decoded the
first sentence with the meaning embedding of the
second, and vice versa. Table 2 shows that the
model correctly captures the meaning of sentences
and decodes them using the form of the source
sentences, preserving specific words and the struc-
ture of the source sentence. Note that in the first
example, the model decided to put the colon af-
ter the “crisis management”, as the source form
sentence has this syntactic structure (“A review:”).
This is not possible in the previously proposed
models, as they treat form as just a binary variable.

6.3 Performance of meaning embeddings on
downstream tasks

We conducted some experiments to test the as-
sumption that the derived meaning embeddings
should improve performance on downstream tasks



823

(a) Meaning embeddings (b) Form embeddings

Figure 4: t-SNE visualization of the form and meaning embeddings. Each color corresponds to a different author.

BoW Seq2Seq InferSent Fu et al. (2018) ADNet

80.82 74.68 83.17 78.88 81.38

Table 3: F1 scores on the task of paraphrase detection
using the SentEval toolkit (Conneau et al., 2017)

that require understanding of the meaning of the
sentences regardless of their form. We evaluated
embeddings produced by the ADNet, trained in
the Headlines dataset, on the paraphrase detection
task. We used the SentEval toolkit (Conneau et al.,
2017) and the Microsoft Research Paraphrase Cor-
pus (Dolan et al., 2004). The F1 scores on this
task for different models are presented in Table 3.
Note that all models, except InferSent, are unsu-
pervised. The InferSent model was trained on a
big SNLI dataset, consisting of more than 500,000
manually annotated pairs. ADNet achieves the the
highest score among the unsupervised systems and
far outperforms the regular sequence-to-sequence
autoencoder.

6.4 Multiple forms and stylistic similarities

In order to go beyond just two different forms, we
experimented with training the model on a set of
literature novels from six different authors from
Project Gutenberg4 written in two different time
periods. A t-SNE visualization of the resulting
meaning and form embeddings is presented in Fig-
ure 4. Note how form embeddings create a six-
pointed star. After further examination, we ob-
served that common phrases (for example, “Good
morning” or “Hello!”) were embedded into the
center of the star, whereas the most specific sen-
tences from a given author were placed into the
rays of the star. In particular, some sentences in-
cluded character names, thus further research is re-
quired to mitigate this problem. Stamatatos (2017)

4http://www.gutenberg.org/

provides a promising direction for solving this.

7 Conclusion

We presented ADNet, a new model that performs
adversarial decomposition of text representation.
In contrast to previous work, it does not require
a parallel training corpus and works directly on
hidden representations of sentences. Most impor-
tantly, it does not treat the form as a binary vari-
able (as done in most previously proposed mod-
els), enabling a fine-grained change of the form of
sentences or specific aspects of meaning. We eval-
uate ADNet on two tasks: the shift of language
register and diachronic language change. Our so-
lution achieves superior results, and t-SNE visual-
izations of the learned meaning and form embed-
dings illustrate that the proposed motivational loss
leads to significantly better separation of the form
embeddings.

References
Samuel Albanie, Sébastien Ehrhardt, and João F

Henriques. 2017. Stopping gan violence: Gen-
erative unadversarial networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.02528.

Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bot-
tou. 2017. Wasserstein gan. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1701.07875.

Sanjeev Arora, Yingyu Liang, and Tengyu Ma. 2017.
A simple but tough-to-beat baseline for sentence em-
beddings. In International Conference on Learning
Representation.

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2014. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.0473.

Keith Carlson, Allen Riddell, and Daniel Rockmore.
2017. Zero-shot style transfer in text using recurrent
neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.04731.

http://www.gutenberg.org/


824

Daniel Cer, Yinfei Yang, Sheng-yi Kong, Nan Hua,
Nicole Limtiaco, Rhomni St John, Noah Constant,
Mario Guajardo-Cespedes, Steve Yuan, Chris Tar,
et al. 2018. Universal sentence encoder. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1803.11175.

Junyoung Chung, Caglar Gulcehre, KyungHyun Cho,
and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Empirical evaluation of
gated recurrent neural networks on sequence model-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.3555.

Djork-Arné Clevert, Thomas Unterthiner, and Sepp
Hochreiter. 2015. Fast and accurate deep network
learning by exponential linear units (elus). arXiv
preprint arXiv:1511.07289.

Alexis Conneau, Douwe Kiela, Holger Schwenk, Loı̈c
Barrault, and Antoine Bordes. 2017. Supervised
learning of universal sentence representations from
natural language inference data. In Proceedings of
the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing, pages 670–680.

Dua Dheeru and Efi Karra Taniskidou. 2017. UCI ma-
chine learning repository.

Bill Dolan, Chris Quirk, and Chris Brockett. 2004.
Unsupervised construction of large paraphrase cor-
pora: Exploiting massively parallel news sources.
In Proceedings of the 20th international conference
on Computational Linguistics, page 350. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Jessica Ficler and Yoav Goldberg. 2017. Controlling
linguistic style aspects in neural language genera-
tion. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Stylistic
Variation, pages 94–104.

Zhenxin Fu, Xiaoye Tan, Nanyun Peng, Dongyan
Zhao, and Rui Yan. 2018. Style transfer in text:
Exploration and evaluation. In Thirty-Second AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence.

Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza,
Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron
Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Generative ad-
versarial nets. In Advances in neural information
processing systems, pages 2672–2680.

Caglar Gulcehre, Sungjin Ahn, Ramesh Nallapati,
Bowen Zhou, and Yoshua Bengio. 2016. Pointing
the unknown words. In Proceedings of the 54th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), volume 1,
pages 140–149.

M. A. K. Halliday, A. McIntosh, and P. Stevens. 1968.
The Linguistic Sciences and Language Teaching.
Longmans, Green and Co., London.

Zhiting Hu, Zichao Yang, Xiaodan Liang, Ruslan
Salakhutdinov, and Eric P Xing. 2017. Toward con-
trolled generation of text. In International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, pages 1587–1596.

Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A
Efros. 2017. Image-to-image translation with con-
ditional adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 1125–1134.

Harsh Jhamtani, Varun Gangal, Eduard Hovy, and Eric
Nyberg. 2017. Shakespearizing modern language
using copy-enriched sequence-to-sequence models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.01161.

Vineet John, Lili Mou, Hareesh Bahuleyan, and Olga
Vechtomova. 2018. Disentangled representation
learning for text style transfer. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1808.04339.

Yoon Kim, Kelly Zhang, Alexander M Rush, Yann
LeCun, et al. 2017. Adversarially regularized au-
toencoders for generating discrete structures. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1706.04223.

Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. 2013. Auto-
encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.6114.

Alex M Lamb, Anirudh Goyal ALIAS PARTH
GOYAL, Ying Zhang, Saizheng Zhang, Aaron C
Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. 2016. Professor
forcing: A new algorithm for training recurrent net-
works. In Advances In Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, pages 4601–4609.

Jiwei Li, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, Georgios Sp-
ithourakis, Jianfeng Gao, and Bill Dolan. 2016. A
persona-based neural conversation model. In Pro-
ceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), volume 1, pages 994–1003.

Zachary C Lipton, Sharad Vikram, and Julian
McAuley. 2015. Generative concatenative nets
jointly learn to write and classify reviews. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1511.03683.

Lajanugen Logeswaran and Honglak Lee. 2018. An
efficient framework for learning sentence represen-
tations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.02893.

Alireza Makhzani, Jonathon Shlens, Navdeep Jaitly,
Ian Goodfellow, and Brendan Frey. 2015. Adversar-
ial autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05644.

Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and
Richard Socher. 2016. Pointer sentinel mixture
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.07843.

Jonas Mueller, David Gifford, and Tommi Jaakkola.
2017. Sequence to better sequence: continuous re-
vision of combinatorial structures. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2536–
2544.

Nikita Nangia, Adina Williams, Angeliki Lazaridou,
and Samuel R Bowman. 2017. The repeval 2017
shared task: Multi-genre natural language infer-
ence with sentence representations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.08172.

http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml
http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml


825

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 40th annual meeting on association for compu-
tational linguistics, pages 311–318. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Peter Potash, Alexey Romanov, and Anna Rumshisky.
2015. Ghostwriter: using an lstm for automatic rap
lyric generation. In Proceedings of the 2015 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 1919–1924.

Peter Potash, Alexey Romanov, and Anna Rumshisky.
2017. Here’s my point: Joint pointer architecture for
argument mining. In Proceedings of the 2017 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 1364–1373.

William Safire. 1995. On Language – Gotcha! Gang
Strikes Again.

Ferdinand de Saussure. 1959. Course in General Lin-
guistics. New York : Philosophical Library.

Tianxiao Shen, Tao Lei, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi
Jaakkola. 2017. Style transfer from non-parallel text
by cross-alignment. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, pages 6833–6844.

Efstathios Stamatatos. 2017. Authorship attribution us-
ing text distortion. In Proceedings of the 15th Con-
ference of the European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Volume 1, Long Pa-
pers, volume 1, pages 1138–1149.

Sandeep Subramanian, Adam Trischler, Yoshua Ben-
gio, and Christopher J Pal. 2018. Learning gen-
eral purpose distributed sentence representations via
large scale multi-task learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1804.00079.

Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. 2014.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural net-
works. In Advances in neural information process-
ing systems, pages 3104–3112.

Jian Tang, Yifan Yang, Sam Carton, Ming Zhang, and
Qiaozhu Mei. 2016. Context-aware natural lan-
guage generation with recurrent neural networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.09900.

Dmitry Ulyanov. 2016. Multicore-tsne.
https://github.com/DmitryUlyanov/
Multicore-TSNE.

Laurens Van Der Maaten. 2014. Accelerating t-sne
using tree-based algorithms. Journal of machine
learning research, 15(1):3221–3245.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, pages 6000–6010.

Oriol Vinyals, Meire Fortunato, and Navdeep Jaitly.
2015. Pointer networks. In Advances in Neural In-
formation Processing Systems, pages 2692–2700.

Wei Xu, Alan Ritter, Bill Dolan, Ralph Grishman, and
Colin Cherry. 2012. Paraphrasing for style. Pro-
ceedings of COLING 2012, pages 2899–2914.

Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A
Efros. 2017. Unpaired image-to-image translation
using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition, pages 2223–2232.

https://www.nytimes.com/1995/12/31/magazine/on-language-gotcha-gang-strikes-again.html
https://www.nytimes.com/1995/12/31/magazine/on-language-gotcha-gang-strikes-again.html
http://archive.org/details/courseingenerall00saus
http://archive.org/details/courseingenerall00saus
https://github.com/DmitryUlyanov/Multicore-TSNE
https://github.com/DmitryUlyanov/Multicore-TSNE

