




































Unsupervised Latent Tree Induction with Deep Inside-Outside Recursive Auto-Encoders


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2019, pages 1129–1141
Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2 - June 7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

1129

Unsupervised Latent Tree Induction with
Deep Inside-Outside Recursive Autoencoders

Andrew Drozdov∗, Pat Verga∗, Mohit Yadav∗,

Mohit Iyyer, and Andrew McCallum

College of Information and Computer Sciences

University of Massachusetts Amherst

{adrozdov, pat, ymohit, miyyer, mccallum}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract

We introduce deep inside-outside recursive

autoencoders (DIORA), a fully-unsupervised

method for discovering syntax that simulta-

neously learns representations for constituents

within the induced tree. Our approach pre-

dicts each word in an input sentence condi-

tioned on the rest of the sentence and uses

inside-outside dynamic programming to con-

sider all possible binary trees over the sen-

tence. At test time the CKY algorithm extracts

the highest scoring parse. DIORA achieves a

new state-of-the-art F1 in unsupervised binary

constituency parsing (unlabeled) in two bench-

mark datasets, WSJ and MultiNLI.

1 Introduction

Syntactic parse trees are useful for downstream

tasks such as relation extraction (Gamallo et al.,

2012), semantic role labeling (Sutton and Mc-

Callum, 2005; He et al., 2018), machine trans-

lation (Aharoni and Goldberg, 2017; Eriguchi

et al., 2017; Zaremoodi and Haffari, 2018), and

text classification (Li and Roth, 2006; Tai et al.,

2015). Traditionally, supervised parsers trained

on datasets such as the Penn Treebank (Marcus

et al., 1993) are used to obtain syntactic trees.

However, the treebanks used to train these su-

pervised parsers are typically small and restricted

to the newswire domain. Unfortunately, models

trained on newswire treebanks tend to perform

considerably worse when applied to new types of

data, and creating new domain specific treebanks

with syntactic annotations is expensive and time-

consuming.

Motivated by the desire to address the limita-

tions of supervised parsing and by the success of

large-scale unsupervised modeling such as ELMo

and BERT (Peters et al., 2018a; Devlin et al.,

∗Equal contribution, randomly ordered.

Under the current circumstances he says their scenario no longer seems unrealistic

Figure 1: An unlabeled binary constituency parse from

DIORA matching the ground truth.

2019), we propose a new deep learning method

of unsupervised parser training that can extract

both shallow parses (i.e., noun phrases or entities)

and full syntactic trees from any domain or lan-

guage automatically without requiring any labeled

training data. In addition to producing parses,

our model simultaneously builds representations

for internal constituents that reflect syntactic and

semantic regularities which can be leveraged by

downstream tasks.

Our model builds on existing work developing

latent tree chart parsers (Socher et al., 2011b; Le

and Zuidema, 2015; Yogatama et al., 2017; Mail-

lard et al., 2017; Choi et al., 2018). These meth-

ods produce representations for all internal nodes

in the tree (cells in the chart), each generated as

a soft weighting over all possible sub-trees (§2).
Unfortunately, they still require sentence-level an-

notations during training, as they are all trained to

optimize a downstream task, typically natural lan-

guage inference.

To address these limitations, we present deep

inside-outside recursive autoencoders (DIORA)

which enable unsupervised discovery and repre-

sentation of constituents without requiring any su-

pervised training data. DIORA incorporates the

inside-outside algorithm (Baker, 1979; Lari and

Young, 1990) into a latent tree chart parser. The

bottom-up inside step calculates a representation

for all possible constituents within a binary tree

over the input sentence. This step is equivalent

to the forward-pass of previous latent tree chart

parsers (Maillard et al., 2017). These inside repre-

sentations only encode the current subtree, ignor-



1130

0.7 ⋅ + 0.3 ⋅

The cat drinks The cat drinks

(a) Inside Pass (b) Outside Pass

The cat drinks The cat drinks

e(i, j) e(i, j)a(i, j) a(i, j)
b(i, j)

i0
j0 i1

j1
i0

j0

ā(k)

b̄(k)

Figure 2: The illustrated inside and outside pass of DIORA operating over an input of length three, ‘the cat drinks’.

a) The inside pass: The inside vector ā(k) for the phrase ‘the cat drinks’ is a weighted average of the compositions
for the two possible segmentations - ((the cat), drinks) and (the, (cat drinks)). The scalar weights come from a

learned compatibility function. b) The outside pass: The outside vector b̄(k) for the phrase ‘the cat’ is a function
of the outside vector of its parent ‘the cat drinks’ and the inside vector of its sibling ‘drinks’.

ing all outside context. Thus, we perform an addi-

tional top-down outside calculation for each node

in the tree, providing external context into the sub-

tree representations in each chart cell. The model

is then trained with the objective that the outside

representations of the leaf cells should reconstruct

the corresponding leaf input word, analogous to

masked language model (Devlin et al., 2019) pre-

training, except by using dynamic programming

we predict every word from a completely un-

masked context. The single most likely tree can be

recovered using the CKY algorithm and compati-

bility scores between constituents. Previous work

either predict trees that are not well aligned with

known treebanks (Yogatama et al., 2017; Choi

et al., 2018), or has no mechanism for explicitly

modeling phrases, requiring a complex procedure

to extract syntactic structures (Shen et al., 2018).

To probe different properties of our model, we

run experiments on unsupervised parsing, seg-

ment recall, and phrase representations. DIORA

achieves multiple new state-of-the-art results for

unsupervised constituency parsing (absolute im-

provements of 13.7%, 11.5%, and 7.8% on WSJ,

WSJ-40, and MultiNLI), has a greater recall on

more constituent types than a strong baseline, and

produces meaningful phrase representations.

2 DIORA: Deep Inside-Outside

Recursive Autoencoders

Our goal is to design a model and unsupervised

training procedure that learns structure from raw

text. The design of DIORA is based on our

hypothesis is that the most effective compres-

sion of a sentence will be derived from following

the true syntactic structure of the underlying in-

put. Our approach builds on previous latent tree

chart parsers which are augmented with the inside-

outside algorithm (Baker, 1979; Lari and Young,

1990) and trained to reproduce each input word

from its outside context. Based on our hypothe-

sis, loosely inspired by the linguistic “substitution

principle” (Frege, 1960), the model will best re-

construct the input by discovering and exploiting

syntactic regularities of the text.

The inside pass of our method recursively com-

presses the input sequence, at each step inputting

the vector representations of the two children into

a composition function (§2.1.1) that outputs an in-
side vector representation of the parent. This pro-

cess continues up to the root of the tree, eventu-

ally yielding a single vector representing the en-

tire sentence (Figure 2a). This is loosely analo-

gous to the compression step of an autoencoder

and equivalent to existing latent tree chart parsers

forward pass (Maillard et al., 2017). Follow-

ing this, we initiate the outside pass of our algo-

rithm with a generic (root) representation that is

learned as a separate parameter. As the outside

step of the inside-outside algorithm (Figure 2b),

we unfold until finally producing representations

of the leaf nodes. These leaves are then optimized

to reconstruct the input sentence as done in an

autoencoder-based deep neural network.

2.1 Filling the Chart with Inside-Outside

Each inside representation is the root of a particu-

larly sub-tree, and that representation is generated

by considering only the descendant constituents

within that sub-tree, ignoring any outside context.

After the inside representations are calculated, we



1131

perform a top-down outside pass to compute out-

side representations. The outside representations

are encoded by looking at only the context of a

given sub-tree. Once the chart is filled, each con-

stituent k (cell in the chart) is associated with an
inside vector ā(k), an outside vector b̄(k), inside
compatibility score ē(k) and outside compatibility
score f̄(k).

The input to our model is a sentence x made up

of T tokens, x0, x1, ..., xT−1. Each token xi has a
corresponding pre-trained embedded vector vi.

2.1.1 Inside Pass

For each pair of neighboring constituents i and
j 1, we compute a compatibility score and a com-
position vector. The score and vector that repre-

sent a particular span k are computed using a soft
weighting over all possible pairs of constituents,

that together fully cover the span (we refer to this

set of constituent pairs as {k}).

Vectors for spans of length 1 are initialized as a

non-linear transformation 2 of the embedded input

vi, and the scores associated with these spans are
set to 0:





x
o
u



 =





σ
σ

tanh



 (Uψvk + b)

ā(k) = o+ tanh(x⊙ u)

ē(k) = 0

Higher levels of the chart are computed as a

weighted summation of constituent pairs:

ā(k) =
∑

i,j∈{k}

e(i, j) a(i, j)

ē(k) =
∑

i,j∈{k}

e(i, j) ê(i, j)

The compatibility function ê is meant to pro-
duce a score for how likely a pair of neighboring

cells are to be merged. We implement this as a

bilinear function of the vectors from neighboring

spans, using a learned parameter matrix S. We ad-
ditionally add the individual scores from each two

merging cells. Intuitively, these individual scores

correspond to how likely each of the cells would

1The symbols i, j, and k are identifiers of spans from the
input x. The symbol i∗ identifies a token from the set of
negative examples {x∗}.

2This function shares its bias term b with Composeα, al-
though Uψ is not tied to any other weights.

exist in the final binary tree independently. The

formula for the compatibility function (and its nor-

malized form e) is defined as follows:

e(i, j) =
exp(ê(i, j))
∑

î,ĵ∈{k}

exp(ê(̂i, ĵ))

ê(i, j) = φ(ā(i), ā(j);Sα) + ē(i) + ē(j)

Where the bilinear projection φ is defined as:

φ(u, v;W ) = u⊤Wv

For the composition function a we used either a
TreeLSTM (Tai et al., 2015) or a 2-layer MLP
(see Appendix A.2 for more precise definitions

on both methods). In order for the remainder

of equations to remain agnostic to the choice of

composition function, we refer to the function as

Compose, which produces a hidden state vector h
and, in the case of TreeLSTM, a cell state vector
c, resulting in:

a(i, j) = Composeα(ā(i), ā(j))

2.1.2 Outside Pass

The outside computation is similar to the inside

pass (depicted in Figure 2b).

The root node of the outside chart is learned

as a bias. Descendant cells are predicted using a

disambiguation over the possible outside contexts.

Each component of the context consists of a sib-

ling cell from the inside chart and a parent cell

from the outside chart.

The function f is analogous to the function e.
It is normalized over constituent pairs i, j for the
span k, and is used to disambiguate among the
many outside contexts. The function b generates a
phrase representation for the missing sibling cell.

Equations for the outside computation follow:

b̄(k) =
∑

i,j∈{k}

f(i, j) b(i, j)

f̄(k) =
∑

i,j∈{k}

f(i, j) f̂(i, j)

b(i, j) = Composeβ(ā(i), b̄(j))

f̂(i, j) = φ(ā(i), b̄(j);Sβ) + ē(i) + f̄(j)

In the majority of our experiments, the

Compose used in b shares parameters with a used
in the inside pass, as do the compatibility func-

tions ê and f̂ (see §3.4 for results on the effects of
parameter sharing).



1132

2.2 Training Objective

To train our model we use an autoencoder-like lan-

guage modeling objective. In a standard autoen-

coder, the entire input x is compressed into a sin-

gle lower dimensional representation. This repre-

sentation, z, is then decompressed and trained to

reconstruct x. In our model, we never condition

the reconstruction of x on a single z because the

root’s outside representation is initialized with a

bias rather than the root’s own inside vector. In-

stead, we reconstruct x conditioned on the many

sub-tree roots, each of which is only a compres-

sion of a subset of the input.

To approximate this reconstruction we use a

max-margin loss considering a set {x∗} of N neg-
ative examples that are sampled according to their

frequency from the vocabulary (further details in

Appendix A.1). The terminal outside vector b̄(i)
is trained to predict its original input vi.

The per-instance loss function is described in

Equation 1:

Lx =
T−1
∑

i=0

N−1
∑

i∗=0

max(0, 1− b̄(i) · ā(i)

+ b̄(i) · ā(i∗)) (1)

The max-margin loss does not provide a gradi-

ent if the predicted vector is closer to its ground

truth than the negative example by a margin

greater than 1. For that reason, we also experi-
mented with an objective based on cross-entropy,

described in Equation 2:

Z∗ =
N−1
∑

i∗=0

exp(b̄(i) · ā(i∗))

Lx = −

T−1
∑

i=0

log
exp(b̄(i) · ā(i))

exp(b̄(i) · ā(i)) + Z∗
(2)

2.3 DIORA CKY Parsing

To obtain a parse with DIORA, we populate an

inside and outside chart using the input sentence.

We can extract the maximum scoring parse based

on our single grammar rule using the CKY proce-

dure (Kasami, 1966; Younger, 1967). The steps

for this procedure are described in Algorithm 1

and its runtime complexity in Appendix A.4.

3 Experiments

To evaluate the effectiveness of DIORA, we run

experiments on unsupervised parsing, unsuper-

Algorithm 1 Parsing with DIORA

1: procedure CKY(chart)
Initialize terminal values.

2: for each k ∈ chart | SIZE(k) = 1 do
3: xk ← 0

Calculate a maximum score for each span,

and record a backpointer.

4: for each k ∈ chart do
5: xk ← max

i,j∈{k}
[xi + xj + e(i, j)]

6: πik, π
j
k ← argmax

i,j∈{k}
[xi + xj + e(i, j)]

Backtrack to get the maximal tree.

7: procedure BACKTRACK(k)
8: if SIZE(k) = 1 then
9: return k

10: i← BACKTRACK(πik)

11: j ← BACKTRACK(πjk)
12: return (i, j)

13: return BACKTRACK(k ← root)

vised segment recall, and phrase similarity. The

model has been implemented in PyTorch (Team,

2018) and the code is published online.3 For train-

ing details, see Appendix A.1.

3.1 Unsupervised Parsing

We first evaluate how well our model predicts a

full unlabeled constituency parse. We look at

two data sets used in prior work (Htut et al.,

2018), The Wall Street Journal (WSJ) section of

Penn Treebank (Marcus et al., 1993), and the au-

tomatic parses from MultiNLI (Williams et al.,

2018b). WSJ has gold human-annotated parses

and MultiNLI contains automatic parses derived

from a supervised parser (Manning et al., 2014).

In addition to PRPN (Shen et al., 2018),4

we compare our model to deterministically con-

structed left branching, right branching, balanced,

and random trees. We also compare to ON-LSTM

(Shen et al., 2019), an extension of the PRPN

model, RL-SPINN (Yogatama et al., 2017), an

unsupervised shift-reduce parser, and ST-Gumbel

(Choi et al., 2018), an unsupervised chart parser.

The latter two of these models are trained to pre-

dict the downstream task of natural language in-

ference (NLI).

3https://github.com/iesl/diora
4We consider the PRPN models using LM stopping crite-

ria, which outperformed UP.



1133

3.1.1 Binarized WSJ and MultiNLI results

For the full WSJ test set and MultiNLI datasets

we follow the experimental setup of previous work

(Williams et al., 2018a). We binarize target trees

using Stanford CoreNLP (Manning et al., 2014)

and do not remove punctuation (experiments in

§3.1.2 do remove punctuation).
Latent tree models have been shown to perform

particularly poorly on attachments at the begin-

ning and end of the sequence (Williams et al.,

2018a). To address this, we incorporate a post-

processing heuristic (denoted as +PP in result
tables)5. This heuristic simply attaches trailing

punctuation to the root of the tree, regardless of

its predicted attachment.

In Table 1, we see that DIORA+PP achieves

the highest average and maximum F1 from five

random restarts. This model achieves a mean F1

7 points higher than ON-LSTM and an increase

of over 6.5 max F1 points. We also see that

DIORA exhibits much less variance between ran-

dom seeds than ON-LSTM. Additionally, we find

that PRPN-UP and DIORA benefit much more

from the +PP heuristic than PRPN-LM. This is
consistent with qualitative analysis showing that

DIORA and PRPN-UP incorrectly attach trailing

punctuation much more often than PRPN-LM.

On the MultiNLI dataset, PRPN-LM is the top

performing model without using the +PP heuris-
tic while DIORA matches PRPN-UP (Table 2. Us-

ing the heuristic, DIORA greatly surpasses both

variants of PRPN. However, it is worth noting that

this is not a gold standard evaluation and instead

evaluates a model’s ability to replicate the output

of a trained parser (Manning et al., 2014). A sec-

ond caveat is that SNLI (Bowman et al., 2015)

and MultiNLI contain several non-newswire do-

mains. Syntactic parsers often suffer significant

performance drops when predicting outside of the

newswire domain that the models were trained on.

3.1.2 WSJ-10 and WSJ-40 results

We also compare our models to two subsets of the

WSJ dataset that were used in previous unsuper-

vised parsing evaluations. WSJ-10 and WSJ-40

contain sentences up to length 10 and 40 respec-

tively after punctuation removal. We do not bi-

narize either of these two splits in order to com-

pare to previous work (see Appendix A.3 for more

5We did not have access to predictions or an implementa-
tion of the concurrent ON-LSTM model and therefore could
not apply the +PP heuristic.

Model F1µ F1max δ

LB 13.1 13.1 12.4

RB 16.5 16.5 12.4

Random 21.4 21.4 5.3

Balanced 21.3 21.3 4.6

RL-SPINN† 13.2 13.2 -
ST-Gumbel - GRU† 22.8 ±1.6 25.0 -

PRPN-UP 38.3 ±0.5 39.8 5.9

PRPN-LM 35.0 ±5.4 42.8 6.2

ON-LSTM 47.7 ±1.5 49.4 5.6

DIORA 48.9 ±0.5 49.6 8.0

PRPN-UP+PP - 45.2 6.7

PRPN-LM+PP - 42.4 6.3

DIORA+PP 55.7 ±0.4 56.2 8.5

Table 1: Full WSJ (test set) unsupervised unlabeled bi-

nary constituency parsing including punctuation. † in-
dicates trained to optimize NLI task. Mean and max

are calculated over five random restarts. PRPN F1 was

calculated using the parse trees and results provided by

Htut et al. (2018). The depth (δ) is the average tree
height. +PP refers to post-processing heuristic that at-
taches trailing punctuation to the root of the tree. The

top F1 value in each column is bolded.

Model F1median F1max δ

Random 27.0 27.0 4.4

Balanced 21.3 21.3 3.9

PRPN-UP 48.6 - 4.9

PRPN-LM 50.4 - 5.1

DIORA 51.2 53.3 6.4

PRPN-UP+PP - 54.8 5.2

PRPN-LM+PP - 50.4 5.1

DIORA+PP 59.0 59.1 6.7

Table 2: NLI unsupervised unlabeled binary con-

stituency parsing comparing to CoreNLP predicted

parses. PRPN F1 was calculated using the parse trees

and results provided by Htut et al. (2018). F1 median

and max are calculated over five random seeds and the

top F1 value in each column is bolded. Note that we

use median rather than mean in order to compare with

previous work.

details on WSJ split differences). Not binarizing

the target trees sets an upper-bound on the perfor-

mance of our models, denoted as UB in Table 3.

We compare against previous notable models

for this task: CCM (Klein and Manning, 2002)

uses the EM algorithm to learn probable nested



1134

bracketings over a sentence using gold or induced

part-of-speech tags, and PRLG (Ponvert et al.,

2011) performs constituent parsing through con-

secutive rounds of sentence chunking.

In Table 3, we see that DIORA outperforms the

previous state of the art for WSJ-40, PRLG, in

max F1. The WSJ-10 split has been difficult for la-

tent tree parsers such as DIORA, PRPN, and ON-

LSTM, none of which (including our model) are

able to improve upon previous non-neural meth-

ods. However, when we compare trends between

WSJ-10 and WSJ-40, we see that DIORA does a

better job at extending to longer sequences.

3.2 Unsupervised Phrase Segmentation

In many scenarios, one is only concerned with ex-

tracting particular constituent phrases rather than

a full parse. Common use cases would be iden-

tifying entities, noun phrases, or verb phrases for

downstream analysis. To get an idea of how well

our model can perform on phrase segmentation,

we consider the maximum recall of spans in our

predicted parse tree. We leave methods for cut-

ting the tree to future work and instead consider

the maximum recall of our model which serves as

an upper bound on its performance. Recall here is

the percentage of labeled constituents that appear

in our predicted tree relative to the total number

of constituents in the gold tree. These scores are

separated by type and presented in Table 4.

In Table 4 we see the breakdown of constituent

recall across the 10 most common types. DIORA

achieves the highest recall across the most types

and is the only model to perform effectively

on verb-phrases. Interestingly, DIORA performs

worse than PRPN-LM at prepositional phrases.

3.3 Phrase Similarity

One of the goals of DIORA is to learn meaningful

representations for spans of text. Most language

modeling methods focus only on explicitly model-

ing token representations and rely on ad-hoc post-

processing to generate representations for longer

spans, typically relying on simple arithmetic func-

tions of the individual tokens.

To evaluate our model’s learned phrase repre-

sentations, we look at the similarity between spans

of the same type within labeled phrase datasets.

We look at two datasets. CoNLL 2000 (Tjong

Kim Sang and Buchholz, 2000) is a shallow pars-

ing dataset containing spans of noun phrases, verb

phrases, etc. CoNLL 2012 (Pradhan et al., 2012)

WSJ-10 WSJ-40

Model F1µ F1max F1µ F1max

UB 87.8 87.8 85.7 85.7

LB 28.7 28.7 12.0 12.0

RB 61.7 61.7 40.7 40.7

CCM† - 63.2 - -
CCMgold† - 71.9 - 33.7
PRLG † - 72.1 - 54.6

PRPNNLI 66.3 ±0.8 68.5 - -

PRPN‡ 70.5 ±0.4 71.3 - 52.4
ON-LSTM‡ 65.1 ±1.7 66.8 - -
DIORA 67.7 ±0.7 68.5 60.6 ±0.2 60.9

Table 3: WSJ-10 and WSJ-40 unsupervised non-binary

unlabeled constituency parsing with punctuation re-

moved. † indicates that the model predicts a full, non-
binary parse with additional resources. ‡ indicates
model was trained on WSJ data and PRPNNLI was

trained on MultiNLI data. CCM uses predicted POS

tags while CCMgold uses gold POS tags. PRPN F1 was

calculated using the parse trees and results provided by

Htut et al. (2018). LB and RB are the left and right-

branching baselines. UB is the upper bound attainable

by a model that produces binary trees.

is a named entity dataset containing 19 different

entity types.

For each of the labeled spans with length greater

than one, we first generate its phrase representa-

tion. We then calculate its cosine similarity to all

other labeled spans. We then calculate if the label

for that query span matches the labels for each of

the K most similar other spans in the dataset. In
Table 5 we report precision@K for both datasets
and various values of K.

The first baseline we compare against produces

phrase representations from averaging context-

insensitive (CI) ELMo vectors of individual to-

kens with the span. The second uses sentence-

insensitive (SI) ELMo vectors, running the full

ELMo over only the relevant tokens and ignor-

ing the rest of the sentence. We also look at

ELMo’s output when given the entire sentence.

When analyzing our baselines that run the full

ELMo, we follow the procedure described in (Pe-

ters et al., 2018b) and represent phrases as a func-

tion of its first and last hidden state. We extract

these states from the final ELMo layer (3rd BiL-

STM) as these consistently gave the best perfor-

mance among other options. For DIORA, we use

the concatenation of the inside and outside repre-

sentations ([ā; b̄]).



1135

Label Count DIORA P-UP P-LM

NP 297,872 0.767 0.687 0.598

VP 168,605 0.628 0.393 0.316

PP 116,338 0.595 0.497 0.602

S 87,714 0.798 0.639 0.657

SBAR 24,743 0.613 0.403 0.554

ADJP 12,263 0.604 0.342 0.360

QP 11,441 0.801 0.336 0.545

ADVP 5,817 0.693 0.392 0.500

PRN 2,971 0.546 0.127 0.144

SINV 2,563 0.926 0.904 0.932

Table 4: Segment recall from WSJ separated by phrase

type. The 10 most frequent phrase types are shown

above, and the highest value in each row is bolded. P-

UP=PRNP-UP, P-LM=PRPN-LM

For CoNLL 2000, we find that our model out-

performs all baselines for all values of K. This
demonstrates DIORA’s ability to capture and rep-

resent syntactic information within phrases. For

CoNLL 2012, we find that DIORA outperforms

both ELMoCI and ELMoSI while ELMo per-

forms best overall. ELMoCI is surprisingly ef-

fective on this dataset even though it performed

more poorly on CoNLL 2000. These results in-

dicate that DIORA is capturing syntax quite well,

but still has room to improve on more fine-grained

semantic representations.

3.4 Impact of Modeling Choices

To test the impact of our modeling choices, we

compared the performance of two different losses

and four different composition functions on the

full WSJ validation set. The losses were covered

in Equations 1 (Margin) and 2 (Softmax). The

two primary methods of composition we consid-

ered were TreeLSTM (Tai et al., 2015) and MLP

(a 2-hidden layer neural network). In addition, we

experimented with a simple kernel of the MLP in-

put [x; y;x ⊙ y;x − y] and with a setting where
both the inside and outside parameters are shared.

The results are shown in Table 6. We see

that MLP composition consistently performs bet-

ter than with TreeLSTM, that MLP benefits from

the Softmax loss, and that the best performance

comes from sharing parameters. All other exper-

imental results use this highly performant setting

unless otherwise specified.

The convoy of about 100 vehicles was the first to make deliveries to the capital in about 10 days

The court ruled that the news media did n't reveal Twiggy 's problems at the time

Figure 3: DIORA can match the ground truth exactly.

Ferro also said it would cancel the unused portion of a 1987 buy-back  plan for administrative reasons

Ferro also said it would cancel the unused portion of a 1987 buy-back  plan for administrative reasons

In the stands people waved ANC flags wore ANC T-shirts sang ANC songs and chanted ANC slogans

In the stands people waved ANC flags wore ANC T-shirts sang ANC songs and chanted ANC slogans

Figure 4: At times, DIORA exhibits contrary behav-

ior to the ground truth inevitably leading to some error.

DIORA’s output is shown above the ground truth.6

The following month the company put itself up for sale

The following month the company put itself up for sale

He added that the U.S. has cut off aid to some rebel units when it was determined that those units broke the cease-fire

He added that the U.S. has cut off aid to some rebel units when it was determined that those units broke the cease-fire

We simply do n't agree with that or the findings of their investigation

We simply do n't agree with that or the findings of their investigation

Figure 5: DIORA often groups verbs and particles

(top), sometimes exactly as the ground truth (mid-

dle). Occasionally, errors are particle-like (bottom).

DIORA’s output is shown above the ground truth.6

6Ground truth parses are binarized unless otherwise spec-
ified. All examples of DIORA parses are already binary.
Some punctuation has been removed for easier readability.



1136

CoNLL 2000 CoNLL 2012

Model Dim P@1 P@10 P@100 P@1 P@10 P@100

Random 800 0.684 0.683 0.680 0.137 0.133 0.135

ELMoCI 1024 0.962 0.955 0.957 0.708 0.643 0.544

ELMoSI 4096 0.970 0.964 0.955 0.660 0.624 0.533

ELMo 4096 0.987 0.983 0.974 0.896 0.847 0.716

DIORAIn/Out 800 0.990 0.985 0.979 0.860 0.796 0.646

Table 5: P@1, P@10, and P@100 for labeled chunks from CoNLL-2000 and CoNLL 2012 datasets. For all

metrics, higher is better. The top value in each column is bolded. Diora uses the concatenation of the inside and

outside vector at each cell which performed better than either in isolation.

3.5 Qualitative Results

Looking at our model’s output, we see that some

trees are an exact replication of the binarized

ground truth (Fig. 3), or very close (Fig. 4). For

future work we intend to explore common patterns

in DIORA’s learned structure, although some pat-

terns are already recognizable, such as the affinity

to group particles and verbs (Fig. 5).

4 Related Work

Latent Tree Learning A brief survey of neural la-

tent tree learning models was covered in (Williams

et al., 2018a). The first positive result for neural la-

tent tree parsing was shown in (Htut et al., 2018),

which used a language modeling objective. The

model in (Liu et al., 2018) uses an inside chart and

an outside procedure to calculate marginal proba-

bilities in order to align spans between sentences

in entailment.

F1µ

Composition Loss ∅ +PP

TreeLSTM Margin 49.9 53.1

TreeLSTM Softmax 52.0 52.9

MLP Margin 49.7 54.4

MLP Softmax 52.6 55.5

MLPKernel Softmax 51.8 54.8

MLPShared Softmax 50.8 56.7

Table 6: F1 for different model variants on the binary

WSJ validation set with included punctuation. The bi-

nary trees are as-is (∅) or modified according to the

post-processing heuristic (+PP ). The mean F1 is
shown across three random seeds.

Neural Inside-Outside Parsers The Inside-

Outside Recursive Neural Network (IORNN) (Le

and Zuidema, 2014) is closest to ours. It is a

graph-based dependency parser that uses beam

search and can reliably find accurate parses when

retaining a k-best list. In contrast, our model
produces the most likely parse given the learned

compatibility of the constituents. The Neural

CRF Parser (Durrett and Klein, 2015), similar to

DIORA, performs exact inference on the structure

of a sentence, although requires a set of gram-

mar rules and labeled parse trees during training.

DIORA, like Liu et al. (2018), has a single gram-

mar rule that applies to any pair of constituents and

does not use structural supervision.

Learning from Raw Text Unsupervised learn-

ing of syntactic structure has been an active re-

search area (Brill et al., 1990), including for un-

supervised segmentation (Ando and Lee, 2000;

Goldwater et al., 2009; Ponvert et al., 2011)

and unsupervised dependency parsing (Spitkovsky

et al., 2013). Some models exploit the availabil-

ity of parallel corpora in multiple languages (Das

and Petrov, 2011; Cohen et al., 2011). Others have

shown that dependency parsing can be used for un-

supervised constituency parsing (Spitkovsky et al.,

2013; Klein and Manning, 2004), or that it’s ef-

fective to prune a random subset of possible trees

(Bod, 2006). These approaches aren’t necessar-

ily orthogonal to DIORA. For instance, our model

may benefit when combined with an unsupervised

dependency parser.

5 Conclusion

In this work we presented DIORA, an unsuper-

vised method for inducing syntactic trees and rep-

resentations of constituent spans. We showed



1137

inside-outside representations constructed with a

latent tree chart parser and trained with an autoen-

coder language modeling objective learns syntac-

tic structure of language effectively. In exper-

iments on unsupervised parsing, chunking, and

phrase representations we show our model is

comparable to or outperforms previous methods,

achieving the state-of-the-art performance on un-

supervised unlabeled constituency parsing for the

full WSJ (with punctuation), WSJ-40, and NLI

datasets. We also show our model obtains higher

segment recall than a comparable model and out-

performs strong baselines on phrase representa-

tions on a chunking dataset.

While the current model seems to focus pri-

marily on syntax, future work can improve the

model’s ability to capture fine-grained semantics.

Potential avenues include training larger mod-

els over much larger corpora, extra unsupervised

or weakly-supervised phrase classification objec-

tives, and other modeling enhancements. We are

also eager to apply DIORA to other domains and

languages which do not have rich linguistically an-

notated training sets.

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to Carolyn Anderson, Adina

Williams, Phu Mon Htut, and our colleagues at

UMass for help and advice, and to the UMass

NLP reading group and the anonymous reviewers

for feedback on drafts of this work. This work

was supported in part by the Center for Intelli-

gent Information Retrieval, in part by the National

Science Foundation (NSF) grant numbers DMR-

1534431, IIS-1514053 and CNS-0958392. Any

opinions, findings and conclusions or recommen-

dations expressed in this material are those of the

authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the

sponsor.

References

Roee Aharoni and Yoav Goldberg. 2017. Towards
string-to-tree neural machine translation. In Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (ACL).

Rie Kubota Ando and Lillian Lee. 2000. Mostly-
unsupervised statistical segmentation of japanese:
Applications to kanji. In North American Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics (NAACL).

James K Baker. 1979. Trainable grammars for speech
recognition. The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 65(S1):S132–S132.

Rens Bod. 2006. An all-subtrees approach to unsu-
pervised parsing. In Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL).

Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts,
and Christopher D. Manning. 2015. A large anno-
tated corpus for learning natural language inference.
In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP).

Eric Brill, David Magerman, Mitchell Marcus, and
Beatrice Santorini. 1990. Deducing linguistic struc-
ture from the statistics of large corpora. In Informa-
tion Technology, 1990.’Next Decade in Information
Technology’, Proceedings of the 5th Jerusalem Con-
ference on (Cat. No. 90TH0326-9), pages 380–389.
IEEE.

Jihun Choi, Kang Min Yoo, and Sang-goo Lee. 2018.
Learning to compose task-specific tree structures.
In Advancement of Artificial Intelligence Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI).

Shay B. Cohen, Dipanjan Das, and Noah A. Smith.
2011. Unsupervised structure prediction with non-
parallel multilingual guidance. In Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).

Dipanjan Das and Slav Petrov. 2011. Unsupervised
part-of-speech tagging with bilingual graph-based
projections. In Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (ACL).

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. North American Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (NAACL).

Greg Durrett and Dan Klein. 2015. Neural crf parsing.
In Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL).

Akiko Eriguchi, Yoshimasa Tsuruoka, and Kyunghyun
Cho. 2017. Learning to parse and translate improves
neural machine translation. In Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (ACL).

Friedrich Ludwig Gottlob Frege. 1960. On sense
and reference. In Zeitschrift für Philosophie und
philosophische Kritik 100 (1892) 25-50; translated
in Translations from the Philosophical Writings of
Gottlob Frege (ed. by P. Geach and M. Black). Ox-
ford.

Pablo Gamallo, Marcos Garcia, and Santiago
Fernández-Lanza. 2012. Dependency-based
open information extraction. In Joint workshop on
unsupervised and semi-supervised learning in NLP.
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL).

Sharon Goldwater, Thomas L Griffiths, and Mark John-
son. 2009. A bayesian framework for word segmen-
tation: Exploring the effects of context. Cognition,
112:21–54.



1138

Luheng He, Kenton Lee, Omer Levy, and Luke Zettle-
moyer. 2018. Jointly predicting predicates and argu-
ments in neural semantic role labeling. In Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL).

Phu Mon Htut, Kyunghyun Cho, and Samuel R Bow-
man. 2018. Grammar induction with neural lan-
guage models: An unusual replication. In Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP): Short Paper.

Tadao Kasami. 1966. An efficient recognition
and syntax-analysis algorithm for context-free lan-
guages. Coordinated Science Laboratory Report no.
R-257.

Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam:
A method for stochastic optimization. CoRR,
abs/1412.6980.

Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2002. A
generative constituent-context model for improved
grammar induction. In Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL).

Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2004. Corpus-
based induction of syntactic structure: Models of de-
pendency and constituency. In Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (ACL).

Karim Lari and Steve J Young. 1990. The estimation of
stochastic context-free grammars using the inside-
outside algorithm. Computer speech & language,
4(1):35–56.

Phong Le and Willem Zuidema. 2014. The inside-
outside recursive neural network model for depen-
dency parsing. In Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP).

Phong Le and Willem Zuidema. 2015. The forest con-
volutional network: Compositional distributional se-
mantics with a neural chart and without binarization.
In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP), pages 1155–1164.

Xin Li and Dan Roth. 2006. Learning question clas-
sifiers: the role of semantic information. Natural
Language Engineering, 12(3):229–249.

Yang Liu, Matt Gardner, and Mirella Lapata. 2018.
Structured alignment networks for matching sen-
tences. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP).

Jean Maillard, Stephen Clark, and Dani Yogatama.
2017. Jointly learning sentence embeddings and
syntax with unsupervised tree-lstms. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1705.09189.

Christopher Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Finkel, Steven Bethard, and David McClosky.
2014. The stanford corenlp natural language pro-
cessing toolkit. In Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL): System Demonstrations.

Mitchell Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated
corpus of english: The penn treebank. Computa-
tional linguistics, 19(2):313–330.

Matthew E. Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt
Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2018a. Deep contextualized word rep-
resentations. In North American Association for
Computational Linguistics (NAACL).

Matthew E Peters, Mark Neumann, Luke Zettlemoyer,
and Wen-tau Yih. 2018b. Dissecting contextual
word embeddings: Architecture and representation.
In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP).

Elias Ponvert, Jason Baldridge, and Katrin Erk. 2011.
Simple unsupervised grammar induction from raw
text with cascaded finite state models. In Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL).

Sameer Pradhan, Alessandro Moschitti, Nianwen Xue,
Olga Uryupina, and Yuchen Zhang. 2012. Conll-
2012 shared task: Modeling multilingual unre-
stricted coreference in ontonotes. In Joint Confer-
ence on EMNLP and CoNLL-Shared Task.

Yikang Shen, Zhouhan Lin, Chin-Wei Huang, and
Aaron Courville. 2018. Neural language modeling
by jointly learning syntax and lexicon. In Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR).

Yikang Shen, Shawn Tan, Alessandro Sordoni, and
Aaron Courville. 2019. Ordered neurons: Integrat-
ing tree structures into recurrent neural networks. In
International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions (ICLR).

Richard Socher, Eric H Huang, Jeffrey Pennin, Christo-
pher D Manning, and Andrew Y Ng. 2011a. Dy-
namic pooling and unfolding recursive autoencoders
for paraphrase detection. In Advances in Neural In-
formation Processing Systems (NeurIPS).

Richard Socher, Jeffrey Pennington, Eric H Huang,
Andrew Y Ng, and Christopher D Manning. 2011b.
Semi-supervised recursive autoencoders for predict-
ing sentiment distributions. In Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).

Valentin I Spitkovsky, Hiyan Alshawi, and Daniel Ju-
rafsky. 2013. Breaking out of local optima with
count transforms and model recombination: A study
in grammar induction. In Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP).

Charles Sutton and Andrew McCallum. 2005. Joint
parsing and semantic role labeling. In Confer-
ence on Computational Natural Language Learning
(CoNLL).

Kai Sheng Tai, Richard Socher, and Christopher D.
Manning. 2015. Improved semantic representations



1139

from tree-structured long short-term memory net-
works. In Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (ACL).

Pytorch Core Team. 2018. Pytorch: Tensors and dy-
namic neural networks in python with strong gpu ac-
celeration. http://pytorch.org/. Accessed:
2018-09-26.

Erik F Tjong Kim Sang and Sabine Buchholz. 2000.
Introduction to the conll-2000 shared task: Chunk-
ing. In Proceedings of CoNLL-2000 and LLL-2000,
pages 127–132.

Adina Williams, Andrew Drozdov, and Samuel R Bow-
man. 2018a. Do latent tree learning models iden-
tify meaningful structure in sentences? Transac-
tions of the Association of Computational Linguis-
tics (TACL), 6:253–267.

Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman.
2018b. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sen-
tence understanding through inference. In North
American Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (NAACL).

Dani Yogatama, Phil Blunsom, Chris Dyer, Edward
Grefenstette, and Wang Ling. 2017. Learning to
compose words into sentences with reinforcement
learning. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR).

Daniel H Younger. 1967. Recognition and parsing of
context-free languages in time n3. Information and
control, 10(2):189–208.

Poorya Zaremoodi and Gholamreza Haffari. 2018. In-
corporating syntactic uncertainty in neural machine
translation with a forest-to-sequence model. In In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics.

A Appendices

A.1 Training Details

Training Data. Sentences of length ≤ 20 from the
SNLI and MultiNLI training sets.

Optimization. We train our model using stochas-

tic gradient descent with the Adam optimization

algorithm (Kingma and Ba, 2014). Cells were

normalized to have magnitude of 1, following

Socher et al. (2011a). For instance, ā(k) :=
ā(k)/ ‖ā(k)‖2. Gradients are clipped to a maxi-
mum L2-norm of 5.

Hyperparameters. Chosen using grid search over

cell-dimension {400D, 800D} and learning rate
{2, 4, 8, 10, 20} · 10−4.

Early Stopping. Using unlabeled parsing F1

against the binarized WSJ validation set.

Vocabulary. The model is trained in an open-

vocabulary setting using pre-trained context-

insensitive character embeddings. The embedder

is taken from ELMo (Peters et al., 2018a).

Batching. Batches were constructed such that they

contained sentences of uniform length. Using

batch size 128 for 400D and 64 for 800D.

Sampling. N negatives are sampled for each
batch. All experiments use N = 100.
Training Steps. 1M parameter updates, taking 3

days using 4x Nvidia 1080ti.

A.2 Composition and Input Transform

TreeLSTM. The TreeLSTM (Tai et al., 2015)
function produces a hidden state vector h and cell
state vector c given two input vectors hi and hj .













x
fi
fj
o
u













=













σ
σ
σ
σ

tanh













(

U

[

hi
hj

]

+ b+













0
ω
ω
0
0













)

c = ci ⊙ fi + cj ⊙ fj + x⊙ u

h = o+ tanh(c)

The constant ω is set to 1 for the inside, 0 for
the outside. U and b are learned.

MLP. MLP (Multi-Layer Perceptron) is a deep

non-linear composition with the following form:

h = W1 (W0 〈hi, hj〉+ b) + b1

The operator 〈hi, hj〉 is a concatenation [hi;hj ].
For the MLPKernel 〈hi, hj〉 is more involved to
support further interaction between the two input

vectors [hi;hj ;hi ⊙ hj ;hi − hj ]. The variables
W0,W1, b, b1 are learned and c is unused.

A.3 Reproducing Parsing Results

In Table 7, we’ve organized a reference for cre-

ating various splits of the WSJ for the purpose

of evaluating unsupervised parsing. Some splits

use only the test set (section 23), others use all of

the training, validation, and test data. Optionally,

punctuation is stripped and sentences greater than

a specified length are ignored. Predictions can be

compared to the full parse trees in the annotated

data, or to a binarized version. The PARSEVAL

specification calculated bracketing F1 considering

all spans, although some previous work diverts

from PARSEVAL and ignores spans that are triv-

ially correct (ones over the entire sentence).



1140

WSJ WSJ-10 WSJ-40

Split Test All Test

w/ Punctuation Yes No No

Max Length ∞ 10 40

Binarized Yes No No

Trivial Spans Yes No No

Table 7: Settings for unlabeled binary bracketing eval-

uation for different splits of the WSJ corpus.

A.4 Runtime Complexity

The runtime complexities for DIORA’s methods

are shown in Table 8. The parallel column rep-

resents the complexity when the values for all

constituent pairs are computed simultaneously, as-

suming that these computations are independent

and do not depend on values that have yet to be

computed. Linear complexity is theoretically fea-

sible depending on batch size, input length, and

number of computational cores. In practice, one

might experience super-linear performance.

Although both the inside pass and outside pass

have an upper bound of n3 operations, the outside
pass will have more operations than the inside pass

for sentences of length > 1.
As a point of reference, our implementation

computes the loss over the entire WSJ corpus in

5 minutes 30 seconds at a rate of 3,500 words per

second using a single GPU.

Method Serial Parallel

Inside Pass O(n3) O(n)

Outside Pass O(n3) O(n)

Training Objective O(n ·N) O(n)

CKY O(n3) O(n)

Table 8: Runtime complexity for methods associated

with DIORA in terms of sentence length n and number
of negative examples per token N . Each column rep-
resents the complexity when the values for each con-

stituent are computed serially or in parallel.

A.5 Parse Trees

Examples of parse trees derived from the compat-

ibility scores are shown in Figures 6 and 7. Some

punctuation has been removed for readability.

In addition a big loan that First Boston made to Ohio Mattress Co was n't repaid on time when its 450 million junk financing for a buy-out  of the bedding company was withdrawn

In addition a big loan that First Boston made to Ohio Mattress Co was n't repaid on time when its 450 million junk financing for a buy-out  of the bedding company was withdrawn

In its latest compilation  of performance statistics  Moody 's Investors Service found that investment-grade  bonds posted a total return of 2.7 % in October while junk bonds showed a negative return of 1.5 %

In its latest compilation  of performance statistics  Moody 's Investors Service found that investment-grade  bonds posted a total return of 2.7 % in October while junk bonds showed a negative return of 1.5 %

Within a year Kao Corp. a major cosmetics company plans to eliminate 1,000 clerical jobs by putting on a central computer network some work such as credit reports currently performed in 22 separate offices

Within a year Kao Corp. a major cosmetics company plans to eliminate 1,000 clerical jobs by putting on a central computer network some work such as credit reports currently performed in 22 separate offices

Authorities at London 's Heathrow Airport are investigating the disappearance of a Paul Gauguin watercolor Young Tahitian Woman in a Red Pareo that has two sketches on its verso -LRB- opposite  -RRB- side

Authorities at London 's Heathrow Airport are investigating the disappearance of a Paul Gauguin watercolor Young Tahitian Woman in a Red Pareo that has two sketches on its verso -LRB- opposite  -RRB- side

But in its ruling last April the New York court said that all producers of the anti-miscarriage drug should share liability when the manufacturer of a specific dose ca n't be determined

But in its ruling last April the New York court said that all producers of the anti-miscarriage drug should share liability when the manufacturer of a specific dose ca n't be determined

The Fed said the Comptroller of the Currency is expected to begin a Community Reinvestment Act examination of First Union 's Florida and North Carolina banking units in the next two weeks

The Fed said the Comptroller of the Currency is expected to begin a Community Reinvestment Act examination of First Union 's Florida and North Carolina banking units in the next two weeks

The appeals-court  decision last year was particularly surprising because the same court had dismissed a similar case in 1970 involving singer Nancy Sinatra and a tire ad also a Young & Rubicam product

The appeals-court  decision last year was particularly surprising because the same court had dismissed a similar case in 1970 involving singer Nancy Sinatra and a tire ad also a Young & Rubicam product

The resulting # 1.9 billion merchandise trade deficit  was partly offset by an assumed surplus of # 300 million in so-called invisible items which include income from investments services and official transfers

The resulting # 1.9 billion merchandise trade deficit  was partly offset by an assumed surplus of # 300 million in so-called invisible items which include income from investments services and official transfers

For the third quarter net premiums were 742 million up 9.6 % from 677 million in last year 's quarter because of the expiration of the National Indemnity quota share reinsurance agreement

For the third quarter net premiums were 742 million up 9.6 % from 677 million in last year 's quarter because of the expiration of the National Indemnity quota share reinsurance agreement

BANKERS ACCEPTANCES : 8.45 % 30 days ; 8.33 % 60 days ; 8.32 % 90 days ; 8.15 % 120 days ; 8.06 % 150 days ; 7.96 % 180 days

BANKERS ACCEPTANCES : 8.45 % 30 days ; 8.33 % 60 days ; 8.32 % 90 days ; 8.15 % 120 days ; 8.06 % 150 days ; 7.96 % 180 days

At the 932 million T. Rowe Price High Yield Fund investors yanked out about 182 million in the past two months

At the 932 million T. Rowe Price High Yield Fund investors yanked out about 182 million in the past two months

Import values are calculated on a cost insurance and freight -LRB- c.i.f -RRB- basis while exports are accounted for on a free-on-board  -LRB- f.o.b -RRB- basis

Import values are calculated on a cost insurance and freight -LRB- c.i.f -RRB- basis while exports are accounted for on a free-on-board  -LRB- f.o.b -RRB- basis

The three units are a nationwide pharmaceutical and health-products  distributor  a small sporting-goods  chain and a combination catalog showroom and toy-store chain

The three units are a nationwide pharmaceutical and health-products  distributor  a small sporting-goods  chain and a combination catalog showroom and toy-store chain

Dreyfus alone has seen its money market funds grow from 1 billion in 1975 to closes to 15 billion today

Dreyfus alone has seen its money market funds grow from 1 billion in 1975 to closes to 15 billion today

Also it was not a funny time over here what with the Vietnam War the '68 Democratic convention assassinations and riots

Also it was not a funny time over here what with the Vietnam War the '68 Democratic convention assassinations and riots

The Tennessee Valley Authority issued 4 billion in bonds in the federal utility 's first public debt offering in 15 years

The Tennessee Valley Authority issued 4 billion in bonds in the federal utility 's first public debt offering in 15 years

Figure 6: Examples where DIORA achieves 100% re-

call compared with the raw (n-ary) ground truth, but

less than 100% accuracy on the binarized ground truth.

DIORA’s output is shown above the ground truth.



1141

On Tuesday the House approved a labor-backed  amendment that would require the Transportation Department to reject airline acquisitions if the person seeking to purchase a carrier had run two or more airlines previously that have filed for protection  from creditors under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code

On Tuesday the House approved a labor-backed  amendment that would require the Transportation Department to reject airline acquisitions if the person seeking to purchase a carrier had run two or more airlines previously that have filed for protection  from creditors under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code

There is also speculation that Mr. Newhouse could bring in a powerhouse businessman or another Newhouse family member to run the business side in combination with a publishing executive like Robert Gottlieb who left Random House 's Alfred A. Knopf to run the New Yorker also owned by the Newhouse family

There is also speculation that Mr. Newhouse could bring in a powerhouse businessman or another Newhouse family member to run the business side in combination with a publishing executive like Robert Gottlieb who left Random House 's Alfred A. Knopf to run the New Yorker also owned by the Newhouse family

The Warner Bros. studio and Sony signaled they are close to a settlement yesterday asking a Los Angeles Superior Court to postpone a hearing scheduled for tomorrow  on Warner 's request for a preliminary injunction blocking Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters from taking the top posts at Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc

The Warner Bros. studio and Sony signaled they are close to a settlement yesterday asking a Los Angeles Superior Court to postpone a hearing scheduled for tomorrow  on Warner 's request for a preliminary injunction blocking Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters from taking the top posts at Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc

Rep. Edwards the California Democrat is one who pledges that he would immediately challenge Mr. Bush in the courts arguing a line-item veto would expand a president 's powers far beyond anything the framers of the Constitution  had in mind

Rep. Edwards the California Democrat is one who pledges that he would immediately challenge Mr. Bush in the courts arguing a line-item veto would expand a president 's powers far beyond anything the framers of the Constitution  had in mind

The Merc received considerable criticism in 1987 when it was discovered that its compliance director Kevin P. Conway who then was responsible for policing the exchange 's busy oil and metal pits was engaged in other personal business activities on Exchange time including out-of-state  trips according to a New York Merc report prepared last year

The Merc received considerable criticism in 1987 when it was discovered that its compliance director Kevin P. Conway who then was responsible for policing the exchange 's busy oil and metal pits was engaged in other personal business activities on Exchange time including out-of-state  trips according to a New York Merc report prepared last year

For example one of my favorite movies is the 1949 British comedy Kind Hearts and Coronets in which the entire comedy is based on actor Dennis Price 's murdering eight titled relatives -LRB- all played by Alec Guinness -RRB- because they snubbed his mother and stand in the way of his acquiring the family title

For example one of my favorite movies is the 1949 British comedy Kind Hearts and Coronets in which the entire comedy is based on actor Dennis Price 's murdering eight titled relatives -LRB- all played by Alec Guinness -RRB- because they snubbed his mother and stand in the way of his acquiring the family title

The leveraged buy-out  firm of Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. which owns 46 % of the common equity of SCI TV indicated in the debt plan that it would reduce its equity stake to 15 % giving the rest of its stake to bondholders in the restructuring

The leveraged buy-out  firm of Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. which owns 46 % of the common equity of SCI TV indicated in the debt plan that it would reduce its equity stake to 15 % giving the rest of its stake to bondholders in the restructuring

BUSINESSLAND INC. San Jose computer retail company annual sales of 1.1 billion NYSE said all 16 corporate office and stores in the area were open with the exception of a retail center in San Francisco 's business district

BUSINESSLAND INC. San Jose computer retail company annual sales of 1.1 billion NYSE said all 16 corporate office and stores in the area were open with the exception of a retail center in San Francisco 's business district

Recognition also said it obtained a commitment  from Chemical Bank and Bank of Boston to convert an estimated 18 million in bank debt to a new 24-month  secured term loan to be repaid through the sale of certain assets

Recognition also said it obtained a commitment  from Chemical Bank and Bank of Boston to convert an estimated 18 million in bank debt to a new 24-month  secured term loan to be repaid through the sale of certain assets

The prices of cattle and hog futures contracts  dropped  sharply because traders speculated that the stock market plunge Friday will linger in the minds of U.S. consumers long enough to prompt  them to rein in their spending at the supermarket which would hurt demand for beef and pork

The prices of cattle and hog futures contracts  dropped  sharply because traders speculated that the stock market plunge Friday will linger in the minds of U.S. consumers long enough to prompt  them to rein in their spending at the supermarket which would hurt demand for beef and pork

Figure 7: DIORA can perform close to the ground truth even on long sentences. In this figure, n-ary trees are

shown for the ground truth. DIORA’s output is shown above the ground truth.


