



















































ADIDA: Automatic Dialect Identification for Arabic


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2019: Demonstrations, pages 6–11
Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2 - June 7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

6

ADIDA: Automatic Dialect Identification for Arabic

Ossama Obeid, Mohammad Salameh,† Houda Bouamor,† Nizar Habash
New York University Abu Dhabi, UAE

†Carnegie Mellon University in Qatar, Qatar
{oobeid,nizar.habash}@nyu.edu
{msalameh,hbouamor}@cmu.edu

Abstract

This demo paper describes ADIDA, a web-
based system for automatic dialect identifica-
tion for Arabic text. The system distinguishes
among the dialects of 25 Arab cities (from Ra-
bat to Muscat) in addition to Modern Standard
Arabic. The results are presented with either
a point map or a heat map visualizing the au-
tomatic identification probabilities over a geo-
graphical map of the Arab World.

1 Introduction

The last few years have witnessed an increased
interest within the natural language processing
(NLP) community in the computational model-
ing of dialectal and non-standard varieties of lan-
guages (Malmasi et al., 2016; Zampieri et al.,
2017, 2018). The Arabic language, which is a
collection of variants or dialects, has received a
decent amount of attention in this regard with a
number of efforts focusing on dialect identifica-
tion, translation and other forms of modeling. In
this demo paper, we present ADIDA,1 a public on-
line interface for visualizing fine-grained dialect
identification of Arabic text (Salameh et al., 2018).
The dialect identification system produces a vector
of probabilities indicating the likelihood an input
sentence is from 25 cities (Table 1) and Modern
Standard Arabic (MSA). ADIDA displays the re-
sults with either a point map or a heat map overlaid
on top of a geographical map of the Arab World.

2 Arabic and its Dialects

Although MSA is the official language across the
Arab World, it is not the native language of any
speakers of Arabic. Dialectal Arabic (DA), on the
other hand, is the daily informal spoken variety.

1https://adida.abudhabi.nyu.edu/
The Arabic word �èYK
Y« /ςadida/ means ‘numerous’.

DA is nowadays emerging as the primary language
of communication – not just spoken, but also writ-
ten, particularly in social media. Arabic dialects
are often classified in terms of geographical re-
gions, such as Levantine Arabic, Gulf Arabic and
Egyptian Arabic (Habash, 2010). However, within
each of these regional groups, there is significant
variation down to the village, town, and city lev-
els. The demo we present is based on the work
of Salameh et al. (2018), who utilize the MADAR
Project parallel corpus of 25 Arab cities plus MSA
(Table 1) (Bouamor et al., 2018).2

Arabic dialects differ in various ways from
MSA and from each other. These include phono-
logical, morphological, lexical, and syntactic dif-
ferences (Haeri, 1991; Holes, 2004; Watson, 2007;
Bassiouney, 2009). Despite these differences,
distinguishing between Arabic dialects in writ-
ten form is an arduous task because: (i) dialects
use the same writing script and share part of the
vocabulary; and (ii) Arabic speakers usually re-
sort to repeated code-switching between their di-
alect and MSA (Abu-Melhim, 1991; Bassiouney,
2009), creating sentences with different levels of
dialectness (Habash et al., 2008).

3 Related Work

3.1 Arabic Dialect Processing
While automatic processing of DA is relatively re-
cent compared to MSA, it has attracted a consid-
erable amount of research in NLP (Shoufan and
Al-Ameri, 2015). Most of it focuses on (i) collect-
ing datasets from various sources and at different
levels (Zaidan and Callison-Burch, 2011; Khalifa
et al., 2016; Abdul-Mageed et al., 2018; Bouamor
et al., 2018), (ii) creating processing tools (Habash
et al., 2013; Al-Shargi and Rambow, 2015; Obeid
et al., 2018) (iii) developing DA to English ma-

2https://camel.abudhabi.nyu.edu/madar/

https://adida.abudhabi.nyu.edu/
https://camel.abudhabi.nyu.edu/madar/


7

Region Maghreb Nile Basin Levant Gulf Yemen
Sub-region Morocco Algeria Tunisia Libya Egypt/Sudan South Levant North Levant Iraq Gulf Yemen

Cities Rabat
Fes

Algiers Tunis
Sfax

Tripoli
Benghazi

Cairo
Alexandria
Aswan
Khartoum

Jerusalem
Amman
Salt

Beirut
Damascus
Aleppo

Mosul
Baghdad
Basra

Doha
Muscat
Riyadh
Jeddah

Sana’a

Table 1: Different city dialects covered in ADIDA and the regions they belong to.

chine translation systems (Zbib et al., 2012; Saj-
jad et al., 2013), (iv) or performing dialect identifi-
cation (Zaidan and Callison-Burch, 2014; Huang,
2015; Salameh et al., 2018).

3.2 Dialect Identification

Dialect Identification (DID) is a particularly chal-
lenging task compared to Language Identifica-
tion (Etman and Beex, 2015). Since Arabic di-
alects use the same script and share part of the vo-
cabulary, it is quite arduous to distinguish between
them. Hence, developing an automatic identifica-
tion system working at different levels of repre-
sentation and exploring different datasets has at-
tracted increasing attention in recent years. For
instance, DID has been the goal of a dedicated
shared task (Malmasi et al., 2016; Zampieri et al.,
2017, 2018), encouraging researchers to submit
systems to recognize the dialect of speech tran-
scripts for dialects of four main regions: Egyptian,
Gulf, Levantine and North African, and MSA.
Several systems implementing a range of tradi-
tional supervised learning (Tillmann et al., 2014)
and deep learning methods (Belinkov and Glass,
2016; Michon et al., 2018) were proposed.

In the literature, a number of studies have
been exploring DID using several datasets, rang-
ing from user-generated content (i.e., blogs, so-
cial media posts) (Sadat et al., 2014), speech tran-
scripts (Biadsy et al., 2009; Bougrine et al., 2017),
and other corpora (Elfardy and Diab, 2012, 2013;
Zaidan and Callison-Burch, 2014; Salameh et al.,
2018; Dinu et al., 2018; Goldman et al., 2018).
Shoufan and Al-Ameri (2015) and Al-Ayyoub
et al. (2017) present a survey on NLP and deep
learning methods for processing Arabic dialectal
data with an overview on Arabic DID of text and
speech. While most of the proposed approaches
targeted regional or country level DID, Salameh
et al. (2018) introduced a fine-grained DID sys-
tem covering the dialects of 25 cities from several
countries across the Arab world (from Rabat to
Muscat), including some cities in the same coun-
try.

3.3 Visualization
Map visualizations are used in multiple fields of
study including linguistics, socio-linguistics, and
political science to display geographical relations
of non-geographic data. Geographical visualiza-
tions may include point maps to display individ-
ual data points, choropleths and Voronoi tessala-
tion maps that cluster data points by region, and
heat maps and surface maps that interpolate data
over some geographical area.

In the general context of visualization of lan-
guage data, one example is the Visualizing Me-
dieval Places project (Wrisley, 2017, 2019), which
extracted place names from medieval French texts
and overlaid them over their physical locations as
a point map with a color ramp to display their
frequency. The Linguistic Landscapes of Beirut
Project (Wrisley, 2016) visualizes the presence
of multilingual written samples within the greater
Beirut area using different geographical visual-
izations to explore different aspects of its data.
Specifically in the context of dialectometric vi-
sualizations, most relevant to this paper, Scherrer
and Stoeckle (2016) provide surface and Voronoi
tessalation maps3 to visualize difference in Swiss
German dialects using data extracted from the
Sprachatlas der deutschen Schweiz. Similarly,
data collected from The Harvard Dialect Survey
(Vaux and Golder, 2003) used point maps to dis-
play phrase variation across American English di-
alects. Katz and Andrews (2013) provide further
visualization of The Harvard Dialect Survey using
heat maps to interpolate data from the survey.

4 Design and Implementation

4.1 Design Considerations
The underlying system we use for dialect identifi-
cation can work with any number of words (single
words, phrases or sentences) and produces proba-
bilities of occurrence in different locales in a one
dimensional vector (with 26 values in our case).
As such, we want an interface that can visualize

3http://dialektkarten.ch/dmviewer

http://dialektkarten.ch/dmviewer


8

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: ADIDA Interface showing the output for a verse from an Egyptian Arabic song in the two display modes:
point map (right) and heat map (left). The subfigures (a), (b) and (c) correspond to different lengths of the verse:
(a) full, (b) first four words, and (c) the first word only.

the probability distribution into a two-dimensional
geographical map space allowing us to easily ob-
serve and debug connections and patterns relat-
ing to dialectal similarities and differences that are
harder to catch in the one dimensional output of
the system classifier. We also want to visualize

aggregations of probabilities of nearby cities that
give a sense of regional presence.

Our setup and needs are different from other di-
alect map visualization efforts discussed in Sec-
tion 3.3 which mostly focus on specific concepts
and their realizations in different forms.



9

4.2 The ADIDA Interface

The ADIDA interface is publicly available
at https://adida.abudhabi.nyu.edu/.
Figure 1.(a, left side) presents the basic structure
of the interface. At the top there is a box to in-
put the Arabic text to dialect identify. The web
page automatically fills the box with a randomly
selected song verse from a set of well known songs
from different dialects. This is intended to make it
easy for the user to understand the task of the inter-
face. After the user clicks on the Identify button, a
geographical map of the Arab world is shown with
one of two toggleable overlays: (1) a point map
displaying one point per city scaled to the prob-
ability of attribution to the city (default mode),
or (2) a heat map that plots the probabilities as
Gaussians centered on each city with proportional
intensities that aggregate any nearby points at a
given zoom level. The point map only shows
cities that have an attribution probability larger
than 0.1% while the heat map displays Gaussians
for all cities. Both visualization modes exclude
MSA as there is no geographical location that can
represent it. The heat map should not be inter-
preted to make claims about the attribution prob-
abilities of regions between the considered cities.
The falloff of each Gaussian and their aggregates
are used solely as a high-level visualization aid
through allowing aggregation of probabilities of
nearby cities. Additionally, the interface presents
the top five cities with their probabilities, together
with that of MSA and of the remaining probability
mass assigned to Other. We discuss the rest of the
screen shots in Figure 1 in Section 4.4.

4.3 Implementation

Back-end The ADIDA back-end was imple-
mented in Python using Flask4 to create a Web
API wrapper for the dialect ID code. The core di-
alect ID application is based on the best perform-
ing model distinguishing between 26 classes (25
dialects and MSA), described in Salameh et al.
(2018). The application makes use of scikit-
learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011) to learn a Multi-
nomial Naive Bayes (MNB) classifier using the
MADAR corpus (Bouamor et al., 2018), a large-
scale collection of parallel sentences built to cover
the dialects of 25 cities from the Arab World (Ta-
ble 1), in addition to MSA. The model is fed with a
suite of features covering word unigrams and char-

4http://flask.pocoo.org/

acter unigrams, bigrams and trigrams weighted
by their Term Frequency-Inverse Document Fre-
quency (TF-IDF) scores, combined with language
model scores.The output of the MNB model is
a set of 26 probability scores referring to the 25
cities and MSA. Results on a test set show that the
model can identify the exact city of a speaker at
an accuracy of 67.9% for sentences with an aver-
age length of 7 words. Salameh et al. (2018) re-
ported on an oracle study showing that accuracy
can reach more than 90% with 16-word inputs.

Front-end The front-end was implemented us-
ing Vue.js5 for model view control. We
use Leaflet6 with Mapbox7 to provide the
geographical map display. We also use
heatmap.js8 to generate the heat maps.

4.4 Example

Figure 1 demonstrates the output of ADIDA for
a verse from an Egyptian Arabic song (Hafez,
1963). The left side of Figure 1 shows the default
point-map mode, while the right side shows the
heat-map mode. In Figure 1.(a), the full verse of
11 words is returns a correct preference for Cairo
at a high degree of confidence (99.5% probability).
In Figure 1.(b) and (c), the length is reduced first to
the first four words, and then to the very first word
only. In all three cases, Cairo is the top choice,
but with decreasing confidence correlating with
the length of the input: 99.5% > 92.5% > 20.4%.
Additionally we see a great diffusion of the prob-
ability score, with the case of one word input re-
sulting with more probability mass in the other 20
cities that are not shown than in the first choice.

5 Conclusion and Future Work

We presented ADIDA, a public online interface for
visualizing a system for fine-grained dialect iden-
tification. This system produces a vector of proba-
bilities indicating the likelihood an input sentence
is from 25 cities and MSA. ADIDA displays the
results as a point map or a heat map overlaid on
top of a geographical map of the Arab World.

In the future, we plan to continue improving our
dialect identification back-end. We also plan to ex-
tend the interface in a number of ways: (a) provide

5https://vuejs.org/
6https://leafletjs.com/
7https://www.mapbox.com/
8https://www.patrick-wied.at/static/

heatmapjs/

https://adida.abudhabi.nyu.edu/
http://flask.pocoo.org/
https://vuejs.org/
https://leafletjs.com/
https://www.mapbox.com/
https://www.patrick-wied.at/static/heatmapjs
https://www.patrick-wied.at/static/heatmapjs


10

a display mode that better serves color-blind indi-
viduals, (b) provide a feedback mode that can be
used to collect additional data provided by users
with their quality judgments, and (c) gamify the
interface to allow the use of it as a tool to identify
more cities in the Arab World.

The data we use in building the back-end is
made available as part of a shared task on Arabic
fine-grained dialect identification (Bouamor et al.,
2019).

Acknowledgments The work presented was
made possible by grant NPRP 7-290-1-047 from
the Qatar National Research Fund (a member
of the Qatar Foundation). The statements made
herein are solely the responsibility of the authors.
We would like to thank David Wrisley and Yves
Scherrer for their valuable feedback and insights.

References
Muhammad Abdul-Mageed, Hassan Alhuzali, and Mo-

hamed Elaraby. 2018. You tweet what you speak: A
city-level dataset of Arabic dialects. In Proceedings
of the Language Resources and Evaluation Confer-
ence (LREC), Miyazaki, Japan.

Abdel-Rahman Abu-Melhim. 1991. Code-switching
and linguistic accommodation in Arabic. In Pro-
ceedings of the Annual Symposium on Arabic Lin-
guistics, volume 80, pages 231–250.

Mahmoud Al-Ayyoub, Aya Nuseir, Kholoud
Alsmearat, Yaser Jararweh, and Brij Gupta.
2017. Deep learning for Arabic nlp: A survey.
Journal of Computational Science.

Faisal Al-Shargi and Owen Rambow. 2015. Diwan: A
dialectal word annotation tool for Arabic. In Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop for Arabic Natural Lan-
guage Processing (WANLP), pages 49–58, Beijing,
China.

Reem Bassiouney. 2009. Arabic Sociolinguistics: Top-
ics in Diglossia, Gender, Identity, and Politics.
Georgetown University Press.

Yonatan Belinkov and James Glass. 2016. A
Character-level Convolutional Neural Network for
Distinguishing Similar Languages and Dialects. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on NLP for Similar
Languages, Varieties and Dialects (VarDial), pages
145–152, Osaka, Japan.

Fadi Biadsy, Julia Hirschberg, and Nizar Habash. 2009.
Spoken Arabic Dialect Identification Using Phono-
tactic Modeling. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Computational Approaches to Semitic Languages
(CASL), pages 53–61, Athens, Greece.

Houda Bouamor, Nizar Habash, Mohammad Salameh,
Wajdi Zaghouani, Owen Rambow, Dana Abdul-
rahim, Ossama Obeid, Salam Khalifa, Fadhl Eryani,
Alexander Erdmann, and Kemal Oflazer. 2018. The

MADAR Arabic Dialect Corpus and Lexicon. In
Proceedings of the Language Resources and Eval-
uation Conference (LREC), Miyazaki, Japan.

Houda Bouamor, Sabit Hassan, Nizar Habash, and Ke-
mal Oflazer. 2019. The MADAR shared task on
Arabic fine-grained dialect identification. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fourth Arabic Natural Language
Processing Workshop (WANLP), Florence, Italy.

Soumia Bougrine, Hadda Cherroun, and Djelloul
Ziadi. 2017. Hierarchical Classification for Spoken
Arabic Dialect Identification using Prosody: Case of
Algerian Dialects. CoRR, abs/1703.10065.

Liviu P. Dinu, Alina Maria Ciobanu, Marcos Zampieri,
and Shervin Malmasi. 2018. Classifier ensem-
bles for dialect and language variety identification.
CoRR, abs/1808.04800.

Heba Elfardy and Mona Diab. 2012. Token level iden-
tification of linguistic code switching. In Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (COLING), Mumbai, India.

Heba Elfardy and Mona Diab. 2013. Sentence Level
Dialect Identification in Arabic. In Proceedings of
the Conference of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL), pages 456–461, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Asma Etman and Louis Beex. 2015. Language and Di-
alect Identification: A Survey. In Proceedings of the
Intelligent Systems Conference (IntelliSys), London,
UK.

Jean-Philippe Goldman, Yves Scherrer, Julie Glik-
man, Mathieu Avanzi, Christophe Benzitoun, and
Philippe Boula de Mareil. 2018. Crowdsourcing Re-
gional Variation Data and Automatic Geolocalisa-
tion of Speakers of European French. In Proceed-
ings of the Eleventh International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018),
Miyazaki, Japan. European Language Resources
Association (ELRA).

Nizar Habash, Owen Rambow, Mona Diab, and Reem
Kanjawi-Faraj. 2008. Guidelines for Annotation of
Arabic Dialectness. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on HLT & NLP within the Arabic World, Marrakech,
Morocco.

Nizar Habash, Ryan Roth, Owen Rambow, Ramy Es-
kander, and Nadi Tomeh. 2013. Morphological
Analysis and Disambiguation for Dialectal Arabic.
In Proceedings of the Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (NAACL), Atlanta, Georgia.

Nizar Y Habash. 2010. Introduction to Arabic natural
language processing, volume 3. Morgan & Clay-
pool Publishers.

Niloofar Haeri. 1991. Sociolinguistic Variation in
Cairene Arabic: Palatalization and the qaf in the
Speech of Men and Women.

Abdel Halim Hafez. 1963. Gabbar (Arrogant). Lyrics
by Hessien El Sayed.

Clive Holes. 2004. Modern Arabic: Structures, Func-
tions, and Varieties. Georgetown Classics in Ara-
bic Language and Linguistics. Georgetown Univer-
sity Press.

http://arxiv.org/abs/1808.04800
http://arxiv.org/abs/1808.04800


11

Fei Huang. 2015. Improved Arabic Dialect Classifica-
tion with Social Media Data. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP), pages 2118–2126, Lis-
bon, Portugal.

Josh Katz and Wilson Andrews. 2013. How
Yall, Youse and You Guys Talk. https:
//www.nytimes.com/interactive/
2014/upshot/dialect-quiz-map.html.

Salam Khalifa, Nizar Habash, Dana Abdulrahim, and
Sara Hassan. 2016. A Large Scale Corpus of
Gulf Arabic. In Proceedings of the Language Re-
sources and Evaluation Conference (LREC), Por-
torož, Slovenia.

Shervin Malmasi, Marcos Zampieri, Nikola Ljubešić,
Preslav Nakov, Ahmed Ali, and Jörg Tiedemann.
2016. Discriminating between Similar Languages
and Arabic Dialect Identification: A Report on the
Third DSL Shared Task. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on NLP for Similar Languages, Varieties
and Dialects (VarDial), pages 1–14, Osaka, Japan.

Elise Michon, Minh Quang Pham, Josep Crego, and
Jean Senellart. 2018. Neural network architectures
for Arabic dialect identification. In Proceedings of
the Fifth Workshop on NLP for Similar Languages,
Varieties and Dialects (VarDial 2018), pages 128–
136.

Ossama Obeid, Salam Khalifa, Nizar Habash, Houda
Bouamor, Wajdi Zaghouani, and Kemal Oflazer.
2018. MADARi: A Web Interface for Joint Ara-
bic Morphological Annotation and Spelling Correc-
tion. In Proceedings of the Language Resources and
Evaluation Conference (LREC), Miyazaki, Japan.

Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gram-
fort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier
Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron
Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, Jake Vanderplas, Alexan-
dre Passos, David Cournapeau, Matthieu Brucher,
Matthieu Perrot, and Édouard Duchesnay. 2011.
Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python. Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830.

Fatiha Sadat, Farnazeh Kazemi, and Atefeh Farzindar.
2014. Automatic Identification of Arabic Dialects
in Social Media. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Natural Language Processing for Social Media
(SocialNLP), pages 22–27, Dublin, Ireland.

Hassan Sajjad, Kareem Darwish, and Yonatan Be-
linkov. 2013. Translating dialectal Arabic to En-
glish. In Proceedings of the Conference of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages
1–6, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Mohammad Salameh, Houda Bouamor, and Nizar
Habash. 2018. Fine-grained arabic dialect identi-
fication. In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics (COLING),
pages 1332–1344, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA.

Yves Scherrer and Philipp Stoeckle. 2016. A quan-
titative approach to Swiss German dialectometric
analyses and comparisons of linguistic levels. Di-
alectologia et Geolinguistica, 24(1):92–125.

Abdulhadi Shoufan and Sumaya Al-Ameri. 2015. Nat-
ural language processing for dialectical Arabic: A
survey. In Proceedings of the Workshop for Arabic
Natural Language Processing (WANLP), page 36,
Beijing, China.

Christoph Tillmann, Saab Mansour, and Yaser Al-
Onaizan. 2014. Improved Sentence-Level Arabic
Dialect Classification. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Applying NLP Tools to Similar Languages,
Varieties and Dialects, pages 110–119, Dublin, Ire-
land.

Bert Vaux and Scott Golder. 2003. The Harvard Di-
alect Survey. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Linguistics Department.

Janet CE Watson. 2007. The Phonology and Morphol-
ogy of Arabic. Oxford University Press.

David Joseph Wrisley. 2016. Linguistic Landscapes of
Beirut Project. http://llbeirut.org.

David Joseph Wrisley. 2017. Locating medieval
French, or why we collect and visualize the
geographic information of texts. Speculum,
92(S1):S145–S169.

David Joseph Wrisley. 2019. ”Aggregate map.”
Visualizing Medieval Places. http://vmp.
djwrisley.com/map/.

Omar Zaidan and Chris Callison-Burch. 2014. Ara-
bic dialect identification. Computational Linguis-
tics, 40(1):171–202.

Omar F Zaidan and Chris Callison-Burch. 2011. The
Arabic Online Commentary Dataset: an Annotated
Dataset of Informal Arabic With High Dialectal
Content. In Proceedings of the Conference of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL),
pages 37–41.

Marcos Zampieri, Shervin Malmasi, Nikola Ljubešić,
Preslav Nakov, Ahmed Ali, Jörg Tiedemann, Yves
Scherrer, and Noëmi Aepli. 2017. Findings of the
VarDial Evaluation Campaign 2017. In Proceedings
of the Workshop on NLP for Similar Languages, Va-
rieties and Dialects (VarDial), pages 1–15, Valencia,
Spain.

Marcos Zampieri, Shervin Malmasi, Preslav Nakov,
Ahmed Ali, Suwon Shon, James Glass, Yves Scher-
rer, Tanja Samardžić, Nikola Ljubešić, Jörg Tiede-
mann, Chris van der Lee, Stefan Grondelaers,
Nelleke Oostdijk, Antal van den Bosch, Ritesh Ku-
mar, Bornini Lahiri, and Mayank Jain. 2018. Lan-
guage identification and morphosyntactic tagging:
The second VarDial evaluation campaign. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fifth Workshop on NLP for Similar
Languages, Varieties and Dialects (VarDial), Santa
Fe, USA.

Rabih Zbib, Erika Malchiodi, Jacob Devlin, David
Stallard, Spyros Matsoukas, Richard Schwartz, John
Makhoul, Omar F. Zaidan, and Chris Callison-
Burch. 2012. Machine Translation of Arabic Di-
alects. In Proceedings of the Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (NAACL), pages 49–59,
Montréal, Canada.

https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/upshot/dialect-quiz-map.html
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/upshot/dialect-quiz-map.html
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/upshot/dialect-quiz-map.html
http://llbeirut.org
http://vmp.djwrisley.com/map/
http://vmp.djwrisley.com/map/

