




































Short-Term Meaning Shift: A Distributional Exploration


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2019, pages 2069–2075
Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2 - June 7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

2069

Short-Term Meaning Shift: A Distributional Exploration

Marco Del Tredici∗ Raquel Fernández∗ Gemma Boleda†
∗University of Amsterdam †Universitat Pompeu Fabra
{m.deltredici|raquel.fernandez}@uva.nl

gemma.boleda@upf.edu

Abstract

We present the first exploration of meaning
shift over short periods of time in online com-
munities using distributional representations.
We create a small annotated dataset and use
it to assess the performance of a standard
model for meaning shift detection on short-
term meaning shift. We find that the model has
problems distinguishing meaning shift from
referential phenomena, and propose a measure
of contextual variability to remedy this.

1 Introduction

Semantic change has received increasing attention
in empirical Computational Linguistics / NLP in
the last few years (Tang, 2018; Kutuzov et al.,
2018). Almost all studies so far have focused on
meaning shift in long periods of time—decades
to centuries. However, the genesis of meaning
shift and the mechanisms that produce it operate
at much shorter time spans, ranging from the on-
line agreement on words’ meaning in dyadic in-
teractions (Brennan and Clark, 1996) to the rapid
spread of new meanings in relatively small com-
munities of people in (Wenger, 1998; Eckert and
McConnell-Ginet, 1992). This paper is, to the best
of our knowledge, the first exploration of the latter
phenomenon—which we call short-term mean-
ing shift—using distributional representations.

More concretely, we focus on meaning shift
arising within a period of 8 years, and explore it
on data from an online community of speakers, be-
cause there the adoption of new meanings happens
at a fast pace (Clark, 1996; Hasan, 2009). Indeed,
short-term shift is usually hard to observe in stan-
dard language, such as the language of books or
news, which has been the focus of long-term shift
studies (e.g., Hamilton et al., 2016; Kulkarni et al.,
2015), since it takes a long time for a new meaning
to be widely accepted in the standard language.

Our contribution is twofold. First, we create a
small dataset of short-term shift for analysis and
evaluation, and qualitatively analyze the types of
meaning shift we find.1 This is necessary because,
unlike studies of long-term shift, we cannot rely on
material previously gathered by linguists or lex-
icographers. Second, we test the behavior of a
standard distributional model of semantic change
when applied to short-term shift. Our results show
that this model successfully detects most shifts in
our data, but it overgeneralizes. Specifically, the
model gets confused with contextual changes due
to speakers in the community often talking about
particular people and events, which are frequent
on short time spans. We propose to use a measure
of contextual variability to remedy this and show-
case its potential to spot false positives of refer-
ential nature like these. We thus make progress
in understanding the nature of semantic shift and
towards improving computational models thereof.

2 Related Work

Distributional models of semantic change are
based on the hypothesis that a change in con-
text of use mirrors a change in meaning. This in
turn stems from the Distributional Hypothesis, that
states that similarity in meaning results in similar-
ity in context of use (Harris, 1954). Therefore, all
models (including ours) spot semantic shift as a
change in the word representation in different time
periods. Among the most widely used techniques
are Latent Semantic Analysis (Sagi et al., 2011;
Jatowt and Duh, 2014), Topic Modeling (Wijaya
and Yeniterzi, 2011), classic distributional repre-
sentations based on co-occurence matrices of tar-
get words and context terms (Gulordava and Ba-
roni, 2011). More recently, researchers have used

1Data and code are available at: https://github.
com/marcodel13/Short-term-meaning-shift.



2070

word embeddings computed using the skip-gram
model by Mikolov et al. (2013). Since embed-
dings computed in different semantic spaces are
not directly comparable, time related representa-
tions are usually made comparable either by align-
ing different semantic spaces through a transfor-
mation matrix (Kulkarni et al., 2015; Azarbonyad
et al., 2017; Hamilton et al., 2016) or by initializ-
ing the embeddings at ti+1 using those computed
at ti (Kim et al., 2014; Del Tredici et al., 2016;
Phillips et al., 2017; Szymanski, 2017). We adopt
the latter methodology (see Section 3.2).

Unlike most previous work, we focus on the
language of online communities. Recent stud-
ies of this type of language have investigated the
spread of new forms and meanings (Del Tredici
and Fernández, 2017, 2018; Stewart and Eisen-
stein, 2018), competing lexical variants (Rotabi
et al., 2017), and the relation between conven-
tions in a community and the social standing of its
members (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al., 2013).
None of these works has analyzed the ability of a
distributional model to capture these phenomena,
which is what we do in this paper for short-term
meaning shift. Kulkarni et al. (2015) consider
meaning shift in short time periods on Twitter
data, but without providing an analysis of the ob-
served shift nor systematically assessing the per-
formance of the model, as we do here.

Evaluation of semantic shift is difficult, due to
the lack of annotated datasets (Frermann and La-
pata, 2016). For this reason, even for long-term
shift, evaluation is usually performed by manu-
ally inspecting the n words whose representation
changes the most according to the model under
investigation (Hamilton et al., 2016; Kim et al.,
2014). Our dataset allows for a more systematic
evaluation and analysis, and enables comparison
in future studies.

3 Experimental Setup

3.1 Data

We exploit user-generated language from an
online forum of football fans, namely, the
r/LiverpoolFC subreddit, one of the many commu-
nities hosted by the Reddit platform.2 Del Tredici
and Fernández (2018) showed that this subreddit
presents many characteristics that favour the cre-

2https://www.reddit.com. We downloaded Red-
dit data using the Python package Praw: https://pypi.
python.org/pypi/praw/.

ation and spread of linguistic innovations, such as
a topic that reflects a strong external interest and
high density of the connections among its users.
This makes it a good candidate for our investiga-
tion. We focus on a short period of eight years, be-
tween 2011 and 2017. In order to enable a clearer
observation of short-term meaning shift, we de-
fine two non-consecutive time bins: the first one
(t1) contains data from 2011–2013 and the second
one (t2) from 2017.3 We also use a large sample
of community-independent language for the ini-
tialization of the word vectors, namely, a random
crawl from Reddit in 2013. Table 1 shows the size
of each sample.

3.2 Model
We adopt the model proposed by Kim et al.
(2014), a representative method for computing di-
achronic meaning shift.4 While other methods
might be equally suitable (see Section 2), we ex-
pect our results not to be method-specific, because
they concern general properties of short-term shift,
as we show in Sections 4 and 5. In the model by
Kim et al. (2014), word embeddings for the first
time bin t1 are initialized randomly; then, given a
sequence of time-related samples, embeddings for
ti are initialized using the embeddings of ti−1 and
further updated. If at ti the word is used in the
same contexts as in ti−1, its embedding will only
be marginally updated, whereas a major change in
the context of use will lead to a stronger update
of the embedding. The model makes embeddings
across time bins directly comparable.

We implement the following steps: First, we
create randomly initialized word embeddings with
the large sample Reddit13 to obtain meaning rep-
resentations that are community-independent. We
then use these embeddings to initialize those in
LiverpoolFC13, update the vectors on this sample,
and thus obtain embeddings for time t1. This step
adapts the general embeddings to the LiverpoolFC
community. Finally, we initialize the word embed-
dings for LiverpoolFC17 with those of t1, train on
this sample, and get embeddings for t2.

The vocabulary is defined as the intersec-
tion of the vocabularies of the three samples

3These choices ensure that the samples in these two time
bins are approximately of the same size – see Table 1. The
r/LiverpoolFC subreddit exists since 2009, but very little con-
tent was produced in 2009–2010.

4The model was implemented using the Python pack-
age Gensim: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/
gensim/.



2071

sample time bin million tokens
Reddit13 2013 ∼900
LiverpoolFC13 2011–13 8.5
LiverpoolFC17 2017 11.9

Table 1: Time bin and size of the datasets.

(Reddit13, LiverpoolFC13, LiverpoolFC17), and
includes 157k words. For Reddit13, we include
only words that occur at least 20 times in the sam-
ple, so as to ensure meaningful representations for
each word, while for the other two samples we do
not use any frequency threshold: Since the embed-
dings used for the initialization of LiverpoolFC13
encode community-independent meanings, if a
word doesn’t occur in LiverpoolFC13 its represen-
tation will simply be as in Reddit13, which reflects
the idea that if a word is not used in a community,
then its meaning is not altered within that commu-
nity. We train with standard skip-gram parameters
(Levy et al., 2015): window 5, learning rate 0.01,
embedding dimension 200, hierarchical softmax.

3.3 Evaluation dataset

Our dataset consists of 97 words from the
r/LiverpoolFC subreddit with annotations by
members of the subreddit —that is, community
members with domain knowledge (needed for this
task) but no linguistic background.

To ensure that we would get enough cases of
semantic shift to enable a meaningful analysis, we
started out from content words that increase their
relative frequency between t1 and t2.5 A threshold
of 2 standard deviations above the mean yielded
∼200 words. The first author manually identi-
fied 34 semantic shift candidates among these
words by analyzing their contexts of use in the
r/LiverpoolFC data. Semantic shift is defined here
as a change in the ontological type that a word
denotes, which takes place when the word starts
to be used to denote an entity which is different
from the one originally denoted and the new use
spreads among the members of a community (see
examples in Sec. 4). We added two types of con-
founders: 33 words with a significant frequency
increase but not marked as meaning shift candi-

5Frequency increase has been shown to positively cor-
relate with meaning change (Wijaya and Yeniterzi, 2011;
Kulkarni et al., 2015); although it is not a necessary condi-
tion, it is a reasonable starting point, as a random selection of
words would contain very few positive examples. Our dataset
is thus biased towards precision over recall.

dates, and 33 words with constant frequency be-
tween t1 and t2, included as a sanity check. All
words have absolute frequency in range [50–500].

The participants were shown the 100 words (in
randomized order) together with randomly chosen
contexts of usage from each time period (µ=4.7
contexts per word) and, for simplicity, were asked
to make a binary decision about whether there
was a change in meaning. In order to have the
redditors familiarize with the concept of meaning
change, we first provide them with an intuitive,
non-technical definition, and then a set of cases
that exemplify it. The instructions to participants
can be found in the project’s GitHub repository
(see footnote 1).

Semantic shift is arguably a graded notion. In
line with a suggestion by Kutuzov et al. (2018) to
account for this fact, we aggregate the annotations
into a graded semantic shift index, ranging from 0
(no shift) to 1 (shift) depending on how many sub-
jects spotted semantic change. The shift index is
exclusively based on the judgments of the reddi-
tors, and does not consider the preliminary candi-
date selection done by us. Overall, 26 members of
r/LiverpoolFC participated in the survey, and each
word received on average 8.8 judgements. Further
details about the dataset are in Appendix A.

4 Types of Meaning Shift

We identify three main types of shift in our data
via qualitative analysis of examples with a shift
index > 0.5: metonymy, metaphor, and meme.

Metonymy. In metonymic shifts, a highly
salient characteristic of an entity is used to re-
fer to it. Among these cases are, for example,
‘highlighter’, which in t2 occurs in sentences like
‘we are playing with the highlighter today’, or
‘what’s up with the hate for this kit? This is
great, ten times better than the highlighter’, used
to talk about a kit in a colour similar to that of
a highlighter pen; or ‘lean’, in ‘I hope a lean
comes soon!’, ‘Somebody with speed. . . make a
signing. . . Cuz I need a lean’, used to talk about
hiring players due to new hires typically leaning
on a Liverpool symbol when posing for a photo
right after signing for the club. Particularly il-
lustrative is the ‘F5’ example shown in Table 2.
While ‘F5’ is initially used with its common us-
age of shortcut for refreshing a page (1), it then
starts to denote the act of refreshing in order to get
the latest news about the possible transfer of a new



2072

(1) Damn, after losing the F5 key on my
keyboard [...]

16 Jun

(2) [he is] so close, F5 tapping is so in-
tense right now

18 Jun

(3) Don’t think about it too much, man.
Just F5

1 Jul

(4) Literally 4am I slept and just woke
up and thought it was f5 time

3 Jul

(5) this was a happy f5 3 Jul
(6) what is an F5? 3 Jul
(7) I’m leaving the f5 squad for now 5 Jul
(8) I made this during the f5 madness 6 Sep

Table 2: Examples of use of ‘F5’ with time stamps,
which illustrate the speed of the meaning shift process.
All the examples are from LiverpoolFC17.

player to LiverpoolFC (2). This use catches on and
many redditors use it to express their tension while
waiting for good news (3-5),6 though not all mem-
bers are aware of the new meaning of the word
(6). When the transfer is almost done, someone
leaves the ‘F5 squad’ (7), and after a while, an-
other member recalls the period in which the word
was used (8).

Metaphor. Metaphorical shifts lead to a broad-
ening of the original meaning of a word through
analogy. For example, in t2 ‘shovel’ occurs in
sentences such as ‘welcome aboard, here is your
shovel’ or ‘you boys know how to shovel coal’: the
team is seen as a train that is running through the
season, and every supporter is asked to figuratively
contribute by shoving coal into the train boiler.

Meme. Finally, memes are another prominent
source of meaning shift. In this case, fans use a
word to make jokes and be sarcastic, and the new
usage quickly spreads within the community. As
an example, while Liverpool was about to sign a
new player named Van Dijk, redditors started to
play with the homography of the first part of the
surname with the common noun ‘van’, its plural
form ‘vans’, and the shoes brand ‘Vans’: ‘Rumour
has it Van Djik was wearing these vans in the van’
or ‘How many vans could Van Dijk vear if Van Dijk
could vear vans’. Jokes of this kind are positively
received in the community (‘Hahah I love it. Any-
thing with vans is instant karma!’) and quickly
become frequent in it.

6Here the semantic change is accompanied by a change in
the part of speech, and ‘F5’ becomes a denominal verb.

Figure 1: Semantic shift index vs. cosine distance in
the evaluation dataset (Pearson’s r = 0.49, p < 0.001).
Red horizontal ellipsis: false positives; blue vertical el-
lipsis: false negatives.

5 Modeling Results and Analysis

The positive correlation between cosine distance
and semantic shift index (Pearson’s r= 0.49, p <
0.001, see Figure 1) confirms the hypothesis that
meaning shift is mirrored by a change in context of
use. However, we also find systematic deviations.

5.1 False negatives
A small, but consistent group is that of words
that undergo semantic shift but are not captured
by the model (blue vertical ellipsis Figure 1;
shift index>0.5, cosine distance<0.25). These
are all metaphorical shifts; in particular, cases
of extended metaphor (Werth, 1994), where the
metaphor is developed throughout the whole text.
For instance, besides the ‘shovel’ example men-
tioned in Section 4, we find ‘pharaoh’, the nick-
name of an Egyptian player who joined Liverpool
in 2017, used in sentences like ‘approved by our
new Pharaoh Tutankhamun’, or ‘our dear Egyp-
tian Pharaoh, let’s hope he becomes a God’. De-
spite the metaphoric usage, the local context of
these words is similar to the literal one, and so the
model does not spot the meaning shift. We expect
this to happen in long-term shift models, too, but
we are not aware of results confirming this.

5.2 False positives
A larger group of problematic cases is that of
words that do not undergo semantic shift despite
showing relatively large differences in context be-
tween t1 and t2 (red horizontal ellipsis in Figure 1;
shift index=0, cosine distance>0.25). Manual in-



2073

spection reveals that most of these “errors” are due
to a referential effect: words are used almost ex-
clusively to refer to a specific person or event in
t2, and so the context of use is different from the
contexts in t1. For instance, ‘stubborn’ is almost
always used to talk about a coach who was not
there in 2013 but only in 2017; ‘entourage’, for
the entourage of a particular star of the team; ‘in-
dependence’ for the political events in Catalonia
(Spain). In all these cases, the meaning of the
word stays the same, despite the change in con-
text. In line with the Distributional Hypothesis,
the model spots the context change, but it is not
sensitive to its nature. We expect long-term shift
to not be as susceptible to referential effects like
these because embeddings are aggregated over a
larger and more varied number of occurrences.

We expect that in referential cases the contexts
of use will be narrower than for words with actual
semantic shift, as they are specific to one person
or event. Hence, a measure of contextual variabil-
ity should help spot false positives. To test this
hypothesis, we define contextual variability as fol-
lows: For a target word, we create a vector for
each of its contexts (5 words on both sides of the
target) in t2 by averaging the embeddings of the
words occurring in it, and define variability as the
average pairwise cosine distance between context
vectors.7 We find that contextual variability is in-
deed significantly correlated with semantic shift in
our dataset (Pearson’s r=0.55, p< 0.001), while
it is independent from cosine distance (Pearson’s
r= 0.18, p > 0.05). These two aspects are thus
complementary. While both shift words and ref-
erential cases change context of use in t2, context
variability captures the fact that only in referential
cases words occur in a restricted set of contexts.
Figure 2 shows this effect visually. This result can
inform future models of short-term meaning shift.

6 Conclusion

The goal of this initial study was to bring to the at-
tention of the NLP community short-term mean-
ing shift, an under-studied problem in the field.
Our hope is that it will spark further research
into a phenomenon which, besides being of the-
oretical interest, has potential practical implica-
tions for NLP downstream tasks concerned with

7There are alternative ways of measuring contextual vari-
ability, but we expect them to yield the same picture. For
instance, we experimented with a different window size and
obtained the same pattern.

Figure 2: Semantic shift index vs. context variability.
Red horizontal ellipsis: referential cases which are as-
signed high cosine distance values by the model (false
positives).

user-generated language, as modeling how word
meanings rapidly change in communities would
allow a better understanding of what their mem-
bers say. Future research should experiment with
other datasets (reddits from other domains, other
online communities) and also alternative models
that address the challenges described here.

Acknowledgements

The research carried out by the Amsterdam section
of the team was partially funded by the Nether-
lands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO)
under VIDI grant no. 276-89-008, Asymmetry in
Conversation. This project has received funding
from the European Research Council (ERC) un-
der the European Unions Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme (grant agreement No
715154), and from the Spanish Ramón y Cajal
programme (grant RYC-2015-18907). This paper
reflects the authors’ view only, and the EU is not
responsible for any use that may be made of the
information it contains.

References
Ron Artstein and Massimo Poesio. 2008. Inter-coder

agreement for computational linguistics. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 34(4):555–596.

Hosein Azarbonyad, Mostafa Dehghani, Kaspar Bee-
len, Alexandra Arkut, Maarten Marx, and Jaap
Kamps. 2017. Words are malleable: Computing



2074

semantic shifts in political and media discourse.
In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Conference
on Information and Knowledge Management, pages
1509–1518. ACM.

Susan E. Brennan and Herbert H. Clark. 1996. Con-
ceptual pacts and lexical choice in conversation.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 22(6):1482.

Herbert H. Clark. 1996. Using language. Cambridge
University Press.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Robert West, Dan
Jurafsky, Jure Leskovec, and Christopher Potts.
2013. No country for old members: User lifecy-
cle and linguistic change in online communities. In
Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on
World Wide Web, pages 307–318. ACM.

Marco Del Tredici and Raquel Fernández. 2017. Se-
mantic variation in online communities of practice.
In IWCS 2017-12th International Conference on
Computational Semantics-Long papers.

Marco Del Tredici and Raquel Fernández. 2018. The
road to success: Assessing the fate of linguistic
innovations in online communities. In COLING
2018-27th International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics-Long papers.

Marco Del Tredici, Malvina Nissim, and Andrea Za-
ninello. 2016. Tracing metaphors in time through
self-distance in vector spaces. In CLiC it 2016 -
Third Italian Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics.

Penelope Eckert and Sally McConnell-Ginet. 1992.
Communities of practice: Where language, gender,
and power all live. In Locating Power, Proceedings
of the 1992 Berkeley Women and Language Confer-
ence, pages 89–99.

Lea Frermann and Mirella Lapata. 2016. A bayesian
model of diachronic meaning change. Transactions
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
4:31–45.

Kristina Gulordava and Marco Baroni. 2011. A distri-
butional similarity approach to the detection of se-
mantic change in the google books ngram corpus. In
Proceedings of the GEMS 2011 Workshop on GE-
ometrical Models of Natural Language Semantics,
pages 67–71. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

William L Hamilton, Jure Leskovec, and Dan Jurafsky.
2016. Diachronic word embeddings reveal statisti-
cal laws of semantic change. In Proceedings of the
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), vol-
ume 1, pages 1489–1501.

Zellig S Harris. 1954. Distributional structure. Word,
10(2-3):146–162.

Ruqaiya Hasan. 2009. Semantic variation: Meaning in
society and in sociolinguistics. Equinox London.

Adam Jatowt and Kevin Duh. 2014. A framework for
analyzing semantic change of words across time. In
Proceedings of the 14th ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Con-
ference on Digital Libraries, pages 229–238. IEEE
Press.

Yoon Kim, Yi-I Chiu, Kentaro Hanaki, Darshan Hegde,
and Slav Petrov. 2014. Temporal analysis of lan-
guage through neural language models. In Proceed-
ings of the ACL 2014 Workshop on Language Tech-
nologies and Computational Social Science, pages
61–65. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Vivek Kulkarni, Rami Al-Rfou, Bryan Perozzi, and
Steven Skiena. 2015. Statistically significant detec-
tion of linguistic change. In Proceedings of the 24th
International Conference on World Wide Web, pages
625–635. ACM.

Andrey Kutuzov, Lilja Øvrelid, Terrence Szymanski,
and Erik Velldal. 2018. Diachronic word embed-
dings and semantic shifts: a survey. In Proceedings
of the 27th International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (COLING), pages 1384–1397. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Omer Levy, Yoav Goldberg, and Ido Dagan. 2015. Im-
proving distributional similarity with lessons learned
from word embeddings. Transactions of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, 3:211–225.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In Advances in neural information processing
systems, pages 3111–3119.

Lawrence Phillips, Kyle Shaffer, Dustin Arendt,
Nathan Hodas, and Svitlana Volkova. 2017. Intrin-
sic and extrinsic evaluation of spatiotemporal text
representations in twitter streams. In Proceedings of
the 2nd Workshop on Representation Learning for
NLP, pages 201–210.

Rahmtin Rotabi, Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil,
and Jon Kleinberg. 2017. Competition and selec-
tion among conventions. In Proceedings of the 26th
International Conference on World Wide Web, pages
1361–1370. International World Wide Web Confer-
ences Steering Committee.

Eyal Sagi, Stefan Kaufmann, and Brady Clark. 2011.
Tracing semantic change with latent semantic anal-
ysis. Current methods in historical semantics, pages
161–183.

Ian Stewart and Jacob Eisenstein. 2018. Making”
fetch” happen: The influence of social and linguistic
context on the success of lexical innovations. Pro-
ceedings of Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).



2075

Terrence Szymanski. 2017. Temporal word analogies:
Identifying lexical replacement with diachronic
word embeddings. In Proceedings of the 55th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), volume 2,
pages 448–453.

Xuri Tang. 2018. A state-of-the-art of semantic
change computation. Natural Language Engineer-
ing, 24(5):649–676.

Etienne Wenger. 1998. Communities of practice:
Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.

Paul Werth. 1994. Extended metaphor—a text-world
account. Language and literature, 3(2):79–103.

Derry Tanti Wijaya and Reyyan Yeniterzi. 2011. Un-
derstanding semantic change of words over cen-
turies. In Proceedings of the 2011 international
workshop on DETecting and Exploiting Cultural di-
versiTy on the social web, pages 35–40. ACM.

A Further Details on Evaluation Dataset

For our experiment, we considered content words
only, which we identified by using the external list
of common words available at https://www.
wordfrequency.info/free.asp.

Three words were discarded from the initial
list after analysis of the redditor data: ‘discord’
and ‘owls’ due to the homonymy with proper
names not detected during survey’s implemen-
tation; ‘tracking’ because the chosen examples
clearly mislead the judgements of the redditors.

As detailed in Section 3.3, 26 members of
r/LiverpoolFC participated in the survey, and each
word received on average 8.8 judgements. We
computed inter-annotator agreement as Krippen-
dorff’s alpha, and obtained α = 0.58, a relatively
low value but common in semantic tasks (Artstein
and Poesio, 2008).

The results of the annotation validate our initial
word sampling procedure:

• the words that present a significant increase
in frequency and were annotated as meaning
shift by us received an average shift annota-
tion of 0.72 (± 0.15);

• the words that present a significant increase
in frequency but that were not annotated as
meaning shift by us received an average shift
annotation of 0.15 (± 0.16);

• the words that keep a constant frequency be-
tween t1 and t2, and we don’t consider exam-
ples of meaning shift, got 0.07 (± 0.12).


