



















































Towards Content Transfer through Grounded Text Generation


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2019, pages 2622–2632
Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2 - June 7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

2622

Towards Content Transfer through Grounded Text Generation

Shrimai Prabhumoye
Carnegie Mellon University

5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15219

sprabhum@andrew.cmu.edu

Chris Quirk, Michel Galley
Microsoft Research
One Microsoft Way

Redmond, WA 98052
{chrisq,mgalley}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recent work in neural generation has attracted
significant interest in controlling the form of
text, such as style, persona, and politeness.
However, there has been less work on control-
ling neural text generation for content. This
paper introduces the notion of Content Trans-
fer for long-form text generation, where the
task is to generate a next sentence in a docu-
ment that both fits its context and is grounded
in a content-rich external textual source such
as a news story. Our experiments on Wikipedia
data show significant improvements against
competitive baselines. As another contribution
of this paper, we release a benchmark dataset
of 640k Wikipedia referenced sentences paired
with the source articles to encourage explo-
ration of this new task.

1 Introduction

Recent work in neural natural language genera-
tion (NLG) has witnessed a growing interest in
controlling text for various form-related and lin-
guistic properties, such as style (Ficler and Gold-
berg, 2017), affect (Ghosh et al., 2017), politeness
(Sennrich et al., 2016), persona (Li et al., 2016b)
voice (Yamagishi et al., 2016), grammatical cor-
rectness (Ji et al., 2017), and length (Kikuchi et al.,
2016). This trend offers the promise of empow-
ering existing authoring tools such as Grammarly,
Google Smart Compose, and Microsoft Word with
the ability to control a much greater variety of tex-
tual properties, which are currently mostly lim-
ited to grammar, spelling, word choice, and wordi-
ness. What has been relatively less explored in
neural NLG research is the ability to control the
generation of a current sentence not only in its
form, but also its content.1 Consider for example
Fig. 1, which illustrates a situation where an au-
thor edits a document (here a Wikipedia article),

1Historically, NLG has focused on generation from struc-
tured content such as a database or semantic representation,
but this paper is interested in generation from free-form text.

Figure 1: Example of content transfer: Given existing
curated text (yellow) and a document with additional
relevant information (green), the task is to update the
curated text (orange) to reflect the most salient updates.

and the goal is to generate or suggest a next sen-
tence (shown in orange) to the author. This type
of unconstrained, long-form text generation task
(Mostafazadeh et al., 2016; Fan et al., 2018) is of
course extremely difficult. Free-form generation
can easily go astray due to two opposing factors.
On one hand, ensuring that the generated output
is of relatively good quality often comes at the
cost of making it bland and devoid of factual con-
tent (Li et al., 2016a). On the other hand, exist-
ing techniques can help steer neural models away



2623

from blandness in order to produce more con-
tentful outputs (using temperature sampling (Fan
et al., 2018), GAN (Goodfellow et al., 2014), etc.),
but often at the cost of “hallucinating” (Wiseman
et al., 2017) words or concepts that are totally ir-
relevant. Neither situation provides a compelling
experience to the user.

What is clearly missing from the aforemen-
tioned authoring scenario is the notion of ground-
ing: there is often a profusion of online re-
sources that bear at least some relevance to any
given document currently being written. Much of
the general-purpose world knowledge is available
in the form of encyclopedias (e.g., Wikipedia),
books (e.g., Project Gutenberg, Google Books),
and news articles. While the generation of good
quality texts without any conditioning on “exter-
nal” sources (Fan et al., 2018) might be an inter-
esting research endeavor on its own, we argue that
grounding can make the generation task much eas-
ier, e.g., as shown in Fig. 1 where a passage of a
news article (green) can be reformulated consider-
ing the current context of the document (yellow)
in order to produce a natural next sentence (or-
ange). In light of this desideratum, this paper ad-
dresses the problem of grounded text generation,
where the goal is to infuse the content or knowl-
edge from an external source (e.g., a news article
as in Fig. 1) in order to generate a follow-up sen-
tence of an existing document. We see this as a
form of Content Transfer, as other characteristics
of the external source—such as style and linguistic
form—are not controlled.

In addition to formulating this new task, our
work makes the following contributions: We pro-
vide a large dataset of 640k instances that contain
parallel data of a source document (news articles),
a context, and sentence to be produced. The lat-
ter two are extracted from Wikipedia, which is
an attractive dataset for grounded generation as
many of the statements in Wikipedia cite external
sources (i.e., grounded in an external article). Fi-
nally, we also provide simple yet efficient mod-
els that condition both on the external article and
the context of the current document. We com-
pare our models against extractive and abstractive
baselines, including summarization methods that
simply try to condense the external article with-
out considering the context of the document. Our
experiments show that our models which incorpo-
rate the context gain 7.0 ROUGE-L F1 points —in

other words, treating our task as a summarization
problem is not enough. Our human evaluations
also show that models that are aware of the con-
text generate relevant and fluent sentences that are
coherent to the context.

2 Task

This research is concerned with the general prob-
lem of grounded authorship assistance, i.e., the
task of suggesting text to insert or append in an
existing document draft, in such a way that all the
added content reflects information from external
sources, such as news articles and books. This
type of grounded generation task could take many
forms, so we decided to formalize the task as fol-
lows, while still keeping the task both challeng-
ing and practically interesting. Given an external
document (green in Fig. 1), and some existing cu-
rated text (yellow), the task is to generate a single
update sentence (orange). This update sentence
should be both relevant to the context and reflec-
tive of the information contained in the document.

This task bears some similarity with automatic
summarization (Nenkova and McKeown, 2011),
as a naı̈ve approach to the above problem is to ap-
pend a one-sentence summary of the document to
the curated text. While indeed related, the two
tasks differ in two key points. First, the one-
sentence summary must be contextually appropri-
ate given the previous context of the curated text.
Second, summarization is mostly concerned with
finding salient information, but—in the case of our
task—information relevant to the context might
actually only be auxiliary within the external doc-
ument. Section 6 (Related Work) further contrasts
our task with summarization.

Formally we define our task as follows: given
an existing curated text s and a document d de-
scribing novel information relevant to that text, the
system must produce a revised text s′ that incor-
porates the most salient information from d. We
restrict our focus to the cases where the revised
text s′ can be obtained by appending the new in-
formation from d to the original curated text s.2

In particular, we assume we can transform the old
curated text s into the new text s′ by appending
one additional update sentence x to s.

2 In general, updated information from d might demand
substantial changes to s: perhaps core assumptions of s were
contradicted, necessitating many removed and rewritten sen-
tences. We postpone this complex setting to future work.



2624

3 Models

This paper operates in a conventional super-
vised learning setting. For training data, we
rely on a large dataset of existing curated text
S = {s1, . . . , sn}, corresponding documents with
novel informationD = {d1, . . . ,dn}, and the up-
date sentences X = {x1, . . . ,xn}. Our task is
to generate the update sentence xi that could be
appended to the curated text si in order to incor-
porate the additional information from document
di. The goal would be to identify new information
(in particular, di \ si) that is most salient to the
topic or focus of the text, then generate a single
sentence that represents this information.

3.1 Generative models

A natural though difficult means of generating this
additional update sentence x is to use a genera-
tive model conditioned on the information in the
curated text s and the new document d. Re-
cent methods inspired by successful neural ma-
chine translation systems have produced impres-
sive results in abstractive summarization (Nalla-
pati et al., 2016). Hence, our first step is to use
the sequence-to-sequence encoder-decoder model
(Bahdanau et al., 2015) with attention (Luong
et al., 2015) for our task. This kind of model as-
sumes that the output sentence can be generated
word-by-word. Each output word xti generated is
conditioned on all prior words x<ti and an encoded
representation of the context z:∏

t

p(x̂ti|x̂<ti , z) (1)

Context Agnostic Generative (CAG) Model:
One simple baseline is to train a sequence-to-
sequence model for the document d alone that
does not directly incorporate information from the
curated text s. Here, the algorithm is trained to
generate the most likely update sentence x̂ =
argmax p(x|d). In this setting, we consider the
reference document di as the source and the up-
date sentence to be generated xi as the target.

z = Encoder(di,θ) (2)

The encoder and decoder do not directly see the
information from the curated text s, but the up-
date x inherently carries some information about
it. The parameters of the model are learned from
updates that were authored given the knowledge

of the curated text. Hence, the model may cap-
ture some generalizations about the kinds of infor-
mation and locations in d that are most likely to
contribute novel information to s.

Context Only Generative (COG) Model: This
algorithm is trained to generate the most likely up-
date sentence x̂ = argmax p(x|s). This model
is similar to CAG except that we consider the cu-
rated si as the source. In this setting, there is no
grounding of the content to be generated.

Context Informed Generative (CIG) Model:
An obvious next step is to incorporate information
from the curated text s as well. We can concate-
nate the document and the curated text, and pro-
duce an encoded representation of this sequence.

z = Encoder([di; si],θ) (3)

This approach incorporates information from both
sources, though it does not differentiate them
clearly. Thus, the model may struggle to identify
which pieces of information are novel with respect
to the curated text.

To clearly identify the information that is al-
ready present in the curated text s, a model could
encode s and d separately, then incorporate both
signals into the generative procedure.

Context Receptive Generative (CRG) Model:
Our next step was to condition our generative pro-
cess more concretely on the curated text s. We
condition the generative process on the represen-
tation of s at each time step. Formally:

zd = Encoderd(di,θd) (4)

zs = Encoders(si,θs) (5)

x̂i ∼
∏
t

p(x̂ti|[x̂<ti ; zs], zd) (6)

where, θd and θs are the parameters of the encoder
for the document d and encoder for the curated
text s respectively, zd and zs are the encoded rep-
resentations of the document di and curated text
si respectively. At each time step of generation,
the output is conditioned on the tokens generated
up to the time step t concatenated with zs. Hence,
the generative process is receptive of the context
at each time step.

3.2 Extractive models
Generative models that construct new sentences
conditioned on the relevant context are compelling



2625

but have a number of modeling challenges. Such
a model must both select the most relevant content
and generate a fluent linguistic realization of this
information.

We also consider extractive models: approaches
that select the most relevant sentence from the
document d to append to the curated text s. These
approaches can focus solely on the content selec-
tion problem and ignore the difficulties of genera-
tion. This simplification does come at a cost: the
most effective sentence to add might require only
a subset of information from some sentence in the
document, or incorporate information from more
than one sentence.

Sum-Basic (SB): One common baseline is Sum-
Basic, an extractive summarization technique that
relies on word frequency statistics to select salient
sentences (Nenkova and Vanderwende, 2005). As
an initial step, unigram probabilities are computed
from the set of input documents using relative fre-
quency estimation. Then, sentences are selected
one-by-one in greedy rounds until the summary
budget is saturated. At each round, this model se-
lects the most likely sentence according to the cur-
rent unigram distribution. The selected sentence
is added to the summary and removed from the
pool of available sentences. The unigram proba-
bilities of all words in the selected sentence are
heuristically discounted (replaced by square root).
Select-then-discount operations continue until the
summary is written. Discounting is crucial to pre-
vent repetition: once a word (or ideally a concept)
has been selected for the summary, it is much less
likely to be picked in a subsequent round.

We use Sum-Basic as a Context Agnostic ex-
tractive model: we provide the document d as an
input to the model and run Sum-Basic for exactly
one round. The selected sentence is considered to
be the update sentence x.

Context Informed Sum-Basic (CISB): We de-
veloped a simple modification of the Sum-basic
technique to incorporate information from the cu-
rated text s as context. Initial unigram probabil-
ities are computed using word counts from both
the curated text and the document. Next, for each
sentence in the curated text, we apply just the dis-
count procedure, updating the probability distribu-
tion as if those sentences were selected. Finally,
we select the single sentence from the document
that is most likely according to the resulting dis-

Figure 2: Dataset creation process

counted unigram probabilities. This simple modi-
fication of Sum-Basic helps select a sentence that
is novel with respect to the curated text by lower-
ing the probability of all words already present.

Extractive CAG, CIG, CRG Models: Any
generative model of x can also be used as an ex-
tractive model: we simply estimate the likelihood
of each sentence in the document according to the
model, and select the most likely one. Genera-
tive models may fail because either they are un-
able to select the most relevant information, or be-
cause the resulting sentence is ill-formed. Extrac-
tive ranking circumvents all errors due to genera-
tion and can help isolate model issues.

Hybrid CAG, CIG, CRG Models: Since the
document d can be quite large, a generative model
may struggle to pick the most salient information
based on the context. To simplify the generative
modeling task, we can pre-filter the document to-
ward only the most salient parts. We use the Con-
text Informed Sum-Basic technique to first select
the top five sentences from the document. We sup-
ply only these five sentences in place of the source
document d, then apply the CAG, CIG, and CRG
techniques described above.

4 Dataset

Our ideal dataset would capture the edits made to
some curated reference text in light of a stream of
new articles describing changes. For instance, one
might maintain reference software documentation
about a system, making additions or changes in
light of incoming emails describing updates or ad-
ditions. This type of data is unfortunately difficult
to obtain due to privacy considerations.

However, Wikipedia can provide a naturally-
occurring body of text with references to primary
sources. A substantial fraction of Wikipedia sen-
tences include citations to supporting documenta-
tion, a ripe source of data for content transfer. That



2626

Corpus Input Output #Examples Rouge-1 R

Gigaword (Graff and Cieri, 2003) 101 101 106 78.7
CNN/DailyMail (Nallapati et al., 2016) 102–103 101 105 76.1
WikiSum (Liu et al., 2018) 102–106 101–103 106 59.2
Content Transfer (this paper) 101–103 101–102 105 66.9

Table 1: Key characteristics of the dataset: approximate size of input and output instances, approximate dataset
size, and recall of reference output against the source material, as a measure of dataset difficulty.

said, some of the citations are quite difficult to fol-
low or trust: broken URLs might lead to lost infor-
mation; citations to books are difficult to consume
given the large scope of information; etc. There-
fore, we only consider cases where the reference
links to some well-known news sources.

Based on citation frequency, we selected a list
of 86 domains,3 primarily news outlets. During
the data creation process we only considered cita-
tions belonging to one of these eighty six domains.
We make this simplifying assumption for several
reasons. First, our English Wikipedia dump con-
tained approximately 23.7 million citation URLS
belonging to 1.6 million domains; fine-grained fil-
tering would be a daunting task. Our hand-vetted
list of domains is a high-precision (albeit low-
recall) means of selecting clean data. Second, we
wanted to ground the generated text on credible,
consistent, and well-written sources of informa-
tion. Furthermore, well-known domains are read-
ily available on Common Crawl,4 leading to an
easily-reproducible dataset.

Fig. 2 illustrates the procedure used to create a
dataset for the task described in Section 2 from
Wikipedia. For each Wikipedia article, we ex-
tracted the plain text without markdown. When
encountering a citation belonging to a selected do-
main, we considered the sentence just before the
citation to be generated based on the content of
the citation. This sentence became our reference
update sentence: the additional update sentence x
added to the curated text s to produce the new text
s′. The k sentences prior to the target sentence
in the Wikipedia article were considered to be the
curated text s. In our case, we used a window of
k = 3 sentences to select our context. The cited
article acted as the document d, from which the
appropriate update x can be generated.

The HTML source of the citation was down-

3This list is provided in the data release of this paper.
4http://commoncrawl.org/

loaded from Common Crawl for reproducibility
and consistency. The HTML derived from Com-
mon Crawl is then processed to get the plain text of
the news article. The resulting dataset C consists
of aligned tuples C =

(
di, si,xi

)
i∈[1,n], where n

is the total number of samples in the dataset.
Alternatively, one might rely on Wikipedia edit

history to create a dataset. In this setting, edits
which include a new citation would act as the up-
date x. Although this has the upside of identify-
ing potentially complex, multi-sentence updates,
preliminary analysis suggested that these edits are
noisy. Editors may first generate the content in
one edit, then add the citation in a subsequent edit,
they may only rephrase a part of the text while
adding the citation, or they may check in a range
of changes across the document in a single edit.
Our simpler sentence-based approach leads to an
interesting dataset with fewer complications.

Dataset Statistics and Analysis Table 1 de-
scribes some key statistics of our dataset and how
it compares with other datasets used for similar
tasks. The ROUGE-1 recall scores of reference
output x against document d suggest this task will
be difficult for conventional extractive summariza-
tion techniques.5 We hypothesize that during con-
tent transfer, the language in document d often un-
dergoes substantial transformations to fit the cu-
rated text s. The average unigram overlap (after
stopword removal) between the document d and
the reference update sentence x is 55.79%; over-
lap of the curated text s and the reference update
sentence x is 30.12%. This suggests the reference
update sentence x can be derived from the doc-
ument d, though not extracted directly. Further-
more, the content of x is very different from the
content of s but appears topically related.

Our dataset consists of approximately 290k
unique Wikipedia articles. Some heavily-cited

5ROUGE-1 recall was computed on a sample of 50k in-
stances from the entire dataset.

http://commoncrawl.org/


2627

articles include ‘Timeline of investigations into
Trump and Russia (2017)’, ‘List of England Test
cricketers’, and ‘2013 in science’. We randomly
split the dataset into 580k training instances, 6049
validation instances, and 50k test instances, en-
suring that any Wikipedia article appearing in the
train set must not appear in validation or test.

5 Experimental results

We evaluate our models using both automated
metrics and, for a subset of promising systems,
human assessment. One key evaluation is the sim-
ilarity between the model generated update sen-
tence and reference update sentence. We also ask
human judges to assess grammaticality and coher-
ence.

Hyper-parameter settings: For all our experi-
ments with generative models, we have used bidi-
rectional encoder, 2 layers in encoder and decoder,
RNN size of 128, word vector size of 100. We
have used sentencepiece toolkit6 to use byte-pair-
encoding (BPE) with a vocabulary size of 32k. We
used stochastic gradient descent optimizer and the
stopping criterion was perplexity on the validation
set. We filtered our dataset to contain instances
which have length of the document between 50
and 2000 tokens, length of the curated text be-
tween 20 and 500 tokens and the length of the up-
date sentence between 5 and 200 tokens.

5.1 Automated Evaluation
Our primary automated evaluation metric for
system-generated update sentences is ROUGE-L
F1 against reference update sentence,7 though we
also include BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) and
METEOR (Denkowski and Lavie, 2011) as addi-
tional indicators. ROUGE is a standard family of
metrics for summarization tasks; ROUGE-L mea-
sures the longest common subsequence between
the system and the reference, capturing both lexi-
cal selection and word order.

Table 2 illustrates that this task is quite diffi-
cult for extractive techniques. Furthermore, the re-
sults emphasize the importance of having curated
text as context when generating the update. In all
experimental conditions, models aware of context
perform much better than models agnostic of it. In
contrast to Liu et al. (2018), generative approaches

6https://github.com/google/sentencepiece
7We use the pyrouge toolkit along with ROUGE-1.5.5:

https://github.com/bheinzerling/pyrouge

Model ROUGE-L B
L

E
U

M
E

T
E

O
R

SB 5.6 (5.6–5.7) 0.6 2.0
CISB 7.0 (7.0–7.1) 1.0 2.8

CAG 9.1 (9.0–9.2) 1.2 4.6
COG 13.5 (13.4–13.6) 1.7 3.5
CIG 16.0 (15.9-16.1) 3.5 5.3
CRG 14.7 (14.6–14.8) 2.6 4.5

Hybrid CAG 8.0 (7.9–8.0) 1.0 3.8
Hybrid CIG 15.0 (14.9–15.1) 2.7 4.7
Hybrid CRG 13.5 (13.4–13.6) 2.3 4.1

Extractive CAG 9.3 (9.2–9.3) 1.1 3.2
Extractive CIG 9.3 (9.2–9.3) 1.1 3.2
Extractive CRG 9.2 (9.1–9.3) 1.1 3.2

Oracle 28.8 (28.7–29.0) 11.0 10.9

Table 2: Automated metrics; 95% confidence interval
in parentheses.

outperformed hybrid, likely because we only had
a single input document. Extractive CAG, CIG,
and CRG all outperformed both Sum-Basic and
the context informed variant. Extractive CAG was
on-par with generative CAG, suggesting the gen-
erated sentences were of reasonable quality. How-
ever, generative CIG and CRG were substantially
better: rewriting to match context was beneficial.

The Oracle system of Table 2 aims to es-
tablish an upper limit attainable by extractive
methods, using the following oracle experiment:
For each test instance

(
di, si,xi

)
, we enumer-

ate each extracted sentence e of document di
and select the one with highest ROUGE-L score
as Oracle’s update sentence x̂i (i.e., x̂i =
argmaxe∈di ROUGE-L(xi, e)). Note this yields
a very optimistic upper bound, as the same ground
truth xi is used both to select an extractive sen-
tence from a large pool of candidates and for final
automatic metric scoring.8 Nevertheless, these or-
acle results let us draw two conclusions: (1) They
give us better perspective to assess the non-oracle
systems, and we believe that their seemingly low

8Previous work has shown that this type of oracle can
yield upper bounds that are unrealistically high, and they tend
to be above human performance (Och et al., 2004, Table 1).
One remedy suggested by Och et al. is a round-robin oracle
ensuring that the reference (ground truth) used by the argmax
is distinct from that of the final automatic evaluation, but that
scheme is only possible with a multi-reference test set.

https://github.com/bheinzerling/pyrouge


2628

automatic evaluation scores are quite reasonable
relative to the optimistic upper bound (e.g., CIGs
ROUGE-Ls score is 55% of the oracle). (2) The
oracle results suggest that humans are substan-
tially changing the surface realization as they sum-
marize for Wikipedia, as otherwise the oracle re-
sults would be much closer to maximum metric
scores (i.e., 100%). This shows that extractive
methods are not enough for this task, justifying our
use of generation techniques.

5.2 Human Evaluations

For careful evaluation of the performance of the
most promising configurations (CAG and CIG
models) we also asked human judges for quality
assessments. We solicited several types of evalua-
tion, including two relative comparisons between
pairs of system outputs and an absolute quality
evaluation of individual system outputs.

Close to reference (Relative): The first relative
comparison measured how accurately the gener-
ated update reflected information in the reference
update. Here, the annotators saw only the ref-
erence update sentence and the outputs of two
systems labeled A and B in a randomized order.
We asked the annotators “Which system output is
closest in meaning to the reference update?” The
annotators could pick system A, system B, or in-
dicate that neither was preferred. This is a simple
evaluation task though potentially biased toward
the sole reference update.

Coherent to context (Relative): The second
relative comparison measured whether the gener-
ated output contained salient information from the
document written in a manner appropriate to the
curated text. The annotators saw the document d,
the curated text s, and the outputs of the two sys-
tems A and B, again in a random order. They were
asked, “Which system output is more accurate rel-
ative to the background information given in the
snippet of the article?” Each judge had to consider
whether the information fits with the curated text
and also whether system-generated content could
be supported by the document.

Four human judges each annotated 30 unique
output pairs for these two relative comparison set-
tings, a total of 240 relative judgments. Table 3
shows the results: the context-aware CIG system
was substantially better in both settings.

prefer

Evaluation task CAG neither CIG

Close to reference 15.8% 53.3% 30.8%
Coherent to context 7.5% 53.3% 39.2%

Table 3: Human preferences of CAG vs. CIG.

Model G
ra

m
m

ar

N
on

-r
ed

un
d.

R
ef

.c
la

ri
ty

Fo
cu

s

St
ru

ct
ur

e

CAG 2.6 1.8 2.7 2.6 2.4
CIG 4.3 3.9 3.6 3.5 3.2

Table 4: Human absolute quality assessments.

DUC Guidelines (Absolute): In addition, we
performed an absolute quality evaluation follow-
ing the guidelines from DUC 2007.9 Each judge
was presented with a single system output, then
they were asked to evaluate five aspects of system
output: grammaticality, non-redundancy, referen-
tial clarity, focus, and structure/coherence. For
each aspect, the judge provided an assessment on
a five-point scale: (1) Very Poor, (2) Poor, (3)
Barely Acceptable, (4) Good, (5) Very Good. We
gathered 120 additional judgments in this setting
(4 judges, 30 outputs). Again, context-aware CIG
substantially outperforms CAG across the board,
as seen in Table 4.

Observations: Systems unaware of the curated
text s tend to generate long updates with repeated
frequent words or phrases. Consider the ratio of
unique tokens over the total number of tokens in
the generated output, which we denote by R. A
small R indicates many repeated tokens. We find
that 88% of the time this ratio R falls below 0.5
for the CAG model, i.e. for 88% instances, more
than 50% of the words in the generated output are
repeats. This number is relatively small – 14% for
CIG and 20% for CRG – in context aware mod-
els. In the reference updates only 0.21% instances
repeat more than 50% of words.

Figs. 3 and 4 show good and bad examples gen-
erated by the CIG model along with the document,
curated text and the reference update. Table 5 has
a set of updates generated by the CIG model as

9http://duc.nist.gov/duc2007/
quality-questions.txt

http://duc.nist.gov/duc2007/quality-questions.txt
http://duc.nist.gov/duc2007/quality-questions.txt


2629

Document (News Article)
sequels are fairly new to bollywood, but director sanjay gad-
hvi realised there was cash to be made from resurrecting his
hit action thriller dhoom, by casting sexy young stars like
hrithik rosha, aishwarya rai and abhishek bachchan in an even
bigger game of cops and robbes...that the twist in dhoom
2’s tail is not explained is yet another shortcoming. it’s
only roshan’s charismatic performance as the criminal mas-
termind, and the sizzling chemistry he shares with rai’s sassy
cohort, that rescues this adventure from becoming an elon-
gated tourism commercial.

Curated Text (Wikipedia Context)
it makes no lasting contributions to world cinema, but if two-
and-a-half hours of disposable entertainment are all you’re af-
ter, you could do far worse. “l.a. weekly’s david chute stated
the film was, ”a movie meal as satisfying as this one can make
you feel that nothing else matters.” jaspreet pandohar of the
bbc gave it a two-star rating, writing “by roping in acclaimed
action director alan amin to take care of the thrills and spills,
you’d expect gadhvi to have spent time crafting out a sophis-
ticated storyline instead of simply sending his cast on a cat-
and-mouse chase around the globe.

Reference Update
it’s only roshan’s charismatic performance as the criminal
mastermind, and the sizzling chemistry he shares with rai’s
sassy cohort, that rescues this adventure from becoming an
elongated tourism commercial.”

Generated Update
it’s only roshan’s finest performance as the criminal terror-
ist, and the sizzling chemistry he shares with rai’s sassy
anatomy, that attues this adventure from becoming an elon-
gated tourism commercial.”

Figure 3: Example of good quality generation, where
the system-generated update is close to the reference.

well as the reference update. As we can see in
examples 3 and 4, the CIG model misplaces the
date but correctly generates the remaining con-
tent. In examples 1 and 2, the CIG model appears
to successfully select the correct pronouns for co-
reference resolution, though it gets confused as to
when to use the pronoun or the named entity. Ex-
amples 5 and 6 represent failure cases due to miss-
ing words.

6 Related Work

The proposed content transfer task is clearly re-
lated to a long series of papers in summariza-
tion, including recent work with neural tech-
niques (Rush et al., 2015; Nallapati et al., 2016).
In particular, one recent paper casts the the task of
generating an entire Wikipedia article as a multi-
document summarization problem (Liu et al.,
2018). Their best-performing configuration was
a two-stage extractive-abstractive framework; a
multi-stage approach helped circumvent the diffi-

Document (News Article)
anne kirkbride, who portrayed bespectacled, gravelly-voiced
deirdre barlow in coronation street for more that four decades,
has died. the 60-year-old, whose first appearance in the soap
opera was in 1972, died in a manchester hospital after a short
illness.... kirkbride had left the soap opera after she was di-
agnosed with non-hodgkin’s lymphoma in 1993 but returned
some months later after treatment and spoke candidly about
how she had struggled with depression following the diagno-
sis...

Curated Text (Wikipedia Context)
in 1993, kirkbride was diagnosis with non-hodgkin’s lym-
phoma. she spoke to the british press about her bout of de-
pression following the diagnosis. she was cured within a year
of being diagnosed.

Reference Update
anne kirkbride died of breast cancer in a manchester hospital
on 19 january 2015, aged 60.

Generated Update
she was diagnosed with non-hodgkin’s lymphoma.

Figure 4: Example of lower-quality output: the gen-
erated update unnecessarily restates information yet
misses the most salient detail from the document.

culties of purely abstractive methods given quite
large input token sequences.

Looking beyond the clear task similarity of au-
thoring Wikipedia style content, there are several
crucial differences in our approach. First, the
goal of that paper is to author the whole page,
starting from nothing more than a set of primary
sources, such as news articles. In practice, how-
ever, Wikipedia articles often contain information
outside these primary sources, including common
sense knowledge, framing statements to set the ar-
ticle in context, and inferences made from those
primary sources. Our task restricts the focus to
content where a human editor explicitly decided
to cite some external source. Hence, it is much
more likely that the resulting summary can be de-
rived from the external source content. Further-
more, we focus on the act of adding information
to existing articles, rather than writing a complete
article without any context. These two scenarios
are clearly useful yet complementary: sometimes
people want to produce a new reference text where
nothing existed before; in other cases the goal is to
maintain and update an existing reference.

Another closely related task is update summa-
rization (Dang and Owczarzak, 2008), where sys-
tems attempt to provide a brief summary of the
novel information in a new article assuming the
user has read a known set of prior documents.
Our focus on curating an authoritative resource



2630

Reference Update Generated Update

1. rob brydon, the comedian was born in baglan. he was born in baglan.
2. in may 2014 he was diagnosed with prostate cancer. st. clair was diagnosed with prostate cancer.
3. on april 3, 2014, manning signed a one-year deal with the

cincinnati bengals.
on march 9, 2014, manning signed a one-year contract with
the cincinnati bengals.

4. on oct 10, 2013, barrett signed with the memphis grizzlies. on feb 9, 2013, barrett signed with the memphis grizzlies.
5. some people think elvis is still alive, but most of us think

he’s dead and gone.”
some people think elvis, but most of us think he’s dead and
gone.”

6. it’s always the goal of the foreign-language film award exec-
utive committee to be as inclusive as possible.”

it’s always the goal of the foreign- entry film award executive
to be as possible.”

Table 5: Example generations from the CIG system, paired with the human generated updates.

is a substantial difference. Also our datasets are
substantially larger, enabling generative models to
be used in this space, where prior update sum-
marization techniques have been primarily extrac-
tive (Fisher and Roark, 2008; Li et al., 2015).

For any generation task, it is important to ad-
dress both the content (‘what’ is being said) as
well its style (‘how’ it is being said). Recently, a
great deal of research has focused on the ‘how’ (Li
et al., 2018; Shen et al., 2017), including efforts
to collect a parallel dataset that differs in polite-
ness (Rao and Tetreault, 2018), to control author
characteristics in the generated sentences (Prabhu-
moye et al., 2018), to control the perceived person-
ality traits of dialog responses (Zhang et al., 2018).
We believe this research thread is complementary
to our efforts on generating the ‘what’.

Another form of content transfer bridges across
modalities: text generation given schematized or
semi-structured information. Recent research has
addressed neural natural language generation tech-
niques given a range of structured sources: se-
lecting relevant database records and generating
natural language descriptions of them (Mei et al.,
2016), selecting and describing slot-value pairs
for task-specific dialog response generation (Wen
et al., 2015), and even generating Wikipedia biog-
raphy abstracts given Infobox information (Lebret
et al., 2016). Our task, while grounded in exter-
nal content, is different in that it leverages linguis-
tic grounding as well as prior text context when
generating text. This challenging setting enables
a huge range of grounded generation tasks: there
are vast amounts of unstructured textual data.

7 Conclusions

This article highlights the importance of the task
of content transfer: generation guided by an ex-
isting curated text to set context and tone, and
grounded in a new source providing useful in-

formation. We demonstrate how multiple mod-
els can address this challenging problem on a
novel dataset derived from Wikipedia and Com-
mon Crawl. This dataset is released to the com-
munity along with scripts and models.10 We find
this setting particularly promising given the op-
portunity for human interaction: in contrast to ap-
proaches that do not rely on human-generated con-
text, we establish a collaboration between user and
computer. Each newly suggested sentence can be
rejected, accepted, or edited before inclusion, and
the edits can provide more training data.

We believe there are many natural extensions to
this work. The models described here are mostly
extensions of existing approaches; approaches tar-
geting novelty detection, focus, and document
structure could lead to substantial improvements.
We could apply models in series to incorporate
changes for a set of documents. Future work could
also explore changes that modify existing content
rather than simply appending.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to the anonymous reviewers, as
well as Alan W. Black, Chris Brockett, Bill
Dolan, Sujay Jauhar, Michael Gamon, Jianfeng
Gao, Dheeraj Rajagopal, and Xuchao Zhang for
their helpful comments and suggestions on this
work. We also thank Emily Ahn, Khyati Chandu,
Ankush Das, Priyank Lathwal, and Dheeraj Ra-
jagopal for their help with the human evaluation.

References
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-

gio. 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. In International Con-
ference on Learning Representations.

10https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/
research/project/content-transfer/

https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/project/content-transfer/
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/project/content-transfer/


2631

Hoa Trang Dang and Karolina Owczarzak. 2008.
Overview of the TAC 2008 update summarization
task. In In TAC 2008 Workshop - Notebook papers
and results, pages 10–23.

Michael Denkowski and Alon Lavie. 2011. Me-
teor 1.3: Automatic metric for reliable optimiza-
tion and evaluation of machine translation systems.
In Proceedings of the sixth workshop on statistical
machine translation, pages 85–91. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Angela Fan, Mike Lewis, and Yann Dauphin. 2018.
Hierarchical neural story generation. In Proceed-
ings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-
pers), pages 889–898, Melbourne, Australia.

Jessica Ficler and Yoav Goldberg. 2017. Controlling
linguistic style aspects in neural language genera-
tion. In Proc. of EMNLP, page 94.

Seeger Fisher and Brian Roark. 2008. Query-focused
supervised sentence ranking for update summaries.
In TAC.

Sayan Ghosh, Mathieu Chollet, Eugene Laksana,
Louis-Philippe Morency, and Stefan Scherer. 2017.
Affect-LM: A neural language model for customiz-
able affective text generation. In ACL, volume 1,
pages 634–642.

Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza,
Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron
Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Generative ad-
versarial nets. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 27, pages 2672–2680.

David Graff and Christopher Cieri. 2003. English Gi-
gaword LDC2003T05. In Philadelphia: Linguistic
Data Consortium.

Jianshu Ji, Qinlong Wang, Kristina Toutanova, Yongen
Gong, Steven Truong, and Jianfeng Gao. 2017. A
nested attention neural hybrid model for grammati-
cal error correction. In Proceedings of the 55th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 753–
762, Vancouver, Canada.

Yuta Kikuchi, Graham Neubig, Ryohei Sasano, Hi-
roya Takamura, and Manabu Okumura. 2016. Con-
trolling output length in neural encoder-decoders.
In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
1328–1338, Austin, Texas.

Rémi Lebret, David Grangier, and Michael Auli. 2016.
Neural text generation from structured data with ap-
plication to the biography domain. In Proceed-
ings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 1203–1213.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Chen Li, Yang Liu, and Lin Zhao. 2015. Improving up-
date summarization via supervised ILP and sentence
reranking. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, pages 1317–1322.

Jiwei Li, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, Jianfeng Gao,
and Bill Dolan. 2016a. A diversity-promoting ob-
jective function for neural conversation models. In
Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 110–119, San Diego, California. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Jiwei Li, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, Georgios Sp-
ithourakis, Jianfeng Gao, and Bill Dolan. 2016b. A
persona-based neural conversation model. In Pro-
ceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pages 994–1003, Berlin, Germany.

Juncen Li, Robin Jia, He He, and Percy Liang. 2018.
Delete, retrieve, generate: a simple approach to sen-
timent and style transfer. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers),
volume 1, pages 1865–1874.

Peter J. Liu, Mohammad Saleh, Etienne Pot, Ben
Goodrich, Ryan Sepassi, Lukasz Kaiser, and Noam
Shazeer. 2018. Generating wikipedia by summariz-
ing long sequences. In International Conference on
Learning Representations.

Thang Luong, Hieu Pham, and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2015. Effective approaches to attention-based
neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the
2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 1412–1421. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Hongyuan Mei, TTI UChicago, Mohit Bansal, and
Matthew R Walter. 2016. What to talk about
and how? selective generation using LSTMs
with coarse-to-fine alignment. In Proceedings of
NAACL-HLT, pages 720–730.

Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Nathanael Chambers, Xiaodong
He, Devi Parikh, Dhruv Batra, Lucy Vanderwende,
Pushmeet Kohli, and James Allen. 2016. A cor-
pus and cloze evaluation for deeper understanding of
commonsense stories. In Proceedings of the 2016
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, pages 839–849, San Diego,
California.

Ramesh Nallapati, Bowen Zhou, Cicero dos Santos,
Caglar Gulcehre, and Bing Xiang. 2016. Ab-
stractive text summarization using sequence-to-
sequence rnns and beyond. In Proceedings of The
20th SIGNLL Conference on Computational Natural



2632

Language Learning, pages 280–290. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Ani Nenkova and Kathleen R. McKeown. 2011. Au-
tomatic summarization. Foundations and Trends in
Information Retrieval, 5(2-3):103–233.

Ani Nenkova and Lucy Vanderwende. 2005. The im-
pact of frequency on summarization. Technical re-
port, Microsoft Research.

Franz Josef Och, Daniel Gildea, Sanjeev Khudanpur,
Anoop Sarkar, Kenji Yamada, Alex Fraser, Shankar
Kumar, Libin Shen, David Smith, Katherine Eng,
Viren Jain, Zhen Jin, and Dragomir Radev. 2004.
A smorgasbord of features for statistical machine
translation. In Proc. of HLT-NAACL, pages 161–
168.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 40th annual meeting on association for compu-
tational linguistics, pages 311–318. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yulia Tsvetkov, Ruslan
Salakhutdinov, and Alan W Black. 2018. Style
transfer through back-translation. In Proceedings
of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pages 866–876.

Sudha Rao and Joel Tetreault. 2018. Dear sir or
madam, may I introduce the GYAFC dataset: Cor-
pus, benchmarks and metrics for formality style
transfer. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), volume 1, pages
129–140.

Alexander M. Rush, Sumit Chopra, and Jason Weston.
2015. A neural attention model for abstractive sen-
tence summarization. In Proceedings of the 2015
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 379–389, Lisbon, Portugal.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2016. Controlling politeness in neural machine
translation via side constraints. In Proceedings of
the 2016 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, pages 35–40, San
Diego, California. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Tianxiao Shen, Tao Lei, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi
Jaakkola. 2017. Style transfer from non-parallel text
by cross-alignment. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, pages 6830–6841.

Tsung-Hsien Wen, Milica Gasic, Nikola Mrkšić, Pei-
Hao Su, David Vandyke, and Steve Young. 2015.
Semantically conditioned LSTM-based natural lan-
guage generation for spoken dialogue systems. In

Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
1711–1721.

Sam Wiseman, Stuart Shieber, and Alexander Rush.
2017. Challenges in data-to-document generation.
In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
2253–2263, Copenhagen, Denmark. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Hayahide Yamagishi, Shin Kanouchi, Takayuki Sato,
and Mamoru Komachi. 2016. Controlling the voice
of a sentence in Japanese-to-English neural machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on
Asian Translation (WAT2016), pages 203–210, Os-
aka, Japan. The COLING 2016 Organizing Commit-
tee.

Saizheng Zhang, Emily Dinan, Jack Urbanek, Arthur
Szlam, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. 2018. Per-
sonalizing dialogue agents: I have a dog, do you
have pets too? In Proceedings of the 56th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 2204–
2213. Association for Computational Linguistics.


