



















































No Permanent Friends or Enemies: Tracking Relationships between Nations from News


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2019, pages 1660–1676
Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2 - June 7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

1660

No Permanent Friends or Enemies:
Tracking Relationships between Nations from News

Xiaochuang Han
College of Computing

Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA

xc@gatech.edu

Eunsol Choi
Paul G. Allen School of CSE

University of Washington
Seattle, WA

eunsol@cs.washington.edu

Chenhao Tan
Dept. of Computer Science

Unversity of Colorado Boulder
Boulder, CO

chenhao@chenhaot.com

Abstract

Understanding the dynamics of international
politics is important yet challenging for civil-
ians. In this work, we explore unsupervised
neural models to infer relations between na-
tions from news articles. We extend exist-
ing models by incorporating shallow linguis-
tics information and propose a new automatic
evaluation metric that aligns relationship dy-
namics with manually annotated key events.
As understanding international relations re-
quires carefully analyzing complex relation-
ships, we conduct in-person human evalua-
tions with three groups of participants. Over-
all, humans prefer the outputs of our model
and give insightful feedback that suggests fu-
ture directions for human-centered models.
Furthermore, our model reveals interesting re-
gional differences in news coverage. For in-
stance, with respect to US-China relations,
Singaporean media focus more on “strength-
ening” and “purchasing”, while US media fo-
cus more on “criticizing” and “denouncing”.

1 Introduction

In the context of growing globalization (Baylis
et al., 2017), understanding complex international
relations is increasingly relevant to our daily life.
Yet this is a challenging task due to the inher-
ently dynamic nature of international relations. As
Kissinger famously said, “America has no perma-
nent friends or enemies, only interests.” Staying
informed becomes even harder in the continuous
streams of information from news outlets and so-
cial media.

This very availability of such information, how-
ever, opens up exciting opportunities for natu-
ral language processing to support individuals in
understanding international relations. Supervised
extraction has been incredibly useful at identi-
fying pre-defined relations and events (Dodding-
ton et al., 2004; Mintz et al., 2009) but fails to

capture emerging or complex information needs.
Topic models and neural models have been pro-
posed to explore relations between entities with-
out supervision (O’Connor et al., 2013; Chaney
et al., 2016; Iyyer et al., 2016). In particular,
Iyyer et al. (2016) introduces an unsupervised neu-
ral model for tracking relations between fictional
characters, and this approach outperforms base-
lines from topic models and hidden Markov mod-
els. In this work, we incorporate linguistic insights
into this model to track relation dynamics between
nations from news articles.

Our model reconstructs textual information in
the embedding space using relation embeddings,
as proposed in Iyyer et al. (2016). We inte-
grate simple yet effective linguistic insights: ver-
bal predicates often describe the relationship be-
tween entities,1 while nouns and proper nouns pro-
vide the context of this relationship. For exam-
ple, in “U.S. denounces Russia for its interference
in the 2016 election”, denounce describes the re-
lation, and election and interference provide the
context. We show that this intuition leads the
model to discover relation descriptors that are eas-
ier to interpret and less noisy.

Evaluating these exploratory models for sub-
jective tasks poses a challenge as there are no
gold labels. Along with the model, we pro-
pose new approaches for evaluation. We in-
troduce a quantitative metric which aligns pre-
annotated key events with the temporal trends of
relationships produced by the models. Since this
task requires careful analysis of complex interna-
tional relations, we conduct in-person user stud-
ies with NLP researchers and undergraduate stu-
dents recruited from political science and linguis-
tics courses. Both quantitative evaluation and hu-
man evaluation indicate that our model better rep-

1We use entities, countries, and nations interchangeably
in this work.



1661

resents the dynamic relationships between nations
than the prior model (Iyyer et al., 2016): 75.9% of
participants preferred our model for finding natu-
ral language words describing international rela-
tions and 85.5% preferred temporal trends gener-
ated by our model.

Finally, we qualitatively explore the context of
relations provided by an attention-based mecha-
nism and demonstrate a practical application of
our model by studying regional differences in
news coverage of relationships between two coun-
tries. We conclude with discussions on future di-
rections for buildings models that can support in-
dividuals in navigating a large collection of news
articles. Our code is available at https://
github.com/BoulderDS/LARN.

2 Data

We start by introducing our dataset of news arti-
cles, the shallow linguistic information that we ex-
tract, and our annotation of key events.

News article collection. Our dataset is derived
from the NOW corpus, the largest corpus of news
articles that is available in full-text format.2 The
NOW corpus collects the news articles that are
available on Google News in 20 English-speaking
countries and thus include news articles that span
a wide variety of topics, ranging from politics, to
sports, to celebrity news from 23K media outlets.
In this work, we consider the news articles in re-
cent years, i.e., from January 2016 to June 2018,
to facilitate human evaluation.

We consider 12 nations (U.S., Russia, China,
UK, Germany, Canada, France, India, Japan, Iran,
Israel, and Syria) and the 66 nation pairs between
them. To identify mentions of each nation in news
articles, we manually construct a set of aliases for
each nation to cover common abbreviations and
the names of political leaders (e.g., Trump, Putin).
On average, each nation has 3.5 aliases. We then
use these aliases to find sentences that contain
a pair of nations under consideration and obtain
1.2M sentences associated with 634K articles.

Adding Shallow Linguistic Information. To
incorporate shallow linguistic knowledge, we pro-
cess the news article collection for each nation
pairs to extract (1) verbal predicates and (2) nouns

2The dataset can be obtained from https://www.
corpusdata.org/now_corpus.asp.

Total # of months considered 30
Total # of articles 7.7M
Total # of articles with valid nation pairs 634K

Avg. # of articles per nation pair 9.6K
Avg. # of sentences per nation pair 18.2K
Avg. # of predicates per nation pair 21.6K
Avg. # of nouns & proper nouns per nation pair 201K

Avg. # of key events per nation pair (8 pairs) 4.9

Table 1: Data statistics.

and proper nouns from each sentence. Specifi-
cally, we use a dependency parser to detect verbal
predicates and their subjects and objects, and only
include predicates for which both subjects and ob-
jects were found. For sentences with such predi-
cates, we find nouns and proper nouns using part
of speech tags. All data processing was done in
spaCy (Honnibal and Montani, 2017) and full de-
tails can be found in the appendix.

Key events annotation. The main goal of our
model is to support the exploration of interna-
tional relations, which is very challenging to eval-
uate. To derive quantitative evaluation measures
and provide the basic context of international re-
lations, we manually identify key events over the
30 months for 8 most frequently mentioned nation
pairs (i.e. US-[China, Russia, UK, India, Canada,
Japan, Syria], China-India) by reading through the
top Google search results for each two countries
and each month.3 We identified roughly five key
events per nation pair. For example, one key event
for US-China relation is Chairman Xi’s visit to the
US in April 2017. A complete list of key events
is shown in the appendix. Table 1 summarizes the
data statistics.

3 Model

In this section, we formally introduce our
model that builds on Relation Modeling Network
(RMN) (Iyyer et al., 2016). Our main contribu-
tion is to integrate shallow linguistic information
(i.e., verbal predicates and nouns/proper nouns)
and identify the context of relations.

3.1 Overview
The intuition behind our model follows RMN,
i.e., inferring relation embeddings by reconstruct-

3 This annotation is done by the first author and is thus
inherently subjective. We add a robustness check in the ap-
pendix based on another set of independently annotated key
events by the third author. Automatic evaluation shows a sim-
ilar trend holds for the two sets of annotations.

https://github.com/BoulderDS/LARN
https://github.com/BoulderDS/LARN
https://www.corpusdata.org/now_corpus.asp
https://www.corpusdata.org/now_corpus.asp


1662

ing textual information in the embedding space.
Specifically, we learn a fixed set of relation em-
beddings and use a convex combination of these
relation embeddings to reconstruct information in
sentences that mention both entities.

Our main hypothesis is that relation informa-
tion is often encoded in verbal predicates and we
can obtain more interpretable and robust relations
if we focus on predicates. For each pair of enti-
ties, we extract information from the predicates in
sentences with both entities and reconstruct these
predicates using shared relation embeddings. In
addition, we use nouns to provide the context for
the relations. We refer to our model as Linguisti-
cally Aware Relationship Networks (LARN).

We now formally define our problem. The in-
put of our model is a collection of news articles.
For each entity pair ei, ej , we obtain a set of arti-
cles, Aei,ej , containing at least one sentence men-
tioning both entities. We identify sentences where
both ei and ej occur based on any alias associ-
ated with an entity (nation). We extract all the
verbal predicates from these sentences in article
a ∈ Aei,ej as {p

a,ei,ej
1 , . . . , p

a,ei,ej
N }, as well as the

proper nouns or nouns as {na,ei,ej1 , . . . , n
a,ei,ej
M }.

Preprocessing details could be found in the ap-
pendix. We then use GloVe embeddings to rep-
resent these words, i.e., v

p
a,ei,ej
k

for pa,ei,ejk and

v
n
a,ei,ej
k

for na,ei,ejk (Pennington et al., 2014).
These word embeddings are static in the entire
learning process.

Our model learns relation embeddings R ∈
RK×d, where K is a hyperparameter for the num-
ber of relations and d is the dimension of the re-
lation embedding as well as the word embedding.
Following Iyyer et al. (2016), we obtain a list of
natural language descriptors for each relation us-
ing the nearest neighbors of the relation embed-
ding within the 500 most common predicates.4

The model also provides (1) a probability distri-
bution over relations for each article, (2) a proba-
bility distribution over nouns for each relation be-
tween each entity pair, and (3) an embedding for
each entity.

Figure 1 describes the overall architecture. We
will describe the construction of valabel in §3.2, a

4Refer to the appendix for a version that include all words.
The relation descriptors from RMN required a manual filter-
ing step in Iyyer et al. (2016), and become unintelligible with-
out the 500 common words constraint. Note that our model
produces intelligible descriptors even without the 500 most
common predicates constraint.

PREDICATE

vpa1
accuse

· · · vpaN
explain

valabel

ENTITIES

vei

U.S
vej

Russia

vae

+

NOUNS

[vna1 ;
election

ta]

10/16

· · · [vnaM ;
hacker

ta]

10/16

van

vafinal : [v
a
p ; v

a
e ; v

a
n]

da

ra = R>da

L(θ)

R: Relation embeddings

Figure 1: Model overview of an article with respect to
a pair of nations. Our model approximates the predi-
cates from the input article valabel as a weighted sum of
relation embeddings from R. The blue embeddings are
fixed and the green ones are trained. The red cell in-
dicates our attention mechanism. The shaded area is
our extension: we use only predicates as the label and
provide the context of relations via nouns.

reconstruction of valabel through a weighted sum of
relation embeddings in §3.3, and finally the learn-
ing in §3.4.

3.2 Modeling Text with Predicates

We compute the representation for each article to
be reconstructed as the sum of bag-of-words em-
beddings. While Iyyer et al. (2016) considers all
the words in a window in which both entities oc-
cur, we only consider predicates in the sentences
where both entities show up:

v
a,ei,ej
label =

N∑
k=1

v
p
a,ei,ej
k

.

v
a,ei,ej
label depends on both the news article and the

entity pair. In the rest of the paper, We omit ei, ej
in the superscript here for simplicity, i.e., valabel.

3.3 Reconstructing Text with Relation
Embeddings

We represent each article as a weighted sum of
relation embeddings. Assuming da represents a
weight vector over theK relation embeddings that



1663

sums to 1 for an article a with respect to a pair of
entities (ei, ej), we obtain ra as follows:

ra = R>da.

da can also be thought of as a distribution over re-
lations. This distribution over relations depends
on entity pair (vae ), predicate information (v

a
p ), and

noun information (van). While RMN simply takes
the average of all words in the sentence, LARN fo-
cuses on verbal predicates and nouns to capture
our intuition that predicates describe the main re-
lations, whereas nouns provide background infor-
mation to explain the relations. We now describe
these three components in details.

Representing predicates and entity pair. We
follow RMN to construct embedding for each en-
tity pair and for the predicates. The entity pair
vector, vae , simply adds the embedding of the two
entities. The predicate vector, vap , is equivalent to
valabel except for word dropout during training, i.e.,
setting bak to be 0 or 1 with a probability of 0.5.

vae = vei + vej ,

vap =
N∑
k=1

bak · vpak .

Representing context with nouns. To under-
stand relations between an entity pair in a sen-
tence, nouns should be considered in addition to
predicates. For example, tariff is indicative of
the relation between US and China in “Originally,
Trump favoured the simple imposition of a tar-
iff on products from selected countries, especially
China and Mexico”, despite the seemingly posi-
tive predicate favour. As nouns are much more
common than predicates (see Table 1) and not
all of them are meaningful for understanding in-
ternational relations, we employ a weighted sum
of noun vectors. We use an attention mecha-
nism (Conneau et al., 2017; Bahdanau et al., 2015)
and consider each entity pair as a unique key
to compute the attention weights, since the same
noun can be interpreted differently across differ-
ent entity pairs. To this end, we train an attention
query embedding qei,ej for each entity pair sepa-
rately. We further encode the temporal informa-
tion by concatenating a one-hot vector ta that in-
dicates the month when the article was published
with the noun representation vnak . This allows us

to capture the shifts in a word’s meaning over time.

hnak = tanh(Wproj · [vnak ; t
a]),

αnak =
exp(hnak · qei,ej )∑M

k′=1 exp(hnak′ · qei,ej )
,

van =

M∑
k=1

αnakhn
a
k
.

Finally, we concatenate the three representations
as the input to a feedforward network and pass to
a softmax layer to create the weight vector da.

vafinal = ReLU(Wcat · [vap ; vae ; van]),
da = Softmax(Wfinal · vafinal).

This da is multiplied with the descriptor matrix R
to get the final representation ra. Different from
RMN, we do not consider temporal dependencies
between time steps in our model because it is im-
portant to understand sudden shifts in international
relations rather than assuming that the relations
slowly evolve. We also found the temporal de-
pendencies were not helpful empirically in our do-
main but rather computationally expensive.

3.4 Learning Objective and Summary
The reconstruction objective pushes ra to resem-
ble valabel. Our formulation is identical to RMN:
the loss function consists of a contrastive max-
margin loss term, J , and an auxiliary loss term,
X , to encourage unique relation embeddings.

L(θ) =J(θ) + λX(θ),

J(θ) =
∑

a∈Aei,ej

∑
va

label′∈N
max(0,

1−
ra · valabel

||ra|| · ||valabel||
+

ra · valabel′
||ra|| · ||valabel′ ||

),

X(θ) =‖RR> − I‖,

where v′label is a randomly sampled negative exam-
ple, N is a collection of them, and λ is a hyperpa-
rameter for balancing two loss terms.

4 Evaluation

In this section, we compare our model to RMN.
For both models, we fixed the number of descrip-
tors to 30 following Iyyer et al. (2016). As track-
ing dynamic international relations requires care-
ful analysis, we hosted onsite user studies for qual-
ity control and in-person feedback. We first de-
scribe the model outputs, and then present both
quantitative and qualitative evaluation results.



1664

LARN (Linguistically Aware Relationship Net-
work)

Weight RMN (Relationship Modeling Network) Weight

denounce, undermine, condemn, punish, oppose 5.46% seem, thing, though, too, especially 11.79%
leave,tell,ask,know,want 4.93% range, information, supply, infrastructure, value 9.42%
differ, indicate, affect, regard, determine 4.64% theresa, emmanuel, yemen, poland, lebanon 8.24%
strengthen, enhance, improve, develop, boost 4.56% negotiate, establish, impose, propose, negotiation 7.92%
hit, cut, end, kick, beat 4.05% terrorism, militant, terror, terrorist, condemn 7.54%

buy, manufacture, use, brand, purchase 2.59% propose, woman, represent, indians, spend 1.69e-09
win, defeat, beat, title, match 2.59% de, defense, kremlin, cite, pressure 1.62e-09
receive, express, praise, send, acknowledge 2.58% car, de, bomb, little, note 5.39e-10
offer, provide, deliver, feature, guarantee 2.46% cost, cite, compare, co, m 2.94e-10
launch, announce, unveil, release, celebrate 2.36% aid, hand, small, public, round 2.21e-10

Table 2: Relation descriptors of the most/least frequent five relations by LARN and RMN and their average weights
in news articles. The relations generated from LARN are more semantically meaningful.

(a) US-China’s relation trends by LARN. (b) US-China’s relation trends by RMN.

Figure 2: Temporal trends of top three relations between US and China based on LARN (Figure 2a), in comparison
with results from RMN (Figure 2b). We highlight key events during this time period under the x-axes. Similar
visualizations are also used in human evaluations. More figures are provided in the appendix.

4.1 Understanding Model Outputs

Given a set of time-stamped news articles and a list
of nations of interest, both models provide a set of
relation descriptors, where each one defines a type
of relation and a temporal trend analysis of these
descriptors that shows how the relation evolves.

Relation descriptors. Table 2 shows the top five
and bottom five descriptors from LARN and RMN
sorted by the average weights over all news arti-
cles related to the most frequently mentioned eight
nation pairs.5 By using predicates to describe re-
lations, our descriptors seem to contain more se-
mantically meaningful words. For instance, the
top relation in RMN consists of exclusively non-
content words. Another interesting advantage of
our model is that the five relations with the lowest

5We focus on the top eight nation pairs to be consistent
with human evaluation.

weight have much higher weights in LARN than
in RMN. This suggests that RMN tends to gener-
ate “useless” relations that do not show up in the
data, while even bottom relations in LARN remain
useful for describing the data.

Temporal trends. We visualize the temporal
trends of the most prominent relations between
nation pairs. We further provide our annotated
key events as the context to interpret these tem-
poral trends. Figure 2 gives an example for US
and China. The top three relations based on LARN
are “denounce”, “strengthen”, and “leave”,6 while
the top three based on RMN are “seem”, “range”,
and “negotiate”. We find our model generally
aligns better with the key events: for instance, the
“denounce” relation peaked around the time that
Trump started issuing a series of tariffs based on

6For space reasons, we only include the top word in the
relation descriptor.



1665

LARN RMN Random0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14

Ch
an

ge
 ra

te
Key event months
Other months

Figure 3: Change rate at key event months vs. other
months. Our model demonstrates a clearer relative dif-
ference between key event months and other months
(66.9%) than RMN (50.1%). For the random baseline,
we randomly choose the same number of key events
and we observe no differences as expected.

our model (Figure 2a), while there do not exist
similar fluctuations in Figure 2b based on RMN.

4.2 Quantitative Evaluation

We leverage our manually annotated key events
to develop a novel automatic metric to evaluate
how well the temporal trends from our model are
aligned with key events. We define a change rate at
each month ∆t as the weighted average of changes
in relation weights in the top three relations:

∆t =
∑

i∈top 3 relations
wt,i ∗

|dt,i − dtprev ,i|
dtprev ,i

,

where dt,i is the average weight for the i-th rela-
tion in all the articles published at t, dtprev ,i is the
average weight before t in a window ofW preced-
ing months ( 1W

∑W
w=1 d(t−w),i), and weight wt,i

is the normalized weight for top three descriptors
( dt,i∑

j∈top 3 relations dt,j
). Our results are robust to the

choices of W , and we set it to 6 for presentation.
We expect change rates to be greater when sig-

nificant events happen in international politics.
Figure 3 compares the change rate at months
where key events occurred with other months for
eight nation pairs for which we annotated key
events. Both models present more abrupt changes
when key events occurred. Unlike RMN, our
model does not have temporal dependencies be-
tween relation distributions over time,7 and thus
has a higher discontinuity in general. However,
even in relative terms, our model fluctuated more
substantially than RMN when key events occurred.

7Please refer to Iyyer et al. (2016)’s Section 3.2.3 for
more details on how they incorporated previous time steps.

Model P ValueLARN RMN

Descriptor 22 7 8.1e-3
Temporal Trend 106 18 2.3e-16

Nation Pair Matching 38.0 % 45.2 % 0.33

Table 3: Human evaluation results: The first two rows
represents the number of votes, while the last row rep-
resents % of nation pairs matched correctly with its
temporal trend. We did a two-tail binomial test for the
relation descriptor and temporal trend evaluation and
an independent t-test for the nation pair matching eval-
uation. We show the p-values in the last column.

We also did a robustness check with another set
of independently annotated key events and the re-
sults can be found in the appendix. This measure
captures whether the model can detect the change
points, but does not measure whether the model
correctly captures the semantics of the key events,
i.e., did a negative relation increase after hostile
events such as war? To this end, we performed
human evaluations.

4.3 Human Evaluation

We hosted three human evaluations with partici-
pants from different demographics: undergradu-
ate students from political science classes, gradu-
ate students from a computer science department
(mostly in NLP), and undergraduate students tak-
ing a linguistics class. The total number of partic-
ipants was 29, roughly equally divided among the
three groups. The participants were shown outputs
from RMN and LARN, and asked to choose the
output that better aligns with their intuitions. Each
participant answered about 10 questions and pro-
vided justification for their answers to each ques-
tion, taking roughly 30 minutes to an hour. Table 3
summarizes the results of our human evaluations.

Relation descriptor evaluation. The partici-
pants were shown a list of top five descriptors (as
in Table 2) from two models, and prompted to se-
lect a set which adequately covers possible rela-
tionships that can occur between countries. 75.9%
of participants preferred our model.

Temporal trends evaluation. We showed tem-
poral trends between nation pairs annotated with
key events, one from RMN and the other from
LARN (as in Figure 2). We asked them to evaluate
whether the temporal trends accurately reflect the
dynamics in nation-to-nation relationships. Each
participant evaluated four randomly chosen nation



1666

pairs. The temporal trend from our model was pre-
ferred more frequently (85.5% of total responses).

Nation pair matching. We designed a novel
task where we showed the participants the other
four temporal trends without annotated key events
and asked them to match each trend with the cor-
responding nation pair from the four candidates,
based on their world knowledge about nation-
nation relations. Each participant did the match-
ing twice, once for RMN and once for LARN.
The participants found correct temporal trends for
45.2% of entity pairs for RMN, and 38.0% of en-
tity pairs for LARN, when random pairing would
yield 25.0%. The difference between two mod-
els here is not statistically significant. Most par-
ticipants found this task very challenging, as they
did not know much about the relationship between
certain entity pairs (e.g., a participant said “As an
American, there’s no way to know the relation be-
tween China and India.”). Even political science
students do not perform better than the other two
groups.

Discussion. Overall the output from our model
is preferred by the participants. We found that po-
litical science students paid more attention to de-
tail, took a longer time to finish, and were more
ambivalent between the performance of the two
models. For example, for temporal trends, they
preferred our model for 71.4% of the examples,
compared to other groups which preferred our
model for 90% of the examples. They also pre-
ferred RMN’s relation descriptors slightly (42.9%
selected our model) and commented that a few
concepts from RMN, like “infrastructure, supply,
and value”, are more concrete (e.g., a participant
said “I chose the left one (RMN), because it is easy
to determine and remember the positive of items
such as infrastructure, value, and supply. Those
have more positive undertones, while it is easy to
gauge negative sentiments with ‘terrorism,’ ‘con-
demn’ and those.”). As LARN encodes the back-
ground context specific to each nation pair sepa-
rately, our relation descriptors do not contain such
“concrete” concepts. In the next section, we will
discuss contexts for relations, where these con-
cepts appear in LARN.

5 Further Exploration

We present additional qualitative results to show-
case the applications of our model. First, we ex-

Figure 4: Top contextual words for US-China’s “de-
nounce” relation derived from three approaches. Top:
Showing word’s avg. attention score in all “denounce”
articles each month. Middle: Showing word’s fre-
quency in all “denounce” articles each month. Bottom:
Showing word’s average attention score multiplied by
log(appearance) in each month. All figures are normal-
ized by the global maximum score in the figure.

amine the context (nouns) associated with a rela-
tion between two nations based on an attention-
based mechanism, which RMN does not handle.
Second, we perform an in-depth analysis to show
how our model can reveal regional differences in
news coverage on the same topic.

5.1 Context for Relations

To help users better understand the inferred re-
lations, we offer specific contexts that relate to
the inferred relations based on the attention-based
mechanism introduced in §3. For each relation, we
find articles that place the most weight in that rela-
tion, and rank the nouns and proper nouns in those
articles by their average attention score (i.e., αnai
in §3.3).

The top part of Figure 4 shows the top 10 words
for the “denounce” relation in Figure 2a, the tem-
poral trend for US-China relations. Since RMN
does not support such mechanism, we show the
most frequent nouns that occurred in the doc-
uments that mention both entities as a baseline



1667

(middle part).8 We find that the attended nouns
from our model are more informative than fre-
quent nouns: “tariff” is the most attended word;
words such as “sanction”, “treaty”, and “pressure”
also show up, while the frequency baseline cen-
ters around words like “China” and “president”.
As we noticed that the frequency baseline can cap-
ture alignment with key events, we incorporate at-
tention score and frequency in the bottom part of
Figure 4. This augmented version captures infor-
mative words (e.g., “tariff”, “sanction”, and “mis-
sile”) 9 and closely aligns with the key events.

5.2 Regional Differences in News Coverage

To further demonstrate the utility of our model,
we explore regional differences in news cover-
age, as “it is possible to build real knowledge by
comparing perspectives from different social con-
texts.”10 This also relates to the longstanding lit-
erature on framing in news coverage, i.e., “se-
lecting some aspects of a perceived reality and
make them more salient to promote problem def-
inition/interpretation” (Entman, 1993; Chong and
Druckman, 2007).

We picked two countries, Singapore and US, to
study US-China relations.11 Using country source
of media outlets in the NOW corpus, we found
10K articles from Singaporean media and 5.7K ar-
ticles from US media on US and China.

Table 4 shows the top five relations sorted by
their absolute weight differences between US me-
dia outlets and Singaporean media outlets. Sin-
gaporean media more frequently use “positive”
descriptors such as “strengthen” and “purchase”,
whereas US media report negative relations such
as “denounce” and “criticize” more frequently. Ta-
ble 5 shows two example sentences from arti-
cles with the most weight in the “denounce” rela-
tion. Even though two media sources are focusing
on events leading to the same type of relation, a
reader who mainly consume news articles in Sin-
gapore would get a clearly different impression of
US-China relations from those who read US news.

8We had a comparison between the top figure and the mid-
dle figure in the human evaluation, but we found an error in
visualization and thus focus on qualitative comparisons.

9“missile” points us to another event related to US de-
ploying missile defense system in South Korea, which also
impacts US-China relations.

10https://www.publicbooks.org/why-an-age-of-machine-
learning-needs-the-humanities/

11China is not an English speaking country and is thus not
in the NOW corpus. Singapore contained the most articles
containing both US and China.

Relation descriptor US Singapore

strengthen, enhance, improve,
develop, boost

4.62% 5.42%

purchase, sell, pay, buy, cost 3.18% 3.86%
denounce, undermine, con-
demn, punish, oppose

6.21% 5.66%

wag, criticise, accuse, tell, crit-
icize

3.81% 3.29%

flee, destroy, invade, unmake,
expel

3.70% 3.32%

Table 4: Top five relations between US and China
sorted by absolute weight differences between US me-
dia outlets and Singaporean media outlets.

US media: “President Donald Trump is prepar-
ing to impose a package of $60 billion in an-
nual tariffs against Chinese products, following
through on a longtime threat that he says will
punish China for intellectual property theft and
create more American jobs.”

Singaporean media: It does not look like just a
trade war, but rather the US is trying to bully
China and the rest of the world in order to make
China concede economic resources and devel-
opment opportunities to the US and make the
US forever big and strong.

Table 5: Example sentences in top-scoring articles on
US-China’s “denounce” relation in March 2018. We
italicize key predicates (red color) and three most at-
tended nouns (cyan color).

6 Related Work

Prior work (Chambers et al., 2015; Choi et al.,
2016; Rashkin et al., 2017) studied entity-entity
relations in terms of positive and negative senti-
ments between them. Similarly, literature on re-
lation extraction (Riedel et al., 2010; Gardner and
Krishnamurthy, 2017; Elson et al., 2010; Srivas-
tava et al., 2016) focused on pre-defined relations
between a pair of entities in the database schema.
In comparison, our work discovers descriptors for
relations between entity pairs instead of finding
entity pairs matching pre-defined relation schema.

Topic modeling has been an important method
to grasp important concepts from a large col-
lection of documents in an unsupervised fash-
ion (Blei et al., 2003; Das et al., 2015; Chang et al.,
2009; Schein et al., 2015). Similar to our work,
O’Connor et al. (2013) incorporates linguistic in-
sights with topic models to identify event classes
and detect conflicts. Our work additionally models



1668

the context of relations through nouns and focuses
on exploring the potential of neural models.

Most relevant to our work is Iyyer et al. (2016),
which suggests RMN better capture dynamic
relationships in literature than hidden Markov
model (Gruber et al., 2007) and LDA (Blei et al.,
2003). Recent work extended and applied RMN to
other settings such as studying user roles in on-
line communities (Wang et al., 2016; Frermann
and Szarvas, 2017). Notably, Chaturvedi et al.
(2017) suggests HMM with shallow linguistic fea-
tures (i.e., frame net parses) and global constraints
can outperform RMN for modeling relations in lit-
erature. In this work, we incorporate linguistic in-
sights with RMN and apply it to news domain.

Last but not least, researchers have studied
the dynamics of media coverage from a wide
range of perspectives, ranging from framing (Card
et al., 2015; Field et al., 2018), to relationship
between ideas (Tan et al., 2017), to quotes of
politicians (Niculae et al., 2015; Tan et al., 2018;
Leskovec et al., 2009). There is also signifi-
cant effort for building event databases in political
science (Leetaru and Schrodt, 2013), and assist-
ing journalists with tools (Handler and O’Connor,
2017), and dating historical text (Niculae et al.,
2014).

7 Conclusion

We investigate the promise of unsupervised neu-
ral models for automatically inferring relations be-
tween nations. We find that incorporating shal-
low linguistic information is a simple yet effec-
tive strategy for deriving robust and interpretable
relations. We develop a novel quantitative evalu-
ation metric for understanding international rela-
tions and in-depth human evaluation also confirms
the effectiveness of our model. We further show
that our models can provide the background of re-
lations using attention score and reveal regional
differences for future studies on media framing.

Meanwhile, our work suggests important future
directions for using NLP technologies to support
individuals in navigating a large collection of news
articles. Our participants often find it challenging
to infer information simply from temporal dynam-
ics of our inferred relations based on natural lan-
guage descriptors. It is thus important to incor-
porate human cognitive preferences in developing
such models and provide narratives beyond words
such as key events. Furthermore, different popu-

lations pay attention to different parts of informa-
tion. We need to understand the diversity when de-
veloping NLP technologies for end users and pro-
vide helpful personalized hints to lower the barrier
of benefiting from model outputs.

Acknowledgments

We thank the anonymous reviewers, Dallas Card,
and Mohit Iyyer for helpful feedback and discus-
sion. We thank all the participants in our hu-
man evaluation from LING 3813 at Georgia Tech
by Lelia Glass, students at X-lab at University of
Washington, and undergraduate students at Uni-
versity of Colorado Boulder. We also thank Andy
Baker and Sven Steinmo for recruiting students in
their classes. Choi is supported by a Facebook Fel-
lowship.

References
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-

gio. 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. In ICLR.

John Baylis, Steve Smith, and Patricia Owens. 2017.
The globalization of world politics: an introduction
to international relations. Oxford University Press.

David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan.
2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of ma-
chine Learning research, 3(Jan):993–1022.

Dallas Card, Amber E. Boydstun, Justin H. Gross,
Philip Resnik, and Noah A. Smith. 2015. The media
frames corpus: Annotations of frames across issues.
In ACL.

Nathanael Chambers, Victor Bowen, Ethan Genco,
Xisen Tian, Eric Young, Ganesh Harihara, and Eu-
gene Yang. 2015. Identifying political sentiment be-
tween nation states with social media. In EMNLP.

Allison June-Barlow Chaney, Hanna M. Wallach,
Matthew Connelly, and David M. Blei. 2016. De-
tecting and characterizing events. In EMNLP.

Jonathan Chang, Jordan L. Boyd-Graber, and David M.
Blei. 2009. Connections between the lines: aug-
menting social networks with text. In KDD.

Snigdha Chaturvedi, Mohit Iyyer, and Hal Daumé.
2017. Unsupervised learning of evolving relation-
ships between literary characters. In AAAI.

Eunsol Choi, Hannah Rashkin, Luke S. Zettlemoyer,
and Yejin Choi. 2016. Document-level sentiment in-
ference with social, faction, and discourse context.
In ACL.



1669

Dennis Chong and James N Druckman. 2007. Framing
theory. Annual Review of Political Science, 10:103–
126.

Alexis Conneau, Douwe Kiela, Holger Schwenk, Loı̈c
Barrault, and Antoine Bordes. 2017. Supervised
learning of universal sentence representations from
natural language inference data. In EMNLP.

Rajarshi Das, Manzil Zaheer, and Chris Dyer. 2015.
Gaussian lda for topic models with word embed-
dings. In ACL.

George R Doddington, Alexis Mitchell, Mark A Przy-
bocki, Lance A Ramshaw, Stephanie Strassel, and
Ralph M Weischedel. 2004. The automatic content
extraction (ace) program-tasks, data, and evaluation.
In LREC.

David K. Elson, Nicholas Dames, and Kathleen McKe-
own. 2010. Extracting social networks from literary
fiction. In ACL.

Robert M Entman. 1993. Framing: Toward clarifica-
tion of a fractured paradigm. Journal of communi-
cation, 43(4):51–58.

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic
Lexical Database. Bradford Books.

Anjalie Field, Doron Kliger, Shuly Wintner, Jennifer
Pan, Dan Jurafsky, and Yulia Tsvetkov. 2018. Fram-
ing and agenda-setting in russian news: a compu-
tational analysis of intricate political strategies. In
EMNLP.

Lea Frermann and György Szarvas. 2017. Inducing se-
mantic micro-clusters from deep multi-view repre-
sentations of novels. In EMNLP.

Matt Gardner and Jayant Krishnamurthy. 2017. Open-
vocabulary semantic parsing with both distributional
statistics and formal knowledge. In AAAI.

Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. 2010. Understand-
ing the difficulty of training deep feedforward neural
networks. In AISTATS.

Amit Gruber, Yair Weiss, and Michal Rosen-Zvi. 2007.
Hidden topic markov models. In AISTATS.

Abram Handler and Brendan T. O’Connor. 2017.
Rookie: A unique approach for exploring news
archives. In Workshop on Data Science + Journal-
ism at KDD.

Matthew Honnibal and Ines Montani. 2017. spacy 2:
Natural language understanding with bloom embed-
dings, convolutional neural networks and incremen-
tal parsing.

Mohit Iyyer, Anupam Guha, Snigdha Chaturvedi, Jor-
dan Boyd-Graber, and Hal Daumé III. 2016. Feud-
ing families and former friends: Unsupervised learn-
ing for dynamic fictional relationships. In NAACL.

Kalev Leetaru and Philip A Schrodt. 2013. Gdelt:
Global data on events, location, and tone, 1979–
2012. In ISA annual convention.

Jure Leskovec, Lars Backstrom, and Jon Kleinberg.
2009. Meme-tracking and the dynamics of the news
cycle. In KDD.

Mike Mintz, Steven Bills, Rion Snow, and Dan Juraf-
sky. 2009. Distant supervision for relation extrac-
tion without labeled data. In ACL.

Vlad Niculae, Caroline Suen, Justine Zhang, Cristian
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, and Jure Leskovec. 2015.
Quotus: The structure of political media coverage as
revealed by quoting patterns. In WWW.

Vlad Niculae, Marcos Zampieri, Liviu P. Dinu, and
Alina Maria Ciobanu. 2014. Temporal text ranking
and automatic dating of texts. In EACL.

Brendan O’Connor, Brandon M Stewart, and Noah A
Smith. 2013. Learning to extract international rela-
tions from political context. In ACL.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christo-
pher D. Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for
word representation. In EMNLP.

Hannah Rashkin, Eric Bell, Yejin Choi, and Svitlana
Volkova. 2017. Multilingual connotation frames: A
case study on social media for targeted sentiment
analysis and forecast. In ACL.

Sebastian Riedel, Limin Yao, and Andrew McCallum.
2010. Modeling relations and their mentions with-
out labeled text. In ECML.

Aaron Schein, John Paisley, David M Blei, and Hanna
Wallach. 2015. Bayesian poisson tensor factoriza-
tion for inferring multilateral relations from sparse
dyadic event counts. In KDD.

Shashank Srivastava, Snigdha Chaturvedi, and Tom M.
Mitchell. 2016. Inferring interpersonal relations in
narrative summaries. In AAAI.

Chenhao Tan, Dallas Card, and Noah A. Smith. 2017.
Friendships, rivalries, and trysts: Characterizing re-
lations between ideas in texts. In ACL.

Chenhao Tan, Hao Peng, and Noah A Smith. 2018. ”
you are no jack kennedy”: On media selection of
highlights from presidential debates. In WWW.

Alex Wang, William L. Hamilton, and Jure Leskovec.
2016. Learning linguistic descriptors of user roles
in online communities. In NLP+CSS@EMNLP.



1670

A Appendix

Data: Aliases and Key Events
We use a dictionary of nation aliases to find rele-
vant sentences in the corpus that mentioned at least
one nation pair.12 Table A1 shows the full alias
dictionary we used. Table A5 shows the complete
list of key events used in this paper.

Nation Aliases

U.S. U.S., US, USA, Trump, Obama
China. China, Chinese, Xi
Syria Syria, Syrian, Assad
France France, French, Macron, Hollande
Germany. Germany, German, Merkel
Canada Canada, Canadian, Trudeau
Russia Russia, Russian, Putin
U.K. U.K., UK, British, Britain, Cameron
India India, Indian, Modi
Japan Japan, Japanese, Abe
Iran Iran, Iranian, Khamenei, Rouhani
Israel Israel, Israeli, Netanyahu

Table A1: Aliases used for detecting nation mentions.

Preprocessing
We use spaCy to preprocess all sentences (Honni-
bal and Montani, 2017). We then use a rule based
extractor13 to get verbal predicates with detectable
subjects and objects. When verbal predicate has a
negation, we take its antonym in WordNet (Fell-
baum, 1998) if it exists, ignored otherwise. We
also extract nouns and proper nouns in sentences
using spaCy’s part-of-speech tagging.

We follow the preprocessing steps in Iyyer et al.
(2016) for RMN. The original RMN, which used a
fiction dataset, removes the 500 most frequently
occurring words and words that occur in fewer
than 100 books. We also remove the 500 most
frequent words for the input to RMN. However,
since our news dataset doesn’t have the notion of
“books”, we remove 5000 least common words
(out of a 200K vocabulary) for RMN. Note that
this is not done for our model LARN.

Implementation Details
We show all hyperparameters used in our study
in Table A2. We generally use the same hyper-
parameter values as RMN, except a few model-

12We did not use coreference resolution to avoid noisy
linking.

13https://github.com/NSchrading/
intro-spacy-nlp/blob/master/subject_
object_extraction.py

Hyperparameter Value

vlabel, vp, vn dimension 300
pdrop 0.5
ve dimension 50
hn (LARN) dimension 300 + 30
vfinal dimension 300
recurrent enforcement α (RMN) 0.5
number of relations K 30
number of training epochs 15
learning rate 1e-3
orthogonal penalty λ 1e-1
number of negative samples 15
batch size 256

Table A2: Hyperparameters.

specific hyperparameters in Table A2. We also use
Xavier initialization (Glorot and Bengio, 2010) for
all trainable layers as in the original RMN.

Relation Descriptors Postprocessing

In addition to finding the nearest neighboring
words to the relation embeddings, the orginal
RMN also requires a manual filtering process to
achieve an interpretable definition of the relation
descriptor. To prevent introducing bias in this
manual filtering step, we define each relation de-
scriptor directly as its five nearest neighboring
words in the input vocabulary. However, since the
full vocabulary would contain many uncommon
words which could hinder the interpretation of re-
lation descriptors, we limit both models to choose
descriptor words from the most frequently occur-
ring 500 words in their own processed input vo-
cabulary (i.e., verb predicates only for LARN and
all words for RMN).

In Table A3, we present the descriptor set by
RMN and LARN without the most common 500
words constraint on descriptor word selection. We
find that the descriptor set of our model is robust
to this change and does not suffer from a lowered
interpretability as much as RMN.

Additional Temporal Relation Trends:
US-Russia, US-India, US-Syria

See Figure A2, Figure A3, and Figure A4 for
three more examples of temporal relation trends
between nation pairs.

Additional Influential Background
Words:US-Russia, US-India, US-Syria

In Figure A5, Figure A6, and Figure A7, we fur-
ther show the corresponding attended background
words for the top relation descriptor in each of the

https://github.com/NSchrading/intro-spacy-nlp/blob/master/subject_object_extraction.py
https://github.com/NSchrading/intro-spacy-nlp/blob/master/subject_object_extraction.py
https://github.com/NSchrading/intro-spacy-nlp/blob/master/subject_object_extraction.py


1671

LARN (Linguistically aware relationship net-
work)

Weight RMN (Relationship modeling network) Weight

denounce, undermine, condemn, decry, legit-
imize

5.46% always, something, seem, sense, thought 11.79%

leave,tell,forget,ask,know 4.93% components, utilization, integrated, optimized,
component

9.42%

differ, indicate, extent, affect, imply 4.64% morroco, theresa, miriam, emmanuel, charlene 8.24%
strengthen, enhance, improve, develop, maxi-
mize

4.56% mandate, authorize, assurances, rescind, ratify 7.92%

hit, fell, slump, edge, cut 4.05% provocation, bloodshed, reprisals, incursion,
hostilities

7.54%

buy, cheap, manufacture, use, shop 2.59% una, esa, harridan, chicas, hija 1.69e-09
win, clinch, defeat, championship, champion 2.59% gest, epoque, rol, chiat, tripper 1.62e-09
receive, bestow, redeem, entitle, outpour 2.58% pharmacologically, offred, condemnable,

chapelle, benassi
5.39e-10

offer, provide, deliver, ideal, cater 2.46% ricoh, powe, mw, sy, hamill 2.94e-10
launch, relaunch, announce, debut, unveil 2.36% tunstall, booksellers, seiko, pring, reflation 2.21e-10

Table A3: Relation descriptors of the most/least frequent five relations by RMN and LARN and their average
weights in news articles (without constraint on most common words).

three nation pair relations shown in the previous
section.

Robustness Check: Another Set of Key Events
Annotations

Apart from the key events annotated by the first
author, which were used in the change rate anal-
ysis in the main paper, the third author also did
an independent annotation of the key events as a
robustness check. The details of this annotation
could found in Table A6. Figure A1 shows the
change rate evaluation with respect to this annota-
tion. A similar trend holds for both sets of annota-
tions.

LARN RMN Random0.00

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.10

0.12

0.14

Ch
an

ge
 ra

te

Key event months
Other months

Figure A1: Change rate at key event months vs. other
months using an additional set of key events annota-
tions. Our model demonstrates a clearer relative dif-
ference between key event months and other months
(41.74%) than RMN (36.75%). For the random base-
line, we randomly choose the same number of key
events and we observe no differences as expected.

A Simpler Baseline: Term-frequency Trend of
Verbal Predicates
In addition to the comparison with RMN, we also
checked a simpler baseline by replacing the de-
scriptor weights with term-frequency values of
each verbal predicates for each document. Specif-
ically, the term-frequency of a predicate p in doc-

ument d is
count(p)

length(d)
. Note that document refers

to all sentences where a nation pair is mentioned.
We show some temporal trend examples in Fig-
ure A8 and also the change rate evaluation result
in Table A4. Note that the scales of these results
are different from LARN and RMN, since the pred-
icate words are much more sparse than the 30 de-
scriptors used in LARN and RMN.

Change rate
∆key months other months

LARN 12.44 % 7.45 % 66.91 %
RMN 6.81 % 4.53 % 50.07 %

Predicate TF 69.86 % 62.36 % 12.02 %

Table A4: Change rate at key event months vs. other
months with the predicate term-frequency baseline,
compared to LARN and RMN.



1672

Nation pair Key events

U.S.-China (2016-12) Trump made phone call to Taiwan’s leader; (2017-04) Xi visited U.S.; (2017-08)
Section 301 investigations on China; (2017-11) Trump visited China; (2018-03) Trump started
issuing a series of tariffs.

U.S.-Russia (2016-10) U.S. officially accused Russia’s hacking; (2017-04) Syria airstrike; (2017-07) Trump
and Putin’s first meeting; (2017-11) Trump and Putin’s meeting at APEC; (2018-02) Dozens of
Russians killed by U.S.-backed Syria attack.

U.S.-Syria (2016-10) U.S. suspended Syria ceasefire talk; (2017-04) Khan Shaykhun chemical attack and
Shayrat missile strike; (2017-10) ISIS ’capital’ captured; (2017-11) ISIS’s defeat and aftermath;
(2018-02) Battle of Khasham.

U.S.-U.K. (2016-06) U.K. Brexit vote; (2017-01) Therasa May visited U.S.; (2017-12) Trump set a con-
troversial visit to U.K.

U.S.-Canada (2017-01) Trump said Nafta renegotiation to be started; (2017-04) Trump imposed tariff on
Canadian lumber; (2018-06) Canada fought back with retaliatory tariff on U.S. products.

U.S.-India (2016-06) Modi visited U.S. and met Obama; (2016-12) Trump made a complimentary phone
call to Pakistan; (2017-06) Modi visited U.S. and met Trump; (2017-10) U.S. Secretary Of State
Tillerson visited India; (2018-06) India imposed retaliatory tariffs on U.S.

U.S.-Japan (2016-05) Obama gave memorial speech at Hiroshima with Japanese PM Abe; (2016-12) Abe
visited Pearl Harbor; (2017-02) Abe visited Washington and met Trump; (2017-11) Trump vis-
ited Japan and met Abe; (2018-03) Trump accepted North Korea’s invitation for direct nuclear
talks.

China-India (2016-04) Minister of Foreign Affairs meeting; (2016-11) China and India’s joint military drill;
(2017-02) India to develop a new missile; (2017-05) India refused to attend Belt and Road
Summit; (2017-06) Doklam border standoff started; (2017-08) Doklam border standoff ended;
(2017-11) China and India’s WMCC meeting; (2018-03) China and India to boost trade.

Table A5: Key events annotations and references.

(a) US-Russia’s relation trends by LARN. (b) US-Russia’s relation trends by RMN.

Figure A2: Temporal trends of top three relations between U.S. and Russia based on LARN (Figure A2a), in
comparison with results from RMN (Figure A2b).

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trump–Tsai_call
https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/apr/06/trump-china-meeting-xi-jinping-mar-a-lago
http://www.businessinsider.com/us-begins-section-301-investigation-2017-8
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/07/business/trump-china-trade.html
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/22/us/politics/trump-will-hit-china-with-trade-measures-as-white-house-exempts-allies-from-tariffs.html
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/22/us/politics/trump-will-hit-china-with-trade-measures-as-white-house-exempts-allies-from-tariffs.html
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/07/us-russia-dnc-hack-interfering-presidential-election
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/apr/07/us-airstrikes-syria-russian-american-relations-vladimir-putin
https://www.theatlantic.com/news/archive/2017/07/trump-putin/532899/
https://www.theatlantic.com/news/archive/2017/07/trump-putin/532899/
https://www.cnn.com/2017/11/09/politics/donald-trump-vladimir-putin-vietnam/index.html
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/13/world/europe/russia-syria-dead.html
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/13/world/europe/russia-syria-dead.html
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-mideast-crisis-usa-russia-idUSKCN1231X3
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2017_Shayrat_missile_strike
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2017_Shayrat_missile_strike
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/17/world/middleeast/isis-syria-raqqa.html
https://news.antiwar.com/2017/11/17/pentagon-isis-defeated-but-us-will-stay-in-syria/
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_Khasham
https://www.bbc.com/news/36622711
https://www.cnn.com/2017/01/26/politics/donald-trump-theresa-may-white-house-visit/index.html
https://www.csmonitor.com/World/Europe/2017/1207/In-Trump-era-US-UK-special-relationship-faces-and-causes-new-trials
https://www.csmonitor.com/World/Europe/2017/1207/In-Trump-era-US-UK-special-relationship-faces-and-causes-new-trials
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-38713227
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/24/us/politics/lumber-tariff-canada-trump.html
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/24/us/politics/lumber-tariff-canada-trump.html
https://www.cnbc.com/2018/06/29/canada-makes-retaliatory-tariffs-official-we-will-not-back-down.html
https://www.c-span.org/video/?410278-2/president-obama-meets-prime-minister-modi-india
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-38165878
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-38165878
https://www.c-span.org/video/?430524-4/us-india-relations
https://www.npr.org/sections/parallels/2017/10/26/560224471/tillerson-visit-highlights-indias-evolving-relationship-with-u-s
https://www.npr.org/sections/parallels/2017/10/26/560224471/tillerson-visit-highlights-indias-evolving-relationship-with-u-s
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/india-imposes-retaliatory-tariffs-on-us-as-global-trade-war-widens/2018/06/21/7c3a016b-1de0-497a-9635-a522bc55810a_story.html?noredirect=on&utm_term=.6ba2cd6411ed
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/28/world/asia/text-of-president-obamas-speech-in-hiroshima-japan.html
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/05/world/asia/shinzo-abe-pearl-harbor-japan.html
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/05/world/asia/shinzo-abe-pearl-harbor-japan.html
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2017/02/13/did-trump-and-abe-just-launch-a-new-chapter-in-u-s-japan-relations/?utm_term=.f4e2a17f96b6
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/president-donald-j-trumps-summit-meeting-prime-minister-shinzo-abe-japan/
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/president-donald-j-trumps-summit-meeting-prime-minister-shinzo-abe-japan/
https://www.cnbc.com/2018/03/29/japan-wants-its-own-bilateral-summit-with-north-korea.html
https://www.cnbc.com/2018/03/29/japan-wants-its-own-bilateral-summit-with-north-korea.html
https://thediplomat.com/2016/04/foreign-ministers-of-russia-india-china-meet-in-moscow/
https://thediplomat.com/2016/11/china-india-hold-joint-military-drill/
https://www.armyrecognition.com/weapons_defence_industry_military_technology_uk/india_to_develop_new_variant_of_brahmos_missile.html
https://www.thehindu.com/news/international/india-unlikely-to-participate-in-chinas-belt-and-road-forum/article18445908.ece
https://www.thehindu.com/news/international/india-unlikely-to-participate-in-chinas-belt-and-road-forum/article18445908.ece
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2017_China–India_border_standoff
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2017_China–India_border_standoff
http://mea.gov.in/press-releases.htm?dtl/29122/IndiaChina_WMCC_Meeting_November_17_2017
http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2018-03/27/c_137068871.htm


1673

(a) US-India’s relation trends by LARN. (b) US-India’s relation trends by RMN.

Figure A3: Temporal trends of top three relations between U.S. and India based on LARN (Figure A3a), in com-
parison with results from RMN (Figure A3b).

(a) US-Syria’s relation trends by LARN. (b) US-Syria’s relation trends by RMN.

Figure A4: Temporal trends of top three relations between U.S. and Syria based on LARN (Figure A4a), in com-
parison with results from RMN (Figure A4b).



1674

Figure A5: Influential words for US-Russia’s “de-
nounce” relation derived from three approaches. Top:
Showing word’s average attention score in all “de-
nounce” articles each month. Middle: Showing word’s
appearance frequency in all “denounce” articles each
month. Bottom: Showing word’s average attention
score multiplied by log(appearance) in each month.
All figures are normalized by the global maximum
score in the figure.

Figure A6: Influential words for US-India’s “leave”
relation derived from three approaches. Top: Show-
ing word’s average attention score in all “leave” arti-
cles each month. Middle: Showing word’s appearance
frequency in all “leave” articles each month. Bottom:
Showing word’s average attention score multiplied by
log(appearance) in each month. All figures are normal-
ized by the global maximum score in the figure.



1675

Figure A7: Influential words for US-Syria’s “denounce” relation derived from three approaches. Top: Showing
word’s average attention score in all “denounce” articles each month. Middle: Showing word’s appearance fre-
quency in all “denounce” articles each month. Bottom: Showing word’s average attention score multiplied by
log(appearance) in each month. All figures are normalized by the global maximum score in the figure.

(a) US-Russia’s relation (b) US-India’s relation

Figure A8: Temporal trend examples by the predicate term-frequency baseline.



1676

Nation pair Key events

U.S.-China (2016-02) China Sends Missiles to Contested South China Sea Island; (2016-06) Xi urges cau-
tion over THAAD deployment in South Korea; (2016-12) Trump-Tsai call; (2017-02) Trump
affirms One China policy; (2017-04) Xi visits US; (2017-11) Trump visited Beijing; (2018-03)
tariff targets China; (2018-04) China retaliates.

U.S.-Russia (2016-02) U.S.-Russian deal on a “cessation of hostilities”; (2016-09) Russia and the U.S. an-
nounce joint peace plan for Syria; (2016-10) Russian interference with election; (2017-01) The
U.S. Office of the Director of National Intelligence releases a declassified version of the In-
telligence Communitys assessment that “Putin ordered an influence campaign in 2016 aimed
at the U.S. presidential election”; (2017-04) US airstrike Syria; (2017-05) Comey fired and
Trump met Russian ambassadors; (2017-07) Trump met Putin at G20 summit; (2018-04) Mis-
sile strikes against Syria.

U.S.-Syria (2016-02) US and Russia agree to enforce new Syria ceasefire; (2016-09) Another ceasefire
agreement broke in the same month; (2016-11) Senior Chief Petty Officer Scott Cooper Day-
ton, 42, of Woodbridge, Virginia, is killed in an improvised explosive device blast near the
northern Syrian town of Ayn Issa, becoming the first American casualty in combat in the fight
against IS in Syria.; (2017-01) Trump orders ban on Syrian refugees; (2017-04) Trump orders
strikes against Syria in response to chemical attack; (2017-07) Another ceasefire agreement that
involved united states; (2018-03) U.S. Master Sgt. Jonathan J. Dunbar is killed by a roadside
bomb attack in Syria alongside a British serviceman; (2018-04) The US, The U.K. and France
carried out missile strikes against Assad’s compounds in response to the Douma chemical at-
tack.

U.S.-U.K. (2016-04) Obama and Cameron joint news conference; (2017-01) May visit Trump; (2017-02)
Parliament debate trump visit; (2017-09) May visit US for UN general assembly; (2018-04)
Missile strikes in Syria.

U.S.-Canada (2016-03) Trudeau visited the White House for an official visit and state dinner on March 10,
2016; (2017-02) Prime Minister Trudeau and President Trump formally met for the first time
at the White House on February 13, 2017; (2017-06) The Trudeau government announced that
Canada would continue to support coalition operations; (2018-03) President Donald J. Trump
announced he will apply across-the-board tariffs, or import taxes, on steel and aluminum; (2018-
05) Canada, Mexico, and the EU became subject to the steel and aluminium tariffs later in an
announcement on May 31, 2018; (2018-06) Trump comments at G7 summit.

U.S.-India (2016-02) The Obama administration notified the US Congress that it intended to provide Pak-
istan eight nuclear-capable F-16 fighters and assorted military goods; (2016-06) Modi visits
Obama; (2016-08) U.S., India sign military logistics agreement; (2017-06) Modi visits Trump;
(2017-09) Mattis visits India; (2017-10) Secretary of State Rex Tillerson visits India; (2018-03)
The India-US 2 + 2 Dialogue postponed.

U.S.-Japan (2016-05) Abe meets Obama; (2016-07) Abe, U.S. commander agree to carry out defense
guidelines in steady manner; (2016-11) Abe meets Trump in New York; (2016-12) U.S. Returns
Some Okinawa Land to Japan, but Unease Endures; Abe visits Pearl Harbor; (2017-01) Trump
abandons TPP; (2017-02) Abe and Trump presented a united front on dealing with Pyongyang’s
nuclear weapon test and multiple missile launches; (2017-04) Japan, U.S. hold missile defense
drill in Sea of Japan; (2017-09) Japan, U.S., India vow to work together on strategic port de-
velopment as China flexes clout; (2017-11) Trump visits Japan; (2018-02) Pence visits Japan;
(2018-04) Abe visits US.

China-India (2016-06) Tashkent on the sidelines of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization Summit; (2016-
09) G20 and East Asia Summit; (2016-10) Modi meets Chinese president Xi Jinping on the
sidelines of the Goa BRICS Summit; (2017-05) Indias decision to boycott the Belt and Road
Initiative (BRI) summit held in Beijing in May; (2017-06) Chinese troops with construction
vehicles and road-building equipment began extending an existing road southward in Doklam,
a territory which is claimed by both China as well as India’s ally Bhutan.; (2017-08) China and
India reached a consensus to put an end to the border stand-off; (2017-09) Xi Jinping Meets with
Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India; (2017-11) India joins QUAD; (2018-03) China-India
border affairs meeting held in New Delhi; (2018-06) Xi meets Modi.

Table A6: Extra key events annotations for robustness check.


