



















































Cross-referencing Using Fine-grained Topic Modeling


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2019, pages 3978–3987
Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2 - June 7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

3978

Cross-referencing using Fine-grained Topic Modeling

Jeffrey Lund, Piper Armstrong, Wilson Fearn, Stephen Cowley, Emily Hales, Kevin Seppi
Computer Science Department

Brigham Young University
{jefflund, piper.armstrong, wfearn,

scowley4, emilyhales, kseppi}@byu.edu

Abstract

Cross-referencing, which links passages of
text to other related passages, can be a valu-
able study aid for facilitating comprehension
of a text. However, cross-referencing requires
first, a comprehensive thematic knowledge
of the entire corpus, and second, a focused
search through the corpus specifically to find
such useful connections. Due to this, cross-
reference resources are prohibitively expen-
sive and exist only for the most well-studied
texts (e.g. religious texts). We develop a
topic-based system for automatically produc-
ing candidate cross-references which can be
easily verified by human annotators. Our sys-
tem utilizes fine-grained topic modeling with
thousands of highly nuanced and specific top-
ics to identify verse pairs which are topically
related. We demonstrate that our system can
be cost effective compared to having annota-
tors acquire the expertise necessary to produce
cross-reference resources unaided.

1 Introduction

Cross-references are references within or between
bodies of text that can help elaborate upon or clar-
ify that text. They can be a useful tool for deep
understanding and can also be used to analyze
the relational structure of a text. In contrast to a
word concordance which simply shows passages
which share a common keyword, cross-references
often include links which do not necessarily share
the same keywords, but are still related topically.
The existence of a thorough and complete cross-
reference resource can facilitate better scholarship
of a text and help readers to quickly find clarify-
ing information or see repeated themes throughout
a text.

Compared to language tasks such as part-of-
speech tagging, producing cross-reference anno-
tations is much more labor intensive. To pro-

duce cross-references, annotators must become in-
timately familiar with a text in order to note that
a particular passage is related to another passage
they happen to recall. This level of familiarity
and expertise with a particular text typically re-
quires the annotator to spend a great deal of time
studying and reading. Possibly for this reason, ex-
pansive cross-references have only been produced
for the most well-studied texts, such as the Bible.
Other texts, such as academic textbooks, may in-
clude indices or other similar references, but these
tend to be sparse, focusing on a small number of
keywords rather than linking each individual pas-
sage with other relevant passages.

The process of creating such a resource can
be expensive and time consuming. For exam-
ple, the Bible1 published by The Church of Je-
sus Christ of Latter-day Saints includes numer-
ous cross-references and topic-based categories.
These cross-references took hundreds of volun-
teers thousands of hours over seven years to pro-
duce (Anderson, 1979). This process involved
collecting more than 19,900 manually curated en-
tries from volunteers, and then editing and refining
those references with a small committee of experts
down to a final cross-reference database contain-
ing 12,475 entries.

Cross-referencing grows quadratically with the
size of the data because for each of n passages,
there are n− 1 possibly related passages, yielding
O(n2) potential pairs. This differs from tasks such
as part-of-speech tagging where annotators can tag
individual sentences in isolation (O(n)). We can,
however, evaluate pairs in isolation. Therefore,
our approach is to produce a system which utilizes
fine-grained topic modeling in order to dramati-
cally lower the cost of producing a cross-reference
resource for new texts. We do not expect that such

1https://www.lds.org/scriptures/bible

https://www.lds.org/scriptures/bible


3979

a system will produce only–or even primarily–
valid cross-references, but we hope that the system
could be accurate enough to allow annotators to
simply review the proposed cross-references and
reduce the search cost.

2 Methodology

In this section, we describe our experimental setup
and how we approach the problem of automatic
cross-reference generation.

2.1 Cross-reference Datasets

While exact statistics are impossible to obtain, the
number of printed copies of the Bible is estimated
to be more than 5 billion (Guiness). It is one of
the most well-studied texts in existence, and one
of the few texts in the world with extensive cross-
reference data. We utilize the English Standard
Version of the Holy Bible (Crossway, 2001) in
order to validate our method. We use this spe-
cific translation of the Bible because it is used on
openbible.info. While our work focuses on
this specific religious text out of necessity, it can
also be applied to other texts, including literary
classics and collections of historical documents.

To aid any readers who are unfamiliar with this
religious text, we note that the term ‘verse’ refers
to a short division of a chapter. The entirety of
the text is divided up into books. Typically, in-
dividual verses are referenced by the name of the
book, the chapter number, and the verse number,
e.g., Isaiah 25:8. For convenience, each referenced
verse in electronic versions of this paper is a hy-
perlink to openbible.info, showing the verse
along with associated cross-references. For the
sake of narrowing our focus, our efforts in cross-
referencing the Bible will focus on finding topi-
cally related verses, though other work could po-
tentially link larger passages, such as entire chap-
ters or passages spanning multiple verses.

As a ground truth for cross-references, we uti-
lize two sources. The first is the “Treasury of
Scripture Knowledge, Enhanced” (Morton, 2010)
(an extended version of the original “Treasury
of Scripture Knowledge” (Torry, 2002)), which
includes 670,796 cross-references between the
31,085 verses of the Bible. To our knowledge, this
is the most exhaustive resource of human curated
cross-references for the Bible to date. We will de-
note this cross-reference dataset as TSKE.

The second source of ground truth cross-

references is a dataset from openbible.info.
This dataset was seeded with various public do-
main cross-reference data, including the Treasury
of Scripture Knowledge. As shown in Figure 1,
users search for a verse they are interested in and
can then vote on whether they found a particular
cross-reference to be helpful or not. With each
helpful or not helpful vote counting as +1 and −1
respectively, the dataset includes the net result of
the votes for each included cross-reference.

Thus we can filter the dataset of cross-
references based on how helpful each verse was
rated to be. Counting only those cross-references
which have a non-negative vote total, this dataset
contains 344,441 cross-references. In figures, we
denote this subset of the openbible.net cross-
reference dataset as OpenBible+0. We also use the
subset of cross-references which received a net to-
tal of at least 5 helpful votes. This subset, denoted
as OpenBible+5, has 50,098 cross-references.

We do note however that the voting data has
some skewness in the number of votes for each
cross-reference. The overwhelming majority of
cross-references received fewer than five total
votes for or against the reference. A small number
of verses, including both popular verses as well as
verses which happen to come from the very begin-
ning of the Bible, have received hundreds of votes.

2.2 Baselines for Automated Cross-reference
Generation

These cross-reference datasets were produced at a
tremendous cost in time and human effort. To the
best of our knowledge, efforts at automating this
process are limited and have not received much at-
tention in computer science literature. That said, a
reasonable baseline for automated efforts is a sim-
ple word-based concordance, which lists words
along with references to where the words occur in
the text2.

Using the TSKE as the ground truth for
cross-references, this simple baseline will recover
roughly 65% of the cross-references. For exam-
ple, as shown in Figure 1 and assuming that stem-
ming is performed, the verse Isaiah 25:8 would be
properly linked to 1 Corinthians 15:54 due to the
two verses sharing the terms ‘death’ and ‘swal-
low’. On the other hand, verses such as Hosea
13:14 or 1 Corinthians 15:55 which reference the

2For an example of such a concordance for the
King James Version of the Bible, see Strong’s Concor-
dance (Strong, 1890).

openbible.info
https://www.openbible.info/labs/cross-references/search?q=Isaiah 25:8
openbible.info
openbible.info
openbible.net
https://www.openbible.info/labs/cross-references/search?q=Isaiah 25:8
https://www.openbible.info/labs/cross-references/search?q=1 Corinthians 15:54
https://www.openbible.info/labs/cross-references/search?q=Hosea 13:14
https://www.openbible.info/labs/cross-references/search?q=Hosea 13:14
https://www.openbible.info/labs/cross-references/search?q=1 Corinthians 15:55


3980

‘sting of death’ should not be linked to verses such
as Revelation 9:10, which references the sting
of a scorpion. For this reason, roughly 99% of
cross-references found using word-based concor-
dance are spurious according to the TSKE, mak-
ing this baseline less useful as a cross-referencing
resource.3 We refer to this baseline as word match.

As a slightly stronger baseline, we also consider
a topical concordance in which verses assigned to
the same topic by some topic model are consid-
ered to be linked. We refer to this baseline as
topic match. For example, suppose that a topic
model includes a topic which gives high probabil-
ity to terms such as ‘death’, ‘swallow’, ‘victory’
and ‘sting’. Assuming that such a model would as-
sign the previously mentioned verse to this topic,
then verses such as Isaiah 25:8, Hosea 13:14, and
1 Corinthians 14:54 would be linked, but Revela-
tion 9:10 which uses the term ‘sting’ in a different
context (i.e., the sting of a scorpion) would not be
linked.

We can further increase the precision of this
baseline by only linking references which share
a topic and a word, although this does come at
the cost of recall. We refer to this final baseline
method as topic-word match.

3For this reason, published biblical word concordances
typically only give a manually curated subset of significant
vocabulary terms.

2.3 Topic-based Cross-referencing

We now describe our approach to topic-based
cross-referencing. The baselines built upon word
or topic concordances simply propose any cross-
reference for which a word or topic matches an-
other verse, meaning that we cannot set a threshold
on the quality of the proposed cross-references.
Instead, we propose comparing document-topic
distributions as K-dimensional vectors, where K
is the number of topics, using standard vector dis-
tance metrics to compare verses. This idea has
been used before (Towne et al., 2016), although
not for the task of producing cross-references. By
using a vector distance metric to compare the topi-
cal similarity of verse pairs, we can set a threshold
on the number of proposed cross-references and
propose only the most topically related verse pairs
as cross-references. We experiment with four dis-
tance metrics: cosine distance, Euclidean distance,
cityblock (or Manhattan) distance, and Chebyshev
distance. However, given that previous work com-
paring document-topic vectors from LDA seem to
default to cosine similarity (Towne et al., 2016;
Chuang et al., 2012), we anticipate that cosine dis-
tance will be the best metric for selecting cross-
references.

2.4 Model Selection

We claim that a fine-grained topic model, i.e., a
topic model with a large number of highly nu-
anced topics, will be able to provide more value

Figure 1: Voting interface for cross-reference data from openbible.info.

https://www.openbible.info/labs/cross-references/search?q=Revelation 9:10
https://www.openbible.info/labs/cross-references/search?q=Isaiah 25:8
https://www.openbible.info/labs/cross-references/search?q=Hosea 13:14
https://www.openbible.info/labs/cross-references/search?q=1 Corinthians 14:54
https://www.openbible.info/labs/cross-references/search?q=Revelation 9:10
https://www.openbible.info/labs/cross-references/search?q=Revelation 9:10
openbible.info


3981

for tasks like cross-referencing than traditional
coarse-grained topic models. In order to validate
this claim, we will compare our fine-grained mod-
els with topics from a traditional Latent Dirichlet
Allocation model with 100 topics. We refer to this
baseline model as coarse.

Traditional probabilistic topic models such as
Latent Dirichlet Allocation are not able to utilize
large numbers of topics (Wallach et al., 2009).
However, we successfully train anchor-based topic
models with thousands of topics. Consequently,
for our fine-grained models, we will employ
the Anchor Word algorithm (Arora et al., 2013).
Anchor-based topic models view topic modeling
as non-negative matrix factorization. This class of
topic models attempts to decompose a document-
word matrix into two matrices, including a topic-
word matrix which gives the conditional probabil-
ities of a particular word given a topic. Ordinarily,
this factorization is NP-Hard (Arora et al., 2012).
However, given a set of anchor words, or words
which uniquely identify a topic, the computation
requires only O(KV 2 + K2V I) where K is the
number of topics, V is the size of the vocabulary,
and I (typically around 100) is the average number
of iterations (Arora et al., 2013).

We train our anchor-based model using 3,000
topics. We choose this number based on the num-
ber of documents we expect each topic to explain:
there are roughly 30,000 verses and, according to
OpenBible+0, a median of 10 cross-references per
verse, so we want each topic to be responsible for
roughly 10 documents.

By default, the anchors for the 3,000 topics
are produced using a modified form of the Gram-
Schmidt process (Arora et al., 2013). This process
views each word as a vector in high-dimensional
space and attempts to pick anchor words which
maximally span that space. For more details,
see Arora et al. (2013). In our results and figures,
we refer to this model with the default anchor se-
lection method as Gram-Schmidt.

This does present us with some difficulty with
anchor words as this process tends to select the
most extreme and esoteric anchors possible (Lee
and Mimno, 2014), which can lead to less use-
ful topics as we increase their number. Lund
et al. (2017) introduced a method of using multiple
words to form a single anchor. This method, called
tandem anchoring, was originally formulated as a
way to extend the anchor algorithm to allow for

interactive topic modeling.
Instead of utilizing human interaction to seed

the topic anchors, we will seed the tandem anchors
using the terms from randomly selected verses.
For example, suppose we randomly select Isa-
iah 25:8 as a verse from which to form an an-
chor. As shown in Figure 1, this verse includes
terms such as ‘swallow’, ‘death’, and ‘tears’. Each
of these terms is represented as a point in high-
dimensional space. To produce a single anchor
from these terms, we average the words using the
element-wise harmonic mean4. While this new
point may not correspond to any particular word,
it does capture the joint occurrence pattern of the
words which form the anchor. We repeat this pro-
cess 3,000 times to produce an anchor-based topic
model with tandem anchors. While this exact
methodology of seeding topic anchors using ran-
domly selected verses is novel, we note the simi-
larity to the method used to seed topics in Rephil,
a web scale topic model used by Google (Murphy,
2012). In figures, we refer to this model with tan-
dem anchors as tandem.

For each of these models, we must take the
topic-word distributions from the topic model and
produce document specific topic assignments. We
utilize mean field variational inference in order
to assign the individual verses to topics, similar
to Nguyen et al. (2015).

3 Results

In this section we present the results of our ex-
periments with topic-based cross-referencing. As
discussed in Section 2, we experiment with three
different cross-reference datasets: TSKE, Open-
Bible+0, and OpenBible+5. We utilize three dif-
ferent topic models: coarse, Gram-Schmidt, and
tandem. We seek to demonstrate that our topic-
based cross-referencing system can effectively uti-
lize fine-grained topic modeling to produce candi-
date cross-references which can be annotated by
humans in a cost effective manner.

3.1 Metric Comparisons

We first explore the various metrics for selecting
cross-references discussed in Section 2.3. With
each proposed distance metric, we are able to set
a threshold and determine which Bible verse pairs
to keep as candidate cross-references and which

4See Lund et al. (2017) for details on why the harmonic
mean is useful for forming tandem anchors

https://www.openbible.info/labs/cross-references/search?q=Isaiah 25:8
https://www.openbible.info/labs/cross-references/search?q=Isaiah 25:8


3982

to discard. Figure 2 and Figure 3 summarize our
results with respect to metrics.

Figure 2 gives a receiver operator characteristic
(or ROC) curve, which compares the true positive
rate (or recall) against the false positive rate (or
fall-out). We show the curve for the various met-
rics using the TSKE as our ground truth. We show
these curves on each of the three different models
discussed in Section 2.4.

Overall, cosine distance is the best method for
selecting cross-references, as it gives the largest
area under the ROC curve. The major exception
to this is with the traditional coarse-grained topic
model for which Euclidean distance performs the
best. Considering that cosine distance has fre-
quently been used in conjunction with topics from
LDA (Towne et al., 2016; Chuang et al., 2012),
this result is somewhat surprising.

Also of interest is the fact that the word-match
baseline does reasonably well with respect to the
true positive rate, at least if a false positive rate of
roughly 0.196 is acceptable. Note that this corre-
sponds to 188,974,806 false positives in the TSKE
dataset, so while the raw number of true positives

may be impressive, this baseline is not likely to be
useful in practice.

While the ROC plot is undoubtedly more popu-
lar than the precision-recall plot, in cases where
the data is imbalanced, the precision-recall plot
can be much more informative. This is mainly
because of the use of false-positives in the ROC
curve, which can present an overly optimistic
picture of the classifier performance (Saito and
Rehmsmeier, 2015). Consequently, in Figure 3,
we also compare each of the proposed metrics us-
ing a precision-recall curve (or PRC).

The PRC plot reinforces the claim that cosine
distance is the best distance metric to threshold
cross-references since for any reasonable level of
precision, cosine distance yields the best results.
Once again, with the exception of Euclidean dis-
tance performing better with the coarse-grained
topic model. However, we note that the precision
using coarse-grained topics is much lower than
using fine-grained topics with cosine distance.
Even with Gram-Schmidt based fine-grained top-
ics, where Euclidean distance eventually wins out
against cosine distance, the high amount of false

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Tr
ue

Po
si

tiv
e

R
at

e

Tandem

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
False Positive Rate

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Gram-Schmidt

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Coarse

wordmatch topicmatch topicwordmatch cosine cityblock euclidean chebyshev

Figure 2: Cross-reference ROC curves for different metrics for cross-reference selection with topics from three
different topic models and TSKE as the cross-reference ground truth.

0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
0.00

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

P
re

ci
si

on

Tandem

0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
Recall

0.00

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05
Gram-Schmidt

0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
0.00

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05
Coarse

wordmatch topicmatch topicwordmatch cosine cityblock euclidean chebyshev

Figure 3: Cross-reference PRC plots with different metrics for cross-reference selection with topics from three
different topic models and TSKE as the cross-reference ground truth.



3983

positives means that cosine distance is the most
useful metric for this task. The PRC plot also il-
lustrates why the matching baselines are not prac-
tically useful—they do have decent true positive
rates, but the precision with these baselines is ex-
tremely low.

3.2 Topic Model Comparison

We now explore the various topic models dis-
cussed in Section 2.4. Figure 4 and Figure 5 sum-
marize these results. Based on Section 3.1, each
reported result in this section uses cosine distance
to determine verse pairs which should be consid-
ered as candidate cross-references. We compare
the results of the three topic models on the three
datasets discussed in Section 2.1.

The overall trend on each of the three datasets
is simply that we lower the true positive rate and
precision as we use more selective datasets. Con-
sidering that OpenBible+5 is a subset of Open-
Bible+0, and that OpenBible+0 is nearly a subset

of TSKE5, this result is not surprising. In the fi-
nal cost analysis (see Section 3.3), the selectivity
of the actual annotators must be taken into account
when attempting to predict the true positive rate or
the precision of a system.

As shown in Figure 4, regardless of the anchor
selection strategy, both fine-grained topic models
outperform the traditional coarse-grained model.
Our model using tandem anchors built from ran-
domly selected verses performs the best for nearly
all levels of false positive rate. However, the
Gram-Schmidt based anchors produce better true
positive rates for very low false positive rates.

This trend is better illustrated with the PRC
plots in Figure 5. While for higher values of re-
call the tandem anchor selection strategy does win
out, it is only after precision significantly drops
that tandem anchors produce superior predictions
to Gram-Schmidt anchors.

5OpenBible+0 has 533 references seeded from other pub-
lic domain sources, which are not included in TSKE.

0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Tr
ue

Po
si

tiv
e

R
at

e

TSKE

0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
False Positive Rate

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

OpenBible+0

0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

OpenBible+5

wordmatch topicmatch topicwordmatch tandem gramschmidt coarse

Figure 4: Cross-reference ROC curves with different models for cross-reference selection with three different
datasets.

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0.00

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

P
re

ci
si

on

TSKE

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Recall

0.00

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05
OpenBible+0

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0.00

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05
OpenBible+5

wordmatch topicmatch topicwordmatch tandem gramschmidt coarse

Figure 5: Cross-reference PRC plots with different models for cross-reference selection with three different
datasets.



3984

101 103 105 107 109

101

103

105
Tr

ue
Po

si
tiv

es

TSKE

101 103 105 107 109

Predicted Positives

101

103

105

OpenBible+0

101 103 105 107 109

101

103

105

OpenBible+5

wordmatch topicmatch topicwordmatch tandem gramschmidt coarse

Figure 6: Cross-reference cost curves with different models for cross-reference selection with three different
datasets. Note the log-log scale. The x-axis denotes the number of cross-references produced by our method,
while the y-axis indicates how many of those cross-references are valid according to the human-provided ground
truth.

3.3 Cost Analysis

While the precision-recall curves in Figure 5 may
suggest that Gram-Schmidt based topic models
produce superior topics for cross-referencing, we
suggest that this analysis may be missing a key
point in real world analysis. As an alternative to
both PRC and ROC curves, we suggest that this
task might be best served with an analysis of cost
per true positive.

We envision that our system would be used to
produce a set of candidate cross-references which
would then be curated using human annotators.
These annotators would be tasked with evaluating
each potential reference and determining whether
or not each cross-reference is valid. Critically, the
annotator would only be required to evaluate indi-
vidual cross-references, not the entire text.

As a working example of the cost of such an an-
notation process, suppose we use a popular crowd-
sourcing service (e.g., Amazon Mechanical Turk)
to produce human annotations. We might rea-
sonably expect to pay something around $0.01
USD per annotation. We would likely require
some form of quality control in the form of re-
dundant annotations, so we might end up pay-
ing $0.05 USD per annotated cross-reference can-
didate. Of course, the exact cost per annotated
cross-reference will vary depending on the ser-
vice and difficulty of the specific text being cross-
referenced. However, we will use these estimates
for the purpose of illustration.

Suppose as part of this working example, we
are interested in producing a resource with 12,000
valid cross-reference annotations (roughly match-

ing the size of the previously mentioned LDS edi-
tion of the Bible (Anderson, 1979)). Consult-
ing Figure 6 we can then determine how many
candidate cross-references we would need to pro-
duce for human annotation in order to create the
final curated cross-reference resource. For ex-
ample, using the TSKE as our ground truth, we
would need approximately 150,000 predicted pos-
itives in order to find 12,000 true positives. At
$0.05 USD per annotation, this would cost about
$7,500 USD. Supposing that our annotators were
more selective, we could use the OpenBible+0
as the ground truth, which would roughly dou-
ble the cost. With OpenBible+5, which is consid-
erably more selective, this cost rises to approxi-
mately $1,000,000 USD. In contrast, with tradi-
tional coarse-grained topic modeling, this cost is
anywhere from $40,000 USD using the TSKE as
the ground truth, to $17,500,000 USD using Open-
Bible+5 as the ground truth.

While these costs may seem prohibitive, con-
sider that the alternative is to have experts under-
stand the entire text to the degree that they can read
one passage and recall other relevant passages they
have previously read. In the case of religious texts,
this is often possible since adherents study those
texts as part of their daily routine. For example, in
the case of the LDS edition, it took a committee of
experts seven years of work to produce their cross-
reference resource, even with the aid of hundreds
of volunteers. However, without those experts and
volunteers, the cost would have been even greater.
In the naive case where every possible reference is
manually checked, the cost skyrockets to around
$48,000,000 USD.



3985

Passage 1 Passage 2
“I have an excessive regard for Miss
Jane Bennet, she is really a very
sweet girl, and I wish with all my
heart she were well settled. But with
such a father and mother, and such
low connections, I am afraid there is
no chance of it.”

“I wish you may not get into a scrape, Harriet, whenever
he does marry;–I mean, as to being acquainted with his
wife–for though his sisters, from a superior education, are
not to be altogether objected to, it does not follow that he
might marry any body at all fit for you to notice. The
misfortune of your birth ought to make you particularly
careful as to your associates. There can be no doubt of
your being a gentleman’s daughter, and you must support
your claim to that station by every thing within your own
power, or there will be plenty of people who would take
pleasure in degrading you.”

Table 1: Passage 1 is taken from the eighth chapter of Pride and Prejudice, and Passage 2 is taken from the fourth
chapter of Emma. These two passages are a valid cross-reference because they both discuss social standing and
family connections in the context of marriage. Their connection was found even with their lack of shared words.

4 Discussion

Without extensive cross-referencing resources for
more secular datasets, it is difficult to empiri-
cally prove the usefulness of our system gener-
ally without an extremely costly user study. That
said, we make a small attempt by manually ex-
amining cross-references generated from the com-
plete works of Jane Austen and Plato. Based on
our cost analysis in Section 3.3, and since we
will be examining only a small number of cross-
references, we utilize tandem anchors to generate
topics. With each dataset, we examine the first 300
cross-references produced by our system.

We also examine what our model got wrong in
proposing Bible cross-references.

4.1 Jane Austen

Of the first 300 cross-references, we find that 39 of
them are valid, linking passages from all six works
by Jane Austen. As with our experiments with the
Bible, this level of precision is sufficient that we
believe that we could dramatically lower the cost
of producing a full cross-referencing resource for
this text.

We note that 109 of these are cross-references
linking a paragraph in the eighth chapter of Pride
and Prejudice to other passages in our corpus. Of
the references involving this one paragraph, 22
were valid. An example of such a cross-reference
is shown in Table 1. While marriage in general is
a common theme in the works of Jane Austen, this
particular paragraph more specifically discusses
the role of social status and family connection as
it relates to choosing a marriage partner. We note

that the connection between the passages in Ta-
ble 1 is thematic; they share no significant words
in common, demonstrating the capability of the
system to detect nuanced topics and themes.

4.2 Plato

Of the first 300 cross-references generated from
the works of Plato, we found 119 that were valid.
Many of the cross references were between dis-
tinct works, and included discussions about the na-
ture of justice, arguments about the composition of
things, the nature and role that certain things play,
and discussions of appropriate legislation.

It is important to note that the model found sig-
nificantly more cross references in the works of
Plato than those by Jane Austen. This is likely
due to the nature of the writing. We find in the
works of Plato that ideas themselves are discussed
directly, similar to the bible, and thus we would
expect it to be easier for a model to find words
and phrases that link to a specific topic. An exam-
ple of this is that words like “virtue,” “courage,”
“mean,” and “cowardice” would likely identify a
topic about virtue that comes up in the works of
Plato. However, in Jane Austen we find ideas dis-
cussed implicitly through interactions of the char-
acters and commentary by the author. The mean-
ing, while present, is found by “reading between
the lines.” An example of this is that we might find
marriage discussed in the works of Jane Austen,
but more often through characters discussing their
feelings after getting married. Here, words that
we might see could be words such as “happy,”
“elated,” “love,” “efficient,” etc. However, these



3986

words could also correlate equally well with other
topics, and thus it would be harder for our model
to discern. As further evidence of this we point
out that the cross reference we used above from
Jane Austen is an explicit discussion of marriage.
It is likely that an implicit discussion of marriage
would be harder for our model to find. We also
point out that in such cases it is a non-trivial task
for humans to come to a specific consensus about
what a given passage could mean or relate to.

That said, given the relevant and influential na-
ture that the works of Plato still hold even today,
we can see that these cross references are highly
useful in that they facilitate study and understand-
ing of his works that a study of each individual
work separately might miss.

4.3 Error Analysis

We examine the errors of running tandem an-
chors using cosine distance on the Bible. There
are two types of errors to examine: candidate
cross-references proposed early in the process that
are not valid cross-references and valid cross-
references that are not proposed until the end of
the process (as determined by the Treasury of
Scripture Knowledge).

Early invalid candidate cross-references all ex-
hibit the same characteristic; the documents are
exactly or substantively the same (e.g. Deuteron-
omy 2:17 the Lord said to me, and Deuteronomy
2:2 Then the Lord said to me). Indeed, a human
given only those two documents would also mark
them as related, and many valid cross-references
exhibit this same characteristic (e.g. Psalms 107:6
and Psalms 107:28 are exactly the same and are a
valid cross-reference).

Cross-references are partially so difficult be-
cause what constitutes a valid cross-reference is at
least partially determined by what the community
surrounding the text views as significant, and so
two documents that are identical may or may not
be a valid cross-reference depending on the view
of that community. This particular issue would
make any end-to-end automated solution to cross-
referencing particularly difficult.

We also examined the last one hundred valid
cross-references proposed. We consider these er-
rors because in a system where a predetermined
number of candidate cross-references are consid-
ered, these candidate cross-references would most
likely never be considered. For 28 of the last one

hundred valid cross-references, it is unclear why
they are considered valid cross references (e.g.,
Ezekiel 16:10 I clothed you also with embroidered
cloth and shod you with fine leather. I wrapped
you in fine linen and covered you with silk. and
Deuteronomy 8:11 “Take care lest you forget the
Lord your God by not keeping his commandments
and his rules and his statutes, which I command
you today,).

Many of the other 72 valid cross-references are
also difficult in some way. Many of the connec-
tions involve some use of metaphor (25) or are
linked by a single key word, such as a name, but
are otherwise topically dissimilar (34). The other
13 cross-references are all documents describing
the construction of the tabernacle, and we have
enough extra context to recognize this, however
it isn’t surprising that the model doesn’t find this
connection.

It is useful to note that of the final 600,000 can-
didate cross-references, only one hundred of them
were valid cross-references.

5 Conclusion

We have produced a system using fine-grained
topic modeling which is able to propose candidate
cross-references which can be verified by non-
expert human annotators for the purpose of creat-
ing a cross-reference resource at a fraction of the
cost of current manual techniques. Our method,
which utilizes tandem anchors to produce large
numbers of highly nuanced topics coupled with an
effective assignment strategy, is able to produce
document-topic vectors which are comparable us-
ing cosine distance.

Our results also demonstrate that this system
would not be as cost effective with traditional
coarse-grained topic modeling. While we can find
sets of topically related documents using coarse-
grained topics, for the task of finding the most
closely related documents we require a system
which is more specific. We suggest that this suc-
cess serves as motivation for exploration of fine-
grained topic modeling for other topic-based use
cases which require nuance and precision.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the NSF Grant IIS-
1409739

https://www.openbible.info/labs/cross-references/search?q=Deuteronomy 2:17
https://www.openbible.info/labs/cross-references/search?q=Deuteronomy 2:17
https://www.openbible.info/labs/cross-references/search?q=Deuteronomy 2:2
https://www.openbible.info/labs/cross-references/search?q=Deuteronomy 2:2
https://www.openbible.info/labs/cross-references/search?q=Ezekiel 16:10
https://www.openbible.info/labs/cross-references/search?q=Deuteronomy 8:11


3987

References
Lavina Fielding Anderson. 1979. Church publishes

first LDS edition of the bible. Ensign, 10.

Sanjeev Arora, Rong Ge, Yonatan Halpern, David
Mimno, Ankur Moitra, David Sontag, Yichen Wu,
and Michael Zhu. 2013. A practical algorithm for
topic modeling with provable guarantees. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference of Machine
Learning.

Sanjeev Arora, Rong Ge, and Ankur Moitra. 2012.
Learning topic models–going beyond svd. In Fifty-
Third IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of
Computer Science.

Jason Chuang, Daniel Ramage, Christopher Manning,
and Jeffrey Heer. 2012. Interpretation and trust: De-
signing model-driven visualizations for text analy-
sis. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 443–
452. ACM.

Crossway. 2001. The Holy Bible: English Standard
Version. Crossway Bibles.

Guiness. 2018. Best selling book of non-fiction.
Http://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/world-
records/best-selling-book-of-non-fiction.

Moontae Lee and David Mimno. 2014. Low-
dimensional embeddings for interpretable anchor-
based topic inference. In Proceedings of Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing.

Jeffrey Lund, Connor Cook, Kevin Seppi, and Jordan
Boyd-Graber. 2017. Tandem anchoring: A multi-
word anchor approach for interactive topic model-
ing. In Proceedings of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Timothy Morton. 2010. Treasury of Scripture Knowl-
edge, Enhanced. BibleAnalyzer.com.

Kevin P Murphy. 2012. Machine learning: a proba-
bilistic perspective, pages 928–929. MIT Press.

Thang Nguyen, Jordan Boyd-Graber, Jeffrey Lund,
Kevin Seppi, and Eric Ringger. 2015. Is your anchor
going up or down? Fast and accurate supervised
topic models. In Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Takaya Saito and Marc Rehmsmeier. 2015. The
precision-recall plot is more informative than the
roc plot when evaluating binary classifiers on imbal-
anced datasets. PloS one, 10(3):e0118432.

James Strong. 1890. The Exhaustive Concordance of
the Bible. Jennings & Graham.

R.A. Torry. 2002. Treasury of Scripture Knowledge.
Hendrickson Publishers.

W Ben Towne, Carolyn P Rosé, and James D Herb-
sleb. 2016. Measuring similarity similarly: Lda and
human perception. ACM Transactions on Intelligent
Systems and Technology, 8(1).

Hanna M Wallach, David M Mimno, and Andrew Mc-
Callum. 2009. Rethinking lda: Why priors matter.
In NIPS, volume 22, pages 1973–1981.


