




































Zero-Shot Cross-Lingual Opinion Target Extraction


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2019, pages 2486–2495
Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2 - June 7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

2486

Zero-Shot Cross-Lingual Opinion Target Extraction

Soufian Jebbara and Philipp Cimiano
Semalytix GmbH, Bielefeld, Germany

Semantic Computing Group, CITEC - Bielefeld University, Bielefeld, Germany
soufian.jebbara@semalytix.com
cimiano@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de

Abstract

Aspect-based sentiment analysis involves the
recognition of so called opinion target expres-
sions (OTEs). To automatically extract OTEs,
supervised learning algorithms are usually em-
ployed which are trained on manually anno-
tated corpora. The creation of these corpora is
labor-intensive and sufficiently large datasets
are therefore usually only available for a very
narrow selection of languages and domains.
In this work, we address the lack of avail-
able annotated data for specific languages by
proposing a zero-shot cross-lingual approach
for the extraction of opinion target expres-
sions. We leverage multilingual word embed-
dings that share a common vector space across
various languages and incorporate these into a
convolutional neural network architecture for
OTE extraction. Our experiments with 5 lan-
guages give promising results: We can suc-
cessfully train a model on annotated data of a
source language and perform accurate predic-
tion on a target language without ever using
any annotated samples in that target language.
Depending on the source and target language
pairs, we reach performances in a zero-shot
regime of up to 77% of a model trained on
target language data. Furthermore, we can in-
crease this performance up to 87% of a base-
line model trained on target language data by
performing cross-lingual learning from multi-
ple source languages.

1 Introduction

In recent years, there has been an increasing in-
terest in developing sentiment analysis models
that predict sentiment at a more fine-grained level
than at the level of a complete document. A
paradigm coined as Aspect-based Sentiment Anal-
ysis (ABSA) addresses this need by defining the
sentiment expressed in a text relative to an opinion
target (also called aspect). Consider the following
example from a restaurant review:

“ Moules were excellent , lobster ravioli was VERY
salty ! ”

In this example, there are two sentiment state-
ments, one positive and one negative. The posi-
tive one is indicated by the word “excellent” and
is expressed towards the opinion target “Moules”.
The second, negative sentiment, is indicated by the
word “salty” and is expressed towards the “lobster
ravioli”.

A key task within this fine-grained sentiment
analysis consists of identifying so called opinion
target expressions (OTE). To automatically extract
OTEs, supervised learning algorithms are usually
employed which are trained on manually anno-
tated corpora. In this paper, we are concerned with
how to transfer classifiers trained on one domain
to another domain. In particular, we focus on the
transfer of models across languages to alleviate
the need for multilingual training data. We pro-
pose a model that is capable of accurate zero-shot
cross-lingual OTE extraction, thus reducing the re-
liance on annotated data for every language. Simi-
lar to Upadhyay et al. (2018), our model leverages
multilingual word embeddings (Smith et al., 2017;
Lample et al., 2018) that share a common vector
space across various languages. The shared space
allows us to transfer a model trained on source lan-
guage data to predict OTEs in a target language
for which no (i.e. zero-shot setting) or only small
amounts of data are available, thus allowing to ap-
ply our model to under-resourced languages.

Our main contributions can be summarized as
follows:

• We present the first approach for zero-shot
cross-lingual opinion target extraction and
achieve up to 87% of the performance of a
monolingual baseline.

• We investigate the benefit of using multi-



2487

ple source languages for cross-lingual learn-
ing and show that we can improve by 6 to
8 points in F1-Score compared to a model
trained on a single source language.

• We investigate the benefit of augmenting
the zero-shot approach with additional data
points from the target language. We ob-
serve that we can save hundreds of annotated
data points by employing a cross-lingual ap-
proach.

• We compare two methods for obtaining
cross-lingual word embeddings on the task.

2 Approach

A common approach for extracting opinion target
expressions is to phrase the task as a sequence tag-
ging problem using the well-known IOB scheme
(Tjong Kim Sang and Veenstra, 1999) to repre-
sent OTEs as a sequence of tags. According to
this scheme, each word in our text is marked with
one of three tags, namely I, O or B that indicate
if the word is at the Beginning1, Inside or Outside
of a target expression. An example of such an en-
coding can be seen below:

The wine list is also really nice .
O I I O O O O O

By rephrasing the task in this way, we can ad-
dress it using established sequence tagging mod-
els. In this work, we use a multi-layer convolu-
tional neural network (CNN) as our sequence tag-
ging model. The model receives a sequence of
words as input features and predicts an output se-
quence of IOB tags. In order to keep our model
simple and our results clear, we restrict our in-
put representation to a sequence of word embed-
dings. While additional features such as Part-of-
Speech (POS) tags are known to perform well in
the domain of OTE extraction (Toh and Su, 2016;
Kumar et al., 2016; Jebbara and Cimiano, 2016),
they would require a separately trained model for
POS-tag prediction which can not be assumed to
be available for every language. We refrain from
using more complex architectures such as memory
networks as our goal is mainly to investigate the
possibility of performing zero-shot cross-lingual
transfer learning for OTE prediction. Being the

1Note that the B token is only used to indicate the bound-
ary of two consecutive phrases.

first approach proposing this, we leave the ques-
tion of how to increase performance of the ap-
proach by using more complex architectures to fu-
ture work.

In the following, we describe our monolingual
CNN model for OTE extraction which we use as
our baseline model. Afterwards, we show how we
adapt this model for a cross-lingual and even zero-
shot regime.

2.1 Monolingual Model

Our monolingual baseline model consists of a
word embedding layer, a stack of convolution lay-
ers, a standard feed-forward layer followed by a
final output layer. Formally, the word sequence
w = (w1, . . . ,wn) is passed to the word em-
bedding layer that maps each word wi to its em-
bedding vector xi using an embedding matrix W.
The sequence of word embedding vectors x =
(x1, . . . ,xn) is processed by a stack of L convo-
lutional layers2, each with a kernel width of lconv,
dconv filter maps and RELU activation function
f (Nair and Hinton, 2010). The final output of
these convolution layers is a sequence of abstract
representations hL = (hL1 , . . . ,h

L
n) that incorpo-

rate the immediate context of each word by means
of the learned convolution operations. The hid-
den states hLi of the last convolution layer are pro-
cessed by a regular feed-forward layer to further
increase the model’s capacity and the resulting se-
quence is passed to the output layer.

In a last step, each hidden state is projected
to a probability distribution over all possible out-
put tags qi = (qBi , q

I
i , q

O
i ) using a standard feed-

forward layer with weights Wtag, bias btag and a
softmax activation function.

Since the prediction of each tag can be inter-
preted as a classification, the network is trained
to minimize the categorical cross-entropy between
expected tag distribution pi and predicted tag dis-
tribution qi of each word i:

H(pi, qi) = −
∑
t∈T

pti log(q
t
i),

where T = {I,O,B} is the set of IOB tags, pti ∈
{0, 1} is the expected probability of tag t and qti ∈
[0, 1] the predicted probability. Figure 1 depicts
the sequence labeling architecture.

2The input sequences are padded with zeros to allow the
application of the convolution operations to the edge words.



2488

Figure 1: Model for sequence tagging using convolu-
tion operations. For simplicity, we only show a single
convolution operation. The gray boxes depict padding
vectors. The layers inside the dashed box are shared
across multiple languages.

2.2 Cross-Lingual Model

Our cross-lingual model works purely with cross-
lingual embeddings that have been trained on
monolingual datasets and in a second step have
been aligned across languages. In fact, the embed-
dings are pre-computed in an offline fashion and
are not adapted while training the convolutional
network on data from a specific language. As the
inputs to the convolutional network are only the
cross-lingual embeddings, the network can be ap-
plied to any language for which the embeddings
have been aligned.

Since the word embeddings for source and tar-
get language share a common vector space, the
shared parts of the target language model are able
to process data samples from the completely un-
seen target language and perform accurate predic-
tion i.e. enabling zero-shot cross-lingual extrac-
tion of opinion target expressions.

We rely on two approaches to compute em-
beddings that are aligned across languages. Both
methods rely on fastText (Bojanowski et al., 2017)
to compute monolingual embeddings trained on
Wikipedia articles. The first method is the one
proposed by Smith et al. (2017), which com-
putes a singular value decomposition (SVD) on
a dictionary of translated word pairs to obtain an
optimal, orthogonal projection matrix from one
space into the other. We refer to this method as
SVD-aligned. We use these embeddings3 in
our experiments in Sections 3.3, 3.4 and 3.6.

The second method proposed by Lample et al.
(2018) performs the alignment of embeddings

3Obtained from: https://github.com/
Babylonpartners/fastText_multilingual

across languages in an unsupervised fashion, with-
out requiring translation pairs.

The approach uses adversarial training to ini-
tialize the cross-lingual mapping and a synthet-
ically generated bilingual dictionary to fine-tune
it with the Procrustes algorithm (Schönemann,
1966). We refer to the multilingual embeddings4

from Lample et al. (2018) as ADV-aligned.
These are used in Section 3.5.

3 Evaluation

In this section, we investigate the proposed zero-
shot cross-lingual approach and evaluate it on the
widely used dataset of Task 5 of the SemEval 2016
workshop. With our evaluation, we answer the fol-
lowing research questions:

RQ1: To what degree is the model capable of
performing OTE extraction for unseen lan-
guages?

RQ2: Is there a benefit in training on more than
one source language?

RQ3: What improvements can be expected when
a small amount of samples for the target
language are available?

RQ4: How big is the impact of the used align-
ment method on the OTE extraction perfor-
mance?

Before we answer these questions, we give a brief
overview over the used datasets and resources.

3.1 Datasets
As part of Task 5 of the SemEval 2016 workshop
(Pontiki et al., 2016), a collection of datasets for
aspect-based sentiment analysis on various lan-
guages and domains was published. Due to its
relatively large number of samples and high cov-
erage of languages and domains, the datasets are
commonly used to evaluate ABSA approaches. To
answer our research questions, we make use of
a selection of the available datasets. We eval-
uate our cross-lingual approach on the available
datasets for the restaurant domain for the 5 lan-
guages Dutch (nl), English (en), Russian (ru),
Spanish (es) and Turkish (tr)5. Table 1 gives a
brief overview of the used datasets.

4Obtained from: https://github.com/
facebookresearch/MUSE

5We tried to include the dataset of French reviews in our
evaluation but the provided download script no longer works.



2489

Dataset #Sent. #Tokens #Targets

en (train) 2000 29278 1880
en (test) 676 10080 650
es (train) 2070 36164 1937
es (test) 881 13290 731
nl (train) 1722 24981 1283
nl (test) 575 7690 394
ru (train) 3655 53734 3159
ru (test) 1209 17856 972
tr (train) 1232 12702 1385
tr (test) 144 1360 159

Table 1: Statistics of the SemEval 2016 ABSA dataset
for the restaurant domain.

3.2 Experimental Settings

In all our experiments, we report F1-scores for the
extracted opinion target expressions computed on
exact matches of the character spans as in the orig-
inal SemEval task (Pontiki et al., 2016).

As described in Section 2.2, our model relies
on pretrained multilingual embeddings. For both
SVD-aligned and ADV-aligned, we use the
embeddings as provided by the original authors.
However, we restrict our vocabulary to the most
frequent 50,000 words per language6 to reduce
memory consumption.

For all experiments, we fix our model architec-
ture to 5 convolution layers with each having a ker-
nel size of 3, a dimensionality of 300 units and a
ReLU activation function (Nair and Hinton, 2010).
The penultimate feed-forward layer has 300 di-
mensions and a ReLU activation, as well. We ap-
ply dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014) on the word
embedding layer with a rate of 0.3 and between
all other layers with 0.5. The word embeddings
and the penultimate layer are L1-regularized (Ng,
2004).

The network’s parameters are optimized us-
ing the stochastic optimization technique Adam
(Kingma and Ba, 2015). We optimize the number
of training epochs for each model using early stop-
ping (Caruana et al., 2000) but do not tune other
hyperparameters of our models. We always pick
20% of our available training data for the valida-
tion process. For the zero-shot scenario, this en-
tails that we optimize the number of epochs on the
source language and not on the target language to
simulate true zero-shot learning.

6As appearing in the respective embedding files.

3.3 Zero-Shot Transfer Learning

In this section, we present our evaluation for zero-
shot learning. We first examine a setting with a
single source language. Then, we evaluate the ef-
fect of cross-lingual learning from multiple source
languages.

Single Source Language This part of our eval-
uation addresses our first research question:

RQ1: To what degree is the model capable of
performing OTE extraction for unseen lan-
guages?

To answer this question, we perform a set of ex-
periments in the zero-shot setting. We train a
model on the training portion of a source language
and evaluate the model performance on all possi-
ble target languages. Figure 2 shows the obtained
scores. The reported results are averaged over 10
runs with different random seeds. The main di-
agonal represents results of models both trained
and tested on target language data. We considered
these our monolingual baselines.

In general, the proposed approach achieves rel-
atively high scores for some language pairs, al-
though with large performance differences de-
pending on the exact source and target language
pairs. Looking at the absolute scores, the best
performing cross-lingual language pair is en→es
with an F1-score of 0.5. This is followed by
en→nl at 0.46. The lowest is es→tr with an
F1-score of 0.14. When considering the results
relative to their respective monolingual baselines,
the highest relative performance is achieved by
en→nl at 77% of a nl→nl model, followed
by en→es and ru→nl, which both reach an F-
Measure of about 74%. The weakest performing
language pair is still es→tr at 29% relative per-
formance. In general, the Turkish language seems
to benefit the least from the cross-lingual trans-
fer learning, while Russian is on average the best
source language in terms of relative performance
achievement for the target languages.

Overall, the presented results show that it is
in fact possible for most considered languages to
train a model for OTE extraction without ever us-
ing any annotated data in that target language.

Multiple Source Languages In the next exper-
iment, we want to address our second research
question:



2490

en es nl ru tr
target language

en

es

nl

ru

tr

so
ur

ce
 la

ng
ua

ge

0.66 0.5 0.46 0.37 0.17

0.43 0.68 0.29 0.28 0.14

0.45 0.44 0.6 0.37 0.17

0.42 0.49 0.45 0.56 0.3

0.33 0.42 0.34 0.35 0.48

Figure 2: Zero-shot F1-scores for cross-lingual learn-
ing from a single source to a target language.

target en es nl ru tr

best→target 0.45 0.50 0.46 0.37 0.30
all others→target 0.52 0.58 0.53 0.43 0.27

target→target 0.66 0.68 0.60 0.56 0.48

Table 2: Zero-shot results for cross-lingual learning
from multiple source languages to a target language.
The row best→target represents the best perform-
ing cross-lingual model from Figure 2 for each target
language. all others→target are the results for
training on all languages except for the target language.
target→target shows the monolingual scores that
act as a baseline.

RQ2: Is there a benefit in training on more than
one source language?

As we explained in Section 2.2, our approach
allows us to train and test on any number of
source and target languages, provided that we have
aligned word embeddings for each considered lan-
guage.

In order to answer our second research question,
we train a model on the available training data for
all but one language and perform prediction on the
test data for the left-out language. The results for
these experiments are summarized in Table 2. We
can see that all languages with the exception of
Turkish seem to profit from a cross-lingual trans-
fer setting with multiple source languages. The
absolute improvements are in the range of 6 to 8
points in F1-Score while the performance on Turk-
ish samples drops by 3 points.

We can summarize that we can obtain sub-
stantial improvements for most languages when
training on a combination of multiple source lan-
guages. In fact, for en, es, nl and ru, the results

of our cross-lingual models trained on all other
languages reach between 78% to 87% relative per-
formance of a model trained with target language
data.

3.4 Cross-Lingual Transfer Learning with
Additional Target Language Data

While our goal is to reduce the effort of annotat-
ing huge amounts of data in a target language to
which the model is to be transferred, it might still
be reasonable to provide a few annotated samples
for a target language. Our next research question
addresses this issue:

RQ3: What improvements can be expected when
a small amount of samples for the target
language are available?

We answer this question by training our models
jointly on a source language dataset as well as a
small amount of target language samples and com-
pare this to a baseline model that only uses tar-
get language samples. By gradually increasing the
available target samples, we can directly observe
their benefit on the test performance. Figure 3
shows a visualization for the source language en
and the target languages es, nl, ru, and tr.

We can immediately see that a monolingual
model requires at least 100 target samples to pro-
duce meaningful results as opposed to a cross-
lingual model that performs well with source lan-
guage samples alone. Training on increasing
amounts of target samples improves the model
performances monotonically for each target lan-
guage and the model leveraging the bilingual data
consistently outperforms the monolingual baseline
model. The benefits of the source language data
are especially pronounced when very few target
samples are available, i.e. less than 200. As an
example, a model trained on bilingual data using
all available English samples and 200 Dutch sam-
ples is competitive to a monolingual model trained
on 1000 Dutch samples (0.55 vs. 0.56).

As one would expect, the results in Table 2 and
Figure 3 suggest that training the model on more
data samples leads to a better performance. Since
our model can leverage the data from all languages
simultaneously, we can exhaust our resources and
train an instance of our model that has access to all
training data samples from all languages, includ-
ing the target training data. This is reflected by the
dashed line in Figure 3. We see, however, that the
model cannot leverage the other source languages



2491

0 20 50 100 200 500 1000
all

0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0

F 1
-S

co
re

(en, es) es
es es
all es

0 20 50 100 200 500 1000
all

0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0

(en, nl) nl
nl nl
all nl

0 20 50 100 200 500 1000
all

Number of target samples

0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0

F 1
-S

co
re

(en, ru) ru
ru ru
all ru

0 20 50 100 200 500 1000
all

Number of target samples

0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0

(en, tr) tr
tr tr
all tr

Figure 3: Cross-lingual results for increasing numbers
of training samples from the target language.

beyond what it achieves with the combination of
the full target and English language data alone.

3.5 Comparison of Alignment Methods

The previous experiments show that we can
achieve good performance in a cross-lingual set-
ting for OTE extraction using the multilingual
word embeddings proposed by Smith et al. (2017).
Now we address our final research question:

RQ4: How big is the impact of the used align-
ment method on the OTE extraction perfor-
mance?

With our final research question, we compare our
previous results to an alternative method of align-
ing word embeddings in multiple languages. We
repeat our experiments in Section 3.3 using the
embeddings of Lample et al. (2018) which we re-
fer to as ADV-aligned.

To enable a direct comparison to the zero-shot
results in Section 3.3, we report absolute differ-
ences in F1-Score to the scores obtained with
SVD-aligned for all source and target language
combinations.

As can be seen in Figure 4, the two meth-
ods do perform well overall, albeit different for
specific language pairs. In a monolingual set-
ting (i.e. main diagonal), ADV-aligned per-
forms slightly worse than SVD-aligned with
the exception of en→en. Using ADV-aligned,
Spanish appears to be a more effective source

en es nl ru tr
target language

en

es

nl

ru

tr

so
ur

ce
 la

ng
ua

ge

0.74 -0.82 -4.6 -2.4 2.3

3.5 -0.41 4.7 1.9 4.9

1.2 0.097 -0.87 -4.6 2.9

2 -1.8 -3.7 -0.44 0.17

3.5 -3.3 -6.2 -2.9 -1.1

Figure 4: Zero-shot results comparing the multilin-
gual embeddings ADV-aligned to SVD-aligned.
A positive value means higher absolute F1 score for
ADV-aligned and vice versa. For readability, score
differences are scaled by a factor of 100.

language than using SVD-aligned as the av-
erage performance is about 2.9 points higher. It
can also be observed that the cross-lingual trans-
fer learning works better for English as a target
language using ADV-aligned since the average
performance is about 2.2 points higher than for
SVD-aligned. The opposite is true for Dutch as
a target language, which shows a reduction in per-
formance by 2.1 points on average. Overall, for 13
of the 25 language pairs, the embeddings based on
SVD-aligned perform better than embeddings
aligned with ADV-aligned.

3.6 Comparison to State-of-the-Art
In this last part of our evaluation, we want to
put our work into perspective of prior systems
for opinion target extraction on the SemEval 2016
restaurant datasets. We report results for our mul-
tilingual model that is trained on the combined
training data of all languages and evaluated on
the corresponding test datasets. We compare our
model to the respective state-of-the-art for each
language in Table 3.

We can see that the competition is strongest
for English where we fall behind recent monolin-
gual systems. This corresponds to rank 7 of 19 of
the original SemEval competition. Regarding the
other languages, we see that we are close to the
best Spanish and Dutch systems and even clearly
outperform systems for Russian and Turkish by at
least 7 points in F1-score. With that, we present
the first approach on this task to achieve such com-
petitive performances for a variety of languages



2492

System en es nl ru tr

Toh and Su (2016) 0.723 – – – –
Àlvarez-López et al. (2016) 0.666 0.685 – – –
Kumar et al. (2016) 0.685 0.697 0.644 – –
Pontiki et al. (2016)* 0.441 0.520 0.506 0.493 0.419
Li and Lam (2017) 0.734 – – – –
all→target (Ours) 0.660 0.687 0.624 0.567 0.490

Table 3: Overview of the current state-of-the-art for
opinion target extraction for 5 languages. Our model is
trained on the combined training data of all languages
and evaluated on the respective test datasets. The row
marked with * is the baseline provided by the work-
shop organizers. To our knowledge, no better model is
published for Russian and Turkish.

with a single, multilingual model.

3.7 Discussion and Future Work

The presented experiments shed light on the per-
formance of our proposed approach under vari-
ous circumstances. In the following, we want to
discuss its limitations and consider explanations
for performance differences of different language
pairs.

Model Limitations The core of our proposed
sequence labeling approach consists of aligned
word embeddings and shared CNN layers. Due to
the limited context of a CNN layer, the model can
only base its decisions for each word on the local
information around that word. In many cases, this
information is sufficient since most opinion tar-
get expressions are adjective-noun phrases7 which
are well enough identified by the local context for
most considered languages.

As future work, it is worth to investigate in how
far our findings translate to more complex model
architectures that have been proposed for OTE ex-
traction, such as memory networks or attention-
based models.

Language Characteristics Due to the inherent
variability of natural languages and of the used
datasets, it is difficult to identify the exact rea-
sons for the observed performance differences be-
tween language pairs. However, we suspect that
language features such as word order, inflection,
or agglutination affect the compatibility of lan-
guages. As an example, Turkish is considered
a highly agglutinative language, that is, complex
words are composed by attaching several suffixes

790% of OTEs in the English dataset consist of zero or
more adjectives followed by at least one noun.

to a word stem. This sets it apart from the other
4 languages. This language feature might present
a difficulty in our approach since the appending
of suffixes is not optimally reflected in the tok-
enization process and the used word embeddings.
An approach that performs alignment of languages
on subword units might alleviate this problem and
lead to performance gains for language pairs with
similar inflection rules.

Syntactic regularities such as word order might
also play a role in our transfer learning approach.
It is reasonable to assume that the CNN layers of
our approach pick up patterns in the word order of
a source language that are indicative of an opin-
ion target expression, e.g. ”the [NOUN] is good”.
When applying such a model to a target language
with drastically different word order regularities,
these patterns might not appear as such in the tar-
get language.

For the considered languages, we see follow-
ing characteristics: Where English and Spanish
are generally considered to follow a Subject-Verb-
Object (SVO) order, Dutch largely exhibits a com-
bination of SOV and SVO cases. Turkish and Rus-
sian are overall flexible in their word order and al-
low a variety of syntactic structures. In the case of
Turkish, its morphological and syntactic features
seem to explain some of the relatively low results.
However, with the small sample of languages and
the many potential influencing factors at play, we
are aware that it is not possible to draw any strong
conclusions. Further research has to be conducted
in this direction to answer open questions.

4 Related Work

Our work brings together the domains of opinion
target extraction on the one side and cross lingual
learning on the other side. In this section, we give
a brief overview of both domains and point out
parallels to previous work.

Opinion Target Extraction San Vicente et al.
(2015) present a system that addresses opinion
target extraction as a sequence labeling problem
based on a perceptron algorithm with token, word
shape and clustering-based features.

Toh and Wang (2014) propose a Conditional
Random Field (CRF) as a sequence labeling model
that includes a variety of features such as Part-of-
Speech (POS) tags and dependency tree features,
word clusters and features derived from the Word-
Net taxonomy. The model is later improved us-



2493

ing neural network output probabilities (Toh and
Su, 2016) and achieved the best results on the Se-
mEval 2016 dataset for English restaurant reviews.

Jakob and Gurevych (2010) follow a very sim-
ilar approach that addresses opinion target extrac-
tion as a sequence labeling problem using CRFs.
Their approach includes features derived from
words, Part-of-Speech tags and dependency paths,
and performs well in a single and cross-domain
setting.

Kumar et al. (2016) present a CRF-based model
that makes use of a variety of morphological and
linguistic features and is one of the few systems
that submitted results for more than one language
for the SemEval 2016 ABSA challenge. The
strong reliance on high-level NLP features, such as
dependency trees, named-entity information and
WordNet features restricts its wide applicability to
resource-poor languages.

Among neural network models Poria et al.
(2016) and Jebbara and Cimiano (2016) use deep
convolutional neural network (CNN) with Part-of-
Speech (POS) tag features. Poria et al. (2016) also
extend their base model using linguistic rules.

Wang et al. (2017) use coupled multi-layer at-
tentions to extract opinion expressions and opin-
ion targets jointly. This approach, however, relies
on additional annotations for opinion expressions
alongside annotations for the opinion targets.

Li and Lam (2017) propose two LSTMs with
memory interaction to detect aspect and opinion
terms. In order to generate opinion expression an-
notations for the SemEval dataset, a sentiment lex-
icon is used in combination with high precision
dependency rules.

For a more comprehensive overview of ABSA
and OTE extraction approaches we refer to Pontiki
et al. (2016).

Cross-Lingual and Zero-Shot Learning for Se-
quence Labelling With the CLOpinionMiner,
Zhou et al. (2015) present a method for cross-
lingual opinion target extraction that relies on ma-
chine translation. The approach derives an an-
notated dataset for a target language by translat-
ing the annotated source language data. Part-of-
Speech tags and dependency path-features are pro-
jected into the translated data using the word align-
ment information of the translation algorithm. The
approach is evaluated for English to Chinese re-
views. A drawback of the presented method is
that it requires access to a strong machine trans-

lation algorithm for source to target language that
also provides word alignment information. Addi-
tionally, it builds upon NLP resources that are not
available for many potential target languages.

Addressing the task of zero-shot spoken lan-
guage understanding (SLU), Upadhyay et al.
(2018) follow a similar approach as our work.
They use the aligned embeddings from Smith
et al. (2017) in combination with a bidirectional
RNN and target zero-shot SLU for Hindi and
Turkish.

Overall, our work differs from the related work
by presenting a simple model for the zero-shot
extraction of opinion target expressions. By us-
ing no annotated target data or elaborate NLP re-
sources, such as Part-of-Speech taggers or depen-
dency parsers, our approach is easily applicable to
many resource-poor languages.

5 Conclusion

In this work, we presented a method for cross-
lingual and zero-shot extraction of opinion target
expressions which we evaluated on 5 languages.
Our approach uses multilingual word embeddings
that are aligned into a single vector space to allow
for cross-lingual transfer of models.

Using English as a source language in a zero-
shot setting, our approach was able to reach an F1-
score of 0.50 for Spanish and 0.46 for Dutch. This
corresponds to relative performances of 74% and
77% compared to a baseline system trained on tar-
get language data. By using multiple source lan-
guages, we increased the zero-shot performance
to F1-scores of 0.58 and 0.53, respectively, which
correspond to 85% and 87% in relative terms. We
investigated the benefit of augmenting the zero-
shot approach with additional data points from the
target language. Here, we observed that we can
save several hundreds of annotated data points by
employing a cross-lingual approach. Among the
5 considered languages, Turkish seemed to benefit
the least from cross-lingual learning in all experi-
ments. The reason for this might be that Turkish
is the only agglutinative language in the dataset.
Further, we compared two approaches for aligning
multilingual word embeddings in a single vector
space and found their results to vary for individ-
ual language pairs but to be comparable overall.
Lastly, we compared our multilingual model with
the state-of-the-art for all languages and saw that



2494

we achieve competitive performances for some
languages and even present the best system for
Russian and Turkish.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by the H2020
project Prêt-à-LLOD under Grant Agreement
number 825182.

References
Tamara Àlvarez-López, Jonathan Juncal-Martı́nez,

Milagros Fernández Gavilanes, Enrique Costa-
Montenegro, and Francisco Javier González-
Castaño. 2016. GTI at SemEval-2016 Task 5:
SVM and CRF for Aspect Detection and Unsu-
pervised Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis. In
SemEval@NAACL-HLT, pages 306–311. The
Association for Computer Linguistics.

Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and
Tomas Mikolov. 2017. Enriching Word Vectors with
Subword Information. Transactions of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, 5:135–146.

Rich Caruana, Steve Lawrence, and C. Lee Giles. 2000.
Overfitting in Neural Nets: Backpropagation, Con-
jugate Gradient, and Early Stopping. In NIPS, pages
402–408. MIT Press.

Niklas Jakob and Iryna Gurevych. 2010. Extracting
opinion targets in a single-and cross-domain setting
with conditional random fields. In Proceedings of
the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 1035–1045.

Soufian Jebbara and Philipp Cimiano. 2016. Aspect-
Based Relational Sentiment Analysis Using a
Stacked Neural Network Architecture. In ECAI
2016 - 22nd European Conference on Artificial In-
telligence, 29 August-2 September 2016, The Hague,
The Netherlands - Including Prestigious Applica-
tions of Artificial Intelligence (PAIS 2016), pages
1123—-1131.

Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam: A
Method for Stochastic Optimization. In Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Learning
Representations.

Ayush Kumar, Sarah Kohail, Amit Kumar, Asif Ekbal,
and Chris Biemann. 2016. IIT-TUDA at SemEval-
2016 Task 5: Beyond Sentiment Lexicon: Combin-
ing Domain Dependency and Distributional Seman-
tics Features for Aspect Based Sentiment Analysis.
In SemEval@NAACL-HLT, pages 1129–1135. The
Association for Computer Linguistics.

Guillaume Lample, Alexis Conneau, Marc’Aurelio
Ranzato, Ludovic Denoyer, and Herv Jgou. 2018.
Word translation without parallel data. In Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations.

Xin Li and Wai Lam. 2017. Deep Multi-Task Learn-
ing for Aspect Term Extraction with Memory In-
teraction. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 2886–2892. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Vinod Nair and Geoffrey E. Hinton. 2010. Rectified
Linear Units Improve Restricted Boltzmann Ma-
chines. In Proceedings of the 27th International
Conference on International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, ICML’10, pages 807–814, USA.
Omnipress.

Andrew Y. Ng. 2004. Feature Selection, L1 vs. L2
Regularization, and Rotational Invariance. In Pro-
ceedings of the Twenty-first International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, ICML ’04, pages 78–,
New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Maria Pontiki, Dimitris Galanis, Haris Papageor-
giou, Ion Androutsopoulos, Suresh Manandhar, Mo-
hammad Al-Smadi, Mahmoud Al-Ayyoub, Yanyan
Zhao, Bing Qin, Orphée De Clercq, Véronique
Hoste, Marianna Apidianaki, Xavier Tannier, Na-
talia V. Loukachevitch, Evgeniy Kotelnikov, Núria
Bel, Salud Marı́a Jiménez Zafra, and Gülsen Eryigit.
2016. SemEval-2016 Task 5: Aspect Based Sen-
timent Analysis. In Proceedings of the 10th
International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation,
SemEval@NAACL-HLT 2016, San Diego, CA, USA,
June 16-17, 2016, pages 19–30.

Soujanya Poria, Erik Cambria, and Alexander Gel-
bukh. 2016. Aspect Extraction for Opinion Min-
ingwith a Deep Convolutional Neural Network.
Knowledge-Based Systems, 108:42–49.

Iñaki San Vicente, Xabier Saralegi, and Rodrigo
Agerri. 2015. Elixa: A modular and flexible ABSA
platform. In Proceedings of the 9th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, pages 748–752,
Denver, Colorado. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Peter H. Schönemann. 1966. A generalized solution of
the orthogonal procrustes problem. Psychometrika,
31(1):1–10.

Samuel L. Smith, David H. P. Turban, Steven Hamblin,
and Nils Y. Hammerla. 2017. Offline bilingual word
vectors, orthogonal transformations and the inverted
softmax. In International Conference on Learning
Representations.

Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky,
Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. 2014.
Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neural Networks
from Overfitting. Journal of Machine Learning Re-
search, 15:1929–1958.

Erik F. Tjong Kim Sang and Jorn Veenstra. 1999. Rep-
resenting text chunks. In Proceedings of Euro-
pean Chapter of the ACL (EACL), pages 173–179.
Bergen, Norway.



2495

Zhiqiang Toh and Jian Su. 2016. NLANGP at
SemEval-2016 Task 5: Improving Aspect Based
Sentiment Analysis using Neural Network Features.
In Proceedings of the 10th International Work-
shop on Semantic Evaluation, SemEval@NAACL-
HLT 2016, volume 2015, pages 282–288.

Zhiqiang Toh and Wenting Wang. 2014. DLIREC: As-
pect Term Extraction and Term Polarity Classifica-
tion System. In Proceedings of the 8th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, pages 235–240.

Shyam Upadhyay, Manaal Faruqui, Gokhan Tur, Dilek
Hakkani-Tur, and Larry Heck. 2018. (Almost) Zero-
Shot Cross-Lingual Spoken Language Understand-
ing. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Pro-
cessing (ICASSP).

Wenya Wang, Sinno Jialin Pan, Daniel Dahlmeier,
and Xiaokui Xiao. 2017. Coupled Multi-Layer At-
tentions for Co-Extraction of Aspect and Opinion
Terms. In Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, February 4-9,
2017, San Francisco, California, USA., pages 3316–
3322.

Xinjie Zhou, Xiaojun Wan, and Jianguo Xiao. 2015.
CLOpinionMiner: Opinion Target Extraction in a
Cross-Language Scenario. IEEE/ACM Transactions
on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 23:1–
1.


