




































Multilingual Entity, Relation, Event and Human Value Extraction


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2019: Demonstrations, pages 110–115
Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2 - June 7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

110

Multilingual Entity, Relation, Event and Human Value Extraction

Manling Li1, Ying Lin1, Joseph Hoover3, Spencer Whitehead1,
Clare R. Voss2, Morteza Dehghani3, Heng Ji1

1 Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA
{lim22,liny9,whites5,jih}@rpi.edu

2 US Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi, MD, USA
clare.r.voss.civ@mail.mil

3 University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
{jehoover,mdehghan}@usc.edu

Abstract

This paper demonstrates a state-of-the-art end-
to-end multilingual (English, Russian, and
Ukrainian) knowledge extraction system that
can perform entity discovery and linking, re-
lation extraction, event extraction, and coref-
erence. It extracts and aggregates knowledge
elements across multiple languages and doc-
uments as well as provides visualizations of
the results along three dimensions: temporal
(as displayed in an event timeline), spatial (as
displayed in an event heatmap), and relational
(as displayed in entity-relation networks). For
our system to further support users’ analyses
of causal sequences of events in complex sit-
uations, we also integrate a wide range of hu-
man moral value measures, independently de-
rived from region-based survey, into the event
heatmap. This system is publicly available as
a docker container and a live demo,1,2 with a
video demonstrating the system 3.

1 Introduction

Knowledge extraction aims to convert unstruc-
tured texts into structured entities, relations and
events. Recently, we have developed a state-of-
the-art multilingual knowledge extraction system
for three languages including English, Russian,
and Ukrainian (Zhang et al., 2018). However,
individual extraction components lack the ability
to aggregate knowledge from multiple languages
and documents. For example, complementary
salient information about the Ukraine crisis may
be extracted from English, Ukrainian, and Russian
news documents. We develop a novel framework,
as illustrated in Figure 1, to aggregate knowledge
elements from multiple documents in multiple lan-
guages and visualize these knowledge elements

1System: http://nlp.cs.rpi.edu/demo/aida_
pipeline-master.zip

2Demo: http://nlp.cs.rpi.edu/software/
3Video: https://youtu.be/cQPHaxGLn8k

in three interfaces (temporal, spatial, and entity-
relation networks) which support effective multi-
dimensional search and filtering. The system is
publicly available as a series of docker containers
and it can be easily run via a single script. We also
provide a live demo of the system that efficiently
extracts knowledge elements from user input text.

The system improves the ease and speed
with which users may discover inter-connections
among knowledge elements from multiple lan-
guages and documents, so users can isolate sub-
sets of activity that warrant further attention. The
complementary dimensions of the three visualiza-
tion interfaces provide distinct yet comprehensive
views of the entities, relations, and events as well
as, most notably, their implicit connections.

For example, in the Ukraine crisis, a Transport-
Person event in an airport in Kramatorsk is part
of the Attack event in Sloviansk. A causal relation
between these two events may be discovered both
in the event heat-map interface, where the former
event in Kramatorsk is located near the latter event
in Sloviansk, and in the event timeline interface,
where these two events both occur in April 2014.
Furthermore, the entity-relation network interface
enables users to retrieve and relate entities of in-
terest while reasoning about such events. The in-
terface displays each retrieved entity with its one-
hop relations to other entities, which then allows
the user to retrieve one-hop relations for any of
those entities, thereby traversing the network and
discovering information. We see this in travers-
ing the network following the Leadership relation
from Donbass People’s militia to Pro-Russian sep-
aratists and then the Sponsorship relation from
Pro-Russian separatists to Russia, suggesting the
Donbass People’s militia is sponsored by Russia.

Other types of implicit knowledge that are
not readily discovered by traditional methods of
knowledge extraction, such as human values, play

http://nlp.cs.rpi.edu/demo/aida_pipeline-master.zip
http://nlp.cs.rpi.edu/demo/aida_pipeline-master.zip
http://nlp.cs.rpi.edu/software/
https://youtu.be/cQPHaxGLn8k


111

Figure 1: System overview.

a major role in social functioning and motiva-
tion (Rai and Fiske, 2011; Haidt, 2012; Graham
et al., 2013; Schwartz, 2017). Numerous stud-
ies suggest that human values are often central
motivating factors for protests, conflicts, and vi-
olence (Ginges and Atran, 2009; Fiske et al.,
2014; Mooijman and Van Dijk, 2015; Skitka et al.,
2017). Therefore, we integrate region-specific es-
timates of dominant psychological characteristics
into the spatial event heat-map, which provides an
additional layer of information that can be used to
understand geo-spatial event patterns.

2 Multilingual Knowledge Extraction

The overall architecture of our multilingual
knowledge extraction system is illustrated in Fig-
ure 1. The system performs entity discovery and
linking (Pan et al., 2017; Lin et al., 2018), time
expression extraction and normalization (Manning
et al., 2014), relation extraction (Shi et al., 2018),
event extraction (Zhang et al., 2017, 2019), and
event coreference (Zhang et al., 2015). The system
supports the extraction of 7 entity types, 23 rela-
tions, and 47 event types, as defined in the DARPA
AIDA ontology.4 Table 1 shows the main types.

For Russian and Ukrainian text input, we did
4https://www.darpa.mil/program/

active-interpretation-of-disparate-alternatives

Entity Person, Organization, Geopolitical En-
tity, Facility, Location, Weapon, Vehicle

Relation Physical, Part-Whole, Personal-Social,
Measurement, Organization-Affiliation,
General-Affiliation

Event Life, Movement, Business, Conflict,
Contact, Manufacture, Personnel, Jus-
tice, Transaction, Government, Inspec-
tion, Existence

Table 1: Main types of knowledge elements

not adopt the alternative approach of translating
the source documents into English and then apply-
ing English knowledge extraction system due to
the low-quality of state-of-the-art machine transla-
tion and word alignment for these two languages.

Once within-document knowledge elements for
each language are extracted, the system performs
cross-lingual entity linking to Wikipedia, cross-
document entity clustering for unlinkable men-
tions, and cross-document event coreference res-
olution for cross-lingual information fusion. Fur-
ther details of each component are described
in (Zhang et al., 2018). Currently, each main com-
ponent in the system outperforms the best reported
results in the literature, as shown in Table 2.

https://www.darpa.mil/program/active-interpretation-of-disparate-alternatives
https://www.darpa.mil/program/active-interpretation-of-disparate-alternatives


112

Components Ours State-of-the-art

Name Tagging 91.8%
91.4%
(Liu et al., 2018)

Relation Extraction 66.4%
65.2%
(Fu et al., 2017)

Event
72.9%

69.6%
Trigger Labeling (Sha et al., 2018)
Event

59.0%
57.2%

Argument Labeling (Sha et al., 2018)

Table 2: F1 score comparisons of our approach vs.
state-of-the-art for English knowledge extraction.

3 Knowledge Aggregation and
Visualization

To demonstrate the capabilities of our afore-
mentioned system, we process 10,984 documents
about the Ukraine-Russia conflict scenario from
the DARPA AIDA program, including 7,415 in
English, 2,307 in Russian, and 929 in Ukrainian.

We organize the extracted events in our inter-
faces, as described below, along the temporal and
spatial dimensions in order to assist users both in
gaining a comprehensive view of the evolving sit-
uations in this scenario and in detecting shared
patterns of occurrence and possible connections
among events of interest over time and space.

3.1 Event Timeline

We extract and normalize time arguments to con-
struct an event timeline in Figure 2 using Time-
lineJS for visualization.5 There are three zones
in the web-enabled timeline interface. By click-
ing on an event in the timeline (i.e., the gray area
at the bottom of the screen), the pertinent con-
text sentence for that event is displayed in the
middle of the screen with the trigger and argu-
ments highlighted in color, along with a link to
the sentence’s source document (Figure 3). Click-
ing on the source document link retrieves the doc-
ument with full inline annotations and its publi-
cation date, to support inference of the absolute
date(s) from relative time expressions in the text
(e.g., “two days ago”). Additionally, at the top of
the interface, users may search and filter with mul-
tiple criteria (entity name, event type, event sub-
type, argument role, and time period) to narrow
down the results to a particular query of interest.

5https://timeline.knightlab.com/

Figure 2: Example of the event timeline interface.

Figure 3: Example source document with inline anno-
tation retrieved from the link in the event timeline in-
terface.

3.2 Event and Human Value Heatmap

We link event locations to the GeoNames
database (Vatant and Wick, 2012) via the entity
linking component and visualize involved events
on a world map using Mapbox for visualization,
as Figure 4 illustrates.6 Each event is displayed as
a dot or, when zooming in, an icon on the map.
The color of a dot indicates the language of the
source sentence, while the icon denotes the event
type. Users can apply filters to the map to view the
events of a certain type or language.

In addition to events, we also integrate regional
estimates of human values into the heatmap.
Specifically, the system encodes the geographic
variations of 10 distinct dimensions of the hu-
man values in Table 3. These values are proposed
in the Schwartz Basic Theory of Human Values
(Schwartz, 2012) as a culturally universal taxon-
omy of human values.

The human values estimates are derived from
the European Social Survey (ESS) (Round, 5, 6,

6https://www.mapbox.com/

https://timeline.knightlab.com/
https://www.mapbox.com/


113

Figure 4: Example event heatmap with events and hu-
man values by region.

Human Achievement, Benevolence,
Values Conformity, Hedonism, Power,

Security, Self-direction, Simula-
tion, Tradition, Universalism

Age Filter 15-29, 30-44, 45-59, 60+
Gender Filter Female, Male

Table 3: Human values. In the heatmap, the estimates
for these values are displayed by region.

7), a nationally representative survey administered
throughout the European Union. While the ESS
data is sufficient for directly estimating national
human values, it cannot be used to directly derive
Oblast-level estimates because it is not representa-
tive at the Oblast-level.7 To resolve this issue, we
employ a state-of-the-art approach to survey ad-
justment and small-area estimation called Multi-
level Regression and Synthetic Post-stratification
with Spatial Smoothing (MrsP-SM) (Park et al.,
2004; Selb and Munzert, 2011; Leemann and
Wasserfallen, 2017; Hoover and Dehghani, 2018).
This involves a model-based approach to post-
stratification in which a hierarchical regression
model is used to model person-level responses to a
survey item as a function of demographic charac-
teristics, region-level factors, and geographic indi-
cators. Then, the model is used to generate predic-
tions for each combination of demographic vari-
ables and geographic region. Finally, the predic-
tions are weighted by the demographic population
proportions within each region, yielding a set of
regularized regional estimates that are adjusted for
representativeness. To obtain regional human val-
ues estimates in the event heatmap, we estimate

7Our regional unit of analysis is the Oblast, of which there
are 24 in Ukraine.

MrsP-SM models for each of the 10 Schwartz Hu-
man Values domains.

Human values have close ties to the intentions
underlying events. A Demonstration event may re-
sult in violence, property destruction and involve-
ment of extremist groups. The values of Benevo-
lence, Hedonism, and Conformity among authority
figures may impact their response to a protest. Ad-
ditionally, people in areas where Conflict events
are common may have higher values for Security
and lower values for Achievement.

3.3 Entity-relation Networks

Figure 5: Entity-relation network.

A critical task for users gaining an understand-
ing of complex scenarios is to explore implicit en-
tity relations beyond the scope of traditional in-
line document annotation. Our interface provides
interactive knowledge graph exploration, using
Neo4j8 (Figure 5), where entities can be searched
by name and a sub-graph for each entity with its
one-hop neighbors and their relations is returned,
with entity properties displayed at the bottom of
the interface. Users may either explore each re-
trieved neighbour by double clicking on it for its
subgraph, or reduce their search graph by deleting
entities no longer of interest. Thus, users can con-
struct a multi-hop entity-relation graph, discover-
ing variable length paths between entities. Each
entity is labeled with its canonical name mention,
while the entities without name mentions are re-
moved from the network.

4 Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper, we demonstrate a comprehensive
multi-lingual knowledge extraction, aggregation

8https://neo4j.com/

https://neo4j.com/


114

and visualization system which can effectively
discover and synthesize knowledge elements from
multiple data sources, and present them to users
in multiple dimensions. In the future, we plan to
conduct utility experiments with users to compare
and evaluate the quality and speed of generating
summary reports with and without using our inter-
faces.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the U.S. ARL NS-
CTA No. W911NF-09-2-0053 and DARPA AIDA
Program No. FA8750-18-2-0014. The views and
conclusions contained in this document are those
of the authors and should not be interpreted as rep-
resenting the official policies, either expressed or
implied, of the U.S. Government. The U.S. Gov-
ernment is authorized to reproduce and distribute
reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding
any copyright notation here on.

References
A P Fiske, T S Rai, and S Pinker. 2014. Virtuous Vio-

lence: Hurting and Killing to Create, Sustain, End,
and Honor Social Relationships. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.

Lisheng Fu, Thien Huu Nguyen, Bonan Min, and
Ralph Grishman. 2017. Domain adaptation for re-
lation extraction with domain adversarial neural net-
work. In Proceedings of the Eighth International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(Volume 2: Short Papers), volume 2, pages 425–429.

Jeremy Ginges and Scott Atran. 2009. What motivates
participation in violent political action. Annals of
the New York Academy of Sciences, 1167(1):115–
123.

Jesse Graham, Jonathan Haidt, Sena Koleva, Matt
Motyl, Ravi Iyer, Sean P Wojcik, and Peter H Ditto.
2013. Moral foundations theory: The pragmatic va-
lidity of moral pluralism. In Advances in experimen-
tal social psychology, volume 47, pages 55–130. El-
sevier.

Jonathan Haidt. 2012. The righteous mind: Why good
people are divided by politics and religion. Vintage.

J Hoover and M Dehghani. 2018. The big, the bad, and
the ugly: Geographic estimation with flawed psy-
chological data. PsyArXiv. October.

Lucas Leemann and Fabio Wasserfallen. 2017. Ex-
tending the use and prediction precision of sub-
national public opinion estimation: EXTENDING
USE AND PRECISION OF MrP. American jour-
nal of political science, 61(4):1003–1022.

Ying Lin, Shengqi Yang, Veselin Stoyanov, and Heng
Ji. 2018. A multi-lingual multi-task architecture
for low-resource sequence labeling. In Proceed-
ings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-
pers), volume 1, pages 799–809.

Liyuan Liu, Jingbo Shang, Xiang Ren,
Frank Fangzheng Xu, Huan Gui, Jian Peng,
and Jiawei Han. 2018. Empower sequence la-
beling with task-aware neural language model.
In Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence.

Christopher Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Finkel, Steven Bethard, and David McClosky.
2014. The stanford corenlp natural language pro-
cessing toolkit. In Proceedings of 52nd annual
meeting of the association for computational lin-
guistics: system demonstrations, pages 55–60.

Marlon Mooijman and Wilco W Van Dijk. 2015.
The self in moral judgement: How self-affirmation
affects the moral condemnation of harmless sex-
ual taboo violations. Cognition and Emotion,
29(7):1326–1334.

Xiaoman Pan, Boliang Zhang, Jonathan May, Joel
Nothman, Kevin Knight, and Heng Ji. 2017. Cross-
lingual name tagging and linking for 282 languages.
In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1: Long Papers), volume 1, pages 1946–1958.

David K Park, Andrew Gelman, and Joseph Bafumi.
2004. Bayesian multilevel estimation with post-
stratification: State-Level estimates from national
polls. Political analysis: an annual publication of
the Methodology Section of the American Political
Science Association, 12(4):375–385.

Tage Shakti Rai and Alan Page Fiske. 2011. Moral psy-
chology is relationship regulation: moral motives for
unity, hierarchy, equality, and proportionality. Psy-
chological review, 118(1):57–75.

ESS Round. 5. 5: European social survey round 4 data
(2010). Data file edition, 5.

ESS Round. 6. 6: European social survey round 6 data
(2012). Data file edition, 6.

ESS Round. 7. 7: European social survey round 7 data
(2014). Data file edition, 7.

Shalom H Schwartz. 2012. An overview of the
schwartz theory of basic values. Online Readings
in Psychology and Culture, 2(1):11.

Shalom H Schwartz. 2017. The refined theory of basic
values. In Sonia Roccas and Lilach Sagiv, editors,
Values and Behavior: Taking a Cross Cultural Per-
spective, pages 51–72. Springer International Pub-
lishing, Cham.



115

P Selb and S Munzert. 2011. Estimating constituency
preferences from sparse survey data using auxiliary
geographic information. Political analysis: an an-
nual publication of the Methodology Section of the
American Political Science Association.

Lei Sha, Feng Qian, Baobao Chang, and Zhifang Sui.
2018. Jointly extracting event triggers and argu-
ments by dependency-bridge rnn and tensor-based
argument interaction. In Thirty-Second AAAI Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence.

Ge Shi, Chong Feng, Lifu Huang, Boliang Zhang,
Heng Ji, Lejian Liao, and Heyan Huang. 2018.
Genre separation network with adversarial training
for cross-genre relation extraction. In Proceedings
of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 1018–1023.

Linda J Skitka, Brittany E Hanson, and Daniel C Wis-
neski. 2017. Utopian hopes or dystopian fears? ex-
ploring the motivational underpinnings of moralized
political engagement. Personality & social psychol-
ogy bulletin, 43(2):177–190.

Bernard Vatant and Marc Wick. 2012. Geonames on-
tology. Dostupné online:¡ http://www. geonames.
org/ontology/ontology v3, 1.

Boliang Zhang, Di Lu, Xiaoman Pan, Ying Lin, Hal-
idanmu Abudukelimu, Heng Ji, and Kevin Knight.
2017. Embracing non-traditional linguistic re-
sources for low-resource language name tagging. In
Proceedings of the Eighth International Joint Con-
ference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1:
Long Papers), volume 1, pages 362–372.

Tongtao Zhang, Heng Ji, and Avirup Sil. 2019. Joint
entity and event extraction with generative adversar-
ial imitation learning. Data Intelligence.

Tongtao Zhang, Hongzhi Li, Heng Ji, and Shih-Fu
Chang. 2015. Cross-document event coreference
resolution based on cross-media features. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 201–
206.

Tongtao Zhang, Ananya Subburathinam, Ge Shi, Lifu
Huang, Di Lu, Xiaoman Pan, Manling Li, Bo-
liang Zhang, Qingyun Wang, Spencer Whitehead,
Heng Ji, Alireza Zareian, Hassan Akbari, Brian
Chen, Ruiqi Zhong, Steven Shao, Emily All-
away, Shih-Fu Chang, Kathleen McKeown, Dongyu
Li, Xin Huang, Kexuan Sun, Xujun Peng, Ryan
Gabbard, Marjorie Freedman, Mayank Kejriwal,
Ram Nevatia, Pedro Szekely, T.K. Satish Kumar,
Ali Sadeghian, Giacomo Bergami, Sourav Dutta,
Miguel Rodriguez, and Daisy Zhe Wang. 2018.
Gaia - a multi-media multi-lingual knowledge ex-
traction and hypothesis generation system. In Pro-
ceedings of TAC KBP 2018, the 25th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics: Techni-
cal Papers.

http://aclweb.org/anthology/P16-1001
http://aclweb.org/anthology/P16-1001

