



















































Enabling Search and Collaborative Assembly of Causal Interactions Extracted from Multilingual and Multi-domain Free Text


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2019: Demonstrations, pages 12–17
Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2 - June 7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

12

Enabling Search and Collaborative Assembly of Causal Interactions
Extracted from Multilingual and Multi-domain Free Text
†George C. G. Barbosa, ‡Zechy Wong, ­Gus Hahn-Powell, ­Dane Bell,
‡Rebecca Sharp, ‡­Marco A. Valenzuela-Escárcega, ‡­Mihai Surdeanu

†Centre for Data and Knowledge Integration for Health (CIDACS), Salvador, Brazil
‡University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, USA

­LUM.AI, Tucson, Arizona, USA
{gcgbarbosa,zechy,bsharp,marcov,msurdeanu}@email.arizona.edu

{ghp,dane}@lum.ai

Abstract

Many of the most pressing current research
problems (e.g., public health, food security, or
climate change) require multi-disciplinary col-
laborations. In order to facilitate this process,
we propose a system that incorporates multi-
domain extractions of causal interactions into
a single searchable knowledge graph. Our sys-
tem enables users to search iteratively over di-
rect and indirect connections in this knowl-
edge graph, and collaboratively build causal
models in real time. To enable the aggrega-
tion of causal information from multiple lan-
guages, we extend an open-domain machine
reader to Portuguese. The new Portuguese
reader extracts over 600 thousand causal state-
ments from 120 thousand Portuguese publica-
tions with a precision of 62%, which demon-
strates the value of mining multilingual scien-
tific information.

1 Introduction

The number of scientific publications has in-
creased dramatically in the past few years. For
example, PubMed1, a repository of biomedical pa-
pers, now indexes more than one million publica-
tions per year, for a total of over 29 million publi-
cations processed to date2.

Given this vast amount of information, it is
clear that search must be a key part of the sci-
entific research process. However, we argue that
search tools today do not support this process
properly. We see at least three limitations. First,
most search tools tend to be relatively shallow
(i.e., relying on keywords or topics), while in-
formation needs in science often require seman-
tics. For example, scientific hypotheses in many
sciences can be represented as causal statements,

1https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/PubMed
2As of February 4, 2019. See the Advanced search tab on

the PubMed website.

e.g., “what causes malnutrition?”, or “what are
the effects of pollution?”. Such queries are not
easily supported by current tools. Second, many
sciences are becoming increasingly multilingual,
as key scientific analyses are published in non-
English venues. For example, Brazil has reduced
the under-5 mortality rate resulting from poverty-
related causes through its Bolsa Familia program
(BFP), a widespread conditional money transfer to
poor households (Rasella et al., 2013). However,
most of the data collected in the BFP and the re-
sulting analyses are only made available through
scientific reports in Portuguese. For example,
SciELO3, an electronic repository of papers pub-
lished in South America, now indexes 234,596
publications in Brazilian Portuguese4. Lastly, re-
search is iterative and collaborative, whereas most
search is stateless and private. For example, under-
standing children’s health requires collaborations
across multiple disciplines, e.g., biology, econ-
omy, education.

We propose a system for the search of scientific
literature that addresses these three limitations. In
particular, the contributions of our work are:
(1) An approach for the search of causal state-
ments that can be both direct and indirect. Our
approach relies on a novel approach for open-
domain information extraction (OpenIE) that is
unsupervised and domain agnostic. The proposed
OpenIE method relies on syntax, and performs ex-
tractions using a top-down grammar, which first
extracts relevant events, followed by event argu-
ments, whose boundaries are determined by the
syntactic constraints of the event predicate. The
extractions are assembled into a graph knowledge
base (KB), which supports both direct and indirect
searches across causal pathways.

3http://www.SciELO.br
4As of February 4, 2019. See SciELO analytics: https:

//analytics.SciELO.org

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/PubMed
http://www.SciELO.br
https://analytics.SciELO.org
https://analytics.SciELO.org


13

Domain Experts
(e.g., biologist, economist)

a)

b)

c)

Readers

… aleitamento materno 
exclusivo … possibilitaria uma 
redução marcante nos índices 

de mortalidade infantil …
PT

EN

Graph
Assembler

Knowledge
Graph DB

Web UI

Collaborative
Interest Maps

DB

… minimizing the use of 
a pacifier may promote 

the establishment of 
exclusive breastfeeding …

breastfeedingpacifier

mortalidade
infantil

aleitamento
materno exclusivo

pacifier mortalidade
infantil

breastfeeding

pacifier mortalidade
infantil

overweight

breastfeeding

Figure 1: System architecture and example. Causal rela-
tions from sentences about breastfeeding in English (Maas-
trup et al., 2014) and Portuguese (Cavalcanti et al., 2015) are
extracted and used by domain experts to collaboratively build
a shared causal model of the task of interest, called an inter-
est map, through a web UI. (a) A user searches for causes of
breastfeeding and effects of aleitamento materno exclusivo
(exclusive breastfeeding), and adds two interesting links to a
shared interest map. (b) A second user merges aleitamento
materno exclusivo and breastfeeding. (c) A third user adds
an additional link (to overweight) from a new search to the
shared interest map. The constructed interest maps are stored
in a separate database, where they can be edited in real-time
by collaborators.

(2) A multilingual search platform. We provide
OpenIE grammars for English and Portuguese,
and demonstrate their utility in searching PubMed
and SciELO.

(3) A framework for collaborative model build-
ing. The proposed system allows end users to
save the results of their semantic searches into
an editable graph knowledge base, which can be
shared and edited in real time by multiple collab-
orators. The underlying functionality for this col-
laborative component relies on Operational Trans-
formations (OT), which is a conflict-free and non-
blocking change propagation algorithm that al-
lows individual users to edit a shared knowledge
base in real time (Sun and Ellis, 1998).

2 Architecture

Our approach for information aggregation com-
bines the output of machine readers into a knowl-
edge graph which can be efficiently queried,
stored, filtered, and edited by multiple users in
real-time.

Specifically, given a collection of documents,
we first extract relevant relations using a set of
rule-based machine readers. This approach can
use the output of any reader (e.g., the biomedi-
cal relation extraction framework of Valenzuela-
Escárcega et al. (2018) or the open-domain frame-
work of Hahn-Powell et al. (2017)), but here we
focus on the Eidos reader (Section 3) which we
extend to Portuguese (Section 3.2) in order to in-
crease the coverage of the knowledge graph by in-
cluding scientific publications in Portuguese.

The extracted concepts are unified using the
deduplication approach of Hahn-Powell et al.
(2017), which uses an O(n) hash-based approach
to fingerprint relation and concept attributes paired
with a set of normalized terms filtered against a
series of linguistic constraints. A graph database
is then populated with the unified concepts and
the relations linking them. During this process,
we preserve all evidence for the extractions, along
with information about whether relations were
hedged or negated. We employ two Lucene5 in-
dexes, one for indexing the content of the papers
(for use in filtering the knowledge graph based on
a specified context), and another for the concepts
in the knowledge base (to allow for faster query-
ing).

An important component of this system is a
web-based user interface (UI) which allows users
to query the graph easily and incrementally se-
lect results in order to construct a qualitative influ-
ence model, which we refer to as an interest map
(Section 4). This UI features a real-time collab-
orative graph editor that is conflict-free and non-
blocking, allowing multiple users to work together
on a shared interest map.

3 Reader

In the context of OpenIE (Banko et al., 2007),
determining the fixed set of relevant entities and
events, and aggregating this information across
domains and languages is likely impossible. For
this reason, we use the Eidos reader (Sharp et al.,

5https://lucene.apache.org

https://lucene.apache.org


14

2019), which is a taxonomy-free OpenIE sys-
tem that uses a top-down information extraction
pipeline. This pipeline begins by finding relations
of interest such as causal statements (through the
use of specific trigger words), and continues by
extracting the concepts that participate in these re-
lations from the syntactic context.

3.1 Reading with Eidos
To understand the individual steps of Eidos’s top-
down approach, consider the example sentence,
According to two studies, breast milk with omega-
3 LCPUFA reduced allergic manifestations.

First, the Eidos system finds causal and corre-
lation relations, using a set of trigger words with
a grammar of rules written in the Odin informa-
tion extraction framework (Valenzuela-Escárcega
et al., 2016). Odin consists of a declarative lan-
guage, capable of describing patterns over surface
and syntax, coupled with a runtime engine that
applies these rules in a cascade, making the pre-
vious matches available for subsequent rules. In
the sentence above, a Causal relation would be
triggered by the predicate reduced, with an initial
cause of milk and an initial effect of allergic man-
ifestations. Using the approach of Hahn-Powell
et al. (2017), Eidos then expands these initial ar-
guments by traversing outgoing dependency links
(with some exceptions such as conjunctions). For
example, here milk is expanded to breast milk with
omega-3 LCPUFA. The final system output of the
Eidos system for the sentence above is shown in
Figure 2.

3.2 Extension to Portuguese
We adapted the English-based Eidos system to ex-
tract causal relations from Portuguese text by first
translating the trigger words and words related to
filtering, negation, and hedging. We compared the
syntactic preprocessing of a sample of causal sen-
tences in English with their Portuguese transla-
tions, writing additional rules to account for dif-
ferences. Rules were also written to capture lexi-
calized causal patterns in Portuguese. During rule
development, we ran the reader over a 1K article
sample of SciELO multiple times, evaluating the
accuracy of each rule and adjusting them to re-
move incorrect extractions.

Since the grammars that Eidos uses operate over
universal dependency (UD) syntax (Nivre et al.,
2016), and are largely unlexicalized (with the ex-
ception of certain prominent causal forms, e.g.,

due to), we anticipated that minimal adjustments
to the grammars would be needed. However, the
Portuguese UD dataset used v2 of UD, while the
grammar for English was written for UD v16.
Thus, some relations were tagged differently be-
tween the two languages, for example, nmod rela-
tions for English were split into nmod and obl in
Portuguese. Because the Portuguese training data
for UD was considerably smaller than for English,
we also had to deal with the lower accuracy of
the dependency parser7, which represented a chal-
lenge when porting the grammars.

In total, we ported eight high-yield rules to
Portuguese. An analysis of the extractions from
the 1K article sample showed that approximately
65% of the extractions were made by a single ac-
tive voice rule whose arguments are matched by
traversing nsubj and obj dependencies. The
next most frequently used rule, which matches
causal events where the trigger is followed by the
token por, e.g., diminuı́do por [reduced by], ac-
counted for 15% of the extractions. No other rule
accounted for more than 5% of the extractions.

Note that the Portuguese extractions are cur-
rently kept separate from the English ones. That
is, the user must explicitly search for causal path-
ways by language. However, these results may
be manually aggregated in the collaborative model
workspace, described below. We describe possible
strategies for the automated integration of cross-
language results in Section 6.

4 Collaborative model builder

The causal graphs built from the extractions are
useful for finding direct and indirect relations be-
tween concepts. However, in order to truly sup-
port the scientific research process, we argue that
the resulting system must implement the following
additional functionality:

(1) It must support iterative and stateful search. It
is unlikely that any single search query solves a
real-world research problem. It is thus necessary
to allow multiple searches whose outputs are saved
in the same state or model. For example, Jensen
et al. (2017) showed that understanding children’s
health requires information from biology, psychol-
ogy, economy, and environmental science.

6https://universaldependencies.org/
7The parser used for this component was an ensemble of

Malt parsers (http://www.maltparser.org), as in-
troduced in Surdeanu and Manning (2010).

https://universaldependencies.org/
http://www.maltparser.org


15

According to two studies , breast milk with omega-3 LCPUFA reduced
Decrease

allergic manifestations .
Concept Concept

cause effect

De acordo com dois estudos , o leite materno enriquecido com ômega-3 LCPUFA reduziu
Decrease

as manifestações alérgicas .
Concept Concept

cause effect

Figure 2: TAG (Forbes et al., 2018) visualization of the multilingual reader’s output for one sentence in English and Portuguese.

Interest Map Definition
To define an area of interest that you would like to explore, select the relationship type you are interested in, then choose a
source, target, or both. 
The results can then be added to the currently active interest map.

Alternatively, specify only a context (with no source or target) to browse articles which match that context.

Show relational paths in the database that match the following definition:

Any source influences Any target

in the context of Any context

within a maximum of 1 hop(s)

breastfeeding decreases Necrotizing enterocolitis (Consolidated)
(Hedged entries are marked by dashed boxes . Entries that don't match the currently specified context directly are grayed-out.)

2019-02-11 05:09:39pm 

Edge imported or created by Marco Valenzuela:  
breast milk decreases Necrotizing enterocolitis

Modulation of human immune responses by bovine interleukin-10.
PMID: 21464967 (1 entry)

Necrotizing enterocolitis  induced in rats can be reversed  by human breast milk  as well as IL-10 <CITATION> ,
<CITATION> , and increased cytoplasmic IL-10 levels in epithelial cells in rats correlated with protection to NEC <CITATION>
.

Risk Factors of Breast Problems in Mothers and Its Effects on Newborns
PMID: 25068067 (1 entry)

Studies show that breast milk  decreases  the prevalence and severity of lower respiratory tract infections , acute otitis
media , bacteriemia , bacterial meningitis , botulism , urinary tract infections and necrotizing enterocolitis  in newborns .

Interest Map (Consolidated)
Default map for marcos.vzla@gmail.com (marcos.vzla@gmail.com)

Interest Map Definition

Advanced Options Details

Query - Graph Query - Table Interest Map - Graph Interest Map Editor Interest Map Management Interest Ma

Figure 3: Screenshot showing some key functionality of our system’s user interface. In the upper left panel, users can search
for direct or indirect causal statements found in the literature. The right panel has the multilingual interest map, collaboratively
built by different users from multiple search results. The bottom left panel has the evidence for a selected causal interaction.

(2) It must allow the addition of background
knowledge that is known to the domain experts,
but is not published in literature.

(3) Most importantly, the above operations must
be performed in a collaborative environment that
allows multiple experts to contribute to the same
model, or interest map, in real time. The National
Science Foundation has recognized that inter-
disciplinary collaborations have become a funda-
mental aspect of science and has called for “grow-
ing convergence research” in its “10 big ideas”.8

To implement the above functionality, we added
a module for collaborative model building, which
incorporates: (a) the ability to incrementally save
the results of causal searches in a user’s interest
map, thus accumulating (a subset of) search results
that capture the problem of interest; (b) operations
to edit this interest map such as adding causal rela-
tions (to account for the user’s background knowl-
edge) and deleting them (to account for machine
errors); and (c) real-time collaborative functional-
ity, which allows users to share their interest maps,
and edit them in parallel, in real time.

The real-time collaborative functionality
is implemented using Operational Transfor-
mations (OT), which is a conflict-free and
non-blocking change propagation algorithm that

8https://www.nsf.gov/news/special_
reports/big_ideas/

allows individual users be able to edit without
waiting on others even under high-latency (Sun
and Ellis, 1998). Typically OT is applied to doc-
uments (e.g., as with Google Docs), but here we
apply it to our interest maps that are represented
as directed causal graphs.

Briefly, each client has a local copy of the
shared interest map, which they are free to edit.
The edits are represented as operations (e.g., dele-
tion of a node, or addition of a relation link). Oper-
ations generated by different clients are each trans-
formed according to the operations of the other
clients in order to synchronize the interest maps.
The result is an intuitively-built unified interest
map that incorporates the input from all expert
users, without requiring them to be concerned with
manual synchronization or conflict resolution.

5 Discussion

As shown in Figure 3, the collaborative model
builder summarized in the previous section en-
ables users to aggregate influence statements from
multiple searches, multiple domains, and multiple
languages. This allows end users to make full use
of any information complementarity (i.e., between
different domains or different languages) that is in-
herent in inter-disciplinary research.

Table 1 shows overall statistics for the two doc-
ument collections currently processed. The ta-
ble indicates that both collections contain approx-

https://www.nsf.gov/news/special_reports/big_ideas/
https://www.nsf.gov/news/special_reports/big_ideas/


16

English Portuguese

Documents 94,684 121,801
Concepts in causal interactions 1,550,912 772,470
Causal interactions 2,121,574 631,965
Precision 54% 62%

Table 1: Statistics of English and Portuguese document col-
lections, including number of causal interactions, and number
of concepts participating in such interactions. Precision was
computed over a sample of 50 statements in each language.
We considered an interaction to be correct if the sentence sup-
ports the interaction, the polarity (promotes/inhibits) and di-
rection of the interaction are both correct, and the spans of
the two arguments overlap with the correct spans.

imately 100K documents (more for Portuguese,
less for English), and the readers extracted 2.1M
causal statements from the English documents
with a precision of 54%, and 631K causal state-
ments in Portuguese with a precision of 62%,
which demonstrates the value of mining multi-
lingual scientific information. In this evaluation,
extracted causal relation arguments were consid-
ered correct if the argument extracted overlapped
with the correct argument. For example, in the
sentence “IL-10 decreases epsilon transcript ex-
pression,” the strictly correct extraction would be:
(IL-10; decreases; epsilon transcript expression).
Based on our evaluation criteria, the following ex-
traction would be also considered correct (IL-10;
decreases; epsilon transcript), as the span of the
second argument overlaps with the strictly correct
argument.

The difference in precision between Portuguese
and English might be due to the fact that the Por-
tuguese reader uses a smaller set rules that ex-
tracts approximately 4 times fewer causal state-
ments than the English reader. Additionally, the
evaluation was performed on a sample of 50 ex-
tractions, and so the difference may not be statis-
ticaly significant.

6 Future work

Our future work efforts will focus on extending
the multi-linguality of the proposed system. Given
the architecture currently in place, we predict that
extending it to other languages will not be too
costly. We plan to use the corpora from the Uni-
versal Dependencies effort9 to train part-of-speech
taggers and syntactic parsers for additional lan-
guages. Our semantic causal grammars are mostly
unlexicalized; most of the effort required to adapt
them to other languages will be on translating the

9https://universaldependencies.org

causal triggers.
In order to merge knowledge graphs constructed

using corpora from different languages, we will
need to align of multilingual terminology. Some
domains may already provide manually translated
vocabularies, for example, within the medical do-
main, UMLS (Bodenreider, 2004) provides trans-
lations of the controlled vocabulary MeSH (Lip-
scomb, 2000) for several languages. For domains
in which manual translations are not available,
we can take advantage of recent developments in
unsupervised bilingual dictionary induction (Con-
neau et al., 2017; Kementchedjhieva et al., 2018)
to learn alignments.

Lastly, we will work on methods to mini-
mize the spreading of accidental misinformation,
which may be introduced by incorrect extraction
or statements that are not factual. To mitigate
the former issue, we found that extraction redun-
dancy provides a strong signal, i.e., statements ex-
tracted multiple times from different publications
are more likely to be correct. For the latter, we
will employ recently-proposed methods for factu-
ality detection (Rudinger et al., 2018).

7 Conclusion

We introduced a novel system10 that facilitates the
search for multilingual and multi-domain causal
interactions that are either direct or indirect. Fur-
ther, the proposed system includes a framework
for collaborative model building, which allows
multiple domain experts to collaborate in real time
on the construction of a causal model for a given
problem, which aggregates the results of multiple
searches as well as background knowledge manu-
ally added by the experts.

Acknowledgments

This work was funded by the Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation HBGDki Initiative. Marco
Valenzuela-Escárcega and Mihai Surdeanu de-
clare a financial interest in LUM.AI. This inter-
est has been properly disclosed to the University
of Arizona Institutional Review Committee and is
managed in accordance with its conflict of interest
policies.

10https://multiling.demos.clulab.org

https://universaldependencies.org
https://multiling.demos.clulab.org


17

References

Michele Banko, Michael J Cafarella, Stephen Soder-
land, Matthew Broadhead, and Oren Etzioni. 2007.
Open information extraction from the web. In IJ-
CAI, volume 7, pages 2670–2676.

Olivier Bodenreider. 2004. The Unified Medical
Language System (UMLS): integrating biomed-
ical terminology. Nucleic Acids Research,
32(suppl 1):D267–D270.

Sandra Hipólito Cavalcanti, Maria de Fátima Costa
Caminha, José Natal Figueiroa, Vilneide Maria San-
tos Braga Diegues Serva, Rachel de Sá Barreto Luna
Cruz, Pedro Israel Cabral de Lira, Malaquias
Batista Filho, et al. 2015. Fatores associados à
prática do aleitamento materno exclusivo por pelo
menos seis meses no estado de pernambuco. Revista
Brasileira de Epidemiologia, 18:208–219.

Alexis Conneau, Guillaume Lample, Marc’Aurelio
Ranzato, Ludovic Denoyer, and Hervé Jégou. 2017.
Word translation without parallel data. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1710.04087.

Angus Graeme Forbes, Kristine Lee, Gus Hahn-
Powell, Marco Antonio Valenzuela-Escárcega, and
Mihai Surdeanu. 2018. Text annotation graphs:
Annotating complex natural language phenomena.
In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC-2018). European Language Resources Asso-
ciation (ELRA).

Gus Hahn-Powell, Marco A. Valenzuela-Escárcega,
and Mihai Surdeanu. 2017. Swanson linking revis-
ited: Accelerating literature-based discovery across
domains using a conceptual influence graph. Pro-
ceedings of ACL 2017, System Demonstrations,
pages 103–108.

Sarah KG Jensen, Anne E Berens, and Charles A Nel-
son 3rd. 2017. Effects of poverty on interacting bio-
logical systems underlying child development. The
Lancet Child & Adolescent Health, 1(3):225–239.

Yova Kementchedjhieva, Sebastian Ruder, Ryan Cot-
terell, and Anders Søgaard. 2018. Generalizing pro-
crustes analysis for better bilingual dictionary induc-
tion. In CoNLL.

Carolyn E Lipscomb. 2000. Medical subject headings
(mesh). Bulletin of the Medical Library Association,
88(3):265.

Ragnhild Maastrup, Bo Moelholm Hansen, Hanne
Kronborg, Susanne Norby Bojesen, Karin Hallum,
Annemi Frandsen, Anne Kyhnaeb, Inge Svarer, and
Inger Hallström. 2014. Factors associated with
exclusive breastfeeding of preterm infants. results
from a prospective national cohort study. PloS one,
9(2):e89077.

Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip Gin-
ter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajic, Christopher D. Man-
ning, Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo,
Natalia Silveira, Reut Tsarfaty, and Daniel Zeman.
2016. Universal dependencies v1: A multilingual
treebank collection. In Proceedings of the Tenth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2016), Paris, France. European
Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Davide Rasella, Rosana Aquino, Carlos A. T. Santos,
Romulo Paes-Sousa, and Mauricio L. Barreto. 2013.
Effect of a conditional cash transfer programme on
childhood mortality: a nationwide analysis of brazil-
ian municipalities. The Lancet, 382:57–64.

Rachel Rudinger, Aaron Steven White, and Benjamin
Van Durme. 2018. Neural models of factuality. In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
Volume 1 (Long Papers), volume 1, pages 731–744.

Rebecca Sharp, Adarsh Pyarelal, Benjamin M. Gyori,
Keith Alcock, Egoitz Laparra, Marco A. Valenzuela-
Escárcega, Ajay Nagesh, Vikas Yadav, John A.
Bachman, Zheng Tang, Heather Lent, Fan Luo,
Mithun Paul, Steven Bethard, Kobus Barnard, Clay-
ton Morrison, and Mihai Surdeanu. 2019. Eidos, IN-
DRA, & Delphi: From free text to executable causal
models. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Demonstrations. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Chengzheng Sun and Clarence Ellis. 1998. Opera-
tional transformation in real-time group editors: Is-
sues, algorithms, and achievements. In Proceed-
ings of the 1998 ACM Conference on Computer Sup-
ported Cooperative Work, CSCW ’98, pages 59–68,
New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Mihai Surdeanu and Christopher D. Manning. 2010.
Ensemble models for dependency parsing: Cheap
and good? In Proceedings of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics Conference (NAACL-2010), Los Ange-
les, CA.

Marco A. Valenzuela-Escárcega, Özgün Babur, Gus
Hahn-Powell, Dane Bell, Thomas Hicks, Enrique
Noriega-Atala, Xia Wang, Mihai Surdeanu, Emek
Demir, and Clayton T. Morrison. 2018. Large-scale
automated machine reading discovers new cancer
driving mechanisms. Database: The Journal of Bi-
ological Databases and Curation.

Marco A. Valenzuela-Escárcega, Gustave Hahn-
Powell, and Mihai Surdeanu. 2016. Odin’s runes: A
rule language for information extraction. In LREC.

https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkh061
https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkh061
https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkh061
http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.00529
http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.00529
https://doi.org/10.1145/289444.289469
https://doi.org/10.1145/289444.289469
https://doi.org/10.1145/289444.289469
https://doi.org/10.1093/database/bay098
https://doi.org/10.1093/database/bay098
https://doi.org/10.1093/database/bay098

