










































Evaluating Multilanguage-Comparability of Subjectivity Analysis Systems


Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 595–603,
Uppsala, Sweden, 11-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Evaluating Multilanguage-Comparability of Subjectivity Analysis
Systems

Jungi Kim, Jin-Ji Li and Jong-Hyeok Lee
Division of Electrical and Computer Engineering

Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang, Republic of Korea
{yangpa,ljj,jhlee}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract

Subjectivity analysis is a rapidly grow-
ing field of study. Along with its ap-
plications to various NLP tasks, much
work have put efforts into multilingual
subjectivity learning from existing re-
sources. Multilingual subjectivity analy-
sis requires language-independent crite-
ria for comparable outcomes across lan-
guages. This paper proposes to mea-
sure the multilanguage-comparability of
subjectivity analysis tools, and provides
meaningful comparisons of multilingual
subjectivity analysis from various points
of view.

1 Introduction

The field of NLP has seen a recent surge in the
amount of research on subjectivity analysis. Along
with its applications to various NLP tasks, there
have been efforts made to extend the resources
and tools created for the English language to other
languages. These endeavors have been success-
ful in constructing lexicons, annotated corpora,
and tools for subjectivity analysis in multiple lan-
guages.

There are multilingual subjectivity analysis sys-
tems available that have been built to monitor and
analyze various concerns and opinions on the In-
ternet; among the better known are OASYS from
the University of Maryland that analyzes opinions
on topics from news article searches in multiple
languages (Cesarano et al., 2007)1 and TextMap,
an entity search engine developed by Stony Brook
University for sentiment analysis along with other
functionalities (Bautin et al., 2008).2 Though these
systems currently rely on English analysis tools
and a machine translation (MT) technology to

1http://oasys.umiacs.umd.edu/oasysnew/
2http://www.textmap.com/

translate other languages into English, up-to-date
research provides various ways to analyze subjec-
tivity in multilingual environments.

Given sentiment analysis systems in differ-
ent languages, there are many situations when
the analysis outcomes need to be multilanguage-
comparable. For example, it has been common
these days for the Internet users across the world
to share their views and opinions on various top-
ics including music, books, movies, and global af-
fairs and incidents, and also multinational compa-
nies such as Apple and Samsung need to analyze
customer feedbacks for their products and services
from many countries in different languages. Gov-
ernments may also be interested in monitoring ter-
rorist web forums or its global reputation. Sur-
veying these opinions and sentiments in various
languages involves merging the analysis outcomes
into a single database, thereby objectively compar-
ing the result across languages.

If there exists an ideal subjectivity analy-
sis system for each language, evaluating the
multilanguage-comparability would be unneces-
sary because the analysis in each language would
correctly identify the exact meanings of all in-
put texts regardless of the language. However, this
requirement is not fulfilled with current technol-
ogy, thus the need for defining and measuring the
multilanguage-comparability of subjectivity anal-
ysis systems is evident.

This paper proposes to evaluate the
multilanguage-comparability of multilingual
subjectivity analysis systems. We build a number
of subjectivity classifiers that distinguishes sub-
jective texts from objective ones, and measure
the multilanguage-comparability according to our
proposed evaluation method. Since subjectivity
analysis tools in languages other than English are
not readily available, we focus our experiments on
comparing different methods to build multilingual
analysis systems from the resources and systems

595



created for English. These approaches enable us to
extend a monolingual system to many languages
with a number of freely available NLP resources
and tools.

2 Related Work

Much research have been put into developing
methods for multilingual subjectivity analysis re-
cently. With the high availability of subjectivity re-
sources and tools in English, an easy and straight-
forward approach would be to employ a machine
translation (MT) system to translate input texts
in target languages into English then carry out
the analyses using an existing subjectivity analy-
sis tool (Kim and Hovy, 2006; Bautin et al., 2008;
Banea et al., 2008). Mihalcea et al. (2007) and
Banea et al. (2008) proposed a number of ap-
proaches exploiting a bilingual dictionary, a paral-
lel corpus, and an MT system to port the resources
and systems available in English to languages with
limited resources.

For subjectivity lexicons translation, Mihalcea
et al. (2007) and Wan (2008) used the first sense in
a bilingual dictionary, Kim and Hovy (2006) used
a parallel corpus and a word alignment tool to ex-
tract translation pairs, and Kim et al. (2009) used
a dictionary to translate and a link analysis algo-
rithm to refine the matching intensity.

To overcome the shortcomings of available re-
sources and to take advantage of ensemble sys-
tems, Wan (2008) and Wan (2009) explored meth-
ods for developing a hybrid system for Chinese us-
ing English and Chinese sentiment analyzers. Ab-
basi et al. (2008) and Boiy and Moens (2009) have
created manually annotated gold standards in tar-
get languages and studied various feature selec-
tion and learning techniques in machine learning
approaches to analyze sentiments in multilingual
web documents.

For learning multilingual subjectivity, the lit-
erature tentatively concludes that translating lex-
icon is less dependable in terms of preserving sub-
jectivity than corpus translation (Mihalcea et al.,
2007; Wan, 2008), and though corpus translation
results in modest performance degradation, it pro-
vides a viable approach because no manual la-
bor is required (Banea et al., 2008; Brooke et al.,
2009).

Based on the observation that the performances
of subjectivity analysis systems in comparable
experimental settings for two languages differ,

Texts with an identical negative sentiment:
* The iPad could cannibalize the e-reader market. 
* 아이패드가(iPad) 전자책 시장을(e-reader market) 
위축시킬 수 있다(could cannibalize).

Texts with different strengths of positive sentiments:
* Samsung cell phones have excellent battery life.
* 삼성(Samsung) 휴대전화(cell phone) 배터리는
(battery) 그럭저럭(somehow or other) 오래간다(last 
long).

Figure 1: Examples of sentiments in multilingual
text

Banea et al. (2008) have attributed the variations
in the difficulty level of subjectivity learning to
the differences in language construction. Bautin et
al. (2008)’s system analyzes the sentiment scores
of entities in multilingual news and blogs and ad-
justed the sentiment scores using entity sentiment
probabilities of languages.

3 Multilanguage-Comparability

3.1 Motivation
The quality of a subjectivity analysis tool is mea-
sured by its ability to distinguish subjectivity from
objectivity and/or positive sentiments from nega-
tive sentiments. Additionally, a multilingual sub-
jectivity analysis system is required to generate
unbiased analysis results across languages; the
system should base its outcome solely on the sub-
jective meanings of input texts irrespective of the
language, and the equalities and inequalities of
subjectivity labels and intensities must be useful
within and throughout the languages.

Let us consider two cases where the pairs of
multilingual inputs in English and Korean have
identical and different subjectivity meanings (Fig-
ure 1). The first pair of texts carry a negative sen-
timent about how the release of a new electronics
device might affect an emerging business market.
When a multilanguage-comparable system is in-
putted with such a pair, its output should appropri-
ately reflect the negative sentiment, and be identi-
cal for both texts. The second pair of texts share
a similar positive sentiment about a mobile de-
vice’s battery capacity but with different strengths.
A good multilingual system must be able to iden-
tify the positive sentiments and distinguish the dif-
ferences in their intensities.

However, these kinds of conditions cannot be
measured with performance evaluations indepen-

596



dently carried out on each language; A system
with a dissimilar ability to analyze subjective ex-
pressions from one language to another may de-
liver opposite labels or biased scores on texts with
an identical subjective meaning, and vice versa,
but still might produce similar performances on
the evaluation data.

Macro evaluations on individual languages can-
not provide any conclusions on the system’s
multilanguage-comparability capability. To mea-
sure how much of a system’s judgment principles
are preserved across languages, an evaluation from
a different perspective is necessary.

3.2 Evaluation Approach

An evaluation of multilanguage-comparability
may be done in two ways: measuring agreements
in the outcomes of a pair of multilingual texts with
an identical subjective meaning, or measuring the
consistencies in the label and/or accordance in the
order of intensity of a pair of texts with different
subjectivities.

There are advantages and disadvantages to each
approaches. The first approach requires multi-
lingual texts aligned at the level of specificity,
for instance, document, sentence and phrase, that
the subjectivity analysis system works. Text cor-
pora for MT evaluation such as newspapers,
books, technical manuals, and government offi-
cial records provide a wide variety of parallel
texts, typically at the sentence level. Annotating
these types of corpus can be efficient; as par-
allel texts must have identical semantic mean-
ings, subjectivity–related annotations for one lan-
guage can be projected into other languages with-
out much loss of accuracy.

The latter approach accepts any pair of multi-
lingual texts as long as they are annotated with la-
bels and/or intensity. In this case, evaluating the la-
bel consistency of a multilingual system is only as
difficult as evaluating that of a monolingual sys-
tem; we can produce all possible pairs of texts
from test corpora annotated with labels for each
language. Evaluating with intensity is not easy for
the latter approach; if test corpora already exist
with intensity annotations for both languages, nor-
malizing the intensity scores to a comparable scale
is necessary (yet is uncertain unless every pair is
checked manually), otherwise every pair of mul-
tilingual texts needs a manual annotation with its
relative order of intensity.

In this paper, we utilize the first approach be-
cause it provides a more rational means; we can
reasonably hypothesize that text translated into an-
other language by a skilled translator carries an
identical semantic meaning and thereby conveys
identical subjectivity. Therefore the required re-
source is more easily attained in relatively inex-
pensive ways.

For evaluation, we measure the consistency in
the subjectivity labels and the correlation of sub-
jectivity intensity scores of parallel texts. Section
5.1 describes the details of evaluation metrics.

4 Multilingual Subjectivity System

We create a number of multilingual systems con-
sisting of multiple subsystems each processing a
language, where one system analyzes English, and
the other systems analyze the Korean, Chinese,
and Japanese languages. We try to reproduce a set
of systems using diverse methods in order to com-
pare the systems and find out which methods are
more suitable for multilanguage-comparability.

4.1 Source Language System

We adopt the three systems described below as our
source language systems: a state-of-the-art sub-
jectivity classifier, a corpus-based, and a lexicon-
based systems. The resources needed for devel-
oping the systems or the system itself are readily
available for research purposes. In addition, these
systems cover the general spectrum of current ap-
proaches to subjectivity analysis.
State-of-the-art (S-SA): OpinionFinder is a
publicly-available NLP tool for subjectivity analy-
sis (Wiebe and Riloff, 2005; Wilson et al., 2005).3

The software and its resources have been widely
used in the field of subjectivity analysis, and it
has been the de facto standard system against
which new systems are validated. We use a high-
coverage classifier from the OpinionFinder’s two
sentence-level subjectivity classifiers. This Naive
Bayes classifier builds upon a corpus annotated by
a high-precision classifier with the bootstrapping
of the corpus and extraction patterns. The classi-
fier assesses a sentence’s subjectivity with a label
and a score for confidence in its judgment.
Corpus-based (S-CB): The MPQA opinion cor-
pus is a collection of 535 newspaper articles in En-
glish annotated with opinions and private states at

3http://www.cs.pitt.edu/mpqa/opinionfinderrelease/, ver-
sion 1.5

597



the sub-sentence level (Wiebe et al., 2003).4 We
retrieve the sentence level subjectivity labels for
11,111 sentences using the set of rules described
in (Wiebe and Riloff, 2005). The corpus provides
a relatively balanced corpus with 55% subjective
sentences. We train an ML-based classifier us-
ing the corpus. Previous studies have found that,
among several ML-based approaches, the SVM
classifier generally performs well in many subjec-
tivity analysis tasks (Pang et al., 2002; Banea et
al., 2008).

We use SVMLight with its default configura-
tions,5 inputted with a sentence represented as a
feature vector of word unigrams and their counts
in the sentence. An SVM score (a margin or the
distance from a learned decision boundary) with a
positive value predicts the input as being subjec-
tive, and negative value as objective.
Lexicon-based (S-LB): OpinionFinder contains a
list of English subjectivity clue words with in-
tensity labels (Wilson et al., 2005). The lexicon
is compiled from several manually and automati-
cally built resources and contains 6885 unique en-
tries.

Riloff and Wiebe (2003) constructed a high-
precision classifier for contiguous sentences us-
ing the number of strong and weak subjective
words in current and nearby sentences. Unlike pre-
vious work, we do not (or rather, cannot) main-
tain assumptions about the proximity of input text.
Using the lexicon, we build a simple and high-
coverage rule-based subjectivity classifier. Setting
the scores of strong and weak subjective words as
1.0 and 0.5, we evaluate the subjectivity of a given
sentence as the sum of subjectivity scores; above
a threshold, the input is subjective, and otherwise
objective. The threshold value is optimized for an
F-measure using the MPQA corpus, and is set to
1.0 throughout our experiments.

4.2 Target Language System

To construct a target language system leveraging
on available resources in the source language, we
consider three approaches from previous litera-
ture:

1. translating test sentences in target language
into source language and inputting them into

4http://www.cs.pitt.edu/mpqa/databaserelease/, version
1.2

5http://svmlight.joachims.org/, version 6.02

a source language system (Kim and Hovy,
2006; Bautin et al., 2008; Banea et al., 2008)

2. translating a source language training corpus
into target language and creating a corpus-
based system in target language (Banea et al.,
2008)

3. translating a subjectivity lexicon from source
language to target language and creating a
lexicon-based system in target language (Mi-
halcea et al., 2007)

Each approach has its advantages and disadvan-
tages. The advantage of the first approach is its
simple architecture, clear separation of subjectiv-
ity and MT systems, and that it has only one sub-
jectivity system, and is thus easier to maintain.
Its disadvantage is that the time-consuming MT
has to be executed for each text input. In the sec-
ond and third approaches, a subjectivity system in
the target language is constructed sharing corpora,
rules, and/or features with the source language
system. Later on, it may also include its own set
of resources specifically engineered for the target
language as a performance improvement. How-
ever, keeping the systems up-to-date would require
as much effort as the number of languages. All
three approaches use MT, and would suffer sig-
nificantly if the translation results are poor.

Using the first approach, we can easily adopt all
three source language systems;

• Target input translated into source, analyzed
by source language system S-SA
• Target input translated into source, analyzed

by source language system S-CB
• Target input translated into source, analyzed

by source language system S-LB

The second and the third approaches are carried
out as follows:
Corpus-based (T-CB): We translate the MPQA
corpus into the target languages sentence by sen-
tence using a web-based service.6 Using the same
method for S-CB, we train an SVM model for
each language with the translated training corpora.
Lexicon-based (T-LB): This classifier is identi-
cal to S-LB, where the English lexicon is replaced
by one of the target languages. We automatically
translate the lexicon using free bilingual dictionar-
ies.7 First, the entries in the lexicon are looked

6Google Translate (http://translate.google.com/)
7quick english-korean, quick eng-zh CN, and JMDict

from StarDict (http://stardict.sourceforge.net/) licensed under
GPL and EDRDG.

598



Table 1: Agreement on subjectivity (S for subjec-
tive, O objective) of 859 sentence chunks in Ko-
rean between two annotators (An. 1 and An. 2).

An. 2
S O Total

A
n.

1 S 371 93 464
O 23 372 395

Total 394 465 859

up in the dictionary, if they are found, we se-
lect the first word in the first sense of the def-
inition. If the entry is not in the dictionary, we
lemmatize it,8 then repeat the search. Our sim-
ple approach produces moderate-sized lexicons
(3,808, 3,980, 3,027 for Korean, Chinese, and
Japanese) compared to Mihalcea et al. (2007)’s
complicated translation approach (4,983 Roma-
nian words). The threshold values are optimized
using the MPQA corpus translated into each tar-
get language.9

5 Experiment

5.1 Experimental Setup

Test Corpus
Our evaluation corpus consists of 50 parallel

newspaper articles from the Donga Daily News
Website.10 The website provides news articles in
Korean and their human translations in English,
Japanese, and Chinese. We selected articles that
contain Editorial in its English title from a 30-
day period. Three human annotators who are flu-
ent in the two languages manually annotated N-
to-N sentence alignments for each language pairs
(KR-EN, KR-CH, KR-JP). By keeping only the
sentence chunks whose Korean chunk appears in
all language pairs, we were left with 859 sentence
chunk pairs.

The corpus was preprocessed with NLP tools
for each language,11 and the Korean, Chinese, and
Japanese texts were translated into English with
the same web-based service used to translate the
training corpus in Section 4.2.
Manual Annotation and Agreement Study

8JWI (http://projects.csail.mit.edu/jwi/)
9Korean 1.0, Chinese 1.0, and Japanese 0.5

10http://www.donga.com/
11Stanford POS Tagger 1.5.1 and Stanford Chinese Word

Segmenter 2008-05-21 (http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/),
Chasen 2.4.4 (http://chasen-legacy.sourceforge.jp/), Korean
Morphological Analyzer (KoMA) (http://kle.postech.ac.kr/)

Table 2: Agreement on projection of subjectivity
(S for subjective, O objective) from Korean (KR)
to English (EN) by one annotator.

EN
S O Total

K
R

S 458 6 464
O 12 383 395

Total 470 389 859

To assess the performance of our subjectiv-
ity analysis systems, the Korean sentence chunks
were manually annotated by two native speakers
of Korean with Subjective and Objective labels
(Table 1). A proportion agreement of 0.86 and a
kappa value of 0.73 indicate a substantial agree-
ment between the two annotators. We set aside
743 sentence chunks that both annotators agreed
on for the automatic evaluation of subjectivity
analysis systems, thereby removing the borderline
cases, which are difficult even for humans to as-
sess. The corresponding sentence chunks for other
languages were extracted and tagged with labels
equivalent to Korean chunks.

In addition, to verify how consistently the sub-
jectivity of the original texts is projected to the
translated, we carried out another manual annota-
tion and agreement study with Korean and English
sentence chunks (Table 2).

Note that our cross-lingual agreement study is
similar to the one carried out by Mihalcea et
al. (2007), where two annotators labeled the sen-
tence subjectivity of a parallel text in different lan-
guages. They reported that, similarly to monolin-
gual annotations, most cases of disagreements on
annotations are due to the differences in the anno-
tators’ judgments on subjectivity, and the rest from
subjective meanings lost in the translation process
and figurative language such as irony.

To avoid the role played by annotators’ pri-
vate views from disagreements, the subjectivity of
sentence chunks in English were manually anno-
tated by one of the annotators for the Korean text.
Judged by the same annotator, we speculate that
the disagreement in the annotation should account
only for the inconsistency in the subjectivity pro-
jection. By proportion, the agreement between the
annotation of Korean and English is 0.97, and the
kappa is 0.96, suggesting an almost perfect agree-
ment. Only a small number of sentence chunk
pairs have inconsistent labels; six chunks in Ko-

599



Implicit sentiment expressed through translation:
* 시간이 갈수록(with time) 그 격차가(disparity/gap) 
벌어지고 있다(widening).
* Worse, the (economic) disparity (between South 
Korea and North Korea) is worsening with time.

Sentiment lost in translation:
* 인도의 타타 자동차회사는(India's Tata Motors) 
2200달러짜리 자동차 나노를(2,200-dollar 
automobile Nano) 내놓아(presented) 주목을 끌었다
(drew attention).
* India's Tata Motors has produced the 2,200-dollar 
subcompact Nano.

Figure 2: Excerpts from Donga Daily News with
differing sentiments between parallel texts

rean lost subjectivity in translation, and implied
subjective meanings in twelve chunks were ex-
pressed explicitly through interpretation. Excerpts
from our corpus show two such cases (Figure 2).
Evaluation Metrics

To evaluate the multilanguage-comparability of
subjectivity analysis systems, we measure 1) how
consistently the system assigns subjectivity labels
and 2) how closely numeric scores for systems’
confidences correlate with regard to parallel texts
in different languages.

In particular, we use Cohen’s kappa coefficient
for the first and Pearson’s correlation coefficient
for the latter. These widely used metrics provide
useful comparability measures for categorical and
quantitative data.

Both coefficients are scaled from −1 to +1, in-
dicating negative to positive correlations. Kappa
measures are corrected for chance, thereby yield-
ing better measurements than agreement by pro-
portion. The characteristics of Pearson’s correla-
tion coefficient that it measures linear relation-
ships and is independent of change in origin, scale,
and unit comply with our experiments.

5.2 Subjectivity Classification

Our multilingual subjectivity analysis systems
were evaluated on the test corpora described in
Section 5.1 (Table 3).

Due to the difference in testbeds, the perfor-
mance of the state-of-the-art English system (S-
SA) on our corpus is lower by about 10% rela-
tively than the performance reported on the MPQA
corpus.12 However, it still performs sufficiently

12precision, recall, and F-measure of 79.4, 70.6, and 74.7.

well and provides the most balanced results among
the three source language systems; The corpus-
based system (S-CB) classifies with a high pre-
cision, and the lexicon-based (S-LB) with a high
recall. The source language systems (S-SA,-CB,-
LB) lose a small percentage in precision when in-
putted with translations, but the recalls are gener-
ally on a par or even higher in the target languages.

For the systems created from target language re-
sources, Corpus-based systems (T-CB) generally
perform better than the ones with source language
resource (S-CB), and lexicon-based systems (T-
LB) perform worse than (S-LB). Similarly to sys-
tems with source language resources, T-CB clas-
sifies with a high precision and T-LB with a high
recall, but the gap is less. Among the target lan-
guages, Korean tends to have a higher precision,
and Japanese a higher recall than other languages
in most systems.

Overall, S-SA provides easy accessibility when
analyzing both the source and the target languages,
with a balanced precision and recall performance.
Among the other approaches, only T-CB is bet-
ter in all measures than S-SA, and S-LB performs
best on F-measure evaluations.

5.3 Multilanguage-Comparability

The evaluation results on multilanguage-
comparability are presented in Table 4. The
subjectivity analysis systems are evaluated with
all language pairs with kappa and Pearson’s
correlation coefficients. Kappa and Pearson’s
correlation values are consistent with each other;
Pearson’s correlation between the two evaluation
measures is 0.91.

We observe a distinct contrast in performances
between corpus-based systems (S-CB and T-CB)
and lexicon-based systems (S-LB and T-LB); All
corpus-based systems show moderate agreements
while agreements on lexicon-based systems are
only fair.

Within corpus-based systems, S-CB performs
better with language pairs that include English,
and T-CB performs better with language pairs of
the target languages.

For lexicon-based systems, systems in the tar-
get languages (T-LB) performs the worst with
only slight to fair agreements between languages.
Lexicon-based systems and state-of-the-art sys-
tems in the source language (S-LB and S-SA) re-
sult in average performances.

600



Table 3: Performance of subjectivity analysis with precision (P), recall (R), and F-measure (F). S-SA,-
CB,-LB systems in Korean, Chinese, Japanese indicate English analysis systems inputted with transla-
tions of the target languages into English.

English Korean Chinese Japanese
P R F P R F P R F P R F

S-SA 71.1 63.5 67.1 70.7 61.1 65.6 67.3 68.8 68.0 69.1 67.5 68.3
S-CB 74.4 53.9 62.5 74.5 52.2 61.4 71.1 63.3 67.0 72.9 65.3 68.9
S-LB 62.5 87.7 73.0 62.9 87.7 73.3 59.9 91.5 72.4 61.8 94.1 74.6
T-CB 72.4 67.5 69.8 75.0 66.2 70.3 72.5 70.3 71.4
T-LB 59.4 71.0 64.7 58.4 82.3 68.2 56.9 92.4 70.4

Table 4: Performance of multilanguage-comparability: kappa coefficient (κ) for measuring comparability
of classification labels and Pearson’s correlation coefficient (ρ) for classification scores for English (EN),
Korean (KR), Chinese (CH), and Japanese (JP). Evaluations of T-CB,-LB for language pairs including
English are carried out with results from S-CB,-LB for English and T-CB,-LB for target languages.

S-SA S-CB S-LB T-CB T-LB
κ ρ κ ρ κ ρ κ ρ κ ρ

EN & KR 0.41 0.55 0.45 0.60 0.37 0.59 0.42 0.60 0.25 0.41
EN & CH 0.39 0.54 0.41 0.62 0.33 0.52 0.39 0.57 0.22 0.38
EN & JP 0.39 0.53 0.43 0.65 0.30 0.59 0.40 0.59 0.15 0.33
KR & CH 0.36 0.54 0.39 0.59 0.28 0.57 0.46 0.64 0.23 0.37
KR & JP 0.37 0.60 0.44 0.69 0.50 0.69 0.63 0.76 0.18 0.38
CH & JP 0.37 0.53 0.49 0.66 0.29 0.57 0.46 0.63 0.22 0.46
Average 0.38 0.55 0.44 0.64 0.35 0.59 0.46 0.63 0.21 0.39

-100

-50

0

50

100

-100 -50 0 50 100

(a) S-SA

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

-4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4

(b) S-CB

-10

-5

0

5

10

-10 -5 0 5 10

(c) S-LB

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

-4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4

(d) T-CB

-10

-5

0

5

10

-10 -5 0 5 10

(e) T-LB

Figure 3: Scatter plots of English (x-axis) and Korean (y-axis) subjectivity scores from state-of-the-art
(S-SA), corpus-based (S-CB), and lexicon-based (S-LB) systems of the source language, and corpus-
based with translated corpora (T-CB), and lexicon-based with translated lexicon (T-LB) systems. Slanted
lines in figures are best-fit lines through the origins.

601



Figure 3 shows scatter plots of subjectivity
scores of our English and Korean test corpora eval-
uated on different systems; the data points on the
first and the third quadrants are occurrences of la-
bel agreements, and the second and the fourth are
disagreements. Linearly scattered data points are
more correlated regardless of the slope.

Figure 3a shows a moderate correlation for mul-
tilingual results from the state-of-the-art system
(S-SA). Agreements on objective instances are
clustered together while agreements on subjective
instances are diffused over a wide region.

Agreements between the source language
corpus-based system (S-CB) and the corpus-based
system trained with translated resources (T-CB)
are more distinctively correlated than the results
for other pairs of systems (Figures 3b and 3d). We
notice that S-CB seems to have a lower number of
outliers than T-CB, but slightly more diffusive.

Lexicon-based systems (S-LB, T-LB) gener-
ate noticeably uncorrelated scores (Figures 3c and
3e). We observe that the results from the English
system with translated inputs (S-LB) is more cor-
related than those from systems with translated
lexicons (T-LB), and that analysis results from
both systems are biased toward subjective scores.

6 Discussion

Which approach is most suitable for multilingual
subjectivity analysis?

In our experiments, the corpus-based sys-
tems trained on corpora translated from English
to the target languages (T-CB) perform well
for subjectivity classification and multilanguage-
comparability measures on the whole. However,
the methods we employed to expand the languages
were naively carried out without much considera-
tions for optimization. Further adjustments could
improve the other systems for both classification
and multilanguage-comparability performances.
Is there a correlation between classification per-
formance and multilanguage-comparability?

Lexicon-based systems in the source language
(S-LB) have good overall classification perfor-
mances, especially on recall and F-measures.
However, these systems performs worse on
multilanguage-comparability than other systems
with poorer classification performances. Intrigued
by the observation, we tried to measure which
criteria for classification performance influences
multilanguage-comparability. We again employed

Pearson’s correlation metrics to measure the corre-
lations of precision (P), recall (R), and F-measures
(F) to kappa (κ) and Pearson’s correlation (ρ) val-
ues.

Specifically, we measure the correlations be-
tween the sums of P, the sums of R, and the
sums of F to κ and ρ for all pairs of systems.13

The correlations of P with κ and ρ are 0.78
and 0.68, R −0.38 and −0.28, and F −0.20
and −0.05. These numbers strongly suggest that
multilanguage-comparability correlates with the
precisions of classifiers.

However, we cannot always expect a high-
precision multilingual subjectivity classifier to be
multilanguage-comparable as well. For example,
the S-SA system has a much higher precision
than S-LB consistently over all languages, but
their multilanguage-comparability performances
differed only by small amounts.

7 Conclusion

Multilanguage-comparability is an analysis sys-
tem’s ability to retain its decision criteria across
different languages. We implemented a number of
previously proposed approaches to learning mul-
tilingual subjectivity, and evaluated the systems
on multilanguage-comparability as well as clas-
sification performance. Our experimental results
provide meaningful comparisons of the multilin-
gual subjectivity analysis systems across various
aspects.

Also, we developed a multilingual subjectivity
evaluation corpus from a parallel text, and studied
inter-annotator, inter-language agreements on sub-
jectivity, and observed persistent subjectivity pro-
jections from one language to another from a par-
allel text.

For future work, we aim extend this work to
constructing a multilingual sentiment analysis sys-
tem and evaluate it with multilingual datasets
such as product reviews collected from different
countries. We also plan to resolve the lexicon-
based classifiers’ classification bias towards sub-
jective meanings with a list of objective words
(Esuli and Sebastiani, 2006) and their multilin-
gual expansion (Kim et al., 2009), and evaluate
the multilanguage-comparability of systems con-
structed with resources from different sources.

13Pairs of values such as 71.1 + 70.7 and 0.41 for preci-
sions and Kappa of S-SA for English and Korean.

602



Acknowledgement

We thank the anonymous reviewers for valuable
comments and helpful suggestions. This work is
supported in part by Basic Science Research Pro-
gram through the National Research Foundation
of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Edu-
cation, Science and Technology (MEST) (2009-
0075211), and in part by the BK 21 project in
2010.

References
Ahmed Abbasi, Hsinchun Chen, and Arab Salem.

2008. Sentiment analysis in multiple languages:
Feature selection for opinion classification in web
forums. ACM Transactions on Information Systems,
26(3):1–34.

Carmen Banea, Rada Mihalcea, Janyce Wiebe, and
Samer Hassan. 2008. Multilingual subjectivity
analysis using machine translation. In EMNLP ’08:
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 127–
135, Morristown, NJ, USA.

Mikhail Bautin, Lohit Vijayarenu, and Steven Skiena.
2008. International sentiment analysis for news and
blogs. In Proceedings of the International Confer-
ence on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM).

Erik Boiy and Marie-Francine Moens. 2009. A
machine learning approach to sentiment analysis
in multlingual Web texts. Information Retrieval,
12:526–558.

Julian Brooke, Milan Tofiloski, and Maite Taboada.
2009. Cross-linguistic sentiment analysis: From en-
glish to spanish. In Proceedings of RANLP 2009,
Borovets, Bulgaria.

Carmine Cesarano, Antonio Picariello, Diego Refor-
giato, and V.S. Subrahmanian. 2007. The oasys 2.0
opinion analysis system: A demo. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Weblogs and Social
Media (ICWSM).

Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2006. Senti-
wordnet: A publicly available lexical resource for
opinion mining. In Proceedings of the 5th Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’06), pages 417–422, Geneva, IT.

Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy. 2006. Identifying
and analyzing judgment opinions. In Proceedings
of the Human Language Technology Conference of
the NAACL (HLT/NAACL’06), pages 200–207, New
York, USA.

Jungi Kim, Hun-Young Jung, Sang-Hyob Nam, Yeha
Lee, and Jong-Hyeok Lee. 2009. Found in trans-
lation: Conveying subjectivity of a lexicon of one
language into another using a bilingual dictionary

and a link analysis algorithm. In ICCPOL ’09: Pro-
ceedings of the 22nd International Conference on
Computer Processing of Oriental Languages. Lan-
guage Technology for the Knowledge-based Econ-
omy, pages 112–121, Berlin, Heidelberg.

Rada Mihalcea, Carmen Banea, and Janyce Wiebe.
2007. Learning multilingual subjective language via
cross-lingual projections. In Proceedings of the 45th
Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational
Linguistics (ACL’07), pages 976–983, Prague, CZ.

Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up? Sentiment classification using
machine learning techniques. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP), pages 79–86.

Ellen Riloff and Janyce Wiebe. 2003. Learning ex-
traction patterns for subjective expressions. In Pro-
ceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).

Xiaojun Wan. 2008. Using bilingual knowledge and
ensemble techniques for unsupervised Chinese sen-
timent analysis. In Proceedings of the 2008 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 553–561, Honolulu, Hawaii, Oc-
tober. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Xiaojun Wan. 2009. Co-training for cross-lingual sen-
timent classification. In Proceedings of the Joint
Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL
and the 4th International Joint Conference on Nat-
ural Language Processing of the AFNLP, pages
235–243, Suntec, Singapore, August. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Janyce Wiebe and Ellen Riloff. 2005. Creating subjec-
tive and objective sentence classifiers from unanno-
tated texts. In Proceedings of the 6th International
Conference on Intelligent Text Processing and Com-
putational Linguistics (CICLing-2005), pages 486–
497, Mexico City, Mexico.

Janyce Wiebe, E. Breck, Christopher Buckley, Claire
Cardie, P. Davis, B. Fraser, Diane Litman, D. Pierce,
Ellen Riloff, Theresa Wilson, D. Day, and Mark
Maybury. 2003. Recognizing and organizing opin-
ions expressed in the world press. In Proceedings
of the 2003 AAAI Spring Symposium on New Direc-
tions in Question Answering.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-
level sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Human Language Technology and Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(HLT-EMNLP’05), pages 347–354, Vancouver, CA.

603


