










































Now, Where Was I? Resumption Strategies for an In-Vehicle Dialogue System


Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 798–805,
Uppsala, Sweden, 11-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Now, where was I?
Resumption strategies for an in-vehicle dialogue system

Jessica Villing
Graduate School of Language Technology and

Department of Philosophy, Linguistics and Theory of Science
University of Gothenburg
jessica@ling.gu.se

Abstract

In-vehicle dialogue systems often contain
more than one application, e.g. a navi-
gation and a telephone application. This
means that the user might, for example, in-
terrupt the interaction with the telephone
application to ask for directions from the
navigation application, and then resume
the dialogue with the telephone applica-
tion. In this paper we present an anal-
ysis of interruption and resumption be-
haviour in human-human in-vehicle dia-
logues and also propose some implications
for resumption strategies in an in-vehicle
dialogue system.

1 Introduction

Making it useful and enjoyable to use a dialogue
system is always important. The dialogue should
be easy and intuitive, otherwise the user will not
find it worth the effort and instead prefer to use
manual controls or to speak to a human.

However, when designing an in-vehicle dia-
logue system there is one more thing that needs
to be taken into consideration, namely the fact that
the user is performing an additional, safety crit-
ical, task - driving. The so-called 100-car study
(Neale et al., 2005) revealed that secondary task
distraction is the largest cause of driver inatten-
tion, and that the handling of wireless devices is
the most common secondary task. Even if spoken
dialogue systems enables manouvering of devices
without using hands or eyes, it is crucial to ad-
just the interaction to the in-vehicle environment
in order to minimize distraction from the interac-
tion itself. Therefore the dialogue system should
consider the cognitive load of the driver and ad-
just the dialogue accordingly. One way of doing
this is to continously measure the cognitive work-
load level of the driver and, if the workload is high,

determine type of workload and act accordingly.
If the workload is dialogue-induced (i.e. caused
by the dialogue itself), it might be necessary to
rephrase or offer the user help with the task. If
the workload is driving-induced (i.e. caused by
the driving task), the user might need information
that is crucial for the driving task (e.g. get nav-
igation instructions), or to pause the dialogue in
order to enable the user to concentrate on the driv-
ing task (Villing, 2009). Both the driver and the
system should be able to initiate interruptions.

When the interaction with a dialogue system has
been interrupted, e.g. because the user has not an-
swered a question, it is common that the system
returns to the top menu. This means that if the
user wants to finish the interrupted task she has
to restart from the beginning, which is both time-
consuming and annoying. Instead, the dialogue
system should be able to either pause until the
workload is low or change topic and/or domain,
and then resume where the interruption took place.
However, resumption of an interrupted topic needs
to be done in a way that minimizes the risk that
the cognitive workload increases again. Although
a lot of research has been done regarding dialogue
system output, very little work has been done re-
garding resumption of an interrupted topic. In this
paper we will analyse human-human in-vehicle di-
alogue to find out how resumptions are done in
human-human dialogue and propose some impli-
cations for resumption strategies in a dialogue sys-
tem.

2 Related work

To study resumption behaviour, Yang (2009), car-
ried out a data collection where the participants
were switching between an ongoing task (a card
game) and a real-time task (a picture game). The
participants randomly had to interrupt the ongo-
ing task to solve a problem in the real-time task.
When studying the resumption behaviour after an

798



interruption to the real-time task they found that
the resuming utterance contained various amounts
and types of redundant information depending on
whether the interruption occured in the middle of
a card discussion, at the end of a card or at the
end of a card game. If the interruption occured
in the middle of a card discussion it was possible
to make a distinction between utterance restate-
ment (repeat one’s own utterance, repeat the dia-
logue partners utterance or clarification of the dia-
logue partners utterance) and card review (review-
ing all the cards on hand although this information
had already been given). They found that the be-
haviour is similar to grounding behaviour, where
the speaker use repetition and requests for repeti-
tion to ensure that the utterance is understood.

3 Data collection

A data collection has been carried out within the
DICO project (see, for example, (Larsson and
Villing, 2007)) to study how an additional distrac-
tion or increase in the cognitive load would affect a
driver’s dialogue behaviour. The goal was to elicit
a natural dialogue (as opposed to giving the driver
a constructed task such as for example a math task)
and make the participants engage in the conversa-
tion.

The participants (two female and six male) be-
tween the ages of 25 and 36 drove a car in pairs
while interviewing each other. The interview
questions and the driving instructions were given
to the passenger, hence the driver knew neither
what questions to discuss nor the route in advance.
Therefore, the driver had to signal, implicitly or
explicitly, when she wanted driving instructions
and when she wanted a new question to discuss.
The passenger too had to have a strategy for when
to change topic. The reasons for this setup was
to elicit a natural and fairly intense dialogue and
to force the participants to frequently change topic
and/or domain (e.g. to get driving instructions).
The participants changed roles after 30 minutes,
which meant that each participant acted both as
driver and as passenger. The cognitive load of the
driver was measured in two ways. The driver per-
formed a Tactile Detection Task (TDT) (van Win-
sum et al., 1999). When using a TDT, a buzzer
is attached to the driver’s wrist. The driver is told
to push a button each time the summer is activated.
Cognitive load is determined by measuring hit-rate
and reaction time. Although the TDT task in itself

might cause an increased workload level, the task
is performed during the whole session and thereby
it is possible to distinguish high workload caused
by something else but the TDT task.

Workload was also measured by using an IDIS
system (Broström et al., 2006). IDIS determines
workload based on the driver’s behaviour (for ex-
ample, steering wheel movements or applying the
brake). What differs between the two measure-
ments is that the TDT measures the actual work-
load of each driver, while IDIS makes its assump-
tions based on knowledge of what manouvres are
usually cognitively demanding.

The participants were audio- and videotaped,
the recordings are transcribed with the transcrip-
tion tool ELAN1, using an orthographic transcrip-
tion. All in all 3590 driver utterances and 4382
passenger utterances are transcribed. An annota-
tion scheme was designed to enable analysis of
utterances with respect to topic change for each
domain.

Domain and topic was defined as:

• interview domain: discussions about the in-
terview questions where each interview ques-
tion was defined as a topic

• navigation domain: navigation-related dis-
cussions where each navigation instruction
was defined as a topic

• traffic domain: discussions about the traffic
situation and fellow road-users where each
comment not belonging to a previous event
was defined as a topic

• other domain: anything that does not fit
within the above domains where each com-
ment not belonging to a previous event was
defined as a topic

Topic changes has been coded as follows:

• begin-topic: whatever→ new topic

– I.e., the participants start discussing an
interview question, a navigation instruc-
tion, make a remark about the traffic
or anything else that has not been dis-
cussed before.

• end-topic: finished topic→ whatever
1http://www.lat-mpi.eu/tools/elan/

799



– A topic is considered finished if a ques-
tion is answered or if an instruction or a
remark is confirmed.

• interrupt-topic: unfinished topic→ whatever

– An utterance is considered to interrupt if
it belongs to another topic than the pre-
vious utterance and the previous topic
has not been ended with an end-topic.

• resume-topic: whatever→ unfinished topic

– A topic is considered to be resumed if
it has been discussed earlier but was not
been finished by an end-topic but instead
interrupted with an interrupt-topic.

• reraise-topic: whatever→ finished topic

– A topic is considered to be reraised if it
has been discussed before and then been
finished with an end-topic.

The utterances have been categorised according
to the following schema:

• DEC: declarative

– (“You are a Leo and I am a Gemini”,
“This is Ekelund Street”)

• INT: interrogative

– (“What do you eat for breakfast?”,
“Should we go back after this?”)

• IMP: imperative

– (“Go on!”)

• ANS: “yes” or “no” answer (and variations
such as “sure, absolutely, nope, no way”)

• NP: bare noun phrase

– (“Wolfmother”, “Otterhall Street”)

• ADVP: bare adverbial phrase

– (“Further into Karlavagn Street”)

• INC: incomplete phrase

– (“Well, did I answer the”, “Should we”)

Cognitive load has been annotated as:

• reliable workload: annotated when work-
load is reliably high according to the TDT
(reliability was low if response button was
pressed more than 2 times after the event).

• high: high workload according to IDIS

• low: low workload according to IDIS

The annotation schema has not been tested for
inter-coder reliability. While full reliability test-
ing would have further strengthened the results,
we believe that our results are still useful as a basis
for future implementation and experimental work.

4 Results

The codings from the DICO data collection has
been analysed with respect to interruption and re-
sumption of topics (interrupt-topic and resume-
topic, respectively). Interruption can be done in
two ways, either to pause the dialogue or to change
topic and/or domain. In the DICO corpus there are
very few interruptions followed by a pause. The
reason is probably that both the driver and the pas-
senger were strongly engaged in the interview and
navigation tasks. The fact that the driver did not
know the route elicited frequent switches to the
navigation domain done by both the driver and the
passenger, as can be seen in Figure 1. Therefore,
we have only analysed interruption and resump-
tion from and to the interview and navigation do-
mains.

!"

#!"

$!"

%!"

&!"

'!!"

()*+,-(+." )/-(" *,/01" 2*3+,"

Figure 1: Distribution of utterances coded as
interrupt-topic for each domain, when interrupt-
ing from an interview topic.

4.1 Redundancy
The easiest way of resuming an interrupted topic
in a dialogue system is to repeat the last phrase that
was uttered before the interruption. One disda-
vantage of this method is that the dialogue system
might be seen as tedious, especially if there are
several interruptions during the interaction. We
wanted to see if the resuming utterances in human-
human dialogue are redundant and if redundancy
has anything to do with the length of the inter-
ruption. We therefore sorted all utterances coded

800



as resume-topic in two categories, those which
contained redundant information when comparing
with the last utterance before the interruption, and
those which did not contain and redundant infor-
mation. As a redundant utterance we counted all
utterances that repeated one or more words from
the last utterance before the interruption. We then
counted the number of turns between the interrup-
tion and resumption. The number of turns varied
between 1 and 42. The result can be seen in Figure
2.

!"

#"

$!"

$#"

%!"

%#"

&'()*""""""
+,-"

*.)/01"

2345.6"
+#78"
*.)/01"

9(/:"""""""""""""""""
+;$!"
*.)/01"

<(/=)34./4>/*"

?34./4>/*"

Figure 2: Number of redundant utterances depend-
ing on length of interruption.

As can be seen, there are twice as many non-
redundant as redundant utterances after a short
interruption (≤4 turns), while there are almost
solely redundant utterances after a long interrup-
tion (≥10 turns). The average number of turns
is 3,5 when no redundancy occur, and 11,5 when
there are redundancy. When the number of turns
exceeds 12, there are only redundant utterances.

4.2 Category

Figure 3 shows the distribution, sorted per cate-
gory, of driver utterances when resuming to an in-
terview and a navigation topic. Figure 4 shows the
corresponding figures for passenger utterances.

!"#

$!"#

%!"#

&!"#

'!"#

(!"#

)*
+#

,-
+#

,-
.# -/

#
0-
1#

0)
2/
#

345678369#

4:83#

Figure 3: Driver resuming to the interview and
navigation domains.

The driver’s behaviour is similar both when re-
suming to an interview and a navigation topic.
Declarative phrases are most common, followed
by incomplete, interrogative (for interview topics)
and noun phrases.

!"#

$!"#

%!"#

&!"#

'!"#

(!"#

)*
+#

,-
+# ,-

.# -/
#
,0
/#

1)
2/
#

345678369#

4:83#

Figure 4: Passenger resuming to the interview and
navigation domains.

When looking at the passenger utterances we
see a lot of variation between the domains. When
resuming to an interview topic the passenger
uses mostly declarative phrases, followed by noun
phrases and interrogative phrases. When resum-
ing to a navigation topic imperative phrases are
most common, followed by declarative phrases.
Only the passenger use imperative phrases, proba-
bly since the passenger is managing both the inter-
view questions and the navigation instructions and
therefore is the one that is forcing both the inter-
view and the navigation task through.

4.3 Workload level
The in-vehicle environment is forcing the driver to
carry out tasks during high cognitive workload. To
minimize the risk of increasing the workload fur-
ther, an in-vehicle dialogue system should be able
to decide when to interrupt and when to resume a
topic depending on the driver’s workload level.

The figures in this section shows workload level
and type of workload during interruption and re-
sumption to and from topics in the interview do-
main. When designing the interview and naviga-
tion tasks that were to be carried out during the
data collection, we focused on designing them so
that the participants were encouraged to discuss
as much as possible with each other. Therefore,
the navigation instructions sometimes were hard
to understand, which forced the participants to dis-
cuss the instructions and together try to interpret
them. Therefore we have not analysed the work-
load level while interrupting and resuming topics
in the navigation domain since the result might be

801



misleading.
Type of workload is determined by analysing

the TDT and IDIS signals described in 3. Work-
load is considered to be dialogue-induced when
only the TDT is indicating high workload (since
the TDT indicates that the driver is carrying out a
task that is cognitively demanding but IDIS is not
indicating that the driving task is demanding at the
moment), driving-induced when both the TDT and
IDIS is indicating high workload (since the TDT is
indicating that the workload level is high and IDIS
is indicating that the driving task is demanding)
and possibly driving-induced when only IDIS is
indicating high workload (since IDIS admittedly
is indicating that the driving task is demanding
but the TDT indicates that the driver’s workload is
low, it could then be that this particular driver does
not experience the driving task demanding even
though the average driver does) (Villing, 2009).

The data has been normalized for variation in
workload time. The diagrams shows the distri-
bution of interruption and resumption utterances
made by the driver and the passenger, respectively.

dialogue-
induced

possibly 
dr iv ing-
induced

driv ing-
induced

low 
workload

Page 1

Figure 5: Workload while the driver is interrupting
an interview topic.

dialogue-
induced

possibly 
dr iv ing-
induced

driv ing-
induced

low 
workload

Page 1

Figure 6: Workload while the passenger is inter-
rupting an interview topic.

Figures 5 and 6 show driver workload level
while the driver and the passenger (respectively)

are interrupting from the interview domain. The
driver most often interrupts during a possible
driving-induced or low workload, the same goes
for the passenger but in opposite order. It is
least common for the driver to interrupt dur-
ing dialogue- or driving-induced workload, while
the passenger rarely interrupts during dialogue-
induced and never during driving-induced work-
load.

dialogue-
induced

possible 
dr iv ing-
induced

driv ing-
induced

low 
workload

Page 1

Figure 7: Workload while driver is resuming to the
interview domain.

dialogue-
induced

possible 
dr iv ing-
induced

driv ing-
induced

low 
workload

Page 1

Figure 8: Workload while passenger is resuming
to the interview domain.

Figures 7 and 8 show workload level while the
driver and the passenger (respectively) are resum-
ing to the interview domain. The driver most of-
ten resumes while the workload is low or possi-
bly driving-induced, while the passenger is mostly
resuming during low workload and never during
driving-induced workload.

5 Discussion

For both driver and passenger, the most common
way to resume an interview topic is to use a declar-
ative utterance, which is illustrated in Figure 3.
When studying the utterances in detail we can see
that there is a difference when comparing infor-
mation redundancy similar to what Yang (2009)
describe in their paper. They compared grade of

802



redundancy based on where in the dialogue the in-
terruption occur, what we have looked at in the
DICO corpus is how many turns the interrupting
discussion contains.

As Figure 2 shows, if the number of turns is
about three (on average, 3,5), the participants tend
to continue the interrupted topic exactly where it
was interrupted, without considering that there had
been any interruption. The speaker however of-
ten makes some sort of sequencing move to an-
nounce that he or she is about to switch domain
and/or topic, either by using a standard phrase or
by making an extra-lingustic sound like, for exam-
ple, lipsmack or breathing (Villing et al., 2008).
Example (1) shows how the driver interrupts a dis-
cussion about what book he is currently reading to
get navigation instructions:

(1) Driver: What I read now is Sofie’s
world.

Driver (interrupting): Yes, where do
you want me to drive?

Passenger: Straight ahead,
straight ahead.

Driver: Straight ahead. Alright,
I’ll do that.

Passenger (resuming): Alright [sequencing
move]. Enemy of the enemy was
the last one I read. [DEC]

If the number of turns is higher than ten (on av-
erage, 11,5) the resuming speaker makes a redun-
dant utterance, repeating one or more words from
the last utterance before the interruption. See ex-
ample (2):

(2) Driver: Actually, I have always been
interested in computers and
technology.

Passenger (interrupting): Turn right
to Vasaplatsen. Is it here?
No, this is Grönsakstorget.

Driver: This is Grönsakstorget.
We have passed Vasaplatsen.

.

.

. (Discussion about how to
turn around and get back to
Vasaplatsen, all in all 21
turns.)

Driver (resuming): Well, as I said
[sequencing move]. I have
always been interested in
computer and computers and
technology and stuff like that.
[DEC]

The passenger often uses a bare noun phrase to
resume, the noun phrase can repeat a part of the

interview question. For example, after a discus-
sion about wonders of the world, which was inter-
rupted by a discussion about which way to go next,
the passenger resumed by uttering the single word
“wonders” which was immediatly understood by
the driver as a resumption to the interview topic.
The noun phrase can also be a key phrase in the
dialogue partner’s answer as in example (3) where
the participants discuss their favourite band:

(3) Driver: I like Wolfmother, do you know
about them?

Passenger: I’ve never heard about
them. [...] You have to bring
a cd so I can listen to them.

Driver (interrupting): Where was I
supposed to turn?

.

.

. (Navigation discussion, all
in all 13 turns.)

Passenger (resuming): [LAUGHS]Wolfmother.
[NP]

When resuming to the navigation domain, the
driver mostly uses a declarative phrase, typically
to clarify an instruction. It is also common to use
an interrogative phrase or an incomplete phrase
such as “should I...” which the passenger answers
by clarifying which way to go. The passenger in-
stead uses mostly imperative phrases as a reminder
of the last instruction, such as “keep straight on”.

When the speakers interrupts an interview topic
they mostly switch to the navigation domain, see
Figure 1. That means that the most common rea-
son for the speaker to interrupt is to ask for or give
information that is crucial for the driving task (as
opposed for the other and traffic domains, which
are mostly used to signal that the speaker’s cogni-
tive load level is high (Villing et al., 2008)). As
can be seen in Figures 5 and 6, the driver mostly
interrupts the interview domain during a possi-
ble driving-induced workload while the passen-
ger mostly interrupts during low workload. As
noted above (see also Figure 3), the utterances are
mostly declarative (“this is Ekelund Street”), in-
terrogative (“and now I turn left?”) or incomplete
(“and then...”), while the passenger gives addi-
tional information that the driver has not asked for
explicitly but the passenger judges that the driver
might need (“just go straight ahead in the next
crossing”, “here is where we should turn towards
Järntorget”). Hence, it seems like the driver inter-
rupts to make clarification utterances that must be
answered immediately, for example, right before a

803



crossing when the driver has pressed the brakes or
turned on the turn signal (and therefore the IDIS
system signals high workload which is interpreted
as driving-induced workload) while the passenger
take the chance to give additional information in
advance, before it is needed, and the workload
therefore is low.

Figure 7 shows that the driver mostly resumes
to the interview domain during low or possible
driving-induced workload. Since the IDIS system
makes its assumption on driving behaviour, based
on what the average driver finds cognitively de-
manding, it might sometimes be so that the system
overgenerates and indicates high workload even
though the driver at hand does not find the driv-
ing task cognitively demanding. This might be an
explanation to these results, since the driver of-
ten resumes to an interview topic although he or
she is, for example, driving through a roundabout
or pushing the brakes. It is also rather common
that the driver is resuming to an interview ques-
tion during dialogue-induced workload, perhaps
because she has started thinking about an answer
to a question and therefore the TDT indicates high
workload and the IDIS does not. The passenger
mostly resumes to the interview domain during
low workload, which indicates that the passenger
analyses both the traffic situation and the state of
mind of the driver before he or she wants to draw
the drivers attention from the driving task.

6 Implications for in-vehicle dialogue
systems

In this paper we point at some of the dialogue
strategies that are used in human-human dialogue
during high cognitive load when resuming to an
interrupted topic. These strategies should be taken
under consideration when implementing an in-
vehicle dialogue system.

To make the dialogue natural and easy to under-
stand the dialogue manager should consider which
domain it will resume to and the number of turns
between the interruption and resumption before
deciding what phrase to use as output. For ex-
ample, the results indicate that it might be more
suitable to use a declarative phrase when resum-
ing to a domain where the system is asking the
user for information, for example when adding
songs to a play list at the mp3-player (cf. the in-
terview domain). If the number of turns are 4 or
less, it probably does not have to make a redun-

dant utterance at all, but may continue the discus-
sion where it was interrupted. If the number of
turns exceeds 4 it is probably smoother to let the
system just repeat one or more keywords from the
interrupted utterance to make the user understand
what topic should be discussed, instead of repeat-
ing the whole utterance or even start the task from
the beginning. This will make the system feel less
tedious which should have a positive effect on the
cognitive workload level. However, user tests are
probably needed to decide how much redundant
information is necessary when talking to a dia-
logue system, since it may well differ from talking
to a human being who is able to help the listener
understand by, for example, emphasizing certain
words in a way that is currently impossible for a
computer. When resuming to a domain where the
system has information to give to the user it is suit-
able to make a short, informative utterance (e.g.
“turn left here”, “traffic jam ahead, turn left in-
stead”).

Finally, it is also important to consider the cog-
nitive workload level of the user to determine
when - and if - to resume, and also whether the
topic that is to be resumed belongs to a domain
where the system has information to give to the
user, or a domain where the user gives informa-
tion to the system. For example, if the user is us-
ing a navigation system and he or she is experi-
encing driving-induced workload when approach-
ing e.g. a crossing, it might be a good idea to give
additional navigation information even though the
user has not explicitly asked for it. If the user how-
ever is using a telephone application it is probably
better to let the user initiate the resumption. The
DICO corpus shows that it is the passenger that is
most careful not to interrupt or resume when the
driver’s workload is high, indicating that the sys-
tem should let the user decide whether it is suit-
able to resume during high workload, while it is
more accepted to let the system interrupt and re-
sume when the workload is low.

When resuming to the interview domain the
driver (i.e. the user) mostly uses declarative
phrases, either as an answer to a question or as a
redundant utterance to clarify what was last said
before the interruption. Therefore the dialogue
system should be able to store not only what has
been agreed upon regarding the interrupted task,
but also the last few utterances to make it possible
to interpret the user utterance as a resumption.

804



It is common that the driver utterances are in-
complete, perhaps due to the fact that the driver’s
primary task is the driving and therefore his or her
mind is not always set on the dialogue task. Lind-
ström (2008) showed that deletions are the most
common disfluency during high cognitive load,
which is supported by the results in this paper. The
dialogue system should therefore be robust regard-
ing ungrammatical utterances.

7 Future work

Next we intend to implement strategies for inter-
ruption and resumption in the DICO dialogue sys-
tem. The strategies will then be evaluated through
user tests where the participants will compare an
application with these strategies with an applica-
tion without them. Cognitive workload will be
measured as well as driving ability (for example,
by using a Lane Change Task (Mattes, 2003)). The
participants will also be interviewed in order to
find out which version of the system is more pleas-
ant to use.

References
Robert Broström, Johan Engström, Anders Agnvall,

and Gustav Markkula. 2006. Towards the next gen-
eration intelligent driver information system (idis):
The volvo cars interaction manager concept. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2006 ITS World Congress.

Staffan Larsson and Jessica Villing. 2007. The dico
project: A multimodal menu-based in-vehicle dia-
logue system. In H C Bunt and E C G Thijsse, edi-
tors, Proceedings of the 7th International Workshop
on Computational Semantics (IWCS-7), page 4.

Anders Lindström, Jessica Villing, Staffan Lars-
son, Alexander Seward, Nina Åberg, and Cecilia
Holtelius. 2008. The effect of cognitive load on
disfluencies during in-vehicle spoken dialogue. In
Proceedings of Interspeech 2008, page 4.

Stefan Mattes. 2003. The lane-change-task as a tool
for driver distraction evaluation. In Proceedings of
IGfA.

V L Neale, T A Dingus, S G Klauer, J Sudweeks, and
M Goodman. 2005. An overview of the 100-car
naturalistic study and findings. In Proceedings of
the 19th International Technical Conference on En-
hanced Safety of Vehicles (ESV).

W van Winsum, M Martens, and L Herland. 1999. The
effect of speech versus tactile driver support mes-
sages on workload, driver behaviour and user ac-
ceptance. tno-report tm-99-c043. Technical report,
Soesterberg, Netherlands.

Jessica Villing, Cecilia Holtelius, Staffan Larsson, An-
ders Lindström, Alexander Seward, and Nina Åberg.
2008. Interruption, resumption and domain switch-
ing in in-vehicle dialogue. In Proceedings of Go-
TAL, 6th International Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing, page 12.

Jessica Villing. 2009. In-vehicle dialogue man-
agement - towards distinguishing between different
types of workload. In Proceedings of SiMPE, Fourth
Workshop on Speech in Mobile and Pervasive Envi-
ronments, pages 14–21.

Fan Yang and Peter A Heeman. 2009. Context restora-
tion in multi-tasking dialogue. In IUI ’09: Proceed-
ings of the 13th international conference on Intelli-
gent user interfaces, pages 373–378, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

805


